Graphene-based Distributed 3D Sensing Electrodes for Mapping 
Spatiotemporal Auricular Physiological Signals  

Qingyun Huang1,7, Cong Wu1,7, Senlin Hou1, Hui Sun1, Kuanming Yao2, Junhui Law3, Mingxiao Yang4, 
Vellaisamy A. L. Roy5, Xinge Yu2, Ho-yin Chan1*, Lixing Lao6, Yu Sun3, and Wen Jung Li1* 

1 Department of Mechanical Engineering, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China 
2 Department of Biomedical Engineering, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China  
3 Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering, University of Toronto, Canada 
4 Bendheim Integrative Medicine Center, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, USA 
5 James Watt School of Engineering, University of Glasgow, UK 
6 Virginia University of Integrative Medicine, USA 
7 These authors contributed equally: Qingyun Huang & Cong Wu 
* Email: hoychan@cityu.edu.hk & wenjli@cityu.edu.hk 

ABSTRACT 

Underneath  the  ear  skin  there  are  richly  branching  vascular  and  neural  networks  that  ultimately 

connecting  to  our  heart  and  brain.  Hence,  the  three-dimensional  (3D)  mapping  of  auricular 

electrophysiological signals could provide a new perspective for biomedical studies such as diagnosis 

of  cardiovascular  diseases  and  neurological  disorders.  However,  it  is  still  extremely  challenging  for 

current sensing techniques to cover the entire ultra-curved auricle. Here, we report a graphene-based 

ear-conformable  sensing  device  with  embedded  and  distributed  3D  electrodes  which  enable  full-

auricle physiological monitoring. The sensing device, which incorporates programable 3D electrode 

thread  array  and  personalized  auricular  mold,  has  3D-conformable  sensing  interfaces  with  curved 

auricular skin, and was developed using one-step multi-material 3D-printing process. As a proof-of-

concept, spatiotemporal auricular electrical skin resistance (AESR) mapping was demonstrated. For 

the first time, 3D AESR contours were generated and human subject-specific AESR distributions among 

a  population  were  observed.  From  the  data  of  17  volunteers,  the  auricular  region-specific  AESR 

changes  after  cycling  exercise  were  observed  in  98%  of  the  tests  and  were  validated  via  machine 

learning techniques. Correlations of AESR with heart rate and blood pressure were also studied using 

1 

 
 
 
 
statistical  analysis.  This  3D  electronic  platform  and  AESR-based  new  biometrical  findings  show 

promising biomedical applications.  

INTRODUCTION 

Intelligent wearable electronics have become widespread with the advancements in material science, 

fabrication technologies, and data science, for diverse healthcare applications involving physiological 

signal monitoring1-10, including electrocardiography (ECG), electroencephalography (EEG), heart rate 

(HR),  blood  pressure  (BP),  body  temperature,  etc.  These  vital  physiological  signs  carrying  various 

biophysical  or  biochemical  information  from  human  bodies  are  critical  for  pursuing  long-term  and 

large-scale monitoring for clinical diagnosis of diverse diseases11,12. Many electronic devices worn on 

wrists, fingers, head, or legs recorded signals at single locations; however, signals measured at various 

spatial locations could provide additional dimension of crucial physiological information. For instance, 

full-scalp EEG monitoring with high-density electrode arrays enables recording of electrical activity in 

multiple  positions  across  the  brain  with  complementary  information  provided  during  functional 

magnetic  resonance  imaging13-15,  and  spatiotemporal  cardiac  measurements  of  ECG,  pH  and 

temperature by integumentary membranes with conformable electrode arrays enables 3D mapping 

of epicardial signals16.  

Human ears also provide diverse physiological signals for health monitoring17-24, such as oxygen 

saturation, pulse, EEG, body temperature and etc. Underneath the auricular skin, a complicated nerve 

network  involving  branches  of  the  greater  auricular nerve,  lesser  occipital  nerve,  auriculotemporal 

nerve, facial nerve, and vagus nerve, as well as a vessel network involving branches of the superficial 

temporal artery and posterior auricular artery with varying sizes of diameters are formed across the 

auricles25,26.  This  special  and  intricate  subcutaneous  structure  may  also  provide  rich  physiological 

information varying with regions, such as BP, EEG and etc. However, most current ear-worn sensing 

devices with earplug-like or clip-like structures mainly focus on collecting data at a single location such 

as  ear  canal,  earlobe,  antihelix,  etc.  Thus,  only  temporal  signal  recording  in  specific  region  can  be 

acquired  and  spatial-level  characterization  is  missing.  For  instance,  the  pencil-like  commercial 

2 

 
auricular  detecting  tools,  which  are  primarily  single-probe  electrical  detectors  (SPEDs)  with  a  rigid 

metal probe (such as Pointer Excel II, Lhasa OMS Inc., Weymouth, MA, USA), can measure point-by-

point cutaneous conductance levels by manually moving the probe over the auricular skin surface, but 

the  acquired  signal  is  extremely  sensitive  to  applied  pressure,  leading  to  low  measurement 

repeatability.  Another emerging form of skin-integrated sensor is ultrathin flexible and stretchable 

electronics attached directly to the curved skin to monitor various physical signals27-33. However, it is 

also very challenging for these two-dimensional electrode arrays to cover the entire auricle and be 

reusable. Thus, there is a critical need for a conformable auricular sensing device that can provide a 

full-auricle measurement of physiological signals to investigate their spatiotemporal characteristics.  

Here,  we  present  the  design  and  development  of  graphene-based  distributed  3D  sensing 

electrodes for the acquisition of spatiotemporal physiological signals of the human auricles.  A novel 

shape-conformable  personalized  auricular  sensor  (3D-PAS)  has  been  demonstrated  to  enable  real-

time electrophysiological signals mapping across the entire auricle. This platform, with printable and 

programable electrode threads, offers both conformable sensing interfaces with the curved auricular 

skin  and  3D  electrical  interconnects.  The  entire  sensor  prototyping  procedure,  including  human-

specific  auricular  shape  acquisition,  3D  electrode  pathways  design  and  one-step  multi-material  3D 

printing,  is  presented  in  this  paper.  Mechanical  analysis  of  the  skin  surface  curvature-dependent 

electrode sensing area design was also performed.  As a proof-of-concept, simultaneous measurement 

of electrical skin resistance which may reflect the subcutaneous biological conditions and vascular or 

neural activities34-39 at multiple auricular points (APs) was demonstrated. An auricular electrical skin 

resistance (AESR) contour is generated for 3D AESR mapping. For the first time, subject-specific AESR 

distributions and auricular region-specific AESR changes following physical exercise are demonstrated 

with  unsupervised  machine  learning  techniques.  Finally,  the  correlations  of  AESR  with  HR  and  BP 

signals were also studied. These results provide potentially a universal platform and methodology for 

biomedical applications based on physiological signals of the auricles. 

3 

 
RESULTS 

Design  and  fabrication.  The  entire  fabrication  process  included  three  steps.  First,  geometrical 

information  on  the  human-specific outer ear  structure was  acquired and  transferred (Fig.  1a). This 

began with the creation of a solid, 3D ear impression that shaped conformably with the auricle, whose 

surface curvature varies greatly between individuals and possesses a complex geometry. As shown in 

Fig. 1a(i), medical-grade molding polymers were evenly mixed and then filled into the entire outer ear, 

resulting in a personalized auricular mold (PAM). Structural light-based 3D scanning (Fig. 1a(ii)) was 

utilized on the PAM to generate a point cloud (Fig. 1a(iii)), which was later merged into a solid 3D-

PAM  geometry  (Fig.  1a(iv))  in  a  1:1  scaled  form.  Second,  a  geometric  layout  for  the  3D  electrode 

pathways was designed inside the acquired PAM model (Fig. 1b). Multiple electrodes were located at 

specific APs (Fig. 1b(i)), where spatially separated pathways were extended across the PAM model 

accordingly and embedded inside with a tortuous layout to serve as 3D interconnects (Fig. 1b(ii)). Here, 

the sensing areas of electrodes at multiple APs with varied surface curvatures were fixed to the same 

by  scaling  the  geometric  parameters  (such  as  cross-sections,  diameter,  and  orientation)  of  the  3D 

pathways  (Fig.  1b(iii)).  Third,  the  sensor  was  one-step  prototyped  (Fig.  1c).  A  well-designed  PAM 

prototype incorporated with multiple electrode pathways, defining the overall format of the sensor, 

was  subsequently  rendered  by  a  commercial  dual-nozzle  3D  printer  integrating  both  a  flexible 

elastomer  and  conductive  graphene-enhanced  polylactide  (g-PLA)  (Fig.  1c(i-iv)).  The  use  of  this 

materials combination provides good printability, comfortability and superior conductivity. The result 

of these steps was the creation of a 3D conformable and mechanically stable electrode-skin sensing 

interface. The hardware control units were then connected to the printed electrode channels for data 

acquisition. Herein, we delivered a universal strategy involving a wearable 3D-PAS device that offers 

a  platform  for  geometrically  integrating  3D-distributed  and  conformable  electrodes  to  achieve 

simultaneous multi-region AESR collection in real time across the entire auricle. 

4 

 
Fig.  1.  Diagram  of  the  3D-PAS  design  and  fabrication  process.  (a)  Illustration  of  human-specific  auricular  skin-shape 
acquisition and transfer. i) Outer ear impression molding; ii) 3D scanning of the PAM; iii) point cloud generation; iv) CAD 
modeling of the PAM. (b) Illustration of 3D electrodes layout design. i) APs locating; ii) 3D electrode-pathways embedding; 
iii) geometric parameters scaling of 3D electrodes to achieve the same sensing area; iv) sensor-prototype assembling with 
3D electrodes and the PAM. (c) Illustrations of one-step sensor prototyping. i-iv) sequential snapshots of 3D printing process 
integrating flexible TPE and conductive g-PLA materials. d) Schematic diagram of the 3D-PAS monitoring platform and data 
analysis route for potential biomedical healthcare applications. 

5 

 
 
Mechanical analysis. A critical feature of this device is that it can be conformably shaped to the entire 

curved  auricle  and  geometrically  configured  with  multiple  3D  electrodes  with  a  profile-controlled 

layout. The auricle of the ear, one of the smallest functional human organs, forms an ultra-curved skin 

surface (Fig. 2a). This curvature varies not only within an auricular region but also across individual 

subjects, and this is also reflected in the geometry of the PAM. From one of the cross-sections of the 

PAM (Fig. 2b), it can be observed that the curvatures of 10 points located along the cross-sectional 

curve differ up to tenfold (Fig. 2c). As a result, cylindrical electrode pathways with the same diameter 

across multiple APs with different surface curvatures and orientations will generate widely varying 

sensing areas (i.e., contact area) (Fig. 2d-e), which can cause great deviations in contact resistance. 

Therefore,  once  the  cross-sections  of  the  electrode  pathways  were  determined,  their  geometric 

parameters (diameter, orientation, etc.) can be scaled point-by-point to achieve a consistent sensing 

area. Furthermore, wearing the 3D-PAS provides a 3D conformable and stable interface between the 

device and the entire auricle (Fig. 2f(i)). As a result, three repeated AESR measurements on each of 

human  subjects  demonstrated  excellent  repeatability  of  the  sensor  with  only  a  4.9%  average 

coefficient of variation (CV) among all testing points (Fig. 2f(ii)). However, a commercial SPED had a 

much  larger  CV  of  approximately  35%,  which  was  mainly  caused  by  the  significant  deviation  from 

operating pressure when moving across the auricle manually and freely without quantitative force 

feedback.  Here,  an  overall  surface  curvature-dependent  geometric  design  for  the  electrodes  is 

implemented to ensure both conformability and consistency for the 3D AESR sensing interface. 

6 

 
 
Fig. 2. Mechanical analysis of the 3D-PAS. (a) Overall curvature distribution across the entire human auricle. (b) Illustration 
of A-A’ cross-section of 3D-PAM. (c) Curvature comparison at multiple points located along the cross-sectional curve. (d) 
Comparison of the electrode sensing area at multiple AP locations with varying surface curvatures. i) Illustration of cylindrical 
electrode  pathways with the  determined diameter across spatially distributed APs; ii)  Sensing area comparison between 
multiple  electrodes  with  pathway  diameter  D=3  and  4  mm.  (e)  Comparison  of  the  electrode  sensing  area  with  different 
pathway orientations at each AP location. i) Illustration of electrode pathways with the same size (3 mm diameter) across 
the AP with different orientations (blue: normal to surface, red: 15° from normal, green: 30° from normal); ii) Sensing area 
comparison between different electrode pathway orientations at multiple AP locations. (f) Analysis of AESR measurement 
repeatability.  i)  Illustration  of  the  mechanically  stable  sensing  interface  between  the  3D-PAS  and  auricular  skin;  ii) 
Comparison of AESR measurement CV between a commercial SPED and the 3D-PAS. 

Spatial AESR mapping. To demonstrate simultaneous multi-region AESR monitoring with the 3D-PAS, 

the  positions of multiple testing  points were  first  located  (Fig. 3b).  For each ear,  a  specific 3D-PAS 

device  was  prototyped  by  the  abovementioned  procedures  for  AESR  signal  collection  with  a  data 

acquisition unit. The whole electrical loop includes a sensor, the auricular skin, body and LCR meter, 

where the circuit logically switches between the multiple electrodes with a multiplexer that prevents 

channel signal interference (Fig. 3a). The AESRs were directly read from a self-developed user interface 

in real time, which also marked all AP locations and highlighted the AP with the lowest AESR for further 

analysis;  this  can  help  systematically  screen  potential  patients  with  abnormal  AESR  signals  and 

7 

 
 
 
advance  auricular  diagnoses.  The  AESR  signals  were  stably  collected  across  several  minutes  of 

monitoring (Fig. 3c). The variation in AESR levels across all testing APs in each measurement was drawn 

as a trend line (Fig. 3d), which maintains highly consistent among multiple tests indicating excellent 

repeatability  of  measurement.  Furthermore,  based  on  the  AESR  data  spatially  mapped  at  the 

scattered  APs,  a 3D  AESR contour  with  both  geometric  and  spatiotemporal signal  information was 

generated  for  the  first  time  by  a  numerical  interpolation  algorithm  to  visualize  the  overall  AESR 

distribution  across  the  entire  auricle  (Fig.  3e).  This  universal  methodological  route  for  3D  AESR 

mapping can be used to acquire quantifiable data for further study. 

Fig. 3. AESR mapping across the entire auricle. (a) Illustration of AESR signal collection by the ear-worn 3D-PAS with a user 
interface and electrical control unit for multiplexed data acquisition. (b) Spatial distribution of AP locations across the entire 
auricle. (c) Simultaneously stable AESR  signal collection at multiple  APs in real time. (d) Highly consistent  AESR variation 
across all tested APs between repeatable tests. (e) 3D AESR contour generation for visualizing the overall AESR distribution 
across the entire auricle. 

Human-specific AESR distribution. Using 3D-PAS tools, comprehensive studies on the characteristics 

of the distribution of AESR among a human population were performed. Here, personalized devices 

were prototyped for both the left and right ears of 30 human subjects. In this paper, 10 APs across the 

8 

 
 
 
entire auricle were selected and located on all ear subjects with a proportionally scaled layout (Fig. 

4a). After placing the 3D-PAS into the ear, AESR signals were collected with the same procedures from 

all  subjects,  followed  by  data  normalization.  The  AESR  distribution  across  each  ear  was  then 

characterized  as  a trend  line  which  is  drawn  by  connecting  all  the  normalized AESRs  of  10Aps  and 

packaged as a single dataset (i.e., a matrix of 1 by 10). Unsupervised machine learning techniques, 

including principal component analysis (PCA) and K-means clustering, were performed on the AESR 

datasets collected from all 60 ears (i.e., a pair ear per subject). Firstly, PCA achieved 86.1% of the total 

explained variance (EV) from raw data with 3 principal components (PCs). Then, K-means clustering 

algorithm was performed, here we calculated the sum of the square error (SSE) and use the elbow 

method to find that 4 was the optimal value of cluster number K that yielded the greatest cluster-to-

cluster separation and best within-cluster gathering; we also achieved a high silhouette score (S-score) 

of 0.76. This result indicates that all AESR datasets were clearly classified into 4 clusters, while each 

cluster showed a specific AESR distribution across the 10 APs. Accordingly, 4 clusters of 3D scattered 

points were acquired by PCA dimensionality reduction, and were plotted to visualize the clustering 

result  (Fig.  4b).  Four  trend  lines  with  shaded  error  bands  (Fig.  4d)  also  depicted  the  specific  AESR 

distribution of clusters A, B, C and D, which included 35, 17, 5 and 3 ears, respectively (Fig. 4c). By 

matching  the  clustered  datasets  with  the  subject  labels,  it  was  observed  that  80%  of  the  tested 

subjects (i.e., 24/30) had their left- and right-ear AESR distribution classified into the same cluster (Fig. 

4e). This preliminarily indicates that AESR distribution information of both auricles is highly similar. 

Furthermore,  the  3D  AESR  contours  of  all  ears  were  generated;  the  clustering  result  can  also  be 

characterized  by  these  contours,  which  directly  illustrate  the  high  consistency  in  the  3D  AESR 

distribution  among  within-cluster  subjects  as  well  as  the  large  variability  among  across-cluster 

subjects (Fig. 4f). Here, we demonstrated a novel biometrical tool for human population classification, 

which shows great potential to serve as a new form of biological marker. 

9 

 
Fig. 4. Human-specific AESR distribution analysis. (a) Schematic illustration of 10 AP locations for all human auricles. (b) K-
means clustering result for the AESR datasets collected from all 60 ears shown on a 3D scatter plot (each point denotes one 
AESR dataset from a single ear after PCA). (c) Distribution of the total ear subject number in each cluster. (d) Matching results 
of both the left- and right- ear datasets from each human subject after K-means clustering (horizontal: cluster label of the 
left ear, vertical: cluster label of the right ear; diagonal numbers denote the number of subjects for whom both the left and 
right AESR datasets were classified to the same cluster (A, B, C or D). (e) Specific AESR variation trendlines across all tested 
APs with shaded error bands for each cluster. (f) 3D AESR contours visualization for specific AESR distribution of ear subjects 
from each cluster (5 representative subjects are selected in clusters A and B). 

10 

 
 
Region-specific AESR change after exercise. Using 3D-PAS tools, the study on individual AESR change 

when  subjected  to  physiological  stimuli  was  investigated  for  the  first  time.  Stationary  cycling,  a 

popular  physical  exercise  worldwide,  causes  a  whole-body  physiological  response40,  including  an 

increase heart rate (HR) to meet the muscles’ demand for oxygen and a surge in blood pressure (BP) 

with the increased availability of vasodilatory mediators. To explore the effects of physical exercise on 

AESR levels, 17 volunteers participated in a study to repeat stationary cycling exercises three times at 

a fixed intensity (i.e., test A1, A2 and A3). Here, 3 additional APs (i.e., AP3, 7 and 11) were added to 

the  10  previously  studied  APs  (Fig.  5f).  All  tests  followed  the  same  procedures.  During  each  test, 

biosignals were collected at 4 fixed periods (i.e., period Ⅰ, Ⅱ, Ⅲ and Ⅳ) before and after cycling (Fig. 

5a). Two additional tests of controls were also performed without cycling (i.e., test B1 and B2), where 

the AESR signals were collected in the same 4 periods. Meanwhile, HR and BP were recorded by a 

commercial smart watch and a cuff-style BP monitor, respectively. Five minutes after the completion 

of  the  exercise,  it  was  observed  that  HR  and  BP  increased  by  42.9%  and  16.0%,  respectively,  on 

average over all tests (Fig. 5b-c). Correspondingly, the AESR levels at AP1-6 dramatically dropped by 

60.8%, 66.8%, 55.4%, 64.9%, 57.8% and 51.3% on average, while those at AP7-13 dropped by less than 

23.5% (Fig. 5d). In 98% of total 51 individual cycling tests, auricular region-specific AESR changes were 

observed  under  the  stimuli  of  physical  exercise.  Comparatively,  AESR  levels  remained  no  change 

across the four periods in all tests of controls. Similar change of the auricular electrical skin impedance 

(AESI) scanning from 4 to 4000 Hz at AP1-6 was also shown in Fig. 5e. 

For each measurement, the AESRs collected at each of the 13 APs were point-to-point normalized 

by their initial AESRs (AESR Ⅰ) and repackaged into a new dataset (i.e., matrix of 1 by 13) labeled as 

‘Subject-Test-Period’.  Unsupervised  machine  learning  was  then  utilized  to  classify  the  datasets 

comprising the data from all five tests for each volunteer, including three datasets from the repeated 

cycling tests and two from the control tests, using the AESR Ⅱ. Following PCA which achieved a 98.5% 

average total EV with 3 PCs, K-means clustering was performed, the optimal value of cluster number 

11 

 
 
K determined by the elbow method was 2, while the S-score was 0.88 on average, which indicates that 

the two clusters of datasets can be clearly classified. In the analysis for 94% (i.e., 16 out of 17) of the 

volunteers, datasets in these two clusters were exactly label-matched to the AESR signals collected in 

cycling tests and control tests, respectively. A 3D scatter plot was shown to visualize the individual 

clustering results (Fig. 5g(i)). Furthermore, similar PCA and clustering analyses were performed for the 

datasets comprising the data from all the tests on 17 volunteers. Following PCA, the total EV with 3 

PCs was 88.3%, and similar to the prior analysis, two clusters (Fig. 5g(ii)) were classified with K=2 and 

an S-score of 0.85. 

Additionally, it was also observed that the AESR at periods Ⅲ and Ⅳ of AP1-6 gradually increased 

back to 67.7% and 100% of the initial value on average, demonstrating a highly consistent trend with 

HR and BP. Here, unsupervised machine learning was also used to classify the normalized datasets 

comprising the AESR data collected at the 4 periods across the three repeated cycling tests for each 

volunteer. First, PCA achieved 93.4% total EV on average with 3 PCs. Then K-means clustering was 

performed; when K was determined as 3, analysis for datasets from 76.5% (i.e., 13 out of 17) of the 

volunteers obtained the result that, one dataset of “AESR Ⅱ” together with three datasets of “AESR 

Ⅳ” were classified into cluster A, three datasets of “AESR Ⅱ” were classified into cluster B, and three 

datasets of “AESR Ⅲ” were classified into cluster C. A 3D scatter plot visualized this clustering result, 

in which three arrows were drawn to illustrate cluster-point shifting and match the dynamic evolution 

of the whole-body response (Fig. 5h(i)). Furthermore, similar machine learning results were obtained 

for the AESR datasets collected from all cycling tests from the 17 volunteers; PCA yielded 82% total EV 

with  3  PCs,  the  elbow  method  yielded  a  K  of  3,  the  S-score  was  0.64,  and  85.1%  of  the  datasets 

achieved the same label-group matching result described in the above individual volunteer analysis 

(Fig.  5h(ii)).  Last,  a  highly  consistent  region-specific  color  change  across  the  four  periods  can  be 

observed  from  the  generated  3D  AESR  contours  (Fig.  5i).  Here,  both  data-driven  and  vision-driven 

analyses validate the auricular region-specific AESR change as the response to physical exercise stimuli. 

12 

 
Fig. 5. Analysis of after-exercise region-specific AESR change. (a) Schematic illustration of biosignals (HR, BP, AESR and AESI) 
collection in four sequential periods in each cycling test. (b) HR, (c) BP, (d) AESR, and (e) AESI changes after fixed-intensity 
cycling exercise. (f) Locations of the studied 13 APs for all human ear auricles. (g) 3D scatter plots showing K-means clustering 
results for the AESR datasets collected from the cycling/control tests for i) an individual volunteer and ii) all 17 volunteers. 
(“1-A1-Ⅱ” denotes the AESR dataset collected in the period Ⅱ in the first cycling test from volunteer 1) (h) 3D scatter plots 
showing K-means clustering results for the AESR datasets collected in each of the four periods from the three cycling tests 
for  i)  an  individual  volunteer  and  ii)  all  17  volunteers.  (i)  3D  AESR  contours  illustrating  overall  AESR  distribution  changes 
across all four periods in the cycling tests (one representative volunteer is selected). 

13 

 
 
Furthermore, it was observed that AESR changes differed greatly test-to-test after fixed-intensity 

exercise.  This  indicated  the  presence  of  individual  body  condition  differences,  which  were  also 

reflected in the changes in HR and BP signals. Scatter plots comparing the changes in AESR with the 

changes in HR and BP across all cycling tests from 17 volunteers are shown in Fig. 6. Statistical analysis 

was performed on these biosignals point by point. It obtained that the Pearson correlation coefficient 

(PCC) was 0.57 on average for the “AESR-HR” comparison across AP1-6, and was 0.47 on average for 

the “AESR-BP” comparison across AP1-5, indicating that AESR certainly correlates with HR and BP at 

most of the “active points” (AP1-6). On the other hand, there is no correlation of AESR with HR and 

BP (P>0.05 or PCC<0.4) at most of “inactive points” (AP7-13). 

Fig. 6. Correlation analysis of AESR with HR and BP. Scatter plots of changes in AESR at AP1-6 versus changes in (a) HR and 
(b) BP after fixed-intensity cycling exercise (Biosignals Ⅱ collected in all cycling tests from 17 volunteers are used). 

DISCUSSION 

The design of the 3D-PAS provides a 3D conformable sensing interface with multiple electrodes whose 

locations,  layout,  size  and  density  can  be  scalably  altered  by  demand.  In  addition  to  AESR,  other 

auricular physiological biosignals (such as BP, blood oxygen saturation, temperature, hydration) can 

14 

 
 
 
 
also be monitored and mapped through the strategy of sensor design and data analysis introduced in 

this paper. Furthermore, diverse physical stimulating functions (electrical, mechanical, thermal, etc.) 

can  be  developed  to  assist  auricular  therapies  by  applying  alternative  functional  materials  for  3D 

electrodes. Accordingly, multimodal sensing together with stimulation over the entire auricle would 

be quite promising for comprehensive health evaluation and management. 

In  this  paper,  the  characteristics  of  the  AESR  distribution  were  investigated  among  30  human 

subjects. The result is that 4 types of AESR distributions across all testing APs were clearly classified. 

Interestingly,  it  was  observed  that  subjects  in  cluster  A,  B  and  D  have  a  recognizable  age-level 

difference, which may reveal that the separation of these clusters can partially be explained by “age 

differences”.  However,  given  the  age-level  overlap  for  a  few  subjects  from  different  clusters, 

additional  hidden  classification  criteria  may  also  exist.  Therefore,  more  studies  involving  a  larger 

cohort of subjects in the future may help in forming a comprehensive understanding of the underlying 

physical  meaning  for  these  interesting  observations.  Furthermore,  within  each  cluster,  the  AESR 

distributions  of  all  subjects  were  essentially  similar  with  only  minor  differences  between  them. 

Meanwhile, the AESR datasets collected from repeated measurements on multiple subjects from the 

same cluster can also be clustered into individuals. This indicates that each subject has a unique form 

of AESR distribution, which, in the vein of a “fingerprint”, can be called an “earprint”. Given the above 

analyses, AESR signals hold great potential to serve as a new form of biological marker, similar to BP 

or HR, for matching individuals with diverse body conditions. 

In  the  cycling  tests  on  17  volunteers,  much  greater  AESR  changes  were  consistently  observed 

after  exercise  at  AP1-6  than  at  AP7-13,  which  may  reflect  the  varying  levels  of  hemodynamic  and 

neural activity underneath skin in different auricular regions. The gradual increase in the AESRs back 

to their baseline levels is consistent with the evolution of the condition of the body during recovery 

after exercise. In the statistical analysis, the fact that AESR didn’t correlate with BP at AP6 and that 

smaller PCCs were obtained for the “AESR-BP” comparison than for the “AESR-HR” comparison may 

have resulted primarily from the high inconsistency in the noncontinuous BP measurement with the 

15 

 
commercial, cuff-style BP monitor. Furthermore, approximately 10% of all the datasets were abnormal, 

80% of which were collected from only two individual volunteers who may differ from the others in 

body condition. These findings provide quantitative evidence for auricular region-specific AESR change 

under  physiological  stimuli.  Thus,  following  further  studies,  AESR  monitoring  is  promising  for 

personalized healthcare applications. 

In  summary,  a  personalized  wearable  device  incorporating  distributed  3D  electrodes  for 

simultaneous, multi-region AESR monitoring across the entire auricle was developed. Data analyses, 

including 3D contours for spatiotemporal AESR mapping and unsupervised machine learning for AESR 

datasets classification, reveal for the first time human-specific AESR distribution, and the correlations 

of AESR spatiotemporal electrophysiological signals with HR and BP. This strategy of 3D electrodes 

design and full-auricle sensing platform shows promising biomedical applications for spatiotemporal 

auricular physiological monitoring during daily activities. 

METHODS 

Fabrication of the 3D-PAS: The whole process starts with the construction of personalized 3D auricular 

impressions by molding with medical-grade polymers and catalyzers (Green Eco, DETAX), which are 

mixed at a ratio of 1:1 and then injected into the entire auricle as well as the backside with a syringe. 

After  a  few  minutes,  the  mixture  solidifies,  and  the  PAM  is  shaped.  3D  scanning  of  the  PAM  is 

performed  by  a  structural  light-based  3D  scanner  (Dual-laser-source,  0.001  mm  resolution, 

Nanyangmengyang Machinery Co., Ltd, China) to generate a point cloud, which is then merged into a 

3D solid model whose surface is further modified in Computer-Aided Design (CAD) software. Testing 

points are located with a proportionally scaled layout. The layout, orientation and size of 3D electrode 

pathways  are  geometrically  designed  within  the  PAM  in  CAD  software.  A  single  sensor  that 

incorporates the PAM and the 3D electrodes is then one-step prototyped with a dual-nozzle 3D printer 

(RAISE 3D PRO 2, USA), which integrates thermoplastic elastomer (TPE) (TPE-85A, Esun Industrial Co., 

Ltd., China) and g-PLA (BLACKMAGIC3D Company, USA) printable materials. The flexible TPE enables 

good  comfortability  in  contact  with  the  auricular  skin  and  integrates  well  with  the  g-PLA  material, 

16 

 
offering a superior conductivity of 1.7 S·cm−1. The good printability of this materials combination is 

realized by optimizing the printing parameters (e.g., extruder temperature and extrusion rate). Last, 

commercial conductive gel is thinly coated onto the printed electrode surfaces prior to measurement. 

Measurement  Calibration:  For  each  single  electrode  on  the  3D-PAS,  the  accuracy  of  the  electrical 

resistance measurement was calibrated by a series of constant resistors ranging from 0.5 to 10 MΩ. 

The temperature coefficient of resistance was also characterized in a laboratory oven as around 2.6 

Ω/°C  over  a  range  of  room  temperatures  (25-35°C),  which  is  negligible  relative  to  skin  resistance. 

Therefore, the 3D-PAS can achieve good measurement accuracy, efficiency, visuality and repeatability 

far beyond those of manually operated, commercial SPEDs. 

Mechanical analysis: The distribution of the curvature of the entire auricle skin surface is acquired by 

the  internal  curvature  analysis  function  built  in  CAD  software,  which  also  provides  the  curvature-

dependent  sensing  area  for  the  conformable  electrodes  with  predetermined  locations  and 

geometrical parameters. 

Human studies: In total, 30 volunteers participated in the AESR distribution study, and 17 volunteers 

participated in the cycling exercise tests. Before each measurement, medical alcohol pads were used 

to remove oil, sweat and other impurities on the auricular skin surface followed by air drying. In the 

investigation  of  AESR  change  after  physical  exercise,  each  volunteer  was  asked  to  repeat  three 

stationary cycling tests at a fixed intensity (7 km within 20 min) with at least a 48-hours interval on a 

fitness bike (Decathlon EB 500 SP, France) and two control tests without cycling during the same time 

slot  on  a  separate  day.  For  the  individual  tests,  AESR,  HR  and  BP  signals  were  recorded  in  four 

sequential periods: before exercise (period Ⅰ) and 5 min (period Ⅱ), 25 min (period Ⅲ) and 60 min 

after  the  completion  of  the  exercise  (period  Ⅳ).  Room  temperature  and  humidity  were  also 

monitored, demonstrating negligible fluctuations during the whole test. 

Data  acquisition:  AESR  was  measured  by  the  LCR-meter  function  embedded  in  the  impedance 

analyzer (HIOKI-IM3570, Japan), with a 16-channel multiplexer (ADG706) switching between multiple 

17 

 
electrodes. HR was monitored by a commercial smart watch (HUAWEI WATCH GT 2 Pro, China). BP 

was measured by a cuff-style commercial monitor (Omron HEM-7320, Japan). Room temperature and 

humidity were measured by a commercial monitor (Jiandarenke COS-03, China). 

Data  analysis:  AESR  normalization.  In  the  investigation  of  AESR  distribution  among  a  human 

population and generation of 3D AESR contours, AESR levels measured at all testing APs from each 

subject were normalized to those at AP1 for further analysis. In the investigation of AESR change under 

physical exercise conditions, including both cycling and control tests, the AESRs collected in periods Ⅰ 

to Ⅳ at each AP were normalized to those in period Ⅰ (i.e., initial value). 3D AESR contour generation. 

The normalized AESR signals collected at multiple APs and 3D coordinates of the point cloud acquired 

from  auricular  shape  3D-scanning  were  input  to  perform  natural  neighbor  interpolation  for  3D 

scattered data in MATLAB, generating a 3D AESR contour with a continuous AESR gradient to visualize 

the  overall  spatial  AESR  distribution  across  the  entire  auricle.  AESR  dataset  package.  Normalized 

AESRs collected at N APs in one single measurement were packaged into a single dataset, that is, a 

matrix  of  1  by  N.  Unsupervised  machine learning  analysis.  All  normalized  AESR  datasets  collected 

from M tests were incorporated into an input matrix (M*N), which was later dimension-reduced to a 

M*3 matrix by PCA. Then, the K-means clustering algorithm was utilized to classify the datasets in 

Matlab, where the Euclidean distance and “K-means++” clustering center initialization were used; the 

other parameters were set to their default values. Determination of K. The optimal value of cluster 

number K was determined by the “elbow method”, that is, by selecting the elbow point in the SSE-K 

plot. The SSE for each cluster is calculated as Eq. (1) and the S-score of each dataset was acquired as 

Eq. (2). Correlation analysis. P-values for significance testing and PCC were acquired by SPSS software 

after excluding abnormal datasets. 

(cid:23)

(cid:18)

(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:2) = (cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:8)
(cid:12)(cid:24)(cid:25)

(cid:19)∈(cid:21)(cid:22)

(cid:9)

(cid:10)(cid:11)(cid:12), (cid:14)(cid:15)     (cid:10)1(cid:15)

where 

 is a data point in cluster 

 and 

 is the center point for cluster 

.  

(cid:14)

(cid:26)(cid:12)

(cid:11)(cid:12)

(cid:26)(cid:12)

18 

 
 
(cid:7)(cid:10)(cid:6)(cid:15) = (cid:27)

1 − (cid:29)(cid:10)(cid:6)(cid:15)/(cid:31)(cid:10)(cid:6)(cid:15),
(cid:6)  (cid:29)(cid:10)(cid:6)(cid:15) < (cid:31)(cid:10)(cid:6)(cid:15)
0,                                (cid:6)  (cid:29)(cid:10)(cid:6)(cid:15) = (cid:31)(cid:10)(cid:6)(cid:15)
(cid:6)  (cid:29)(cid:10)(cid:6)(cid:15) > (cid:31)(cid:10)(cid:6)(cid:15)
(cid:31)(cid:10)(cid:6)(cid:15)/(cid:29)(cid:10)(cid:6)(cid:15) − 1,

     (cid:10)2(cid:15)

where 

(cid:29)(cid:10)(cid:6)(cid:15) =

(cid:25)
|(cid:21)(cid:22)|&(cid:25) ∑

)∈(cid:21)(cid:22),(cid:12)*)

(cid:5)(cid:10)(cid:6), ((cid:15)

, 
(cid:31)(cid:10)(cid:6)(cid:15) = min(cid:23)*(cid:12)

(cid:25)
|(cid:21).| ∑

)∈(cid:21).

(cid:5)(cid:10)(cid:6), ((cid:15)

, and 

 is a data point in cluster 
i

(cid:26)(cid:12)

. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

We acknowledge the support of the Hong Kong Research Grants Council’s Joint Laboratory Funding 

Scheme (Project No.: JLFS/E-104/18), the Hong Kong Research Grants Council’s General Research Fund 

(Project  No.:  11204918)  and  the  University  of  Hong Kong  Seed  Fund  for  Translational  and  Applied 

Research (Grant No.: 201711160034). 

ETHICAL DECLARATION 

All human cycling studies were implemented in accordance with the ethical guidelines and with the 

approval of the Human Subject Ethics Committee of City University of Hong Kong (Reference No.: 10-

2020-19-F).  Written  informed  consent  was  obtained  from  all  participants  with  the  purpose  and 

procedures of the study clearly explained. 

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS 

W.J.L., Q.H. and H.Y.C. conceived of the basic idea of this study and sensor design. W.J.L., Q.H., and 

C.W. designed the experiments. Q.H. performed the experiments. Q.H., W.J.L., H.Y.C., X.Y., V.A.L., and 

Y.S.  analyzed  the  data.  M.Y.  and  L.L.  provided  support  for  medical  related  information  and 

interpretation of data for this study. K.Y., J.L., H.S. and S.H. assisted in part of experiments and sensor 

fabrication process. Q.H., W.J.L. and C.W. co-drafted this paper. X.Y., V.A.L. and Y.S. provided critical 

technical advice for this study. W.J.L. and H.Y.C. supervised the project. 

19 

 
 
 
 
REFERENCE 

[1] 

Sugiyama, M. et al. An ultraflexible organic differential amplifier for recording electrocardiograms. Nat. 

Electron. 2, 351-360 (2019). 

[2] 

Xu, S. et al. Soft microfluidic assemblies of sensors, circuits, and radios for the skin. Science 344, 70-74 

(2014).  

[3] 

Kwon, K. et al. An on-skin platform for wireless monitoring of flow rate, cumulative loss and temperature 

of sweat in real time. Nat. Electron. 4, 302-312 (2021). 

[4] 

Fortin, J. et al. A novel art of continuous noninvasive blood pressure measurement. Nat. Commun. 12, 

1387 (2021). 

[5] 

Lu, W. et al. Wireless, implantable catheter-type oximeter designed for cardiac oxygen saturation. Sci. 

Adv. 7, eabe0579 (2021). 

[6]  Wang, B. et al. Flexible and stretchable metal oxide nanofiber networks for multimodal and monolithically 

integrated wearable electronics. Nat. Commun. 11, 2405 (2020). 

[7] 

Niu, S. et al. A wireless body area sensor network based on stretchable passive tags. Nat. Electron. 2, 361-

368 (2019). 

[8] 

Lee, G. H. et al. Multifunctional materials for implantable and wearable photonic healthcare devices. Nat. 

Rev. Mater. 5, 149-165 (2020). 

[9] 

Song, E. et al. Miniaturized electromechanical devices for the characterization of the biomechanics of 

deep tissue. Nat. Biomed. Eng. (2021). 

[10]  Choi, C. et al. Curved neuromorphic image sensor array using a MoS 2-organic heterostructure inspired 

by the human visual recognition system. Nat. Commun. 11, 5934 (2020). 

[11] 

Tian,  L.  et  al.  Large-area  MRI-compatible  epidermal  electronic  interfaces  for  prosthetic  control  and 

cognitive monitoring. Nat. Biomed. Eng. 3, 194-205 (2019). 

[12] 

Sim,  K.  et  al.  An  epicardial  bioelectronic  patch  made  from  soft  rubbery  materials  and  capable  of 

spatiotemporal mapping of electrophysiological activity. Nat. Electron. 3, 775-784 (2020). 

20 

 
[13]  Ullsperger, M. & Debener, S. Simultaneous EEG and fMRI: Recording, Analysis, and Application. (Oxford 

Univ. Press, 2010). 

[14]  Ritter, P. & Villringer, A. Simultaneous EEG–fMRI. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 30, 823-838 (2006). 

[15]  MacIntosh,  B.  J.  et  al.  Improving  functional  magnetic  resonance  imaging  motor  studies  through 

simultaneous electromyography recordings. Hum. Brain Mapp. 28, 835-845 (2007). 

[16]  Xu, L. et al. 3D multifunctional integumentary membranes for spatiotemporal cardiac measurements and 

stimulation across the entire epicardium. Nat. Commun. 5, 3329 (2014). 

[17]  Park,  J.  H.,  Jang,  D.  G.,  Park,  J.  W.  &  Youm,  S.  K.  Wearable  sensing  of  in-ear  pressure  for  heart  rate 

monitoring with a piezoelectric sensor. Sensors (Basel) 15, 23402-23417 (2015). 

[18]  Nakamura, T., Goverdovsky, V. & Mandic, D. P. In-ear EEG biometrics for feasible and readily collectable 

real-world person authentication. IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur. 13, 648-661 (2018). 

[19]  Nakamura,  T.,  Alqurashi,  Y.  D.,  Morrell,  M.  J.  &  Mandic,  D.  P.  Hearables:  automatic  overnight  sleep 

monitoring with standardized in-ear EEG sensor. IEEE. Trans. Biomed. Eng. 67, 203-212 (2020). 

[20]  Venema, B. et al. Robustness, specificity, and reliability of an in-ear pulse oximetric  sensor in surgical 

patients. IEEE J Biomed Health Inform. 18, 1178-1185 (2013). 

[21]  Ota, H. et al. 3D printed “earable” smart devices for real-time detection of core body temperature. ACS 

Sens. 2, 990-997 (2017). 

[22]  Alqurashi, Y. D. et al. A novel in-ear sensor to determine sleep latency during the multiple sleep latency 

test in healthy adults with and without sleep restriction. Nat. Sci. Sleep 10, 385-396 (2018). 

[23] 

Lee, J. H. et al. Flexible conductive composite integrated with personal earphone for wireless, real-time 

monitoring of electrophysiological signs. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 10, 21184-21190 (2018). 

[24]  Guo, H. et al. A highly sensitive, self-powered triboelectric auditory sensor for social robotics and hearing 

aids. Sci. Robot. 3, eaat2516 (2018). 

[25]  Kaniusas, E., Varoneckas,  G.,  Mahr, B. & Szeles, J.  C. Optic visualization of auricular nerves and blood 

vessels: optimisation and validation. IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 60, 3253-3258 (2011). 

21 

 
[26] 

Shiffman,  M.  A.  (Ed.).  Advanced  Cosmetic  Otoplasty:  Art,  Science,  and  New  Clinical  Techniques.  Ch2 

(Springer Science & Business Media, 2013). 

[27]  Norton, J. J. S. et al. Soft, curved electrode systems capable of integration on the auricle as a persistent 

brain–computer interface. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 112, 3920-3925 (2015). 

[28]  Huang, Z. et al. Three-dimensional integrated stretchable electronics. Nat. Electron. 1, 473-480 (2018). 

[29]  Dai, Y., Hu, H., Wang, M., Xu, J. & Wang, S. Stretchable transistors and functional circuits for human-

integrated electronics. Nat. Electron. 4, 17-29 (2021). 

[30]  Hu, H. et al. Stretchable ultrasonic transducer arrays for three-dimensional imaging on complex surfaces. 

Sci. Adv. 4, eaar3979 (2018). 

[31]  Wang, C. et al. Monitoring of the central blood pressure waveform via a conformal ultrasonic device. Nat. 

Biomed. Eng. 2, 687-695 (2018). 

[32]  Meng, K. et al. Flexible weaving constructed self‐powered pressure sensor enabling continuous diagnosis 

of cardiovascular disease and measurement of cuffless blood pressure. Adv. Funct. Mater. 29, 1806388 

(2019). 

[33]  Ma, Y. et al. Flexible hybrid electronics for digital healthcare. Adv. Mater. 32, 1902062 (2020). 

[34]  Kim,  S.  et  al.  Soft,  skin-interfaced  microfluidic  systems  with  integrated  immunoassays,  fluorometric 

sensors, and impedance measurement capabilities. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 117, 27906-27915 (2020). 

[35]  Matsukawa, R., Miyamoto, A., Yokota, T. & Someya, T. Skin impedance measurements with nanomesh 

electrodes for monitoring skin hydration. Adv. Healthc. Mater. 9, 2001322 (2020). 

[36]  Huang,  X.  et  al.  Epidermal  impedance  sensing  sheets  for  precision  hydration  assessment  and  spatial 

mapping. IEEE. Trans. Biomed. Eng. 60, 2848-2857 (2013). 

[37]  Rinaldi,  A.  O.  et  al.  Direct  assessment  of  skin  epithelial  barrier  by  electrical  impedance  spectroscopy. 

Allergy 74, 1934-1944 (2019). 

[38] 

Eisenbarth, H., Chang, L. J. & Wager, T. D. Multivariate brain prediction of heart rate and skin conductance 

responses to social threat. J. Neurosci. 36, 11987-11998 (2016). 

22 

 
[39]  Marin,  M.  F.  et  al.  Skin  conductance  responses  and  neural  activations  during  fear  conditioning  and 

extinction recall across anxiety disorders. JAMA psychiatry 74, 622-631 (2017). 

[40] 

Sempionatto,  J.  R.  et  al.  An  epidermal  patch  for  the  simultaneous  monitoring  of  haemodynamic  and 

metabolic biomarkers. Nat. Biomed. Eng. (2021). 

23 

 
 
 
 
 
 
