arXiv: 2108.00829, updated May 28, 2022, this is a significantly expanded version of P. Moeck, 

Acta Cryst. A 78, 172–199 (2022), doi: 10.1107/S2053273322000845 (received at the journal 28 July 2021, 
accepted with minor additions January 24, 2022 (those additions went mainly into endnotes on the text and two 
appendices in arXiv: 2204.13107, April 27, 2022). This version includes in addition to the originally submitted 
version of the paper inter alia an appendix on crystallographic symmetry classifications by machine learning 
systems up to the middle of the year 2022, an appendix on crystallographic image processing as a form of 
“computational imaging”, as well as an appendix by the artist Eva Knoll herself on the physical creation of the 
crystal pattern that served as basis of this study. (That pattern can be downloaded from the supporting material to 
the published paper at http://scripts.iucr.org/cgi-bin/paper?ou5022#suppinfoanchor). 
).   
Information-theoretic symmetry classifications of crystal patterns in 
the presence of noise and strong Fedorov type pseudosymmetries for an 
optimal subsequent crystallographic processing of these patterns  

Peter Moeck 

 

in 

Abstract:  Statistically  sound  crystallographic  symmetry 
classifications  are  obtained  with  information  theory  based 
the  presence  of  approximately  Gaussian 
methods 
distributed noise. A set of three synthetic patterns with strong 
Fedorov  type  pseudosymmetries  and  varying  amounts  of 
noise serve  as examples. Contrary to  traditional  crystallogra-
phic  symmetry  classifications  with  an  image  processing 
program  such  as  CRISP,  the  classification  process  does  not 
need  to  be  supervised  by  a  human  being  and  is  free  of  any 
subjectively  set  threshold  in  the  geometric  model  selection 
process. This enables crystallographic symmetry classification 
of  digital  images  that  are  more  or  less  periodic  in  two 
dimensions  (2D)  as  recorded  with  sufficient  structural 
resolution  from  a  wide  range  of  crystalline  samples  with 
different  types  of  scanning  probe  microscopes.  Alternatives 
to the employed objective classification methods as proposed 
by  members  of  the  computational  symmetry  community  and 
machine  learning  proponents  are  briefly  discussed  in  an 
appendix  and  are  found  to  be  wanting  because  they  ignore 
Fedorov  type  pseudosymmetries  completely.  For  sufficiently 
complex crystal patterns in 2D, the information theory based 
methods  are  more  accurate  than  visual  classifications  by 
human experts.  

I.  INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND 

The  symmetries  of 

the  Euclidian  plane 

that  are 
compatible  with  translation  periodicity  in  two  dimensions 
(2D)  are  tabulated  exhaustively  in  volume  A  of  the 
International  Tables  for  Crystallography  [1]  and  in  the 
brief  teaching  edition  [2]  of  that  series  of  authoritative 
reference  books 
International  Union  of 
the 
Crystallography  (IUCr).  Quasicrystalline  symmetries  are 
discussed  in  [3].  Noncrystallographic  symmetry  has  been 
defined  in  the  on-line  dictionary  of  the  IUCr  as  a 
“symmetry  operation  that  is  not  compatible  with  the 
periodicity of a crystal pattern” [4]. 

from 

It  is  also  noted  in  [4]  and  [5]  that  this  term  is  often 
improperly  used  in  biological  crystallography,  where  one 

Peter Moeck is with the Nano-Crystallography Group, Department of 

Physics, Portland State University, Portland, OR 97207-0751, phone: 
503-725-4227; fax: 503-725-2815; e-mail: pmoeck@pdx.edu, 
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5511-8482 

should refer either to local and partial symmetry operations 
on the one hand, and pseudosymmetries, on the other hand. 
The  above  mentioned  on-line  directory  defines  crystallo-
graphic pseudosymmetry simply as featuring a “deviation” 
from  a  space  group  symmetry  (of  one,  two  and  three 
dimensions)  that  “is  limited”  [6],  without  giving  an 
explanation  on  how  the  deviation  is  to  be  quantified.  In 
this  paper,  we  will  provide  such  quantifications  for  three 
synthetic images. 

Pseudosymmetry is “a spatial arrangement that feigns a 
symmetry  without fulfilling it” [7] and can in direct space 
exist  at  either  the  site/point  symmetry  level  of  a  plane 
symmetry group or the projected Bravais lattice type level, 
or a combination thereof. When a very strong translational 
pseudosymmetry  results  in  metric  tensor  components  and 
lattice  parameters  that  are  within  experimental  error  bars 
indistinguishable from those of a higher symmetric Bravais 
lattice type, one speaks of a metric specialization [8].  

On  the  site/point  symmetry  level,  one  can  make  a 
distinction  between  crystallographic  pseudosymmetries 
that  are  either  compatible  with  the  Bravais  lattice  of  the 
unit  cell  of  the  genuine  symmetries  or  a  sublattice  of  the 
genuine symmetries. These kinds of pseudosymmetries are 
often  collectively  called  Fedorov  type  pseudosymmetries 
[9].  When  Fedorov  type  pseudosymmetries  exist  in  direct 
space,  they  will  also  show up in reciprocal/Fourier  space. 
In  very  noisy  experimental  data, 
local  and  partial 
symmetries  may  become  difficult  to  distinguish  from 
pseudosymmetries and genuine symmetries alike.  

type  pseudosymmetries 

In  the  presence  of  noise,  it  becomes  for  human 
classifiers  of  2D  crystal  patterns  particularly  difficult  to 
distinguish  Fedorov 
that  are 
compatible  with  the  Bravais  lattice  of  the  genuine 
symmetries  from  their  genuine  symmetries  counterparts. 
The  somewhat  less  difficult  distinction  of  Fedorov  type 
pseudosymmetries that are compatible with a sublattice of 
the underlying Bravais lattice from the genuine symmetries 
has  been  demonstrated  already  by  this  author  in  a  very 
short conference paper [10]. In that case, a very simple 2D 
crystal  pattern  was  used  to  which  moderate  and  large 
amounts  of  noise  were  added.  It 
to 
demonstrate  such  distinctions  for  the  more  difficult 
problem in this paper.  

is  now  time 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pseudosymmetries  of  the  Fedorov  type  form  plane 
non-disjoint from the plane symmetry group and projected 
lowest 
Laue  class  of  the  genuine  symmetries.  The 
symmetric  pseudosymmetry  groups  will  per  definition 
always  be  disjoint  from  the  lowest  symmetric  genuine 
symmetry  group  that  provides  the best fit to  experimental 
data,  but  their  minimal  Fedorov  type  supergroups  can  be 
non-disjoint  from  that  plane  symmetry  group.  Also,  per 
definition,  the lowest symmetric plane symmetry group of 
the  genuine  symmetries,  i.e.  the  so  called  “anchoring 
group”,  is  the  one  that  is  measurably  least  broken  by  the 
generalized noise in the pattern. 

Generalized noise [7] is defined in this paper as the sum 
of  all  deviations  from  the  genuine  translation  periodic 
symmetries  in  a  crystal’s  structure  and/or  the  imaged  2D 
periodic  properties  of  the  crystal.  At  the  experimental 
level,  generalized  noise  as  defined  here  combines  all 
effects  of  a  less-than-perfect  imaging  of  a  crystal,  all 
rounding  errors  and  effects  of  approximations  in  the 
applied  image  processing  algorithms,  effects  such  as 
uneven  staining  in  the  cryo-electron  microscopy  [11]  of 
subperiodoc  intrinsic  membrane  protein  crystals,  and  the 
real  structure  that  typically  exist  in  addition  to  the  ideal 
structure of a crystal.     

Note that it is always only the ideal structure of a crystal 
that is strictly 2D periodic, but the symmetry group of the 
ideal structure is per definition the one that the real crystal 
possesses  on  average  over  larger  sample  regions  which 
contain only a few symmetry breaking structural defects.    
Fedorov  type  pseudosymmetry  groups  are  by  these 
definitions  broken  to  a  measurably  larger  extent  than  the 
symmetry  group  of  the  genuine  symmetries  (and  all 
maximal  subgroups  of  these  symmetries).  This  will  be 
further  elaborated  on  in  the  second  section  of  this  paper, 
where a visual example is provided. 

The  essence  of  crystallographic  image  processing  (in 
2D)  is  the  enforcing  of  the  site/point  symmetries  that 
correspond to a correctly identified plane symmetry group 
on  all  of  the  pixel  intensity  values  within  the  translation 
averaged unit cell. This is done after translation averaging 
by  symmetrizing  the  structure-bearing  complex  Fourier 
coefficients of the intensity of the more or less 2D periodic 
image that is to be processed. 

When done correctly, crystallographic image processing 
[12-19]  increases  the  intrinsic1  quality  [20]  of  a  digital 
image  significantly  by  means  of  averaging  over  all 
asymmetric  units  of  all  unit  cells  of  the  selected  image 
area.  This  enforces  all  site/point  symmetries  of  a  plane 
symmetry  group  onto  the  translation-averaged  unit  cell. 
The  precondition  for  correctly  processing  an  image 
crystallographically  is  the  knowledge  of  the  most  likely 
plane  symmetry  that  a  hypothetical  version  of  that  image 
would possess in the absence of generalized noise. For an 
unknown crystal,  this knowledge  has historically not been 
easy  to  come  by,  and  elucidating  that  kind  of  plane 
symmetry group has been a long-standing problem in both 

1 The intrinsic quality as defined in [20] is the ratio of the (structural) 
signal to (non-structure) noise ratio with the product of the widths of the 
effective point spread function (spatial-angular resolution) and the square 
root of the number of imaging particles that contributed to the processed 
image. This concept is discussed further in the context of computational 
imaging in an appendix of this paper. 

inclusion 

“pseudosymmetry  groups”,  which  are  either  disjoint  or 
the  computational  symmetry  subfield  of computer science 
[21-23] and image-based electron crystallography [11-19].  
The  main  reason  that  this  problem  had  remained 
unsolved  for  more  than  half  a  century  are  mathematically 
defined 
relations  between  crystallographic 
symmetry groups, classes, and types [1,2]. In other words, 
the  main  reason  was  non-disjointness  of  many  of  the 
geometric  models  that  are  to  be  compared  to  the  input 
image data  and from which  the best, i.e. statistically most 
justified,  model  is  to  be  selected.  Symmetry  inclusion 
relations,  non-disjointness  and  disjointness  are  explained 
in  some  detail  in  the  third  section  of  this  paper.  That 
section also presents the plane symmetry hierarchy tree as 
a  visualization  of  disjoint  and  non-disjoint  symmetry 
inclusion  relationships  between  the  translationengleiche 
[1,2]  maximal  subgroups  and  minimal  supergroups  of  the 
plane symmetry groups.  

This author presented recently a so far unique threshold-
free  solution  to  identifying  the  genuine  plane  symmetry 
group  in  a  digital  more  or  less  2D  periodic  image  in  the 
presence  of  pseudosymmetries  and  generalized  noise 
[7,10,24,25].  Fedorov  type  pseudosymmetries  do  not 
present  challenges  to  this  solution  as  they  are  reliably 
identified  (and  can  be  quantified)  as  long  as  noise  levels 
are moderate. This will be demonstrated in this paper.  

The  author’s  solution  is  based  on  Kenichi  Kanatani’s 
theory2  [26-28]  and 
geometric  form  of 
information 
complemented  by  analogous  methods  to  identify  the 
projected Laue class [7,10] of such an image as well as its 
projected  Bravais  lattice  type  [29].  Kanatani’s  theory 
presents  a  geometric  “workaround”  to  the  symmetry 
inclusion relations problem and has the added benefit that 
the prevailing noise level does not need to be estimated for 
the comparison of non-disjoint geometric models of digital 
image  data.  This  statistical  theory  tackles  the  inclusion 
problem that a less restricted, e.g. lower symmetric, model 
of  some  input  image  data  will  always  feature  a  smaller 
deviation  (by  any  kind  of  distance  measure)  to  the  input 
image data than any more restricted, e.g. higher symmetric, 
model  that  is  non-disjoint  [26].  In  other  words,  the  fit  to 
some experimental data with more parameters will always 
be better than a fit with fewer parameters. 

The  third  section  of  this  paper  gives  the  relevant 
equations  and  inequalities  for  making  objective  plane 
symmetry and projected Laue class classifications with the 
author’s  methods  so  that  they  can  be  used  in  the  fourth 
section.  Objectivity  is  in  this  paper  to  be  understood  as 
only stating what digital image data actually reveal about a 
crystallographic 
subjective 
symmetry  without 
interpretation of any symmetry distance measure.  

any 

Note  that  information  theory  based  crystallographic 
symmetry classification methods should also be developed 
for  crystallographic  symmetry  classifications  in  three 
spatial dimensions because there is also subjectivity in the 

2 According to the Merriam-Webster Dictionary, information theory is 
defined  as  “a  theory  that  deals  statistically  with  information,  with  the 
measurement  of  its  content  in  terms  of  its  distinguishing  essential 
characteristics  or  by  the number of alternatives  from which it makes a 
choice  possible,  and with the efficiency of  processes of communication 
between humans and machines”.  

https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/information%20theory 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
current  practice  of  single  crystal  X-ray  and  neutron 
crystallography [7]. 

When  the  underlying  plane  symmetry  in  a  noisy 
experimental  image  has  been  underestimated,  i.e.  only  a 
subgroup  of  the  most  likely  plane  symmetry  group  has 
been  identified,  one  does  not  make  the  most  out  of  the 
available image data in the subsequent symmetry enforcing 
step  of  the  crystallographic  image  processing  procedure. 
On the other hand, if the plane symmetry is overestimated, 
“non-information”  due  to  noise  will  unavoidably  be 
averaged  with  genuine  structural  information  in  the 
subsequent processing (symmetry enforcing) of the image.  
In  the  latter  case,  one  may  have  wrongly  identified  a 
minimal  supergroup  of  the  correct  plane  symmetry  group 
that  the  analyzed  image  would  possess  in  the  absence  of 
generalized  noise.  That  supergroup  could  be  the  union  of 
the  genuine  plane  symmetry  group  and  one  (or  more) 
Fedorov type pseudosymmetry group(s). 

It 

important 

is,  accordingly,  very 

the 
to  get 
crystallographic  symmetry  classification  step  of 
the 
crystallographic image processing procedure just right. For 
that,  one  should  only  rely  on  the  digital  image  data  itself 
and  refrain  from  any  subjective  considerations.  The 
inclusion  of  prior  knowledge  into  such  considerations 
would be fine if done at a formal mathematical level. 

Common  practice  in  electron  crystallography  is  so  far,  
however,  to  make  such  considerations  based  on  residuals 
between  the  translation  averaged  image  and  differently 
symmetrized versions of it that are based on the structure-
bearing Fourier coefficients of the image intensity [11-19]. 
It  has  recently  been  noted  with  respect  to  cryo-electron 
microscopy that “… as currently practiced, the procedure 
is  not  sufficiently  standardized:  a  number  of  different 
variables  (e.g.  …  threshold  value  for  interpretation)  can 
substantially  impact  the  outcome.  As  a  result,  different 
expert  practitioners  can  arrive  at  different  resolution 
estimates for the same level of map details.” [11].  

With the author’s objective and interpretation-threshold-
free  methods  [7,10,24,25],  one  can  now  make  advances 
with  respect  to  the  stated  situation  in  the  cryo-electron 
microscopy 
intrinsic 
membrane  proteins,  in  the  electron  crystallography  of 
inorganic materials, and the crystallographic processing of 
digital images in general. 

that  deals  with 

[11]  subfield 

It  is  well  known  that  the  structural  (spatial-angular) 
resolution  of  crystallographic  studies  depends  on  the 
number of structural entities over which one averages [30]. 
The  correct  averaging can,  however,  only be  obtained  for 
the  correct  prior  symmetry  classification  of  the  data  that 
enter  into  such  studies  when  no  prior  knowledge  of  the 
plane symmetry is available.  

In  crystallographic  image processing on the basis  of the 
correctly identified plane symmetry group, one enforces all 
of  the  site/point  symmetries  that  the  translation  averaged 
unit  cell  image  needs  to  feature  in  order  to  be  the  best 
representation  of  the  input  image  data  in  the  information 
theoretic sense. This best representation is often called the 
“Kullback-Leibler3  best”  or  simply  K-L  best  geometric 
model that the input image data maximally supports. 

3  In  more  technical  terms,  as  explained  in  more  detail  below  in  the 
third  section  of  this  paper,  the  K-L  best  model  features  a small sum  of 
squared residual, i.e. combined difference between the input image data 

Compared 

to  standard  Fourier  filtering  [31], 

the 
processing  of  a  digital  image  in  the  correctly  determined 
plane symmetry group leads to a significant increase of the 
intrinsic  image  quality  [20]  primarily  by  an  improvement 
of the structural resolution [30] of a crystallographic study. 
Classical Fourier filtering, on the other hand, increases the 
intrinsic image quality primarily by an enhancement of the 
signal  to  noise  level.  Note  that  Fourier  filtering  is  an 
intrinsic  part  of  crystallographic  image  processing  so  that 
the image quality is improved twice4 by the enforcing of an 
objectively  derived  plane  symmetry  on  an  experimental 
image that is more or less 2D periodic.  

in 

sets  of 

implemented 

Two  different 

structure-bearing  Fourier 
coefficient  based  residuals,  as 
the 
crystallographic  image  processing  programs  CRISP  [13-
15] and ALLSPACE [12], are most popular in the electron 
crystallography  community.  Neither  of  these  two  sets  of 
residuals are maximal likelihood estimates combined with 
geometric-model 
for 
objective symmetry model selections of the image data. A 
geometric form of information theory can not, therefore, be 
based  on  these  residuals  in  order  to  avoid  a  necessarily 
subjective decision of what the underlying plane symmetry 
most  likely  is  (in  the  considered  opinion  of  the  users  of 
these two programs). 

selection-bias-correction 

terms 

The  sets  of  typically  employed  residuals  in  electron 
crystallography  quantify  deviations  of  the  experimental 
image  with  respect  to  differently symmetrized  versions of 
it,  but  the  decision  which  plane  symmetry  group  is  to  be 
its 
enforced  on 
crystallographic  image  processing is with necessity  left to 
the electron crystallographer. The CRISP program makes a 
suggestion that the user may either accept or overwrite, but 
relies  heavily  on  visual  comparisons  between  differently 
symmetrized versions of the input image data.  

image  data  as  part  of 

input 

the 

This  author  has  not  used  ALLSPACE  (in  its  2dx 
incarnation  [16])  so  far  as  no  version  that  runs  on 
Microsoft Windows compatible computers seems to exist. 
There  are  also  competing  computer  programs  with  less 
comprehensive residuals, e.g. VEC [17,18] and EDM [19] 
that  rely  even  more  heavily  on  visual  comparisons  of  the 
translation  averaged  image  to  its  fully  symmetrized 
versions.  (Note  in  passing  that  VEC  stands  for  “visual 
computing in electron crystallography” and is aptly named 
with respect to its reference to a human being’s vision.)     

The  benefits  of  the  correct  crystallographic  processing 
of a more or less 2D periodic image will be demonstrated 
as  a  secondary  goal  of  this  paper.  Scanning  probe 

and a geometric model for that data, plus twice a model-specific additive 
geometric-model selection-bias correction term. The K-L best geometric 
model  within  a  model  set  for  the  same  image  input  data  features  the 
the  classification  specific  geometric  Akaike 
minimal  value  of 
Information Criterion. The criterion  itself is an estimate of the expected 
Kullback-Leibler divergence.    

4  For  Poisson  and  approximately  Gaussian  distributed  noise,  the 
intrinsic  image  quality  [20]  increases  with  the  enforcement  of  the 
correctly identified plane symmetry by a factor that is proportional to the 
square  root  of  the  multiplicity  of  the  general  position  per  lattice  point 
(equal  to  the  number  of  non-translational  symmetry  operations  in  the 
plane  symmetry  group).  Fourier  filtering  alone  increases  the  intrinsic 
image quality with the square root of the number of crystallographic unit 
cells  in  the  recorded  image  for  Poisson  and  approximately  Gaussian 
distributed noise.   

3 

 
 
 
 
                                                                                               
 
to 

them.  This 

microscopists  should  take  notice  as  these  demonstrations 
are  mainly  directed 
is  because 
crystallographic  image  processing  is  just  as  applicable  to 
more  or  less  2D  periodic  images  from  scanning  probe 
microscopes  [25,29]  as  it  is  to  images  from  parallel 
illumination transmission electron microscopes (as used in 
electron  crystallography).  Scanning  probe  microscopists 
may,  however,  like  to  correct  for  scanning  distortions  in 
their images of 2D periodic samples with direct space tools 
such  as  Jitterbug  [32]  or  Smart  Align  [33]  before  they 
make  crystallographic 
symmetry  classifications  and 
process their images crystallographically.  

three 

synthetic 

images.  This  may  entice 

The  main  goal  of  this  paper  is  to  demonstrate  the 
author’s  threshold-free  classification  methods  on  a  series 
of 
the 
computational  symmetry,  electron  crystallography,  and 
scanning  probe  microscopy  communities  to  replace  their 
subjectivity  in  crystallographic  symmetry  classifications 
with  the  objectivity  that  the  information  theory  based 
methodology enables. 

The 

genuine 

between 

symmetries 

type 
limiting  effects  of  noise  and  Fedorov 
pseudosymmetries  in  more  or  less  2D  periodic images on 
the  accuracy  of  crystallographic  symmetry  classifications 
have so far rarely been analyzed. As one would expect, the 
distinction 
and 
pseudosymmetries  of  the  Fedorov  type  becomes  more 
difficult  with  increasing  amounts  of  noise  even  when  a 
geometric  form  of  information  theory  is  used  [10].  This 
will  be  demonstrated  here  once  more,  but  in  much  more 
detail,  in  the  fourth  section  of  this  paper.  That  section 
constitutes  this  paper’s  main  part  and  features  three 
subsections  containing  nine  numerical  data  tables  as  well 
as  four  figures.  Two  of  these  figures  illustrate  the 
beneficial  noise  reduction  and  crystallographic-averaging-
induced  structural  resolution  enhancement  effects  of 
crystallographic image processing. 

In  order  to  facilitate  direct  comparisons  to  results 
obtained  by  one  of  the  two  most  popular  traditional 
crystallographic  symmetry  classification  methods  of 
electron crystallography [13-15], *.hka files were exported 
from  CRISP  and  used  for  the  calculation  of  the  ratios  of 
sums  of  squared  residuals  (as  parts  of  geometric  Akaike 
Information  Criterion  (G-AIC)  values)  of  non-disjoint 
geometric  models  for  the  image  input  data.  Note  that 
CRISP  does  not  provide  a  direct  estimate  of  the  point 
symmetry  in  the  amplitude  map  of  a  discrete  Fourier 
transform,  which is here  referred to as the projected Laue 
class of a more or less 2D periodic image.  

The fifth section of this paper compares the results of our 
three  crystallographic  symmetry  classifications  (by  the 
author’s  information  theory  based  methods)  to  plane 
symmetry  group  estimates  by  the  program  CRISP  as 
applied  to the same and adjacent image areas of the three 
synthetic  images.  The  paper  ends  with  a  summary, 
conclusions, and outlook section.  

The  first  appendix  presents  the  hierarchy  tree  of  the 
crystallographic  2D  point  groups  that  are  projected  (2D) 
Laue  classes.  It  also  gives  a  table  on  which  plane 
symmetry  groups  and  projected  Laue  classes  are 
crystallographically  compatible  with  each  other.  The 
second  appendix  expands  the  idea  of  objective  projected 
Laue  class  classifications  from  amplitude  maps  of  the 

discrete  Fourier  transform  of  a  more  or  less  2D  periodic 
image  to  electron  diffraction  patterns  from  periodic  and 
aperiodic crystals.  

The  third  appendix  provides  the  equations  for  the 
calculation  of  ad-hoc  defined  confidence 
levels  for 
crystallographic  symmetry  classifications  by  the  author’s 
methods  into  plane  symmetry  groups  and  projected  Laue 
classes.  The  fourth  appendix  discusses  crystallographic 
image processing in the context of computational imaging, 
as  defined  in  [20].  The  fifth  appendix  gives  hypothetical 
scenarios/examples  for  the  correct  usage  of  the  symmetry 
hierarchy  trees  for  plane  symmetry  groups  and  projected 
Laue  classes 
in  objective  crystallographic  symmetry 
classifications. 

The  sixth  appendix  discusses  crystallographic  symmetry 
classifications  by alternative methods. Comments on what 
has up to December of 2021 been achieved by others with 
alternative  computational  symmetry  and  machine  learning 
approaches are provided there. That discussion extends an 
earlier  review  by  this  author  of  the  whole  field  of  direct 
reciprocal/Fourier  space  based  crystallographic 
and 
symmetry classifications of digital images that are more or 
less 2D periodic [34].  

An  outlook  on  future  developments  of  the  information 
theoretic  crystallographic  symmetry  classification  and 
quantification methodology and their potential applications 
is  provided  in  the  seventh  appendix.  So  far  unpublished 
results  of  this  author  on  the  classification  of  parallel-
illumination transmission electron microscope images from 
two  alternative 
intrinsic  membrane  protein 
an 
conformations are mentioned there.  

in 

The eights appendix is an account on the creation of the 
graphic  piece  of  art  (crystal  pattern)  [35]  that  is  analyzed 
in  this  paper.  It  is  by  the  artist  Eva  Knoll  herself  and 
clarifies  that  the  genuine  plane  symmetry  in  Figs.  1  to  3 
must be p4 in spite of a visual p4gm appearance.  

The  latter  is  clearly  a  Fedorov  type  pseudosymmetry 
because  it  is  measurably  more  severely  broken  than  the 
genuine  plane  symmetry.  The  p4  symmetry  of  the 
discussed  graphic  work  of  art  is  simply  the  result  of  the 
tiling of the Euclidian plane with digital copies of a single 
painted  ceramic  tile.  This  tile  features  the  shape  of  a 
square and represents one asymmetric unit, of a square unit 
cell, see Fig. A-7. Four tiles represent one unit cell of the 
composite  graphic  artwork  [35].  The  rest  of  the  tiling  is 
translation periodic in 2D. 

II. FEDOROV TYPE PSEUDOSYMMETRIES ILLUSTRATED 
ON A NOISE-FREE SYNTHETIC IMAGE 

Figure 1 shows a slightly enlarged reproduction of a 2D 
crystal  pattern  that  originated  with  the  artist  Eva  Knoll 
[35].  After  expansion  by  periodic  motif  stitching  of  a 
digital  representation  of  the  original  artwork  as  presented 
in  [35],  that  pattern  features  in  total  approximately  144 
primitive unit cells. The expanded image/crystal pattern is 
provided  in  the  supporting  material  of  the  published 
version  of  this  paper  in  the  *.jpg  format,  1160  by  1165 
pixels  with  24  bit  depth,  and  413.058  bytes  at 
http://scripts.iucr.org/cgi-bin/paper?ou5022#suppinfoanchor. 
Only some primitive 16 unit cells are shown in Fig. 1.  

4 

 
 
 
 
structural  imperfections/defects  that  are  intrinsic  to  the 
imaged  object.  The  generalized  noise  in  that  pattern  is, 
therefore,  negligible and we  call  this  image the noise-free 
member of a series of three images that are to be classified 
with  respect  to  their  crystallographic  symmetries  and 
Fedorov type pseudosymmetries in this paper. 

Note in passing that there are “very faint narrow-straight 
crosses”  inside  the  “curved  dark  diamonds”  that  feature 
four-fold rotation  points  in Fig.  1. The fractional unit cell 
coordinates  0,0,  1,0,  01,  and  1,1  are  assigned  to  such 
“diamonds”  in  Fig.  2.  The  “crosses”  originate  from  the 
translation  periodic  tiling  of  digital  photos  of  the  same 
painted  ceramic  square  tile,  Fig.  A-7,  without  gaps  or 
overlaps on a square lattice. 

The  artist  might  have  had  the  intention  to  “amuse” 
(maybe  also  somewhat  confuse)  a  human  classifier  of  the 
art  object’s  crystallographic  symmetries  by  presenting  a 
combination  of 
strong 
pseudosymmetries  of  the  Fedorov  type.  The  approximate 
translation  symmetry  of  the  piece of graphic art is  clearly 
revealed  in  the  2D  crystal  pattern  in  Fig.  1.  Approximate 
point/site symmetries in the approximate unit cells can also 
be recognized visibly. 

symmetries 

genuine 

and 

A human expert classifier would most likely assign plane 
symmetry  group  p4gm to the pattern in this image  at first 
sight because  approximate four-fold and two-fold rotation 
points  as  well  as  mirror  and  glide  lines  are  all  visibly 
recognizable in their required spatial arrangements in all of 
the  more  or  less  translation  periodic  unit  cells  of  the  2D 
crystal pattern in Fig. 1.  

The  different  types  of  visually  recognizable  point/site 
symmetries in all individual unit cells are probably broken 
by slightly different amounts, but these differences appear 
to  be  so  minor  that  a  human  being  may  just  assume  they 
are  all  broken  by  exactly  the  same  amount.  Under  this 
assumption,  plane  symmetry  group  p4gm  would  indeed 
underlie  the  completely  symmetric  idealization  of  the  2D 
crystal  pattern  in  Fig.  1.  The  rather  sharp  peaks  in  the 
histogram  in  Fig.  1  are  to  be  interpreted  as  genuine 
characteristics  of  the  underlying  2D  crystal  pattern  since 
no noise was added to deliberately disturb this pattern. 
image-pixel-value  based  classification  of 

this 
pattern  with  the  author’s  method  reveals,  however,  plane 
symmetry  groups  p2  and  p4  as  genuine,  with    p2  least 
broken  being  the  anchoring  group,  and  the  Fedorov  type 
pseudosymmetry  groups  p1g1,  p11g,  c1m1,  and  c11m  as 
quantitatively  more  severely  broken  than  the  p2  and  p4 
symmetries.  These  pseudosymmetries  combine  with  the 
genuine  symmetries  to  the  two  minimal  pseudo-super-
groups p2gg and c2mm, as well as their respective minimal 
pseudo-supergroup p4gm.  

The 

The  fourth  section  of  this paper gives  the details of the 
corresponding  analysis.  The  point/site  symmetry  of  the 
centers  of  the  quite  conspicuous  bright  “bow  ties”  in  this 
pattern  is  visibly  no  higher  than  point  symmetry  group  2, 
which  is  one  of  the  maximal  subgroups  of  2mm.  Site 
symmetry  2mm  is,  on  the  other  hand,  one  of  the  minimal 
supergroups  of  point  symmetry  group  2,  but  visibly  more 
severely broken in the 2D crystal pattern in Fig. 1.  

This  becomes  even  clearer 

in  Figs.  2  and  3. 
Approximately  four  primitive  (or  two  centered)  unit  cells 

5 

Fig. 1. Reproduction of a digital photo of the graphic artwork “Tiles with 
quasi-ellipses” (1992, acrylic on ceramic) by Eva Knoll with permission 
by  the  artist  and  histogram  of  the  expanded  pattern  as  inset.  The  blue 
thin line and descriptive annotations in red ink in the histogram are due 
to the program CRISP. The histogram entry “100%, 64322” means that 
there  are  64,322  pixels  with  a  gray  level  of  166,  delivering  the highest 
peak  in  the  histogram.  “RMS  =  68.3”  is  the  standard  deviation  (root 
mean  square).  “MAD  =  53.2”  is  the  mean  absolute  deviation  from  the 
mean  value.  “MEAN  =  88.574”  is  the  average brightness  value,  with 0 
corresponding to black and 256 to white. “FWID = 256 is the full width 
of 
the  histogram,  i.e.  maximal  brightness  value  minus  minimal 
brightness value.  

The  computer  program  Image  Composite  Editor  [36] 
was  used  for  the  periodic  motif  stitching.  (No  stitching 
artifacts  such  as  possible  superlattice  reflections  were 
detected  in  the  amplitude  map  of  the  discrete  Fourier 
transform  of  the  approximately  six-fold  enlarged  crystal 
pattern  that  serves  as  the  basis  of  this  study.)  There  are 
about 15.5 periodic motifs in Knoll’s paper.  

The  stitched/expanded  digital  pattern  (of  which  Fig.  1 
shows a small selection) serves in this paper as the basis of 
three synthetic images that are to be classified with respect 
to  their  crystallographic  symmetries  and  Fedorov  type 
pseudosymmetries.  The  two  per  design  noisy  versions  of 
the  series  of  analyzed  images)  are 
the  pattern  (in 
subsequently  processed  crystallographically  in  order  to 
demonstrate  the  technique’s  benefits  with  respect  to  the 
noise  suppression  and  site/point  symmetry  enforcing  of 
such a processing. 

Because the physical piece of graphic art from which the 
digital pattern in Fig. 1 was created is hand made, none of 
the 2D translation compatible crystallographic symmetries 
of  the  Euclidean  plane  are  strictly  speaking  present  (as 
they  are  only  mathematical  abstractions).  It  is,  however, 
standard practice to assign a plane symmetry group to such 
a crystal pattern as one would also do for any sufficiently 
well  resolved  image  from  a  real  crystal  in  the  real  world. 
That symmetry group is per definition the one that is least 
broken  by  structural,  sample  preparation,  imaging,  and 
image  processing  imperfections  (generalized  noise).  For 
the purpose of this demonstration, the assumption is made 
that the imaging and image processing imperfections of the 
pattern  in  Fig.  1  are  negligible  and  that  there  are  no 

 
 
 
 
 
 
of  this  pattern  in  Fig.  1  are  displayed  in  Fig.  2  after 
translation averaging by Fourier filtering5.  

0,0 

0,½ 

0,1 

½,0 

½,½ 
 ,1/2  

½,1 

1,0 

1,½ 

1,1 

Fig.  2.  Approximately  four  primitive  (or  two  centered)  translation 
averaged  unit  cells  of  the  pattern  in  Fig.  1  after  Fourier  filtering  over 
approximately  88  stitched-together  primitive  unit  cells  and  using  956 
structure-bearing  Fourier  coefficients  for  the  back  transform  into  direct 
space.  Selected  fractional  unit  cell  coordinates  as  insets.  Note  that  the 
“very  faint  narrow-straight  crosses”  inside  the  “curved  dark  diamonds” 
of  Fig.  1  that  are  labeled  here  with  fractional  unit  cell  coordinates  are 
nearly imperceptible due to a reduction of the Abbe resolution.  

Note that each bright bow tie in Fig. 2 is shared between 
two adjacent unit cells that are based on what seems to be 
a square Bravais lattice. The centers of the bright bow ties 
are  at  fractional  unit  cell  coordinates  ½,0,  ½,1,  0,½,  and 
1,½,  as  marked  by  insets  in  Fig.  2.  These  points  feature 
visually  the  approximate  site  symmetry  group  2  at  best, 
rather 
than  2mm,  which  would  be  required  if  the 
underlying  plane  symmetry  group  were  to  be  c2mm  or 
p4gm.  The  observed  site  symmetry  2  at  these  fractional 
unit cell coordinates is, on the other hand, compatible with 
plane symmetry groups p2, p2gg, and p4.  

At  the  fractional  unit  cell  coordinates  0,0,  1,0,  01,  and 
1,1 as well as ½,½ in Fig. 2, there are also clearly visible 
approximate four-fold rotation points at the centers of very 
dark “curved diamonds” so that a p4 or p4gm classification 
by a human expert is probably the best anyone could come 
up with when  the slight differences in  the breaking  of the 
individual  symmetry  operations  are  not  noticed  and 
quantified.  The  genuine  plane  symmetry  group  of  this 
image  can,  however,  only  be  p2,  p2gg,  or  p4  when  the 

5 The obtaining of satisfactory Fourier filtering results was facilitated 
by  the  above  mentioned  increase  in  the  number  of  unit  cells  in  the  2D 
crystal  pattern  that  underlies  Fig.  1  by  computational  periodic  motif 
stitching.  This  kind of  computational  increase of  a digital  image of  the 
original  graphic  work  of  art  in  [35]  is  also  highly  beneficial  to  the 
subsequent  crystallographic  symmetry  classification  and  a  possible 
follow  up  step  of  the  enforcing  of  the  plane  symmetry  that  most  likely 
underlies the pattern in a statistically sound sense. Note also that Fourier 
filtering  [31]  is  integral  part  of  symmetry  classifications  and  any 
subsequent  crystallographic  processing  of  a  digital  image.  This  is 
because the sums of squared residuals and the symmetrizing of the input 
image  data  are  based  only  on  the  structure-bearing  Fourier  coefficients 
(that are periodic in reciprocal space) of a digital image. 

visible site/point symmetry around the centers of the bright 
bow  ties  are  taken  into  account.  (Section  IV  will  reveal 
which one of the so symmetrized geometric models of the 
pattern in Fig. 1 is best in the minimal expected Kullback-
Leibler divergence sense.) 

Figure 3 zooms into the translation periodic motif of Fig. 
2  and  features  a  single  bright  bow  tie  and  its  immediate 
surrounding. Both of the arrows point in Fig. 3 to positions 
in the motif where the tips of the bright bow ties end and 
meet straight edges from the gray “right angle ruler” parts 
of the motif.  

There is approximately a 20 % difference in the distance 
of  these  points  from  the  horizontal  and  vertical  edges  of 
the gray right angle ruler shaped motif parts, so that there 
is  definitively  no  mirror  line  from  the  top-right  corner  to 
the bottom left corner in this figure, as would be required 
for  the  whole  motive  to  be  part  of  a  unit  cell  with  plane 
symmetry group p4gm.  

≈ 1.2 
units to 
upper 
edge of 
gray 
right 
angle 
ruler 

≈ 1 unit to right 
edge of gray right 
angle ruler 

Fig.  3. One bright bow tie in a close up of Fig. 2. There is probably no 
longer  an  argument  that  the  point  symmetry  of  this  feature  is  at  best 
point group 2.  

of 

the 

tile 

painted 

ceramic 

Figure  A-7  in  the  final  appendix  shows  a  photo  of  the 
original 
physical 
implementation  of  the  asymmetric  unit  of  the  graphic 
artwork  in  Fig.  1.  It  is  clear  that  this  tile/asymmetric  unit 
has  the  shape  of  a  square.  Assembling  four  of  these  tiles 
around a four-fold rotation point creates the unit cell of the 
crystal  pattern 
in  plane  symmetry  group  p4.  This 
corroborates  the  analysis  above  unambiguously.  (It  is 
irrelevant  to  the  crystallographic  analysis  that  the  artist 
intended  to  create  a  pattern  with  plane  symmetry  group 
p4gm, see Fig. A-6 for her original sketch.)  

Another  example  of  a  visual  and  analytical  discrimi-
nation  between  a  genuine  plane  symmetry  group  and 
Fedorov  type  pseudosymmetries  in  a  synthetic  image  has 
been presented  in [10].  The visual difference  between the 
least  broken  plane  symmetry  and  the  Fedorov  type 
pseudosymmetries  in  the  noise-free  image  is  clearly 
revealed  in  that  short  conference  paper.  That  other  paper 
demonstrated  also  that  the  author’s  methods  identify  the 

6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
these 

genuine  symmetry  and  pseudosymmetry  correctly  in  the 
presence of a modest amount of noise, but fail to do so for 
a large noise level when very small Fourier coefficients are 
ignored.  Some  of 
structure-bearing  Fourier 
coefficients  were  weak  superlattice  reflections  that  might 
easily be masked by noise in Fourier space and, therefore, 
overlooked. Strictly Gaussian distributed noise was used in 
that other paper [10].  
These  results  were  all  rather  similar  to  the  results  of  this 
study as presented in the fourth section of this paper. The 
main  differences  here  are 
the  crystallographic 
symmetry  classifications  are  described  in  some  detail, 
backed  up  by  data 
that  much  more 
sophisticated patterns (based on a bona fide artist’s work) 
were  analyzed.  As  another  noticeable  difference  to  the 
analysis in [10], the added noise in the analyzed patterns is 
in  this  paper  only  approximately  Gaussian  distributed  by 
design. 

tables,  and 

that 

III. PERTINENT EQUATIONS, INEQUALITIES, THE PLANE 
SYMMETRY HIERARCHY TREE; AND THEIR USAGES 

As  mentioned  above,  the  structure-bearing  Fourier 
coefficient residuals of CRISP are not in a form that allows 
for their usage as part of a G-AIC. Kanatani’s G-AIC relies 
on the noise being approximately Gaussian distributed. For 
that kind of noise, the residuals need to be sums of squares 
of  the  differences  between  the  input  data  and  geometric 
models  for  that  data.  (Other  formulations  of  geometric 
Information  Criteria  are  possible  where  the  generalized 
noise  does  not  need  to  be  approximately  Gaussian 
distributed.  The  sums  of  squared  residuals  in  Kanatani’s 
formulation are then to be replaced by maximal likelihood 
estimates  that  are  specific  to  that  other  noise  distribution. 
The  geometric-model  selection-bias correction terms need 
to be specific to the distribution of that noise as well.)  

Since  crystallographic  symmetry  classifications  are best 
done  in  Fourier  space,  the  maximal  likelihood  estimates 
for  approximately  Gaussian  distributed  noise  in  more  or 
less  2D  periodic  patterns  takes  the  form  of  the  sums  of 
squared residuals of the complex structure-bearing Fourier 
coefficients  for  plane  symmetry  group  classifications.  For 
projected  Laue  class  classifications, they take the form of 
the  sums  of  squared  residuals  of  the  amplitudes  of  those 
Fourier coefficients.  

The residuals are calculated as sums of squared Fourier 
space differences between the (Fourier) coefficients of the 
Fourier  filtered  input  image  data  and  the  differently 
symmetrized geometric models for  this  data. Equation  (1) 
gives the sum of squared residuals of the complex Fourier 
coefficients  of  a  symmetrized  (geometric)  model  of  the 
input  image  data  with  respect  to  the  translation-averaged-
only (Fourier filtered) version of this data: 


J
cFC

N

 

j


1

(

F

j

,

trans



F

symj
,

*

)


(

F

j

,

trans



F

symj
,

)

       (1), 

where  (.)*  stands  for  the  complex  conjugate  of  the 
difference  of  a  pair  of  complex  numbers  (.).  The  sum  is 
over  the  differences  of  all  N  structure-bearing  Fourier 
coefficients with matching Laue indices, and the subscripts 
on  the  right  hand  stand  for  translation  averaged  and 

symmetrized,  respectively.  The  subscript  on  the  left  hand 
side  stands  for  complex  Fourier  coefficients.  Note  that 
there  is  a  zero  sum  of  residuals  per  equation  (1)  for  the 
case  of  Fj,trans  =  Fj,sym,  i.e.  the  translation-averaged-only 
model  of  the  input  image  data,  which  features  plane 
symmetry group p1. 

The  sum  of  squared  residuals  of  the  amplitudes  of  the 
Fourier  coefficients  is  calculated  in  an  analogous  manner 
from  the  real  valued  amplitudes  of  the  structure-bearing 
Fourier coefficients: 


J
aFC



N

(

j


1

F

j

,

trans



F

symj
,

2

)

                                 (2),  

where  the  subscript  on  the  left  hand  side  stands  for 
amplitude of Fourier coefficients.  

Note again that there is a zero sum of residuals when all 
of  the  translation  averaged  and  symmetrized  Fourier 
coefficient  amplitudes  with  matching  Laue  indices  are 
equal  to  each  other.  This  happens  for  the  translation-
averaged-only  model  of  the  input  image  data,  which 
features  point  symmetry  2  due  to  the  Fourier  transform 
being  centrosymmetric.  Projected  Laue  class  2  features, 
accordingly, a zero sum of amplitude residuals in the data 
tables that are shown in the fourth section. 

In order to restrict the sums of squared residuals to small 
numbers,  the  Fourier  coefficients  of  the  input  image 
intensity and their symmetrized versions are normalized by 
division  of  the  maximal  amplitudes  that  the  CRISP 
program provides for both the translation averaged model 
and  the  symmetrized  models  of  the  input  image  data  in 
both equations (1) and (2). (That maximum is set to 10,000 
for  the  translation  averaged  image  data  as  obtained  by 
CRISP.) 

What follows below is valid for classifications into both 
plane  symmetry  groups  and  projected  Laue  classes.  The 
same  equations  and  inequalities  as  well  as  analogous 
considerations  concerning  the  plane  symmetry  group 
hierarchy and the hierarchy of 2D point groups that are 2D 
Laue classes apply so that the subscripts cFC and aFC on 
the  sums  of  squared  residuals  from  equations  (1)  and  (2) 
are  dropped  below.  Two  different  symmetry  hierarchy 
trees will, however,  be applicable.  The first one for plane 
symmetry groups is presented as Fig. 4 below. The second 
one  for  projected  Laue  classes  is  given  in  the  first 
appendix as Fig. A1. 

Kanatani’s G-AIC has the general form: 

G



AIC

S
)(


J


(2

dN



n


2

)


4

(



O

)



...

     (3), 

where Ĵ is a sum of squared residuals, as for example given 
in equations (1) and (2) for the geometric model S, d is the 
dimension  of  S,  N  is  the  number  of  data  points  that 
represent  the  model  S,  n  is  the  number  of  degrees  of 

freedom of S, and 
is the variance of a generalized noise 
term,  which  obeys  a  Gaussian  distribution  to  a  sufficient 
)

approximation.  The 

in  (3)  represents 


( 4

term 

O


2

unspecified  terms  that  are  second  order  in 
,  while  the 
ellipsis indicates higher-order terms that become progress-
sively smaller. 


2

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
For crystallographic symmetry classifications of more or 
less  2D  periodic  images,  the  dimension  of  the  geometric 
models  is  zero  (as  the  data  are  the  intensity  values  of 
individual  pixels  that  are  considered  to  be  mathematical 
points,  i.e.  zero  dimensional).  The  degrees  of  freedom  of 
the geometric  models  in this paper depend on the number 
of  non-translational  symmetry  operations  in  the  plane 
symmetry  groups  to  which  the  translation-averaged  input 
image data has been symmetrized.  

They are obtained by the ratio 

n 

N
k

                                                                       (4), 

is 

where  k 
the  above  mentioned  number  of  non-
translational  symmetry  operations,  which  is  equal  to  the 
multiplicity  of  the  general  position  per  lattice  point  in  all 
plane symmetry groups.  

Nm = Nl 

ˆ
J
m
ˆ
J
l



4
3

ˆ
J
m
ˆ
J

l



2

ˆ
J
m
ˆ
J
l



13
9

ˆ
J
m
ˆ
J

l



7
3

ˆ
J
m
ˆ
J

l



6
5

ˆ
J
m
ˆ
J

l



3
2

Fig. 4. Hierarchy tree of the translationengleiche plane symmetry groups with ratios of sums of squared complex Fourier coefficient residuals as insets. 
The inset ratios are valid for equal numbers of structure bearing Fourier coefficients of geometric models and apply to transitions from a  kl level of the 
graph to a permitted km level. Maximal subgroups are connected to their minimal supergroups by arrows. Subscript l in these ratios stands for less-
symmetric and subscript m stands for more-symmetric. 

For small and moderate amounts of generalized noise, 
it  is  justified  to  ignore  all  of  the  higher  order  terms  in 
(3):  

G



AIC

S
)(



J

(2

dN



n


2)


                         (5). 

The number of data points N can either be constant for 
all  geometric  models  or  differ  from  model  to  model. 
The  dimension  of  the  model  is  defined  by  the  type  of 
geometric model.  

residual” 

Equation  (5)  is  to  be  interpreted  as  a  “balanced 
geometric  model 
for  geometric  model 
selections  that  is  well  suited  to  deal  with  symmetry 
inclusion  relations.  A  non-disjoint  and  less-constrained 
model,  which  is  lower  symmetric,  will  always  fit  the 
input  data  better  than  the  more  constrained  model  that 
features a higher non-disjoint symmetry. The Ĵ value of 
the  less  constrained  (more  general)  model  that  is  in  a 
non-disjoint relationship with a higher symmetric model 
will,  therefore,  be  smaller  than  its  counterpart  for  the 
more  constrained  model.  In  other  words,  the  more 
general  geometric  model  fits  the  data  better  than  the 

more restricted model. This is because the more general 
(less constrained) model has more degrees of freedom. 

The geometric model-bias correction-term 2 (dN + n) 

2
in (5) will for the less constrained geometric model 
be  larger  than  its  counterpart  for  the  more  constrained 
model (assuming k > 1 and, for convenience, an equal N 
for both models). In other words, the better fitting, less 
constrained,  model  features  a  higher  “geometric  model 
selection  penalty” 
fitting,  more 
constrained, counterpart. This kind of interplay between 
fitting  the  input  image  data  better  at  the  expense  of  a 
higher  model  selection  penalty  provides  the  basis  for 
objective geometric model selections by the minimizing 
of their G-AIC values over a complete set of geometric 
models.  

its  worse 

than 

As  long  as  the  G-AIC  value  of  a  more  constrained, 
higher  symmetric  model,  subscript  m,  is  smaller  than 
that  of  the  less  constrained  model,  subscript  l,  the 
former  model  is  a  better  representation  of  the  input 
image data than the latter: 

                                        (6). 

8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The  rational  geometric  model  selection  strategy  is  to 
minimize  the  G-AIC  values  (rather  than  only  the  sums 
of  squared  residuals)  for  a  whole  set  of  geometric 
models by means of repeated applications of inequality 
(6). As there are two models, Sm and Sl in (6), one sets 
this  inequality  up  for  non-disjoint  pairs  of  geometric 
models,  one  at  a  time,  and  tests  if  inequality  (6)  is 
fulfilled.  

This  allows  for  a  more  constrained/symmetric  model 
of  the  input  image  data  to  be  selected  in  a  statistically 
sound manner as better representation of the input data 
although  its  numerical  fit,  as  measured  by  its  sum  of 
squared  residuals,  is  worse  than  that  of  the  less 
constrained 
the 
(symmetric)  model.  Note 
identification  of  which  of  the  two  geometric  models  is 
the better representation of the input image data is based 
solely  on  the  input  data  itself  and  the  underlying 
mathematics  [27,28]  of  Kanatani’s  theory.  (In  this 
paper,  the  mathematics  of  crystallographic  symmetries 
[1,2] comes obviously into play as well.)  

that 

for 

There 

threshold 

is  no  arbitrarily  set 

the 
identification  of  the  better  model  in  the  presence  of  a 
symmetry  inclusion  relationship,  just  an  inequality  that 
needs  to  be  fulfilled  numerically.  All  of  the  other 
crystallographic  symmetry  classification  methods  that 
were so far used in electron crystallography [11-19] and 
the computational symmetry community [21-23] feature 
such thresholds. 

separation  of 

At  first  sight,  it  would  seem  that  estimates  of 

are 
needed to make objective geometric model selections by 
the  minimization  of  their  G-AIC  values  by  means  of 
inequality (6) and the definition of the first-order model 
selection criterion (5). Each geometric model features a 
the  presumed  geometric 
different 
information  amount,  on  the  one  hand,  and  presumed 
non-information  (generalized  noise)  amount,  on  the 
other hand. 

There  is,  however,  a  workaround  to  estimating 


2
that  not  only  identifies  the  best  possible  separation  of 
geometric  information  and  non-information,  but  also 
gives  an  estimate  of  the  prevailing  noise  in  the  input 
image  data.  The  workarounds  in  this  paper  take 
advantage  of  the  translationengleiche  [1,2]  symmetry 
inclusion  relationships  between  plane symmetry  groups 
as shown in Fig. 4, i.e. non-disjointness in other words.  
We  will  explain  the  workaround  for  plane  symmetry 
classifications  in  this  section  of  the  paper  and  refer  to 
the  first  appendix  for  specifics  that  need  to  be 
considered in order to use this workaround for projected 
Laue  class  classifications  on  the basis  of the amplitude 
map of the discrete Fourier transform of a more or less 
2D periodic pattern.  

The number of non-translational symmetry operations, 
k is one of the two ordering principles of the hierarchy 
tree of the translationengleiche plane symmetry groups, 
Fig.  4. The other ordering principle in this figure is the 
non-disjointness  of  maximal  subgroups  and  minimal 
supergroups  of  the  plane  symmetry  groups.  These 
symmetry  inclusion  relations  are  in  Fig.  4  marked  by 
arrows  between  maximal  subgroups  and  minimal 
supergroups. The ratios of the sums of squared residuals 


2

of  complex  structure-bearing  Fourier  coefficients  for 
climbing  up  from  a  lower  level  (subscript  l  for  less-
symmetric) of the hierarchy to a higher level (subscript 
m  for  more-symmetric)  that  is  permitted  by  the  special 
case Nm = Nl of inequality (9a) are also given in Figure 
4.  

Translationengleich  in  the  previous  paragraph  means 
that  the  addition  of  a  non-translational  symmetry 
operation  to  the  unit  cell  of  a  lower  symmetric  group, 
which has the status of a maximal subgroup, results in a 
unit  cell  of  a  higher  symmetric  group,  which  is  the 
former’s minimal supergroup. Changes from a primitive 
unit  cell  to  a  centered  unit  cell  and  vice  versa  are 
permitted [37] (as they represent effectively orientation 
changes  of  symmetry  operations  with  respect  to  the 
conventional unit cell vectors).  

The  translation  averaged  geometric  model  of  some 
input  image  data  (with  plane  symmetry  group  p1)  is 
non-disjoint from the c1m1 symmetrized model of these 
data,  as  that  plane  symmetry  groups  is  a  minimal 
supergroup  of  p1.  The  centered  plane  symmetry  group 
c1m1  with  k  =  2  is  in  turn  in  a  maximal  subgroup 
relationship with plane symmetry  group p3m1 with k = 
6, see Fig. 4.  

The number of non-translational symmetry operations 
in  each  plane  symmetry  group,  k,  is  given  on  both  the 
left and right hand side of Fig. 4 and increases from the 
bottom to the top of the hierarchy tree. The connecting 
arrows  in  Fig.  4  mark  plane  symmetry groups as being 
non-disjoint.  Whenever  there  is  no  arrow  connecting 
two plane symmetry groups in Fig. 4, that pair of groups 
is disjoint in the translationengleiche sense [37].   

  In the above mentioned workaround to estimating the 

2
square  of  the  noise  level,
,  for  the  best  possible 
separation  of  the  experimental  data  into  signal  and 
noise,  one  sets  up  inequality  (6)  for  two  non-disjoint 
models of the input image data that were symmetrized to 
non-disjoint plane symmetry groups, i.e.  


J
m



(2

dN



m

with 



2

m 
l

2

we obtain 

J
m

(2



dN



m

m


2

)
m




J
l



(2

dN



l

N
k

m

m


2

)
l




J
l



(2

dN



l

N
k

m

l


2

)
l

 (7a),  

N
k

l

     (7b), 

l


2

)
l

  (7c),  

N
k

l

by taking advantage of both the inequality signs in (7a) 
and (7b).  
   The unbiased estimate 

J
 2
l


   (8), 

rN



l

n
l

l

for  the  square  of  the  “amount”  of  approximately 
Gaussian distributed noise,  where r is the so-called  co-
dimension  in  Kanatani’s  framework  (which  is  for  our 

9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
case  equal  to  one6)  allows  us  to  recast  inequality  (7c) 
with dm = dl = 0 into 
N
m
N


                                     (9a). 


1

l
)1

(2



k

k

k

k

(

)


J
m

J
l

m

m

l

l

The  more  symmetric/restricted  model,  subscript  m, 
that fulfills inequality (7c) and (9a) will provide a better 
separation  of  noise/non-information  and  signal/structu-
ral information in the image, as stated in (7b).  

Note  that  per  inequality  (9a),  climbing  up  from  the 
translation-averaged-only model of the input image data 
to  all  geometric  models  that  have been symmetrized to 
minimal supergroups of p1 is impossible, as kl  = 1 in all 
of  these  cases.  (There  is  also  a  zero  sum  of  squared 
complex Fourier coefficient residuals for the translation-
averaged-only  model,  equation  (1),  so  that  there  is  no 
inconsistency.)  

One,  therefore,  simply  assumes  that  there  is  indeed 
more than translation symmetry in the input image data 
and uses inequality (9a) with kl = 2 and 3 as minimum. 
After  having  made  that  assumption,  one  proceeds  with 
determining  what  symmetry  operations  there  are  in  the 
input  image  data  and  to  what  plane  symmetry  group 
they combine.  

and  possibly 

symmetry  groups 

One  needs  to  carefully  distinguish  between  genuine 
plane 
existing 
pseudosymmetry  groups  in  the  input  image  data  based 
on the model pair’s Ĵm, Ĵl, km, and kl values and Nm to Nl 
ratio. Based on the definitions in the first section of the 
paper, the least broken  symmetry at the kl = 2  and 3 is 
the first genuine symmetry that is identified and all other 
genuine  symmetries  need  necessarily  be  anchored  on 
this particular symmetry group.  

For the special case Nm = Nl, inequality (9a) reduces to  

J
m

J
l

                                           (9b)7.  

k

)
l

)1

k
m
(
k

(2
k


1

m

l

6 This is because the dimension of the data space is one (intensity 
values  of  pixels).  The  co-dimension  is  the  difference  between  the 
dimension  of  the  data  space  and  the  dimension  of  the  model space. 
The  latter  is  zero  as  we  are  dealing  with  mathematical  points  as 
approximations of image pixels. 

7  Xanxi  Liu  and  co-workers  used  Kanatani’s  G-AIC  for  the 
classification of more or less 1D periodic patterns into freeze groups 
in direct space. In the appendix of an earlier/longer version of X. Liu, 
R. T. Collins, and Y. A. Tsin, IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 
2004, vol. 26, 354-371 (as quoted in [7] with the URL to the *,pdf), a 
formula analogous to (9b) (equivalent to (9a) for Nm = Nl) is given for 
direct  space classifications  of  more or less  2D periodic patterns into 
plane symmetry groups. The number of analyzed translation periodic 
tiles  enters  into  their  equation  so  that  a  non-zero  squared  residual 
ratio exist for ascent tests of plane symmetry groups from kl = 1 to km 
= 2 or 3, whenever more than a single tile is compared.  

Working in direct space has, however, the significant disadvantage 
of not being able to remove much of the noise from the analysis in a 
simple  and  effective  manner.  Also  as  inconsistencies  in  their  frieze 
symmetry  classifications  of  time  periodic  movements  of  people 
showed [7], one has a significant pattern alignment problem in direct 
space that does not exist in Fourier space. In Fourier space one always 
works  with  tiles  that  are  symmetrized  to  plane  symmetry  groups 
higher than p1 and kl is always an integer larger than unity. 

One  can  then  take  advantage  of  the  inequality  having 
now  the  simple  form  of  a  numerical  value  on  its  right 
hand  side  that  is  just  the  sum  of  unity  and  a  constant 
term that only depends on the difference in the hierarchy 
levels, k, of the respective two symmetrized non-disjoint 
models that are to be compared to each other8, see Fig. 
4.  The  respective  ratios  of  sums  of  squared  complex 
Fourier  coefficient  residuals  are  provided  in  Fig.  4  as 
insets for easy reference.  

levels 

Inequality (9b) can be used in connection with ad hoc 
defined  confidence 
for  geometric  model 
selections [29]. Providing such confidence levels can be 
understood  as  giving  a  quantitative  measure  of  the 
corresponding model-selection-uncertainty, which needs 
to 
symmetry 
measurement results in order to be complete [38].  

crystallographic 

accompany 

any 

The third appendix gives the formulae for calculating 
confidence  levels  for  both  plane  symmetry  and  Laue 
class  classifications.  We  will,  however,  not  use 
inequality  (9b)  and  equations  (A-1)  to  (A-4)  in  this 
paper as their precondition Nm = Nl is in general not met 
in  our  study.  This  is  due  to  the  usage  of  as  exported 
*.hka files from the CRISP program or, in other words, 
due  to  the  setup  of  this  particular  study.  It  is  also 
possible to generalize the confidence level equations by 
basing them on inequality (9a). 

(number 

In  practice,  one  begins  an  objective  crystallographic 
symmetry  classification  with  calculating  the  sums  of 
squared  residuals  for  all  of  the  geometric  models  that 
feature  a  multiplicity  of  the  general  position  per lattice 
point 
symmetry 
operations) of two and three, see Fig. 4. Note that plane 
symmetry  groups  c1m1  and  c11m  feature  two  non-
translational symmetry operations each, the multiplicity 
of  the general position in  the centered unit cell is four, 
but there are two lattice points per unit cell.  

non-translational 

of 

All  of  the  geometric  models  with  two  and  three  non-
translational  plane  symmetry  operations  are  disjoint 
from  each  other  per  definition.  Combinations  of  the 
groups  with  two  and  three  non-translational  plane 
symmetry  operations  lead  to  the  majority  of  plane 
symmetry  groups  that  are  higher  up  in  the  hierarchy 
tree, Fig. 4. 
    When  there is more than translation symmetry in the 
input  image  data,  at  least  one  of  the  geometric  models 
that  has  been  symmetrized  to  a  plane  symmetry  group 
with two or three non-translational symmetry operations 
will have a low sum of squared residuals of the complex 
structure-bearing  Fourier  coefficients.  The  plane 
symmetry  group  of  that  model  is  necessarily  non-
disjoint  from  its  minimal  supergroups  so  that  tests  if  a 
“climbing  up”  in  the  plane  symmetry  hierarchy  tree  is 
allowed  by  inequality  (9a)  can  proceed  until  the 
Kullback-Leibler  best  geometric  model  of  the  image 
input  data  has  been  found.  Appendix  E  gives  a  few 
hypothetical  scenarios/examples  that  illustrate the logic 
of  the  climbing  up  procedure  to  identify  the  K-L  best 

8  The  comparison  of  two  non-disjoint  symmetrized  models  with 
respect of their ability to represent the input image data well is based 
on  having  an  appropriate  “relative  measure”  of  their  numerical 
distance  to  the  common  translation-averaged-only  model  in  the  first 
place. 

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
geometric model of some image input data for both the 
plane symmetry group and the projected Laue class.  

By  first  calculating  the  sums  of  squared  residuals  for 
all eight  geometric models of the input image  data that 
feature k = 2 and 3, we made sure we know from which 
plane symmetry group the anchoring and climbing up in 
the  hierarchy  tree  of  plane  symmetry  groups,  Fig.  4, 
shall proceed as long as permitted by the fulfillment of 
inequality (9a).  

The  sums  of  squared  residuals  of  the  complex 
structure-bearing  Fourier  coefficients  of  the  geometric 
models  of  the  input  image  data  that  have  been 
symmetrized  to  higher  symmetric  plane  symmetry 
groups  may  be  calculated  on  an  as  needed  basis.  Note 
that the whole procedure  can be programmed and does 
not  require  visual  inspections  and  comparisons  of 
differently  symmetrized  versions  of  the  input  image 
data.  This  makes 
theory  based 
classification  techniques  very  different  to  the  other 
plane  symmetry  classification  methods  that  are  used  in 
contemporary electron crystallography [12-19].   

information 

the 

that 

Note 

to  conclude 

that  a  certain  minimal 
supergroup  is  a  plane  symmetry  that  minimizes  the  G-
AIC value of a geometric model of the image input data 
within a set of models, inequality (9a) has to be fulfilled 
for  all  maximal  subgroups  (and  in  turn  their  maximal 
subgroups). If that  is  not  the case, that plane symmetry 
is only  a  Fedorov type pseudosymmetry as  it is broken 
to a larger extent than the genuine plane symmetry that 
the  hypothetical  noise-free  version  of  the  input  image 
most  likely  possesses.  The  correct  crystallographic 
symmetry  classifications  of  a  more  or  less  2D  periodic 
pattern  are  the  plane  symmetry  group  and  Laue  class 
that minimize the G-AIC values.  
   A  good  estimate  of  the  amount  of  generalized  noise 
can  be  obtained  after  the  correct  crystallographic 
symmetry classification has been made 

 2

best




J
best


best

rN

n
best

                                             (10), 

where the subscript best stands for the Kullback-Leibler 
best  model  of  the  input  image  data.  This  estimate is in 
the  same  format  as  (8),  i.e.  the  representation  of  the 
estimated  noise  level  of  the  geometric  model  that 
features  the  lower  symmetric  group  or  class  in  a  pair-
wise  model  comparison  procedure.  When  the  K-L  best 
model of the input image data has been identified, there 
is  obviously  no  further  climbing  up  allowed  in  the 
symmetry hierarchy trees of Figures 4 and A-1. This is 
because  the  G-AIC  values  inequality  (5)  can  no  longer 
be fulfilled by ways of fulfillments of inequalities (7) as 
well as (9a) or (9b).  

are 

Geometric  Akaike  weights,  which 

the 
probabilities that a certain geometric model of the input 
image  data  is  indeed  the  K-L  best  model  in  a  set  of 
geometric models, can then be calculated on the basis of 
the  estimated  noise  level  and  the  full  G-AIC  values  of 
the geometric models according to equation (5). This is 
not  done  in  this  paper  and  the  reader  is  referred  to 
[7,23]  for  details  on  how  likelihoods  of  geometric 
models  are  transformed  into  model  probabilities.  Note 

that  providing  geometric  Akaike  weights  is  a  second 
to  deriving  uncertainty  measures  for  plane 
route 
class 
symmetry 
classifications,  without  which 
crystallographic 
symmetry measurements are simply incomplete [38]. 

projected  Laue 

group 

and 

IV. OBJECTIVE CRYSTALLOGRAPHIC SYMMETRY 
CLASSIFICATIONS OF A NOISE-FREE AND TWO 
RELATED SYNTHETIC PATTERNS WITH ADDED NOISE 

these  files  contains  all  of 

As already mentioned in the introduction of this paper, 
crystallographic  symmetry classifications are  done here 
with  both  the  author’s  methods  and  the  electron 
crystallography program CRISP [13-15] using the same 
*.hka  files  of  the  latter  program.  An  appropriately 
chosen  series  of 
the 
information  on  the  periodic-structure  bearing  Fourier 
coefficients  of  the  differently  symmetrized  geometric 
models  of  the  input  image  data  that  is  needed  for 
objective classification into plane symmetry groups and 
projected  Laue  classes.  In  the  CRISP  program,  these 
files  are  internally  used  to  calculate  sets  of  amplitude 
and  phase  angle  residuals  of  the  symmetrized  input 
image  data  as  well  as  ratios  of  sums  of  odd  to  even 
amplitudes  where  those  are  meaningful,  i.e.  symmetry 
quantifiers  of  the  deviation  of  a  tested  plane  symmetry 
group in reciprocal space from the Fourier filtered input 
image data. These files are also used internally to create 
symmetrized  direct  space  versions  of  the  input  image 
data  by  Fourier  back  transforming  for  visual  compare-
sons by the CRISP program’s user.  

The  *.hka  files  can  be  interactively  edited  in  CRISP. 
This  allows  for  restrictions  of  the  geometric  models  of 
the  input  image  to  a  desired  dynamic  range  of  the 
Fourier  coefficient  amplitudes.  The  program’s  default 
value  for  this  dynamic  range  is  200.  (The  maximal 
dynamic range is 10,000.)  

Lowering  the  dynamic  range  leads  to  a  reduction  of 
the  number  of  complex  structure-bearing  Fourier 
coefficients  of  the  geometric  models  and  we will make 
use of that for both the noise-free image and the modest 
amount of added noise image in the analyzed series, see 
Figs. 1 and 5. 

Calculating the discrete Fourier transform with CRISP 
in  its  maximal  dynamic  range  setting  resulted  in  3,666 
complex  structure-bearing  Fourier  coefficients  for  the 
translation  averaged  model  of  the  2D  crystal  pattern in 
Fig.  1.  The  patterns  in  Figs.  2  and  3  are,  on  the  other 
hand,  restricted  to  the  back-transform  of  the  956 
strongest  complex  Fourier  coefficients  without  any 
symmetrizing. 

A  limited  dynamic  range  of  the  Fourier  coefficient 
amplitudes  may  lead  to  a  reduction  in  the  accuracy  of 
the  geometric  models  of  the  input  image  data.  As  the 
direct  visual  comparison  of  the  2D  crystal  patterns  in 
Figs.  1  and  2  suggests,  this  is  not  a  problem  in  the 
present  study.  Limiting  the  dynamic  range  has,  on  the 
other  hand,  the  benefit  of  reducing  “Fourier  ripples” 
around  features  with  very  strong  contrast  changes,  as 
can be seen in Fig. 2.  

With a very large number of data points in the discrete 
Fourier  transform  of  some  input  image  data  with  very 

11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
small amplitudes, one has to wonder if the accuracies of 
geometric  models  of  the  input  image  data  are  not 
compromised  by  the  limited  representation  length  of 
real  numbers  in  a  computer  program,  accumulated 
rounding  errors,  and  numerical  approximations  in  the 
calculation of the discrete Fourier transform. 

The CRISP program allows also for restrictions of the 
spatial  resolution  of  the  geometric  models  of  the  input 
image  data.  This  spatial  resolution  is  defined  by  the 
Abbe criterion9 [20].  

Restricting the spatial resolution is typically necessary 
for  noisy  images  that  are  to  be  classified  and  will  be 
done  here  as well for  both of the noisy images, Figs. 5 
and  6.  What  will  be  called  “spread  noise”  below  is 
particularly  effective  in  reducing  the  number  of  well 
resolved  data  points  in  a  discrete  Fourier  transform,  as 
demonstrated  in  [24],  so  that  restrictions  of  the  Abbe 
resolution  need  to  be  done  in  this  study  for  the  noisy 
images. Without judicious restrictions of the dynamical 
range  of 
the  structure-bearing  Fourier  coefficient 
amplitudes  and  the  Abbe  resolution  of  noisy  images, 
one  may  produce  conspicuous  artifacts 
the 
subsequent  crystallographic  processing  of  more  or  less 
2D periodic images.  

in 

the  pertinent 

The MatLab script hkaAICnorm10 [24], as written by a 
graduate  student  of  this  author,  was  used  for  the 
extraction  of 
the 
exported  *.hka  files.  That  script  can  be  freely 
downloaded  and  calculates 
the  sums  of  squared 
residuals, equations (1) and (2),  for all of the geometric 
models that are used in this study from a series of  *.hka 
files from the CRISP program. 

information  from 

The  noise-free  pattern,  Fig.  1,  of  the  synthetic  image 
series  is  classified  with  respect  to  its  plane  symmetry 
group  and  projected  Laue  class  in  the  first  subsection 
below.  The 
the 
classifications of the two noisy images, Figs. 5 and 6, of 
the series. 

subsection 

presents 

second 

The  results  of  the  crystallographic  processing  of  the 
two noisy patterns of the analyzed series are given in the 
third subsection.  

A.  Classifications of the noise-free pattern in the series 

Table  I  lists  the  sums  of  squared  residuals  for  a 
judicious  selection  of  geometric  models  of  the  noise-
free pattern, of which a small section is shown in Fig. 1. 
In  all  three  analyses  of  this  paper,  circular  area 
selections with a diameter of 1024 pixels were made in 
direct  space  for  the  calculation  of  the  discrete  Fourier 
transforms.  (Circular  area  selections  were  shown  to 
deliver  better  results  than  square  selections  in  [24].) 

9  Just  like  the  spatial  resolution  limit  according  to  Rayleigh  and 
Sparrow,  the  Abbe  resolution  is  strictly  defined  for  an  infinite 
imaging particle fluence [20], implying a signal to noise ratio that is 
independent of the spatial resolution of a system that can be modeled 
by a Fourier transform. It is, therefore, not fully suitable to capture the 
full complexity in the era of computational imaging  

10  This  script  works  with  normalized  amplitudes of the structure-
bearing Fourier coefficients in order to keep the numbers in the data 
tables below reasonably small. 

These  sections  contained  approximately  88  primitive 
unit  cells  of  the  2D  crystal  patterns  that  are  to  be 
classified. 

Table I: Results of the hkaAICnorm MatLab script on the 
noise-free pattern that underlies Fig. 1 for geometric model 
selections by inequality (9a). 
Sums of squared 
residuals of 
complex Fourier 
coefficients 

Sums of squared 
residuals of 
Fourier coefficient 
amplitudes 

 Plane symmetry 
group to which 
the image data 
have been 
symmetrized  

p2 
p1m1 
p11m 
p1g1 
p11g 
c1m1 
c11m 
p3 
p2gg 
c2mm 
p4 
p4mm 
p4gm 

0.0042 
1.8799 
1.8642 
0.0094 
0.0081 
0.0103 
0.0110 
2.5290 
0.0096 
0.0119 
0.0065 
1.9558 
0.0102 

None 
0.0052 
0.0052 
0.0052 
0.0052 
0.0053 
0.0053 
1.3339 
0.0052 
0.0053 
0.0021 
0.0063 
0.0061 

Number of 
Fourier 
coefficients in 
the geometric 
model of the 
image data 
956 
937 
937 
934 
934 
924 
924 
954 
931 
924 
948 
918 
912 

No  spatial  restriction  was  made  in  Fourier  space  for 
the  calculation  of  the  entries  in  Table  I.  The  dynamic 
range  of  the  Fourier  coefficient  amplitudes  was  set  to 
100  in  order  to  restrict  the  number  of  data  points  N  in 
equations  (1),  (2),  and  (5)  to  something  that  is  easier 
managed.  

Note that the first seven entries in this table consist of 
the geometric  models  of the input data that feature two 
non-translational  symmetry  operations,  whereas  the  8th 
entry  features  three  such  operations.  All  of  these  eight 
models  are  disjoint  from  each  other  (and  there  are  no 
connecting vectors between them in the plane symmetry 
hierarchy tree in Fig. 4). 

The  subsequent  three  entries  in  Table  I  consist  of 
geometric  models  that  feature  four  non-translational 
symmetry  operations.  The last two  entries  feature eight 
such  operations  and  the  two  corresponding  models  are 
disjoint  from  each  other  (in  the  translationengleiche 
sense [37]).  

The  lowest  sum  of  squared  residuals  of  the  complex 
Fourier  coefficients  is  for  the  2D  crystal  pattern  that 
underlies  Fig.  1  obtained  for  the  geometric  model  that 
has been symmetrized to plane symmetry group p2. The 
model with plane symmetry group p4 is listed in Table I 
as  the  one  that  has  the  lowest  (non-zero)  sum  of 
residuals of the amplitudes of the Fourier coefficients.  

The  symmetry  in  the  amplitude  map  of  the  discrete 
Fourier  transform  is  for  the  p4  symmetry  model  of  the 
input  image  data  point  group  4  [1,2],  which  is  a 
projected Laue class. For easy reference, the entries for 
geometric  models  with  plane  symmetry  groups  p2  and 
p4  are  marked  in  Table  I  by  the  shading  of  the 
respective two rows.  

The  selection  of  entries  in  Table  I  has  been  made  in 
order to demonstrate the climbing up from a lower level 
of the hierarchy of plane symmetry groups, see Fig. 4, to 
the next higher level.  

12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
The  tests  if  such  a  climbing  up  is  allowed  by  the 
fulfillment  of  inequality  (9a)  start  always  at  the 
geometric  model  with  the  plane  symmetry  that  has  the 
lowest sum of squared residuals of the complex Fourier 
coefficients  amongst  the  mutually  disjoint  models  with 
two  and  three  non-translational  symmetry  operations, 
i.e.  the  anchoring  group.  That  starting  model  features 
always  per  definition  a  genuine  symmetry,  but  more 
genuine symmetries can potentially be identified by the 
fulfillment of inequality (9a) for some of its non-disjoint 
models  that  may  combine  with  the  first  identified 
level  genuine 
genuine  symmetry 
symmetry.  

to  some  higher 

As  already  mentioned  above,  the  geometric  model 
that  was  symmetrized  to  plane  symmetry  group  p2 
features  the  lowest  sum  of  squared  residual  of  the 
complex  Fourier  coefficients  in  Table  I.  All  symmetry 
models  that  are  candidates  for  climbing  up  from  the 
geometric  model  that  was  symmetrized  to  p2  in  the 
plane symmetry group hierarchy tree, Fig. 4, i.e. p2mm, 
p2gm,  p2mg,  c2mm,  and p4 need to have a sufficiently 
small sum of squared residuals (and G-AIC values) with 
respect to all of their maximal subgroups in order to be 
declared  genuine.  Otherwise  they  are  Fedorov  type 
pseudosymmetries  by  definition.  Geometric  models  of 
the input image data with low (but not the lowest) sums 
of squared complex Fourier coefficient residual and two 
or  three  non-translational  symmetry  operations  may 
either  reveal  a  genuine  symmetry  or  a  Fedorov  type 
pseudosymmetry. 

Plane  symmetry  group  p4  has  only  one  maximal 
subgroup, i.e. p2, so that only one inequality fulfillment  
test  is  needed  to  find  out  if  the  former  is  a  genuine 
symmetry  of  the  2D  crystal  pattern  in  the  input  image 
data or not. For each of the other four models mentioned 
in  the previous paragraph, one would need to complete 
three inequality fulfillment tests. It is, however, already 
quite  clear  from  the  entries  in  Table  I  that  only  the 
models  that  were  symmetrized  to  plane  symmetry 
groups  p1g1,  p11g,  c1m1,  and  c11m,  have  reasonably 
low  sums  of  squared  residuals  (and  G-AIC  values)  to 
make them reasonable candidates for climbing up tests. 
The geometric models that were symmetrized to p2mm, 
p2gm,  and  p2mg  are  just  too  far  from  fulfilling 
inequality  (9a)  with  respect  to  the  anchoring  group  as 
their sums of squared residuals in Table 1 are very much 
larger than that for the p2 model.   

Table  II  gives  the  ratios  of  the  sums  of  squared 
residuals  of  the  complex  Fourier  coefficients  for  the 
non-disjoint  models  of  Table  I  (left  hand  side  of 
inequality  (9a)  in the second column) together with the 
maximal  value  that  these  ratios  may  have  (right  hand 
side  of  inequality  (9a)  in  the  third  column)  in  the 
context  of  minimization  of  the  G-AIC  value  of  the 
higher  symmetric  model  of  a  pair  of  non-disjoint 
geometric  models  of  the  input  image  data.  The  tests  if 
climbing  up  to  the  next  level  of  the  plane  symmetry 
hierarchy tree is allowed consist in a simple comparison 
of the numerical values in the second and third column 
of Table II, which is recorded in the fourth column. 

There  is  only  one  unconditional  “yes”  in  the  fourth 
column  of  this  table,  as  marked  by  the  shading  of  the 

corresponding  row,  so  that  the  conclusion  has  to  be 
drawn  that  the  geometric  model  which  has  been 
symmetrized  to  plane  symmetry  group  p4  features  the 
only  other  genuine  symmetry  in  the  2D  crystal  pattern 
that  underlies  Fig.  1,  i.e.  the  noise-free  image  of  the 
series.  

Table II: Numerical values of ratios of sums of squared 
residuals of the complex Fourier coefficients of non-disjoint 
models of the noise-free pattern that are either within their 
maximal allowance or not. 

p2gg over p2 
p2gg over p1g1 

Left hand side of 
(9a) 
2.285714 
1.021277 

Right hand 
side of (9a) 
2.0261506 
2.0032312 

p2gg over p11g 

1.185185 

2.0032312 

c2mm over p2 
c2mm over 
c1m1 
c2mm over 
c11m 
p4 over p2 
p4mm over p4 
p4gm over p4 
p4gm over 
p2gg 
p4gm over 
c2mm 

2.83333 
1.155340 

1.081818 

1.547619 
300.8923 
1.569231 
1.06250 

2.0 
2.0 

2.0 

2.008368 
1.3438819 
1.3459916 
1.3401361 

0.857143 

1.3376623 

Inequality (9a) 
fulfilled? 
no, blocking ascent 
yes, but due to 
pseudosymmetry 
yes, but due to 
pseudosymmetry 
no, blocking ascent 
yes, but due to 
pseudosymmetry  
yes, but  due to 
pseudosymmetry  
yes 
no, blocking ascent 
no, blocking ascent 
yes, but due to 
pseudosymmetry 
yes, but due to 
pseudosymmetry 

It  is  important  to  realize  that  all  genuine  symmetries 
above  the  k  =  2  and  3  level  must  by  definition  be 
anchored on the least broken plane symmetry group, i.e. 
the one with the lowest sum of squared residuals for the 
complex Fourier coefficients at the kl = 2 and 3 levels in 
Fig.  4.  The  fulfillment  of  inequality  (9a)  for  a  pair  of 
non-disjoint  geometric  models  that  does  not  fulfill  this 
overwriting  requirement  can  per  definition  only  signify 
a  strong  Fedorov  type  pseudosymmetry,  which  will  be 
clearly visible  in a direct space image. Plane symmetry 
type 
groups  p2gg  and  c2mm  must  be  Fedorov 
pseudosymmetries  of  the  pattern  in  Fig.  1  because 
climbing  up  from  p2  is  not  permitted,  see  first  and 
fourth entry in Table II. Their maximal subgroups p1g1, 
p11g,  c1m1,  and  c11m  are  also  Fedorov 
type 
pseudosymmetries  as  they  are  disjoint  from  the  p2 
anchoring group.  

Note  that  climbing  up  tests  for  strong  Fedorov  type 
pseudosymmetries  to  the  km  =  4  level,  i.e.  p2gg  and 
c2mm,  and  up  to  km  =  8,  i.e.  p4gm,  have  rather  low 
values for the left hand side of inequality (9a) in Table 
II.  This  is  due  to  the  corresponding  sums  of  squared 
complex Fourier coefficient residuals for the matching kl 
= 2 and 4 levels being on the same order of magnitude 
in  Table  I.  The  ratios  of  such  sums  may  for  strong 
Fedorov  pseudosym-metries  even  fall  below  unity,  as 
shown for the last entry in Table II. 

the  same  appropriately 

Ideally,  one  would  base  all  calculations  on 
symmetrized models of the input image data that feature 
exactly 
indexed  Fourier 
coefficients and number of such coefficients. To obtain 
the  same  number  of  data  points  (complex  Fourier 
coefficients) in all geometric models of the input image 
data,  one  would  need  to  treat  Fourier  coefficients  that 

13 

 
 
 
 
 
 
are absent in certain geometric models as featuring zero 
amplitude  and  arbitrary  phase.  The  absences can either 
be  systematic  or  incidental.  In  both  cases  the  zero 
amplitude Fourier coefficients are  characteristics of the 
properly  symmetrized  geometric  models  of  the  input 
image  data.  The  smallest  possible  entry  in  the  second 
column of Table II should for genuine symmetries then 
be  restricted  to  unity  (in  the  absence  of  generalized 
noise  including  small  calculation  errors)  and  one  can 
also  give  confidence  levels  for  the  classification  into 
genuine  symmetries  by  using  equations  (A-1)  to  (A-4) 
and provide a complete [38] crystallographic symmetry 
measurement result.  

Relying  on  the  *.hka  files  of  CRISP  in  this  study 
without  further  editing, 
is,  however,  almost 
this 
impossible to achieve in practice. The geometric models 
that  are  represented  by  *.hka  files  with  different 
numbers  of  data  points,  different  dynamic  ranges,  and 
Abbe resolutions [20] do not necessarily give always the 
best  possible  symmetrized  version  of  the  input  image 
the 
data 
demonstrations  in  this  paper  and  to  allow  for  the 
comparison  of  classification  results  that  were  obtained 
with  the  information  theory  based  methods  to  those  of 
the  CRISP  program,  the  accuracy  of  all  geometric 
models is deemed to be more than sufficient.  

in  Fourier  space.  For 

the  purpose  of 

On  all  accounts,  the  geometric  models  that  CRISP 
provides in the form of exportable *.hka files are always 
quite 
representative  of  symmetrized  versions  of 
analyzed  images  as  demonstrated  by  the  successes  of 
numerous  electron  crystallography  studies  [13-15]  in 
spite  of  necessarily  different  choices  for  the  dynamic 
range,  Abbe  resolutions  [20],  and  numbers  of  included 
Fourier coefficients. 

The  identification  of  the  projected  Laue  class  that 
minimizes  the  G-AIC  value  for  the  2D  crystal  pattern 
that underlies Fig. 1 proceeds analogously. Laue class 4 
has already been identified above as the point symmetry 
of  the  amplitude  map  of  the  geometric  model  that  has 
been symmetrized to plane symmetry group p4. Because 
the p4 model has the lowest squared Fourier coefficient 
amplitude  residual  in  Table  1,  point  group  4  is  the 
anchoring  point  group  for  the  Laue  class  classification 
of the pattern in Figure 1. Both this projected Laue class 
and  2D  Laue  class  2mm  feature  four  point  symmetry 
operations, kl = 4, and are disjoint from each other, see 
hierarchy tree in Fig. A-1 in the first appendix.  

Table  III  gives  the  ratios  of  the  sums  of  the  squared 
Fourier  coefficient  amplitude  residuals  for  the  non-
disjoint models of Table I (with kl = 4) together with the 
maximal value that these ratios may have for a climbing 
up to the km = 8 level. Obviously, one cannot climb up 
from  Laue  class  4  to  the  non-disjoint  Laue  class  4mm 
with km = 8 (in Fig. A-1), based on the numbers in this 
table.  

Based on the low sums of squared Fourier coefficient 
amplitude residuals in Table I, the models for projected 
Laue classes 2mm and 4mm reveal pseudosymmetries in 
the  input  image  data.  This  is  fully  consistent  with  the 
identified  Fedorov  type  pseudosymmetries  at  the  plane 
symmetry group level.  

identified 

To conclude this subsection: plane symmetry group p4 
(which  contains  p2  as  its  only  maximal  subgroup)  and 
Laue  class  4  are  identified  as  both  genuine  in  the  2D 
crystal  pattern  and  crystallographically  consistent  with 
each  other.  The  identified  Fedorov  type  pseudosym-
metries at the lowest level of the hierarchy tree of plane 
symmetry  groups  are  p1g1,  p11g,  c1m1,  and  c11m. 
These  pseudosymmetries  combine  with  each  other  and 
the 
the 
pseudosymmetry groups p2gg, c2mm, and p4gm. There 
are  corresponding  2mm  and  4mm  pseudosymmetries  in 
the amplitude map of the noise free pattern in Fig. 1, but 
no  4mm  pseudo-site  symmetry  in  the  direct  space  unit 
cell  of  the  input  image  data  since  the  p1m1  and  p11m 
models  of  this  data  feature  sums  of  squared  complex 
Fourier  coefficient  residuals  that  are  way  too  large  to 
pass  climbing up  tests in  the plane symmetry hierarchy 
tree of Fig. 4. 

symmetries 

genuine 

to 

Table III: Numerical values of ratio of the sums of squared 
amplitude residuals of non-disjoint geometric models of the 
noise free pattern that are either within their maximal 
allowance or not. 

4mm over 4 (in 
c2mm setting)  
4mm over 4 (in 
p2gg setting)  
4mm over 2mm 
(in p2gg 
setting) 
4mm over 2mm 
(in c2mm 
setting) 

Left hand side of 
inequality (9a) 
3 

Right hand side 
of inequality (9a) 
1.3438819 

Inequality 
fulfilled? 
no, as it should 

2.90476 

1.3577236 

no, as it should 

1.2115385 

1.3379878 

1.1886792 

1.3246592 

yes, but due to 
pseudo-
symmetry 
yes, but due to 
pseudo-
symmetry 

B.  Classifications of the two noisy patterns of the 

series 

repeats 

containing 

Figures  5  and  6  show  sections  of  the  two  synthetic 
patterns  that  were  obtained  by  adding  approximately 
Gaussian  distributed  noise  to  the  synthetic  pattern  that 
served  as  basis  of  Fig.  1,  i.e.  the  approximately  144 
periodic  motif 
expanded 
representation  of  the  original  graphic  artwork  [34]  that 
is  considered  to  be  free  of  generalized  noise.  The 
freeware program GIMP [39] was used to add the noise.  
Spread  noise  swaps  individual  pixel  intensities  in  the 
horizontal  and  vertical  directions  by  a  selected number 
of  pixels.  Strictly  Gaussian  distributed  noise  only 
changes  the  individual  pixel  values  but  not  their 
positions  in  the  translation  periodic  unit  cell.  The 
employed mixtures of strictly Gaussian distributed noise 
and  spread  noise  add  up  to  approximately  Gaussian 
distributed noise. The strictly Gaussian distributed noise 
had been added to the 2D crystal pattern in Fig. 1 before 
the spread noise was added with GIMP. 

The  effects  of  the  added  noise  are  clearly  visible  in 
Figs. 5 and 6 and their histogram insets when compared 
to  the  histogram  inset  in  Fig.  1  and  that  figure  itself. 
Compared to Fig. 5, there is approximately five times as 
much added noise in Fig. 6. 

This approximate 1 to 5 ratio of the amounts of noise 
is  similar  to  that  of  the  two  noisy  synthetic  images  in 

14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
expect 

should, 

therefore, 

[10].  One 
similar 
crystallographic classification results as in [10], i.e. the 
correct  distinction  between  genuine  symmetries  and 
Fedorov  type pseudosymmetries for the image  with the 
moderate  amount  of  noise  and  a  misidentification  for 
the image with the large amount of noise. 

Fig.  5. Section  of the  underlying 2D crystal pattern of Fig. 1 with  a 
moderate amount of approximately Gaussian distributed noise added. 
The histogram of the whole pattern is provided as inset. The blue thin 
line  and  descriptive  annotations  in  red  ink  in  the  histogram  are 
provided by the CRISP program. The histogram entry “35%, 11831” 
means that 11,831 pixels deliver the highest peak in this histogram. 

We classify the noisy 2D crystal pattern in Fig. 5 first. 
The  dynamic  range  in  the  employed  *.hka  file  from 
CRISP  was  set  to  100.  The  selection  in  Fourier  space 
was  set  to  a  350  pixel  radius  (out  of  the  maximal 
possible 512 pixels), which results in a Abbe resolution 
reduction,  that  may  be  appreciated  by  a  comparison  of 
the crystallographically processed version of this image, 
Figure 7, in the third subsection below to the 2D crystal 
pattern  in  Fig.  1.  Both  of  these  settings  resulted  in  a 
reasonable  number  of  Fourier  coefficients  in  the  last 
column of Table IV. 

The  geometric  model  with  plane  symmetry  group  p2 
features again the lowest sum of squared residuals of the 
complex  Fourier  coefficients  in  this  table.  Also  as 
before,  the  model  that  was  symmetrized  to  plane 
symmetry  group  p4  features  the  lowest  sum  of  Fourier 
coefficient  amplitude  residuals.  Again,  the  rows  for 
these two geometric models of the input image data are 
highlighted in Table IV for easy reference by shading. 

Analogous to Table II, Table V gives the ratios of the 
sums  of  the  squared  residuals  of  the  complex  Fourier 
coefficients for climbing up tests. 

information  on 

There  are  four  unconditional  “yes”  in  Table  V  when 
the  objective  symmetry 
the  prior 
classification  of  the  noise-free  pattern  of  the  crystal 
pattern series from the previous subsection  is  not used. 
The rows of the corresponding entries are again marked 
by the shading.  

The  preliminary  conclusion  from  the  shaded  rows  in 
Table V is that the genuine plane symmetry group of the 
noisy crystal pattern in Figure 5 must either be p2gg or 
p4. Both plane symmetry groups are disjoint from each 
other, see Figure 4a, so that one of these two groups has 
to  be  a  Fedorov  type  pseudosymmetry  per  definition. 
The decision about which of these two plane symmetries 
is  genuine  relies  on  the  necessity  of  the  consistency  of 
the  plane  symmetry  classification  with  the  Laue  class 
classification of the noisy pattern in Figure 5. 

Table IV: Results of the hkaAICnorm MatLab script on the 
modest amount of noise added image that underlies Fig. 5 for 
geometric model selection by G-AIC value ratios. 

 Plane symmetry 
group to which 
the image data 
have been 
symmetrized  

Sums of 
squared 
residuals of 
complex Fourier 
coefficients 

Sums of squared 
residuals of 
Fourier coefficient 
amplitudes 

p2 
p1m1 
p11m 
p1g1 
p11g 
c1m1 
c11m 
p3 
p2gg 
c2mm 
p4 
p4mm 
p4gm 

0.0041 
1.7207 
1.7210 
0.0059 
0.0066 
0.0081 
0.0081 
2.0554 
0.0066 
0.0102 
0.0040 
1.7934 
0.0074 

None 
0.0041 
0.0041 
0.0041 
0.0041 
0.0043 
0.0043 
1.3052 
0.0041 
0.0043 
0.0015 
0.0050 
0.0050 

Number of 
Fourier 
coefficients in 
the geometric 
model of the 
image data 
665 
654 
654 
652 
652 
655 
655 
685 
650 
655 
648 
644 
640 

Table V: Numerical values of ratios of sums of squared 
residuals of the complex Fourier coefficients of non-disjoint 
models of the pattern with a moderate amount of added noise 
that are either within their maximal allowance or not. 

Left hand side of 
(9a) 
1.6097561 

Right hand side of 
(9a) 
2.0225564 

1.1186441 

2.0030675 

1.0 

2.0030675 

2.4878049 

1.2592593 

1.2592593 

0.9756098 
448.35 

2.0 

2.0 

2.0 

2.0255639 
1.3353909 

Inequality 
fulfilled? 
yes, but due to 
pseudosymmetry  
yes, but due to 
pseudosymmetry 
yes, but due to 
pseudosymmetry 
no, blocking ascent 

yes, but due to 
pseudosymmetry  
yes, but  due to 
pseudosymmetry  
yes 
no, blocking ascent 

1.85 

1.3374486 

no, blocking ascent 

1.1212121 

1.3384615 

0.7254902 

1.3409669 

yes, but due to 
pseudosymmetry 
yes, but due to 
pseudosymmetry 

p2gg over 
p2 
p2gg over 
p1g1 
p2gg over 
p11g 
c2mm over 
p2 
c2mm over 
c1m1 
c2mm over 
c11m 
p4 over p2 
p4mm over 
p4 
p4gm over 
p4 
p4gm over 
p2gg 
p4gm over 
c2mm 

The  anchoring  Laue  class  is  point  symmetry  group  4 
because the corresponding p4 symmetrized model of the 
noisy pattern in Figure 5 features in Table IV the lowest 
sum  of  squared  residuals  of  the  Fourier  coefficient 
amplitudes. The point symmetry  in the amplitude maps 
of  the  discrete  Fourier  transforms  of  the  geometric 

15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
models  of  the  crystal  pattern  in  Fig.  5  that  were 
symmetrized  to  plane  symmetry  groups  p1m1,  p11m, 
p1g1,  p11g,  c1m1,  c11m,  p2gg,  and  c2mm  is  point 
symmetry/Laue class 2mm (Aroyo, 2016, Hahn, 2010). 

Table VI is analogous to Table III and lists the ratios 
of  sums  of  squared  Fourier  coefficient  amplitude 
residuals  for the modest amount of added noise pattern 
in  Figure  5.  The  conclusion  from  this  table  is  that 
projected  Laue  class  4  is  the  only  genuine  class  as 
climbing up from the anchoring class to Laue class/point 
group 4mm is not allowed.  

Note  that  point  symmetry  group  4  captures  the 
symmetry  in  the  amplitude  map  of  the  discrete  Fourier 
transform  of  the  noisy  crystal  pattern  that  underlies 
Figure  5  better  by more than a factor  of  2.7  than point 
group  2mm,  which  is  at  the  same  kl  =  4  level  of  the 
hierarchy tree of Figure 4b. It is, therefore, without any 
doubt  the  point  symmetry  of  the  Kullback-Leibler  best 
geometric model of the amplitude map of that pattern.  

level  and 

Laue class 2mm is accordingly to Table VI a pseudo-
the 
the  point  symmetry 
symmetry  at 
correspond-ding  plane  symmetry  group  p2gg  can  also 
only  be  a  strong  Fedorov  type  pseudosymmetry.  With 
point  group  2mm  identified  as  pseudosymmetry  and 
point group 4 a genuine symmetry in the amplitude map 
of the discrete Fourier transform of the noisy pattern in 
Figure 5, there must also be a 4mm pseudosymmetry in 
this  map.  This  is  confirmed  by  the  numerical  values in 
Table VI.  

Table VI: Numerical values of ratio of the sums of squared 
amplitude residuals of non-disjoint models of the moderate 
amount of added noise pattern that are either within their 
maximal allowance or not. 

4mm over 4 (in 
c2mm setting)  
4mm over 4 (in 
p2gg setting)  
4mm over 2mm 
(in p2gg 
setting) 
4mm over 2mm 
(in c2mm 
setting) 

Left hand side of 
inequality (9a) 
3.333333 

Right hand side of 
inequality (9a) 

1.3353909 

Inequality 
fulfilled? 
no, as it should 

3.333333 

1.3374486 

no, as it should 

1.2195122 

1.3384615 

1.1627907 

1.3389313 

yes, but due to 
pseudo-
symmetry 
yes, but due to 
pseudo-
symmetry 

Note  in  passing  that  the  ratio  of  the  sums  of  squared 
residuals  of  the  complex  Fourier  coefficients  is  for  the 
“p4 over p2” row of Table V smaller than unity. This is 
result  of  both  small  accumulated 
probably 
calculation  errors  in  the  analysis  and  slight  differences 
in  the  accuracy  of  the  representation  of  the  geometric 
models in the employed *.hka files from CRISP.  

the 

   There is, again no 4mm pseudo-site symmetry in the 
direct  space  unit  cell  of  that  crystal  pattern  because 
ascent from  the geometric model that was symmetrized 
to  plane  symmetry  group  p4  to  its  counterpart  with 
plane symmetry p4mm is blocked in Table V by a very 
wide margin. 

Clear  distinctions  between  genuine  symmetries  and 
Fedorov  type  pseudosymmetries  were,  thus,  again 
obtained. The added approximately Gaussian distributed 
noise  presented  no  challenge  to  the  crystal  pattern 

classification  task  with  respect  to  its  crystallographic 
symmetries when the amount of noise was modest.  

The preliminary issue which of the two disjoint plane 
symmetry  groups,  p2gg  or  p4,  is  the  symmetry  of  the 
Kullback-Leibler  best  model  of  the  noisy  pattern  in 
Figure 5 was straightforwardly resolved by recognizing 
point symmetry 4 as the anchoring Laue class. Note that 
no  prior  knowledge  of  the  classification  of  the  noise-
free  pattern  in  the  series  of  crystal  pattern  from  the 
previous  subsection  was  used 
to  reach  the  final 
conclusions.  As  expected,  the  effect  of  adding  noise  is 
an  obscuring  of  the  differences  in  the  amounts  of 
breakings  of  the  various  plane  symmetry  groups. 
Adding  larger  amounts  of  noise  that  is  to  a  lesser 
approximation  Gaussian  distributed  should  confirm  the 
general  trend  that  genuine  symmetries  and  pseudosym-
to 
metries 
distinguish.  As  we  will  see  below,  this  is  indeed  the 
case. 

in  crystal  patterns  get  more  difficult 

The  dynamic  range  of  the  amplitudes  of  the  Fourier 
coefficients  of  the  2D  crystal  pattern  in  Fig.  6  was  for 
the  analysis  increased  to  200  and  the  radius  of  the 
circular  area  in  Fourier  space  restricted  to  200  pixels 
because  several  Fourier  coefficients  were  essentially 
“washed  out”  by  the  large  spread  noise  component  of 
the  added  noise.  These  settings  ensured  that  the 
geometric  models  of  this  pattern  are  represented  in 
Fourier space by a reasonable number of data points in 
the fourth column of Table VII.  

Fig.  6.  Section  of the  underlying 2D crystal pattern of Fig. 1  with  a 
large amount of approximately Gaussian distributed noise added. The 
histogram  of  the  whole  pattern  is  provided  as  inset.  The  descriptive 
annotations  in  red  ink  in  the  histogram  are  provided  by  the  CRISP 
program. 

In  analogy  to  Tables  I  and  IV,  Table  VII  gives  the 
characteristics  of  the  geometric  models  for  the  rather 
noisy  2D  crystal  pattern  that  underlies  Fig.  6.  The  two 
rows  for  the  plane  symmetry  and  projected  Laue  class 
anchoring  groups  are  again  highlighted  in  this  table  by 
shading of the respective rows.  

16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table VIII reveals, however, that genuine symmetries 
at  the  plane  symmetry  group  level  can  no  longer  be 
distinguished  from  Fedorov  type  pseudosymmetries  as 
the result  of  the large amount of added noise. All rows 
with  an  unconditional  ‘yes’  in  this  table  are,  therefore, 
shaded. 

   Plane symmetry group p4gm is now misidentified as 
genuine and the symmetry that most likely underlies the 
rather  noisy  2D  crystal  pattern  in  Fig.  6.  Note  that 
climbing  ups  in  the  plane  symmetry  hierarchy  tree  of 
Fig. 4 are now permitted all the way up to the top of the 
p4gm  branch  since  inequality  (9a) is fulfilled  for all of 
the relevant  non-disjoint  geometric models of the input 
image data.  

Table VII: Results of the hkaAICnorm MatLab script on the 
pattern with a large amount of added noise that underlies Fig. 
6 for geometric model selection by G-AIC value ratios.  

Plane symmetry 
group to which 
the image data 
have been 
symmetrized  

Sums of 
squared 
residuals of 
complex Fourier 
coefficients 

Sums of squared 
residuals of 
Fourier coefficient 
amplitudes   

p2 
p1m1 
p11m 
p1g1 
p11g 
c1m1 
c11m 
p3 
p2gg 
c2mm 
p4 
p4mm 
p4gm 

0.0061 
1.5353 
1.5320 
0.0069 
0.0078 
0.0085 
0.0074 
1.7565 
0.0098 
0.0115 
0.0088 
1.5876 
0.0109 

None 
0.0039 
0.0039 
0.0039 
0.0039 
0.0041 
0.0041 
1.2029 
0.0039 
0.0041 
0.0028 
0.0053 
0.0051 

Number of 
Fourier 
coefficients in 
the geometric 
model of the 
image data 
275 
271 
271 
265 
270 
269 
269 
306 
264 
269 
276 
276 
266 

Table VIII: Numerical values of ratios of sums of squared 
residuals of the complex Fourier coefficients of non-disjoint 
geometric models of the pattern with a large amount of added 
noise. 

Left hand side of 
(9a) 
1.6065574 

Right hand side of 
(9a) 
2.04 

Inequality 
fulfilled? 
yes 

1.4202899 

2.0037736 

1.2564103 

2.0222222 

1.8852459 

2.0218182 

1.3529412 

1.5540541 

1.442623 
180.4091 

2.0 

2.0 

1.9963636 
1.3333333 

1.2386364 

1.3454106 

1.1122449 

1.3308081 

0.947826 

1.3370508 

yes 

yes 

yes 

yes  

yes  

yes 
no, blocking 
ascent 
yes 

yes 

yes 

p2gg over 
p2 
p2gg over 
p1g1 
p2gg over 
p11g 
c2mm over 
p2 
c2mm over 
c1m1 
c2mm over 
c11m 
p4 over p2 
p4mm over 
p4 
p4gm over 
p4 
p4gm over 
p2gg 
p4gm over 
c2mm 

It  is  interesting  to  check  if  this  misidentification  is 
consistent  with  the  classification  of  the  rather  noisy 
pattern into the most likely projected Laue class as well. 

Table IX provides the basis for checking this out. Laue 
class 4 is, however, still identified by inequality (9a) as 
the  one  that  minimizes  the  geometric  AIC  value.  This 
might  be  due  to  2D  Laue  class  determinations  being 
somewhat less susceptible to added noise.  

symmetry  groups  as  compared 

Also  there  are  many  more  calculations  going  into 
crystallographic symmetry classifications with respect to 
their 
plane 
counterparts  for  projected  Laue  classes.  Rounding 
errors  and  approximations  in  the  algorithms  may 
in  the  calculation  for  plane 
therefore  accumulate 
their 
than 
symmetry 
counterparts for 2D Laue classes.  

classifications  more 

for 

to 

From  the  obvious  crystallographic  inconsistency  that 
plane symmetry group p4gm and Laue class 4 have both 
been identified as K-L best representations of the rather 
noisy  pattern  in  Fig.  6,  one  needs  to  conclude  that  the 
plane  symmetry  classification  is  probably  too  high  and 
Fedorov 
been 
pseudosymmetries 
misinterpreted as genuine symmetries.  

have 

type 

Table IX: Numerical values of the ratio of the sums of 
squared amplitude residuals of non-disjoint geometric models 
of the pattern with a large amount of added noise.  
Left hand side 
of inequality 
(9a) 

Inequality fulfilled? 

Right hand 
side of 
inequality 
(9a) 
1.333333 

4mm (in c2mm 
setting) over 4 
4mm (in p2gg 
setting) over 4 
4mm over 2mm 
(in p2gg setting) 
4mm over 2mm 
(in c2mm setting) 

1.8928571 

1.8214286 

1.3454106 

1.3076923 

1.3370508 

1.2926829 

1.3246592 

no, revealing an 
inconsistency 
no, revealing an 
inconsistency 
yes, as a result of 
pseudo-symmetry  
yes, as a result of 
pseudo-symmetry 

that 

that 

As mentioned above twice, crystallographic symmetry 
classification results  as  obtained  in this section were to 
be  expected  and  are  in  line  with  those  of  [10]  for 
another  series  of  synthetic  patterns  with  and  without 
feature  pseudosymmetries.  The 
added  noise 
conclusion  from  both  studies  must  be 
the 
information  theory  based  classification  methods  work 
very well for small to moderate amounts of noise that is 
to  a  sufficient  approximation  Gaussian  distributed. 
Methods  that  rely  on  the  suppression  of  higher  order 
terms in equation (3) must, however, fail if there is way 
too much Gaussian noise in a more or less 2D periodic 
pattern  that  is  to  be  classified  with  respect  to  its 
crystallographic  symmetries.  Everything  depends,  of 
relative  complexity  of  a 
course,  also  on 
crystallographic  pattern  and 
its 
the  strength  of 
pseudosymmetries. 

the 

the  most 

The classification failure is for the 2D crystal pattern 
in  Fig.  6  not  “catastrophic”  as  even  when  a 
misidentification 
likely 
is  obtained  for 
underlying plane symmetry group of the noisiest image, 
most human experts would have made the same mistake, 
at  least  at  first  sight.  Because  it  is  well  known  that 
Fedorov  type  pseudosymmetries  are  not  rare  [9]  in 
nature,  one  needs 
the 
crystallographic  processing  of  very  noisy  images  in 
order not to misinterpret noise as structural information.  

to  be  extra  careful  with 

17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In the following subsection, the noisy pattern of Fig. 5 
is  symmetrized  to  the  plane  symmetry  group  that  our 
analyses  indicated.  We  also  symmetrize  the  very  noisy 
pattern  of  Figure  6  to  plane  symmetry  group  p4gm, 
although  our  analysis  indicated  that  there  was  a 
problem.  

C.  Results of crystallographic image processing of the 
two noisy patterns of the analyzed image series 

In  order  to  demonstrate  the  benefits  of  the  crystallo-
graphic  image  processing  procedure,  the  classification 
results  of  the  genuine  plane  symmetries  of  the  noisy 
patterns in Fig. 5 and 6 are now used to boost the signal 
to noise ratio in these two crystal patterns. 

Figure 7 shows approximately 2.2 unit cells of the p4 
symmetrized  pattern  of  Fig.  5.  The  conspicuous  bright 
bow  ties  in  Fig.  7  feature  now  site  symmetry  2  as 
exactly as this is possible for a real-world entity that has 
been  derived  from  another  real-world  entity  by  the 
employed  algorithmic  procedure.  (As  a  reminder:  in 
Figs. 1 to 3 and 5, the bow ties feature point symmetry 
group 2 to a very good approximation. The entry for the 
p2  symmetrized  model  of  the  noisy  pattern  in  Fig.  5 
features in Table IV the lowest sum of squared residuals 
of  the  complex  Fourier  coefficients,  making  this  plane 
symmetry group the anchoring group.)  

Fig.  7. Approximately  2.2 unit  cells  of the  moderately noisy pattern 
of  Fig.  5  after  crystallographic  image  processing  with  histogram  as 
inset.  Minor  artefacts  that  are  due  to  the  crystallographic  image 
processing  are  marked  by  arrows  of  two  different  shapes.  The 
reduction  of  the  Abbe  resolution,  the  symmetrization  of  Fourier 
ripples as well as the symmetrization of “remains” of the generalized 
noise to site symmetry group caused these artifacts. 

  Note by a visual comparison between the patterns in 
Figs.  5  and  7  how  much  of  the  added  noise  has  been 
removed by the crystallographic image processing. This 
becomes  also  clear  by  a  direct  comparison  of  the 
histogram  insets  of  both  figures.  A  comparison  of  the 
histogram insets of Figs. 7 and 1 reveals the effect of the 

crystallographic image processing as well. Note that the 
overall contrast in Fig. 7 is lower than in Fig. 1.    

Very  small  four-fold  artifacts  of  the  crystallographic 
image processing are marked in Fig. 7 by white arrows 
with two different shapes. One such translation periodic 
artifact  is,  for  example,  the  imposing  of  exact  site 
symmetry  4  on  the  centers  of  the  dark  rounded 
diamonds  and  the  faint  narrow-straight  crosses11  inside 
these diamonds. (This leads to an enhanced visibility of 
the  narrow-straight  crosses  as  compared 
their 
counterparts in Fig. 1.) 

to 

The  very  low-contrast  four-fold  “feature”  inside  the 
curved  dark  diamond  at  fractional  unit  cell  coordinate 
½,½,  is  marked  by  an  arrow  with  a  different  shape.  It 
originated  as  well  from  the  symmetrization  of  remains 
of  the  noise  at  the  positions  of  the  structure-bearing 
Fourier  coefficients  by  the  crystallographic  image 
processing. 

Analogously,  note  that  the  “bright  bow  ties”  (at  unit 
cell  coordinates  ½,0,  ½,0,  ½,1,  and  1,½)  are  not 
homogenously  bright  as  they  were  in  Fig.  1.  They 
feature instead some form of a “fine structure” that has 
been  enforced  to  display  the  symmetry  of  two-fold 
rotation  points.  That  fine  structure  is  due  to  the 
symmetrization  of  a  combination  of  Fourier  ripples,  as 
visible in Fig. 2, and remains of the noise.   

All  of  these  undesired  features  are,  however,  small 
prices  to  pay  in  the  opinion  of  the  author  for  a 
significant  reduction 
the 
associated  increase  in  the  intrinsic  image  quality  by 
means  of  the  crystallographic  processing  of  a  noisy 
image. 

level  and 

the  noise 

in 

Essentially 

the  same  can  be  said  about 

the 
crystallographically processed version of the very noisy 
pattern in Fig. 6. The contrast in the crystallographically 
processed version of this pattern in Fig. 8 is even lower 
than in Fig. 7.  

The  contrast  reduction  is  mainly  a  consequence  of 
using a smaller number of symmetrized complex Fourier 
coefficients for the transformation back into direct space 
(reduced  Abbe  resolution).  The  faint  narrow-straight 
cross  artifacts  within  the  dark  rounded  diamonds  from 
Fig.  7  have  apparently  disappeared  in  Fig.  8.  Similarly 
the  bright  bow  ties  in  that  figure  appear  to  have  lost 
much of their fine structure. 

Because  plane  symmetry  group  p4gm  has  been 
enforced  on  the  very  noisy  image  in  Fig.  6,  strong 
Fedorov pseudo-symmetries have been rendered visibly 
indistinguishable  from  genuine  symmetries  in  direct 
space.  The  conspicuous  bow  ties  feature  in  Fig.  8, 
therefore,  point 
the 
corresponding  site  symmetry  in  the  undisturbed  2D 
crystal pattern was at best point group 2, as most clearly 
visible  in  Figs.  2  and  3.  Noise  in  the  image  has,  thus, 
been  misinterpreted  as  structure  as  part  of 
the 
crystallographic image processing. 

symmetry  2mm, 

although 

11  The  structural  origin  of  these  narrow-straight  crosses  is  the 
joining of four identical photos of the original square painted ceramic 
tile,  Fig.  A-7.  These  crosses  are  clearly  visible  in  Fig.  A-8  for 
arrangements  of  four  tiles  that  feature  a  central  four-fold  rotation 
point. 

18 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
V. COMPARISONS OF OUR RESULTS TO SUGGESTIONS 
BY THE CRISP PROGRAM  

The  objectively  obtained  crystallographic  symmetry 
classification results of the previous section are summed 
up in Table X and are now compared to the results of a 
traditional 
electron 
the 
classification 
crystallography program CRISP, Table XI. 

with 

It  is  clear  from  Table  XI  that  the  CRISP  suggestions 
do  not  make  distinctions  between  genuine  symmetries 
and  Fedorov  type  pseudosymmetries.  As  mentioned 
above,  most  human  experts  would  most  likely  have 
classified  all  three images of the  series  as  belonging to 
plane  symmetry  group  p4gm  (at  least  at  first  sight) 
because it would not occur to them that such distinctions 
might  be  necessary  although  it  is  well  known  that 
Fedorov  type  pseudosymmetries  are  not  rare  in  nature 
[9].  As 
the  preceding  sections 
in 
demonstrate, p4gm classifications for the noise-free and 
large  amount  of  added  noise  pattern  constitute 
overestimations of the plane symmetry that is genuinely 
there, i.e. p4, due to the artist’s graphic handiwork.  

the  analyses 

Table X: Plane symmetry and Laue class classifications of the 
analyzed set of patterns by the author’s methods. 

Pattern 
Free of added 
noise, Fig. 1 

Moderate 
amount of 
added noise, 
Fig. 5 
Large amount 
of added 
noise, Fig. 6 

Laue class 
4, 2mm and 
4mm 
pseudo-
symmetries 
4, 2mm and 
4mm 
pseudo-
symmetries 
4, 2mm and 
4mm 
pseudo-
symmetries 

Plane symmetry group 
p4, with strong p1g1, p11g, c1m1, 
c11m, and somewhat weaker p2gg, 
c2mm, p4gm Fedorov type 
pseudosymmetries 
p4, with strong p1g1, p11g, c1m1, 
c11m, p2gg, and somewhat weaker 
c2mm, p4gm Fedorov type 
pseudosymmetries 
p4, all Fedorov type 
pseudosymmetries at the plane 
symmetry group level were 
misidentified as genuine 
symmetries, but the identification 
of point symmetry 4 as the 
anchoring Laue class revealed their 
true nature and confirmed p4 as the 
crystallographically consistent 
plane symmetry group classification   

Table XI: CRISP program suggestions for the plane 
symmetry classifications of the analyzed series of patterns. 

Pattern 
Free of added noise, Fig. 1 
Moderate amount of added 
noise, Fig. 5 
Large amount of added noise, 
Fig. 6 

Plane symmetry group 
p4gm  
p2gg  

p4gm  

internal 

thresholds  for 

One  has  to  conclude  that  two  of  CRISP’s  three 
suggestions  are  about  as  accurate  as  most  human 
classifiers would be by visual inspection, at least at first 
the 
sight.  The  program’s 
interpretation  of  the  CRISP  residuals  that  enabled  its 
plane  symmetry  estimations  must,  therefore,  be  well 
adjusted.  The  great  popularity  of  this  Windows-based 
computer  program  with  the  electron  crystallography 
community  is,  therefore,  well  justified.  It  has  been 
shown  elsewhere  that  the  CRISP  program  is  more 
accurate  in  the  extraction  of  the  lattice  parameters  of 
more  or  less  2D  periodic  images  than  two  of  its 
competitors [8].  

19 

Fig. 8. Approximately 2.2 unit cells of the rather noisy pattern of Fig. 
6 after crystallographic image processing with histogram as inset. The 
blue  and red  thin  lines  and  descriptive  annotations  in  red  ink  in the 
histogram are provided by the CRISP program. Note the reduction in 
contrast and Abbe resolution with respect to both the images in Figs. 
1 and 6. 

to 

increased  narrowness  of  the  peaks  in  the 
The 
histogram 
their 
inset  of  Fig.  8  with  respect 
counterparts  in  the  histogram  inset  of  Fig.  7  is  due  to 
averaging  over  twice  as  many  (wrongly  identified) 
asymmetric  units 
image 
processing. This wrongful averaging (and Fourier back-
transforming  into  direct  space)  created  sites  in  the  unit 
cells that feature now point symmetry group 2mm at the 
fractional unit cell coordinates ½,0, 0,½, ½,1, and 1,½, 
compare to Fig. 2. 

the  crystallographic 

in 

Nevertheless,  the  suppression  of  the  noise  in  both of 
the noisy patterns is quite impressive when judged from 
the  histogram  insets  in  Figs.  5  and  6.  Again,  scanning 
probe  microscopists  should  take  notice  of  this  fact  as 
crystallographic  image  processing  on  the  basis  of 
objective  crystallographic  symmetry  classifications  is 
now  available  to them as well.  They  need, however, to 
be  wary  of  Fedorov  type  pseudosymmetries  that  are 
easily misinterpreted as genuine symmetries when noise 
levels are high. 

The large amount of added noise pattern, Fig. 6, was 
crystallographically processed in plane symmetry group 
p4gm,  Fig.  8,  although  the  Laue  class  classification 
identified a problem with the p4gm classification that is 
caused  by  the  large  amount  of  added  noise.  This  was 
done  here  for  the  sake  of  a  demonstration  of  what 
happens  when  one  symmetrizes  a  more  or  less  2D 
periodic  pattern  to  a  plane  symmetry  group  that  is  not 
crystallographically  consistent  with  the  corresponding 
projected  2D  Laue  class  classification  by 
the 
information theory based method. 

Scanning probe microscopists should heed the advice 
that  noisy  images  are  only  to  be  symmetrized  to  plane 
symmetry  groups  that  are  crystallographic  consistent 
with  the  Laue  class  classification  of  a  more  or  less  2D 
periodic image.   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The  p2gg  classification  by  CRISP  for  the  modest 
amount of added noise pattern, Fig. 5, is consistent with 
the bright bow tie features having a site symmetry that is 
no  higher  than  point  symmetry  group  2,  as  clearly 
revealed  in  Figs.  2  and  3.  It  is  also  consistent  with  the 
CRISP derived lattice parameter set of a = 97.1 pixels, b 
= 97.0 pixels, and γ = 90.0° for the 2D crystal pattern in 
Fig.  5.  The  difference  in  the  magnitude  of  the  unit 
vectors  is  probably  not  significant  based  on  what  has 
been shown in [8].  

As one can interactively test adjacent image areas for 
their  CRISP  program  suggestions’,  one  can  not  only 
assess  the  accuracy  of  the  program’s  classification 
suggestions,  but  also  their  precision.  It  was  found  that 
adjacent  areas  in  both  the  noise-free  and  moderate 
amount of noise added image resulted in either p4gm or 
p2gg  classifications  with  CRISP.  The  p4gm suggestion 
by  CRISP  for  the  noisiest  image  did,  however,  not 
change with the selected image regions.  

At  least  the  noise-free  image  in  the  series  should  be 
homogenous so  that  all adjacent  image areas should be 
classified  as  featuring  the  same  plane  symmetry.  One 
has to note that a large amount of calculations goes into 
a  plane  symmetry  classification  so  that  the  CRISP 
residuals  for  different  geometric  models  of  the  input 
image  data  are  indeed  slightly  different  for  each 
different image region.  

Crystallographic  symmetry  classifications  with  the 
CRISP  program  rely  in  practice  heavily  on  visual 
comparisons  between  the  translation  averaged  (Fourier 
filtered)  and  differently  symmetrized  versions  of  the 
input  image  data  by  an  expert  practitioner  of  electron 
crystallography.  Faced  with a p2gg classification and a 
2D  Bravais  lattice  that  is  almost  of  the  square  type  by 
CRISP  (as  obtained  for  the  moderate  amount  of  added 
noise  image),  most  electron  crystallographers  would 
probably  have  simply  overwritten  that  suggestion  after 
visual 
the  plane 
symmetry  groups  is  p4gm,  based  on  a  square  unit  cell, 
and discounted the possibility of a metric specialization. 
Using the author’s information theory based methods, 
no visual comparisons between the translation averaged 
and differently symmetrized versions of the input image 
symmetry 
necessary.  Crystallographic 
data 
classifications  can,  therefore,  be  made  without  human 
supervision,  but  under 
the  currently  necessary 
assumption  that  there  is  indeed  more  than  translation 
symmetry in a noisy image. 

inspections  and  concluded 

that 

are 

to  employ  crystallographic 

Therefore, the user no longer needs  to be  an electron 
crystallographer 
image 
processing techniques. This fact allows sufficiently well 
resolved  more  or  less  2D  periodic  images  from  a  wide 
range  of  crystalline  samples  that  are  recorded  with 
different 
to  be  processed 
crystallographically. Previous successes in the crystallo-
graphic  processing  of  images  from  scanning  tunneling 
and atomic force microscopes are quoted and shown in 
[25,29].  

types  of  microscopes 

VI. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS 

for 

the 

three 

Information  theory  based  crystallographic  symmetry 
classification  methods  for  plane  symmetry  groups  and 
projected  Laue  classes  have  been  demonstrated  on  a 
synthetic  crystal  patterns.  The 
series  of 
classifications  were 
two  noisy  patterns 
complemented  by  the  showing  of  the  corresponding 
images  and  their  histograms  before  and  after  their 
crystallographic  processing.  Note  that  these  pairs  of 
images  needed 
this  paper  for 
demonstration  purposes,  but  crystallographic  image 
processing  by  the  new  method  can  proceed  without 
prior  visual  inspections  of  such  images  by  human 
beings.  

to  be  shown 

in 

It  is  concluded  that  the  information  theory  based 
classification  methods  are  statistically  sound  and 
superior  to  all  other  existing  methods,  including  the 
visual insights of human expert classifiers as far as their 
accuracy  and  precision  at  first  sight  is  concerned. 
Information theory based methods should be developed 
for  crystallographic  symmetry  classifications  and 
quantifications  in  three  spatial  dimensions  as  there  is 
also  subjectivity12  in  the  current  practice  of  single 
crystal X-ray and neutron crystallography.  

The  detection  of  noncrystallographic  symmetries  (as 
defined  in  the  introduction  as  being  incompatible  with 
translation  symmetry)  is  beyond  the  scope  of  the 
demonstrated  methods  and  there  are  no  plans  by  this 
author to try to tackle that kind of problem. 

Acknowledgments 

The  current  members  of  Portland  State  University’s 
Nano-Crystallography  Group,  Regan  Garner,  Choomno 
Moos,  Grayson  Kolar,  Gabriel  Eng,  Noah  Allen,  and 
Lukas von Koch are thanked for critical proofreads of the 
manuscript. Regan Garner is also thanked for the graphs in 
Figs.  4,  A-1,  and  A-2.  Professor  Eva  Knoll  of  the 
Department of Mathematics of the University of Quebec at 
Montreal  is  thanked  for  a  critical  proofread  of  the 
manuscript,  enlightening  discussions  per  email,  and  the 
final appendix. Professor emeritus Emil Makovicky of the 
Department  of  Geosciences  and  Natural  Resource 
Management  of  the  University  of  Copenhagen  is  thanked 
for comments and stimulating discussions. 

12  In  every  single  crystal  X-ray  or  neutron  diffraction  based 
determination of an unknown crystal structure, one needs to assign a 
space group in which the subjectively most reasonable model for the 
structure is to be refined. Information theory, as defined in footnote 2, 
is partly about the selection of the model for experimental data that is 
statistically/objectively  most  justified  by  the  data  itself.  Since  the 
experimental  data  is  in  diffraction  based  crystallography  of  a 
geometric nature, a geometric form of information theory such as the 
one by Kenichi Kanatani is applicable.  

When the symmetry classification (and quantification) methods of 
this  paper have been  generalized  to three spatial dimensions, Walter 
C.  Hamilton’s  well  known  significance  tests  of  crystallographic  R-
values  after  refinements  into  non-disjoint  space  groups  (W.  C. 
Hamilton,  Acta  Cryst.  18,  502–510,  1965)  could  be  considered 
superseded. This is because they have been set up as null-hypothesis 
tests.  Information  theory  is  widely  considered  to  offer  a  superior 
alternative  to  null-hypothesis  testing,  see  D.  R.  Anderson,  Model 
Based Inference in the Life Science, a Primer on Evidence, Springer, 
2008,  for  a  gentle  introduction  on  how  to  bring  more  objectivity  to 
scientific studies.   

20 

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
      REFERENCES 

[1] I. Aroyo (ed.), International Tables for Crystallography, 
Volume A, Space-Group Symmetry, 6th rev. ed., 
Chichester, UK: Wiley, 2016. 

[2] Th. Hahn (ed.), International Tables for 
Crystallography, Brief Teaching Edition of Vol. A, Space 
Group Symmetry, 5th edition, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd., 
2010. 

[3] W. Steurer and S. Deloudi, Crystallography of 
Quasicrystals: Concepts, Methods and Structures, 2009. 

[4] 
https://dictionary.iucr.org/Noncrystallographic_symmetry. 

[5] https://dictionary.iucr.org/Pseudo_symmetry. 

[6] M. Nespolo, B. Souvignier, and D. B. Litvin, “About 
the concept and definition of “noncrystallographic 
symmetry”,” Z. Kristallogr., vol. 223, pp. 605–606, 2008, 
doi: 10.1524/zkri.2008.1137. 

[7] P. Moeck, “Towards Generalized Noise-Level 
Dependent Crystallographic Symmetry Classifications of 
More or Less Periodic Crystal Patterns,” Symmetry, vol. 
10, article 133 (46 pages), 2018, doi: 
10.3390/sym10050133. 

[8] P. Moeck and P. DeStefano, “Accurate lattice 
parameters from 2D-periodic images for subsequent 
Bravais lattice type assignments,” Adv. Struct. Chem. 
Imag., vol. 4, article 5 (33 pages), 2018, doi: 
10.1186/s40679-018-0051-z. 

[9] E. V. Chuprunov, “Fedorov pseudosymmetry of 
crystals: Review,” Crystallogr. Rep., vol. 52, pp. 52, 1–11, 
2007, doi: 10.1134/S1063774507010014. 

[10] P. Moeck and A. Dempsey, “Crystallographic 
symmetry classifications of noisy 2D periodic images in 
the presence of pseudo-symmetries of the Fedorov type,” 
Microsc. and Microanal. vol. 25, pp. 1936–1937, 2019, 
doi: 10.1017/S1431927619010419.  

[11] C. L. Lawson, H. M. Berman, and W. Chiu, 
“Evolving data standards for cryo-EM structures,” Struct. 
Dyn., vol. 7, paper 014701 (11 pages), 2020, doi: 
10.1063/1.5138589. 

[12] J. M. Valpuesta, J. L. Carrascosa, and R. Henderson, 
“Analysis of Electron Microscope Images and Electron 
Diffraction Patterns of Thin Crystals of Ø29 Connectors in 
Ice,” Journal of Molecular Biology, vol. 240, pp. 281–287, 
1994, doi: 10.1006/jmbi.1994.1445. 

[13] S. Hovmöller, “CRISP: crystallographic image 
processing on a personal computer,” Ultramicroscopy, vol. 
41, pp.121–135, 1992, doi: 10.1016/0304-3991(92)90102-
P. 

[14] X. Zou and S. Hovmöller, “Electron Crystallography: 
Structure Determination by HREM and Electron 
Diffraction,” in: Industrial Applications of Electron 
Microscopy, Ed. Z. R. Li, Marcel Dekker, New York, pp. 
583–614, 2003. 

[15] X. Zou, S. Hovmöller, and P. Oleynikov, Electron 
Crystallography: Electron Microscopy and Electron 
Diffraction, IUCr Texts on Crystallography, No. 16, 2011, 
Oxford University Press, Oxford, U. K., doi: 
10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199580200.001.0001. 

[16] B. Gipson, X. Zeng, Z. Y. Zhang, and H. Stahlberg, 
“2dx—User-friendly image processing for 2D crystals,” J. 
Struct. Biol., vol. 157, pp. 64–72, 2007, doi: 
10.1016/j.jsb.2006.07.020. 

[17] Z. Wan, Y. Liu, Z. Fu, Y. Li, T. Cheng, F. Li, and H. 
Fan, “Visual computing in electron crystallography,” 
Zeitschrift für Kristallographie, vol. 218, pp. 308–315, 
2003, doi: 10.1524/zkri.218.4.308.20739. 

[18] X.-M. Li, F.-H. Li, and H.-F. Fan, “A revised version 
of the program VEC (visual computing in electron 
crystallography,” Chinese Phys., vol. B18, pp. 2459–2463, 
2009. 

[19] R. Kilaas, L. D. Marks, and C. S. Own, “EDM 1.0: 
Electron direct methods,” Ultramicroscopy, vol. 102, pp. 
233–237, 2005, doi: 10.1016/j.ultramic.2004.10.004, 
version 2.0.1, 
http://www.numis.northwestern.edu/edm/documentation/e
dm.htm, version 3.0, 
http://www.numis.northwestern.edu/edm/. 

[20] D. M. Paganin, A. Kozlov, and T. E. Gureyev, 
“Spatial resolution, noise and information in the 
computational-imaging era,” arXiv: 1909.11797, 2019, (9 
pages) & T. E. Gureyev, D. M. Paganin, A. Kozlov, and H. 
M. Quiney, “Spatial resolution and signal-to-noise ratio in 
X-ray imaging, Proc. SPIE Quantitative Phase Imaging V, 
vol. 10887, paper 108870J (12 pages), 2019, doi: 
10.1117/12.2511608. 

[21] Y. Liu, H. Hel-Or, C. S. Kaplan, and L. Van Gool, 
“Computational symmetry in computer vision and 
computer graphics”, Foundations and Trends® in 
Computer Graphics and Vision, vol. 5, pp. 1–195, 2009, 
doi: 10.1561/0600000008. 

[22] M. Agustí-Melchor, A. Rodas-Jordá, and J. M. 
Valiente-González, “Computational symmetry via 
prototype distances for symmetry groups classification,” 
Proc. Intern. Conf. Computer Vision Theory and 
Applications, 2011, pp. 85–94, doi: 
10.5220/0003375300850093. 

[23] F. Albert, J. M. Gómis, J. Blasco, J. M. Valiente, and 
N. Aleixos, “A new method to analyse mosaics based on 
symmetry group theory applied to Islamic geometric 
patterns,” Computer Vision and Image Understanding, vol. 
130, pp. 54–70, 2015, doi: 10.1016/j.cviu.2014.09.002. 

[24] A. Dempsey and P. Moeck, “Objective, probabilistic, 
and generalized noise level dependent classifications of 
sets of more or less 2D periodic images into plane 
symmetry groups,” arXiv: 2009.08539, (74 pages, Dec. 15, 
2020). 

[25] P. Moeck, “Towards more reasonable identifications 
of the symmetries in noisy digital images from periodic 
and aperiodic crystals,” Proc. 21st IEEE Intern. Conf. on 
Nanotech., 2021, (4 pages), doi: 
10.1109/NANO51122.2021.9514320. 

[26] K. Kanatani, “Comments on “Symmetry as a 
Continuous Feature”,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern 
Analysis and Machine Intelligence, vol. 19, pp. 246–247, 
1997, doi: 10.1109/34.584101. 

[27] K. Kanatani, “Geometric information criterion for 
model selection,” International Journal of Computer 
Vision, vol. 26, pp. 171–189, 1998, doi: 
10.1023/A:1007948927139. 

21 

 
 
 
 
[28] K. Kanatani, “Uncertainty modeling and model 
selection for geometric inference,” IEEE Transactions on 
Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, vol. 26, pp. 
1307–1319, 2004, doi: 10.1109 /TPAMI.2004.93. 

[29] P. Moeck, “Advances in crystallographic image 
processing for scanning probe microscopy,” in: A. 
Méndez-Villas, (ed.), Microscopy and Imaging Science: 
Practical Approaches to Applied Research and Education, 
pp. 503–514, 2017, Microscopy Book Series No. 7, 
Badajoz: FORMATEX Research Center, arXiv: 
2011.13102v2 (12 pages, Nov. 30, 2020).   

[30] D. McLachlan (Jr.), “Crystal structure and 
information theory,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 44, 
pp. 948–956, 1958, doi: 10.1073/pnas.44.9.948. 

[31] S. Park and C. F. Quate, “Digital filtering of scanning 
tunneling microscope images”, J. Appl. Phys., vol. 62, pp. 
312–314, 1987, doi: 10.1063/1.339150. 

[32] L. Jones and P. D.  Nellist, “Identifying and 
Correcting Scan Noise and Drift in the Scanning 
Transmission Electron Microscope,” Microscopy and 
Microanalysis, vol. 19, pp. 1050–1060, 2013, doi: 
10.1017/S1431927613001402. 

[33] L. Jones, H. Yang, T. J. Pennycook, M. S. J. Marshall, 
S. Van Aert, N. D. Browning, M. R. Castell, and P. D. 
Nellist, “Smart Align—a new tool for robust non-rigid 
registration of scanning microscope data,” Adv. Struct. 
Chem. Imag., vol. 1, paper 8 (16 pages), 2015, doi: 
10.1186/s40679-015-0008-4. 

[34] P. Moeck, “On classification approaches for 
crystallographic symmetries of noisy 2D periodic 
patterns”, IEEE Trans.  Nanotech., vol. 18, pp. 1166–1173, 
2019, doi: 10.1109/TNANO. 2019.2946597, expanded 
version (21 pages) arXiv: 1902.04155v4, May 29, 2021. 

[35] E. Knoll, “Life after Escher: A (Young) Artist’s 
Journey,” In: Schattschneider D., Emmer M. (eds.), M. C. 
Escher’s Legacy. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 189–
198, 2003, doi: 10.1007/3-540-28849-X_19. 

[36] Microsoft ICE 2.0, Image Composite Editor, for 
Windows Vista SP2, 7, 8, and 10. 

[37] H. Burzlaff, W. Fischer, and E. Heller, “Die 
Gitterkomplexe der Ebenengruppen,” Acta Cryst., vol. 
A24, pp. 57–67, 1968, doi: 10.1107/S0567739468000070 
(in German). 

[38] J. R. Helliwell, “Combining X-rays, neutrons and 
electrons, and NMR, for precision and accuracy in 
structure–function studies,” Acta Cryst. A, vol. 77, pp. 
173–185, 2021, doi: 10.1107/S205327332100317X. 

[39] GIMP 2.10, for Windows 7 and above, freely 
downloadable at https://www.gimp.org/.  

[40] C. Ophus, “Four-Dimensional Scanning Transmission 
Electron Microscopy (4D-STEM): From Scanning 
Nanodiffraction to Ptychography and Beyond,” 
Microscopy and Microanalysis, vol. 25, 563–582, 2019, 
doi: 10.1017/S1431927619000497. 

[41] M. Krajnak and J. Etheridge, “A symmetry-derived 
mechanism for atomic resolution imaging,” PANS, vol. 
117, pp. 27805–27810, 2020, doi: 
10.1073/pnas.2006975117, arXiv: 1903.04780. 

[42] P. Moeck and S. Rouvimov, “Precession electron 
diffraction and its advantages for structural fingerprinting 
in the transmission electron microscope,” Z. Kristallogr., 
vol. 225, pp. 110–124, 2010, doi: 10.1524/zkri.2010.1162. 

[43] J.-P. Morniroli, P. Stadelmann, G. Ji, and S. 
Nicolopoulos, The symmetry of precession electron 
diffraction patterns, J. Microsc., vol. 237, pp. 511–515, 
2010, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2818.2009.03311.x. 

[44] J.-P. Morniroli and A. Redjaimia, “Electron 
precession microdiffraction as a useful tool for the 
identification of the space group,” J. Microsc., vol. 227, 
pp. 157-171, 2007, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-
2818.2007.01800.x 

[45] P. Moeck and S. Rouvimov, “Structural 
Fingerprinting of Nanocrystals in the Transmission 
Electron Microscope: Utilizing Information on Projected 
Reciprocal Lattice Geometry, 2D Symmetry, and Structure 
Factors,” In: Drug Delivery Nanoparticles Formulation and 
Characterization (Drugs and the pharmaceutical sciences, 
vol. 191), Y. Pathak and D. Thassu (eds.), informa 
healthcare, New York, London, 2009. 

[46] M. Gemmi, E. Mugnaioli, T. E. Gorelik, U. Kolb, L. 
Palatinus, P. Boullay, S. Hovmöller, and J. P. Abrahams, 
“3D Electron Diffraction: The Nanocrystallography 
Revolution,” ACS Central Science, vol. 5, pp. 1315–1329, 
2019, doi: 10.1021/acscentsci. 9b00394. 

[47] J. C. H. Spence and J. J. Donatelli, “Inversion of 
dynamical Bragg intensities to complex structure factors 
by iterated projections. For Ultramic. 2020. (“Pico” 
Festschrift. May 2021),” Ultramicroscopy, vol. 222, article 
113214 (6 pages), doi: 10.1016/j.ultramic. 2021.113214.  

[48] J. T. McKeown and J. C. H. Spence, “The kinematic 
convergent-beam electron diffraction method for 
nanocrystal structure determination,” J. Appl. Phys., vol. 
106, paper 074309 (8 pages), 2009, doi: 
10.1063/1.3238312.  

[49] H. G. Brown, Z. Chen, M. Weyland, C. Ophus, J. 
Ciston, L. J. Allen, and S. D. Findlay, “Structure Retrieval 
at Atomic Resolution in the Presence of Multiple 
Scattering of the Electron Probe,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 
121, article 266102 (6 pages), doi: 
10.1103/PhysRevLett.121.266102. 

[50] T. E. Gureyev, F. de Hoog, Ya. I. Nesterets, and D. 
M. Paganin, “On the noise-resolution duality, Heisenberg 
uncertainty and Shannon's information,” The ANZIAM 
Journal, vol. 56, pp. C1–C15, 2014, doi: 
10.21914/anziamj.v56i0.9414, (Proc. 17th Biennial 
Computational Techniques and Applications Conference, 
https://journal.austms.org.au/ojs/index.php/ANZIAMJ/ 
article/view/9414), arXiv: 1503.04367. 

[51] P. Moeck, “Crystallographic image processing for 
scanning probe microscopy,” In: Microscopy: Science, 
Technology, Applications and Education, A. Méndez-
Vilas and J. Díaz (Eds.), FORMATEX, 2010, pp. 1951–
1962, arXiv: 2012.08057. 

[52] V. Kopský and D. B. Litvin, International Tables for 
Crystallography, Vol. E, Subperiodic groups, 2nd ed., 
Chichester, UK: John Wiley & Sons, 2010. 

[53] C. Funk and Y. Liu, “Beyond Planar Symmetry: 
Modeling Human Perception of Reflection and Rotation 
Symmetries in the Wild,” 2017 IEEE International 

22 

 
 
 
Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2017, pp. 793–
803, doi: 10.1109/ICCV.2017. 92.  

[54] R. K. Vasudevan, N. Laanait, E. M. Ferragut, K. 
Wang, D. B. Geohegan, K. Xiao, M. Ziatdinov, S. Jesse, 
O. Dyck, and S. V. Kalinin, “Mapping mesoscopic phase 
evolution during e-beam induced transformations via deep 
learning of atomically resolved images,” npj Comp. 
Mater., vol. 4, article 30 (9 pages), 2018, doi: 
10.1038/s41524-018-0086-7. 

[55] J. A. Aguiar, M. L. Gong, R. R. Unocic, T. Tasdizen, 
and B. D.  Miller, “Decoding crystallography from high-
resolution electron imaging and diffraction datasets with 
deep learning,” Sci. Adv., vol. 5, article eaaw1949 (10 
pages), 2019, doi: 10.1126/sciadv.aaw1949. 

[56] L. C. O. Tiong, J. Kim, S. S. Han, and D. Kim, 
“Identification of crystal symmetry from noisy diffraction 
patterns by a shape analysis and deep learning,” npj 
Comput. Mater., vol. 6, article 196 (11 pages), 2020, doi: 
10.1038/s41524-020-00466-5. 

[57] K. Kaufmann, C. Zhu, A. S. Rosengarten, D. 
Maryanovsky, T. J. Harrington, E. Marin, and K. S. 
Vecchio, “Crystal symmetry determination in electron 
diffraction using machine learning,” Science, vol. 367, pp. 
564–568, 2020, doi: 10.1126/science. aay3062, extended 
preprint “Paradigm shift in electron-based crystallography 
via machine learning,” arXiv: 1902.03682. 

[58] K. Kaufmann, C. Zhu, A. S. Rosengarten, and K. S. 
Vecchio, “Deep Neural Network Enabled Space Group 
Identification in EBSD,” Microscopy and Microanalysis, 
vol. 26, pp. 447–457, 2020, doi: 
10.1017/S1431927620001506. 

[59] K. Kaufmann and K. S. Vecchio, “An Acquisition 
Parameter Study for Machine-Learning-Enabled Electron 
Backscatter Diffraction,” Microscopy and Microanalysis, 
vol. 27, pp. 776–793, 2021, doi: 
10.1017/S1431927621000556.  

[60] S. Dash and A. Dasgupta, “Towards a Universal 
Classifier for Crystallographic Space Groups: A Trickle-
Down Approach to Handle Data Imbalance,” In: J. 
Nichols, B. Verastegui, A. Maccabe, O. Hernandez, S. 
Parete-Koon, and T. Ahearn (eds.), Communications in 
Computer and Information Science, vol. 1315, Springer, 
2020, (Smoky Mountain Computational Science and 
Engineering Conference, MC 2020: Driving Scientific and 
Engineering Discoveries Through the Convergence of 
HPC, Big Data and AI), doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-63393-
6_31. 

[61] K. Choudhary, K. F. Garrity, C. Camp, S. V. Kalinin, 
R. Vasudevan, M. Ziatdinov, and F. Tavazza, 
“Computational scanning tunneling microscope image 
database,” Scientific Data, vol. 8, article 57 (9 pages), 
2021, doi: 10.1038/s41597-021-00824-y.  

[62] V. S. Urusov and T. N. Nadezhina, “Frequency 
distribution and selection of space groups in inorganic 
crystal chemistry,” Journal of Structural Chemistry, vol. 
50, pp. S22–S37, 2009, doi: 10.1007/s10947-009-0186-9. 

[63] A. J. C. Wilson, V. L. Karen, and A. Mighell, “The 
space-group distribution of molecular organic structures,” 
In: International Tables for Crystallography, vol. C, ch. 
9.7, pp. 897–906, 2006, 
doi:10.1107/97809553602060000623. 

[64] A. D. Mighell, V. L. Himes, and J. R. Rodgers, 
“Space-group frequencies for organic compounds,” Acta 
Cryst., vol. 39, pp., 737–740, 1983, doi: 
10.1107/s0108767383001464.  

[65] H. Wondratschek and U. Müller, International Tables 
for Crystallography, Vol. A1 Symmetry relations between 
space groups, 1st edition, Kluwer Academic Publ. 2004. 

[66] P. Kayastha and R. Ramakrishnan, “Machine 
Learning Modeling of Materials with a Group-Subgroup 
Structure,” Machine Learning: Science and Technology, 
vol. 2, article abffe9 (13 pages), 2021, doi: 10.1088/2632-
2153/abffe9. 

[67] Y. Suzuki, H. Hino, T. Hawai, K. Saito, M. Kotsugi, 
and K. Ono, “Symmetry prediction and knowledge 
discovery from X‑ray diffraction patterns using an 
interpretable machine learning approach,” Scientific 
Reports, vol. 10, article 21790 (11 pages), 2020, doi: 
10.1038/s41598-020-77474-4. 

[68] R. de Gelder and A. Janner, “Remarkable features in 
the lattice-parameter ratios of crystals. I. Orthorhombic, 
tetragonal and hexagonal crystals,” Acta Cryst. B, vol. 61, 
pp. 287–295, 2005, doi: 10.1107/S0108768105006968. 

[69] R. de Gelder and A. Janner, “Remarkable features in 
the lattice-parameter ratios of crystals. II. Monoclinic and 
triclinic crystals,” Acta Cryst. B, vol. 61, pp. 296–303, 
2005, doi:  10.1107/S010876810500697X. 

[70] N. V. Somov and E. V. Chuprunov, “The 
Translational and Inversion Pseudosymmetry of the 
Atomic Crystal Structures of Organic and Organometallic 
Compounds,” Crystallography Reports, vol. 54, pp. 727–
733, 2009, doi: 10.1134/ S1063774509050022.  

[71] E. V. Chuprunov, Symmetry and Pseudosymmetry of 
Crystals, Nizhny Novgorod, Izd-vo NNGU, 2015, (in 
Russian). 

[72] J. Ismael, “Curie's Principle,” Synthese, vol. 110, pp. 
167–190, 1997, https://www.jstor.org/stable/20117593. 

[73] P. Curie, “Sur la symétrie dans phénomènes 
physiques, symétrie d’un champ électrique et d’un champ 
magnétique,” J. de Physique, vol. 3, pp. 393–415, 1884 (in 
French). 

[74] J. F. Mansfield, “Error bars in CBED symmetry?,” 
Ultramicroscopy, vol. 18, pp. 91–96, 1985, doi: 
10.1016/0304-3991(85)90125-1. 

[75] R. Vincent, and T. D. Walsh, “Quantitative 
assessment of symmetry in CBED patterns,” 
Ultramicroscopy, vol. 70, pp. 83-94, 1997, doi: 
10.1016/S0304-3991(97)00080-6. 

[76] K.-H. Kim and J.-M. Zuo, “Symmetry quantification 
and mapping using convergent beam electron diffraction,” 
Ultramicroscopy, vol. 124, pp. 71–76, 2013, doi: 
10.1016/j. ultramic.2012.09.002.  

[77] G. B. Hu, L.-M. Peng, Q. F. Yu, and H. Q. Lu, 
“Automated identification of symmetry in CBED patterns: 
a genetic approach,” Ultramicroscopy, vol. 84, pp. 47–56, 
2000, doi: 10.1016/S0304-3991(00)00006-1. 

[78] H. So, R. W. Lee, S. T. Hong, and K. H. Kim, 
“Sensitivity of quantitative symmetry measurement 
algorithms for convergent beam electron diffraction 

23 

 
 
 
technique,” Applied Microscopy, vol. 51, article 51 (9 
pages), 2021, doi: 10.1186/s42649-021-00060-z. 

[79] T. Masuda, K. Yamamoto, and H. Yamada, 
“Detection of partial symmetry using correlation with 
rotated-reflected images,” Journal of Pattern Recognition, 
vol. 26, pp. 1245–1253, 1993, doi: 10.1016/0031-
3203(93)90209-f. 

[80] P. Moeck and L. von Koch, “Information-theoretic 
point symmetry classifications/quantifications of an 
electron diffraction spot pattern from a crystal with strong 
translational pseudosymmetry,” Proc. 22nd IEEE 
International Conference on Nanotechnology, 4 pages, 
July 4-8th, 2022, Palma de Mallorca, Spain, slightly 
expanded version: arXiv: 2202.00220, 4 pages, Feb. 2022.  

[81] P. Moeck and L. von Koch, “Objective Point 
Symmetry Classifications/Quantifications of an Electron 
Diffraction Spot Pattern with Pseudo-Hexagonal Lattice 
Metric,” Extended abstracts of the Annual American 
Microscopy and Microanalysis Meeting, 2022, Portland, 
OR, 3 pages, expanded version, arXiv: 2201.04789, 4 
pages, Jan-Feb. 2022. 

[82] P. Moeck, Crystals, 2022, in preparation. 

[83] J.-M. Zuo, R. Yuan, Y.-T. Shao, H. W. Hsiao, S. 
Pidaparthy, Y. Hu, Q. Yang, and J. Zhang, “Data-driven 
electron microscopy: Electron diffraction imaging of 
materials properties,” arXiv: 2110.02070, Oct. 5, 2021, 28 
pages.  

[84] R. Yuan, J. Zhang, L. He, and J.-M. Zuo, “Training 
artificial neural networks for precision orient and strain 
mapping using 4D electron diffraction datasets,” 
arXiv:2103.03367, March 4, 2021, 19 pages. 

[85] K. Hornik, M. Stinchcombe, and H. White, 
“Multilayer feedforward networks are universal 
approximators,” Neural Networks, vol. 2, pp. 359–366, 
1989, doi: 10.1016/0893-6080(89)90020-8. 

[86] H. W. Lin, M. Tegmark, and D. Rolnick, “Why does 
deep and cheap learning work so well?,” J. Statistical 
Physics, vol. 168, pp. 1223–1247, 2017, doi: 
10.1007/s10955-017-1836-5. 

[87] T. N. M. Nguyen, Y. Guo, S. Qin, K. S. Frew, R. Xu, 
and J. C. Agar, “Symmetry-Aware Recursive Image 
Similarity Exploration for Materials Microscopy,” npj 
Computational Materials , vol. 7, article 166 (14 pages), 
2021, doi: 10.1038/s41524-021-00637-y; also personal 
communications by Joshua Agar 

[88] Y. Guo and J. Agar, “Wallpaper Group Symmetry 
Dataset based on ImageNet,” (2021), doi: 10.5281/ 
ZENODO.4747082. 

[89] Y. Guo and J. Agar, “Identifying Symmetries with 
Deep Learning Model,” 2020 user meeting of the Center 
for Nanophase Materials Science of the Oak Ridge 
National Lab, August 10 – 12, 2020, agenda and extended 
abstracts booklet download: 
https://cnmsusermeeting.ornl.gov/agenda/. 

[90] Y. Bengio, “Deep learning of representations for 
unsupervised and transfer learning,” Proc. ICML 
Workshop on Unsupervised and Transfer Learning, vol. 
27, pp. 17–36, 2012, 
http://proceedings.mlr.press/v27/bengio12a.html.  

[91] C. Liu, Y. Tao, D. Hsu, Q. Du, and S. J. L. Billinge, 
“Using a machine learning approach to determine the 
space group of a structure from the atomic pair distribution 
function,” Acta Cryst. A, vol. 75, pp. 633–643, 2019, doi: 
10.1107/S2053273319005606. 

[92] L. Yang, E. A. Culbertson, N. K. Thomas, H. T. 
Vuong, E. T. S. Kjær, K. M. Ø. Jensen, M. G. Tucker, and 
S. J. L. Billinge, “A cloud platform for atomic pair 
distribution function analysis: PDFitc,” Acta Cryst. A, vol. 
77, pp. 2–6, 2021, doi: 10.1107/S2053273320013066. 

[93] P. M. Vecsei, K. Choo, J. Chang, and T. Neupert, 
“Neural network based classifications of crystal 
symmetries from x-ray diffraction patterns,” Phys. Rev. B., 
vol. 99 (2019) article 245120 (9 pages), doi: 
10.1103/PhysRevB.99.245120. 

[94] A. N. Zaloga, V. V. Stanovov, O. E. Bezrukova, P. S. 
Dubinin, and I. S. Yakimov, “Crystal symmetry 
classification from powder X-ray diffraction patterns using 
a convolutional neural network,” Materials Today 
Communications, vol. 25, paper 101662 (6 pages), 2020, 
doi: 10.1016/j.mtcomm.2020.101662.  

[95] S. R. Chitturi, D. Ratner, R. C. Walroth, V. Thampy, 
E. J. Reed, M. Dunne, C. J. Tassone, and K. H. Stone, 
“Automated prediction of lattice parameters from X-ray 
powder diffraction patterns,” J. Appl. Cryst. vol. 54, pp. 
1799–1810, 2021, doi: 10.1107/S1600576 721010840. 

[96] M. Hellenbrandt, “The Inorganic Crystal Structure 
Database (ICSD) – present and future,” Crystallography 
Reviews, vol. 10, pp. 17–22, 2004, doi: 
10.1080/08893110410001664882. 

[97] C. R. Groom, I. J. Bruno, M. P. Lightfoot, and S. C. 
Ward, “The Cambridge Structural Database,” Acta Cryst. 
B, vol. 72, pp. 171–179, (2016), doi: 
10.1107/S2052520616003954 

[98] S. Habershon, E. Y. Cheung, K. D. M. Harris, and R. 
L. Johnston, “Powder Diffraction Indexing as a Pattern 
Recognition Problem: A New Approach for Unit Cell 
Determination Based on an Artificial Neural Network,” J. 
Phys. Chem. A, vol. 108, pp. 711–716, 2004, doi: 
10.1021/jp0310596. 

[99] C. Garcia-Cardona, R. Kannan, T. Johnston, T. 
Proffen, K. Page, and S. K. Seal, "Learning to Predict 
Material Structure from Neutron Scattering Data," Proc. 
2019 IEEE International Conference on Big Data, pp. 
4490–4497, 2019, doi: 10.1109/ 
BigData47090.2019.9005968. 

[100] C. Garcia-Cardona, R. Kannan, T. Johnston, T. 
Proffen, and S. K. Seal, "Structure Prediction from 
Neutron Scattering Profiles: A Data Sciences Approach," 
Proc. 2020 IEEE International Conference on Big Data, 
pp. 1147-1155, 2020, doi: 
10.1109/BigData50022.2020.9377853. 

[101] O.  Madelung, U. Rössler, and M. Schulz, 
“Substance: BaTiO3 property, crystal structure, lattice 
parameters, crystal structure,” in: Landolt-Börnstein - 
Group III Condensed Matter, Ternary Compounds, 
Organic Semiconductors, vol. 41E, pp. 1–6, 2000, doi: 
10.1007/ 10717201_513. 

[102] https://stokes.byu.edu/iso/findsym, H. T. Stokes and 
D. M. Hatch, “FINDSYM: program for identifying the 
space-group symmetry of a crystal,” J. Appl. Cryst., vol. 

24 

 
 
 
38, pp. 237–238, 2005, doi: 
10.1107/S0021889804031528. 

[103] K. Atz, F. Grisoni, and G. Schneider, Geometric 
Deep Learning on Molecular Representations, 
arXiv:2107.12375 (17 pages, 2021. 

[104] T. S. Cohen and M. Welling, “Group Equivariant 
Convolutional Networks,” Proc. 33rd International 
Conference on Machine Learning, New York, vol. 48, pp. 
2990–2999, 2016, doi: 10.5555/3045390.3045705. 

[105] T. E. Smidt, Euclidean symmetry and equivariance 
in machine learning, Trends in Chemistry, vol. 3, pp. 82–
85, 2021, doi: 10.1016/j.trechm.2020.10.006. 

[106] T. E. Smidt, M. Geiger, B. K. Miller, Finding 
symmetry breaking order parameters with Euclidean neural 
networks, Phys. Rev. Research, vol.3, article L012002, (6 
pages), 2021, doi: 10.1103/PhysRevResearch.3.L012002, 
see also arXiv:2007.02005. 

[107] D. Matthew and T. Ward. Information-Corrected 
Estimation: A Generalization Error Reducing Parameter 
Estimation Method. Entropy, vol. 23, article 1419 (pages) 
2021. doi: 10.3390/e23111419. 

[108] M. Haenlein and A. Kaplan, “A Brief History of 
Artificial Intelligence: On the Past, Present, and Future of 
Artificial Intelligence,” California Management Review, 
vol. 61, pp. 5–14, 2019, doi: 10.1177/0008125619864925. 

[109] M. Hutson, “Has artificial intelligence become 
alchemy?,” Science, vol. 360, pp. 478–478, 2018, doi: 
10.1126/science. 360.6388.478.  

[110] M. Hutson, “Artificial intelligence faces 
reproducibility crisis,” Science, vol. 359, pp. 725–726, 
2018, doi: 10.1126/ science.359.6377.725. 

[111] M. Hutson, “Core progress in AI has stalled in some 
fields,” Science, vol. 368, pp. 927–927, 2020, doi: 
10.1126/science. 368.6494.927.   

[112] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AI_winter. 

[113] A. Klug, “Image Analysis and Reconstruction in the 
Electron Microscopy of Biological Macromolecules,” 
Chem. Scr., vol. 14, pp. 245–256, 1978–79. 

[114] S. Hovmöller, A. Sjögren, G. Farrants, M. Sundberg, 
and B.-O. Marinder, “Accurate atomic positions from 
electron microscopy,” Nature, vol. 311, pp. 238–241, 
1984, doi: 10.1038/311238a0. 

[115] O. E. Piro, “Information Theory and the 'Phase 
Problem' in Crystallography,” Acta Cryst. A, vol. 39, pp. 
61–68, 1983, doi: 10.1107/S0108767383000094. 

[116] S. W. Wilkins, J. N. Varghese, and M. S. Lehmann, 
Statistical Geometry. I. A Self-Consistent Approach to the 
Crystallographic Inversion Problem Based on Information 
Theory, Acta Cryst. A, vol. 39, pp. 47–60, 1983, doi: 
10.1107/S0108767383000082. 

[117] S. W. Wilkins, Statistical geometry. II. Numerical 
solution via the single pixel equation, Acta Cryst. A, vol. 
39, pp. 892–896, 1983, doi: 10.1107/ 
S0108767383001786. 

[118] S. W. Wilkins, Statistical geometry. III. Accelerated 
convergence using contrast amplification, Acta Cryst. A, 
vol. 39, pp. 896–898, 1983 doi: 
10.1107/S0108767383001798. 

[119] A. K. Livesey and J. Skilling, “Maximum entropy 
theory, Acta Cryst. A, vol. 41, pp. 113–122, 1985, doi: 
10.1107/s0108767385000241.  

[120] S. F. Burch, S. F. Gull, and J. Skilling, “Image 
restoration by a powerful maximum entropy method,” 
Computer Vision, Graphics, and Image Processing, vol. 
23, pp. 113–128, 1983, doi: 10.1016/0734-
189x(83)90108-1. 

[121] F. M. Zanzotto, “Viewpoint: Human-in-the-loop 
Artificial Intelligence,” Journal of Artificial Intelligence 
Research, vol. 64, pp. 243–252, 2019, doi: 
10.1613/jair.1.11345. 

[122] D. P. Varn and J. P. Crutchfield, “Chaotic 
crystallography: how the physics of information reveals 
structural order in materials,” Current Opinion in Chemical 
Engineering, vol. 7, pp. 47–56, 2015, doi: 
10.1016/j.coche.2014.11.002. 

[123] T. Proffen, Machine learning in crystallography, 
IUCr Newsletter, Volume 30 Number 1, 17 February 2022. 

[124] P. L. Chiu, M. D. Pagel, J. Evans, H.-T. Chou, X. 
Zeng, B. Gipson, H. Stahlberg, and  C. M. Nimigean, “The 
structure of the prokaryotic cyclic nucleotide-modulated 
potassium channel MloK1 at 16Å resolution,” Structure, 
vol. 15, pp. 1053–1064, 2007, doi: 
10.1016/j.str.2007.06.020. 

[125] J. Kowal, M. Chami, P. Baumgartner, M. Arheit, P.-
L. Chiu, M. Rangl, S. Scheuring, G. F. Schröder, C. M. 
Nimigean, and  H. Stahlberg, “Ligand-induced structural 
changes in the cyclic nucleotide-modulated potassium 
channel MloK1,” Nature Commun., vol. 5, article 3106 
(10 pages), 2014, doi: 10.1038/ncomms4106. 

[126] J. Kowal, N. Biyani, M. Chami, S. Scherer, A. J. 
Rzepiela, P. Baumgartner, V. Upadhyay, C. M. Nimigean, 
and H. Stahlberg, “High-Resolution Cryoelectron 
Microscopy Structure of the Cyclic Nucleotide-Modulated 
Potassium Channel MloK1 in a Lipid Bilayer,” Structure, 
vol. 26, pp. 20–27, 2018, doi: 10.1016/j.str.2017.11.012. 

[127] EMDataResource, data entries EMD-2526 and 
EMD-2527, https://www.emdataresource.org/. 

25 

 
 
 
 
 
Appendices 

Appendix A: Hierarchy tree of the crystallographic 2D 
point groups that are projected Laue classes 

Figure  A-1  presents  the  hierarchy  tree  of  the  2D 
crystallographic  point  groups  that  are  projected  Laue 
classes.  The  two  ordering  principles  in  this  graph  are  the 
order  of  the  point  group/Laue  class  on  the  left  and  right 
hand  side,  increasing  from  the  bottom to the  top,  and the 
maximal  subgroup  and  minimal  supergroup  relationships. 
Maximal  subgroups  are  connected  to 
their  minimal 
supergroups by arrows. The ratios of the sums of squared 
residuals of the amplitudes of the structure-bearing Fourier 
coefficients  for  climbing  up  from  a  lower  level  of  the 
hierarchy to a higher level that are permitted by inequality 
(9b) are also given in this figure.  

Nm = Nl 

ˆ
J
m
ˆ
J

l



6
5

ˆ
J
m
ˆ
J

l



13
9

ˆ
J
m
ˆ
J
l



4
3

= k 

Fig.  A-1.  Hierarchy  tree  of  the  2D  point  symmetry  groups  that  are 
projected  Laue  classes  with  ratios  of  sums  of  squared  Fourier 
coefficient  amplitude  residuals  as  insets.  These  ratios  are  valid  for 
equal  numbers  of  structure bearing Fourier coefficients of geometric 
models  and  apply  to  climbing  up  from  a  maximal  subgroup  at  a  kl 
level  to  its  minimal  supergroup  at  the  km  level.  Maximal  subgroups 
are connected to their minimal supergroups by arrows. 

Table  A-1  lists  the  crystallographically  consistent  plane 
symmetry  groups  for  each  projected  Laue  class.  The 
projected  Laue  class  can  be  inferred  for  each  plane 
symmetry  group  entry 
the  Patterson 
symmetry symbol by deleting the leading letter for the type 
of the unit cell.    

in  [1,2]  from 

Table A-1 projected Laue classes and their crystallographical-
ly consistent plane symmetry groups in short Herman-
Mauguin notation.   
Projected (2D) 
Laue class 
2 
2mm 

Plane symmetry group 

p1, p2 
pm, pg, cm, p2mm, p2mg, p2gg, 
c2mm 
p4 
p4mm, p4gm 
p3, p6 
p3m1, p31m, p6mm 

4 
4mm 
6 
6mm 

Appendix B: Objective symmetry classifications from 
electron diffraction patterns from crystals 

of 

Objective 

symmetry 

classifications 

electron 
diffraction patterns have a great future in connection with 
scanning  transmission  electron  microscopy  (STEM)  using 
fast-readout  pixelated  direct-electron  detectors.  This 
relatively  new  technique  is  often  referred  to  by  the 
acronym  4D-STEM  as  2D  diffraction  patterns13  are 
recorded  sequentially  over  a  2D  grid  of  (direct-space) 
probe positions using a very fine electron probe [40].  

A novel 4D-STEM imaging contrast mode that relies on 
the variation of the point symmetry of electron diffraction 
patterns with electron probe position changes on the order 
of  a  few  tens  of  picometers  was  recently  demonstrated 
[41].  The  acronym  S-STEM  was  introduced  in  that  paper 
for this new scanning probe imaging technique, where the 
leading  letter  S  stands  for  symmetry.  A  serious  weakness 
in  [41] is not to rely on a method for the classification of 
experimental  electron  diffraction  patterns  from  crystals 
that 
inclusion 
relationships  between  the  projected  crystallographic  point 
groups.  

objectively  with 

symmetry 

deals 

strictly  kinematic 

Such  a  classification  method  is,  however,  straightfor-
wardly  extrapolated  from  what  is  described  above  in  this 
paper.  For 
electron  diffraction 
conditions, one would have to use the hierarchy tree of the 
projected  Laue  classes,  Fig.  1A,  and  the  equations above. 
This is because Friedel’s law applies per definition to such 
a  scenario  (as 
in  X-ray  diffraction 
experiments). The electron diffraction patterns would then 
be  strictly  centrosymmetric  about  the  position  of  the 
primary beam.  

it  often  does 

Most  electron  diffraction  patterns  for  acceleration 
voltages of 100 to 300 keV feature, however, violations of 
Friedel’s  law  [14,15,42].  For  the  classification  of  such 
electron  diffraction  patterns,  the  2D  Laue  class  hierarchy 
tree of  Fig.  A-1  needs  be replaced by one which contains 
all  10  of  the  crystallographic  2D  point  groups.  The  same 
equations  and  inequalities  as  above  apply  for  the  ascent 
from  lower  symmetric  point  symmetry  groups  (that  are 
maximal  subgroups)  to  higher  symmetric  point  symmetry 
groups (that are their minimal supergroups) on the basis of 
the  ratios  of  the  sums  of  reflection  spot  residuals  in  that 
other (not shown) hierarchy tree.  

13 As  this  electron  probe is formed  by  a  lens,  one  can  refer  to the 
recorded  diffraction  patterns  as  “images”  of  the  probe-sample 
interaction.  The  recorded  4D-STEM  dataset  contains  a  very  large 
amount of information about the local electron probe interaction with 
a material sample. 

26 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Violations of Friedel’s law can be reduced by precessing 
the  primary electron beam [42]  close to  precise  zone  axis 
orientations  and  transmitting  the  thinnest  possible  sample 
area [14,15]. Precession electron diffraction results also in 
more  diffraction  spots  being  present  in  spot  electron 
diffraction  pattern  [42].  The  symmetry  of  precession 
electron diffraction patterns [43] from several well chosen 
zone axes of highly symmetric crystals allows for 3D point 
symmetry  reconstructions  and  facilitates  space  group 
determinations [44].  

All  of  these  features  are  useful  for  both  electron 
crystallography  [45]  and  structural  fingerprinting  [42,46]. 
Many diffraction based electron crystallography techniques 
[45]  have  so  far  avoided  highly  symmetric  zone  axis 
orientations of the crystals that are to be analyzed because 
dynamical diffraction effects are particularly prominent for 
such orientations. 

When  energy  filtered  electron  diffraction  patterns  are 
available,  one  will  be  able  to  correct  for  dynamical 
electron  diffraction  effects  [47]  (and  subsequently  solve 
the lost structure factor phase problem of diffraction based 
crystallography  as  recently  demonstrated  on  synthetic 
data).  One will no longer have to rely on sufficiently thin 
crystals  for  electron  crystallography  on  the  basis  of  a 
multiple zone axis diffraction patterns [48].  

The  removal  of  dynamical  electron  diffraction  effects 
will  also  benefit  electron  crystallography  studies  on  the 
basis  of  STEM-through-focus- series  images [49].  On the 
basis  of  such  images  [49]  and  by using a pixelated direct 
electron  detector  [40],  one  could  proceed  analogously  to 
[23]  and  build  up  an  objective  plane  symmetry  group 
site/point 
classification 
symmetries  [7,10,24,25].  As 
in  any  other  kind  of 
scattering-based  crystallography,  objectively  determined 
2D  point  and  plane  symmetries  will  facilitate 
the 
refinement  of  crystal  structures  that  were  solved  from 
electron diffraction or imaging data. 

from  objectively 

identified 

It  is  also  possible  to  expand  the  above  described 
objective crystallographic symmetry classification methods 
to the point symmetries of quasicrystal. An amendment of 
the  projected  Laue  class  (centrosymmetric  point  group 
symmetry)  hierarchy  tree  of  Fig.  A-1  would  again  be 
necessary.  

A  binary  type  classification  method  for  distinguishing 
between  quasicrystals  and  their  rational  approximants  on 
the  basis  of  the  amplitude  maps  of  the  discrete  Fourier 
transforms  of  sufficiently  well  resolved  images  from  a 
crystal  or  quasicrystal  is  mentioned  in  [25].  Figure  A-2 
provides  the  projected  Laue  class  hierarchy  tree  for  such 
binary  classifications.  The  ratios  of  the  sums  of  the 
squared  residuals  of  the  amplitudes  of  the  structure-
bearing  Fourier  coefficients  for  objective  classifications 
using the equations and inequalities above are given in this 
graph as well. 

For  electron  diffraction  spot  patterns  from  quasicrystals 
in selected zone axis orientations, the hierarchy tree of Fig. 
A-2 would need to be amended by the crystallographic 2D 
point  groups  (as  mentioned  above  for  electron diffraction 
spot patterns from crystals). 

Nm = Nl 

ˆ
J
m
ˆ
J

l



12
11

ˆ
J
m
ˆ
J
l



.1

190

ˆ
J
m
ˆ
J

l



8
7

ˆ
J
m
ˆ
J

l



533.1

ˆ
J
m
ˆ
J

l



4
3

Fig.  A-2.  Hierarchy  tree  of  the  2D  point  symmetry  groups  that  are 
projected  (2D)  Laue  classes  of  selected  quasicrystals  and  their 
rational  approximants.  The  ratios  of  the  sums  of  the  squared 
amplitude  residuals  are  valid for  equal  numbers  of  structure bearing 
Fourier coefficients of geometric models and apply to ascents from a 
maximal  subgroup  at  a  kl  level  to  its  minimal  supergroup  at  the  km 
level. Maximal subgroups are connected to their minimal supergroups 
by arrows. 

Appendix C: Ad-hoc confidence levels for 
classifications into minimal supergroups  

Based  on  Kanatani’s  information  content  ratio  equation 
[27],  ad  hoc  defined  confidence  levels  for  the  model 
selections  in  favor  of  the  more  symmetric/restricted 
geometric  model  can,  for  the  special  case  Nm  =  Nl,  be 
straightforwardly  defined.  For  two  non-disjoint  geometric 
models for which inequality 9b is fulfilled one obtains: 

                        (A-1), 

27 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The  critical  value  for  K  is  obtained  for  inserting  the 
condition 

J
m

J
l

                                                                      (A-2), 

1

into (A-1) so that 

                             (A-3)  

KK 

results. 
   Obviously,                   is valid as the ratio of the two 
sums  of  squared  residuals  ranges  from  unity  (A-2)  to  a 
constant value that is larger than unity and depends on the 
particular combination of km and kl in inequality (9b).  

critical

When  the  ratio  of  the  squared  residuals  is  unity  (as  in 
equation (A-2), one has 100 % confidence in choosing the 
more  symmetric  model  over  the  less  symmetric  model. 
Both  models  fit  the  input  image  data  equally  well  in  that 
special  case,  which  will  in  practice  only  be  obtained  for 
noise-free mathematical idealizations of real world images, 
perfect  geometric  models,  and  with  a  perfectly  accurate 
algorithm.  

When  inequality  (9b)  is  not  fulfilled,  one  has  zero 
confidence in the selection of the more constrained model 
over its less symmetric counterpart. This is formalized by 
the confidence level in identifying a minimal supergroup 

                                  (A-4), 

which  takes  on  values  between  zero  and  100  %  as  a 
function of the ratio of the sums of squared residuals that 
allow for climbing ups from lower levels of the symmetry 
hierarchy  to  higher  levels.  It  makes  sense  to  define  an 
average confidence level for a transition from all maximal 
subgroups  to  their  joint  minimal  supergroup.  For  small 
symmetry  breakings  by  each  individual  group  and  low-
noise  data,  this  average  confidence  level  can  be  rather 
high.  

The confidence level becomes negative and devoid of its 
usual meaning when inequality (9b) is not fulfilled. This is 
a  result  of  the  ratio  of  the  squared  residuals  in  A-1 
becoming so large that K becomes larger than 1.  

Pseudosymmetries  are  identified  by  high  confidence 
levels  for  transitions  that  are  not  based  on  the  anchoring 
group.  

Appendix D: Crystallographic image processing as a 
form of computational imaging 

Computational imaging is in [20] defined as the union of 
digital data recording and processing that results in a much 
improved  image  of  some  physical  interaction  between 
some  sample  with  probing  particles  or  forces  in  any 
dimension. The concept of an “indirect” imaging system is 
also defined in [20], whereby the image-data processing is 
an  indispensable  part  of  the  imaging  process  (as  it  is,  for 
example, in tomography, holography, ptychography, super-
resolution  fluorescence  microscopy,  and 
image-based 
electron crystallography).  

The spatial resolution of the physical apparatus used for 
the initial data collection part of indirect imaging, e.g. the 
pixel  size  of  a  digital  detector  and  a  microscope’s 

magnification,  determines  no  longer  the spatial resolution 
of  a  study  in  computational  and  indirect  imaging.  Of 
central importance in computational imaging is the concept 
of the dimensionless intrinsic image quality [20] 

Q

as

_

recorded



SR

SNR
d

2



PSF

F
in

(A-5), 

where  SNR  stands  for  the  signal  to  noise  ratio,  SR  is  the 
spatial  resolution  as  defined  by  the  widths  of  the 
instrumental  point  spread  function  (PSF),  and  d  is  the 
dimension of the image (equal to two for the images in this 
study).  The  quantity  Fin  in  this  equation  is  the  imaging 
particle  fluence,  expressed  as  the  number  of  registered 
quanta  (input)  per  image-unit  area  (or  generally  per  d-
dimensional volume)  of a digital  image.  In  computational 
imaging,  SRPSF  and  SNR can  be  traded-off each other and 
the  intrinsic  image  quality of  the as recorded image is  on 
the order of unity [20].  

the 

(or, 

ratio 

equivalently, 

Note  the  duality  of  the  signal-to-noise  ratio  and  spatial 
resolution  in  equation  A-5  for  a  fixed  imaging  particle 
fluence.  While  the  image  size,  its  bandwidth,  and  signal-
to-noise 
structural 
(spatial/angular) resolution and the SNR) can all be traded-
off  against  each  other,  their  product  cannot  exceed  the 
number  of 
forming  quanta.  The  maximum 
imaging 
“information  capacity”  of  a  computational 
system  is  limited  by  the  number  of  quanta  used  in  the 
formation  of  the  image  [50].  Additional  information  is 
often  available  in  the  form  of  prior  knowledge  about 
certain aspects of the imaged sample.  

image 

The intrinsic image quality can be significantly increased 
by 
In 
the  application  of  such  prior  knowledge. 
crystallographic  image  processing,  this  knowledge  comes 
in  two  forms:  (i)  the  sample  is  known  to  be  translation 
periodic  in  a  2D  projection  and  (ii),  the  projection  of  the 
space  group  symmetry  features  a  plane  symmetry  higher 
than  p1.  When  a  quasicrystal 
imaged  with  a 
computational  imaging  system,  it  is  known  that  the 
amplitude  map  of  the  discrete  Fourier  transform  of  its 
image consists of  discrete Bragg spots that feature a (2D) 
projected  Laue  class  that  is  non-crystallographic  and 
typical of a quasicrystal, see Fig. A-2.)    

is 

The  total  area  of  the  image  on  which  the  imaging 
particles impinged is taken in this paper to be composed of 
K  crystallographic  unit  cells.  Since  Fourier  filtering  is 
analogous to translation averaging over all noisy unit cells 
of the image with subsequent removal of all non-structure 
bearing Fourier coefficients, a factor of the square root of 
K  enters  the  nominator  of  equation  (A-5)  when  the 
averaged particle fluence per unit cell area (instead  of the 
total image area) is used.  

Q

Fourier

_

filtered



SNR

SR

PSF

_

periodic


structure
average



K

_

F
in

        (A-6). 

The effect of the translation averaging by Fourier filtering 
can,  therefore,  be  considered  as  a  significant  boost  to the 
signal  to  noise  ratio  [30]  that  affects  the  intrinsic  image 
quality positively. Information on the real crystal structure 
is,  however,  removed  by  Fourier  filtering  as  recovering 
that kind of information was considered outside of the goal 
of the investigation. This information is filtered out as if it 
were just noise. 

28 

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A reduction of the widths of the PSF is equivalent to an 
increase  of  both  the  structural  (spatial/angular)  resolution 
and  the  intrinsic  image  quality.  Reductions  of  the  widths 
of the PSF can be obtained by deconvolutions [20]. 

The crystallographic processing of a translation averaged 
image  is  in  essence  a  deconvolution/removal  of  the 
“position-  dependent  point-symmetry-smearing”  part  [20] 
of the PSF from said image in Fourier space [51]. The rest 
of  the  computational  imaging  part  of  the “complete  PSF” 
[20]  remains  as  a  feature  of  the  digital  image  after  this 
“site/point-symmetry-restoring partial deconvolution.  

This  kind  of  deconvolution  can  be  considered  as  being 
equivalent  to  a  posterior  symmetrizing/shaping  of  the 
scanning  probe  tip  in  scanning  probe  microscopy.  The 
partial  image  deconvolution  by  means  of  crystallographic 
image  processing  (CIP)  is  formally  equivalent  to  the 
averaging  over  the  k  noisy  asymmetric  units  of  the 
translation-averaged unit cell. No simple formula captures 
the  increase  of  the  intrinsic  image  quality  with  the 
crystallographic processing of an image 

Q

CIP



CIP

factor

,(
k

motif

...)



Q

Fourier

_

filtered

    (A-7), 

because the “boost factor” depends on the specifics of the 
translation  periodic  motif,  its  underlying  plane  symmetry, 
the  physical  pixel  size, 
the  number  of  pixels  per 
translation-  averaged  unit  cell,  and  other  measures  of  the 
physical-imaging instrument-part of the complete PSF. As 
Fig.  4  shows,  the  correctly  averaged  asymmetric  unit  can 
be  up  to  kmax  =  12  times  smaller  than  the  translation-
averaged unit cell.  

Since  it  is  connected  to  the  multiplicity  of  the  general 
position  (k),  the  boost  factor  in  equation  (A-7)  should  be 
proportional to the square root of that multiplicity. Digital 
images  from  higher  symmetric  crystals  gain,  thus,  more 
from  CIP 
lower  symmetric 
from 
counterparts.  

those 

their 

that 

Scanning probe microscopy of more or less 2D periodic 
images  fell  previously  not  under  the  strict  definition  of 
computational  imaging  [20]  since  it  often  ended  with 
Fourier  filtering  and  required  the  value  judgment  of  a 
human  being  on  what  the  most  likely  plane  symmetry 
group  may  be.  This  has  now  changed  as  objective 
crystallographic symmetry  classifications (that  do not  rely 
on  such  value  judgments  by human  beings) were  enabled 
by this author’s recent work [7,10,24,25,29]. 

Appendix E: Hypothetical climbing up scenarios in 
the hierarchy trees of translationengleiche plane 
symmetry groups and projected Laue classes   

   Let  us  assume  for  the  sake  of  the  argument  that  the 
geometric model with the lowest sum of squared residuals 
was  the  one  that  was  symmetrized  to  plane  symmetry 
group  p2  and  Laue  class  2.  This  plane  symmetry  group 
features kl = 2 in the plane symmetry hierarchy tree in Fig. 
4. 
   We  see  that  this  plane  symmetry  group  is  in  minimal 
supergroup  relationships  with  plane  symmetry  groups 
p2mg,  p2gm,  p2gg,  p2mm,  p4,  and  c2mm  at  the  km  =  4 
level, as well as with p6 at the km = 6 level, Fig. 4. Let us 
further assume that the sums of squared residuals for plane 
symmetry groups p1m1, p11m, c1m1, and c11m are two to 
three  orders  of  magnitude  larger  than  for  p2.  This  would 
mean that there are no mirror lines in the input image data 
and plane symmetry groups that contain mirror lines at the 

km = 4 level are to be ruled out as correct classification of 
the input image data.  

Let  us  further  assume  that  the  sums  of  squared  Fourier 
coefficient residuals for the models that were symmetrized 
to plane symmetry groups p4 and p6 are also two to three 
orders  of  magnitude  larger  than  that  for  p2.  This  means 
that the input image data does not contain four-fold or six-
fold rotation points. The sums of squared residuals for the 
models that have been symmetrized to p1g1 and p11g, are, 
on  the  other  hand,  in  our  example  rather  low  so  that  it 
seems possible that the corresponding symmetrized models 
of  the  input  image  data  could  combine  with  the  p2 
symmetrized  model  to  the  model  with  plane  symmetry 
p2gg.  As  long  as  inequality  (9a)  is  fulfilled  for  all  three 
cases  p2,  p1g1,  and  p11g,  we  can  “climb  up”  from  all 
three of the lower symmetric models at the kl = 2 level to 
the  model  that  has  been  symmetrized  to  plane  symmetry 
group p2gg at the km = 4 level of Fig. 4.  

Plane  symmetry  group  p2gg  is  a  maximal  subgroup  of 
p4gm, so that another test with inequality (9a) needs to be 
made if a further climbing up in the plane symmetry group 
hierarchy tree may be permitted. Let us assume this test is 
negative  (as  there  are  no  four-fold  rotation  points  in  the 
input image data). The model that features plane symmetry 
p2gg  is  then  the  Kullback-Leibler  best  model,  which 
allows for the best separation of the structural information 
in the input image data from the non-information/noise. It 
was  arrived at  without an estimate of  the prevailing noise 
level.  

We now make up another sake of argument scenario. Let 
us assume that the correct plane symmetry classification is 
p2gg, but that the geometric model of the input image data 
that was symmetrized to p4 features also a rather low sum 
of  squared  residuals  of  the  complex  Fourier  coefficients. 
Plane  symmetry  group  p4  is  then  identified  as  Fedorov 
type pseudosymmetry as it is disjoint from plane symmetry 
group p2gg, which is the highest genuine symmetry. 

In  a  third sake of  argument  scenario,  let us assume that 
the  sum  of  squared  residual  of  the  complex  Fourier 
coefficient  of  the  model  that  has  been  symmetrized  to 
plane  symmetry  group  p4  is  only  modestly  larger  than 
those  for  the  p1g1  and  p11g  models  and,  therefore, 
sufficiently  low  that  one  can  not  only  climb  up  from  p2, 
p1g1, and p11g to p2gg (and no further beyond), but also 
from p2 to p4 (but no further beyond). The image features 
then a strong Fedorov type pseudosymmetry.  

When a p4 pseudosymmetry of the Fedorov type in some 
input  image data  is very strong, the unit cell  in the image 
will  be  nearly  of  the  square  type.  If  the  a  =  b  lattice 
parameter  condition  for  a  square  Bravais  lattice  type  is 
fulfilled  within  error  bars  of  their  measurements,  one 
speaks  of  such  a  p4  pseudosymmetry  as  being 
simultaneously  of 
type  and  a  metric 
the  Fedorov 
specialization.  Key  to  this  classification  is  the  fact  that 
plane  symmetry  p4  is  measurably  more  severely  broken 
than p2, p1g1, and p11g in our third sake of the argument 
scenario. 

The  p4  symmetrized  model  of  the  input  image  data 
features  2D  Laue  class  4.  For  consistency  of  the  plane 
symmetry  classification  for  our  last  scenario,  the  sum  of 
squared residuals of the Fourier coefficient amplitudes for 
Laue  class  4  needs  to  be  higher  than  that  for  Laue  class 
2mm.  See  the  first  appendix  for  the  hierarchy  tree  of  the 
projected Laue classes. The variables km and kl refer in the 
context of classifications into 2D Laue classes to the order 
of  the  crystallographic  2D  point  groups  on  which  these 

29 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
classes  are  based.  All  of  the  equations  and  inequalities 
above  are  valid  with  the  modified  meaning  of  km  and  kl 
when  information  theory  based  classifications  into  Laue 
classes are made.   

Projected  Laue  class  2mm  is  the  one  that  is  consistent 
with  all  three  geometric  models  of  the  input  image  data 
that  contain  glide  lines  in  our  third  scenario,  which  have 
been  identified  as  genuine  symmetries  of  the input  image 
data.  At  the  center  of  the  amplitude  map  of  the  discrete 
Fourier  transform  of  the  input  image  data,  there  can, 
therefore,  only  be  a  four-fold  rotation  pseudosymmetry 
point  superimposed  on  a  genuine  two-fold  rotation  point 
that is located at the intersection of two mirror lines. 

Appendix F: Comments on alternative computational 
symmetry and machine learning approaches to 
crystallographic symmetry classifications 

Individual  members  of  the  computational  symmetry 
community  [21]  need  to  be  credited  with  realizing  the 
importance  of  Kanatani’s  geometric  form  of  information 
theory [26-28] for their field roughly five years earlier than 
this author did. As mentioned above, this statistical theory 
deals  objectively  with  symmetry  inclusion  relations  and 
ensures  that  the  least  broken  symmetry  can  be  reliably 
identified in noisy 2D periodic images.  

The  works  of  the  computational  symmetry  community 
are  concerned  with  direct  space  analyses  and  sometimes 
lack  crystallographic  rigor  (as  evident  by  a  display  of 
ignorance  about  the  concepts  of  standard  plane  symmetry 
group origin choices and the importance of site symmetries 
[1,2]).  Maybe  this  is  one  of  the  reasons  that  only  two 
studies exist, to the best of this author’s knowledge, where 
a  G-AIC  was  used in  the classification of  a  time-periodic 
series  of  2D  images  in  direct  space.  These  two  studies 
ignored the standard  origin  choices  for frieze groups [52] 
and  their  results  are  somewhat  questionable,  as  discussed 
in appendix E of [7]. If the two above-mentioned periodic 
time  series  had  been  analyzed  in  Fourier  space,  the 
alignment of the raw data with the symmetrized models for 
that  data  would  have  been  trivial  and  better  results  could 
presumably have been obtained. 

The  conceptual  difficulty  in  distinguishing  between 
pseudosymmetries  at  the  point/site  level  and  genuine 
symmetries was noted in [22] by other computer scientists, 
but  no  solution  to  this  problem  was  given.  Since  this 
difficulty  is  conceptual,  it  needs  to  be  overcome  by 
precisely  defining  what  constitutes  a  genuine  symmetry 
group,  on 
type 
pseudosymmetry  group,  on  the  other  hand.  This  has been 
done  in  this  paper  in  line  with  the  common  practice  in 
crystallography,  according  to  which  only  the  least  broken 
symmetry group is genuine. 

the  one  hand,  and  a  Fedorov 

Just as any other crystallographic symmetry classification 
study  by  the  computational  symmetry  community,  the 
method  in  [23]  relies  on  arbitrarily  set  thresholds.  Their 
method, is, however, quite unique in so far as it identifies 
the  higher  symmetric  site/point  symmetries  and  combines 
them to plane symmetry group classifications. 

The  preoccupation  of 

the  computational  symmetry 
community  with  making  classifications  in  direct  space  is 
from  the  perspective  of  natural  scientists  and  engineers 
misguided.  In science and  engineering,  one  would always 
use  Fourier  methods  when  one  is  confronted  with  a 
problem  that  is  periodic  in  space  or  time.  When  the 

sequence  of  periodic  repeats  is  small,  one  would  simply 
augment  it  with  multiple  copies  of  the  original  data  in 
order  to  enable  effective  space  or  time  “translation-
averaging” by a discrete Fourier transform. One would, of 
course,  also  make  sure  that  no  artifacts  were  introduced 
into  the  data  due  to  the  procedure  that  was  used  for  the 
augmentation14.  

Note that except for the two above mentioned studies of 
periodic  time  series,  all  of  the  so  far  reviewed  [34] 
crystallographic  symmetry  classifications 
into  plane 
symmetry  groups,  frieze  groups,  site/point  symmetry 
groups, and 2D Bravais lattice types by the computational 
symmetry  community  involved  internally  programmed 
thresholds  for  automated  interpretations,  i.e.  subjectivity 
in  computer  code  in  other  words.  These 
disguised 
classifications  are, 
subjective  at  a 
fundamental 
in  spite  of  having  been  under 
level 
development for more than half of a century.  

therefore,  all 

the 

The  person  who  coined 

term  “computational 
symmetry”  of  more  or  less  2D  periodic  patterns  has 
recently  started  to  use  machine  learning  techniques  for 
symmetry  classifications  of  everyday  objects  from  digital 
2D  images  [53].  This  seems  like  a  proper  ending  of  the 
more  than  50  years  quest  to  find  the  best  possible 
symmetry 
computer 
classifications 
inclusion 
problem  with  subjectively  set  thresholds,  which  seems  in 
hindsight somewhat ill-advised.  

crystallographic 

the  symmetry 

that  combats 

program 

for 

There  is  also  a  new  breed  of  materials-data  scientists 
who  used  machine  learning  systems  for  crystallographic 
symmetry classifications of direct and reciprocal space 2D 
images  from  crystals  [54-61].  All  of  their  classifications 
were  performed  in  reciprocal/Fourier  space,  as  this  is  the 
most sensible thing to do. Their general approach might at 
first  sight  appear  to  be  semi-objective  as  no  subjectively 
set  “thresholds  for  interpretation”  are  programmed  into 
the  computer  code.  Machine  learning  classifications  are 
(for contemporary systems) always functions of the sets of 
labeled  images  that  were  used  in  the  training  of  such 
machines.  Decisions  on  the  composition  and  size  of  the 
training image set are obviously subjective.  

When  one  relies  for  the  training  data  sets  on  symmetry 
information  about  crystals  that  has  been  collected  in  the 
large  crystallographic  databases,  one  encounters 
the 
additional  problem  that  the  crystal  structures  of  chemical 
compounds  are  extremely  unevenly  distributed  over  the 
various  space groups.  This is  true for both inorganic  [62] 
and organic materials [63,64].  

While  many  inorganic  crystals  feature  high  symmetries, 
the  opposite  is  true  for  organic  crystals.  Approximately 
one third of all organic compounds crystallize for example 
in  space  group  P21/c.  Approximately  three  quarters  all 
organic  compounds  crystallize  in  one  of  only  five  space 
groups. For inorganic compounds, there are only 24 space 
groups  that  feature  more  than  1  %  of  the  (more  than 

14  Weak  superstructure  reflections  may  appear  in  the  discrete 
Fourier  transform  amplitude map  if one had stitched  several slightly 
different direct space periodic repeats together. One should then only 
use the main reflections, i.e. the Fourier coefficients that represent the 
average  structure  for  crystallographic  symmetry  classifications.  No 
superstructure reflections were observed in the amplitude map of the 
crystal  pattern  in  Fig.  1  as  all  repeats  in  the  original  composite 
graphic work of art were identical, i.e. one physical tile represents one 
asymmetric unit and one quarter of the translations periodic unit cell, 
see Fig. A-6. 

30 

 
 
 
 
 
 
100,000) entries in  the 2006 edition [62] of  the Inorganic 
Crystal Structure Database. 

metric  symmetry  higher  than  that  of  the  triclinic  Bravais 
lattice, i.e. 1P . 

Individual more or less kinematic 2D diffraction patterns 
from  real  crystals  and  calculated  amplitude  maps  of 
discrete Fourier transforms from more or less 2D periodic 
images  probably  do  not  contain  enough  symmetry 
information 
to  arrive  at  unambiguous  space  group 
classifications  by  machine  learning  systems  (in  either  2D 
or  3D)  even  when  complications  due  to  symmetry 
inclusion relations are ignored. Note that there are only 11 
Laue  classes  (centrosymmetric  crystal  classes  and  point 
groups)  but  230  space  groups  in  three  dimensions, 
projecting  to  six  2D  Laue  classes and  17  plane  symmetry 
groups  (with  21  settings)  [1,2].  Note  further  that  the 
comprehensive/systematic 
the  maximal 
subgroups of the space groups takes up over 300 pages in 
[65].  

listing 

of 

There are,  thus,  a  lot  of symmetry inclusion relations to 
be  considered  in  3D.  In  one  dimension,  there  are  only 
seven 
inclusion 
relationships  have  recently  been  exploited  in  order  to 
increase the performance of a neural network [66] in a task 
other than a crystallographic symmetry classification.      

groups.  Their 

symmetry 

space 

Structural  and  symmetry  information  that  has  been  lost 
by  the  recording  of  the  outcome  of  a  crystallographic 
diffraction  experiment  (or 
the  extraction  of  Fourier 
transform amplitudes of a more or less 2D periodic image), 
i.e.  the  equivalent  of  collapsed  wave  functions,  can 
probably  not  be  recovered  by  contemporary  “correlation 
detection  machines”.  The  goals  of  the  study  of  [55]  are, 
therefore,  way 
idiosyncratic 
neologisms  for  well  established  crystallographic  concepts 
such  as  some  of  the  geometric/morphological  crystal 
classes [1,2] is also a shortcoming of [55].)  

too  ambitious. 

(Using 

and 

system 

The  authors  of  [55]  claimed  that  they  boosted  the 
performance  of  their  machine  learning  system  by  using 
predicted  crystal  systems  as  features  for  space  group 
predictions.  The  usefulness  of 
this  strategy  could, 
however,  not  been  confirmed  in  a  study  on  machine 
learning  based  crystal 
space  group 
classifications  on  the  basis  of  powder  X-ray  diffraction 
patterns [67]. This discrepancy could be due to the study in 
[55]  being  about  symmetry  in  two  dimensions  (as 
projected  from  three  dimensional  crystals) and [67]  being 
about  3D  crystal  symmetry  projected  into  one  dimension 
only.  However,  there  is  also  a  crystallographic-statistic 
reason  that  the  “stacking  strategy”  of  [55]  is  probably  no 
optimal.  Translational  pseudosymmetries  are  definitively 
not  rare in nature [68-71] and not all of the entries in the 
large crystallographic databases are correct [7,64].  

It 

to 
is  not  uncommon  for  non-crystallographers 
mistakenly  think  that  2D  lattice  parameters  which  are 
within  experimental  error  bars  equal  to  each  other,  90  or 
120  degrees  (60°  as  complement  to  180°)  allow  for  an 
assignment  of  noisy  2D  periodic  image  data  to  higher 
symmetric  2D  Bravais  lattice  types.  The  point  group 
symmetry  of  a  crystal  structure  restricts  the  metric 
properties of the translation lattice of any crystal structure 
(over restrictions  on the components of  the metric tensor) 
by 
the  Neumann-Voigt-Minnigerode-Curie-principle 
[72,73].  In  the  “opposite  direction”,  there  is  no  principle 
that  requires  a  triclinic  crystal  with  a  very  strong 
translational  pseudosymmetry  or  metric  specialization  [8] 
(that  might  be  too  strong  to  be  identified  as  such  in  the 
unavoidable  presence  of  experimental  noise)  to  feature  a 

Correspondingly,  a  study  of  the  distribution  of  organic 
crystal  over  the  space  groups  (from  the  year  1983)  found 
that “depending on values used for ‘reasonable’ errors on 
the cell parameters, it was found that for 3 to 12% of the 
compounds  the  metric  symmetry  exceeds  the  crystal 
the  original 
symmetry  reported  by 
reference” [64]. 

the  authors 

in 

the 

learning 

individual 

images  of 

The study in [56] provides indirect support for the above 
presented  hypothesis  that  there  is  probably  insufficient 
symmetry  information  for  the  classification  tasks  at  hand 
individual  amplitude  maps  of  discrete  Fourier 
in 
transforms  of  digital  images  and  more  or  less  kinematic 
electron  and  X-ray diffraction spot patterns  from  crystals. 
The classification results of their neural network improved 
[56]  when  algorithmic  “shape  information”  was  added  to 
training  set.  Adding 
the 
information  to  the  training  set  suggests  to  this  author 
simply  that  there  was  not  sufficient  information  there  in 
the  first  place  to  obtain  good  classification  results.  The 
authors of [56] are, however, well aware of the difficulties 
that symmetry inclusion relation pose as they write in their 
abstract:  “deep 
the  DL-based 
identification  of  crystal  symmetry  suffers  from  a  drastic 
drop in accuracy for problems involving classification into 
tens  or  hundreds  of  symmetry  classes  (e.g.,  up  to  230 
space groups), severely limiting its practical usage.”  
Backscattered  electron  diffraction  patterns 

feature 
Kikuchi lines and bands. They often cover a large field of 
view  in  reciprocal  space  so  that  some  3D  structural 
information  about  a  crystalline  sample  is  contained  in 
them.  Crystallographic  symmetry  classifications  on  the 
basis of such patterns [57-59] by machine learning systems 
could,  therefore,  be  superior  in  their  accuracy  to  those 
from  transmission  electron  diffraction  spot  patterns.  A 
good strategy for the building up of a relevant training data 
set  of  experimental  images  is  the  elaboration  of  the 
experimental 
the 
performance  of  their  machine  learning  system  [57,58] 
strongly [59]. 

imaging  parameters 

(DL)  … 

affect 

that 

More structural information than in essentially kinematic 
2D  electron  diffraction  patterns  is  encoded  in  dynamical 
convergent  beam  electron  diffraction  (CBED)  patterns. 
This  includes  a  limited,  projection  specific,  amount  of 
structural  information  in  3D  and  even  some  structure 
factor  phase  information  when  convergent  beam  electron 
diffraction  disks  overlap  (and  the  crystals  are  sufficiently 
thick 
to 
dominate).  One  may,  however,  remain  skeptical  if  that 
additional amount of structural information may suffice for 
reliable  space  group  determinations  so  that  “a  universal 
classifier  for  crystallographic  space  groups”  [60]  might 
eventually be created or remain a pipe dream.  

for  dynamical  electron  diffraction  effects 

Analytic  methods  of  quantifying  crystallographic 
symmetries  in  CBED  patterns  have,  on  the  other  hand, 
been  developed  and  refined  since  the  year  1985  [74-78]. 
The  proposed  symmetry  deviation  quantifiers  of  these 
studies are, however, not in a form that would allow them 
to become part of a geometric AIC.  

Aspects of these analytic methods could, nevertheless, be 
adapted  to  work  in  conjunction  with  a  novel  crystal 
symmetry-based contrast mechanism for atomic resolution 
imaging  [41].  That  contrast  mechanism  uses  so  far 
exclusively a cross-correlation  quantification technique of 
the  shape  of  planar  figures  (with  emphasis  on  the  figure 

31 

 
 
 
edges  but  without  inherent  crystallographic  restrictions) 
[79]. As that  symmetry classification technique originated 
in the computational symmetry community, it treats Bragg 
diffracted  electron 
intensities  and  diffusely  scattered 
background  intensities  in  the  same  manner.  Because  the 
Bragg intensities carry the directly quantifiable bulk of the 
interpretable symmetry information from the crystal, there 
is  room  for  improvement  of  the  contrast  mechanism  of 
[41].    This  crystal  symmetry-driven  contrast  mechanism 
for  atomic  resolution  imaging  is  applicable  to  4D-STEM 
images  that  were  recorded  with  fast  pixelated  direct 
electron detectors [40].  

An  information  theoretic  approach  to  the  quantification 
of  the  crystallographic  point  symmetries  in  electron 
diffraction  spot  and  featureless  disk  Bragg  diffraction 
patterns  that  contain  3D  information  is  currently  under 
development  [80-82].  That  method  is  highly  sensitive  to 
symmetry  breakings  so  that  genuine  symmetries  can  be 
distinguished  from  pseudosymmetries  in  the  presence  of 
symmetry  inclusion  relations and experimental  noise  (just 
as  the  method  that  is  described  in  the  main  part  of  this 
paper).  That  method 
to  be  probabilistic, 
is  going 
generalized  noise  level  dependent,  robust  with  respect  to 
small  mis-orientations  around  low-index  zone  axes,  will 
allow  for  evidence-based  geometric  model  rankings,  and 
be free of arbitrary set thresholds for interpretations. It has, 
therefore, the potential to contribute to the development of 
objective  symmetry  contrast  mechanisms 
in  atomic 
resolution  imaging.  For  materials  with  medium  to  large 
unit  cells,  one  could  potentially  quantify 
the  site 
symmetries  of  most  of  the  atomic  columns  in  a projected 
unit cell by augmenting the general approach of [23] with 
geometric Akaike weights when sufficiently well resolved 
4D-STEM data have been collected.    

Data-driven  transmission  electron  microscopy  [83]  is 
rapidly  becoming  a  reality,  but  objective  analytical 
techniques  for  symmetry  quantifications  may  always  be 
necessary  and  not  be  replaced  by  machine  learning 
techniques.  The  importance  of  including  noise  in  the 
synthetic  training  data  of  machine  learning  systems  that 
predict crystal orientations and map strains on the basis of 
experimental  4D-STEM  diffraction  datasets  has  recently 
been highlighted [84].  

While  “universal  approximators”  [85]  are  theoretically 
possible, it remains to be seen [86] if the inclusion relation 
problem  of  crystallographic  symmetry  classifications  can 
be  overcome  with  such  machines  at  a  reasonable  cost, 
especially when there is insufficient structural information 
in the training data and experimental noise is present.  

Classification results for plane symmetry groups, i.e. the 
17  space  group  types  in  2D,  can  be  amazingly  accurate 
when enough synthetic training data is used that is more or 
less  evenly  distributed  over  all  classes.  An  accuracy  of 
higher than 99 % was, for example, reported in [87] after a 
deep  convolutional  network  was  trained  with  600,000 
synthetic  2D  periodic  images  that  were  generated  from 
random 
ImageNet 
(https://imagenet.stanford.edu/)  dataset.  The  validation  of 
this  machine  learning  system  was  done  on  an  additional 
200,000 of such images.  

selections  of 

images  of 

the 

Symmetry inclusion relationships were partly revealed in 
the  confusion  matrix  of  that  study  [87].  Given  the  very 
large training  and validation sets,  these  authors were well 
aware  of  the  limitations  of  their  neural  network  and 
concluded  “until  neural  networks  can  learn concepts like 
symmetry  parsimoniously,  their  use  in  materials  micro-

structures  should  be  restricted 
to  narrow  bounded 
problems  (e.g.,  binary  classification),  where  subsequent 
physics-based validation is possible, or there is an expert-
in-the-loop” [87].  

The full one-million-entry dataset of the study in [87] is 
available  online  [88].  In  an  earlier  study  [89],  a  neural 
network  that  was  trained  on  this  “wallpaper”  dataset  was 
used  to  classify  synthetic  atomic  resolution  images  from 
crystals.  In  order  to  make  the  synthetic  atomic  resolution 
images  resemble  experimental 
images  more  closely, 
Gaussian blur  and random atomic displacements from the 
ideal  atomic  positions  were  applied.  That  image  dataset 
had also about a million entries.  

The  hypothesis  tested  in  [89]  was  if  transfer  learning 
[90]  would  enable  reasonably  good  classification  results 
for  the  study’s  atomic  resolution  images  by  the  network 
that  was  trained  on  the  wallpaper  images  and  vice  versa. 
Symmetry  transfer  learning  did,  however,  not  happen  to 
any  appreciable amount and the authors concluded “if  we 
cross-validate the performance of a model trained on one 
dataset  with  a  dataset  of  a  different type,  the  accuracy  is 
no  better  than  a  random  guess”  [89].  (There  was  also  a 
third  set  of  about  a million 2D  periodic images that  were 
created from random noise for which analogous hypothesis 
test results were obtained.)  

information 

is  contained 

Albeit  in  a  projection  into  one  dimension,  3D  space 
in  pair  distribution 
group 
functions 
that  were  calculated  from  powder  X-ray 
diffraction patterns [91]. It is highly commendable to put a 
machine  learning  system  for  space  group  classifications 
from that  kind of  data into open access [92]. That system 
inclusion 
did,  however,  “rediscover” 
problem  (and offers no solution to it beyond a potentially 
infinitely  large  training  data  set).  Its  classification  results 
are  at  best  a  bunch  of  space  groups 
that  are 
translationengleiche  subgroups  and  supergroups  of  each 
other  [91].  That  system  has,  therefore,  learned  nothing 
about space group symmetries that has not been known for 
over a century.  

the  symmetry 

A similar result was reported in [93] for the space group 
classification  by  a  machine  learning  system  that  was 
trained  with  calculated  powder  X-ray  diffraction  patterns 
to  which  noise  and  background  were  added  in  order  to 
better  approximate  experimental  data.  Three-dimensional 
space  group  information  is  contained  in  such  patterns  as 
well, again as a projection into one dimension. 

The authors of [93] reported a space group classification 
accuracy  of  around  54  %  on  experimental  data  and  gave 
their  network  the  option  to  refuse  a  classification  if  it 
could  only  be  made  with  a  high  uncertainty.  This 
permission  to  refuse  improved  the  classification  accuracy 
to  82  %,  albeit  at  the  price  of  leaving  half  of  the 
experimental data unclassified. 

What  may  be  inferred  from  the  results  of  [93]  is  not  to 
expect  too much from  a machine  classifier  that  delivers a 
variational approximation to some arbitrary function while 
bypassing well established analytical procedures for space 
group  classifications.  In  order  to  save  time,  it  may, 
however, often be advantageous to use a machine classifier 
to  find  a  set  of  3D  subgroups  and  supergroups  amongst 
which  the  correct  space  group  of  an  experimental  X-ray 
powder  diffraction  pattern  is  to  be  found  by  analytical 
means. 

One  of  the  conclusions  of  a  similar  study  using 
calculated  powder  X-ray  diffraction  patterns  of  inorganic 
materials  [94]  was  that  they  could  not  train  their  neural 

32 

 
 
 
liked 

they  would  have 

network  as  well  as 
for 
classifications  into  low  symmetric  crystal  systems  and 
space  groups.  The  main  reason  for  this  was  probably  the 
above-mentioned very  strong imbalance in the occupation 
of space group symmetries for this kind of crystals. For the 
higher  symmetric  space  group  symmetries,  these  authors 
obtained,  on  the  other  hand,  comparable  (and  partially 
superior)  classification  results  [94]  with  respect  to  earlier 
[34] studies by other authors.  

The  relative  large  error  rate  in  their  classifications  into 
low  crystallographic  symmetries  may  again  suggest  that 
there  is  simply  not  enough  symmetry  information  in  the 
corresponding powder X-ray diffraction patterns when the 
crystal symmetry is low. If that  were indeed to be so, this 
would  not  bode  well  for  classifications  of  2D  data  from 
low  symmetry  crystals  into  plane  symmetry  group,  Laue 
class,  and  Bravais  lattice  type.  This  is  because  lower 
symmetric  crystals  project  to  lower  symmetric  plane 
symmetry groups.  

The  so  far  latest  (December  2021),  most  sophisticated, 
and  comprehensive  study  of  the  application  of  machine 
learning system to the extraction of lattice parameters from 
powder X-ray diffraction patterns [95] concludes that “the 
presence  of  multiple  phases,  baseline  noise  and  peak 
broadening  are  particularly  damaging”  to  the  prediction 
accuracy.  “Incorporating  these  experimental  conditions 
into the training is absolutely necessary”. Nearly a million 
crystallographic  datasets  from  both  the  Inorganic  Crystal 
Structure  Database  [96]  and  the  Cambridge  Structural 
Database  [97]  were  used  in  that  study,  providing  both 
higher  symmetric 
lower 
symmetric  organic  crystal  data.  That  study  identifies  a 
“pattern recognition” study [98] from the year 2004 as the 
start  of  the  field of  applying  machine  learning  techniques 
to  unit  cell  parameter  prediction  from  power  X-ray 
diffraction  patterns  without  prior 
crystallographic 
indexing.    

inorganic  crystal  data  and 

The so-called “data science approach” i.e. an arsenal of 
contemporary machine learning system, have recently also 
been  applied  to  powder  neutron  diffractometry  [99,100]. 
Just as in powder X-ray diffractometry, there is 3D crystal 
structure  information  in  powder  neutron  diffraction  data 
that is projected into one dimension.  

the  material’s 

So  far  it  was  only  attempted  to  predict  selected  crystal 
systems  for  five  of  the  seven  types  of  metric  symmetry 
from  simulated  powder  neutron  diffraction  training  data 
[99]  and  to  test  the  machine  learning  system  with  a  few 
temperature  depended  experimental  datasets  from BaTiO3 
that  spanned 
rhombohedral/(trigonal), 
tetragonal,  and  cubic  phases.  The  synthetic  training  data 
were  calculated  neutron  diffraction  profiles  for  BaTiO3 
over  a  wide  range  of  hypothetical  lattice  parameters  for 
standard  experimental  conditions  of 
the  employed 
diffractometer.  Most  of  these  training  data are  unphysical 
as, depending on the temperature, this material features in 
nature  only  a  few  crystal  phases  with  distinct  lattice 
parameters (at standard pressure) [101].  

cubic 

The  tetragonal  phase  of  BaTiO3  features  a  c/a  lattice 
vector magnitude ratio of approximately 1.01, signifying a 
strong 
pseudosymmetry. 
translational/metric 
Likewise,  the  angle  between  the  lattice  vectors  is  in  the 
rhombohedral  BaTiO3  phase  within  0.15  degrees  of  the 
90.0°  [101],  resulting  in  a  cubic  metric/translational 
pseudosymmetry  as  well.  Similar 
lattice  parameter 
relationships  are  observed  for  the  crystal  phases  of  other 
compounds  that  crystallize  in  the  perovskite  structural 

prototype.  It  will,  therefore,  be  difficult  to  prepare  a 
machine  learning  system  that  can  reliably  classify  the 
metric symmetry of experimental diffraction patterns from 
the  crystal  phases of  members of the perovskite structural 
prototype.  

of 

tetragonal,  and 

Although  being  unphysical,  the  synthetic  training  data 
set allowed for highly accurate classifications of synthetic 
validation  data  into  the  higher  symmetric  crystal  systems 
cubic, 
rhombohedral/(trigonal).  For 
synthetic  monoclinic  and  triclinic  validation  data,  the 
prediction  accuracies  were  approximately  90  and  95  %, 
respectively.  Most  misclassifications 
synthetic 
validation data occurred for the monoclinic crystal system. 
A completely unrestricted metric symmetry, i.e. that of the 
triclinic  crystal  system,  was  predicted  for  this  system  for 
about  10  %  of  the  synthetic  test  patterns  [100].  This 
demonstrates  that  the  machine  learning  system  worked 
largely  as  intended  at  the  mathematical  level  for  metric 
symmetry classifications of  synthetic data. Due to using a 
largely  unphysical  training  dataset  that  is  based  on 
hypothetical  arrangements  of  the  atoms  of  the  BaTiO3 
compound, its usefulness is extremely limited with respect 
to  classifications  of  experimental  powder  neutron 
recorded  with  other 
diffraction  data 
that  were 
diffractrometers  and  from  materials  outside  of 
the 
perovskite structural prototype. 

For  an  experimental  powder  neutron  diffraction  dataset 
from  cubic  BaTiO3,  i.e.  the  ferroelectric  phase  that  is 
stable  above  approximately  403  °K,  the  machine  learning 
system in [99] predicted a lattice constant of 4.215 Å. The 
widely  accepted  lattice  constant  for  this  particular  crystal 
phase is, however, 3.996 Å [101]. As there was visually a 
good match to the experimental powder neutron diffraction 
profile in [99] for the cubic crystal phase, the discrepancy 
might have been due to some uncorrected systematic errors 
in  the  experimental  data.  The  rhombohedral  lattice  angle 
was  in  [99]  predicted  to  be  41.6°,  whereas  the  accepted 
literature value is 89.85° [101]. The predicted c/a ratio for 
the tetragonal lattice of BaTiO3 was 1.045, for a literature 
value  of  1.011  [101].  These  results  show  that  predictions 
for data that  are of a different type than the training data, 
i.e.  so  called  generalizations,  are  to  be  taken  with  more 
than one grain of salt.  

The  authors  of  that  study  were,  nevertheless,  very 
optimistic  that  an  expert-in-the-loop  [87]  would  in  the 
future  no  longer  be  needed  for  crystallographic  analyses 
[99], see Fig. A-3. All structural parameters, i.e. fractional 
atomic coordinates in the unit cell, bond length and angles, 
(and  presumably  also  isotropic  or  anisotropic  vibration 
parameters  of  the  atoms),  should  according  to  these 
authors  be  predicable  with  a  machine  learning  based 
workflow in the future.  

This might perhaps work one day for very simple crystal 
structures  that  are  mono-atomic,  since each atom features 
three  positional  parameters  and  up  to  six  vibrational 
parameters per unit cell. Note that the proposed “workflow 
of  the  future”  in  Fig.  A-3  does  not  even  involve  a 
mandatory  crystal  structure  refinement  step  so  that  its 
results would probably not be very precise (not to mention 
accurate in the physical sense, see Fig. A-4). 

This  author  strongly  suspects  that  there  may  not  be 
enough  information  in  experimental  powder  neutron 
diffraction  data  to  succeed  with  a  complete  crystal 
structure  determination  of  complex  chemical  compounds. 
There  seem,  at  present,  to  be  no  plans  to  build  machine 
learning systems for space group predictions from powder 

33 

 
 
 
neutron  diffraction  data  [99,100],  so  that  the  determined 
crystal  structures  would  presumably  all  be  presented  in 
space group P1 (at least initially until an on-line tool such 
as  FINDSYM  [102]  is  used  by  an  expert-in-the-loop  to 
find a reasonably well fitting space group for the predicted 
atomic coordinates).  

accurate  than  the  physics-driven  approach  was  lacking  in 
[99,100] so that one may consider it at present as wishful 
thinking  (rather  than  a  meaningful  contribution  to  the 
experimental  science  of  3D  crystallography).  There might 
be some confusion on what exactly is accuracy in machine 
learning studies, on the one hand, and measurement based 
physical science on the other hand. 

Accuracy  in  the  physics  sense,  see  Fig.  A-4,  depends 
crucially on the skillful modeling of an experiment by the 
application  of  the  pertinent  physical  laws  [38],  which the 
data  science approach  largely aims to ignore.  A  good  test 
the  successful  removal  of  systematic  errors 
for 
in 
the  better 
increased  accuracy, 
experiments, 
agreement  of  results  that  were  obtained  in  a  statistically 
sound  manner  (with  high  precision)  by  different  methods 
(based on different physical laws) [38]. 

i.e. 

is 

Fig.  A-3.  From  [99]  with  permission.  Left:  Classical  workflow  of 
solving  and  refining  a  crystal  structure  with  an  expert-in-the-loop 
[87] who comes up with an initial model of the crystal structures and 
decides  on  the  refinement  strategy  to  make  the  most  out  of  the 
structural  information  in  the  experimental  data.  This  is  a  two-step 
procedure  where  the  refinement  calculations  are  based  on  the 
employed space group symmetry. Middle: from the bottom to the top, 
experimental  time  of  flight  neutron  diffraction  data,  photo  of  a 
diffractometer,  and  cartoon  of  a  crystal  structure  of  the  perovskite 
structural  prototype.  Right:  Proposed  one-step  procedure  for  the 
determination  of  a  crystal  structure  by  a  future  machine-learning 
system where the structure refinement is optional.    

Not (exactly) 
knowable in 
nature, 
approximated 
by minimizing 
systematic 
errors. 

Obtainable by 
statistics of 
multiple 
measurements
. 

Fig.  A-4.  The  concepts  of  precision  and  accuracy  in  experimental 
measurement science. From [38] with annotations. 

The  2020  follow  up  study  on  [99]  used  only  synthetic 
training data for the trigonal, tetragonal, and cubic phases 
of  BaTiO3  [100].  The  predicted  lattice  parameters  of 
experimental test data were closer to the accepted literature 
values  (of  [101]),  perhaps  as  results  of  a  better  physics-
driven  pre-processing  of  the  experimental  data  or  the 
restriction  of  the  synthetic  training  data  set  to  only  three 
metric  symmetries  (crystal  systems)  of  synthetic  data 
[100].  (The  predicted  rhombohedral  angle,  was,  however, 
still unreasonable.) 

While  it  is  true  that  “existing  methods  …  rely  on  the 
fidelity  of  physics-driven  forward  models  for  accuracy” 
and that the proposed machine learning alternative in [100] 
“is  fast,  data-driven and less reliant on the fidelity of the 
underlying  physics”,  this  author  does  not  believe  that 
“data-driven  machine  learning”  is  “potentially  more 
accurate” [99] than standard crystallographic analyses that 
involve  structure  refinements  under  the  constraints  of  an 
objectively  determined  space  group.  Support  for  their 
assertion that the data-driven approach is potentially more 

is 

in  machine 

Instead,  accuracy 

learning  often 
understood  as  simple  adherence  to  some  “ground  truth”, 
which  is  assumed  to  be  known  with  unlimited  accuracy 
and  precision (just like a Dirac delta function in a plot of 
the probability density over a value such as Fig. A-4). Note 
in passing that the correct space group symmetry is a very 
powerful  constraint  that  allows  for  spatial  averaging  over 
the  asymmetric  3D  unit,  which  can  be  up  to  192  times 
smaller than the translation periodic unit cell.  

to  show 

Shannon’s  information  theory  was  used  more  than  60 
that  complete  crystal  structure 
years  ago 
determinations  are  theoretically  possible  based  on  a 
comprehensive  set  of  3D  diffraction  data  alone  when 
analytic routes are followed [30]. This author is not aware 
that  something  comparable  has  been  demonstrated  with 
respect  to  the  utility  of  machine  learning  systems  for 
crystallographic  symmetry  classifications  and  crystal 
structure determination.  
that  compared 

to  a  whole  crystal  structure 
determination, an accompanying space group classification 
is much less involved, but a different kind of problem. As 
mentioned above, the correct space group classification is 
the  precondition  for  the  objective,  experimental  data 
supported, refinement of the crystal structure. 

Note 

It  is  well  known  that  pseudosymmetries  are  not  rare  in 
real-world  crystals  [7-9,68-70].  Two-dimensional  images 
with  pseudosymmetries  are,  however,  so  far  absent  from 
labeled  training  datasets  in  machine  learning  studies  [54-
61],  so  that  distinctions  between  genuine  symmetries  and 
pseudosym-metries cannot be achieved by such machines. 
Also,  several  of  these  studies  did  not  even  include  noisy 
and experimental images into their training data sets.  

One may wonder where the merit lay in the recent past in 
preparing correlation detection machines for classifications 
that  necessarily  encounter  symmetry  inclusion  relations 
when  this  might  well  be  outside  of  the  capabilities  of 
“translation-only” equivariant machine learning systems. 

Geometric  deep  learning,  as recently reviewed in [103], 
benefits  from  hardware  implementations  of  geometric 
priors.  Such  priors  capture  information  on  the  symmetry 
properties  of  the input  data. Symmetry inclusion  relations 
were, however, not specifically addresses in an equivariant 
network  [103],  where  point  symmetries  4  and  4mm  were 
combined  with  the  inherent  translation  symmetry  of 
convolutional neural networks.  

A  practical  advantage  of  Euclidian  equivariant  neural 
networks is that they do not rely on input data that needed 
to  be  augmented  with  a  multitude  of  arbitrarily  rotated 
images  [105].  Another 
versions  of 
advantage  of  these  machine  learning  systems  is  that  they 

the  same  input 

34 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
system 

symmetry 

cannot  make  predictions  that  are  nonsensical  from  a 
symmetry  viewpoint  [106].  Improvements  of  machine 
learning  systems  by  means  of  the  incorporation  of 
information  theoretic  concepts  have  also  been  proposed 
[107].  It remains to be seen if “crystallographic symmetry 
learning  systems  can  be  build.  A 
savvy”  machine 
symmetry 
should  be  much  more 
savvy 
sophisticated  than  a  “symmetry  aware”  [87]  system,  as  it 
would  need  to  deal  with  the  crystallographic  pseudosym-
metries, 
and 
inclusion 
experimental  noise  all  at  the  same  time.  The  question  if 
“artificial 
[108])  has  “become 
alchemy”  or  is  a  viable  form  of  experimental  computer 
engineering  has  recently  been  discussed  in  the  journal 
Science [109]. Despite the somewhat negative connotation 
of  the  word  “alchemy”  in  this  direct  quote,  one  needs  to 
remember  that  the  efforts  of  alchemist  contributed  to 
mankind’s  material  basis  as  they  did  create  both  gun 
powder  and  porcelain  in  their  heydays.  For  technological 
progress  to  be  continued  in  the  long  run,  a  strong 
theoretical  basis  needed  to  be  developed  to  underpin 
experimental engineering breakthroughs.  

intelligence15” 

relationships, 

(AI, 

Fittingly to the alchemy metaphor, a replication crisis has 
also  been  noted  for  the  AI  field  as  a  whole  [110]  and 
progress  in  some  sub-fields  seems  to  have  stalled  [111]. 
For the sake of progress, one can only hope that there will 
not be another “AI winter” [112]. A first attempt to briefly 
review  the successes and  failures  of the machine learning 
approaches  to  crystallographic  symmetry  classifications 
was  provided  by  this  author  in  the  expanded  on-line 
version of [34] in the year 2019. The discussion above may 
serve as some kind of an update to that review. 

computational 

symmetry  community  and 

As the main part of this paper demonstrates, statistically 
sound  analytic  alternatives  to  both  the  computer  codes  of 
the 
the 
application  of  machine  learning  systems  to  the  task  of 
exist 
crystallographic 
[7,10,24,25,29].  These  alternatives  even  outperform 
human  experts  with  respect  to  their  accuracy  in  the 
admittedly 
genuine 
symmetries and strong Fedorov type pseudosym-metries in 
the presence of noise (as demonstrated in this paper). 

classifications  do 

distinction 

symmetry 

between 

difficult 

the 

symmetry 

As  to  the  merits  of  analytical  approaches  in  general, 
crystallographers  have  over  the  years  found  multiple 
workarounds  for  the  recovery  of  the  lost  structure  factor 
phases of crystal diffraction experiments (but only recently 
for 
2D 
inclusion 
[7,10,24,25,29]).  One  such  lost  structure  factor  phases 
workaround  is  used  in  electron  crystallography,  where 
good  estimates  of  these  phases  are  recovered  from 
sufficiently well resolved images of a crystal (Nobel Prizes 
to  Sir  Aaron  Klug,  1982,  Richard  Henderson,  Joachim 
Frank, and Jacques Dubochet, 2017).  

problem 

in 

These  estimates  are  then  used  for  crystallographic 
symmetry classifications of 2D projections of space group 
symmetries and the subsequent crystallographic processing 
of  the  images  [113],  which  facilitated  the  solving  of  an 

  15 Artificial intelligence has been defined  as  “a system’s ability to 
interpret external data correctly, to learn from such data, and to use 
those  learnings  to  achieve  specific  goals  and  tasks  through flexible 
adaptation”  [108].  It  is  fair  to  state  that  the  above  mentioned 
contemporary  machine  learning  systems  have  “learned”  something 
about  their  subjectively  selected  training  data  sets,  but  not  their 
essence,  i.e.  the  crystallographic  symmetries  themselves  into  which 
noisy experimental data is to be classified in the presence of pseudo-
symmetries and symmetry inclusion relationships.   

inorganic crystal structure to atomic resolution by electron 
microscopy [114] as early as the year 1984. The projected 
space  group  was  known  from  X-ray  crystallography  in 
[114]  so  that  it  did  not  need  to  be  determined  from  the 
input  data  for  the  crystallographic  processing  of  the 
experimental  transmission  electron  microscope  images  of 
that study. 

The author of [30] concluded more than six decades ago 
that “information theory … points the way to extending the 
resolution  of  detail  in  electron  micrographs  of  crystals”. 
In  the  modern  terminology  of  “computational  imaging” 
[20],  this  kind  of  “resolution  of  detail”  is  referred  to  as 
image  quality  and  structural  resolution,  as 
intrinsic 
discussed in appendix C. 

Nearly four decades ago, justifications for the validity of 
the  direct  methods  approach  (Nobel  Prizes  to  Herbert  A. 
Hauptman  and  Jerome  Karle,  1985)  of  diffraction  based 
the  basis  of 
crystallography  have  been  derived  on 
Shannon’s information theory [115].  

Around  the  same  time,  the  crystallographic  inversion 
problem,  i.e.  the  derivation  of  crystal  structures  form  the 
intensities  of  kinematic  X-ray  diffraction  patterns  from 
single  crystals,  has  been  formulated  as  a  statistical 
inference problem [116-118]. That problem is to be solved 
by  an  optimal  utilization  of  available  partial  structural 
information  while  being  maximally  non-committal  to 
missing  information.  The  term  “statistical  geometry”  has 
been coined in that series of papers on a maximum entropy 
approach  to  the  solving  and  refining  of  3D  crystal 
structures [116-118] that is also applicable to more or less 
2D periodic images. 

Applications  of  the  maximum  entropy  principle  in 
crystallography  [119]  and  in  the  processing  of  noisy  and 
sparsely  sampled  non-periodic  linear  images  [120]  have 
also  been  discussed and  demonstrated at around the same 
time.  The  world  had,  however,  to  wait  until  1996  for 
Kanatani’s  geometric  form  of  information  theory  [26-28] 
and  his  solution  to  the  symmetry  inclusion  problem  to 
emerge. 

The  application  of  Kanatani’s  statistical  theory  to 
crystallo-graphic  symmetry  classifications  is  by  now 
reasonably well developed so that it can be taken up by the 
wider  scientific  community.  In  other  words,  there  is  no 
good justification to stick to a “procedure” that has in the 
year 2020 been ruled to be “not sufficiently standardized” 
and  where  “a  number  of  different  variables  (e.g.  … 
threshold  value 
interpretation)  can  substantially 
impact the outcome” [11].  

for 

There  is  also  no  good  justification  to  wait for  robots  to 
do  accurate  crystallographic  symmetry  classifications  and 
whole  crystal  structure  determinations  for  us.  First  off, 
there is probably always a human expert that needs to be in 
the loop [87] for the foreseeable future to make physically 
accurate  crystallographic  symmetry  classifications  and 
subsequent  crystal  structure  analyses  reliably.  Secondly, 
such  loops  should  not  be  closed  to  human  beings 
prematurely  and  future  AI  systems  need  to  work  for  the 
greater good rather than only maximizing profits [121]. 

A  statistical  extension  of  classical  (space  group  based) 
crystallography has recently been proposed on the basis of 
Shannon’s  information  theory  [122].  In  the  humble 
opinion  of  this  author,  the  future  seems  to  belong  to  the 
analytical  approaches.  The  most  objective  (unbiased) 
description  of  a  noisy  system  that  is  not  completely 
amenable  to  experimental  verification  is,  after  all  at  any 
one  time,  the  one  with  maximum  entropy  (minimizes  the 

35 

 
 
 
 
estimate  of  the  expected  Kullback-Leibler  divergence) 
with respect to whatever has already been well established 
by science and mathematics.  

Nevertheless,  Thomas  Proffen  was  probably  right  when 
he answered his own rhetorical question “So will machine 
learning  replace  crystallographers?”  with  “No,  but 
crystallographers  using  machine-learning  techniques  will 
likely surpass those who do not.” [123]. 

Appendix G: Outlook on future developments of the 
information theoretic crystallographic symmetry 
classification and quantification methodology and 
their potential applications  

The assumption had to be made in the main part of this 
paper that  there  is  indeed more than translation symmetry 
in  a  more  or  less  2D periodic image.  This  may,  however, 
not always be the case. There are certainly (approximately) 
2D  periodic  patterns  with  and  without  noise  in  which  all 
point/site symmetries higher than the identity operation are 
only  pseudosymmetries  and  not  genuine.  These  patterns 
are  revealed  by  large  ratios  of  the  complex  Fourier 
coefficient residuals for all plane symmetry groups with kl 
=  2  or 3 and  large Fourier coefficient amplitude residuals 
for  all  projected  Laue  classes  with  kl  =  4  or  6.  Those 
patterns would be misclassified by the author’s methods at 
the  present  stage  of  their  development  if  the  facts  were 
ignored  that  the  residuals  for  all  of  these  groups  and 
classes are rather large.  

Formulations  of  geometric 

information  criteria  are 
possible  where  the  generalized  noise  does  not  need  to  be 
approximately  Gaussian  distributed.  The  sums  of  squared 
residuals in Kanatani’s formulation are then to be replaced 
by  maximal  likelihood  estimates  that  are  specific  to  that 
noise  distribution.  The  geometric-model  selection-bias 
correction  terms  need  to  be  specific  to  the distribution of 
that noise also.  

Crystallographic  studies  of  the  quaternary  structure  of 
intrinsic  membrane  proteins  in  lipid  bilayers  are  in  the 
structural  biology  field  based  on  parallel-illumination 
transmission  electron  microscopy  (TEM)  images  that  are 
dominated  by  Poisson  distributed  shot  noise.  As 
mentioned  in  the  previous  sub-section,  an  information 
theoretic  approach  to  the  classification  and  quantification 
of  crystallographic  symmetries  in  such  highly  beam-
sensitive  samples  (and  the  digital  images  that  were 
recorded from them) could be specifically developed by a 
generalization of Kanatani’s geometric framework.  

For the time being, this author sees no harm in using the 
method of this paper in that particular field as well. This is 
for  two  reasons: (i) because with moderate electron doses 
aggregated  shot  noise  becomes  approximately  Gaussian 
distributed  and  (ii) 
traditional 
crystallographic  symmetry  classification  methods  (that  do 
not  model  the  noise  at  all)  are  currently  used  for  exactly 
this purpose.  

inferior/subjective 

the 

So  far  unpublished  results  of  this  author  on  the  plane 
symmetry group and Laue class classification of the cyclic 
nucleotide-modulated  potassium  channel  MloK1  from 
bacterium mesorhizobium loti in both the open and closed 
conformations indicate that the projected genuine, i.e. least 
broken,  quaternary  symmetry  of  this  protein  complex  is 
point  group  2.  There  is,  however,  a  strong  four-fold 
pseudo-symmetry  along  the  channel  axis  as  indicated  by 

the relatively low squared residual of the complex Fourier 
coefficients for plane symmetry group p4gm. 

This  makes  the  potassium  channel  a  dimer  of  two 
dimers,  while  other  authors  [124-126]  claimed  it  to  be  a 
tetramer.  Their  claim  relies,  however,  on  the  traditional 
crystallographic  symmetry  classification  methodology, 
which is inherently subjective.  

Incidentally, the experimental facts of this author’s study 
on  the  above  mentioned  MloK1  potassium  channel  are 
similar  to  the  results  of  the  information-theoretic analysis 
of  the noisiest crystallographic pattern in  the main part of 
this  paper.  The  histograms  of  the  experimental  TEM 
images  looked  rather  similar  to  the  histogram  inset  in 
Figure  6  in  the  sense  that  there  was  only  one  broad  peak 
with a mean value that  corresponded to approximately 50 
%  of  the  whole  dynamic  intensity  range.  In  other  words, 
there  was  enough  shot  noise  in  the  experimental  images 
that the generalized noise became approximately Gaussian 
distributed.  

According  to  other  authors  [124-126],  the  projected 
plane symmetry of MloK1 potassium channel crystals from 
this  bacterium  in  lipid  bilayers  is  plane  symmetry  group 
p4gm. This  author’s analysis  indicates, on the other hand, 
that  this  can  only  be  a  strong  pseudosymmetry  because 
projected  Laue  class  2mm  has  been  identified  as  the  K-L 
best  representation  of  the  symmetry  information  in  the 
amplitude  maps  of  the  discrete  Fourier  transforms  of  the 
TEM images. Note that this analysis was based on some16 
of  the  same  experimental  images  that  [125]  used  in  their 
study, as downloaded from the EMDataResource [127].  

A tomographic images and derived electron density maps 
supported  model  mechanism  for  the  opening  and  closing 
of  this  particular  potassium  channel  that  is  restricted  to 
four-fold rotation symmetry, as the one proposed in [127] 
has  (at  the  present  time),    accordingly,  less  experimental 
support than an alternative mechanism that is restricted to 
the 
two-fold 
identification of projected Laue class 2mm as the K-L best 
model  of  the  experimental  data  rules  the  existence  of 
genuine four-fold rotation points as site symmetries in the 
unit cell of the MloK1 potassium channel crystal out in an 
analogous manner, as the entries for projected Laue class 4 
in Tables 7 and 9 rule out plane symmetry group p4gm for 
the noisy crystallographic pattern in Figure 6.  

symmetry  only.  Note 

rotation 

that 

to 

led 

that 

It is noticeable that it was again the information theoretic 
the 
projected  Laue  class  determination 
identification of a strong Fedorov type pseudosymmetry at 
the site/point symmetry level. Presumably, projected  Laue 
class  determinations by the new  method are less sensitive 
to  noise  than  the  corresponding  plane  symmetry  group 
determinations.  (Amplitude  maps  of  discrete  Fourier 
transforms  of  perfect  crystallographic  patterns  are  known 
to be translation invariant.)   

information 

Complementing 

theoretic  classification 
studies  of  transmission  electron  diffraction  spot  patterns 
from intrinsic membrane proteins under zero-tilt condition 
would  be  helpful  as  these  patterns  feature  typically  more 
spots  than  the  number  of  Fourier  coefficients  of  the 
corresponding TEM images. This means they contain more 
point/site 
information.  Electron 
specific 
diffraction patterns from perfect plane-parallel crystals are 
theoretically  translation  invariant  so  that  small  random 
sample  movements  under  the  electron  beam  might  be 

symmetry 

16  Those  experimental  images  were  recorded  with  a  large 
underfocus at a nominal zero-tilt setting of the specimen goniometer. 

36 

 
 
 
 
 
 
tolerable  when  projected  point  symmetry  classifications 
are made on the basis of such patterns. 

There  is,  thus,  a  motivation  for  the  development  of  an 
information-theoretic 
symmetry 
projected 
classification  and  quantifications  method.  There  are,  in 
addition, very interesting developments in  4D STEM [40] 
with  fast  pixelated  electron  detectors.  A  new  symmetry-
contrast imaging mode for has, for example, been recently 
demonstrated [41].  

point 

Future  developments  of  that  contrast  mechanism  into  a 
widely  accepted  standard  are,  however,  hampered  by  the 
symmetry  inclusion  relationships.  The  incorporation  of  a 
newly  developed  information-theoretic  projected  point 
symmetry  group  classification and  quantifications method 
from  electron  diffraction  patterns  would  solve 
this 
problem. 

This author has taken up the challenge to develop such a 
method for selected area electron diffraction spot patterns, 
precession  electron  diffraction  patterns,  nearly  parallel-
illumination nano-diffraction disk patterns, and convergent 
beam  micro-diffraction  patterns  with  essentially  non-
overlapping  and  featureless  (blank)  electron  diffraction 
disks. 

Appendix H: The Genesis of “Tiles with Quasi-
ellipses, 1992”, contributed to this paper by the artist 
Eva Knoll herself 

Peter  Möck  kindly  requested  that  I  write  about  the 
pattern that  he used in  this paper. It is  one of many that I 
designed as a student, first in school and later in university, 
where  I  studied  architecture.  Initially,  these  pattens  took 
the form of doodles, drawn on graph paper as a distraction 
in  unchallenging  classes,  but  they  soon  became  a  kind of 
puzzle:  could  I  find  a  way  to  design  forms  that  I  could 
predict  to  be  tessellating  (tiling  without  gaps or overlaps, 
see Schattschneider, 1980). 

I was certainly influenced by the images of work by M. 
C.  Escher  found  in  various  books  at  home  (for  example, 
Lanners,  1973),  but  I  was  less  interested  in  realism  of 
shape  than  in  the  underlying  structure.  As  I  progressed 
with my experimentation, I narrowed down what I came to 
call  my  “vocabulary”  to  straight  lines  joining  relatively 
near  vertices  of  the  square  grid,  plus  quarters  of  circles 
embedded in squares of length 1, 2 or 3 (Knoll, 1997), as 
shown in Fig. A-5.  

Figure A-5: The Vocabulary. 

Over  time,  some  of  these  designs  involved  more  than 
one  shape  of  tile,  or  tiles  that  incorporated  a  design  on 
their  surface.  The  example  that  intrigued  Peter,  found  in 
Knoll  (2003),  is  part  of  a  specific  series  within  the larger 
inventory, that goes back to a period when I experimented 
with  designs,  still  incorporating  the  vocabulary,  whose 
basic  element  was  pre-determined  as  a  3  x  3  square,  as 
shown in Figure A-6.  

Figure A-6: Original sketch with colour selection. 

The image that drew Peter’s eye is in fact a composite of 
multiple copies of a digital photo of the same original tile, 
Figure A-7, which I had created as a bid to enter the tiling 
design industry. 

Figure A-7: Photo of the original physical tessellation element, 
painted with acrylic onto an unglazed, 6” (15.24 cm) edge-length 
tile. (The tile lays apparently on a slightly larger white piece of 
paper.) 

At  that  time,  I  also  had  developed  a  preference  for  the 
p4gm wallpaper group  and  applied it often  to these  3  x 3 
designs,  including  the  one  selected  by  Peter.  Figure  A-6 
shows  the  original  sketch,  along  with  some  colour 
combinations, the last of which was used. 

Multiple  square-painted-ceramic  tiles  can  not  only  be 
assembled  using  the  square  Bravais  lattice  type  but  also 
quasi-randomly,  see  Figure  A-8,  potentially  reducing  the 
translation symmetry of a larger assembly. This is because 
its  specific  design  is  entirely  encapsulated  in  a  square 
“fundamental  region”,  see  Figure  A-7.  (Because  I  aimed 
for the inclusion of a diagonal mirror line, the fundamental 

37 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
region  of  my  intended  design17  was  one half of the  3  x  3 
square).  

Figure  A-8:  Random assembly  of  the tile. Note the  four tiles  in 
the  top  left  corner  that  are  related  by  a  four-fold  rotation  point 
and represent by themselves a unit cell of an ordered tessellation 
with  plane  symmetry  group  p4.  Immediately  to  the  right  of  this 
patch of four tiles, there are two a translation symmetric.  

Tiles  with  Quasi-Ellipses  is  a  bit  unusual  within  my 
repertoire  (www.teknollogy.com)  for  a  few  reasons. 
Firstly,  it  uses  a  palette  of  earth  tones  that  contrasts  with 
my  more  usual highly  saturated  choices.  Second,  and  this 
is  more  relevant,  perhaps,  to  Peter’s  work,  the  sharp 
angularity  of  the  steps  travelling  diagonally  creates  an 
atypical tension when juxtaposed so closely with the curve 
that  gave  the  tile  its  name.  This  curve,  respecting  the 
vocabulary, is in fact a composition of 3 quarter-circles of 
radius 1, 2, and 1, respectively. 

Finally, the incorporation of black outlines to mark only 
certain  boundaries  between  colours  signifies  a  departure 
from  my  practice  and  creates  a  demarcation  between  two 
multicoloured regions of the tile. The tessellation of Figure 
A-8 shows how this line creates interesting regions on the 
tiled  plane,  which  are  closed  in  a  p4gm  unit  cell 
idealization  but  can  be  open  in  a  randomised  region,  so 
that the yellow regions of adjacent tiles become joined. 

Additional references for this appendix 

Knoll, E. Transfert de 2-D en 3-D de l’Opus 84 de Hans 
Hinterreiter. Unpublished Master’s Thesis, Université de 
Montréal, 1997. 
Knoll, E. Life after Escher: A (Young) Artist’s Journey. In 
Emmer, M. and Schattschneider, D. (Eds.), Escher A Centennial 
Celebration, New York, Springer, 2003, 189-198.  
Lanners, E. Illusionen, Illusionen, Illusionen. Luzern und 
Frankfurt/Main, Verlag C. J. Bucher, 1973. 
Schattschneider, D. Will it tile? Try the Conway Criterion. In 
Mathematical Magazine, 53, 1980.

17  The  artist’s  intention  having  been  clearly  stated,  it  is  quite 
unreasonable  to  expect  a  perfect  mirror  line  from  a  human 
painter. It is obvious from Figs. A-7 and A-8 that the mirror line 
in the original asymmetric unit is broken. 

38 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
39 

 
 
 
 
