Deep2Lead: A distributed deep learning

application

for

small molecule

lead

optimization

Tarun Kumar Chawdhury , * David J. Grant , and Hyun Yong Jin*

College of Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology Atlanta, GA, USA

Abstract Lead optimization is a key step in drug discovery to produce potent and
selective compounds. Historically, in silico screening and structure-based small molecule
designing facilitated the processes. Although the recent application of deep learning to
drug discovery piloted the possibility of their in silico application lead optimization steps,
the real-world application is lacking due to the tool availability. Here, we developed a
single user interface application, called Deep2Lead. Our web-based application integrates
VAE and DeepPurpose DTI and allows a user to quickly perform a lead optimization task
with no prior programming experience.

Summary: Deep2Lead allows a user to execute a drug lead optimization pipeline from a single user
interface with molecule generation using a Variational Autoencoder (VAE) model and drug target
interaction prediction using Deep Purpose library.

Availability and implementation: https://deep2lead.dlyog.com/
Developer and Maintainer Contact: tarunchawdhury@gatech.edu

Introduction

Lead optimization is a key step of small molecule drug discovery to produce more potent and

selective compounds with pharmacologically acceptable properties. Typically, this process requires a

series of

investigations of structure-activity relationship (SAR) around each core compound

structure, rational optimization of the compounds and iterative assay result interpretation. However,

this conventional process is time and resource consuming and does not guarantee to achieve target

Chawdhury et al.

potency, which is often low-nM level. To overcome this issue, computational methods for de novo

small molecule design and structure-based, virtual screening including in silico molecular docking

strategy has been applied (Rester, 2008). However, such an in silico application of lead optimization

based on deep learning algorithm has been significantly lagged due to the lack of the tool availability.

DeepPurpose is a software library created by Sun group (Fu et al., 2020) and represents a recent

advancement in the use of Deep Learning for Drug Target Interaction (DTI). DeepPurpose can serve

as a key component of a lead optimization pipeline. Here, we developed a single user interface

application, Deep2Lead, which integrates an additional molecule generation step and the power of

DeepPurpose DTI. Our application allows a user to quickly perform a lead optimization task with no

programming experience required.

Implementation

There are three main components: Graphical User Interface (GUI), Variational Autoencoder

(VAE) and Drug Target Interaction Predictor (DTI) (Aspuru-Guzik, 2017). The GUI is a web

application implemented in HTML / JavaScript and Java EE technologies and allows the user to

submit requests to an application programming interface (API). On the server side, the request is

passed through the VAE – DTI pipeline and returns a list of valid molecules generated and their

predicted binding affinity to the user-specified target (amino acid sequence). Figure 1 shows high

level solution design of the application.

Deep2Lead application note

Figure 1. High level solution design for Deep2Lead distributed application.

The purpose of the VAE is to generate candidate molecules which are slight variations of the

input molecule (SMILE string representation), and is implemented using a pre-trained TensorFlow

(Gómez-Bombarelli et al., 2018). These candidate molecules are passed to the DTI module which

predicts binding affinity to the user specified target using DeepPurpose API (Fu et al, 2020). The

results are returned to the GUI in a sortable table. Both the VAE and DTI (using DeepPurpose) are

implemented as provided from their reference papers, and hence their individual efficacy is not

assessed here. However, example molecule-target scenarios and results from the Deep2Lead

combined pipeline are shown in the supplementary information.

Chawdhury et al.

Usage

Deep2Lead allows a user to generate molecules and assess binding affinity against a particular

target. The process is as follows:

1. Select a Drug Target (enter applicable Amino Acid sequence)

2. Select a Lead Compound (specified as SMILE string)

● Option 1. Paste a SMILES string directly.

● Option 2. Deep2Lead interface provides a Molecular Designer that users can directly

draw chemical structures and convert them into SMILES strings.

3. Enter additional trial parameters (number of attempts, sampling noise parameter)

4. View generated molecules based sorted increasing by predicted IC50

The user can examine the predicted IC50 binding affinity and compare against the lead compound. A

specific use case example using a SMILES string of FDA-approved anti-cancer drug Imatinib

(Gleevec) and full amino acid sequences of it’s known therapeutic target, ABL-BCL fusion protein is

shown in Figure 2.

(a)

Deep2Lead application note

(b)

Figure 2. (a) Use case of FDA approved anti-cancer agent Imatinib (Gleevec) and its known target,
BCR-ABL fusion protein. Using Imatinib as a lead molecule, we attempt to generate novel candidate
inhibitors that potentially have better pharmacological properties than Imatinib. As expected,
Deep2Lead was able to generate a small molecule that is 10 times more potent than Imatinib (using
Deep Purpose Parameters: Affinity Prediction Model Type = CNN-CNN, ADMET Prediction model
Type = CNN). (b) by clicking each molecule, users can easily explore the structural information of
the newly generated molecules, including original input (left) and the molecule of interest (right).

Conclusions

Deep2Lead successfully completes the task of integrating VAE molecule generation and DTI

prediction into a single user interface. This allows users with limited programming experience to

leverage complex deep-learning models and complete a full lead optimization pipeline. The resulting

molecule list can be used for further practical validation of drug-target interaction. While Deep2Lead

can generate molecules and predict binding affinity to a target, there is no guarantee that generated

molecules will have improved properties compared to the original input. This is due to the nature of

the random sampling process used in the VAE. Future work could explore optimization techniques to

efficiently search the latent space for candidate molecules based on the DeepPurpose predicted

binding affinity.

Chawdhury et al.

References

Aspuru-Guzik,

Chemical

VAE,

(2017).

GitHub

Repository.

https://github.com/aspuru-guzik-group/chemical_vae

Huang, K., Fu, T., Glass, L., Zitnik, M., Xiao, C., Sun, J, (2020) DeepPurpose: a Deep Learning

Library for Drug-Target Interaction Prediction and Applications to Repurposing and Screening,

arXiv:2004.08919

Rafael Gómez-Bombarelli, Jennifer N. Wei, David Duvenaud, José Miguel Hernández-Lobato,

Benjamín Sánchez-Lengeling, Dennis Sheberla, Jorge Aguilera-Iparraguirre, Timothy D. Hirzel,

Ryan P. Adams, and Alán Aspuru-Guzik. Automatic Chemical Design Using a Data-Driven

Continuous Representation of Molecules. ACS Central Science 2018 4 (2), 268-276

Ulrich Rester, From virtuality to reality - Virtual screening in lead discovery and lead optimization: a

medicinal chemistry perspective. Current Opinion in Drug Discovery & Development, 30 Jun

2008, 11(4):559-568

Ulrich Rester

