A machine-learning framework for daylight and visual comfort assessment in early design 
stages 

Hanieh Nourkojouri1, Zahra Sadat Zomorodian1, Mohammad Tahsildoost1, Zohreh Shaghaghian2 
1Shahid Beheshti University, Tehran, Iran 
2Texas A&M University, College Station, United States 

Abstract 
This  research  is  mainly  focused  on  the  assessment  of 
machine learning algorithms in the prediction of daylight 
and visual comfort metrics in the early design stages.  A 
dataset  was  primarily  developed  from  2880  simulations 
derived from Honeybee for Grasshopper. The simulations 
were done for a shoebox space with a one side window. 
The alternatives emerged from different physical features, 
including room dimensions, interior surfaces reflectance, 
window  dimensions  and  orientations,  number  of 
windows,  and  shading  states.  5  metrics  were  used  for 
daylight  evaluations,  including  UDI,  sDA,  mDA,  ASE, 
and  sVD.  Quality  Views  were  analyzed  for  the  same 
shoebox  spaces  via  a  grasshopper-based  algorithm, 
developed from the LEED v4 evaluation framework for 
Quality Views. The dataset was further analyzed with an 
Artificial  Neural  Network  algorithm  written  in  Python. 
The accuracy of the predictions was estimated at 97% on 
average.  The  developed  model  could  be  used  in  early 
design  stages  analyses  without  the  need  for  time-
consuming simulations in previously used platforms and 
programs. 

Key Innovations 

  A machine learning framework for early design 
stages  analysis  of  daylight,  glare,  and  quality 
views altogether 

Practical Implications 

  Application  of  artificial  neural  networks  in 
predicting visual comfort performance of a space 

Introduction 
Due to binding effect on occupant wellbeing and energy 
savings,  Daylight  and  visual  comfort  assessment,  have 
been within the comprehensive  discussion of sustainable 
building  design  in  recent  years  (Mariana  G.  Figueiro, 
2017). Besides, lighting energy has previously consumed 
almost 19% of total electricity consumption (IEA, 2006), 
and  office  buildings  consume  more  than  20%  of  this 
energy (Ürge-Vorsatz, 2012). Nowadays 7% of consumed 
energy in buildings is for lighting; thanks to the progress 
in  daylight  standards  and  regulations    (IEA,  2019). 
Besides, lighting energy represents a main source of heat 

that  directly  impacts  the  building’s  cooling  energy 
(Tzempelikos  &  K.Athienitis,  2007). 
consumption 
Accordingly,  Proper  daylighting  strategies  seriously 
affects  the  optimiziation  of  the  lighting  and  cooling 
energies, especially in harsh climates (Ayoub, 2019). One 
of  the  sustainable  procedures  to  enhance  the  mentioned 
efficiency is to use daylighting strategies that provide the 
controlled  use  of  natural  daylight  inside  buildings  
(Reinhart,  2014).  Quantification  of  internal  daylighting 
conditions  have  been  done  via  simple  methods, 
protractors,  scale  models,  mathematical  formulas  and 
rules-of-thumb in the early years of daylight predictions 
(Ayoub, 2020). In recent years, because of the progress of 
computer processing, newly introduced methods, named 
white-box, extended the former approaches (Ward, 1994). 
constant efforts have been made to integrate all available 
techniques  into  design  process,  and  Climate-based 
daylight metrics are now widely used as the most accurate 
indicators of the overall daylight  situation of the  spaces 
(Shaghaghian  &  Yan,  2020);  However,  The  tools  and 
applied  professional  methods  that  predict  daylighting 
performance  in  buildings  are  still  impractical  (Emilie 
Nault,  2017).Time-intensive  CBDM  can  be  a  real 
challenge  when  assessing  the  daylight  performance  for 
numerous  design  alternatives,  especially  in  parametric 
design  environments  when  designers  aim  to  push  for 
daylight  optimization  (C.  L.  Lorenza,  2019).  Besides 
architects don’t spend time to include what they consider 
complex methods into their practices (Mardaljevic, 2015). 
Artificial 
achieving 
significant  successes  in  many  fields  today.  Predictive 
models  that  are  built  on  machine  learning  algorithms, 
called  black-box,  have  been  receiving  recognition  from 
the building design community because of their ability to 
handle complex problems in a short time with acceptable 
accuracy. These newly introduced methods are based on 
algorithms  that  learn  the  mathematical  relationship 
between  a  dataset’s  parameters  and  construct  a 
mathematically-fit model. Much useful information about 
the data could then be extracted without the need for time-
consuming simulations or calculations.The application of 
these newly introduced methods in daylighting prediction 
is still underexploited  (Ayoub, 2020). 

applications 

intelligence 

are 

Studies  on  the  application  of  MLAs  in  daylighting  has 
been progressive in recent years. The objectives of these 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
indicate 

results  accordingly 

evaluations  during 

studies  are  varied,  including  building  type,  location, 
selected algorithm, and output parameters. 
Da Fonseca et al. in 2013, assessed the prediction quality 
of two known algorithms named artificial neural networks 
and multiple linear regression in a potential energy saving 
of a building through daylighting. They figured out that 
even  though  the  ANN  showed  better  results,  both 
algorithms could predict the results with high accuracy. 
 In similar research, Chatzikonstantinou and Sariyildiz in 
2015,  evaluated  three  algorithms,  including  ANN,  K-
nearest,  and  random  forest.  The  research  is  focused  on 
two  metrics:  daylight  autonomy  and  daylight  glare 
probability.  The 
that 
machine-learning-based  approaches  achieve  a  favorable 
trade-off between accuracy and computational cost. The 
authors suggest that they provide a worthwhile alternative 
for  performance 
architectural 
conceptual design. 
Mohammad  Ayoub,  in  2020,  has  reviewed  previous 
researches in this field. The author studied related articles 
in the following categories: Scope of prediction, MLAs, 
Data  sources,  sizes  and  temporal  granularities,  and 
evaluation  metrics.  According  to  the  results,  the  most 
used  algorithm  in  these  studies  are  artificial  neural 
networks,  multiple  linear  regression  and  support  vector 
machine,  considering  regression  as  the  most  mentioned 
problem  to  solve.  And  finally,  the  most  used  output 
parameters  are  illuminance  values,  daylight  autonomy, 
spatial daylight autonomy, and daylight glare probability, 
respectively. 
In  this  study,  a  framework  will  be  formed  based  on 
Artificial  Neural  Network  algorithm  to  predict  daylight 
and visual comfort  metrics in a simple room. The  main 
purpose is to evaluate the algorithm in the estimation of 
the mentioned metrics and determine whether this method 
could replace former tools and software. 
For this purpose, a dataset is primarily developed  based 
on  simulations  derived  results  from  Honeybee  for 
Grasshopper.  The  dataset  includes  daylight,  glare,  and 
quality view metrics. The dataset is then analyzed with the 
machine  learning  algorithm  presented.  The  significant 
feature  of  this  research  is  that  three  fields  of  visual 
comfort  assessment  are  analysed  simultaneously,  which 
gives a complete vision about the intended space. 

Methodology 
To assess MLAs in predicting the intended metrics, two 
main  steps  were  taken.  At  first,  a  dataset  was  primarily 
created  from  simulation-derived  results  that  emerged  in 
grasshopper  for  rhino  and  the  related  plugins.  Then  the 
dataset is analysed in an MLA, and the predictive model 
is created. The details of these steps are as below: 

they 

space 

the  alternatives; 

include  window 
to  define 
orientation, 
surfaces 
interior 
dimensions, 
reflectance factor, shading states, O.K.B, window height, 
and window divisions. The shape of the space is presented 
in fig.1. the variables interval changes could be found in 
table 1.  

Figure 1.The shoebox space form 

Table 1. variables interval changes 

Variables 

Number of 
alternatives 

Location 
Occupation 

Window glass type 

Tehran 
Office 
Single pane 
glass with 0.85 
visual 
transmittance 

Space height(m) 

3.5 

Window orientation 

N,E,S,W 

Space 
dimensions(x,y) (m) 

(3,4)-(6,7)-
(8,10) 

interior surfaces 
reflectance factor 

Shading state 

0.2 - 0.4 – 0.7 

No shading – 
15cm horizontal 
louvre 

Window Sill Height 
(m) 

0.5 – 0.7 – 0.9 – 
1.1 

s
r
e
t
e
m
a
r
a
P
d
e
x
i
F

s
e
l
b
a
i
r
a
V

Window height (m) 

window divisions 

1.2 – 1.5 – 1.8 – 
2.1 – 2.4 

1 window as 
wide as the 
rooms width- 
3 windows with 
equal distances 

Overall 
alternatives 

- 
- 

- 

- 

4 

3 

3 

2 

4 

5 

2 

2880 

Dataset creation 

The defined space was a one-side-opened shoebox room 
that several parameters of it were considered as variables 

To select appropriate metrics for assessment of the space, 
it was considered that the chosen metrics should indicate 
the overall performance of the space in the fields of 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Overall Research Methodology Steps 

Figure 3. grasshopper code for daylight, glare and quality views calculations schematic overview 

daylight sufficiency, glare and visual comfort, and quality 
views. The selected metrics in daylight and glare analyzes 
include:  mean  daylight  autonomy,  spatial  daylight 
autonomy,  useful  daylight  illuminance,  annual  sunlit 
exposure,  and  spatial  visual  discomfort.  The  threshold 
considered  for  minimum  acceptable  illuminance  of  the 
space is 300lux. Quality views are assessed by the terms 
of  LEED  v4  principles.  This  standard  states  four  main 
factors  for  evaluation  of  views  in  the  buildings:  view 
factor, view depth, view range, and the characteristics of 
the landscape outside the window. If two out of these four 
terms are provided for at least 75% of the space, the view 
quality of the room is acceptable.  Due to the definition of 
assumed  variables  in  this  project,  the  landscape  outside 
the window is not mentioned and assessed, so three other 
factors  are  simulated  and  discussed.  The  modeling 
process of the shoebox space was done in grasshopper for 
rhino.  Honeybee  v0.0.66  was  applied  as  the  simulation 
engine  in  daylight  and  glare  metrics.  The  quality  view 
factors  were  geometrically  calculated  in  grasshopper. 
(fig.3)  The  Daysim  simulation  engine  factors  were 
adjusted in accordance with table 2. 

1

2

3

4

5

Table 2. daysim parameters adjustment 

Radiance parameters 
ab
ad
as
ar
aa

value 
5 
1500 
128 (default) 
16 (default) 
0.25 (default) 

Machine learning algorithm development  
As mentioned above, several algorithms have been used 
to  predict  daylight  metrics  in  recent  studies.  The  most 
common  algorithm  is  artificial  neural  networks  with 
acceptable  prediction  accuracy.  (Ayoub,  2020)  In  this 
research,  this  algorithm  was  applied  for  producing  the 
predictive model.  
Artificial  neural  networks  is  an  algorithm  that  does 
function  approximations  and 
basically  non-linear 
performs 
supervised, 
via 
predictions 
numerical 
unsupervised  and  reinforcement  learning  techniques 
(Yao,  1999)  the  biological  structure  of  neural  networks 
that constitutes the brain and nervous system is the main 
concept  behind  ANN.  This  algorithm  is  composed  of  a 
several layers, each of which contains several processing 
elements,  called  neurons.  The  input  layer  receives  the 
input  data;  the  hidden  layers  perform  the  computations, 
and  output  layer  predicts  the  results.    (Hecht-Nielsen, 
1992)  Inputs  are  multiplied  by  corresponding  weights, 
and the sum is then biased to minimize errors that stem 
from  the  difference  between  the  actual  and  predicted 
outputs. The value passes through an activation function, 
acting as a gate that allows the transmittance of the value 
to the next layer. (Bishop, 2006) There are key parameters 
that  tune  ANN;  they  include  number  of  hidden  layers, 
number  of  hidden  neurons,  learning  rate,  number  of 
epochs,  batch  size,  and  activation  functions.  These 
parameters  are  selected  and  tuned  for  each  model  and 
differs from one dataset to another. The hyperparameters 
of  the  ANN  are  presented  in  table  3.  The  algorithm 
architecture  has  a  single  hidden  layer  with  40  neurons. 

1 Ambient Bounces 
2 Ambient Divisions 
3 Ambient Super-Samples 

4 Ambient Resolution 
5 Ambient Accuracy 

 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
                                                           
This  architecture  had  the  best  performance  among  all 
alternatives.  Tuning  the  algorithm  included  several  try 
and  error  steps  that  was  taken  in  order  to  get  the  best 
performing  algorithm  architecture.  This  process  started 
with  a  3-layer  network  with  varied  number  of  neurons 
from  10  to  40.  At  each  step,  these  parameters  were 
adjusted and the results were observed. It was noticed that 
the algorithm with a single hidden layer and 40 neurons 
performed better compared to others. After adjusting the 
hidden  layer  properties,  epoch  and  batch  sizes  were 
adjusted  through  another  try  and  error  process.  The 
influence of the changes in these two latter parameters are 
not  of  vital  significance.  So  that,  a  simple  and  fast 
responding value was finally chosen for them.  
It  should  be  noted  that  the  window  orientation  variable 
has been divided into 4 inputs with 0 and 1 values e.g., 
north orientation is defined as 4 inputs like [1,0,0,0] for 
the neural network model. This was done because if the 
four orientations were defined as 1 to 4 numerical values, 
each orientation would be weighed compared to another. 

Table 3. hyper parameters of the best performing ANN 
algorithm 

ANN hyper parameters 
Train/ test data numbers 
Number of layers 
Number of neurons 
Epoch 
Batch size 

values 
2304/576 (80% to 20%) 
1 
40 
50 
10 

To  assess  the  accuracy  of  the  prediction  results  of 
different algorithm architectures, two error metrics were 
used: Mean square error and mean actual error.  
MSE  defines  the  average  actual  difference  between 
predicted and simulated values in the dataset, while MSE 
is the average squared difference between the estimated 
values  and  the  actual  value.  MAE  fails  to  punish  large 
errors  in  prediction,  while  MSE  indicates  large  errors 
more obviously.  

𝑀𝐴𝐸 =  

∑|𝑦𝑖 − 𝑦̂𝑖|
𝑛

𝑀𝑆𝐸 =  

∑(𝑦𝑖 − 𝑦̂𝑖)2
𝑛

By  comparing  the  predicted  and  simulated  results  of  a 
new set of alternatives for the shoebox space, the ANN-
based model’s efficiency was evaluated. The new dataset 
included  new  values  for  the  shoebox  space  parameters 
that didn’t exist in the former dataset. This was mainly to 
evaluate 
learning  model  performance 
confronting totally new inputs that the ANN didn’t learn 
from in the training step. The alternatives considered for 
this step are presented in table 4. 

the  machine 

Figure 4. Applied artificial neural network architecture 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 4. variables interval changes for validation 
step 

Variables 

Number of 
alternatives 

s
r
e
t
e
m
a
r
a
P
d
e
x
i
F

s
e
l
b
a
i
r
a
V

Location 
Occupation 

Window glass 
type 

Space height(m) 
Window 
orientation 
Space 
dimensions(x,y) 
(m) 
interior surfaces 
reflectance 
factor 

Shading state 

Window O.K.B 
(m) 
Window height 
(m) 

window 
divisions 

Tehran 
Office 
Single pane 
glass with 
0.85 visual 
transmittance 
3.5 

S,E 

(7,8)-(5,6) 

0.3-0.6 

No shading – 
15cm 
horizontal 
louvre 

0.8 - 1 

1.6 – 2.0 

1 window as 
wide as the 
rooms width 
Overall 
alternatives 

- 
- 

- 

- 

2 

2 

2 

2 

2 

2 

1 

64 

Sensitivity  Analysis  with  Shapley  additive 
explanations 
There are several procedures for sensitivity analysis 
of the metrics to different variables. One of the most 
used methods is the Pierson factor calculation. This 
factor is used primarily for the values which have a 
linear relationship which each other (Magiya, 2019).   
In  our  case  in  this  research,  there’s  no  confidence 
about  the  relationship  among  the  values.  That’s 
because  the  ANN-based  model  is  categorized  as  a 
black-box  model  meaning  that  the  exact  function 
and formula calculating the metrics is not apparent 
(Ayoub, 2020). Accordingly, another method named 
Shapley  additive  explanations,  is  applied  for  the 
sensitivity analysis. The main aspect of this method 
is that it doesn’t  necessarily  adopt linear functions 
for  the  analysis  (Rathi,  2020)  (Lundberg,  et  al., 
2017). In this method, the algorithm performance is 
evaluated  in  two  different  conditions,  with  and 
without  the  target  variable’s  presence.  Then  each 
feature’s effect on the prediction process would be 
observed by a value named Shap value. Shap value 
is calculated through this equation: 

Φ𝑖 = ∑

𝑆 ⊆𝑀∖𝑖

|𝑆|! (|𝑀| − |𝑆| − 1)!
|𝑀|!

 [𝑓 (𝑆 ∪ 𝑖) − (𝑆)] 

The  main  result  of  this  equation  is  the  difference 
between  the  model’s  prediction  with  and  without 
feature i. S is a subset of the features, that doesn’t 
include the feature that the Φ value is calculated for. 
𝑆 ∪ 𝑖 is a subset of features that include S features 
and i feature together 𝑆  ⊆ 𝑀 includes all S sets that 
are subsets of M perfect set excluding i.  
Results and Discussion 
The neural networks validation results 
All  64  alternatives  forming  the  validation  dataset 
calculated  by  both  the  ANN  model  and  CBDM 
simulations  were  compared  to  figure  out  the 
efficiency  of  the  MLA-based  method.  The  results 
were promising in nearly all eight metrics that were 
analyzed.  (figure  6.)  Both  MAE  and  MSE  error 
metrics  were  used  again  at  this  step  to  assess  the 
prediction accuracy of the ANN model (table 5). The 
results indicate that on average, daylight metrics had 
more promising results than the others. However, all 
errors  are  within  the  acceptable  range,  and  the 
model’s 
satisfying 
considering the fact that there would be no need for 
time-consuming 
the  overall 
performance  of  the  space  in  daylight,  glare,  and 
quality views would be available in a short time.  
Each variable has a distinct effect on the calculated 
metrics, which is indicated with the Shap value. The 
application  of  this  analysis  could  be  the  further 
usage  in  extending  the  model  in  variables  for 
prediction  of  more  varied  alternatives;  e.g.,  if 
window  height is the  most influential variable, the 
extension  of  the  model  could  be  formed  based  on 
more number of variations in this value. 

simulations  and 

prediction 

accuracy 

is 

Table 5. Metrics prediction errors 

Daylight 

Glare 

Quality 
Views 

UDI 

mDA 

sDA 

sVD 

ASE 

View 
Range>90° 

View Depth 

View Factor 

MAE 

0.022 

0.019 

0.042 

0.047 

0.031 

0.06 

0.018 

0.03 

MSE 

0.0008 

0.0006 

0.003 

0.003 

0.003 

0.007 

0.0017 

0.0015 

The results which are presented in figure 6 and table 
5 indicate the results in the view range factor has the 
most MAE value in comparison to the other factors. 
The errors in this metric vary from 0.01 to 0.11 in 
the  actual  value  of  the  metric.  This  could  be  a 
significant  error  when  it  comes  to  the  idea  of 
replacing  this  method  with  previous  calculation 
procedures; but it must be noted that these results are 
emerged from a limited set of data that most of its 
variables  may  have  no  effect  on  quality  view 
metrics.  These  variables  include  interior  surfaces 
reflectance, window orientation and shading states.   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Shap values (Impact on model output) for each variable on each metric  

 
Figure 6. Simulated vs. Predicted values of the metrics 

Accordingly,  overall  2880  data  will  not  be 
applicable  to  the  models  training  process  and  the 
model  won’t  be  able  to  conduct  the  predictions  as 
well as other daylight and visual comfort metrics. It 
is recommended to apply more variables regarding 
physical  parameters  of  the  analyzed  space  to  get 
more  promising  results  in  quality  view  metrics  as 
well.  Other  metrics  which 
indicate  daylight 
sufficiency and glare may have overall performance 
with same MAE and MSE values but actual errors 
on each alternative are hardly more than 10%.  
The  predictive  model  which  was  formed  in  this 
research  may  not  be  practically  used  instead  of 
traditional methods for now, but the results are to be 
applied in performance simulation analyses  in  two 
main  fields.  Firstly,  all  three  fields  of  study  in 
daylight  and  visual  comfort  are  simultaneously 
assessed  in  the  study  and  the  results  indicate  that 
these  new  methods  could  be  applied  for  all 
mentioned fields. Secondly, by sensitivity analyses 
we could be informed of the most effective variables 
which  could  be  extended  for  further  researches 
which are focused on improvements of this field of 
study.  

Figure 7. Sensitivity analysis of the metrics  

The sensitivity analysis results show that the number 
of windows, room dimensions, and window height 
are  the  most  effective  variables  in  the  set.  In 
contrast, the sill height and shading state are the least 
effective  ones.  Figure  5  indicates  the  Shap  value 
analysis  for  each  of  the  metrics.  Some  of  the 
the  output 
variables  have  negative  effect  on 
parameter and others may have positive ones. In the 
graphs  presented  in  figure  5,  the  plotted  colors 
indicate  the  effect  of  each  variable  value  in  the 
dataset  on  the  output  parameter.  For  instance,  The 
effect  of  orientation  on  the  view  range  metric  is 
significantly high. While it seems this results could 
be illogical, it shall be noted that orientation is one 
of  the  affective  factors  on  the  width  of  each 
alternative’s  window  in  our  spaces;  so  that,  these 
results are exclusively related to the present dataset 
and cannot be extended to other situations or space 
definitions. The average influence is represented in 
figure 7. 

Conclusions 
An  ANN-based  predictive  model  has  been 
developed  in  this  research.  Daylight  and  visual 
comfort,  along  with  quality  views  metrics,  have 
been analysed in a single shoebox space. The results 
indicated  that  all  three  fields  of  metrics  could  be 
predicted by this method with acceptable accuracy. 
This  means  that  this  procedure  could  form  a 
framework  to  be  substituted  with  the  present 
simulation-based methods, and the calculation of the 
metrics  would  be  available  without  the  need  for 
time-consuming computer-based simulations.    

 
 
 
To  expand  the  created  predictive  model  of  this 
research, the number of variables and their interval 
changes shall be extended to new values in the firstly 
simulated  dataset.  This  will  lead  to  more  accurate 
predictions and more reliable results based on proper 
training of the ANN model. 

References 

Ayoub, M. (2019). A multivariate regression to 

predict daylighting and energy consumption of 
residential buildings within hybrid settlements in 
hot-desert climates. Indoor and built environment, 
28, 848-866. 

Ayoub, M. (2020). A review on machine learning 

algorithms to predict daylighting inside buildings. 
Solar energy, 202, 249-275. 

office workers. Sleep Health, 3(3). Retrieved from 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sleh.2017.03.005 
Rathi, P. (2020). A Novel Approach to Feature 

Importance — Shapley Additive Explanations. 
Retrieved from towardsdatascience: 
https://towardsdatascience.com/a-novel-approach-
to-feature-importance-shapley-additive-
explanations-d18af30fc21b 

Reinhart. (2014). Daylighting handbook I: 

Funamentals, designing with the sun, Muscle & 
Nerve. . Building Technology Press. 

Shaghaghian, Z., & Yan, W. (2020). Application of 

deep learning in generating desired design options: 
Experiments using synthetic training dataset. 2020 
Building Performance Analysis Conference and 
SimBuild co-organized by ASHRAE and IBPSA-
USA.  

Bishop, S. (2006). Pattern Recognition and Machine 

Tzempelikos, A., & K.Athienitis, A. (2007). The 

impact of shading design and control on building 
cooling and lighting demand. Solar Energy, 81, 
369-382. 

Ürge-Vorsatz, D. E. (2012). Global Energy 

Assessment, Toward a sustainable future. 
Cambridge University Press. 

Ward, G. (1994). The RADIANCE lighting simulation 
and rendering system. Proceedings of the 21st 
annual conference on Computer Graphics and 
Interactive Techniques.  

Yao, X. (1999). Evolving artificial neural networks. 
IEEE- Institute of electrical and electronics 
engineers. 

Learning. Singapore: Springer. 

C. L. Lorenza, A. B. (2019). Artificial Neural 
Networks for parametric daylight design. 
Architectural Science and Review, 63, 210-221. 

Chatzikonstantinou, I., & Sariyildiz, S. (2015). 
Approximation of simulation-derived visual 
comfort indicators in office spaces: a comparative 
study in machine learning. Architectural Science 
Review , 1-16. 

Emilie Nault, P. M. (2017). Predictive models for 

assessing the passive solar and daylight potential of 
neighborhood designs: A comparative proof-of-
concept study. Building and Environment, 116, 1-
16. 

Hecht-Nielsen, R. (1992). Theory of the 

backpropagation neural network. In Neural 
networks for perception (pp. 65-93). Academic 
press. 

IEA. (2006, Jun 26). Light’s Labour’s Lost” – Policies 
for Energy-efficient Lighting,International Energy 
Agency. (International Energy Agency) Retrieved 
from https://www.iea.org/news/lights-labours-lost-
policies-for-energy-efficient-lighting 

IEA. (2019). Energy Efficiency,International energy 
agency. (International energy agency) Retrieved 
from https://www.iea.org/reports/energy-
efficiency-2019 

Lundberg, M., S., & Lee, S.-I. (2017). A unified 
approach to interpreting model predictions. 

Magiya, J. (2019). Pearson Coefficient of Correlation 

Explained. Retrieved from 
towardsdatascience.com: 
https://towardsdatascience.com/pearson-
coefficient-of-correlation-explained-369991d93404 

Mardaljevic, J. (2015). Climate-based daylight 

modelling and its discontents. Simple Buildings 
Better Buildings? Delivering Performance through 
Engineered Solutions, CIBSE Technical 
Symposium. London. 

Mariana G. Figueiro, B. S. (2017). The impact of 
daytime light exposures on sleep and mood in 

 
 
 
