AUMATED MULTI-DOMAIN ENGINEERING DESIGN 

THOUGH LINEAR GRAPS AND GENETIC PROGRAMMING 

Eric McCormick*, Haoxiang Lang* and Clarence W. de Silva** 

*GRASP  Laboratory,  Department  of  Automotive  and  Mechatronics,  Ontario  Tech  University, 
Oshawa, ON, Canada.  

Emails: eric.mccormick@ontariotechu.net, haoxiang.lang@ontariotechu.ca 

**Industrial Automation Laboratory, Department of Mechanical Engineering, The University of 
British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.  

Email: desilva@mech.ubc.ca 

Abstract 

This paper proposes a methodology of integrating the Linear Graph (LG) approach with Genetic 

Programming  (GP)  for  generating  an  automated  multi-domain  engineering  design  approach  by 

using  the  in-house  developed  LG  MATLAB  toolbox  and  the  GP  toolbox  in  MATLAB.  The 

necessary background for the development are presented, and the methodology used in this work 

to  facilitate  the  construction  and  evaluation  of  filter  circuits,  using  LG  models,  is  described. 

Designing  electronic  filter  circuits  through  an  evolution  from  electronic  components  to  the 

completed circuits is demonstrated. The topology and component values of three types of filter 

circuits: low pass, high pass, and band pass, are designed through this evolutionary approach, for 

various  cut-off  frequencies.  Furthermore,  the  paper  demonstrates  through  examples  of  these 

evolved filter circuits, the combined GP and LG approach is successful in constructing high order 

filter  circuits  that  are  capable  of  attenuating  undesired  frequencies  while  maintaining  desirable 

ones.  The  work  presented  in  the  paper  is  a  key  step  towards  the  integration  of  LG  modeling, 

through the use of the LGtheory MATLAB Toolbox, with machine learning techniques for the 

automated design of dynamic multi-domain mechatronic systems. 

Keywords: Linear graphs, mechatronic modeling, genetic programming, MATLAB, filter circuit 

1 

 
 
1.  Introduction 

From voice and facial recognition software to self driving vehicles and beyond, the applications 

of artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning techniques to various aspects of our lives is an 

ever-growing field of research. One such up and coming focus of this research field is the use of 

machine learning in the design of mechatronic engineering systems. Similar to AI and machine 

learning,  the  field  of  mechatronic  engineering,  involving  the  design  of  multi-energy-domain 

systems, is one that is becoming ever more prevalent. Systems that were once purely single-domain 

in  nature  (mechanical,  electrical,  hydraulic,  thermal,  etc.)  are  now  being  improved  immensely 

through their integration, by the combination of energy-domain sub-systems, with the benefits of 

more  robust  functionality,  improved  efficiency  and  reliability,  enhanced  ability  for  system 

optimization, and accurate control. 

The Linear Graph (LG) Modeling approach, performed in the present work through the use of the 

LGtheory MATLAB Toolbox developed in the GRASP lab at Ontario Tech University[1], is a 

method of dynamic system modeling which is derived from Graph Theory. The origin of LG may 

be traced back to the 18th century, with the work of Leonhard Euler in order to solve the topological 

problem of the Seven Bridges of Königsberg [2]. The first formal formulation of the LG Theory 

and  its  application  in  the  modeling  of  engineering  systems  was  during  the  1950s  by  Henry  M. 

Paynter (1961) at MIT, particularly for the purposes of evaluating large electrical networks [3]. At 

that  time,  methods  of  evaluating  systems  of  various  energy  domains  utilized  different  methods 

depending on the domain in question; the work of Koenig and Blackwell (1960) presented in [4] 

was  a  key  steps  towards  expanding  the  use  of  LG  Theory  to  various  energy  domains  beyond 

electrical systems. Through decades of development, LG Theory has been expanded to the four 

2 

 
primary  energy  domains:  electrical,  mechanical  translation  and  rotational,  hydraulic/fluid,  and 

thermal [5], and also various additional application areas such as multi-body systems [2,6]. 

The genetic programming (GP) approach, which is implemented in the present work through the 

use  of  the  GPLAB  MATLAB  Toolbox  [7],  is  a  machine  learning  and  automatic  programming 

technique which genetically evolves computer programs in the form of tree structures as a method 

of problem solving. Although the idea of evolving computer programs had been theorized for many 

years before, the paradigms that govern the GP process were formally introduced by John Koza in 

1990 [8]. Since its introduction, numerous applications of GP have been explored in various fields 

such  as  engineering,  computer  science,  biomedical,  and  chemistry  [9].  Applications  of  GP  in 

engineering design include pre-existing examples of filter circuit synthesis as demonstrated in [10-

12],  but  the  use  of  GP  along  with  LG  theory  for  the  evolutionary  design  of  multi-domain 

mechatronic systems is still rather scarce, with examples of it being rather limited [13]. Although 

the present paper is only concerned with the evolution of filter circuits in the electrical-domain, by 

demonstrating the successful implementation of the LGtheory MATLAB Toolbox for the purposes 

of  automated  design,  this  work  may  then  be  extended  in  a  straightforward  manner  to  systems 

encompassing multiple energy domains. 

The  purpose  of  the  present  paper  is  to  demonstrate  the  potential  of  combining  the  two  fields, 

machine  learning  and  mechatronics  design,  through  the  evolutionary  design  methodology  of 

engineering systems to achieve computer automated design of multi-domain engineering systems. 

In  this  paper,  the  general  concepts  of  LG  and  GP  are  introduced  in  Section  2,  along  with  the 

development  of  the  LG-based  MATLAB  toolbox.  Detailed  examples  are  given  for  converting 

physical  systems  into  linear  graph  models  and  eventually  to  the  MATLAB  code  using  the 

developed MATLAB toolbox called LGtheory. With the integration of the GP and LG approaches 

3 

 
through  the  combination  of  LGthoery  and  GPLab  toolboxes,  an  evolutionary  design  method  is 

proposed with detailed explanations of the terminology and design steps. In Section 3, examples 

of designing filters are presented to demonstrate the application of the proposed method. Results 

of the implementations are provided and discussed in Section 4. Conclusion are drawn in the last 

section of the paper. 

2.  Background 

2.1.   Linear Graph Modeling 

The LG modeling approach provides a method of representing and evaluating complex dynamic 

systems  through  the  use  of  a  simplistic  graphical  and  topological  representation  in  order  to 

facilitate  the  derivation  of  state-space  models.  The  systematic,  unique,  unified,  and  integrated 

nature  of  the  LG  modeling  approach  allows  for  a  robust  modeling  method,  which  produces  a 

unique  solution  through  the  application  of  methodologies  analogously  across  multiple  energy 

domains (i.e., a mechatronic system). This means that a multi-domain system is evaluated in its 

entirety (not sequentially, like with other methods), while applying the same basic procedures for 

each energy domain contained within the system to produce a unique state-space model [14].  

The  LG  modeling  approach  represents  dynamic  systems  through  two  main  components:  1) 

branches:  line  segments  used  to  represent  the  elements  of  the  system;  and  2)  nodes:  a  point 

representing the physical connections between the system elements. Similarly, two main variable 

types are considered in the LG modeling approach: across-variables, denoted generally as 𝑣, which 

are the variables measured “across” an element (such as voltage across a resistor or velocity across 

an  inertia  element);  and  through-variables,  denoted  generally  as  𝑓 ,  which  are  the  variables 

measured “through” an element (such as current through a resistor or force through a spring). The 

4 

 
product of the Across- and Through-variables of a system element determines the power flow of 

that element. 

The  three  primary  passive  single-port  element  types  represented  in  the  LG  modeling  approach 

include A-type, T-type, and D-type elements. A- and T-type elements are energy storage elements 

whose  energy  storage  is  defined  by  their  across-variable  and  through-variable,  respectively. 

Examples of these elements include capacitors and inertial elements for A-types, and inductors 

and springs for T-types. D-type elements are energy dissipating elements whose energy dissipation 

is  define  by  either  their  across  or  through-variables.  Examples  for  this  element  type  include 

resistors and dampers. Likewise, there are two source element types, A-type and T-type source 

elements, which provide energy to the system in the form of their respective variable type. 

There  are  two  additional  passive  two-port  element  types,  transformers  and  gyrators,  which  are 

non-dissipative  elements  that  either  convert  the  magnitude  of  the  variables  acting  upon  it,  or 

convert  the  energy-type  to  that  of  a  different  energy-domain.  An  example  of  a  magnitude 

converting element is an ideal electrical transformer, where the magnitude of the input current is 

traded  off  for  the  magnitude  of  the  output  voltage,  or  vise  versa.  An  example  of  a  domain 

converting element is a DC motor, where electrical energy input into the element is converted to 

mechanical energy at the output. In the case of a transformer element, the input variable type is 

related to the same output variable type, while in the case of a gyrator element, the input variable 

type is related to the opposite variable type. 

The constitutive equations of each aforementioned element type is presented in Table 1. 

Table 1: Constitutive equations of single- and two-port elements 

Element 

Constitutive Equations 

5 

 
Generalized A-type 

Generalized T-type 

𝑓 = 𝐶!

𝑣 = 𝐿!

𝑑𝑣
𝑑𝑡
𝑑𝑓
𝑑𝑡

Generalized D-type 

𝑓 =

1
𝑅!

𝑣 

𝑣 = 𝑅!𝑓 

Transformer 

𝑣" = 𝑇𝐹𝑣# 

𝑓" = − -

. 𝑓# 

Gyrator 

𝑣" = 𝐺𝑌𝑓# 

𝑓" = − -

. 𝑣# 

1
𝑇𝐹
1
𝐺𝑌

For  more  information  of  LG  modeling,  the  references  [5][14][15]  provide  a  fundamental 

formulation of the LG modeling approach, introduce the basic concepts of LG theory, and several 

examples of various single and multi-domain systems. 

2.1.1.  LG Modeling Example 

The following example of a hydraulically actuated mechanical system from [5] will be evaluated 

using the LGtheory MATLAB Toolbox developed in our lab [1]. This system consists of a pump, 

which transmits fluid through a resistive pipe into a hydraulic piston. This piston then converts the 

hydraulic pressure into force in the mechanical translational domain in order to actuate a mass 

attached to a spring, which slides on a resistive surface. The schematic diagram and the LG model 

of this system are shown in Fig. 1. 

R

2

3

4

VS

b K m

GY

1

1

1

    (a)                                                                                                 (b) 
Fig. 1 (a) Schematic model [5] and (b) LG model of the hydraulically actuated mechanical system 

The required inputs to the LGtheory MATLAB Toolbox for this system are as follows: 

6 

 
 
 
       
 
S = [2 2 3 4 4 4 4]; 

T = [1 3 1 1 1 1 1]; 

Type = [1 5 4 4 5 6 2]; 

Domain = [4 4 4 2 2 2]; 

syms s R A_p b K m 

Var_Names = [s R 1/A_p 1/A_p b K m]; 

syms v_m(t) 

y = [v_m(t)]; 

[A,B,C,D,F,x,u] = LGtheory(S,T,Type,Domain,Var_Names,y); 

An updated input method is now utilized by the LGtheory Toolbox since its introduction [1]. The 

user is no longer required to input the incidence matrix form of the LG model; instead, the user 

defines the model topology through the Source (S) and Target (T) vectors. The column-wise index 

values  of  the  Source  vector  inform  the  program  which  nodes  the  corresponding  elements  are 

leaving, while the index values of the Target vector inform the program which nodes the elements 

are entering. 

The Type and Domain vectors are thus formed using Table 2 with the corresponding index values 

related to each element. 

The Var_Names vector allows the user to define the variable names for each element. These names 

can either be individual symbolic variables or expressions containing symbolic variables, such as 

the  gyrator  ratio  of  the  piston  being  equal  to  the  reciprocal  of  the  piston’s  cross-sectional  area 

(𝐺𝑌 = 1/𝐴$), as seen in the example inputs above.  

The user then specifies the output variables of interest in the output vector (y); for this example, 

the variable of interest is the velocity of the mass element, 𝑣%(𝑡).  

Table 2: Index values for element types and energy domains. 

7 

 
Index  Element Type 

Index  Energy Domain 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

A-Source 

1 

Electrical 

A-Type Element 

2  Mech. Translational 

Transformer 

Gyrator 

D-Type Element 

T-Type Element 

T-Source 

3  Mech. Rotational 

4 

5 

Hydraulic/Fluid 

Thermal 

The state-space model output by the MATLAB toolbox is as follows: 

𝑣̇%
5
𝐹̇&

7 = 5

# + 𝑏)/𝑚 −1/𝑚
−(𝑅 ∙ 𝐴$
𝐾

0

7 >

𝑣%
𝐹&

? + 5

−𝐴$/𝑚
0

7 𝑃’(𝑡) 

𝑣% = [1 0] >

𝑣%
𝐹&

? + [0]𝑃’(𝑡) 

The dynamic response of this system for the specified output (velocity of the mass element) is 

shown in Fig. 2. This system was evaluated using a 100	kPa pressure source, a pipe resistance of 

100	Pa ∙ s/m(, a sliding resistance of 50	N ∙ s/m, and a spring coefficient of 150	N/m for a mass 

of 100	kg and a piston with a 10	cm diameter. 

Fig. 2 Dynamic response of the hydraulically actuated mass system 

8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
By observing the velocity response of the mass element, it can be determined that the force of the 

piston,  created  via  the  pressure  source,  accelerates  the  block  towards  the  spring  element  in  the 

negative direction (shown as negative velocity). Once the compression of the spring becomes too 

great, the block is then pushed back towards the piston briefly until the velocity oscillations settle. 

By  observing  the  position  response  of  the  mass  element,  which  was  found  by  integrating  the 

velocity response, it can be seen that the piston pushes the block approximately 8 meters before 

the piston force is eventually equalized with the spring force and the mass settles at around the 5-

meter position. 

As can be observed by the results obtained in this example, the LGtheory MATLAB Toolbox is a 

simple and robust method of evaluating multi-domain dynamic systems using the LG approach. 

This  toolbox  will  be  utilized  to  facilitate  the  design  evolution  of  electronic  filter  circuits  by 

evaluating the dynamic frequency response of the generated system models. 

2.2.   Genetic Programming 

Genetic Programming (GP) is a machine learning technique which generates computer programs 

consisting of various functions and terminals in an evolutionary manner based on the concept of 

natural evolution. In natural evolution, members of a population adapt to changing environments 

over  numerous  generations,  with  some  members  who  inherit  or  adapt  beneficial  characteristics 

being more likely to survive, reproduce and, therefore, pass on these benefits, while other members 

who do not are more likely to die off before reproduction. This process of natural selection means 

that, over time, the weaker members of the population are unable to pass on their unbeneficial 

characteristics, thus strengthening the total population. 

9 

 
GP represents members of the population in the form of tree structures, consisting primarily of two 

main components: functions, which are sub-programs that conduct a specific procedure or routine 

based on input values and return or perform some output action; and terminals, which can either 

be functions, having no inputs, or operands, which provide input values to other functions in the 

tree.  The  topological  structure  of  these  trees  is  represented  by  nodes  which  denote  the 

aforementioned functions and terminals, and lines, which represent the hierarchical connections 

between nodes. In the tree structure, all inner nodes must be functions as they can accept input 

actions from other nodes and provide an output action, whereas all outermost nodes of the tree 

must be terminals as they can only provide output actions. 

All functions and terminals used in GP must satisfy the property of closure, which requires that all 

functions take into consideration type consistency and evaluation safety (Poli et al. 2008). This is 

important because as the GP process adapts and manipulates trees stochastically through crossover 

and mutation operations, it is possible that any combination of functions and terminals may occur; 

thus, consistency in function input/output types, or a method of predictably converting types, is 

required to ensure that any possible tree structure can be evaluated properly. Similarly, evaluation 

safety is required as some functions may fail during runtime under certain conditions (i.e., a divide 

function may fail if the operand of the denominator is 0). It is common practice to ensure that these 

functions are protected by checking for conditions that would lead to failure and, if so, perform 

some predetermined output action instead (e.g., if dividing by 0, always return 1). Alternatively, it 

is possible to allow these failures to occur while applying a large fitness penalty to these solutions 

in order to potentially eliminate them from the population in subsequent generations. 

10 

 
2.2.1.  Fitness Function 

Similar to how the environment tests an individual’s ability to survive in natural evolution, the 

fitness function in GP evaluates a solution’s ability to produce a desired result. This method of 

evaluation can be conducted in any number of ways that the user sees fit, and can optimize for 

either maximizing or minimizing the resulting fitness values. One of the most common ways to 

determine fitness is to calculate the absolute error between the produced result and the desired 

outcome. For this particular type of fitness measurement, it is desired to minimize the fitness of 

each member as the fitness value relates directly to the total error for that individual. By prioritizing 

the minimization of fitness for this type of fitness function, preceding generations will strive to 

achieve  increasingly  lower  fitness  values,  thus,  minimizing  the  error.  Ultimately,  after  every 

member  of  each  generation  has  been  produced  and  evaluated,  the  individual  with  the  most 

desirable fitness value, be it lowest or highest, is chosen as the solution to the GP problem. 

2.2.2.  Selection 

Once the fitness of the population has been evaluated, the selection process occurs. Again, this 

process can be conducted in a number of ways depending on the specific application, but one of 

the most common methods used is the roulette wheel approach. This method involves spinning a 

roulette wheel where each member of the population occupies a portion of the wheel with a size 

corresponding to their fitness with respect to the total fitness of the population. This means that 

members with more desirable fitness values will be more likely to be selected for reproduction 

than members with less desirable fitness values. Other methods of selection include variations of 

the  roulette  wheel  approach,  and  the  tournament  selection  approach,  which  involves  pitting 

individuals against each other randomly, with the individual selected to reproduce being the one 

with the most desirable fitness. 

11 

 
2.2.3.  Genetic Operations 

In GP, two primary genetic operations (and many variants of these operations) are utilized during 

the reproduction process in order to introduce new individuals and diverse characteristics into the 

population. These operations are crossover and mutation: 

The crossover operation occurs between two individuals that have been selected as parents for 

reproduction.  A  node  is  selected  from  each  of  these  parents  and  the  associated  branches  are 

swapped with one another. This process results in two new children who differ slightly from their 

parents in order to further explore the solution space. 

The mutation operation involves one individual who has been selected to be a parent. A random 

node is selected in this individual and the associated tree branch is replaced with a random branch 

that is created using the available functions and terminals. This process results in one new child 

who  differs  from  its  parent,  and  is  beneficial  for  introducing  more  solution  diversity  into  the 

population. 

2.2.4.  GPLAB 

GPLAB is a GP-based MATLAB toolbox developed by Sara Silva at the University of Coimbra, 

Portugal, which was released for public use in July of 2003 [17]. This toolbox has been under 

consistent development since its initial release, with the most recent version at the time of writing, 

version 4.04, being released in June of 2018. While GPLAB’s default configuration is for more 

basic  tasks  such  as  symbolic  regression,  it  is  also  possible  to  customize  various  aspects  of  the 

toolbox,  such  as  functions  and  terminal  sets,  fitness  functions,  selection  procedures,  genetic 

operations, and so on, in order to facilitate the needs of more advanced research. 

12 

 
Since  GPLAB  is  written  in  MATLAB,  along  with  other  benefits  such  as  its  robustness  and 

flexibility  for  user  modification,  it  can  be  easily  adapted  to  be  compatible  with  any  other 

MATLAB-based  scripts  or  toolboxes  such  as  our  LGtheory  MATLAB  Toolbox.  Due  to  these 

reasons, GPLAB was selected for implementation with LGtheory for the present work. 

3.  Design Evolution of Electronic Filters 

Electronic filters are signal processing electric circuits consisting of discrete electrical components 

with the purpose of attenuating unwanted frequencies while maintaining the wanted ones. There 

are many types of electronic filters with different functions and benefits. The purpose of the present 

section is to explore the application of LG and GP in the design of linear passive low-pass, high-

pass, and band-pass filter circuits, and thereby validate the proposed method. Passive filters are 

filter  circuits  that  contain  passive  electrical  components,  such  as  capacitors,  inductors,  and 

resistors. They do not contain active components, such as operational amplifiers, which require 

external power sources to operate.  

3.1.   Embryo Model 

The design evolution process begins with an initial embryo model in order to provide a basis on 

which the evolutionary process can commence. For all three filters that will be designed in the 

following sections, the embryo model will consist of a voltage source, 𝑉), in series with a resistive 

element,  𝑅) ,  representing  the  source  internal  resistance,  and  another  resistive  element,  𝑅* , 

representing the load resistance, which will be placed in parallel with the last element added to the 

model between the 𝑛+, node and the ground node, 1. The values pertaining to the source voltage 

and  the  resistances  of  the  embryo  model  are  specified  by  the  user  during  setup  in  order  to 

accommodate  the  specific  needs  of  the  designed  system.  Fig.  3  represents  the  embryo  system 

13 

 
model; the evolved filter circuit is constructed within this embryo between the nodes highlighted 

with the red squares, 3 and n. In order to evaluate the evolved models, the voltage of the load 

resistance element is selected as the output of the state-space model and the frequency response of 

this element is observed via a Bode plot for each iteration of the evolutionary design process. 

RS

2

3

n

VS

1

Evolved	Filter	Circuit

RL

1

Fig. 3 Embryo model for evolved filter circuits 

3.2.   Functions 

The  following  sections  describe  the  functions  utilized  by  the  GP  toolbox  to  facilitate  the 

construction of the LG models of the filter circuits. 

3.2.1.  Series 

The series function takes two input actions and constructs the resulting sub-models in series. In 

the simplest case, if both actions are the addition of elements to the model, the series function will 

place both of these elements in series with one another in the system model. For more complex 

cases, this function will produce the sub-models that result from the associated input branches in 

such a way that the resulting system components are constructed in series with one another as well. 

3.2.2.  Split 

The split function takes two input actions and constructs the resulting sub-models independently 

of one another. After a split occurs, each resulting sub-model will be constructed separately from 

one  another  and  grounded  independently,  resulting  in  each  sub-model  being  parallel  with  one 

14 

 
 
another between the node where the split occurs and the ground node. The splitting function is 

important for the design of electronic filters as it results in a ladder-like topology that is required 

for constructing higher order filter circuits. 

3.3.   Terminals 

The  Add_A,  Add_D,  and  Add_T  terminals  each  add  their  respective  passive  elements  to  the 

embryo  system  model.  These  terminals  perform  the  addition  of  their  respective  elements  in  an 

identical manner, with the exception of the element type index value which must correspond with 

type of element that is being added to the system. When an element is added, a new node is also 

created, upon which the model can be built further. If this newly created node is not to be further 

built  upon  during  the  GP  process,  it  will  be  converted  into  a  ground  node.  Additionally,  these 

terminals randomly select the parameter values associated with the newly added element within a 

range of values which are determined based on the source/load resistance values and the cutoff 

frequencies specified by the user. This parameter selection process is done in order to ensure that 

the GP fitness will converge toward an optimal value quickly by reducing the solution space which 

the algorithm must explore. 

3.4.   Fitness Function 

Each model generated by the GP algorithm is subsequently sent to the LGtheory toolbox in order 

to extract the state-space model of the system. If this toolbox determines that it is impossible to 

extract the state-space models of the evolved systems due to any issues with the model construction 

by the GP (e.g., excess or lack of state variables, incomplete models, etc.) an error message is 

returned to the fitness function by the toolbox. Upon detection of such error messages, the fitness 

function will end for that particular system and a large penalty value shall be applied to the fitness 

of that individual. 

15 

 
If a state-space model can be extracted, the frequency response of the system is evaluated using 

the “bode” function in MATLAB. From the data produced by the “bode” function, the magnitude 

of the output voltage at each point along the plot is evaluated against the desired voltage output 

for that specific frequency. Ideally, this means that for frequencies that are desired to be passed, 

the  magnitude  of  the  output  voltage  will  be  equal  to  the  input  voltage,  and  for  unwanted 

frequencies, the magnitude of the output voltage will be equal to zero. The absolute error values 

found  between  the  desired  and  the  actual  voltage  values  within  the  entire  frequency  range  are 

summed and equated to the fitness of the evolved system. In band pass filter evolution, the absolute 

error values associated with the pass band frequencies are squared to increase their impact on the 

fitness value. This is due to the pass band generally being narrow compared to the total frequency 

range; squaring the error of the pass band helps to equalize the algorithm’s prioritization of the 

pass band and attenuated frequencies, thus tending to generate a more optimal system. 

The  GP  algorithm  is  run  for  the  specified  amount  of  generations  and  population  size,  and  the 

evolved model that results in the lowest fitness value is selected and presented to the user as the 

final design. 

3.5.   Interpreting Tree Structures 

Fig. 4 shows the tree structure evolved for the low pass filter model. The GP algorithm executes 

functions  in  a  manner  that  the  first  sub-tree  from  the  function  node  is  evaluated  in  its  entirety 

before the second sub-tree is considered. This is represented in the figure by the arrows lining the 

perimeter  of  the  tree  in  a  counter-clockwise  direction,  which  represents  the  order  in  which  the 

terminal nodes are executed, and thus, the order in which elements are added to the system. 

16 

 
(Start)

(End)

(7)

(6)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Fig. 4 Tree structure of the evolved low pass filter with the directionality of node execution 

This tree structure is interpreted as follows: at (Start), a split is created at node 3 of the embryo 

model. At (1), an inductor (T-Type) element is added to the model at node 3 and a new node, 4, is 

created. Another split is created at node 4, and at (2), a second inductor element and node, 5, are 

added to the model. At this newly created node, another split occurs with the addition of a resistive 

(D-Type) element at (3), with the node created by the addition of this element being connected to 

ground. A series connection of the third inductor and the second resistor elements are added to 

node 5 at (4) and (5), creating new nodes 6 and 7. Following the arrow from (5) to (6) results in 

the grounding of node 7, and the addition of a capacitor (A-Type) element between the previously 

split node 4 and a new node, which is subsequently grounded. Finally, following the arrow from 

(6) through (7) to (End) results in the addition of a second capacitor element between node 3 and 

ground. 

After the tree has been interpreted by the GP algorithm and the LG model constructed, the load 

resistance element is added to the system between the highest integer node, in this case 6, and 

ground. This results in the final low pass filter LG model, as shown in Fig. 6. 

17 

 
 
4.  Results and Discussion 

4.1.   Low Pass Filter Evolution 

The low pass filter evolution program was run for a system containing a 10-volt source with an 

internal resistance of 750 Ohms, and a load resistance of 50 Ohms. The filter was designed for a 

cutoff frequency of 50 kHz over 100 generations with a population size of 50. Fig. 4 of the previous 

section shows the tree structure that was constructed by the GP algorithm for these input values. 

The two graphs shown in Fig. 5 demonstrate the evolution of the fitness and structural complexity, 

respectively, of the evolved tree structures over the course of the 100 generations. The left graph 

shows the change in the fitness of the “best so far” tree structure, as well as, the median and average 

finesses,  and  the  average  standard  deviations  of  all  trees  for  each  generation  of  the  evolution 

process. Similarly, the right graph shows the evolving structural complexity of the “best so far” 

solution in the form of depth, size, and percentage of introns of the associated tree structure. 

    (a)                                                                                                 (b) 
Fig. 5 (a) Fitness and (b) structural complexity for the evolution of the low pass filter 

The resulting LG model and the equivalent circuit diagrams are shown in Fig. 6. 

18 

 
         
 
RS
RS

2
2

L1

3
3

4

L2

L3

5

6

VS
VS

1
1

C2

1

C1

1

R2

R3

RL

1

1

    (a)                                                                                                 (b) 
Fig. 6 (a) LG model and (b) circuit diagram of the evolved low pass filter 

The frequency response of the system is shown in Fig. 7. 

Fig. 7 Frequency response function of the evolved low pass filter 

4.2.   High Pass Filter Evolution 

The high pass filter evolution program was run for a system containing a 10-volt source with an 

internal resistance of 750 Ohms, and a load resistance of 50 Ohms. The filter was designed for a 

cutoff frequency of 300 kHz over 100 generations, with a population size of 50. Fig. 8 shows the 

tree structure that was constructed by the GP algorithm for these input values. 

19 

 
 
 
 
The two graphs shown in Fig. 9 demonstrate the evolution of the fitness and structural complexity 

Fig. 8 Tree structure of the evolved high pass filter 

of the evolved tree structures over the course of the 100 generations. 

    (a)                                                                                                 (b) 
Fig. 9 (a) Fitness and (b) structural complexity for the evolution of the high pass filter 

The resulting LG model and the equivalent circuit diagrams are shown in Fig. 10. 

RS
RS

2
2

C1

3
3

4

C2

C3

5

8

VS
VS

1
1

L1

1

L2

1

L3

6

L5

7

L7

RL

L4 R2

L6 R3

1

1

1

    (a)                                                                                                 (b) 
Fig. 10 (a) LG model and (b) circuit diagram of the evolved high pass filter 

20 

 
 
         
 
 
 
The frequency response function of the system is shown in Fig. 11. 

Fig. 11 Frequency response function of the evolved high pass filter 

4.3.   Band Pass Filter Evolution 

The band pass filter evolution program was run for a system containing a 10-volt source with an 

internal resistance of 750 Ohms, and a load resistance of 50 Ohms. The filter was designed for a 

lower cutoff frequency of 20 kHz and an upper cutoff frequency of 250 kHz, over 100 generations 

with a population size of 50. Fig. 12 shows the tree structure, which was constructed by the GP 

algorithm for these input values. 

21 

 
 
Fig. 12 Tree structure of the evolved band pass filter 

The two graphs shown in Fig. 13 demonstrate the evolution of the fitness and structural complexity 

of the evolved tree structures over the course of the 100 generations. 

    (a)                                                                                                 (b) 
Fig. 13 (a) Fitness and (b) structural complexity for the evolution of the band pass filter 

The resulting LG model and equivalent circuit diagrams are shown in Fig. 14. 

RS
RS

2
2

L1

3
3

4

L2

5

VS
VS

C1 R2

L3 R3 RL

1
1

1

1

    (a)                                                                                                 (b) 
Fig. 14 (a) LG model and (b) circuit diagram of the evolved band pass filter 

22 

 
 
         
 
 
 
The frequency response function of the system is shown in Fig. 15. 

Fig. 15 Frequency response function of the evolved band pass filter 

5.  Conclusion 

This paper presented the application of the combined LG modeling and GP design approach for 

the evolutionary design of passive electronic filter circuits. While the use of GP for the design of 

electronic  filters  is  not  new,  this  application  of  design  evolution  was  utilized  in  order  to 

demonstrate the capabilities of LG modeling and the LGtheory MATLAB Toolbox for automated 

design by evaluating the evolved systems via dynamic simulation. 

In this paper, three types of passive filter circuits (low pass, high pass, and band pass filters) were 

designed using the combination of LG modeling and GP. The results of the frequency response of 

these systems demonstrated that the LG/GP program was able to successfully evolve high-order 

filter  circuits  that  were  effective  at  attenuating  the  voltages  of  undesirable  frequencies  while 

maintaining the voltages of desired frequencies. 

23 

 
 
While  the  present  application  of  designing  filter  circuits  is  only  concerned  with  the  electrical 

energy domain, due to the unified and integrated nature of LG modeling, a characteristic which 

other  single-domain  evaluation  tools  lack,  it  is  possible  to  extend  the  present  work  to  other 

domains, and even combinations of different domains, for the design of complex multi-domain 

mechatronic  system.  The  present  paper  further  validates  the  capabilities  of  the  LGtheory 

MATLAB Toolbox, which has been developed by us, as a robust and reliable software package 

for the design and simulation of complex dynamic systems. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

This research was funded by the NSERC Discovery Program, grant number RGPIN-2017-05762. 

References 

[1] E. McCormick, H. Lang and C. W. de Silva, "Research and Development of a Linear Graph-
based MATLAB Toolbox," in The 14th International Conference on Computer Science & 
Education (ICCSE 2019), Toronto, 2019, pp. 942-947.  

[2] C. Schemike, K. Morency and J. McPhee, "Using Graph Theory and Symbolic Computing to 
Generate Efficient Models for Multi-Body Vehicle Dynamics," Proceedings of the Institution 
of Mechanical Engineers. Part K, Journal of multi-body dynamics, vol. 222, no. 4, pp. 339-
352, 2008.  

[3] H. M. Paynter, Analysis and Design of Engineering Systems, Boston: The M.I.T. Press, 1961.  

[4] H.  E.  Koenig  and  W.  A.  Blackwell,  "Linear  Graph  Theory  -  A  Fundamental  Engineering 

Discipline," IRE Transactions on Education, vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 42-49, 1960.  

[5] D.  Rowell  and  D.  N.  Wormley,  System  Dynamics:  An  Introduction,  Upper  Saddle  River: 

Prentice Hall, 1997.  

[6] J. McPhee, C. Schmitke and S. Redmond, "Dynamic Modelling of Mechatronic Multibody 
Systems with Symbolic Computing and Linear Graph Theory," Mathematical and Computer 
Modelling of Dynamical Systems, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 1-23, 2004.  

[7] S. Silva and J. Almeida, "GPLAB - A Genetic Programming Toolbox for MATLAB," 2008.  

[8] J.  R.  Koza,  "Genetic  Programming:  A  Paradigm  for  Genetically  Breeding  Populations  of 

Computer Programs to Solve Problems," Stanford University, Stanford, 1990. 

[9] M. T. Ahvanooey, Q. Li, M. Wu and S. Wang, "A Survey of Genetic Programming and Its 
Applications,"  KSII  Transactions  on  Internet  and  Information  Systems,  vol.  13,  no.  4,  pp. 

24 

 
1765-1794, 2019.  

[10] 

J. R. Koza, F. H. Bennett III, D. Andre and M. A. Keane, "Automated Design of Both the 
Topology and Sizing of Analog Electrical Circuits using Genetic Programming," in Artificial 
Intelligence in Design '96, Stanford, 1996.  

[11]  V.  Durev  and  E.  Gadjeva,  "Passive  Circuit  Synthesis  using  Genetic  Algorithms  in 
MATLAB,"  in  9th  WSEAS  International  Conference  on  Evolutionary  Computing  (EC'08), 
Sofia, 2008.  

[12]  O.  J.  Ushie,  M.  F.  Abbod  and  J.  C.  Ogbulezie,  "The  Use  of  Genetic  Programming  to 
Evolve  Passive  Filter  Circuits,"  International  Journal  of  Engineering  and  Technology 
Innovation, vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 255-268, 2017.  

[13]  L. B. Gamage, C. W. de Silva and R. Campos, "Design Evolution of Mechatronic Systems 
Through  Modeling,  On-Line  Monitoring,  and  Evolutionary  Optimization,"  Mechatronics, 
vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 83-94, 2012.  

[14]  C. W. de Silva, "Linear Graphs," in Modeling of Dynamic Systems - With Engineering 

Applications, Boca Raton, Taylor & Francis, CRC Press, 2018, pp. 199-391. 

[15]  C. W. de SIlva, "Linear Graphs," in Mechatronics: A Foundation Course, Boca Raton, 

CRC Press, 2010, pp. 122-147. 

[16]  R.  Poli,  W.  B.  Langdon  and  N.  F.  McPee,  A  Field  Guide  to  Genetic  Programming, 
Published via http://lulu.com and freely available at http://www.gp-field-guide.org.uk. (With 
contributions by J. R. Koza), 2008.  

[17]  S.  Silva,  "GPLAB  -  A  Genetic  Programming  Toolbox  for  MATLAB,"  June  2018. 

[Online]. Available: http://gplab.sourceforge.net/. 

25 

 
 
 
 
 
