Estimating returns to special education: combining machine

learning and text analysis to address confounding

Aurélien Sallin†

This version: February 2022

Abstract

Leveraging unique insights into the special education placement process through written individ-
ual psychological records, I present results from the ﬁrst ever study to examine short- and long-
term returns to special education programs with causal machine learning and computational text
analysis methods. I ﬁnd that special education programs in inclusive settings have positive re-
turns in terms of academic performance as well as labor-market integration. Moreover, I uncover
a positive effect of inclusive special education programs in comparison to segregated programs.
This effect is heterogenous: segregation has least negative effects for students with emotional
or behavioral problems, and for nonnative students with special needs. Finally, I deliver optimal
program placement rules that would maximize aggregated school performance and labor market
integration for students with special needs at lower program costs. These placement rules would
reallocate most students with special needs from segregation to inclusion.

Keywords: returns to education, special education, inclusion, segregation, causal machine learning,

computational text analysis

JEL Classiﬁcation: H52, I21, I26, J14, C31, Z13

2
2
0
2

b
e
F
5
1

]

N
G
.
n
o
c
e
[

2
v
7
0
8
8
0
.
0
1
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

I am grateful to my supervisor Beatrix Eugster, as well as Elliott Ash, Simone Balestra, Brianna Ballis, Uschi Backes-
Gellner, Caroline Chuard, Michael Knaus, Edward Lazear, Michael Lechner, Helge Liebert, Bryan S. Graham, Fanny Puljic,
participants of the Law, Economics, and Data Science Group seminar at the ETH, the Causal Data Science Meeting at
Maastricht University &Copenhagen Business School, the Machine Learning in Labor, Education, and Health Economics
Workshop at the IAB, the EffEE Workshop on Causal Analyses of School Reforms at the WZB in Berlin, the Brown Bag
seminar at the University of St. Gallen, the Young Swiss Economists Meeting 2021, the Spring Meeting of Young Economists
2021, the International Conference on Econometrics and Business Analytics (iCEBA) 2021 for their constructive comments
and suggestions on early drafts of this paper. I acknowledge ﬁnancing from the Swiss National Science Foundation (grant
no. 176381). This paper reﬂects the views of the author alone. The usual disclaimer applies.

† University of St. Gallen, Switzerland. aurelien.sallin@unisg.ch.

 
 
 
 
 
 
1 Introduction

A growing number of students in OECD countries are identiﬁed with special needs (SEN)1.

Taking the US as an example, 14.1 percent of US public school students received Special Education

services in 2018–2019, compared to 13.3 percent in 2000-2001, and 10.1 percent in 1980-1981

(NCES, 2020). At the same time, the inclusion of students with SEN in mainstream education has
been set as an educational objective by developed countries since the late 1990’s.2 To this end, most

OECD countries have reduced segregation of students with SEN and developed a variety of services

such as alternative teaching methods and curricula, Individualized Education Programs (IEPS), and
increased staff to accommodate individualized support within mainstream education.3

Despite the growing number of students with SEN and the increasing implementation of inclu-

sive education programs, empirical evidence regarding how special education (SpEd) placements

affect academic and labor market outcomes for students with SEN remains scarce. Existing research

shows inconclusive effects of SpEd on academic performance (Hanushek, Kain, and Rivkin, 2002;

Lavy and Schlosser, 2005; Keslair, Maurin, and McNally, 2012; Schwartz, Hopkins, and Stiefel, 2021)

and on educational attainment (Ballis and Heath, forthcoming). Since (early) interventions in chil-

dren’s school curricula have a profound impact on children’s academic and lifelong prospects (see

among others Cappelen et al., 2020; Heckman, Pinto, and Savelyev, 2013; Duncan and Magnuson,

2013; Chetty et al., 2011), it is crucial to provide teachers, parents, and policy makers with insights

into which SpEd programs are effective. These insights should also help them allocate the most ef-

ﬁcient interventions to the students who would beneﬁt the most. This is important in light of the

considerable additional ﬁnancial costs SpEd programs generate for public schools in comparison to
standard education (Duncombe and Yinger, 2005; Elder et al., 2021).4

In this study, I set out to investigate returns to SpEd on academic performance, labor partici-

pation, use of disability insurance, and wages. I analyze returns to SpEd in a comprehensive way,

and assess returns of six different SpEd programs. The ﬁrst four programs are offered in inclusive

academic settings, and are comprised of counseling, academic support (or tutoring), individual ther-

apies (such as speech therapy), inclusion (students with SEN are mainstreamed but with additional

support by a SpEd teacher). Two programs are offered in segregated settings, i.e., semi-segregation

(same school but special classrooms), and full segregation (separate schools). In addition, I assess

whether inclusive programs are more efﬁcient than segregated programs in generating positive aca-

demic and labor market outcomes. I use student-level administrative data on school performance on

a compulsory standardized test and social security administrative records. These data are combined

1Following ICD-10 diagnosis guidelines, students with “special-needs” (SEN) are students suffering from learning
impairments, behavioral, emotional or social disorders, communication disorders, physical or developmental disabilities.
2According to the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (2006), “States Parties recognize
the right of persons with disabilities to education. With a view to realizing this right without discrimination and on the
basis of equal opportunity, States Parties shall ensure an inclusive education system at all levels”.

3See Schwab (2020), and the following OECD reports: “Students with Disabilities, Learning Difﬁculties and Disad-
vantages” (OECD Publishing, Paris, 2005), and “TALIS 2018 Results (Volume I): Teachers and School Leaders as Lifelong
Learners” (OECD Publishing, Paris, 2019).

4For reference, an annual total of $40 billion was spent exclusively on SpEd in the USA for the 2015 academic year
(Elder et al. 2021; NCES, 2015), and educating a student in SpEd can cost twice to three times as much as educating
a mainstreamed student. As an example, the State of California estimates that a SpEd student each year costs $26,000,
compared to $9,000 for a mainstreamed student (Overview of Special Education in California report, LAO, 2019).

1

with detailed information and psychological written records on each individual student, uniquely

linking students’ school performance, labor market integration and written psychological assess-

ments for ten consecutive cohorts of students with SEN enrolled in SpEd in the Swiss State of St.

Gallen.

I conduct these analyses in the context of the Swiss education system, an academic context

which is similar to most OECD countries and the US in terms of inclusive SpEd structures (De Bruin,

2019). Moreover, the Swiss academic setting offers ideal conditions for the investigation of returns to

SpEd. A ﬁrst ideal feature is that the diagnosis of special needs and the SpEd placement decision are

conducted by the School Psychological Service (SPS), an external and independent administrative

entity. This ensures that treatment is given by professional psychologists, rather than by parents,

teachers, or schools. In addition, each school is free to implement the SpEd programs of its choice

from a catalogue of measures provided by the Education Ministry. In practice, this means that there

is variation in program assignment across schools which is not explained by student or by school

characteristics. This is reinforced by the fact that schools in Switzerland were strongly encouraged

to implement inclusive programs instead of segregated programs after the Swiss Equality Act for

People with Disabilities was passed in 2004. However, not all schools started replacing segregated

programs with inclusive programs at the same time. All in all, these features allow me to observe

students with similar characteristics and similar SEN but assigned to different SpEd programs.

Special education programs are difﬁcult to evaluate because SpEd placement is based on stu-

dents’ characteristics that are usually unobservable to the econometrician. To tackle the problem of

potential selection into SpEd programs, I leverage data that offer unique and unprecendented in-

sights into the placement process: for each student with SEN, I observe all the psychological records

and session transcripts written by the caseworkers in charge of both diagnosing the student’s special

needs and assigning the student to treatment. These records allow me to gain a deep understanding

of the students’ background, and the nature and complexity of their special needs. To make use of

the information contained in text, I implement newly developed techniques in computational text

analysis and natural language processing (NLP) adapted to a causal framework (Gentzkow, Kelly,

and Taddy, 2019; Mozer et al., 2020; Roberts, Stewart, and Nielsen, 2020; Egami et al., 2018; Keith,

Jensen, and O’Connor, 2020). Leveraging text information with methods from the small but steadily

growing literature on Double Machine Learning for ﬂexible program evaluation (see, for instance,

Chernozhukov et al. (2018); Athey and Wager (2019); Davis and Heller (2017), Knaus, Lechner,

and Strittmatter 2020), I am able to account for confounding in unprecedented detail and to plau-

sibly assume unconfoundedness for identiﬁcation of returns to programs. This study is among the

ﬁrst studies to take advantage of computational text analysis, causal inference, and Double Machine

Learning methods to evaluate education programs and returns to education.

I compare students assigned to various SpEd interventions in a pairwise manner (comparing

programs that are the most similar, from the most to the least inclusive), as well as students assigned

to SpEd interventions with students that were referred to the school psychological service for assess-

ment but not treated. I ﬁnd that, among all SpEd programs, inclusive programs pay off: ﬁrst, returns

to SpEd programs provided in mainstream education are mostly positive or null in comparison to

2

being referred but receiving no SpEd. I present evidence that targeted individual therapies (such

as speech therapy, dyslexia therapies, etc.) are effective at treating preexisting learning disabilities.

Moreover, returns to inclusive education in comparison to segregated programs are strongly positive:

students with SEN who remain in the mainstream classroom perform better at school, are more likely

to participate in the labor market and earn a 15 percentage points higher salary on average than stu-

dents with SEN segregated into small classes. By conditioning on all the information psychologists

report when assigning treatment through written records, I compare students that are similar in all

their observed characteristics. On average, I ﬁnd that estimates based on both covariates and text

information are 29% smaller in magnitude than estimates that do not leverage the text informa-

tion. Moreover, my study suggests that students with SEN who exhibit “disruptive” tendencies (e.g.,

Lazear, 2001; Carrell, Hoekstra, and Kuka, 2018), i.e., students with social and emotional problems,

psychological problems, and nonnative speakers with SEN, are the students who would beneﬁt the

most from semi-segregation in comparison to inclusion. Finally, my results highlight that the magni-

tude of returns vary greatly with the type of program, and thus that sound evaluation of SpEd should

account for program speciﬁcities.

Getting insights from the literature on statistical treatment rules (e.g., Kitagawa and Tetenov,

2018; Manski, 2004), I further explore optimal policy allocations to inclusive and segregated SpEd

programs and make placement recommendations to reach higher aggregate school performance and

improve on labor market integration.

I propose a set of optimal policies using machine learning

algorithms (Athey and Wager, 2021; Zhou, Athey, and Wager, 2018) and compare implemented

policies with optimal policies in terms of costs and outcomes. By implementing my proposed optimal

policies, a policy maker could signiﬁcantly increase average school performance and, to a lesser

extent, labor market integration at lower overall costs. Easily implementable policies would send all

segregated students to inclusion, while more reﬁned policies suggest to keep students with social and

emotional problems as well as nonnative students with SEN in semi-segregated settings. I further

conduct welfare computations to see whether including students who were previously segregated in

the classroom would harm mainstreamed students. I integrate the ﬁndings of the quasi-experimental

study from Balestra, Eugster, and Liebert (forthcoming) using the same dataset to my analysis, and

I ﬁnd that my optimal policies would generate negligible negative effects on mainstreamed students

while signiﬁcantly increasing average school performance of the reallocated students with SEN.

The present paper contributes to the understanding of returns to SpEd programs. Most studies

investigate SpEd as a single, all-encompassing treatment intervention, and compare students in SpEd

with students outside of SpEd. Given that SpEd is usually a multifaceted intervention with programs

that differ in quality and intensity, these studies fail to provide insights into the effectiveness of
different types of programs.5 Studies have shown moderate effectiveness of SpEd considered as a

single program on the academic performance of SEN students (Schwartz, Hopkins, and Stiefel, 2021;
Keslair, Maurin, and McNally, 2012; Harrison et al., 2013; Lavy and Schlosser, 2005)6 and positive

5As exceptions, Lavy and Schlosser (2005) and Lovett et al. (2017) focus on targeted remedial education only, and

Blachman et al. (2014) look at reading remediation.

6Scruggs et al. (2010) conduct a meta-analysis and ﬁnd overall positive effects of remediation interventions for stu-
dents with disabilities. SpEd has been shown to have negative or no effects on reading skills, mathematics skills and
behavior of SEN students in comparison to non-SEN students in the US (Morgan et al., 2010; Dempsey, Valentine, and

3

returns for SEN students with learning and/or emotional disabilities (Hanushek, Kain, and Rivkin,

2002). In addition, evidence on the effects of SpEd on high-school graduation rates are found to be
both positive (Ballis and Heath, forthcoming) and negative.7 Studies on the effects of SpEd on labor

market integration are quasi nonexistent (to the exception of McGee, 2011; Kirjavainen, Pulkkinen,

and Jahnukainen, 2016). To my knowledge, this is the ﬁrst study that assesses short- and long-term

returns to SpEd programs at a granular level by ordering SpEd interventions according to their scope

and intensity.

Moreover, this study expands on insights from the literature about the factors inﬂuencing the

emergence of special needs and leading to referrals to SpEd interventions. Many studies highlight

the fact that assignment to programs depends heavily on confounders that together inﬂuence iden-

tiﬁcation of SEN, assignment to treatment, and the investigated outcomes. For instance, students

from non-resilient, low-SES family backgrounds are more likely to develop SEN and to be referred

to SpEd (Case, Lubotsky, and Paxson, 2002; Currie and Stabile, 2003; Smith, 2009; Kvande et al.,

2018). Other factors that inﬂuence referrals include starting school earlier (Balestra, Eugster, and

Liebert, 2020; Elder, 2010), racial or ethnic background (Elder et al., 2021) or suspicion of intellec-

tual giftedness (Balestra, Sallin, and Wolter, forthcoming). In this paper, I am able to explore many

of these confounders by leveraging individual written psychological records and background infor-

mation about each student with SEN. Furthermore, I use all this information not only to investigate

heterogeneities in returns to programs, but also to devise placement rules that are welfare increasing

for all students, and cost-reducing for school ofﬁcials.

Lastly, this study contributes to investigations of the effects of inclusion in comparison to seg-

regation. On the one hand, existing research offers inconclusive results on the short-term and long-

term impacts of inclusion for SEN students (Freeman and Alkin, 2000; Cole, Waldron, and Majd,

2004; Sermier-Dessemontet, Benoit, and Bless, 2011; Daniel and King, 1997; Peetsma et al., 2001;
Eckhart et al., 2011)8 On the other hand, inclusion is reported to have negative effects on peers

without SEN in the mainstream classroom (Balestra, Eugster, and Liebert, forthcoming; Rangvid,

2019; Fletcher, 2009). This study bridges the gap between these two strands of literature by investi-

gating in more detail the short-term and long-term impacts of inclusion from the perspective of SEN

students, and by investigating optimal inclusive policy rules.

Colyvas, 2016). Similar results are documented for Norway (Kvande et al., 2018; Lekhal, 2018), but with positive im-
pact on math skills development. Early preschool SpEd has also been shown to have little to no effects on reading and
mathematics skills (Sullivan and Field, 2013; Kohli et al., 2015; Judge and Watson, 2011; Morgan, Farkas, and Wu, 2009).
7McGee (2011) for the US and Kirjavainen, Pulkkinen, and Jahnukainen (2016) for Finland report that SEN students
have a higher high-school graduation rate than their cognitively equivalent non-SEN peers due to more lenient graduation
rules, but lower college enrollment, lower employment rates, and lower wages. Blachman et al. (2014) document that
the effects of a randomized reading intervention fade out 10 years after completion of the program.

8In comparison to segregated SEN students, SEN students in inclusive education perform as well in mathematics
and even better in literacy (Sermier-Dessemontet, Benoit, and Bless, 2011), exhibit lower motivation but better math
performance (Peetsma et al., 2001). However, Daniel and King (1997) ﬁnd that mainstreamed students with SEN generate
more behavioral disruptions, exhibit lower self-esteem, and marginally improve in academic performance. Eckhart et al.
(2011) reports that segregated students are less likely to be integrated in the job market and have smaller social networks
than students in inclusive environments. The attitude of teachers towards inclusion is also a major inﬂuential factor of
success for inclusive schooling (Avramidis and Norwich, 2002; De Boer, Pijl, and Minnaert, 2011).

4

2 Background and Data

2.1 Institutional background: special education programs

The implementation of SpEd policies in Switzerland is conducted independently by each Swiss

federal state (“canton”). To foster inclusion, the Swiss Equality Act for People with Disabilities (2004)

made the equality of access to education for SEN students a priority, and emphasized the promo-

tion of inclusion of SEN students in the main classroom rather than segregation. Thus, inclusion is

promoted as the main SpEd intervention tool (Wolter and Kull, 2006), and as a direct substitute for

segregation in small special needs classrooms (semi-segregation) (Häfeli and Walther-Müller, 2005).

As a result, the share of students sent to segregated schooling has decreased since the Equality Act,

while the share of students sent to inclusive schooling has increased. According to the European

Agency Statistics on Inclusive Education (EASIE, 2014, 2018), the enrollment rate in mainstream

education in Switzerland is similar to other European countries. However, the share of segregated

Swiss students with SEN varies substantially across Swiss cantons. The Canton of St. Gallen ranked

5th as the canton with the most segregated SEN students (3.33% of the overall student population
vs. 1.85% in Switzerland) in 2010.9

This study focuses on students enrolled in SpEd during their mandatory schooling in the Swiss

Canton of St. Gallen (around 6% of the Swiss population). The St. Gallen Ministry of Education
deﬁnes a catalogue of SpEd measures and programs for SEN children.10 These measures are coun-

seling, academic support, individual therapies, inclusion, semi-segregation, and full segregation.

Counseling refers to traditional visits to a therapist or a counselor in which the student’s difﬁculties

in school or at home are discussed. It is mostly offered by therapists outside of the School Psycho-

logical Service (SPS). Academic support refers to tutoring for children needing additional support

for their homework or for learning.

Individual therapies are one-to-one or small group sessions;

they typically take place during class time, and they target particular learning disabilities for which

a particular treatment is required (such as speech therapy, dyslexia or dyscalculia therapy). The

inclusion measure refers to all students who received individual inclusive SpEd. These students are

provided adapted and goal-oriented complementary teaching by a SpEd teacher who works in the

main classroom alongside the main teacher. Semi-segregation refers to small classes (with 10 to 15

students) within the main school. Both inclusive SpEd and semi-segregation are targeted at students

with learning and social disabilities, special diagnoses (such as autism, dyslexia, etc.) as well as

students who fall behind the class schedule. Full segregation refers to schooling in special schools

and targets students for whom mainstream schooling is too challenging (e.g., students with severe

disabilities or students suffering from physical impairments such as deafness). Finally, I also observe

students who were referred to the SPS for diagnosis but who were not assigned to any treatment

(“No placement”).

[Insert Figure 1 here]

9Canton St. Gallen, Nachtrag zum Volkschulgesetz 2013, p.38.
10As elaborated in the ofﬁcial document “Kantonales Konzept fördernde Massnahmen” in 2006 by the Canton of St.
Gallen, the basic offer includes “SE, speech therapy, rhythm therapy, psychomotor therapy, therapy for dyslexia and dyscal-
culia, tutoring, special classes”. I describe all the therapies given in the canton of St. Gallen in Table C.1.

5

Figure 1 displays the newly assigned SpEd interventions in St. Gallen per year. The most fre-

quently assigned therapies are individual therapies. The number of students newly assigned to inclu-

sive SpEd increased from around 6% of students referred to the SPS in 1998 to around 30% in 2010,

whereas the number of students assigned to small classes steadily decreased (from 12.4% to around

5%). These ﬁgures reﬂect the actual number of students with SEN being taught in a semi-segregated

setting at the primary level (“stocks”), which dropped from 9.17% in 1999 to 6.4% of all students

with SEN in 2009, as documented by the ofﬁcial placement register data.

The St. Gallen setting offers many advantages to estimate returns to SpEd programs. First, the

diagnosis and SpEd placement decision of students with SEN is conducted by the School Psycho-

logical Service, which is an external and independent administrative entity. Therefore, diagnoses

and placement decisions are made by SPS psychologists, rather than by parents, teachers, or school

administrators. The SPS is organized in eight regional ofﬁces. The main task of the SPS is to inde-

pendently provide diagnoses of learning disabilities, behavioral difﬁculties, and developmental deﬁ-

ciencies. It assigns therapies and treatments, and offers counseling to students, parents and teachers.

As part of the diagnoses, an intelligence test (IQ test) is often administered. After the ﬁrst consulta-

tion, the caseworker, in agreement with parents and teachers, assigns the student to the necessary

program. For most students (about nine out of ten), services of the SPS are requested directly by the
teacher and/or school ofﬁcial, but some requests are also ﬁled by the parents or the child’s medical
doctor. Most of the requests to the SPS are made when the student is in Kindergarten/Preschool (see
Figure C.2).11

[Insert Figure 2 here]

Second, each school is in charge of setting up their own SpEd policies. This offers valuable

variation in program assignment within years across schools which is not explained by the students’

characteristics. Schools choose, on a yearly basis, which programs to offer among the programs in

the catalogue of interventions provided by the Canton. Schools vary substantially in the therapies

they offer, as well as in the extent to which they implement inclusive schooling. Figure 2 shows

the distribution of deviations in the assignment rate of students assigned to each SpEd program per

school-year from the mean year inclusion assignment rate for the population of students with SEN.

The ﬁgure shows that there is substantial variation in assignment to each program across schools

within the same year, and that this variation in program assignment is not fully explained by students’

and schools’ characteristics such as socio-economic score and per-student expenditure (regression-

adjusted mean assignment). For instance, some schools have a probability to assign students to

inclusion which is more than 50 percentage points higher than the mean assignment to inclusion in

the same year. This is valuable information, especially given that students in St. Gallen are assigned

to schools on the sole basis of their location of residence. Parents and students must comply with
the assignment to the treatment offered by the school.12

11The end of Kindergarten is the moment when teachers decide whether the student is ready for primary school or
whether the student needs to take a bridge year. This is in line with Greminger, Tarnutzer, and Venetz (2005), who report
that most segregation decisions happen in Kindergarten in Switzerland.

12This strict assignment procedure is thoroughly implemented, such that parents have no say about their child’s school
other than moving permanently to a different municipality or enrolling their students in a private school. Private schooling

6

Third, due to the centralized administration and monitoring of SpEd interventions, programs

are similar across schools and use comparable educational technology. Moreover, schools have no

real budget constraints when it comes to SpEd programs. This prevents strategic program assignment

against additional budget, as documented for some US States (e.g., Cullen, 2003). Schools receive

a target amount of therapy-hours from the cantonal central administration, which is calculated on
the basis of their “socio-economic score”.13 Within this given amount of therapy-hours, schools are

free to allocate SpEd programs according to their preferred strategy. Schools are obliged to satisfy

demand, and often offer more hours than the number of allocated hours. Schools also have a duty

to report yearly statistics on the number of SpEd hours offered.

2.2 Data: main variables and summary statistics

The main data source on students in SpEd are the administrative records from the SPS, academic

test scores, data on labor market integration provided by the Swiss Social Security Administration

(SSA), and data on schools’ statistics about SpEd (“Pensenpool”). Figure 3 summarizes the dataset

structure and gives an overview of the cohorts represented in the sample. In what follows, I discuss

in detail each element of the ﬁgure.

[Insert Figure 3 here]

Administrative records from the SPS The administrative records from the SPS provide informa-
tion on all students referred to the SPS for a clariﬁcation/diagnosis interview between 1998 and

2012. They contain information about the student’s characteristics, the therapy assigned, the num-

ber of visits to the SPS, and the entirety of the psychological records written by the caseworker. All

summary statistics are reported in Table 1, and more detailed statistics per treatment status are given
in Table C.3 (columns are ordered from the most inclusive program to the least inclusive program).14

[Insert Table 1 here]

Students’ characteristics are presented in Panel A of Table 1. Forty percent of students in the

whole sample are female, and 13% do not have German as their mother tongue. The IQ score is

available for 73% of the students, mostly for students in later years as IQ testing at the SPS has

become more systematic over the years. At an average of 95, sample IQ scores for SEN students are

slightly lower than the population average of 100. Students had on average 10.6 contacts with the

SPS, and the number of contacts is strongly positively correlated with the intensity of the program

(more contacts are needed for students in segregated programs). Age at ﬁrst registration is almost 9

remains uncommon in Switzerland: in 2014, around 95% of students attend public-funded schools of their community of
residence (Wolter and Kull, 2014).

13The school socio-economic score is based on the following four indicators: ratio of foreigners with citizenship of
non-German-speaking countries in the population group of 5-14-year-olds, share of unemployed in the 15-64-year-old
permanent resident population, ratio of 5-14-year-olds dependent on social assistance to the 5-14-year-old population,
quota of low-income households with 0-13-year-old children. It is provided by Competence Center for Statistics within
the Department of Economic Affairs of the Canton of St. Gallen.

14Table C.4 in the Appendix gives the Standardized Mean Difference across all treatment states for all covariates.

7

on average, which coincides with the start of grading for students attending second grade. The (not

mutually exclusive) reasons for referral most commonly mentioned are performance and learning

problems (89%), and social or emotional problems (21%). Sixty-six percent of all decisions for

referrals are made by the teachers together with the parents of the child. Around 13% of students

were enrolled in bridge years between Kindergarten and primary school because of slow development

or poor school readiness.

The identiﬁcation of returns to SpEd in this paper relies mostly on the text contained in the

student-level psychological records written by caseworkers. The valuable information contained in

the text records makes the assignment process observable. For each visit to the SPS, the caseworker

in charge of the student documents the visit, reports the discussion, and gives a recommendation

for SpEd placement. Most comments are quite detailed and offer a comprehensive picture of the

problems addressed in the discussion, such as family background, psychological issues, the diagnoses

of the student, and the particularities of the case.

To be used in estimation, text records must be reduced to some usable representation. In the

context of this study, psychological text records are modeled with the intention of learning about the

assignment process and adjusting for confounding, while remaining as low dimensional as possible

to avoid problems of support and of computational complexity. The text representations should
map concepts of the students’ mental health, learning/behavioral disabilities, and other background

information as well as possible; they should also account for the context of words and offer enough

nuance to adequately represent the situation of each student. Using text for the purpose of causal

analysis to adjust for confounding is a recent enterprise and depends heavily on the empirical setting:

there is so far no established standard practice (see relevant discussions in Mozer et al., 2020; Weld

et al., 2020; Keith, Jensen, and O’Connor, 2020; Roberts, Stewart, and Nielsen, 2020; Egami et al.,

2018).

[Insert Table 2 here]

Table 2 summarizes the computational apparatus used to extract information from text. To avoid

making estimates too dependent on the choice of text information retrieval method, I extract informa-

tion from the text using ﬁve different state-of-the-art NLP methods and nine different speciﬁcations:

the term-document matrix (TDM) representation, or “bag-of-words” (see, for instance, Mozer et al.,

2020); structural topic modeling and topical inverse regression matching, which learn topics and

context of words in a semi-supervised manner (Roberts, Stewart, and Airoldi, 2016; Roberts, Stew-

art, and Nielsen, 2020; Blei, Ng, and Jordan, 2003); neural network embeddings such as Word2Vec

in which words are embedded in a lower-dimensional space (Mikolov et al., 2013); dictionary rep-

resentations that map professional diagnoses. For each method, the ﬁnal dimension of the text

representation matrix is presented. The features contained in the representation matrix are subse-

quently used as controls for estimation of treatment effects. I discuss how I implement each of these

methods and provide descriptive statistics for each method in Appendix Section A.

8

Program assignment SpEd programs of interest are deﬁned as the programs ﬁguring in the can-

tonal catalogue of measures mentioned in Table C.1. Around 37% of the students were given in-

dividual, one-to-one therapy only, such as speech therapy, dyslexia therapy, or dyscalculia therapy.

Thirteen percent of all students are placed in inclusive settings, around 16% in segregated settings

(8% in semi segregation and 8% in full segregation). Some students (around 5%) were referred by

their teachers to the SPS but did not receive any SpEd intervention. These students form an inter-

esting comparison group, since they are students who raised strong suspicion for SpEd referral but

who do not receive SpEd placement after all. From the notes, I know that most of these students

have been received and assessed by a caseworker who in turn decided that no further intervention

was needed.

Even though SpEd interventions are deﬁned at the central level, program effectiveness might

vary with schools’ characteristics. To account for this, I bring in statistics about schools obtained from

the Pensenpool data of the Ministry of Education. I use four measures about the school population

(share of students with SEN, share of foreign students, total school population, urban or rural school).

Moreover, I use two measures of educational inputs previously used in the literature: standardized
per-student spending (e.g., Jackson, Johnson, and Persico, 2016)15, and the “socio-economic score”,

introduced above, which measures the school’s socio-economic composition (e.g., Angrist and Lang,

2004). These school-level statistics are measured in the year in which students with SEN are assigned

to treatment (with the exception of per-student spending, which is only measured in 2017). Table C.3

shows that school characteristics are rather well balanced across all treatments, with the exception

of inclusion and semi-segregation. Schools implementing semi-segregation tend to be more urban,

larger, and with a higher share of foreign students. However, schools offering inclusion and schools

offering semi-segregation overlap in their characteristics, as can be seen in Figure C.1.

Outcomes: test scores and labor-market integration I measure different outcomes to capture

school achievement as well as labor market integration. Outcomes are reported in Panel D of Table 1.

For academic performance, I use test scores from the “Stellwerk8” standardized test (SW8) taken

in grade 8, which give the individual academic achievement for the entire population of students

enrolled in 8th grade during the years 2008 to 2017. This test is mandatory for all students with SEN

(except for students in fully segregated settings) and is the same in all schools. It is computer-based,

and automatically adapts the difﬁculty of questions to the ability and knowledge revealed by the

student in the previous questions. It tests core knowledge of mathematics, language (German), and,

depending on the track, other subjects. I focus on the composite score in German and Math, which are

compulsory subjects for all students. Test scores range between 0 and 1,000 (1,000 being the best),

and are standardized by school-year for easier interpretation and comparison. The performance

on the test is important both for students, who will use the test scores when choosing their post-

compulsory education, and for teachers, whose relative performance can be reﬂected in the rate of

15The data on spending per primary school students comes from the ofﬁcial accounts published by municipalities at
the end of the ﬁscal year. According to the data, municipalities spend on average 10,160 Swiss Francs (approximately
11,140 USD) per primary school student. This ﬁgure is higher than the OECD average (8,733 USD) but comparable to the
corresponding ﬁgure in the U.S. (11,319 USD), as the OECD documents (OECD, 2017).

9

success of their students. As students with SEN in fully segregated settings are not required to take

the test and can choose to opt out, I create a test-taking indicator variable to account for attrition.

Data on labor market integration are provided by the Swiss Social Security Administration (SSA)

for the years 2007 to 2016, and contain the individual history of wages, whether the individual has

beneﬁted from a disability insurance status (DI), and whether the individual has requested unem-

ployment insurance. I compute the income as the last income recorded standardized over birth years.

This gives the average relative position of individual income per cohort and per year, which accounts
for cohort as well as year effects.16 Income is deﬁned as income from one’s own labor, namely net

of DI and unemployment beneﬁts. Around 8% of the sample have claimed disability insurance, and

23% have claimed unemployment insurance.

Sample restrictions Some restrictions are imposed on the data (details can be found in Table C.2).

I discard students who received therapies or measures that are not offered by the schools (for in-

stance, private tutoring). Moreover, I conservatively discard students who received so-called sec-
ondary “supportive measures” only17, and students who received more than one treatment. This

ensures that multiple inﬂuences of different treatments are not confounding the main treatment.

Cohorts registered in the school data and cohorts registered in the SSA data do not perfectly

overlap (see the red arrows in Figure 3). Since the SW8 test was given in years 2008 to 2017, and

given that some cohorts were not exposed to the test, I investigate subsamples for each outcome

separately. Subsample sizes are reported in Panel E of Table 1. While 78% of the sample were in

cohorts subject to the SW8 test, 67% are from cohorts with no test but with recorded labor market

outcomes. Finally, 46% of observations are observed in both subsamples. Attrition is only due to

cohort variation, and I conduct attrition analyses in my robustness checks to show that attrition is

not a problem for my main results.

3 Empirical strategy

A plausible causal estimation of returns to SpEd programs requires comparing the academic

and labor outcomes of students who are similar in all the characteristics which jointly inﬂuence

their outcomes and their assignment to SpEd programs. In the absence of a randomized experiment

in which students are randomly assigned to programs, I leverage the information contained in the

psychological reports, and I model the assignment process with a unusually exclusive and detailed

perspective. Furthermore, I make implicit use of the exogenous variation in treatment assignment

within years across schools to identify effects of SpEd programs.

16I also checked other income deﬁnitions, such as last monthly income recorded standardized over birth years. Results

are robust across these alternative income deﬁnitions.

17These measures include tutoring, language classes for students with an immigration background, and gifted educa-
tion. For details, see the “Sonderpädagogik-Konzept” of the Canton of St. Gallen, available on the website of the St. Gallen
schools. Students receiving supportive measures in addition to the main measures are, however, kept in the dataset.

10

3.1 Deﬁnition

I compare the outcomes of students assigned to various SpEd interventions in a pairwise manner

(from most to least inclusive interventions), as well as students assigned to SpEd interventions with

students that were referred to the SPS but who were not treated. I follow a multivalued treatment

framework in observational studies (Imbens, 2000; Lechner, 2001), in which I compare program d
with program d (cid:48) for student i. More precisely, I denote by d the received treatment by student i
among the set of mutually exclusive seven programs D. The observed outcome given i’s assigned
for all d ∈ D.
therapy is Yi
I further denote as X a set of pre-treatment variables, and as Z the subset of X that contains the
variables used to conduct heterogeneity analysis. The generalized propensity score is deﬁned as

i , and the potential outcome for each individual is Y d

d=1 1(Di

= d)Y d

= (cid:80)D

i

pd

(x) = P(Di

= d|X i

= x), namely the conditional probability of receiving each treatment.

= E[Y d
i

I am interested in the following estimands. The ﬁrst is the average potential outcome (APO)
]. It is the average outcome for the whole population as if
under each treatment d, APOd
it was assigned to program d. This corresponds to the “value” of each program. The second is the
], which represents the effect of treatment
pairwise Average Treatment Effect ATEd,d(cid:48) = E[Y d
i
d vs treatment d (cid:48) as if everyone in the population was observed under both treatment states. Since
some treatments might not be available for the whole population (for instance, full segregation is

− Y d (cid:48)
i

not a feasible intervention for all SEN students), the ATE is not interesting for all treatment pairs.

I thus compare treatment effects for the subpopulation actually observed in a given program using
the Average Treatment Effect on the Treated ATETd,d (cid:48) = E[Y d
|D = d]. Comparing the ATE and
i
the ATET gives valuable insights about the program assignment process: a large difference between

− Y d(cid:48)
i

the two estimates might underline effect heterogeneity or nonrandom assignment into programs.

Finally, I look at Conditional Average Treatment Effects (CATEs).

I consider two different cases

of CATEs: ﬁrst, Group Average Treatment Effects (GATEs) give the ATEs for predeﬁned and policy
∈ Z. For instance, I
relevant groups of students, i.e. GATEd,d (cid:48)(z) = E[Y d
i
investigate whether treatment effects are heterogeneous for students with and without behavioral

= z] where Zi

− Y d(cid:48)
i

|Zi

problems. Second, I look at Individual Average Treatment Effects (IATEs) for ATEs at the most

granular, individual level. Instead of focusing on groups, IATEs include all observed confounders
∈ X (i.e.
as heterogeneity variables. This is expressed as IATEd,d(cid:48)(z) = E[Y d
i
a vector of observed pre-treatment variables).

= x], where X i

− Y d(cid:48)
i

|X i

3.2 Identiﬁcation

The previous section presented the estimands of interest as potential outcomes. As each student

is only observed in one program, only one potential outcome per student is observable and the other

potential outcomes are latent. Therefore, the estimands of interest are not identiﬁed unless the fol-

lowing standard assumptions hold (Imbens and Rubin, 2015). The ﬁrst key identifying assumption is

unconfoundedness, i.e. that the vector of observed pre-treatment covariates X i contains all the fea-
= x, ∀x ∈ χ, ∀d ∈ D. The
tures that jointly inﬂuence treatment and potential outcomes Y d
plausibility of this assumption is justiﬁed by the use of text information: the information extracted

= Di
i |

|X i

from the text delivers a unique and detailed overview of both pre-treatment information relevant for

11

treatment assignment and details on the treatment assignment itself. To support this assumption,

I show that text brings additional information which is richer than the information contained only

in covariates not extracted from text. Section A in the Appendix, and more precisely Figure A.1,

Figure A.2, Figure A.3, and Figure A.4, provide evidence that the text delivers valuable additional

information which is not contained in the covariates not extracted from text. These ﬁgures also

show how text information is related to treatment assignment. In addition to the use of text, un-

confoundedness is particularly plausible in my setting given the unexplained variation in treatment

assignment within years across schools.

The second identifying assumption states that confounders are exogenous, i.e. confounding
variables in X (and in Z) are not inﬂuenced by the treatment in a way which is related to the out-
comes. This assumption would be violated if covariates are measured after treatment assignment.

Non-text covariates are measured before treatment assignment, but text covariates require more

scrutiny. To avoid text-induced post-treatment bias, I only use records written before the treatment

assignment, thereby removing therapy evaluations and reports about the progress of the student. I

also strip out of the text all mentions or discussions of interventions per se. The exogeneity assump-

tion would also be violated if referrals to the SPS and treatment assignment would be done based on

expected treatment returns, i.e. teachers would refer only the students who are expected to beneﬁt

from SpEd to the SPS, and psychologists would be perfectly able to predict the outcomes from treat-

ment assignment. On the one hand, this problem is likely mitigated given that SPS centers as well as

the organization of SpEd in St. Gallen are centralized, and that there is no budgetary constraints for

SpEd. On the other hand, psychologists are not able to perfectly predict outcomes given treatment,

since not all treatments are available in all schools and in all years.

Third, overlap (or common support) 0 < pd

(x) < 1, ∀x ∈ χ, ∀d ∈ D ensures that SEN students
can be compared at all values of X for a given treatment effect. Because of the variation offered

by the school choices of supplied interventions, I can observe students with similar characteristics

who were offered different interventions. To make this assumption even more plausible, I compare

only interventions that are closest in terms of intensity and in terms of the special needs they target.

Moreover, to deal with potential problems of overlap, I present effects for the overlap population in

the Appendix B. Finally, lack of overlap is problematic for students assigned to fully segregated SpEd

programs, since this particular population of SEN students exhibits more severe mental and learning

disabilities than other SEN students. This will be kept in mind in the discussion of the results.

Finally, assignment to a particular SpEd program does not generate spillover effects (SUTVA),
). There are mainly two cases in which SUTVA could be violated. First, the presence of
= Yi

i.e. Yi
a student with SEN in a program might generate spillover effects. I estimate total effects of programs

(Di

on the population of SEN students only (and not on the mainstream population). In other words,
my estimates incorporate potential classroom spillovers.18 Second, if therapies are budgeted at the

school level, sending one student to therapy might reduce available resources for other SEN students

who also need therapy. This is not a concern in this setting. As mentioned above, schools in St. Gallen

18Note that there is no strategic assignment of SEN students to mainstream classrooms in St. Gallen (see Balestra,

Sallin, and Wolter, forthcoming; Balestra, Eugster, and Liebert, forthcoming).

12

do not engage in strategic therapy assignment against additional budget (e.g., Cullen, 2003), as there

are no real budget constraints when it comes to SpEd.

Under these assumptions, the estimands of interest are identiﬁed using the “augmented” weighted

d,X i

estimator (AIPW) score Γ h
ciﬁc to each potential treatment, µ(d, x) = E[Yi
|Di
by some function of the treatment probability pd
Li and Li (2019), the general form of this estimator is:

. This score combines the conditional expectations of the outcome Y spe-
= d, X i
= x] with the outcome residual reweighed
(x). Following the “balancing weights” notation of

Γ h(d, X i

) = µ(d, x)h(x) + 1(Di

= d)(Yi

− µ(d, x))ω

(x),

d

(1)

(x) = h(x)/pd

(x),
The “tilting function” h(x) deﬁnes the target population as a function of the propensity score pd
and ω
(x).19 When the population of interest is the whole population, as in the ATE,
the tilting function h(x) is 1 and the estimator is doubly robust (Robins, Rotnitzky, and Zhao, 1994,
1995).20

d

All estimands of interest mentioned above are identiﬁed as follows:

APOd

= E[Γ h(d, X i
= E[Γ h(d, X i
ATEd,d (cid:48)
ATETd,d (cid:48) = E[Γ h(d, X i
= E[Γ h(d, X i

GATEd,d (cid:48),z

)],

h(x) = 1

) − Γ h(d

) − Γ h(d

) − Γ h(d

(cid:48)

(cid:48)

(cid:48)

, X i

, X i

, X i

)],
)|Di
)|Zi

h(x) = 1
= d], h(x) = pd (cid:48)(x)
h(x) = 1
= z],

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

The APO Γ h(d, X i
) for the ATE score takes h(x) = 1 since it applies to the whole population. The
estimand for the ATET takes h(x) = pd(cid:48)(x) as it applies to the population of the treated. Note that,
in my main speciﬁcations, I do not explicitly model the variation in assignment rate across schools

within years. These variations contribute to the plausibility of the four assumptions presented above.

However, I estimate an IV speciﬁcation with the within year across school variation in program

assignment rate as an instrument in Appendix Section B.4.

3.3 Estimation with Double Machine Learning

The estimation procedure is represented in the stylized workﬂow of Figure 4. In a ﬁrst step, text

representations are extracted from an independent, held-out sample in order to avoid risks of overﬁt-

ting, and are subsequently predicted on the main sample. This ensures that text representations are

meaningful across the whole dataset. Once text representations are predicted on the main sample,

K-fold cross-ﬁtting (see Chernozhukov et al., 2018) is used to estimate the two nuisance param-
(x) (estimated
eters of interest ˆµ(d, x) (estimated conditional expectation of the outcome) and ˆpd
propensity score) using the covariates X presented in Panel A of Table 1 as well as text covariates.

19Note that ω can accommodate weights for different subpopulations as additional “balancing weights” schemes, such

as trimming weights or matching weights (Li, Morgan, and Zaslavsky, 2018; Li and Li, 2019).

20The score is doubly robust when it is still consistent if the propensity score or the outcome equation are misspeciﬁed.
For more details on the APO score and the double robustness properties, see Glynn and Quinn (2010) for an intuitive
introduction and Knaus (2021) for DML.

13

Succinctly, the procedure works as follows: (i) the sample is randomly split in K folds of equal size,
(ii) one fold is left out, and the remaining K − 1 folds are used to train machine learning models to
(x) and ˆµ(d, x) on the
estimate the nuisance parameters. These models (iii) are used to predict ˆpd
left-out Kth fold, and (iv) the procedure is repeated such that each fold is left out once. Extracting

text representations from an independent sample requires the availability of large amount of data,

which is not always available. When not available, text representations can be retrieved alongside
the training of nuisance functions within each K − 1 folds.21 In this application, text representations

are extracted from the City of St. Gallen sample in the case of Word2Vec and the dictionary. Topics
for STM and TIRM are extracted within each K − 1 folds.

[Insert Figure 4 here]

The nuisance parameters are then combined to build, on each left-out fold, the doubly-robust

(DR) score as:

ˆΓ h=1
i,d

= ˆµ(d, X i

) +

1(Di

= d)(Yi
ˆpd

(X i

− ˆµ(d, X i
)

))

.

(6)

Since no observation is used to estimate its own nuisance parameter, cross-ﬁtting reduces the risk

of overﬁtting. I estimate the nuisance parameters with a combination of many methods through an

ensemble learner (Van der Laan, Polley, and Hubbard, 2007): I predict the nuisance parameters with

three ML methods (Lasso, Elastic Net and Random Forest) and with 11 different text representations

on top of main covariates. This results in 33 different estimations per fold. I obtain the weights

of the ensemble learner by cross-validating the out-of-sample MSE of each speciﬁcation and use a

weighted combination of the 5 most predictive speciﬁcations in the ﬁnal score.

From the score of the APO deﬁned in Equation (6), the ATE is constructed as the mean of the
i,d(cid:48) . For the

difference between the APO scores for the treatments of interest, i.e. (cid:212)ATEi,d,d (cid:48) = ˆΓ h=1
i,d
=d (cid:48))(Yi
− ˆµ
ˆpd

ATET, the doubly-robust score for (cid:214)ATETi,d,d (cid:48) is
where
/N (Farrell, 2015). For point estimates of the APO, ATE and ATET, I take
ˆpd
the means of the different estimands and rely on single-sample t−tests for statistical inference.22

= P[D = d] = Nd

=d)(Yi
ˆpd

)
(X i
)
ˆpd(cid:48) (X i

− ˆΓ h=1

(cid:149) 1(Di

− ˆpd

d(cid:48) (X i

d(cid:48) (X i

1(Di

− ˆµ

(cid:152)

))

))

The GATEs are estimated by taking the conditional mean of the (cid:212)ATEi,d,d (cid:48) over groups determined by
pretreatment variables Zi, i.e. by regressing the score (cid:212)ATEi,d,d(cid:48) on the group variables of interest and
using standard heteroscedasticity robust standard errors (following Semenova and Chernozhukov,

2021). To assess the effect heterogeneity along a continuous variable Zi, Zimmert and Lechner
(2019) and Fan et al. (2020) propose to regress the individual score of (cid:212)ATEi,d,d (cid:48) on Zi with a kernel
regression and standard inference for nonparametric regression. I estimate second-order Gaussian

21For each fold, the model used for text representation is trained on the K − 1 training folds and is in turn used as a
set of covariates to train the predictive model for the propensity score or the outcome. In this case, text representations
are discovered in each K − 1 fold and thus are fold-dependent. They cannot be compared to text representations in other
folds, and cannot be used as covariates of interest in the set Z. To reduce computing times, the vocabulary (the set of
tokens) is extracted for the whole dataset before cross-ﬁtting.

22This is possible without taking into account the fact that nuisance parameters are estimated in the ﬁrst place if
the nuisance parameters estimators are consistent at a relatively fast rate, asymptotically normal and semiparametrically
efﬁcient (Chernozhukov et al., 2018).

14

kernel functions and choose the 0.9 cross-validated bandwidth, as recommended by Zimmert and

Lechner (2019). Finally, I estimate IATEs by using a DR-learner, i.e. I train an ensemble learner to
predict the individual ATE score (cid:212)ATEi,d,d (cid:48) out-of-sample (see Kennedy, 2020; Knaus, 2021).23

Alongside its double-robustness property, the use of Double Machine Learning (DML) and of

the AIPW score has many advantages when working with text. First, it allows for leveraging text

representations both in the propensity score (as in Mozer et al., 2020; Roberts, Stewart, and Nielsen,

2020) and in the outcome equation, which reduces problems of extreme propensity score accuracy
(Weld et al., 2020) and overcomes difﬁculties of matching on both covariates and text.24 Second,

by not relying on one particular estimation method but combining many of them in an ensemble

learner, I make full use of different ML methods and use the ones that work best with each text

representation. This also mitigates potential misspeciﬁcation of the text and covariate functional
forms.25

4 Results: returns to special education programs

In this section, I present different sets of main results: ﬁrst, I present the pairwise effects for

inclusive SpEd interventions (i.e., interventions that are provided in the mainstream school envi-

ronment). Second, I focus more speciﬁcally on the effect of inclusion vs. semi-segregation. Third,

in order to relate to existing literature, I look at the “extensive margin” of SpEd interventions and

assess the effect of being assigned to a program vs. being assigned to no program at all. This set of

results corresponds to the effect traditionally estimated in the literature. Fourth, I conduct analyses

of the heterogeneous effect of inclusion. Finally, I perform a series of further analyses and robustness

checks.

4.1 Returns to Special Education programs in inclusive school settings

I ﬁrst present, in Figure 5, returns to SpEd on academic performance for interventions that are

the closest in degree of severity and inclusion, and which are either provided as supportive or re-

mediation measures (counseling, academic support or tutoring, individual therapies, and inclusion)

provided in the mainstream school environment. Results read as follows: pairwise effects give the

effect for being assigned to the ﬁrst program (for instance, in the ﬁrst column, to counseling) instead

of being assigned to the second program (e.g., to no program) on academic performance (Panel a),

23I follow the following procedure: in a ﬁrst step, I predict in each fold the nuisance parameters and then compute
the individual score (cid:212)ATEi,d,d(cid:48) .
In a second step, I train an ensemble learner in the same folds to predict (cid:212)ATEi,d,d(cid:48) from
covariates X . In a third step, I use the trained ensemble learner to predict (cid:212)ATEi,d,d(cid:48) on the left-out fold. This procedure is
computationally heavier than an in-sample IATE prediction but has the advantage of avoiding overﬁtting. It is however less
computationally burdensome than the cross-ﬁtting procedure proposed by Knaus (2021), as I do not have to re-estimate,
in each fold, the text measures that need to be estimated in-sample.

24Matching algorithms for text as proposed by Mozer et al. (2020) are both computationally burdensome and difﬁcult
to implement, insofar as assessing match quality of text is difﬁcult (researchers must ﬁnd the relevant text reduction, the
relevant text distance metrics, and the relevant matching assessment tool, such as human coders).

25For instance, the Generalized Random Forest of Athey, Tibshirani, and Wager (2019) or the Modiﬁed Causal Forests of
Lechner (2019) rely exclusively on random forest, which might not perform well on a “bag-of-words” representation of
text due to the high number of sparse dummy variables.

15

probability to be unemployed (Panel b), the probability to use disability insurance (Panel c), and on

work income (Panel d). Test scores and wages are standardized with mean 0 and standard devia-

tion 1. The baseline (“No SpEd”) probability of unemployment beneﬁt recipiency is 0.19, and 0.07

for disability insurance recipiency. Effects account for all the observed confounding from covariates

(such as gender and IQ) as well as all information contained in the psychologists’ records. Point

estimates and 95% conﬁdence intervals are shown graphically, and both the effect for the whole
population (ATE) and the effect for the population of the treated (ATET) are represented.26 Pairwise

effects compare interventions that are the most similar, but that incrementally differ in their sever-

ity. For instance, the pairwise comparison of academic support and individual therapy compares

interventions which are very similar and which target issues that are overlapping. The exception

is counseling, which I compare to no treatment, as counseling does not happen in schools but with

independent psychologists.

[Insert Figure 5 here]

Results clearly show that returns to counseling are positive for academic performance. Stu-

dents who receive counseling seem to fare better academically in comparison to those who do not

receive any intervention but who exhibit similar difﬁculties and characteristics. This effect is four

times the 0.1 standard deviation effect size criterion for successful interventions suggested by Bloom

et al. (2006) and Schwartz, Hopkins, and Stiefel (2021). Academic support offers no beneﬁts but

does not harm either. Results suggest that individual therapies are more effective than tutoring to

improve academic performance. This is due most likely to the fact that students in individual ther-

apies work alone with a trained therapist who can address the roots of their learning difﬁculties

(for instance, dyscalculia or speech problems). Finally, students in inclusive intervention fare worse

than students in individual therapies. The main explanation for this difference is that inclusion is

designed to address clusters of learning, psychological, behavioral and social problems, whereas in-

dividual therapies tackle one particular (learning) disability. Dealing with multi-faceted issues might

render inclusion less effective in terms of academic achievement.

Long-term labor market effects are consistent with the effects on academic performance. As

regards the probability of being unemployed and thus of beneﬁting from unemployment insurance,

results show that counseling (-3 percentage points) and individual therapies (-10 percentage points)

have a positive effect. Students beneﬁting from academic support are more likely to be unemployed

than students with the same issues receiving no SpEd. A possible explanation for this negative la-

bor integration effect is that these students needed support to succeed in school, support which is

no longer provided once they enter the labor market. Individual therapies are more effective than

tutoring in lowering unemployment probability (-10 p.p.), and are almost as effective as inclusion.

Most pairwise effects indicate that intenser programs lead to lower probabilities of beneﬁting from

disability insurance, with individual therapies showing the strongest reduction in disability insur-

ance recipiency. The difference between inclusion and individual therapies in terms of disability

insurance recipiency is small (0.8 percentage points for the ATE, 0 for the ATET). Finally, effects in

26Regression tables with point estimates and exact conﬁdence intervals are available upon request.

16

wage returns remain small, as most pairwise effects are kept within the 0.1 standard deviation effect

size criterion for successful SpEd interventions. Only individual therapies increase expected wage

returns by almost 0.15 standard deviations in comparison to tutoring.

Figure C.3 in the Appendix shows that more severe interventions in the inclusive setting slightly

increase the probability of taking the Stellwerk8 test. Although the Stellwerk8 test does not indicate

graduation per se, these results back the idea that SpEd interventions slightly increase the probability

of attending high-stake tests close to the age of graduation, which brings nuance to the ﬁndings of

Schwartz, Hopkins, and Stiefel (2021), McGee (2011) or Kirjavainen, Pulkkinen, and Jahnukainen

(2016). Moreover, Figure C.3 shows that more serious interventions in inclusive settings are as

effective as more benign interventions in ensuring that students with SEN take the test.

Finally, in most pairwise treatment effects, the ATE does not differ signiﬁcantly from the ATET,

which suggests that effects for the population of the treated are consistent with effects for the whole

population. Noticeable differences between the ATE and the ATET persist for the pairwise compar-

isons that involve the “no treatment” category in the case of disability insurance. For these com-

parisons, the population of students who either receive counseling or academic support are more

positively affected than the whole population by the interventions.

4.2 Returns to Special Education programs in segregated school settings

I now pay closer attention to returns to inclusion and segregation.

I ﬁrst compare inclusion

and semi-segregation, which are two SpEd programs that are considered as close substitutes in St.

Gallen. Second, I compare semi-segregation with full segregation. Results presented in Figure 6

speak in favor of inclusive measures when it comes to improving academic performance: students in

inclusive settings perform on average 0.6 test score standard deviations better than students sent to

semi-segregation. The most commonly given explanation for the success of inclusion in the literature

is that mainstreaming enhances the performance of students with SEN due to a more stimulating

and demanding environment (e.g., Cole, Waldron, and Majd, 2004; Daniel and King, 1997; Peetsma

et al., 2001).

As regards labor participation, students sent to semi-segregation have a 10 percentage point

higher probability to become unemployed than SEN students kept in the mainstream classroom. If

students in inclusive settings have an average probability of being unemployed of around 11%, this

probability reaches around 20% for students in semi-segregation. These ﬁndings conﬁrm ﬁndings

from Eckhart et al. (2011), who mention the lack of social network of segregated students as a

plausible reason for lower employment. Moreover, these results might be explained by the fact

that semi-segregation is attached to a signaling penalty, i.e. semi-segregation results in an irregular

degree that considerably reduces access to regular VET programs. This is even more striking as lower

employment by semi-segregated students comes exclusively from unemployment insurance and not

from disability insurance. Estimates show a signiﬁcant wage gap: students placed in semi-segregated

settings earn on average 0.15 standard deviations less than students placed in the main classroom.

[Insert Figure 6 here]

17

Returns to full segregation in comparison to semi-segregation are grim: the seemingly positive

returns to full segregation in terms of academic performance are mostly due to selection into test

participation (see Figure C.3). Since, in the Canton of St. Gallen, only students in segregated school-

ing environments are allowed to opt out of the mandatory test, SEN students in full segregation are

between 20 to 30 percentage points less likely to take the SW8 test than students in semi-segregation.

Contrary to the case of semi-segregation, results for full segregation correspond to the ﬁndings of

McGee (2011) and Kirjavainen, Pulkkinen, and Jahnukainen (2016), who found a lower gradua-

tion rate for students in SpEd. This emphasizes the importance of making a distinction between

semi-segregation and full segregation when assessing the effects of segregation in general.

SEN students assigned to segregated schooling have a signiﬁcantly higher probability of ben-

eﬁting from disability insurance, but not of becoming unemployed. Interestingly, the channels of

(lack of) labor market participation are different for semi-segregated and fully segregated students:

whereas students in small classes are more likely to be unemployed, students in special schools are

likely to end up on disability insurance. This is not surprising in light of the information extracted

from the psychological records. Records strongly suggests that students in full segregation are stu-

dents with a higher probability of suffering from motor disabilities, developmental problems as well

as speech and language problems (see Figure A.4). Students with SEN are less likely to be sent to

full segregation for learning disabilities. As mentioned in the identiﬁcation section, results about full

segregation should be interpreted with caution, as overlap is difﬁcult to obtain for students in full

segregation.

4.3 Returns to Special Education interventions against no intervention

Most of the literature evaluating SpEd programs focuses on returns to SpEd as a single inter-

vention, without distinguishing between SpEd programs. My results clearly show that SpEd cannot

be considered as a single intervention, and that each program brings different returns.

In order

to compare my results to results presented in the existing literature, I now compare the effect of

each program with receiving no program at all. Even though all effects take into account observed

confounding from covariates and text, it is clear that the ATE and ATET between receiving an inter-

vention and not receiving one becomes more and more difﬁcult to identify as interventions become

more severe (lack of overlap). I therefore remain cautious when interpreting the effect of receiving

no intervention with receiving more intensive interventions such as semi-segregation.

[Insert Figure 7 here]

Figure 7 presents main results and shows intervention effects from the least intensive inter-

ventions (left) to the most intensive interventions (right). I represent again the ﬁrst two pairwise

effects for sake of comparison. Counseling and individual therapies have positive academic returns

(their effects exceed the threshold of 0.1 standard deviations in test score). Academic support and

inclusion bring almost zero returns (for inclusion, I measure -0.0878 for the ATE and -0.121 for the

ATET). Students with SEN in these four programs catch up on the labor market: they are less likely

to be unemployed (Figure 7b.), are less likely to end up on disability insurance (Figure 7c.), and earn

18

as much or even more than students having received no SpEd (Figure 7d.). Only academic support

does not improve chances of labor market integration.

Effects of segregation are generally negative. Segregated interventions have negative academic

returns (the negative effects of full segregation are due to attrition into test taking), and generate

negative labor market outcomes. Students with SEN in semi-segregated settings have a higher prob-

ability of becoming unemployed (around 10 percentage points), but not of receiving DI. However,

returns to semi-segregation in terms of wages are similar to receiving no SpEd at all. In contrast, stu-

dents with SEN assigned to segregated schooling have a signiﬁcantly higher probability of beneﬁting

from disability insurance, but not of becoming unemployed.

4.4 Inclusion and semi-segregation: who beneﬁts from segregation?

Is inclusion always preferable to segregation for students with SEN? Despite the (political) de-

cision to implement inclusive SpEd rather than segregated SpEd, a nuanced analysis about which

students might still beneﬁt from segregation is lacking. In this section, I explore whether average

effects of inclusion compared to semi-segregation hides treatment effect heterogeneity, and whether

semi-segregation might be beneﬁcial for some students.

I ﬁrst investigate Individual Average Treatment Effects (IATEs) for the effect of inclusion in

comparison to semi-segregation. IATEs give the treatment effects at the most granular level and are

useful to identify students with SEN who beneﬁt the most from each treatment assignment. Figure 8

reports the smoothed distribution of IATEs per outcome with the light horizontal bars depicting the
ﬁrst and ﬁfth quintiles of the IATE distribution.27 The distributions of IATEs are quite spread out,

indicating large heterogeneities in responses to semi-segregation in comparison to inclusion across

students with SEN. This is specially salient for IATEs in academic performance. For all outcomes,

some students are shown to be indifferent between semi-segregation and inclusion, or even to beneﬁt

from semi-segregation.

[Insert Figure 8 and Table 3 here]

To have an idea of which individual characteristics are the most predictive of treatment effect

size, I perform a classiﬁcation analysis in the spirit of Chernozhukov, Fernández-Val, and Luo (2018).

I group the predicted IATEs into quintiles and compare the standardized means difference (SMD) of

covariates for students with the 20% highest IATEs (ﬁfth quintile) and students with the 20% lowest

IATEs (ﬁrst quintile). For the probability of unemployment, the ﬁrst and ﬁfth quintiles are reversed

in the table, as students in the ﬁfth quintile suffer the most from semi-segregation. SMDs that are

larger than 0.2 are considered to be large (Rosenbaum and Rubin, 1985). I report covariates for

which the standardized mean difference is higher than 0.2 in at least one of the treatment effects.

Note that I do not report results for disability insurance, as average effects are almost zero.

27Note that some predicted IATEs have very large values, especially for the test scores. This is due to the fact that the
DR-learner is weighted by the inverse of the propensity scores, which do not sum to one in ﬁnite samples. Although I am
not concerned with extreme values in this case, I computed the normalized DR-learner of Knaus (2021), which mitigates
this problem. Results are very similar, and are available upon request.

19

Table 3 shows the characteristics of students in the lower and higher tails of the IATE distribu-

tions according to main covariates. Students in the highest IATE quintile for academic performance

are more likely to be nonnative students referred for social and emotional issues. Students in need

of psychological support are also more likely to beneﬁt from semi-segregation for academic perfor-

mance. This particular population of students with SEN is also more likely to beneﬁt from inclusion

in terms of employment and wages. Finally, results clearly show that the age at referral is important

for labor market outcomes: students that are referred earlier to the SPS clearly better beneﬁt from

segregation in terms of labor market integration. It is important to note that gender alone is not a

predictive characteristic of different individual effects, the exception being that female students can

expect worse wage outcomes as a result of semi-segregation.

4.4.1 Group heterogeneity in the effect of semi-segregation: the disruption hypothesis
An argument in favor of semi-segregation is that it attenuates disruption in the main classroom by

removing “disruptive” students from the mainstream environment. However, the question whether

semi-segregation is more beneﬁcial than inclusion for “disruptive” peers has not yet been answered

in the literature. Disruptive students are students who disturb their classmates and need additional

teacher time and attention (see Lazear, 2001; Carrell, Hoekstra, and Kuka, 2018). They might beneﬁt

from a segregated environment, which offers them increased teacher time and the right monitoring to

focus on academic tasks. In this section, I explore whether returns to inclusion and semi-segregation

systematically differ along pretreatment characteristics that potentially reveal disruptive behaviors:

gender, nonnative speaking, whether the student has been referred for behavioral problems, and

interaction between these groups. Disruptive behaviors are known to be prevalent in male students

(Bertrand and Pan, 2013; Lavy and Schlosser, 2011), students with behavioral problems (Fletcher,

2009), or nonnative speakers (Diette and Uwaifo Oyelere, 2014; Cho, 2012).

[Insert Figure 9 here]

Findings about the “disruptiveness” hypothesis are presented in Figure 9. Each row of the ﬁgure

gives the results of a regression where the DR score for the ATE is regressed on the group dummy.

The GATEs are represented on the x axis. Red dots indicate the treatment effect for the reference

category (those students who do not belong to the category of interest), and blue dots indicate the

treatment effect for the category of interest. The stars indicate the statistical signiﬁcance of the

difference between the two groups. For instance, the ﬁrst row of the ﬁrst column shows that the

treatment effect of semi-segregation vs. inclusion is -0.75 test score standard deviations for students

without social or emotional problems. The treatment effect is around -0.55 for students with social or

emotional problems. The difference in treatment effect between both groups is statistically signiﬁcant
(p < 0.01).

From this analysis, two main conclusions can be drawn. First, heterogeneity in effects along

disruptive characteristics are important for school performance, and also for long-term outcomes.

Major effect differences between inclusion and semi-segregation can be found for male nonnative

students with social or emotional problems. Second, results of the GATE analysis clearly show that

“disruptive” students tend to beneﬁt more from semi-segregation than non-disruptive students. How-

20

ever, my analysis does not show that “disruptive” students would perform better in semi-segregation

settings: they would still be better off in inclusive settings.

In particular, while semi-segregation

negatively impacts SEN students on average, three particular groups of SEN students seem to have

systematically higher GATEs: nonnative speakers, students with social and emotional problems, and

male students. Any subgroups of students among these three groups exhibit GATEs that are higher

than the ATEs. For instance, the effect on test scores of semi-segregation in comparison to inclu-

sion is 0.3 standard deviations higher for nonnative speakers than for native speakers. Nonnative

speakers are also less likely to be unemployed when segregated than native speakers, and they ex-

pect higher wages. When segregated, they expect a wage premium of .15 wage standard deviations

higher than for natives, making semi-segregation as good as inclusion in terms of expected wages.

The subgroup that would see the smallest difference between inclusion and semi-segregation are

nonnative students with emotional or behavioral problems, who would perform only .19 test score

standard deviations less in segregation than in inclusion (and almost 0.6 standard deviations bet-

ter than other students in semi-segregation). All in all, even though inclusion remains on average

better for students with SEN, even for those with “disruptive” characteristics, my results show that

“disruptive” students are the students who beneﬁt the most from semi-segregation.

4.4.2 Do the effects of semi-segregation vary with school characteristics?
School characteristics, especially the school socio-economic composition (SES score), could poten-

tially drive the effect of inclusive and semi-segregated programs. To investigate this mechanism,

I explore treatment heterogeneity in school characteristics for inclusion and semi-segregation. To

estimate CATEs with respect to school characteristics, I regress the continuous school characteristics

on the DR score for the ATE following Zimmert and Lechner (2019) as explained in Section 3.3. I

present results for the CATE for academic test score and for the probability to be unemployed in

Figure C.4 and Figure C.6. I do not report per-student spending in my heterogeneity analysis given

that it has been measured only once in 2017 and would not reﬂect schools’ change of SpEd policies

across the years.

Results show an interesting tendency in the effects of inclusion in comparison to semi-segregation.

Negative effects in school performance get closer to 0 as school size increases, and also as the schools’

SES score and the share of nonnative students increase. For instance, the negative effects of semi-

segregation become 0.2 standard deviations smaller when the school has a high SES score (meaning

that the school’s population is of a lower average SES status). The magnitude of this effect is rather

substantial, and would indicate that students in schools that have a less homogeneous population

(mostly in urban schools) and with more lower SES students are not harmed as much if they are

segregated. The same picture is reﬂected in the effects for the probability to be unemployed: the

negative effects of semi-segregation become almost zero in schools with a high number of foreign

language speaking students, and with a higher SES score.

Thus, the negative effects of semi-segregation are shown to slightly fade out for schools that

are more socially and economically diverse. One potential explanation for this phenomenon is that

the average level of disruptiveness in schools with more diversity would make semi-segregation

comparatively more effective for disruptive students. Another possible explanation is that inclusion

21

works better when teachers are less overwhelmed, i.e.

in more homogeneous classrooms. These

ﬁndings indirectly corroborate teachers’ worries that inclusion is difﬁcult to implement when the
population of students is already difﬁcult to deal with in the main classroom.28

In conclusion, my analysis shows that semi-segregation programs are less effective than inclu-

sion in terms of academic performance and labor market integration for (almost) all students with

SEN. However, students who exhibit “disruptive” characteristics, i.e. male students, students with

social and emotional problems, and nonnative speakers, are the students who beneﬁt most from

semi-segregation. Importantly, the success of inclusion or semi-segregation does not depend on IQ,

gender or the prevalence of learning disabilities: this is especially true for school performance, but

also extends to labor market integration. Finally, the schools’ average SES status and population of

nonnative students has non-negligible inﬂuence on the effect of inclusion and semi-segregation SpEd

programs.

4.5 Further analyses and robustness checks

I conduct a battery of robustness tests in Appendix B. In Appendix B.1, I account for potential

overlap and lack of common support problems in the generalized propensity score distribution and

implement overlap-weighted average treatment effects (Li, Morgan, and Zaslavsky, 2018; Li and Li,

2019) as well as different trimming schemes (see Crump et al., 2009; Stürmer et al., 2010). I ﬁnd

that point estimates do not vary much when extreme weights are trimmed, and become less precisely

estimated.

In Appendix B.2, I investigate how sensitive my estimates are to the inclusion of text covariates

in order to see how much confounding my text variables are able to remove. I ﬁnd that estimates

based on both covariates and text information are on average 29% smaller than estimates that do not

leverage the text information. Furthermore, I account for the possibility that my text representations

capture the psychologist’s biases (towards a certain treatment or a certain writing style) rather than

information on the student. I show that my estimates remain consistent with my main ﬁndings when

I strip out psychologists’ effects from the text.

In Appendix B.3, I tackle the problem of potential selective attrition in the measured outcomes.

I conduct an attrition analysis by showing the results for the cohorts that are in both the SW8 and

the SSA subsamples. Results of this check are in line with main results.

Finally, even though I observe the assignment process in its entirety through written reports,

some factors inﬂuencing SpEd placements might still remain unobserved.

I address this issue by

leveraging the within year across school variation in supply of SpEd as an instrument to compare the

outcomes of SEN students in inclusive settings with similar peers in semi-segregated settings (in the

spirit of Keslair, Maurin, and McNally, 2012). In Appendix B.4, I present Local Average Treatment

28Such arguments have been expressed by teachers:

compatibility between non-SEN and included SEN students,
dents.
For
“Teaching the same to students who are not the same”, “The integrative model puts teachers to their limits”.

in-
for SEN stu-
to the problem.
“How inclusion divide teachers”, “Special education needs resources”, “Include instead of segregate”,

Newspaper articles
instance

from the Tagblatt newspaper

in St. Gallen regularly refer

inclusion is a factor of

teachers’ overload,

efﬁciency

lack of

and a

22

Effects of inclusion on students who would have been segregated, had they lived in a school that

implemented semi-segregated SpEd programs. LATE results corroborate my main ﬁndings.

5 Policy learning: optimal SpEd placement for inclusion and semi-

segregation

How would a school psychologist or a policy maker assign SEN students to the program that

corresponds the best to their particular characteristics? Getting insights from the literature on statis-

tical treatment rules (e.g., Kitagawa and Tetenov, 2018; Manski, 2004), I perform optimal treatment

allocations simulations based on tree-search based algorithms (Athey and Wager, 2021; Zhou, Athey,

and Wager, 2018). I leverage my rich set of covariates as well as the information retrieved from the

psychological records to look at whether policy makers might be able to better tailor policies on the

basis of observed individual characteristics. I focus on allocation to inclusion and semi-segregation,

two programs that are used as quasi-substitutes in St. Gallen.

Let π(Zi

) be a policy rule that leverages a relatively small number of observed individual char-
acteristics of interest Zi to assign individuals to a treatment d. The number of characteristics in Zi is
small because it contains variables that can be easily interpreted and used by a policy maker. For each
policy rule π(Zi
) among all candidate policy rules Π, a policy value summarizes the estimated popu-
lation potential outcome attained under the policy. The policy value is the average of the individual
APOs (deﬁned by Equation (6)) under the policy rule ˆQ(π) = 1
i . The
N
goal of the policy maker is to ﬁnd the optimal policy, i.e. the particular policy rule among all possible
policy rules that maximizes the policy value. This means ﬁnding the policy rule ˆπ∗ that maximizes
the policy value function ˆπ∗ = arg maxπ∈Π ˆQ(π) among all candidate policies. Note that the goal of
this exercise is not to discriminate students on the basis of their characteristics, but to guide policy

i=1 1(π(Zi

) = d)ˆΓ d

(cid:80)D

(cid:80)N

d=1

makers on how they could potentially improve policies by leveraging observed characteristics.

For instance, a policy maker could propose three candidate policy rules for optimal placements:

(1) assign all SEN students to inclusion; (2) assign all SEN students to semi-segregation; (3) “split”

students along their nonnative status, i.e. assign all nonnative speakers to semi-segregation and

all other students to inclusion. The policy value of the ﬁrst rule is the average of all APOs under

inclusion, and similarly for the second rule under semi-segregation. For the third rule, the policy

value would be the average over the APO under semi-segregation for all nonnative students and

over the APO under inclusion for all native students. The policy maker would then choose the policy

with the highest overall policy value.

To ﬁnd the optimal policy, I compute the policy tree algorithm with ﬁxed depth based on double
machine learning of Zhou, Athey, and Wager (2018).29 Intuitively, trees (policy rules) split the sam-

ple along variables in Zi many times, and the split that gives the maximal policy value is given as the
optimal policy. I experiment with policy trees of depth 2 and 3 (the depth indicates the number of

29The algorithm ﬁnds the optimal policy such that it minimizes the regret function, i.e. the difference between the true

and the estimated optimal policy value. In general, see algorithm 1 in Zhou, Athey, and Wager (2018).

23

times leaves are split) with two different sets of student attributes Z, i.e. the baseline covariates and

covariates extracted from the diagnosis (dictionary approach). I compute optimal policy allocations

for inclusion or semi-segregation on the subsample of students either sent to inclusion or segrega-

tion. As outcomes, I look at test scores and labor-market integration (probability of employment).

I subsequently link optimal policy allocations to actual and counterfactual policy costs, which are

estimated by taking average costs per student per year of each SpEd placement given by the Canton
of St. Gallen.30 I then compare changes in costs and changes in policy value for each optimal policy.

[Insert Table 4 here]

Panel A of Table 4 compares the actual observed percentage of students assigned to inclusion

and to semi-segregation with the allocation of students resulting from optimal reallocation. Around

70% of the students sent either to inclusion or semi-segregation who took the SW8 test were actually

assigned to inclusion, and 53% of students who were registered in the SSA dataset were assigned to

inclusion. For academic performance, the policy value of the actual implemented policy is -0.46, and

it is 0.67 for labor market integration (which gives the average employment probability under the

implemented policy). I propose four reallocation policies for each outcome. All proposed policies

dramatically improve the policy value by reallocating the majority of students to inclusion rather than

segregation. All proposed policies would reduce overall costs, but not dramatically so (at around

94% of actual realized cost). In general, proposed assignment schemes are very similar in terms of
improved outcomes and reduced costs.31

What are the rules that allow better allocation of students in terms of better school performance?

Figure C.8 represents the tree policies for improved test scores. Interestingly, a simple policy tree of

depth 2 would automatically assign all nonnative students with emotional or social issues to semi-

segregation, as well as all gifted students (with IQ higher than 125) without emotional or social

issues to semi-segregation. All other students with SEN would be assigned to inclusive settings.

This makes sense since students with social problems are likely to be disruptive and might beneﬁt

from segregation, and since gifted students might beneﬁt from “pull-out” programs. This policy

would outperform the actual assignment by gaining an average of around 0.2 test score standard
deviations.32 The policy tree of depth 3 with baseline characteristics conﬁrms the importance of

issues in emotional or social behaviors, problems with test performance, and IQ score as important

variables for optimal policies. Policies using diagnoses are very similar to policies based solely on

30For costs, I use the following estimates obtained from SG-Volksschulgesetznachtrag 2013. A student in mainstreamed
environment costs between 15’000 and 20’000 CHF (approximately 16’500 to 22’000 USD) on average per year, depending
on the school and the grade. I take the highest estimate, namely 20’000 CHF. A student in semi-segregation costs on average
24’500 CHF (27’000 USD) per year. Individual, hour-long therapy SpEd programs costs on average 5000 CHF (5500 USD)
per year. Schooling in full segregation settings costs between 39’000 and 260’000 CHF, on average between 70‘000 to
80’000 CHF (77’000 USD to 88’000 USD) per student per year.

31One could think that the remaining students sent to segregation are observations with extreme weights in their doubly
robust score. I computed the same policy classiﬁcation after trimming, and the policy rules would consistently send the
same amount of students to segregation.

32Note that the variable “IQ score” is actually the interaction between the actual score and whether the IQ test has been
administered, thus taking 0 when no IQ score exists. I perform a similar analysis with the subsample of students for whom
the IQ is observed.

24

main covariates, which highlights the fact that diagnoses extracted from text are not very predictive

of policy improvement.

Sending more students to inclusive settings has beneﬁts for integration on the labor market.

The second part of Panel A in Table 4 shows that by sending less students to semi-segregation, the

average employment probability can be increased by around 20 percentage points for quasi-similar

policy costs. Interestingly, proposed policies that target better labor-market integration send a larger

share of students to semi-segregation. Figure C.10 shows that semi-segregation is the most helpful for

students with IQ scores lower than average, without performance or learning problems. In general,

IQ seems to be the most predictive variable of success of semi-segregation with respect to labor-

market integration. Students who were not given an IQ test would also be sent to semi-segregation.

From the trees with diagnoses, we learn that children with ADHD would be sent to semi-segregation.

The policy tree of depth 3 that leverages the information on ADHD is the most effective policy in

terms of labor market integration.

To test whether the decision trees are stable, I conduct validation tests inspired by Zhou, Athey,

and Wager (2018) and Knaus (2021).

I test whether the proposed policies perform better than

either sending everyone to inclusion, sending everyone to semi-segregation, or implementing the

(already implemented) observed policy (the “Null-hypothesis” policies). To do this, I use 10-fold

cross-validation, i.e. I train the policy tree on the training subsample and use the tree to predict

assignment on the left-out fold. I then compute the difference between the APO under the optimal
policy and the APO under one of the three alternative policies, and compute a one sample t−test to

assess whether the difference in means is signiﬁcantly different than zero. Panel B in Table 4 shows

that all optimal reallocations outperform sending all students to semi-segregation for both outcomes.

For academic performance, all policies outperform the implemented policies, but perform as well or

even slightly worse than sending all students to inclusion. For labor-market integration, sending

all students to inclusive settings marginally outperforms the optimal policies; however, all proposed

policies fail to signiﬁcantly improve on realized therapy assignments. This indicates that actual

placement by school psychologists already leverages the available information in a relevant way, but

that this placement could be improved to increase academic performance.

I implicitly assumed in my optimal allocation exercise that non-SEN students receive a welfare

weight of 0. In reality, the reallocation of students with SEN from semi-segregation to the main class-

room induce spillover effects that could negatively impact mainstreamed SEN and non-SEN students

(as shown by Balestra, Eugster, and Liebert, forthcoming; Rangvid, 2019). To measure overall wel-

fare functions, I integrate spillover effects of reassigning students with SEN to the main classroom

in my optimal policy rule. I proceed as follows: I merge my dataset with the data containing all

students without SEN from the Canton of St. Gallen. I then estimate the peer effect of reassigning

students with SEN to mainstream classrooms on the academic performance of their classmates (for

classmates with SEN and for classmates without SEN). As students with SEN are randomly allocated

to classrooms in St. Gallen, I am able to estimate causal spillover functions with ﬂexible estimation

procedures (for more information on this quasi-experimental setting, see Balestra, Sallin, and Wolter,

25

forthcoming).33 The classroom spillover function is presented in Figure C.12 of the Appendix. The

function is estimated for students with SEN (in brown) and for students without SEN (in blue). I ﬁnd

that the shape of the spillover function is monotonically decreasing, meaning that including an ad-

ditional peer with SEN has negative effects on mainstreamed peers with SEN and on mainstreamed

peers without SEN. The negative effect worsens with more students with SEN in the classroom.

Based on my ﬂexible estimation of the spillover function, and with a simplistic back-of-the-

envelope utility computation, I compute the average reallocation effects induced by the optimal

policy for the whole student population. I base my computations on the following statistics: stu-

dents with SEN make up 25% of the mainstreamed students population, mainstream classrooms

have on average 19.17 students, and the data contains 2723 classrooms. As presented in Panel A

of Table 4, optimal policies reallocate 807 students from semi-segregation to inclusion for a policy

gain of 0.17. The reallocation of 807 students from semi-segregation to inclusion means that there

are 0.3 additional students with SEN per classroom, thus increasing the average proportion of stu-

dents with SEN per classroom from 0.25 to 0.266 (a 0.016 increase). The effect of reallocation for
the reallocated students is therefore an average gain of 0.016 ∗ .17 = 0.003 in policy value per stu-

dent in the whole population. For the population of mainstreamed students, the spillover functions

in Figure C.12 (and tables available on request) show that the increase in the proportion of peers

with SEN in the main classroom from 0.25 to 0.266 generates a loss of expected test score standard

deviation of -0.04 for mainstreamed students with SEN, and a loss of -0.03 test score standard devi-

ations for mainstreamed students without SEN. This means that the policy loss is on average around
0.25∗(−0.04)+0.75∗(−0.03) = −0.032 per student. Combining both effects (and ignoring the very

small shift in group proportions after reallocation), the average loss in policy value after reallocation
is around −0.03 standard deviations of test scores per student.

All in all, this optimal policy exercise exercise delivers valuable insights into improved allocation

of SEN students to semi-segregation and inclusion.

It strengthens the idea that inclusion works

well, as none of my suggested reallocation policies perform better than allocating all students to

inclusion. There also seems to be a trade-off between short-term, academic beneﬁts, and longer-

term beneﬁts:

from the perspective of labor-market integration, it seems that a higher share of

semi-segregated students is beneﬁcial, whereas it is not from an academic performance perspective.

Finally, it highlights the idea that less segregation is desirable and could be reached without imposing

too much harm on students in mainstream classrooms: the individual gains for the newly reallocated

students are large and by far offset the individual loss for mainstreamed students, even though
the social reallocation effect is negative by −0.03 standard deviations of test scores per student.

In light of the results from the heterogeneity analysis and from the reallocation exercise, it might

seem wise for policy makers to segregate disruptive students, as these students generate the largest

negative spillover effects on their peers, and they are the ones beneﬁting the most from segregated

environments.

33I estimate spillovers with machine learning algorithms and an ensemble learner. I use clustered cross-validation to

estimate functions at the classroom level.

26

6 Conclusion

The present study sheds light on short-term and long-term returns to SpEd programs for students

with special needs. Using recent methodological developments in computational text analysis and in

causal machine learning, this study leverages psychologists’ written reports to address the problem

of confounding in the absence of experimental design. My study complements the literature by

showing that SpEd should not be considered as a single intervention. Each program differs in its

expected returns, and inclusive programs are quite effective at generating academic success and

labor market integration. More speciﬁcally, I ﬁnd that returns to SpEd programs in inclusive settings

(counseling and individual therapies) are positive for academic performance, and that tutoring has

no measurable effect. When compared to receiving no SpEd, all inclusive treatments have zero to

positive returns.

Moreover, this study contributes to our understanding of inclusive and segregated measures for

students with SEN. In general, inclusion pays off in terms of academic performance, labor market

participation and earnings in comparison to semi-segregation. The results of this study show that

inclusion works better for (almost) all students with SEN. However, semi-segregation is the least

detrimental for students with SEN who exhibit disruptive tendencies, or for nonnative students with

SEN. Semi-segregation works best in schools with an lower average SES status and more nonnative

speakers. Results presented in this study, however, do not extend to the analysis of full segregation,

as students placed in fully segregated settings have almost no overlapping characteristics with stu-

dents in semi-segregated and inclusive settings. Moreover, higher attrition and selection into test

participation for students placed in fully segregated school environments make the assessment of

academic returns difﬁcult.

The optimal policy allocations analyses offer further insights into inclusive and segregated SpEd

programs for policy makers. With the help of policy trees, I propose placement recommendations

to improve aggregate school performance and better labor market integration. These policies are

outcome-improving for students with SEN, and cost-reducing. By implementing such optimal poli-

cies, a policy maker could signiﬁcantly increase average school performance and labor market inte-

gration for students in semi-segregation by reallocating them to mainstream classrooms. However,

this reallocation would incur costs on their peers in mainstream classrooms. In light of the results

from the heterogeneity analysis and from the reallocation exercise, it might seem wise for policy mak-

ers to segregate disruptive students, as these students generate the largest negative spillover effects

on their peers, and they are the ones beneﬁting the most from segregated environments. However,

it is ultimately up to the policy maker and to society at large to decide whether a small decrease in

school performance is a cost that should be endured by mainstream students in order to signiﬁcantly

increase the performance of reallocated students.

This paper invites further research on two fronts. On the one hand, the role of teachers and SpEd

teachers in decisions to implement inclusion or segregation must be further investigated. Teachers’

input and teachers’ productivity in inclusive and segregated settings are important factors of the

success of inclusive policies. However, little is known about their value-added for students with SEN.

On the other hand, inclusion has beneﬁts that extend beyond measurable academic performance

27

and labor market integration. For instance, inclusion is likely to affect non-cognitive skills such

as altruism, self-esteem, and self-image. These aspects need to be investigated to deliver a more

complete picture of inclusion. Finally, this paper is an invitation for further methodological research

in optimal policy allocation and in the use of text as covariate.

28

References

Angrist, Joshua and Kevin Lang. 2004. “Does school integration generate peer effects? Evidence

from Boston’s Metco Program.” American Economic Review 94 (5):1613–1634.

Athey, Susan, Julie Tibshirani, and Stefan Wager. 2019. “Generalized random forests.” Annals of

Statistics 47 (2):1148–1178.

Athey, Susan and Stefan Wager. 2019. “Estimating treatment effects with causal forests: An applica-

tion.” arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.07409 .

———. 2021. “Policy learning with observational data.” Econometrica 89 (1):133–161.

Avramidis, Elias and Brahm Norwich. 2002. “Teachers’ attitudes towards integration/inclusion: a

review of the literature.” European journal of special needs education 17 (2):129–147.

Balestra, Simone, Beatrix Eugster, and Helge Liebert. 2020. “Summer-born struggle: The effect of

school starting age on health, education, and work.” Health Economics 29 (5):591–607.

———. forthcoming.

“Peers with special needs: effects and policies.” Review of Economics and

Statistics .

Balestra, Simone, Aurélien Sallin, and Stefan Wolter. forthcoming. “High-ability inﬂuencers? The

heterogeneous effects of gifted classmates.” Journal of Human Resources .

Ballis, Briana and Katelyn Heath. forthcoming. “The long-run impacts of special education.” American

Economic Journal: Economic Policy 43.

Bertrand, Marianne and Jessica Pan. 2013. “The trouble with boys: Social inﬂuences and the gender

gap in disruptive behavior.” American economic journal: applied economics 5 (1):32–64.

Blachman, Benita A, Christopher Schatschneider, Jack M Fletcher, Maria S Murray, Kristen A Munger,
and Michael G Vaughn. 2014. “Intensive reading remediation in grade 2 or 3: Are there effects a
decade later?” Journal of educational psychology 106 (1):46.

Blei, David M, Andrew Y Ng, and Michael I Jordan. 2003. “Latent dirichlet allocation.” Journal of

Machine Learning Research 3 (Jan):993–1022.

Bloom, Harold, Carolyn Hill, A Black, and Mark Lipsey. 2006. “Effect sizes in education research:
What they are, what they mean, and why they’re important.” Institute of Education Sciences 2006
Research Conference, Washington, DC .

Cappelen, Alexander, John List, Anya Samek, and Bertil Tungodden. 2020. “The effect of early-
childhood education on social preferences.” Journal of Political Economy 128 (7):2739–2758.

Carrell, Scott, Mark Hoekstra, and Elira Kuka. 2018. “The long-run effects of disruptive peers.”

American Economic Review 108 (11):3377–3415.

Case, Anne, Darren Lubotsky, and Christina Paxson. 2002. “Economic Status and Health in Child-

hood: The Origins of the Gradient.” American Economic Review 92 (5):1308–1334.

Chernozhukov, Victor, Denis Chetverikov, Mert Demirer, Esther Duﬂo, Christian Hansen, Whitney
Newey, and James Robins. 2018. “Double/debiased machine learning for treatment and structural
parameters.” Econometrics Journal 21:C1–C68.

Chernozhukov, Victor, Iván Fernández-Val, and Ye Luo. 2018. “The sorted effects method: discovering

heterogeneous effects beyond their averages.” Econometrica 86 (6):1911–1938.

29

Chetty, Raj, John Friedman, Nathaniel Hilger, Emmanuel Saez, Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach, and
Danny Yagan. 2011. “How does your kindergarten classroom affect your earnings? Evidence from
Project STAR.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (4):1593–1660.

Cho, Rosa Minhyo. 2012. “Are there peer effects associated with having English language learner
(ELL) classmates? Evidence from the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study Kindergarten Cohort
(ECLS-K).” Economics of Education Review 31 (5):629–643.

Cole, Cassandra M, Nancy Waldron, and Massoumeh Majd. 2004. “Academic progress of students

across inclusive and traditional settings.” Mental retardation 42 (2):136–144.

Crump, Richard, Joseph Hotz, Guido Imbens, and Oscar Mitnik. 2009. “Dealing with limited overlap

in estimation of average treatment effects.” Biometrika 96 (1):187–199.

Cullen, Julie Berry. 2003. “The impact of ﬁscal incentives on student disability rates.” Journal of

Public Economics 87 (7-8):1557–1589.

Currie, Janet and Mark Stabile. 2003. “Socioeconomic Status and Child Health: Why Is the Rela-

tionship Stronger for Older Children?” American Economic Review 93 (5):1813–1823.

D’Amour, Alexander, Peng Ding, Avi Feller, Lihua Lei, and Jasjeet Sekhon. 2021. “Overlap in obser-
vational studies with high-dimensional covariates.” Journal of Econometrics 221 (2):644–654.

Daniel, Larry G and Debra A King. 1997. “Impact of inclusion education on academic achievement,
student behavior and self-esteem, and parental attitudes.” The Journal of Educational Research
91 (2):67–80.

Davis, Jonathan M.V. and Sara B. Heller. 2017. “Using Causal Forests to Predict Treatment Hetero-

geneity: An Application to Summer Jobs.” American Economic Review 107 (5):546–50.

De Boer, Anke, Sip Jan Pijl, and Alexander Minnaert. 2011. “Regular primary schoolteachers’ atti-
tudes towards inclusive education: A review of the literature.” International journal of inclusive
education 15 (3):331–353.

De Bruin, Kate. 2019. “The impact of inclusive education reforms on students with disability: an

international comparison.” International Journal of Inclusive Education 23 (7-8):811–826.

Dempsey, Ian, Megan Valentine, and Kim Colyvas. 2016. “The Effects of Special Education Support on
Young Australian School Students.” International Journal of Disability, Development and Education
63 (3):271–292.

Diette, Timothy M and Ruth Uwaifo Oyelere. 2014. “Gender and race heterogeneity: The impact
of students with limited english on native students’ performance.” American Economic Review
104 (5):412–17.

Duncan, Greg J. and Katherine Magnuson. 2013. “Investing in Preschool Programs.” Journal of

Economic Perspectives 27 (2):109–32.

Duncombe, William and John Yinger. 2005. “How much more does a disadvantaged student cost?”

Economics of Education Review 24 (5):513– 532.

EASIE. 2014. “2014 Dataset Cross-Country Report.” Tech. rep., European Agency Statistics on In-

clusive Education.

———. 2018.

“2018 Dataset Cross-Country Report.” Tech. rep., European Agency Statistics on

Inclusive Education.

30

Eckhart, Michael, Urs Haeberlin, Sahli Lozano Caroline, and Philippe Blanc. 2011. “Langzeitwirkun-
gen der schulischen Integration. Eine empirische Studie zur Bedeutung von Integrationserfahrun-
gen in der Schulzeit für die soziale und beruﬂiche Situation im jungen Erwachsenenalter.” Bern,
Stuttgart, Wien: Haupt .

Egami, Naoki, Christian J. Fong, Justin Grimmer, Margaret E. Roberts, and Brandon M. Stewart.

2018. “How to Make Causal Inferences Using Texts.” ArXiv Working Paper (1802.02163).

Elder, Todd, David Figlio, Scott Imberman, and Claudia Persico. 2021. “School Segregation and

Racial Gaps in Special Education Identiﬁcation.” Journal of Labor Economics Forthcoming.

Elder, Todd E. 2010. “The importance of relative standards in ADHD diagnoses: Evidence based on

exact birth dates.” Journal of Health Economics 29 (5):641– 656.

Fan, Qingliang, Yu-Chin Hsu, Robert P Lieli, and Yichong Zhang. 2020. “Estimation of conditional
average treatment effects with high-dimensional data.” Journal of Business & Economic Statistics
:1–15.

Farrell, Max H. 2015. “Robust inference on average treatment effects with possibly more covariates

than observations.” Journal of Econometrics 189 (1):1– 23.

Fletcher, Jason M. 2009. “The effects of inclusion on classmates of students with special needs: The

case of serious emotional problems.” Education Finance and Policy 4 (3):278–299.

Freeman, Stephanny FN and Marvin C Alkin. 2000. “Academic and social attainments of children
with mental retardation in general education and special education settings.” Remedial and Special
Education 21 (1):3–26.

Gentzkow, Matthew, Bryan Kelly, and Matt Taddy. 2019. “Text as data.” Journal of Economic Literature

57 (3):535–74.

Glynn, Adam N. and Kevin M. Quinn. 2010. “An Introduction to the Augmented Inverse Propensity

Weighted Estimator.” Political Analysis 18 (1):36–56.

Greminger, Eva, Rupert Tarnutzer, and Martin Venetz. 2005. “Die Tragfähigkeit der Regelschule

stärken.” Schweizerische Zeitschrift für Heilpädagogik, 7 8 (5):49–52.

Häfeli, Kurt and Peter Walther-Müller. 2005. “Das Wachstum des sonderpädagogischen Angebots im

interkantonalen Vergleich.” Schweizerische Zeitschrift für Heilpädagogik (7-8).

Hanushek, Eric A., John F. Kain, and Steven G. Rivkin. 2002. “Inferring Program Effects for Special
The

Populations: Does Special Education Raise Achievement for Students with Disabilities?”
Review of Economics and Statistics 84 (4):584–599.

Harrison, Judith R., Nora Bunford, Steven W. Evans, and Julie Sarno Owens. 2013. “Educational
Accommodations for Students With Behavioral Challenges: A Systematic Review of the Literature.”
Review of Educational Research 83 (4):551–597.

Heckman, James, Rodrigo Pinto, and Peter Savelyev. 2013. “Understanding the Mechanisms through
Which an Inﬂuential Early Childhood Program Boosted Adult Outcomes.” American Economic
Review 103 (6):2052–86.

Imbens, Guido W. 2000. “The role of the propensity score in estimating dose-response functions.”

Biometrika 87 (3):706–710.

Imbens, Guido W and Donald B Rubin. 2015. Causal inference in statistics, social, and biomedical

sciences. Cambridge University Press.

31

Jackson, Kirabo, Rucker Johnson, and Claudia Persico. 2016. “The effects of school spending on
educational and economic outcomes: Evidence from school ﬁnance reforms.” Quarterly Journal
of Economics 131 (1):157–218.

Judge, Sharon and Silvana M. R. Watson. 2011. “Longitudinal Outcomes for Mathematics Achieve-
ment for Students with Learning Disabilities.” The Journal of Educational Research 104 (3):147–
157.

Keith, Katherine A, David Jensen, and Brendan O’Connor. 2020.

A Review of Using Text to Remove Confounding from Causal Estimates.”
arXiv:2005.00649 .

“Text and Causal Inference:
arXiv preprint

Kennedy, Edward H. 2020. “Optimal doubly robust estimation of heterogeneous causal effects.” arXiv

preprint arXiv:2004.14497 .

Keslair, Francois, Eric Maurin, and Sandra McNally. 2012. “Every child matters? An evaluation of
“Special Educational Needs? programmes in England.” Economics of Education Review 31 (6):932–
948.

Kirjavainen, Tanja, Jonna Pulkkinen, and Markku Jahnukainen. 2016. “Special education students
in transition to further education: A four-year register-based follow-up study in Finland.” Learning
and Individual Differences 45:33– 42.

Kirkeboen, Lars J, Edwin Leuven, and Magne Mogstad. 2016. “Field of study, earnings, and self-

selection.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 131 (3):1057–1111.

Kitagawa, Toru and Aleksey Tetenov. 2018. “Who should be treated? empirical welfare maximization

methods for treatment choice.” Econometrica 86 (2):591–616.

Knaus, Michael. 2021. “Double Machine Learning based Program Evaluation under Unconfounded-

ness.” Working Paper .

Knaus, Michael, Michael Lechner, and Anthony Strittmatter. 2020. “Heterogeneous employment
effects of job search programmes: A machine learning approach.” Journal of Human Resources
:0718–9615R1.

Kohli, Nidhi, Amanda L. Sullivan, Shanna Sadeh, and Cengiz Zopluoglu. 2015. “Longitudinal math-
ematics development of students with learning disabilities and students without disabilities: A
comparison of linear, quadratic, and piecewise linear mixed effects models.” Journal of School
Psychology 53 (2):105– 120.

Kvande, Marianne Nilsen, Oda Bjørklund, Stian Lydersen, Jay Belsky, and Lars Wichstrøm. 2018.
“Effects of special education on academic achievement and task motivation: a propensity-score
and ﬁxed-effects approach.” European Journal of Special Needs Education 0 (0):1–15.

Lavy, Victor and Analia Schlosser. 2005.

“Targeted Remedial Education for Underperforming

Teenagers: Costs and Beneﬁts.” Journal of Labor Economics 23 (4):839–874.

———. 2011.

“Mechanisms and impacts of gender peer effects at school.” American Economic

Journal: Applied Economics 3 (2):1–33.

Lazear, Edward P. 2001. “Educational production.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 116 (3):777–

803.

Lechner, Michael. 2001. “Identiﬁcation and estimation of causal effects of multiple treatments under
the conditional independence assumption.” In Econometric Evaluation of Labour Market Policies.
Physica-Verlag HD, 43–58.

32

———. 2019. “Modiﬁed causal forests for estimating heterogeneous causal effects.” arXiv preprint

arXiv:1812.09487 .

Lekhal, Ratib. 2018. “Does special education predict students’ math and language skills?” European

Journal of Special Needs Education 33 (4):525–540.

Li, Fan and Fan Li. 2019. “Propensity score weighting for causal inference with multiple treatments.”

The Annals of Applied Statistics 13 (4):2389–2415.

Li, Fan, Kari Lock Morgan, and Alan M Zaslavsky. 2018. “Balancing covariates via propensity score

weighting.” Journal of the American Statistical Association 113 (521):390–400.

Lovett, Maureen W, Jan C Frijters, Maryanne Wolf, Karen A Steinbach, Rose A Sevcik, and Robin D
Morris. 2017. “Early intervention for children at risk for reading disabilities: The impact of grade
at intervention and individual differences on intervention outcomes.” Journal of Educational Psy-
chology 109 (7):889.

Maestas, Nicole, Kathleen J Mullen, and Alexander Strand. 2013. “Does disability insurance receipt
discourage work? Using examiner assignment to estimate causal effects of SSDI receipt.” American
Economic Review 103 (5):1797–1829.

Manning, Christopher D., Prabhakar Raghavan, and Hinrich Schütze. 2008. Introduction to Informa-

tion Retrieval. Cambridge University Press.

Manski, Charles. 2004. “Statistical treatment rules for heterogeneous populations.” Econometrica

72 (4):1221–1246.

McGee, Andrew. 2011. “Skills, standards, and disabilities: How youth with learning disabilities fare

in high school and beyond.” Economics of Education Review 30 (1):109– 129.

Mikolov, Tomas, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg S Corrado, and Jeff Dean. 2013. “Distributed rep-
resentations of words and phrases and their compositionality.” In Advances in neural information
processing systems. 3111–3119.

Morgan, Paul L., George Farkas, and Qiong Wu. 2009. “Five-Year Growth Trajectories of Kindergarten
Children With Learning Difﬁculties in Mathematics.” Journal of Learning Disabilities 42 (4):306–
321.

Morgan, Paul L., Michelle L. Frisco, George Farkas, and Jacob Hibel. 2010. “A Propensity Score
Matching Analysis of the Effects of Special Education Services.” The Journal of Special Education
43 (4):236–254.

Mozer, Reagan, Luke Miratrix, Aaron Russell Kaufman, and L. Jason Anastasopoulos. 2020. “Match-
ing with Text Data: An Experimental Evaluation of Methods for Matching Documents and of Mea-
suring Match Quality.” Political Analysis 28 (4):445–468.

OECD. 2017. Education at a Glance 2017: OECD Indicators. Organisation for Economic Cooperation

and Development, Paris (France).

Peetsma, Thea, Margaretha Vergeer, Jaap Roeleveld, and Sjoerd Karsten. 2001. “Inclusion in ed-
ucation: Comparing pupils’ development in special and regular education.” Educational Review
53 (2):125–135.

Rangvid, Beatrice Schindler. 2019. “Returning special education students to regular classrooms:

Externalities on peers’ reading scores.” Economics of Education Review 68:13–22.

33

Roberts, Margaret E, Brandon M Stewart, and Edoardo M Airoldi. 2016. “A model of text for exper-
imentation in the social sciences.” Journal of the American Statistical Association 111 (515):988–
1003.

Roberts, Margaret E, Brandon M Stewart, and Richard A Nielsen. 2020. “Adjusting for confounding

with text matching.” American Journal of Political Science .

Robins, James M., Andrea Rotnitzky, and Lue Ping Zhao. 1994. “Estimation of Regression Coefﬁcients
When Some Regressors are not Always Observed.” Journal of the American Statistical Association
89 (427):846–866.

Robins, James M, Andrea Rotnitzky, and Lue Ping Zhao. 1995. “Analysis of semiparametric regression
models for repeated outcomes in the presence of missing data.” Journal of the american statistical
association 90 (429):106–121.

Rosenbaum, Paul R. and Donald B. Rubin. 1985. “Constructing a control group using multivari-
ate matched sampling methods that incorporate the propensity score.” The American Statistician
39 (1):33–38.

Schwab, Susanne. 2020. “Inclusive and special education in Europe.” In Oxford Research Encyclopedia

of Education.

Schwartz, Amy Ellen, Bryant Gregory Hopkins, and Leanna Stiefel. 2021. “The Effects of Special
Education on the Academic Performance of Students with Learning Disabilities.” Journal of Policy
Analysis and Management 40 (2):480–520.

Scruggs, Thomas E., Margo A. Mastropieri, Sheri Berkeley, and Janet E. Graetz. 2010. “Do Special
Education Interventions Improve Learning of Secondary Content? A Meta-Analysis.” Remedial and
Special Education 31 (6):437–449.

Semenova, Vira and Victor Chernozhukov. 2021. “Debiased machine learning of conditional average

treatment effects and other causal functions.” The Econometrics Journal 24 (2):264–289.

Sermier-Dessemontet, Rachel, Valérie Benoit, and Gérard Bless. 2011. “Schulische Integration von
Kindern mit einer geistigen Behinderung. Untersuchung der Entwicklung der Schulleistungen und
der adaptiven Fähigkeiten, der Wirkung auf die Lernentwicklung der Mitschüler sowie der Lehrere-
instellungen zur Integration.” Empirische Sonderpädagogik 3 (4):291–307.

Smith, James P. 2009. “The Impact of Childhood Health on Adult Labor Market Outcomes.” The

Review of Economics and Statistics 91 (3):478–489.

Stürmer, Til, Kenneth J Rothman, Jerry Avorn, and Robert J Glynn. 2010. “Treatment effects in
the presence of unmeasured confounding: dealing with observations in the tails of the propensity
score distribution—a simulation study.” American Journal of Epidemiology 172 (7):843–854.

Sullivan, Amanda L. and Samuel Field. 2013. “Do preschool special education services make a dif-
ference in kindergarten reading and mathematics skills?: A propensity score weighting analysis.”
Journal of School Psychology 51 (2):243– 260.

Van der Laan, Mark J, Eric C Polley, and Alan E Hubbard. 2007. “Super learner.” Statistical applications

in genetics and molecular biology 6 (1).

Weld, Galen, Peter West, Maria Glenski, David Arbour, Ryan Rossi, and Tim Althoff. 2020. “Adjust-
ing for Confounders with Text: Challenges and an Empirical Evaluation Framework for Causal
Inference.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.09961 .

34

Wolter, Stefan C. and Miriam Kull. 2006. “Bildungsbericht 2006.” Tech. rep. URL http://www.

skbf-csre.ch/bildungsbericht/bildungsbericht/.

———. 2014.

“Bildungsbericht 2014.”

Tech. rep.

URL http://www.skbf-csre.ch/

bildungsbericht/bildungsbericht/.

Yoshida, Kazuki, Daniel H Solomon, Sebastien Haneuse, Seoyoung C Kim, Elisabetta Patorno, Sara K
Tedeschi, Houchen Lyu, Jessica M Franklin, Til Stürmer, Sonia Hernández-Díaz et al. 2019. “Multi-
nomial extension of propensity score trimming methods: a simulation study.” American Journal of
Epidemiology 188 (3):609–616.

Zhou, Zhengyuan, Susan Athey, and Stefan Wager. 2018. “Ofﬂine multi-action policy learning: Gen-

eralization and optimization.” arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04778 .

Zimmert, Michael and Michael Lechner. 2019. “Nonparametric estimation of causal heterogeneity

under high-dimensional confounding.” arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.08779 .

35

7 Figures and tables

Notes: This ﬁgure displays the newly assigned special education interventions per year.
It gives the share of students
assigned to a particular SpEd program among all students referred to the School Psychological Service over the years.
Source: SPS.

Figure 1: Share of Special Education placements among students referred to the School Psychological Service
over the years

1

Notes: This ﬁgure shows the distribution of deviations (residuals) in the assignment rate of students assigned to all SpEd
programs per school-year from the mean year assignment rate for the population of students with SEN. Both the raw devia-
tion and the regression-adjusted deviation are displayed. The adjusted deviation shows deviation adjusted for student-level
and school-level covariates. Student-level covariates include gender, nonnative status, IQ, reason for referral, and who
sent the student for referral (Panel A of Table 1). School-level covariates are shown in Panel B of Table 1 and include share
of nonnative speakers, share of students with SEN, school size, school socio-economic composition, and urban status. Full
segregation is not represented. Source: Pensenpool, SPS.

Figure 2: Distribution of school-years deviations in assignment to SpEd from mean year inclusion assignment
rate

2

Notes: This ﬁgure presents the sample structure as a timeline. All students referred to the School Psychological Service
(SPS) between years 1998 to 2012 are observed and receive a treatment. Students’ academic performance is observed in
the test data (“Stellwerk8”) for all students reaching the age of 14 or 15 in years 2008 to 2017. Labor market outcomes
are observed in the Swiss Social Security Administration (SSA) data for students reaching the labor market in years 2007
to 2016. Because of attrition and the particular data structure, not all students are observed in both the Stellwerk8 and
the SSA data (blue arrow).

Figure 3: Visualization of the sample structure

3

Notes: This ﬁgure represents a stylized workﬂow of the estimation procedure. First information from text is retrieved, then
used in k−fold cross-ﬁtting to estimate the two nuisance parameters (estimated propensity score and estimated conditional
expectation of the outcome). The doubly-robust score is computed and used to estimate the estimands of interest (APO,
ATE, ATET, IATE and GATE, optimal policies).

Figure 4: Workﬂow of Double Machine Learning and text analysis

4

Notes: This ﬁgure depicts pairwise treatment effects for Special Education programs in St. Gallen. Each pair compares
interventions that are the closest in degree of severity and inclusion. Each pairwise treatment effect is the effect of being
assigned to the ﬁrst program in comparison to the second program on one of the four outcomes presented in the panel
headers. Both the treatment effect on the whole population (ATE) and on the population of the treated (ATET) are
presented. “Ind. therapy” is the abbreviation for individual therapies, “Acad. support” for academic support, and “no SpEd”
for receiving no program. Nuisance parameters are estimated using an ensemble learner that includes text representations
presented in the “data” section. 95% conﬁdence intervals are represented and are based on one sample t-test for the ATE
and the ATET. Test results and wages are standardized with mean 0 and standard deviation 1. The baseline (“No SpEd”)
probability of unemployment beneﬁt recipiency is 0.19, and 0.07 for disability insurance recipiency. Source: SPS.

Figure 5: Pairwise returns to Special Education programs according to their level of inclusion.

5

(c) Probability of using DI(d) Work income (standardized)(a) SW8 test results (standardized)(b) Probability of being unemployedCounselling − No SpEdAcad. support − No SpEdInd. therapy − Acad. supportInclusion − Ind. therapyCounselling − No SpEdAcad. support − No SpEdInd. therapy − Acad. supportInclusion − Ind. therapy−0.10−0.050.000.050.100.000.050.100.15−0.20.00.20.40.6−0.04−0.020.00EstimandATEATETNotes: This ﬁgure depicts relevant pairwise treatment effects for Special Education programs in St. Gallen. Each pairwise
treatment effect is the effect of being assigned to the ﬁrst program in comparison to the second program on one of the four
outcomes presented in the panel headers. Both the treatment effect on the whole population (ATE) and on the population
of the treated (ATET) are presented. “Semi-segr.” is the abbreviation for semi-segregation (segregation in small classes),
and “Full segr.” stands for full segregation (in special schools). Nuisance parameters are estimated using an ensemble
learner that includes text representations presented in the “data” section. 95% conﬁdence intervals are represented and are
based on one sample t-test for the ATE and the ATET. Test results and wages are standardized with mean 0 and standard
deviation 1. The baseline (“Inclusion”) probability of unemployment beneﬁt recipiency is 0.19, and 0.04 for disability
insurance recipiency. Source: SPS.

Figure 6: Pairwise returns to segregated SpEd programs.

6

Notes: This ﬁgure depicts relevant pairwise treatment effects for Special Education programs in St. Gallen. Each pairwise
treatment effect is the effect of being assigned to the ﬁrst program in comparison to being assigned to no program on one
of the four outcomes presented in the panel headers. Both the treatment effect on the whole population (ATE) and on the
population of the treated (ATET) are presented. “Ind. therapy” is the abbreviation for individual therapies, “Acad. support”
for academic support, “no SpEd” for receiving no program, “Semi-segr.” for semi-segregation (segregation in small classes),
and “Full segr.” for full segregation (in special schools). Nuisance parameters are estimated using an ensemble learner
that includes text representations presented in the “data” section. 95% conﬁdence intervals are represented and are based
on one sample t-test for the ATE and the ATET. Source: SPS.

Figure 7: Pairwise returns to Special Education vs. No Special Education.

7

(c) Probability of using DI(d) Work income (standardized)(a) SW8 test results (standardized)(b) Probability of being unemployedCounselling − No SpEdAcad. support − No SpEdInd. therapy − No SpEdInclusion − No SpEdSemi−segr. − No SpEdFull segr. − No SpEdCounselling − No SpEdAcad. support − No SpEdInd. therapy − No SpEdInclusion − No SpEdSemi−segr. − No SpEdFull segr. − No SpEd0.00.1−0.4−0.20.00.2−1.0−0.50.00.50.00.10.20.3EstimandATEATETNotes: This graph represents the smoothed distribution of IATEs for the four outcomes of interest. The IATEs were predicted
out-of-sample using the DR-learner presented in Equation (6). The average effect is reported in the ﬁgure. Light quintile
bars represent the median and the 1st. and 5th. quintiles of the IATE distribution.

Figure 8: Distributions of IATEs for segregation vs. inclusion.

8

−0.690.1−0.23SW8 test results (standardized)Probability of being unemployedWork income (standardized)SW8 test results (standardized)Probability of being unemployedWork income (standardized)−2.00−1.75−1.50−1.25−1.00−0.75−0.50−0.250.000.250.50Figure 9: GATEs for semi-segregation vs inclusion

Notes: This graph presents estimated GATEs for the treatment effect of semi-segregation vs.
inclusion. The GATEs are
represented on the x axis. Red dots indicate the treatment effect for the reference category (those students who do not
belong to the category of interest), and blue dots indicate the treatment effect for the category of interest. The stars indicate
the statistical signiﬁcance of the difference between the two groups. For instance, the ﬁrst row of the ﬁrst column shows
inclusion is -0.75 test score standard deviations for students without
that the treatment effect of semi-segregation vs.
social or emotional problems. The treatment effect is -0.55 for students with social or emotional problems. The difference
in treatment effect between both groups is statistically signiﬁcant (p < 0.01).

9

A: Individual and school characteristics
Female
Foreign language
IQ
IQ measured
Birth year
Had bridge year (intro class)
Age at ﬁrst interview
Reasons: social and emotional problems
Reasons: performance and learning problems
Reasons: problems with teachers or school
Reasons: not speciﬁed
Sent by Caseworker
Sent by Others
Sent by Parents
Sent by Parents and teacher
Sent by Teacher
Total number of SPS visits

B: School characteristics
Schools: share of nonnative speakers
Schools: share of SEN students
Schools: total number of students
Schools: urban
Schools: socio-economic score
Schools: per-student expenditure (2017, std.)

C: Treatment assignment
Counseling
Academic support
Individual therapy
Inclusive SE
Semi-segregation
Full segregation
No therapy (but sent to SPS)

D: Outcomes
SW8 in SW8 cohort
SW8 composit score (SW8 cohort)
Used disability insurance (SSA cohort)
Used unemployment insurance (SSA cohort)
Monthly wage: last registered year (std., SSA cohort)

E: Sample attrition
In SW8 cohort (1992-2003)
In SSA cohort (1982-1998)
In both SW8 and SSA cohorts

Mean

Sd

Min

Max

N. obs

0.407
0.126
94.92
0.730
1995.35
0.134
8.563
0.209
0.886
0.027
0.011
0.029
0.024
0.052
0.656
0.237
10.587

0.223
0.180
170.028
0.453
0.980
0.00

0.081
0.077
0.449
0.152
0.095
0.090
0.056

0.763
0.000
0.075
0.234
0.000

0.779
0.672
0.463

11.9

4.3

2.3

8.6

0.1
0.1
151.0

0.1
1

0
0
41
0
1982
0
3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1

0
0
0
0
0.79
-0.94

0
0
0
0
0
0
0

1
1
152
1
2003
1
18
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
152

0.59
1.00
1063
1
1.20
5.02

1
1
1
1
1
1
1

1

1

0
-3.70
0
0
-1.85

1
4.28
1
1
6.85

0
0
0

1
1
1

17,822
17,822
13,021
17,822
17,822
17,822
17,822
17,822
17,822
17,822
17,822
17,822
17,822
17,822
17,822
17,822
17,822

17,812
17,812
17,812
17,812
17,812
13,052

17,822
17,822
17,822
17,822
17,822
17,822
17,822

13,890
10,602
11,979
11,979
11,979

17,822
17,822
17,822

Notes: Summary statistics for the population of students referred to the SPS in the Canton of St. Gallen.
The sample is composed of SN students from the Canton of St. Gallen having visited the SPS between
1998 and 2012. “SW8” refers to students observed in the Stellwerk8 academic performance dataset, and
“SSA” to students observed in the the Swiss Social Security dataset. Standard deviations are not reported
for dummy variables. Source: SPS, SW8, SSA and Pensenpool data.

Table 1: Summary statistics

10

Text Representation

“Bag-of-words”

Structural Topic Modelling (STM)

Topical Inverse Regression Match-
ing (TIRM)

Word2Vec

tf
tf-idf
tf-tf-idf

10 topics
80 topics

Dimension of covariate matrix

N ×782 tokens
N ×921 tokens
N ×914 tokens

N ×10 topics
N ×80 topics

10 topics + 1 treatment projection

N ×10 topics

50–dimensional
100–dimensional

N ×50
N ×100

Professional diagnosis

Dictionary/Keyword approach

N ×16 diagnoses

Notes: This table describes the different Natural Language Processing (NLP) methods for text information re-
trieval used in this paper. A discussion of these methods, examples and summary statistics can be found in
Appendix Section A.

Table 2: List of used methods for text information retrieval

11

Test scores

Unemployment Probability

Wage

Quint. I.

Quint. V.

SMD

Quint. V.

Quint. I.

SMD

Quint I.

Quint. V.

SMD

Main covariates

Female
Nonnative
IQ
Age referral
Referral: social/emotional problems
Referral: performance/learning problems
Referral: conﬂict with teacher
Need psychological treatment
Nonnative × Female
Nonnative × Social/emotional

0.45
0.07
93.41
8.00
0.13
0.87
0.02
0.13
0.04
0.01

0.38
0.34
97.20
8.39
0.37
0.90
0.05
0.26
0.13
0.11

0.14
0.73
0.34
0.19
0.56
0.09
0.21
0.31
0.34
0.43

0.41
0.06
94.66
10.06
0.13
0.91
0.01
0.14
0.03
0.01

0.39
0.22
94.82
8.61
0.28
0.79
0.04
0.24
0.08
0.06

0.04
0.48
0.01
0.63
0.39
0.35
0.141
0.27
0.22
0.31

0.48
0.04
95.82
10.06
0.13
0.85
0.01
0.11
0.02
0.00

0.35
0.21
93.66
8.40
0.27
0.84
0.03
0.25
0.08
0.06

0.28
0.55
0.18
0.75
0.34
0.03
0.11
0.35
0.28
0.33

Table 3: Classiﬁcation analysis of IATEs for semi-segregation vs inclusion

Notes: This table shows the mean of each covariate and the standardized mean differences (SMD) across both SE programs between the
ﬁfth and the ﬁrst quintile of the respective estimated IATE distribution. The ﬁrst quintile refers to the most negative effects, whereas the
ﬁfth quintile to the most positive effects. For the probability of unemployment, the ﬁrst and ﬁfth quintiles are reversed (as students in
the ﬁfth quintiles suffer the most from semi-segregation). For two SE programs w and w(cid:48), SMDs are computed as
, where ¯x w is

¯xw−¯xw(cid:48)
(cid:114)
+s2
s2
w(cid:48)
w
2

the mean of the covariate in treatment group w and s2
are depicted in bold.

w is the sample variance of covariate in treatment group w. SMDs higher than 0.2

12

Panel A: Allocation to program in percent and potential cost reduction

% Students
sent to
inclusion

% Students
sent to semi-
segregation

Policy
value

Costs per year
(in mm CHF)

Percent of
actual costs

Test scores. N = 2988

Actual allocation
Depth 2 and baseline variables
Depth 3 and baseline variables
Depth 2 and diagnosis variables
Depth 3 and diagnosis variables

0.69
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.97

Probability of employment. N = 2939

Actual allocation
Depth 2 and baseline variables
Depth 3 and baseline variables
Depth 2 and diagnosis variables
Depth 3 and diagnosis variables

0.53
0.83
0.87
0.87
0.85

0.31
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.03

0.47
0.17
0.13
0.13
0.15

-0.46
-0.29
-0.27
-0.29
-0.27

0.67
0.79
0.80
0.79
0.81

63,925
60,271
60,235
59,762
60,145

64,958
61,007
60,490
60,485
60,796

1
0.94
0.94
0.93
0.94

1
0.94
0.93
0.93
0.94

Notes: This table shows the treatment assignment from four different policies. The depth indicates the depth of the policy trees.
The baseline variables are individual covariates excluding variables from text, and diagnosis variables are individual covariates
together with covariates from the diagnoses extracted from the text (dictionary approach). The policy value is the average APO
under each policy. Total cost estimates and potential cost reduction from the implemented policies are computed.

Panel B: Cross-validated difference between optimal policy value and different policies

All inclusion

All semi-segregation

Assigned policy

Test scores. N = 2988

Depth 2 and baseline variables

Depth 3 and baseline variables

Depth 2 and diagnosis variables

Depth 3 and diagnosis variables

-0.010∗∗
(0.004)
-0.009∗
(0.004)
-0.009∗∗
(0.004)
-0.015∗
(0.009)

Depth 3 and baseline variables

Depth 2 and baseline variables

Probability of no unemployment. N = 2939
-0.027∗∗∗
(0.008)
-0.031∗∗
(0.013)
-0.021∗∗
(0.009)
-0.043∗∗∗
(0.014)

Depth 2 and diagnosis variables

Depth 3 and diagnosis variables

0.651∗∗∗
(0.036)
0.652∗∗∗
(0.036)
0.652∗∗∗
(0.036)
0.646∗∗∗
(0.035)

0.110∗∗∗
(0.037)
0.106∗∗∗
(0.035)
0.116∗∗∗
(0.037)
0.094∗∗∗
(0.035)

0.484∗∗∗
(0.029)
0.485∗∗∗
(0.029)
0.485∗∗∗
(0.029)
0.478∗∗∗
(0.029)

0.016
(0.028)
0.012
(0.029)
0.022
(0.028)
-0.000
(0.030)

Notes: This table displays validation tests for policy trees. 10-fold cross-validation is used. Optimal policies are compared
to either sending everyone to inclusion, to sending everyone to semi-segregation, or to the (already implemented) observed
policy. For each policy, the average difference between the APO under the optimal policy and the APO under one of the
three alternative policies is computed. Inference is done with a one sample t−test on the difference. Standard deviations
of one-sample t-test in parenthesis.

: p < 0.05,

: p <0.01,

: p < 0.1.

∗∗∗

∗∗

∗

Table 4: Optimal policies for inclusion and semi-segregation

13

Appendix A Appendix: Using text to adjust for confounding

The purpose of using computational text analysis methods and Natural Language Processing

(NLP) in this paper is for confounding adjustment in the estimation of returns to SE programs. It

secondarily serves as an interesting pretreatment variable to explore treatment heterogeneity.

Extracting information from raw text is difﬁcult for two main reasons: ﬁrst, text is unstructured

and high-dimensional, and, second, it includes latent features. To account for these two difﬁculties,
text must be represented by an unknown g() function that must be discovered in order to make

text comparable and interpretable, as well as compress its dimensionality to a lower dimensional
space. The main trade-off in discovering g() is to compress the high-dimensionality of text without

losing its substantial meaning: marginally extracting more information from the text occurs at the

cost of increasing the dimensions of the covariate space, which leads to support and computational
problems. Traditionally, g() is discovered by human coders who extract relevant dimensions of the

text into a low-dimensional space (e.g., a series of indicators). Recent machine-learning methods
discover g() in an unsupervised manner (e.g., Blei, Ng, and Jordan (2003)).

This appendix presents in greater details the way I tackle these two difﬁculties and how I prepare

the written psychological records for the estimation of treatment effects. It provides information on

how I preprocessed the text, as well as how I implement the different methods. Summary statistics

about the distribution of text statistics across treatment states are also provided.

A.1 Text preprocessing

Most text analysis methods implemented in this study require the text to be preprocessed — with

the exception of word embeddings. For preprocessing, I strip the text from words which have low

information value (so-called “stopwords”, numbers, and punctuation signs). Subsequently, I reduce

the text to single words (“tokens”), and lemmatize them.(for more details, see Manning, Raghavan,
and Schütze, 2008). The lemmatization ensures that all tokens are reduced to their stems/roots

without inﬂectional endings. Finally, I represent the text into types, i.e. unique expressions of tokens

made out of onegrams (single tokens) and bigrams (two co-occuring tokens). For instance, if the

number of tokens in the following document “I ate an apple apple” is 5, the number of one-gram

types is 4, as the token “apple” is repeated. After preprocessing, the psychological records per student

contain on average 241 tokens and 137 types.

A.2 Text representations

Document term matrix (DTM) The simplest way of representing a text is to reduce the text to its

components (“tokens”) and, for each token, indicate its frequency of appearance within each docu-

ment in a “Document term matrix” (DTM). Thus, two documents are identical (and comparable) if

they use the same tokens with a similar frequency. The limitations of DTMs is that frequency matri-

ces do not account for the context in which tokens appear. Moreover, the dimensionality of DTMs

i

quickly explodes with the number of documents, making comparisons across documents difﬁcult.

This requires handling huge sparse matrices, which can be computationally difﬁcult.

To reduce the dimension of the DTM, I implement two methods: scaling and bounding. For

scaling, I weight the DTM either by term frequency tf, which simply weights terms according to

their number of appearances in a document, or by term-frequency-inverse document frequency (tf-

idf ), which increases with the term frequency of a word in a document and decreases with the

number of documents in the corpus that contains the word (thus highlighting words that carry a lot

of information about the document). Basically, very often used “stop words” have a very low tf-idf

score, and words that are highly speciﬁc to a document have high tf-idf scores.

To select terms that are general enough, I bound the number of terms by selecting words that

appear at least 350 times (min. term frequence) and in at least 150 documents (min doc. frequency)

for tf. For tf-idf, I select very speciﬁc tokens, i.e. tf-idf score bounded at the 99.9th percentile of all

tf-idf scores. I provide a third measure with a mixture of tf and tf-idf scores: I ﬁrst select the most

frequent tokens, and then weight them by tf-idf, which ensures that only frequent words with high

signiﬁcance are selected. As an illustration, Figure A.1 and Figure A.2 display the 20 most frequent

terms per treatment assignment.

The criterion for the choice of scaling scheme and tuning parameters in the DTM representation

depends on the empirical problem at hand: I do not only want tokens that are very predictive of

treatment and outcome, but also tokens that are common enough to serve the purpose of comparing

documents. Thus, a very high tf-idf may suit the purpose of prediction very well; however, scores in

the middle range might serve the purpose of comparison better.

Structural Topic Modeling (STM) and Topical Inverse Regression Matching (TIRM) To miti-

gate the high-dimensionality and lack of word context in DTM, representations that discover latent

features of the text are interesting ways of representing high-dimensional text. I implement Struc-

tural Topic Models (STM) as proposed by Roberts, Stewart, and Airoldi (2016) and Topical Inverse

Regression Matching (TIRM) Roberts, Stewart, and Nielsen (2020), which are a variant of the Latent

Dirichlet Allocation topic model (LDA, Blei, Ng, and Jordan (2003)). Succinctly, LDA and STM ﬁrst

sample a topic from the distribution of tokens in a given document, and then sample each observed

token from the distribution of words given each topic. Unlike LDA, STM allows for covariates to af-

fect the proportion of a document attributed to a topic (“topical prevalence”) and the distribution of

tokens within a topic (“topical content”). STM assumes that covariates inﬂuence the way tokens are

distributed: it includes covariates in the prior distribution of topics per documents (logistic normal

distribution) and the distribution of tokens per topic (multinomial logistic regression). In STM, the

number of topics is chosen ad-hoc, and topics are not directly interpretable.

The advantage of STM is that it reduces the text dimensionality into a ﬁnite number of topics,

and offers a good comparison of documents, as documents that cover the same topics at the same

rates are represented as similar documents. In this application, I estimate STM and deﬁne the number
of topics k to either 10 or 80. I then use the vector of k topic proportions (k × N ) directly in the

ii

Notes: This ﬁgure represents the 20 most frequent terms (tokens) per treatment assignment.
Text is preprocessed via lemmatization. Source: SPS.

Figure A.1: Most common tokens per treatment assignment

propensity score. Other variants are possible, such as taking the k − x most important topics or the

topics that explain topical content the most (see, for instance, Mozer et al., 2020).

Topical Inverse Regression Matching (TIRM) is an interesting method that allows to directly

model the treatment assignment process from text. It builds on STM by estimating an additional

iii

Notes: This ﬁgure represents the 20 most frequent terms (tokens) weighted by tf-idf per
treatment assignment. Text is preprocessed via lemmatization. Source: SPS.

Figure A.2: Most frequent weighted tokens per treatment assignment

reduction, i.e. a document-level propensity score based on STM and the treatment status as a content

covariate. This additional reduction is used together with the STM topics to perform traditional

matching. This method ensures that matched documents are similar in their topics and within-topic

treatment propensity. In this study, I predict the TIRM sufﬁcient prediction score for each treatment

iv

Notes: The prevalence of each STM topic per treatment assignment is represented.
I compute the mean
prevalence of each of the 10 topics per treatment category. Topic prevalence in STM is given by the main
covariates. Source: SPS.

Figure A.3: Prevalence of STM topics per treatment assignment

status (similarly to the propensity score estimation). I then use the score as additional covariate for

the estimation of the nuisance parameter for the propensity score.

To give an example on how topic modeling can be used to remove confounding, I extract an

STM on 10 topics with the covariates presented in Table 1 as topic prevalence covariates. The topic

content is presented in Table A.1 (in German) and the topic distribution across treatment states is
shown in Figure A.3.34 Even though STM topics are not always directly interpretable, Table A.1 shows

interesting patterns. Topic 2, for instance, seems to relate to the evaluation of learning disabilities

with an IQ test and the discussion of the results with parents, whereas topic 5 reports behavioral

issues and the discussion of school reports. Interestingly, topics highlight the fact that parents are

active in the process (see the occurrence of the tokens “mutt” and “elt”). This is valuable information,

as it allows me to account for parental inﬂuence in my estimates.

34Note that this topic distribution is presented as an example. In the main analysis, it will slightly differ because of the
cross-ﬁtting strategy. However, if data are randomly cross-validated, there must be no big discrepancy between Table A.1
and the topics extracted in each fold (even though stm can slightly vary with changing samples).

v

Topic Highest probability

Most frequent and exclusive

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

sr, mutt, km, schulrat, les, pr, kiga, vgl, lehr, pr

iq, elt, ki, besprech, rechn, hawik, einschul, notiz, ke,
kl

lekt, gespraech, kv, elt, k-abc, iq, shs, mutt, mutt, elt

jedoch, mutt, sgd, vg, auffaell,

hawik, dr, math, abklaer, sed, sv, motor, ki, schwierig,
iq
untersuch, spd,
vgl_notiz, mehr, gut
lehr, kjpd, sp, lehrerin, sed_sgd, wld, abklaer, lehr,
bess, cpm
schulleist, weit, kl, vorgespraech, unsich, agd, kg,
abkl, wenig, kram

uebertritt, situation, noetig, therapi, mueh, sv_wld,
einverstand, austausch, termin, pl

ilz, wunsch, sif, motti,

kram, sr,
gespraech, evtl
elt, info, spd, problem, schwierig, wld_agd, sed, gut,
srp

fortschritt, vg,

vb,

herrn,

trog-d,

iq_sed,

inform,

jug, u’ergebnis,

auditiv_merkfaeh,

gemein-
vgl_notiz,

leg.-th,
beob,
einschulungsjahr,

sr_lekt,
sam_auswertungsgespraech,
proz, sht
be-
untersuch_hawik,
sprech_u’ergebnis,
psychodi-
agnost_gemeinsam, wwt, notiz_vgl, sek, leistungs-
_lernverhalt
bad_sond,
untersuch_k-abc,
dyskalkulie-therapi, wld_agd,
vgl, ke, pl
lekt_vorlaeuf, beistand, z.h, abklaer_wunsch, forst,
agd_vg, hpd, antragsschreib, li, lernverhalt_aktuell
testsitz, km, semesterbericht, macht_mueh, agd, shs,
notiz, beﬁnd, lernverhalt
rav_pr, moegl, dc-ther,
hs_ds, vg_mutt, familia, cpm_rav
kkd, langhald, zz, wunsch_lehrerin, k-abc_sed, inter-
view, hs, legasthenie-schlussbericht, diagnost_termin,
wn
schlussgespraech_sr,
cholog_abklaer,
vg_abkl, th, leistungs-
intelligenzstatus, bad, kle, kit, woechent, sv_wld, ej,
mutt_abkl, ngste, audi
sr_schlussbericht, time-out, z.h_sr, lrs-ther, textver-
staendnis, rt, spezial, antragsschreib_schulrat, thema,
slp

schulpsy-
lektion_woechent, psychodiagnost,

les_langsam, kontextklaer,

thera,

sond,

Notes: This table represents the tokens occurring with the highest probability in each of the 10 topics, as well as the to-
kens that are the most frequent and most exclusive in each topic. The method of topic extraction is STM, and topics are
not necessarily interpretable.

Table A.1: Topics from a STM on main sample

When looking at whether topics are discriminatory in terms of treatment assignment, all top-

ics are represented in all treatments, but some seem to be more prevalent in some treatments. For

instance, topics 1 and 2 are more represented in children who have been segregated in special class-

rooms, while topics 5 and 6 are more represented in students sent to inclusion. Even though it could

be interesting to ﬁnd meaning in topics, the true number of topics is never known, which makes

topics sensitive to the ad-hoc choice of k (Roberts, Stewart, and Airoldi, 2016). For this reason, I

estimate STM models with different k.

Word embedding with Word2Vec The word embedding representation estimates the semantic

proximity of words. The algorithm I use in this study is the Word2vec of Mikolov et al. (2013), who

propose a neural network architecture to represent words in vectors as a function of their use and the

words that most commonly co-occur with them. I use the Word2Vec embedding with word vectors of
length K=50, 100 (I also tried with 200 and 500) based on text which is not preprocessed. For each
embedding, I compute a document-level vector of length K by taking the average of the numeric
vectors of all the words within a document (similar to Mozer et al. (2020)). The result is an N × K

matrix. Documents that are similar to each other in terms of words and their context will therefore

be similar on the K dimensions. Word embeddings are famous for the word associations they can

vi

Word
adhs
adhs
adhs
adhs
adhs
adhs
adhs
adhs
adhs
adhs

Most similar
ads
adhd
neuropsycholog
pos
autismus
medizinische
erhaertet
mediz
neurologische
asperger

rechtschreibstoerung
rechtschreibstoerung
rechtschreibstoerung
rechtschreibstoerung
rechtschreibstoerung
rechtschreibstoerung
rechtschreibstoerung
rechtschreibstoerung
rechtschreibstoerung
rechtschreibstoerung

erschwerten
rezeptive
beeintraechtigung
auditiver
sprachstoerung
rechtschreibschwaeche
spracherwerbsstoerung
teilleistungsstaerung
rechtschreibschwierigkeiten
ausgepraegte

Table A.2: Word2Vec word similarities

Similarity
0.84
0.76
0.74
0.73
0.73
0.71
0.70
0.70
0.70
0.70

0.77
0.76
0.75
0.74
0.73
0.72
0.72
0.71
0.71
0.71

Notes: Illustrative examples of word associations produced by word embeddings and Word2Vec in German. “ADHS” is the
German abbreviation for “ADHD”, and “rechtschreibstoerung” is the German translation of “spelling disorder”.

produce, and I give some illustrative examples in Section A.2. For instance, the words that are

the closest to “ADHD” and “dyslexia” (literally, “spelling disorder”) are close in meaning to the two

expressions. This method is therefore a good way to capture conceptual proximity between words,

and accounts for the context of words.

Mapping mental diagnoses with ad-hoc dictionary approach The text representation that is the

most directly interpretable and perhaps the most convincing in this context is a dictionary approach

that leverages independent mental health diagnoses. I use an independent sample on children from

the City of St. Gallen, which contains an additional observed diagnosis variable given by the case-

worker.

I build a lexicon that, for each of the 16 formal diagnoses assigned in the City sample,

identiﬁes the tokens that are the most “key” in each diagnosis (namely, the “keywords” that are the

most exclusive, or predictive, of each diagnosis). There are many ways to deﬁne “keyness”, and I pro-
pose a combination of different measures that are common in computational linguistics.35 Namely,

I ﬁrst take the 40 most frequent tokens per diagnosis (based on count frequency), then the 60 most

frequent tokens weighted by tf-idf, the 40 tokens with the highest chi-squared keyness value, the 40

tokens with the highest likelihood ratio G2 statistics and the 40 tokens with the highest pointwise
mutual information statistics. I then take the union of all tokens provided by each measure.36

35Keyness is the importance of a keyword within its context. To compute keyness, the frequency of a keyword in a target
category for the observed frequency of a word (one particular diagnosis) is compared with its frequency in a reference
category (the expected frequency, in all the other diagnoses).

36Alternatively, this purely frequency analysis could be done by training a classiﬁer on text tokens.

vii

To classify documents into diagnoses, I ﬁrst map each document to the diagnoses using the key

tokens of each diagnosis extracted in the St. Gallen sample. I then compute the share of diagnoses per

document by dividing the frequency of tokens assigned to a given diagnosis in a document by the total

number of tokens per document. I weight diagnoses such that the sum of each document’s diagnosis

frequency sums up to 1. As a result, I obtain a vector of length 16 with the predicted proportion of

diagnoses per document. In a second measure, I ensure that the most prominent diagnosis assigned

to a document is discriminatory enough. I hot-encode the diagnosis if the proportion of the given

diagnosis is 1.5 standard deviations above the mean of diagnosis frequency within the document.

The dictionary/keyword approach maps documents into clinically meaningful concepts by using

natural language which is almost exactly similar to the language used by therapists in the Canton

of St. Gallen. Therefore, it is the closest to what a human coder would do if she had to classify the

caseworkers’ comments. Moreover, contrary to STM and word embeddings, it is supervised. Since

therapists from the City and therapists from the Canton work in the same environment, under the

same rules, and use the same lexicon, texts are very similar.

Distribution of diagnoses across treatment status is presented in Figure A.4. It is interesting to

notice that individual therapies, inclusion and semi-segregation share a roughly similar population

of students, namely students diagnosed with problems related to school performance. Inclusion has

a relatively higher share of students with learning disabilities, while semi-segregation has a higher

share of students with behavioral problems. In contrast, hard segregation is particularly targeted to

students with more severe disabilities, such as motor problems, and students with parental educa-

tional deﬁcit. As I can expect, students not given any treatment display a more equal share of all
diagnoses.37

37A similar descriptive picture holds when I use 1 standard deviations above the mean to classify diagnoses.

viii

Notes: The main 15 diagnoses extracted from an independent dataset are represented (the diagnosis “foreign
language” is not displayed here). Diagnosis are extracted from the data of the City of St. Gallen Source: SPS.

Figure A.4: Average diagnosis per treatment assignment

ix

Appendix B Appendix: Robustness and sensitivity checks

B.1 Overlap: ATO and alternative trimming schemes

The problem of overlap is especially exacerbated in settings with many treatments. It becomes

even more important with a high-dimensional, highly predictive, covariate space (see D’Amour et al.,

2021). In such settings, overlap is difﬁcult to obtain, which induces bias and extreme variability of

ATEs estimates. To ensure overlap and remove extreme weights, I check the robustness of my results

by estimating the Average Treatment Effect on Overlap (ATO), and by using different trimming rules.

Average treatment effect on the population of Overlap (ATO)

If students with SEN differ greatly

across programs and overlap is poor, it might be relevant from a policy perspective to look at pair-

wise treatment effects for the population which is the most similar in terms of covariates across

multiple treatments.

I estimate overlap-weighted average treatment effects (Li, Morgan, and Za-

slavsky, 2018; Li and Li, 2019), i.e. average treatment effects on the population of propensity score
overlap ATOd,d (cid:48) = Eoverlap

]. The ATO estimand is the following:

[Y d
i

− Y d(cid:48)
i

ATOd,d (cid:48) = Eoverlap

[Γ h(d, X i

) − Γ h(d

(cid:48)

, X i

)], h(x) =

D
(cid:88)

k=1

( 1
pk

(x)

)−1

(7)

The ATO score gives the most relative weight to the covariate regions in which none of the propen-

sities are close to zero.

It is the product of the IPW and the harmonic mean of the generalized

propensity scores. Beyond focusing on an interesting population, the advantage of using the ATO is

that it mitigates problems of extreme propensity scores in the ATE computation. The ATO score is
not doubly-robust, and is sensitive to potential misspeciﬁcations in the propensity score.38

Results for the ATO are presented for each pairwise treatment effect in Figure B.1, and they are

compared to the ATE and the ATET. The point estimates of the ATO are, in most cases, quite similar

to the ATE point estimates, which indicates that there is good overlap in the overall population. This

suggests that my ATE results do not suffer from lack of overlap.

Trimming The idea of trimming is to remove observations with weights h(x) in Equation (1) below
a certain threshold, such that h(x) = 1(x ∈ C) with C denoting the target subpopulation deﬁned by
a threshold of the propensity score distribution α. Each trimming rule slightly shifts the population
of interest C. In other words, the more conservative the trimming rule, the more homogeneous the

population across treatment states.

To deﬁne the trimming schemes and trimming thresholds α, I explore different options. Fol-

lowing the adaptation of trimming schemes for the multi-treatment case in Yoshida et al. (2019),

I trim, in a ﬁrst setting, observations with all propensity scores below a certain threshold of the

38Since the weight is a function of the propensity score, it is not consistent if the propensity score is misspeciﬁed.
However, as pointed out by Li and Li (2019), outcome regression may still increase the efﬁciency of the weighting estimator.
I estimated the variance of the ATO the same way I estimated the variance of the ATE and the ATET. For more information,
see Li and Li (2019) and the R-Package psweight.

i

Notes: This ﬁgure depicts pairwise treatment effects for Special Education programs in St. Gallen. Each pair compares
interventions that are the closest in degree of severity and inclusion. Each pairwise treatment effect is the effect of
being assigned to the ﬁrst program in comparison to the second program on one of the four outcomes presented in
the panel headers. The treatment effect on the whole population (ATE), on the population of the treated (ATET), and
on the population of overlap (ATO) (see Li and Li, 2019) are presented. “Ind. therapy” is the abbreviation for individual
therapies, “Acad. support” for academic support, “segr” for segregation, and “no SpEd” for receiving no program. Nuisance
parameters are estimated using an ensemble learner that includes text representations presented in the “data” section. 95%
conﬁdence intervals are represented and are based on one sample t − t est for the ATE and the ATET. Test results and wages
are standardized with mean 0 and standard deviation 1. Source: SPS.

Figure B.1: Pairwise treatment effects with ATO estimates

propensity score (see Crump et al., 2009). This referenced under “absolute trimming” with α =
{0.001, 0.005, 0.01}. In a second setting, the “asymmetrical trimming”, I trim treated observations

with their corresponding propensity score within a chosen quantile of each propensity score (“asym-
metrical trimming”, see Stürmer et al. (2010)). I use α = {0.01, 0.033, 0.05, 0.1} for the 1st., 3.3th,

5th and 10th quantiles. Results are presented in Figure B.2: the majority of results discussed in

Section 4 persist across different trimming schemes. The interpretation of effect variation under

different trimming rules must however be done with caution, as each trimming rule “shifts” the

population of interest.

ii

(c) Probability of using DI(d) Work income (standardized)(a) SW8 test results (standardized)(b) Probability of being unemployedCounselling − No SpEdAcad. support − No SpEdInd. therapy − Acad. supportInclusion − Ind. therapySemi−segr. − InclusionFull segr. − Semi−segr.Counselling − No SpEdAcad. support − No SpEdInd. therapy − Acad. supportInclusion − Ind. therapySemi−segr. − InclusionFull segr. − Semi−segr.−0.10.00.1−0.3−0.2−0.10.00.10.2−0.50.00.51.0−0.050.000.050.100.150.20EstimandATEATETATONotes: This ﬁgure depicts relevant pairwise treatment effects for Special Education programs in St. Gallen at different
trimming levels. Absolute trimming of Crump et al. (2009) and asymmetrical trimming of Stürmer et al. (2010) are
represented at different trimming thresholds. Each pairwise treatment effect is the effect of being assigned to the ﬁrst
program in comparison to the second program on one of the four outcomes presented in the column headers. Both the
treatment effect on the whole population (ATE) and on the population of the treated (ATET) are presented. “Ind. therapy”
is the abbreviation for individual therapies, “Acad. support” for academic support, “segr.” for segregation and “no SpEd”
for receiving no program. Nuisance parameters are estimated using an ensemble learner that includes text representations
presented in the “data” section. 95% conﬁdence intervals are represented and are based on one sample t − t est for the
ATE and the ATET. Source: SPS.

Figure B.2: Pairwise treatment effects with different trimming rules

B.2 Handling text as covariate

In this section, I check that my results do not depend heavily on the way I retrieve information

from the text. First, I investigate the sensitivity of my estimates to the inclusion of text covariates.

Second, I explore the problem of “text-induced endogeneity”, which might arise if the text repre-

sentation captures the psychologist’s biases (towards a certain treatment or a certain writing style)

rather than information on the student.

Sensitivity to text covariates To investigate the sensitivity of my results to the inclusion of text co-

variates, I compute all my results using only nontext covariates. I then show how much the estimates

iii

(c) Probability of using DI(d) Work income (standardized)(a) SW8 test results (standardized)(b) Probability of being unemployedCounselling − No SpEdAcad. support − No SpEdInd. therapy − Acad. supportInclusion − Ind. therapySemi−segr. − InclusionFull segr. − Semi−segr.Counselling − No SpEdAcad. support − No SpEdInd. therapy − Acad. supportInclusion − Ind. therapySemi−segr. − InclusionFull segr. − Semi−segr.−0.2−0.10.00.10.2−0.4−0.20.00.2−1.0−0.50.00.51.00.00.10.2EstimandATE: Abs. trimming (0.001)ATE: Abs. trimming (0.005)ATE: Abs. trimming (0.01)ATE: Asymetrical trimming (10th)ATE: Asymetrical trimming (1th)ATE: Asymetrical trimming (3.3th)ATE: Asymetrical trimming (5th)ATET: Abs. trimming (0.001)ATET: Abs. trimming (0.005)ATET: Abs. trimming (0.01)ATET: Asymetrical trimming (10th)ATET: Asymetrical trimming (1th)ATET: Asymetrical trimming (3.3th)ATET: Asymetrical trimming (5th)Notes: This ﬁgures gives the effect variation between the speciﬁcation with text covariates and the speciﬁcation without
text. On the y axis, the ATE with text covariates is represented for each outcome and pairwise treatment effect investigated
in this paper. The x axis gives the difference between the ATE estimated with text covariates and the ATE estimated without
text covariates in percent of the ATE estimated without text covariates.

Figure B.3: Effect comparison with speciﬁcation without text covariates

based on text vary with respect to estimates obtained without controlling for text. This exercise gives

me an approximate indication on how much confounding I can remove by using the text.

Figure B.3 gives the variation in effect between the speciﬁcation with text covariates and the

speciﬁcation without text. On the y axis, the ATE with text covariates is represented for each outcome

and pairwise treatment effect investigated in this paper. The x axis gives the difference between the

ATE estimated with text covariates and the ATE estimated without text covariates in percent of the

ATE estimated without text covariates. On average, I ﬁnd that estimates based on both covariates

and text information are 29% smaller than estimates that do not leverage the text information.

Interestingly, differences between estimates with text and estimates without text are particularly

pronounced for comparisons with the “No SpEd” intervention, which suggests that there is valuable

confounding information contained in the text for this particular population of students.

Text-induced endogeneity It is inherent to the discovery of latent features in text data that some

dimensions (latent or not) of text might be exogenous to the child’s characteristics but inﬂuencing

treatment assignment. An example is if a given psychologist is biased towards a particular treatment,

and that this psychologist always writes using a similar set of words-tokens, then the information

retrieved from test will capture the psychologist’s biases together with the information on the student.

iv

To tackle this problem, I conduct two analyses. In the ﬁrst analysis, I explore whether the text

reﬂects the psychologist’s writing style. I program a classiﬁer to predict from the text the psychologist

who wrote the report. If the classiﬁer is not able to capture the psychologists’ writing styles, the risk

of including unwanted exogenous variation in my estimates is minimized. Running a random forest

classiﬁer to predict the caseworker, my best measure of text (frequency weighted term frequency

matrix) has a prediction error of 40%, meaning that 40% of all psychologists are misclassiﬁed. How-

ever, this measure goes as low as 59% for word embeddings with 100 features and 73% for stm with

80 topics. In conclude that the psychologists do not inﬂuence the distribution of text covariates in a

systematic manner.

In the second analysis, I systematically remove, for each psychologist, the most frequently and

uniquely used tokens (I compute the "keyness" score across psychologists using different measures

such as the chi-squared measure, likelihood ratio and point-wise mutual information). Thus, words

that are too predictive of a given psychologists do not inﬂuence the estimates. I then compute my

main text measures on this reduced set of features. The intuition of this procedure is somewhat

similar in spirit to including psychologists’ ﬁxed effects in the regression. Results are similar to the

main results presented (ﬁgures available on request).

B.3 Selective Attrition

Potential selective attrition in the measured outcomes could undermine the validity of the re-

sults insofar as outcomes are not observed for all individuals. For test scores, I explicitly modeled

selection into test taking and presented results above. To tackle the problem of selective attrition, I
further narrow the sample to individuals for which I observe all outcomes (N = 8993). Estimates

are presented in Figure B.4. Results are in line with main results.

B.4 Exogenous placement into inclusive vs. semi-segregated Special Education pro-

grams

I turn my attention to remaining potentially unaddressed selection in the estimation of the causal

effect of inclusion vs. semi-segregation. I leverage residual unexplained variation in the probability

to assign students to inclusion using instrumental variables in the spirit of “judge-design” studies (see,

e.g., Maestas, Mullen, and Strand, 2013). The main source of exogenous variation in the assignment

of students to SpEd education programs and to inclusion instead of semi-segregation is the variation

in the probability to assign students with SEN to inclusion across schools within years. This variation

is shown in Figure 2. Some variation remains even when years ﬁxed effects are introduced, and more

importantly, when school-year characteristics are accounted for. Characteristics include reasons for

referral, main characteristics, IQ, and whether parents decided to send the child to the SPS. School

characteristics include the percentage of nonnative students, the percentage of students with SEN,

the socio-economic index, the school size, and the expenditures per student.

v

Figure B.4: Pairwise treatment effects for cohorts observed in all outcomes

This ﬁgure depicts relevant pairwise treatment effects for Special Education programs in St. Gallen. Each pairwise treat-
ment effect is the effect of being assigned to the ﬁrst program in comparison to the second program on one of the four
outcomes presented in the column headers. Both the treatment effect on the whole population (ATE) and on the popula-
tion of the treated (ATET) are presented. “Ind. therapy” is the abbreviation for individual therapies, “Acad. support” for
academic support, “segr.” for segregation and “no SpEd” for receiving no program. Nuisance parameters are estimated
using an ensemble learner that includes text representations presented in the “data” section. 95% conﬁdence intervals are
represented and are based on one sample t − t est for the ATE and the ATET. Source: SPS.

I measure variations in the probability to assign students with SEN to inclusion across schools

within years as the school-year deviations in assignment to inclusion from the mean inclusion assign-

ment rate at the year level. This variation gives how much individual schools differ in the probability

to assign inclusion from all the other schools within a year. I exploit treatment assignment deviations

from mean rates of assignment to inclusive treatment as a instruments for assignment to inclusion.

Preferences at the school level for inclusive treatment increase the likelihood that students with SEN

will be sent to inclusive SpEd, especially for students with moderate difﬁculties. The key assumption

that underlies my approach is that the assignment of students with SEN to a school-year is uncorre-

lated with unobserved characteristics (such as SEN severity) conditional on observed characteristics.

vi

(c) Probability of using DI(d) Work income (standardized)(a) SW8 test results (standardized)(b) Probability of being unemployedCounselling − No SEAcad. support − No SEInd. therapy − Acad. supportInclusion − Ind. therapyCounselling − No SEAcad. support − No SEInd. therapy − Acad. supportInclusion − Ind. therapy−0.10−0.050.000.050.100.000.050.100.150.20−0.20.00.20.40.6−0.04−0.03−0.02−0.010.000.01EstimandATEATETTreatment effects for SE programs: cohorts in both samplesAs pointed out by Maestas, Mullen, and Strand (2013), this amounts to an assumption of conditional

random assignment to school-year within a year.

One potential threat to this assumption is that students could select into schools. However, my

rich information on school characteristics and the referral process allows me to control for this. More-

over, a careful reading of ministry reports in St. Gallen (for instance, the Nachtrag zum Volkschulgesetz

2013) and school documents show that schools’ preferences in terms of inclusion and segregation do

not, for the most case, follow a predictable pattern. Moreover, the diagnosis and treatment assign-

ment are done in a centralized manner by independent psychologists, and they are not inﬂuenced

by ﬁnancial constraints at the school level. Finally, it is documented that student mobility between

school is rare in the canton of St. Gallen. Families must move to another municipality if they want

to change school (or enroll their students in private schools) (Balestra, Eugster, and Liebert, forth-

coming, 2020; Balestra, Sallin, and Wolter, forthcoming).

In Table B.1, I present ﬁrst-stage estimates and add covariates sequentially to the regression in

order to indirectly test for random assignment within year on the basis of observable characteris-

tics. The idea is that only covariates that are correlated with the deviation will affect the estimated

coefﬁcient on the deviation when included. The coefﬁcient on the variation is not signiﬁcantly af-

fected by the addition of variables, not even by the addition of school-year characteristics such as

socio-economic status of the school or by the IQ score. This is the case both when the raw and the

adjusted variation is considered. Thus, these results show that the measured variations are not corre-

lated with student or school characteristics, and thus the preference for inclusion depends on schools’

preferences. Note that, since, in a multiple treatment setting, a sound IV approach requires one in-

strument per treatment (see Kirkeboen, Leuven, and Mogstad, 2016), I focus only on SN students

having received either inclusion (excluding individual therapies) or semi-segregation and restrict

my dataset accordingly. This also ensures that I measure the effect for a homogeneous population

of students with SN (students who have issues such that they would either assigned to inclusion or

semi-segregation). However, the ﬁrst stage estimates hold also when the whole sample is considered.

I estimate (Conditional) Local Average Treatment Effects of being assigned to inclusion rather

than segregation on test scores using unexplained variation in the decision to implement inclusion

by school within years or by year within school. Similar to Maestas, Mullen, and Strand (2013),

I estimate 2SLS with and without covariates, both using the raw and the adjusted variation. I do

not use text information in this case. Results are presented in Figure B.5. LATE estimates show that

semi-segregation has a negative impact on students’ academic performance. The impact of semi-

segregation is around -0.45 standard deviations of test score in comparison to inclusion, and it is of

10 percentage points on the probability to be unemployed. The fact that the test score estimates are

substantially lower than the ATE estimates is mostly due to the fact that the populations of interest

are not exactly the same: ATEs measure the effect for the whole population of students with SEN,

whereas the LATE measures the effect on compliers, i.e. students who would have been assigned to

semi-segregation if the school did not have a “preference” for inclusion.

In conclusion, this IV exercise allowed me to exploit some existing exogenous variation in treat-

ment assignment across schools within years to estimate treatment effects. It is, however, not the

vii

Coefﬁcient on raw variation
(within year across schools)
Coefﬁcient on raw variation
(within year across schools)

Coefﬁcient on raw variation
(within school across years)
Coefﬁcient on adjusted variation
(within school across years)

Control variables included
Students’ characteristics
IQ score
Reasons for referral
School characteristics per year

Probability to be assigned to inclusion

(I)

(II)

(III)

(IV)

(V)

0.89∗∗∗

0.87∗∗∗

0.82∗∗∗

0.83∗∗∗

0.78∗∗∗

0.76∗∗∗

0.76∗∗∗

0.76∗∗∗

0.76∗∗∗

0.75∗∗∗

0.44∗∗∗

0.48∗∗∗

0.45∗∗∗

0.44∗∗∗

0.45∗∗∗

0.37∗∗∗

0.38∗∗∗

0.39∗∗∗

0.39∗∗∗

0.40∗∗∗

X

X
X

X
X
X

X
X
X
X

Notes: First stage regression of the schools preferences for inclusion on the assignment
to inclusion. All regressions include schools ﬁxed effects for the regressions within
schools, and year ﬁxed effects for the regressions within years. Number of observa-
tions: 2932 for raw variation and 2497 for adjusted variation. ∗ p < 0.1; ∗∗ p < 0.05;
∗∗∗ p < 0.001. Source: SPS

Table B.1: First-Stage Regressions: Effect of preference for inclusion on assignment to inclusion

panacea. First, potential difﬁculties with the monotonicity might persist when more than two treat-

ments exist. Even though I restricted my analysis to the subsample of students observed in inclusion

and semi-segregation, the instrument could still move some students to other available treatments.

Second, even though I observe many characteristics about schools, the (almost unsolvable) issue of

not being able to observe the actual teaching behaviors and teaching styles of both the main teachers

and the SpEd teachers at the school level still leaves the black box open.

viii

Notes: This ﬁgure shows LATE estimates of the effect of inclusion for academic performance and
unemployment probability for students either in inclusive or segregated settings. The estimates
are found with 2SLS, and covariates include student and school characteristics. 95% conﬁdence
intervals are represented. Both the effect for the adjusted and the raw deviations in the ﬁrst stage
are represented.

Figure B.5: LATE for inclusion vs. semi-segregation

ix

Appendix C Appendix: Supplementary Material

Therapy

German

Inclusive special education (ISF)

Special (small) classes

Integrierte Schülerförderung (ISF),
Schulische Heilpädagogik
Kleinklasse

Speech therapy
Psychomotor therapy
Dyslexia therapy
Dyscalculia therapy
Rhythm therapy (Dalcroze eurhythmics)

Logotherapie
Psychomotoriktherapie
Legasthenie (Lese- und Rechtschreibstörung)
Dyskalkulietherapie
Rhythmik

Tutoring, language tutoring

Hilfe

Treatment group

Inclusion

Semi-segregation

Individual therapy
Individual therapy
Individual therapy
Individual therapy
Individual therapy

Academic support

Counseling

Psychologische Hilfe, Beratung

Counseling

Table C.1: List of available therapies from the Cantonal offer

“Sonderpädagogikkonzept

Source:
für die Regelschule”
trieved on the ofﬁcial website of
the Ministry of Education of St.
sport/volksschule/rahmenbedingungen/rechtliche-grundlagen/konzepte.html.

from the Ministry of Education, 18.3.2015,

re-
Gallen, https://www.sg.ch/bildung-

i

Data restrictions

Number of observations

Full sample of students in contact with SPS
- Trim cohorts (1982 to 2003) and missing birthdates
- Native language non-imputable
- Treatment not in cantonal offer
- Treatment not identiﬁed

TOTAL
IQ not computed

Table C.2: Attrition analysis

28584
-972
-1288
-8612
-478

17822
4801

ii

i
i
i

N (N = 17, 822)

1,450

1,381

7,997

2,705

1,690

1,603

996

Counselling

Academic support

Individual therapy

Inclusive special ed.
(ISF)

Semi-segregation

Full segregation

No therapy
(but sent to SPS)

A: Individual characteristics
Female
Foreign language
IQ
IQ measured
Birth year
Age at ﬁrst interview
Had bridge year
Reasons: other
Reasons: social and emotional problems
Reasons: performance and learning problems
Reasons: problems with teachers or school
Reasons: not speciﬁed
Referred by: Caseworker
Referred by: Other
Referred by: Parents
Referred by: Parents and teacher
Referred by: Teacher
Total number of SPS visits
Regional ofﬁce: Ro
Regional ofﬁce: Go
Regional ofﬁce: Wi
Regional ofﬁce: Wa
Regional ofﬁce: Ra
Regional ofﬁce: Sa
Regional ofﬁce: Re
School: percent nonnatives
School: percent SEN students
School: social index
School: total number of students
School: expenditures per student (2017)
School: urban

B: Sample attrition
In a SW8 cohort
In AHV data
In both SW8 and AHV data

C: Outcomes
SW8 Test taken (in SW8 cohort)
SW8 Math and German (std)
Used disability insurance
Used unemployment insurance
Last registered yearly wage (std., SSA cohort)

0.34
0.08
101.47 (13.08)
0.62
1994.43 (4.53)
9.12 (285)
0.08
0.04
0.48
0.68
0.06
0.03
0.00
0.04
0.15
0.62
0.19
10.69 (8.08)
0.12
0.09
0.15
0.22
0.12
0.23
0.07
0.22 (0.10)
0.18 (0.10)
0.98 (0.07)
176.37 (158.92)
-0.01 (0.95)
0.48 (0.50)

0.72
0.73
0.47

0.74
0.57 (1.05)
0.06
0.24
-0.09 (1.03)

0.50
0.15
94.24 (10.54)
0.73
1993.86 (4.25)
9.47 (2.29)
0.08
0.03
0.19
0.91
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.06
0.66
0.25
8.77 (5.94)
0.22
0.07
0.12
0.10
0.09
0.16
0.24
0.21 (0.10)
0.18 (0.09)
0.98 (0.07)
151.55 (123.93)
0.06 (1.05)
0.43 (0.50)

0.67
0.76
0.46

0.81
-0.09 (0.86)
0.05
0.32
-0.06 (0.96)

0.40
0.09
98.26 (10.58)
0.74
1995.14 (4.33)
8.69 (1.96)
0.08
0.03
0.15
0.92
0.01
0.01
0.04
0.02
0.05
0.71
0.18
9.10 (6.18)
0.15
0.13
0.18
0.12
0.07
0.18
0.17
0.22 (0.10)
0.18 (0.10)
0.98 (0.07)
161.58 (133.71)
-0.05 (0.97)
0.45 (0.50)

0.75
0.70
0.46

0.82
0.24 (0.88)
0.03
0.19
0.15 (0.97)

0.46
0.11
92.94 (9.41)
0.80
1996.68 (3.73)
8.75 (2.03)
0.07
0.02
0.18
0.94
0.05
0.00
0.02
0.01
0.04
0.64
0.28
10.27 (7.72)
0.04
0.02
0.12
0.17
0.38
0.20
0.06
0.20 (0.09)
0.18 (0.11)
0.95 (0.06)
174.97 (194.00)
0.28 (1.03)
0.37 (0.48)

0.89
0.58
0.47

0.86
-0.24 (0.85)
0.04
0.19
0.12 (0.98)

0.43
0.28
86.17 (8.96)
0.78
1993.61 (3.64)
9.11 (2.50)
0.13
0.06
0.22
0.88
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.03
0.02
0.61
0.33
13.58 (9.25)
0.15
0.12
0.25
0.07
0.06
0.18
0.18
0.26 (0.10)
0.18 (0.10)
1.01 (0.07)
211.08 (161.88)
-0.23 (0.88)
0.60 (0.49)

0.30
0.14
87.01 (14.99)
0.67
1995.80 (4.31)
7.19 (2.63)
0.08
0.10
0.28
0.78
0.04
0.02
0.05
0.07
0.06
0.53
0.29
19.62 (14.79)
0.14
0.12
0.13
0.19
0.20
0.15
0.08
0.22 (0.11)
0.18 (0.11)
0.98 (0.07)
173.50 (150.32)
0.03 (1.10)
0.47 (0.50)

0.38
0.20
93.63 (11.25)
0.61
1999.18 (3.41)
6.24 (0.60)
1.00
0.10
0.24
0.87
0.03
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.58
0.36
6.14 (3.93)
0.15
0.04
0.12
0.11
0.13
0.20
0.25
0.24 (0.10)
0.19 (0.11)
0.99 (0.07)
165.58 (139.30)
0.01 (1.05)
0.44 (0.50)

0.69
0.81
0.53

0.82
0.64
0.47

0.99
0.33
0.32

0.80
-1.12 (0.92)
0.11
0.39
-0.16 (1.00)

0.41
-0.20 (1.12)
0.38
0.25
-0.57 (0.95)

0.63
0.17 (0.95)
0.07
0.19
-0.15 (0.95)

Table C.3: Summary statistics per treatment group

Summary statistics for the population of students referred to the SPS in the Canton of St. Gallen. The names of Regional ofﬁces are abbreviated for conﬁdentiality purposes. The sample is composed of SN students from the
Canton of St. Gallen having visited the SPS between 1998 and 2010 and being born between 1982 and 2003. Mean per treatment groups are reported, and standard deviations are reported in parentheses for continuous variables.
Source: SPS

support
ther.
vsInd.
C ounseling

vs Acad.
C ounseling

vs Se mi-segr.
C ounseling

vs Fullsegr.
C ounseling

vsISF
C ounseling

Average

C ounseling

ther.

vs N o treatm ent
supportvsInd.

supportvsISF

supportvs Se mi-segr.

supportvs N o treatm ent
supportvs Fullsegr.

ther.

Acad.

Acad.

Acad.

Acad.

Acad.

Ind.

vsISF
Ind.

ther.

vs Se mi-segr.

vs Fullsegr.

ther.

Ind.

ther.

Ind.

vs N o treatm ent
vs Se mi-segr.

ISF

ISF

vs Fullsegr.

ISF

vs N o treatm ent
Se mi-segr.

vs Fullsegr.
Se mi-segr.

vs N o treatm ent

vs N o treatm ent
Fullsegr.

i
v

Female
Foreign language
IQ
IQ measured
Birth year
Age at ﬁrst interview
Had bridge year
Reasons: other
Reasons: social and emotional problems
Reasons: performance and learning problems
Reasons: problems with teachers or school
Reasons: not speciﬁed
Referred by: Caseworker
Referred by: Other
Referred by: Parents
Referred by: Parents and teacher
Referred by: Teacher
Referred by: NA
Total number of SPS visits
Regional ofﬁce: Ro
Regional ofﬁce: Go
Regional ofﬁce: Wi
Regional ofﬁce: Wa
Regional ofﬁce: Ra
Regional ofﬁce: Sa
Regional ofﬁce: Re
In a SW8 cohort
In AHV data
In both SW8 and AHV data
SW8 Test taken (in SW8 cohort)
SW8 Math and German (std)
Used disability insurance
Used unemployment insurance
Income (std.)

0.17
0.23
0.58
0.20
0.58
0.67
1.36
0.16
0.27
0.30
0.11
0.11
0.14
0.09
0.17
0.13
0.18
0.10
0.55
0.17
0.19
0.14
0.19
0.32
0.08
0.27
0.39
0.40
0.13
0.39
0.64
0.34
0.20
0.16

0.33
0.23
0.61
0.24
0.13
0.13
0.02
0.07
0.64
0.59
0.20
0.10
0.06
0.09
0.32
0.08
0.16
0.02
0.27
0.26
0.05
0.09
0.34
0.07
0.17
0.46
0.11
0.06
0.03
0.17
0.68
0.02
0.18
0.01

0.13
0.04
0.27
0.27
0.16
0.18
0.01
0.08
0.75
0.64
0.22
0.11
0.25
0.07
0.37
0.18
0.01
0.11
0.22
0.07
0.13
0.09
0.26
0.14
0.13
0.29
0.07
0.08
0.02
0.19
0.34
0.12
0.12
0.05

0.26
0.11
0.75
0.40
0.54
0.15
0.05
0.12
0.66
0.71
0.01
0.22
0.16
0.14
0.40
0.04
0.22
0.11
0.05
0.30
0.28
0.08
0.12
0.65
0.09
0.04
0.43
0.33
0.00
0.30
0.85
0.10
0.13
0.07

0.19
0.53
1.37
0.36
0.20
0.01
0.16
0.06
0.57
0.50
0.17
0.11
0.06
0.11
0.46
0.01
0.33
0.04
0.33
0.07
0.11
0.25
0.43
0.19
0.14
0.32
0.07
0.19
0.12
0.14
1.71
0.19
0.33
0.10

0.08
0.19
1.03
0.10
0.31
0.71
0.00
0.22
0.43
0.22
0.07
0.07
0.29
0.09
0.29
0.16
0.25
0.12
0.75
0.06
0.09
0.06
0.09
0.23
0.21
0.03
0.24
0.21
0.01
0.70
0.71
0.84
0.01
0.32

0.09
0.37
0.64
0.01
1.19
1.40
4.64
0.20
0.51
0.46
0.15
0.23
0.03
0.10
0.42
0.08
0.38
0.04
0.72
0.07
0.19
0.07
0.30
0.05
0.08
0.49
0.83
0.89
0.32
0.22
0.40
0.05
0.12
0.09

0.20
0.19
0.38
0.03
0.30
0.36
0.01
0.01
0.11
0.04
0.03
0.01
0.20
0.02
0.05
0.10
0.18
0.09
0.06
0.19
0.19
0.19
0.09
0.07
0.04
0.18
0.18
0.14
0.01
0.02
0.38
0.10
0.30
0.07

0.08
0.12
0.13
0.16
0.71
0.33
0.04
0.05
0.02
0.13
0.19
0.14
0.11
0.05
0.09
0.04
0.06
0.09
0.22
0.55
0.23
0.01
0.22
0.72
0.09
0.50
0.54
0.39
0.03
0.13
0.18
0.08
0.31
0.08

0.14
0.30
0.82
0.12
0.06
0.15
0.18
0.13
0.06
0.09
0.03
0.01
0.01
0.03
0.15
0.08
0.16
0.06
0.62
0.19
0.16
0.34
0.09
0.12
0.03
0.15
0.04
0.13
0.14
0.03
1.15
0.21
0.15
0.10

0.41
0.04
0.56
0.14
0.45
0.92
0.02
0.29
0.20
0.37
0.13
0.03
0.25
0.17
0.03
0.24
0.09
0.14
0.96
0.20
0.14
0.04
0.26
0.30
0.04
0.44
0.35
0.27
0.02
0.89
0.11
0.86
0.17
0.34

0.24
0.14
0.06
0.25
1.38
1.92
4.79
0.27
0.12
0.14
0.05
0.16
0.03
0.01
0.10
0.16
0.22
0.02
0.52
0.19
0.13
0.02
0.04
0.13
0.09
0.02
0.94
0.97
0.30
0.39
0.28
0.07
0.30
0.09

0.12
0.07
0.53
0.12
0.38
0.03
0.04
0.04
0.09
0.08
0.22
0.14
0.10
0.08
0.04
0.14
0.24
0.00
0.17
0.37
0.40
0.17
0.14
0.79
0.05
0.33
0.35
0.25
0.02
0.11
0.56
0.02
0.01
0.02

0.05
0.49
1.23
0.09
0.38
0.19
0.17
0.13
0.17
0.14
0.06
0.00
0.20
0.05
0.11
0.19
0.34
0.14
0.57
0.00
0.02
0.16
0.18
0.05
0.00
0.03
0.14
0.27
0.14
0.05
1.52
0.31
0.45
0.17

0.21
0.15
0.87
0.17
0.15
0.65
0.01
0.29
0.31
0.41
0.16
0.04
0.06
0.15
0.08
0.35
0.26
0.21
0.93
0.01
0.04
0.15
0.17
0.37
0.08
0.26
0.17
0.13
0.01
0.92
0.44
0.94
0.13
0.41

0.04
0.33
0.42
0.29
1.04
1.69
4.71
0.27
0.23
0.18
0.08
0.15
0.23
0.03
0.06
0.26
0.40
0.07
0.57
0.00
0.31
0.16
0.05
0.20
0.05
0.20
0.76
0.80
0.30
0.42
0.08
0.17
0.00
0.16

0.07
0.42
0.74
0.03
0.83
0.16
0.21
0.17
0.09
0.22
0.17
0.14
0.11
0.03
0.07
0.05
0.10
0.14
0.39
0.37
0.38
0.33
0.31
0.84
0.05
0.36
0.49
0.53
0.12
0.16
0.99
0.29
0.46
0.18

0.34
0.07
0.47
0.30
0.22
0.66
0.06
0.33
0.22
0.49
0.06
0.17
0.15
0.22
0.12
0.20
0.02
0.22
0.79
0.36
0.36
0.02
0.03
0.42
0.13
0.07
0.18
0.12
0.01
1.05
0.04
0.93
0.14
0.40

0.16
0.25
0.07
0.41
0.70
1.67
5.11
0.31
0.15
0.26
0.15
0.04
0.14
0.04
0.02
0.12
0.16
0.07
0.68
0.37
0.10
0.01
0.18
0.60
0.00
0.53
0.44
0.53
0.32
0.53
0.46
0.15
0.01
0.17

0.27
0.35
0.07
0.26
0.55
0.75
0.16
0.17
0.13
0.27
0.11
0.04
0.26
0.20
0.19
0.16
0.08
0.09
0.49
0.01
0.02
0.30
0.35
0.42
0.07
0.29
0.31
0.40
0.13
0.86
0.90
0.65
0.32
0.26

0.09
0.17
0.73
0.38
1.58
1.57
3.59
0.15
0.06
0.04
0.02
0.15
0.03
0.01
0.05
0.07
0.06
0.08
1.05
0.01
0.29
0.32
0.13
0.24
0.06
0.17
0.89
1.13
0.45
0.36
1.38
0.15
0.45
0.00

0.17
0.18
0.50
0.11
0.87
0.49
4.61
0.02
0.07
0.23
0.09
0.18
0.28
0.18
0.14
0.08
0.13
0.16
1.25
0.02
0.27
0.01
0.22
0.18
0.13
0.46
0.60
0.65
0.32
0.46
0.35
0.80
0.13
0.24

Table C.4: Summary statistics: SMD comparison

Standardized mean differences (SMD) across SE programs. For two SE programs w and w(cid:48), SMDs are computed as

, where ¯x w is the mean of the covariate in treatment group w and

s2
w is the sample variance of covariate in treatment group w. A SMD above 0.2 is considered as an important difference across groups. “Acad. support” is academic support, ISF is inclusion,
Semi-segr. is semi-segregation. Source: SPS

¯xw−¯xw(cid:48)
(cid:114)
+s2
s2
w(cid:48)
w
2

v

Figure C.1: Overlap of school characteristics for schools with inclusion and for schools with semi-segregation

Notes: This ﬁgure represents the distribution of schools with inclusion and of schools with semi-segregation along main school characteristics.

Notes: This ﬁgure shows the distribution of age and grade at registration to the School Psychological Service. The
“Preschool” category groups three years of Kindergarten, which explains why it appears to be the largest category. The
number of children who have been registered at the SPS (assigned and non-assigned to a particular therapy) is represented.
Source: SPS.

Figure C.2: Distribution of age and grade at registration

vi

020004000600034567891011121314151617Number of childrenAge at registration0200040006000PreschoolIntroductory year1 Primary2 Primary3 Primary4 Primary5 Primary6 PrimaryNumber of childrenGrade at registrationNotes: This ﬁgure depicts relevant pairwise treatment effects for Special Education programs in St. Gallen. Each pairwise
treatment effect is the effect of being assigned to the ﬁrst program in comparison to the second program on one of the four
outcomes presented in the panel headers. Both the treatment effect on the whole population (ATE) and on the population of
the treated (ATET) are presented. “Ind. therapy” is the abbreviation for individual therapies, “Acad. support” for academic
support, and “no SpEd” for receiving no program, “Semi-segr.” for semi-segregation (segregation in small classes), and
“Full segr.” for full segregation (in special schools). Nuisance parameters are estimated using an ensemble learner that
includes text representations presented in the “data” section. 95% conﬁdence intervals are represented and are based on
one sample t − t est for the ATE and the ATET. Source: SPS.

Figure C.3: Pairwise treatment effects for probability of taking the SW8 test

vii

(e) Probability of taking the SW8 testCounselling − No SpEdAcad. support − No SpEdInd. therapy − Acad. supportInclusion − Ind. therapySemi−segr. − InclusionFull segr. − Semi−segr.−0.3−0.2−0.10.00.1EstimandATEATET(a) Schools: share of foreign students

(b) Schools: share of SEN students

(c) Schools: total number of students

(d) Schools: “SES score”

Notes: Continuous Conditional Average Treatment Effects in academic performance for inclusion vs. semi-segregation are depicted. The
CATEs show how much the ATE would change at different levels of school characteristics (on the x axis).

Figure C.4: Academic performance: continuous CATE for school characteristics

viii

(a) Schools: share of foreign students

(b) Schools: share of SEN students

(c) Schools: total number of students

(d) Schools: “SES score”

Notes: Continuous Conditional Average Treatment Effects in the probability to be unemployed for inclusion vs. semi-segregation are depicted.
The CATEs show how much the ATE would change at different levels of school characteristics (on the x axis).

Figure C.6: Probability of unemployment: continuous CATE for school characteristics

ix

(a) Depth 2, baseline

(b) Depth 3, baseline

(c) Depth 2, baseline + diagnosis

(d) Depth 3, baseline + diagnosis

Notes: Decision trees for optimal policy allocations of depth 2 and 3 are depicted. “Baseline” means that only baseline
students’ characteristics are included, and “baseline + diagnosis” includes both baseline characteristics and diagnosis
characteristics extracted from psychological records with the dictionary approach. The IQ variable IQ* is the interaction
between the IQ score and the indicator whether an IQ score has been taken.

Figure C.8: Optimal policy trees for test scores

x

(a) Depth 2, baseline

(b) Depth 3, baseline

(c) Depth 2, baseline + diagnosis

(d) Depth 3, baseline + diagnosis

Notes: Decision trees for optimal policy allocations of depth 2 and 3 are depicted. “Baseline” means that only baseline
students’ characteristics are included, and “baseline + diagnosis” includes both baseline characteristics and diagnosis char-
acteristics extracted from psychological records with the dictionary approach. The IQ variable is the interaction between
the IQ score and the indicator whether an IQ score has been taken.

Figure C.10: Optimal policy trees for probability to be employed

xi

Notes: This graph depicts the spillover functions for the effect of the presence of students with SEN on the test scores
of their peers with and without SEN in inclusive classrooms. All effects follow the identiﬁcation strategy and results by
Balestra, Eugster, and Liebert (forthcoming). Flexible spillover functions are estimated with an ensemble learner similar to
the estimation procedure used in this paper. Clustered cross-validation procedures at the classroom level are implemented.
95% conﬁdence intervals are represented.

Figure C.12: Classroom spillover effects of students with SEN on their peers without SEN.

xii

