Deep learning models for predicting RNA degradation via dual crowdsourcing 

Hannah K. Wayment-Steele*1,5, Wipapat Kladwang*2,5, Andrew M. Watkins*2,5, Do Soon Kim*2,5, Bojan 
Tunguz*2,3, Walter Reade4, Maggie Demkin4, Jonathan Romano2,5,6, Roger Wellington-Oguri5, John J. 
Nicol5, Jiayang Gao7, Kazuki Onodera8, Kazuki Fujikawa9, Hanfei Mao10, Gilles Vandewiele11, Michele 
Tinti12, Bram Steenwinckel11, Takuya Ito13, Taiga Noumi14, Shujun He15, Keiichiro Ishi16, Youhan Lee17, 
Fatih Öztürk18, Anthony Chiu19, Emin Öztürk20, Karim Amer21, Mohamed Fares22, Eterna Participants**5, 
Rhiju Das2,5,23 

1Department of Chemistry, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, USA 
2Department of Biochemistry, Stanford University, California 94305, USA  
3NVIDIA Corporation, Santa Clara, California 95051 
4Kaggle, San Francisco, California 94107 
5Eterna Massive Open Laboratory 
6Department of Computer Science and Engineering, State University of New York at Buffalo, Buffalo, 
New York, 14260, USA 
7High-flyer AI, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China, 310000 
8NVIDIA Corporation, Minato-ku, Tokyo 107-0052, Japan 
9DeNA, Shibuya-ku, Tokyo 150-6140, Japan 
10Yanfu Investments, Shanghai, China, 200000 
11IDLab, Ghent University, Technologiepark-Zwijnaarde, Gent, Belgium, B-9052 
12College of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee DD1 4HN, United Kingdom 
13Universal Knowledge Inc., Tokyo 150-0013, Japan  
14Keyence Corporation, 1-3-14, Higashi-Nakajima, Higashi-Yodogawa-ku, Osaka, 533-8555, Japan 
15Department of Chemical Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843 
16Rist Inc, Meguro-ku, Tokyo 153-0063, Japan 
17Kakao Brain, Seongnam, Gyeonggi-do, Republic of Korea 
18H2O, Istanbul, 3400, Turkey 
19Clover Health, Hong Kong, 999077, PRC 
20Afiniti, Istanbul, 3400, Turkey 
21Center for Informatics Science, Nile University, Sheikh Zayed, Giza, Egypt, 12588 
22National Research Centre, Dokki, Cairo, Egypt, 12622 
23Department of Physics, Stanford University, California 94305, USA  

* these authors contributed equally. 
** Eterna consortium authors are listed in Table S1. 

Abstract 

Messenger RNA-based medicines hold immense potential, as evidenced by their rapid deployment as 

COVID-19 vaccines. However, worldwide distribution of mRNA molecules has been limited by their 

thermostability, which is fundamentally limited by the intrinsic instability of RNA molecules to a 

chemical degradation reaction called in-line hydrolysis. Predicting the degradation of an RNA molecule is 

a key task in designing more stable RNA-based therapeutics. Here, we describe a crowdsourced machine 

learning competition ("Stanford OpenVaccine") on Kaggle, involving single-nucleotide resolution 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
measurements on 6043 102-130-nucleotide diverse RNA constructs that were themselves solicited 

through crowdsourcing on the RNA design platform Eterna. The entire experiment was completed in less 

than 6 months, and 41% of nucleotide-level predictions from the winning model were within 

experimental error of the ground truth measurement. Furthermore, these models generalized to blindly 

predicting orthogonal degradation data on much longer mRNA molecules (504-1588 nucleotides) with 

improved accuracy compared to previously published models. Top teams integrated natural language 

processing architectures and data augmentation techniques with predictions from previous dynamic 

programming models for RNA secondary structure. These results indicate that such models are capable of 

representing in-line hydrolysis with excellent accuracy, supporting their use for designing stabilized 

messenger RNAs. The integration of two crowdsourcing platforms, one for data set creation and another 

for machine learning, may be fruitful for other urgent problems that demand scientific discovery on rapid 

timescales. 

Introduction 

Therapeutics based on messenger RNA (mRNA) have shown immense promise as a modular 

therapeutic platform, allowing potentially any protein to be delivered and translated1, 2, as evidenced by 

the rapid deployment of mRNA-based vaccines against SARS-CoV-23-5. However, the chemical 

instability of RNA sets a fundamental limit on the stability of RNA-based therapeutics such as mRNA-

based vaccines1, 6-8. RNA hydrolysis is the limiting factor in lipid nanoparticle (LNP)-based formulations9, 

10. Hydrolysis in LNP formulations degrades the amount of mRNA remaining during shipping and 

storage, and hydrolysis in vivo after vaccine injection limits the amount of resulting protein produced 

over time9. Better methods to develop thermostable RNA therapeutics would allow for increasing the 

equitability of their distribution, reducing their cost, and possibly increasing their potency10, 11. Initial 

results have demonstrated that more stable mRNAs can be designed via stochastic algorithms that identify 

mRNA sequences that code for the same protein12, but are predicted to be more resistant to hydrolysis13, 

14.  Importantly, these mRNAs are demonstrated to produce equivalent amounts of protein to non-

2 

 
 
optimized mRNAs14. These design strategies are predicted to be able to produce mRNAs that do not 

activate double-stranded RNA immune sensors13, 15, and have also demonstrated to be compatible with 

mRNAs synthesized from modified nucleotides including pseudouridine14, which are used in mRNA 

vaccine formulations16. 

A key prediction task underpinning algorithms for designing mRNAs with increased stability is 

the model used to predict of RNA hydrolysis from sequence (Figure 1A). Previous models for RNA 

degradation have assumed that the probability of any RNA nucleotide linkage being cleaved is 

proportional to the probability of the 5' nucleotide being unpaired13. Computational studies with this 

model suggested that at least a two-fold increase in stability could be achieved through sequence design, 

while maintaining a wide diversity of sequences and features related to translatability, immunogenicity, 

and global structure14. However, it is unlikely that degradation depends only on the probability of a 

nucleotide being unpaired: local sequence-and structure-specific contexts may vary widely, as evidenced 

by ribozyme RNAs found in nature, whose sequences adopt specific structures that undergo self-

scission17. 

We wished to understand the maximum predictive power achievable for RNA degradation on a 

short timescale for model development. To do this, we combined two crowdsourcing platforms: Eterna, 

an RNA design platform, and Kaggle, a platform for machine learning competitions. Eterna has 

previously been able to solve near-intractable problems in RNA design18, 19, and the diversity of resulting 

structures on its platform have more recently contributed to advancing RNA secondary structure 

prediction20. We reasoned that crowdsourcing the problem of obtaining data on a wide diversity of 

sequences and structures would rapidly lead to a diverse dataset, and that crowdsourcing the second 

problem of obtaining a machine learning architecture would result in a model capable of expressing the 

resulting complexity of sequence- and structure-dependent degradation patterns. We hypothesized this 

"dual crowdsourcing" would lead to stringent and independent tests of the models developed, minimizing 

interplay between the individuals designing the constructs to test (Eterna participants) and the individuals 

building the models (Kaggle participants) and leading to better generalizability on independent data sets. 

3 

 
The resulting models were subjected to two blind prediction challenges. The first was in the 

context of the Kaggle competition, where the RNA structure probing and degradation data that 

participants would be aiming to predict was not acquired until after the competition was announced. The 

experimental method used for these data, In-line-seq, allowed for measuring the degradation rate of 

individual dinucleotide linkages. However, this method relies on probing short RNA fragments and is 

unable to scale to make single-nucleotide degradation measurements of full-length mRNAs for protein 

targets of interest. Other experimental methods such as PERSIST-seq14 have been developed to 

characterize the overall degradation rates per mRNA molecule, which is the primary value of interest to 

minimize when designing stabilized RNA-based therapeutics. In principle, the overall degradation rate of 

a mRNA molecule of length N is equivalent to the sum of degradation rates at each dinucleotide linkage 

in the backbone21: 

$%&’ = ∑

𝑘!"#

&)*
(+*

(
𝑘!"#

,   (1) 

Where 𝑘!"#

(

is the degradation of nucleotide linkage i. The half-life of the mRNA is calculated as 

𝑡*/- =

./ -
$%&’  
0!"#

     (2). 

We tested the above model empirically by comparing the summed degradation rates per nucleotide to the 

log abundance of the entire construct remaining from sequencing and found high agreement (Figure S1). 

Using the above ansatz, the resulting models were tested in a second blind challenge of predicting the 

overall degradation of full-length mRNAs encoding a variety of model proteins, experimentally tested 

using PERSIST-seq. The models also demonstrated increased predictive power over existing methods in 

predicting these overall degradation rates. These models therefore appear immediately useful for guiding 

design of low degradation mRNA molecules. Analysis of model performance suggests that the task of 

predicting RNA degradation patterns is limited by both the amount of data available as well as the 

accuracy of the structure prediction tools used to create input features.  Further developments in 

experimental data and secondary structure prediction, when combined with network architectures such as 

those developed here, will further advance RNA degradation prediction and therapeutic design. 

4 

 
Results 

Dual-crowdsourced competition design and assessment. The aim of the OpenVaccine Kaggle competition 

(Figure 1B) was to develop computational models for predicting RNA degradation patterns. We asked 

participants on the Eterna platform to submit RNA designs using a web-browser design window (Figure 

1C), which resulted in a diversity of sequences and structures (Figure 1D). 150 participants in total (Table 

S1) submitted sequences. A secondary motivation was an opportunity for participants to receive feedback 

on RNA fragments they may wish to use in mRNA design challenges described in Leppek et al.14 3029 

RNA designs of length 107 nt were collected in the first "Roll-Your-Own-Structure" round I (RYOS-I), 

which was opened March 26, 2020, and closed upon reaching 3029 constructs on June 19, 2020 (Figure 

1E).  

We then obtained nucleotide-level degradation profiles for the first 68 nucleotides of these RNAs 

using In-line-seq14, a novel method for characterizing in-line RNA degradation in high-throughput for the 

purposes of designing stabilized RNA therapeutics. Degradation profiles were collected in four different 

accelerated degradation conditions, and the structures of the constructs were also characterized via 

selective 2' hydroxyl acylation with primer extension (SHAPE; termed "Reactivity" below)22, 23, a 

technique to characterize RNA secondary structure. The Kaggle competition was designed to create 

models that would have predictive power for three of these data types, given RNA sequence and 

secondary structure as input (Figure 1F). Though SHAPE reactivity is distinct from the degradation 

measurements we wished to be able to predict for the application of mRNA design, the SHAPE reactivity 

datasets had higher signal-to-noise ratio (Figure S2), and we hypothesized that models would demonstrate 

improved performance predicting SHAPE reactivity and that the data would serve as a “positive control” 

for a predictable data type. Additionally, models with highly accurate predictions of SHAPE reactivity 

would have utility in biological applications.24  

In total, each independent construct of length N required predicting 3xN values for the 3 data 

types. In addition to these experimental data, Kaggle participants were also provided with features related 

5 

 
 
to RNA secondary structure computed from available biophysical models to use if they wished. These 

features included 107x107 base pairing probability matrices from EternaFold20, a recently developed 

package with state-of-the-art performance on RNA structural ensembles; dot-parenthesis notated 

minimum free energy (MFE) RNA secondary structure from the ViennaRNA package25; and a six-

character featurization of the MFE structure calculated using bpRNA26. 

We developed training and “public test” datasets from the RYOS-I dataset (Figure 2). The public 

test dataset was used to rank submissions during the competition. The 3029 constructs were filtered for 

those with mean signal-to-noise values greater than 1, resulting in 2218 constructs (Figure 2, dark blue 

track, see Methods). These constructs were segmented into splits of 1179 in the public training dataset, 

400 constructs in the public test set, and 639 for the “private test” dataset, the set which would be used in 

the final evaluation. The sequences that did not pass the signal-to-noise filter were also provided to 

Kaggle participants with the according description. The RYOS-I data contained some "clusters" of 

sequences where Eterna players included many small variations on a single sequence (clusters visible in 

Figure 1D). To mitigate the possibility of sequence motifs in these clusters biasing evaluation, we 

segmented the RYOS-I data into a public training, public test, and private test sets by clustering the 

sequences and including only sequences that were singly, doubly, or triply-clustered in the private test set 

(see Methods). This strategy was described to Kaggle participants during the competition.  

To ensure that the majority of the data used for the private test set was fully blind, we initiated a 

second "Roll-your-own-structure" challenge that was launched for Eterna design collection on August 18, 

2020. Given that useful models for degradation should be agnostic to RNA length, we designed the 

constructs in RYOS-II to be 34 nucleotides longer (102 vs. 68 nts) than the constructs in RYOS-I to 

discourage modelling methods that would overfit to constructs of length 68. Design collection was closed 

on September 7th, three days before the launch of the Kaggle challenge on September 10th. The RYOS-II 

wet-lab experiments were conducted concurrently with the Kaggle challenge, enabling a completely blind 

test for the models developed on Kaggle. The Kaggle competition was closed on October 6th. The RYOS-

II was similarly clustered and filtered to ensure that the test set used for scoring consisted primarily of 

6 

 
singly- and double-clustered constructs. Three data types were used to score models: SHAPE; 10 mM 

Mg2+, pH 10, 1 day, 24 ˚C; and 10 mM Mg2+, pH 7.2, 1 day, 50 ˚C. Models were scored using the mean 

column RMSE (MCRMSE) across three data types, defined as 

𝑀𝐶𝑅𝑀𝑆𝐸 =

*
&(

∑ +*
&(
2+*
1

∑ ,𝑦(2 − 𝑦/(20

1
(+*

-

, 

(3) 

Where 𝑁3 is the number of scored data types, n is the number of nucleotides in the dataset, and t, 

𝑦(2 is the measured data value, and 𝑦/(2 is the predicted data value. Two additional data types were 

included in the training data corresponding to RNAs degraded for 7 days rather than 1 day without Mg2+: 

(pH 10, 7 days, 24 ˚C; and pH 7.2, 7 days, 50 ˚C). However, these data were not collected for the second 

round to accelerate competition turnaround.  

Performance of Kaggle teams and common attributes of top-performing models. During the three 

week competition period, 1,636 teams submitted 35,806 solutions. Overall performance of teams vs. 

baseline models for RNA degradation are depicted in Figure 3A. Kaggle entries significantly 

outperformed the "DegScore" linear regression model for RNA degradation14 by 37 % in MCRMSE for 

the public test set and 25% for the private test set (Figure 3A). An additional benchmark model which 

used the DegScore windowed featurization (see Methods) with improved XGBoost27 training, termed the 

DegScore-XGB model, resulted in moderate improvement (Public MCRMSE 0.35854, Private MCRMSE 

0.43850). Kaggle participants developed feature encodings beyond what was provided. One of the most 

widely-used community-developed featurizations was a graph-based distance embedding depicted in 

Figure 3B. Several teams, including the top three teams, used a publicly-shared autoencoder/GNN/GRU 

kernel (https://www.kaggle.com/code/mrkmakr/covid-ae-pretrain-gnn-attn-cnn/), which alone achieved a 

MCRMSE of 0.24860 on the Public and 0.36106 on the Private test set (Figure 3A). This notebook was 

the most forked (forked 936 times as of March 2022) and upvoted (upvoted 386 times). The architecture 

of the winning “Nullrecurrent” model (Figure 3C) depicts the architecture of this shared kernel, which 

feeds 1D and 2D features, including adjacency matrices based on the secondary structure of the RNA 

7 

 
 
inputs, into multi-head attention network that is then fed into convolutional neural net layers.. Many 

teams additionally cited pseudo-labeling and generating additional mock data as being integral to their 

solutions. The architecture of the second-place team (Figure 3D) demonstrates an example 

implementation of using pseudo-labeling. The machine learning practice of pseudo-labeling involves 

using predictions from one model as "mock ground truth" labels for another model. Effective pseudo-

labeling usually requires a high level of accuracy of the primary model and is most frequently used with 

classification problems. To generate additional mock data, participants generated random RNAs as well 

as structure featurizations using 5 different secondary structure prediction algorithms using the package 

Arnie (https://github.com/DasLab/arnie) and iteratively scored based on these predictions for their model 

as well (see Supplement for more detailed descriptions of solutions from Kaggle teams).  

Ensembling models. We explored whether increased accuracy in modeling might be achieved by 

combining models, as a common feature of Kaggle competitions is that winning solutions are dissimilar 

enough that ensembled models frequently improve predictive ability. We used a genetic algorithm to 

ensemble maximally 10 of the top 100 models. The score on the public dataset was used to optimize, with 

the final ensembled model evaluated on the private dataset. With this method, ensembling achieved a 

Public MCRMSE of 0.2237 (compared to the best Public MCRMSE of 0.2276) and a Private MCRMSE 

of 0.3397 (compared to the best Private test set MCRMSE of 0.3420). In comparison, averaging the 

outputs of the top two models gave a result of 0.2244 Public, 0.33788 Private. Blending the top two 

solutions with the 3rd solution did not improve the result. An estimated bound of ensembling can be 

found by optimizing directly to the Private ensemble score. With this method, it was possible to achieve a 

Private ensemble score of 0.3382 (again, vs. best Leaderboard MCRMSE 0.3420). The improvement of 

0.0038 over the leaderboard for this last approach is about the distance between the 1st place and 10th 

place teams, and the "correct" way gives an improvement that is the distance between the 1st and 5th 

place teams. All these experiments suggest that most of the signal has been captured by the top two 

models, and that the use of further ensembling provides, at best, modest improvements. The seemingly 

puzzling result that the simple ensemble of the top two models outperforms the genetic algorithm blend of 

8 

 
the top 10 (on the private test set) suggests that the genetic algorithm did not find a global minimum for 

model weights. 

Top models are capable of deep representation of RNA experimental motifs. We analyzed predictions 

from the first-place model ("Nullrecurrent") in depth to better understand its performance. Across all 

nucleotides in the private test set, 41% of nucleotide-level predictions for SHAPE reactivity agreed with 

experimental measurements within an error that was lower than experimental uncertainty; for comparison, 

if experimental errors are distributed as normal distributions, a perfect predictor would agree with 

experimental values over 68% of data points. For Deg_Mg_pH10 and Deg_Mg_50C, 28% and 42% of 

predictions were within error, respectively. Per-construct RMSE between data types was moderately 

correlated, with the highest correlation being Spearman R=0.63 between deg_Mg_pH10 and 

deg_Mg_50C (Figure S3). The nucleotides with the highest RMSE in the Deg_Mg_pH10 data type were 

any nucleotide type in bulges, and U's in any unpaired context. Figure 4A depicts representative 

constructs with the lowest RMSE for the Deg_Mg_pH10 data type out of the private test data, 

demonstrating that a diverse set of structures and structure motifs were capable of being predicted 

correctly. Aggregating the predictions from the Nullrecurrent model over secondary structure motifs 

(Figure 4B) demonstrates that the Nullrecurrent predictions by motif captured patterns previously 

observed in the experimental signal14. The most reactive RNA structure motifs were triloops, a previously 

unknown biological finding. Another unexpected finding from these data were that internal loops with 

symmetric lengths on either side recovered stability over internal loops with asymmetric lengths. The fact 

that the Nullrecurrent model was able to capture this trend indicates that using such models within a 

design algorithm would allow for an automated way to impart such biological attributes within a designed 

mRNA. Constructs with the highest RMSE demonstrate indicators that the provided structure features 

were incorrect. Figure 4C depicts two constructs with the highest RMSE for the SHAPE modification 

prediction. The SHAPE data for the first construct, "2204Sept042020", has high reactivity in predicted 

stem areas, indicating the stems were unfolded in solution. In contrast, construct "Triple UUUU 

9 

 
 
Tetraloops" has experimentally low reactivity in the exterior loop, suggesting that a stem was present. 

However, we found no correlation between the EternaScore, a metric indicating how closely the 

experimental reactivity signal matches the predicted structure18, and RMSE summed per construct for the 

private test constructs, suggesting that in general, quality of the input structure features was not a 

limitation in model training (Figure S4). 

Kaggle models show improved performance in independent mRNA degradation prediction. As an 

independent test, we assessed the ability of the top two Kaggle models to predict the overall degradation 

rates of a dataset of full-length mRNAs, which were not publicly available at the time of the Kaggle 

competition. Because the throughput of the In-line-seq experimental method is limited to RNA lengths 

easily accessible by Illumina sequencers (500 nts), these mRNAs could not be probed at a per-nucleotide 

level akin to the datasets used in the Kaggle experiments. However, their overall degradation rates 

(related to the per-nucleotide degradation rate via Eqn. 1), were characterized using PERSIST-seq14. The 

lengths of these mRNAs ranged from 504 to 1588 with a median length of 928 (Figure 5A), nearly 10-

fold times longer than the longest RNA fragments used in the OpenVaccine Kaggle challenge (full 

dataset, attributes, and calculations in Table S2). The experimentally-determined structures of two 

example mRNAs designed by Eterna participants,14 which both code for Nanoluciferase but have a 2.5-

fold difference in hydrolysis lifetime, are depicted in Figure 5B.  

To compare the Kaggle predictors to the single overall degradation rate from PERSIST-seq, we 

made predictions for all nucleotides in the full mRNA constructs and summed the predictions from the 

region that was captured in the PERSIST-seq method by reverse-transcription PCR which, in most cases, 

included the mRNA's 5' untranslated region (UTR) and coding sequence (CDS) (Figure 5C). Carrying out 

predictions on the full RNA sequence and then summing over the probed window allows to account for 

interactions between the untranslated regions and CDS, as can be seen for two example constructs in 

Figure 5B -- nucleotides in the 5' and 3' UTRs are predicted to pair with the CDS.  We made predictions 

for 188 mRNAs in 4 classes: a short multi-epitope vaccine (MEV), the model protein Nanoluciferase, 

10 

 
 
with one class consisting of varied UTRs and a second consisting of varied CDSs, and enhanced Green 

Fluorescent Protein (eGFP). We found that the Kaggle second-place "Kazuki2" model exhibited the 

highest correlation to fit degradation rates, followed by the Kaggle 1st-place "Nullrecurrent" model 

(Figure 5C), with Spearman correlation coefficients of 0.48 (p=3.3e-12) and 0.43 (p=9.5e-10), 

respectively. Both Kaggle models outperformed unpaired probability values from ViennaRNA RNAfold 

v. 2.4.1425 (R=0.25, p=5.4e-4), the DegScore linear regression model (R=0.36, p=2.9e-7) and the 

DegScore-XGBoost model (R=0.42, p=1.8e-09). An ensemble of the Nullrecurrent and Kazuki2 models 

did not outperform the Kazuki2 model (R=0.47, p=1.4e-11), again suggesting that the models themselves 

had reached their predictive potential. In comparison, resampling the measured degradation rates from 

within experimental error and calculating the correlation to the mean degradation rate, as a measure of the 

upper limit of experimental noise, resulted in a Spearman correlation of 0.88 (Table 1). 

Discussion 

The OpenVaccine competition uniquely leveraged resources from two complementary crowd-sourcing 

platforms: Kaggle and Eterna. The participants in the Kaggle competition were tasked with predicting 

stability measurements of individual RNA nucleotides. The urgency of timely development of a stable 

COVID-19 mRNA vaccine necessitated that the competition be run on a relatively short timeframe of 

three weeks, as opposed to three months, which is more common with the Kaggle competitions.  

The models presented here are immediately useful for mRNA design in that they could be called 

within a stochastic mRNA design algorithm21 to minimize the predicted degradation. There is likely 

further opportunity to leverage advancements in natural language processing to use datasets such as the 

ones presented here to generate candidate mRNA designs using text generation approaches 28-30. The 

degradation data used in this competition were from unmodified nucleotides, but mRNA vaccines are 

being formulated with modified nucleotides including pseudouridine or N-1-methyl-pseudouridine 16. 

Modified nucleotides in general will have differing underlying thermodynamics12, and there is a need to 

develop datasets and predictive models to predict structures and resulting stabilization of mRNAs 

11 

 
 
 
 
formulated with modified nucleotides. Short of developing complete new thermodynamic parameters for 

modified nucleotides, it may be possible to develop principled heuristics to adapt models to mRNAs 

synthesized with modified nucleotides. For instance, Leppek et al. modified the DegScore model for 

pseudouridine by setting all contributions to degradation from uracil to zero to mimic the stabilization 

effect, and saw moderate improvement in correlation14. 

Kaggle competitions with relatively small datasets can be subject to serious overfitting to the 

public leaderboard, which often leads to a major "shake up" of the leaderboard when the results on the 

unseen test set are announced. In this competition the shakeup was minimal - most of the top teams were 

ranked close to the same position on the private leaderboard as they were on the public leaderboard. As 

the private leaderboard was determined on data that had not been collected at the time of the competition 

launch, this result suggests that the models that were developed are robust and generalizable. 

Furthermore, the models generalized to the task of predicting degradation for full-length mRNA 

molecules that were ten-fold longer than the constructs used for training. We speculate that the use of a 

separate, independently collected data set for the private leaderboard tests -- a true blind prediction 

challenge -- was important for ensuring generalizability. The winning solutions all used neural network 

architectures that are commonly used with modeling of 1D sequential data: recurrent NNs (LSTMs and 

GRUs) and 1D CNNs. The effectiveness of pseudo-labeling has two implications: more data will likely 

benefit any future modeling efforts, and the simple neural networks that were used have enough capacity 

to benefit from more data.  

An under-investigated aspect of the models presented here is the effect of training on multiple 

data types. We speculate that because SHAPE reactivity has higher signal-noise than the degradation data 

types (cf. Figure S2), models with architectures that allowed for weight-sharing between data types 

benefitted from learning to predict SHAPE reactivity as well. Directly predicting RNA degradation 

without concurrently training on SHAPE data may result in worse model performance. Conversely, the 

model architectures presented here may also prove to have useful biological applications in predicting 

only SHAPE reactivity data. Future directions for model development includes training such models on 

12 

 
larger chemical mapping datasets from more diverse experimental sources20, and integrating into 

inference frameworks for RNA structure prediction20, 31. 

Finally, the models for predicting RNA hydrolysis developed in this work may prove useful in 

computationally identifying classes of natural RNAs which have evolved to be resistant to degradation. 

Such future bioinformatic analysis may suggest entirely new biologically-inspired approaches for 

designing hydrolysis-resistant RNA therapeutics. 

Acknowledgments. We thank all participants of the Kaggle OpenVaccine challenge. We thank Sharif 

Ezzat and Camilla Kao for Eterna development and assistance launching the OpenVaccine challenge. We 

acknowledge funding from the National Institutes of Health (R35 GM122579 to R.D.), FastGrants, and 

gifts to the Eterna OpenVaccine project from donors listed in Table S3. 

Contributions. HKWS, DSK, AMW, BT, WR, MT, and RD designed and implemented the Kaggle 

OpenVaccine competition. WK performed all In-line-seq experiments. HKWS, DSK, AMW, RD 

designed the curated datasets. HKWS performed model analysis. HKWS, AMW, BT, RD wrote the 

manuscript. JG, KO, KF, HM, GV, MT, BS, TI, TN, SH, KI, YL, FO, AC, EO, KA, MF contributed as 

members of gold-winning teams from the Kaggle competition and wrote supplemental solution 

descriptions.  

Conflict of Interest. DSK, WK, and RD hold equity and are employees of a new venture seeking to 

stabilize mRNA molecules.  WR and MD are employees of Kaggle. 

Methods 

Initial feature generation.  As a starting point for Kaggle teams, we supplied a collection of 

features for each RNA sequence, including the minimum free energy (MFE) structure according to the 

ViennaRNA 2 energy model25, loop type assignments generated with bpRNA26 (S=Stem, E=External 

13 

 
        
 
 
 
 
Loop, I=Internal loop, B=Bulge, H=Hairpin, M=Multiloop, X=Dangle) and the base pair probability 

matrix according to the EternaFold20 energy model. These features were generated using Arnie 

(https://github.com/DasLab/arnie).   

Experimental data generation. The first experimental dataset used in this work, for the public 

training and test set, resulted from the "Roll-Your-Own-Structure" Round I lab on Eterna, and had been 

generated previously by Leppek et al14.  

The second experimental dataset used in this work, for the private test set, was generated for this 

work specifically. To produce these data, and for precise consistency with the public training and test set, 

In-line-seq was carried out as described by Leppek et al.14 In brief, DNA templates were ordered via 

custom oligonucleotide pool from Custom Array/Genscript, prepended by the T7 RNA polymerase 

promoter. Templates were amplified via PCR, transcribed to RNA via the TranscriptAid T7 High Yield 

Transcription Kit (Thermofisher, K0441), and the purified RNA was subjected to degradation conditions: 

1) 50 mM Na-CHES buffer (pH 10.0) at room temperature without added MgCl2; 2) 50 mM Na-CHES 

buffer (pH 10.0) at room temperature with 10 mM MgCl2; 3) phosphate buffered saline (PBS, pH 7.2; 

Thermo Fisher Scientific-Gibco 20012027) at 50˚C without added MgCl2; and 4) PBS (pH 7.2) at 50˚C 

with 10 mM MgCl2. In parallel, purified RNA was subjected to SHAPE structure probing conditions, and 

one sample was subjected to the SHAPE protocol absent addition of the 1-methyl-7-nitroisatoic anhydride 

reagent. 

cDNA was prepared from the six RNA samples (SHAPE probed, control reaction, and four 

degradation conditions). We pooled 1.5 μL of each cDNA sample together, ligated with an Illumina 

adapter, washed, and resuspended the ligated product, which was quantified by qPCR, sequenced using an 

Illumina Miseq. Resulting reads were analyzed using MAPseeker (https://ribokit.github.io/MAPseeker) 

following the recommended steps for sequence assignment, peak fitting, background subtraction of the 

no-modification control, correction for signal attenuation, and reactivity profile normalization as 

described in Seetin et al.22. 

14 

 
Signal-noise filtering. Data were filtered to include RNAs with a min value > 0.5, max value < 20 

across 5 RNA degradation conditions, and RNAs with a signal/noise ratio for SHAPE reactivity greater 

than 1.0. Signal/noise ratio for each construct was calculated as  

𝑆𝑁	𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜 =

*

4

∑

4
(+*

*

&

∑

&
2+*

5),+
6),+

 ,   

(4) 

Where µ7,9 is the mean value of data type i at nucleotide j, and σ7,9 is standard deviation of data 

type i at nucleotide j, as calculated by MAPseeker. The data that did not pass the above filters was also 

provided to participants to give the option to use in training, and was flagged with the variable 

`SN_filter=0`. Applying the above filter did not significantly alter the distribution of the median reactivity 

or signal/noise of any data type (SHAPE reactivity, deg_Mg_pH10, deg_Mg_50C) within either dataset 

(RYOS 1 or RYOS 2) (Figure S5).  However, average signal/noise of the Round II constructs was higher 

than the Round 1 constructs. Average signal/noise for SHAPE reactivity increased from 5.3(2.4) to 

6.2(3.5); for deg_Mg_pH10, 4.1(2.0) to 6.4(3.8) for Rounds 1 and 2; and for deg_Mg_50C 3.87(1.8) to 

5.3(3.1) (Figure S2). 

We wished to ascertain if the measured reactivities and degradation from Round 2 needed to be 

rescaled to match Round 1. To assess this, we compared distributions of nucleotide reactivities from 

nucleotide types. We found that for each data type and nucleotide type, the median values for Round 2 

were within the 50% interquartile range of Round 1 (Figure S6A). We also compared distributions of 

reactivity from the first 5 nucleotides, which are a constant “GGAAA” for each construct. The median 

values for each nucleotide in this were within the 50% interquartile range for all except for the first two 

GG’s in the `deg_Mg_pH10` data type (Figure S6B). We elected to not rescale the data from Round 2. 

Private test set curation. The private test set was curated to avoid bias toward more highly-

represented sequence motifs from the Eterna designs. Sequences that passed the above filters were 

clustered hierarchically using the `ward` method in scikit-learn32 and then clustered at a cophenetic 

distance of 0.5. That is, sequences within the same cluster have <50% sequence similarity. All sequences 

15 

 
that were in clusters with 1, 2, or 3 members were included in the private test set, as well as one cluster 

member from other randomly-selected clusters to attain the desired number of test set constructs. 

Comparing to the DegScore model. We compared Kaggle models to the “DegScore” linear 

model14, which models degradation at a given nucleotide k as a linear function of nucleotides surrounding 

k: 

𝑌0 = ∑

0>?
(+0)?

∑

1∈’;<=

𝛽(,1𝐼(,1

+

∑

0>?
(+0)?

∑

@∈ABC4DE

𝛽(,@𝐼(,@

+ 𝛽F

,  

(5) 

Where 𝛽	are the learned coefficients and I is an indicator function corresponding to the identity of 

nucleotide k+i. I accounts for sequence identity n (A,C,G,U) and its loop type assignment s (S=Stem, 

E=External Loop, I=Internal loop, B=Bulge, H=Hairpin, M=Multiloop, X=Dangle). w is the maximum 

window distance, set to be 12 in Leppek et al14. For a window size of w=12, or 25 positions, there are 251 

parameters (25 positions with 4 sequence indicators and 6 secondary structure indicators for each 

position, and 1 intercept parameter). 

Data availability. All datasets are downloadable in raw RDAT format from rmdb.stanford.edu at 

the following accession numbers: SHAPE_RYOS_0620, RYOS1_NMD_0000, RYOS1_PH10_0000, 

RYOS1_MGPH_0000, RYOS1_50C_0000, RYOS1_MG50_0000, RYOS2_1M7_0000, 

RYOS2_MGPH_0000, RYOS2_MG50_0000. Kaggle-formatted train and test sets are downloadable 

from https://www.kaggle.com/c/stanford-covid-vaccine. Datasets, scripts, and models are also included at 

https://www.github.com/eternagame/KaggleOpenVaccine. 

Code availability. Code to run the Nullrecurrent model and the DegScore-XGBoost model is 

available at www.github.com/eternagame/KaggleOpenVaccine.  Code to use and reproduce the linear 

regression DegScore model is available at www.github.com/eternagame/DegScore. 

References 

1. 
2. 

Kramps, T. & Elbers, K. in Methods Mol Biol, Vol. 1499, Edn. 2016/12/18 1-11 (2017). 
Kaczmarek, J.C., Kowalski, P.S. & Anderson, D.G. Advances in the delivery of RNA 
therapeutics: from concept to clinical reality. Genome Med 9, 60 (2017). 

16 

 
 
 
3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

10. 

11. 

Corbett, K.S. et al. Evaluation of the mRNA-1273 Vaccine against SARS-CoV-2 in 
Nonhuman Primates. N Engl J Med 383, 1544-1555 (2020). 
Baden, L.R. et al. Efficacy and Safety of the mRNA-1273 SARS-CoV-2 Vaccine. N Engl J 
Med 384, 403-416 (2021). 
Polack, F.P. et al. Safety and Efficacy of the BNT162b2 mRNA Covid-19 Vaccine. N Engl J 
Med 383, 2603-2615 (2020). 
Verbeke, R., Lentacker, I., De Smedt, S.C. & Dewitte, H. Three decades of messenger 
RNA vaccine development. Nano Today 28, 100766 (2019). 
Zhang, N.N. et al. A thermostable mRNA vaccine against COVID-19. Cell 182, 1271-1283 
e1216 (2020). 
Wu, K. et al. mRNA-1273 vaccine induces neutralizing antibodies against spike mutants 
from global SARS-CoV-2 variants. bioRxiv (2021). 
Crommelin, D.J.A., Anchordoquy, T.J., Volkin, D.B., Jiskoot, W. & Mastrobattista, E. 
Addressing the Cold Reality of mRNA Vaccine Stability. J Pharm Sci 110, 997-1001 
(2021). 
Schoenmaker, L. et al. mRNA-lipid nanoparticle COVID-19 vaccines: Structure and 
stability. Int J Pharm 601, 120586 (2021). 
Kon, E., Elia, U. & Peer, D. Principles for designing an optimal mRNA lipid nanoparticle 
vaccine. Curr Opin Biotechnol 73, 329-336 (2022). 

12.  Mauger, D.M. et al. mRNA structure regulates protein expression through changes in 

functional half-life. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 116, 24075-24083 (2019). 

13.  Wayment-Steele, H.K. et al. Theoretical basis for stabilizing messenger RNA through 

14. 

15. 

16. 

17. 

18. 

19. 

secondary structure design. Nucleic Acids Res 49, 10604-10617 (2021). 
Leppek, K. et al. Combinatorial optimization of mRNA structure, stability, and translation 
for RNA-based therapeutics. Nature Communications 13, 1536 (2022). 
Kato, H. et al. Differential roles of MDA5 and RIG-I helicases in the recognition of RNA 
viruses. Nature 441, 101-105 (2006). 
Kariko, K. et al. Incorporation of pseudouridine into mRNA yields superior 
nonimmunogenic vector with increased translational capacity and biological stability. 
Mol Ther 16, 1833-1840 (2008). 
Doherty, E.A. & Doudna, J.A. Ribozyme structures and mechanisms. Annu Rev Biophys 
Biomol Struct 30, 457-475 (2001). 
Lee, J. et al. RNA design rules from a massive open laboratory. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
111, 2122-2127 (2014). 
Anderson-Lee, J. et al. Principles for Predicting RNA Secondary Structure Design 
Difficulty. J Mol Biol 428, 748-757 (2016). 

20.  Wayment-Steele, H.K., Kladwang, W., Participants, E. & Das, R. RNA secondary structure 
packages ranked and improved by high-throughput experiments. bioRxiv (2020). 

21.  Wayment-Steele, H.K. et al. Theoretical basis for stabilizing messenger RNA through 

22. 

secondary structure design. bioRxiv (2021). 
Seetin, M.G., Kladwang, W., Bida, J.P. & Das, R. Massively parallel RNA chemical 
mapping with a reduced bias MAP-seq protocol. Methods Mol Biol 1086, 95-117 (2014). 

17 

 
23.  Wilkinson, K.A., Merino, E.J. & Weeks, K.M. Selective 2'-hydroxyl acylation analyzed by 

primer extension (SHAPE): quantitative RNA structure analysis at single nucleotide 
resolution. Nat Protoc 1, 1610-1616 (2006). 
Delli Ponti, R., Marti, S., Armaos, A. & Tartaglia, G.G. A high-throughput approach to 
profile RNA structure. Nucleic Acids Res 45, e35 (2017). 
Lorenz, R. et al. ViennaRNA Package 2.0. Algorithms Mol Biol 6, 26 (2011). 
Danaee, P. et al. bpRNA: large-scale automated annotation and analysis of RNA 
secondary structure. Nucleic Acids Res 46, 5381-5394 (2018). 
Chen, T.G., C. XGBoost: A Scalable Tree Boosting System. Proceedings of the 22nd ACM 
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (2016). 
Cho, K. et al. Learning phrase representations using RNN encoder-decoder for statistical 
machine translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1406.1078 (2014). 
Bowman, S.R. et al. Generating sentences from a continuous space. arXiv preprint 
arXiv:1511.06349 (2015). 
Zhang, Y. et al. in International Conference on Machine Learning 4006-4015 (PMLR, 
2017). 
Foo, C.-S. & Pop, C. Learning RNA secondary structure (only) from structure probing 
data. bioRxiv, 152629 (2017). 
Pedregosa, F.V., G.; Gramfort, A.; Michel, V.; Thirion, B.; Grisel, O.; Blondel, M.; 
Prettenhofer, P.; Weiss, R.; Dubourg, V.; Vanderplas, J.; Passos, A.; Cournapeau, D.; 
Brucher, M.; Perrot, M.; Duchesnay, E. Scikit-learn: Machine Learning in Python. Journal 
of Machine Learning Research 12, 2825-2830 (2011). 
van der Maaten; L, H., G. Visualizing Data using t-SNE. Journal of Machine Learning 
Research 9, 2579-2605 (2008). 

24. 

25. 
26. 

27. 

28. 

29. 

30. 

31. 

32. 

33. 

18 

 
 
 
Figures and Figure captions 

Figure 1. Dual-crowdsourcing setup for creating predictive models of RNA degradation. A. mRNA 
molecules fold into secondary structures containing unpaired regions prone to hydrolysis and limiting to 
therapeutic stability. B. Screenshot of the OpenVaccine Kaggle competition public leaderboard. C. 
Screenshot of an example construct designed by an Eterna participant in the "Roll Your Own Structure" 
challenge ("rainbow tetraloops 7" by Omei). D. tSNE33 projection of training sequences of "Roll-Your-
Own-Structure" Round I, marker style and colors indicating 150 Eterna participants. Lines indicate 
example short 68 nt RNA fragments. E. Timelines of dual crowdsourced challenges. Eterna participants 
designed datasets that were used for training and blind test data for Kaggle machine learning competition 
to predict RNA chemical mapping signal and degradation.  F. Kaggle participants were given RNA 
sequence and structure information and asked to predict RNA degradation profiles and SHAPE reactivity. 
Error bars represent standard deviation. 

19 

 
 
Figure 2. Signal-noise filtering and hierarchical clustering was used to filter the constructs designed by 
Eterna participants to create a test set of constructs that were maximally distant from other test constructs. 
Heatmaps of datatype "deg_Mg_pH10". 

Figure 3. Deep learning strategies used in competition. (A) Public test vs. private test performance of all 
teams in Kaggle challenge. Black star: experimental error. Red star: DegScore baseline model14. Orange 
star: DegScore-XGB model using DegScore featurization with XGBoost. Purple star: baseline kernel used 
by many top-performing teams. (B) Distance embedding used to represent nucleotide proximity to other 
nucleotides in secondary structure. (C) Schematic of the single neural net (NN) architecture used by the 

20 

 
 
 
 
 
 
first place solution. This solution combined two sets of features into a single NN architecture, which 
combined elements of classic RNNs and CNNs. (D) Schematic of the full solution pipeline for the second 
place solution. This solution combined single model neural networks, similar to the ones used for the first 
place solution, with more complex 2nd and 3rd level stacking using XGBoost27 as the higher level 
learner.  

Figure 4. Deep-learning models can represent RNA-structure-based observables. (A) Representative 
structures from the best-predicted constructs from SHAPE modification (top row) and degradation at 10 
mM Mg2+, pH 10, 1 day, 24 ˚C (Deg_Mg_pH10, bottom row). (B) Nullrecurrent model predictions and 
experimental signal, averaged over secondary structure motifs. (C) One failure mode for prediction came 
from constructs whose input secondary structure features were incorrectly predicted. 

21 

 
 
 
Figure 5. Kaggle models demonstrate improved performance in independent test of degradation of full-
length mRNAs. (A) Overall mRNA degradation rate from PERSIST seq is driven by mRNA length. 
Kaggle models were therefore tested in their ability to predict length-averaged mRNA degradation. (B) 
Representative structures of two mRNAs of the same length that both encode Nanoluciferase, one with 
high degradation ("Yellowstone", left) and low degradation ("LinearDesign-1", right). (C) Prediction 
vectors were summed over nucleotides corresponding to the CDS region to compare to PERSIST-seq 
degradation rates, which account for degradation between two RT-PCR primers designed to capture 
degradation in the CDS region. (D) Length-normalized predictions from the Kaggle 1st place 
"Nullrecurrent" model and Kaggle 2nd place "Kazuki2" model show improved prediction over unpaired 
probabilities from ViennaRNA RNAfold25 and the DegScore linear regression model14, and a version of 
the DegScore featurization with XGBoost27 training. Error bars represent standard error estimated from 
the PERSIST-seq experiment. 

22 

 
 
 
 
Private test set (1801 
constructs, 162316 
 nucleotides) 

mRNA degradation 
prediction from ref. 6 
(188 constructs)  

Public test set 
(400 
constructs, 
27200 
nucleotides) 

Metric 

MCRMSE 

MCRMSE 

Spearman Correlation 

Experimental error 

0.12491 

0.10571 

0.88 

Single Model (blind prediction) 

DegScore 

0.39219 

0.47297 

DegScore-XGBoost 

0.35854 

0.43850 

Nullrecurrent 

Kazuki2 

0.22758 

0.34198 

0.22756 

0.34266 

Ensembled models (post hoc) 

Genetic algorithm (10 of top 100 
selected) 

0.2237 

0.3397 

Ensemble top 2 models 

0.2244 

0.33788 

Genetic algorithm on private test 
set 

0.3382 

0.36 

0.42 

0.43 

0.48 

0.47 

-- 

Table 1. Results from models tested in this work on Kaggle OpenVaccine public leaderboard, private test 
set, and orthogonal mRNA degradation results. 1Bootstrapped Spearman correlation of degradation rate 
(resampled from experimental error) to half-life.      

23 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
Supporting information corresponding to “Diverse machine learning models for predicting RNA 
degradation via dual crowdsourcing” 

Figure S1. Summed per-nucleotide degradation rates and overall degradation rate, estimated by 
log(abundance of full-length construct), are highly correlated in Rounds 1 and 2. 

Figure S2. Average signal-noise from data splits, separated by data from Rounds 1 and 2. Solid lines: 
median, dotted lines: 25/75% percentile. 

Figure S3. Correlation between RMSE by data type across constructs. 

24 

 
 
 
 
 
Figure S4. RMSE of Nullrecurrent model did not correlate with EternaScore, a measure of how closely 
the SHAPE reactivity data matched the predicted secondary structure. 

Figure S5. Effect of signal-noise filter (described in Methods) on (A) median reactivity/degradation per 
construct and (B) average signal-noise per construct for Rounds 1 and 2. Solid lines: median, dotted lines: 
25/75% percentile. 

25 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure S6. (A) Reactivity/degradation data disaggregated by nucleotide from rounds 1 and 2, from 
constructs that passed signal-noise filter. (B) Reactivity/degradation data from first 5 nucleotides from 
rounds 1 and 2, which were a constant “GGAAA”. Solid lines: median, dotted lines: 25/75% percentile. 

Solution descriptions from Kaggle teams 

1st Place - Jiayang Gao (also called "Nullrecurrent" model) 
My final submission is a simple ensemble of 4 models, each starts with an auto-encoder pretrained GNN 
architecture, followed by LSTM, GRU or Wavenet layers. My model takes in two kinds of features, (1) 
1D features with length n (the length of the mRNA sequence), representing features at each location of 
the sequence; (2) 2D features with size n^2, representing "distance" or "relationship" concepts between 
each pair. The strongest 1D features are the distance to the closest paired position, as well as the distance 
to the closest unpaired position - reactivity increases as the distance to the closest paired position becomes 
larger. The strongest 2D feature is the distance between each pair in the primary pairing based graph - this 
allows the model to capture the "neighbors" caused by pairing. One major difficulty of this problem is 
generalizing the model to different sequence lengths, and I use a semi-supervised approach to make my 
model more generalizable. In particular, I randomly generate sequences of different length, calculate their 
BPP matrix and pairing structure using the Arnie library, pseudo label their targets, and train them 
together with the original train dataset. This semi-supervised learning approach is particularly useful in 
this problem, for which sample size is small and labeled data is expensive to obtain. 
https://www.kaggle.com/c/stanford-covid-vaccine/discussion/189620 

2nd Place - Kazuki ** 2 (also called "Kazuki2" model) 
The mRNA sequence is not just a linear series of data, but also constitutes a loop by pairing between 
specific bases. Therefore, we thought of constructing LSTM/GRU and GNN independently, and 
integrating the prediction results with XGBoost. The base pair probabilities (bpps) are calculated by 
prediction, and the calculation results differ depending on the algorithm used. Therefore, we used several 

26 

 
 
 
 
 
 
algorithms in Arnie to predict base pairs, and used these algorithms as data augmentation and input 
multiple bpps simultaneously to improve the performance. We prepared 38 LSTM/GRU-based and 49 
GNN-based bpps by changing the types of bpps and their architectures, and integrated them with 
XGBoost to help improve the stability of prediction. Also, since the sequences in the test set tended to be 
longer than those in the training data, we confirmed in preliminary experiments that the model trained by 
shortening the sequences in the training data (107 to 88) was applicable to sequences of the original 
length (107). 
https://www.kaggle.com/c/stanford-covid-vaccine/discussion/189709 

3rd Place - Striderl 
My solution is an ensemble of various models of different structures and different training techniques. I 
added various LSTM/GRU/wavenet layers at the end of the AE pretrained GNN structure, in which 2 x 
128 units of LSTM or GRU layers work the best for me. Besides the common features used by other 
teams like structure adjacency matrix and neighbor adjacency matrix, I used RNAComposer to generate 
3D structures for each sample in the competition, and used predicted 3D distance to form the distance 
matrix. I used Arnie to predict other possible base pairs as data augmentation. Besides, another 
augmentation I used was to reverse the sequence and targets. The two augmentations quadruple the size 
of the original data. I also used pseudo labeling technique to iteratively improve my best single model. 

4th Place - FromTheWheel & Dyed & StoneShop 
The 4th place solution is a blend of 4 different models, in which the RNN layers were varied 
(LSTM+LSTM, LSTM+GRU, GRU+LSTM and GRU+GRU). We represent the RNA sequences as 
graphs where each base corresponds to a node. The network then learns a representation for each of these 
graphs and passes this representation through bi-directional RNN layers to obtain a sequence of predicted 
targets. Both the edge and node features were derived from the given sequence and provided Base Pairing 
Probability (BPP) matrix. One-hot-encoded bases (A, G, C, or U), one-hot-encoded positional feature (the 
remainder of the base index divided by 3), one-hot-encoded loop types, loop type probabilities (CapR) 
and BPP sum and number of zero's were beneficial node features. The distances (manhattan) between 
bases, normalized by sequence length and whether there is a base-pairing indicated in the structure were 
used as edge features. All these features were also inferred for newly generated BPP matrices, generated 
with 6 libraries available within the ARNIE software package. The new information derived from the 
CONTRAfold library was the most useful for this task, followed by RNAsoft, RNAstructure and Vienna. 
We also tried to use 3D angle information (binned and then categorically encoded) extracted with 
AMIGOS: this boosted our simple LSTM architecture used to fast check the feature importance but 
deteriorated the performance of our final model.  

5th Place - tito 
My solution is a simple ensemble of GNN-based model and GRU/LSTM-based model.  The features are 
not significantly different from those used by the other teams.  I focused mainly on augmentation.  (1) I 
used eternafold, vienna, nupack, contrafold and rnasoft to extract structure and loop_type. These backend 
engines are used to extract additional bpps too.  Especially eternafold and contrafold worked well.  (2) In 
this competition, the sequence length of the test data was longer than that of the training data, so we 
added a dummy sequence to the training data.  (3) I added reversed sequence to training data.  I think 
augmentation was important in this competition. 

6th Place - nyanp 
The data in this competition is very unique in two ways: 1) the sequence length is different between the 
training data and the private test data, and 2) the sequence has long-term dependencies via pairing. My 
NN model is constructed by stacking 1D SE-ResNet Layer and Graph Convolution Layer in order to 
make the model invariant to sequence length and to capture the long-term dependency. The Graph 
Convolution Layer is computed by a simple sum of products of the BPP matrix or adjacency matrix and 

27 

 
 
 
 
 
the sequence feature vector. The best single model was ranked 42nd (0.35045) on the private leaderboard, 
while it was 513th (0.24371) on the public leaderboard. This indicates that my model is more robust to 
changes in sequence length compared to the other participants. Best ensemble achieved MSRMSE's of 
0.23069/0.34538 on the public/private leaderboard by combining 4 different architectures. 
https://www.kaggle.com/c/stanford-covid-vaccine/discussion/189241 
https://www.kaggle.com/nyanpn/6th-place-cnn-gcn 

7th Place - One architecture 
Main features for my solution used were base pairing probability matrix, nucleotide sequence, structure, 
and loop type. Additionally, an inverse distance matrix (nucleotides at position i and j have distance |i-j| 
between them) was added to the base pairing probability matrix before inputting it as a bias for the self-
attention matrix. The conventional type of positional encoding as detailed in the original transformer or 
learnable positional encoding were not used; instead, position was encoded by the inverse distance matrix. 
Further, 5 secondary structure packages were used to generate pairing probability matrix, structure, and 
loop type at 37 and 50 C, resulting in 10 sets of features for each sequence. The architecture used was 
almost identical to bert aside from the 1D/2D convolution/deconvolution layers (without padding). The 
core module (ConvTransformerEncoder) was constructed as follows: (1) 1D convolution on the sequence 
of encodings and 2D convolution on the bpp feature map. (2) self-attention with bpp feature map as 
additive bias (3) position wise feedforward network. (4) 1D deconvolution on the sequence of encodings 
and 2D deconvolution on the bpp feature map. All available sequences were used to pretrain 
(unsupervised) models on randomly mutated or masked (with NULL token) sequence retrieval loss 
(basically just softmax to retrieve correct nucleotide/structure/loop). For convenience, two linear decoders 
were initialized before pretraining, one for sequence retrieval, and another for degradation predictions 
later on. The Ranger optimizer was used with a flat and anneal schedule. Some sequences were excluded 
during training on degradation targets based on signal to noise threshold (0.25, 0.5, or 1). My biggest 
discovery from this competition is that the vanilla positional encoding used in the original transformer 
paper does not generalize well to this task at least. It seems that the type of positional encoding used in 
most transformers does not adequately describe the concept of position, which is fine for NLP because I 
believe order and position of words are not as important as for RNA. The vanilla positional encoding is 
more of an absolute positional encoding, whereas the inverse distance basically encoders relative position 
in a very simple way that generalized better to longer sequences. Best ensemble achieved MSRMSE's of 
0.23056/0.34550 on the public/private leaderboard.  

8th Place - ishikei 
My solution is an ensemble of GRU/LSTM and GNN. Each model is AE pretrained with all data. For 
features, bpps was augmented with different temperature parameters (T=37, 50) using the ARNIE 
package (vienna, nupack, rnastructure, rnasoft, eternafold, contrafold). I also added the shannon entropy 
at each base position. Because all of the data in this competition are predicted values except for the 
sequence, I think it would have been effective to use an ensemble of bpps predictions from various 
algorithms. At high temperature: Since the secondary structure of RNA is temperature-dependent, I think 
it was effective to use bpps with T changed as input. At high pH: Alkaline hydrolysis of RNA can occur 
at any position in the sequence (probably) as well, so I think the prediction itself is difficult. 
https://www.kaggle.com/c/stanford-covid-vaccine/discussion/190314 

9th Place - Keep going to be GM 
The big issue of this contest is that the train and test RNA sequence lengths are different, and the data 
contains noise. The RNA sequence length used for training was 107, and the final ranking was obtained 
for 130 sequences. Different models with fluent feature engineering to enhance the generalization of 
predictions. Because RNA can have both graph and sequence, traditional recurrent neural networks 
(LSTM, GRU), transformer and graph-neural networks were applied. For feature engineering, (A, G, C, 
or U) were represented by embedding layers. And, various (N, N) adjacency matrices called bpps, which 

28 

 
 
 
 
are probabilities of being linked between nucleotides are calculated with various softwares, such as 
CONTRAFold, RNAFold. The statistical features such as ratio of (A, G, C, or U) in sequence are added.  
has are also included.I created the (N, N) matrix for fixed attention in various ways. Bpps was created 
using several packages. The distance matrix was augmented using gaussian. With these features, dozens 
of models were created by differing hyperparameters of sequential blocks and graph convolution layers. 
https://www.kaggle.com/c/stanford-covid-vaccine/discussion/189845 

11th Place - Social Distancing Please 
Our solution is an ensemble of multiple models. There are mainly 2 types of models. The first type is a 
combination of 1D Convolution Layers, Graph Convolution Layers, and RNN Layers. The second type is 
a combination of WaveNet layers and RNN Layers. The most powerful features are the adjacency 
matrices constructed by the given structure sequence and the given base-pair probabilities. The adjacency 
matrices are used for the Graph Convolution Layers. Another useful trick we have used is to apply a 
lower training weight to the top 6 sequence position, it is because the sequence start is similar across the 
different sequences. We also used 2 different Linear Regression models to ensemble the predictions in 
different sequence positions that are seqpos[:6] and seqpos[6:].  

13th Place - The Machine 
The main idea behind our approach is generating bpp matrices from all the libraries included in Arnie, 
training a model from the output structures of each library and finally creating an ensemble of all the 
trained models. Although each library provides sub optimal bpp, their consensus provides a better 
solution. We also included several architectures in the ensemble and the best of them consisted of 1D 
convolution, static graph convolution and bi-directional LSTM layers. A static graph convolution layer 
processes each two connected nucleotides in the predicted secondary structure (zeros added when a 
nucleotide isn't connected). All our models were trained on all the data using self supervised learning then 
fine-tuned on the training data only using supervised learning. 

29 

 
 
 
 
 
