Jabbar, R.; Zaidan, E.;  
Ben Said, A.; Ghofrani A. 

Reshaping Smart Energy Transition 

Research Paper  

Reshaping Smart Energy Transition:  

An analysis of human-building interactions in Qatar Using 
Machine Learning Techniques 
Rateb Jabbar, College of Arts and Science, Qatar University, Doha, Qatar 

Esmat Zaidan, College of Arts and Science, Qatar University, Doha, Qatar 

                              Ahmed ben Said, College of Engineering, Qatar University, Doha, Qatar 

                              Ali Ghofrani, College of Arts and Science, Qatar University, Doha, Qatar 

Abstract 

Policy Planning have the potential to contribute to the strategic development and economic diversification of 
developing countries even without considerable structural changes. In this study, we analyzed a set of human-
oriented dimensions aimed at improving energy policies related to the building sector in Qatar. Considering the 
high percentage of expatriate and migrant communities with different financial and cultural backgrounds and 
behavioral  patterns  compared  with  local  communities  in  the  GCC  Union,  it  is  required  to  investigate  human 
dimensions  to  propose  adequate  energy  policies.  This  study  explored  the  correlations  of  socioeconomic, 
behavioral,  and  demographic  dimensions  to  determine  the  main  factors  behind  discrepancies  in  energy  use, 
responsibilities, motivations, habits, and overall well-being. The sample included 2,200 people in Qatar, and it 
was clustered into two consumer categories: high and low. In particular, the study focused on exploring human 
indoor  comfort  perception  dependencies  with  building  features.  Financial  drivers,  such  as  demand  programs 
and energy subsidies, were explored in relation to behavioral patterns. Subsequently, the data analysis resulted 
in implications for energy policies regarding interventions, social well-being, and awareness. Machine learning 
methods  were  used  to  perform  a  feature  importance  analysis  to  determine  the  main  factors  of  human 
behavior. The findings of this study demonstrated how human factors impact comfort perception in residential 
and  work  environments,  norms,  habits,  self-responsibility,  consequence  awareness,  and  consumption.  The 
study has important implications for developing targeted strategies aimed at improving the efficacy of energy 
policies and sustainability performance indicators. 

Keywords 

Energy  policy,  Human-building  interactions,  Empirical  behavioral  analysis,  Machines  Learning, 
Thermal comfort, Demand response  

1.  Introduction 

The  development  of  a  knowledge-based  economy  represents  the  core  of  Qatar’s  strategies,  with  a 
particular focus on social well-being and sustainability (unescwa, 2017). Economic growth rates in Qatar 
have  been  among  the  fastest  globally  in  the  last  two  decades,  which  considerably  impacted  its  energy 
demands. The population growth as well has contributed to the increasing number of installed electricity 
meters in the commercial and residential sectors and electricity consumption. Moreover, the arid climate 
presents  a  substantial  cooling  load  in  the  building  sector.  To  illustrate,  46%  to  61%  of  the  annual 
electricity  is  consumed  for  cooling  purposes,  as  the  building  simulations  of  eight  residential  and 
commercial buildings demonstrated (Nazemi, Zaidan and Jafari, 2021). Up to date, the strategies have not 
included  human-building  interactions  (HBIs)  (Labanca  and  Bertoldi,  2018),  although  residents  indirectly 

57th ISOCARP World Planning Congress 
8-11 November 2021 | Doha, Qatar 

 
 
 
 
Jabbar, R.; Zaidan, E.;  
Ben Said, A.; Ghofrani A. 

Reshaping Smart Energy Transition 

and  directly  interact  with  equipment  and  buildings  (Angizeh  et  al.,  2021)(Zaidan  and  Abulibdeh,  2021). 
Accordingly,  performance  gaps  are  a  result  of  non-including  human  factors  in  energy  decision-making 
(Bertoldi, 2019)(Jafari et al., 2020)(Zaidan, Al-Saidi and Hammad, 2019). HBIs are critical for the building 
energy  efficiency  and  conservation  equation  (B  and  Lalanne,  2017).  Relevant  literature  has  identified 
human factors that impact energy use (Jia, Srinivasan and Raheem, 2017),(Zhao and Magoulès, 2012). To 
illustrate, occupants with ‘wasteful workstyles’ consume up to double the energy that those with “non-
wasteful” styles (Lin and Hong, 2013). Moreover, studies have demonstrated that occupants’ preferences 
depend on gender, age, and cultural and psychological factors (Masoso and Grobler, 2010), (Thiaux et al., 
2019)  this  and  can  predict  the  operation  of  commercial  buildings  (Nematchoua  et  al.,  2019),(Appel-
Meulenbroek and Danivska, 2021),(Nazemi, Zaidan and Jafari, 2021) such as offices. According to some 
researchers,  human  factors  in  commercial  buildings  are  the  ‘dark  side’  of  energy  use  (Masoso  and 
Grobler,  2010).  Accordingly,  the  implications  of  occupant  behavior  are  stochastic  and  require  in-depth 
investigation (Hong et al., 2017),(Thiaux et al., 2019), because technology investments are not sufficient 
to  ensure  higher  comfort  perceptions  and  low  or  net-zero  energy  in  the  buildings  (D’Oca,  Hong  and 
Langevin, 2018).  

Our  study  surveyed  2,200  individuals  in  Doha,  Qatar  to  determine  the  interdependencies  in  HBIs  using 
empirical and analytical analysis. The sample was clustered using the k-means clustering method into two 
consumer  categories  in  terms  of  the  energy  use  intensity  of  their  dwellings.  We  conducted  a  feature 
importance analysis based on a random forest classification to determine the main factors behind human 
energy  consumption  patterns.  Subsequently,  we  classified  the  sample  data  on the  basis  of  the  primary 
human-oriented factors to identify the relationships between the survey elements. The results were then 
used  to  propose  recommendations  to  integrate  human  dimensions  into  energy  policy  and  improve  the 
outcomes of strategic plans for the building environment sector in Qatar. 

2.  Methodology and Survey Structure 

This study explored human and social factors in improving the efficiency of energy policy and overcoming 
performance  gaps  in  the  building  sector  in  Qatar.  Accordingly,  we  surveyed  the  sample  in  terms  of 
demographic  (gender,  age,  and  ethnicity)  and  socioeconomic  (employment  status,  marital  status, 
expenses,  and  household  income)  factors  and  their  association  with  behavioral  factors  and  human 
interactions  in  building  environments.  We  used  both  quantitative  and  qualitative  methods  to  identify 
indoor  lighting  and  thermal  comfort  and  indoor  environment  preferences  and  to  determine  how  they 
impact  respondents’  performance  and  well-being.  We  investigated  the  habits  and  routines  of  the 
respondents in interacting with the building, such as thermostat switching and window use, to determine 
relationships between features. In addition, we explored behavioral and psychological factors, including 
attitudes, motivations, responsibilities, awareness of consequences, and their intercorrelations. The main 
factors  are  shown  in  Error!  Reference  source  not  found.,  as  well  as  the  human-oriented  applications 
based  on  particular  demographic  and  socioeconomic  characteristics  of  the  migrant  and 
local 
communities.  

57th ISOCARP World Planning Congress 
8-11 November 2021 | Doha, Qatar 

 
 
Jabbar, R.; Zaidan, E.;  
Ben Said, A.; Ghofrani A. 

Reshaping Smart Energy Transition 

Figure 1: Survey framework comprising the data acquisition of human dimensions and building properties of 
the sample 

3.  Categorization of Energy Consumers  

Determining primary human-driven factors that impact consumption habits and patterns is required for 
improving  energy  policies  by  targeting  specific  population  segments  and  developing  strategies  through 
coercive  actions,  pricing,  interventions,  incentive  modeling,  and  awareness  raising.  This  is  critical  for 
Qatar considering its variety in human characteristics. 

3.1. Consumer clustering  

To compare consumption patterns and calculate a new attribute equivalent to energy use intensity (EUI), 
we divided the average monthly electricity payments by floor area to calculate a new attribute equivalent 
to energy use intensity (EUI). Qatar’s residential rate structure is not based on dynamic pricing schemes. 
Subsequently, the k-means clustering method (Jin and Han, 2010) was used to categorize EUI values into 
low and high consumers. We partitioned 1021 respondents into 829 users of Category 1 
(𝐸𝑈𝐼=2.89𝑄𝑅𝑚2) representing low consumers and 192 users in Category 2, representing high 
consumers. Two patterns are illustrated in Error! Reference source not found. and Error! Reference 
source not found.. Subsequently, we used those patterns to perform a feature importance analysis. 

Figure 2: Distribution of users’ energy use intensity on the basis of average monthly bill payments and home 
floor area. 

57th ISOCARP World Planning Congress 
8-11 November 2021 | Doha, Qatar 

 
 
 
 
 
Jabbar, R.; Zaidan, E.;  
Ben Said, A.; Ghofrani A. 

Reshaping Smart Energy Transition 

Figure 3: Low (green area) and high consumer (red area) categories on the basis of the normalized monthly 
bill per area using the k-means clustering algorithm. 

3.2. Feature importance analysis  

Machine  Learning  can  be  applied  to  solve  complex  problems  efficiently  (Said  and  Erradi,  2019), 
(Abdelhedi  et  al.,  2020),  (Ayadi  et  al.,  2020),(Jabbar  et  al.,  2018).  In  this  study,  random  forest  (RF),  a 
widely  used  machine  learning  technique  (Wainberg,  Alipanahi  and  Frey,  2016)  is  used.  Accordingly,  we 
used  RF  classifiers  to  conduct  the  feature  importance  analysis  as  they  employ  bootstrap  aggregating 
(bagging)  to  sample  the  training  dataset  to  establish  a  set  of  decision  tree  estimators  (Breiman,  1996). 
The  bagging  method  generates  an  ensemble  of  predictors  considering  random  subsets  of  the  main 
training  dataset  to  enhance  the  generalization  of  the  ensemble.  We  used  three  techniques  to  perform 
the feature importance analysis using the trained classifier. 

Gini impurity:  

The measure of the quality of split depends on metrics such as the Gini impurity, defined as: 

 represents the Gini impurity of node I, whereas 

Where 
 represents the ratio of class k among all 
instances in node i. The cost function to train a decision tree on the basis of the Gini impurity and the 
CART algorithm to determine the optimum split is expressed by (Breiman, 1984): 

Where 

 represents the cost function based on feature k, threshold 

, 

 represents the 

impurity of the left or right subset, and 
 denotes the number of instances on the left or right. 
Random sampling is applied to both the training dataset and the feature set in a random forest classifier. 
RF classifiers can measure the relative importance of features determined based on the extent to which a 
feature, on average, reduces the impurity measure based on Equation 4. 

Where 
denotes the importance of feature I. 

  denotes  the  importance  of  node  i,  w  denotes  the  weighted  number  of  instances,  and 

  Permutation  importance  measures  an  increase  in  the  model’s  prediction  error  following  the 
permutation  of  the  values  of  the  feature,  consequently  breaking  the  relationship  between  the 

57th ISOCARP World Planning Congress 
8-11 November 2021 | Doha, Qatar 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Jabbar, R.; Zaidan, E.;  
Ben Said, A.; Ghofrani A. 

Reshaping Smart Energy Transition 

feature  and  the  true  outcome.  If  shuffling  its  values  increases  the  model  error,  the  feature  is 
considered  important.  In  contrast,  it  is  considered  unimportant  if  the  model  error  remains  the 
same because it implies that the model made the prediction without using the feature.  

 

SHAP:  The  SHAP  explanation  method  draws  upon  coalitional  game  theory  to  calculate  Shapley 
values, which reflect how to fairly distribute the payout among the features (i.e., the prediction). 
A  player  can  also  be  represented  by  a  group  of  feature  values.  To  illustrate,  pixels  can  be 
grouped into superpixels to explain an image, and the prediction is distributed among them. The 
Shapley value explanation is shown as an additive feature attribution method. 

We measured the relative importance of demographic, socioeconomic, and behavioral factors in relation 
to the consumption pattern using two random forest classifiers. We used Gini impurity, random patches 
method, and the bootstrap algorithm to train the random forest to train 500 decision tree classifiers, 
which comprised the random forest. The first model included five attributes as independent variables, 
namely monthly expenses, household income, ethnicity, gender, and age, to categorize the consumption 
category (high and low). Using a ten-fold cross-validation analysis, the random forest estimators 
categorize the two classes with an average accuracy of 93.5% (90-97.1%). Considering the random 
behavior of the feature importance procedure, we conducted 1,000 iterations of the analysis to obtain 
the average feature importance of the independent attributes. We applied the same procedure to the 
second independent variable set consisting of the perceived factors that improve self-responsibility, 
motives for adopting home energy efficiency, and consequence awareness. The average accuracy of the 
second classifier was 92.6% (90-95.1%) for the same cross validation.  
Error! Reference source not found., Error! Reference source not found., and Error! Reference source 
not found. show the correlation between these three variables and the independent variables in the first 
random forest classifier in the following order of importance for the first (household expenses, age, 
ethnicity, gender, and income) and the second classifier (responsibility factor, energy efficiency motives, 
and awareness). Accordingly, household expenses, respondent age, and ethnicity group are sufficient for 
differentiating household energy consumption patterns. In contrast, consequence awareness is not 
crucial for energy consumption. Furthermore, the results indicated that household monthly expenses 
impact the energy consumption more than the income level. The household monthly expenses level 
consists of factors such as appliance use, appliance types, and building characteristics. Age and ethnicity 
group impact the energy consumption, but gender does not. Error! Reference source not found., Error! 
Reference source not found., and Error! Reference source not found. illustrate that consequence 
awareness does not impact aggregate household energy patterns. 

57th ISOCARP World Planning Congress 
8-11 November 2021 | Doha, Qatar 

 
 
 
 
Jabbar, R.; Zaidan, E.;  
Ben Said, A.; Ghofrani A. 

Reshaping Smart Energy Transition 

Figure 4: Feature importance analysis of the energy consumer categories based on demographic and 
socioeconomic factors using the Gini impurity. 

Figure 5: Feature importance analysis of the energy consumer categories based on demographic and 
socioeconomic factors using permutation importance. 

Figure 6: Feature importance analysis of the energy consumer categories based on demographic and 
socioeconomic factors using SHAP. 

57th ISOCARP World Planning Congress 
8-11 November 2021 | Doha, Qatar 

 
 
 
 
 
Jabbar, R.; Zaidan, E.;  
Ben Said, A.; Ghofrani A. 

Reshaping Smart Energy Transition 

Figure 7: Feature importance analysis of the energy consumer categories based on human attitudes and 
behavioral factors using the Gini impurity. 

Figure  8:  Feature  importance  analysis  of  the  energy  consumer  categories  based  on  human  attitudes  and 
behavioral factors using permutation importance. 

Figure 9: Feature importance analysis of the energy consumer categories based on human attitude and 
behavioral factors using SHAP. 

Figure 10 shows the associations between the investigated variables and energy consumption categories. 
Arabic and North American groups and older people tend to have high consumption patterns, in addition 
to those motivated by financial incentives and those concerned about home energy efficiency. 

57th ISOCARP World Planning Congress 
8-11 November 2021 | Doha, Qatar 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Jabbar, R.; Zaidan, E.;  
Ben Said, A.; Ghofrani A. 

Reshaping Smart Energy Transition 

Figure 10: Energy consumer categories demonstrated based on human-oriented factors. 

4.  Discussion 

We  investigated  the  associations  between  the  factors  regarding:  (1)  thermal  comfort  in  residential 
buildings  and  human-building 
in 
workplaces, (3) behavioral factors and energy attitudes, and (4) financial drivers in residential buildings. 

interactions,  (2)  productivity  and  human-building 

interactions 

4.1. Analysis of thermal comfort in residential buildings 

Heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) systems keep the indoor environment comfortable, and 
they account for a considerable amount of energy consumption in hot climates as they largely depend on 
user’s preferences. The saving energy in some cases is in contrast with the user’s well-being. Studies have 
demonstrated that the well-being and preferences regarding the indoor environment are in correlation 
with socioeconomic and  demographic factors (e.g.,  (Schweiker et al., 2018;  Sintov, White and Walpole, 
2019)). Violin plots based on KDE distributions of the respondents’ perceptions about thermal comfort at 
home and the importance of the comfort level for their well-being are shown in Error! Reference source 
not  found..  The  right  column  illustrates  the  importance  of  indoor  thermal  comfort  for  their  well-being 
based  on  ethnicity,  income,  and  gender.  Users’  perceptions  of  comfort  level  are  presented  in  the  left 
column. Comfort levels of women tend to be higher, implying that they feel more comfortable at home 
than men. Moreover, it can be seen from the right column that women value more indoor comfort than 
men. Considering the household income level, it is in correlation with comfort importance and perceived 
comfort. Furthermore, Qataris, Arabs, and Europeans value indoor comfort more than North American, 
Asian,  and  Indian  ethnic  groups.  Accordingly,  strategies  in  electricity  pricing  and  financial  incentive 
modeling  can  be  proposed  to  enhance  the  well-being  of  communities.  Quantifying  penalty  factors  for 
comfort  deviation  and  building  design,  operation,  and  control  guidelines  is  also  possible.  Correlations 
between the occupant’s comfort level and building construction type and conditions were determined as 
well. Error! Reference source not found. shows a general enhancement of the indoor comfort level for 
newer  buildings.  Moreover,  users  are  in general  more  satisfied  in  Arabic-style  homes  and  villas  than  in 
the flats. In addition, modern buildings offer more comfortable indoor environments. Finally, according to 
the  comparison  results,  central  ducted  systems  and  wall-mounted  units  provide  higher  indoor  comfort 
compared with window air conditioners and ceiling fans. 

57th ISOCARP World Planning Congress 
8-11 November 2021 | Doha, Qatar 

 
 
 
 
Jabbar, R.; Zaidan, E.;  
Ben Said, A.; Ghofrani A. 

Reshaping Smart Energy Transition 

Figure 11: Associations between demographic factors and participants’ perceived thermal comfort at home 
(left column plots) and indoor comfort importance for the respondents’ quality of life (right column plots) 
based on Kernel Density Estimation. 

Accordingly, energy efficiency and retrofit financial incentives can be directed toward systems providing 
the lowest comfort levels (and least efficiency) to enhance the overall well-being of society and energy 
efficiency indicators. 

Figure 12: Correlation between perceived thermal comfort at home and dwelling characteristics. 

4.2. Analysis of thermal comfort in workplaces 

In addition, it is possible to use visual and thermal comfort measures to determine lower consumption 
modes  and  at  the  same  time  save  energy  while  meeting  user’s  preferences,  According  to  Error! 
Reference source not found., ethnicity and gender impact perceived comfort in the indoor environment 
in  workplaces.  Men  prefer  higher  temperatures  (22-24  °C)  than  women  (below  22  °C).  Considering 
ethnicities, Asians prefer hot indoor environments compared with North Americans and Arabs. Asians are 
inclined  to  change  thermostat  settings  and  open  windows,  in  contrast  to  women.  Also,  Asian  ethnic 
groups reported preferences toward light workplaces. Patterns in human-building interactions are shown 
in Error! Reference source not found.. 

57th ISOCARP World Planning Congress 
8-11 November 2021 | Doha, Qatar 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Jabbar, R.; Zaidan, E.;  
Ben Said, A.; Ghofrani A. 

Reshaping Smart Energy Transition 

Figure 13: Intercorrelations between the demographic factors and users’ preferences in the workplace  

indoor environment. 

Figure 14: Intercorrelations between the demographic factors and users’ interactions with the building. 

Error!  Reference  source  not  found.  shows  patterns  concerning  the  respondents’  perceived  comfort  at 
work  and  the  impact  of  the  comfort  level  on  productivity  and  performance.  Women  value  thermal 
comfort more than men, which is in line with the findings relayed to the perceived comfort at home. The 

57th ISOCARP World Planning Congress 
8-11 November 2021 | Doha, Qatar 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Jabbar, R.; Zaidan, E.;  
Ben Said, A.; Ghofrani A. 

Reshaping Smart Energy Transition 

results  also  indicated  a  positive  correlation  between  income  and  impact  on  productivity  and  perceived 
comfort  at  work.  Regarding  ethnicity,  Asians  and  Indians  reported  less  comfort,  although  it  is  a  critical 
factor  for  productivity.  In  addition,  the  correlations  between  human-building  interactions  and  indoor 
environment preference with perceived comfort level at work are shown in Error! Reference source not 
found.. According to the results, individuals with hotter indoor environment preferences reported more 
discomfort.  
The results also revealed that those who frequently open windows and override the thermostat tend to 
feel  higher  thermal  discomfort,  which  implies  the  importance  of  thermal  discomfort  in  preventing 
negative  human  interruptions.  The  influence  of  building  construction  and  attributes  on  the  perceived 
comfort level is shown in Error! Reference source not found.. Notably, users of personal offices have a 
higher perceived comfort level at work than those in open office spaces. 

Figure 15: Associations between demographic factors and participants’ perceived thermal comfort at work 
(left column plots) and indoor comfort importance on the respondent’s work performance (right column 
plots). 

Figure 16: Relationship between the respondents’ perceived comfort with (a) a preferred indoor 
temperature, (b) tendency toward thermostat override, and (c) tendency toward opening windows. 

57th ISOCARP World Planning Congress 
8-11 November 2021 | Doha, Qatar 

 
 
 
 
 
Jabbar, R.; Zaidan, E.;  
Ben Said, A.; Ghofrani A. 

Reshaping Smart Energy Transition 

Figure 17: Relationship between the respondent’s perceived comfort and (a) workplace construction year, 
(b) workplace style, and (c) workplace type. 

4.3. Awareness, motives, and responsibility  

We also assessed the associations between human dimensions and factors in terms of perceived energy 
consumption, perceived factors that can enhance energy consumption responsibility, motives for home 
energy  efficiency,  and  climate  change  awareness.  This  aimed  at  assisting  decision-making  in  proposing 
strategies  for  different  population  segments,  such  as  developing  personal  and  social  norms  and  raising 
awareness.  The  associations  between  ethnicity,  income,  and  gender  with  consequence  awareness  are 
shown  in  the  first-row  plots  of  Error!  Reference  source  not  found..  The  highest  income  group  and 
women are the most concerned about climate change, in contrast to Indian and Arab ethnic groups. Men 
value  more  financial  motives  for  home  energy  efficiency,  as  shown  in  the  second-row  plots  of  Error! 
Reference source not found.. Moreover, this figure also shows that  the  lower-income groups reported 
financial factors, Qataris social and environmental factors, and other ethnic groups the financial factors as 
the main driver in relation to home energy efficiency. The coercive factors were more prominent among 
male  respondents  (the  third-row  plots).  North  Americans  highly  value  financial  incentives,  Europeans 
value  education,  and  other  ethnic  groups  coercive  actions  (Nazemi,  Jafari  and  Zaidan,  2021).  Female 
respondents  reported  considerably  more  responsible  behavior  regarding  self-perceived  energy 
responsibility at work (fourth-row plots), especially in  comparison with Indian and Asian ethnic groups. 
The highest proportion of adverse interactions in work environments was reported in the lowest-income 
group. 

57th ISOCARP World Planning Congress 
8-11 November 2021 | Doha, Qatar 

 
 
 
 
Jabbar, R.; Zaidan, E.;  
Ben Said, A.; Ghofrani A. 

Reshaping Smart Energy Transition 

Figure 18: Intercorrelation between respondents’ attitudes and key demographic/socioeconomic factors. 

4.4. Financial drivers in energy consumption patterns  

Determining  the  primary  financial  drivers  of  home  energy  consumption  patterns  and  their  associations 
with human factors allow developing energy strategies. To illustrate, determining if high electricity prices 
of  energy  subsidies  modify  energy  consumption  behavior  can  inform  such  strategies.  The  impact  of 
income, ethnicity, and gender on energy pricing and energy use associations is shown in Error! Reference 
source  not  found..  Thus,  high  electricity  prices  can  considerably  impact  men  to  modify  their  energy 
consumption, in particular those from Indian, Asian, and Arab ethnic groups. Moreover, electricity pricing 
is more effective strategy for reducing consumption among low-income than high-income respondents. 
In  the  second  row  of  Error!  Reference  source  not  found.,  the  association  between  human  factors  and 
willingness to participate in DR programs is illustrated. For women, social and environmental incentives 
are  more  important  for  participating  in  DR  programs,  whereas  men  emphasize  financial  incentives. 
Regarding  ethnicities,  Qataris,  in  general,  are  against  participation  in  DR  programs,  while  other  ethnic 
groups  reported  financial  incentives  as  the  most  important  factor.  An  association  between  DR 
participation and the household income level was not determined. The associations between the income 
level, ethnicity, and  gender and  energy consumption as a result of  waived electricity bills are shown in 
the last row. Considering gender, women reported that they would not change their energy use due to 
waived electricity bills. Indian and Arab ethnic groups reported that they would increase the usage in the 
case  of  waived  electricity  bills,  in  contrast  to  other  ethnic  groups.  Finally,  lower-income  groups  would 
likely increase energy consumption, in contrast to high-income respondents.  
Findings  regarding  ratepayers’  willingness  to  participate  in  demand  response  programs  are  shown  in 
Error!  Reference  source  not  found..  In  contrast  to  villa  owners,  apartment  residents  are  much  more 
inclined  to  participate  in  DR.  Moreover,  there  is  a  distinction  between  homeowners  who  are  not 

57th ISOCARP World Planning Congress 
8-11 November 2021 | Doha, Qatar 

 
 
 
 
Jabbar, R.; Zaidan, E.;  
Ben Said, A.; Ghofrani A. 

Reshaping Smart Energy Transition 

interested  in  DR  participation  and  home  rental  residents  who  are.  Finally,  the  residents  of  old-style 
buildings are more inclined toward DR participation. 

Figure 19: Interdependencies between demographic/socioeconomic factors and financial drivers of home 
energy consumption and DR participation willingness. 

Figure 20: DR willingness association with building attributes with respect to home type, ownership, and 
style. 

57th ISOCARP World Planning Congress 
8-11 November 2021 | Doha, Qatar 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Jabbar, R.; Zaidan, E.;  
Ben Said, A.; Ghofrani A. 

5.  Conclusion  

Reshaping Smart Energy Transition 

In this study, we carried out an empirical and analytical study by surveying a sample of 2,200 respondents 
in Doha, Qatar with an aim to investigate the influence of behavioral, socioeconomic, and demographic 
factors on human-building interactions. We employed the machine learning method to categorize the 
respondents into high and low ratepayer classes on the basis of normalized energy use per area. The 
feature relevance analysis revealed that the most important factors needed to determine family 
consumption patterns are ethnicity, age structure, and household costs. In addition, the results indicated 
that behavioral traits and human attitudes can be used to categorize the consumption patterns. Owing to 
these findings, the decision-makers can develop strategies aimed at raising awareness among particular 
social communities. Moreover, these findings can contribute to proposing interventions aimed at 
reducing high consumption among specific groups. Furthermore, the findings indicated the considerable 
association between personal well-being and comfort levels in the indoor environment. Importantly, we 
also investigated how socio-economic and demographic factors and building characteristics impact 
human-building interactions. Therefore, one important implication of this study is that it is necessary to 
define incentives (e.g., financial) aimed at increasing well-being in the indoor environment and 
minimizing adverse human-building interactions by investigating and determining specific community 
characteristics. Finally, the results indicated that factors such as income level, ethnicity, and gender 
impact users’ willingness to participate in demand response programs with a monetary incentive, as well 
as the financial drivers regarding residential energy consumption. Owners of older-style buildings, 
apartment occupants, and home rental residents reported higher inclination to participate in DR projects, 
in contrast to homeowners who strongly opposed them.  
This study has some limitations. First, it did not take into account the COVID-19 pandemic and its possible 
impacts on electricity consumption trends. Therefore, we recommend conducting studies that will take 
into account new data updates resulting from the pandemic. Furthermore, this study divided the 
respondents into only two classes: high and low consumers. Therefore, we suggest including a more 
detailed decomposition analysis to fully capture consumption trends of different end-user groups and 
determine related factors. 

6.  Acknowledgments 

This publication was made possible by an NPRP award [NPRP11S-1228-170142] from the Qatar National 
Research Fund (a member of Qatar Foundation). The statements made herein are solely the responsibility 
of the authors. The publication of this article was funded by the Qatar National Library 

7.  References 

Abdelhedi, M. et al. (2020) ‘Prediction of uniaxial compressive strength of carbonate rocks and cement mortar 
using artificial neural network and multiple linear regressions’, Acta Geodynamica et Geromaterialia, 17(3), pp. 
367–378. 

Angizeh, F. et al. (2021) ‘Resilience-Oriented Behind-the-Meter Energy Storage System Evaluation for Mission-
Critical Facilities’, IEEE Access. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3085410. 

Appel-Meulenbroek,  R.  and  Danivska,  V.  (2021)  A  Handbook  of  Theories  on  Designing  Alignment  between 
People and the Office Environment, A Handbook of Theories on Designing Alignment between People and the 
Office Environment. Routledge. doi: 10.1201/9781003128830. 

Ayadi, S. et al. (2020) ‘Dairy Cow rumination detection: A deep learning approach’, in International Workshop 
on Distributed Computing for Emerging Smart Networks, pp. 123–139. 

B, J. N. and Lalanne, D. (2017) ‘Human-Building Interaction : When the Machine A Definition of HBI’, pp. 348–

57th ISOCARP World Planning Congress 
8-11 November 2021 | Doha, Qatar 

 
 
 
Jabbar, R.; Zaidan, E.;  
Ben Said, A.; Ghofrani A. 

369. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-67684-5. 

Reshaping Smart Energy Transition 

Bertoldi, P. (2019) Overview of the European Union policies to promote more sustainable behaviours in energy 
end-users, Energy and Behaviour: Towards a Low Carbon Future. Elsevier Inc. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-818567-
4.00018-1. 

Breiman,  L. 
10.1002/cyto.990080516. 

(1984) 

‘Classification  and 

regression 

trees’,  Cytometry,  8(5),  pp.  534–535.  doi: 

L. 
Breiman, 
10.1023/A:1018054314350. 

(1996) 

‘Bagging 

Predictors’,  Machine 

Learning, 

24(2), 

pp. 

123–140. 

doi: 

D’Oca,  S.,  Hong,  T.  and  Langevin,  J.  (2018)  ‘The  human  dimensions  of  energy  use  in  buildings:  A  review’, 
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 81(May 2017), pp. 731–742. doi: 10.1016/j.rser.2017.08.019. 

Hong, T. et al. (2017) ‘Ten questions concerning occupant behavior in buildings: The big picture’, Building and 
Environment, 114, pp. 518–530. doi: 10.1016/j.buildenv.2016.12.006. 

Jabbar, R. et al. (2018) ‘Applied internet of things iot: Car monitoring system for modeling of road safety and 
traffic  system  in  the  state  of  qatar’,  in  Qatar  Foundation  Annual  Research  Conference  Proceedings  Volume 
2018 Issue 3, p. ICTPP1072. 

Jafari,  M.  A.  et  al.  (2020)  ‘Improving  Building  Energy  Footprint  and  Asset  Performance  Using  Digital  Twin 
Technology’, IFAC-PapersOnLine, 53(3), pp. 386–391. doi: 10.1016/J.IFACOL.2020.11.062. 

Jia, M., Srinivasan, R. S. and Raheem, A. A. (2017) ‘From occupancy to occupant behavior: An analytical survey 
of  data  acquisition  technologies,  modeling  methodologies  and  simulation  coupling  mechanisms  for  building 
energy  efficiency’,  Renewable  and  Sustainable  Energy  Reviews,  68(June  2016),  pp.  525–540.  doi: 
10.1016/j.rser.2016.10.011. 

Jin,  X.  and  Han,  J.  (2010)  ‘K-Means  Clustering  BT    -  Encyclopedia  of  Machine  Learning’,  in  Sammut,  C.  and 
Webb, G. I. (eds). Boston, MA: Springer US, pp. 563–564. doi: 10.1007/978-0-387-30164-8_425. 

Labanca, N. and Bertoldi, P. (2018) ‘Beyond energy efficiency and individual behaviours: policy insights from 
social practice theories’, Energy Policy, 115(February), pp. 494–502. doi: 10.1016/j.enpol.2018.01.027. 

Lin, H. W. and Hong, T. (2013) ‘On variations of space-heating energy use in office buildings’, Applied Energy, 
111, pp. 515–528. doi: 10.1016/j.apenergy.2013.05.040. 

Masoso, O. T. and Grobler, L. J. (2010) ‘The dark side of occupants’ behaviour on building energy use’, Energy 
and Buildings, 42(2), pp. 173–177. doi: 10.1016/j.enbuild.2009.08.009. 

Nazemi,  S.  D.,  Jafari,  M.  A.  and  Zaidan,  E.  (2021)  ‘An  Incentive-Based  Optimization  Approach  for  Load 
Scheduling  Problem  in  Smart  Building  Communities’,  Buildings  2021,  Vol.  11,  Page  237,  11(6),  p.  237.  doi: 
10.3390/BUILDINGS11060237. 

Nazemi, S. D., Zaidan, E. and Jafari, M. A. (2021) ‘The Impact of Occupancy-Driven Models on Cooling Systems 
in Commercial Buildings’, Energies 2021, Vol. 14, Page 1722, 14(6), p. 1722. doi: 10.3390/EN14061722. 

Nematchoua, M. K. et al. (2019) ‘A review on energy consumption in the residential and commercial buildings 
located in tropical regions of Indian Ocean: A case of Madagascar island’, Journal of Energy Storage, 24(April). 
doi: 10.1016/j.est.2019.04.022. 

Said, A. Ben and Erradi, A. (2019) ‘A probabilistic approach for maximizing travel journey WiFi coverage using 
mobile crowdsourced services’, IEEE Access, 7, pp. 82297–82307. 

Schweiker,  M.  et  al.  (2018)  ‘Drivers  of  diversity  in  human  thermal  perception–A  review  for  holistic  comfort 
models’, Temperature, 5(4), pp. 308–342. doi: 10.1080/23328940.2018.1534490. 

Sintov, N. D., White, L. V. and Walpole, H. (2019) ‘Thermostat wars? The roles of gender and thermal comfort 
negotiations 
doi: 
household 
in 
10.1371/journal.pone.0224198. 

PLoS  ONE, 

behavior’, 

14(11), 

energy 

8–10. 

use 

pp. 

Thiaux,  Y.  et  al.  (2019)  ‘Demand-side  management  strategy  in  stand-alone  hybrid  photovoltaic  systems  with 
real-time simulation of stochastic electricity consumption behavior’, Applied Energy, 253(November 2018), p. 
113530. doi: 10.1016/j.apenergy.2019.113530. 

57th ISOCARP World Planning Congress 
8-11 November 2021 | Doha, Qatar 

 
 
Jabbar, R.; Zaidan, E.;  
Ben Said, A.; Ghofrani A. 

Reshaping Smart Energy Transition 

unescwa  (2017)  ‘The  Demographic  Profile  of  Qatar  Population  Trends-Mortality-Fertility-Age  Structure-
Urbanization-International  Migration-Education  and  Youth  Unemployment  Population  Trends  Mortality’. 
Available at: http://apps.who.int/gho/data/node.main.MATMORT?lang=en (Accessed: 6 October 2021). 

Wainberg, M., Alipanahi, B. and Frey, B. J. (2016) ‘Are random forests truly the best classifiers?’, The Journal of 
Machine Learning Research, 17(1), pp. 3837–3841. 

Zaidan, E. and Abulibdeh, A. (2021) ‘Master planning and the evolving urban model in the gulf cities: principles, 
policies,  and  practices  for  the  transition  to  sustainable  urbanism’,  Planning  Practice  \&  Research,  36(2),  pp. 
193–215. 

Zaidan,  E.,  Al-Saidi,  M.  and  Hammad,  S.  H.  (2019)  ‘Sustainable  development  in  the  Arab  world  –  is  the  Gulf 
Cooperation  Council  (GCC)  region  fit  for  the  challenge?’,  https://doi.org/10.1080/09614524.2019.1628922, 
29(5), pp. 670–681. doi: 10.1080/09614524.2019.1628922. 

Zhao, H. X. and Magoulès, F. (2012) ‘A review on the prediction of building energy consumption’, Renewable 
and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 16(6), pp. 3586–3592. doi: 10.1016/j.rser.2012.02.049. 

57th ISOCARP World Planning Congress 
8-11 November 2021 | Doha, Qatar 

 
 
 
