1
2
0
2

v
o
N
4
2

]

M
Q
.
o
i
b
-
q
[

1
v
1
1
7
2
1
.
1
1
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

DIAGNOSIS OF SICKLE CELL ANEMIA USING AUTOML ON UV-VIS ABSORBANCE
SPECTROSCOPY DATA

Sarthak Srivastava1, Radhika N. K.1, Rajesh Srinivasan1, Nishanth K M Nambison2, and Sai Siva Gorthi1∗

Indian Institute of Science Bangalore1
Government Homeopathic Medical College & Hospital, Bhopal2
*Corresponding author email: saisiva@iisc.ac.in

ABSTRACT

Sickle cell anemia is a genetic disorder that is widespread in
many regions of the world. Early diagnosis through screening
and preventive treatments are known to reduce mortality in
the case of sickle cell disease (SCD). In addition, the screen-
ing of individuals with the largely asymptomatic condition
of sickle cell trait (SCT) is necessary to curtail the genetic
propagation of the disease. However, the cost and complex-
ity of conventional diagnostic methods limit the feasibility of
early diagnosis of SCD and SCT in resource-limited areas
worldwide. Recently, our group developed a low-cost UV-
Vis absorbance spectroscopy based diagnostic test for SCD
and SCT. Here, we propose an AutoML based approach to
classify the raw spectra data obtained from the developed UV-
Vis spectroscopy technique with high accuracy. The proposed
approach can detect the presence of sickle hemoglobin with
100% sensitivity and 93.84% speciﬁcity. This study demon-
strates the potential utility of the machine learning-based ab-
sorbance spectroscopy test for deployment in mass screening
programs in resource-limited settings.

1. INTRODUCTION

Hemoglobin is an oxygen-binding protein found inside red
blood cells (RBCs).
It is made up of four peptide chains,
each bound to a heme group. Hemoglobin A (or adult
hemoglobin), which makes up 95–98% of all hemoglobin
content in normal healthy adults, is composed of two α-
globin and two β-globin peptide chains. In sickle cell dis-
ease, mutations in the HBB (hemoglobin subunit beta) gene
which encodes for the β-globin peptide chains, gives rise to
an abnormal form of hemoglobin called sickle hemoglobin
(HbS) [1]. Under oxidative stress, the HbS molecule poly-
merizes and forces the RBCs to assume a characteristic sickle
shape. Sickle cell disease is characterized by debilitating
pain, hemolysis, vaso-occlusion, stroke, and organ damage.
Around 300,000 to 400,000 children globally are born each
year with the condition. The disease is prevalent in sub-
Saharan Africa and parts of the Mediterranean, the Middle
East, and India.

Sickle cell anemia is an autosomal recessive disease,
which means that an individual inherits sickle cell disease
(SCD) only when both parents are carriers of the HBB gene
mutation. In contrast, the carriers only possess a single copy
of the mutated gene, and this condition is called sickle cell
trait. Sickle cell trait is hard to detect as the carriers do not
show any apparent health problems unless they are subjected
to oxidative stress due to extreme conditions like dehydra-
tion or high altitude. Consanguineous marriages are still
prevalent in southern Asia and sub-Sahara Africa leading
to a large number of people being born with SCD. Mass
screening programs to identify individuals with SCT and
subsequent genetic counselling is the only way to reduce the
prevalence of SCD. However, the standard diagnostic meth-
ods like HPLC (high-performance liquid chromatography)
or IEF (isoelectric focusing electrophoresis) are expensive
and technically complex. The dependence of these conven-
tional tests on specialized equipment, stable infrastructure,
and well-trained laboratory personnel are the major barriers
limiting the deployment of large scale screening tests for
SCT/SCD. In addition, the conventional solubility test, which
is used for detection of sickle cell anemia, suffers from a high
false positivity rate [2].

In recent years, various low-cost methods have been pro-
posed to detect SCD at the point-of-care [3, 4, 5]. Recently,
Rajesh et al. developed a rapid low-cost optical-absorbance
based test for the diagnosis of sickle cell disease and sickle
cell trait [6]. The test is based on the differences in the
UV-Vis absorbance spectra of normal hemoglobin and sickle
hemoglobin suspended in a special buffer solution. The test
criteria is based on the ratio of the absorbance at two peak
wavelengths. However, this test criteria is sensitive to the in-
strument to instrument variations among spectrometers made
by different manufacturers, necessitating the characterization
and calibration of the spectrometers prior to testing.

To overcome this issue,

in this paper, we present an
to classify the raw UV-Vis spec-
AutoML-based model
troscopy data. AutoML [7] is a machine learning technique
used to discover the best-performing pipeline of data trans-
forms, models, and model conﬁgurations for a dataset. It is

 
 
 
 
 
 
designed to reduce the demand for data scientists and to en-
able domain experts to automatically build ML applications
without much prerequisite statistical and ML knowledge. As
it’s pipeline architecture comprises of all essential compo-
nents to build a model, it holds several advantages over the
conventional classiﬁcation models. AutoML provides auto-
mated hyperparameter optimization which reduces human
effort and improves the reproducibility and fairness of scien-
tiﬁc studies. The meta-learning component exploits the abil-
ity of computer systems to store extensive amounts of prior
learning experiences which can be leveraged to learn new
tasks. AutoML employs neural architecture search (NAS)
that creates a search space, search strategy, and performance
estimation strategy to ﬁnd architectures that achieve high pre-
dictive performance on unseen data. We compared the perfor-
mance of four AutoML models, Auto-SKlearn [8], TPOT [9],
Hyperopt-SKlearn [10], and AutoKeras [11], to determine the
most suitable model for SCT/SCD screening based on spec-
troscopy data. The proposed AutoML model can complement
the absorbance-based test to rapidly screen for SCT/SCD and
enable the deployment of the test in resource-limited settings.
The paper is organized as follows. Firstly, we describe
the dataset and the data preprocessing method adopted for ex-
traction of relevant features in section 2. The various models
used for the study and the parameter tuning for each model
are described in section 2.4. The performance of the various
models in terms of various performance metrics is described
in section 3.

2. METHODS

2.1. Data Collection

In the spectrocopy test proposed by Rajesh et al.
[6], the
blood samples are mixed in a special phosphate buffer con-
taining a lysing agent and a reducing agent and incubated
for 15 minutes. The UV-Vis absorbance spectra of the solu-
tion is then captured for each sample. The total absorbance
spectroscopy test dataset includes 199 normal samples, 16
sickle cell disease samples, and 156 sickle cell trait samples.
The spectroscopy-based test was performed on blood samples
collected from the tribal regions of Madhya Pradesh, India,
where sickle cell anemia is endemic. The spectroscopy test
was performed on the samples using the low-cost, portable
Prizm Plus spectrometer (Testright systems, India). All sam-
ples were tested using HPLC to obtain the ground truth.

2.2. Data preparation

The absorbance spectra of the positive and negative samples
are shown in Fig. 1. For each sample, the absorbance data
was captured in the wavelength range from 395 nm to 750
nm, with a resolution of 0.165 nm. Here, we refer to a wave-
length and its corresponding absorbance value as a feature.
Hence, the data corresponding to each sample consisted of

Fig. 1. Absorbance spectra of negative and positive samples.
In this study, both SCT and SCD samples are considered as
positive samples.

2183 features. As this would signiﬁcantly increase the com-
plexity of the model, we sought to reduce the number of fea-
tures of each sample data. From careful observation of the ab-
sorbance spectra, we decided to consider only the absorbance
spectra in the range of 400 nm to 600 nm for our analysis.
Outside this range, the absorbance values are mostly constant,
providing no useful insight. Then, the data was averaged over
each wavelength to form a dataset with integral wavelengths
(1 nm resolution), as the variation in the absorbance values
for sub-nm wavelengths was observed to be minimal. Fur-
ther, the data was averaged over 5 nm-intervals in order to
create the ﬁnal sample data. Thus, in the ﬁnal dataset used to
train the models, each sample data had 41 features.

2.3. Data split

The data was split between training and testing sets in the
70:30 ratio. The size of the datasets are summarized below in
Table 1.

Sample
Normal
SCT/SCD

Train Test Total
199
65
134
172
47
125

Table 1. Data distribution across various sets

2.4. AutoML Models

We evaluated the classiﬁcation performance of four differ-
ent AutoML models to ﬁnd the most suitable model for the
screening of sickle hemoglobin positive samples.

2.5. Auto-Sklearn

Auto-sklearn is a system based on scikit-learn and uses 15
classiﬁers, 14 feature preprocessing methods, and 4 data pre-
processing methods, giving rise to a structured hypothesis
space with 110 hyperparameters. It improves on existing Au-
toML methods by automatically taking into account past per-
formance on similar datasets and by constructing ensembles
from the models evaluated during the optimization. After
multiple trials, for optimal results, the execution time was set
to 15 minutes and the metric was chosen as precision micro.

2.6. TPOT

Tree-based pipeline optimization tool (TPOT) is a model
that automatically designs and optimizes machine learning
pipelines. TPOT uses a version of genetic programming to
automatically design and optimize a series of data transforma-
tions and machine learning models that attempt to maximize
the classiﬁcation accuracy for a given supervised learning
data set. Optimal results were obtained when we set the num-
ber of generations to 5, population size to 100, and scoring to
be precision micro.

2.7. Hyperopt-Sklearn

Hyperopt-sklearn provides a uniﬁed interface to a large subset
of the machine learning algorithms available in scikit-learn.
With the help of its optimization functions, Hyperopt is able
to search over all possible conﬁgurations of scikit-learn com-
ponents, including preprocessing, classiﬁcation, and regres-
sion modules to surpass human experts in algorithm conﬁg-
uration.
In this study, optimal results were obtained when
SVC was chosen as the classiﬁer with max evals set to 70
and trail timeout to 60.

2.8. Auto-Keras

Auto-Keras uses Bayesian optimization to guide the search by
designing a neural network kernel and an algorithm for opti-
mizing acquisition function in tree-structured space, wrapped
on to the Keras package. After multiple experiments, we set
the max trials to 20 and epochs to 45. The model was set to
iterate over 20 different Keras models trained for 20 epochs
each.

3. RESULT

3.1. Overall Performance

The parameters of each model were tuned over several iter-
ations to achieve the best model performance. The overall
performance of the models is reported in Table 2. The models
were evaluated on the basis of sensitivity, speciﬁcity, accu-
racy, positive predictive value (PPV), and negative predictive

T P +T N
value (NPV). Here, accuracy is deﬁned as
T P +F N +T N +F P ,
where TP is true positive, FN is false negative, TN is true
negative, and FP is false positive. Sensitivity is deﬁned as
T P +F N , speciﬁcity is deﬁned as
T N +F P , PPV is deﬁned as
T N
T N +F N .
T P +F P , and NPV is deﬁned as

T N

T P

T P

Metric
TP
TN
FP
FN
Sensitivity
Speciﬁcity
Accuracy
PPV
NPV

Auto-sklearn TPOT Hyperopt-Sklearn Auto-Keras

45
63
2
2
95.74
96.92
96.43
95.74
96.92

47
61
4
0
100
93.84
96.43
92.15
100

46
61
4
1
97.87
93.84
95.53
92.00
98.38

47
59
6
0
100
90.76
94.64
88.67
100

Table 2. Performance metrics of the various models on the
test dataset

In addition to the performance metrics, another parameter
that should be taken into consideration while evaluating the
performance of the diagnostic test is the number of false neg-
atives. A false negative test, in the case of sickle cell screen-
ing, can lead to the patient not receiving genetic counselling
and lead to further generational propagation of sickle cell dis-
ease. Hence, an ideal diagnostic test should have zero false
negatives. In our study, both TPOT and AutoKeras showed
zero false negatives. However, the TPOT outperforms all the
other models in terms of all the performance metrics as shown
in Table 2. Therefore, we conclude that TPOT is the best per-
forming model that can screen for SCT/SCD with 100% sen-
sitivity. In future, we intend to develop a machine learning
based test that can distinguish between SCD and SCT. In this
study, we could only obtain 16 SCD patient blood samples.
On signiﬁcantly increasing the number of SCD samples used
for training the AutoML model, it would be possible to clas-
sify SCT and SCD samples accurately. We also intend to train
the classiﬁer on data obtained from multiple spectrometer in-
struments to account for the effect of instrument variations on
the classiﬁcation performance.

4. CONCLUSION

In summary, it is demonstrated that the proposed AutoML-
based technique applied on the UV-Vis spectroscopy data can
screen for sickle cell trait and disease with high accuracy, sen-
sitivity, and speciﬁcity. After training, the proposed model
can be deployed on a mobile phone app to enable local health
workers to interpret the data from the low-cost spectroscopy-
based test in resource-limited clinical settings. In future work,
we intend to create a ML model that can differentiate be-
tween trait and disease conditions, which can potentially re-
place the conventional conﬁrmatory tests, such as HPLC and
electrophoresis.

[10] Brent Komer, James Bergstra, and Chris Eliasmith,
“Hyperopt-sklearn: automatic hyperparameter conﬁgu-
ration for scikit-learn,” in ICML workshop on AutoML.
Citeseer, 2014, vol. 9, p. 50.

[11] Haifeng Jin, Qingquan Song, and Xia Hu, “Auto-keras:
An efﬁcient neural architecture search system,” in Pro-
ceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD International Con-
ference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, 2019,
pp. 1946–1956.

5. REFERENCES

[1] Gregory J Kato, Fr´ed´eric B Piel, Clarice D Reid,
Marilyn H Gaston, Kwaku Ohene-Frempong, Laksh-
manan Krishnamurti, Wally R Smith, Julie A Panepinto,
David J Weatherall, Fernando F Costa, et al., “Sickle
cell disease,” Nature Reviews Disease Primers, vol. 4,
no. 1, pp. 1–22, 2018.

[2] Ven´ee N Tubman and Joshua J Field, “Sickle solubility
test to screen for sickle cell trait: what’s the harm?,”
Hematology 2014, the American Society of Hematology
Education Program Book, vol. 2015, no. 1, pp. 433–435,
2015.

[3] Nathaniel Z Piety, Alex George, Sonia Serrano, Maria R
Lanzi, Palka R Patel, Maria P Noli, Silvina Ka-
han, Damian Nirenberg, Jo˜ao F Camanda, Gladstone
Airewele, et al., “A paper-based test for screening new-
borns for sickle cell disease,” Scientiﬁc reports, vol. 7,
no. 1, pp. 1–8, 2017.

[4] Xiaoxi Yang, Julie Kanter, Nathaniel Z Piety, Melody S
Benton, Seth M Vignes, and Sergey S Shevkoplyas, “A
simple, rapid, low-cost diagnostic test for sickle cell dis-
ease,” Lab on a Chip, vol. 13, no. 8, pp. 1464–1467,
2013.

[5] Obiageli Nnodu, Hezekiah Isa, Maxwell Nwegbu, Chi-
natu Ohiaeri, Samuel Adegoke, Reuben Chianumba,
Ngozi Ugwu, Biobele Brown, John Olaniyi, Emmanuel
Okocha, et al., “Hemotypesc, a low-cost point-of-care
testing device for sickle cell disease: promises and chal-
lenges,” Blood Cells, Molecules, and Diseases, vol. 78,
pp. 22–28, 2019.

[6] Rajesh Srinivasan, Eugene Christo V. R., Prateek
Katare, Aravind Venukumar, Nisanth K M Nambi-
son, and Sai Siva Gorthi,
“Methods for identifying
haemoglobin S or C in a biological sample and kits
thereof,” India Patent 202141009024, March 2021.

[7] Frank Hutter, Lars Kotthoff, and Joaquin Vanschoren,
Automated machine learning: methods, systems, chal-
lenges, Springer Nature, 2019.

[8] Matthias Feurer, Aaron Klein, Katharina Eggensperger,
Jost Tobias Springenberg, Manuel Blum, and Frank
Hutter, “Auto-sklearn: efﬁcient and robust automated
machine learning,” in Automated Machine Learning, pp.
113–134. Springer, Cham, 2019.

[9] Randal S Olson, Nathan Bartley, Ryan J Urbanowicz,
and Jason H Moore, “Evaluation of a tree-based pipeline
optimization tool for automating data science,” in Pro-
ceedings of the genetic and evolutionary computation
conference 2016, 2016, pp. 485–492.

