Journal of Advanced Instrumentation in Science

JAIS-ID, 2022

Muography in Colombia: simulation framework, instrumentation
and data analysis

J. Pe˜na-Rodr´ıguez1*, A. Vesga-Ram´ırez2, A. V ´asquez-Ram´ırez1, M. Su ´arez-Dur ´an3, R. de Le ´on-Barrios1, D.
Sierra-Porta4, R. Calder ´on-Ardila5, J. Pisco-Guavabe1, H. Asorey5,6, J. D. Sanabria-G ´omez1,
and L. A. N´u˜nez1,7
1Escuela de F´ısica, Universidad Industrial de Santander, Bucaramanga, Colombia
2International Center for Earth Sciences, Comisi´on Nacional de Energ´ıa At´omica, Buenos Aires, Argentina
3Universit´e Libre de Bruselles, Bruselles, Belgium
4 Departamento de Ciencias B´asicas, Universidad Tecnol´ogica de Bolivar, Cartagena de Indias, Colombia.
5Instituto de Tecnolog´ıas en Detecci´on y Astropart´ıculas, Centro At´omico Constituyentes, Buenos Aires, Argentina
6Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Cient´ıﬁcas y T´ecnicas, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
7Departamento de F´ısica, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de Los Andes, M´erida, Venezuela
∗jesus.pena@correo.uis.edu.co

Abstract

We present the Colombo-Argentinian Muography Program for studying inland Latin-American volca-
noes. It describes the implementation of a simulation framework covering various factors with different
spatial and time scales: the geomagnetic effects at a particular geographic point, the development of ex-
tensive air showers in the atmosphere, the propagation through the scanned structure and the detector
response. Next, we sketch the criteria adopted for designing, building, and commissioning MuTe: a hybrid
Muon Telescope based on a composite detection technique. It combines a hodoscope for particle tracking
and a water Cherenkov detector to enhance the muon-to-background-signal separation due to extensive
air showers’ soft and multiple-particle components. MuTe also discriminates inverse-trajectory and low-
momentum muons by using a picosecond Time-of-Flight system. We also characterise the instrument’s
structural –mechanical and thermal– behaviour, discussing preliminary results from the background com-
position and the telescope-health monitoring variables. Finally, we discuss the implementations of an opti-
misation algorithm to improve the volcano internal density distribution estimation and machine learning
techniques for background rejection.

Keywords: Muon Tomography, Muon Telescope, Simulation Framework, Instrumentation, Data Analysis

1. VOLCANOES IN LATIN-AMERICA AND COLOMBIA

Latin America is part of the Paciﬁc Ring of Fire, with more than 200 Holocene volcanoes sculpting the Andean mountain range
traversing the continent. Almost 20 million people live close to active volcanic zones (< 100 km). Four geographic areas group
volcanoes in South America: Northern, Central, Southern, and Austral, with more than 600 eruptions reported since 1532, causing
25000 casualties. The most deadly was the disaster that occurred with the lahars of the Nevado del Ruiz (23000 deaths), Colombia,
in 1985 [1].

Volcanoes cause ash clouds, eruptions, pyroclastic ﬂows, lahars, debris avalanches, and earthquakes. The previous monitoring
of related phenomena allows the prevention of disasters and casualties. Information on seisms, ground deformation, gas emissions,
and thermal anomalies helps to alert authorities and citizens about possible hazards. About 60% of Andean volcanoes remain
unmonitored due to lack of resources, remote access and dangerous conditions for the installations of equipment locally [2].

Colombia has more than a dozen active volcanoes (Azufral, Cerro Negro, Chiles, Cumbal, Do ˜na Juana, Galeras, Mach´ın,
Nevado del Huila, Nevado del Ru´ız, Nevado Santa Isabel, Nevado del Tolima, Purac´e, and Sotar´a) clustered in three main groups
along the Cordillera Central, the highest of the three branches of the Colombian Andes. Most of these volcanoes represent a signif-
icant risk to the nearby population in towns and/or cities [3, 4, 5].

The Galeras, Cerro Mach´ın, and Nevado del Ru´ız volcanoes represent a high risk for Colombian citizens. Evidence of that was
the Nevado del Ruiz eruption on November 13, 1985, which involved the partial melting of the glacier cap and consequent lahars.
Mood ﬂows reached the municipality of Armero-Tolima, causing more than 23000 causalties [6].

The Cerro Mach´ın volcano, with a crater of 2.4 km diameter and 450 m height, could cause a future pyroclastic eruptive episode
reaching an area of 10 km2 around the volcano ediﬁce [7]. The similarities in morphologies between two volcanic must be consid-

2
2
0
2

n
a
J

6
2

]

M

I
.
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[

1
v
0
6
1
1
1
.
1
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
Journal of Advanced Instrumentation in Science

JAIS-ID, 2022

ered in the risk evaluation of an eventual eruption. The Mach´ın1 volcano has a morphology similar to the Chich ´on/Chichonal2
volcano in southern state of Chiapas in M´exico [6]. The Chich ´on has been the most deadly eruption in Mexico, creating an ash
cloud covering 200 km, ∼ 2000 causalities, and the displacement of ∼ 20000 citizens in March 1982. [8].

2. MUOGRAPHY IN THE LATIN AMERICAN REGION
Muography is a non-invasive technique for scanning the inner structure of volcanoes. This method uses the attenuation of atmo-
spheric muons after crossing the volcanic ediﬁce. The emerging muon ﬂux measurements at different directions give estimations
for the density distributions of volcanic ediﬁces [6].

FIGURE 1: Geographical distribution of Universities/Institutions actively working in muography in Latin America. Most of them
are focused on muography applied to vulcanology. Argentina and Colombia register most activities with groups cooperating in
different areas.

Several Latin American Universities/Institutions (see Figure 1) work in muography due to the number of active volcanoes
along the Andean mountain range and the risk they represent. The Latin American muography consists in three research areas:
creation of simulation frameworks, development of instrumentation and implementation of data analysis methods [9, 10].

Muography simulation tools & frameworks estimate the atmospheric muon ﬂux [11, 12], muon propagation through the ge-
ological target [6, 13, 14], detector response [15, 16, 17] and density optimisation [18] by using Monte Carlo codes. Development
of muography instruments have been addressed from different perspectives. The use of continuous scintillators [16], scintillators
strips [19], hybrid muon telescopes for enhancing the muon-to-background ratio [20, 21], and development of new technologies
[22].

The Muon Telescope implements machine learning algorithms for particle identiﬁcation of signal/background using the de-
posited energy, time-of-ﬂight, and momentum [23]. Muography brings data analysis challenges from raw data treatment to solving
the density estimation inverse problem. Simulated annealing and Bayesian dual inversion algorithms tackle the inverse problem
to infer the target density distribution [18, 24].

3. THE MUON TELESCOPE
The Muon Telescope (MuTe) project involves designing and implementing a muon detector for scanning volcanoes. The project
boosts the muography research area in Colombia in close collaboration with Argentinian colleagues, providing an innovation
ecosystem between the two countries. This R & D area identiﬁes three lines of action: the simulation framework, the instrumenta-
tion and online/ofﬂine data analysis. The simulation framework implements Monte Carlo simulations to estimate the muon ﬂux
at any geographical point and then estimate the energy loss of the crossing muons and the detector response. The instrumentation
branch manages the steps of designing, implementing, and calibrating the muon telescope. The data analysis branch processes the
recorded data and develops algorithms for background rejection and density inverse problem-solving.

1https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cerro_Machin
2https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chichonal

2

Journal of Advanced Instrumentation in Science

JAIS-ID, 2022

The MuTe combines two detection techniques. A hodoscope measures the muon ﬂux by tracking the particle trajectories and a
water Cherenkov detector (WCD) which records the deposited energy of particles traversing the MuTe. A time-difference system
for the hodoscope measures the time-of-ﬂight of particles impinging the detector [20]. The particle identiﬁcation system of MuTe
allows the rejection of muography background sources: the soft component of Extended Air Showers, backscattering particles, and
forward scattering muons [23].

A photo-voltaic system supplies the MuTe with autonomy for up to 6 days in cloudy conditions. The MuTe daily reports the
hodoscope and WCD status: power consumption, average particle ﬂux, detector temperature, atmospheric pressure, and environ-
mental humidity.

4. SIMULATION FRAMEWORK

As shown in Figure 2, the simulation scheme for the MuTe project implements the ARTI framework from the Latin-American Giant
Observatory collaboration. This framework considers three essential factors with different spatial and time scales: the geomagnetic
effects, the development of the extensive air showers in the atmosphere, and the detector response at ground level [15, 25, 26].

In the ﬁrst step, a MAGNETOCOSMICS3 based script computes the primary cosmic ray ﬂux impinging the earth atmosphere
after modulation due to the geomagnetic ﬁeld rigidity. Then, a second step uses the CORSIKA4 script simulates the interaction of
primary cosmic rays and the Earth’s atmosphere. We compute the spectrum of atmospheric particles reaching the observation place
and the angular (zenith and azimuth) dependency of the muon ﬂux [27]. We found secondary cosmic rays at Cerro Mach´ın volcano
(4◦29(cid:48)00”N, 75◦23(cid:48)30”W, 2749 m a.s.l.) to be mainly composed by electromagnetic particles (photons, electrons and positrons) and
muons.

FIGURE 2: Muography simulation framework. MAGCOS computes the cosmic ray modulation due to the geomagnetic ﬁeld, and
CORSIKA estimates the atmospheric particle ﬂux at the observation place. MUSIC, Python, and MATLAB scripts compute the
ray tracing, volcano opacity, and emerging muon ﬂux (considering energy loss and scattering). GEANT4 simulates the detector
response.

MUSIC-MUSUN codes [28, 29] and Python/MATLAB scripts calculate the ray tracing, the volcano opacity, the muon energy
loss, the emerging muon ﬂux and estimates the period of observation [6, 30, 27]. The code obtains the volcano topography from
the SRTM5 NASA database. The energy loss is calculated considering losses by ionisation and Bremsstrahlung through a standard
rock density (ρ = 2.65 g/cm3) or any particular rock compositions in the case of MUSIC-MUSUN codes.

GEANT4 simulations estimates muography affectation by muon forward scattering. We concluded that the muon forward
scattering effect is negligible for muon momenta above 5 GeV/c and incident zenith angles smaller than 85◦ from the surface’s
normal [20].

We compute the MuTe response by using GEANT4 simulations. This script estimated the deposited energy spectrum of parti-
cles impinging the WCD, the photoelectron spectrum of the scintillator strips and the panel attenuation. We found that a vertical
muon deposits ∼ 240 MeV in the WCD, losses ∼ 2.08 MeV in the scintillator strip generating an average signal of 40 photo-
electrons. This signal attenuates up to 12% in the panel corner opposite to the SiPM location [15]. Optical parameters (solid angle
and acceptance) of MuTe were also computed. MuTe can reconstruct 3481 trajectories with a maximum acceptance of 3.69 cm2sr
[31, 6].

3http://cosray.unibe.ch/~laurent/magnetocosmics/
4https://www.iap.kit.edu/corsika/
5https://www2.jpl.nasa.gov/srtm/

3

Journal of Advanced Instrumentation in Science

JAIS-ID, 2022

5. INSTRUMENTATION

MuTe combines two detection techniques: a scintillator hodoscope and a water Cherenkov detector. The hodoscope is based on
independent modules made of 30 scintillators bar per panel (120 cm x 4 cm ×1 cm), a WLS ﬁbre (Saint-Gobain BCF-92), a SiPM
(Hamamatsu S13360-1350CS) and the electronics frontend. An RG-174U coaxial cable transmits the SiPM pulses to the acquisition
system. The SiPM electronics frontend and the scintillator panel assembly are shown in Figure 3.

Two MAROC3A ASICs perform the gain-tuning and discrimination of the 120 scintillator signals. A couple of Cyclone III

FPGAs conﬁgure the DAQ slow control parameters.

We established a discrimination threshold of 8 photo-electrons considering the SiPM noise analysis. The MuTe controls the

SiPMs bias voltage using a programmable power supply (Hamamatsu C11204).

MuTe datasets combine particle ﬂux and environmental data (temperature, barometric pressure, and power consumption)
for post-processing, detector status monitoring, and calibration procedures. A GPS pulse-per-second signal synchronises the ho-
doscope and WCD data.

FIGURE 3: (Left) SiPM electronics front-end. (Right) Mechanical assembly of the scintillator bar, the Saint-Gobain BCF-92 WLS
ﬁber, the Hamamatsu S13360-1350CS SiPM, and the transmission cables (coaxial RG-174U).

A PMT (photomultiplier tube Hamamatsu R5912) detects the Cherenkov light from the charged particles crossing the WCD. A
high-voltage power supply EMCOC20 biases the PMT from 0 to 2000 V. Two 10-bit ADCs digitise the PMT anode and last-dynode
signals at a frequency of 40 MHz. An FPGA Nexys II handles the tasks of thresholding, base-line correction, temporal labelling,
and temperature-pressure recording.

The third ADC channel in the WCD digitises a NIM signal from the hodoscope indicating a double coincidence event (ho-
doscope + WCD). A Cubieboard-2 sets the acquisition parameters (discrimination thresholds and the PMT bias voltage) of the
WCD [20, 31].

During the development of the MuTe project, we implemented several specialised equipment and instrumentation for muog-
raphy. We designed a controlled environment for the calibration of Silicon Photomultipliers (see Figure 4). This equipment allows
us to control the SiPM temperature, bias voltage, and pulsed-light stimulus. We characterised the SiPM parameters as breakdown
voltage, gain, dark count, afterpulsing, and crosstalk, and their dependency on temperature [32, 33].

FIGURE 4: (Left) Experimental setup for measuring the gain and noise of the SiPM S13360-1350CS. A 480 nm pulsed light 10 ns
width at 500 Hz stimulates the SiPM. The SiPM pulses are digitized at 14-bit/125 MHz. (Right) SiPM pulse waveform quantization.

4

Journal of Advanced Instrumentation in Science

JAIS-ID, 2022

We also performed a complete characterisation of the signal attenuation along the scintillator strips [15]. We calibrated the
hodoscope response using the atmospheric cosmic ray ﬂux. It allows us also to determine the acceptance conﬁdence window
taking into account the variance of the measured open sky muon ﬂux depending on the zenith angle. Figure 5 shows the muon
number histogram after 15 hours of recording and the comparison between the estimated (red-line) and measured (black-points)
muon ﬂux. The measuring error increases with the zenith angle while the muon ﬂux and the hodoscope acceptance decrease.

FIGURE 5: (Left) Particle count recorded by the hodoscope during 15 hours with a separation of 13 cm between panels. (Right)
Open sky muon ﬂux proﬁle recorded by the hodoscope. The muon ﬂux measurements (black-line) ranges zenith angles between
-40◦ to 40◦. A cosn function ﬁts the muon ﬂux with n ∼ 2.

5.1. Mechanics
We designed the detector mechanics and simulated its structural behaviour under typical environmental conditions through
SOLIDWORKS. We determined an average temperature of 23◦C on the MuTe with maximum temperatures reaching ∼ 60◦C
in the centre of the scintillation panels due to solar radiation. The water volume (∼ 1.7 m3) of the WCD and the wind ﬂow reduce
the telescope temperature.

The mechanical structure of MuTe was found to be robust against tremors and vibrations triggered by volcanic activity. The

MuTe vibrations did not exceed 0.04 Hz, guaranteeing its structural integrity [20].

6. DATA ANALYSIS

The MuTe performed its ﬁrst muogram after two months of data recording pointing towards the mountain range at the northwest
of Bucaramanga-Colombia with an elevation of 15◦. The open sky muon ﬂux Φ
0 was estimated considering the data recorded
during the hodoscope calibration stage. Figure 6 shows the MuTe view and the obtained muogram [34].

6.1. Muography background characterization
MuTe data analysis allows us to understand the composition of particles impinging the detector during a muography adquisition
run. Not only muons impinge the detector, background particles too. We found four background sources in muography: electro-
magnetic particles of extensive air showers (photons, electrons, and positrons), back-scattering particles, forward scattering muons,
and multiple-particle events.

We characterised the muography background by analysing the time-of-ﬂight and deposited energy data. Electromagnetic back-
ground deposits an energy lower than 180 MeV and the multiple-particle component deposits an energy above 400 MeV with a
signiﬁcant contribution at 480 MeV (equivalent to 2 vertical muons) as shown in Figure 7-(Left).

Multiple-particle component splits in two: correlated particles (∆t < 100 ns) originated in the same shower and uncorre-

lated/independent particles (∆t > 300 ns) as shown in Figure 7-(Right plate).

The deposited energy information allows us to determine the particle mass. The incident particle momentum was estimated
using the ToF measurements, the traversing distance, and the particle mass [23]. We set a threshold to reject muons with momentum
below 1 GeV/c as shown in Figure 7.

We have implemented a machine-learning algorithm to classify and reduce the muography background. Firstly, training a
Gaussian Mixture Model to parameterise the deposited energy spectrum and establish thresholds to separate the electromagnetic
and multiple-particle background. Then, we use an algorithm to ﬁlter low momentum muons (< 1 GeV/c) by thresholding [35].

5

Journal of Advanced Instrumentation in Science

JAIS-ID, 2022

FIGURE 6: (Left) Frontal view of the mountain range scanned by the MuTe. The telescope has an elevation angle of ∼ 15◦ covering
zenith angles from 50◦ to 90◦ and 10◦ under the horizon. (Right panel) Muogram obtained by MuTe after 2-month data recording.
The muogram is in terms of the logarithm of transmittance (T = ln Φ/Φ
0 open sky muon
ﬂux. In the open sky zones (Θ >70◦) T ∼ 1 (ln T ∼ 0), while for the mountain region the transmittance decrease (ln T < 0). Below
the horizon line, the open sky ﬂux is zero, and the transmittance is inﬁnite.

0) with Φ the emerging muon ﬂux and Φ

FIGURE 7: (Left) Deposited energy histogram for particles crossing the MuTe during one hour. The black-line hump (< 180 MeV)
corresponds to the electromagnetic component. The green-line hump (180 MeV< Ed < 400 MeV) indicates the deposited energy of
muons. Multiple particle events (blue-line) deposit energy above 400 MeV. (Right-panel) Time-of-Flight of particles traversing the
MuTe hodoscope. Single-particle events and correlated background have a ToF <100 ns, while the uncorrelated background has a
ToF > 300 ns.

6.2. Density inversion
A crucial step in muography data processing is to solve the inverse problem to determine the inner density distribution of the
scanned target. We implemented the Metropolis-Simulated-Annealing algorithm, which inputs an observed muon ﬂux and obtains
the best-associated density distribution of the Cerro Machin volcano.

We simulated an inner structure of the Cerro Mach´ın composed by a conduit below the volcano fumaroles zone as shown in
Figure 8. We improved this model by including rock densities from samples taken from the crater, the dome, and the areas asso-
ciated with fumaroles. The inversion algorithm reconstructed the density differences inside the emulated Cerro Mach´ın structure
from the measured muon ﬂux within a 1% error. The result showed a remarkable density contrast between the volcanic duct, the
encasing rock, and the fumarole area [18].

DISCUSSION

The MuTe project plays a signiﬁcant role in the muography development in Colombia, Argentina and the Latin American region.
We summarise our contributions from creating a simulation framework for muography, instrumentation implementations, and
data analysis.

6

Journal of Advanced Instrumentation in Science

JAIS-ID, 2022

FIGURE 8: (Left) The synthetic density model of the Cerro Machin volcano. (Right) The proﬁle after the inversion. The contrast of
densities between the volcanic conduit and the surrounding rock remains [18].

We simulated the physics behind the muography technique, the cosmic ray ﬂux, the geomagnetic modulation, the creation
of extensive air showers in the Earth’s atmosphere, the muon ﬂux passing through the geologic structure, the energy loss and
scattering of muons, and the detector response. This model can be adapted to any geographical location and detector technology.
We designed a hybrid muon telescope combining a tracking system and a water Cherenkov detector. We can identify muog-
raphy background sources, electromagnetic particles, back-scattering particles, forward scattering muons, and multiple-particle
detection during the data analysis. Finally, we have separated the background components using the deposited energy, tracking,
and momentum information. This approach allows us to get extra information about particles impinging the detector.

The MuTe project also addresses the inverse problem of estimating the density distribution of volcanoes. We solved the opti-
misation problem using a simulated annealing algorithm. We reconstructed the inner structure of the emulated volcano with an
error of 1%. The muography program of the Universidad Industrial de Santander offers a training research environment for the
new generation of Colombian interdisciplinary particle scientists.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The authors recognise the ﬁnancial support of Departamento Administrativo de Ciencia, Tecnolog´ıa e Innovaci ´on de Colom-
bia (ColCiencias) under contract FP44842-082-2015 and to the Programa de Cooperaci ´on Nivel II (PCB-II) MINCYT-CONICET-
COLCIENCIAS 2015, under project CO/15/02. We are also very thankful to LAGO and the Pierre Auger collaborations for their
continuous support.

References

[1] C. R. Stern. Active andean volcanism: its geologic and tectonic setting. Revista geol´ogica de Chile, 31(2), December 2004.
[2] K. Reath, M. Pritchard, M. Poland, F. Delgado, S. Carn, D. Coppola, B. Andrews, S. K. Ebmeier, E. Rumpf, S. Henderson, S. Baker, P. Lundgren,
R. Wright, J. Biggs, T. Lopez, C. Wauthier, S. Moruzzi, A. Alcott, R. Wessels, J. Griswold, S. Ogburn, S. Loughlin, F. Meyer, G. Vaughan, and
M. Bagnardi. Thermal, deformation, and degassing remote sensing time series (CE 2000–2017) at the 47 most active volcanoes in latin america:
Implications for volcanic systems. Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth, 124(1):195–218, January 2019.

[3] G. P. Cort´es. Informe de actividad volc´anica segmento norte de colombia diciembre de 2016. Technical report, INGEOMINAS, 2016.
[4] A. Agudelo.

Informe t´ecnico de actividad de los volcanes nevado del Huila, Purac´e y Sotar´a, durante el per´ıodo de diciembre de 2016.

Technical report, Servicio Geol ´ogico Colombiano, 2016.

[5] E. Mu ˜noz. Informe mensual de actividad de los volcanes Galeras, Cumbal, Chiles, Cerro Negro, Las Animas, Do ˜na Juana y Azufral. Technical

report, INGEOMINAS, 2017.

[6] A. Vesga-Ram´ırez, D. Sierra-Porta, J. Pe ˜na-Rodr´ıguez, J. D. Sanabria-G ´omez, M. Valencia-Otero, C. Sarmiento-Cano, M. Su´arez-Dura´an,

H. Asorey, and L. A. Nu ˜nez. Muon tomography sites for colombian volcanoes. Annals of Geophysics, 63(6), December 2020.

[7] H. F. Murcia, M.F. Sheridan, J. L. Mac´ıas, and G. P. Cort´es. TITAN2d simulations of pyroclastic ﬂows at cerro mach´ın volcano, colombia:

Hazard implications. Journal of South American Earth Sciences, 29(2):161–170, March 2010.

[8] S. De la Cruz-Reyna and A. L. Martin Del Pozzo. The 1982 eruption of el chich ´on volcano, mexico: Eyewitness of the disaster. Geof´ısica

Internacional, 48(1), January 2009.

[9] H. Asorey, R. Calder ´on-Ardila, C.R. Carvajal-Bohorquez, S. Hern´andez-Barajas, L. Mart´ınez-Ram´ırez, A. Jaimes-Motta, F. Le ´on-Carre ˜no,
J. Pe ˜na-Rodr´ıguez, J. Pisco-Guavabe, J.D. Sanabria-G ´omez, M. Su´arez-Dur´an, A. V´asquez-Ram´ırez, K. Forero-Guti´errez, J. Salamanca-Coy,
L.A. N ´u ˜nez, and D. Sierra-Porta. Astroparticle projects at the eastern colombia region: facilities and instrumentation. Scientia et technica,
23(3):391–396, 2018.

[10] H. Asorey, R. Calder ´on-Ardila, K. Forero-Guti´errez, L.A. N ´u ˜nez, J. Pe ˜na-Rodr´ıguez, J. Salamanca-Coy, J.D. Sanabria-G ´omez, J. S´anchez-
Villafrades, and D. Sierra-Porta. minimute: A muon telescope prototype for studying volcanic structures with cosmic ray ﬂux. Scientia et
technica, 23(3):386–390, 2018.

[11] H. Asorey, L. A. N ´u ˜nez, and M. Su´arez-Dur´an. Preliminary results from the latin american giant observatory space weather simulation chain.

Space Weather, 16(5):461–475, May 2018.

7

Journal of Advanced Instrumentation in Science

JAIS-ID, 2022

[12] J. Grisales-Casadiegos, C. Sarmiento-Cano, and L.A. N ´u ˜nez. Impact of global data assimilation system atmospheric models on astroparticle

showers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.01224, 2020.

[13] A. Tapia, D. Due ˜nas, J. Rodr´ıguez, J. Betancourt, and D. A. Mart´ınez Caicedo. Preliminary monte carlo simulation study of the structure of
the galeras volcano using muon tomography. In Proceedings of 38th International Conference on High Energy Physics — PoS(ICHEP2016). Sissa
Medialab, February 2017.

[14] J. S. Useche Parra and C. A. ´Avila Bernal. Estimation of cosmic-muon ﬂux attenuation by monserrate hill in bogota. Journal of Instrumentation,

14(02):P02015–P02015, February 2019.

[15] A. V´asquez-Ram´ırez, M. Su´arez-Dur´an, A. Jaimes-Motta, R. Calder ´on-Ardila, J. Pe ˜na-Rodr´ıguez, J. S´anchez-Villafrades, J.D. Sanabria-G ´omez,
H. Asorey, and L.A. N ´u ˜nez. Simulated response of MuTe, a hybrid muon telescope. Journal of Instrumentation, 15(08):P08004–P08004, August
2020.

[16] I. D. Guerrero, D. F. Cabrera, J. C. Paz, J. D. Estrada, C. A. Villota, E. A. Velasco, F. E. Fajardo, O. Rodriguez, J. Rodriguez, D. Arturo, D. Due ˜nas,
D. Torres, J. Ramirez, J. Revelo, G. Ortega, D. Benavides, J. Betancourt, A. Tapia, and D. A. Martinez-Caicedo. Design and construction of a
muon detector prototype for study the galeras volcano internal structure. Journal of Physics: Conference Series, 1247(1):012020, June 2019.
[17] A. Menchaca-Rocha. Using cosmic muons to search for cavities in the pyramid of the sun, teotihuacan: preliminary results. In Proceedings of

10th Latin American Symposium on Nuclear Physics and Applications — PoS(X LASNPA). Sissa Medialab, October 2014.

[18] A. Vesga-Ram´ırez, J.D. Sanabria-G ´omez, D. Sierra-Porta, L. Arana-Salinas, H. Asorey, V.A. Kudryavtsev, R. Calder ´on-Ardila, and L.A. N ´u ˜nez.

Simulated annealing for volcano muography. Journal of South American Earth Sciences, 109:103248, August 2021.

[19] N. Lesparre, J. Marteau, Y. D´eclais, D. Gibert, B. Carlus, F. Nicollin, and B. Kergosien. Design and operation of a ﬁeld telescope for cosmic ray

geophysical tomography. Geoscientiﬁc Instrumentation, Methods and Data Systems, 1(1):33–42, April 2012.

[20] J. Pe ˜na-Rodr´ıguez, J. Pisco-Guabave, D. Sierra-Porta, M. Su´arez-Dur´an, M. Arenas-Fl ´orez, L.M. P´erez-Archila, J.D. Sanabria-G ´omez, H. Asorey,
Journal of Instrumentation,

and L.A. N ´u ˜nez. Design and construction of MuTe: a hybrid muon telescope to study colombian volcanoes.
15(09):P09006–P09006, September 2020.

[21] J. Pe ˜na-Rodr´ıguez, A. V´asquez-Ram´ırez, J. D. Sanabria-G ´omez, L. A. Nunez, D. Sierra-Porta, and H. Asorey. Calibration and ﬁrst measure-
ments of MuTe: a hybrid muon telescope for geological structures. In Proceedings of 36th International Cosmic Ray Conference — PoS(ICRC2019).
Sissa Medialab, July 2019.

[22] R. Calder ´on Ardila, H. Asorey, and A. Almela. Desarrollo de t´ecnicas de muongraf´ıa para estudios densitom´etricos de objetos de importancia

estrat´egica. AJEA, (5), October 2020.

[23] J. Pe ˜na Rodr´ıguez, R. de'Le ´on Barrios, A. Ram´ırez-Mu ˜n ´oz, D. Villabona-Ardila, M. Su´arez-Dur´an, A. V´asquez-Ram´ırez, H. Asorey, and L. A.
In Proceedings of 37th International

N ´u ˜nez. Muography background sources: simulation, characterization, and machine-learning rejection.
Cosmic Ray Conference — PoS(ICRC2021). Sissa Medialab, August 2021.

[24] N. Lesparre, D. Gibert, and J. Marteau. Bayesian dual inversion of experimental telescope acceptance and integrated ﬂux for geophysical

muon tomography. Geophysical Journal International, 188(2):490–497, November 2011.

[25] H. Asorey, L.A. N ´u ˜nez, M. Su´arez-Dur´an, L.A. Torres-Ni ˜no, M. Rodr´ıguez-Pascual, A.J. Rubio-Montero, and R. Mayo-Garc´ıa. The latin amer-
ican giant observatory: a successful collaboration in latin america based on cosmic rays and computer science domains. In Cluster, Cloud and
Grid Computing (CCGrid), 2016 16th IEEE/ACM International Symposium on, pages 707–711. IEEE, 2016.

[26] C. Sarmiento-Cano, M. Su´arez-Dur´an, R. Calder ´on-Ardila, A. V´asquez-Ram´ırez, A. Jaimes-Motta, S. Dasso, I. Sidelnik, L.A. N ´u ˜nez, and

H. Asorey. Performance of the LAGO water Cherenkov detectors to cosmic ray ﬂux. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.14591, 10 2020.

[27] M. L. Valencia-Otero. Estudio de las componentes de secundarios en cascadas originadas por rayos c ´osmicos para aplicaciones sobre estruc-

turas geol ´ogicas. Master’s thesis, Universidad Industrial de Santander, 2016. Bachelor’s Thesis.

[28] V.A. Kudryavtsev. Muon simulation codes music and musun for underground physics. Computer Physics Communications, 180(3):339–346,

2009.

[29] H. Moss, A. Vesga-Ram´ırez, V.A. Kudryavtsev, L.A. N ´u ˜nez, and D. Sierra-Porta. Muon tomography for the cerro mach´ın volcano. Technical

report, Department of Physics & Astronomy, University of Shefﬁeld, Shefﬁeld, United Kingdom, 2018.

[30] L. V. Gir ´on-Lozano. C´alculo de p´erdida de energ´ıa de muones que interact ´uan con diferentes tipos de roca: aplicaci ´on al volc´an Cerro Mach´ın

para el proyecto MuTe, en el rango de energ´ıa de 1 a 1000 GeV. Master’s thesis, Universidad del Tolima, 2020.

[31] J. Pe ˜na Rodr´ıguez. Dise ˜no y calibraci´on de un telescopio de muones h´ıbrido para estudios vulcanol´ogicos. PhD thesis, Universidad Industrial de

Santander, 2021.

[32] J. S´anchez-Villafrades, J. Pe ˜na Rodr´ıguez, H. Asorey, and L. A. N ´u ˜nez. Characterization and on-ﬁeld performance of the MuTe Silicon Photo-

multipliers. 2 2021.

[33] J. S´anchez-Villafrades, J. Pe ˜na Rodr´ıguez, R. Calder ´on-Ardila, and L. A. N ´u ˜nez. Control de temperatura para el estudio del voltaje de ruptura

de SiPMs. In Congreso Internacional de Ciencias B´asicas e Ingenier´ıa — (CICI2018). Universidad de los Llanos, August 2018.

[34] L. A. Nunez, R. de Leon-Barrios, J. Pe ˜na-Rodr´ıguez, J. D. Sanabria-G ´omez, A. V´asquez-Ram´ırez, R. Calder ´on-Ardila, C. Sarmiento-Cano,
A. Vesga-Ramirez, D. Sierra-Porta, M. Su´arez-Dur´an, and H. Asorey. Muography for the colombian volcanoes. In Proceedings of 37th Interna-
tional Cosmic Ray Conference — PoS(ICRC2021). Sissa Medialab, August 2021.

[35] A. Ram´ırez-Mu ˜noz and D. Villabona-Ardila. Discriminaci ´on del ruido de fondo en muograf´ıa usando t´ecnicas de aprendizaje automatizado.

Master’s thesis, Universidad Industrial de Santander, 2021. Bachelor’s Thesis.

8

