MNRAS 000, 1–20 (2021)

Preprint 27 January 2022

Compiled using MNRAS LATEX style ﬁle v3.0

YOUNG Star detrending for Transiting Exoplanet Recovery
(YOUNGSTER) II: Using Self-Organising Maps to explore young
star variability in Sectors 1-13 of TESS data

Matthew P. Battley,1,2★ David J. Armstrong,1,2 Don Pollacco,1,2
1Dept. of Physics, University of Warwick, Gibbet Hill Road, Coventry CV4 7AL, UK
2Centre for Exoplanets and Habitability, University of Warwick, Gibbet Hill Road, Coventry CV4 7AL, UK

Accepted XXX. Received YYY; in original form ZZZ

ABSTRACT
Young exoplanets and their corresponding host stars are fascinating laboratories for constrain-
ing the timescale of planetary evolution and planet-star interactions. However, because young
stars are typically much more active than the older population, in order to discover more young
exoplanets, greater knowledge of the wide array of young star variability is needed. Here
Kohonen Self Organising Maps (SOMs) are used to explore young star variability present in
the ﬁrst year of observations from the Transiting Exoplanet Survey Satellite (TESS), with such
knowledge valuable to perform targeted detrending of young stars in the future. This technique
was found to be particularly eﬀective at separating the signals of young eclipsing binaries and
potential transiting objects from stellar variability, a list of which are provided in this paper.
The eﬀect of pre-training the Self-Organising Maps on known variability classes was tested,
but found to be challenging without a signiﬁcant training set from TESS. SOMs were also
found to provide an intuitive and informative overview of leftover systematics in the TESS
data, providing an important new way to characterise troublesome systematics in photometric
data-sets. This paper represents the ﬁrst stage of the wider YOUNGSTER program, which
will use a machine-learning-based approach to classiﬁcation and targeted detrending of young
stars in order to improve the recovery of smaller young exoplanets.

Key words: techniques: photometric – planets and satellites: general – stars: activity – stars:
rotation – methods: observational

1

INTRODUCTION

1.1 The Young Star Challenge

Young stars and their corresponding exoplanetary systems are equal
parts fascinating and troublesome. Existing at epochs where system
evolution is ongoing, young exoplanets1 may experience phenom-
ena such as continuing formation and accretion (Marley et al. 2007;
Manara et al. 2019), disk migration (Nelson 2018), dynamical inter-
actions (Ida & Lin 2010; Schlichting et al. 2015) and atmospheric
loss (Baraﬀe et al. 2003; Owen 2019). Unfortunately, these same
processes which make young stars such interesting objects to study
also vastly increase the diﬃculty of ﬁnding new young exoplanets,
especially when coupled with the intrinsically increased stellar ac-
tivity/variability of young stars (e.g. Skumanich 1972; Soderblom
et al. 1991; Mamajek & Hillenbrand 2008; Briceno et al. 2019;
Kiman et al. 2021). Particularly challenging (and interesting) are
variability types such as evolving spot-induced modulation (Sergi-

★ E-mail: Matthew.Battley@warwick.ac.uk
1 n.b. for the purpose of this paper, ’young’ is deﬁned as <1Gyr in age.

© 2021 The Authors

son 2015), signatures of atmospheric loss and extended atmospheres
(Owen 2019), dippers and bursters (Hedges et al. 2018) and young
eclipsing binaries (Smith et al. 2021).

However, despite this stellar activity, a few score young tran-
siting exoplanets have now been discovered, with discoveries ac-
celerating in the past decade thanks to the Kepler (Borucki et al.
2010), K2 (Howell et al. 2014) and Transiting Exoplanet Survey
Satellite (TESS, Ricker et al. 2014) missions. A number of diﬀerent
groups have been involved in the discovery of these planets, but
particularly proliﬁc have been the ZEIT (Zodiacal Exoplanets In
Time, e.g. Mann et al. 2016; Rizzuto et al. 2017, 2018) and THYME
teams (TESS Hunt for Young and Maturing Exoplanets, Newton
et al. 2019; Rizzuto et al. 2020; Mann et al. 2020; Newton et al.
2021; Toﬄemire et al. 2021). The all-sky nature of TESS’s mission
makes it an attractive instrument for revealing more of these inter-
esting young planets, so a number of further searches are ongoing,
often linked to light-curve extraction methods like the Cluster Dif-
ference Imaging Photometric Survey (CDIPS, Bouma et al. 2019,
2020), PSF-based Approach to TESS High quality data Of Stellar

2 M. P. Battley et al.

clusters (PATHOS,e.g. Nardiello et al. 2019, 2020, 2021) and MIT
Quick-look Pipeline (QLP, Huang et al. 2020).

One of the main challenges hindering further young planet dis-
coveries is the wide variety in photometric variability of young stars,
as was explored in Battley et al. (2020). This provides a signiﬁcant
challenge to traditional ‘one-size-ﬁts-most’ detrending approaches,
where often a single window size is chosen for simplicity. Indeed,
as Hippke et al. (2019) illustrated in their Wotan detrending pa-
per, most general detrending algorithms recovered only 37% of the
0.5𝑅𝐽 𝑢 𝑝 sized young planetary signals injected into young star
light-curves, compared to approximately 99% of those injected into
an older population. Battley et al. (2020) and Nardiello et al. (2021)
recently broke this down further, illustrating how the recovery of
planets injected into young-star light-curves varied with planetary
radius/radius ratio and period, as well as stellar magnitude and
rotation period. In both these cases recovery was seen to drop con-
siderably when injected planetary radii fell below the Hot Jupiter
size regime.

In order to push down to smaller and younger exoplanets, it
is crucial to both gain a deeper understanding of the variability
present in these young stars and to work out the most eﬀective
ways of removing it. With increased knowledge of each potential
host star’s variability, each target could then be detrended using a
method best suited to its variability type. This maximises the ability
to remove complex variability without also removing transits.

Large-scale stellar variability classiﬁcation has been a subject
of interest since the ﬁrst large-scale surveys such as the Hipparcos
mission2, Optical Gravitational Lensing Experiment (OGLE3), and
All-Sky Automated Survey (ASAS4) began making traditional hu-
man eyeballing untenable. Machine-learning methods are typically
grouped into ‘supervised’ and ‘unsupervised’ methods, depending
whether they are provided with labelled training data or not. Most
of the earliest variability classiﬁers focused on supervised methods,
labelling distinct variability groups and ‘features’ before applying
versions of neural networks (Pojmanski 2002) or decision trees
(Ball et al. 2006). Similarly, Debosscher et al. (2007), Sarro et al.
(2009) and Debosscher et al. (2011) built a pipeline based on Gaus-
sian Mixtures and Bayesian networks to conduct global variability
classiﬁcation (and training) on data from CoRoT (Auvergne et al.
2009), OGLE and Kepler Quarter 1. Richards et al. (2011) returned
to the decision-tree (or Random Forest) method to classify stars
from OGLE and Hipparcos, eventually using these as a training set
to construct the large Machine-learned ASAS Classiﬁcation Cat-
alog (MACC Richards et al. 2012). The versatility of retraining
supervised nachine learning methods have also allowed them to be
applied to slightly more unusual types of variability, including for
the discovery of transients in synoptic survey imaging data (Brink
et al. 2013), detecting anomalous light curves in massive astro-
nomical catalogs (Nun et al. 2014) and even on MACHO (MAssive
Compact Halo Objects) and LINEAR (LincoIn Near-Earth Asteroid
Research) data Kim & Bailer-Jones (2016).

Unsupervised methods on the other hand allow their algorithms
to discover information and clusters in the data without pre-decided
labels or groups. This can lead to new data groups emerging and is
useful for situations in which not all potential solutions are known.
However, these methods are comparatively rare in stellar classiﬁca-
tion analyses. One of the earliest applications of such a method was

2 https://www.cosmos.esa.int/web/hipparcos
3 http://ogle.astrouw.edu.pl/
4 http://www.astrouw.edu.pl/asas/

completed by (Eyer & Blake 2005), using an unsupervised Bayesian
classiﬁer on features from Fourier-space to classify variable stars in
ASAS data releases 1-2. In another direction, Valenzuela & Pichara
(2018) created a ’Variability Tree’ which allowed simultaneous fea-
ture generation and varaibility search to be completed concurrently
on OGLE, MACHO and Kepler data. Meanwhile others such as
Modak et al. (2020) and (Armstrong et al. 2016) have turned to
clustering methods instead, allowing similar variability shapes or
light-curves to be places in similar clusters.

More recently, there has been a drive to combine the diﬀerent
beneﬁts provided by both unsupervised and supervised methods into
a single classiﬁcation. Naul et al. (2018) for example combined an
unsupervised autoencoded recurrent neural network to ﬁnd features
within their dataset with a supervised random forest to make the ﬁ-
nal classiﬁcations for optical variable star catalogs. Meanwhile the
large TESS Data for Asteroseismology (T’DA) collaboration is cur-
rently working on a large stellar variability classiﬁcation pipeline
(Audenaert et al. 2021), or ‘meta-classiﬁer’, which combines the
Multiclass Solar-like Oscillation Shape Hunter (multiSLOSH Hon
et al. 2018) neural network, Random Forest General Classiﬁcation
(RFGC, a hybrid unsupervised Self-Organising Map and Random
Forest implementation developed by Armstrong et al. 2016), Super-
vised Random Forest Variability Classiﬁer Using High-resolution
Photometry Attributes in TESS Data (SORTING-HAT Audenaert
et al. 2021) and Gradient Boosting General Classiﬁcation (GBGC
Friedman 2001) methods. Furthermore, the Gaia mission collaboar-
tion applies a wide variety of classiﬁcation pipelines depending on
the type of variability, with classiﬁcations continuing to be improved
with the ongoing mission (Gaia Collaboration et al. 2016, 2018b;
Eyer et al. 2019)

However, despite these widespread approaches to general stel-
lar variability analyses, machine-learning classiﬁcation of variabil-
ity in young stars remains in its comparative infancy. Due to chal-
lenges like swiftly evolving and unusually shaped activity, coupled
with a traditional dearth of bona-ﬁde young stars (Gagné et al.
2018a), most classiﬁcation of young star light-curves has been based
on human eyeballing (e.g. Cody & Hillenbrand 2018). However, as
young stars exhibit a breadth and depth of stellar variability often
not seen in older populations, there is signiﬁcant value in complet-
ing variability classiﬁcation independent of the older population.
Thankfully the improved performance and coverage of the new all-
sky TESS and Gaia missions is now beginning to supply the data
necessary for young-star speciﬁc analyses, making this a useful time
to begin such analyses. Indeed Hedges et al. (2018) have recently
shown the power of young-star speciﬁc classiﬁcation in a search for
for dippers/bursters found from supervised machine learning.

1.2 The YOUNGSTER Program

The aim of the "YOUNG Star detrending for Transiting Exoplanet
Recovery" (YOUNGSTER) program, is to develop a targeted de-
trending approach in young exoplanet searches by using information
about the stellar variability of potential young host stars to inform
detrending of diﬀerent categories of variability. Unlike a traditional
‘one size-ﬁts-most’ detrending approach, this program relies on ﬁrst
classifying diﬀerent types of young star variability which can then
be treated independently. By considering the variability of poten-
tial host stars during the analysis (rather than simply eliminating
it), this approach helps to reduce the prevalence of leftover signals
induced by improper detrending and should aid the search for shal-
lower exoplanets around young stars considerably. Furthermore, it

MNRAS 000, 1–20 (2021)

provides additional information about the individual systems, thus
aiding further analysis of the system as a whole.

The ﬁrst paper in this series (Battley et al. 2020, here-
after YOUNGSTER I) presented a new lowess-based detrending
method which showed promise as a dedicated young-star detrend-
ing method, but also highlighted some of the challenging variability
classes such as very short-period rotation (<1.5 day rotation peri-
ods). This paper, paper II, presents the results from the use of an
unsupervised Self-Organising Map (SOM, Kohonen 1982, 2001)
as a tool to explore young star variability further, and acts as a
ﬁrst step into more targeted characterisation and sorting of young
star variability for exoplanet searches. It also provides a useful ad-
ditional method of recognising and removing leftover systematics
in young star light-curves and gives an eﬃcient method to recover
example light-curves of unusual variability types on which to train
future classiﬁcation methods. Paper III (Battley et al., in prep) will
extend this classiﬁcation using a supervised random-forest imple-
mentation which combines additional light-curve statistics with the
results from the SOM in order to give ﬁnal classiﬁcations for each
star. Speciﬁcally, it will combine the SOM position and Euclidean
distance of each light-curve from its closest SOM pixel with noise
statistics and (a)periodic information about the light-curves in order
to give a ﬁnal classiﬁcation for each light-curve. Future papers in
this series will then use these classiﬁcations as test-beds to develop
new targeted detrending methods and apply these to each variability
group in order to search for smaller transiting exoplanets.

1.3 Self-Organising Maps

Self-Organising Maps (SOMs; aka Self-Organizing Maps) are an
unsupervised machine-learning technique originally developed by
Kohonen (1982, 2001) which allows for sorting of data based on
topology, or similar shapes. A form of artiﬁcial neural-network
birthed from research into neural networks in the human brain (Ko-
honen 1982), SOMs use short-range lateral feedback to group simi-
lar input data into similar regions of a ‘map’. The ﬁnal map, usually
1-2 dimensions for clarity, can then be used to explore groups of
similar data or to more simply investigate the evolution of a com-
plex data-set in a form of dimensionality reduction (Armstrong
et al. 2016). One key advantage of Self-Organising Maps is their
unsupervised nature, meaning that underlying trends and groups in
the input data can be explored without the need for pre-allocated
classes of variability or signiﬁcant knowledge about the target stars.
This makes them particularly useful for young star studies, where
new classes of photometric variability are still being discovered
and understood (e.g. Zieba et al. 2019; Tajiri et al. 2020). A useful
extension to this behaviour is that not only are those data which
are most similar placed closest together in the ﬁnal map, but those
which are most diﬀerent are placed furthest apart (Mostert et al.
2021). However, an important proviso with the use of the SOM is
that far more importance should be given to the relative position
of the analysed data compared to its overall distribution, since, as
noted by Geach (2012), the randomness of the initial SOM setup
results in a diﬀerent ﬁnal distribution on each new run, even for
precisely the same input data-set. This means that while the same
input data should always end up closest to those data which are most
similar, the overall shape of the SOM may be diﬀerent in each run
depending on how the som was initialised in each instance.

SOMs are particularly popular in computer science, quantita-
tive biology and statistics (e.g. Rahmani et al. 2019; Burnap et al.
2018), however until recently have been relatively under-utilised in
astronomy. Brett et al. (2004) were the ﬁrst to use this technique for

MNRAS 000, 1–20 (2021)

Young Star Self Organising Maps with TESS

3

astrophysical data, using self-organising maps to classify a set of
synthetic light-curves and 1026 real light-curves from the ROTSE
experiment (Akerlof et al. 2000). As well as providing an overview
of how the SOM evolves over diﬀerent numbers of iterations, Brett
et al. (2004) illustrated that the performance of the SOM was rela-
tively insensitive to changes in the value and decay shape of the two
main SOM parameters: the learning rate 𝛼 and eﬀective neighbour-
hood size 𝜎. This makes it a versatile and easy approach to use for
a wide range of data-sets.

More recently Armstrong et al. (2016) extended this work by
using a SOM alongside a supervised Random Forest implemen-
tation to classify the variability (or lack thereof) of all stars in
Campaigns 0-4 of the K2 mission. In this work Armstrong et al.
(2016) used a 2D 40x40 Kohonen layer with an initial learning
rate of 𝛼0 = 0.1 𝜎0 = 40 (the width of the Kohonen layer) to clearly
demonstrate the utility of the SOM for splitting types of photometric
variability by training the SOM on a set of 4047 known variables
from campaigns 0-2 of the K2 mission. An improved version of
this same SOM setup has recently been folded into the wider TESS
T’DA stellar variability classiﬁer, combined with a small selection
of other supervised and unsupervised classiﬁcation methods (Au-
denaert et al. 2021), however it has never previously been tested
on the unique groups of variability seen in young stars. In related
works (Armstrong et al. 2016, 2020) have also used SOMs to clas-
sify transit shapes in an eﬀort to aid automated vetting of planetary
transits.

In wider astronomy SOMs have been used for a wide array
of analyses, from Photometric Redshift calibration (Geach 2012;
Carrasco Kind & Brunner 2014; Wright et al. 2020a,b), Radio
astronomy (Galvin et al. 2020; Mostert et al. 2021) and spectro-
scopic image segmentation (Fustes et al. 2013; Schilliro & Romano
2021) to classiﬁcation of Galaxies (Naim et al. 1997; Johnston et al.
2021), AGNs (Faisst et al. 2019) and unusual quasars (Meusinger
et al. 2012). Of particular note were the discoveries of Johnston
et al. (2021) who showed how eﬀective SOMs can be at identify-
ing systematics alongside the main data-groups (in their case in a
study of galaxy clustering in the Kilo-Degree Survey), and Khacef
et al. (2020)’s suggestion that the eﬃciency of SOMs could be im-
proved for very large data-sets by applying the SOM to extracted
features rather than the raw data. Although many of these wider
applications are less relevant to the current work, the wide range of
uses further highlights the versatility of the SOM for complex data,
alongside the ability to classify a wide array of interesting behaviour
into groups. This versatility, coupled with the unsupervised cluster-
ing algorithm, intuitive results format and promising track record
for photometric variability classiﬁcation make the Self-Organising
Map an appealing technique for exploring and classifying young
star variability.

2 LIGHT-CURVE SOURCE AND TARGET SELECTION

2.1 Light-curve extraction

For machine-learning approaches like self-organising maps, two
factors are crucial: consistency and data volume. Now, in the era of
the Transiting Exoplanet Survey Satellite (TESS, Ricker et al. 2014),
the community has access to a uniform source of millions of light-
curves from an ever-increasing proportion of the sky, including
hundreds of thousands of young star light-curves extracted from
the Full-Frame-Image (FFI) data. Numerous diﬀerent sources of
FFI light-curves are now available, including a number of very

4 M. P. Battley et al.

large data-sources like the TESS SPOC (Caldwell et al. 2020a),
MIT Quick-Look (QLP, Huang et al. 2020) and eleanor pipelines
(Feinstein et al. 2019). Crucially for this analysis, there are now also
a selection of dedicated young star light-curve extraction programs
such as the CDIPS (Bouma et al. 2019), PATHOS (Nardiello 2020),
and Oelkers & Stassun (2018)’s Diﬀerence Imaging Analysis light-
curves. These specialised extraction pipelines are particularly useful
for dense regions where young stars are commonly found due to their
diﬀerence imaging (n.b. also used to extract Huang et al. (2020)’s
QLP light-curves) or PSF-based approaches.

In this work, light-curves extracted from the Cluster Diﬀerence
Imaging Photometric Survey (CDIPS) pipeline (Bouma et al. 2019;
Bhatti et al. 2019)5 were chosen as the primary data source due to
their dedicated young-star extraction approach and the availability
of a large number of light-curves for the entire ﬁrst year of TESS’s
Primary Mission (Sectors 1-13). They also provide a ‘lightly de-
trended’ PCA form of light-curve particularly useful for the SOM
technique, as discussed later. Through comparison to diﬀerent year-
1 light-curve sources currently available to the community, this form
of light-curve was found to best preserve signals of stellar activity
whilst removing additional spacecraft systematics. Note however
that because no light-curves from the second year of TESS’s ob-
servations were available from the CDIPS pipeline at the time of
writing, the more widely-available QLP light-curves of (Huang et al.
2020) were chosen as a backup data source for exploring scattered
light systematics in section 4.2.

The CDIPS pipeline uses a diﬀerence-imaging approach to ex-
tract light-curves from the TESS FFIs. Based largely on the fitsh
package of Pál (2012), the pipeline is similar in vein to other diﬀer-
ence imaging pipelines designed for use with the TESS data, such
as that of Oelkers & Stassun (2018) and Huang et al. (2020). An in-
depth description of the full CDIPS pipeline can be found in Bouma
et al. (2019), but is brieﬂy explained here. The pipeline begins with
the calibrated TESS SPOC FFIs, performs large-scale background
subtraction and then builds an astrometric reference frame based
on a series of the brightest stars in each image, veriﬁed with the
World Coordinate system (WCS) and the Gaia-DR2 catalog (Gaia
Collaboration et al. 2016, 2018b). All calibrated images are then
transformed to this frame before a photometric reference frame is
constructed from 50 images with low background noise. In order to
get the ﬁnal light-curves, each target frame is then subtracted from
the photometric reference frame and aperture photometry applied
to each source.

It should be noted that while times of known momentum dumps
and coarse pointing were removed using the TESS data release
notes6 early in the CDIPS pipeline, a number of additional system-
atics from the spacecraft motion and scattered light still exist in the
data after the main diﬀerence-imaging extraction. In order to combat
this, Bouma et al. (2019) present two partial-detrending approaches:
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) and the Trend-Filtering Algo-
rithm (TFA). Both approaches rely on ensemble-detrending of the
light-curve of interest using up to 200 nearby ‘template’ stars with-
out signiﬁcant periodicity. Principal Component Analysis works by
deriving 10-15 principal components which comprise the systematic
trends in each individual CCD and then building a model for each
light-curve using a subset of these components, weighted by consid-
eration of linear least squares. This removes the largest systematics
on each CCD while avoiding over-ﬁtting of most stellar variabil-

ity. The speciﬁc implementation used here was that included in
the scikit-learn package (Pedregosa et al. 2011). Meanwhile TFA
works by deriving a ﬁlter function to remove long-period trends
and thus is well-suited to transit studies, but too severe for analy-
sis of stellar signals, as it often removes/distorts interesting stellar
variability alongside true systematics.

Due to its ability to remove spacecraft systematics whilst main-
taining most stellar variability, the PCA detrended light-curves were
eventually chosen as the primary brightness data-source for this
analysis. For consistency, aperture 2 (1.5 pixels in radius) was used
for all light-curves, chosen as a balance of noise and the relative
crowding of many young stars. The ﬁnal data vectors used for each
object were thus time = ‘TMID_BJD’, magnitude = ‘PCA2’ and
mag_err = ‘IRE2’. Finally, these magnitudes were converted to
normalised ﬂux to prepare them for further analysis, based on the
median ﬂux for each source.

2.2 Target Selection

An additional beneﬁt of using the CDIPS light-curves is that
light-curves extracted by the pipeline show evidence of
all
youth, either
through candidate membership of young clus-
ters/associations/moving groups or due to external photometric in-
dications. The CDIPS target list was constructed from four large
archival catalogs of open clusters (Cantat-Gaudin et al. 2018; Gaia
Collaboration et al. 2018b,a; Kharchenko et al. 2013; Dias et al.
2014) as well as nine smaller catalogs of moving groups and stellar
associations (Gagné et al. 2018a,b; Gagné & Faherty 2018; Kraus
et al. 2014; Röser et al. 2011; Bell et al. 2017; Rizzuto et al. 2011;
Oh et al. 2017; Zari et al. 2019). This resulted in an overall target
list of 1,061,447 stars, for which 671,894 light-curves are available
over the ﬁrst year of TESS observations.7 All of these light-curves
were included in the present analysis. For a full description of the
target list and its construction see Bouma et al. (2019). However,
some additional care is needed when using this list, as Bouma et al.
(2019) admit that the it was compiled for "completeness, not ac-
curacy", so the true youth of some of the included objects should
be treated with caution. Nonetheless, since the overall aim of the
YOUNGSTER program is to understand and detrend diﬀerent types
of variability in the wider sample of young stars, the inclusion of
some older, likely less-active sources is of little concern.

3 PERIOD-FINDING AND SOM ARRAY PREPARATION

The ﬁrst step in characterising the variability of the young star
sample is deriving the variability period of each source. Although
most instrumental systematic eﬀects were removed in the CDIPS
extraction and PCA steps, in order to combat the common systematic
period of 13.5 days (half the length of a typical TESS sector), a 13.5
day period ( 𝑓 = 1/14) sinusoid of the form

𝑦 = 𝑎 sin 2𝜋 𝑓 𝑡 + 𝑏 cos 2𝜋 𝑓 𝑡 + 𝑐

(1)

was ﬁtted to the data and removed by division from the ﬂux
data before the main period search. Primary, secondary and tertiary
periods for each light-curve were then found using the common
Lomb-Scargle method (Lomb 1976; Scargle 1982), as implemented
into python as the LombScargle function in the python astropy

5 http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3370324
6 https:archive.stsci.edutesstess_drn.html

7 https://archive.stsci.edu/hlsp/cdips

MNRAS 000, 1–20 (2021)

library8 (The Astropy Collaboration et al. 2013; Astropy Collabo-
ration et al. 2018). These periods were found iteratively, with the
primary period in each iteration obtained using the Lomb-Scargle
method and then removed by ﬁtting a sinusoid of the same form
used for the systematic 13.5d period. As the present work is most
interested in the overall shape of the variability rather than the
absolute period for each target, the periods were allowed to vary
from 0.25 days (4 𝑑−1) to 25 days (0.04 𝑑−1), allowing the non-
variable or aperiodic light-curves to remain largely unfolded whilst
not risking the introduction of more noise-related frequencies at
much longer frequencies. Given that most periods found were on
the order of multiple days, extending the upper frequency to the
Nyquist frequency (∼1h period) is not expected to change this anal-
ysis signiﬁcantly. Furthermore, attempting to remove stellar activity
with periods shorter than a quarter of a day would be exceedingly
diﬃcult in the 30min data.

To prepare for the SOM analysis, the extracted CDIPS PCA
light-curves were folded by their strongest period and normalised
between 0 and 1 to allow direct comparisons of diﬀerent shapes of
variability. Similar to Armstrong et al. (2016), these phase-curves
were binned into 64 bins in order to save computational time whilst
maintaining the overall shape of the variability. The phased arrays
were then aligned such that the minimum point always occurred as
the ﬁrst element in the array, before all phase-curves were arranged
into per-sector lists as the main input to the SOM analysis. Where
gaps existed in the light-curves of over 0.5 days, these were ﬁlled
in with linear interpolation (after the Lomb-Scargle period search)
in order to avoid processing issues. In most sectors this was only
required across the 1.1 day inter-orbital gap, and thus was not found
to signiﬁcantly aﬀect the shape of the binned and folded phase curve.
As an additional test, phase arrays for all light-curves from Sector
2 (except those with periods resulting in gaps in the phase-curve)
were reconstructed with the gap retained instead of interpolation
and mapped onto the ﬁnal SOMs trained on Sectors 1-5 (Figure 2
and 1-13 (Figure 11 respectively. All light-curves in well-deﬁned
variability clusters (such as EA/EB eclipsing binaries) were found
to fall precisely on their original positions in both test cases, with
82-86% of all light-curves falling within 10 pixels of their original
position (and 70% overall within 2 pixels). As the shape associated
with each Kohonen pixel in the more amorphous region of the SOM
was not observed to evolve quickly over the course of 10 pixels, the
imposed linear interpolation does not appear to result in signiﬁcant
mis-classiﬁcations of shape.

4 SELF ORGANISING MAP EVOLUTION

4.1 SOM Setup and Algorithm

The SOM implementation used in this work is similar to the one
used by Brett et al. (2004) and Armstrong et al. (2016), but is brieﬂy
explained here for context. The SOM works by minimising the Eu-
clidean distance between each phase curve and the ’Best-Matching-
Unit’ (BMU) within the Kohonen Layer. Three main parameters
are important for the setup of the SOM: the initial learning rate,
𝛼0, initial learning radius, 𝜎0 and the SOM shape. The learning rate
controls how quickly pixels in the Kohonen layer are changed, while
the learning radius controls how large the neighbourhood of com-
parison is during each iteration. Brett et al. (2004) recommended
learning rate values of 𝛼0 ≤ 0.2 in order to prevent undesirable

Young Star Self Organising Maps with TESS

5

movement and constant restructuring with further iterations, how-
ever the speciﬁc value of the learning radius was not found to have a
signiﬁcant eﬀect on SOM performance. Similar to Armstrong et al.
(2016), these parameters were eventually chosen as 𝛼0 = 0.1 and
𝜎0 = 𝑟, where 𝑟 is the SOM radius. A ’radius’ is deﬁned here instead
of a length, because the boundaries of the SOM are cyclic, wrap-
ping around at each edge. Also following Armstrong et al. (2016),
the nominal SOM shape was set to a 2D square of 40x40 pixels
for a good balance of detail and required human eyeballing time.
However, variations on this shape are also explored in Section 5.2.
Once the input parameters have been chosen, the algorithm
proceeds as follows. Firstly, each pixel in the Kohonen layer is
randomised such that the 64 elements within each one all have
values between 0 and 1. For each iteration, each phase curve array
(prepared in Section 3) is compared to the Kohonen layer to ﬁnd
its BMU, by minimising the Euclidean distance between the pixel
elements and the phased array elements. Every element in each pixel
of the Kohonen layer is then updated according to the expression

𝑚 𝑥 𝑦,𝑘,𝑛𝑒𝑤 = 𝑚 𝑥 𝑦,𝑘,𝑜𝑙𝑑 + 𝛼𝑒−𝑑2

𝑥 𝑦 /2𝜎2

(𝑠𝑘 − 𝑚 𝑥 𝑦,𝑘,𝑜𝑙𝑑)

(2)

following the formalism of (Armstrong et al. 2016), where
𝑚 𝑥 𝑦,𝑘 is the value 𝑚 of the pixel at coordinates 𝑥, 𝑦, element 𝑘 in
the phase curve, 𝑑𝑥 𝑦 is the Euclidean distance of that pixel from
the BMU in the layer, and 𝑠𝑘 is the 𝑘th element of the input phase
curve currently being compared. This process is repeated for each
iteration, with learning rate and learning radius evolving as follows

𝛼 = 𝛼0 (1 −

𝑖
𝑛𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑟

)

𝜎 = 𝜎0𝑒 ( −𝑖𝑙𝑜𝑔 (𝑟 )

𝑛𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑟

)

(3)

(4)

where 𝑖 is the iteration number, 𝑟 is the radius of the Kohonen
layer and 𝑛𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑟 is the total number of iterations (chosen as 1000 in
this work). Note that the SOM performance is relatively insensitive
to the precise functional form of how 𝛼 and 𝜎 evolve, as explored
by Brett et al. (2004).

The ﬁnal result of the algorithm is the Kohonen map, a repre-
sentation of the overall variability present in the data-set. In this case
each pixel eﬀectively represents an average of those phase arrays
which ended up at it after the ﬁnal iteration. Querying individual
pixels in the Kohonen map thus gives an approximation of each
phase-curve at that pixel.

The speciﬁc software implementation used in this work was
adapted from the TransitSOM code of (Armstrong et al. 2017)9,
which in turn was based on the SOM code from the PyMVPA
Python package (Hanke et al., 2009).10

4.2 Identiﬁcation and removal of systematics

One of the additional beneﬁts of the unsupervised clustering method
used by the SOM is the easy identiﬁcation of leftover systematics
in the TESS light-curves. Indeed Geach (2012) refer to the SOM
as a form of "non-linear principal component analysis" due to its
ability to ﬁnd patterns and common features in data. The intuitive
and visual results interface oﬀered by the SOM makes understanding
these systematics simple and eﬃcient. To explore this aspect of SOM

8 https://docs.astropy.org/en/stable/api/astropy.timeseries.LombScargle.html

9 https://github.com/DJArmstrong/TransitSOM
10 http://www.pymvpa.org

MNRAS 000, 1–20 (2021)

6 M. P. Battley et al.

Figure 1. Original S1-5 SOM, constructed from CDIPS ‘IFL2’ ﬂux light-
curves. The Kohonen x and y pixels correspond to x and y in Equation 2, with
individual pixels referred to in the form [x, y]. Both colour (low = purple;
high = yellow) and pixel radius are a function of the number of phase-curves
situated at that pixel in the ﬁnal SOM map. The larger, brighter pixels thus
represent the pixels which the greatest number of phase-arrays ended up at,
corresponding to the most common shapes in the input light-curve data.

Figure 2. Final S1-5 SOM using PCA ﬂux. Colours and pixel size share
same meaning as in Figure 1. In this case a more even distribution is present
than in Figure 1, but

clear hot-spots can be seen at pixels [x,y] = [3,5] and [5,8], representing EA
and EB-like eclipsing binary signals.

performance, SOMs generated for the raw ﬂux (‘IFL2’) and PCA
(‘PCA2’) CDIPS light-curves for Sectors 1-5 (shown in Figures 1
and 2 respectively) are compared here.

While the SOM based on PCA ﬂux (Figure 2) exhibited a
relatively even distribution of phase-curves aside from some ‘hot-
spots’ of large numbers of eclipsing-binary-like light-curves near
pixels [x,y] = [3,5] and [5,8] (as is common for all sectors in the
ﬁnal SOM - see main discussion in Section 5), the SOM based
on ‘IFL2’ ﬂuxes (Figure 1) extracted straight from the diﬀerence
images exhibited considerably more hot-spots, spread over much of
the 40x40 grid. The most common pixels for phase curves to end up
at in the ‘IFL2’ SOM were pixels [11,9] and [16,11]. When these

Figure 3. The most common Kohonen pixel [11,9] in the CDIPS S1-5 ’IFL2’
ﬂux run, showing clear ﬂux-jump around bin 20 in the phase-curve. Note
that ’Bin’ here is synonymous with phase, with bin 0 at phase = 0 and bin
63 at phase = 1.

.

Figure 4. IFL2 light-curve for young star Gaia DR2 5275841004963097728,
representative of all those light-curves with SOM arrays ending up at pixel
[11,9] in the IFL2 SOM for CDIPS S1-5. The clear systematic seen in
Figure 3 is explained by a ﬂux jump present in the ﬁrst part of the ﬁrst orbit,
a common systematic in Sector 4.

pixels were queried in the Kohonen layer, all of the phase curves
clustered at these points were found to be from Sector 4, with a very
distinctive SOM array shown in Figure 3. At ﬁrst glance this phase-
array appears to represent interesting outburst-like activity, however
investigating this feature further by checking the raw light-curves
upon which the phase-curves were based (e.g. for object Gaia DR2
5275841004963097728 shown in Figure 4) revealed that the cause
of this unusual shape was simply a common ﬂux-jump present in
the ﬁrst part of many dimmer Sector 4 light-curves. Variations in
the phase of this ﬂux-jump in the ﬁnal phase-curves accounted for
a large number of the other ’hot-pixels’, especially in the regions
immediately adjacent to [11,9] and [16,11]. Closer inspection of the
wider IFL2-based SOM revealed that other individual hot-pixels
could be explained by additional systematics, such as ﬂux ramps
(e.g. [10,29], [20,2] and [25,39]) and sudden ﬂux dips, mimicking
Algol-type eclipsing binaries (e.g. [31,30] and [31,27]).

While the signiﬁcance of the leftover systematics in the raw
IFL2 ﬂux light-curves varies from sector to sector,11 the presence of
such eﬀects even in a single sector make it concerning for variabil-
ity analyses, as telling the diﬀerence between true variability and
leftover systematics shared with adjacent stars is made considerably
more diﬃcult. This suggested that some ensemble post-processing

11 In this test of Sectors 1-5, Sector 4 was found to most commonly include
such systematics, with Sectors 1 and 2 relatively clear.

MNRAS 000, 1–20 (2021)

Young Star Self Organising Maps with TESS

7

Figure 6. Typical scattered light pixel in QLP quality clean light-curves.

Figure 7. Example of scattered light systematics leftover in ’cleaned’ QLP
light-curve.

inspection of these regions reveal SOM pixels with shapes like that
presented in Figure 6, featuring a steep climb and a slow descent
in a triangluar pattern. Querying typical light-curves at this pixel
makes it clear that this is caused by steep ﬂux-ramps at the end of
each orbit. According to the TESS data release notes for S17, this
was typically caused by scattered light from the Earth and Moon
glinting across the detector at these epochs, and can be clearly seen
in the background ﬂux (e.g. panel 2 of Figure 9).

Removing the eﬀect of this scattered light is complicated, as it
varies in signiﬁcance depending on a wide range of factors, includ-
ing position on the ccd/detectors, brightness and crowding on the
source star and the angle of the space-craft. These scattered-light
systematics were still retained (though slightly reduced in severity)
when the most aﬀected detector (Camera 3, Detector 1) was re-
moved from the analysis. Background-based and initial ensemble-
based detrending methods based on nearby stars were also trialled,
but found to have variable success. The reason for this is best ex-
plained by Figure 8, showing the raw light-curves for TIC 64940788
and the 9 closest sources with QLP light-curves from TESS. It is
immediately clear that removing an average of the activity will not
entirely remove the scattered light signal of the original light-curve,
and may actually distort it further in some cases. This is a product of
the scattered light eﬀect evolving in a complex manner, aﬀected by
such factors as the detector position and magnitude of each source.
A simple epoch-cut was also found to be challenging, as the epoch
where scattered light systematics began to dominate varied between
source to source and, in some brighter cases, never to occur at all.
Eventually however, a hybrid approach was found to have
some success by considering the background error data row
’SAP_BKG’. Through comparison of the SAP ﬂux (‘SAP_FLUX’),
SAP background ﬂux (‘SAP_BKG’) and SAP background error
(‘SAP_BKG_ERR’), the SAP ﬂux was found to become scattered-

Figure 5. Original S17 QLP SOM (after cleaning with the quality ﬂag only)
showing scattered light systematics, particularly in the vicinity of [16,12]
and [30,27].

of the light-curves was wise, such as that performed for the ‘lightly-
detrended’ PCA light-curves. Indeed, when the PCA light-curves
were used instead of the IFL2 ﬂuxes, the ﬁnal result (Figure 2)
was no longer systematics-dominated, with the hottest pixels corre-
sponding to eclipsing binaries [5,8] and ’noisy’ sinusoids ([6,22];
sinusoids with signiﬁcant scatter), alongside the typical evolution of
activity discussed in Sector 5. This suggests that these light-curves
are far more suited to analyses of overall variability compared to the
raw ‘IFL2’ ones, backing up their choice as the primary light-curve
in the full year SOM analysis.

Another challenging systematic known in TESS data is scat-
tered light, which is particularly prevalent in early Year II of the
TESS data. Because CDIPS light-curves were only available for
Year I at the time of writing, this systematic eﬀect was explored
using QLP light-curves instead (Huang et al. 2020). In this case
young star targets were chosen from the catalogues upon which the
CDIPS target list is based, by performing a cross-match between
them and the QLP light-curves. This resulted in 24,495 light-curves
at the time of writing. Light-curves were extracted from the QLP
light-curves using the ‘SAP_FLUX’ keyword, before being cleaned
by removing any data points with QLP ‘QUALITY’ values > 4095
from the light-curve. Moments of known poor telescope pointing (as
detailed in the TESS data release notes12) were also removed where
these were not caught by the quality cut. This cleaning method re-
sulted in removing similar sections of the data removed in the initial
steps of the CDIPS pipeline.

A SOM was then built using all 24,495 light-curves using the
same setup outlined in Section 4.1, resulting in the ﬁnal SOM map
shown in Figure 5. What is immediately obvious is the unusually-
shaped clusters around [16,12] and [30,27]. These structures display
a much wider spatial extent on the ﬁnal map compared to those
clusters in the raw IFL2 CDIPS SOM shown in Figure 1, appearing
as large collections of light-curves spread over many pixels, instead
of single ’hot-pixels’ at deﬁned points on the SOM. This implies
that they are variations on a shape theme, rather than exactly the
same shape each time, hence spread out further on the SOM. Closer

12 https://archive.stsci.edu/tess/tess_drn.html

MNRAS 000, 1–20 (2021)

8 M. P. Battley et al.

Figure 8. Scattered Light variation on 10 adjacent QLP light-curves, il-
lustrating the challenge of removing this systematic eﬀect through simple
co-trending techniques

Figure 9. Example of the background error cut being applied. Flux data is
cut in regions where the background error exceeded two times the median
background error, as highlighted in red.

light dominated beyond the point in each orbit when the background
error exceeded twice the median background err. This relationship
is demonstrated visually in Figure 9. Cutting the light-curve at this
point was found to remove the majority of the scattered light sys-
tematic whilst minimising loss of useful data at the same epochs
in objects less aﬀected by scattered light. After cleaning all light-
curves based on this background error cut approach, a new SOM
was built for the S17 QLP light-curves, which is shown in Figure
10. This SOM no longer displays the clear systematic scattered light
eﬀects seen in the original S17 QLP SOM (Figure 5) and instead
results in a SOM similar to the ﬁnal CDIPS SOM for Sectors 1-13
(Figure 11), with steadily evolving stellar variability over the whole
40x40 SOM and hot-spots of eclipsing-binary-like activity around
[8,4] and [12,1]. The use of such a cleaning technique thus extends
the potential of SOM analysis to the prevalent QLP light-curves as
well.

Figure 10. S17 QLP SOM after applying background error clean. This
displays a much cleaner distribution across the SOM map and traditional
EA/EB hot-pixels, compared to the systematics-dominated original S17
SOM in Figure 5.

Hence by clustering similar shapes of phase-curve close to-
gether, the SOM eﬀectively gives a visual overview of any common
systematics in the data-set which may otherwise be missed. It also
gives the user a useful set of trial light-curves to test techniques of
removing these troublesome systematics, without having to check
each by eye. Furthermore, the clustering gives an overview of which
systematics appear to be related in shape, and can more easily allow
the user to view what is being removed in any related principal com-
ponent analysis. Identifying and removing these systematics one by
one can signiﬁcantly aid searches for planetary transits, whether the
stars are young or otherwise. The SOM’s ability to identify these au-
tomatically and visually thus make it attractive as an additional tool
for narrowing down troublesome systematics. This analysis also il-
lustrates the necessity of carefully checking individual light-curves
when applying wider machine-learning techniques to the TESS data,
as some phase arrays can be suggestive of real activity when the
extra information given in the original light-curves is simpliﬁed.

4.3 Self-trained vs Pre-trained SOM

The are two primary ways to train the SOM, both of which have
diﬀerent beneﬁts to understanding the variability in the young star
population. We here deﬁne these two ways as ‘Self-trained’, where
the SOM is trained directly on the young star light-curves analysed
in this work, and ‘Pre-trained’, where light-curves from known
variability groups are used to train the SOM. In the latter case
the young star light-curves are then mapped onto the trained SOM
in order to see where they fall in regards to the known classes of
variability. The prior training method is used for the majority of
this analysis, as it is useful to explore the inherent variability in
the young star light-curves speciﬁcally. However, the ‘pre-trained’
SOM may be useful for future machine-learning classiﬁcation of
these light-curves, so is also explored here.

Self-training the SOM is the easiest option for training the
SOM, and is particularly useful as it does not require any prior
knowledge about the expected shape of the light-curves, or indeed
any extra data-set. In this method the SOM is trained by inputting
the young star SOM arrays prepared in Section 3 directly into the

MNRAS 000, 1–20 (2021)

SOM algorithm. The algorithm then moves these light-curves into
similar regions when they share similar shapes, as explained in
Section 4.1. The ﬁnal Kohonen map in this instance is thus trained
on the shapes present only in the young star light-curves, so can be
useful to explore the overall variability trends and any clusters of
interesting young star variability. Results from this training method
are explored through most of Section 5, and in the systematics
discussion above.

The alternative approach of pre-training the SOM is perhaps
most useful for classiﬁcation/grouping of light-curves into pre-
known classes of variability, but can also be used as a valuable
way to compare diﬀerent data-sets on a common and repeatable
structure. This method involves training the SOM on a pre-selected
set of light-curves (often pre-classiﬁed into variability classes) and
then mapping all new light-curves onto the same pre-trained Koho-
nen layer. This is helpful because it breaks the randomness of each
newly trained SOM, and means that the Kohonen shape at each
pixel of the SOM will remain unchanged, even when new light-
curves are mapped onto it. This makes it very useful for comparing
data-sets (e.g. diﬀerent TESS sectors), as each region of the ﬁnal
SOM map will correspond to the same shape, so only the number
of light-curves at each spot will vary between runs. Note that Koho-
nen (1982) discussed an alternative approach to compare data-sets
whereby a known ’seed’ is used in the SOM initialisation to ensure
that the distribution of shapes on the SOM is repeatable between
SOM runs, but this was not tried in this work.

In this case light-curves from the pre-classiﬁed K2 Variabil-
ity Catalog (Armstrong et al. 2016) were chosen to pre-train the
SOM, as these would allow speciﬁc SOM regions to correspond to
known variability classes after training. Stars in the K2 Variability
Catalog were classiﬁed using a combination of a Self-Organising
Map and a Random Forest classiﬁer, making them well-suited to
use in further SOM analysis. In total the catalog consists of 68910
classiﬁed light-curves, including 154 ab-type RR (RRab) Lyraes,
377 𝛿 Scuti stars (DSCUT), 133 𝛾 Doradus variables (GDOR), 183
Algol-type eclisping binaries (EA), 290 contact eclipsing binaries
(EB) and 9399 other periodic variables (OTHERPER) of high-
probability (P>0.7) in campaigns 0-4 of the K2 mission. Ideally
TESS light-curves would be used for each of these stars to max-
imise similarity to the young star data-set, however at the time of
writing only 8903 of these stars had been observed by TESS, as the
K2 mission took place primarily on the ecliptic plane, where TESS
observations are still ongoing. Instead the Warwick detrended light-
curves from (Armstrong et al. 2016) were chosen as the primary
data-source, allowing the primary rotation periods derived in this
source to be used directly. SOM arrays were then built in the same
manner as outlined in Section 3, using the periods presented in Ta-
ble 5 of (Armstrong et al. 2016). Two separate approaches were then
used to train the SOM: ﬁrstly the SOM was trained using all light-
curves except those classiﬁed as ‘Noise’ (24,947 light-curves) and
secondly using all 68,910 light-curves at once. The resulting SOMs
are shown in Figures 22 and 23 respectively and are discussed in
detail in Section 5.4.

5 RESULTS

5.1 Overall results

The overall SOM built and trained on all young star CDIPS light-
curves from the ﬁrst year of TESS data is shown in Figure 11,
with an overview of the main features presented in Table 1. The

MNRAS 000, 1–20 (2021)

Young Star Self Organising Maps with TESS

9

raw result from the SOM is somewhat subtle, as the most important
information is hidden in the pixels themselves (a sample of which are
shown alongside). However, there are still some important features
to note in the overall SOM shape. For clarity, the pixels have been
colour-coded and given radii in the overall SOM plot based on
the number of light-curves (or their respective phase arrays) which
ended up at that pixel after training on the CDIPS young star data-
set. This aids the eye to see clusters of larger numbers of light-
curves in lighter, denser regions. It is important to remember that the
SOM boundaries wrap around, such that pixel [0,0] is diagnonally
adjacent to [39,39]. This can clearly be observed in the continued
’ridge’ from [0,13] to [39,13] and in the speciﬁc phase-curves at the
edges of Figure 11.

The most striking features in this SOM are the hot spots at [6,2]
and [8,6], represented as the yellow spots on the SOM, alongside
the slower evolution of light-curve shape across the remainder of the
map. The SOM pixels for these two ‘hot-pixels’ at [6,2] and [8,6] are
plotted in Figures 12 and 13 respectively, and appear to represent
two very well-known classes of photometric variability: Beta Lyrae
type contact eclipsing binaries (EB; [6,2]) and Algol-type detached
eclipsing binaries (EA; [8,6]). Querying speciﬁc light-curves at
these pixels conﬁrms this classiﬁcation, with clear examples of both
type of binary evident. This suggests that this clustering method is
very eﬀective at ﬁnding eclipsing binaries, and further gives an
eﬃcient and intuitive view of those present in the data-set. A closer
examination of the EA-like signals is also useful given that transiting
planets could give very similar eclipse shapes, especially for those
pixels where secondary eclipses are not obvious in the phase-curves.
The regions immediately around these ‘hot-pixels’ are inter-
esting to examine, representing shapes similar to the most distinct
EA and EB eclipsing binaries. The region surrounding pixel [6,2] is
comparatively sparse, suggesting that it is a very distinctive shape,
with few variations from the shape present. On the other hand, there
are a number of warm pixels to the left of [8,6], which when queried
show evidence of a second eclipse, for which a hint can be seen on
the bottom of Figure 11, at pixel [5,5]. This comparison suggests
that there is considerably more shape variation in EA light-curves
viewed in these young stars compared to the variation observed in
EB light-curves, much of which may be down to the period of the
detached EAs. To the right of both of these hot pixels is a steep
drop-oﬀ, which makes sense given the distinct change in shape to
noisy sinusoids which occurs towards pixel [15,5] (also pictured in
the bottom panel of Figure 11).

A ﬁrst glance at the full SOM distribution through individual
pixels reveals the rich array of variability present in young star
light-curves. While sinusoidal pixels are certainly common (as is
expected given the common spot modulation in young stars), it is not
hard to ﬁnd alternative pixels where simple sinusoidal detrending
would be completely inappropriate (e.g. [10,30] and [30,20]). It is
also obvious that in some regions of the SOM the shape trend varies
slowly (e.g. the diagonal from [0,10] to [20,30]), but in others the
changes in shape are rapid (e.g. the swift change between pixels
[10,30] and [15,35]). When analysing the wider SOM distribution
further, two key things to look out for are light clusters of the most
common light-curves (e.g. [2,32] and [15,5]) and dark regions (e.g.
[21,26] and adjacent to [6,2]) separating quite distinct shapes of
variability. As discussed previously, it is these individual clusters
and not the overall SOM distribution that are of greatest importance,
especially as the speciﬁc locations of clusters will change with every
run without pre-training. The most common phase-curve shapes
aside from the EA/EBs discussed previously appear to be variations
on the asymmetric sinusoids at [2,32] (similar to [5,30] in Figure 11)

10 M. P. Battley et al.

Figure 11. S1-13 Final CDIPS SOM. Top: Final SOM map for all CDIPS light-curves, showing their clustering and distribution into the 40x40 pixel map. The
number of individual light-curve arrays at each point is represented both by colour (see the colour-bar above), and by pixel radius. The most common pixels
are thus lighter colour and in regions of the map with less white space. Bottom: Plots of individual SOM pixels from the trained SOM, at 10-pixel intervals
over the SOM, to show the approximate evolution of light-curve phase arrays over the SOM map. Note that the SOM wraps at all edges, so the shapes at y=39
are largely very similar to those at y=0.

MNRAS 000, 1–20 (2021)

+35302520151055101520253035Table 1. Overview Table of full S1-13 Self-Organising Map

Young Star Self Organising Maps with TESS

11

Variability Type

Main Position

Algol type eclipsing binaries (EAs)
Beta Lyrae type eclipsing binaries (EBs)
Flares
Dipper-like behaviour
Main sinusoidal modulation
Asymmetric sinusoids
Other periodic signals/shapes
Flat/Noise-dominated

[8,6]
[6,2]
[22,24]
Regions around [10,30], [25,16], [35,1] and [35,29]
Distinct diagonal band North-East from [34,7] to [13,24]
Region around [2,32]
Large region around [30,30]
Large region around [18,10]

and negative sines/cosines (e.g. the distinct diagonal cluster from
[34,7] to [13,24] in Figure 11). However one particularly unusual
one is [22,24], falling in the middle of another less-dense region, like
the EA and EB pixels. Querying the individual phase-curves and
corresponding light-curves (e.g. Figure 14) at this point curiously
reveals most to contain ﬂares, suggesting that this extended peak
in the top panel of Figure 14 is caused by averaging the diﬀerent
phases of maximum ﬂare brightness.

One variability shape that proved harder to ﬁnd than origi-
nally expected was the Dipper/burster class. As these light-curve
shapes are thought to be caused by occultations by wraps of ac-
cretion columns in circumstellar disks (Hedges et al. 2018), they
could theoretically take quite unique and unusual shapes, meaning
that they may not all fall on one deﬁned region of the ﬁnal map.
However, through examination of individual light-curves at pixels
with unusual Kohonen phase arrays, some dipper and burster-like
light-curves were found in the vicinity of [10,30], [25,16], [35,1]
and [35,29]. Lists and speciﬁc examples of these will be discussed in
YOUNGSTER III (Battley et al, in prep) after additional supervised
machine-learning methods are combined with the SOM to more
automatically weed out the large number of noisy light-curves also
present at these pixels. The co-location of the noisy and dipper-like
light-curves at these pixels is an unfortunate side-eﬀect of swiftly-
evolving dippers and some heavily noise-dominated light-curves
appearing similar when condensed down to 64 ﬂux bins. Consider-
ing non-periodic statistics alongside the SOM shapes in the future
should help to separate these signals much more eﬀectively.

The remainder of the ﬁnal map is mostly split into two main
large regions, centred on [30,30] and [18,10] respectively. The ﬁrst
region (around [30, 30]) typically contains phase-/light-curves with
other periodic variability (similar in vein to the ’OTHERPER’ class
deﬁned by Armstrong et al. (2016)), appearing as repeated signals
with shapes unlike typical sinusoids. Such proﬁles may be caused by
such processes as stellar oscillations or rotating star spots. Some of
these also harbour signiﬁcant evolution even along the duration of
a single TESS sector. Meanwhile the region around [18,10] consists
primarily of ﬂat or noise-dominated light-curves, with no obvious
variability. This would be the bulk of a SOM completed for an
older population, yet is comparitively rare for such young active
light-curves.

A ﬁnal interesting feature of some of the phase-curves pictured
in Figure 11 is that there is some variation in the range of ﬂux, from
0 to 1 for the strongest signals (e.g. [8,6]), down to as low as 0.15 to
0.3 for some of the noisier light-curves (see [22,24], Figure 14). This
is somewhat surprising given that all phase-arrays were normalised
between zero and one in their construction. Such a discrepancy is
explained through examining individual phase-curves at this pixel,
showing that many of the light-curves grouped at these pixels are

Figure 12. Phase curve and example light-curve for Kohonen pixel [6,2] in
the ﬁnal S1-13 SOM, representing the position of most EB signals.

Figure 13. Phase curve and example light-curve for Kohonen pixel [8,6] in
the ﬁnal S1-13 SOM, representing the position of most EA signals.

MNRAS 000, 1–20 (2021)

12 M. P. Battley et al.

Figure 14. Phase curve and example light-curve for Kohonen pixel [22,24]
in the ﬁnal S1-13 SOM, another site of unusually distinct variability.

Figure 15. S1-13 CDIPS SOM - 20x20

Figure 16. S1-13 CDIPS SOM - 60x60

representative of all those light-curves within it, which was seen
to distort the main EB pixel shape compared to the 40x40 run.
This size of SOM is thus most useful for getting an idea of the
overall larger variability classes present in the model by eye, but is
considered slightly too simple for representing the wide variation
in light-curves shapes present in young star light-curves.

On the other hand, the 60x60 SOM (Figure 16) exacerbates in-
dividual variability types while sacriﬁcing the ease of understanding
overall trends by human eyeballing. Examining all 3600 pixels by
eye is unwieldy, and unlikely to give much of an understanding of
the large-scale variations in the data-set. It is the hot-pixels where
this larger SOM really excels however, showing considerably more
small-scale peaks and troughs than the 40x40 SOM. As in the 40x40
case, the key features to look for are bright pixels surrounded by
darker pixels, as these are comprised of arrays very diﬀerent to
the surrounding data. The clearest example of this is around the
pixel [20,9] in Figure 16, which once again represents the distinc-
tive group of Beta-Lyrae type Eclispsing Binaries. Slightly subtler
interesting groups can be found at pixels such as [37,0] and [40,30],
pictured in Figures 17 and 18 respectively. While many phase-curves
ending up at these pixels are simply due to noise scatter, others (such
as those pictured) are worth investigating further for behaviour such
as dippers, bursters, dusty systems and interesting variability.

less similar in shape to each other, hence average out to smaller
ranges.

5.3 Sector by sector analysis

5.2 Variation in SOM size

Two additional sizes of SOM were trialled to yield more information
from the SOM: 20x20 and 60x60, both of which highlight diﬀerent
aspects of the young star data.

The 20x20 pixel SOM (Figure 15) provides an easier way
to see overall trends in the data-set, including the main evolution
from sinusoids (e.g. [3,9]) to more complex shapes (e.g. [10,0])
and the ‘hot-pixels’ at [0,13] and [19,11] for the EAs and EBs
respectively. This makes it a useful ﬁrst overview to the data-set,
and can capture any signiﬁcant systematics present. However, given
the much smaller mapping space to spread things out, it is prone to
combining slightly diﬀerent types of variability into a single pixel.
Such a combination typically makes the individual SOM pixels less

As well as generating an overall SOM for the complete Year 1
CDIPS light-curves, SOMs were generated for each TESS Sector
individually. Because the constructed phase arrays are of a constant
size and normalised between zero and one, direct comparisons be-
tween sectors are easy, despite variations in data gaps and periods
of extra scatter. Note however that as most young stars are concen-
trated along the galactic equator, the number of targets per TESS
sector was found to vary considerably, ranging from as few as 3120
in Sector 3 to 146557 in Sector 11. Because of this, building a SOM
out of Sectors 1-5 individually was not found to be very instruc-
tive, so instead these were combined into a single S1-5 run totalling
26,153 targets.

Alike to the full Year-1 SOM run, the self-training method of
building the SOM was used for each sector, with the results for
sectors 1-5 shown in Figure 2 and the remaining sectors presented

MNRAS 000, 1–20 (2021)

Young Star Self Organising Maps with TESS

13

Figure 17. Example 1 of interesting Kohonen-pixel shape and corresponding
example light-curve from 60x60 SOM run - pixel [37,0]

Figure 19. Phase-curve and example light-curve for additional ’Hot-Pixel’
[6,22] in S1-5 SOM, showing noisy sinusoidal geometry.

Meanwhile, the additional two hot pixels in the Sector 9 plot
at [7,14] and [35,10] have the geometry plotted in Figures 20 and
21 respectively. These are less easy to characterise using the SOM
pixels alone, and hence are better understood by checking some
of the individual light-curves at these points. Closer inspection
of these light-curves revealed that the targets at both pixels were
dominated by excess noise, coupled with a distinctive background
signal consisting of V-shaped dips at the beginning of both orbits. An
additional ﬂux ramp before these V-shaped dips in the light-curves at
[7,14] changed the overall shape at this pixel further. All of the light-
curves grouped to these pixels came from suspiciously similar light-
curve numbers (Sector 9 light-curves 45,000-50,000 for pixel [7,14]
and around 1400-4000 for pixel [35,10]), suggesting that they come
from similar regions of the CCDs originally. Sector 9 also contains
some very crowded regions of sky near the ecliptic plane, which
may explain why so many light-curves were adversely aﬀected.
This example illustrates the care needed when analysing the ﬁnal
product of the SOM, showing that it is always best to double-check
the original light-curves for any particularly interesting Kohonen
pixels.

Nonetheless, the similarity in SOM clustering and overall
trends present between sectors show that the SOM remains eﬀective
across all sectors, with the one proviso that enough light-curves are
available to allow signiﬁcant clustering to occur. This bodes well for
using SOM positions as a useful metric for further machine learning
classiﬁcation of young stars, as useful results can be obtained even
when only running a single month of data.

5.4 Pre-trained SOM

Results from pre-training the SOM on the K2 Variable Catalogue
data (Armstrong et al. 2016) are shown in Figures 22 and 23, ex-
cluding and including those light-curves classiﬁed as ‘noise’ respec-
tively. The same trained SOM underlies both the left and right hand
side of each ﬁgure, with the K2 Variability Catalogue light-curves
mapped onto the SOM on the left and the full TESS S1-13 young
star light-curves mapped onto the SOM on the right. This means
that the shape of each pixel in the K2 Variability Catalogue map on

Figure 18. Example 2 of interesting Kohonen-pixel shape and corresponding
example light-curve in 60x60 SOM run - pixel [40,30]

in Figures A1 to A8. Although speciﬁc positions vary because
of the random initialisation of the SOM, the major characteristics
of the ﬁnal maps for each sector are very similar, with hot-pixels
for the EA/EB eclipsing binaries surrounded by the lowest density
regions, alongside more steady evolution over the rest of the map.
Some discrepancies do however exist with regards to additional hot
pixels, such as pixels [6,22] in the S1-5 SOM and [7,14] in Sector
9. In the case of pixel [6,22] of the Sector 1-5 SOM, this pixel
represents a noisy sinusoid (plotted in Figure 19). This is thought
to be caused by the extra pointing noise present in the early TESS
sectors, which were corrected in Sector 6 onward. Because these
light-curves represent a reasonably small number in the overall Year
1 data, these light-curves do not form a large enough group to be a
signiﬁcant hot pixel in the full Year 1 run.

MNRAS 000, 1–20 (2021)

14 M. P. Battley et al.

Figure 20. Phase-curve and example light-curve for additional ’Hot-Pixel’
[7,14] in S9 SOM. Inspection of individual light-curves revealed this to be
caused by the distinctive background signal than can be seen at the start of
each orbit (steep up then u-shaped dip) in the light-curve.

Figure 21. Phase-curve and example light-curve for additional ’Hot-Pixel’
[35,10] in S9 SOM. Similar to [7,14] this was caused by additional noise
and a distinctive background signal.

the left corresponds to the same shape at the corresponding pixel on
the right, allowing direct comparisons between expected variability
classes and the position of young star phase-curves.

In the case of the ‘no-noise’ SOM (Figure 22), the plotted vari-
ability classes were observed to cover most of the 40 x 40 grid, with
a wide diagonal band of primarily other periodic (OTHERPER),
delta-scuti (DSCUT) and Gamma-Dor (GDOR) variables. Mean-
while eclipsing binaries of both types (EA/EB) congregated around
[39, 30] (remembering that the SOM wraps at the each edge), dis-
tinctly oﬀ-set from the other types of variability. In this case the
white space left on the plot is mostly full of targets with class

probabilities of <90%, representing those with less clean-cut classi-
ﬁcations from the K2 Variability Catalogue. Interestingly, when the
TESS S1-13 CDIPS light-curves analysed in this work were applied
to this same map, the vast majority of them fell on regions of the
map with low densities of K2 variability catalogue targets. This sug-
gests most of the shapes seen in the young TESS light-curves (likely
from alternative types of variability or noise) are diﬀerent to the spe-
ciﬁc variability classes deﬁned in the K2 variability catalogue. Such
poor classiﬁcation performance stresses the importance of conduct-
ing young-star speciﬁc classiﬁcation rather than simply relying on
previously known variability classes. It should be noted however
that some of the young star light-curves do still fall on, or nearby,
known variability classes on the ’no-noise‘ SOM, particularly over
the centre of the main OTHERPER block of targets and adjacent to
the main group of eclipsing binary light-curves. Querying CDIPS
young star light-curves which appeared in this EB-adjacent region
does reveal them to be eclisping-binary-like signals in the TESS data
as well, suggesting that these types of signals are the ones which are
best handled by (and most similar to) the K2 Variability Catalogue
trained SOM.

Examining the SOM trained on the full K2 Variability Cata-
logue (Figure 23) provides more promising results. Because training
of the SOM spreads variability across the entire map, there is con-
siderably more white space in this latter case, where most of the
’Noise’ light-curves fell. However, the OTHERPER sources are still
spread out over a large proportion of the SOM, suggesting that there
is a lot of variation in their speciﬁc light-curves, compared to the
much more localised EA and EB light-curves. In this particular run
the eclipsing binary signals were split into two main groups rather
than a single region, but while there is some diﬀerence in the shape
of the phase-curves between these groups (with the top right group
having wider dips), this is considered more to do with the random
initialisation of the SOM than signiﬁcant diﬀerences in shape, as
a previous run with the same K2 Variable Catalog data placed all
EAs/EBs in a single joined group. The inclusion of the ‘noise’ class
appears to aid the SOM performance considerably, both by group-
ing light-curves similar to known variability classes more obviously
and by allowing internal structure and speciﬁc groups of the light-
curves which fall onto quieter regions of the plot to be viewed. Of
particular interest is the main EA/EB group at [19,25] on the K2
Variability Catalogue map, which is clearly reproduced as an area
of high density in the young star map on the right. As is expected,
querying individual phase- and light-curves ending up at this point
reveals true EA/EB-like signals, showing that the SOM is working
eﬀectively at ﬁnding these. A similar region of high density can
be seen at [26,33] in the young star map on the right, just slightly
below and to the left of the expected position ([28,35]) in the K2
Variability Catalogue map.

Meanwhile there are a handful of clear over-densities in the
quieter regions of the original K2 Variability Catalogue map, specif-
ically around [5,20], [10,28], [16,10], [21,36] and [35,1]. While the
shape of the average phase curve at each of these pixels varies some-
what, all of these phase-curves have y-ranges of about 0.3-0.7 rather
than 0-1 as they were initialised with, suggesting that they contain
more variation between each phase curve at these pixels. This is
common where initial light-curves are noisy, causing large variation
between each corresponding phase-curve. Indeed querying individ-
ual TESS phase- and light-curves which congregated at these pixels
(e.g. see Figure 24) reveals them to be noise-dominated, signiﬁcantly
more noisy than is usually seen in light-curves extracted from the
K2 mission. This was not entirely unexpected given TESS’s reduced
photometric precision compared to the Kepler spacecraft, as indeed

MNRAS 000, 1–20 (2021)

Young Star Self Organising Maps with TESS

15

Figure 22. SOM trained on the 24,442 light-curves from the K2 Variability Catalogue which had classiﬁcations indicating that they were not noise. As usual,
axis numbers correspond to Kohonen x and y pixel numbers, similar to Figure 1. Note that only targets with >90% class probability in the catalogue are plotted
for clarity. Left: The 24,442 non-‘noise’ light-curves mapped onto the SOM, showing distribution of known variability types. Right: All young star CDIPS
light-curves from the ﬁrst year of the TESS mission (Sectors 1-13) mapped onto the same K2 Variability Catalogue-trained SOM. The bulk of the CDIPS
light-curves can be observed to fall into gaps in the K2 Variability Catalogue map.

Figure 23. Same as Figure 22, but considering all 68,910 in the K2 variability Catalogue, including those classiﬁed as ‘noise’. Axis numbers represent Kohonen
x and y pixels, alike to Figure 1. While overall classiﬁcation performance is improved (see for example the clear EA/EB over-densities at [19,25] and [26,33]),
many light-curves still fall in gaps in the K2 Variability Catalogue trained SOM, likely due to excess noise in the TESS light-curves and additional types of
young variability not present in the K2 Variability Catalog

.

similarly large noise diﬀerences were also seen by Battley et al.
(2021) when comparing a number of Kepler planets reobserved by
TESS. Such a problem is particularly challenging for dimmer TESS
targets, where the instrumental white noise far outweighs any po-
tential variability signals. In order to explore this aspect further,
a brighter subset of the CDIPS targets were selected by choosing
those stars brighter than Tmag = 12 in the TESS Input Catalog
(TIC v8; Stassun et al. 2019). Applying the SOM trained on the full
K2 Variability Catalog (including the ’Noise’ class) to the phase-

curves for these targets resulted in the ﬁnal map pictured in Figure
25. Through comparison to Figure 23, it is clear that these brighter
TESS targets align much better with the previously known variabil-
ity groups from the K2 Variability Catalog (plotted on the left of
Figure 23) than the full CDIPS light-curves did, with the bulk of
the targets falling on the main band of OTHERPER/DSCUT vari-
ables or EA/EB clusters. Furthermore, the distinct over-densities
observed around [5,20], [10,28], [16,10], [21,36] and [35,1] have

MNRAS 000, 1–20 (2021)

16 M. P. Battley et al.

Figure 24. Example of one of the noise-dominated TESS light-curves (top)
and phase-curves (bottom) placed into gaps in the SOM pre-trained on the
full K2 Variability Catalogue.

Figure 25. Bright (Tmag<12) CDIPS targets from Sectors 1-13 mapped onto
the full K2 Variability Catalog trained SOM shown in Figure 23. Although
a few smaller areas of higher density still exist in gaps in the original K2
Variability Catalog SOM (e.g. on the lower right of the plot, around pixel
[30,3]), the majority of the data now falls into regions of previously known
variability classes.

all reduced signiﬁcantly in relative strength compared to the main
clusters of known variability type.

None the less, not all of the light-curves falling in the gaps
can be explained by the excess noise in TESS. Alongside these
phase-curves exist a number of unusual variability types, including
dipper-like behaviour and unusual rotation-like signals. It is these
phase curves that remain in regions like [28,3] and [22,36] in the
brighter CDIPS SOM (Figure 25). The reason for these falling in
gaps could be partially explained by the included young stars having
a much wider sample of young ages compared to the often older
K2 stars. This would mean that some K2 light-curves may have
types of variability not seen in young stars, and some particularly

young stars may have types of variability not present in bulk in the
K2 Variability Catalogue. Additional diﬀerences in shapes could
also be explained by the diﬀerences in TESS sector lengths (roughly
27d), compared to K2 campaign length ( 80d for the analysed 0-4th
campaigns), meaning that K2 targets may evolve more in phase over
the time period. However, such interesting types of variability will
be much more easily explored and explained when not overwhelmed
by the large number of noisier TESS light-curves also constrained
to these pixels.

These challenges show that although pre-training the SOM
shows some promise in classifying new targets into previously
known variability groups, the performance of this classiﬁcation
would beneﬁt signiﬁcantly from using light-curves from the same
survey/instrument compared to archival data. In future analyses in
the YOUNGSTER program, TESS light-curves will be used instead,
based on objects with previously classiﬁed variability classes. Un-
fortunately at the time of writing not enough of these existed to test
such an analysis, however with TESS now observing the ecliptic
plane, many of these pre-classiﬁed targets from the K2 Variability
Catalog should soon receive TESS data.

5.5 Catalog of Eclipsing binaries and eclipse events in TESS

Year 1

As discussed in Section 5.1, the SOM method appears to be very
eﬀective at highlighting and separating the distinctive shapes
of eclipsing binaries from other variability present in the young
star light-curves, appearing as distinctive hot-pixels in all the
self-trained SOMs generated in this work. As young eclipsing
binaries are very important to understanding the early evolution of
star systems, those identiﬁed in this work are presented here in the
hope that they will be useful for the wider young star community.
Although the bulk of these light-curves ended up at the hot-pixels
at [6,2] and [8,6] in the complete Year 1 SOM (Figure 11), there are
additional binary-like signals in pixels adjacent to these, especially
to the left of the main detached eclipsing binary (EA) pixel at
[8,6]. Because of this, a more conservative method of selecting
light-curves was used, selecting phase-curves by using a cut based
on the Euclidean distance from the archetypal phase-curve at the
strongest pixels. The speciﬁc cuts used were 𝑑𝑥 𝑦 < 1.56 from pixel
[8,6] for the EA candidates and 𝑑𝑥 𝑦 < 1.37 from pixel [6,2] for
the EB candidates. This allowed the most similar light-curves from
the surrounding area to be selected whilst reducing the number
of false-positives that would be selected by simply choosing all
pixels which harbour some eclipsing binary-like signals. These
cuts resulted in a total of 13,366 candidate EA signals and 2448
candidate eclipsing binary signals, including many systems which
were picked up in multiple sectors. All selected light-curves were
then checked by eye in order to catch any remaining obvious
false positives. Such false positives typically consisted of excess
noise, sharp stellar activity or obvious blends with other nearby
targets. Following this step and a uniqueness cut on TIC ID, 8103
EA and 1297 EB candidate systems remained, all of which are
presented in Table 2. This signiﬁcant drop is largely not due to
mis-classiﬁcations by the algorithm, but instead light-curves with
the EA/EB shape which were subsequently found to be blends
during human eyeballing, or those which appear in multiple
sectors. As such, some care is advised when interacting with this
catalog, as further less obvious blends may still exist due to the
large TESS pixels. This catalog is not exhaustive, but represents the
cleanest sample of young eclipsing binaries identiﬁed by the SOM
analysis of these young stars. The catalog will be updated with less

MNRAS 000, 1–20 (2021)

Table 2. Candidate eclipsing binary signals found in Year 1 of the CDIPS
TESS light-curves. Light-curves with only single eclipses are labelled as
’Single’ in the Period column. A machine-readable version of the full table
(9400 targets) is included alongside the paper online. Periods shown are the
primary period found in section 3.

Gaia DR2 ID

TIC ID

Period [Days] Type

6585253422567909760
6619768913628810624
...
6630166342263764992
5777534485542148608

197601231
32197062
...
365770318
310104320

Single
0.331
...
0.289
1.17

EA
EA
...
EB
EB

distinctive cases using future supervised machine learning methods
in the continuing YOUNGSTER program.

6 DISCUSSION

With these promising results, it is clear how powerful the Self-
Organising Map technique is for exploring the variability of young
stars, both in terms of viewing the broad distribution in variability
and for isolating individual groups of distinct variability such as
EAs and EBs. The ﬁnal Kohonen map provides an intuitive and
useful overview of the entire ﬁrst year of young star data in TESS
(especially when individual pixels are queried) and can even speed
up identiﬁcation and characterisation of systematic errors in the
data. This is the ﬁrst time that such a technique has been applied
to a dedicated sample of young stars, as well as the ﬁrst time such
a technique has been applied in bulk to TESS data. Applying this
technique to young stars speciﬁcally allows for a deeper view of
unusual variability types which would easily be drowned out by
some of the distinctive variability classes presented in older samples
of stars (e.g. Cepheids, RR Lyraes). This is especially important as
their spot modulation and comparatively short-period variability
can result in signiﬁcantly diﬀerent shapes to the standard accepted
variability classes. Indeed one particularly interesting feature of the
full S1-13 SOM (Figure 11) is how uncommon basic sinuisoidal
shapes are, suggesting that simple spot modulation with single large
spots dominating the photosphere are not the dominant variability
type. This wide array of diﬀerent shapes helps to explain why transit
surveys struggle to ﬁnd planets around young stars with traditional
‘one-size-ﬁts-most’ detrending methods.

However, despite the useful results oﬀered by the SOM anal-
ysis, some key provisos remain. Most importantly, as the SOM
technique works by folding light-curves and binning phase-curves
by the strongest periodic signal, it eﬀectively obscures or reduces
any short-term or aperiodic activity, including important features
such as ﬂares and aperiodic dipping activity. Similarly, because
all phase-curves are normalised, some noisy light-curves can have
their slight variability greatly exaggerated. These two factors show
the need for extra factors like period, peak-to-peak scatter statistics
and amplitude measurements when attempting wider classiﬁcation
of light-curves. This is corroborated by Brett et al. (2004) who
point out that because real-world examples will have a lot of similar
shapes at the edges of each class, additional diagnostic attributes are
required for safer, more accurate classiﬁcation. In order to combat
this in the continuing YOUNGSTER program, information from the
generated SOMs (in particular the ﬁnal SOM position and Euclidean
distance from ﬁnal pixel) will be combined with known stellar in-

MNRAS 000, 1–20 (2021)

Young Star Self Organising Maps with TESS

17

formation, light-curve statistics and known variability classes in a
wider random-forest-based machine-learning method in future (see
YOUNGSTER III, Battley et al., in prep). While biases and varying
membership likelihoods in the CDIPS target-list mean that reliable
statistics are not easily obtained from this current sample, using
these SOM-based techniques with more accurate target-lists (such
as in individual moving groups/associations) have the potential to
provide statistical overviews of the shapes present in a speciﬁc sam-
ple.

Because of TESS’s observing strategy, most targets analysed
in this study only had a single sector of TESS photometry, totalling
approximately 27days of observations. This means that young stars
in this sample with dominant activity periods of longer than this
window will not be folded by their correct period, instead likely
appearing as aperiodic. One way to solve this challenge would be
to focus on stars in the TESS continuous viewing zone (CVZ),
however because the majority of young stars fall near the galactic
plane, only on the order of 500 stars in the CDIPS sample analysed
here fell in this area of the sky, far fewer than necessary to generate
a reliable and informative self-organising map. Using new data for
these targets from TESS’s extended mission will help to extend
the observational baseline for these objects, however at the time of
writing no light-curves beyond Year 1 of the TESS mission were
available from the utilised CDIPS pipeline. None the less, it is clear
that even using a single sector of data allows a wide distribution of
variability shapes to be observed. Indeed, one of the key beneﬁts
of using binned phase-curves instead of light-curves as the primary
SOM data-input is that light-curves from diﬀerent sectors and data-
lengths can be easily compared. Theoretically this should allow
data from diﬀerent instruments to be compared also, however this
was shown to be more challenging than originally expected when
comparing to the K2 Variable catalog (Armstrong et al. 2016) in
Section 5.4 above. In the future this pre-training will be improved
by using TESS light-curves for objects pre-classiﬁed into known
variability classes, alongside potential new groups found through
deeper SOM analysis.

One additional aspect of the SOM that was made clear by the
sector by sector analysis was the required number of light-curves
before notable patterns and groups could be seen on the map. In
this case, primarily using a 40x40 SOM, 10,000 light-curves were
found to be the point at which clustering became signiﬁcant, which
is why the ﬁrst ﬁve sectors were eventually run as one (Sectors 1-5
had 4772, 3535, 3059, 5435 and 9353 young star light-curves re-
spectively). Naturally smaller SOMs could be used to aid clustering
in the case of fewer light-curves, but the 40x40 SOM was found to
be a good balance of allowing understanding of the global pattern
while not merging too many interesting types of individual variabil-
ity. Thus here it is recommended that at least 10,000 light-curves
are utilised for optimum SOM performance.

A challenge of completing this analysis with TESS light-curves
compared to previous Kepler/K2 analyses is the increased blending
from neighbouring stars due to TESS’s larger pixels. This challenge
fundamentally means that some objects nearby to targets with strong
variability may be miss-classiﬁed due picking up some of this adja-
cent signal. This eﬀect is made even worse for young stars compared
to the general stellar population due to many young stars existing
in relatively dense birth environments. This challenge is well illus-
trated by the number of supposed EA/EB light-curves which had to
be removed in the eyeballing stage of section 5.5, so classiﬁcations
from TESS data alone should be taken with a grain of salt. How-
ever, since one of the primary goals of YOUNGSTER program is to
detrend the variability of these young stars to search for new young

18 M. P. Battley et al.

exoplanets, knowing the dominant shape of the variability of each
target is still very important, regardless if this is the true variability
class of that target.

In Summary, Self-Organising Maps are a powerful technique to
explore and characterise young star variability in large surveys such
as TESS, allowing both an intuitive understanding of the overall vari-
ability evolution across the entire sample and highlighting groups
of distinct variability. For this reason it will be folded into the wider
supervised machine learning methods of the continuing YOUNG-
STER program, combined with knowledge of the light-curve statis-
tics and stellar parameters. The ﬁnal variability classiﬁcations from
this program can then be used to inform future detrending during
searches for new young exoplanets, for example by building vari-
ability models or using the knowledge of the light-curve shapes
to tune smoothing parameters. Although this analysis primarily fo-
cused on the CDIPS light-curves, the methods discussed in this
paper are well-suited to other, often more extensive, light-curve
sources such as those generated by TESS-SPOC pipeline (Caldwell
et al. 2020b), the Quick Loop Pipeline (QLP Huang et al. 2020)
and eleanor pipeline (Feinstein et al. 2019), provided that typical
systematics are well characterised for these sources. Furthermore,
because the SOM analysis is based on binned phase-curves, it can
easily be extended to the main 2min TESS data and planned 10min
and 300s FFI observations.

7 SUMMARY

Here Kohonen Self-Organising Maps (Kohonen 1982, 2001) have
been used for the ﬁrst time on a dedicated selection of young stars
from the TESS survey, in order to explore the wide-scale variability
of these interesting objects. This unsupervised machine learning
technique allows light-curves to be grouped according to their dom-
inant shapes, without needing prior knowledge of expected groups
and clusters. This is particularly important for young stars, where
the community it still discovering new types of stellar activity. All
currently available light-curves from the Cluster Diﬀerence Imag-
ing Photometric Survey (CDIPS, Bouma et al. 2019) are analysed
here, representing over 600,000 young star light-curves from the
entire ﬁrst year of TESS’s observations.

Overall Self-Organising Maps reveal young star activity shape
distribution to be more varied than expected, with a signiﬁcant
spread over the whole parameter space of shapes, from archetypal
sinusoidal signals to more varied ‘dipper’ or pulsation-like activity.
The SOMs are also very proﬁcient at separating eclipsing binary
and potential transiting signals from the data, typically appearing as
signiﬁcant hot-spots in the ﬁnal Kohonen maps. Given the impor-
tance of these objects, a target list of those identiﬁed in this work
is supplied in this work and online. SOMs generated for individual
sectors retained similar distributions to the overall Year 1 version,
provided that at least 20,000 light-curves were present in that sec-
tor (i.e. for all but sectors 1-5, which were combined into a single
SOM). This illustrates the SOM’s eﬀectiveness in characterising the
variability of young stars in a single sector alone, without having to
run a full year of light-curve data. While most analysis was com-
pleted using a 40 x 40 SOM, 20x20 and 60x60 versions were also
tested for the full sample of light-curves, revealing the strongest
groups of variability in the ﬁrst case and a deeper sub-structure
of variability in the latter. However, the 20x20 SOM was found to
merge too many dissimilar light-curves, while the 60x60 SOM is
somewhat unwieldy for in-depth analyses, so the 40x40 version is
recommended for future analyses.

Pre-training the SOM was attempted using light-curves with
pre-deﬁned variability classes from the K2 Variability Catalog of
Armstrong et al. (2016), which proved eﬀective for bright targets but
was found to be challenging in dimmer light-curves due to diﬀer-
ences between the noise characteristics of light-curves from TESS
and the K2 mission. Nonetheless, such a method shows suﬃcient
promise to be worth repeating when suﬃcient TESS data is available
for these objects from the TESS extended mission.

The self-organising map method was also revealed to give
valuable and intuitive insight into leftover sysetematics in the TESS
data (regardless of which pipeline is used), especially where there
is variation in the severity of the eﬀects. This will be particularly
useful for diagnosing and understanding the signiﬁcant scattered
light systematic present in TESS light-curves for dimmer stars. The
increased understanding garnered about young star variability from
this analysis will be used to guide future light-curve classiﬁcation
and targeted detrending methods in order to search for new young
exoplanets in the continuing YOUNGSTER program.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The authors would like to thank the anonymous referee for their
comments which improved the quality and robustness of this paper.
This paper includes data collected by the TESS mission. We
acknowledge the use of public TOI Release data from pipelines
at the TESS Science Oﬃce and at the TESS Science Processing
Operations Center. Funding for the TESS mission is provided by
NASA’s Science Mission directorate. This research has made use
of the Exoplanet Follow-up Observation Program website, which is
operated by the California Institute of Technology, under contract
with the National Aeronautics and Space Administration under the
Exoplanet Exploration Program. TESS data were obtained from the
Mikulski Archive for Space Telescopes (MAST). STScI is operated
by the Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy, Inc.,
under NASA contract NAS5-26555. Support for MAST is provided
by the NASA Oﬃce of Space Science via grant NNX13AC07G and
by other grants and contracts.

MPB acknowledges support from the University of War-
wick via the Chancellor’s International Scholarship. DJA acknowl-
edges support from the STFC via an Ernest Rutherford Fellowship
(ST/R00384X/1). DLP acknowledges support from STFC and also
the Royal Society.

DATA AVAILABILITY

The full young eclipsing binary list constructed in this work
is presented as supplementary material in the online version of
this manuscript. All other data generated in this work will be
shared on reasonable request to the corresponding author. Light-
curves analysed in this work were drawn from public CDIPS
and QLP TESS data hosted on the Mikulski Archive for Space
Telescopes (MAST) Portal (https://archive.stsci.edu/hlsp/cdips and
https://archive.stsci.edu/hlsp/qlp).

REFERENCES

Akerlof C., et al., 2000, Astronomical Journal, 542, 251
Armstrong D. J., et al., 2016, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical

Society, 456, 2260

MNRAS 000, 1–20 (2021)

Young Star Self Organising Maps with TESS

19

Armstrong D. J., Pollacco D., Santerne A., 2017, Monthly Notices of the

Royal Astronomical Society, 465, 2634

Armstrong D. J., Gamper J., Damoulas T., 2020, MNRAS, 504, 5327
Astropy Collaboration et al., 2018, The Astronomical Journal, 156, 123
Audenaert J., et al., 2021, Astronomical Journal, 162, 209
Auvergne M., et al., 2009, A&A, 506, 411
Ball N. M., Brunner R. J., Myers A. D., Tcheng D., 2006, The Astrophysical

Journal, 650, 497

Huang C. X., et al., 2020, Research Notes of the AAS, 4, 206
Ida S., Lin D. N., 2010, Astrophysical Journal, 719, 810
Johnston H., et al., 2021, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 648
Khacef L., Gripon V., Miramond B., 2020, preprint (arXiv: 2009.03665), p.

arXiv:2009.03665

Kharchenko N. V., Piskunov A. E., Schilbach E., Röser S., Scholz R. D.,

2013, Astronomy and Astrophysics, 558, A53

Kim D.-W., Bailer-Jones C. A. L., 2016, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 587,

Baraﬀe I., Chabrier G., Barman T. S., Allard F., Hauschildt P. H., 2003,

A18

Astronomy & Astrophysics, 402, 701

Battley M. P., Pollacco D., Armstrong D. J., 2020, Monthly Notices of the

Royal Astronomical Society, 496, 1197

Battley M. P., Kunimoto M., Armstrong D. J., Pollacco D., 2021, Monthly

Kiman R., et al., 2021, AJ, 161, 277
Kohonen T., 1982, Biol. Cybern, 43, 59
Kohonen T., 2001, Self-Organizing Maps, 3rd edn. Springer, New York
Kraus A. L., Shkolnik E. L., Allers K. N., Liu M. C., 2014, Astronomical

Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 503, 4092

Journal, 147, 146

Bell C. P., Murphy S. J., Mamajek E. E., 2017, Monthly Notices of the Royal

Astronomical Society: Letters, 468, 1198

Bhatti W., Bouma L., Yee S., 2019, waqasbhatti/cdips-pipeline: cdips-
pipeline v0.1.0, https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3370324

Borucki W. J., et al., 2010, Science, 327, 977
Bouma L. G., Hartman J. D., Bhatti W., Winn J. N., Bakos G. A., 2019, The

Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series, 245, 13

Bouma L. G., et al., 2020, The Astronomical Journal, 160, 239
Brett D. R., West R. G., Wheatley P. J., 2004, MNRAS, 353, 369
Briceno C., et al., 2019, Astronomical Journal, 157, 85
Brink H., Richards J. W., Poznanski D., Bloom J. S., Rice J., Negahban
S., Wainwright M., 2013, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical
Society, 435, 1047

Burnap P., French R., Turner F., Jones K., 2018, Computers & Security, 73
Caldwell D. A., et al., 2020a, Research Notes of the American Astronomical

Society, 4, 201

Caldwell D. A., et al., 2020b, Research Notes of the American Astronomical

Society, 4, 201

Cantat-Gaudin T., et al., 2018, A&A, 618, A93
Carrasco Kind M., Brunner R. J., 2014, Monthly Notices of the Royal

Astronomical Society, 438, 3409

Cody A. M., Hillenbrand L. A., 2018, The Astronomical Journal, 156, 71
Debosscher J., Sarro L. M., Aerts C., Cuypers J., Vandenbussche B., Garrido

R., Solano E., 2007, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 475, 1159

Debosscher J., Blomme J., Aerts C., De Ridder J., 2011, Astronomy &

Astrophysics, 529, A89

Dias W. S., Monteiro H., Caetano T. C., Lépine J. R., Assaﬁn M., Oliveira

Lomb N., 1976, Astrophysics and Space Science, 39, 447
Mamajek E. E., Hillenbrand L. A., 2008, ApJ, 687, 1264
Manara C. F., Mordasini C., Testi L., Williams J. P., Miotello A., Lodato G.,

Emsenhuber A., 2019, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 631, L2

Mann A. W., et al., 2016, ApJ, 818, 46
Mann A. W., et al., 2020, Astronomical Journal, 160, 179
Marley M. S., Fortney J. J., Hubickyj O., Bodenheimer P., Lissauer J. J.,

2007, The Astrophysical Journal, 655, 541

Meusinger H., Schalldach P., Scholz R.-D., in der Au A., Newholm M., de
Hoon A., Kaminsky B., 2012, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 541, A77
Modak S., Chattopadhyay T., Chattopadhyay A. K., 2020, Journal of Applied

Statistics, 47, 376

Mostert R. I. J., et al., 2021, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 645, A89
Naim A., Ratnatunga K. U., Griﬃths R. E., 1997, ApJSS, 111, 357
Nardiello D., 2020, MNRAS, 498, 5972
Nardiello D., et al., 2019, MNRAS, 490, 3806
Nardiello D., et al., 2020, MNRAS, 495, 4924
Nardiello D., et al., 2021, MNRAS, 505, 3767
Naul B., Bloom J. S., Pérez F., van der Walt S., 2018, Nature Astronomy, 2,

151

Nelson R. P., 2018,

in Deeg H. J., Belmonte J. A., eds,

, Hand-
book of Exoplanets. Springer
International Publishing, Cham,
pp 2287–2317, doi:10.1007/978-3-319-55333-7_139, http://link.
springer.com/10.1007/978-3-319-55333-7_139
Newton E. R., et al., 2019, The Astrophysical Journal, 880, L17
Newton E. R., et al., 2021, Astronomical Journal, 161, 65
Nun I., Pichara K., Protopapas P., Kim D.-W., 2014, The Astrophysical

A. F., 2014, Astronomy and Astrophysics, 564, A79

Journal, 793, 23

Eyer L., Blake C., 2005, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society,

358, 30

Eyer L., et al., 2019, Astronomy and Astrophysics, 623
Faisst A. L., Prakash A., Capak P. L., Lee B., 2019, Astrophysical Journal

Letters, 881, L9

Feinstein A. D., et al., 2019, PASP, 131, 094502
Friedman J. H., 2001, The Annals of Statistics, 29
Fustes D., Manteiga M., Dafonte C., Arcay B., Ulla A., Smith K., Borrachero

R., Sordo R., 2013, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 559, A7
Gagné J., Faherty J. K., 2018, The Astrophysical Journal, 862, 138
Gagné J., et al., 2018a, ApJS, 856
Gagné J., Roy-Loubier O., Faherty J. K., Doyon R., Malo L., 2018b, The

Astrophysical Journal, 860, 43

Gaia Collaboration et al., 2016, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 595, A1
Gaia Collaboration et al., 2018a, Astronomy and Astrophysics, 616, A10
Gaia Collaboration Brown A. G. A., Vallenari A., Prusti T., de Bruĳne
J. H. J., Babusiaux C., Bailer-Jones C. A. L., 2018b, Astronomy and
Astrophysics, 616, A1

Galvin T. J., et al., 2020, MNRAS, 497, 2730
Geach J. E., 2012, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 419,

2633

Hedges C., Hodgkin S., Kennedy G., 2018, MNRAS, 476, 2968
Hippke M., David T. J., Mulders G. D., Heller R., 2019, The Astronomical

Oelkers R. J., Stassun K. G., 2018, ApJ, 156, 132
Oh S., Price-Whelan A. M., Hogg D. W., Morton T. D., Spergel D. N., 2017,

Astronomical Journal, 153, 257

Owen J. E., 2019, Annual Review of Earth and Planetary Sciences, 47, 67
Pál A., 2012, MNRAS, 421, 1825
Pedregosa F., et al., 2011, Journal of Machine Learning Research, 12, 2825
Pojmanski G., 2002, Acta Astronomica, 52, 397
Rahmani D., Fay D., Brodzki J., 2019, preprint (arXiv: 1905.05540)
Richards J. W., et al., 2011, Astrophysical Journal, 733
Richards J. W., Starr D. L., Miller A. A., Bloom J. S., Butler N. R., Brink
H., Crellin-Quick A., 2012, Astrophysical Journal Supplement, 203, 32

Ricker et al. 2014, JATIS, 1, 014003
Rizzuto A. C., Ireland M. J., Robertson J. G., 2011, Monthly Notices of the

Royal Astronomical Society, 416, 3108

Rizzuto A. C., Mann A. W., Vanderburg A., Kraus A. L., Covey K. R., 2017,

Astronomical Journal, 154, 224

Rizzuto A. C., Vanderburg A., Mann A. W., Kraus A. L., Dressing C. D.,
Agüeros M. A., Douglas S. T., Krolikowski D. M., 2018, Astronomical
Journal, 156, 195

Rizzuto A. C., et al., 2020, Astronomical Journal, 160, 33
Röser S., Schilbach E., Piskunov A. E., Kharchenko N. V., Scholz R. D.,

2011, Astronomy and Astrophysics, 531, A92

Sarro L. M., Debosscher J., López M., Aerts C., 2009, Astronomy & Astro-

Journal, 158, 143

physics, 494, 739

Hon M., Stello D., Zinn J. C., 2018, The Astrophysical Journal, 859, 64
Howell S. B., et al., 2014, PASP, 126, 938

Scargle J., 1982, Astrophysical Journal, 263, 835
Schilliro F., Romano P., 2021, MNRAS, 503, 2676

MNRAS 000, 1–20 (2021)

20 M. P. Battley et al.

Figure A1. Sector 6 SOM

Figure A2. Sector 7 SOM

Schlichting H., Sari R., Yalinewich A., 2015, Icarus, 247, 81
Sergison D. J., 2015, Technical report, Untangling the signals: Investigating
accretion and photometric variability in young stars An observational
analysis. University of Exeter, Exeter

Skumanich A., 1972, The Astrophysical Journal, 171, 565
Smith G. D., et al., 2021, MNRAS, 507, 5991
Soderblom D. R., Duncan D. K., Johnson D. R. H., 1991, The Astrophysical

Journal, 375, 722

Stassun K. G., et al., 2019, The Astronomical Journal, 158, 138
Tajiri T., et al., 2020, ApJSS, 251, 18
The Astropy Collaboration et al., 2013, A&A, 558, A33
Toﬄemire B. M., et al., 2021, Astronomical Journal, 161, 171
Valenzuela L., Pichara K., 2018, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical

Society, 474, 3259

Wright A. H., Hildebrandt H., van den Busch J. L., Heymans C., 2020a,

Astronomy & Astrophysics, 637, A100

Wright A. H., Hildebrandt H., van den Busch J. L., Heymans C., Joachimi
B., Kannawadi A., Kuĳken K., 2020b, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 640,
L14

Zari E., Brown A. G., De Zeeuw P. T., 2019, Astronomy and Astrophysics,

628, A123

Zieba S., Zwintz K., Kenworthy M. A., Kennedy G. M., 2019, Astronomy

& Astrophysics, 625, L13

APPENDIX A: INDIVIDUAL SECTOR PLOTS

Self-Organising Maps for sectors 6-13 follow for reference. Notes
that the SOM created for Sectors 1-5 (which had too few light-curves
to be analysed independently) is shown in Figure 2.

This paper has been typeset from a TEX/LATEX ﬁle prepared by the author.

Figure A3. Sector 8 SOM

Figure A4. Sector 9 SOM

MNRAS 000, 1–20 (2021)

Young Star Self Organising Maps with TESS

21

Figure A5. Sector 10 SOM

Figure A8. Sector 13 SOM

Figure A6. Sector 11 SOM

Figure A7. Sector 12 SOM

MNRAS 000, 1–20 (2021)

