2
2
0
2

r
a

M
2
2

]
L
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
3
4
4
1
1
.
3
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Demo of the Linguistic Field Data Management and Analysis System -
LiFE

Siddharth Singh, Ritesh Kumar, Shyam Ratan, Sonal Sinha
Department of Linguistics, Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar University, Agra

sidd435@gmail.com

ritesh78 llh@jnu.ac.in

shyamratan2907@gmail.com sonalsinha2612@gmail.com

Abstract

In the proposed demo, we will present a
new software - Linguistic Field Data Man-
agement and Analysis System - LiFE 1 - an
open-source, web-based linguistic data man-
agement and analysis application that allows
for systematic storage, management, sharing
and usage of linguistic data collected from the
ﬁeld. The application allows users to store
lexical items, sentences, paragraphs, audio-
visual content including photographs, video
clips, speech recordings, etc, along with rich
glossing / annotation; generate interactive and
print dictionaries; and also train and use natu-
ral language processing tools and models for
various purposes using this data. Since its a
web-based application, it also allows for seam-
less collaboration among multiple persons and
sharing the data, models, etc with each other.

The system uses the Python-based Flask
framework and MongoDB (as database) in the
backend and HTML, CSS and Javascript at
the frontend. The interface allows creation of
multiple projects that could be shared with the
other users. At the backend, the application
stores the data in RDF format so as to allow its
release as Linked Data over the web using se-
mantic web technologies - as of now it makes
use of the OntoLex-Lemon for storing the lex-
ical data and Ligt for storing the interlinear
glossed text and then internally linking it to
the other linked lexicons and databases such
as DBpedia and WordNet. Furthermore it pro-
vides support for training the NLP systems us-
ing scikit-learn and HuggingFace Transform-
ers libraries as well as make use of any model
trained using these libraries - while the user in-
terface itself provides limited options for tun-
ing the system, an externally-trained model
could be easily incorporated within the appli-
cation; similarly the dataset itself could be eas-
ily exported into a standard machine-readable

1https://github.com/kmi-linguistics/life

format like JSON or CSV that could be con-
sumed by other programs and pipelines. The
system is built as an online platform; however
since we are making the source code available,
it could be installed by users on their internal /
personal servers as well.

1 Introduction

Linguistic data management and analysis tools
have always been a requirement of ﬁeld linguists.
A huge amount of data is collected and anal-
ysed by ﬁeld linguists for a large number of lan-
guages including relatively lesser-known, minori-
tised and endangered languages of the world and
these need to be properly stored, analysed and
made accessible to the larger community. On
the other hand, there are a huge number of lan-
guages across the globe (including the kinds men-
tioned above), whose data is not available for
building any kind of language technology tools
and applications.
In order to tackle this multi-
faceted problem of storing, processing, retrieving
and analysing the primary linguistic data, an inte-
grated system with an easily-accessible and user-
friendly interface aimed at linguists needs to be
made available. “LiFE” is developed with the
intent of providing a practical intervention in the
ﬁeld by making available an organised framework
for management, analysis, sharing (as linked data)
and processing of primary linguistic ﬁeld data in-
cluding development of digital and print lexicons,
sketch grammars and fundamental language pro-
cessing tools such as part-of-speech tagger and
morphological analysers. The software provides
an easy-to-use, intuitive interface for performing
all the tasks and there is an emphasis on automat-
ing the tasks as far as possible. For example,
given some initial input, the system incrementally
trains automated methods for inter-linear glossing
of the dataset (which improves as more data is

 
 
 
 
 
 
stored in the system) and subsequent generation
of sketch grammar as well as NLP tools for the
language. Similarly, the system automatically in-
fers and links the entries in the lexicon and inter-
linear glossed data using Lemon (more speciﬁcally
OntoLex-Lemon) (McCrae et al., 2017) and Ligt
(Chiarcos and Ionov, 2019).

2 Motivation and Features

Linguistic ﬁeld data storage, management, sharing
and linked data generation has largely developed
independent of each other. As such while there
are quite a few tools and applications aimed at
ﬁeld linguists (or community members interested
in ﬁeldwork for their own language) for collec-
tion and management of data as well as generating
lexicon, such as FieldWorks Language Explorer
(FLEx)2 (Butler and Volkinburg, 2007) (Manson,
2020); Toolbox3 (Robinson et al., 2007); Lex-
iquePro4 (Gu´erin and Lacrampe, 2007); WeSay5
(Perlin, 2012) (Albright and Hatton, 2008) and
a few other platforms for archiving and pro-
viding access to the data,
the prominent ones
being Endangered Languages Archive (ELAR)6
(Nathan, 2010); The Language Archive (TLA)7
(Cho, 2012); SIL Language and Culture Archive8,
etc. The Open Language Archives Community
(OLAC)9, which is a consortium of over 60 par-
ticipating linguistic archives of various kinds (in-
cluding the ones mentioned above and others for
storage and access of linguistic data, especially of
endangered languages) has also recently joined the
Linguistic Linked Data Open Cloud which paves
the way for providing a large amount of such data
as linked data (Simons and Bird, 2003). However
none of the tools and platforms directly provide an
interface for storing or (largely) automatically gen-
erating the primary linguistic data as linked data
or provide a seamless two-way between the NLP
tools and libraries and linguistic data management
softwares.

On the other hand,

the linked data commu-
nity has developed tools for supporting genera-
tion of linked data, especially linked data lexicons.

2https://software.sil.org/ﬁeldworks/
3https://software.sil.org/shoebox/,

https://software.sil.org/toolbox/

4https://software.sil.org/lexiquepro/
5https://software.sil.org/wesay/
6https://www.elararchive.org/
7https://archive.mpi.nl/tla/
8https://www.sil.org/resources/language-culture-archives
9http://www.language-archives.org/archives

One of the best-known tools for this is VocBench
(VB), which is a fully-ﬂedged open-source web-
based thesaurus management platform with the
feature of collaborative development of multilin-
gual datasets compatible with semantic Web stan-
dards. It provides the facilities of generating lex-
icons, thesauri, and linked data ontologies to the
large organisations, companies, and user commu-
nities (Stellato et al., 2020). However tools like
these focus on generating Linked Data which is
generally not very user-friendly for ﬁeld linguists
nor do they provide options for automating the
tasks or linking to the NLP ecosystem.

The primary motivation for building this plat-
form is to provide a tool that acts as a bridge be-
tween ﬁeld linguists (who are primarily engaged in
data collection from low-resource and endangered
languages, building lexicons, writing grammati-
cal descriptions and also producing educational
and other kinds of materials for the communities
that they work with), linked data community (who
are primarily engaged in meaningfully connecting
data from different languages and resources using
the semantic web techniques) and the NLP com-
munity (who primarily makes use of the linguis-
tic data from multiple languages; could potentially
provide support in automating the tasks carried out
by ﬁeld linguists; and also provide tools and tech-
nologies for the marginalised and under-privileged
linguistic communities). As such in its current
state the app provides the following functionalities
-

• It provides a user-friendly interface for stor-
ing, sharing and making publicly available
the linguistic ﬁeld data including interlinear
glossed text, lexicon and associated multime-
dia content.

• It provides reasonable automation for tasks
such as generating lexicon, sketch grammar,
etc by providing interfaces for training as
well as using pre-trained NLP models needed
for automating various tasks. The tool cur-
rently supports training various algorithms of
the scikit-learn and HuggingFace Transform-
ers library as well as using the models trained
using these libraries.

• It provides interface for exporting the data in
structured formats such as RDF, JSON and
CSV that could be directly used for NLP ex-
periments and modelling.

During the demo we will present these features
and the interface of the tool in detail and also
brieﬂy train the participants in using it.

John P. McCrae,

Julia Bosque-Gil,

Jorge Gra-
cia, Paul Buitelaar, and Philipp Cimiano. 2017.
The ontolex-lemon model: Development and applications.
Brno. Lexical Computing CZ s.r.o.

3 Presenters

The demo will be given by the developers of this
application which include the following -

David

Nathan.

2010.

Archives 2.0 for endangered languages: From disk space to myspace.
International Journal of Humanities and Arts Com-
puting, 4:111–124.

1. Ritesh Kumar is Assistant Professor of
Linguistics and coordinator of the masters
program in computational linguistics at Dr.
Bhimrao Ambedkar University, Agra. he is
working in the ﬁeld of computational linguis-
tics and language documentation and descrip-
tion for over last 10 years. He has conceptu-
alised, mentored and co-developed this app.

2. Siddharth Singh is a software engineer and
is currently pursuing his MSc in Computa-
tional Linguistics from Dr. Bhimrao Ambed-
kar University. He is the principal developer
of the app,

3. Shyam Ratan is pursuing his Mphil in Com-
putational Linguistics and is a co-developer
of the app.

4. Sonal Sinha is pursuing her Mphil in Com-
putational Linguistics and is a co-developer
of the app.

Ross Perlin. 2012. Wesay, a tool for collaborating on dictionaries with non-linguists.

Language Documentation & Conservation, 6:181 –
186.

Stuart Robinson, Greg Aumann, and Steven Bird. 2007.
Managing ﬁeldwork data with toolbox and the natu-
ral language toolkit. Language Documentation and
Conservation, 1.

Gary

Simons

and

Steven

Bird.

2003.

The open language archives community: An infrastructure for distributed archiving of language resources.
Computing Research Repository - CORR, 18:117–
128.

Armando Stellato, Manuel Fiorelli, Andrea Turbati,
Tiziano Lorenzetti, Willem van Gemert, De-
nis Dechandon, Christine Laaboudi-Spoiden,
Euge-
Anik´o Gerencs´er,
niu Costetchi,
2020.
Vocbench 3: A collaborative semantic web editor for ontologies, thesauri and lexicons.
Semantic Web, 11:1–27.

Anne Waniart,
Johannes Keizer.

and

References

Eric

Albright

and

John

Hatton.

2008.

Wesay, a tool for collaborating on dictionaries with non-linguists.
Documenting and revitalizing Austronesian lan-
guages, 6:189 – 201.

Lynnika Butler and Heather Volkinburg. 2007. Review
of ﬁeldworks language explorer (ﬂex). Language
Documentation and Conservation, 1.

Christian Chiarcos

and Maxim Ionov.

2019.

Ligt: An llod-native vocabulary for representing interlinear glossed text as RDF.
In 2nd Conference on Language, Data and Knowl-
edge, LDK 2019, May 20-23, 2019, Leipzig,
Germany, volume 70 of OASICS, pages 3:1–3:15.
Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum f¨ur Informatik.

Julia Cho. 2012. The Language Archive. Dramatists

Play Service.

Val´erie Gu´erin and S´ebastien Lacrampe. 2007. Lex-
ique pro. Language Documentation and Conserva-
tion, 1(2):293 – 300.

Ken Manson. 2020. Fieldworks linguistic explorer

(ﬂex) training 2020 (ver 1.1 august 2020).

