Astronomy & Astrophysics manuscript no. main
March 9, 2022

©ESO 2022

2
2
0
2

r
a

M
8

]

A
G
.
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[

1
v
3
7
9
3
0
.
3
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Characterization of Low Surface Brightness structures in
annotated deep images

Elisabeth Sola1, Pierre-Alain Duc1, Felix Richards2, Adeline Paiement3, Mathias Urbano1, Julie Klehammer1, Michal
Bílek4, 5, 6, Jean-Charles Cuillandre7, Stephen Gwyn8, and Alan McConnachie9

1 Université de Strasbourg, CNRS, Observatoire astronomique de Strasbourg (ObAS), UMR 7550, F-67000 Strasbourg, France

e-mail: elisabeth.sola@astro.unistra.fr

2 Department of Computer Science, Swansea University, UK
3 Université de Toulon, Aix Marseille Univ, CNRS, LIS, Marseille, France
4 European Southern Observatory, Karl-Schwarzschild-Straße 2, 85748 Garching bei Müchen, Germany
5 LERMA, Observatoire de Paris, CNRS, PSL Univ., Sorbonne Univ., 75014 Paris, France
6 Collège de France, 11 place Marcelin Berthelot, 75005 Paris, France
7 AIM, CEA, CNRS, Université Paris-Saclay, Université de Paris, F-91191 Gif-sur-Yvette, France
8 National Research Council, Canadian Astronomy Data Centre, Victoria, BC, V9E 2E7, Canada
9 NRC Herzberg Astronomy and Astrophysics, 5071 West Saanich Road, Victoria, British Columbia, Canada, V9E2E7

Received : November 16, 2021; accepted : March 04, 2022

ABSTRACT

Context. The identiﬁcation and characterization of Low Surface Brightness (LSB) stellar structures around galaxies such as tidal
debris of on-going or past collisions is essential to constrain models of galactic evolution. So far most eﬀorts have focused on the
numerical census of samples of varying sizes, either through visual inspection or more recently with deep learning. Detailed analysis
including photometry has been carried out for a small number of objects, essentially because of the lack of convenient tools able to
precisely characterize tidal structures around large samples of galaxies.
Aims. Our goal is to characterize in detail, and in particular obtain quantitative measurements, of LSB structures identiﬁed in deep
images of samples consisting of hundreds of galaxies.
Methods. We developed an online annotation tool that enables contributors to delineate with precision the shapes of diﬀuse extended
stellar structures, as well as artefacts or foreground structures. All parameters are automatically stored in a database which may be
queried to retrieve quantitative measurements. We annotated LSB structures around 352 nearby massive galaxies with deep images
obtained with the Canada-France-Hawaii Telescope as part of two large programs: MATLAS and UNIONS/CFIS. Each LSB structure
was delineated and labeled according to its likely nature: stellar shells, streams associated to a disrupted satellite, tails formed in major
mergers, ghost reﬂections or cirrus.
Results. From our database containing 8441 annotations, the area, size, median surface brightness and distance to the host of 228
structures were computed. The results conﬁrm the fact that tidal structures deﬁned as streams are thinner than tails, as expected by
numerical simulations. In addition, tidal tails appear to exhibit a higher surface brightness than streams (by about 1 mag), which
may be related to diﬀerent survival times for the two types of collisional debris. We did not detect any tidal feature fainter than 27.5
mag arcsec−2, while the nominal surface brightness limits of our surveys range between 28.3 and 29 mag arcsec−2, a diﬀerence that
needs to be taken into account when estimating the sensitivity of future surveys to identify LSB structures.
Conclusions. We compiled an annotation database of observed LSB structures around nearby massive galaxies including tidal features
that may be used for quantitative analysis and as a training set for machine learning algorithms.

Key words. Galaxies : interactions – Galaxies : evolution – Methods: data analysis

1. Introduction

1.1. Detection of tidal features

According to hierarchical models of galactic evolution, galaxies
assemble through successive mergers, accretion of smaller sys-
tems and smooth accretion of gas (e.g., Kauﬀmann et al. 1993;
Cole et al. 2000; Baugh et al. 2003; Stringer & Benson 2007).
These interactions between galaxies leave collisional debris, in
particular tidal features such as tidal tails, streams or shells,
that have diﬀerent morphologies and survival lifetime (e.g., Arp
1966; Toomre & Toomre 1972; Quinn 1984; Mancillas et al.
2019). Since the diﬀerent types of features are produced by dif-
ferent types of collisions, their identiﬁcation and classiﬁcation
give valuable information about the mass assembly history of the

host galaxy and more in general about models of galactic evolu-
tion. However, the detection of collisional debris is complicated
by their Low Surface Brightness (LSB), challenging detection
by traditional methods.

Detecting LSB tidal features in the Local Group is possi-
ble by stellar count even using ground-based missions, such as
SDSS with which Belokurov et al. (2006) revealed streams and
stellar structures in the Sagittarius dwarf spheroidal. The re-
solved stellar populations photometric survey PAndAS (Martin
et al. 2014) also studied this "Field of streams", as well as the
surrounding of M31 where signs of galactic interactions were
studied (McConnachie et al. 2009). Substructures in M31 halo
were detected in other surveys, such as Ibata et al. (2001) or Fer-
guson et al. (2002) with the Isaac Newton Telescope or Gilbert

Article number, page 1 of 30

 
 
 
 
 
 
A&A proofs: manuscript no. main

et al. (2012) with the SPLASH survey. A wealth of new struc-
tures have been disclosed in the Milky Way by the Gaia mission
(e.g., Malhan et al. 2018; Antoja et al. 2020).

However, for systems with increasing distance from the Lo-
cal Group, stars are less and less resolved individually so that the
detection of tidal features relies mainly on the study of the com-
bined diﬀuse light. Overcoming the observational challenge of
detecting faint and extended structures has been made possible
by the development of dedicated instruments and/or data reduc-
tion pipelines able to produce deep images (i.e. images with a
depth suﬃcient to detect faint structures) with limited undesir-
able artefacts. To that extent, both professional and small-sized
telescopes enabled the discovery of a wealth of LSB structures
around nearby galaxies. For instance, Martínez-Delgado et al.
(2010) and Javanmardi et al. (2016) have respectively discov-
ered streams and LSB systems around spiral galaxies with sev-
eral small-size telescopes, while the Dragonﬂy Telephoto Array
(van Dokkum et al. 2014) produced very deep images of nearby
galaxies. The Huntsman telescope (Spitler et al. 2019) is based
on the same principle as Dragonﬂy. In addition, LSB studies
were conducted using professional telescopes such as the Burrell
Schmidt telescope (e.g., Mihos et al. 2015), the CFHT (e.g., Fer-
rarese et al. 2012; Duc 2020), the VLT Survey Telescope (VST)
(e.g., Venhola et al. 2017; Iodice et al. 2021), or the Subaru tele-
scope (e.g., Alabi et al. 2020; Jackson et al. 2021).

1.2. Identiﬁcation of tidal features

Once the deep images are acquired, the LSB structures need
to be identiﬁed, a task traditionally done with a visual inspec-
tion by one or a handful of contributors. This inspection can be
performed on the images resulting from the basic data reduc-
tion, possibly adjusting the scaling and dynamics of the image
intensity to enhance the LSB structures, or on images with an
advanced processing, such as residual images obtained by sub-
tracting the light proﬁle model of the target (using softwares like
GALFIT (Peng et al. 2002) for example). This technique dis-
closes the inner most tidal debris as asymmetries that are not
well ﬁtted by symmetric models of galactic light (e.g. Bell et al.
2006; McIntosh et al. 2008; Tal et al. 2009), but generates mul-
tiple artefacts.

A number of surveys of tidal features made by a direct visual
inspection of the images by a few expert contributors have been
carried out. For instance, Jackson et al. (2021) have inspected
Subaru Hyper Suprime-Cam images of a sample of 118 low red-
shift, massive central galaxies; Kluge et al. (2020), Wendelstein
Telescope Wide Field Images of the 170 local brightest clus-
ter galaxies; Bílek et al. (2020), CFHT MATLAS images (Duc
2020) of 177 massive nearby early-type galaxies; Morales et al.
(2018) SDSS images of 297 Local Volume galaxies; Atkinson
et al. (2013), CFHTLS-Wide images of luminous 1781 galaxies
at a redshift of 0.04 < z < 0.2; Bridge et al. (2010) the 2 square
degrees CFHTLS-Deep survey images of 27,000 galaxies.

As the sample size of galaxies increases, the classiﬁcation
by a limited team of experts becomes progressively infeasible.
Galaxy features identiﬁcation may then be done by a crowd of
citizen scientists. Their potential lack of expertise is compen-
sated by the higher number of individual annotations per galaxy.
The reliability of the classiﬁcation increases with the number of
participants. This is exploited by the Galaxy Zoo project. For
instance, Casteels et al. (2013) used the Galaxy Zoo 2 classiﬁ-
cations made by 80,000 volunteers of Sloan Digital Sky Survey
images to study tidal features of about 150,000 galaxies of sim-

Article number, page 2 of 30

ilar mass. Similarly, the Galaxy Cruise1 project aims at classi-
fying the presence of shells, rings, streams, and distorted halos
from Subaru-HSC images. However, a method relying on the
participation of volunteers with limited science knowledge can
only be reliable for simple tasks. Precise classiﬁcations require
prior knowledge of the ﬁeld. It is for example the case when
trying to disentangle the tidal tails associated with major merg-
ers (i.e. mergers between two similar-mass galaxies) and the
streams which trace minor mergers (i.e. mergers with a lower-
mass galaxy): just focusing on their shape may not be enough
as both collisional debris exhibit only subtle diﬀerences, as dis-
cussed in this paper. A prior knowledge on galaxy evolution and
mergers is required to separate them. Hence, most studies on
mergers relying on citizen-science eﬀorts have focused on the
presence of tidal distortions or collisional debris, without mak-
ing any attempt to distinguish sub-classes of objects.

As an alternative approach for large samples, fully automated
methods have been developed. The level of the morphological
asymmetry of galaxies can reveal tidal disturbances associated
to on-going or past mergers (Pawlik et al. 2016). More in gen-
eral non-parametric methods such as the Gini-M20 parameter
(e.g., Abraham et al. 2003; Lotz et al. 2004) and/or the CAS
system (e.g., Abraham et al. 1994, 1996; Conselice et al. 2003,
2008; Conselice 2009), that do not assume a particular function
for the galactic light distribution, have been often used. How-
ever, such parameters are not very sensitive to LSB structures,
as they are ﬂux-weighted and dominated by the contribution of
the most luminous parts of a galaxy. On the contrary, Wen et al.
(2014) developed the AO − DO method, which is eﬃcient to se-
lect asymmetric galaxies with faint features like tidal tails. In
addition, Mantha et al. (2019) proposed a new tool to extract and
quantify galactic morphological substructures from residual im-
ages, including plausible tidal features, along with a measure of
their surface brightness. Automated tidal feature identiﬁcation
can also be performed using algorithms to separate the high and
low spatial frequencies in the image (Kado-Fong et al. 2018),
respectively corresponding to tidal features and galaxy light, al-
lowing a quantitative analysis of their properties. However, like
for the citizen scientist approach, these methods to not allow sub-
tle classiﬁcation and disentangling between various types of tidal
features.

Another promising approach towards identifying faint tidal
features on large number of objects is machine learning, as it of-
fers the possibility to work with large samples of galaxies. In par-
ticular, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been used to
classify the morphologies of galaxies (e.g., Huertas-Company
et al. 2015; Dieleman et al. 2015; Vega-Ferrero et al. 2021;
Domínguez Sánchez et al. 2018; Tohill et al. 2021). CNNs are
also able to capture disturbed galactic morphologies that can be
the hint of mergers and interactions (e.g. Pearson et al. 2019;
Ferreira et al. 2020). They can be used to identify LSB tidal fea-
tures in observational images: Walmsley et al. (2019) and Bick-
ley et al. (2021) used CNNs to identify tidally-disrupted galaxies
and classify tidal features. They obtained high accuracy and low
contamination, and in overall performed better than other auto-
mated techniques. In addition, Pearson et al. (2019) were able
to classify merger features in SDSS observations from a CNN
trained on snapshots from the EAGLE simulation. However, cur-
rently the deep learning approach is unable to precisely classify
the diﬀerent types of tidal features, unless it is trained with large
sample of images that have been previously precisely annotated.

1 Galaxy Cruise, https://galaxycruise.mtk.nao.ac.jp/en/
index.html

Elisabeth Sola et al.: Characterization of Low Surface Brightness structures in annotated deep images

Unsupervised techniques could oﬀer a solution to this problem
(e.g., Martin et al. 2020; Uzeirbegovic et al. 2020; Spindler et al.
2021; Cheng et al. 2021), although there may be less control over
the output.

The eﬀorts to classify the morphology of galaxies and de-
tecting surrounding tidal perturbations is not restricted to im-
ages obtained with telescopes. More and more detailed, realis-
tic, images are produced by numerical simulations. They have
the main advantage of providing the ground truth when inter-
preting the results. Indeed, it is possible to track the merger trees
of LSB hosting galaxies and their 3D information to follow the
LSB structures wrapping around galaxies (e.g., Hendel & John-
ston 2015; Pop et al. 2018; Mancillas et al. 2019; Ebrová et al.
2021; Bílek et al. 2021).

Several types of simulations aim at predicting the forma-
tion history of galaxies, including interactions and mergers along
with their tidal debris (e.g., Helmi & White 1999; Cooper et al.
2010; Bullock & Johnston 2005; Johnston et al. 2008; Pillepich
et al. 2018; Schaye et al. 2015; Crain et al. 2015). In order to
be comparable with those observed in the real Universe, simu-
lated galaxies must not be idealized (Bottrell et al. 2019), and
should include realistic sky, resolution, contamination sources
and surface brightness limit. Identiﬁcation of the tidal features
have been carried out on these realistic mock images: for in-
stance, Mancillas et al. (2019) performed a census of tidal fea-
tures around galaxies from a hydrodynamical simulation, while
Martin et al. (2022) investigated their nature, frequency and vis-
ibility around galaxies from the NewHorizon cosmological sim-
ulation.

1.3. Annotation of tidal features

One should note that most of the techniques mentioned above,
whether applied to observational images or simulated ones, fo-
cus on qualitative aspects such as the probability of presence
of one or several tidal features. Quantitative morphological and
photometric measurements of tidal debris have so far been made
for very limited numbers of galaxies (e.g., Martinez-Delgado
et al. 2021) or restricted to on-going tidally interacting systems.
Systematic measurements for larger samples are needed to fully
characterize the various types of LSB structures in order to make
quantitative comparisons with numerical simulation-based mod-
els of galaxy evolution. Such quantitative properties will oﬀer
important calibrations towards understanding the physical na-
ture of mergers causing the observed LSB structures and more
in general to reconstruct the late assembly histories of individual
galaxies. To that end, dedicated tools providing detailed annota-
tions are needed.

In this paper, to systematically characterize tidal structures
in deep observations, we have developed a tool that allows users
to annotate large samples of galaxies via an accessible and intu-
itive on-line interface. The shapes of tidal features may be drawn
with precision directly on the displayed images. Although other
tools such as the Zooniverse platform also enable citizen scien-
tists to delineate morphological features, such as spiral arms or
bars (Masters et al. 2021), our interface provides new function-
alities. It oﬀers a larger variety in the annotation shapes used to
delineate features, and the ﬂexibility to switch between bands,
which are facilities that are well suited for LSB structures anno-
tations.

Given the complexity of the precise annotation task and fo-
cus, our tool is more adapted to expert users. The delineated tidal
features are stored in a database, from which we can then deter-
mine their distribution of shapes, sizes and surface brightness.

Delineation is the ﬁrst step toward exploiting the full 2D proﬁles
of the individual features, which gives additional constraints on
the merger that created them.

The paper is organized as follows. In section 2 of this paper,
we present the data we used for the deep images. We introduce
the annotation server, its features and the annotation process in
section 3. In section 4, we detail the analysis tools that were
used to retrieve quantitative measurements. Then, in section 5 we
present the results obtained from the annotations, and we discuss
them in section 6. Finally, we outline the conclusions in section
7.

2. Deep images

The images and surveys we used in this paper are brieﬂy de-
scribed here. We used data from the 3.6-meter Canada-France-
Hawaii Telescope (CFHT), with the wide-ﬁeld optical imager,
MegaCam. In particular, we utilised images from two CFHT
Large Programs: the Canada-France Imaging Survey (CFIS2)
and the Mass Assembly of early-Type GaLAxies with their ﬁne
Structures survey (MATLAS3). MegaCam oﬀers a wide ﬁeld of
view of 1°×1° with a resolution of 0.18 arcsecond per pixel. Im-
ages were processed by the Elixir-LSB dedicated pipeline op-
timized for the detection of LSB structures (Cuillandre, private
communication, Duc et al. 2015). The limiting surface bright-
ness reaches 28.3 mag arcsec−2 for CFIS (Cuillandre, private
communication) and 28.9 mag arcsec−2 for MATLAS in the r-
band.

While MATLAS targets nearby massive galaxies, especially
of early-type (Duc et al. 2015; Duc 2020; Bílek et al. 2020),
CFIS is a blind survey that will cover 5,000 square degrees in the
Northern hemisphere in the u and r band (Ibata et al. 2017), with
additional bands available from observations made with other
telescopes as part of the Ultraviolet Near Infrared Optical North-
ern Survey (UNIONS) project. 4

The galaxies annotated for the work presented in this paper
are located within the 3,600 square degrees that were covered by
CFIS in March 2021. Annotation was done for the r-band images
from MATLAS and CFIS.

In these CFHT deep images, we selected massive and nearby
galaxies belonging to the reference ATLAS3D (main and par-
ent) samples (Cappellari et al. 2011). They include objects with
distances smaller than 42 Mpc, an absolute K-band magnitude
brighter than -21.5 mag and a stellar mass higher than 6×109M(cid:12).
In order to study LSB features as a function of the morphology
of the host galaxies, we selected 2 sub-samples of comparable
sizes consisting of 186 Early-Type Galaxies (ETGs) and 166
Late-Type Galaxies (LTGs) hence a total of 352 galaxies. If a
galaxy was present in both surveys, we used the MATLAS im-
age, because this survey is deeper. By doing so, we are biased
toward ﬁnding faint features in ETGs, because they were the pri-
mary targets of MATLAS. Table 1 summarizes the number of
galaxies per survey.

2 CFIS, https://www.cfht.hawaii.edu/Science/CFIS/
3 MATLAS, http://obas-matlas.u-strasbg.fr
4 The UNIONS project is a collaboration of wide ﬁeld imaging sur-
veys of the northern hemisphere. UNIONS consists of the Canada-
France Imaging Survey (CFIS), conducted at the 3.6-meter CFHT on
Maunakea, members of the Pan-STARRS team, and the Wide Imaging
with Subaru HyperSuprime-Cam of the Euclid Sky (WISHES) team.
CFHT/CFIS is obtaining deep u and r bands; Pan-STARRS is obtain-
ing deep i and moderate-deep z band imaging, and Subaru/WISHES is
obtaining deep z band imaging.

Article number, page 3 of 30

A&A proofs: manuscript no. main

Table 1. Number of galaxies surveyed in this work, detailed by their
survey and morphological type

Type
MATLAS ETGs
CFIS ETGs
MATLAS LTGs
CFIS LTGs
Total

Number of galaxies studied
179
7
53
113
352

The CFIS 30 arcmin wide tiles were combined using SWarp
(Bertin et al. 2002) and then cropped in order to center the ﬁ-
nal image on the galaxy of interest. Users annotated structures
in images with a ﬁeld of view (FoV) of 31×31 arcmin. This
FoV corresponds to an average physical size of 250×250 kpc
and is equivalent to an average size of 50 eﬀective radii around
the target galaxies (with a minimum of 50×50 kpc, or 6.5 eﬀec-
tive radii), enough to visualize the entire galaxy, its neighbor-
hood and potentially most of its extended tidal features. Inspect-
ing larger areas would have been too time consuming given the
number of stellar structures and instrumental artefacts to anno-
tate, and would not have been relevant to this study. The images
were downsized by a factor of 3 (i.e. binned 3×3), both to de-
crease the size of the ﬁles on the web server and to enhance very
faint structures.

To further enhance the visual identiﬁcation of ﬁne structures,
a transformation from linear scale to a slightly modiﬁed inverse
hyperbolic sine, asinh, was applied, with the following formula:

asinh(ADU) = log

(cid:16)

α × (ADU − b) + (cid:112)

(cid:17)
α2 × (ADU − b)2 + 1

(1)

where asinh is the value of the pixel in asinh scale; ADU is the
pixel value in linear scale; b is the background value and α is a
parameter to tune, chosen here as 1. The background level was
set to a ﬁxed value of 0 in our case. This is motivated by the fact
that the Elixir-LSB pipeline precisely processes the images in
order to achieve a ﬂat background over a given ﬁeld of view, after
correcting for residual instrumental or large scale sky artefacts.
However some local contamination of sources, such as star halos
or Galactic cirrus, remain after this processing. Therefore the
real background may locally be non-zero. Local determination
of the background is required to get a precise photometry, but for
this paper we ﬁxed it to the standard ﬁxed value as a reasonable
approximation.

In addition to asinh scaled images, surface brightness (SB)
maps scaled in mag arcsec−2 were produced and used to char-
acterize the tidal features. The relation from linear to surface
brightness scale is the following:

µ = −2.5 log10

(cid:32)

(cid:33)

ADU − b
pixsize2

+ 30

(2)

where µ is the surface brightness value of
in
mag arcsec−2 in AB magnitude; ADU is the value of the pixel
in the original linear image; b is the value of the background
(chosen here as 0), pixsize is the size of one pixel in arcsecond
and 30 is the value of the zero point.

the pixel

As it will be explained in 3.1, the on-line annotation tool
requires the images to be in a particular format (HiPS, see Fer-
nique et al. 2015) in order to display them. Hence, we created
the HiPS after the asinh and surface brightness scalings. Hav-
ing a single image does not enable the user to adjust on-line the

Article number, page 4 of 30

image dynamics5 such as the contrast or the cuts, however this
homogeneity turns out to be an asset since the consistency of the
images makes it easier to understand the diﬀerences between the
annotations of several users.

In addition, g − r colormaps were computed from the surface
brightness maps for a sub-sample of 177 ETGs and 53 LTGs
from MATLAS with available g-band images, and exploited to
further characterize the LSB strutures, as described in section
4.6.

Finally, we also considered for our annotations shal-
lower true-color images from the Data Release 1 (DR1) of
PanSTARRS 6 (see Section 3), an imaging survey that covered
the entire sky north of Dec=-30 deg in ﬁve bands (g, r, i, z and
y) (Chambers et al. 2016).

3. LSB structures annotation tool

The annotation tool we developed is applicable to any imaging
survey. However we focus here speciﬁcally on its use for the
study of LSB structures.

3.1. General description
Visual classiﬁcation methods are much faster and eﬃcient with
a web browser based tool that provides online facilities such
as image visualization, navigation as well as immediate struc-
ture identiﬁcation and labeling. Simple and clear interfaces are
needed when numerous collaborators or citizen scientists are
asked to review the data, such as the Zooniverse platform7. Al-
though the latter enables collaborators to record quantitative in-
formation through an annotation tool, most platforms simply of-
fer the possibility to assess the presence of a given feature.

In this paper, we present a web-based annotation tool that
enables collaborators (referred to as ’users’ in this paper) to
draw with precision the shapes of LSB structures superimposed
on deep images and label them, allowing a quantitative analy-
sis of the LSB structures of various types. In comparison with
the Zooniverse interface, our tool oﬀers several drawing op-
tions, an easy navigation through the image, the possibility to
display images from other surveys and a simple way to verify
the annotations once they have been drawn. The annotation pro-
cess, described in detail in section 3.2, relies on the visualiza-
tion of astronomical images thanks to an online tool that uses
the Aladin Lite8 facility developed by the Centre de Données
astronomiques de Strasbourg (CDS). It enables the visualization
of sky regions, overlaid with object information from astronomi-
cal databases such as SIMBAD. Data from various surveys, such
as PanSTARRS DR1, can be displayed and explored, but custom
images can also be added, provided that the images are in the Hi-
erarchical Progressive Surveys (HiPS, see Fernique et al. 2015)
format. The HiPS format enables the representation of large as-
tronomical datasets as the resolution increases when the users
zoom on a part of the image. It relies on the hierarchical parti-
tioning of a sphere into smaller and smaller diamonds as the or-
der of the partitioning increases, each diamond being identiﬁed
by a unique index and order. Hence, we added our own HiPS
images, whose origin is detailed in section 2.

5 The original MATLAS server available at https://obas-matlas.
u-strasbg.fr/WP/ allows the user to adjust on line the contrasts and
cuts, as discussed in Bílek et al. (2020)
6 PanSTARRS, https://panstarrs.stsci.edu/
7 Zooniverse https://www.zooniverse.org/
8 Aladin Lite https://aladin.u-strasbg.fr/AladinLite/

Elisabeth Sola et al.: Characterization of Low Surface Brightness structures in annotated deep images

3.2. Annotation process

The annotation process can be divided in several steps: the se-
lection of the galaxy to annotate, the annotation itself, its clas-
siﬁcation and the veriﬁcation or modiﬁcation of the annotation.
All users are previously identiﬁed and logged in to record their
annotations.

The annotation is made directly from the image navigation
interface. The latter allows us to zoom in and out in the images,
navigate through them and switch between diﬀerent layers, i.e.
images with diﬀerent intensity scalings or from various surveys.
Catalogues from for instance the SIMBAD database can be over-
laid to display pieces of information about the objects in the im-
age, including their velocity when known.

Drawing tool buttons are used to make the annotations. The
interface is displayed in Figure 1 with a CFIS asinh-scaled im-
age, while a Pan-STARRS DR1 color image layer of the same
galaxy is shown in Figure 2. The user is asked to draw the ex-
ternal boundary of the features present in the image, as deﬁned
later in this section. To do so, the most appropriate type of shapes
among Circles, Ellipses, Rectangles, Polygons or Curved lines
are selected. Curved lines are cubic Bézier curves deﬁned with
four control points. The shapes, superimposed on the images
with a semi-transparent red color, may be adjusted with preci-
sion. Afterwards, the user needs to associate the drawn shape
with a label from a menu. All annotations may be checked and
further updated from a Summary table. A tutorial explains how
to draw the annotations with speciﬁc tools and then how to label
them.

The aim is to annotate every feature visible on the image
relevant for our study. This means that several annotations are
drawn on the same image. It includes the stellar structures of
interest and contaminants, among which:

– Main galaxy: the target galaxy, encompassing its more lu-
minous features, such as spiral arms for late-type galaxies.
Such annotation is made on standard shallow images, in par-
ticular the PanSTARRS DR1 color images.9 The outer ellip-
tical isophote of the galaxy is delineated. A posteriori, with
the tool presented later, this isophote roughly corresponds to
a surface brightness of 24 mag arcsec−2.

– Halo: the extended low surface brightness stellar halo around
the galaxy, as seen on the deep CFHT images. Its outer
isophote - generally elliptical but sometimes disturbed - is
traced10.

– Tidal Tail: deﬁned here and in the previous papers of this
series (e.g., Duc et al. 2015; Bílek et al. 2020) as elongated
stellar features whose stellar material likely comes from the
target galaxy, and which then should have formed during ma-
jor mergers (e.g. Arp 1966; Toomre & Toomre 1972; Mihos
1995). If the shape diﬀers from the standard, antennae-like
elongated structure, it is labeled as a Plume.

– Streams: generally thin and elongated tidal features, whose
material does not seem to originate from the target galaxy.

9 We delineate the main galaxy on shallow images as they best high-
light the bright inner structures. Indeed, currently, our Aladin-based tool
does not oﬀer the possibility to adjust the contrast and dynamics of the
images, but allows us to switch between diﬀerent sets of images through
a convenient layer interface. Among the existing surveys made available
through the interface, PanSTARRS DR1 was chosen as it covers the en-
tire sky north of Dec=-30 deg and thus encompasses all our galaxies,
contrary to SDSS for instance.
10 Note that the extended presumably thick non-starforming disks that
may be present around LTGs are considered here as a halos as there is
no way to probe their 3D shape, especially when seen face-on.

The stream is either attached to a companion galaxy progen-
itor whose mass is much lower than that of the target galaxy,
or it is deﬁned as an orphan stream if no progenitor is vis-
ible. In all cases, such streams likely trace past or on-going
minor mergers (e.g. Bullock & Johnston 2005; Belokurov
et al. 2006; Martínez-Delgado et al. 2010).

– Shells: arc-shaped features, that are often present in groups
and are concentric. They are typically formed during inter-
mediate mass encounters (with a mass ratio around 1:10)
with speciﬁc orbital parameters (e.g., Prieur 1990; Ebrova
2013; Duc et al. 2015; Pop et al. 2018).

– Companion: a nearby massive galaxy with a known veloc-
ity close to that of the target galaxy. We considered a diﬀer-
ence of velocities of about 200 km s−1 for the threshold. This
value is more conservative than the larger velocity threshold
often used to identify companions. Indeed we want to make
sure that the two galaxies are currently involved in a tidal
interaction able to produce visible tidal debris. The outer en-
velope of the companion on deep imaging is delineated.
– Ghost reﬂections: artiﬁcial and extended round halos
around bright stars caused by internal reﬂections on the de-
tector and optical elements of the camera.

– Instrument: remaining instrument signature (CCD gap).
– Satellite Trail: trail of any satellite passing in the image.
– Cirrus: dust clouds in our Galaxy, scattering the optical
light, and showing up as diﬀuse but structured (usually ﬁl-
amentary) features on the deep images. Regions likely con-
taminated by cirrus emission are delineated.

– High Background: regions in the deep images, with back-
ground levels higher than the blank sky values, not clearly
identiﬁed as structured cirrus. These regions may trace dust
illuminated by bright objects. They are not ﬂat ﬁeld defects
but are really due to higher foreground emissions in these
regions.

The visual classiﬁcation of tidal features among tails, streams
and shells, is necessarily subjective and may be ambiguous. It
then makes sense to have several users annotating and making
the classiﬁcation. One of the goals of this paper is to precisely
characterize each type of structures and retrospectively assess
the relevance of the classiﬁcation.

The annotation of contaminants such as cirrus, ghost reﬂec-
tions or high background is essential as they might pollute the
stellar structures of interest and either make complicated their
detection or skew their annotation. Examples of galaxies with
tidal features from CFIS are presented in Figure 3, while Fig-
ures C1, C2 and C3 from Bílek et al. (2020) present tidal features
identiﬁed in MATLAS images.

Once the user has ﬁnished annotating a galaxy, the shape pa-
rameters, positions (in pixel coordinates and in right ascension
and declination) and labels of each annotation are stored in a
database hosted by a server. These can be used to redraw the an-
notations on the images or plot them as thumbnails, as it will be
seen later. Examples of annotated galaxies are visible in Figure
4.

The annotations are made by several users. In this work, all
the users are considered to have the same level of expertise in
the identiﬁcation of tidal features. Note however that our tool al-
lows us to take into account possible diﬀerent levels of expertise.
This must be taken into account, as it reﬂects the degree of con-
ﬁdence one can have in the annotations. To that end, weights can
in principle be attributed to the users; this is discussed in section
6.2.

Article number, page 5 of 30

A&A proofs: manuscript no. main

Fig. 1. The annotation interface with its main facilities: drawing buttons (label 1), classiﬁcation menu (label 2), examples of already drawn
annotations (label 3) and summary table (label 4). The background is a CFIS asinh-scaled image.

selves. Thumbnails can also be used to visualize annotations of
several users on a same page, for comparison purposes.

The Thumbnails page enables users to choose the galaxies to
be plotted, the size of the thumbnail box (in arcseconds ("), kilo-
parsec (kpc) or eﬀective radius Re of the target galaxy) and the
type of annotations: e.g. main galaxy, halo, tidal tails, streams
and/or shells. Furthermore, the possibility to represent all fea-
tures with thumbnails enables a global visual comparison of their
shapes and sizes. Such thumbnails, representing only the shapes
of tidal features and free of any contaminant (host galaxy, image
artefacts, cirrus), could be used to train an algorithm to classify
structures based on their shape. This could complement other
machine learning algorithms that would be trained on the origi-
nal images. Once generated, the thumbnails can be downloaded
and displayed as webpages. A few examples are illustrated in
Figure 5.

Fig. 2. Zoom on a shallower version of Figure 1 with the same annotated
galaxy. The Pan-STARRS DR1 RGB-color image layer that was used to
delineate the ’main galaxy’ (inner red ellipse) is shown as background.

3.3. Thumbnails

In addition to the annotation tool itself, several analysis tools
were developed and integrated into the server. One of the main
features is the possibility to see the annotations that have been
done, through thumbnails. Indeed, quickly visualizing annota-
tions made by a user may be diﬃcult when many features have
been annotated. Hence, we developed a fast way to draw the
contours of the main features to have an overview of the shapes
of the annotations and to detect errors or missing features such
as the Main Galaxy or the Halo. The thumbnails only contain
the external boundaries of the annotations, not the images them-

Article number, page 6 of 30

4. Analysis tools

In this section, we will present the analysis tools developed to
characterize the LSB structures. As previously mentioned, re-
trieving quantitative measurements about the LSB tidal features
is essential to infer the history and mass assembly of a galaxy.
Yet for large samples of galaxies, except for ﬁne structure nu-
merical censuses, detailed analyses have not been systematically
performed.

The annotation tool we developed oﬀers new possibilities.
Indeed, we now have access to the projected shape of the struc-
tures, since the users are invited to delineate the contours with
precision. This allows us to retrieve the coordinates of the bound-
aries of the structures, making possible the determination of the
area they cover and their length among other properties. For in-
stance, this will be useful to determine retrospectively whether
our criterion to separate streams from tidal tails is relevant.

Elisabeth Sola et al.: Characterization of Low Surface Brightness structures in annotated deep images

Fig. 3. Examples of tidal features detected in CFIS r-band images displayed with a asinh scale. A true color image from the PanSTARRS DR1
survey is overlaid at the center of the target galaxy. The ﬁrst row shows tidal tails and plumes, the middle row streams and the bottom one shells.

4.1. Area

The ﬁrst step was to determine what is the area covered by each
structure. As mentioned in section 3.2, there are diﬀerent anno-
tation shapes that must be considered. Since Curved lines are cu-
bic Bézier curves, it is not possible to determine their area. For
the other shapes, the coordinates of all the points forming the
contour of the annotation are retrieved in right ascension (RA)
and declination (DEC). The distance between two coordinates

was obtained using the on-sky separation11, which enabled us to
compute the areas of Circles, Rectangles and Ellipses.

To compute areas of simple polygons, we used the shoelace

formula which is given by

Apolygon = 1
2

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

n−1(cid:88)


i=1





xiyi+1

+ xny1 −


n−1(cid:88)


i=1





xi+1yi

− x1yn

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

11 Astropy SkyCoord https://docs.astropy.org/en/stable/
api/astropy.coordinates.SkyCoord.html

Article number, page 7 of 30

A&A proofs: manuscript no. main

Fig. 4. Examples of annotated galaxies. Some of them present tidal features and pollutants or a companion galaxy while others only present the
halo and the center of the galaxy.

where Apolygon is the area, n is the number of sides of the polygon
and (xi, yi), i = 1, ..., n are the ordered planar coordinates of the
vertices of the polygon.

4.2. Length

In addition to the area, the computation of the projected longest
length in tidal structures is also important to characterize them.
The deﬁnition of the longest length depends on the shape of the
annotation. For Ellipses, the longest length corresponds to the
length of the major axis; for Circles it is the diameter; for Rect-
angles and Curved lines it is simply the length.

The process is more complicated when dealing with Poly-
gons, as they can have various complicated shapes. In these
cases, the medial axis was used as the longest length: it can
be seen as the topological skeleton and it is deﬁned as the set
of points that have at least two closest points on the polygon
(i.e. it is the set of points that are equidistant to the contour of
the polygon). The medial axes were obtained using scikit-image
(van der Walt et al. 2014) through skeletonization. At the end of
this step, the skeletons can have several branches but only the
longest possible path was kept. To this purpose, the FilFinder
package (Koch & Rosolowsky 2015) was used. An example of
the previous steps is shown in Figure 6.

A limit of this method arises for round polygons, i.e. whose
shape tends to be circular. In such cases, the topological skele-
ton tends to be shorter and shorter, up to the limit case of a circle
where the skeleton is reduced to the center of the circle. This
leads to underestimate the estimated lengths. To tackle this is-
sue, we adapted our method for round polygons and approximate
them by the maximum volume inscribed ellipse. The length is
then taken as that of the major axis. We also modify the value
of the area deﬁned in section 4.1 to keep the area of the com-
puted ellipse. One way to evaluate how round a polygon is is to
compute the isoperimetric ratio q :

q = 4π

area
perimeter2

Article number, page 8 of 30

(3)

The value of the isoperimetric ratio q is between 0 and 1, it
reaches 1 in the case of a disk. In our case, we had to determine
a threshold value for q above which a polygon would be consid-
ered round enough for our skeleton method to be incorrect. We
determined this threshold to be 0.8, based on our measurements
and shapes of the polygons (see section 5). Hence, for polygons
with q < 0.8 we kept the topological skeleton deﬁned above; and
for q ≥ 0.8, we approximated them by an ellipse.

4.3. Distance between shells and the primary galaxy

Wilkinson et al. (1987) and Prieur (1990) divided shells into sev-
eral types according to their position and orientations with re-
spect to the host galaxy. Type I shells are concentric and centered
on the host galaxy; type II shells are circular and randomly dis-
tributed around the galaxy; type III shells appear irregular and
not concentric, either because there are very few shells or be-
cause of their untypical shape.

Hence, the study of the position of a shell relatively to the
center of its primary galaxy is important, as comparisons with
simulations can give us hints about the merger that triggered the
shells, as well as its age (e.g., Ebrová et al. 2021; Bílek et al.
2021). Shell radii are useful also for investigating the gravita-
tional ﬁelds of galaxies (e.g., Hernquist & Quinn 1987; Bílek
et al. 2013).

With our annotations, we computed the projected distance
between the center of the galaxy and the point located in the
middle of the Curved line deﬁning the shell. Here we make the
assumption that the Curved lines are circular arcs.

4.4. Progenitor of tidal tails

Our current annotation server does not allow the user to manu-
ally assign an annotated feature to a speciﬁc galaxy, for instance
the primary galaxy or the companion. By default all annotations
are tied to the primary galaxy. This is especially an issue for sys-
tems made of two interacting target galaxies, present in the same

Elisabeth Sola et al.: Characterization of Low Surface Brightness structures in annotated deep images

– Case 3: The tail has no apparent overlap with the target
galaxy or the companion. In that case, the position of the cen-
ter of mass of the tail is computed, as well as the positions of
the centers of the primary galaxy and its companion. Then,
the distance from each galactic center to the center of the tail
is computed, and the tail is associated to the galaxy with the
shortest distance. If the diﬀerence in distances is small and
inferior to an arbitrary threshold, then the progenitor is set to
Unsure.

– Case 4: The tail has an overlap with both the primary galaxy
and its companion: it looks like a bridge. In this case, the area
of the intersection of the tail with both galaxies is computed,
and the galaxy with the biggest intersection area is kept as
the progenitor. If the diﬀerence of areas is small and infe-
rior to an arbitrary threshold, then the same computation on
distances than for Case 3 is performed.

For the results, only the tidal tails associated to the primary
galaxy were kept, in order to count each structure only once.
For streams, by deﬁnition they are not attached to the primary
galaxy so all the annotations of streams are kept.

4.5. Surface brightness measurements

The assessment of the surface brightness (SB) values of each
type of tidal feature is important to make comparison with sim-
ulations but also determine whether they will be detectable in
surveys to come, such as Euclid or the Vera Rubin Observatory.
With our annotation tool, such measurements can be indirectly
retrieved.

Indeed, since the coordinates of the contours of the annota-
tions are available, it is possible to retrieve them to create masks
that may then be attached to the surface brightness maps. To do
so, the RA, DEC coordinates of the contours are converted into
pixel coordinates of the FITS image on which we want to create
the mask, using Astropy World Coordinate System functions12 .
The interior of that boundary in pixel coordinates is then ﬁlled to
have the mask, using OpenCV-Python13 functions. Then, we ap-
ply this mask to the SB FITS ﬁle and we read the SB values of all
the pixels inside the mask14. For each annotation of a given type,
the median value within the mask area is computed. This way,
contribution of light coming from contamination sources such
as foreground stars or background galaxies is removed, provided
the ﬁeld is not too crowded. This provides a representative (in-
stead of an average) value of the SB of the structure. A direct
aperture photometry would require a proper masking of all con-
taminant sources, which is beyond the scope of this initial study.
Another potential issue could arise if there is a SB gradient
along the structure: deeper imaging will make the median SB
value fainter because more LSB pixels are considered. However,
since we do not want to get a precise value but to compare trends
between tidal features, this issue is not a major one. So our esti-
mate of the SB value of a given structure is quite uncertain. Our
measurements are however useful to compare trends between the
diﬀerent classes of structures. For all the annotations of the same
type, the median value of the previously computed medians was
computed.

Finally, it is also possible to retrieve the SB value along the
contour of the annotation (by transforming the RA, DEC coordi-

12 Astropy WCS https://docs.astropy.org/en/stable/wcs/
index.html
13 OpenCV-Python https://pypi.org/project/opencv-python/
14 For shells, the SB values of the pixels along the Curved line are re-
trieved.

Article number, page 9 of 30

Fig. 5. Examples of annotation thumbnails. The center of the target
galaxy is plotted in purple, its halo in yellow, tidal tails in blue, streams
in red and shells in green. A scalebar in kiloparsecs is shown at the
bottom left of each thumbnail.

Fig. 6. Example of the longest length in a polygon (in gray). Left: me-
dial axis (black line) of the polygon obtained during the skeletonization.
Right: longest length kept (red line) in the polygon

image. In this case, one wishes to attach tidal tails to their real
progenitor. There are four diﬀerent possibilities when determin-
ing the progenitor of tidal tails:

– Case 1: The tail has an overlap with the halo of the primary
galaxy but not with that of the companion: the progenitor is
then the main galaxy.

– Case 2: The tail has an overlap with the halo of the compan-
ion but not with that of the primary galaxy: the progenitor is
then the companion.

A&A proofs: manuscript no. main

nates of the contours into into pixel coordinates of the SB FITS
ﬁles, then reading the corresponding SB values and keeping the
median value). This is useful especially for stellar halos (see sec-
tion 5.3.1), as the corresponding ellipse annotation approximates
the outer isophote, whose SB value can be compared to the lim-
iting SB of the survey.

4.6. Color measurements

As mentioned in section 2, g and r band images were available
for all MATLAS galaxies, so we were able to construct the cor-
responding g − r colormaps. For CFIS, this was not possible as
only the r-band was available. We created the MATLAS SB ﬁles
in the g-band using the same process as the one described in sec-
tion 2 for the r-band images. The g−r colormaps were computed
from the g and r-band SB ﬁles.

Afterwards, we applied the masks of our annotations on the
g − r colormap FITS ﬁle. For each annotation, we retrieved the
g−r values of the pixels inside the mask, and we kept the median
value to remove the contribution of outlier pixels. Finally, we
estimated the median g − r value for each annotation type (tidal
feature, halo or main galaxy). However, these values are only
estimates as the colors were computed on polluted images with
sources of contamination such as bright reﬂections or cirri that
can overlap with the LSB features of interest.

4.7. Level of contamination

The contamination of the images by pollutants such as ghost
reﬂections, cirrus, high background, satellite trails or artefacts
coming from the instrument can be high in deep images and lead
to biased annotations. For instance, if the primary galaxy is em-
bedded in a bright ghost reﬂection from a nearby star, the user is
likely to underestimate the real size of the halo. In order to quan-
tify this degree of contamination, we automatically assigned a
reliability index based on the intersection between the halo of
the primary galaxy and pollutants as follows. The higher the re-
liability index, the cleaner the image.

– None: The annotation of the halo is impossible (e.g. due to a

high contamination by bright sources)

– 1: The entire halo is embedded in a ghost reﬂection or a high

background region

– 2: The halo has an overlap with a ghost reﬂection or a high

background region

same physical type (e.g. halos, pollutants). This similarity in-
dex is compared as a function of the level of contamination we
deﬁned in this section.

4.8. Annotations kept

By construction, several users have annotated the same struc-
tures for any given galaxy. We therefore faced the diﬃculty
of keeping the most representative annotations for any speciﬁc
galaxy. We present in this section our selection process. It is
relatively simple for the diﬀuse halos since they were system-
atically annotated by all users. We made the basic assumption
that more expert users tend to see fainter features in deep images
(Bílek et al. 2020). Therefore, we decided, for a given galaxy and
structure, to only keep the annotation with the largest area. For
the annotations corresponding to the brightest part of the galaxy
(and made based on shallow images, like PanSTARRS-DR1),
the extent is not a relevant criterion and we chose the annotation
that represents the median area as our ﬁnal annotation.

The process is a bit more complicated for tails and streams,
as they were not always identiﬁed by all users, or might have
been delineated in various ways. For these tidal features, we
proceeded in two steps. First, we considered streams and tails
together, and we paired the annotations of the two ﬁrst users.
We used the same method as for the reliability index: two paired
structures with a percentage of intersection 15 higher than a given
threshold (namely 25%) are considered as being the same struc-
ture. A same unique identiﬁer is attributed to them. We repeated
the process with the annotations of the other users: the new fea-
ture was paired with the previous ones, the percentage of inter-
section was computed and then the feature was either associated
with an already existing unique identiﬁer or as a new one. This
iterative process is illustrated on the panels a) to d) of Figure
C.1.

Afterwards, for the features sharing the same unique identi-
ﬁer, the one with the largest area is kept following the procedure
used for the stellar halos. Hence, at the end each galaxy will have
tidal features with diﬀerent unique identiﬁers, as visible on the
panel e) of Figure C.1. In the following, only the annotations
that were kept after the selection process are taken into account
(except if explicitly mentioned otherwise).

– 3: The entire halo is embedded in a companion galaxy
– 4: The entire halo is embedded in a ghost reﬂection coming

5. Results

from the core of the galaxy

– 5: The halo has an overlap with a companion galaxy
– 6: The entire halo is embedded in cirrus
– 7: The halo has an overlap with cirrus
– 8: The halo has an overlap with a satellite trail
– 9: There is no pollutant overlapping with the halo

As the reliability index can take several values for a given
halo, it is stored in a list. To have an average reliability in-
dex per galaxy, it was necessary to compute a weighted average
of the values. In order to penalize strong pollutants, the values
[1,2,3,4,5,6,7,9] were associated to the weights [8,7,6,5,4,3,2,1]
respectively. The satellite trails are not taken into account as their
impact on the classiﬁcation is very low. The weighted reliability
index in our images is discussed in section 6.3.

In addition, in section 6.4, we deﬁne a similarity index that
assesses the similarity between two users’ annotations of the

Article number, page 10 of 30

In this section, we present statistical results based on our annota-
tions of tidal features, including their geometrical properties and
surface brightness. We opted for median values rather than mean
ones in order to get the most representative values. The database
contains 8441 annotations. The number of annotations per fea-
ture type is detailed in Table 2. The annotations have been made
by four users: two of them have annotated all the galaxies, while
30% and 58.5% of the galaxies were delineated by the two other
users.

15 The intersection score is computed as follows: each annotation is de-
ﬁned by its contour coordinates and is considered as a ﬁlled polygon
(using the shapely package (https://shapely.readthedocs.io).
The area of each polygon is computed, as well as the area of the region
of the intersection between the two polygons. The intersection score is
then the area of the intersection region divided by the area of the larger
polygon.

Elisabeth Sola et al.: Characterization of Low Surface Brightness structures in annotated deep images

Table 2. Number of annotations stored in the database as a function of
their type. In parenthesis is indicated the number of annotations kept
after our selection process on the main galaxy, halo, tidal tails and
streams.

streams simply based on a visual inspection. In the following
sections, we use a more quantitative approach to assess whether
a statistically signiﬁcant distinction between these two types of
features can be found.

Annotation type
Main Galaxy
Halo
Tidal Tails
Streams
Shells
Companion Galaxy
High Background
Ghosted Halo
Cirrus
Satellite Trail
Instrument
Total

Number
1013 (352)
962 (340)
433 (223)
171 (84)
260
808
1121
3238
283
30
122
8441 (6861)

5.1. Tidal tails and streams

A total of 223 tidal tails and 84 streams in our database were
kept after the selection process.16 Here we present several geo-
metrical and surface brightness analyses of these features. Based
on these analyses, we provide a discussion on the criterion used
to diﬀerentiate tidal tails from streams in section 6.5.

5.1.1. Qualitative interpretation of global shapes

To have an initial overview of their morphology and of their loca-
tion with respect to the target galaxy, we inspected their thumb-
nails as represented in Figure 7. Their shapes and sizes show a
great variability. For a given galaxy, tidal tails often appear in
pairs and seem to be rather located near the foci of the ellipse
deﬁning the halo, whereas streams seem more isolated. Glob-
ally, tidal tails appear rounder and broader than streams, while
streams seem more elongated and thinner. Note that the thickest
tails were referred as Plumes in our study.

To better compare the individual shapes of each type of tidal
structure, we present in Appendix A the footprint of the tails and
streams without their host galaxy as a function of the morpho-
logical type: tidal features for LTGs are shown in Figure A.1 and
in Figure A.2 for ETGs. All thumbnails have the same physical
size (namely 50 × 50 kpc) and they are sorted by increasing mass
of the host galaxy. The mean galaxy mass in each row is detailed
in the text of Appendix A.

From these ﬁgures, more massive galaxies tend to host larger
or more extended tidal tails. For ETGs, tidal tails seem slightly
rounder and larger than for LTGs, but ETGs are on average more
massive than LTGs. For streams, there is no clear trend neither
as a function of the mass of the galaxy nor of its morphological
type, which is expected as the material does not originate from
the primary galaxy but from a companion.

One important point to note is the fact that tidal tails and
streams look relatively similar. Although streams globally seem
more elongated than tails, there is no obvious visual diﬀerence
between them: some tails look like streams and conversely, for
all mass range.

Though global trends are observed, clearly the large variabil-
ity of structures (that might be partly due to delineation errors)
does not allow us to make a sharp distinction between tails and

16 We do not make a distinction between tidal tails (with typical,
antennae-like shape) and plumes.

5.1.2. Quantitative interpretation: area

The distributions of the areas of each type of structure is plotted
in Figure 8. Table 3 summarizes the results, making a distinction
between LTGs and ETGs.

The distributions of areas hardly diﬀer for both tidal struc-
tures: they are peaked around 115 kpc2 for tidal tails and 110
kpc2 for streams. Most structures cover areas smaller than 300
kpc2, and few between 300 and 800 kpc2. Note that the struc-
tures with the largest areas are associated to systems showing
on-going interactions.

From the table, structures surrounding ETGs seem more ex-
tended than structures surrounding LTGs, but this diﬀerence is
not statistically signiﬁcant. Indeed, we applied Mood’s statisti-
cal test (testing the null hypothesis that two samples come from
populations with the same median) on the areas of the structures
as a function of the morphological type: the p-value is 0.08 (for
tidal tails) and 0.18 (for streams), which are higher than 0.05,
so we cannot reject the null hypothesis that the medians are the
same at a conﬁdence level of 5%.

The values of the standard deviations may be reduced when
taking into account trends with the mass of the host and environ-
ment. This will be studied in detail in another paper.

5.1.3. Quantitative interpretation: length and width

Median values of the measured length are summarized in Table
4 while their histograms are shown in Figure 9. They show that
streams are longer than tidal tails (with respectively a median
value of 29 kpc and 22 kpc when combining all galaxies), for all
galaxy types. The computation of Mood’s test gives a p-value of
0.009, which is smaller than 0.05 so we can conclude that the
medians of the length for tidal tails and streams are not the same
at a signiﬁcance of 5%. The distribution of the length of streams
is more extended and ﬂatter than for tails. A few structures reach
a length longer than 80 kpc.

An estimate of the width of tidal tails and streams is obtained
by dividing the area they cover by their longest length. This relies
on the assumption that these features have ribbon or rectangular
shapes. For round polygons, they are approximated by an ellipse
(as explained in section 4.2) so the width corresponds to the mi-
nor axis (while the length corresponds to the major axis). The
results are presented in Table 5 while the histogram of the width
of tidal features for all the galaxies is shown in Figure 9.

From this histogram, one can see that tidal tails are on av-
erage wider than streams. This diﬀerence is statistically signif-
icant, as Mood’s test on the medians of the width for tidal tails
and streams gives a p-value of 0.0016. Almost all the streams
have a width less than 10 kpc with a peak around 4 kpc, while
for tails the peak is around 6 kpc and the distribution is more
extended. A few tails are very wide (higher than 14 kpc).

The fact that tidal tails are wider than streams was expected
from models : indeed, the width of a tail or stream increases with
the velocity dispersion of the stars that form this structure (e.g.,
Johnston et al. 1996; Johnston 1998). Yet, the velocity disper-
sion of a galaxy depends both on its morphological type and of
its mass (e.g., Bernardi et al. 2010; Bezanson et al. 2012). The
more massive the galaxy, the higher the velocity dispersion and

Article number, page 11 of 30

A&A proofs: manuscript no. main

Fig. 7. Thumbnails of all the galaxies having tidal tails or streams. The main galaxy is represented in magenta, the halo in yellow, tidal tails in blue
and streams in red. A scalebar representing 30 kpc at the bottom left gives an indication of the size of the structures.

Table 3. Median areas covered by tidal tails and streams for each type of galaxy, associated with their standard deviation. Values are expressed in
square kiloparsecs.

Galaxy type

All galaxies
ETGs
LTGs

Tidal Tails
Median area (kpc²)
116
161
102

Streams

std Median area (kpc²)
295
445
149

108
139
86

std
227
252
171

therefore the wider the tail. Hence, since streams originate from
low-mass companions, their velocity dispersion is smaller. This
contributes to their widths being smaller than for tails. This is
consistent with Figure 6 from Hendel & Johnston (2015) who
found in their simulation that if the infalling galaxy satellite had
a higher mass, the width of the debris increases. Therefore, our
results comfort our approach to make a distinction between tidal
tails and streams.

To explore the results even further, the histograms of the
width of tidal tails and streams as a function of the morpholog-
ical type of their host galaxy is shown in Figure 10. From it,
one can see that the distributions of the width of tidal tails are

very diﬀerent for ETGs and LTGs: the distribution is ﬂatter and
more extended for ETGs, with a median value of 6.6 kpc, while
for LTGs the distribution is peaked around 5 kpc, with few tails
having a width between 10 and 18 kpc. This was also expected,
as the velocity dispersion is higher for ETGs than for LTGs, pro-
ducing wider tails. Contrary to the signiﬁcant diﬀerence for tidal
tails, there is no real diﬀerence for streams between the distribu-
tions for ETGs and LTGs, which are relatively similar. This was
also expected, as the morphological type of the primary galaxy is
not related to the one of its small companion producing streams.
We can also represent the length and width of tails normal-
ized by the eﬀective sizes of their host galaxy, and as a function

Article number, page 12 of 30

Elisabeth Sola et al.: Characterization of Low Surface Brightness structures in annotated deep images

Table 4. Median values of the longest length in tidal tails and streams for each type of galaxy, associated with their standard deviation. Values are
expressed in kiloparsecs.

Galaxy type

Tidal Tails

Streams

All galaxies
ETGs
LTGs

Median length (kpc)
22
23
20

std Median length (kpc)
20
27
14

29
34
25

std
29
31
25

Table 5. Median values of the width in tidal tails and streams for each type of galaxy, associated with their standard deviation. Values are expressed
in kiloparsecs.

Galaxy type

Tidal Tails

Streams

All galaxies
ETGs
LTGs

Median width (kpc)
5.7
6.6
5.0

std Median width (kpc)
3.8
4.5
3.1

4.1
4.3
3.9

std
2.1
2.1
2.0

5.1.4. Surface brightness

In Table 6, we give the overall median inner SB value for each
type of structure and host galaxy type. The distributions of these
values are visible in Figure 11.

Having a median SB of 26.2 mag arcsec−2, streams are
fainter than tails by 0.9 mag. This diﬀerence is statistically sig-
niﬁcant, as Mood’s test applied on the SB values of tidal tails
and streams returns a p-value of 8.6 × 10−8. As seen in Figure
11, the SB distribution of streams is narrower than that of tidal
tails. None of them have SB fainter than 27.5 mag arcsec−2.

Several reasons could explain why tidal tails are on average
brighter than streams. First, our sample includes on-going or re-
cent mergers. Their tails are too young to face the evaporation
process that fade collisional debris. Besides, those formed from
gas-rich LTGs can contain young and luminous stellar popula-
tions (e.g., Elmegreen et al. 1993; Jarrett et al. 2006). In addi-
tion, by deﬁnition tails form from massive objects and should
therefore be more massive and luminous than the streams which
emanate from lower-mass satellites. A second explanation could
be related to the diﬀerent survival times of each type of struc-
tures (see e.g., Mihos 1995; Ji et al. 2014; Mancillas et al. 2019):
streams tend to be visible for a longer time than tails. Tails
could be more fragile than streams and therefore could disap-
pear faster, i.e. their typical morphology would start to be lost
when the structure orbits the galaxy more than once. The old tail
would rather resemble multiple streams. We might be able to de-
tect tails only when they are young enough to keep their typical
morphology, hence bright enough.

5.1.5. Overall bending

As seen in numerical simulations of galaxy mergers (e.g., Bul-
lock & Johnston 2005; Cooper et al. 2010; Lux et al. 2013; Gib-
bons et al. 2014), tidal streams follow approximately the orbit
of their progenitors: wrapping around the primary galaxy, they
appear as strongly curved. On the other hand, the shape of tails
that emanate from the primary galaxy is mainly driven by tidal
forces. Depending on their orientation and until their material
falls back on the primary, these structures may appear as rela-
tively straight. Therefore curvature may be another criterion to
disentangle streams and young tails.

To obtain a basic estimate of the curvature, we ﬁtted the topo-
logical skeleton (as deﬁned in section 4.2, it is the medial axis
and can be seen as a thinner version of the shape that is equidis-

Article number, page 13 of 30

Fig. 8. Histogram of the area (in square kiloparsecs) covered by tidal
tails (in blue) and streams (in red), in bins of width 100 kpc2. The me-
dian of each distribution is represented by the dotted lines.

of the morphological type, as visible in Figure B.1 of Appendix
B. The same trends than previously mentioned for tails are visi-
ble, i.e. a ﬂatter distribution for the width of ETGs, and a slightly
longer length, than for LTGs. We did not normalize the length
and width of streams as they do not originate from the primary
galaxy.

To summarize this section, we found statistical diﬀerences
between tidal tails and streams: from our measures, streams are
more elongated and thinner than tidal tails, which was already
hinted by the visual inspection. The agreement with theoretical
arguments gives credibility to our classiﬁcation based on visual
impression.

A&A proofs: manuscript no. main

Fig. 9. Histograms of the length in kiloparsecs of tidal tails (in blue) and streams (in red), in bins of width 8 kpc (left); and of their width in bins
of width 2 kpc (right). The median of each distribution is represented by the dotted lines.

Fig. 10. Histograms of the width in kiloparsecs of tidal tails (left) and streams (right) in bins of 2 kpc as a function of the morphological type of
the galaxies: ETGs are represented by darker shades than LTGs. The median of each distribution is represented by the dotted lines.

Table 6. Median inner SB measurements for tidal tails and streams, expressed in magnitudes per square arcsecond, associated with their standard
deviation.

Galaxy type

Tidal Tails

Streams

All galaxies
ETGs
LTGs

Article number, page 14 of 30

Median inner SB std Median inner SB std
0.7
0.7
0.7

25.3
25.4
25.1

26.2
26.1
26.3

1.1
0.9
1.1

Elisabeth Sola et al.: Characterization of Low Surface Brightness structures in annotated deep images

determined a g − r value between 0.5 and 0.8 mag for 24 streams
around local galaxies.

Our analysis tends to show that tidal tails are bluer than
streams by around 0.1 mag. This diﬀerence is statistically sig-
niﬁcant, as Mood’s test gives a p-value of 0.003. This could
be due to the presence of young stars along the tails. In gas-
rich mergers, gas is expelled along tidal tails, just like the stars,
and may be compressed in the collisional debris and trigger star-
formation (e.g., Jarrett et al. 2006; Olson & Kwan 1990). On the
contrary, dwarf satellites are usually gas poor, and if they have
been stripped the color of their tidal streams will reﬂect that of
their old stellar populations. So the observed diﬀerence in colors
between tails and streams may be due to age eﬀects: as already
argued, tails tend to be observed at a younger age than streams.
Taking into account the fact that the color of the old stars of satel-
lites is bluer than that of the primary galaxy, due to their lower
metallicity, the age eﬀect may be even stronger.

5.1.7. Stream progenitors

If streams emanate from a disrupted satellite, remnants of the
progenitor may still be visible. As matter of fact, the presence of
a condensation within a tidal structure was one of our criteria to
label it as a possible stream, especially if a sign of an S-shape
was present 17.

Hence, it is interesting to check the percentage of streams
that have a progenitor from our annotation database. The pro-
genitor of the stream is deﬁned as follows. If there are no com-
panion or dwarf galaxy in the annotations, the stream is consid-
ered orphan. If the stream has an overlap (partial or entire) with
a companion or dwarf galaxy, then the progenitor is the compan-
ion galaxy.

The absence of a progenitor in a genuine stream may indi-
cate that the satellite has been totally destroyed, if the stream
was formed long ago, or that it is hidden in the primary galaxy.
Statistically, orphan streams should be older than those having a
progenitor still visible.

In our results, when taking all CFIS and MATLAS galaxies
with streams into account, about 70% of all streams are orphan.
In comparison, for the Milky Way and M31, although there is no
precise census of the percentage of orphan streams, most of the
streams originating from companion galaxies do not present a
progenitor, excepted for the Sagittarius stream (Ibata et al. 1994).
Trends are similar for our results even though more progenitors
are still visible. As mentioned before, this percentage of orphan
streams could be related to the age of these structures or to pro-
jection eﬀects, but it might also be linked to misclassiﬁcations
between tidal tails and streams. Indeed, the absence of a progen-
itor in the structure made the identiﬁcation more complicated,
which in some cases might have mislead users during their clas-
siﬁcation. We do not see any diﬀerence between ETG and LTG
hosts, but we did not expect the stream properties or its progeni-
tor to depend on the morphological type of the primary galaxy.

5.2. Shells

A total of 260 shells have been annotated. Geometrical, color and
surface brightness measurements of these features are presented
here.

17 Condensations and tidal dwarf galaxies may be present in tidal tails
made in major mergers, but being formed in situ, they do not exhibit the
S-shape typical of tidally disrupted dwarfs.

Article number, page 15 of 30

Fig. 11. Histogram of the median surface brightness value in magni-
tudes per square arcsecond for tidal tails (in blue) and streams (in red),
in bins of width 0.5 mag arcsec−2 . The median of each distribution is
represented by the dotted lines.

tant to its boundaries) of tidal features by a linear function, us-
ing a least-squares regression. Note that we performed this com-
putation only for not-round polygons, as the skeleton for round
polygon does not represent properly the shape. We compared
the R2 correlation coeﬃcient determined for streams and tails:
the higher R2, the closer the feature is to a straight curve.

For streams, the mean and median R2 are respectively 0.62
and 0.79 with an associated standard deviation of 0.37. For tails,
the mean and median R2 values are respectively 0.59 and 0.64,
with a standard deviation of 0.34. It appears that there is a large
variability, especially for streams where the diﬀerence between
the mean and the median value of R2 is more important. In ad-
dition, the linear ﬁt for streams is better than for tails. Hence,
streams do not appear more curved than tails as we would have
expected from simulations.

One possible explanation, besides the projection eﬀects, the
uncertainties of the method and/or possible confusions between
streams and tails, is that the depth of the survey may not be suﬃ-
cient to follow the structures over large distances. They must be
long enough to get a reliable estimate of the curvature, which is
often not the case (see Figures A.1 and A.2). Besides, the bend-
ing of stream might be invisible if it is partly hidden by the host
galaxy.

5.1.6. Color

The median g − r color values computed from the colormaps for
tidal tails and streams are presented in Table 7. It must be noted
that the colors were computed on the images without any clean-
ing process: pollutants such as bright ghost reﬂections or high
background may aﬀect the color measurements. As pollutants
are more visible in the r-band than in the g-band, they will tend
to redden all measures. Nevertheless, our measure of the color
of streams surrounding ETGs, with a median g − r value of 0.64
mag, is in agreement with Martinez-Delgado et al. (2021) who

A&A proofs: manuscript no. main

Table 7. Median g − r value for tidal tails, streams, shells and halos for each type of MATLAS galaxy, associated with their standard deviation.
The number of structures annotated is indicated in parentheses.

Galaxy type

Tidal Tails

MATLAS all galaxies
MATLAS ETGs
MATLAS LTGs

Median g − r
0.57 (148)
0.57 (95)
0.56 (53)

Streams
std Median g − r
0.17
0.16
0.19

0.65 (52)
0.64 (49)
1.00 (3)

Shells
std Median g − r
0.16
0.15
0.21

0.60 (217)
0.60 (198)
0.70 (19)

Halos
std Median g − r
0.25
0.25
0.20

0.62 (221)
0.63 (170)
0.57 (51)

std
0.12
0.11
0.15

Fig. 13. Example of NGC0474. Left: Histogram of the shell radii for
this galaxy. Right: Corresponding density plot with the inﬂection points
of the curve indicated by red stars.

Most often the diﬀerence between the galactic center and the
center of the shell is less than 10 Re and the median distance is
around 2.5 Re. This means that in general the center of the shell
is still located inside the galaxy and we can consider them as rel-
atively concentric. Cases for which the relative distance between
the centers is large may correspond to bad approximations of the
shells as circular structures or to real non-concentric shells such
as those of Type III.

Radius - The shell radius is another metric which can easily
be compared to predictions from simulations. It is computed as
the on-sky separation between the point lying in the middle of
the Curved line deﬁning the shell and the center of the galaxy
host.

Such a computation needs to take into account the fact that
for a given galaxy, multiple users might have annotated the same
shells. Simply computing the mean shell radius per galaxy aver-
aged over all the users would introduce biases. Indeed, as men-
tioned earlier, the number of shells annotated depends on the ex-
pertise of the user and on the shape of the shell itself. Clearly de-
ﬁned shells will be annotated as one structure, while less-deﬁned
ones will be annotated as several shells. This means that the less
well-deﬁned ones will have a higher impact and count for more
features.

To tackle this issue, we have directly plotted for each galaxy
the histogram of the radii of shells annotated by all users, and
drawn the corresponding density plot. On that plot, we identi-
ﬁed the most representative values, i.e. the radii corresponding
to the inﬂection points, as illustrated in Figure 13. The inﬂec-
tion points, referred here as ’peak radii’, are computed using
a Scipy function to ﬁnd peaks in a 1-D array using a Ricker
wavelet transformation19. Their histogram for all galaxies are
represented in Figure 14.

Most of the shells have a radius smaller than 40 kpc with a
few extending to 80 kpc. For instance the shells of the proto-
typical galaxy NGC0474 range from 10 to 50 kpc Bílek et al.
(2021). We do not observe shells beyond 80 kpc, which seems

Fig. 12. Concentricity test: histogram of the distance in eﬀective radius
between the galactic center and the center of the shell. Higher distances
correspond to larger deviations from concentricity.

5.2.1. Concentricity and radii

Shells have been annotated using Curved lines and thus measur-
ing their area is irrelevant. Such an annotation faces a major is-
sue: the selection of the beginning and ending of a shell might be
diﬀerent for an expert or novice user. The former may be aware
of the well-shaped circular shells in idealized numerical simu-
lations and consider as a single structure a shell that might be
divided into several arcs by the less expert users. Nevertheless,
interesting metrics can still be computed, such as the concentric-
ity or their radius.

Concentricity - From numerical simulations, shells are usu-
ally formed as concentric structures (e.g., Pop et al. 2018; Ebrová
et al. 2021; Bílek et al. 2021), a prediction we can directly test
with our observations. To compute the concentricity, we assume
that the Curved line deﬁning the shell is a circular arc, and we
compute its center18. Since the Curved line is a cubic Bézier
curve, it may diﬀer from a circular arc if the user did not draw
the shell properly. In that case, we only consider the starting,
middle and ending point of the curve and we compute the center
of the circle passing through these three points. We then compute
the distance between the shell center and the center of the host
galaxy. The histogram of theses distances is displayed in Figure
12. A distance equal to zero means the shell is centered on the
galaxy (i.e. concentric), while larger distances indicate a higher
deviation from concentricity.

18 The center of the shell is hence the center of the circle that passes
through the circular arc deﬁning the shell.

19 Scipy ﬁnd_peaks_cwt, https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/
reference/generated/scipy.signal.find_peaks_cwt.html

Article number, page 16 of 30

Elisabeth Sola et al.: Characterization of Low Surface Brightness structures in annotated deep images

is smaller to 0.05 so we can conclude that the medians of shells
for ETGs and LTGs are not the same at a signiﬁcance of 5%.

5.3. Halos

After our selection process, 340 halos were kept. Here, we
present the analysis of their surface brightness, radius and color.

5.3.1. Surface brightness and radius

We measured the surface brightness along the external contours
of the annotated stellar halos. Figure 15 plots their distribution
for the 340 stellar halos kept after our selection process. It peaks
at 26.1 mag arcsec−2 (median value).

Such a value is clearly much lower than the nominal SB limit
of the survey, and that obtained when deriving integrated surface
brightness proﬁles of galaxies. It just reﬂects the ability of the
eye in delineating an external contour on our asinh images.

In addition, from the coordinates of the annotations stored in
our database, we can compute the radius of the annotated stel-
lar halos. The histogram of the values measured for all galaxies
is shown on Figure 16. One can see that the median radius is
around 16.5 kpc for ETGs and 15.9 kpc for LTGs, with the ma-
jority of the halos having a radius smaller than 30 kpc. A few
radii extend up to 70 kpc and correspond mostly to ETGs. How-
ever, the distributions are relatively similar for the two morpho-
logical types.

We would expect ETGs to have larger radii than LTGs. In-
deed, there are more satellite companions around ETGs than
LTGs for a given mass, and more companions for more massive
galaxies (Kawinwanichakij et al. 2014). In addition, the mass
growth of present day galaxies seems to be driven by minor
mergers (Oser et al. 2010), leading to the formation of streams.
Hence ETGs should have more material in their outskirts and
so larger radii. The fact that we do not observe this could be
explained by the low SB of streams. We may not be able to vi-
sually recover all the streams, especially the fainter, so we might
underestimate the extent of the faint outskirts of the halo. The
study of integrated SB proﬁles of ETGs and LTGs might reveal
diﬀerences, but this is behind the scope of this paper.

From our annotation database, we cannot directly infer the
stellar mass of the halo, an important parameter to constrain the
mass assembly of galaxies (Merritt et al. 2020). This estimate
requires a lot of processing, in particular to take into account
PSF eﬀects (Karabal et al. 2017). It will be the focus of another
paper in this series.

5.3.2. Color

The median g − r color values computed from the colormaps for
halos are presented in Table 7.

One can see that there is a 0.06 mag diﬀerence between the
median g − r color for halos of ETGs and LTGs. It is statistically
signiﬁcant (at a signiﬁcant level of 5%), with a p-value of 0.025
from Mood’s test. Not so surprisingly, the stellar halos of LTGs
are bluer than for ETGs, due to (low levels of) star formation
occurring there.

5.4. Covering factor

Fig. 14. Histogram of the peak radii of shells (in kiloparsecs) for all
galaxies, with Poisson uncertainties plotted as the black error bars in
each bin.

at odds with some simulations. Whereas they extend to 120 kpc
in Ebrová et al. (2019) and Karademir et al. (2019), some of the
shells in Pop et al. (2018) have a radius reaching 150-200 kpc.
Obviously the comparison is not straightforward as the shell ori-
entation (not well constrained from our annotations of real sys-
tems) and diﬀerences in surface brightness need to be taken into
account.

5.2.2. Surface brightness

We measured the SB value along the Curved line deﬁning the
shell annotation. When considering all galaxies, the median in-
ner SB values for shells is 25.4 mag arcsec−2; it is of 25.3
mag arcsec−2 for ETGs and of 25.6 mag arcsec−2 for LTGs hosts.
The distribution of SB values, presented in Figure 15, ranges be-
tween 21 and 28 mag arcsec−2. Shells are detected with a maxi-
mal surface brightness close to the nominal depth of the surveys.
This is linked to their shape, as a circular arc is easy to detect
and identify on an image: even very faint shells can be visually
recognized, while it is more diﬃcult for complicated shapes like
tidal tails or streams (see section 6.5)

Note that we did not subtract the stellar halo of the host be-
fore our measurement, explaining why the inner shells (i.e. shells
that are overlapping with the halo) are apparently brighter than
the external ones (i.e. shells further away from the halo).

5.2.3. Colors

The median g − r color values of the shells computed from the
MATLAS colormaps are presented in Table 7. The median color
of shells seems close (slightly redder) than that of other tidal fea-
tures, but again the measurements may be polluted by the stellar
halo.

There is a discrepancy of 0.1 mag between the color of the
shells of LTGs and ETGs. Mood’s test on the medians of the
colors of ETGs and LTGs gives a p-value of 1.8 × 10−5, which

As mentioned earlier, our annotation database does not provide
an estimate of the stellar mass of the LSB structures surrounding
their host galaxies. However one proxy of their relative impor-

Article number, page 17 of 30

A&A proofs: manuscript no. main

Fig. 15. Histograms of the median surface brightness value in magnitudes per square arcsecond for shells (left) and for halos (right), in bins of
width 0.5 mag arcsec−2. The medians are represented by the dotted lines.

Table 8. Median of the percentage of the covering factor in selected
boxes of side length 20 Re around the primary galaxy. For tidal tails and
streams, they are counted only when the galaxy exhibits these features.

Feature type
Main Galaxy
Halo
Tidal Tails
Streams
Ghost reﬂections

Median covering factor
0.03
0.17
0.04
0.02
0.01

Results are shown in Figure 17. Within the selected boxes, the
stellar halo has a median covering factor of 0.16: it is computed
for the entire outer ellipse annotation of the halo, without sub-
tracting the main galaxy. This value is to be compared to 0.03 for
the central regions (’main galaxy’), 0.04 for tidal tails and 0.02
for streams, considering only galaxies that do have tidal tails or
streams.

For pollutants such as high background and cirrus, it is more
relevant to determine their covering factor for larger ﬁelds of
view, to get predictions on the contamination levels for other sur-
veys. We considered a ﬁeld of view of 31x31’. For regions with
high background, the covering factor has two peaks respectively
near 0 and 1, with a relatively uniform distribution between these
two values. It is higher than 0.9 (fully polluted images) for 11%
of our galaxies and lower than 0.1 (clean images) for 34% of our
galaxies. Restricting the analysis to the cirrus, the histogram re-
veals images that are either fully covered or completely absent
with very few intermediate cases. Overall, regions free of any
contamination sources (excepted the ghosted halos), i.e. with a
covering factor higher than 0.9 for the clean pixels, correspond to
about one fourth of our images, while 17% of our images are al-
most fully contaminated, i.e. clean regions cover less than 10%.

Fig. 16. Histogram of the radius of the halos in kiloparsecs as a function
of the morphological type, in bins of width 5 kpc. The median of each
distribution is represented by the dotted line.

tance is their "covering factor", deﬁned as the percentage of the
pixels belonging to one type of structure with respect to a given
ﬁeld of view. For the latter, we considered boxes of side length
20Re centered on the primary galaxy.

For this measurement, we selected the annotations of a given
galaxy and a given user. The median values of the covering fac-
tor for diﬀerent types of structures are given in Table 8. A cov-
ering factor of 0 (respectively 1) means that the feature is not
present on (respectively entirely covers) the given ﬁeld of view.

Article number, page 18 of 30

Elisabeth Sola et al.: Characterization of Low Surface Brightness structures in annotated deep images

Fig. 17. Left: histogram of the covering factor for stellar structures and ghost reﬂections in a selected box of side length 20Re centered on the
primary galaxy. Right: histogram of the covering factor for high background, cirrus and clean ("Not Polluted") regions in a ﬁeld of view of
30.95×30.95’ around the primary galaxy.

6. Discussion

The originality of our approach relies on the use of an annota-
tion database of Low-Surface-Brightness features compiled by a
group of users who have precisely delineated a large number of
individual structures (representing a total of 8441 annotations)
directly on displayed images and classiﬁed them. The method
raises a number of issues partly posted in the previous sections:
(1) the diﬃculty of matching individual annotations made by dif-
ferent users (2) the presence of overlapping structures, in partic-
ular the contaminants which have a large covering factor, which
prevent us from determining with precision the boundaries of
some structures (3) the ambiguity in the classiﬁcation of the var-
ious types of tidal features (4) the fact that we have used images
coming from various CFHT surveys with varying depth and sur-
face brightness limits and (5) the reliability of the annotations
when considering users with diﬀerent levels of expertise. We ad-
dress all these issues in this discussion.

6.1. Survey sensitivity to identify tidal features

One important point to note is the fact that no annotated tidal tails
or streams are fainter than 27.5 mag arcsec−2, even though the
nominal depth of the images is at least of 28.3 mag arcsec−2. This
discrepancy can be explained by several factors. First, the nom-
inal survey depth was estimated from measures done on boxes
of 10"x10", while the structures of interest are more extended.
Fluctuations of the SB brightness along the most diﬀuse struc-
tures (possibly above or below the SB limit) make it break into
several sub-structures on our images, and its identiﬁcation and
classiﬁcation as a single genuine stellar feature is very diﬃcult.
The presence of artefacts of similar SB as the structures has the
same consequence of apparently breaking them into pieces.

This discrepancy of about 1 mag between the faintest tidal
structures that may be identiﬁed and classiﬁed and the nomi-
nal SB limit of the survey must be kept in mind when making
comparisons with simulations or estimating their visibility with

other facilities. Similarly, the outer SB of halos is smaller than
the depth of the survey, as the eye is not able to detect the faintest
structures compared to what can be obtained with aperture pho-
tometry.

On the contrary, shells are more easily identiﬁed because of
their characteristic circular shape, even if they are non-linear,
and indeed the SB of the faintest shells are close to the SB limit
of the survey (see section 5.2.2).

6.2. Generalisation to users with different levels of expertise

In the preliminary study presented in this paper, the annotations
were made by four users with a similar level of expertise. How-
ever, the annotation tool can be used by anyone and this study
can be extended to less expert users. Taking the level of expertise
of the user into account in the classiﬁcation of tidal structures is
important, as it reﬂects the degree of conﬁdence that we can have
in the annotation of this user (Bílek et al. 2020). Therefore, it is
possible with our annotation tool to attribute weights to the users,
and these weights would be inherited by the annotations. In that
case, the results should take the weights into account, by com-
puting for instance the weighted median and weighted standard
deviation instead of simply the median and standard deviation.

Applying weights to the users could also modify our selec-
tion method described in section 4.8. For instance, instead of
keeping the largest annotation for halos, tails and streams, one
could think of weighting the annotation masks and combining
the shapes into a weighted combination of the diﬀerent annota-
tions.

6.3. Level of contamination

As mentioned in section 4.7, we deﬁned a reliability index to
take the pollutant sources in the vicinity of the halo of the
galaxy into account, as they might lead to biased annotations.
The higher the reliability index, the cleaner the image around

Article number, page 19 of 30

A&A proofs: manuscript no. main

However, the area covered is more relevant to characterize
them (rather than the number of features, as they range from
0, 1 or 2 for tails and generally 0 or 1 for streams). Hence,
a second metric was deﬁned. It relies on the pairing of tidal
tails and streams as deﬁned in section 4.8 with the unique
identiﬁer. The Jaccard index is computed on the structures
annotated by useri and user j that share the same unique iden-
tiﬁer.

– For contaminants (high background, cirrus): the union of all
the contaminant of annotations of the given type is made, as
sometimes a user will split a pollutant annotation into two.
Then, the Jaccard index is computed between the unions of
the contaminants.

We found out that the mean similarity index between two of
our users reaches about 0.81 for halos and 0.52 for tidal tails
and streams sharing the same unique identiﬁer. The relatively
high similarity between halo annotations is an indicator that both
users annotated in a comparable way, which is important for our
study. The lower similarity index for tidal features was expected,
since annotating tidal features is not as clear and easy as anno-
tating halos.

It is also interesting to determine whether users annotate in a
comparable way in the presence of pollutants. When we consider
only the cleanest annotations, that is to say annotations with as
weighted reliability index as deﬁned in section 4.7 equal to 9, we
obtain a similarity index of 0.85 for halos and 0.57 for tidal tails
and streams. When keeping only the most polluted annotations
(with a weighted reliability index smaller or equal to 2), the sim-
ilarity index for halos is 0.8 and 0.53 for tails and streams. One
can see that for halos, the cleaner the image, the higher the simi-
larity index, which is likely related to the fact that users annotate
in a more similar manner when the image is less polluted. For
tails and streams, the trend is not that clear but this might be due
to the fact that it is more complicated to precisely delineate these
features in a similar manner. Therefore in general pollutants do
not seem to be the main source of diﬀerences in the delineations
of tidal debris.

6.5. Disentangling tidal tails from streams

As mentioned in section 3.2, we deﬁned tidal tail as structures
with stellar material apparently coming from the primary galaxy,
while streams originate from a less-massive smaller companion
which may still be visible, hidden or have been destroyed. Most
probably the users have adopted this deﬁnition in diﬀerent ways
according to their expertise and used a variety of observables
(location, shape, amount of overlap with the closest galaxy, etc.)
to assess the classiﬁcation.

Getting quantitative measurements from our annotation
database, we are able to determine whether these 2 classes of
tidal objects show diﬀerent properties, may thus be really distin-
guished from our images and retrospectively check whether the
basic initial criterion for disentangling them was relevant.

As presented in detail in section 5.1.3, we found that streams
are narrower than tidal tails, a diﬀerence expected from models,
as the width of tidal debris largely depends on the velocity dis-
persion of the progenitor, itself linked with its total mass. Just
considering tidal tails, those found around ETGs appear wider
than those associated to LTGs, another result at ﬁrst order con-
sistent with the expectations, since the velocity dispersion of
galaxies decreases with their morphological type. In fact this ex-
planation holds only for ETG-ETG collisions which naturally
produce plume-like tidal tails. A merger involving one or two

Fig. 18. Histogram of the weighted reliability index for the galaxies. A
higher index corresponds to a cleaner image around the halo.

the galaxy. The histogram of the weighted reliability index can
be seen in Figure 18. One can see that only 23% of the images
are completely free of pollutants around the halo, while 65% are
polluted (with an index smaller or equal to 2). This indicates that
a majority of our annotations are embedded in a polluted region
which might have biased our delineations, but more importantly
this could be a major issue for automated classiﬁcation methods.

6.4. Similarity between annotations

Since several users have annotated the same galaxies, it is neces-
sary to assess their reliability. Following section 6.2, if the users
have diﬀerent levels of expertise, this assessment could be useful
to adjust the user weight. Indeed, it is important to characterize
whether they annotate like the majority of the group or if their
annotations are too diﬀerent from what is expected (especially
for non-expert users). In that case, the weight associated to that
user will be lowered in order to avoid outliers in the results due to
non-reliable classiﬁcations. This step could be part of a method-
ological process for future studies. We remind that in this paper,
all users have a similar level of expertise and no weight was as-
signed.

A similarity index ranging from 0 (no similarity) to 1 (total
similarity) was computed to assess the similarity between the
annotations of two users. It depends on the annotation type and
is deﬁned as follows:

– For halo and main galaxy annotations: the Jaccard index
(Hennig 2007) is used. It is deﬁned as the area of the in-
tersection of both structures divided by area of their union. If
an annotation is missing for one of the user the index is set
to zero.

– For shells: since their number is relevant, the similarity in-
max(S i,S j) , where S i (respectively S j) is the

dex is deﬁned as min(S i,S j)
number of shells annotated by useri (respectively user j).
– For tails and streams: two metrics are used. The ﬁrst one, like
for shells, is an index computed over the number of features.

Article number, page 20 of 30

Elisabeth Sola et al.: Characterization of Low Surface Brightness structures in annotated deep images

LTGs will produce more narrow tails. Conversely, tails coming
from late-type galaxies (that have kept their stellar disk) are nec-
essarily relatively thin. Taking into account all conﬁgurations,
statistically, there should be more wide tidal tails around ETGs,
as observed.

Note that the area and length measured (from which we es-
timated the width) are only based on the projected shape of the
structures since it is the only thing that can be annotated. It does
not take the inclination and orientation along the line-of-sight of
the galaxy into account, so the real intrinsic size of each structure
is not known. Some tidal features are likely to be overlooked, es-
pecially when the galaxy is seen edge-on or when a tidal tail is
hidden behind the galaxy.

We also found a statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerence between
the median surface brightness and color of tails and streams. This
is also consistent with having progenitors of diﬀerent masses and
ages.

The fact that we see a statistical distinction in the physical
properties of tidal tails and streams is a validation of our deﬁni-
tions of these features (see section 3.2).

However, from visual inspection of the thumbnails with all
the individual tidal features shown in Figures A.1 and A.2, it can
be seen that their shapes can vary a lot from one to the other.
Some trends are emerging (tidal tails seem broader than streams
while streams seem more elongated), but the great variability
observed makes diﬃcult a clear visual separation between the
two structures. This might suggest that an automated classiﬁca-
tion of streams and tails solely based on their individual shape
could be very complicated. The human expert classiﬁer might
have used a number of criteria to classify streams and tails, in
addition to calling his physical intuition on their origin. Thus
results might be better when providing the machine all relevant
information, including the properties of the primary galaxy, but
still requires reliable labels. Deep learning techniques are good
candidates to achieve this inclusion of properties thanks to its
inherent accounting for visual context.

6.6. Impact of the depth of the survey
In this paper, we used images from two surveys with diﬀerent
depth, CFIS and the deeper MATLAS. Since most of our ETGs
are drawn from MATLAS images and most LTGs from CFIS, we
are in principle biased toward ﬁnding fainter features in ETGs.
In this section, we study the impact of the depth of the survey on
tidal features properties like the area or the length. To that end,
we plot the 2D-histogram of the SB values of tails and streams
as a function of their area (Figure 19), for ETGs and LTGs. A
similar 2D-histogram of the length as a function of the SB is
represented in Figure 20. One must note that we cannot compare
these 2D-histograms between tidal tails and streams as other pro-
cesses than the depth are involved (see section 6.5), and we must
keep in mind the fact that we do not have the same number of
tidal features around ETGs and LTGs.

For the area (Figure 19) of tidal tails (panels a) and b), there
seems to be a slight trend that fainter structures are larger. We do
not observe important diﬀerences between ETGs and LTGs, only
three tails are larger and fainter in ETGs compared to LTGs. For
the area of streams (panels c) and d), the trend is less clear. Some
streams have similar areas for a large range of SB values. This
was expected as streams originate from a companion galaxy and
the morphological type of the primary galaxy should not have an
inﬂuence. Two streams are fainter than 27.2 mag arcsec−2 around
ETGs, contrary to LTGs. Hence, for the area, although a few
structures are larger and fainter around ETGs compared to LTGs,

there is no major diﬀerence between ETGs and LTGs that could
be attributed to diﬀerences in the depth of the surveys.

For the length (Figure 20) of tidal tails (panels a) and b),
it seems that fainter structures are longer (the trend is clearer
for ETGs than for LTGs). The maximum SB of tails hardly dif-
fers: around ETGs it reaches about 26.5 mag arcsec−2 for four
structures, compared to 26.9 mag arcsec−2 for LTGs for two
tails. For the length of streams (panels c) and d), for ETGs two
streams reach 27.5 mag arcsec−2, which is 0.2 mag fainter than
the faintest stream around LTGs. The longest streams (with a
length ≥ 80 kpc) are not the faintest ones, and the majority of
streams have comparable length and SB for ETGs and LTGs.
Therefore, although there is a diﬀerence in the depth of the sur-
veys, we do not observe a major bias in our results for the area
or the length of tidal tails and streams.

6.7. Limits of the study

We remind here that all our quantitative measurements relied on
the analysis of the annotation database. In particular, we did not
perform aperture photometry in our images. This means that we
cannot determine the ﬂux of the tidal features or of the halos, and
hence their stellar mass. Furthermore, no masking techniques
were used to remove the polluting light from foreground or back-
ground objects. The SB values that are obtained are useful to
compare trends between features, but a more detailed analysis
would be needed to precisely assess them.

Like any other visual classiﬁcation process, our annotations
would be more reliable if tens or hundreds of people would have
participated. In this paper, we rely on the annotations of 4 users
only. However, we realized this process is complicated and the
users need to be trained both to recognize LSB structures and
to draw their shape with precision, making any citizen science
project like Galaxy Zoo diﬃcult to implement. This task is made
more complicated by the presence of many pollutants that over-
lap with the interesting features. The time necessary to annotate
is quite important as well (around 10 minutes per galaxy). There-
fore, automated techniques will be needed to analyze larger sam-
ples of galaxies with few annotations. The annotations we made
could be used to train machine learning algorithms. In fact, it has
already been the case with Richards et al. (2020), who used our
cirrus annotations to train a new machine learning algorithm to
detect cirrus on deep images. Yet, the small number of annota-
tions is a problem as large datasets are needed to train such al-
gorithms. Appropriate data augmentation or annotations of cos-
mological simulations may be necessary to have large enough
training datasets.

7. Conclusions

The detection and classiﬁcation of tidal features around galaxies
is essential as their characterization gives valuable information
about the past assembly history of their host galaxy. In this pa-
per, we present an online annotation tool that enables users to
draw the shapes of LSB structures with precision in deep im-
ages for a large number of galaxies. We also show how we may
use our annotation database to estimate some physical quanti-
ties, such as the shape, size, surface brightness and colors of
tidal tails, streams, shells and stellar halos. Such values were so
far not very well constrained on large samples of galaxies. They
may be compared to simulations to better understand the type of
mergers that took place, and more generally to constrain models
of galactic evolution.

Article number, page 21 of 30

A&A proofs: manuscript no. main

Fig. 19. 2D-histograms of the area (in square kiloparsecs) of tidal tails and streams as a function of the median surface brightness (in mag arcsec−2).
This 2D-histogram for tidal tails around ETGs is presented in panel a) and for LTGs in panel b). For streams, the histogram for ETGs is visible in
panel c) and in panel d) for LTGs.

Using a customized on-line tool, we have manually identi-
ﬁed, delineated and classiﬁed LSB features including contami-
nants around 352 nearby massive galaxies from the CFHT MAT-
LAS and CFIS surveys. Each ﬁeld has been inspected by up to
4 diﬀerent users. A database containing 8441 annotations was
compiled (Table 2). We have developed a methodology to asso-
ciate common annotations between users and link the associa-
tions with their host galaxies.

With such a project, we aim at diﬀerentiating the types of
tidal debris and a posteriori determine whether a classiﬁcation
solely based on eye inspection of deep images is reliable.

Not so surprisingly, the annotated structures show an appar-
ent large variety of shapes and sizes when put and compared
together (as visible in Figures A.1 and A.2). There is a large

Article number, page 22 of 30

overlap between tails (tidal structures emanating from the pri-
mary galaxy and made during major mergers) and streams (tidal
debris from disrupted low-mass companions). However, a statis-
tical analysis revealed real diﬀerences:

– Tidal tails are wider than streams, with a typical width of 6
kpc against 4 kpc for streams (Figure 9). This was expected
from models: since streams originate from low-mass com-
panions with lower velocity dispersion, their width should
be smaller.

– Tidal

tails are brighter than streams, with a diﬀerence
between their median surface brightness of almost 1
mag arcsec−2 (Table 6). This may be due to some age ef-
fects, with streams having a longer survival (i.e. visibility)

Elisabeth Sola et al.: Characterization of Low Surface Brightness structures in annotated deep images

Fig. 20. 2D-histograms of the length (in kiloparsecs) of tidal tails and streams as a function of the median surface brightness (in mag arcsec−2).
This 2D-histogram for tidal tails around ETGs is presented in panel a) and for LTGs in panel b). For streams, the histogram for ETGs is visible in
panel c) and in panel d) for LTGs.

time than tails, which are more easily identiﬁed as such when
they are young.

– Tidal tails are slightly bluer than streams (a diﬀerence of 0.1
mag for the g-r color) (Table 7), again likely due to an age
bias.
These statistical diﬀerences comfort the approach we used to

speciﬁcally distinguish tidal tails from streams.

– The annotated stellar halos have radii extending mostly be-
tween 5 and 30 kpc (Figure 16) with a similar distribution
for ETGs and LTGs in the environments probed here (out-
side massive clusters).

– Identiﬁed shells have typically radii lower than 40 kpc, with
few extending to 80 kpc (Figure 14): we do not observe

the very external extended shells found in some simulations,
even though the comparison is not straightforward.

Other tendencies interesting for the analysis for future sur-

veys are worth highlighting:

– The faintest structures identiﬁed as tidal tails and streams
have a median surface brightness about 1 mag brighter than
the nominal limiting surface brightness of the survey. This
should also be kept in mind when comparing observations to
simulations.

– Artefacts or foreground structures occupy a large fraction of
the image pixels (more than 50% in 10 Re boxes centered on
the target galaxy). They may signiﬁcantly alter our SB and

Article number, page 23 of 30

A&A proofs: manuscript no. main

color measurements. Having the possibility to remove them
would also be a strong asset for future automatic classiﬁca-
tions.

Finally, our annotations were all done manually, which took
a non-negligible amount of time of a group of participants.
Though feasible in samples of hundreds of galaxies, thanks to
our dedicated on-line tool, it cannot be applied to samples of
thousands. Machine learning methods will be needed to auto-
matically detect and classify tidal features in large surveys to
come, and our annotation database can be used to train such al-
gorithms.

As future prospects, the properties of tidal features with re-
spect to the host galaxy properties will be studied in a future pa-
per. In addition, the amount of stellar mass in the tidal features
could be computed. Together with estimates of their lifetime,
they can give an estimate of the speed of mass gain of galaxies
caused by mergers.

Acknowledgements. The authors thank Garreth Martin for his feedback on the
paper. F.R. was supported by Science and Technology Facilities Council (STFC)
grant ST/P006779/1. This research has made use of the SIMBAD database, op-
erated at CDS, Strasbourg, France, and of "Aladin sky atlas" developed at CDS,
Strasbourg Observatory, France. This work is based on data obtained as part of
the Canada-France Imaging Survey, a CFHT large program of the National Re-
search Council of Canada and the French Centre National de la Recherche Sci-
entiﬁque. Based on observations obtained with MegaPrime/MegaCam, a joint
project of CFHT and CEA Saclay, at the Canada-France-Hawaii Telescope
(CFHT) which is operated by the National Research Council (NRC) of Canada,
the Institut National des Science de l’Univers (INSU) of the Centre National de
la Recherche Scientiﬁque (CNRS) of France, and the University of Hawaii. This
research used the facilities of the Canadian Astronomy Data Centre operated
by the National Research Council of Canada with the support of the Canadian
Space Agency. This research is based in part on data collected at Subaru Tele-
scope, which is operated by the National Astronomical Observatory of Japan.
We are honored and grateful for the opportunity of observing the Universe from
Maunakea, which has the cultural, historical and natural signiﬁcance in Hawaii.
Pan-STARRS is a project of the Institute for Astronomy of the University of
Hawaii, and is supported by the NASA SSO Near Earth Observation Program un-
der grants 80NSSC18K0971, NNX14AM74G, NNX12AR65G, NNX13AQ47G,
NNX08AR22G, YORPD20_2-0014 and by the State of Hawaii.

References

Abraham, R. G., Valdes, F., Yee, H. K. C., & van den Bergh, S. 1994, ApJ, 432,

75

Abraham, R. G., van den Bergh, S., Glazebrook, K., et al. 1996, ApJS, 107, 1
Abraham, R. G., van den Bergh, S., & Nair, P. 2003, ApJ, 588, 218
Alabi, A. B., Romanowsky, A. J., Forbes, D. A., Brodie, J. P., & Okabe, N. 2020,

MNRAS, 496, 3182

Antoja, T., Ramos, P., Mateu, C., et al. 2020, A&A, 635, L3
Arp, H. 1966, ApJS, 14, 1
Atkinson, A. M., Abraham, R. G., & Ferguson, A. M. N. 2013, ApJ, 765, 28
Baugh, C. M., Benson, A. J., Cole, S., Frenk, C. S., & Lacey, C. 2003, in The
Mass of Galaxies at Low and High Redshift, ed. R. Bender & A. Renzini, 91

Bell, E. F., Naab, T., McIntosh, D. H., et al. 2006, ApJ, 640, 241
Belokurov, V., Zucker, D. B., Evans, N. W., et al. 2006, ApJ, 642, L137
Bernardi, M., Shankar, F., Hyde, J. B., et al. 2010, MNRAS, 404, 2087
Bertin, E., Mellier, Y., Radovich, M., et al. 2002, in Astronomical Society of the
Paciﬁc Conference Series, Vol. 281, Astronomical Data Analysis Software
and Systems XI, ed. D. A. Bohlender, D. Durand, & T. H. Handley, 228

Bezanson, R., van Dokkum, P., & Franx, M. 2012, ApJ, 760, 62
Bickley, R. W., Bottrell, C., Hani, M. H., et al. 2021, MNRAS, 504, 372
Bílek, M., Duc, P.-A., Cuillandre, J.-C., et al. 2020, MNRAS, 498, 2138
Bílek, M., Fensch, J., Ebrová, I., et al. 2021, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2111.14886
Bílek, M., Jungwiert, B., Jílková, L., et al. 2013, A&A, 559, A110
Bottrell, C., Hani, M. H., Teimoorinia, H., et al. 2019, MNRAS, 490, 5390
Bridge, C. R., Carlberg, R. G., & Sullivan, M. 2010, ApJ, 709, 1067
Bullock, J. S. & Johnston, K. V. 2005, ApJ, 635, 931
Cappellari, M., Emsellem, E., Krajnovi´c, D., et al. 2011, MNRAS, 413, 813
Casteels, K. R. V., Bamford, S. P., Skibba, R. A., et al. 2013, MNRAS, 429, 1051
Chambers, K. C., Magnier, E. A., Metcalfe, N., et al. 2016, arXiv e-prints,

arXiv:1612.05560

Article number, page 24 of 30

Cheng, T.-Y., Huertas-Company, M., Conselice, C. J., et al. 2021, MNRAS, 503,

4446

Cole, S., Lacey, C. G., Baugh, C. M., & Frenk, C. S. 2000, MNRAS, 319, 168
Conselice, C. J. 2009, MNRAS, 399, L16
Conselice, C. J., Bershady, M. A., Dickinson, M., & Papovich, C. 2003, AJ, 126,

1183

Conselice, C. J., Rajgor, S., & Myers, R. 2008, MNRAS, 386, 909
Cooper, A. P., Cole, S., Frenk, C. S., et al. 2010, MNRAS, 406, 744
Crain, R. A., Schaye, J., Bower, R. G., et al. 2015, MNRAS, 450, 1937
Dieleman, S., Willett, K. W., & Dambre, J. 2015, MNRAS, 450, 1441
Domínguez Sánchez, H., Huertas-Company, M., Bernardi, M., Tuccillo, D., &

Fischer, J. L. 2018, MNRAS, 476, 3661

Duc, P.-A. 2020, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2007.13874
Duc, P.-A., Cuillandre, J.-C., Karabal, E., et al. 2015, MNRAS, 446, 120
Ebrova, I. 2013, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1312.1643
Ebrová, I., Bílek, M., & Jungwiert, B. 2019, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1909.07393
Ebrová, I., Bílek, M., Vudragovi´c, A., Yıldız, M. K., & Duc, P.-A. 2021, A&A,

650, A50

Elmegreen, B. G., Kaufman, M., & Thomasson, M. 1993, ApJ, 412, 90
Ferguson, A. M. N., Irwin, M. J., Ibata, R. A., Lewis, G. F., & Tanvir, N. R. 2002,

AJ, 124, 1452

Fernique, P., Allen, M. G., Boch, T., et al. 2015, A&A, 578, A114
Ferrarese, L., Côté, P., Cuillandre, J.-C., et al. 2012, ApJS, 200, 4
Ferreira, L., Conselice, C. J., Duncan, K., et al. 2020, ApJ, 895, 115
Gibbons, S. L. J., Belokurov, V., & Evans, N. W. 2014, MNRAS, 445, 3788
Gilbert, K. M., Guhathakurta, P., Beaton, R. L., et al. 2012, ApJ, 760, 76
Helmi, A. & White, S. D. M. 1999, MNRAS, 307, 495
Hendel, D. & Johnston, K. V. 2015, MNRAS, 454, 2472
Hennig, C. 2007, Comput. Statist. Data Analysis, 52, 258
Hernquist, L. & Quinn, P. J. 1987, ApJ, 312, 1
Huertas-Company, M., Gravet, R., Cabrera-Vives, G., et al. 2015, ApJS, 221, 8
Ibata, R., Irwin, M., Lewis, G., Ferguson, A. M. N., & Tanvir, N. 2001, Nature,

412, 49

Ibata, R. A., Gilmore, G., & Irwin, M. J. 1994, Nature, 370, 194
Ibata, R. A., McConnachie, A., Cuillandre, J.-C., et al. 2017, ApJ, 848, 128
Iodice, E., Spavone, M., Capaccioli, M., et al. 2021, The Messenger, 183, 25
Jackson, T. M., Pasquali, A., La Barbera, F., More, S., & Grebel, E. K. 2021,

arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2102.02241

Jarrett, T. H., Polletta, M., Fournon, I. P., et al. 2006, AJ, 131, 261
Javanmardi, B., Martinez-Delgado, D., Kroupa, P., et al. 2016, A&A, 588, A89
Ji, I., Peirani, S., & Yi, S. K. 2014, A&A, 566, A97
Johnston, K. V. 1998, in Astronomical Society of the Paciﬁc Conference Series,

Vol. 136, Galactic Halos, ed. D. Zaritsky, 365

Johnston, K. V., Bullock, J. S., Sharma, S., et al. 2008, ApJ, 689, 936
Johnston, K. V., Hernquist, L., & Bolte, M. 1996, ApJ, 465, 278
Kado-Fong, E., Greene, J. E., Hendel, D., et al. 2018, ApJ, 866, 103
Karabal, E., Duc, P. A., Kuntschner, H., et al. 2017, A&A, 601, A86
Karademir, G. S., Remus, R.-S., Burkert, A., et al. 2019, MNRAS, 487, 318
Kauﬀmann, G., White, S. D. M., & Guiderdoni, B. 1993, MNRAS, 264, 201
Kawinwanichakij, L., Papovich, C., Quadri, R. F., et al. 2014, The Astrophysical

Journal, 792, 103

Kluge, M., Neureiter, B., Riﬀeser, A., et al. 2020, ApJS, 247, 43
Koch, E. & Rosolowsky, E. 2015, MNRAS, 452, 3435
Lotz, J. M., Primack, J., & Madau, P. 2004, AJ, 128, 163
Lux, H., Read, J. I., Lake, G., & Johnston, K. V. 2013, MNRAS, 436, 2386
Malhan, K., Ibata, R. A., & Martin, N. F. 2018, MNRAS, 481, 3442
Mancillas, B., Duc, P.-A., Combes, F., et al. 2019, A&A, 632, A122
Mantha, K. B., McIntosh, D. H., Ciaschi, C. P., et al. 2019, MNRAS, 486, 2643
Martin, G., Bazkiaei, A., Spavone, M., et al. 2022, MNRAS
Martin, G., Kaviraj, S., Hocking, A., Read, S. C., & Geach, J. E. 2020, MNRAS,

491, 1408

Martin, N. F., Ibata, R. A., Rich, R. M., et al. 2014, ApJ, 787, 19
Martinez-Delgado, D., Cooper, A. P., Roman, J., et al. 2021, arXiv e-prints,

arXiv:2104.06071

Martínez-Delgado, D., Gabany, R. J., Crawford, K., et al. 2010, AJ, 140, 962
Masters, K. L., Krawczyk, C., Shamsi, S., et al. 2021, MNRAS, 507, 3923
McConnachie, A. W., Irwin, M. J., Ibata, R. A., et al. 2009, Nature, 461, 66
McIntosh, D. H., Guo, Y., Hertzberg, J., et al. 2008, MNRAS, 388, 1537
Merritt, A., Pillepich, A., van Dokkum, P., et al. 2020, MNRAS, 495, 4570
Mihos, J. C. 1995, ApJ, 438, L75
Mihos, J. C., Durrell, P. R., Ferrarese, L., et al. 2015, ApJ, 809, L21
Morales, G., Martínez-Delgado, D., Grebel, E. K., et al. 2018, A&A, 614, A143
Olson, K. M. & Kwan, J. 1990, ApJ, 361, 426
Oser, L., Ostriker, J. P., Naab, T., Johansson, P. H., & Burkert, A. 2010, ApJ,

725, 2312

Pawlik, M. M., Wild, V., Walcher, C. J., et al. 2016, MNRAS, 456, 3032
Pearson, W. J., Wang, L., Trayford, J. W., Petrillo, C. E., & van der Tak, F. F. S.

2019, A&A, 626, A49

Peng, C. Y., Ho, L. C., Impey, C. D., & Rix, H.-W. 2002, AJ, 124, 266
Pillepich, A., Springel, V., Nelson, D., et al. 2018, MNRAS, 473, 4077

Elisabeth Sola et al.: Characterization of Low Surface Brightness structures in annotated deep images

Pop, A.-R., Pillepich, A., Amorisco, N. C., & Hernquist, L. 2018, MNRAS, 480,

1715

Prieur, J. L. 1990, Status of shell galaxies., ed. R. Wielen, 72–83
Quinn, P. J. 1984, ApJ, 279, 596
Richards, F., Paiement, A., Xie, X., Sola, E., & Duc, P.-A. 2020, arXiv e-prints,

arXiv:2011.11734

Schaye, J., Crain, R. A., Bower, R. G., et al. 2015, MNRAS, 446, 521
Spindler, A., Geach, J. E., & Smith, M. J. 2021, MNRAS, 502, 985
Spitler, L. R., Longbottom, F. D., Alvarado-Montes, J. A., et al. 2019, arXiv

e-prints, arXiv:1911.11579

Stringer, M. J. & Benson, A. J. 2007, MNRAS, 382, 641
Tal, T., van Dokkum, P. G., Nelan, J., & Bezanson, R. 2009, AJ, 138, 1417
Tohill, C., Ferreira, L., Conselice, C. J., Bamford, S. P., & Ferrari, F. 2021, ApJ,

916, 4

Toomre, A. & Toomre, J. 1972, ApJ, 178, 623
Uzeirbegovic, E., Geach, J. E., & Kaviraj, S. 2020, MNRAS, 498, 4021
van der Walt, S., Schönberger, J. L., Nunez-Iglesias, J., et al. 2014, arXiv e-

prints, arXiv:1407.6245

van Dokkum, P. G., Abraham, R., & Merritt, A. 2014, ApJ, 782, L24
Vega-Ferrero, J., Domínguez Sánchez, H., Bernardi, M., et al. 2021, MNRAS,

506, 1927

Venhola, A., Peletier, R., Laurikainen, E., et al. 2017, A&A, 608, A142
Walmsley, M., Ferguson, A. M. N., Mann, R. G., & Lintott, C. J. 2019, MNRAS,

483, 2968

Wen, Z. Z., Zheng, X. Z., & An, F. X. 2014, ApJ, 787, 130
Wilkinson, A., Sparks, W. B., Carter, D., & Malin, D. A. 1987, in Structure and

Dynamics of Elliptical Galaxies, ed. P. T. de Zeeuw, Vol. 127, 465

Article number, page 25 of 30

A&A proofs: manuscript no. main

Appendix A: Individual shapes of tidal tails and

streams

In this section, we present the individual thumbnails of tidal tails
(in blue) and streams (in red) identiﬁed around LTGs (Figure
A.1) and ETGs (Figure A.2). The galaxies are sorted by increas-
ing mass, from the top-left for the less massive one to the bottom-
right for the most massive one.

For the streams of LTGs (Figure A.1), the mean galaxy mass
per each row is respectively 1.5×1010, 4.6×1010 and 1.1×1011M(cid:12)
for the ﬁrst, second and third rows. For the tails of LTGs, the
mean mass per row is: 8.5×109, 1.4×1010, 2.3×1010, 3.2×1010,
4.9 × 1010, 6.9 × 1010, 7.8 × 1010 and ﬁnally 1.1 × 1011M(cid:12).

Likewise, the mean galaxy mass per row for the streams of
ETG (Figure A.2) are 1.3 × 1010, 3.1 × 1010, 6.2 × 109, 1.0 × 1011
and 1.8×1011M(cid:12). For the tails of ETGs, this progression per row
is: 1.9 × 1010, 3.3 × 1010, 5.3 × 1010, 1.1 × 1011 and 1.5 × 1011M(cid:12).

(Ferrarese et al. 2012). Unfortunately the r-band image is not
available for this survey, and no direct comparison could be di-
rectly done with CFIS and MATLAS. We therefore decided not
to include the NGVS annotations in our survey but to summarize
our analysis in this Appendix.

Two users annotated a total of 2217 features (among which
1898 have been kept after our selection process) around 58 ETGs
and 65 LTGs from the Virgo Cluster. Figure D.1 displays the
median SB of tails and streams, and Figure D.2 the median value
of the outer contour of the annotated stellar halos.

The maximal outer SB value (28.5 mag arcsec−2) in the g-
band is closer to the nominal depth of the survey than the max-
imal outer SB value in the r-band for MATLAS. One possible
reason is that the g-band is less sensitive to artefacts such as
ghost reﬂections or high background regions and therefore less
contaminated, which enables to detect fainter isophotes than in
the r-band. Figure D.3 displays the radius of the annotated halos
for the Virgo LTGs and ETGs.

Appendix B: Normalized length and width of tidal

tails

In this section, we present the histograms of the length and width
of tidal tails normalized by the eﬀective radius of their host
galaxy, and as a function of the morphological type. One can
see that the trends are similar to the ones presented in section
5.1.3, i.e. the distribution of the width is ﬂatter for ETGs than
for LTGs. The length of the tidal tails for ETGs is slightly longer
than for LTGs.

Appendix C: Precision on the annotations kept

In this appendix, we describe in more detail the selection pro-
cess for tidal tails and streams seen in section 4.8. The aim is
to keep the most representative features by attributing a unique
identiﬁer to the annotations, and then keeping, for annotations
sharing the same unique identiﬁer, the one with the largest area.
This iterative process is illustrated in Figure C.1 for one galaxy.
First, all the tidal tails and streams from all users are considered
(panel a). The ﬁrst iteration starts (panel b): the annotations of
User 2 and User 1 are compared. The red arrows outline which
annotations are currently compared. If their intersection score is
high enough, they are paired and share the same unique identi-
ﬁer (e.g. here the magenta annotations); otherwise a new unique
identiﬁer is given (e.g. here the green annotation). During the
second iteration (panel c), the annotations of User 3 and User 2
are compared with the same method. During the third iteration
(panel d), the annotations of User 3 and User 1 are compared.
At the end of this step, all the annotations have been attributed
a unique identiﬁer. Finally, for the annotations sharing the same
unique identiﬁer, only the one with the largest area is kept (panel
e).

Appendix D: The Next Generation Virgo Cluster

Survey

In addition to the images from CFIS and MATLAS, we have also
annotated the LSB structures visible in the deep images from the
Next Generation Virgo Cluster Survey (NGVS20). This CFHT
Large program surveyed 104 squared degrees in the Virgo clus-
ter in four bands, with a depth of 29 mag arcsec−2 in the g-band

20 NGVS,
html

http://astrowww.phys.uvic.ca/~lff/NGVS/Home.

Article number, page 26 of 30

Elisabeth Sola et al.: Characterization of Low Surface Brightness structures in annotated deep images

Fig. A.1. Thumbnails of the streams (top, in red) and tidal tails (bottom, in blue) identiﬁed around the LTGs, plotted in boxes of 50 × 50 kpc. They
are sorted by increasing mass of the host galaxy, starting from the top-left for the lightest LTG to the bottom-right for the most massive LTG.

Article number, page 27 of 30

A&A proofs: manuscript no. main

Fig. A.2. Thumbnails of the streams ((top, in red)) and tidal tails (bottom, in blue) identiﬁed around the ETGs, plotted in boxes of 50 × 50 kpc.
They are sorted by increasing mass of the host galaxy, starting from the top-left for the lightest ETG to the bottom-right for the most massive ETG.

Article number, page 28 of 30

Elisabeth Sola et al.: Characterization of Low Surface Brightness structures in annotated deep images

Fig. B.1. Histogram of the length (left) and of the width (right) of tidal tails normalized by the eﬀective radius of the host galaxy, as a function of
the morphological type. ETGs are represented by darker shades than LTGs. The median of each distribution is represented by the dotted lines. The
histogram of the length has bins width of 5 Re and of 0.8 Re for the width.

Fig. C.1. Illustration of the selection process for tidal tails and streams for one galaxy. Black annotations indicate that the unique identiﬁer has
not been attributed yet, while each color corresponds to one unique identiﬁer. The linestyles correspond to the diﬀerent users. The red arrows
indicate which annotations are currently compared. a) Initialization: all the annotations of tidal tails and streams are considered. b) First iteration:
the annotations of User 2 and User 1 are compared. c) Second iteration: comparison of the annotations of User 3 and User 2. d) Third iteration:
comparison of the annotations of User 3 and User 1. e) Final step: for the annotations sharing the same unique identiﬁer, only the one with the
largest area is kept.

Article number, page 29 of 30

A&A proofs: manuscript no. main

Fig. D.1. For NGVS only: histogram of the median surface brightness
values in magnitudes per square arcsecond for tidal tails (in blue) and
streams (in red), in bins of 0.5 mag arcsec−2. The median of each distri-
bution is represented by the dotted lines.

Fig. D.3. For NGVS only: histogram of the radius of the halos, in bins
of 5 kpc, as a function of the morphological type. The median of each
distribution is represented by the dotted line.

Fig. D.2. For NGVS only: histogram of the outer median surface bright-
ness values in magnitudes per square arcsecond for halos, in bins of 0.5
mag arcsec−2. The median is represented by the dotted line.

Article number, page 30 of 30

