BME

2
2
0
2

r
p
A
5
2

]
E
P
.
o
i
b
-
q
[

1
v
7
4
7
1
1
.
4
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

A feasibility study proposal of the predictive model to enable the
prediction of population susceptibility to COVID-19 by analysis
of vaccine utilization for advising deployment of a booster dose

Chottiwatt Jittprasong1,∗

1Biomedical Robotics Laboratory, Department of Biomedical Engineering, College of Engineering, City University of Hong Kong

∗Corresponding author: Biomedical Robotics Laboratory, Department of Biomedical Engineering, College of Engineering, City
University of Hong Kong, Kowloon, Hong Kong. chottiwatt.j@my.cityu.edu.hk

Abstract

With the present highly infectious dominant SARS-CoV-2 strain of B1.1.529 or Omicron spreading around the globe, there is concern that the
COVID-19 pandemic will not end soon and that it will be a race against time until a more contagious and virulent variant emerges. One of the
most promising approaches for preventing virus propagation is to maintain continuous high vaccination efﬁcacy among the population, thereby
strengthening the population protective effect and preventing the majority of infection in the vaccinated population, as is known to occur with
the Omicron variant frequently. Countries must structure vaccination programs in accordance with their populations’ susceptibility to infection,
optimizing vaccination efforts by delivering vaccines progressively enough to protect the majority of the population. We present a feasibility
study proposal for maintaining optimal continuous vaccination by assessing the susceptible population, the decline of vaccine efﬁcacy in the
population, and advising booster dosage deployment to maintain the population’s protective efﬁcacy through the use of a predictive model.
Numerous studies have been conducted in the direction of analyzing vaccine utilization; however, very little study has been conducted to
substantiate the optimal deployment of booster dosage vaccination with the help of a predictive model based on machine learning algorithms.

Keywords: predictive model, COVID-19, vaccination

Introduction

Since the outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome coron-
avirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), the causal agent of Coronavirus Disease
(COVID-19), the pandemic has wreaked havoc on humans and
posed a grave danger to the world’s economic growth. The virus
spreads through close contact with an infected person, usually
through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person
coughs or sneezes. It has spread to more than 200 countries and
territories, infecting more than 500 million people and killing
more than 6 million people all over the world (Mathieu et al.
2021). However, the COVID-19 pandemic also demonstrated
the superior capability of modern medicine, which was able to
develop the ﬁrst experimental vaccine 42 days after the disease
emerged (Moderna, Inc. 2020). Tozinamaren (BNT162b2), also
known as the Pﬁzer–BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine sold under
the brand name Comirnarty, was the ﬁrst vaccine to be added
to the World Health Organization’s (WHO) Emergency Use List
(EUL) on 31 December 2020, just a year after the ﬁrst outbreak
(Polack et al. 2020; World Health Organization 2022).

Numerous vaccinations are now being used worldwide, with
some countries currently administering the fourth dose to their
populations (Group 2022; Mathieu et al. 2021) Currently, the
SARS-CoV-2 variant of B.1.1.529 (Omicron) is responsible for the
majority of infections occurring at present. Although less fatal,
it is more infectious than the last dominant strain of B.1.617.2
(Delta). Moreover, it can also evade double vaccination and the

immune system (Rössler et al. 2021). Omicron, therefore, caused
numerous reinfection and outbreak among the fully vaccinated
individual. Those who have received a vaccine with less efﬁcacy
are more vulnerable to Omicron infection (Andrews et al. 2022).
This raises concern that the COVID-19 pandemic may not be
over anytime soon and that it is a race against time until a more
resistant variant emerges. In the meanwhile, the most effective
strategy to prevent the virus from spreading is to maintain con-
tinuous immunization, which increases the protective effect on
the individual. This is because the vaccine’s efﬁcacy against the
Omicron variant declines fairly quickly (Andrews et al. 2022).

However, keeping up with the number of populations who
received the ﬁrst dose, second dose, third dose, fourth dose, and
so on are time extensive considering the nature of the deploy-
ment of the vaccine, which focuses mainly on how quickly the
vaccine can be deployed as much as possible not how can we
track it afterward. In this paper, we propose a predictive model
for predicting the susceptible vaccinated population using gener-
alized vaccination distribution data, daily vaccination rate, and
vaccine type, in conjunction with a recurrent neural network for
predicting the spread of infection in a speciﬁc geographic area.
This enables countries to plan their vaccination programs in
accordance with their populations’ susceptibility to infection,
optimizing vaccination program by not deploying vaccines too
rapidly but enough to protect the majority of the population
from infection, thereby containing the spread of infection.

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

Proposal

Proposal

To ascertain the population’s susceptibility to COVID-19, we
must ﬁrst ascertain vaccination utilization in the region. The
vaccination utilization data may comprise the vaccination rate,
the proportion of types of vaccines deployed, the ordinal number
of vaccine doses administered, and the vaccination population’s
age distribution. Additionally, the inclusion of statistics on the
unvaccinated and partially vaccinated population will result in
an increase in the prediction’s accuracy.

Figure 2 A diagram depicting simpliﬁed principle of random
forest machine learning algorithm.
Note: From "Effective Electrical Submersible Pump Manage-
ment Using Machine Learning," by Pham et al. (2021), Open
Journal of Civil Engineering, 11, 70-80. Copyright 2022 by Pham
et al. and Scientiﬁc Research Publishing Inc. under CC BY-NC
4.0 license. Reprinted under license terms.

Jamshidi et al. (2020) have proposed numerous strategies for
combating the COVID-19 pandemic through employing various
machine learning algorithms, including the Recurrent Neural
Network (RNN), the Long Short Term Memory (LSTM), the Gen-
erative Adversarial Network (GAN), and the Extreme Learning
Machine (ELM). These algorithms may be used for a variety of
purposes, including infection transmission prediction, medica-
tion dosage estimation, visualization of spread, and treatment
recommendation.

Davahli et al. (2021) has developed a deterministic and
stochastic RNN of LSTM and Mixture Density Network (MDN)
for real-time prediction of the virus accross United States.

Figure 3 A diagram illustrating the structure of long short
term memory recurrent neural network.
Note: From "Optimizing COVID-19 vaccine distribution across
the United States using deterministic and stochastic recurrent
neural networks," by Davahli et al. (2021), PLoS ONE , 16(7):
e0253925. Copyright 2021 by Davahli et al. under CC BY 4.0
license. Reprinted under license terms.

By calculating the mixing coefﬁcient, mean, and standard
deviation (SD), the MDNs enables the estimation of the mixed
distribution. This way, MDNs estimate probability distribu-
tions for potential outcomes rather than producing completely
deﬁned outputs like what LSTMs do.

Figure 1 A diagram illustrating COVID-19 vaccine boosters
administered per 100 people in every country.
Note: From "A global database of COVID-19 vaccinations,"
by Mathieu et al. (2021), Nature Human Behaviour, 5, 947-953.
Copyright 2022 by Our World in Data under CC BY 4.0 license.
Reprinted under license terms.

As far as we are aware, the application of ANNs to predict
vaccine/pharmaceutical utilization is extremely limited. How-
ever, the potential for machine learning to assist us in predicting
population susceptibility to COVID-19 and optimizing vacci-
nation programs is indeed intriguing and may beneﬁt us for
eradication of COVID-19 pandemic.

The prediction model will let us see how effectively a coun-
try’s population is protected against COVID-19 and when a
booster dosage is required to maintain adequate protection. Due
to the fact that each person got their vaccination doses at a dif-
ferent interval, determining when the population will need the
booster dosage is challenging, if not impossible. As illustrated in
Figure 1, booster doses above the recommended double doses of
immunizations are not distributed equally around the globe, as
booster doses are not yet generally recommended in the majority
of the world.

The predictive model may be built on machine learning (ML)
algorithms such as support vector machines, random forests,
and k-nearest neighbors. In addition, the predictive model may
also be built on statistical models such as logistic regression,
generalized linear models, and generalized additive models.

Hariharan et al. (2020) observed that random forest (Figure
2) was the most effective ML algorithm for predicting vaccine
utilization. Additionally, the authors noted that the model out-
performed the conventional technique of vaccination utiliza-
tion tracking. Another study used the artiﬁcial neural network
(ANN) to forecast pharmaceutical utilization based on geograph-
ical location (Fruggiero et al. 2012).

Jittprasong

3

Figure 4 A diagram illustrating the structure of mixed desity
network.
Note: From "Optimizing COVID-19 vaccine distribution across
the United States using deterministic and stochastic recurrent
neural networks," by Davahli et al. (2021), PLoS ONE , 16(7):
e0253925. Copyright 2021 by Davahli et al. under CC BY 4.0
license. Reprinted under license terms.

By combining LSTM and MDN, the COVID-19 spread of in-
fection predictive model is developed. We can reliably predict
the next outbreak and spread of infection using two sequence-
learning models: a deterministic LSTM model that delivers de-
terministic output and a stochastic LSTM/MDN model. Both
the deterministic LSTM model and the stochastic LSTM/MDN
model performed well in predicting the infection trend.

Figure 6 A diagram showing the structure of VacSIM deep
reinforcement learning models.
Note: From "VacSIM: Learning Effective Strategies for COVID-
19 Vaccine Distribution using Reinforcement Learning," by
Awasthi et al. (2020), arXiv. Copyright 2021 by Awasthi et
al. under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license. Reprinted under license
terms.

Another study developed a pandemic vulnerability index
(PVI) dashboard using machine learning, statistical modeling,
and visualization to monitor the susceptibility of each region’s
population currently operating under the National Institute of
Environmental Health Sciences in the United States only (Marvel
et al. 2021).

Figure 5 A diagram illustrating the structure of stochastic
LSTM/MDN model.
Note: From "Optimizing COVID-19 vaccine distribution across
the United States using deterministic and stochastic recurrent
neural networks," by Davahli et al. (2021), PLoS ONE , 16(7):
e0253925. Copyright 2021 by Davahli et al. under CC BY 4.0
license. Reprinted under license terms.

This demonstrated that machine learning may be repurposed
from predicting infection transmission to predicting optimal vac-
cine distribution, since both of these characteristics are critical to
the success of disease control, where viral transmission is con-
tinuously monitored and susceptible populations are protected.
Infact, one possible strategy has been proposed, but it focuses
only on vaccination distribution without booster doses and ex-
cludes the decline in vaccine efﬁcacy and virus reproduction
number. Although not yet implemented, Awasthi et al. (2020)
has built a pipeline called VacSIM for optimizing COVID-19
vaccine distribution using Deep Reinforcement Learning models
and contextual bandit machine learning framework.

Figure 7 A diagram depicting the Pandemic Vulnerability
Index in action.
Note: From "The COVID-19 Pandemic Vulnerability Index
(PVI) Dashboard: Monitoring County-Level Vulnerability
Using Visualization, Statistical Modeling, and Machine Learn-
ing," by Marvel et al. (2021), Environmental Health Perspectives.
Reprinted from Environmental Helth Perspectives as a public
domain.

Jamshidi MB, Lalbakhsh A, Talla J, Peroutka Z, Hadjilooei F, Lal-
bakhsh P, Jamshidi M, Spada L, Mirmozafari M, Dehghani M
et al. 2020. Artiﬁcial intelligence and covid-19: Deep learn-
ing approaches for diagnosis and treatment. IEEE Access.
8:109581–109595. 2169-3536 Jamshidi, Mohammad Behdad
Lalbakhsh, Ali Talla, Jakub Peroutka, Zdenek Hadjilooei,
Farimah Lalbakhsh, Pedram Jamshidi, Morteza Spada, Luigi
La Mirmozafari, Mirhamed Dehghani, Mojgan Sabet, Asal
Roshani, Saeed Roshani, Sobhan Bayat-Makou, Nima Mo-
hamadzade, Bahare Malek, Zahra Jamshidi, Alireza Kiani,
Sarah Hashemi-Dezaki, Hamed Mohyuddin, Wahab Jour-
nal Article IEEE Access. 2020 Jun 12;8:109581-109595. doi:
10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3001973. eCollection 2020.

Marvel SW, House JS, Wheeler M, Song K, Zhou YH, Wright
FA, Chiu WA, Rusyn I, Motsinger-Reif A, Reif DM. 2021. The
covid-19 pandemic vulnerability index (pvi) dashboard: Mon-
itoring county-level vulnerability using visualization, statisti-
cal modeling, and machine learning. Environmental Health
Perspectives. 129:017701.

Mathieu E, Ritchie H, Ortiz-Ospina E, Roser M, Hasell J, Appel
C, Giattino C, Rodés-Guirao L. 2021. A global database of
covid-19 vaccinations. Nature Human Behaviour. 5:947–953.
Moderna, Inc.. 2020. Moderna ships mrna vaccine against novel

coronavirus (mrna-1273) for phase 1 study.

Pham ST, Vo PS, Nguyen DN. 2021. Effective electrical sub-
mersible pump management using machine learning. Open
Journal of Civil Engineering. 11:70–80.

Polack FP, Thomas SJ, Kitchin N, Absalon J, Gurtman A, Lock-
hart S, Perez JL, Pérez Marc G, Moreira ED, Zerbini C et al.
2020. Safety and efﬁcacy of the bnt162b2 mrna covid-19 vac-
cine. New England Journal of Medicine. 383:2603–2615.

Rössler A, Riepler L, Bante D, Laer Dv, Kimpel J. 2021. Sars-cov-
2 b.1.1.529 variant (omicron) evades neutralization by sera
from vaccinated and convalescent individuals. medRxiv. p.
2021.12.08.21267491.

World Health Organization. 2022. Who issues its ﬁrst emergency
use validation for a covid-19 vaccine and emphasizes need for
equitable global access.

4

Proposal

Although the application is primarily for the United States
and the PVI does not taken to account vaccinated population, it
demonstrates that a predictive model based on machine learning
and statistical models is capable of tracking vaccine booster
doses and recommending an ideal vaccination scheme.

Despite the fact that numerous studies have been conducted
in a similar direction of developing a predictive model for pre-
dicting vaccine efﬁcacy decline over time and population suscep-
tibility, it would require state-of-the-art data analysis as well as
robust machine learning algorithms to carefully analyze vaccina-
tion data from the time the ﬁrst vaccine was administered to the
present and in real-time. This would be a difﬁcult task, but one
that would be very beneﬁcial to the public health community
and the ﬁght against COVID-19.

Implications

The development of a predictive model capable of predicting
vaccine efﬁcacy decline in the population and advising on when
to initiate a booster dose vaccination program to maintain an ad-
equate level of protection in the community would be required
to contain the pandemic for an extended period of time until it
subsides. This would need the development of a model capable
of predicting vaccine efﬁcacy in the population over time. Ad-
ditionally, the model must be capable of predicting the effect of
vaccination on disease transmission within the population.

If successful, we will have control over the pandemic’s di-
rection and will have an upper hand containing the virus by
keeping the population adequately protected against COVID-19.

Data availability

Data sharing not applicable to this report as no datasets were
generated or analysed during the current study.

Funding

This article received no speciﬁc grant from any funding agency
in the public, commercial, or not-for-proﬁt sectors.

Conﬂicts of interest

The author reports no conﬂict of interest.

Literature cited

Andrews N, Stowe J, Kirsebom F, Toffa S, Rickeard T, Gallagher
E, Gower C, Kall M, Groves N, O’Connell AM et al. 2022.
Covid-19 vaccine effectiveness against the omicron (b.1.1.529)
variant. New England Journal of Medicine. 386:1532–1546.
Awasthi R, Guliani KK, Khan SA, Vashishtha A, Gill MS, Bhatt
A, Nagori A, Gupta A, Kumaraguru P, Sethi T. 2020. Vacsim:
Learning effective strategies for covid-19 vaccine distribution
using reinforcement learning.

Davahli MR, Karwowski W, Fiok K. 2021. Optimizing covid-19
vaccine distribution across the united states using determin-
istic and stochastic recurrent neural networks. PLOS ONE.
16:e0253925.

Fruggiero F, Iannone R, Martino G, Miranda S, Riemma S. 2012.
A forecast model for pharmaceutical requirements based on
an artiﬁcial neural network. In: . pp. 263–268.

Group V. 2022. Covid-19 vaccine tracker.
Hariharan R, Sundberg J, Gallino G, Schmidt A, Arenth D, Sra
S, Fels B. 2020. An interpretable predictive model of vaccine
utilization for tanzania. Frontiers in Artiﬁcial Intelligence. 3.

