2
2
0
2

r
p
A
2
1

]
h
p
-
m
e
h
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

1
v
5
3
6
5
0
.
4
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Dimerization of dehydrogenated polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons on
graphene

Zeyuan Tang1 and Bjørk Hammer1, a)
Center for Interstellar Catalysis, Department of Physics and Astronomy, Aarhus University, Ny Munkegade 120,
Aarhus C 8000, Denmark

Dimerization of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) is an important, yet poorly understood step in
on-surface synthesis of graphene (nanoribbon), soot formation, growth of carbonaceous dust grain in the in-
terstellar medium (ISM). The on-surface synthesis of graphene and the growth of carbonaceous dust grain in
the ISM require the chemical dimerization in which chemical bonds are formed between PAH monomers. An
accurate and cheap method of exploring structure rearrangements is needed to reveal the mechanism of chem-
ical dimerization on surfaces. This work has investigated the chemical dimerization of two dehydrogenated
PAHs (coronene and pentacene) on graphene via an evolutionary algorithm augmented by machine learning
surrogate potentials and a set of customized structure operators. Diﬀerent dimer structures on surfaces have
been successfully located by our structure search methods. Their binding energies are within the experimen-
tal errors of temperature programmed desorption (TPD) measurements. The mechanism of coronene dimer
formation on graphene is further studied and discussed.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Dimerization of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons
(PAHs) plays an important role in on-surface synthe-
sis of graphene (nanoribbon)1,2, soot formation3–5, and
growth of dust grain in the interstellar medium .6–9 There
are two types of PAH dimerization depending on how
PAHs are linked together. One is physical dimeriza-
tion where PAHs are combined through weak van der
Waals interactions. The other one is chemical dimer-
ization where covalent bonds are formed between PAHs.
However, a comprehensive understanding of dimerization
of PAHs has not been reached yet. Previous theoreti-
cal attempts to mimic gas-phase combustion chemistry
include molecular dynamics simulations on binary PAH
collisions10,11, quantum chemical studies on interactions
between PAHs12. PAH dimerization on surfaces (e.g.
self-assembly of PAH on graphite13) is an important in-
gredient in soot particle and dust grain chemistry as well.
Recently, the chemical dimerization of dehydrogenated
PAHs on graphite has been studied using laser desorption
coupled with ion mobility spectrometry14. In this work,
some possible dimer structures are proposed by gas phase
density functional theory (DFT) calculations. To ascer-
tain the dimer structure, one needs to compare the bind-
ing energy of dimers on surface from theory and tempera-
ture programmed desorption. Meanwhile, the dimer for-
mation mechanism on surfaces remains unknown. Many
factors are needed to be considered in order to under-
stand PAH dimerization and growth. For example, tem-
perature and PAH mass can determine whether physical
or chemical growth is favorable and have a signiﬁcant
impact on the size of the formed soot particles.15 The
growth of small PAHs are also dependent on tempera-
ture and pressure.16 When it comes to the dynamics and

a)Electronic mail: hammer@phys.au.dk

kinetics of PAH dimerization, PAH collision settings such
as impact parameters and orientations have a huge inﬂu-
ence on the lifetime of the formed PAH dimers and the
reaction rates.11 For the PAH growth in the interstellar
medium, ultraviolet and cosmic-ray irradiations cannot
be ignored.7

Finding energetically favorable structures is often the
ﬁrst step in studying chemical reactions before more ki-
netic or dynamical analysis is performed. In the case of
the chemical PAH dimerization, resolving the complex
chemical bond rearrangements is necessary and relies
heavily on eﬃcient structure search methods. We only
focus on the structure search and ignore other factors
aﬀecting the chemical PAH dimerization in this study.
A global exploration scheme combining parallel temper-
ing Monte Carlo and local quenches was used to explore
stacking patterns and search stable structures of pyrene
clusters.17 However, few eﬀorts have been dedicated to
the chemical PAH dimerization using global optimization
techniques because the structure complexity is increased
from physical dimerization to chemical dimerization. The
evolutionary algorithm (EA) approach18, another popu-
lar global optimization scheme, has been successfully ap-
plied to a wide range of systems including bulk crystals,18
surface reconstructions,19 and supported nanoclusters20.
It has also been extended to molecular crystals21 and
polymers22 where the mutations in the form of structure
operators are imposed on a group of atoms instead of
individual atoms. Such an extension assumes that the
bond connectivity within monomers is ﬁxed. This as-
sumption may not be valid for the chemical dimerization
of PAHs due to possible hydrogen migration. Therefore,
it is necessary to introduce a new set of structure opera-
tors which allow the bond connectivity within monomers
to change.

In this paper, we propose a new set of structure oper-
ators within the EA framework, which ﬁxes the carbon
skeleton but allows hydrogen atoms to jump between car-
bon atoms. PAH dimers on graphene often contain hun-

 
 
 
 
 
 
dreds of atoms in a large supercell23 and require vdW
functionals24–26 to accurately describe the interaction be-
tween PAHs and graphene.27,28 The requirements of both
large system size and vdW functional render the calcu-
lations extremely expensive especially in an EA search.
The global optimization with ﬁrst-principles energy ex-
pressions (GOFEE)29 is a promising method to reduce
computational costs by replacing the local relaxation in
the ﬁrst principles potential with the local relaxation in a
gaussian process regression model. GOFEE further pro-
duces a number of such new candidate structures and
selects based on a Bayesian acquisition function only the
most promissing one for the expensive DFT evaluation.
Our work will combine the newly introduced structure
operators and GOFEE to ﬁnd stable PAH dimers on
graphene. Two dehydrogenated PAH systems (coronene
and pentacene) are chosen by the inspiration from the
experiment by Weippert et al.14.

2

• Since the action of a single operation or several op-
erations in combination may easily result in dimer
structures where the monomers are too far away
to interact or too close to form proper chemical
bonds, the structure operators must be imposed in
a properly controlled sequence. This is illustrated
in Fig. 1. The operators start by paring two ran-
dom structures from the population according to
the method detailed in Section II A 1. Then, the
resulting structure would explore diﬀerent orienta-
tions as described in Section II A 2.
In order to
avoid two monomers being too far, they are dis-
placed according to the method explained in Sec-
tion II A 3. Finally, hydrogen atoms in the overlap-
ping region of two monomers are removed and rein-
troduced elsewhere as described in Section II A 4.

Based on these requirements, we have designed the fol-
lowing operators.

II. METHOD

1. Crossover

This section describes the theoretical methods utilized
in this work. The structure search method is introduced
ﬁrst.
It is based on GOFEE and a set of newly intro-
duced operators in Section II A. Afterwards, the setup
for the structure search is described in Section II B. Fi-
nally, other computational details are mentioned in Sec-
tion II C.

A. Operators

There are several requirements for structure operators

when searching for PAH dimers on graphene.

• The structure generated by these operators should
not be biased by the prior knowledge of dimer struc-
tures and adsorption sites.

• Operations need to be imposed on groups of atoms
(treated as a monomer) with the aim of conﬁning
the search space and avoiding unnecessary explo-
ration. In practice, a unique tag is assigned to each
monomer to keep its identiﬁcation during structure
operations. This has previously been introduced in
methods for predicting molecular crystals.21

• The bond connectivity in monomers is partially
ﬁxed, meaning the carbon skeleton remains un-
changed but the hydrogen atoms are allowed to
move. Diﬀerent types of dimers (being fused via
4, 5, 6-member rings) can be formed by having this
partially ﬂexible bond connectivity. We will design
a hydrogen operator to address this issue.

• Structure operators should explore all possible ad-
sorption conﬁgurations (top, bridge, hollow, . . . ).

Unique tags are assigned to each monomer (one dehy-
drogenated PAH) for easy identiﬁcation. Only the center
of mass and orientation of each monomer are used when
paring two structures from the population with crossover
operators.

2. Rotation

Since the focus of this work is on-surface dimerization,
the dominant rotation for each monomer is around the z-
axis with angles randomly sampled from 0 to 180 degrees.
The rotations around the x and y axes are limited to a
maximum angle of 15 degrees. The center of mass of the
monomers is chosen as the rotation center.

3. Rattle

Unlike traditional rattle operators in EA, our rattle op-
erator is not purely random, but tries to bring two sepa-
rate monomers together. The direction of the rattle mo-
tion is pointing from the center of mass of one monomer
towards that of the other. The distance through which
each monomer can move is random, but the distance be-
tween the closest atoms (dmin in Fig. 1) after the move
is set to 1.5˚A.

4. Hydrogen

This is a key operator for generating promising dimer
structures. The ﬁrst step is to locate the (ﬁrst, sec-
ond, third, etc.)
closest pairs of edge carbon atoms
(one carbon in one monomer, another carbon in another

3

FIG. 1: Scheme of structure operators for generating promising candidates of PAH dimer on graphene. At the
beginning, two structures are randomly picked from the population. Half of each structure are paired later. Each
monomer in the newly generated structure has rotational degrees of freedom to adjust their orientations. The third
step tries to diminish the distance between two monomers. The closest atom pairs are marked in green. Finally, a
candidate structure is sent for local relaxation after hydrogen vacancies are generated in the overlapping region of
two monomers.

monomer). Then hydrogen atoms are removed from these
carbon sites. The ﬁnal step is to bind deleted hydrogen
If an edge carbon
atoms on some edge carbon atoms.
atom has not been linked to any hydrogen atoms yet, hy-
drogen atoms will preferentially be placed in a proper dis-
tance ﬁrst and in the same plane as the monomer. Once
all edge carbon atoms are occupied by hydrogen atoms,
any remaining hydrogen atoms will be placed randomly
on top of edge carbon atoms.

of hydrogen vacancies for the pentancene monomer was
switched to 5. The number of independent runs was set
to 20 and 10 for gas phase and on-surface search respec-
tively. One run is counted as a success in the gas phase
search if the total energy is within 0.1 eV of the most
stable structure. The energy threshold for deﬁning the
success in the on-surface search can be a little higher, but
the adsorption conﬁguration must match with the one in
the most stable structure by comparing their stacking
modes.

B. Structure search

C. Computational setup

Initial structures are generated by placing two sepa-
rate monomers randomly on the surface of graphene. The
number of hydrogen vacancies were initially set to 2 and 4
for the coronene monomer and the pentacene monomer to
be consistent with the chemical formulas of the coronene
dimer ([Cor−2H]2) and the pentacene dimer ([Pen−4H]2)
in Weippert et al.14. During the search of the pentacene
dimer, we found the conﬁguration in with 5 C-C bonds
connect two monomers had much lower energies than the
one with 4 connecting C-C bonds. Therefore, the number

The Atomic Simulation Environment (ASE)30 was
used to set up atomistic structures. Structure searches
in the gas phase were conducted within the framework
of linear combination of atomic orbitals (LCAO)31 in in
GPAW v19.8.132. The PBE functional33 and double-zeta
polarized basis set were used in all LCAO calculations.
A 10 × 10 graphene monolayer was used for on-surface
structure searches. All on-surface calculations were per-
formed using the real-space, grid-based projector aug-

pick upparents1st opcrossover2rd oprotate4th ophydrogenfinal child3rd oprattle (dimer)monomer adminunsaturated carbonunsaturated carbonmonomer bmented wave method in GPAW. The grid spacing was
0.20 ˚A. The opt-PBE vdW functional26 was used be-
cause it oﬀers an accurate description of the interaction
between PAHs and graphene27. It also has a good agree-
ment with G3(MP2,CC) (a high-level ab initio method)
for the H-migration barrier of selected PAH systems16,34,
see Fig. S3 and Fig. S4 of the supplementary material.
The structures found by GOFEE were relaxed in DFT
until the maximum force reached 0.02 eV/˚A. The adsorp-
tion energies were calculated using the relaxed structures
and compared with experiments. The transition states
were located through the AutoNEB35 which inserts im-
ages between initial and ﬁnal states on the ﬂy and adopts
a modiﬁed spring force. Three images were running si-
multaneously and no more images were inserted when
the accumulated images reached a maximum number (10
∼ 20 images depending on system). The force conver-
gence criterion on transition states was the same as for
local minima. All structure relaxations and NEB calcu-
lations were done with spin paired settings. Spin polar-
ization was only applied in single point calculations of
optimized structures. Therefore, all reported adsorption
energies and energy barriers would contain contributions
from the spin state. More discussions on the spin state
can be found in the supplementary material.

III. RESULTS

In this study, two dehydrogenated polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons (coronene and pentacene, with two and
four hydrogen atoms missing respectively)14 were used
as monomers for dimerization on graphene.

A. Coronene

Coronene is the ﬁrst system for testing our structure
search method. The search begins with two coronene
monomers in which two hydrogen atoms are missing.
Fig. 2 shows the success rate of the coronene dimer
search in the gas phase and on graphene. It is easy to
ﬁnd the most stable conﬁguration of the coronene dimer
([Cor−2H]2) in the gas phase. All 20 runs have suc-
cessfully found the global minimum using less than 400
single point calculations. Stacked or other planar conﬁg-
urations did show up during the search. However, they
would be quickly overtaken by the planar dimer conﬁgu-
ration with 6 membered ring in the center (shown in the
insert of Fig. 2), as evidenced by rapid increases in the
success rate. The search on graphene is more diﬃcult,
since the method needs to not only ﬁnd the most stable
dimer structure, but also locate the most favorable ad-
sorption site. Some of the high-energy structures found
during the search on graphene are given in Fig. S1. The
larger search space on graphene also means that more sin-
gle point calculations are needed than for the gas phase
search. The extra computational time was mainly spent

4

FIG. 2: Success rate of coronene dimer search in the gas
phase (black line) and on graphene (blue line). The
inserted image shows the top view of the global
minimum of the coronene dimer on graphene.

on exploring adsorption sites, while the planar dimer con-
ﬁguration with 6 membered ring in the center has been
located in the early stage of searches. In order to improve
the success rate of the dimer search on graphene, there
is deﬁnitely room for optimizing hyperparameters such
as rotation angles, rattle amplitudes and ratios between
diﬀerent operators. However, those hyperparameters are
very likely to be system dependent. Our study is a proof-
of-concept work to show GOFEE with modiﬁed structure
operators is capable of locating PAH dimers on surfaces.
Therefore, the ﬁne tuning of hyperparameters was not
performed.

The comparison between the theoretical adsorption en-
ergy for the global minimum is given in Fig. 3. Another
two low-energy conﬁgurations (dimer-II and dimer-III)
are included as well. Theoretical adsorption energies for
these three conﬁgurations are all within the range of ex-
periments, thus not distinguishable. Due to the low-
est relative energy, the dimer with a 6-membered ring
(dimer-I, also called dicoronylene (DCY)) is the most
plausible dimer structure. This agrees well with experi-
ments where DCY and products from ion deposition yield
identical binding energies on highly oriented pyrolytic
graphite (HOPG).14

The formation of dimer-I is important for under-
standing the dimerization of dehydrogenated coronene
on graphene. Two doubly dehydrogenated coronene
monomers (referred to as: [Cor−2H]) are chosen as the
start of the dimerization, because it is possible to ob-
tain the [Cor−2H] monomer from the dehydrogenation of
pristine coronene by electron impact experiments14. The
[Cor−2H] monomer can be mass-selected and deposited

02505007501000Singlepoint calculations0 %20 %40 %60 %80 %100 %Succes Rategas phaseon graphene5

one of the hydrogen atoms in between two monomers
migrates from one monomer to the other. The hydrogen
atom in the transition state is positioned on the bridge
site of the newly formed C-C bond which connects two
monomers. Then the hydrogen atom jumps to the un-
saturated carbon in the left monomer. The formation of
the second C-C bond involves a similar hydrogen trans-
fer mechanism, but only needs to overcome a 0.38 eV
barrier which is signiﬁcantly lower than the 1.82 eV in
the ﬁrst C-C bond formation. Detailed energy proﬁles
and intermediate structures of the ﬁrst and second C-C
bond formation are given in Fig. S8 and Fig. S9. (3)
Two monomers are combined directly under the overall
translation and rotation on graphene. The formed dimer
with a 4-member ring is less stable than the one with 6-
member ring and requires 3.53 eV energy to achieve this
conversion. Such a high barrier implies that it is hard to
open a ring once it is formed, even though the coronene
dimer with a 4-member ring has much a higher energy
than that with the 6-member ring.

The presented computational results allow for an as-
sessment of experimentally derived mechanisms. It has
been suggested that the dimerization is promoted by ion
diﬀusion on surface.14 The calculated barriers for trans-
lation and rotation of monomers on graphene are around
0.1 eV, making such fast diﬀusion feasible. Another re-
quirement of [Cor−2H]2 formation is the hydrogen trans-
fer between monomers.14 Inspecting the energy proﬁles
in Fig. 4, it is seen that the pathway leading to the ther-
modynamically preferred dimer, dimer-I, is hindered by
a large barrier of 1.82 eV. Instead, the energy proﬁles re-
veal facile formation of the less stable dimer, dimer-III.
Further isomerization of this isomer into dimer-I is not
likely as the calculated energy proﬁles show a 3.53 eV
barrier for that. While it cannot be ruled out that other
lower energy barrier pathways exist for such a transfor-
mation, our results indicate that the formation of dimer-I
on graphene will be kinetically hindered and that dimer-
III will not. This is not at variance with the available ex-
perimental information that is merely based on the mass
of the dimer formed. We cannot exclude the possibilities
of collision-driven dimerization11 because kinetic ener-
gies of monomers are not considered in our calculations.
It remains unclear whether the dimerization occurs dur-
ing/after the deposition or during the temperature pro-
grammed desorption. The contributions from positively
charged species are not covered in this study.

B. Pentacene

Pentacene is less symmetric than coronene and the
monomer used in the search has four hydrogen vacan-
cies. Therefore, the pentacene dimer experiences a more
diverse conﬁguration space. The structure diversity is
reﬂected in the need for more single point calculations to
achieve the same success rate as for the coronene dimer
in the gas phase. It makes the dimer search on graphene

FIG. 3: Adsorption of diﬀerent coronene dimers on
graphene: (a) Relative energies with respect to the most
stable dimer. (b) Computed adsorption energies vs
experimental values from Weippert et al.14. For the
experimental values, the mean is plotted in a gray
dashed line while the derivation is plotted in gray
shaded region. (c) Side and top views of adsorption
conﬁgurations.

on graphene. The reaction from two [Cor−2H] monomers
to [Cor−2H]2 is known to occur based on the experimen-
tally available mass information. There may exist other
mechanisms for the formation of [Cor−2H]2 if the start
of the reaction is pristine coronene. Those possibilities
are not explored here, since the focus of this work is the
dimerization from two [Cor−2H] monomers to the most
stable conﬁguration of [Cor−2H]2, dimer-I. Fig. 4 shows
three routes to convert two monomers into the dimer-I.
(1) The monomer with armchair dehydrogenated sites is
transformed to the one with zigzag dehydrogenated sites
via the hydrogen migration which needs to overcome a
5.37 eV barrier. The hydrogen migration contains some
separate steps and is described in details in Fig. S6. The
translation and rotation of both types of monomers re-
quire about 0.1 eV kinetic energy. Such a low barrier in-
creases the chance for two monomers to meet with each
other. The combination of two monomers with zigzag
dehydrogenated sites is even easier than the translation
and rotation of the monomer. (2) The hydrogen transfer
within the monomer is happening simultaneously with
the dimer formation. The ﬁrst step in this path is that

012E [eV]dimer-Idimer-IIdimer-III32Eads [eV](a)(b)(c)theoryexperiment6

FIG. 4: Energy proﬁle of dimer formation from two separate monomers on graphene. Diﬀerent pathways are shown
in diﬀerent colors. The solid lines represent local minima (IS: initial state; MS: meta state; FS: ﬁnal state).
Transition states (TS) are plotted in dashed lines with energy barriers attached.

even harder and the success rate saturates at around 40%,
cf. Fig. 5. The global minimum shown in Fig. 5 (same
as dimer-I in Fig. 6) has ﬁve C-C bonds connecting two
monomers while each monomer only has four hydrogen
vacancies. Weippert et al.14 has proposed the dimers
(dimer-IV and dimer-V in Fig. 6) in which the connect-
ing unit has four C-C bonds.

To fully characterize the possible structure of the pen-
tacene dimer on graphene, the global minimum energy
structure and some four other highly stable structures
found during the EA search were subsequently relaxed in
DFT without constraints. Thereby the optimized struc-
tures were obtained. These are depicted in Fig. 6 (c) that
shows how the pentacene dimer in all ﬁve cases adopts the
same type of hollow adsorption site conﬁguration. The
adsorption energies of the ﬁve dimers shown in Fig. 6
(b) all lie in the range of experimental values and the
ﬁve dimers are therefore equally good structural candi-
dates for the observed pentacene dimers. Considering
the relative energies, dimer-I, dimer-II, dimer-III with
ﬁve connecting C-C bonds (blue parts in Fig. 6 (c)) are
more stable than dimer-IV, dimer-V with four connect-
ing C-C bonds. Forming one more C-C bond appears

to lower the total energy at least 1 eV. The ﬁnding of
dimer-I, dimer-II, dimer-III is unexpected since dimer-
IV and dimer-V are more close to chemical intuition and
proposed by the experimental work14.
In other words,
it proves that our EA based search method is capable of
predicting low energy dimers in an unbiased and precise
fashion. Meanwhile, the structure of the global mini-
mum, dimer-I indicates the special hydrogen aﬃnity of
central edge carbon atoms in pentacene36.

The pentancene dimer formation is more complex than
If the dimerization starts from two
the coronene case.
monomers with four hydrogen atoms missing on the long
edge of pentacene, the direct combination of the two
monomers will lead to either dimer-IV or dimer-V. The
conversion from dimer-IV to the global minimum dimer-
I seems impossible because it involves the breaking of
several C-C bonds. The hydrogen migration might be
feasible during the transition from dimer-V to dimer-I,
but the hydrogen atoms would need to travel via many
carbon sites. Another problem is that the most stable
monomer is the one with four hydrogen vacancies on the
same outer ring according to our test. It has also been
observed in experiments that dehydrogenated pentacene

ISTS1MSTS2FS86420246Energy [eV]5.37 eV0.02 eV1.82 eV0.38 eV0.11 eV3.53 eVdimer-IIIdimer-Ipathway 1pathway 2pathway 37

discussion of the spin state.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work has been supported by the Danish Na-
tional Research Foundation through the Center of Ex-
cellence “InterCat” (Grant agreement no.: DNRF150),
the European Union (EU) and Horizon 2020 funding
award under the Marie Sk(cid:32)lodowska-Curie action to the
EUROPAH consortium, grant number 722346. We ac-
knowledge support from VILLUM FONDEN (Investiga-
tor grant, Project No. 16562).

1X.-Y. Wang, A. Narita, and K. M¨ullen, Nat. Rev. Chem. 2, 1
(2017).
2Z. Chen, A. Narita, and K. M¨ullen, Adv. Mater. 32, 2001893
(2020).
3M. R. Kholghy, G. A. Kelesidis, and S. E. Pratsinis, Phys. Chem.
Chem. Phys. 20, 10926 (2018).
4X. Mercier, O. Carrivain, C. Irimiea, A. Faccinetto,
E. Therssen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 21, 8282 (2019).
5M. Frenklach and A. M. Mebel, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 22,
5314 (2020).
6C. S. Contreras and F. Salama, ApJS 208, 6 (2013).
7D. Fulvio, S. G´obi, C. J¨ager, ´A. Kereszturi, and T. Henning,
ApJS 233, 14 (2017).
8M. Thomas, I. Suarez-Martinez, L.-J. Yu, A. Karton, G. S. Chan-
dler, M. Robinson, I. Cherchneﬀ, D. Talbi, and D. Spagnoli,
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 22, 21005 (2020).
9L. G. Marin, S. Bejaoui, M. Haggmark, N. Svadlenak,
M. de Vries, E. Sciamma-O’Brien, and F. Salama, ApJ 889,
101 (2020).

and

10C. A. Schuetz and M. Frenklach, Proc. Combust. Inst. 29, 2307

(2002).

11Q. Mao, Y. Ren, K. H. Luo, and A. C. T. van Duin, J. Chem.

Phys. 147, 244305 (2017).

12H.-B. Zhang, X. You, H. Wang, and C. K. Law, J. Phys. Chem.

A 118, 1287 (2014).

13G. M. Florio, T. L. Werblowsky, T. M¨uller, B. J. Berne, and

G. W. Flynn, J. Phys. Chem. B 109, 4520 (2005).

14J. Weippert, J. Hauns, J. Bachmann, J.-F. Greisch, A. Narita,
K. M¨ullen, A. B¨ottcher, and M. M. Kappes, J. Phys. Chem. C
124, 8236 (2020).

15Q. Mao, A. C. T. van Duin, and K. H. Luo, Carbon 121, 380

(2017).

16A. M. Mebel, Y. Georgievskii, A. W. Jasper, and S. J. Klippen-

stein, Proc Combust Inst 36, 919 (2017).

17L. Dontot, F. Spiegelman, and M. Rapacioli, J. Phys. Chem. A

123, 9531 (2019).

18A. R. Oganov and C. W. Glass, J. Chem. Phys. 124, 244704

(2006).

19K. H. Sørensen, M. S. Jørgensen, A. Bruix, and B. Hammer, J.

Chem. Phys. 148, 241734 (2018).

20L. B. Vilhelmsen and B. Hammer, J. Chem. Phys. 141, 044711

(2014).

21Q. Zhu, A. R. Oganov, C. W. Glass, and H. T. Stokes, Acta

Cryst B 68, 215 (2012).

22Q. Zhu, V. Sharma, A. R. Oganov, and R. Ramprasad, J. Chem.

Phys. 141, 154102 (2014).

23A. W. Skov, M. Andersen, J. D. Thrower, B. Jørgensen, B. Ham-
mer, and L. Hornekær, J. Chem. Phys. 145, 174708 (2016).
24M. Dion, H. Rydberg, E. Schr¨oder, D. C. Langreth, and B. I.

Lundqvist, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 246401 (2004).

25K. Lee, ´E. D. Murray, L. Kong, B. I. Lundqvist, and D. C.

Langreth, Phys. Rev. B 82, 081101 (2010).

26J. Klimeˇs, D. R. Bowler, and A. Michaelides, J. Phys.: Condens.

Matter 22, 022201 (2009).

FIG. 5: Success rate of pentacene dimer search in the
gas phase (black line) and on graphene (blue line). The
inserted image shows the top view of the global
minimum of the pentacene dimer on graphene.

is able to rehydrogenate again on Ir(111)37. Consider-
ing the need for considerable hydrogen migration, we do,
however, expect that the formation of the global mini-
mum energy structure will be kinetically hindered.

IV. CONCLUSION

We have demonstrated that GOFEE with modiﬁed
structure operators is capable of locating energetically fa-
vorable PAH (i.e. coronene and pentacene) dimer struc-
tures on graphene. This method can, in principle, be ap-
plied to the dimerization of arbitrary PAH on surfaces.
The adsorption energies of the obtained PAH dimers on
graphene are computed and compared with experiments.
Diﬀerent isomers of PAH dimer have quite close adsorp-
tion energies with 0-0.5 eV derivations even though their
relative energies diﬀer by ∼2 eV. It remains challenging
to identify the dimer structure by comparing the adsorp-
tion energies of diﬀerent isomers with experiment. We
have further studied the mechanism of coronene dimer
formation on graphene. It has been found that the for-
mation of the most thermodynamically stable dimer is
kinetically hindered. More investigations are needed to
provide valuable information on how the chemical dimer-
ization of PAHs proceeds on graphene.

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL

See supplementary material for the high-energy struc-
tures found during the coronene dimer search and the

02505007501000Singlepoint calculations0 %20 %40 %60 %80 %100 %Succes Rategas phaseon graphene8

FIG. 6: Adsorption of diﬀerent pentacene dimers on graphene: (a) Relative energies with respect to the most stable
dimer. (b) Adsorption energies vs experimental values from Weippert et al.14. For the experimental values, the
mean is plotted in a gray dashed line while the derivation is plotted in gray shaded region. (c) Side and top views of
adsorption conﬁgurations. The carbon atoms connecting two monomers are highlighted in blue while the carbon
atoms with excess hydrogen atoms are shown in orange.

27J. D. Thrower, E. E. Friis, A. L. Skov, L. Nilsson, M. Andersen,
L. Ferrighi, B. Jørgensen, S. Baouche, R. Balog, B. Hammer,
and L. Hornekær, J. Phys. Chem. C 117, 13520 (2013).

28K. Berland and P. Hyldgaard, Phys. Rev. B 87, 205421 (2013).
29M. K. Bisbo and B. Hammer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 124, 086102

(2020).

30A. H. Larsen, J. J. Mortensen, J. Blomqvist, I. E. Castelli,
R. Christensen, Marcin Du(cid:32)lak, J. Friis, M. N. Groves, B. Ham-
mer, C. Hargus, E. D. Hermes, P. C. Jennings, P. B. Jensen,
J. Kermode, J. R. Kitchin, E. L. Kolsbjerg, J. Kubal, Kristen
Kaasbjerg, S. Lysgaard, J. B. Maronsson, T. Maxson, T. Olsen,
L. Pastewka, Andrew Peterson, C. Rostgaard, J. Schiøtz,
O. Sch¨utt, M. Strange, K. S. Thygesen, Tejs Vegge, L. Vilhelm-
sen, M. Walter, Z. Zeng, and K. W. Jacobsen, J. Phys.: Condens.
Matter 29, 273002 (2017).

31A. H. Larsen, M. Vanin, J. J. Mortensen, K. S. Thygesen, and

K. W. Jacobsen, Phys. Rev. B 80, 195112 (2009).

32J. Enkovaara, C. Rostgaard, J. J. Mortensen, J. Chen, M. Du(cid:32)lak,
L. Ferrighi, J. Gavnholt, C. Glinsvad, V. Haikola, H. A. Hansen,
H. H. Kristoﬀersen, M. Kuisma, A. H. Larsen, L. Lehtovaara,

M. Ljungberg, O. Lopez-Acevedo, P. G. Moses, J Ojanen,
T. Olsen, V. Petzold, N. A. Romero, J. Stausholm-Møller,
M. Strange, G. A. Tritsaris, M. Vanin, M. Walter, B Hammer,
H. H¨akkinen, G. K. H. Madsen, R. M. Nieminen, J. K. Nørskov,
M. Puska, T. T. Rantala, J. Schiøtz, K. S. Thygesen, and K. W.
Jacobsen, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 22, 253202 (2010).

33J. P. Perdew, K. Burke, and M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77,

3865 (1996).

34V. V. Kislov, N. I. Islamova, A. M. Kolker, S. H. Lin, and A. M.

Mebel, J. Chem. Theory Comput. 1, 908 (2005).

35E. L. Kolsbjerg, M. N. Groves, and B. Hammer, J. Chem. Phys.

145, 094107 (2016).

36D. Campisi, F. D. S. Simonsen, J. D. Thrower, R. Jaganathan,
L. Hornekær, R. Martinazzo, and A. G. G. M. Tielens, Phys.
Chem. Chem. Phys. 22, 1557 (2020).

37D. Curcio, E. Sierda, M. Pozzo, L. Bignardi, L. Sbuelz, P. La-
covig, S. Lizzit, D. Alf`e, and A. Baraldi, Chem. Sci. 12, 170
(2021).

012E [eV]dimer-Idimer-IIdimer-IIIdimer-IVdimer-V3.53.02.52.0Eads [eV](a)(b)(c)theoryexperiment