Friendliness Of Stack Overflow Towards Newbies 

Aneesh Tickoo1, Shweta Chauhan1, Gagan Raj Gupta1[gagan@iitbhilai.ac.in] 

1 Indian Institute of Technology, Bhilai CG 492015, INDIA 

Abstract. In today’s modern digital world, we have a number of online Question 
and Answer platforms like Stack Exchange, Quora, and GFG that serve as a me-
dium for people to communicate and help each other. In this paper, we analyzed 
the effectiveness of Stack Overflow in helping newbies to programming. Every 
user on this platform goes through a journey. For the first 12 months we consider 
them to be a newbie. Post 12 months they come under one of the following cate-
gories:  Experienced,  Lurkers  or  Inquisitive.  Each  question  asked  has  tags  as-
signed to it and we observe that questions with some specific tags have a faster 
response time indicating an active community in that field over others. The plat-
form had a steady growth up to 2013 after which it started declining, but recently 
during the pandemic 2020, we can see rejuvenated activity on the platform. 

Keywords: Crowdsourced Knowledge, Stack Overflow, Map Reduce, Content-
Based Platforms, COVID-19 

. 

1 

Introduction  

Online communities can be a medium to bring together users with similar ideologies in 
one place where they can discuss course content, apply their learning, and ask ques-
tions. Thus, it becomes important to attract new users who are interested in the goal of 
their community. At the same time, retaining the previous users is also important be-
cause they are expected to be more experienced and can help newbies to the commu-
nity.  

Content from these platforms spans numerous spheres of life  — finance, things re-
lated  to  business  dealings,  software  development,  academics,  etc.  We  refer  to  these 
platforms as content-based platforms and study their successes and failures.[1] The ad-
dition of new users depends on how user-friendly or newbie-friendly that platform ac-
tually is. Because the more user-friendly it is, the more is the number of users that will 
connect to it and help the community on a frequent basis.  

This paper aims to analyze how newbie-friendly these community question-answer 
platforms are. In particular, we will consider Stack Overflow which is a question-and-
answer website for professional and enthusiastic programmers. Stack Overflow is part 
of the Stack Exchange Network which comprises many other sites. It is established that 
users in these communities perform diverse and essential roles.[2] It becomes important 

 
 
2 

to recognize these roles and how users transition between them. Many previous works 
have tried to categorize users into various roles.[3] 

Existing techniques fall short of our objectives in a variety of ways. Many existing 
models don’t consider the timeline of a user rather work on the current snapshot of data. 
We have  extracted the first 12 months’ activity of each user and compared it to the 
user’s post 12-month time spent on the platform. In a way we are analyzing each user’s 
journey on the platform as he transforms from a newbie to an older member. 

We  also  aim  to  study  if  older  members of  the  community are  still  active  on  these 
platforms or not.  The platform assigns a reputation to each user which indicates the 
value that you have added to the platform. It's a good measure to separate the user base 
into various user types. On analysis, we find out 66.14% of the user base have no ac-
tivity on the platform we term them Silent Observers. A user is considered a Newbie 
for the first 12 months from their joining. We also categorized users as  Experienced 
(Reputation>200  and  at  least  5  answers  on  the  platform),  Lurkers  (Reduced  activity 
post their 12-month mark), Inquisitive (Activity even after 12 months but majority of 
the posts are Questions). 

We have analyzed the trends of questions asked and answered from the very start of 
the platform in 2008 to the current day with a special emphasis on the  period when 
education was affected by COVID-19.[4] Apart from this, we will study the response 
times for the questions asked on this platform. We will also try to uncover the aspects 
that cause longer response times. 
Fig 1 shows a sample of the XML file used in data processing. 

Fig. 1 Snapshot of the sample data of Posts.xml 

2 

Research Methodology 

To begin with our analysis, we acquired the data from the Stack Exchange Data Dump 
[5] which is an anonymized dump of all user-contributed content on the Stack Exchange 
network. The data is available in XML format.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
3 

Posts.xml  has  information  regarding  all  the  posts  of  Stack  Overflow.  The  uncom-
pressed size of the data used is close to 100 GB and so to analyze this we have used 
Map-Reduce approach in Apache Hadoop using a 5 Node AWS EMR cluster. Schema 
of Stack Overflow XML files as shown in Table 2. The rows have the names of the 
different XML files available and the columns denote the XML tags in the respective 
files. Our fundamental analysis involves Posts.xml and Users.xml. The basic statistics 
of the Stack Overflow platform are as shown in Table 1. 

Table 1. Basic statistics of the Stack Overflow platform 

Total Number of Users 
Average Reputation1 of a User 
Total Number of Questions Asked 
Total Number of Answers posted 
Total Questions with an accepted answer 
% Of accepted answers2 
Average Response Time (in hours) 

16,279,651 
106 
21,978,326 
20,815,178 
10,682,706 
51.39 % 
252.7 

Table 1. Schema of Stack Overflow XML files 

User 
Id 

Post 
Id 

Post 
Type Id 

Creation 
Date 

Reputation 

View 
Count 

Tags 

- 
- 
- 

Yes 
Yes 
Yes 

Posts 
Users 
Badges 
Comments  Yes  Yes 
Post history  Yes  Yes 
Yes 
Post links 
- 
Tags 
Yes 
Votes 

- 
- 
- 

Yes 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 

Yes 
Yes 
- 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
- 
Yes 

- 
Yes 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 

Yes 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 

Yes 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Yes 
- 

To analyze the Stack Exchange dataset, we use the Map-Reduce approach as it is scal-
able across many nodes. [6] 

The MapReduce algorithm contains two important tasks, namely Map and Reduce. [7] 

•  The Map task takes a set of data and converts it into another set of data, where indi-

vidual elements are broken down into tuples (key-value pairs). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 

•  The Reduce task takes the output from the Map as an input and combines those data 

tuples (key-value pairs) into a smaller set of tuples. 

The reduce task is always performed after the map task. These tasks can be done over 
distributed systems on chunks of our input data allowing faster processing of big data. 

Fig. 2. shows a snapshot of the mapper code 

The mapper code uses regular expressions to extract the reputation of the users from 
the acquired dataset. The final output tuple is (User_Id, reputation). 

Fig. 3. shows a snapshot of the reducer code 

The reducer code takes the output of the mapper code as its input and produces a tuple 
containing the reputation and the number of users having that aforementioned reputa-
tion. 

3 

Key Findings 

3.1  User Type Analysis 

On Stack Overflow, each user’s time on the platform can be visualized broadly into 5 
categories on the basis of their activity in terms of questions asked, answers given, and 

 
5 

questions resolved before and after the 12-month mark. The categories are defined as 
follows: 

1. The Silent Observer: 66.14% of users fall in this category wherein no questions or 

answers are posted ever. 

2. Experienced:  2.45 % of users fall into this category where they have answered a 

number of questions and have significantly contributed to the community. 

3. Inquisitive:  6.77% of users fall under this category wherein they continue to post 
questions even after the 12-month mark but do not make significant contributions in 
terms of answers. 

4. Lurker: These 23.34% are the users who have very low frequency of contributions 
to the community in terms of both questions and answers, signifying that they have 
lost interest. 

5. Others: This 1.28% of the users do not fall in any of the above categories. The ma-
jority of these users are those who have high reputations but have posted fewer an-
swers. The reason behind their high reputation is the fact that they have noteworthy 
contributions on other SE websites which is another criterion taken into considera-
tion during reputation calculation by SE.  
Table 3 and Fig 4 summaries the above details. 

Fig. 4. is a graph plotted between the type of user and the number of questions they have asked 
or answered. The blue bars show the number of answers given by the type of user, the orange 
ones show the number of questions asked and the green bars show the number of resolved ques-
tions. This graph shows a comparison between the users’ first 12 months on the platform [New-
bie] VS their transformation post-12-months of their joining. [Lurker, Experienced, Inquisitive, 
Others]. 

Table 3. Distribution of Users in various categories 

Total Users 
Silent Observer 
Experienced 
Inexperienced but interested 
Lurker 
Others 

16,279,651 
10,768,975  
398,960  
1,102,495  
3,799,964  
209,252  

66.14% 
2.45% 
6.77% 
23.34% 
1.28% 

 
 
 
6 

3.2  Response Time analysis 

Newbies are new to the technological field and seek answers to their questions. These 
are provided by the more experienced users on the platform and help the community as 
a whole. This difference also shows the credibility of the reputation system that Stack 
Exchange uses as the user reputation changes with time and a user with a higher repu-
tation is likely to be more experienced in a specified field.[8] 

The average response time on Stack Exchange is 252.7 hours. For plotting Fig 5, we 
have considered some tags that became popular, that is, had a large number of questions 
asked related to them. As can be seen, they have slower response times. Lower response  

Fig. 5. shows the average time taken to get an adequate response for a question under the speci-
fied tag. A lesser response time means an active community exists for that tag 

time indicates that many users are knowledgeable in the related field and thus leads us 
to believe that these topics either recently became relevant or have continued to main-
tain their importance in the programming field. 

As most of these tags are related to relatively new software and app development 
frameworks, we can conclude that they are currently popular in this field. More and 
more people are becoming interested in these topics which has led to such a high num-
ber of questions being answered in short spans of time. Also, often the answers posted 
on the platform point to various other websites that are beneficial for the topics. We 
have extracted website links from each answer and compiled the result. 

 
 
 
 
 
7 

Fig. 6. shows the websites which have been referenced most by the users on the Stack Exchange 
community in their posts. 

In Fig 6 we can see that the most pointed websites came out to be Imgur, Stack Over-
flow, GitHub, JSFiddle, MSDN from Microsoft, and many others related to the field of 
software development. Imgur came out to be the most pointed website. It is an image 
hosting and sharing site which is favored by users of social media and other CQA (com-
mon question-answering) communities to share images with their posts. 

Stack Overflow was the second most pointed website because many users refer to the 
answers to the questions previously posted by other users. Content is heavily curated 
by the community of Stack Overflow. Duplicate or similar questions are quickly iden-
tified as such and merged with existing questions. Most of the comments on Stack Ex-
change  pointed  to  repository  hosting  services  like  GitHub,  which  provides  Internet 
hosting for software development offering distributed version control and source code 
management functionality. The next one in the popularity line is JSFiddle, which is an 
online IDE service and it is also an online community for testing and showcasing user-
created HTML, CSS, and JavaScript code snippets, known as 'fiddles'. MSDN is also 
on the list because it allows users to install and use software to design, develop, test, 
evaluate, and demonstrate other software. The above-mentioned websites like Imgur, 
JSFiddle,  MSDN  Microsoft  play  the  role  of  supporting  websites  and  they  are  not 
knowledge-based websites because they don’t provide answers.  

 
 
 
 
8 

These results were evident from the fact that Stack Overflow primarily focuses on 
questions about programming that is tightly focused on a specific problem. This gives 
us a clear insight into how the community chooses to share and convey their questions 
or answers.  

3.3  Activity Analysis during COVID 

As of this writing, the new coronavirus infection (COVID-19), which was designated a 
pandemic by the World Health Organization (WHO) on March 11, 2020, had infected 
over 271 million individuals worldwide and killed over 5.33 million people. The world-
wide disaster caused by the COVID-19 outbreak has driven the adoption of technical 
innovations and digital goods with the objective of lowering or at the very least miti-
gating the pandemic's short and/or long-term consequences.   

COVID-19  has  led  in  a  significant  growth  in  Software  Development,  as  well  as  a 
rapid demand for digitalized platforms that are extending the transformation of homes 
into destinations for remote education and employment. Despite the importance of soft-
ware development in research, it has been said that domain scientists are under-trained 
in  software  development.  As  a  result,  we  suggest  that  domain  scientists  should  use 
knowledge-sharing forums on a regular basis to solve development problems. [9] 

The major style of teaching was moved to an online or hybrid approach during the 
epidemic.  Thus,  students  were  attracted  to  various  online  learning  platforms  to  im-
prove/build their skills. We have tried to analyze the activity on Stack Overflow from 
its very start to date. The data ranges from July 2008 to November 2021. We plotted 
the number of questions asked and the posts answered every month starting from July 
2008 all the way up till November 2021.  

The user activity increased by leaps and bounds during the peak of the COVID-19 
period. This makes it evident that since everyone was locked up in their homes, users 
became more and more active thus leading to such jumps in the activity graph. After 
the COVID-19 period, we can clearly see that the difference between the number of 
questions being asked and those being answered is diminishing; this indicates the re-
duced activity of users. 

On a general level, we can see the platform activity peaked in 2013 and since then it's 
decreasing with each passing year with a slight peak in 2020. A possible reason for the 
decrease in the number of posts might be because Stack Overflow has now become a 
good repository of questions and answers. Many a time the user doesn’t need to ask any 
questions as they have been asked and answered previously on the forum 

 
 
 
 
 
 
9 

Fig. 7. This plot shows the number of questions and answers posted every month from 2008 to 
2021. The platform started in July 2008 with only 2 questions and 4 answers. In the first month 
of January 2014, the platform activity was at its peak with 30,000 questions and 20,000 answers. 
And ever since the user activity has started to decline with an exception of April to July 2020 
(the peak of COVID-19 pandemic). Possible reason of decrease in the number of posts might be 
because Stack Overflow has now become a good repository of questions and answers. Many a 
times the user doesn’t need to ask any questions as they have been asked and answered previously 
on the forum. 

3.4  Question tag analysis 

   We see that  some tags are popular when it comes to response times and questions 
with these tags get a shorter response time. Here, in this graph Fig 8, we have plotted 
the number of questions asked under the tag versus the respective tag. 

Fig. 8. The plot shows the percentage of questions asked of a particular tag 

A tag with more questions indicates that more people are trying things related to that 
topic or are taking interest in the subject. This, by extension, suggests that the topic is 
very common in the current time and might have a good scope in the future. As we can 

10 

see, most of the tags shown here are related to software development and programming 
fields, which suggest that these might be big contributors in shaping the future. 

A tag with more accepted answers is likely to be an older topic that has retained the 
users’ interest, which is why more users have useful knowledge about it. To analyze 
this, we plotted the number of accepted answers against the tags considered previously 
in Fig 9. 

Fig. 9. this plot shows the average number of accepted answers for the tags shown in Fig 8. 

Going  by  the  statistics  we  can  infer  that  many  websites  were  made  which  can  be  a 
reason for the increased number of questions with tags like JavaScript, HTML, CSS, 
etc. Nearly 70% of professional developers who responded to the 2020 Stack Overflow 
survey coded in JavaScript. JavaScript has been the most-used technology since Stack 
Overflow started doing the annual survey. [10] 

4 

Discussion 

Knowledge-sharing networks based on Q&A are quickly becoming a primary source 
of  information for  Internet  users.  Understanding  how users  interact  on  these  sites  is 
critical for facilitating information flow between users. [11] 

From the above analysis, we can see that Stack Overflow might not constitute of an 
active community but it does have some experienced users who answer a lot as seen in 
Fig 4. Since majority of users are Silent Observers, this gives us a clear indication that 
Stack Overflow has developed into a good repository of questions that have been satis-
factorily answered. Thus, most of the newer members do not need to ask questions or 
contribute answers as they get what they desire, serving the objective of the site.  

There  are  certain  tags  that  have  a  very  active  community  and  questions  involving 
those tags get resolved quickly. On a general level, the majority of the questions and 
answers are based on various programming languages. We can see a decline in the user 
activity from Fig 7 but it does not clearly imply the platform is dying. A very plausible 

11 

reason for the decline can be the fact that Stack Overflow has become a huge repository 
of questions and answers that are still relevant so there are few additions to the already 
developed question-answer base. Often many users don't need to post a new question 
as there is already a similar question with a satisfactory answer.  

5 

Conclusion 

According to several studies, the vast majority of answers on knowledge-sharing plat-
forms are written by a tiny group of specialists.[12][13] Detecting expert users early on 
can assist site owners to improve the knowledge produced by their community by high-
lighting the experts' answers, or it can help them keep these users by providing special 
privileges. Now regarding whether Stack Exchange is newbie-friendly or not we con-
clude  that  it  is  newbie-friendly  but  not  to  a  much  higher  degree.  The  percentage  of 
accepted  answers  is  around  51.39  %.  Out  of  6,888,503  answers  given  by  newbies, 
4,990,471  answers  were  accepted  by  the  community  which  brings  us  to 72.44  % of 
accepted answers. Out of 10,682,706 accepted answers, 4,990,471 were given by new-
bies which brings us around the value of 46.71 %. Thus, we can conclude that a good 
percentage of answers given by newbies are being accepted by the community and there 
is not much bias against the new users. New users are definitely benefitting from being 
part of the community. Community is not declining rather has become a good repository 
of questions and answers. 

6 

Acknowledgement 

We would like to thank Shaleen Malik and Muttareddygari Sreechakra for useful dis-
cussions and helpful comments. The authors would like to thank Stack Overflow for 
providing the data used in this paper. 

References 

1.  Harvard Business Review, https://hbr.org/2011/10/the-rise-of-content-platforms 
2.   Mamykina L., Manoim B., Mittal M., Hripcsak G. and Hartmann B. “Design lessons from 
the fastest q&a site in the west.” In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Fac-
tors in Computing Systems, CHI ’11, 2857–2866. New York, NY, USA: ACM.(2011) 
3.  Turner,  T.  C., Fisher,  K. E:  The  impact  of  social  types  within  information  communities: 
Findings  from  technical  newsgroups.  In:  Proceedings  of the  39th annual  Hawaii  interna-
tional conference on system sciences (HICSS’06), vol. 6, pp. 135b–135b. IEEE (2006) 
4.  Dhawan, Shivangi.: “Online Learning: A Panacea in the Time of COVID-19 Crisis.” Jour-

nal of Educational Technology Systems 49, no. 1 (September 2020): 5–22. 
5.  Stack Exchange Data Dump, https://archive.org/details/stackexchange 
6.  Donald M., Adam S.: Map Reduce Design Patterns 1st edition. O’Reilly (2012) 
7.  Tom W.: Hadoop – The definitive guide, O’Reilly (2009) 
8.  Dana  Movshovitz-Attias,  Yair  Movshovitz-Attias,  Peter  Steenkiste,  Christos  Faloutsos,: 
“Analysis of the Reputation System and User Contributions on a Question Answering Web-
site: StackOverflow” IEEE/ACM International Conference on Advances in Social Networks 
Analysis and Mining (2013) 

12 

9.  Nguyen-Hoan, Luke & Flint, Shayne & Sankaranarayana, Ramesh.: A survey of scientific 
software development. Proceedings of the 2010 ACM-IEEE International Symposium on 
Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement (2010) 

10.  Stack Overflow Survey, https://insights.stackoverflow.com/survey/2020 
11.  Bogdan Vasilescu, Alexander Serebrenik, Prem Devanbu, and Vladimir Filkov.: “How so-
cial Q&A sites are changing knowledge sharing in open-source software communities”. In 
Proceedings of the 17th ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work & social 
computing. ACM, 342–354 (2014) 

12.  Arpit  Merchant,  Daksh  Shah,  Gurpreet  Singh  Bhatia,  Anurag  Ghosh,  Ponnurangam  Ku-
maraguru.: Signal Matters: “Understanding popularity and impact of users on stack over-
flow” The World Wide Web Conference (2019) 

13.  Modeling 

the  successes  and  failures  of  content-based  platforms,  http://hdl.han-

dle.net/2142/110497 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
