Child Care Provider Survival Analysis 

Phillip Sherlock1, Herman T. Knopf2, Robert Chapman1, Maya Schreiber2, Courtney 
K. Blackwell1 
1 Northwestern University, 2 University of Florida 

Word Count : 4731 

Author Note: 

Correspondence concerning this manuscript should be sent to Dr. Phillip 
Sherlock, Department of Medical Social Sciences, Feinberg School of 
Medicine, Northwestern University, 625 North Michigan Avenue, Chicago, 
Illinois, 60601 

Contact: phillip.sherlock@northwestern.edu 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 

The aggregate ability of child care providers to meet local demand for child care is 
linked to employment rates in many sectors of the economy. Amid growing concern 
regarding child care provider sustainability due to the COVID-19 pandemic, state 
and local governments have received large amounts of new funding to better 
support provider stability. In response to this new funding aimed at bolstering the 
child care market in Florida, this study was devised as an exploratory investigation 
into features of child care providers that lead to business longevity. In this study we 
used optimal survival trees, a machine learning technique designed to better 
understand which providers are expected to remain operational for longer periods 
of time, supporting stabilization of the child care market. This tree-based survival 
analysis detects and describes complex interactions between provider 
characteristics that lead to differences in expected business survival rates. Results 
show that small providers who are religiously affiliated, and all providers who are 
serving children in Florida’s universal Prekindergarten program and/or children 
using child care subsidy, are likely to have the longest expected survival rates.  

Keywords: child care, survival analysis, resource allocation, educational economics 

1.  Introduction               

The aggregate ability of child care providers to meet local demand for child 

care is linked to employment rates in many sectors of the economy. A national 

panel survey revealed that nearly 20% of working parents had their work schedules 

disrupted due to difficulties maintaining child care during the COVID-19 pandemic, 

and only 30% of all working parents had a backup-care arrangement (Modestino et 

al., 2021). Amid growing concern regarding provider sustainability due to the 

COVID-19 pandemic, state and local governments have received large amounts of 

new funding to better support provider stability (CARES, 2020; CRRSA, 2020; 

ARPA, 2021). These investments have provided all states with unprecedented 

amounts of funding to be disbursed to child care providers at the discretion of the 

states, within specified guidelines.  

In particular, the child care stabilization grants in the American Rescue Plan 

Act (ARPA; 2021) are intended to increase provider longevity to both maintain and 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
improve child care infrastructure. These require states to provide funding directly to 

child care providers; however, states are given discretion in how they choose to 

allocate this funding across providers (Office of Child Care, 2021). In order to 

ensure optimal allocation of these funds, it is important to prioritize investment in 

providers who are expected to remain operational over many years.  

In Florida, there are two primary state agencies who are tasked with 

monitoring and engaging with child care providers: (1) the Department of Children 

and Families (DCF); and (2) the Florida Division of Early Learning (DEL) (previously 

the Office of Early Learning; OEL). DCF is responsible for monitoring child care 

provider licensing as well as basic health and safety standards in most counties 

(Florida Department of Children and Families, n.d.). DEL is responsible for 

administering the Child Care Development Fund (CCDF) funded child care subsidy 

program and Florida’s Voluntary Prekindergarten (VPK) program, which is operated 

in private and public sector settings (Florida Division of Early Learning, n.d.a.).  

Given the complex, ever-evolving landscape of the early care and education 

market, it should be noted that this study focuses on providers who interact with 

any of the following three programs: (1) Florida School Readiness (SR); (2) Florida 

Voluntary Pre-Kindergarten (VPK); and (3) Florida Gold Seal Quality Care (GS). 

Florida’s SR program is the state’s CCDF subsidized child care program, which 

supports low-income families in accessing child care (Florida Division of Early 

Learning, n.d.b.). In order to be eligible to serve subsidy recipients in the state, 

providers must have an SR contract with DEL (Florida Division of Early Learning, 

2022a). The VPK program provides universal pre-kindergarten to all families in 

Florida (Florida Division of Early Learning, n.d.c.). In order to provide VPK services 

3 

 
 
 
a provider must be contracted with DEL and meet basic requirements to administer 

services (Florida Division of Early Learning, 2022b). The Florida GS program 

provides financial incentives to providers who have obtained accreditation from 

approved accrediting agencies and are subsequently designated as “Gold Seal” 

providers (Florida Division of Early Learning, n.d.). 

In this study, we performed an exploratory survival analysis using 

administrative child care provider records from Florida, which include providers who 

served children through a variety of public and private payment mechanisms. The 

purpose of this exploratory study is to investigate characteristics of Florida child 

care providers that lead to differential business survival rates. The results of this 

analysis will offer an initial outlook on the salient features of child care providers 

that are associated with increased survival rates. This is a necessary first step in 

understanding historical business life cycles among providers, taking into account 

features such as type of provider (e.g., home-based, center-based), capacity (i.e., 

number of children a provider can legally serve), and whether these providers 

participate in state-funded initiatives. The main aim of this study was to support 

state decision makers as they implement new policies and allocate funding to 

support durable child care infrastructure.  

2.  Materials and Methods 

2.1 Data     

Two data samples were retrieved from the Florida DCF website, the state’s 

child care licensing agency. The first sample, referred to as the “open provider 

dataset,” included a list of all licensed providers who were operating at the time of 

data collection (November 2021) with 13,102 records. The second sample, referred 

4 

 
 
to as the “closed provider dataset,” included all licensed providers that were closed 

at the time of data collection (November 2021) with 5,941 records. In both 

datasets, providers were organized and identified by a unique DCF provider 

identification number (DCF ID) which was used to merge the two files, creating a 

unified list of open and closed providers. Table 1 describes all of the predictor 

variables that were considered during model development. 

5 

 
Table 1. Covariates Originally Present in Open and Closed Providers Datasets 

Type 

Variable 
Name 

Measurement 
Scale 

Program Type 

Description 

Categories/Range 

Program Type 

Categorical, 
Nominal 

Program type of child care provider, only one listing possible 

Child Care Facility, Family 
Day Care Home, Large 
Family Child Care Home, 
Informal 

Faith Based 

Urban Zoned 

School Aged 
Only 
Provider Size 

Categorical, 
Dichotomous 

Categorical, 
Dichotomous 

Categorical, 
Dichotomous 

Capacity 

Interval 

Provider Status 

A positive/negative endorsement of whether a child care provider is 
faith based or not 

Yes, No 

A positive/negative endorsement of whether a child care provider is 
urban zoned or not 

Yes, No 

A positive/negative endorsement of whether a child care provider 
enrolls only school-aged children (children ages 6-13) 

Yes, No 

The upper limit of how many children a child care provider can 
support, based on Florida Department of Children and Families 
square footage guidelines 

0-999 children 

License Status 

Categorical, 
Nominal 

A list of various license statuses, including valid and invalid license 
statuses 

Exempt, Illegal, Licensed, 
Registered, Substantial 
Compliance 

Provider Quality 

Gold Seal 
Status 

Categorical, 
Nominal 

The status of participation in Florida’s Gold Seal program which 
provides a ‘Gold Seal’ quality designation to providers with an 
accreditation from specified accreditation agencies. 

Active, inactive, 
terminated 

Provider Subsidy 

School 
Readiness 
Status 

Categorical 

Child care provider status in the Florida School Readiness (SR) child 
care subsidy program 

Active, applied, 
terminated 

Voluntary Pre-
Kindergarten 

Categorical, 
Dichotomous 

Whether or not a child care provider participates in the Voluntary 
Pre-Kindergarten (VPK) program 

Yes, No 

6 

 
  
  
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
2.2 Deduplication Process 

Data were reviewed for duplicates within each sample. One duplicate closure 

record was removed. Providers’ DCF IDs were then reviewed between the two data 

files to confirm the absence of overlapping records (i.e., providers could be either 

currently open or currently closed, but not both). Five overlapping records 

(matched by DCF IDs) were removed.  

2.3 Delimitation 

The closed dataset included providers with origination years from 1957 to 

2021 and closure years from 2017 to 2021. The open providers dataset included 

providers with origination years from 1961 to 2021 and no closure years. Although 

the open and closed datasets include a broad range of years, we chose to only 

include data from the past ten years, 2012 to 2021, for two reasons. First, the 

quantity of provider records and availability of covariate data greatly improved in 

the past ten years. Second, in Florida, 19.7%, 50.6%, and 65.4% of businesses fail 

within the one, five, and ten years, respectively (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 

n.d.). Across all states, there is a tapering effect in the rate of business failure, 

such that for each additional year after five years, the probability of failure grows at 

a much slower rate than in the first five years (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 

n.d.). Due to the data delimitation used for this exploratory study, the longest 

possible business survival for a child care provider is 10 years.  

Additionally, child care providers who are also public schools were excluded 

from the analyses, as the circumstances leading to public school closures were 

assumed to be different than those leading to failed child care provider businesses. 

2.4 Covariate Selection and Calculation 

7 

 
In total, 11 predictors were included in the survival tree analysis. Provider 

origination year, program type, license status, GS, SR, VPK, Head Start status, and 

provider capacity were included as predictors in the model. Variables indicating 

whether a provider is faith based, urban zoned, and only enrolls school-aged 

children (older than 5 years of age) were also included in the model.  

For all records, the 'years of operation' variable was calculated using the 

provider origination year and closure year. This variable ranged from 0 to 10 years 

of operation, as the earliest provider origination year included in the dataset was 

from 2012 and the last data collection point was 2021. Table 2 describes the data 

from open and closed child care providers that were used to fit the Optimal Survival 

Tree model. The majority of providers were licensed (n=4,454, 80.40%) child care 

facilities (n=3,859, 69.66%) not participating in the VPK (n=4,233, 76.41%) or 

Head Start programs (n=5,330, 96.21%) with an average capacity of 65 children 

(mean capacity = 64.7). 

Table 2. Descriptive Statistics for Child Care Providers used in Optimal Survival Tree 
Models (n=5,540) 

License Status 

    Exempt 

    Licensed 

    Registered 

    Substantial Compliance 

Program Type 

    Child Care Facility 

    Family Day Care Home 

    Large Family Day Care Home 

Gold Seal Status 

    Active 

    Inactive 

n 

576 

4454 

499 

11 

n 

3859 

1462 

219 

n 

431 

133 

% 

10.40% 

80.40% 

9.01% 

0.20% 

% 

69.66% 

26.39% 

3.95% 

% 

7.78% 

2.40% 

Voluntary Pre-
Kindergarten 

    Yes 

    No 

  Faith Based 

    Yes 

    No 

  Head Start 
    Yes 

    No 

n 

1307 

4233 

n 

500 

5040 

n 

210 

5330 

% 

23.59% 

76.41% 

% 

9.03% 

90.97% 

% 

3.79% 

96.21% 

  Urban Zoned 

    Yes 

n 

19 

% 

0.34% 

8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    No 

    Terminated 

School Readiness Status 

    Active 

    Applied 

    No 

    Terminated 

4975 

89.80% 

    No 

5521 

99.66% 

1 

n 

0.02% 

% 

2024 

36.53% 

28 

2207 

1281 

0.51% 

39.84% 

23.12% 

School Aged Only 

    Yes 

    No 

  Origination Year 

Capacity 

n 

259 

5281 

% 

4.68% 

95.32% 

median, range 

2016, 2012-2021 

mean(sd), range 

64.7(70.7), 0-758 

2.5 Optimal Survival Trees 

Tree-based models, such as the Classification and Regression Tree algorithm 

(CART; reiman et al., 1984) have become popular due to their ability to model 

high-dimensional, complex interactions and for their ease of interpretability. This 

approach simultaneously identifies the most meaningful predictors of an outcome 

and their respective threshold values that divide the sample into terminal nodes 

(i.e., subgroups formed following each sequence of splits). However, survival 

analyses necessitate the handling of missing observations that arise in the context 

of censored data, which requires a specific type of approach that is not achievable 

with traditional tree-based regression models. Instead, we used the Optimal 

Survival Tree (OST) algorithm, an approach developed by Bertsimas and Dunn 

(2017), which uses modern mixed-integer optimization. CART first splits the data 

based on the predictor that leads to the highest reduction in prediction error and is 

therefore susceptible to local minima. The tree resulting from the CART procedure 

may not represent the optimal structure for prediction. Additionally, the CART 

approach does not allow for the modification of splits once they enter the model. 

OSTs, however, are constructed in a single step, wherein each split is determined 

9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with full knowledge of all other splits. Furthermore, the OST algorithm produces a 

single, interpretable tree, which in many different applications have been shown to 

perform similarly to cutting-edge, highly predictive methods like random forests 

(Breiman, 2001) and gradient boosted trees (Friedman 2001; 2002) that do not 

have the same interpretability.  

The specific arguments and options used in the Interpretable AI Optimal 

Survival Tree modeling were based on the recommended settings and provided 

examples from Interpretable AI. A training/testing split of 75%/25% was used for 

model building and validation (i.e., out-of-bag [OOB] prediction). We made one a 

priori change to the default OST settings, wherein we increased the default 

minimum terminal node size from 1 to 75 (which represents 1% of the analytic 

sample) in order to increase the likelihood of robust findings and decrease the 

likelihood of spurious subgroups that would compromise OOB prediction.  

The “max depth” parameter was tuned in the range of four to ten with the 

complexity parameter automatically tuned. Max depth refers to the maximum 

number of splits between the root node and any terminal node. It is often the case 

that the depth of tree-based models can yield complex interactions that go beyond 

the capabilities of regression-based modeling with respect to the interpretability of 

high-dimensional, multi-way interactions (e.g., five-, six-, and seven-way 

interactions). However, as it was our intention to yield an interpretable tree with 

optimal predictive ability, we balanced prediction error in the tuning process with 

interpretability and sought a max depth that was sufficiently predictive, yet 

manageable with respect to interpretation and generalizability. Harrell's C-index 

was used to assess model fit. Harrell’s C, an adaptation of the concordance statistic 

10 

 
from logistic regression, was used as a goodness-of-fit measure in our final survival 

model (Harrell et al., 1982). Harrell’s C, in the case of survival analysis, and 

specifically this study, refers to the probability of our model assigning a higher 

survival probability to the provider that actually stayed in business longer. The C-

index which ranges from 0 to 1 can also be thought of in terms of a coin flip. A C 

value equal to 0.5 means that the model correctly identifies the correct survivor, 

between all pairs, 50% of the time. It follows that a value of 1 would mean perfect 

prediction between all allowable comparisons (i.e., pairs of providers for whom we 

know which provider closed first).  

The random nature of splitting the dataset into test/train subsamples and 

starting locations for parameter estimation used in optimal survival trees means 

that a “random seed” must be set to precisely replicate the model results. To detect 

potentially spurious results, once the final model parameters are identified, the 

random seed may be reset (i.e., set to another value), allowing for the evaluation 

of a second model with the same input parameters. The two models with different 

random seeds can be evaluated to determine if the same relationships between 

variables re-emerge with new starting values and a different random split between 

test and train data subsets.  

3.  Results 

3.1 Model Selection and Fit 

The max-depth tuning procedure, with automatically tuned complexity 

parameter, yielded a set of seven best-fitting survival tree models based on a 

maximum possible number of nodes from four to ten. Table 3 shows Harrel’s C 

11 

 
values for the training and testing data subsets of each best-fitting model, 

organized by the maximum number of nodes. The OST algorithm selected the same 

model of best fit when the maximum numbers of nodes were set to 7 and 8, as well 

as 9 and 10, as indicated by identical Harrell’s C values and complexity parameters. 

These values are shown in Table 3. The automatically tuned complexity parameters 

were very small across all models with alpha values ranging from 0.00000158 to 

0.000905. Based on a comparison of the Harrell’s C values across the models, we 

generally found values of Harrell’s C in the range of .85 to .90, with all the C values 

for the testing samples greater than their associated training-sample values. 

Ultimately, we chose the model with a max depth equal to five because the greatest 

increase in Harrell’s C occurred from a max depth of four to five—the added 

predictive value decreased with each additional max-depth integer, as indicated by 

a gray vertical bar in Figure 1. Furthermore, this drop-off with respect to the 

increase in the predictive abilities of the more complex models was an indication 

that a simpler, more easily interpretable tree with a max depth equal to five was 

the preferred model. A final max depth equal to five was selected.  

3.2 Model Reseeding 

To ensure that the results were reproducible and consistent, the max depth 

model was “reseeded”, meaning that the random seed set to calculate the models 

(seed = 1) was reset to different, random value (seed = 352). The original model 

and the reseeded model yielded no substantive differences compared to the original 

model (e.g., the same model variables appeared in both the original and reseeded 

models). In the final tree with max depth equal to five, Harrell’s C for the training 

data was 0.87 and the test data was 0.87, with an automatically tuned complexity 

12 

 
parameter (alpha) of 0.0002. Related to Harrell’s C, this means that in 87% of the 

compared pairs of providers, the model correctly assigned lower expected survivals 

to the providers who indeed were the first to close among all the allowable pairs. 

The reseeded model was selected as the final model and is explained below. 

Table 3. Output Parameters for Candidate Optimal Survival Tree Models 

Max. # of 
Nodes in 
Modeling 

Complexity 
Parameter 
(Alpha) 

Harrell's C 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

0.000844  0.000905  0.000293  0.00000158  0.00000158  0.000172  0.000172 

Train 

Test 

0.849 

0.863 

0.867 

0.880 

0.872 

0.883 

0.875 

0.884 

0.875 

0.884 

0.880 

0.891 

0.880 

0.891 

Figure 1. Harrell’s Concordance Statistic for Models by Max Number of Nodes 

13 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Final Reseeded Model with Max Number of Nodes Equal to Five  

Final Tree Interpretation 

A 

The reseeded model first differentiates child care providers based on their 

capacities. Providers were split into providers with capacity of 13 or greater and 

providers with a capacity of 12 or less (Figure 2, Node A). This split primarily 

distinguishes between home and center-based providers. As a matter of policy in 

Florida, all home-based providers, including family child care homes and large 

B 

E 

family child care homes, have capacities of 12 or less (Florida Department of 

Children and Families, n.d.b.). However, while this split primarily distinguished the 

two provider types, there are a small number of exceptions found in our data: 31 

center-based providers have a capacity of 12 or less and 1 large family child care 

home has a capacity larger than 12. For this reason, we identify providers with a 

C 

F 

capacity of 12 or less as “small providers,” and providers with a capacity of 13 or 

more as “larger providers.” 

Small Providers (Capacity  12)  

As a group, small providers have an expected survival of 6.3 years (Figure 2, 

Node B). However, among the small providers, the expected survival varies by SR 

D 

status. Small providers who have active or applied for SR contracts have an 

expected survival of 9.8 years. This is 4.3 years greater than the expected survival 

for small providers who are not a part of or were terminated from the SR program 

(5.5 years, Figure 2, Node C) and 3.5 years greater than the overall expected 

survival of small providers (6.3 years).   

Among providers who are not a part of the SR program, those with an 

exempt license status (primarily religious providers) have an expected survival of 

14 

 
 
9.8 years. The remaining providers, those with a license status of registered, 

licensed, or substantial compliance (Figure 2, Node D), were further split by 

origination year. Providers who originated in or prior to 2014, were not a part of the 

SR program, and were not license exempt, have an expected survival of 7 years. 

Providers who have these same characteristics, with the exception of having an 

origination date after 2014, have the lowest expected survival across all providers 

(4.4 years).  

Larger Providers (Capacity  13) 

As a group, larger providers have an expected survival of 7.6 years (Figure 

2, Node E). Among these providers, those who are active in the VPK program have 

a greater expected survival of 9.8 years compared to larger providers who are not 

active in the VPK program (6.2 years, Figure 2, Node E). Larger providers who are 

not active in the VPK program but are active in the SR program have an expected 

survival of 9.7 years. Providers who are not active in either program have an 

expected survival of 5.4 years.  

Discussion 

The purpose of this study was to explore how expected child care business 

survival varied among providers in Florida between 2012 and 2021. Results from 

the survival analysis uncovered differential vulnerabilities and protective factors 

among providers with respect to business longevity. Small providers who were 

active in or who applied for the SR program and/or had an exempt license status 

have an expected survival of 9.8 years. Conversely, exempt, small providers who 

were not eligible to serve SR recipients or had been terminated from SR had an 

expected survival of 5.2 years. Among larger providers, those who were active in 

15 

 
the SR program and/or active in the VPK program, had the highest expected 

survival, which was at least 9.7 years. Conversely, larger providers who did not 

contract with VPK or SR, had an expected survival of 5.36 years. Taken together 

these results highlight the importance of participation in state-funded initiatives 

across both center-based and home-based providers. The results also point to 

potential protective factors related to license exemption among small providers 

(i.e., capacity < 13) who were either not participating in SR or who were 

terminated from the program. It should be noted that in this sample all license-

exempt providers were exempt due to religious affiliations. One possibility is that 

faith-based providers may have stronger ties to local communities given they are 

associated with religious institutions within their respective communities. Another 

possibility is that the operational costs of faith-based providers are subsidized by 

their affiliated organization (e.g., rent, personnel, insurance, tax exemption).  

In regard to the main aim of this study, which was to provide guidance to 

support Florida’s decision makers in allocating funding to support durable child care 

infrastructure, results highlight the importance of interventions aimed specifically at 

increasing provider eligibility to serve children funded through state-directed 

programs. As a matter of business practice, providers who contracted with state 

agencies tended to have greater expected longevity, and this deserves further 

examination. One possibility is that providers who are able to contract with the 

state and participate in the SR and/or VPK program(s) have demonstrated the 

organizational ability and business acumen that are becoming of business 

sustainability. Another possibility is that a provider can maximize the likelihood of 

maintaining full service capacity by expanding their customer base to include 

16 

 
families who receive subsidized care. Theoretically, even if only a small percentage 

of child care slots are utilized by subsidy recipients in many providers, it would 

seem to be in the best interest of providers to establish and maintain state 

contracts in order to maintain the greatest utilization of capacity, which in turn 

would lead to increased, sustained revenue. Therefore, the results of this study, as 

well as logic, dictate that it is in the best interest of providers to contract with state 

agencies that issue subsidized child care vouchers, in order to access the entire 

population of child care users, particularly the ones most in need of the service.   

Interestingly, while Gold Seal status was included in the analysis as a 

predictor, it was not identified as a salient provider characteristic that predicted 

business longevity. This should not be taken to mean that provider quality is not 

important. Rather, this finding should be strictly interpreted in the context of the 

survival analysis—after accounting for other salient provider features (e.g., SR 

participation, VPK participation), provider participation in GS does not seem to be 

associated with differences in business longevity. Furthermore, GS participation and 

more broadly, provider quality, is certainly an important topic, but seems to be 

differentiable from business sustainability. 

4.  Limitations and Future Directions 

Despite having uncovered salient features that are associated with child care 

provider longevity, the survival analysis did not include information related to the 

financial perspectives (e.g., earnings reports, non-subsidized and subsidized 

enrollment) of the included providers, simply because this information was not 

available. That said, the results of this study would be further complemented by 

provider financial information that can be used to generate and test more specific 

17 

 
hypotheses about the causes of child care provider closures and differential 

longevity.  

While a primary aim of this study was to inform Florida early child care 

policymakers, findings may have broader applicability to other states. Related to 

state-funded child care funding, this study points to the potential buffering effect of 

being contracted to serve children funded by state-directed programs. Related to 

license-exempt providers (i.e., faith-based organizations), this buffering effect may 

also be present in providers operating in other states with similar license-exemption 

models. Ultimately, the variability in the structure and implementation of child care 

systems across states necessitates state-level investigation of the salient 

characteristics of provider longevity to help inform decision-making and resource 

allocation.  

5.  Acknowledgements  

We would like to express our sincerest gratitude to our partners from the Florida 

Department of Children and Families, Office of Licensing, and the Florida 

Department of Education, Division of Early Learning. This research is supported by 

the Division of Early Learning through the Preschool Development Grant Birth 

through Five Initiative (PDG B-5) Number 90TP0004-02-00 from the Office of Child 

Care, Administration for Children and Families, U.S. Department of Health and 

Human Services. Its contents are solely the responsibility of the authors and do not 

necessarily represent the official view of the United States Department of Health 

and Human Services, Administration for Children and Families. 

6.  Declaration of Interest Statement 

We have no interests to declare. 

18 

 
7.  References 

American Rescue Plan Act (ARPA), 117-2. U.S.C. (2021) 

Breiman, L. (2001). Random Forests. Machine Learning, 45(1), 5–32. 

doi:10.1023/A:1010933404324 

Bertsimas, D., Dunn, J., Gibson, E., & Orfanoudaki, A.. (2020). Optimal Survival 

Trees. 

Breiman, L., Friedman, J. H., Olshen, R. A., & Stone, C. J. (1984). Classification 

And Regression Trees (1st ed.). 
Routledge. https://doi.org/10.1201/9781315139470 

Bertsimas, D., & Dunn, J. (2017). Optimal classification trees. Machine Learning, 

106(7), 1039–1082. doi:10.1007/s10994-017-5633-9 

Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (CARES), 116-136. U.S.C. 

(2020) 

Coronavirus Response and Relief Supplemental Appropriations Act (CRRSA), 116 

136. U.S.C. (2020) 

Florida Department of Children and Families (n.d.). Child care: About child care 

licensure. Retrieved on June 28, 2022 from 
https://www.myflfamilies.com/service-programs/child-care/child-care-
licensure.shtml 

Florida Department of Children and Families (n.d.a). Child Care: Religious exempt 

provider requirements. Retrieved June 28, 2022 from  
https://www.myflfamilies.com/service-programs/child-care/religious-

exemption.shtml 

Florida Department of Children and Families (n.d.b.). Opening a Licensed Family 

Day Care Home. Retrieved on June 28, 2022 from 
https://www.myflfamilies.com/service-programs/child-
care/docs/HowToBecomeAFamilyChildCareHome.pdf 

Florida Division of Early Learning – School Readiness Program. 6M-4 (2022a). § 

4.610-6.30. Retrieved on June 28, 2022 from 

https://www.flrules.org/gateway/ChapterHome.asp?Chapter=6m-4 

Florida Division of Early Learning – Voluntary Prekindergarten Program. 6M-8. 

(2022b).§8.301. Retrieved on June 28, 2022 from 
https://www.flrules.org/gateway/ChapterHome.asp?Chapter=6m-8 

19 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Florida Division of Early Learning (n.d.) About the Gold Seal Quality Program. 

Retrieved on June 28, 2022 from 
https://www.floridaearlylearning.com/providers/gold-seal-quality-care-
program 

Florida Division of Early Learning (n.d.a.). Division of Early Learning Overview. 

Retrieved on June 28, 2022 from 
https://www.floridaearlylearning.com/about-us/office-of-early-learning-
overview 

Florida Division of Early Learning (n.d.b.). Florida’s School Readiness Program fact 

sheet for families. Retrieved from  
https://www.floridaearlylearning.com/Content/Uploads/floridaearlylearning.c

om/images/SR%20Families%20Fact%20Sheet%202022.pdf   

Florida Division of Early Learning (n.d.c.). Voluntary Prekindergarten. Retrieved 
on June 28, 2022 from https://www.floridaearlylearning.com/vpk 

Friedman, J. H. (2001). Greedy function approximation: A gradient boosting 

machine. The Annals of Statistics, 29(5), 1189–1232. 
doi:10.1214/aos/1013203451 

Modestino, A. S., Ladge, J. J., Swartz, A., & Lincoln, A. (2021). Childcare is a 

business issue. Harvard Business Review. 

Office of Child Care (2021). Information memorandum ARP ACT child care 
stabilization funds. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 
Administration for Children and Families. 
https://www.acf.hhs.gov/sites/default/files/documents/occ/CCDF-ACF-IM-
2021-02.pdf 

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (n.d.). Business Employment Dynamics: Table 7. 

Survival of private sector establishments by opening year. Retrieved on June 
29, 2022 from https://www.bls.gov/bdm/ 

20 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
