REMEDIAL SUPPORT FOR REFUGEES: IMPACT OF DOSAGE

1

The Impact of Attending a Remedial Support Program on Syrian Children’s Reading

Skills: Using BART for Causal Inference

Mayarí I. Montes-de-Oca, Jennifer L. Hill,
Lawrence Aber, Carly Tubbs Dolan,
Kalina Gjicali

New York University

Data collection and processing were funded by the Spencer Foundation, Dubai Cares, and the

E-cubed Research Fund. Funding for scientific analysis and write-up was provided by the New

York University Abu Dhabi and the E-cubed Research Fund.

Contact Information

Mayarí Montes de Oca, mmd486@nyu.edu

Jennifer L. Hill, Department of Applied Statistics, Social Science, and Humanities, NYU,

jennifer.hill@nyu.edu

Lawrence Aber, Department of Applied Psychology, NYU, la39@nyu.edu

Carly Tubbs Dolan, NYU Global TIES for Children, carly.tubbs@nyu.edu

Kalina Gjicali, NYU Global TIES for Children, kg1317@nyu.edu

REMEDIAL SUPPORT FOR REFUGEES: IMPACT OF DOSAGE

Abstract

2

This article estimates, for a sample of 1,777 Syrian refugee children, the impact on basic

reading assessments of attending a remedial support program in Lebanon that was infused with

social and emotional learning practices. We use flexible methods that capitalize on advantages

of both machine learning and Bayesian inferential frameworks to leverage the information

available in understudied contexts and help account for the problem of self-selection. Average

treatment effects were estimated both using multiply imputed data and data from

outcome-respondents only. We do not find conclusive evidence for an effect on one of the

reading measures studied (ASER). However, we provide evidence for positive effects for three,

more robust, measures of basic reading outcomes from the Arabic EGRA assessment. We

discuss potential reasons for the differences in effects that are relevant for educational research

and practice. We also consider the implications for future research of choices related to

measurement, data collection and processing, and missing data.

Keywords: causal inference, refugees, social-emotional learning, program evaluation,

attendance, nonparametric, Bayesian, non-formal education, selection bias.

REMEDIAL SUPPORT FOR REFUGEES: IMPACT OF DOSAGE

Introduction

3

6.6 million Syrians have fled their home country since 2011, mostly to neighboring

countries of Turkey, Lebanon, Jordan, Iraq, and Egypt, as a result of a protracted violent conflict

(UNHCR, 2021). Currently, there are at least 855,172 Syrian refugees in Lebanon, 90% of

whom live on less than $2.90 USD per day and 512,500 of whom are estimated to be children

and youth (UNHCR, 2020).

Refugee children have dramatically lower enrollment rates in school than host country

children on average (UNHCR, 2019; Tubbs, Kim, Brown, Gjicali, & Aber, 2021). Moreover,

among those enrolled, chronic absenteeism is prevalent (Sieverding, Krafft, Berri, Keo, &

Sharpless, 2018; Tumen, Vlassopoulos, & Wahba, 2021; Brown, Kim, Tubbs, & Aber, 2021).

This combination of circumstances poses the risk of profoundly hindering the socioemotional

and academic development of a full generation of children and youth.

As a response to this crisis, several efforts by local and international agencies have been put in

place to mitigate the consequences of displacement and armed conflict on the development of

these children (UNHCR, 2012; The World Bank, 2018; Tubbs et al., 2021).  The Lebanese

Ministry of Education and Higher Education, for example, has committed to increasing access to

Lebanese public schools for Syrian refugee students (MEHE, 2016; Kim, Brown, Tubbs,

Sheridan, & Aber, 2020). This has placed substantial pressure on the Lebanese education

system --  a system unprepared to address the specific socioemotional and academic needs of

Syrian refugees (Kim et al., 2020).

Syrian refugee students face a different reality from that of national Lebanese students.

Differences include language adaptation challenges, different grade placement due to previous

school interruptions (Shuayb, Makkouk, & Tuttunji, 2014; Kim et al., 2020), food insecurity, as

well as unstable and overcrowded living conditions (UNHCR, 2020). Moreover, refugee students

REMEDIAL SUPPORT FOR REFUGEES: IMPACT OF DOSAGE

often face cultural and political tensions with their host communities, students, and teachers

4

(UNHCR, 2013; Yoshikawa, Wuermli & Aber, 2019).

Remedial Programing And Social And Emotional Learning

While more efforts from the international community have been put in place to integrate

refugee children into local education systems, evidence regarding which strategies improve

refugee children’s learning outcomes is still scarce. Prior studies suggest that access to formal

schooling does not always translate into improved learning outcomes (Pritchett, 2015; Torrente

et al., 2015; Aber, Tubbs, et al., 2017).

After-school remedial programs have played a central role in the efforts launched by

INGO’s and local governments to mitigate the learning crisis that ongoing armed conflicts have

left behind (Jalbout, 2015). Particularly, social and emotional learning (SEL) programming, both

in school and after school, has been increasingly incorporated into the educational response.

The goal is to provide children in conflict-affected contexts with psychosocial support to mitigate

the effects that migration, conflict, and trauma can have on their academic development (Aber,

Torrente, et al., 2017; UNESCO, 2019; Yoshikawa et al., 2019; Tubbs et al., 2021; Brown et al.,

2021). These programs often involve providing teachers with training and support to promote

safe and supportive learning environments that can help improve the students’ self-perception,

social and self-awareness, interpersonal skills, self-management and regulation of their

emotions, among other skills (Denham & Brown, 2010; Tubbs et al., 2021). Numerous studies

evaluating in-school and after-school SEL programs in the United States and in other Western

countries have found positive impacts on student’s academic performance (Jones, Brown,

Hoglund, & Aber, 2010; Durlak, Weissberg, Dymnicki, Taylor, & Schellinger, 2011; Schonfeld et

al., 2015) and emerging evidence suggests that offering access to SEL education programming

could improve student’s learning and development in crisis contexts (Aber, Torrente, et al., 2017;

Aber, Tubbs, et al., 2017; Tubbs et al., 2021; Brown et al., 2021; Aber, Tubbs, Kim, & Brown,

REMEDIAL SUPPORT FOR REFUGEES: IMPACT OF DOSAGE

5

2021). Nonetheless, there is limited evidence on how to implement such programs effectively

(Torrente et al., 2019) under conditions that compromise children’s ability to regularly attend.

The amount of exposure to an SEL intervention during a trial can vary dramatically due to

numerous reasons, including heterogeneity of the days offered in each classroom, security

threats, and most importantly due to significant differences in the children’s circumstances and

risk factors. The consequences of this non-random differentiated exposure remain understudied

and, if ignored, the potential benefits that remedial support and SEL can have on the academic

development of refugee children cannot be fully understood.

Attendance

Despite the efforts and emergent research around increasing access to schooling in

conflict-affected contexts, attendance in the classroom is “voluntary” and often driven by

financial hardships, migration patterns, and household instabilities. Prior research from

developing countries and from other emergency contexts has documented the prevalence of

absenteeism among at-risk children, and the challenges that it represents for international

efforts that target their academic development (Banerjee et al., 2010; Arbour et al. 2016; Tubbs

et al., 2021). Moreover, absenteeism from regular schooling in Syrian refugee children has been

found at alarmingly high rates (Sieverding et al., 2018; Tumen et al., 2021), and attendance at

out-of-school remedial programs is expected to be more difficult to attain and sustain. While it

would be helpful to better understand the impacts of attendance/absenteeism on subsequent

outcomes, differential selection into levels of attendance complicates this estimation.

Evidence from the implementation of remedial programming in another conflict-affected

context, Niger, suggests that providing access alone cannot leverage all the benefits that

low-cost targeted remedial programming can have on children’s learning outcomes (Brown et

al., 2021). Results from a study in Chile reflects the important role that attendance plays in

moderating the effects of educational interventions for at-risk children. In fact, ignoring

REMEDIAL SUPPORT FOR REFUGEES: IMPACT OF DOSAGE

attendance as a moderator can lead to the misleading conclusion that such interventions have

6

no impact (Arbour et al., 2016).

Furthermore, compelling correlational and regression-based studies have illustrated the

importance of the relationship between attendance and learning outcomes, and of the role that

absenteeism plays as a risk factor in children’s academic development (Finn, 1993; Lamdin,

1996; Maclean et al., 2016; Gershenson et al., 2017; Tubbs et al., 2021).

Fewer studies, however, have focused on the study of the impact of attendance on

academic outcomes under a causal framework. Evidence from studies in the United States,

Australia, and Ghana has supported the reasonable hypothesis that attendance matters in

children’s learning and that it affects academic outcomes (Cannon, Jacknowitz, & Painter, 2006;

Gottfried, 2010, Goodman, 2014; Opoku & Boahen, 2021). Some studies suggest that the

benefits of attendance, however, may not be achieved by the most at-risk participants living

under the poverty line (Cannon et al., 2006).

The context and challenges that Syrian refugee populations face are without a doubt

atypical, heterogeneous, and constantly shifting, and they remain understudied. Furthermore,

attendance in out-of-school programs has the potential to have different implications for learning

outcomes than attendance in regular schooling. Creating a better understanding of

attendance-outcome relationship of interventions that target the well-being of these populations,

while attempting to address the challenges it presents to causal inference, can help us assess

whether remedial education holds promise for refugee and conflict-affected students.

Current Study

As part of the efforts to address the specific needs of refugee children, the International

Rescue Committee (IRC) and NYU Global TIES for Children have conducted and evaluated a

series of interventions that provide remedial tutoring programs for refugee children who are

enrolled in public schools in their host communities (IRC, 2021). The present study uses a

REMEDIAL SUPPORT FOR REFUGEES: IMPACT OF DOSAGE

longitudinal sample of Syrian refugee children in Lebanon who participated in one of these

cluster-randomized control trials in order to study the impact of attending non-formal remedial

7

education on children’s learning.

Most impact evaluation studies perform intent-to-treat analyses that ignore to what

degree participants actually received the treatment. To determine the amplitude of effectiveness

of programming, this analysis considers students’ attendance as a measure of dosage. By

focusing on variability in program uptake we aim to better understand the impact that

interventions can have on children’s learning and development.

Research Question

The children studied in this paper were offered access to non-formal remedial instruction

infused with SEL principles and followed over the course of 26 weeks during the academic year

2016-2017, to address the following research question:

RQ. What is the impact of attendance to non-formal SEL-infused remedial

programming on refugee children’s basic reading outcomes?

However, attendance in the classroom was voluntary and not randomized, and in order

to identify causal effects under these circumstances special methods and stronger assumptions

are needed, than if we could ensure a successful randomization to the program’s exposure. We

therefore use innovative methods for causal inference in the presence of self-selection.

Main Contributions

The main contributions of this study lie at the intersection of (1) an understudied

crisis-context and population, (2) the understudied impact of attendance in out-of-school SEL

programming, (3) the rigor to explicitly address and assess how missing data affected our study,

and (4) the study of attendance through flexible methods for causal inference that (a) capitalize

on the advantages of machine learning and statistical frameworks to better account for the

REMEDIAL SUPPORT FOR REFUGEES: IMPACT OF DOSAGE

problem of self-selection and that (b) can leverage a large amount of information in an

8

understudied context.

Understudied context and population. As a response to the lean evidence base on

the conditions, challenges, and developmental processes of Syrian refugee children, the

Education in Emergencies: Evidence for Action (3EA) partnership between NYU Global TIES for

Children and the IRC collected an extensive amount of information on the children and their

families, their migration history, the teacher’s background characteristics and instructional

practices, and on their communities. The data collection process was driven by a team of

measurement and child development experts and the resulting dataset provides hundreds of

potentially relevant confounders and covariates. One of the distinctive features of this study is

that, to leverage such a rich data set and to limit generalizations from Western countries to

Syrian refugee populations, we use methods that capitalize on the ability of machine learning

algorithms to estimate relationships between attendance and outcomes while adjusting for

numerous covariates (Hill, Weiss, & Zhai, 2011; Degenhardt, Seifert, & Szymczak, 2019).

Relaxing parametric assumptions. Accounting for many covariates, however,

presents a modeling challenge, particularly in a poorly understood context where we want to

avoid making strong assumptions about the precise forms of the relationships between

confounders and the outcome, as well as about the potential interactions with the treatment. In

contrast to linear models, the methods used in the present analysis account for such

complexities naturally, reducing the amount of parametric assumptions that need to be made

(Hill, 2011; Hill, Linero, & Murray, 2020). This minimizes the risk of bias from excessive tweaking

of functional forms and limits the introduction of cultural bias from prior Western-based research

results.

Common support for valid causal inference claims. Furthermore, the methods

applied here make explicit use of the potential outcomes framework (Rubin, 1987, 2005) and

REMEDIAL SUPPORT FOR REFUGEES: IMPACT OF DOSAGE

offer principled ways to assess whether there is enough empirical support to estimate

counterfactual states (and to, thus, make causal claims) at different levels of attendance and for

9

each participant. We draw from the common support approaches developed by Hill and Su

(2013) to assess the availability and quality of empirical counterfactuals in our sample. In

addition, we use the Average Dosage-Response Function framework for causal inference

(Galagate, 2016) to account for differences in the causal relationship between attendance and

the outcome across participants.

Instrumental variables. Many studies use instrumental variables (IV) approaches to

address these questions. We see several downsides to this approach. First, IV requires that the

exclusion restriction is satisfied. In this context, this means that the only pathway by which

randomization to the treatment can affect student outcomes is through attendance. However,

alternate pathways are possible. The child's and parents' general engagement with their

academic development can be affected as a result of being granted access to the program, and

factors such as the remedial teachers’ attendance and engagement could affect students'

outcomes, regardless of the students' individual attendance. Moreover, using a binary

instrument to identify a continuous or multi-valued treatment is an extension of the basic IV

framework that requires stronger assumptions about the functional form of the model than the

simple binary-instrument, binary-treatment context. Traditional IV models are designed to

estimate various forms of local average treatment effects and are not generally capable of

identifying dose-specific effects. Finally, instrumental variables methods typically ignore issues

of common support that, in contrast, the BART-based methods are designed to diagnose. The

fully parametric IV regression-based approaches, don’t provide ways to assess the availability of

adequate counterfactuals at different levels of attendance. Rather, they are concerned with the

impact of moving from zero to the observed, non-random, levels of attendance. This means that

they have to make assumptions about the relationship between attendance and the outcome for

REMEDIAL SUPPORT FOR REFUGEES: IMPACT OF DOSAGE

participants with observed low-attendance, based on the outcome of participants with observed

10

high-attendance, and vice versa. Which risks overconfident extrapolation of estimations to

participants for whom we may lack empirical support for causal inference claims.

Addressing missing data. Missing data, which is prevalent in the study of

crisis-affected migrant populations, is often either ignored or not given sufficient attention. In this

study we devote efforts to 1) examine non-response patterns and diagnostics, 2) address

missing data in a principled way, 3) compare how impact estimates differ before and after

adjustment for non-response, and 4) thoroughly discuss its implications in research findings.

Healing Classrooms

The intervention of focus in this study is a SEL-infused remedial academic support

program implemented by the IRC, referred to as “Healing Classrooms”. The program focused on

improving teachers’ ability to create a supportive environment during their delivery of basic

literacy and numeracy instruction. It was delivered by the IRC at community-based sites

recruited in the Akkar and Bekaa regions of Lebanon. Randomization to access occurred at the

site level, before the academic year 2016-2017, and attendance varied greatly across students

after enrollment.

The IRC Healing Classrooms programs focus on the role that teachers play in promoting

the psycho-social recovery and well-being of students. They aim to foster an inclusive approach

to education, with awareness of the impact that violence and displacement have on children and

of the increased risks that they face. They do this by offering training, ongoing support,

monitoring and referral systems (Child and Youth Protection and Development Unit, 2011). As

part of these programs teachers participate in Teacher Learning Circles (TLCs), and receive

mentoring and training to promote in children a sense of self-worth, self-control, belonging and,

more generally, positive social skills (Child and Youth Protection and Development Unit, 2011).

REMEDIAL SUPPORT FOR REFUGEES: IMPACT OF DOSAGE

In recent years the 3EA partnership conducted evaluations of the access to these

11

programs in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in Niger. Previous evidence from these

evaluations suggests that being offered access to Healing Classrooms helped increase

students’ perceptions of the supportiveness of teachers and schools, as well as their academic

outcomes (Torrente et al., 2015, 2019; Aber, Torrente, et al., 2017; Aber, Tubbs, et al., 2017;

Brown et al., 2021).

Conceptual Framework

The overarching conceptual framework for this study is based on educational and

developmental theory. We draw on “developmental-contextual models” which view development

as taking place in a nested, interactive set of contexts, ranging from immediate (e.g., family,

peer system, classroom) to more distal (e.g., cultural and political) (Bronfenbrenner & Morris,

1998; Cicchetti & Aber, 1998). The classroom serves as the context of focus in this study.

Children’s development depends on the classroom, which provides opportunities for interactions

through relationships that support development. In particular, in our context, the “Healing

Classrooms” (HC) infuses SEL principles into instruction (Aber, Torrente, et al., 2017). The

conceptual framework proposes that for children to effectively acquire SEL and academic skills,

they need to participate in safe and high-quality learning environments. Healing Classrooms

supports this through positive teacher-child relationships, which have been shown to be

associated with social competence and positive school adjustment (Baker, 2006; Hamre &

Pianta, 2001; Pianta & Stuhlman, 2004; Rimm-Kaufman & Hamre, 2010).

Figure 1 illustrates the main components of this framework. We consider that the uptake

(attendance, engagement) and high-quality delivery of the program are crucial for the benefits of

SEL-infused programming to affect academic outcomes. We also assume that pre-existing

characteristics of the child at the individual, family, and community level, can affect the

academic outcomes and uptake levels, and play a role in moderating the impacts of the

REMEDIAL SUPPORT FOR REFUGEES: IMPACT OF DOSAGE

12
program uptake. The key elements for the present analysis are: (1) child attendance in remedial

programming (a proxy for program uptake); and (2) child reading outcomes.

Figure 1 Conceptual framework

Notes. Depiction of child, family, and community characteristics on the left, as pre-treatment covariates. The program
refers to elements of the intervention and its implementation, such as the types of mentoring and support that
teachers received. Exposure heterogeneity is also considered. Mediating mechanisms are not part of the scope of
this analysis and are excluded from the figure for simplicity. The child-level outcomes that the intervention targets are:
(1) social competencies, (2) mental health, and (3) academic competencies, with the focus of this paper being
children's literacy outcomes.

Sample

During the 2016-2017 school year, the 3EA partnership randomized refugee sites in

Lebanon into 4 different treatment conditions: (1) Two cycles (26 weeks) of basic HC

remedial support, (2) Two cycles (26 weeks) of HC remedial support with an added focus on

targeted activities, (3) One cycle (10 weeks) of basic HC remedial support, and (4) One cycle

(10 weeks) of HC remedial support with an added focus on targeted activities. Our sample of

focus is exclusively the group of participants who were offered access to the basic Healing

Classrooms remedial support over 2 cycles of the program between 2016-2017. The sample of

REMEDIAL SUPPORT FOR REFUGEES: IMPACT OF DOSAGE

13
focus consists of 1,777 children (49.5% female) from 33 different refugee sites, aged 4 to 15 (M

= 9.031, SD = 2.33) attending grades 1 to 9 (M = 2.722, SD = 1.715), and attendance rates

averaging 35.4% (SD=24.29). Table 1 contains the descriptive statistics of basic demographics

and baseline measures.

Table 1 Basic descriptive statistics of analysis sample.

variable

min

med.

mean

sd

max

Student’s sex at birth is female

Student’s age at baseline

School Grade

ASER Arabic score - baseline

Sum score of all letter recognition items - baseline

Sum score of all grapheme recognition items - baseline

Sum score of all oral reading items - baseline

Days of attendance to Healing Classroom

0

4

1

0

0

0

0

0

0.0

9.0

2.0

1.0

0.49

0.50

9.03

2.33

2.72

1.71

1.38

1.39

16.2

21.81

20.78

1.0

0.0

12.42

16.72

10.44

15.72

37.0

35.43

24.29

Deviation from expected age for grade

-5

1.00

1.31

1.52

Notes. Descriptives in the table are pooled after addressing missing data.

1

15

9

4

50

50

42

80

7

Measures

One of our target outcome measures of children’s reading skills is a tool designed by the

Annual Status of Education Report (ASER), which is intended to be collected nationwide and to

measure children’s ability to read basic text in Arabic (ASER Centre, 2016; Vagh, 2009). The

tool was administered by enumerators using a paper-based format. It consists of 4 types of

exercises and rates children’s reading skills on a 5 point scale: 0- cannot recognize letters, 1-

letter recognition, 2- word recognition, 3- short paragraph reading, and 4- longer paragraph

reading. ASER is a useful tool in contexts with low resources that have a need for large scale

REMEDIAL SUPPORT FOR REFUGEES: IMPACT OF DOSAGE

14
reading screenings, due to its ease of implementation and the length of the assessment (Brown

et al., 2021). The English version of the tool is presented in Figure A.1 of the online Appendix A ,

for reference.

Given high missingness rates and the bluntness of ASER, sub-scales from a different

literacy tool, the Early Grade Reading Assessment (EGRA) (RTI-International, 2016), are also

considered as outcomes of this study. Specifically, the sub-scales that more closely correspond

to the reading skills targeted by the ASER reading tool were analyzed for comparison. These

outcomes consist of the sum scores of 3 different sets of items that focus on: (1) letter

recognition, (2) grapheme recognition, and (3) oral passage reading. The EGRA performance

was collected through tablets by enumerators trained by the 3EA partnership. Students were

given one minute to complete each type of task. The letter and grapheme recognition tasks

were scored as the number of letters/graphemes correctly read (out of 60). The oral passage

reading assessment consisted of the number of words from the passage that the student

managed to read properly before 1 minute elapsed, and they were automatically scored 0 by the

tablet if they missed all the words from the first sentence.

The unconditional changes from baseline to endline of the outcome measures are

presented in Figure A.2 in online Appendix A . Note that the ASER and letter recognition

outcomes exhibit a more pronounced increase (and distribution shift) from baseline to endline

than the grapheme recognition and oral passage reading tools.

Methods

Missing Data

Several precautions were implemented to prevent missing data. Measurement tools

were carefully selected and designed to reduce the participants’ burden, mindful and culturally

appropriate phrasing was used, data collection protocols allowed for several attempts to track

absent children, and enumerators engaged in many individual efforts. Despite this, several

REMEDIAL SUPPORT FOR REFUGEES: IMPACT OF DOSAGE

factors made it virtually impossible to avoid missing data. These included: 1) the large number

of assessments administered as part of the full 3EA study, 2) having to track down students on

several separate waves for each assessment, and 3) challenging conditions to locate children

15

(no formal identification, no stable residency, high mobility, security threats, etc.).

Outcome non-response. The non-response rates for the ASER reading outcome

measure in this analysis sample was 47.55% (n=845), while that for the 3 EGRA outcomes was

20.37% (n=362). This should make it clear to the reader that missing data played an important

role during the research endeavors of the 3EA partnership amid understudied contexts that face

protracted crises, and that the results presented from now on should be interpreted while

considering these limitations. Non-response rates for each of the covariates selected for the

impact models are presented in Table C.1 of online Appendix C.

Addressing the missing data. The resulting missing data in the 3EA Lebanon

2016-2017 study was addressed comprehensively, using the Multiple Imputation framework

(Rubin, 1987). We used a chained models (or “equations”) approach, commonly referred to as

MICE (Van Buuren, Brand, Groothuis-Oudshoorn, & Rubin, 2006), within the R statistical

programming language. This MICE approach creates a model for each variable with missing

data, conditional on the other variables, and uses this to predict the missing values using all of

the available information. We use Random Forests to model these relationships due to its ability

to flexibly model nonlinear relationships, to accommodate a large number of predictors, and to

identify each predictor's importance (Stekhoven & Bühlmann, 2012; Doove, Van Buuren, &

Dusseldorp, 2014; Shah, Bartlett, Carpenter, Nicholas, & Hemingway, 2014). These methods

were selected considering their ability to account for the uncertainty brought in by the missing

data and to reflect it in the final estimates; with the goal to yield coherent, shareable, and

comprehensive completed data sets to be used across different analyses, preventing

assumptions about the non-response from being dependent on the model selected to address

REMEDIAL SUPPORT FOR REFUGEES: IMPACT OF DOSAGE

16

any one particular research question. The methods we used for convergence and imputation

diagnostics of the outcome variables are described in sections 1 and 2 of online Appendix B.

Outcome imputation diagnostics. The results of the imputation diagnostics (see

online Appendix B) don’t demonstrate meaningful disparities between the two groups

(respondents and non-respondents), that might be left unexplained by the measured information

that was used during the imputation process. While we can never rule out that data may be Not

Missing At Random (NMAR), these diagnostics provide evidence that, given the information we

have, our predictions for the missing data seem consistent with the data that were observed.

The results from these diagnostics can help researchers feel more comfortable about the

performance of the imputation models employed (Abayomi, Gelman, & Levy, 2008; Bondarenko

& Raghunathan, 2016) and can offer peace of mind that there’s no clear evidence against the

assumption that the data are Missing At Random (MAR) (Rubin, 1987; Van Buuren, 2012).

Although these results do provide us with a reasonable degree of confidence regarding the

imputations for the EGRA scores, we feel less confident in the MAR assumption for the ASER

non-response. The non-response rates in ASER were extremely high and also profoundly

unbalanced between the treatment groups. It is likely that there was not enough representation

among the limited pool of low-attendance respondents, of the non-respondents, to allow for

successful bias adjustment (see Limitations and Interpretation of Findings and online Appendix

B for details).

Covariate Selection

In the absence of a pristine randomization, covariates are typically required to satisfy the

assumptions required for causal analysis. In theory, to identify a causal effect we simply need to

properly adjust for all covariates that predict both treatment assignment and the outcome

(confounders). We chose the covariates by considering 1) domain-knowledge (theoretical,

research-based, and context-relevant variables incorporated in previous analyses by

REMEDIAL SUPPORT FOR REFUGEES: IMPACT OF DOSAGE

domain-experts (Kim et al. 2020; Tubbs et al., 2021)) and 2) a data-driven approach that

minimizes researcher and cultural biases through the use of non-parametric models. In practice

17

we always need to be mindful of the fact that it may not be possible to adjust for all such

confounders.

Given the large number of survey items collected, the understudied nature of the

context, and the migrant population of the 3EA study, a data-driven approach was instrumental

to identify the items most important in predicting the outcome and treatment. This approach

relies on a non-parametric recursive partitioning algorithm (Random Forests), which allows for

flexible estimation of the models used to understand these relationships. A key feature of the

algorithm is that it automatically incorporates non-linearities and interactions as long as they are

sufficiently predictive of the outcome (Kursa, Jankowski, & Rudnicki, 2010; Kursa & Rudnicki,

2010; Ali et al., 2019; Degenhardt et al., 2019).

The final selection consists of 68 covariates that were deemed as relevant for at least

one of the impact models. The final covariates include: baseline assessments of literacy and

math skills, a measure of the children self-regulation in class, demographic variables of the

teachers, the students, their households, and their migration history, variables related to the

program training and implementation, as well as the teachers’ experience, practices and

perceptions. A complete explanation of the covariate selection process can be found in online

Appendix C and the full list of covariates used in the model of each outcome in Table C.1.

REMEDIAL SUPPORT FOR REFUGEES: IMPACT OF DOSAGE

Analytic Approach

18

Assumptions for causal inference. To answer our research question causally we draw

from the potential outcomes framework, proposed in Rubin (1978) and Rubin (2005). This

framework allows us to think in terms of counterfactuals -- in this case what the outcome for

each participant would have been under each of the different dosage assignments.

Say we allow

𝑌(0)

to represent all of the post-treatment scores that would result for

participants if they had been placed in a low attendance group. Then allow

𝑌(1)

to represent

what post-treatment scores would have been, had the same participants been placed instead in

a high-attendance group. The average difference between these two sets of "potential

outcomes" is defined as the average treatment effect (ATE). Unfortunately, we can only see one

potential outcome for each person. We don't get to see Y(0) for those in the high attendance

group or Y(1) for those in the low attendance group. This makes estimation challenging for

causal inference. A pristine randomization of participants into the two groups would allow us to

estimate this without bias. However, when the conditions of a pristine randomization are not

present, then students might differ across exposure groups in ways that also predict their

outcome. Addressing the selection bias this can create, requires stronger assumptions and

more complicated methods.

The most critical assumption requires that we have measured all the pre-treatment

covariates that predict both

𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒

and the potential outcomes of the students. This

assumption, often referred to as ignorability, can be formalized as,

𝑌(0), 𝑌(1) ⊥ 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒

|X

If ignorability is satisfied, participants with comparable combinations of their covariates’

values can be assumed to have comparable distributions in their potential outcomes and, thus,

provide the necessary information to estimate reasonable counterfactuals for causal inference.

REMEDIAL SUPPORT FOR REFUGEES: IMPACT OF DOSAGE

19
A second assumption, also known as common support (Hill & Su, 2013), essentially says

that we have enough empirical counterfactuals between exposure groups (that share similar

combinations of pretreatment covariates ), to make reasonable predictions about the potential

𝑋

outcomes

𝑌(0), 𝑌(1) 

for all the students that are used to compute the average treatment effect.

This assumption is expressed in terms of a non-zero probability of exposure for all subgroups of

students that differ in their pretreatment characteristics:

0 < 𝑃𝑟(𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒|𝑋) < 1

This assumption can be explored empirically to shed light on which observations may

lack sufficient overlap. Inference for these observations should be interpreted with caution or

avoided.

A final assumption, common to randomized experiments and observational studies, is

the Stable Unit Treatment Value Assumption (SUTVA) and, for the purposes of this analysis, it

means that the degree of attendance to the remedial classroom of any one child shouldn’t affect

the reading scores of other children. Even under a perfect randomization of attendance it is

possible to imagine that children could collaborate outside the classroom in violation of this

assumption. Making it important to acknowledge the possibility that the estimated treatment

effects that can be obtained from a social study like this could be smaller than the true impact,

as we cannot ensure that students with different attendance didn’t help each other with their

reading skills.

Beyond this, additional "parametric" assumptions are needed regarding our ability to

accurately model the relationships between

𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒

, the pretreatment covariates , and the

𝑋

potential outcomes

𝑌(0), 𝑌(1)

. The plausibility of these assumptions depends on the modeling

strategy used to estimate the treatment effect. Some approaches (such as linear models) rely

more heavily on parametric assumptions than others. The major (and often implicit) assumption

that all researchers make when estimating treatment effects is that the final model chosen

REMEDIAL SUPPORT FOR REFUGEES: IMPACT OF DOSAGE

20
captures the true relationships between the pretreatment covariates, the treatment variable, and

.
𝑌(0), 𝑌(1)

BART. The modeling approach used to estimate the impact of attendance in this study

was Bayesian Additive Regression Trees (BART) (Chipman, George, & McCulloch, 2007, 2010).

This method was used to model the relationship between the outcomes and the treatment and

covariates. The resulting fit allowed us to to predict counterfactual outcomes for each participant

from the analysis sample, which were then used to estimate the treatment effect.

BART is a semi-parametric modeling approach that combines elements of machine

learning and Bayesian inference. It uses simple Regression Trees as a building block within a

recursive partitioning algorithm that can naturally account for a large number of covariates,

interactions, and other non-linearities in the relationship between the outcome variable,

treatment, and covariates; that is, these features are only included in the model fit if they

contribute sufficiently to variance explained. Embedding this algorithm within a Bayesian

inferential framework allows for robust uncertainty quantification and helps prevent overfitting

(one of the most popular concerns about tree-based models) by ensuring (through the prior

specification) that each tree contributes only a small part to the overall fit (Hill, 2011; Hill et al.,

2020).

In observational studies and in experiments where the conditions of pristine

randomization can’t be met, it is often crucial to appropriately adjust for all confounders to

ensure ignorability. This can mean using strategies (matching, weighting, or flexible models) that

can flexibly and simultaneously adjust for many covariates. BART is particularly well suited for

this because it doesn’t require strong assumptions about how the outcome relates to the

covariates. Additionally, it is equipped to estimate counterfactuals for each participant in the

analysis sample, along with the uncertainty of each counterfactual prediction. This feature

allows us to better understand the observations in the sample for which we may lack common

REMEDIAL SUPPORT FOR REFUGEES: IMPACT OF DOSAGE

21
causal support (common support with respect to the true confounders, see Hill & Su, 2013) and

where we should be more skeptical about our inference regarding the treatment effects.

The advantages of BART’s performance when applied to causal inference settings, even

in the absence of randomization properties, have been extensively demonstrated (Hill, 2011;

Hahn, Murray, & Carvalho, 2017; Dorie, Hill, Shalit, Scott, & Cervone, 2019; Hahn, Dorie, &

Murray, 2019) and tested under different configurations of Data Generating Processes (DGP)

that have been calibrated to real world data. For more details on the model and its assumptions,

please refer to (Hill et al., 2020). To account for the uncertainty induced by the missing data in

the present study, for each outcome variable, 100 independent BART models were run, one on

each imputed data set.

Dichotomous treatment. First, for simplicity, the impact was assessed in terms of a

more “traditional” dichotomous treatment variable: high attendance vs low attendance. This

binary representation allows us to think in terms of comparisons between just two groups. The

cutoff rule used to divide participants into the two groups was the median attendance value for

the sample of focus. Raw differences in baseline measures and basic demographics between

high and low attendance groups, after addressing non-response, are available in Table A.1 of

online Appendix A for consultation. Children in the low attendance group have a higher chance

of being male, are slightly older on average, and score slightly lower in most of the baseline

scores (except for the oral passage reading) on average, compared to the children in the high

attendance group.

The letter and grapheme recognition assessments show clear differences in their

distributions across the low and high attendance groups (see Figure A.3 of the online Appendix

A), while this is not the case for the ASER and oral passage reading scores; which are different

from the former in that they both target the more advanced skills involved in full paragraph

reading. After correcting for non-response there was a generalized adjustment of the outcome

REMEDIAL SUPPORT FOR REFUGEES: IMPACT OF DOSAGE

distributions towards lower scores, meaning that non-respondents were more likely to have

lower scores than respondents; this was, however, not the case for ASER scores, and less so

22

for the oral passage reading scores than for the other two tasks studied.

In addition to the covariates selected, the propensity score for belonging to the higher

attendance group was included as a covariate in the model, as including it has been

demonstrated to yield more accurate treatment effect estimates in many settings (Hahn et al.,

2017; Hahn et al., 2019; Dorie et al., 2019; Hill et al., 2020).

The ATEs of moving from the low to the high attendance group were estimated for all

imputed data sets using BART and then pooled using Rubin’s rule to incorporate the uncertainty

brought in by the missing data into the credible interval of the treatment effect estimate.

Continuous treatment. Causal inference with a continuous treatment under the BART

framework permits researchers to deal with non-experimental situations where the degree to

which a participant is “treated” cannot be randomly assigned, and where confounders may play

an important role. Within the framework of potential outcomes (unobserved counterfactuals) it

allows us to obtain individual dosage trajectories for each participant, after conditioning on

confounders, by estimating the outcome response at different dosage levels (Galagate, 2016),

along with their uncertainty.

We use BART to estimate the average dosage-response function (ADRF) within a

causal framework. This curve was produced by estimating counterfactuals for each student at

different levels of attendance =(0 days, 10 days, 20 days, etc), yielding an individual

𝑎

dosage-response function (DRF) for each participant. Next, the individual response paths were

pooled at each dosage level =(0 days, 10 days, 20 days, etc), across the DRFs of all students.

𝑎

This process was conducted separately for each of the 100 imputed data sets to visualize the

uncertainty about the ADRF attributable to non-response.

REMEDIAL SUPPORT FOR REFUGEES: IMPACT OF DOSAGE

Common support. BART provides a strategy to assess the presence of common

23

support for each observation (Hill & Su, 2013). It helps us understand whether we have enough

information for each individual, about their counterfactual outcome, to justify estimating a causal

effect for them. This approach assesses common support by comparing the uncertainty about

the predicted outcomes for the counterfactual state (which we may or may not have information

in the data about), relative to the uncertainty of the predictions of outcomes under the observed

treatment conditions (which should have much more information about since this is based on

observed data). This method tends to be less conservative for excluding observations than

approaches that rely on comparisons of distributions of propensity scores, which can place too

much importance on predictors of the treatment that may or may not be related to the outcome

(Hill & Su, 2013). For a detailed description of the methods used to assess common support see

Online Appendix F.

Results

This section presents results both from our analyses of the impact of high versus low

attendance on reading skills and from our analyses of how these impacts vary across days of

attendance. We further disaggregate these effects by imputed datasets, and consider their

variation across a range of potential moderators.

High Versus Low Attendance Groups1

The results suggest a positive average effect of high versus low attendance on the most

basic reading skills for the study participants, as measured by the letter (ATE=2.14, SE=0.81)

and grapheme recognition (ATE=2.92, SE=1.00) sub-scales from the EGRA assessment.

However, they also suggest there is no conclusive2 impact, on average of moving from the lower

attendance group to the high-attendance group on the ASER literacy scores (ATE=0.00,

1 SEs throughout this manuscript are in fact the posterior standard deviation of each average treatment
effect, which can be thought of as analogous to the standard errors under a frequentist framework, as
they represent our uncertainty about the estimates.
2 Meaning that zero is contained in the 95% Credible Interval of the ATE.

REMEDIAL SUPPORT FOR REFUGEES: IMPACT OF DOSAGE

SE=0.07) and on the oral passage reading EGRA sub-scale (ATE=0.60, SE=0.61). Table 2

displays the ATE estimates, the 95% credible intervals, and two additional estimates related to

the uncertainty brought by the missing data, known as the fraction of missing information about

the estimate and the relative increase in variance due to non-response (Rubin, 1987; Van

24

Buuren, 2012).

Table 2 Average Treatment Effects: High vs Low attendance

outcome

estimate

SE

95% CI

fmi

riv

ASER reading

0.00

0.067

[-0.13, 0.13]

0.304

0.432

Grapheme
recognition

2.14

0.814

[0.55, 3.74]

0.109

0.120

Letter recognition

2.92

1.004

[0.95, 4.89]

0.135

0.154

Oral passage
reading

0.60

0.607

[-0.59, 1.79]

0.251

0.331

Notes. CIs and posterior standard errors have been computed using Rubin’s pooling rules, and already reflect the
uncertainty brought in by the missing data. SE here is actually the posterior standard deviation of the ATE, which can
be thought as analogous to the standard error under a frequentist framework, as it represents our uncertainty about
the ATE estimate.

The posterior distributions (Gelman et al., 2004) for the ATE for each of the reading

outcomes in Figure D.1 of online Appendix D, reflect the impact of moving from the low to the

high attendance groups, in each imputed data set. The plots show important variation in the

impacts on ASER and oral passage reading measures across the different imputed data sets,

illustrating the role that missing data plays in our ability to draw robust conclusions about these

outcomes. The impacts on letter and grapheme recognition, on the other hand, show strong

agreement across imputed data sets, which provides more certainty about the positive impacts

of belonging to the high attendance group.

Common support across high and low attendance groups. We found solid common

support across the two attendance groups for all 100 imputed sets. In most of them no

REMEDIAL SUPPORT FOR REFUGEES: IMPACT OF DOSAGE

observation needed to be excluded from the analysis based on the common support rule

proposed by Hill and Su (2013), and no more than 3 observations were excluded from any one

25

imputed dataset.

Impact heterogeneity. We assessed whether the effect of high versus low attendance

varies by pretreatment scores, propensity scores, and the range of potential moderators that

were available to us (at the individual, family, and community level). However, we found no

compelling evidence of heterogeneous treatment effects across any of the factors considered.

For details, please refer to Online Appendix E .

Continuous Attendance and Incremental Impact

All of the EGRA outcomes show a positive causal relationship between attendance in

the HC and the outcomes. However, the dosage level at which the marginal impact seems to

fade is around 40 days for the letter and grapheme recognition tasks, and around 20 days for

the oral passage reading tasks. These results offer an additional explanation for why a clear

impact wasn't found on the oral passage reading tasks, when comparing low and high

attendance using a 37 day cut-off to split the groups.

Figure 2 displays the BART-estimated ADRFs for all four outcomes. The estimated

ADRF for ASER is visibly flat, suggesting there is no meaningful causal relationship between

attendance and the ASER reading scores. These results may be attributable to the issues

discussed in the interpretations of findings section, however, and should be assessed carefully.

REMEDIAL SUPPORT FOR REFUGEES: IMPACT OF DOSAGE

Figure 2 Continuous attendance: BART ADRFs for different imputed data sets.

26

Notes. These figures illustrate the estimated causal relationship between attendance levels and each outcome, after
controlling for all relevant covariates.

Common support at different levels of dosage. Under the relaxed rule our sample

can be considered to have perfect common support, with all imputed sets agreeing that 100% of

the analysis sample falls underneath the uncertainty threshold. See Figure F.1 in online

Appendix F. Under the highly conservative cut-off, described in section 3 of online Appendix F,

most of the sample retains sufficient causal support to reliably estimate counterfactuals and

treatment effects across the attendance spectrum. Nonetheless, the ASER, grapheme

recognition, and oral passage reading measures suggest that common causal support

decreases for levels of attendance over 40 days, in many of the imputed data sets. On the other

hand, when studying the impact on the letter recognition measure there seems to be less

common causal support (around 70% of the sample having solid counterfactuals) at very low

levels of attendance. See Figure F.2 in online Appendix F.

REMEDIAL SUPPORT FOR REFUGEES: IMPACT OF DOSAGE

Depending on the goals and need for certainty and precision, the reader may choose to

27

rely on either the more relaxed or conservative rule when interpreting the information that the

ADRF provides about the impact of different levels of attendance to the remedial classroom on

refugee children’s reading scores.

Attendance leaps. The estimated ADRFs suggest that the marginal impact of

additional attendance days fades after reaching a certain threshold. To explore how much of the

estimated effects of moving from 0 to 80 days of attendance is attributed to the first 37 days of

exposure (median attendance observed), the posterior distributions of the average

counterfactual predictions at 0, 37, and 80 attendance days were estimated and are displayed in

Figure D.2 of online Appendix D.

All of the EGRA sub-scales show clear and large positive predicted effects of moving

from 0 to 80 days of attendance. This is not the case for ASER, however, which has credible

intervals that cross over zero. No clear impact was found for any of the outcomes of moving

from 37 to 80 days of attendance within the 26 weeks that the program lasted, which suggests

that the vast majority of the gains from this remedial program on the reading scores of Syrian

refugee children can be attributed to the first 37 days of registered attendance. The reader

should be mindful, however, that these results do not necessarily extend to what the effect

would be of sustained attendance over a longer period of time.

Heterogeneity across participants with different observed attendance (see Figure G.1,

Figure G.2, and Figure G.3 of online Appendix G) was explored for the estimated treatment

effects of moving: (1) from 0 to maximum attendance, (2) from 0 to median attendance, and (3)

from median to maximum attendance, separately. No heterogeneity of impact was found across

children with different factual levels of attendance. This means that children who were low or

high attending don't appear to be different, in terms of the benefits they can harvest from the

program, had they been able to attend at the same rates. Note that this is only true for the

REMEDIAL SUPPORT FOR REFUGEES: IMPACT OF DOSAGE

28
reading skills studied here, and may not be the case for the benefits on other types of outcomes

that were targeted by the intervention.

Non-Response Cautionary Note

Missing data played an important role in this study and the sample of respondents

appears to be systematically biased prior to adjusting for non-response. Particularly, because

non-response in the outcome variables was closely tied to attendance (the treatment variable of

interest in this report), the treatment effect estimations that can be obtained from such a biased

sample are expected to differ from the estimates after addressing the missing data.

When looking only at the sample of respondents for each outcome, the ATE on all of the

outcome measures comes up as centered around zero. The impact estimates for the likely

biased sub-samples of respondents for each outcome were computed for transparency and can

be consulted in Table B.3 of online Appendix B. As a reminder, the sample loss when estimating

the ATEs without using the outcome imputed data would be close to 50% for ASER and around

20% for the EGRA sub-scales. The contrast of these results suggests that the children that were

less likely to be located during the post-treatment assessments, could have been those that had

the most to gain from the remedial support.

Limitations and Interpretation of Findings

A combination of factors conspired to create differences in data quality across the

outcomes reviewed here. These differences play a role in the ability of outcome measures to

capture improvements in children’s reading skills, especially in the ASER measure.

Differences in Implementation

Differences in the implementation of each assessment tool and in the data collection

protocols across outcomes, yielded heterogeneity in data quality; which is also reflected in the

differences in impact estimates and their uncertainty. Additionally, some of the assessment

REMEDIAL SUPPORT FOR REFUGEES: IMPACT OF DOSAGE

protocols of the tools used in this analysis could have contributed to exacerbate zero-inflation

29

and artificially obscure treatment effects.

First, there were substantial differences in how ASER was approached during data

collection. ASER was captured in administrative data and was not explicitly designed as a

measure for research purposes. Rather, ASER was used by the IRC for practical and

quick-decision-making during study implementation. In particular, it was used as a screening

tool to place students into different remedial levels and was collected as part of a separate data

collection mechanism implemented independently by the IRC. As such, this data collection did

not adhere to the partnership protocols used for the collection of the central research data. One

of the most significant differences in the data collection protocol for ASER was a policy of

assessing children on “one day and one day only,” with no follow-up set in place for the children

that were missing. In contrast, for EGRA, additional efforts were implemented to track down the

missing children and to maximize representation of those that were less likely to be present on a

given day. This important difference in data collection is directly intertwined with the concerns

that are highlighted in the hidden ASER bias section of online Appendix B. Additionally,

differences in the data collection protocols could have made the ASER scores more prone to

data entry issues.

Differences in Measure Quality

Discrete nature of ASER. Contrary to the EGRA sub-scales, which allow tracking

improvements within each type of reading tasks, the ASER assessment is discretized and

provides only information of full (assessment-based) proficiency on each type of task by grading

students on a 5-point scale from 0 to 4. If attendance to the program over the course of the 26

weeks was more likely to impact the most basic reading tasks than it was to impact the higher

level reading tasks (which is what the analysis of the different EGRA sub-scales suggest), then

the ASER instrument wouldn’t be able to capture and reflect such impact.

REMEDIAL SUPPORT FOR REFUGEES: IMPACT OF DOSAGE

30
Zero-inflation. EGRA sub-scales are not exempt from data quality concerns. Stop rules

were implemented for these outcomes before computing their scores to minimize assessment

burden. If students didn’t give a correct answer within the first 10 items, then they weren’t given

an opportunity to respond to the remaining items of that section, and their responses would get

automatically populated as incorrect. This practice can artificially zero-inflate the collected

outcomes and contribute to obscuring the treatment effects. The repercussions on the oral

passage reading outcome from this issue are twofold. First, the assessment skip-rules made it

so that the opportunity to be presented with the task depended on the score that the child

received on both the letter recognition and grapheme recognition tasks. Second, even when the

task was presented to them, they would be prevented from responding to all of the following oral

passage reading items if they were to miss the very first words from the passage.

Missing Data

Tracking and identification of participants presented many challenges in a

conflict-affected setting where the population constantly relocates and often lacks any form of

official identification. Relentless efforts were conducted to retrieve the data of children with

incorrect or missing IDs through data verification, to minimize the loss of collected data, and

principled methods were used to address missing data after data verification was completed.

However, because of the real-world challenges to track down children throughout several waves

of data collection in such a volatile context, missing data from this study is still not negligible.

Despite encouraging results obtained from diagnostics checks, we cannot rule out the possibility

of a hidden NMAR bias due to unmeasured information.

Although we find no direct evidence of obvious NMAR, there is a chance that they bias

our estimates of the impact of Healing Classrooms on the ASER outcome measure (see Online

Appendix B). Nonetheless, we believe that this impact evaluation provides crucial information

REMEDIAL SUPPORT FOR REFUGEES: IMPACT OF DOSAGE

about the intervention and about the challenges of conducting rigorous research under very

31

precarious and volatile field conditions.

Furthermore, Syrian refugee children could be affected by unmeasured factors that could

impact their ability to be present for all measured assessments as well as their attendance to

the program. Further efforts to track down non-respondents and identify unmeasured reasons

for missing data could help inform future data collection processes in similar contexts and

enhance the chances to prevent NMAR biases. It remains for future research efforts to develop

better identification and contact systems during data collection that are appropriate for the

differences in culture and in the physical reality that families and surveyors face in

conflict-affected regions.

Cultural Bias

Over and above these constraints, this study entails limitations that are inherent in

conducting research in an understudied context and when approaching it from frameworks that

have been developed under the conditions and perspective of the westernized regions of the

world. As scholars external to the region and population of study, we acknowledge the risk that

our framework and methods could still be insufficient for the needs of a study under a different

cultural and practical context.

Conclusions and Discussion

This paper makes several important contributions to the field. We discuss these

contributions here, summarize our major findings, and discuss the implications.

Contributions

Educational interventions remain understudied in conflict-affected and migrating

populations. In fact, most of the evidence that causally links attendance and academic

outcomes comes from the United States, but little is known about these impacts outside that

REMEDIAL SUPPORT FOR REFUGEES: IMPACT OF DOSAGE

narrow scope. This paper contributes to the literature by studying an educational intervention

serving some of the most at-risk children in the world -- Syrian refugee children in Lebanon.

Furthermore, this paper broadens our understanding of attendance by focusing on

out-of-school SEL-infused remedial support programs, and shows how increased exposure to a

safe and supportive learning environment can benefit the academic development of children in

32

crisis contexts.

Our third contribution is methodological. We used more advanced statistical methods

(BART for causal inference and multiple imputation relying on random forests) than are typical in

most studies of attendance as a way to minimize the strong assumptions that are often

necessary when making causal claims, particularly when missing data are involved. We also

were careful to review whether there was sufficient information in data to support our causal

claims. While we always need to be careful when estimating causal effects, we invested

extraordinary efforts to use all of the information available (by not discarding observations with

missing data) and to relax the assumptions required for causal inference (e.g. parametric and

overlap assumptions) to the extent that was possible.

In short, we are aware of no prior study of the impact of attendance in out-of-school

SEL-infused remedial support programs for refugee children that has so rigorously accounted

for selection bias and the many data challenges that are prevalent in crisis contexts.

Impact Conclusions

High versus low attendance. High attendance led to improvements relative to low

attendance for the most basic reading scores from the EGRA assessment: grapheme

recognition and letter recognition. No conclusive impact of attendance was found on the more

advanced task of oral passage reading from moving from the low to the high attendance group.

Continuous dosage. The average response of reading skills to different levels of

attendance, shows a positive and growing impact on the measured reading skills, except for the

REMEDIAL SUPPORT FOR REFUGEES: IMPACT OF DOSAGE

33
ASER assessment which suffers important limitations due to non-response. This positive impact

of attending more days within the 26 weeks offered, displays diminishing returns and becomes

stagnant after crossing 40 days of attendance for letter and grapheme recognition; while for oral

passage reading the marginal returns of attending start disappearing after 20 days of

attendance during the 26 week time frame. The considered measures for common support

suggest that even under highly cautious rules, most of the sample retains sufficient causal

support to estimate adequate counterfactuals and treatment effects across the possible

attendance spectrum.

Attendance leaps. Our exploration of counterfactuals at large leaps of attendance

suggests that the effect of moving from zero attendance days to 37 days, during the 26 weeks

studied, is substantial for all measures (except for ASER) and it represents a potential increase,

on average, of over 10 points in reading outcome scores.

Findings should be interpreted carefully and always under consideration of the limitations

presented by the non-response. Moreover, each refugee population is culturally different, quickly

changing and adapting over time, and their interaction with each host community can likely

impact how children develop and learn.

Methodological Conclusions

An important takeaway from our interpretation about these findings is that research

decisions can have substantial repercussions on what can be learned about an intervention,

beyond the analysis method chosen. Such decisions include: 1) the measurement tool used, 2)

the tool administration protocols, 3) the attempts to track down non-respondents during each

wave, 4) the instrumental information in the assessments that allows for data verification, and 5)

choices regarding how to address missing data (as opposed to efforts to only prevent missing

data).

REMEDIAL SUPPORT FOR REFUGEES: IMPACT OF DOSAGE

34

Summary

We conclude that attending SEL-based remedial support shows promise in improving

basic reading outcomes in Syrian refugee children, even after only 26 weeks of offered access.

We encourage researchers to consider how to improve future studies especially with regard to

(a) identifying unmeasured causes for non-response to prevent the risks of NMAR biases in

contexts where missing data will continue to be a certainty due to migration, and (b) thoroughly

supporting the work required for mindful selection and implementation of appropriate

assessment tools, for dedicated tracking of participants and data verification, as well as for

adequately addressing non-response.

It is crucial to grow rigorous research efforts on refugee children’s development across

contexts with an understanding that blunt generalizations across refugee populations can be

inadequate. It is also necessary to work towards establishing mechanisms for research to reach

(and be used by): the refugee populations themselves, the international agencies that are

implementing these efforts, and the policy makers from the host communities.'

REMEDIAL SUPPORT FOR REFUGEES: IMPACT OF DOSAGE

References

35

Abayomi, K., Gelman, A., & Levy, M. (2008). Diagnostics for multivariate imputations. Journal of

the Royal Statistical Society: Series C (Applied Statistics), 57(3), 273–291.

Aber, J. L., Torrente, C., Starkey, L., Johnston, B., Seidman, E., Halpin, P., Shivshanker, A.,

Weisenhorn, N., Annan, J., & Wolf, S. (2017). Impacts After One Year of “Healing

Classroom” on Children’s Reading and Math Skills in DRC: Results From a Cluster

Randomized Trial. Journal of Research on Educational Effectiveness, 10(3), 507–529.

Aber, J. L., Tubbs, C., Torrente, C., Halpin, P. F., Johnston, B., Starkey, L., Shivshanker, A.,

Annan, J., Seidman, E., & Wolf, S. (2017). Promoting children’s learning and development

in conflict-affected countries: Testing change process in the Democratic Republic of the

Congo. Development and Psychopathology, 29(1), 53–67.

Aber, J. L., Tubbs, C., Kim, H. Y., & Brown, L. (2021). Children’s learning and development in

conflict- and crisis-affected countries: Building a science for action. Development and

Psychopathology, 33(2), 506–521.

Ali, Z., Hussain, I., Faisal, M., Elashkar, E. E., Gani, S., & Shehzad, M. A. (2019). Selection of

appropriate time scale with Boruta algorithm for regional drought monitoring using

multi-scaler drought index. Tellus A: Dynamic Meteorology and Oceanography, 71(1),

1604057.

Arbour, M., Yoshikawa, H., Willett, J., Weiland, C., Snow, C., Mendive, S., Barata, M. C., &

Treviño, E. (2016). Experimental Impacts of a Preschool Intervention in Chile on Children’s

Language Outcomes: Moderation by Student Absenteeism. Journal of Research on

Educational Effectiveness, 9(sup1), 117–149.

ASER Centre. (2016). ASER 2016—ASER Centre.

Baker, J. A. (2006). Contributions of teacher–child relationships to positive school adjustment

during elementary school. Journal of School Psychology, 44(3), 211–229.

REMEDIAL SUPPORT FOR REFUGEES: IMPACT OF DOSAGE

Banerjee, A. V., Banerji, R., Duflo, E., Glennerster, R., & Khemani, S. (2010). Pitfalls of

Participatory Programs: Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation in Education in India.

36

American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2(1), 1–30.

Bondarenko, I., & Raghunathan, T. (2016). Graphical and numerical diagnostic tools to assess

suitability of multiple imputations and imputation models. Statistics in Medicine, 35(17),

3007–3020.

Bronfenbrenner, U., & Morris, P. A. (1998). The ecology of developmental processes. In

Handbook of child psychology: Theoretical models of human development, Volume 1, 5th

ed (pp. 993–1028). John Wiley & Sons Inc.

Brown, L., Kim, H. Y., Tubbs Dolan, C., & Aber, J. L. (2021). Remedial Programming and

Skill-Targeted SEL in Low-Income Contexts: Experimental evidence from Niger [Manuscript

submitted for publication]. NYU Global TIES for Children.

Cannon, J. S., Jacknowitz, A., & Painter, G. (2006). Is full better than half? Examining the

longitudinal effects of full-day kindergarten attendance. Journal of Policy Analysis and

Management, 25(2), 299–321.

Cicchetti, D., & Aber, J. L. (1998). Contextualism and developmental psychopathology.

Development and Psychopathology, 10(2), 137–141.

Child and Youth Protection and Development Unit. (2011). Creating Healing Classrooms: A

Multimedia Teacher Training Resource. International Rescue Committee.

Chipman, H. A., George, E. I., & McCulloch, R. E. (2007). Bayesian ensemble learning.

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 19 - Proceedings of the 2006

Conference, 265–272.

Chipman, H. A., George, E. I., & McCulloch, R. E. (2010). BART: Bayesian additive regression

trees. The Annals of Applied Statistics, 4(1).

REMEDIAL SUPPORT FOR REFUGEES: IMPACT OF DOSAGE

37
Degenhardt, F., Seifert, S., & Szymczak, S. (2019). Evaluation of variable selection methods for

random forests and omics data sets. Briefings in Bioinformatics, 20(2), 492–503.

Denham, S. A., & Brown, C. (2010). “Plays Nice With Others”: Social–Emotional Learning and

Academic Success. Early Education and Development, 21(5), 652–680.

Doove, L. L., Van Buuren, S., & Dusseldorp, E. (2014). Recursive partitioning for missing data

imputation in the presence of interaction effects. Computational Statistics & Data Analysis,

72, 92–104.

Dorie, V., Hill, J., Shalit, U., Scott, M., & Cervone, D. (2019). Automated versus Do-It-Yourself

Methods for Causal Inference: Lessons Learned from a Data Analysis Competition.

Statistical Science, 34(1), 43–68.

Durlak, J. A., Weissberg, R. P., Dymnicki, A. B., Taylor, R. D., & Schellinger, K. B. (2011). The

Impact of Enhancing Students’ Social and Emotional Learning: A Meta-Analysis of

School-Based Universal Interventions. Child Development, 82(1), 405–432.

Finn, J. D. (1993). School Engagement & Students at Risk [Report]. ERIC.

Galagate, D. (2016). CAUSAL INFERENCE WITH A CONTINUOUS TREATMENT AND

OUTCOME: ALTERNATIVE ESTIMATORS FOR PARAMETRIC DOSE-RESPONSE

FUNCTIONS WITH APPLICATIONS.

Gelman, A., Carlin, J. B., Stern, H. S., Dunson, D. B., Vehtari, A., & Rubin, D. B. (2004).

Bayesian Data Analysis. Chapman and Hall/CRC.

Gershenson, S., Jacknowitz, A., & Brannegan, A. (2017). Are Student Absences Worth the

Worry in U.S. Primary Schools? Education Finance and Policy, 12(2), 137–165.

Goodman, J. (2014). Flaking Out: Student Absences and Snow Days as Disruptions of

Instructional Time [NBER Working Paper No. 20221]. National Bureau of Economic

Research, Inc.

REMEDIAL SUPPORT FOR REFUGEES: IMPACT OF DOSAGE

Gottfried, M. A. (2010). Evaluating the Relationship Between Student Attendance and

Achievement in Urban Elementary and Middle Schools: An Instrumental Variables

Approach. American Educational Research Journal, 47(2), 434–465.

Hahn, P. R., Dorie, V., & Murray, J. S. (2019). Atlantic Causal Inference Conference (ACIC) Data

38

Analysis Challenge 2017.

Hahn, P. R., Murray, J. S., & Carvalho, C. (2017). Bayesian regression tree models for causal

inference: Regularization, confounding, and heterogeneous effects.

Hamre, B. K., & Pianta, R. C. (2001). Early Teacher–Child Relationships and the Trajectory of

Children’s School Outcomes through Eighth Grade. Child Development, 72(2), 625–638.

Hill, J. L. (2011). Bayesian Nonparametric Modeling for Causal Inference. Journal of

Computational and Graphical Statistics, 20(1), 217–240.

Hill, J., Linero, A., & Murray, J. (2020). Bayesian Additive Regression Trees: A Review and Look

Forward. Annual Review of Statistics and Its Application, 7(1), 251–278.

Hill, J., & Su, Y.-S. (2013). Assessing lack of common support in causal inference using

Bayesian nonparametrics: Implications for evaluating the effect of breastfeeding on

children’s cognitive outcomes. The Annals of Applied Statistics, 7(3), 1386–1420.

Hill, J., Weiss, C., & Zhai, F. (2011). Challenges With Propensity Score Strategies in a

High-Dimensional Setting and a Potential Alternative. Multivariate Behavioral Research,

46(3), 477–513.

IRC. (2021, March 8). Improving Outcomes for Syrian Refugee Children: Lessons from

Social-Emotional Learning Tutoring Programs in Lebanon [Report]. International Rescue

Committee (IRC).

Jalbout, M. (2015). Reaching all Children with Education in Lebanon: Opportunities for Action

[Report]. Theirworld.

REMEDIAL SUPPORT FOR REFUGEES: IMPACT OF DOSAGE

Jones, S. M., Brown, J. L., Hoglund, W. L. G., & Aber, J. L. (2010). A school-randomized clinical

39

trial of an integrated social-emotional learning and literacy intervention: Impacts after 1

school year. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 78(6), 829–842.

Kim, H. Y., Brown, L., Tubbs Dolan, C., Sheridan, M., & Aber, J. L. (2020). Post-migration risks,

developmental processes, and learning among Syrian refugee children in Lebanon. Journal

of Applied Developmental Psychology, 69, 101142.

Kursa, M. B., Jankowski, A., & Rudnicki, W. R. (2010). Boruta – A System for Feature Selection.

Fundamenta Informaticae, 101(4), 271–285.

Kursa, M. B., & Rudnicki, W. R. (2010). Feature Selection with the Boruta Package. Journal of

Statistical Software, 36(11).

Lamdin, D. J. (1996). Evidence of Student Attendance as an Independent Variable in Education

Production Functions. The Journal of Educational Research, 89(3), 155–162.

Maclean, M. J., Taylor, C. L., & O’Donnell, M. (2016). Pre-existing adversity, level of child

protection involvement, and school attendance predict educational outcomes in a

longitudinal study. Child Abuse & Neglect, 51, 120–131.

MEHE. (2016). Reaching All Children with Education (RACE) 2 [Fact sheet]. Lebanon Ministry

of Education and Higher Education.

Opoku, K., & Boahen, E. A. (2021). Effects of school attendance on child labour and literacy:

Regression discontinuity evidence from Ghana. International Journal of Social Economics,

48(11), 1567–1588.

Pianta, R. C., & Stuhlman, M. W. (2004). Teacher-Child Relationships and Children’s Success in

the First Years of School. School Psychology Review, 33(3), 444–458.

Pritchett, L. (2015). Creating Education Systems Coherent for Learning Outcomes: Making the

Transition from Schooling to Learning [Working Paper]. RISE.

REMEDIAL SUPPORT FOR REFUGEES: IMPACT OF DOSAGE

Rimm-Kaufman, S. E., & Hamre, B. K. (2010). The role of psychological and developmental

40

science in efforts to improve teacher quality. Teachers College Record, 112(12),

2988–3023.

RTI-International. (2016). Early Grade Reading Assessment (EGRA) Toolkit: Second Edition.

Rubin, D. B. (1978). Bayesian Inference for Causal Effects: The Role of Randomization. The

Annals of Statistics, 6(1), 34–58.

Rubin, D. B. (1987). Multiple Imputation for Nonresponse in Surveys. Wiley.

Rubin, D. B. (2005). Causal Inference Using Potential Outcomes. Journal of the American

Statistical Association, 100(469), 322–331.

Schonfeld, D. J., Adams, R. E., Fredstrom, B. K., Weissberg, R. P., Gilman, R., Voyce, C.,

Tomlin, R., & Speese-Linehan, D. (2015). Cluster-randomized trial demonstrating impact on

academic achievement of elementary social-emotional learning. School Psychology

Quarterly: The Official Journal of the Division of School Psychology, American

Psychological Association, 30(3), 406–420.

Shah, A. D., Bartlett, J. W., Carpenter, J., Nicholas, O., & Hemingway, H. (2014). Comparison of

random forest and parametric imputation models for imputing missing data using MICE: A

CALIBER study. American Journal of Epidemiology, 179(6), 764–774.

Shuayb, M., Makkouk, N., & Tuttunji, S. (2014). Widening Access to Quality Education for

Syrian Refugees: The Role of Private and NGO Sectors in Lebanon. Centre for Lebanese

Studies.

Sieverding, M., Krafft, C., Berri, N., Keo, C., & Sharpless, M. (2018). Education Interrupted:

Enrollment, Attainment, and Dropout of Syrian Refugees in Jordan. In Working Papers (No.

1261; Working Papers). Economic Research Forum.

Stekhoven, D. J., & Bühlmann, P. (2012). MissForest—Nonparametric missing value imputation

for mixed-type data. Bioinformatics, 28(1), 112–118.

REMEDIAL SUPPORT FOR REFUGEES: IMPACT OF DOSAGE

The World Bank. (2018). Research for improved quality, access, and efficiency of education

41

services in Lebanon [Press release]. The World Bank.

Torrente, C., Aber, J. L., Starkey, L., Johnston, B., Shivshanker, A., Weisenhorn, N., Annan, J.,

Seidman, E., Wolf, S., & Dolan, C. T. (2019). Improving Primary Education in the

Democratic Republic of the Congo: End-Line Results of a Cluster-Randomized Wait-List

Controlled Trial of Learning in a Healing Classroom. Journal of Research on Educational

Effectiveness, 12(3), 413–447.

Torrente, C., Johnston, B., Starkey, L., Seidman, E., Shivshanker, A., Wisenhorn, N., Annan, J.,

& Aber, J. L. (2015). Improving the quality of school interactions and student wellbeing:

Impacts after one year of a school-based program in the Democratic Republic of the

Congo. Journal of Education in Emergencies, In press.

Tubbs, C., Kim, H. Y., Brown, L., Gjicali, K., & Aber, J. L. (2021). Supporting Syrian Refugee

Children’s Academic and Social-Emotional Learning in a National Education System: A

Cluster Randomized Controlled Trial of Non-formal Remedial Support and Mindfulness

Programs in Lebanon. American Educational Research Journal.

Tumen, S., Vlassopoulos, M., & Wahba, J. (2021). Training Teachers for Diversity Awareness:

Impact on School Attendance of Refugee Children (SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 3892585).

Social Science Research Network.

UNESCO. (2019). Education as healing: Addressing the trauma of displacement through social

and emotional learning [Global Education Monitoring Report]. UNESCO.

United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. (2012). Education strategy 2012-2016.

United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. (2013). The future of Syria: Refugee children

in crisis. UNHCR.

United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. (2019). Stepping up: Refugee education in

crisis - 2019 Report. UNHCR.

REMEDIAL SUPPORT FOR REFUGEES: IMPACT OF DOSAGE

United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. (2020). 3RP Regional Strategic Overview

42

2021-2022. UNHCR.

United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. (2021). Syria emergency. UNHCR.

Vagh, S. B. (2009). Evaluating the reliability and validity of the ASER testing tools. ASER

Centre.

Van Buuren, S. (2012). Why and when multiple imputation works. In Flexible imputation of

missing data.

Van Buuren, S., Brand, J. P. L., Groothuis-Oudshoorn, C. G. M., & Rubin, D. B. (2006). Fully

conditional specification in multivariate imputation. Journal of Statistical Computation and

Simulation, 76(12), 1049–1064.

Yoshikawa, H., Wuermli, A. J., & Aber, J. L. (2019). Mitigating the Impact of Forced

Displacement and Refugee and Unauthorized Status on Youth: Integrating Developmental

Processes with Intervention Research. In M. M. Suárez-Orozco (Ed.), Humanitarianism and

Mass Migration (1st ed., pp. 186–206). University of California Press.

