(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications, 
Vol. 13, No. 5, 2022 

Implementation of Data Mining on a Secure Cloud 
Computing over a Web API using Supervised 
Machine Learning Algorithm 
Data Mining in a Secure Cloud Computing Environment through Restful API 

Tosin Ige1 
Department of Computer Science 
University of Texas at El Paso 
Texas, USA 

Sikiru Adewale2 
Department of Computer Science 
Virginia Technological University 
Virginia, USA 

Abstract—Ever since the era of internet had ushered in cloud 
computing,  there  had  been  increase  in  the  demand  for  the 
unlimited  data  available  through  cloud  computing  for  data 
analysis, pattern recognition and technology advancement. With 
this also bring the problem of scalability, efficiency and security 
threat.  This  research  paper  focuses  on  how  data  can  be 
dynamically  mine  in  real  time  for  pattern  detection  in  a  secure 
cloud computing environment using combination of decision tree 
algorithm  and  Random  Forest  over  a  restful  Application 
Programming  Interface  (API).  We  are  able  to  successfully 
Implement  data  mining  on  cloud  computing  bypassing  or 
avoiding direct interaction with data warehouse and without any 
terminal  involve  by  using  combination  of  IBM  Cloud  storage 
facility,  Amazing  Web  Service,  Application  Programming 
Interface  and  Window  service  along  with  a  decision  tree  and 
Random  Forest  algorithm  for  our  classifier.  We  were  able  to 
successfully  bypass  direct  connection  with  the  data  warehouse 
and cloud terminal with 94% accuracy in our model. 

Keywords—Cloud  computing;  data  warehouse;  data  mining; 
window  service;  Web  API;  machine  learning  algorithm;  secure 
cloud computing 

I. 

INTRODUCTION 

As we all know that Knowledge discovery is the nontrivial 
extraction  of  implicit,  previously  unknown,  and  potentially 
useful  information  from  data  [1].  There  is  no  doubt  that  the 
availability of billions of data in the cloud had open floodgates 
of  opportunity  in  which  model  can  be  trained  and  learn  by 
itself  over  time  thereby  enable  machines  and  intelligent 
elements  to  make  crucial  and  important  decision  without 
human  intervention.  As  millions  of  data  are  constantly  being 
stored  and  retrieve  through  cloud  computing  on  daily  bases. 
There  is  no  doubt  that  data  mining  delivers  a  powerful 
competitive advantage  [6]  for  any  company  or  industry. With 
these  also  arises  the  challenge  on  how  to  make  use  of  the 
unlimited  data  available  through  data  mining  on  cloud 
computing, and how it can be done in a highly secure, scalable 
and  efficient  manner  to  combat  several  security  threats 
associated with cloud computing. 

In  modern  research  and  intelligent  systems,  the  important 
of  data  can  never  be  overemphasized  across  wide  range  of 
industries,  especially  when  we  consider  the  fact  that  the 

traditional  E-commerce  businesses  and 
industry  were 
influenced  by  cloud  computing  in  technical  architecture, 
service modes and the industrial chain [4], economist needs to 
know  how  they  can  use  readily  available  data  in  the  cloud  to 
predict  consumers  need  and  behavior,  meteorologists  need 
those data to make future weather forecast and predict or detect 
climatic change, government agency needs those data to make 
effective policy, police and intelligence agency needs data for 
background  check  and  so  on.  All  government  and  non-
government parastatal depends on data from the cloud for one 
reason  or  the  other.  This  further  brings  about  the  importance 
and  urgency  of  mining  data  to  detect  previously  unknown 
pattern  in  a  scalable  and  efficient  manner  through  cloud 
computing  to  address  daily  needs  with  the  guarantee  of 
maximum security, authorization and authentication which can 
be affected through a restful web API. 

In  this  research,  the  use  of  constantly  updating  real  time 
data  and  without  any  connection  to  the  cloud  data  warehouse 
for  maximal  data  protection  and  dynamic  predictive  pattern 
with  high  accuracy  were  implemented.  To  achieve  this 
objective,  an  application  Programming  Interface  (API)  and 
Background window service was developed to detect and fetch 
new and updated records from data warehouse, transformed to 
json and written to a file on the cloud. This ensures maximum 
security to the data as there is no direct connection to the data 
warehouse  where  data  are  constantly  being  pulled  from.  We 
used  IBM  Cloud  object  storage  facility  to  host  our  csv  file 
while the data warehouse is also on the cloud but from another 
channel  entirely.  Then  a  restful  web  API  service  was 
developed  using  Django  python  framework  which  was 
deployed  to  Amazon  Web  Services  (AWS).  Since  the  newly 
created  API  will  be  constantly  pulling  data  from  the  data 
warehouse and writing directly to into the CSV file which is on 
the  IBM  Cloud  storage  facility.  The  service  can  easily  be 
overwhelmed,  to  prevent  the  service  from  being  overwhelm, 
we  developed  a  background  service  on  a  Microsoft  console 
using Microsoft .NET Technology programming language. 

Any record the web API misses or delayed in picking from 
the warehouse, the background service will pick it up. Hence, 
they  complement  each other and ensure efficiency  so  that the 
web API service is not overwhelmed. With this in place, there 

www.ijacsa.thesai.org 

1 | P a g e  

 
 
(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications, 
Vol. 13, No. 5, 2022 

is  a  constantly  updated  and  up  to  date  data  on  the  CSV  file 
hosted in the IBM cloud storage facility which is now serves as 
the primary source of data. This ensure accessibility to updated 
records at every stage of our data mining activities, as there is 
an  existing  restful  API  and  background  window  service  that 
fetches  data  from  the  warehouse  to  the  hosted  file  in  cloud 
environment from which data is being pulled from. 

Combination of decision tree algorithm and Random Forest 
for  classifier  was  implemented  coupled  with  a  graphic  user 
interface  (GUI)  that  automatically  processed  and  displays 
newly discovered patterns in a graphical format on the screen 
at each and every update on new data. 

There are four main objectives here which are: 

1)  Bypassing direct connection and retrieval from the data 

warehouse through a middle ware. 

2)  Real time access to dynamic data  in an enabling cloud 

environment. 

3)  We want to shield the warehouse for maximum security 

and while also avoiding data lock. 

4)  Automation  of  the  detection  of  any  new  pattern  from 
the  dataset  and  projection  to  the  screen  with  graphical 
illustration and analysis. 

To  ensure  successful  accomplishment  of 

the  fourth 
objective,  a  scheduler  called  Python  scheduling  library  was 
used  so  that  the  whole  process  is  automatically  initiated  and 
repeated immediately a new pattern is detected. 

II.  BACKGROUND STUDY 

The 

computing 

importance  of 

cannot  be 
cloud 
overemphasize  as  it  includes;  unlimited  storage,  provisioning 
and updating, guaranteed privacy more security [13]. Also, it is 
possible  for  users  of  cloud  services  to  optimize  server 
utilization, dynamic scalability, and minimize the development 
of new application life cycles [14]. In addition to the numerous 
benefits in cloud computing, there are also problems as a result 
of  cloud  outage  since  data  storage  is  centralize  in  the  cloud 
which can paralyze a company business [15], also attack on the 
integrated  cloud  environment  can  cause  loss  of  data  and 
finance  for  both  the  service  providers  and  subscribers.  There 
are  also  other  risks  associated  with  computing  on  cloud 
environment  which  includes  the  issues  of  threats  to  data 
security  information  confidentiality  [5],  and  the  possibility  of 
information leakage and vulnerability [12]. 

In today’s data mining, multiple data streams are generally 
complex  than  single  data  streams  [2]  considering  the  security 
architecture and cloud computing environment, the complexity 
increases  when  we  consider  the  cost  and  benefit,  reliability, 
cloud migration and inter clouding [3], While compute/storage 
scaling,  data  parallelism,  virtualization,  MapReduce,  RIA, 
SaaS and Mashups are  likewise also  important in data mining 
[7]  not  all  are  always  implemented.  Although  there  had  been 
improvement  in  the  technology  and  services  of  the  major 
Cloud Computing Platforms likes amazon Relational Database 
Service,  Amazon  Simple  Queue  Service,  Amazon  SimpleDB, 
Amazon  Web  Services,  AppScale,  Azure  Services  Platform, 
Caspio,  CloudControl,  Cordys  Process  Factory,  Engine  Yard, 
Force.com, FreedomBox, Google App Engine, Heroku, Hybrid 

Web  Cluster,  OrangeScape,  Platform  as  a  service,  Rackspace 
Cloud,  Rollbase,  Squarespace,  Sun  Cloud,  Vertebra  (cloud 
computing  framework),  Wolf  Frameworks  [8],  some  of  the 
persistent  problems  associated  with  data  mining  on  cloud 
computing are as a result of the existing method adopted in the 
industry  and  scientific  world  at 
large.  Current  cloud 
computation  for  data  mining  needed  service  provider  to 
provide  interface  for  user.  The  user  does  not  need  to  bother 
about  the  infrastructure.  It  enables  the  retrieval  of  useful 
previously  unknown  data  from  integrated  data  warehouse,  in 
such  a  way 
to  border  about 
infrastructure,  storage,  or  configuration  and  maintenance,  the 
provider handles that. It is based on retrieving directly from the 
integrated data warehouse. 

that  users  doesn’t  need 

[5]  discusses  the  importance  of  large  item  sets  within  a 
cluster  and  its  implication  for  effectiveness, it doesn't  address 
the several issues and vulnerabilities in cloud computing while 
[9]  in  his  research  work  “Data  mining  in  Cloud  Computing”, 
relies  on  extraction  of  previously  unknown  or  meaningful 
pattern from unstructured or semi-structured data from the web 
sources; “The analysis steps in the Knowledge Discovery and 
Databases  process”  [11].  It  listed  three  stages  of  research 
involving  data  warehouse  which  are  staging,  integration,  and 
accessibility  for  the  purpose  of  reporting  and  analysis  in  the 
Review  of  Data  Mining  Techniques  in  Cloud  Computing 
Database by [10]. 

In addition to the problems associated with data mining on 
cloud computing in which majority of the problems are due to 
existing  methods  of  data  mining  on  cloud  computing.  The 
existing methods also creates a wide gap between data mining 
on  cloud  computing  and  application  Programming  Interface 
(API) which are yet to be closed. In the existing method we are 
yet to see an instance in which we call we only need to call an 
API endpoint, and then have everything done for us. 

III.  RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 

Data  used on  this research  work  was obtained  from  social 
network  on  GitHub.  To  begin  this  research,  four  basic  things 
were paramount; 

1)  Subscription  to  IBM  Cloud  Object  Storage  facility  to 

host our CSV file. 

2)  Setting  up  a  data  warehouse  on  cloud  from  another 

channel different from IBM. 

3)  Development  of  a  background  window  service  using 

.NET Technology. 

4)  Implementation of a web service to be consumed in the 

cloud using python. 

5)  Scheduler  using python  scheduler  library  to  trigger  the 

web API at interval. 

In order to prevent the web service from being overwhelm 
due  to  multiple  calling  of  the  endpoint  at  regular  interval,  we 
developed a background window service to sup- port the restful 
API  service.  Both  the  web  API  and  the  window  service  are 
picking  records  from  the  integrated  data  warehouse  and 
pushing  to  the  CSV  file  on  the  IBM  Object  Cloud  Storage 
facility. They automatically pick new records to the CSV, and 
if  a  record  is  modified, it  will  be  picked and  modified on  the 

www.ijacsa.thesai.org 

2 | P a g e  

(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications, 
Vol. 13, No. 5, 2022 

CSV as well. The essence of the scheduler which was written 
in  python  is  to  be  calling  the  web  API  at  regular  interval  to 
check and push from the integrated data warehouse to the CSV 
file. 

With  the  successful  setting  up  of  cloud  environment  and 
the  necessary  software  programs  being  in  fully  execution,  we 
proceeded  by  adopting  the  following  data  cleansing  and 
preparation techniques; 

Data cleaning: We use preprocessing and cleaning methods 
to remove incomplete data that might cause system failure and 
also  affect  output  prediction.  Rows  containing  missing  values 
where  completely  removed. We  also  use different  methods  to 
identify  and  remove  noisy  data,  outliners,  and  other  factors 
which can influence the output result. 

Data Reduction for Data Quality: In order to maintain data 
integrity,  we  needed  to  deal  with  all  rows  containing  null 
value;  hence  we  opted  for  python  library  tool  called  PyCaret. 
We have two options which  are either to automatically fill all 
the null values or to remove any row(s) containing null values 
weighted.  Having  weighted  the  risk  involves  in  both,  we 
decided to remove any row with null or empty value from the 
data, and this was done using PyCaret python library. 

Data Transformation: For us to make our data to acceptable 
format for easy data mining and pattern recognition, it needed 
to  undergo  some  data  transformation.  To  ensure  data  is  fully 
transformed  to  acceptable  format,  we  used  Discretization, 
normalization, and data aggregation technique. 

Data  Mining:  Having  successfully  set  up  our  apparatus 
which  includes  IBM  cloud  object  storage  facility,  running 
background window service, active web service, scheduler, and 
with the data being thoroughly pre-processed and transformed. 

Unlike  current data  mining  in  cloud computing  process  in 
which, one needs to make direct connect to the data warehouse 
or  directly  call  the  csv  file.  We  only  called  our  restful  API 
endpoint  (Fig.  1)  which  was  developed  and  hosted  on  the 
cloud. 

This ensures a higher level of security and control over the 
data, the only thing that needed to be called is the endpoint of 
our API which automatically displays the data as seen in Fig. 1 
displaying  the  first  five  (5)  records  in  the  data  using  python 
library  in  panda.  (Fig.  2)  shows  the  text  representation  of  the 
selected features using decision tree algorithm. 

Fig. 1.  Preview of First Five Rows of Dataset. 

Fig. 2.  Text Representation of the Features using Decision Tree. 

Optimized  Decision  tree  algorithm  was  used  to  train  the 
model having slatted the data into two equal part, half of it to 
train the model and the remaining half for testing of the model 
as seen in (Fig. 3). 

Fig. 3.  Code Snippet for Important Feature Selection and Training of Model. 

We are able to obtain 90% accuracy on testing our model, 
after which we decide to optimize for more accuracy and better 
performance as seen in Fig. 4. 

Fig. 4.  Model Accuracy and Test Performance Evaluation. 

We  are  able  to  obtain  accuracy  of  94%  after  which  we 

decided to visualize the performance of the model. 

We needed to know the level of fitting, because having an 
accuracy of 94% can be as a result of over fitting of the model 
with  the  training  set  of  data,  hence  we  decided  to  do  two 
additional  things.  Firstly,  we  implemented  Random  Forest 
Algorithm for training the data again to check performance and 
then optimize, it gives an accuracy of 92%. Secondly,  we  fed 
another set of data in the format of the trained data but new to 
the  model,  the  model performed  very  well  with  accuracy.  So, 
we proceeded to measure the performance of the model using 
confusion  matrix,  classification  report,  and  accuracy  score 
which gives good indication of optimal performance. We are in 

www.ijacsa.thesai.org 

3 | P a g e  

 
 
 
 
(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications, 
Vol. 13, No. 5, 2022 

a dilemma either to ensure about 100% accuracy or over fitting 
because in supervise machine learning, high accuracy of almost 
100% can be as a result of over fitting of the model which we 
want to avoid by possible means. So, since we are able to feed 
the model with new set of data which had not been previously 
fed  to  the  model  for  which  it  performed  very  well  with  high 
rate  of accuracy.  So,  we  gave  priority  to avoid  over  fitting of 
the model than the accuracy of the model since high accuracy 
for supervised learning can be as a result of over fitting of the 
model for which the model becomes less accurate or behaved 
weird when fed with unfamiliar data. The validation report can 
be seen in Fig. 5. 

Fig. 5.  Validation, Cross Validation and the Estimation of Mean Square 
Error (MSE). 

IV.  CONCLUSION 

In this applied research, we are able to achieve four goals: 

1)  Avoid direct interaction with integrated data warehouse. 
2)  We are able to access data in a secure cloud computing 

environment. 

3)  We are able to close the existing gap in data mining and 
web  API,  as  all  we  needed to  call is  the  endpoint of our  web 
API. No  need of  terminal,  or uniform  resource  locator  (URL) 
of any csv is involved. It is simply over a web API. 
the  patterns  changes  in 

the  background,  the 
algorithm  automatically  adjusts  with  accuracy  of  ninety-four 
(94) percent after optimization. 

4)  As 

We  are  able  to  implement  data  mining  in  a  secure  cloud 
computing  environment  with  accuracy  of  ninety-four  (94) 
percent  after  optimization  in  our  decision  tree  algorithm  over 
web  API.  All  that  an  AI  engineer,  data  scientist,  or  machine 
learning  engineer  needs  is  just  the  endpoint  of  the  API.  This 
removes  complexity  while  at  the  same  time  simplifying  the 
whole process, it also add additional layer of security, and also 
remove  unnecessary  bottleneck  as  scientist and engineers  will 
be able to concentrate more on optimizing their algorithm and 
model  for  optimal  result  since  only  API  endpoint  is  what  is 
needed to be called. 

We  hope  that  this  will  be  de-facto  standard  in  the  data 
mining,  machine  learning,  data  science  and  other  similar 
industry at large. 

V.  LIMITATION AND FUTURE RESEARCH WORK 

This  research  work  is  based  on  the  quantity  of  data 
available  to  us.  Also,  as  Infrastructure  As  a  Service  Provider 
(IAAS), Software As a Service Provider (SAAS), and Platform 
As  a  Service  Provider  (PAAS)  continually  improves  their 
service  for  more  secured  and  enhanced  cloud  computing 
environment, over the times, this can affect the performance of 
the  model  and  the  overall  architecture,  also  as  more  data 
becomes  available,  there  is  possibility  of  more  false  positive 
and this directly impacts the bias-variance tradeoff. 

So,  there  is  future  research  work  of  developing  what  we 
called intelligent model, model which can detect availability or 
changes  in  data,  detect  changes  in  the  cloud  computing 
environment  and  then  re-trained  and  re-adjust  itself  over  the 
time in line with those changes. 

REFERENCES 
[1]  W.  J.  Frawley,  G.  Piatetsky-shapiro,  and  C.  J.  Matheus.  Knowledge 

discovery in databases: an overview, 1992. 

[2]  W.Wu  and  L.  Gruenwald.  Research  issues  in  mining  multiple  data 
streams.  In  Proceedings  of  the  First  International  Workshop  on  Novel 
Data Stream Pattern Mining Techniques, Stream KDD‟10, pages 56–60, 
New York, NY, USA, 2010.ACM. 

[3]  David  E.Y.  Sarna,  Implementing  And  Developing  Cloud  Computing 
Applications,  CRC  Press  https://cwiki.apache.org/MAHOUT/kmeans-
clustering.html. 

[4]  Weiss, A. (2007). Computing in the Clouds Networker. 
[5]  Wang, K., Xu, C. & Liu, B. (1999), Clustering transactions using large 
items, 
International 
Conference on Information and Knowledge Management‟, ACM Press, 
New York, NY, USA, pp. 483–490. 

in„CIKM  ‟99:  Proceedings  of 

the  Eighth 

[6]  Berson, Alex, Stephen Smith, and Kurt Thearling. Building data mining 

applications for CRM. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2000. 

[7]  Moving  To  The  Cloud:  Developing  Apps  in  the  new  world  of  cloud 

computing , By Dinkar Sitaram, Geetha Manjunath. 

[8]  The Cloud Computing Handbook Everything You Need to Know about 

Cloud Computing, By Todd Arias. 

[9]  Data  mining  in  cloud  computing  by  Ruxandra-Ştefania  PETRE,  Link: 

https://www.dbjournal.ro/archive/9/9_7.pdf. 

[10]  Review  of  Data  Mining  Techniques  in  Cloud  Computing  Database,  by 

Astha Pareek1, Manish Gupta2. 

[11]  M. M. Nodine, A. H. H. Ngu, A. Cassandra and W. G. Bohrer, "Scalable 
semantic  brokering  over  dynamic  heterogeneous  data  sources  in 
InfoSleuth/spl  trade/,"  in  IEEE  Transactions  on  Knowledge  and  Data 
Engineering,  vol.  15,  no.  5,  pp.  1082-1098,  Sept.-Oct.  2003,  doi: 
10.1109/TKDE.2003.1232266. 

[12]  Andrei  Tchernykh,  Uwe  Schwiegelsohn,  El-ghazali  Talbi,  Mikhail 
Babenko,Towards  understanding  uncertainty  in  cloud  computing  with 
risks  of  confidentiality, 
integrity,  and  availability,Journal  of 
Computational  Science,Volume  36,2019,100581,ISSN  1877-7503, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jocs.2016.11.011. 

[13]  Ko,  H.,  Hofer,  S.,  Pichler,  B.  et  al.  Functional  specificity  of  local 
synaptic connections in neocortical networks. Nature 473, 87–91 (2011). 
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature09880. 

[14]  Al-Ruithe, Majid  &  Benkhelifa,  Elhadj  &  Hameed,  Khawar.  (2019).  A 
systematic  literature  review  of  data  governance  and  cloud  data 
governance.  Personal  and  Ubiquitous  Computing.  23.  10.1007/s00779-
017-1104-3. 

[15]  Godhankar,  P.B.  and  Gupta,  D.  (2014)  Review  of  Cloud  Storage 
Security  and  Cloud  Computing  Challenges.  International  Journal  of 
Computer Science & Information Technology,5,528-533. 

www.ijacsa.thesai.org 

4 | P a g e  

 
 
