Blockchain-based Security Framework for Critical
Industry 4.0 Cyber-physical System

Ziaur Rahman, Ibrahim Khalil, Xun Yi, and Mohammed Atiquzzaman, Senior Member, IEEE

1

1
2
0
2

n
u
J

4
2

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
9
3
3
3
1
.
6
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—There has been an intense concern for security alter-
natives because of the recent rise of cyber attacks, mainly target-
ing critical systems such as industry, medical, or energy ecosys-
tem. Though the latest industry infrastructures largely depend on
AI-driven maintenance, the prediction based on corrupted data
undoubtedly results in loss of life and capital. Admittedly, an
inadequate data-protection mechanism can readily challenge the
security and reliability of the network. The shortcomings of the
conventional cloud or trusted certiﬁcate-driven techniques have
motivated us to exhibit a unique Blockchain-based framework
for a secure and efﬁcient industry 4.0 system. The demonstrated
framework obviates the long-established certiﬁcate authority
after enhancing the consortium Blockchain that reduces the
data processing delay, and increases cost-effective throughput.
Nonetheless, the distributed industry 4.0 security model entails
cooperative trust than depending on a single party, which in
essence indulges the costs and threat of the single point of failure.
Therefore, multi-signature technique of the proposed framework
accomplishes the multi-party authentication, which conﬁrms its
applicability for the real-time and collaborative cyber-physical
system.

Index Terms—Cyber-physical System, Blockchain, Multisigna-

ture, Edge Computing, Distributed Hash Table.

I. INTRODUCTION

The recent US study takes us to an alarming point that
our cyberinfrastructures are as vulnerable as we are to the
COVID-19. Internet Crime Complaint Center (IC3) of the
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) reports that there has
been a 300% increase in cybercrime since the beginning of the
latest pandemic. They further warn that 95% of the recorded
breaches targeted mostly three critical infrastructures such as
government, technology, and retail industry. While investigat-
ing the threat type, Cisco unveiled Advanced Persistent Threat
(APT), ransomware such as Zero-day, Spyware, and Botnet
Virus, occupy more than half of the total attacks with a loss
of more than $500k. Besides, it is worth frightfully mentioning
that about 6 trillions of budgets are globally projected to tackle
the potential crisis, which was only 1 trillion in 2018. Since
the last decade, this budget has been overgrowing as the world
has experienced the latest industrial iteration namely industry
4.0 [1]. This critical infrastructure has laid the foundation for
the desired smart systems, where the convergence happens
between machines and humans, depending on data. Sensor-
generated data play a vital role in monitoring the manu-
facturing process, such as predicting maintenance, detecting
the equipment anomalies, etc. For example, the data-driven
predictive maintenance systems supervise critical tasks such
as electrical insulation, vibration or temperature analytic, etc.
As a critical component, if data fails to comply with the

the advanced technologies,

security standard, all the actions associated with data would
undeniably counterfeit the entire industrial ecosystem. Even
after deploying all
i.e., Cisco
Forrester Zero Trust security (2019) or Software Intel Guard
Extension (SGX-2015) the world of the state-of-the-art has
encountered unprecedented and, in some cases, unknown (i.e.,
WeLeakData, January 2020) cyberattacks. The latest attacks,
including Advanced Persistent Threat (APT), Drive-by, Spear
phishing, Session hijacking, Zero-day exploit, were triggered
off on account of inadequate and untrusted data and network
protection. Existing industrial security solutions inlcuding
some public Blockchain-based approach (i.e, CertLedger) are
designed after depending on the trust provided by the trusted
third party (TTP) such as PKI (public key infrastructure)
or cloud-driven trusted certiﬁcate authority. The system with
such remedies has experienced adversaries along with several
other issues such as adaption, delay, expenses, latency, etc.
Moreover, any system taking service from a single trusted
entity holds an imminent
threat of data breaching or the
intimidation of single point of failure (SPoF).

Therefore, the paper motivates demonstrating a framework
to solve the existing security challenges (i.e., multi-party
consents, the centralized trust of trusted certiﬁcate authority,
etc.) for the Industry 4.0 Cyber-physical System (CPS). The
blockchain-based Multi-Signature (MS) mechanism ensures
collaborative trust rather than the traditional PKI-like single
signing technique that often adheres to a single-point trust
dependency and transparency loophole.

A. Contributions and Organization

Industry 4.0 CPS need to incorporate collaborative trust
building rather than delegating the trust authority to a single
honest or semi-honest entity [1]. Therefore, the demonstrated
Blockhain based framework proposed to ensure security by a
special certiﬁcateless authentication technique developed upon
the MS scheme. The framework is reluctant to present-day cy-
ber attacks. For precise clariﬁcation, the speciﬁc contributions
can be briefed as below-

• Certiﬁcateless multi-party security: The framework
utilizes smart-edge computation, works over peer-to-peer
(P2P) consortium, and eliminates the centralized trust
i.e., dependency on the single PKI certiﬁcate
model,
authority (CA) for public keys. In addition, multiple
Industry stakeholders collaboratively authenticate both
the device identity and data. This unique feature guards
data against forgery, enhances trust and overcomes the
single-point-of-failure (SPoF).

 
 
 
 
 
 
• Efﬁcient and reliable network: Consortium Blockchain
peers of the proposed framework validate and track device
registration and communication activities into a transpar-
ent ledger inside the restricted channel. In consortium
consensus protocol, the leader proposes the next block
that signiﬁcantly lower the reward costs. It shields against
failures by subduing the inﬂuence of the potential mali-
cious peers and ﬁnalizes the agreement on a new trans-
action without multiple conﬁrmations, thus no waiting
period requires after a particular block addition. Besides,
the permissioned node selection (i.e.,PBFT, Chaincode,
as in the Hyperledger Fabric (HLF) or Iroha (HLI), to
be discussed in section III) and the banning of malicious
node keeps the industry 4.0 cyber-space secure and threat
free [2].

• Distributed off-chain storage: Instead of conventional
cloud or database, the proposed framework adapts storing
data at the distributed hash table (DHT), i.e. InterPlanatry
File System (IPFS) or Kademila. The salient feature of
P2P, version-controlled and content-addressed ﬁle system,
ensures faster data transfer and reduces server dependency
to save additional spending and bandwidth [2].

The proposed technique obtains collaborative trust from
Consortium Blockchain (CBC) peers instead of conventional
PKI-driven CA,
it can
i.e., VeriSign, DigiCert, etc. Thus,
circumvent
the chance of SPoF on account of the TTP’s
betrayal. BC consensus in line with the multi-party con-
sents (through multi-signature), ensure the entrusted security
of several industrial stakeholders. Simultaneously, it reduces
both response latency and risk associated with the trusted
certiﬁcates issued by a single entity, i.e., Membership Service
Provider (MSP), VeriSign, etc.

The rest of the article is organized as follows- the next
section illustrates the suitability of the Consortium Blockchain
technology,
the security requirements and the typical ad-
versaries of the critical Industry 4.0 enterprise. Then the
subsequent section illustrates the proposed BC-based certiﬁ-
cateless framework and its working components. Before the
conclusion, the framework deployment and evaluation section
reinforces the claims of improving the performance conﬁgured
on the CBC, namely HLF.

II. BLOCKCHAIN FOR CRITICAL INDUSTRY 4.0 CPS

Any trusted and reliable critical system essentially requires
to be consistently capable of enduring prohibitive loss all the
way it evolves. From the conservative development perspec-
tive, innovating such a decisive and crucial system naturally
demands proven techniques rather than the naive approaches
that often appear appealing at its ﬁrst sight. Though, BC
technology initially had attracted inundated public attention
but afterward established its impressive attributes to unravel
the advanced security breaches, i.e., APT, Zero-day attack, etc.
as shown by Figure 1. It also helps explaining that CPS refers
to the ﬁrm conjoining and coordination between cyber and
physical resources. The CPS comprises software and physical
components where each component works on the different
temporal and spatial levels and continuously interacts with one

2

Fig. 1. a) Communication ﬂow of CPS b) CPS attacks BC can guard against

another. BC with MS seems to be a promising alternative in
response to those advanced attacks as shown by Figure 1 (b)
respectively.

A. Critical Industry 4.0 Issues with Public Blockchain

BC is resistant to modiﬁcation as if once data recorded,
the block cannot be altered [3]. The link between subsequent
blocks breaks and demands consensus of the participating
nodes if any changes occur in the previously committed
blocks. Unlike the PKI or cloud-driven CA, a BC requires
running consensus i.e., proof of work/stake (PoW/PoS) and
associated smart contracts (SC) protocols before updating a
new block to the shared ledger. The reward and energy-
intensive and mining nodes driven consensus works for public
BC which best suits where an utterly untrusted network is
required to be safe [4]. It is unparalleled in cryptocurrency [5]
but logically unsuited for the critical industry, i.e., smart-grid,
food or health system, road signaling, etc. due to its slower
performance.

Consortium Blockchain Advantages: Whereas CBC such
as Hyperledger or Quorum, has a selective setup where only
trusted and invited members are allowed to join the network

Physical SpaceSensingActuation(a) Cyber Physical System(CPS)(b) CPS Threats and Adversariese.g. SPoF, DDoS Softwaree.g. APT, Eavesdroppinge.g. Integrity, MitMe.g. Novel Zero, MalwareEdgeMQTT, CoAPREST, GRPCCyber SpaceMitM, APT against  CPS (MultiSig guards)Malware, SPoF to  CPS (Blockchin shields)EncryptionNetworkPhysical3

Fig. 2. (a) Industry 4.0 CPS Trust and failure Challenges with Certiﬁcate Authority (b) Multisignature and BC Solution not requiring the Certiﬁcate Authority

[5]. As new block veriﬁcation does not require running PoW-
like consensus, CBC can obviate additional expenses for set-
ting up energy-intensive miner-nodes and compensate needed
rewards or incentives. Instead, it adapts the fault tolerance
consensus mechanism, where the leader proposes the next
block to lower reward costs [6]. It protects system from failures
by subduing the inﬂuence of the potential malicious peers
and thus ﬁnalizes the agreement on a new transaction without
multiple conﬁrmations. The transaction processing rate of
this permissioned nature blockchain [2] is signiﬁcantly higher
than that of the miner-driven public BC,(i.e., for Bitcoin and
Ethereum, about 4 to 5 transaction and for HLF, about 3,000 to
20,000 transaction per second) making it a convincing choice
for the proposed data protection framework of the Industry 4.0
CPS.

B. Challenges of the Cyber-physical System

Since the 2011 Hannover Fair by German government, the
world has experienced the latest iteration of the industrial
ecosystem namely industry 4.0 because of its unique integra-
tion of the CPS [1]. The ultimate goal of building such au-
tomated connections between cyber space and physical space
range from enhancing productivity to boosting revenue where
BC comes to plug-in-play after cooperating with its existing
cybernet technologies such as big data, deep Learning, etc
[7]. The critical industry 4.0 infrastructure demands security
assurance from multiple stakeholders, instead of single trusted
party such as CA. Figure 2 (a) illustrates how the entire
industry 4.0 ecosystem falls due to CA’s betrayal [8].

III. BLOCKCHAIN BASED SECURITY FRAMEWORK

The proposed security framework for critical industry 4.0
CPS works on four different levels, where sensor and smart
edge devices work in the physical space, and consortium
Blockchain network or DHT work in the cyberspace as demon-
strated by Figure 3 (A). Based on the 4 levels of commu-
nication, the working principle can be simpliﬁed through 3
different core stages. Firstly, the machine sensors get registered
and establish communication using a BC-based MS technique.
Secondly, the registered sensors submit data to the BC network
subjective to be veriﬁed by BC consortium. Thirdly, the data

is stored in the DHT after recording the log into the BC
ledger [2]. As claimed in the earlier subsection, the framework
utilizes edge computation instead of cloud computing [9]. The
reasons are listed as following before explaining the steps
within the proposed framework.

• As usually sensors have a weak computational ability that
makes them prone to failure while interacting with its
heavy storage node such as cloud [7]. BC can quickly
adopt smart edge computations with neater storage solu-
tion.

• As the framework requires signing, smart edge device
can securely do the required solving cryptography that
the light-weight sensors are unable to do.

• Besides, it can send data to the P2P DHT storage and can

easily identify the DHT-address [9].

In ordinary certiﬁcate-less authenticated encryption (CLAE)
or identity-based encryption (IBE), partial key intends to
resolve the key-escrow problem (keys are essential to decrypt).
The proposed technique replaces it PKI-like key generation
centre (KGC, works as a trusted center similar to CA) by
adopting a CBC consisting of collaborating peers of the
Industry 4.0 CPS. In the proposed framework, the BC peers,
using the underlying system parameters, ﬁrst generate and then
dissipate the key pairs where the private parameters are known
as the partial key. The partial secret (PS) of the BC consortium
and the sensor’s random secret in conjunction constitute the
desired private key. It secures data from the physical space,
i.e., embedded machine sensors to cyberspace, i.e., BC or DHT
storage, purposing to check out single-point-dependency and
guarantee mutual collaboration [8].

A. Certiﬁcateless Sensor Authentication by Multisignature

MS means applying more than a single key in authentica-
tion, which seems so promising for multi-party industry 4.0
security. For example, in an industry 4.0 setup, the sensitive
data generated by expensive equipment need to be equally
consented by its owner, operator, insurer, or buyer. Each of the
parties could be geographically dislocated but cooperate for a
single mechanical event. In such a scenario, trusting a single
party, i.e., CA, is expensive and not consistently reliable. The
principal objective of signing data is to ensure that data has

verify(ps)Blockchain CosignersCPS Sensors1: broadcastscosigners' keys2: request partial key3: return multiSig (ps)4: submit data to BCPs: partial secretsPscosigningcosigner 1(i.e. owner)cosig. Ncosig. 3Certiﬁcate Authority (CA)CPS SensorsSupervisionIf CA betrays,Industry falls101011  (a) (b) 4

Fig. 3. A. High-level Representation of the Proposed Security Framework, B. Working Flows as per the Framework Conﬁguration

come from an authentic source, and upon producing the same
message-digest to the recipient, it further proofs data integrity.
Therefore, the framework incorporates MS to increase the trust
and pertaining reliability and handle prohibitive costs all the
way the industry 4.0 CPS evolves [10].

Blockchain Replaces the Certﬁcate Auhority: As illustrated
by Figure 2 (b), the BC peers ensure generating a partial
secret before responding to the sensor devices. The process
begins through broadcasting the multiple public keys among
the industry 4.0 sensors by BC consortium. The employed
signature is a variant of the existing Boneh–Lynn–Shacham
(BLS) signature scheme, which works upon two different
elliptic curves (EC) over a ﬁnite prime ﬁeld [11]. It has
implemented a similar partial secret concept of IBE on top of
BC and thus eliminates the Key 𝐾𝐺𝐶 [8]. Suppose there are
several industry stakeholders who have been collaborating with
their public-private key pairs. Two different hash algorithms
produce respective message digest throughout the process. A

sensor runs system’s security parameters to bring out the secret
values. Then it sends their identity (ID) and after encrypting
it using the aggregated public keys. BC peers verify and
generates the PS and cosign by all of its participating peers.
The framework initially requires signing by all; however, it
is not necessarily required as its supports threshold signing
implicitly depicted by the curved arrow of Figure 2 (b). The
industry sensors then verify and decrypt the PS and accomplish
their public-private keys to send data to the BC. The proposed
framework excludes PKI-like certiﬁcates by implementing the
intermediary PS which in essence guarantee desired trust to
the sensors [12].

B. Transaction Veriﬁcation and Storing

Once industry 4.0 sensors are successfully registered to the
BC consortium, they are ready to submit data as transaction
proposal, as illustrated by Figure 3 (B). Data usually gets
transaction (Tx) fashion that includes the identity, timestamp,

Store/Return Hex Databy put() or get()cosignersIndustry 4.0 Sensors13DHT Storage4Request Multi-signed partial Key Response Key/ DataDevice Authenticationhold keysverify TxpermissionedSDK consensusSCSensing/Actuation2Blockchain P2P ConsortiumOSN1OSN2OSN3OSNkApache ZooKeeper (Kafka/RAFT)Consenus Protocols P1Sensor1Sensor2Sensor3SensorjIndustry 4.0  ClientSensors/MEMsIndustry 4.0Business LogicsOrdering ServicesREST / GRPC API CallsData FlowSDK (NodeJS/Java)Conﬁgures Channels for IndustryP2P ConsortiumCRUD Operation and Data FlowSmart EdgesLedgerP2LedgerP3LedgerPnLedgerP2P Gossip Protocols Peers with Ledger (i.e. Cosigners for Multi-signature)CRUD OperationDHT (IPFS)/Kedemelila)Service Request and ResponseSmart Contract (Chincode) OperationA. Proposed Blockchain Based Security Framework (High-level Representation)B. Framework Deployment on Hyperledger (Working Flow)a:b:c:d:e:f:Smart Edgea : Proposing Tx ( registrar  & submit Tx)b : Endorsing Tx (run environment & endorse)c : Verifying Tx (validate propsed Tx )d : Aggregating Tx (OSN articulate)e : Committing Tx (broadcast to all)f : Storing Tx ( to ledger & DHT )and action of the CPS sensors. Action may vary as per the
request type, i.e., update, store, or access to DHT. BC peers
have to meet two necessary conditions to verify a transaction:

i) The public key obtained associates with the identity?
ii) Can the transaction received be veriﬁed?

The transaction veriﬁcation includes the steps illustrated by
the framework conﬁguration on HLF CBC [13]. Figure 3 (A)
demonstrate the proposed ﬁgure with 4 levels (1 to 4) and the
extended Figure 3 (B) illustrates the following steps from a
to f.

a) Propose: Client CPS devices initiate the process by
registering the devices to the BC, as explained in the earlier
section. Then it starts constructing the encrypted transaction
proposal using the private keys and invoke the SC with the help
of Software Development Kit (SDK) and required application
programming interfaces (APIs).

b) Endorse: SDK requests for endorsement, and BC peer
veriﬁes the Tx after authenticating the device identity (id)
subject to ensure that data is coming from the right sources.

c) Verify: The endorsement veriﬁcation requires meeting
the policy, i.e., business logic agreed by all stakeholder peers,
by running the respective SC operation. The SC takes a Tx
proposal as input and returns a multi-signed YES or NO in
response to the SDK apps against step b). If the Tx proposal
is determined as query function, the SDK App returns the data
upon query execution with the help of respective APIs (i.e
OAuth 2.0 REST API). In either case, the SDK apps forward
the transaction with the required operations such as C-create,
R-retrieve, U-update, and D-delete with the endorsement.

d) Aggregate: After receiving the veriﬁed consent,
the
SDK apps aggregates all consents into single (or multiple if
required) Tx and disseminates those to the Ordering Service
Nodes (OSNs). The OSN works on the consensus protocols
tolerance (CFT) with RAFT (etcd.io
such as crash fault
libraries) or practical byzantine fault tolerance (PBFT) within
Apache Kafka platform.

e) Commit: The Tx then relayed to the OSN, all channel
peers validate each Tx of the block by speciﬁc SC validation
and checking through concurrency control version. Any Tx
fails the process is marked with an invalid ﬂag inside the block.
Thus, a desired new block is committed to the ledger.

f) Store: The Gossip data dissemination protocol of the OSN
concurrently broadcasts ledger data across the consortium to
ensure synchronization of the latest version of the ledger. The
pointer of the data is set out in the BC ledger, and at the
same time, data-address is securely stored on the ofﬂine or
online DHT data repository upon IPFS or HL CouchDB. It
conﬁrms the unique beneﬁts such as traceability, P2P adapt-
ability etc. that are already outlined in the earlier contribution
section. DHT incorporation makes the framework robust, self-
organizing, scalable, and fault-tolerant against routing attacks
and false query injection attacks. The proposed framework
mostly suits the DHT protocol, however, we have initially
integrated IPFS and Kademlia considering the ﬁxed-sized
routing and malware attacks.

5

C. Smart Contract and Consensus Implementation

As a transaction protocol or program, smart contract re-
siliently executes, manages assigned events and actions as
per the agreement often called contract. Because of its self-
governing features, it can avoid the need of a trusted in-
termediary, prohibitive costs and accidental losses [14]. The
framework was deployed both on IBM HLF and HLI, which
facilitates writing customized Smart contract called the chain-
code (CC) for speciﬁc tasks. Sample CC are available in the
referred project link 1, provides the founding environment
for authentication, access control, and validation. Being a
platform-independent, HLF supports any language to write
its codes [13]; however, because of related online resources,
we mostly preferred Go and, in some test-cases Java. The
customized CC replaces the existing codes for Membership
Service and its dependencies. Consortium Blockchain entails
default Membership Service Provider (MSP) that works as
PKI-like Certiﬁcate Authority (CA). It provides ledger/other
CC accessing APIs, state variables, or transaction context.
The policy is deﬁned as an access control list (ACL) for
simplicity. However, as explained earlier in the BC suitability
subsection, BFT consensus has salient advantages over the
existing PoW driven approaches [2]. HLF incorporates Apache
Kafka that eases the execution of consensus, such as BFT,
CFT, considering enterprise security requirements. CFT can
withstand even half of the total nodes fail but do not guarantee
adversary nodes what BFT does. It retains working even one
third of total nodes falls. PBFT protocol seems more resilient
to the system failure; however, the proposed framework is
reluctant to both BFT and CFT [3].

D. Framework Threat and Trust Model

The communication between edge devices [9] (i.e. Dell,
Hawaii, AD-Link gateway), accessories, and critical industry
4.0 machine sensors (i.e. motor vibration, force or humidity
sensors) are secure. Besides, consortium peers (i.e. endorse-
ment, anchor peers of the HLF/HLI are assumed to be trusted,
semi-honest or honest-but-curious who issues multisigned PS
instead of traditional certiﬁcates [13]. However, MS and its
associated encryption technique together ensure secure com-
munication between edge and BC level and guard network and
data against data breaching, malware injection, etc.

IV. BLOCKCHAIN DEPLOYMENT AND EVALUATION

The CBC of the proposed framework was deployed in-
side the Caliper evaluation toolkit for Hyperledger, which
helps measuring a particular BC deployment with a set of
previously deﬁned enterprise use cases. IBM admits that no
general tool provides performance evaluation for BC while
releasing Caliper [13]. The extensive use-cases were set to
overlap the industry 4.0 client requirement that generates the
benchmark data. However, the latest version of the nodeJS
package manager (NPM 8.0.1), docker, and curl were installed
to setup the run-time environment inside the Ubuntu 18.04
LTS with 32 GB of memory where python2 , make, g++ and

1Github Project Link:https://github.com/rahmanziaur/IIoTConsortiumBC

6

Fig. 4. READ (a) vs WRITE (b) performance and Throughput (TP) Latency (LC) for two different setup, with 300 Workload, another with 500 workload

git ensure additional supports. A typical conﬁguration for the
BC evaluation should have programs called Test Harness that
include client generation and observation and the deployed BC
System Under Test (SUT) and the RESTful SDK interfaces
[13]. There are four (04) fundamental steps required to ﬁnalize
the evaluation process as following.

a) A local verdaccio-server for package publishing
b) Connecting the repository to the server
c) Binding the CLI from the server-side, and
d) Running the benchmark as per the conﬁguration ﬁle
Then the performance benchmark with the tasks, ﬁrstly,
invoke policy checking functions to READ and WRITE Tx
into the ledger. Secondly, setup multiple test-cases for 4 to
32 number of peers representing industry 4.0 stakeholders.
Finally, allocating the workloads from 100 to 1000 transaction
per second among the peers representing the CPS sensor
device data population. The throughput (TP) and latency (LC)
are calculated based on the READ (RD) and WRITE (WR)
performance where the delay LC is the time between the time
of request and response of the transaction. TP is the ratio of
committed Tx at a particular time.

A. Performance Analysis

The Hyperledger Caliper benchmark results show the per-
formance based on four measurement metrics success rate,
(transaction successfully committed against the submitted pro-
posal), latency and the throughput, and the resource con-
sumption for different test cases. The Figure 4 (a) shows
the system performance under the different number of sensor
workload ranging from 100 (0.1k) to 1k workload where the
HLF network occupies two (02) CC, four (04) peer nodes and
three (03) OSNs running on Apache Kafka (or ZooKeeper)
for PBFT. As seen in the Figure 4 (b), the WRITE has 185 at
0.2k workload with the maximum success rate of 93% and
an average delay of 5 seconds. Notwithstanding, operation
seems to have higher throughput (up to 470 in maximum) on
a similar success rate at its best. The average delay appears to
be half of the WRITE’s delay, as writing has to incorporate
OSNs on Apache Kafka. The benchmark evaluation explicitly
illustrates that the setup conﬁgured has lower performance

for higher number sensor-workload through the theoretical
solution proves the consortium BC has signiﬁcant adaptability
for a higher number of nodes. As investigated,
the local
workload processing bottleneck affects throughput and latency.
HLF Tx ﬂow works demands enough responses against the
in case the responses are
submitted transaction proposals,
queued due to network overhead, bandwidth, or processing-
load consequences the latency-raising. On top of that, the
general-purpose workstation conﬁguration slower the eval-
uation for higher workloads. Here, the result portrays the
relation between performance and scalability based on the
previously executed READ, WRITE Operations. OSN and
peer conﬁguration left resembling initial setup with two test-
cases run for 300 and 500 workloads. As depicted by the
Figure 4 (c), the deployed framework has lower scalability.
For the ﬁrst test-case (300 workloads), the throughput and
latency reach 150 transaction per second and 64 transaction per
second. However, for the other test-case, it comes with lower
throughput and higher latency concerning the number of nodes
ranging from 4 to 32. Caliper toolkit allows to run the node
subset that endorses a particular SC. The proposed framework
upon HLF Caliper benchmark fetches higher latency (i.e.,
about a minute for 32 peers) due to computation constraints.
Besides improving the consensus in terms of a suitable MS
scheme, further scopes include applying an enterprise standard
( i.e., 512 GB of RAM or more) system to improve the latency
overhead currently it suffers from.

For the same setup, the framework’s average response time
is several times lesser than the system with the MSP. By de-
fault, MSP provides certiﬁcate service, i.e., Hyperledger Fabric
MSP, VeriSign, etc. inside the consortium Blockchain network
[13]. The result obtained shows that the proposed framework
without MSP or any other certiﬁcate provider, including the
trusted KGC, responds within 1 to 16 milliseconds. How-
ever, it delays 40 to 242 milliseconds with the default MSP
of the Hyperledger CBC deployment. The response latency
varies with the increase of workloads (number transactions to
process) and co-signing BC peers. The proposed MS aligned
framework (no MSP as discussed earlier) absorbs almost 4-
times lower power than the public BC with traditional signing

100200300400500600700800900100002040608010000.10.20.30.40.50.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91success rate (%)throughput (tx/s)No of nodes (k)(a)ThroughputSuccess RateDelays100200300400500600700800900100002040608010000.10.20.30.40.50.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91Success  rate (%)throughput (tx/s)No of nodes (k)(b)ThroughputSuccess RateDelays4812162024283202040608010005010015020025030035040045050048121620242832latency (s)throughput No of peers (k)(c)RD TP1WR TP1RD LC2WR LC27

techniques. Also, it spurs about 50 percent lesser CPU than
the consortium BC lined with the conventional MSP. Besides,
the certiﬁcate-less mechanism, special remote procedure call,
namely gRPC and mining-free consensus protocols, i.e., PBFT
of HLF, jointly economize the energy and CPU usage it needs.

V. CONCLUSION AND WORK TO AHEAD

Relying on a single trusted party challenges the industry
trust, makes it exposed to several advanced cyberattacks, and
causes single-point-of-failures. Admittedly, critical industry in-
frastructure demands to incorporate cooperative trust-building
rather than trusting a single entity. In response to such security
issues, we have demonstrated the BC-based framework that
ensures security without existing PKI-like certiﬁcates. The
contribution includes unique adaption of multi-signature inside
a reliable BC consortium subject to data protection with an
efﬁcient storing technique. The achieved performance support
the framework applicability for the critical industry 4.0 enter-
prise CPS.

REFERENCES

[8] R. Li, T. Song, B. Mei, H. Li, X. Cheng, and L. Sun, “Blockchain
for large-scale internet of things data storage and protection,” IEEE
Transactions on Services Computing, vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 762–771, 2019.

[9] R. Yang, F. R. Yu, P. Si, Z. Yang, and Y. Zhang, “Integrated blockchain
and edge computing systems: A survey, some research issues and
challenges,” IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials, vol. 21, no. 2,
pp. 1508–1532, 2019.

[10] S. A. Kumar, S. Suraj, and P. Deepak, “Lightweight multi-party authen-
tication and key-agreement protocol in iot based e-healthcare service,”
ACM Trans. Multimedia Comput. Commun. Appl., vol. 0, no. ja, 2020.

[11] D. Boneh, M. Drijvers, and G. Neven, “Compact multi-signatures
for smaller blockchains,” in International Conference on the Theory
and Application of Cryptology and Information Security, pp. 435–464,
International Association for Cryptologic Research, Springer, 2018.

[12] N. Z. Aitzhan and D. Svetinovic, “Security and privacy in decentralized
energy trading through multi-signatures, blockchain and anonymous
messaging streams,” IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure
Computing, vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 840–852, 2018.

[13] N. B. Truong, K. Sun, G. M. Lee, and Y. Guo, “Gdpr-compliant personal
data management: A blockchain-based solution,” IEEE Transactions on
Information Forensics and Security, vol. 15, pp. 1746–1761, 2020.

[14] S. Wang, L. Ouyang, Y. Yuan, X. Ni, X. Han, and F. Wang, “Blockchain-
enabled smart contracts: Architecture, applications, and future trends,”
IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems, vol. 49,
no. 11, pp. 2266–2277, 2019.

[1] M. Aazam, S. Zeadally, and K. A. Harras, “Deploying fog computing
in industrial internet of things and industry 4.0,” IEEE Transactions on
Industrial Informatics, vol. 14, no. 10, pp. 4674–4682, 2018.

[2] A. Dorri, F. Luo, S. S. Kanhere, R. Jurdak, and Z. Y. Dong, “Spb: A
secure private blockchain-based solution for distributed energy trading,”
IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 57, no. 7, pp. 120–126, 2019.
[3] Q. Zhu, S. W. Loke, R. Trujillo-Rasua, F. Jiang, and Y. Xiang, “Ap-
plications of distributed ledger technologies to the internet of things: A
survey,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 52, no. 6, 2019.

[4] Q. Feng, D. He, S. Zeadally, M. K. Khan, and N. Kumar, “A survey
on privacy protection in blockchain system,” Journal of Network and
Computer Applications, vol. 126, pp. 45–58, 2019.

[5] F. Tschorsch and B. Scheuermann, “Bitcoin and beyond: A technical
survey on decentralized digital currencies,” IEEE Communications Sur-
veys Tutorials, vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 2084–2123, 2016.

[6] V. Gramoli and M. Staples, “Blockchain standard: Can we reach
consensus?,” IEEE Communications Standards Magazine, vol. 2, no. 3,
pp. 16–21, 2018.

[7] H. Shen, J. Zhou, Z. Cao, X. Dong, and K. R. Choo, “Blockchain-
based lightweight certiﬁcate authority for efﬁcient privacy-preserving
location-based service in vehicular social networks,” IEEE Internet of
Things Journal, vol. 7, no. 7, pp. 6610–6622, 2020.

Ziaur Rahman is currently a PhD scholar at RMIT University. He is a
graduate member of ACM, Australian Computer Society and IEEE. His
research interest includes Blockchain, IoT etc.

is an Associate Professor at

Ibrahim Khalil
the RMIT University
and previously worked in Silicon Valley, USA. He was the recipient of
IEEE LCN Best Paper award and the Fritz-Kutter award. He has served
as PC member of several IEEE conferences. His research interests overlap
Blockchain, IoT etc.

is currently a Professor at

Xun Yi
the RMIT University. He has led
several projects and been an expert member of Australian Research Council.
He is an Associate Editor of the IEEE TDSC, and PC member of over 40
international conferences. His research interests include Blockchain, Cyber
Security, etc.

Mohammed Atiquzzaman is
a Edith Kinney Gaylord Presidential
professor at the University of Oklahoma. His researches are supported by
NSF, NASA and the US Air Force. He serves as the Editor-in-Chief of
Journal of Network and Computer Applications, Co-Editor-in-Chief of the
Computer Communications Journal and Editor of IEEE Transactions on
Mobile Computing, IEEE JSAC, etc.

