Decentralized Blockchain-based  model for Edge 
Computing 

Mabrook  S. Al-Rakhami1,2,  Abdu  Gumaei2,  Sk. Md.  Mizanur  Rahman3  and  Atif Al-Amri1,4 
1Research Chair of Pervasive and M obile Computing; King Saud University, Riyadh 11543, Saudi  Arabia 
2Information Systems Department, College  of Computer and Information Sciences,  King Saud University, Riyadh 11543, Saudi Arabia 
3Information and Communication Engineering  Technology (ICET), School of Engineering  Technology and Applied Science  (SETAS), 
Centennial College,  Toronto, ON M 1G 3T8, Canada 
4Software Engineering  Department, College  of Computer and Information Sciences,  King Saud University, Riyadh 11543, Saudi  Arabia 
malrakhami@ksu.edu.sa,  abdugomai@gmail.com,  SRahman@centennialcollege.ca,  atif@ksu.edu.sa

Abstract—  Blockchain technology is among the fastest-growing 
technologies in the world  today.  It  has been adopted  in diverse 
areas  but  mostly 
in  financial  systems,  such  as  Bitcoin 
cryptocurrency. Therefore, it is a niche that has attracted interest 
from researchers from various fields, including computer science. 
Other areas where Blockchain is being embraced  are the S mart 
Grid  and  Internet of  Things (IoT)  technologies, among  others. 
While it is all good  and  improving  many  areas of  applications, 
Blockchain still has some  shortcomings. For  example, it  is not 
designed  for  high  scalability  when  accommodating  normal 
transactions. On the other hand,  a  parallel technology that has 
diverse applications in distributed networks better known as edge 
computing has emerged. Its main advantage is that it increases the 
speed  of  pf  processes  within  those  networks.  However,  like 
Blockchain, edge  computing  has  its  shortcomings.  Its  security 
systems and management systems have been found to be wanting. 
Hence  the  idea  to  integrate  the  two  technologies  and  take 
advantage  of their strengths. A  blend of  the two  would  lead to 
advanced  network  servers,  huge data  storage,  and  heightened 
security  in  transactions.  However,  this  integration  will  best 
happen when some measures are taken. For example, there is a 
need to address  scalability, resource management satisfactorily, 
and the security of the systems. To solve the integration problem, 
a  decentralized Blockchain-based model  of  Edge  computing  is 
proposed in this paper. 

Keywords—  Blockchain, Edge Computing, Decentralized model. 

I. 

INT RODUCT ION  

With the emergence of the Internet of Things technology [1], 
many research fields have cropped up in the field of technology. 
In  order  to realize  the potential  of  this  technology, however, 
there is a great need to address the challenges that it has brought 
with it. In six years’ time, the volume of revenue that Blockchain 
is estimated to raise annually will  rise beyond US$  19.9.  This 
projected growth has attracted many  industry players who are 
now keen on ditching centralized models and adopting this new 
decentralized  model  [2].  Blockchain  technology was invented 
on the same grounds as Bitcoin in order to address the concerns 
of transacting money within a centralized model  [3].  The main  
advantage  of  Blockchain  is  that  it  allows  a  high  level  of 

transparency. This allows  the transacting parties to verify  the 
asset ownership and also sign the agreement within the platform 
with ease. In addition, it  is decentralized and secure. However, 
the outstanding challenge is on scalability, which means that its 
applications are limited  [4].   

A  similar  technology  that  has  become  popular  is  edge 
computing.  It  is  more  of  an  extended  function  of  cloud 
computing. As such, both technologies allow numerous devices 
to  be  in  use  within  the  infrastructure  of  the  network.  Edge 
computing has an advantage over cloud computing as it is faster 
in terms of storage and has greater computing power. These and 
other  features  make  edge  computing  better  in  terms  of  the 
Quality of Service (QoS) that it offers to the devices  at the edge.  
Although it has its good side, edge computing has shortcomings, 
including  questionable  privacy  and  security  measures.  The 
shortcomings are due to the fact that there is a combination of 
service migration  and heterogeneous nodes running acros s the 
given  nodes [5],  [6].  Currently,  combining  both  Blockchain  
technology and edge computing technology gives a system that 
has greater and more  efficient features that include  security and 
better management.  The new  system also has an assurance of 
integrity and validity, among other features [7]. The new system 
also  effectively  eliminates  the burden  of  large  storage as  the 
resources being transacted through the system is distributed and 
not  merely  stored[8].  However,  with  all  the  advantages that 
come with integrating the systems, there are challenges that need 
to be addressed. These include privacy  and security concerns, 
which  are  especially posed because there are services that are 
outsourced to support operations at the edge of the networks. As 
such, further research is needed to determine  how such issues 
can practically be addressed in a satisfactory manner. 

In this paper, we propose the development of a novel model 
that will guide the integration of both blockchain technology and 
edge  computing.  The  proposed  model  is  aimed  at  creating 
reliable  and  efficient  access  to  the  networks  by  numerous 
devices. It  also aims  at distributing the storage of resources at 
the edge. The outcome is the provision of servers at a large scale, 
increasing  data storage and  its  validity.  More  importantly,  to 
improve the security of the system.   

XXX-X-XXXX-XXXX-X/XX/$XX.00 ©20XX IEEE 

 
 
Fig. 1. Example of who blockahin handle transactions 

The  parts  of  this  paper  include  the  following:  Section  II 
provides a detailed summary of blockchain technology and edge 
computing; Section III  provides the rationale of integrating the 
two technologies; Section IV provides the intricate details of the 
proposed  model;  Section  V  Presents  the  outcome  of  the 
experiment;  and finally ssection VI details the conclusion. 

II.  BACKGROUND 

A.  Blockchain Technology 

Blockchain  technology is basically  a distributed system of 
recording information  in  a manner  that makes  it  impossible to 
change, hack, or cheat. It is a digital  ledger of transactions that 
is  duplicated  and  distributed  across  an  entire  network  of  a 
connected  computer  system  on  a  blockchain.  The  system 
supports bitcoins and other cryptocurrencies that are transacted 
within the blockchain technology. The system has a high degree 
of transparency as all members  involved in a transaction usually 
have a duplicate o the transaction being undertaken  [9]. It is a 
technology  which  allows  effective  and  highly  secure 
transmission of digital information.  It has roots in Bitcoin but it  
has grown to find applications in numerous fields. In Fig. 1,  the 
transmission  of  digital  information  from  the  source  to  the 
receiver along a blockchain system is illustrated, together with 
actions that occur along the way. 

Layers:  comprehending  Blockchain  technology  is  more 
effective when dissected into security and the economics layers. 
Additionally,  this  breakdown  offers  background  into  the 
developments that have been made to the system over the past. 
These particular  layers  include  the  following:  data,  network, 
consensus,  ledger  topography,  the  incentive  contract,  and 
finally,  the application layers [10]. 

  Data  layer:  this  layer  dissects  data  from  different  
applications through transactions and the blocks.  Along 
with  the  blockchain  system,  there  forms  a  series  of 
blocks  to  indicate  that  transactions have  taken  place 
within the network. The blocks work  in a way that when 
one is formed, it allows the one that follows it to be fully  
formed. Metadata that includes the hash of the preceding 
and following  blocks is recorded in detail the timestamp  
of the time the block used to form. 

  Transaction layer:  once a  transaction is  generated and 
verified,  it is moved to the following  nodes. As a result, 
the  process  details  transaction  using  the  blockchain 

technology. The blockchain network involves peers who 
are connected together in the network.   

  Consensus layer: it consists of an algorithm that verifies 
agreement  between  two  unknown  nodes  within  the 
blockchain  network.  It  is  made  up  of  protocols  that 
interpret  public  ledger  based  on  the  format.  The 
protocols identify  consensus among ledgers and  verify 
other blocks that are new in the ledger. 

There are two major  consensus algorithms. These are Proof-
of-Work  (PoW) and Proof-of-Stake  (PoS).  They are described 
below. 

o  Proof-of-work  (PoW):  this  is  designed to  ensure  that 
security protocols  of  the  system  are  not  broken.  Such 
security threats stopped by PoW include the Dis tributed 
Denial of Service (DDOS),  where attackers can cram  the 
system with false requests leading to a denial of service  
for  genuine  users.  The  assumption is  that  any  nodes 
which  are  an  attack  are  less powerful  compared  to  the 
network [9].  Transactions are verified through mining, as 
well  as the generation of new blocks. 

o  Proof-of-Stake  (PoS):  this  technique  is  also  used  in  
realizing  consensus among different nodes in the system. 
The algorithm uses a random selection method to choose 
the creator of the subsequent blocks in the network. The 
other  factor  considered  in  the  consensus is  the  stake, 
which  may  refer  to  wealth  or  age.  For  instance,  the 
algorithm will  give preference to the nodes bearing coins 
with the highest age [11]. The basis of this method is that 
not more than a third of the nodes in the network can be 
compromised.  As  such,  nodes  function  together  in  
coming  to a  consensus regarding the given state of  the 
blockchain network.   

o  The Ledger topography layer: its main function is to store 
data that has been verified  by the consensus layer. The 
need to improve  on this layer  to increase its scalability 
the 
has  been  observed.  Hence, 
development  of 
lowered 
sidechains 
decentralization [12].   

there  has  been 
allow 
that 

 

Incentive layer:  also called  the mining  layer,  it  ensures 
that consensus in the blockchain network exists, and the 
addition of new blocks to the ledger takes place. This is 

 
achieved by the use of incentives that encourage nodes 
to take part in the verification of data. 

  Contract layer:  its core function is  to combine  features 
that can be programmed.  It  uses the computer nodes in 
processing  agreements 
signed  between 
consenting nodes. These contracts are then moved to a 
proof  public  database where  they cannot be  distorted. 
The layer is fundamental in ensuring that third parties do 
not have their way and that only verified transactions are 
bound to occur upon successfully meeting conditions.  

that  are 

  Application layer: it ensures that services reach the end-
user in  the network.  The layer  is more  involved in  the 
application  of  Blockchain  in  various  fields  such  as 
finance.  

Characterization:  Blockchain  technology is  unique  in  a 
number of ways. It supports a distributed transfer and access to 
information. It supports the storage of critical digital informatio n  
in pubic databases that are proof of any interference from third 
parties.  This  digital  information  known  as  blocks  is  shared 
among members of a given chain or network. The transfer of this 
information  is  a  transparent process where  each  member  can 
track  the  progress. There  is  great  room  for  research on  this  
decentralized and also transparent system, which could lead to 
possible applications in diverse fields. 

B.  Edge Computing 

Edge  computing  technology  brings  distributed  devices 
within  a  network  together.  The  technology,  also  called  fog 
computing,  eliminates  the  need  for  a  central  server  by 
decentralizing  the function of  computer request processing. In 
the end, the need to use central services from  the cloud is done 
away with,  thereby increasing the speed of information transfer 
across the network. The speed and high-performance ideas can 
be implemented  in the field, such as the Internet of Things (IoT) 
[13]. 

Architecture:  the  idea  of  edge  computing  is  founded  to 
reduce  processing  speed  and  increase  the  efficiency  of  the 
system,  the  network,  and  the  end  devices.  The  architecture 
consists of three distinct levels:  

  End devise or (frontend): here, the devices that produce 
and consume data are connected within the network to 
interact with each other. Examples  include sensors and 
actuators, among others.   

  Edge  server  or  (near-end):  the  servers  support  the 
connection  between  devices  at  the  edge  of  the 
connection and the other areas of the network. The edge 
server's  key  function  is  to  increase  efficiency  in 
connectivity through caching, improved data protection, 
and processing.   

  Core cloud (far-end):  This is situated at the far end and 
processes requests coming from  the edge server within 
the network.  

Characterization: Computing occurs at the edge, closer to 
the  end  devices.  This  reduces  the  distance  that  digital 
information  has to travel. As a result, speed is increased, and so 
is efficiency.  As a result, the cost of Computing is significantly 

lowered, and the experience of the system user is enhanced. The 
following  are features that make  edge computing technology fit 
for distributed systems.  

 

Intelligence  and  the  control  of  processes: The  edge 
computing  technology  is  decentralized.  As  such,  it 
becomes a great alternative for processing and handling 
large  quantities of  data.  This is  unlike  operating on  a 
central server where system failure could result in a total 
breakdown of the system.   

  Less concentration of  data and assured privacy:  Edge 
computing technology is distributed. As such, it makes 
it more secure and improves its privacy. Besides, it can 
apply  cloudlets  that  facilitate  the  transfer  of  more 
sensitive information within the network. 

  Heterogeneous factor and scalability:  edge computing 
technology solves the concern of scalability. This means 
that its applications can range from  small  scale to large 
scale.  Besides,  it  has  been  found  to  work  best with  
heterogeneous systems. Besides, it s erves devices based 
on their  geographic location. This is  done in  place  of 
having to transfer data to the cloud for  processing and 
computation. 

III.  MOT IVAT IONS 

This  part  describes  the  intricacies  of  merging  both  edge 
computing and blockchain technologies. We start by explaining 
the rationale behind the idea.  

the 

In  order 

to  understand 

is  secure  from 

the  integration  of 

two 
technologies, it is appropriate that we explore  both technologies. 
To  begin  with,  Blockchain  technology  has  a  very  secure 
infrastructure in  place.  Also, it  is distributed or  decentralized, 
which means that there is no need for a central server. Therefore, 
the digital information  of users, transferred within  a distributed 
ledger 
importantly, 
Blockchain  features  that  include  ledger  topology,  incentive 
layer,  and  consensus algorithm  are  key  in  securing data  and 
decentralizing  processes. The  edge  computing,  on  its  part, 
makes  it  possible for  devices  to  operate  at  the  edge  of  the 
computing  network,  therefore  reducing  the  route  of  data 
processing  and  increasing  the  speed  and  efficiency  of  the 
processes.  The  fundamental  benefit  of  edge  computing 
technology is that it has a high level of scalability.   

third  parties.  More 

The  main  purpose  of  integrating  Blockchain  an  edge 
computing  technologies is in  order  to  enhance efficiency  and 
security  within  a  distributed  network.  Additionally,  both 
technologies are designed to work  efficiently  in  large  systems 
that are distributed. As a result, the two systems combine with 
ease. In the subsequent parts of this paper, we explore how both 
edge computing and blockchain technologies can be integrated. 

IV.  SYST EM ARCHIT CUTRE 

A.  The Blockchain network  

The basis of the Blockchain network is to enable the signing 
of agreements among entities while  at the same time  increasing 
the security of the processes. Besides, it is recommended that the 
network  efficiently  function  in  terms  of  computation and  be 
flexible  enough to be easily managed by the implementers.   

Fig. 2. Conceptual design for the system architecture 

As a result, the use of the Ethereum network has been widely 
suggested. The fundamental  reason being that the technology 
allows the configuration of location. Therefore, the manager of 
the  system  can  easily  determine  the  addresses that  can  be 
allowed into the network and which should not be given access. 
In addition to that, Ethereum  technology allows the creation of 
new accounts that can be used in the Internet of Things d evices 
with  ease. In addition, Ethereum  technology also supports the 
signing  of  agreements  between  entities  in  the  network. 
Conclusively,  Ethereum  technology suffices as far  as meeting  
the needs identified for the project is concerned. 

B.  Smart contract 

This smart contract puts all the relevant security measures, 
the  registration of  information,  and  version  management.  As 
such, the system relies on the smart contract by and large. The 
functionalities of the contract are discussed later in this paper.  

Solidity  [14]  is applied in  the process of programming  the 
smart contract. The programming  language used is designed for 
creating  smart  contracts  that  can  effectively  function  on 
Ethereum Virtual  Machine. Besides, the language supports other 
areas  that  include  inheritance,  the  data  structures,  and  the 
mapping.  The compiler  of the language is known as SOLC.  It 
comprises of various development tools that include Remix [15]. 
This is a platform for design, compilation, debugging, emulation 
as well  as real-time  testing of contracts.  

C.  Servers 

Servers refer to blockchain network nodes that are involved 
in mining.  This is to suggest that they complement IoT devices 
in the sense that they do what the devices would otherwise not 
do.  The  nodes have pre-installed  Go  Ethereum  [16]  or  Geth, 
which  enables them  to affect  the  execution  of  the blockchain 
network. The servers have features that are greater than those of 
customers. In developing this project, we use a computer with 
the following features: 8GB  RAM; 1TB; 7th Generation Intel I5 
processor.  

D.  Customers 

The entities in  this architecture include  IoT  devices. They 
rely on Ethereum network servers to complement computational 
capabilities. These entities that are the customers make use of a 
program  that  is  written  in  Java.  The  programming  language 
increases  the  simulation  of  commercial 
IoT  behavior  by 
requesting resources available in the Blockchain network. The 
customers have Go  Ethereum  that is installed but which do not 
have the capabilities of carrying out mining  operations.  

It  is worth noting that there are  some IoT  devices that are 
incapable of using such software. As a result, a proxy  that acts 
as an intermediary  is used. For the sake of this project, only the 
devices with the ability to use the software are considered. They 
use Raspberry Pi  3B+. 

E.  The interface of Smart Contracts  

The application  of  Ethereum  network  technology is under 
the condition that customers at the edge be able to communicate 
with the network. This is possible and is done using the web3j 
interface[17].  Web3j  is  the  reactive  and  also highly  modular 
Java  library.  It  facilitates  the  integration  of  nodes from  the 
Ethereum  network  to the migration  as well  as the execution  of 
the smart cards.    

F.  Contract Migration 

Migrating the contract that is within the blockchain network 
helps in generating a useful code for execution. This migration 
process is  enabled  by  Truffle[18],  which  is  a  free  code  for 
creating  an  environment  that  can  sustain  migration  and  a 
compilation.  This is besides testing the smart cards that  are in 
blockchain networks that use EVM. 

V.  EXPERIMENTAL RESULT S 
There are a number of experiments  that are done to check the 
status  of  these  functionalities:  Version  control  and  the 
downloading  of  specific  data  automatically;  recording  of  an 
activity  by  system  devices;  detection  of  activities  that  are 
malicious  and the resource distribution in the system. 

 
 
Fig. 3. Gas consumption of a single device. 

Fig. 4. Impact of a penalty on Gas reimbursement. 

The  initial  test confirms  the ability  of  a  device  to  gather 
information  from  the blockchain network repository without an 
updated version of the software. To modify the software version, 
the  migration  of  the  contract  is  required  and  can  only  be 
executed when the administrator account verifies.  With that, the 
IoT  devices  can  download  the  latest  updated  version  after 
rejection  by  the  contract,  which  provides  the  URL  for  the 
download. The contract, therefore, is a gatekeeper to ensure that 
access to the  network  is  only  by  the devices which  have  the 
required credentials.   

Blockchain  technology makes a note of all  the transactions 
that take place in the network. Solidity comes in handy to store 
the data from  the activities of the customer from each block in 
the chain. The other kind of data that is stored in the device data 
is  collected from  the regular  transactions. In order  for  you to 
check how the operation of the device has been, you can retrieve 
the activities in the contract to verify  the status of data that is 
stored already.We  used Ether  Gas,  an  economic  token that is 
exchangeable, in measuring the levels of computational efforts 
required  in  the  execution  of  experimental  operations.  The 
rationale  behind  using Gas  is  that  it  will  prevent users with  
malicious  intentions from disrupting the blockchain network by 
using programs that contain endless loop to jam  the system.   

The  cost  of  each  transaction in  the  contract  migration  is 
equivalent to  the amount  of  Gas,  which  equates to  Ethereum 
blockchain's  fuel.  The  customer  or  entity  that sends the  Gas  
determines the amount that can be used and the price of unit gas 
given  in  ether  units.  If  the  gas  limit  given  by  the  entity  is 
surpassed, this leads to the cancellation of  the transaction and 
payment to the minor.    

Fig.  3  illustrates  the  resource  distribution  and  the  Gas  
amount owned by each device in the blockchain network. The 
transactions cost the resources of the customer, which is the sole 
device available  in  the blockchain system. When blocks have 
recovered  the  resources required,  sharing  of  the resources is 
activated in an attempt to recover lost resources.  Figure 4 gives 
the rationale of the system of penalizing the customers and Gas  
reimbursement.  Here  are  transactions illustrated in  the graph, 
showing  the  remitted  payments.  The  blue  consumer  takes  a 
greater  transaction  percentage  than  is  allowed.  The  orange 
consumer, on the other hand, indicates the irregularities and the 
penalties on the blue consumer. Hence, it is at the time resources 
are being distributed that Gas is being reimbursed.   

The blockchain network system is designed to function a bit 
differently  during the initial  stages of operations. The contract 
initializes  the given variable  the moment  it  is executed for  the 
very first time. This is intended to regulate the intervals of blocks 
that are being formed. As a result, this leads to an increase in the 
cost of Gas  of the specific  transaction. Additionally, the initial 
access of the client to a smart contract is registered in the device 
map  with  the addition of customized data. Both Figures 3  and 
figure 4 illustrate instances where the system is stable.   

VI.  CONCLUSION AND FUT URE WORK 

We gather that further research is needed in order to enhance 
the delivery of data in distributed networks. This paper proposes 
a decentralized model developed from  the Blockchain and edge 
computing  technologies. Essentially,  and as  discussed  above, 
edge computing is capable of enhancing the processing of data 
by bringing closer to the user the required computing services. 
This  increases the speed of  data  processing and significantly 
reduces the costs of processing.  This work has demonstrated the 
possibility  of  using  blockchain  technology in  developing  an 
architecture that could be useful in IoT devices and services on 
the network edge, while  at the same time  applying it  within  a 
reasonable  computational  cost.  When  the  strengths  of  the 
blockchain  technology are  used together with  those of  edge 
computing,  the  resultant  technology  solves  the  issues  of 
scalability and the security of the sys tems. As a future work, our 
interest will  be  in  understanding proposed techniques on  the 
frame  base, the essence base, and the live content. In addition to 
that, we would like  our future study to focus on the manual and 
the automated checks for Quality control. We could also look at 
the process of copying from  the third party network. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
This  work  was  supported by  the  Deanship  of  Scientific 
Research  and  Research  Chair  of  Pervasive  and  Mobile 
Computing at King Saud University. 

REFERENCES 

[1]  S.  Zehir and M.  Zehir, “Internet Of T hings In Blockchain Ecosystem 
From  Organizational  And  Business  Management  Perspectives,”  in 
Digital Business Strategies in Blockchain Ecosystems, Springer, 2020, pp. 
47–62. 

[2]  T . Aste, P.  T asca, and  T . Di  Matteo, “Blockchain technologies: The 
foreseeable impact on society and industry,” computer, vol. 50, no. 9, pp. 
18–28, 2017. 

[3]  Z.  Zheng,  S.  Xie,  H.-N.  Dai,  X.  Chen,  and  H.  Wang,  “Blockchain 

 
 
challenges and opportunities: A survey,” International Journal of Web 
and Grid Services, vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 352–375, 2018. 

[4]  M. Vukolić, “T he quest for scalable blockchain fabric: Proof-of-work vs. 
BFT  replication,” in International workshop on open problems in network 
security, 2015, pp. 112–125. 

[5]  M. Al-Rakhami et al., “A lightweight and cost effective edge intelligence 
architecture based on containerization technology,” World Wide Web, pp. 
1–20, 2019. 

[6]  M. Al-Rakhami, M. Alsahli, M. M. Hassan, A. Alamri, A. Guerrieri, and 
G.  Fortino, “Cost efficient edge  intelligence framework using  docker 
containers,” in 2018 IEEE 16th Intl Conf on Dependable, Autonomic and 
Secure  Computing,  16th  Intl  Conf  on  Pervasive  Intelligence  and 
Computing, 4th Intl Conf on Big Data Intelligence and Computing and 
Cyber 
Congress 
(DASC/PiCom/DataCom/CyberSciTech), 2018, pp. 800–807. 

Technology 

Science 

and 

[7]  P. K. Sharma, S. Singh,  Y.-S. Jeong, and J.  H. Park, “Distblocknet: A 
distributed blockchains-based secure sdn architecture for iot networks,” 
IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 55, no. 9, pp. 78–85, 2017. 

[8]  B. Liu, X. L. Yu, S.  Chen, X. Xu, and L. Zhu, “Blockchain based data 
integrity service framework for IoT data,” in 2017 IEEE International 
Conference on Web Services (ICWS), 2017, pp. 468–475. 

[9]  S. Nakamoto, “Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system,” Manubot, 

2019. 

[10]  K.  Croman  et  al.,  “On  scaling  decentralized  blockchains,”  in 
International conference on financial cryptography and data security, 
2016, pp. 106–125. 

[11]  V.  Buterin,  “A  next -generation  smart  contract  and  decentralized 

application platform,” white paper, vol. 3, no. 37, 2014. 

[12]  A.  Back  et  al.,  “Enabling  blockchain  innovations  with  pegged 
opensciencereview. 

sidechains,” 
com/papers/123/enablingblockchain-innovations-with-pegged-
sidechains, vol. 72, 2014. 

http://www. 

URL: 

[13]  I.  Sittón-Candanedo,  R.  S.  Alonso,  J.  M.  Corchado,  S.  Rodríguez-
González, and R. Casado-Vara, “A review of edge computing reference 
architectures  and  a  new  global  edge  proposal,”  Future  Generation 
Computer Systems, vol. 99, pp. 278–294, 2019. 

[14]  C.  BouSaba  and  E.  Anderson, “Degree Validation Application Using 
Solidity and Ethereum Blockchain,” in 2019 SoutheastCon, 2019, pp. 1–
5. 

[15]  T . T antidham and  Y.  N.  Aung,  “Emergency  service for smart home 
system using  Ethereum blockchain: system and architecture,” in 2019 
IEEE 
international  conference  on  pervasive  computing  and 
communications workshops (PerCom Workshops), 2019, pp. 888–893. 

[16]  A.  Bahga  and  V.  K.  Madisetti,  “Blockchain  platform  for  industrial 
internet of things,” Journal of Software Engineering and Applications, 
vol. 9, no. 10, pp. 533–546, 2016. 

[17]  M.  Bartoletti,  S.  Lande,  L.  Pompianu,  and  A.  Bracciali,  “A  general 
framework for blockchain analytics,” in Proceedings of the 1st Workshop 
on Scalable and Resilient Infrastructures for Distributed Ledgers, 2017, 
pp. 1–6. 

[18]  M.  Sabounchi  and  J.  Wei,  “T owards resilient networked microgrids: 
Blockchain-enabled peer-to-peer electricity trading mechanism,” in 2017 
IEEE Conference on Energy Internet and Energy System Integration 
(EI2), 2017, pp. 1–5. 

 
