1
2
0
2

n
u
J

6
1

]

N
G
.
n
i
f
-
q
[

2
v
7
5
1
8
0
.
6
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

CeFi vs. DeFi —
Comparing Centralized to Decentralized Finance

Kaihua Qin∗
kaihua.qin@imperial.ac.uk
Imperial College London

Liyi Zhou∗
liyi.zhou@imperial.ac.uk
Imperial College London

Yaroslav Afonin
yaroslav.afonin20@imperial.ac.uk
Imperial College London

Ludovico Lazzaretti
ludovicolazzaretti@gmail.com
Independent

Arthur Gervais
a.gervais@imperial.ac.uk
Imperial College London

Abstract
To non-experts, the traditional Centralized Finance (CeFi) ecosys-
tem may seem obscure, because users are typically not aware of
the underlying rules or agreements of financial assets and products.
Decentralized Finance (DeFi), however, is making its debut as an
ecosystem claiming to offer transparency and control, which are par-
tially attributable to the underlying integrity-protected blockchain,
as well as currently higher financial asset yields than CeFi. Yet, the
boundaries between CeFi and DeFi may not be always so clear cut.
In this work, we systematically analyze the differences between
CeFi and DeFi, covering legal, economic, security, privacy and mar-
ket manipulation. We provide a structured methodology to differ-
entiate between a CeFi and a DeFi service. Our findings show that
certain DeFi assets (such as USDC or USDT stablecoins) do not
necessarily classify as DeFi assets, and may endanger the economic
security of intertwined DeFi protocols. We conclude this work with
the exploration of possible synergies between CeFi and DeFi.

1 Introduction
Centralized finance was originally invented in ancient Mesopotamia,
several thousand years ago. Since then, humans have used a wide
range of goods and assets as currency (such as cattle, land, or cowrie
shells), precious metals (such as gold, which have enjoyed near-
universal global cultural acceptance as a store of value), and, more
recently, fiat currencies. As such, it has been shown that a currency
can either carry intrinsic value (e.g., land) or be given an imputed
value (fiat currency). All these known attempts to create an everlast-
ing, stable currency and finance system were based on the premise
of a centralized entity, where e.g., a government is backing the
financial value of a currency, with a military force at its command.
History, however, has shown that currencies can also be valued
using an imputed value, that is an assumed value assigned to a
currency, which can be unrelated to its intrinsic value, and, e.g.,
may even be zero.

With the advent of blockchains, and their decentralized, permis-
sionless nature, novel imputed currencies have emerged. One of
the blockchain’s strongest innovations is the transfer and trade of
financial assets without trusted intermediaries [185]. In addition
to this, Decentralized Finance (DeFi), a new sub-field of blockchain,
specializes in advancing financial technologies and services on top
of smart contract enabled ledgers [168]. DeFi supports most of
the products available in CeFi: asset exchanges, loans, leveraged

∗Both authors contributed equally to the paper.

trading, decentralized governance voting, stablecoins. The range
of products is rapidly expanding, and some of the more complex
products, such as options, and derivatives, are rapidly developing
as well.

Contrary to the traditional centralized finance1, DeFi offers three
distinctive features: 1. Transparency. In DeFi, a user can inspect
the precise rules by which financial assets and products operate.
DeFi attempts to avoid private agreements, back-deals and central-
ization, which are significant limiting factors of CeFi transparency.
2. Control. DeFi offers control to its users by enabling the user to
remain the custodian of its assets, i.e., no-one should be able to
censor, move or destroy the users’ assets, without the users’ con-
sent. 3. Accessibility. Anyone with a moderate computer, internet
connection and know-how can create and deploy DeFi products,
while the blockchain and its distributed network of miners then
proceed to effectively operate the DeFi application. Moreover, the
financial gain in DeFi also presents a significant contrast to CeFi.
In the years 2020 and 2021, DeFi offered higher annual percentage
yields (APY) than CeFi: the typical yield of USD in a CeFi bank is
about 0.01% [53], while at the time of writing, DeFi offers consis-
tent rates beyond 8% [12]. On the one hand, DeFi enables mirroring
traditional financial products, on the other hand, it enables novel fi-
nancial primitives, such as flash loans and highly-leveraged trading
products, that yield exciting new security properties.

In this paper, we aim to compare and contrast systematically the
traditional Centralized Finance and Decentralized Finance ecosys-
tems. Firstly, we compare both domains in their technological differ-
ences, such as transaction execution order, throughput, privacy, etc.
Secondly, we dive into their economic disparities, such as the differ-
ences from an interest rate perspective, transaction costs, inflation
and possible monetary policies. Finally, we contrast the legal pecu-
liarities, such as regulations around consumer protections, know
your customer (KYC) and anti-money laundering (AML) techniques.

In summary, our contributions are the following:

CeFi — DeFi Decision Tree We devise a decision tree which en-
ables the classification of a financial service as CeFi, DeFi, or
a hybrid model. We highlight that commonly perceived DeFi

1We prefer to refer to the (currently) traditional finance as CeFi, as centralization is one
of the most distinguishing properties, and the term “traditional” might not withstand
the test of time.

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a system-
atization of DeFi as well as a background on CeFi and applicable
properties for the remainder of the paper. Diving into specific case-
by-case comparisons, Section 3 focusses on the legal similarities,
Section 4 exposes the differences in the financial CeFi and DeFi ser-
vices, while Section 5 exposes economic and market manipulation
analogies. We positively derive possible synergies between DeFi
and CeFi in Section 6 and conclude the paper in Section 7.

2 Background
In this section we provide a primer on finance, blockchains, DeFi
and its distinguishing properties when considering CeFi.

2.1 What is Finance?
Finance is the process that involves the creation, management, and
investment of money [100]. A financial system links those in need
of finance for investment (borrowers) with those who have idle
funds (depositors). Financial systems play an essential role in the
economy since it boosts the economy’s productivity by regulating
the supply of money, by ensuring high utilization of existing money
supply. Without a financial system, each entity would have to fi-
nance themselves, rather than rely on a capital market, and goods
would be bartered on spot markets. Such a system would only be
able to service a very primitive economy. An effective financial sys-
tem provides legally compliant, safe, sound, and efficient services
to market participants. Financial systems typically consist of the
following three components, namely the institution, instrument
and market [182]. On a high level, financial institutions issue, buy,
and sell financial instruments on financial markets according to the
practices and procedures established by laws.
Financial Institutions refer to financial intermediaries, which
provide financial services. Traditional financial services in-
clude banking, securities, insurance, trusts, funds, etc. Corre-
spondingly, traditional financial institutions include banks,
securities companies, insurance companies, trust investment
companies, fund management companies, etc. A comprehen-
sive definition of financial institutions is contained in title
31 of the United States Code, including financial auxiliary
service providers such as travel agencies, postal services, etc.
Financial Instruments refer to monetary assets. A financial in-
strument can be a paper document or virtual contract that
represents legal agreements involving monetary value. All
securities and financial assets (including cryptocurrencies)
fall under the broad category of financial instruments.
Financial Markets refer broadly to any marketplace where the
trading of financial instruments occurs. Financial markets
create liquidity by bringing together sellers and buyers, which
helps market participants to agree on a price.

2.2 Blockchains and DeFi
The inception of Bitcoin [148] in 2009 solved the fundamental
double-spending problem in a decentralized, electronic setting. For
the first time in history, users are able to send and receive online
financial assets, without passing through third parties, such as bro-
kers. This very permissionless property of Bitcoin enables users
to join and leave the system at their will, without the danger of

Figure 1: Decision tree to differentiate among DeFi and CeFi.

assets (such as USDC or USDT stablecoins), are in fact cen-
trally governed, allowing a single entity to censor or even de-
stroy cryptocurrency assets. We find that nearly 44M black-
listed USDT were destroyed by Tether Operations Limited.
We show how this power may lead to significant financial
danger for DeFi protocols incorporating these assets.
DeFi Systematization We provide a comprehensive systematiza-
tion of DeFi, its underlying blockchain architecture and fi-
nancial services, while highlighting DeFi’s ability to perform
atomic composability. We also exposit the various market
mechanisms that can be targeted from traditional CeFi as
well as novel DeFi market manipulations.

Case Studies We separately provide a case-by-case comparison
between CeFi and DeFi focussing on legal, financial services,
economics and market manipulations. We conclude the case
studies by distilling possible synergies among CeFi and DeFi.

CeFi — DeFi Decision Tree Due to a lack of definition when
it comes to DeFi, we have prepared in Figure 1 a possible decision
tree that may help classify a financial product or service as CeFi or
DeFi. In this tree, the first decisive question is whether the financial
assets are held by the user, i.e., whether the user retains control
over its own assets. If the user is not in control, does not retain
custody nor the ability to transact the assets without a financial
intermediary, the service is an instance of CeFi. Otherwise, we
ask the question whether someone has the capacity to unilaterally
censor a transaction execution. Such powerful intermediary points
to the existence of a CeFi intermediary, while the asset settlement
may still occur in a decentralized, DeFi-compliant manner. Finally,
we question whether an entity bears the power to single-handedly
stop, or censor the protocol’s execution. If this is the case, we
would argue that the DeFi protocol is centrally governed. If this last
question can be answered to the negative, the protocol in question
would then qualify as a pure DeFi protocol. To the best of our
knowledge we are the first to differentiate with three simple and
objective questions whether a service is an instance of CeFi or DeFi.
Our methodology also highlights that the boundary between CeFi
and DeFi is not always as clear-cut as from the first glance.

2

Figure 2: High-level systematization of Decentralized Finance. DeFi builds upon a distributed blockchain database, enabling
atomic transaction settlement. Communication with external databases, such as other blockchains, centralized exchanges etc
is possible through non-atomic interactions.

assets being frozen by a controlling instance. Crucially, Bitcoin
introduced the concept of a time-stamping blockchain, which al-
lows to pin-point the precise time and order at which a transaction
should execute. This time-stamping service is critical to the exe-
cution of financial assets and allows to unmistakably derive how
many financial assets which account holds at which point in time.
Bitcoin’s blockchain therefore allows its users to act as the custo-
dian of their own assets, effectively retaining control over their
assets. This empowering property creates new opportunities for
citizens that are being threatened by malicious governments and
irresponsible monetary inflation policies. While Bitcoin supports
more complex transactions, fully featured smart contract enabled
blockchains truly allow to construct flexible financial products on
top of blockchains. With the broader adoption of smart contracts,
the concept of Decentralized Finance truly came to fruition, to the
point of hosting an economy exceeding 100 Billion USD.

DeFi builds upon the permissionless foundations provided by
blockchains. Anyone is free to code and propose a novel financial
contract, which anyone is free to interact with, transfer assets to,
as well as remove assets from, as long as remaining compliant
with the immutable smart contract rules. To provide a higher level
intuition of what DeFi is, and can do, we provide the high-level
systematization of DeFi in Figure 2.

At its core, a DeFi state transition must be necessarily reflected
on its underlying blockchain. For this to happen, a user has to create
a transaction, and broadcast this transaction in the public peer-to-
peer (P2P) blockchain network. Blockchain miners subsequently
pick up the transaction, and depending on the amounts of fees paid
by the transaction, the miners may choose to include the transaction

in the blockchain consensus layer. Once a transaction is included in
the blockchain, the transaction can be considered to be confirmed,
and may be final after a certain time period passed. A confirmed
transaction modifies the blockchain and its corresponding DeFi
state, by e.g., altering the liquidity provided in an exchange. DeFi
builds upon the blockchain’s state machine, whereby various fi-
nancial services are currently being offered. Those services include
lending/borrowing, market-making, stablecoins, pegged tokens,
price oracles, privacy services, flash loans, decentralized portfolio
managers, insurance and many other [50, 61, 102, 147, 158, 173].

2.3 Properties
In this section we outline the most prevalent DeFi properties.

Public Verifiability: While the DeFi application code may not
always be open source, to classify as non-custodial DeFi,
its execution and bytecode must be publicly verifiable on
a blockchain. Hence, contrary to CeFi, any DeFi user can
inspect the DeFi state transitions and verify their orderly
execution. Such transparency provides the unprecedented
ability to convey trust in the emerging DeFi system.
Custody: Contrary to CeFi, DeFi allows its users to control their
assets directly and at any time of the day (there is no need to
wait for the bank to open). With such great power, however,
also comes great responsibility. Technical risks are mostly
absorbed by the users, unless an insurance is underwritten [8,
147]. Therefore, centralized exchanges are very popular for
storing cryptocurrency assets [82], which in turn are largely
equivalent to traditional custodians.

3

Privacy: To the best of our knowledge, DeFi is exclusively present

on non-privacy preserving smart contract enabled blockchains.
As such, these blockchains offer pseudoanonymity, but no
real anonymity [160, 165]. A rich literature corpus has al-
ready shown how blockchain addresses can be clustered and
transaction data can be traced [114, 115, 140, 145, 150, 160,
180]. Given that centralized exchanges with KYC/AML prac-
tices are often the only viable route to convert between fiat
and cryptocurrency assets, these centralized exchanges have
the ability to disclose address ownership to law enforcement.
Atomicity: A blockchain transaction supports sequential actions,
which can combine multiple financial operations. This com-
bination can be enforced to be atomic — which means that
either the transaction executes in its entirety with all its
actions, or fails collectively. While this programmable atom-
icity property is to our knowledge mostly absent from CeFi,
(likely costly and slow) legal agreements could enforce atom-
icity in CeFi as well.

Execution Order Malleability: Through a P2P network, users
on permissionless blockchains typically share publicly the
transactions that are aimed to be executed. Because of the
lack of a persistent centralized entity ordering transaction
execution, peers can perform transaction fee bidding con-
tests to steer the transaction execution order. Such order
malleability was shown to result in various market manipu-
lation strategies [96, 158, 189, 191], which are widely used
on blockchains nowadays [157]. In CeFi, regulatory bodies
impose strict rules on financial institutions and services as
in how transaction ordering must be enforced [60]. In CeFi
this is possible due to the centralized nature of the financial
intermediaries.

Transaction Costs: Transaction fees in DeFi and blockchains in
general are essential for the prevention of spam. In CeFi,
however, financial institutions can opt to offer transaction
services at no cost (or are mandated by governments to offer
certain services for free [177]) because of the ability to rely
on KYC/AML verifications of their clients.

Non-stop Market Hours: It is rare for CeFi markets to operate
without downtime. For example, the New York Stock Ex-
change and the Nasdaq Stock Exchange are the two major
trading venues in the United States, and their business hours
are Monday to Friday from 9:30 a.m. to 4 p.m. Eastern Time.
Due to the non-stop nature of blockchains, most if not all
DeFi markets are open 24/7. As a result, DeFi does not have
pre- or post-market trading compared to CeFi whereby liq-
uidity on a range of products is typically thin during these pe-
riods. Furthermore, system outages at CeFi stock exchanges
and CeFi cryptocurrency exchanges have been known to
occur due to numbers of users attempting to access the ex-
changes during times of volatility such as the GameStop
short squeeze event, not to mention the intervention by bro-
kerage firms to restrict their respective customer’s purchase
and sale of certain equity products due to liquidity and sol-
vency concerns [41, 44].

Anonymous Development and Deployment: Many DeFi projects

are developed and maintained by anonymous teams2, even
the Bitcoin creator remains to date anonymous. Once de-
ployed, the miners implicitly operate the DeFi smart con-
tracts. Anonymous DeFi projects can function without a
front-end, requiring users to interact with the smart contract
directly. Alternatively, the front-end website can be served
through a distributed storage service, such as IPFS.

3 Case by Case — Legal
In the following we focus on the legal aspects of CeFi and DeFi.

3.1 On-boarding and Continuous Compliance
When opening an account with a financial institution in CeFi, in
most countries, it means that the user needs to visit a nearby branch,
or online portal and follow the on-boarding steps. CeFi heavily re-
lies on KYC verifications, which are required by regulations [159].
KYC typically involves the verification of the identity, through an
ID, passport or a driver’s license. Moreover, the user is usually re-
quired to provide a proof of address or residency. Depending on
local regulations, and the user’s intent, the user may also be re-
quired to answer questionnaires to clarify its financial background
(i.e., whether the user is knowledgeable about the financial risks
of different asset classes). Finally, depending on the user’s intent,
the financial institution may also require a proof of accredited in-
vestor, for example showing that the user’s net worth exceed the
respective jurisdiction’s threshold to admit them for accessing cer-
tain sophisticated services, or requesting formal classification as a
non-retail participant which entails losing their rights to complain
to the Financial Ombudsman (e.g. in the UK) or other financial
regulator [36]. Depending on the user’s background, intentions and
the financial institution, this KYC process may take from a few
hours to several weeks. As such, compliance checks are especially
challenging in a worldwide setting, with many different passport
formats and qualities. Therefore, dedicated companies are nowa-
days offering on-boarding services [25]. While KYC is certainly
very helpful in combating illegal activities, compliance checks sig-
nificantly increase the bureaucratic overhead and associated costs
when offering financial services in CeFi.

Besides KYC, AML verifications in CeFi are typically an ongoing
effort to verify the source, destination and purpose of asset trans-
missions by financial institutions [146, 170]. AML’s purpose is to
combat money laundering, as in to differentiate between benign
and malicious sources of funds and, in most jurisdictions, a senior
official at the financial institution is required to act as the Money
Laundering Reporting Officer or similar nominated role [36]. With
the advent of DeFi, and blockchain transactions in general, CeFi
financial institutions are known to thoroughly investigate funds
with a DeFi provenance [14]. Yet, it is technically much simpler to
trace DeFi funds than CeFi assets due to the open and transparent
nature of blockchains. Therefore, we expect CeFi institutions to
further accept DeFi assets, for which a user is able to justify the
source of funds. Note that some CeFi institutions simply avoid ac-
cepting DeFi or blockchains assets due to the increased compliance

2Such as Harvest Finance on Ethereum and Pancakeswap on Binance Smart Chain.

4

overhead and costs which are at times (depending on jurisdictions)
onerous and costly for traditional CeFi participants.

Because DeFi assets and transactions are typically traceable
through investigating the publicly accessible blockchain, KYC/AML-
enabled CeFi exchanges, which provide fiat and cryptocurrency
assets trading pairs, can offer law enforcement helpful identity in-
formation in combating money laundering [2]. However, if a user
solely operates within DeFi, without ever crossing the boundary
into CeFi, it is technically possible to entirely avoid KYC. Moving
non-KYC’d assets to CeFi, may however prove to be challenging
from a compliance perspective.

Insight 1: Linking DeFi assets from CeFi

The on-boarding process in DeFi typically requires a CeFi
intermediary, and hence discloses the blockchain addresses
of the respective users. DeFi’s transparency would then
allow to trace the coins provenance.

3.2 Asset Fungibility in CeFi and DeFi
The Financial Action Task Force (FATF) is an intergovernmental
organization with the aim to develop policies to combat money
laundering and the financing of terrorism (CFT) [23]. The FATF
recommendations are increasingly being accepted by major juris-
dictions, also affecting DeFi. For instance, the FATF introduced
terms such as virtual asset service provider (VASP), and the travel
rule. VASPs are e.g., entities which hold assets on behalf of users,
such as custodians. However, as of now, it is unclear whether an
individual who deploys a DeFi protocol would be classified as a
VASP [55]. The FATF rules may render a software engineer liable
for developing a DeFi application, even if this developer does not
retain any control over the deployed application, nor is involved in
the launch or post-launch activities [24]. The travel rule requires
financial institutions (in particular VASPs) to notify the receiving
financial institutions about a cryptocurrency transactions along
with its identifying information [1, 19, 39].

Censoring (Temporarily) Transactions In Figure 1 we pro-
vide a decision tree on how to differentiate between CeFi and DeFi
services, whereas this tree is substantially influenced by the legal
peculiarities at stake. One critical differentiation therein is whether
someone has the option to censor a transaction, or an entire proto-
col execution. Regulators, e.g., in Switzerland, are known to impose
AML rules on non-custodial providers which have the ability to in-
tervene, i.e., censor, a transaction [48]. In practice, there may appear
many services capable of first temporarily censoring transactions,
as well as services that may indefinitely block the execution of a
particular transaction.

Miners in Bitcoin for instance, are certainly empowered to not
include a transaction in the blockchain, and hence have the ability
to temporarily censor a transaction execution. In Lightning [156]
for instance, nodes may simply refuse to provide service for a
particular transaction, forcing the user to either chose another
off-chain payment path, or return to the on-chain layer through a
regular Bitcoin transaction. Alternative off-chain technologies, such
as commit-chains, which are possibly operating a single centralized,

5

1

2
3
4

5
6
7
8
9

10
11
12
13

14
15
16
17
18
19

function transfer ( address _to , uint _value ) public

whenNotPaused {

require (! isBlackListed [ msg . sender ]) ;
if ( deprecated ) {

return UpgradedStandardToken ( upgradedAddress ).
transferByLegacy ( msg . sender , _to , _value ) ;

} else {

return super . transfer ( _to , _value );

}

}
function addBlackList ( address _evilUser ) public

onlyOwner {

isBlackListed [ _evilUser ] = true ;
AddedBlackList ( _evilUser );

}
function destroyBlackFunds ( address _blackListedUser )

public onlyOwner {

require ( isBlackListed [ _blackListedUser ]) ;
uint dirtyFunds = balanceOf ( _blackListedUser );
balances [ _blackListedUser ] = 0;
_totalSupply -= dirtyFunds ;
DestroyedBlackFunds ( _blackListedUser , dirtyFunds );

}

Listing 1: USDT code blacklist functionality.

but non-custodial server, may have the ability to censor transactions,
and may hence also require to meet KYC/AML requirements.

Insight 2: Censoring transactions and KYC/AML requirements
If an entity is able to single-handedly censor or intervene
in a financial transaction, this entity may become liable to
KYC/AML/CFT requirements, even if the entity is not an
asset custodian.

Blacklists, Fungibility and the Destruction Assets Once a
financial service provider is subject to KYC/AML requirements, the
financial enforcement authorities of the respective legislation may
request and require the ability to freeze and confiscate financial
assets. This requirement, however, fundamentally contradicts with
the non-custodial property and vision, on which Bitcoin and its
many permissionless follow-up variants are built upon.

For instance, the stablecoins USDT and USDC have a built-in
smart contract functionality to add specific blockchain addresses
on a blacklist (cf. Listing 1). Once a blockchain address is added
to this blacklist, this address cannot send USDT or USDC coins or
tokens any longer (while USDT can still be received). Moreover, the
company behind USDT retains the capability to entirely zero the
balance of a blacklisted address. While we have not found a public
statement, we believe that the blacklist functionality was imple-
mented due to a regulatory requirement. By collecting the entirety
of the Ethereum blockchain events since USDT’s and USDC’s in-
ception, we observe that 449 accounts are blacklisted by the USDT
smart contract (8 of these accounts were removed from the black-
list) at the time of writing. Alarmingly, a total of over 43.97M USDT
were destroyed. The USDC contract features 8 blacklisted accounts.
We find no overlap between the USDT and USDC blacklist.

DeFi “Bank Run” The ability to blacklist, or even destroy cryp-
tocurrency assets by a central body certainly contradicts DeFi’s
non-custodial vision. Technically, such feature moreover endan-
gers the intertwined DeFi ecosystem as we show in the following.

DeFi is heavily reliant on liquidity pools which are governed by
smart contracts accepting a variety of different tokens. A user that
deposits tokens in a liquidity pool, receives in return a liquidity
provider (LP) token, which accounts for the user’s share in the pool.
Exchanges as well as lending platforms, such as Aave [61] and
Curve [13], advertise various pools that contain USDT tokens. If
the company behind USDT would choose to block the address of
the smart contract liquidity pool containing USDT, all users of such
pools are affected, irrespective of whether their USDT are benign
or illicit assets. An adversary with illicit USDT would moreover
be incentivised to deposit its illegally acquired USDT within such
liquidity pools, as blacklisting the adversary’s blockchain addresses
wouldn’t yield any effects thereafter.

If a Curve liquidity pool containing USDT is blacklisted by the
USDT emitter, all users of this pool would exit the pools through
the other (fungible) pool assets. To that end, the user will return to
the smart contract its LP tokens, and demand the non-blacklisted
assets. Contrary to a bank run in CeFi, the smart contract will
not seize operation, but provide the user a possibly significantly
worse exchange rate for the LP tokens. That is, because the pricing
formula of liquidity pools typically penalizes users that move the
pool away from its assets equilibrium. Worryingly, such a DeFi
“bank run” would cause in particular losses to those that act last.

Insight 3: “Bank Run” in DeFi

If an entity can single-handedly blacklist, censor, or destroy
specific cryptocurrency assets, this asset poses a danger to
smart contracts relying on its fungible property, and can
trigger a DeFi “bank run”. Contrary to a CeFi bank run,
a DeFi bank run will return assets to the user, however,
at a much worse exchange rate. Smart contract liquidity
pools are currently not adept to fine-grained AML that
CeFi relies upon.

4 Case by Case — Services
In the following we compare objectively various financial services
and highlight how DeFi and CeFi differ respectively. We outline the
service architecture of CeFi and DeFi in Figure 3. Notably, oracles
and stablecoins (specifically, stablecoins with the reserve of pegged
asset mechanism) interconnect CeFi and DeFi.

DeFi protocols frequently rely on CeFi data to function. Stable-
coins, for example, typically require the USD-to-cryptocurrency
conversion rate to maintain the peg. However, blockchains do not
natively support access to off-chain data. Oracles are a third-party
intermediary service that aims to address this issue by feeding ex-
ternal data (including CeFi data) into DeFi [62, 70, 79, 83, 139, 161,
173, 187, 188]. Due to the high cost of writing data to the chain,
the frequency of an oracle’s updates is typically several orders of
magnitude lower than the frequency of CeFi price changes.

4.1 CeFi vs. DeFi Exchanges
An exchange is a marketplace where financial instruments are
traded. Historically, this can occur on a physical location where
traders meet to conduct business, such as NYSE. In the last decades,
trading has transitioned to centralized electronic exchanges. A

6

Figure 3: High-level service architecture of CeFi and DeFi.

modern electronic exchange typically consists of three components:
(i) a price discovery mechanism, (ii) an algorithmic trade match-
ing engine, and (iii) a trade clearing system. The degree of decen-
tralization of an electronic exchange depends on whether each of
these three components is decentralized. The literature and prac-
titioners community features various exchange designs based on
blockchain architectures (DEX) [117, 178, 184], trusted execution
environments (TEE) [80, 91, 93, 137, 138] and multi-party computa-
tion (MPC) [126, 127] (cf. Table 1).

Exchanges can also be categorized based on the traded asset
pairs. Decentralized, blockchain-based clearing systems, typically
only support cryptocurrency assets, or tokens, and stablecoins rep-
resenting fiat currencies. Contrary to DeFi, in centralized CeFi
exchanges (CEX), there exists standalone custodians, and the ex-
change is segregated from the custodian for safety reasons, with
custodians typically being large banks [107, 131]. CEX can support
the flexible trading of both fiat and cryptocurrencies.

Financial Instrument Listing A CEX usually has specific as-
set listing requirements [149, 155], including the provision of fi-
nancial auditing and earning reports, minimum working capital
statements, etc. However, for centralized cryptocurrency exchanges,
to our knowledge, there exists no binding legal requirement for as-
set listings. Therefore, centralized cryptocurrency exchanges may
accept, or refuse the listing of financial instruments due to sub-
jective or political reasons. One advantage of a DEX is that the
exchange governance may be achieved in a decentralized manner,
such that the listing of assets may be transparent. For instance,
the only requirement for a listing on Uniswap is that the financial
instrument meets the ERC20 standard [20].

High-frequency Trading (HFT) HFT refers to automated trad-
ing strategies that aim to profit from short-term market fluctuations.
Previous research has revealed a variety of CEX HFT strategies and
their economic impact, including arbitrage, news-based trading,
algorithmic market making, etc. [63, 69, 84, 141]. Although DEX
are fundamentally different from CEX in terms of their technical
design, traditional HFT strategies remain similar in DEX [96, 157].
In the following, we focus on one of the most basic HFT strategies,
namely two-point arbitrage, in which a trader purchases a financial
instrument in one market and then sells the same instrument at a
higher price in a different market. Two-point arbitrage eliminates
short-term price discrepancies between two markets, resulting in
an increased market efficiency. Other types of HFT strategies are

CeFiBrokerExchangeCentral BankRegulatorDeFiOracleAutomated Market MakerLending/BorrowingAlgorithmicLeveraged LoanReserve of Pegged AssetStablecoinWalletBankTable 1: Comparison of different types of CeFi and DeFi exchanges.

Exchange Name
Currencies
Governance
Price discovery mechanism
Trade matching engine
Clearing system
Can manipulate transaction order?
Can reject valid transaction?

Centralized (CEX)
NASDAQ [38] Coinbase [5]
Fiat + Crypto
Centralized
Centralized
Centralized
Centralized
Regulated
Regulated

USD
Centralized
Centralized
Centralized
Centralized
Regulated
Regulated

similar to two-point arbitrage in terms of execution, despite being
different in their execution methodologies.

Arbitrage Execution HFT strategies are known to be fiercely
competitive [63, 72, 76, 85, 116]. In the case of a two-point arbitrage
opportunity, the arbitrageur with the fastest execution speed on
both exchanges remains profitable in expectation.

In CEX and hybrid exchanges, arbitrageurs typically interact di-
rectly with a centralized service provider (e.g., the exchange itself)
to obtain the most recent market state to execute their transactions.
Arbitrageurs invest in high performance computing resources and
optimize their source code and hardware to achieve lower laten-
cies [92]. Arbitrageurs are known to even physically relocate servers
closer to the corresponding exchange to further reduce network
layer latency. The recent advent of low-orbit satellite internet ser-
vice [17], was shown to further reduce the global internet latency
by as much as 50% [111], which we therefore expect to be a prime
communication medium for HFT.

Messages in blockchain-based DEX by design propagate on the
public peer-to-peer (P2P) network. Therefore, at the transaction
creation time, it is not known which node, or miner, will execute
the transaction. To gain a competitive advantage, an arbitrageur
must aim to reduce its latency to all major miners and mining pools.
To that end, arbitrageurs can run multiple blockchain nodes in
different physical locations around the world, as well as maximize
the number of connections for each node to decrease transaction
reception latency [106] and transaction broadcast speeds [191].

Arbitrage Risks An arbitrage should ideally execute atomically
to reduce the risks of price fluctuations. In practice, arbitrage on
centralized and hybrid exchanges is unavoidably subject to market
price fluctuations, unless the arbitrageurs are colluding with the
exchanges to guarantee execution atomicity.

Arbitrage between two decentralized exchanges on the same
blockchain can be considered risk-free, when ignoring transaction
fees. This is because traders can use the blockchain atomicity feature
to create a smart contract that executes the arbitrage, and reverts
if the arbitrage does not yield a profit. If, however, an arbitrage
attempt reverts, the trader is still liable to pay the transaction fees.
It should be noted that the atomicity property is only preserved
for arbitrage among different DEX on the same blockchain. If the
arbitrage involves two DEX on different blockchains, the arbitrage
risk can be considered similar to that of a CEX and hybrid exchange.

0x [184]
Crypto
DAO

Hybrid
IDEX [129]
Crypto
Centralized
Centralized Decentralized
Centralized Decentralized
Blockchain
Yes
Yes

Blockchain
Yes
Yes

Decentralized (DEX)
Tesseract [81]
-
Centralized
TEE
TEE
Blockchain
No
No

Uniswap [178]
Crypto
DAO + smart contract
Smart contract
Smart contract
Blockchain
Yes (Miners)
Yes (Miners)

4.2 DeFi vs. CeFi Lending/Borrowing
Lending and borrowing are ubiquitous services in CeFi. Credit, of-
fered by a lender to a borrower, is one of the most common forms
of lending [9]. Credit fundamentally enables a borrower to pur-
chase goods or services while effectively paying later. Once a loan
is granted, the borrower starts to accrue interest at the borrowing
rate that both parties agree on in advance. When the loan is due, the
borrower is required to repay the loan plus the accrued interests.
The lender bears the risk that a borrower may fail to repay a loan on
time (i.e., the borrower defaults on the debt). To mitigate such risk,
a lender, for example, a bank, typically decides whether to grant a
loan to a borrower based on the creditworthiness of this borrower,
or mitigates this risk through taking collateral - shares, assets, or
other forms of recourse to assets with tangible value. Creditwor-
thiness is a measurement or estimate of the repaying capability
of a borrower [10]. It is generally calculated from, for example,
the repayment history and earning income, if it is a personal loan.
In CeFi, both lenders and borrowers can be individuals, public or
private groups, or financial institutions.

On the contrary, in DeFi, the lack of a creditworthiness system
and enforcement tools on defaults leads to the necessity of over-
collateralization in most lending and borrowing protocols (e.g.,
Aave [61], Compound [102]). Over-collateralization means that a
borrower is required to provide collateral that is superior to the
outstanding debts in value. Such systems are also widespread in
CeFi and are known as margin lending or repo-lending [128]. The
most prevalent form of lending and borrowing in DeFi happens in
the so-called lending pools. A lending pool is in essence a smart
contract that orchestrates lender and borrower assets, as well as
other essential actors (e.g., liquidators and price oracles). Typically,
a lender makes cryptocurrencies available for borrowing by de-
positing them into a lending pool. A borrower hence collateralizes
into and borrows from the lending pool. Note that borrowers also
automatically act as lenders when the lending pool lends out the
collateral from borrowers. Assets deposited by users in lending
pools are not protected by traditional CeFi regulations such as bank
deposit protection which protects a banking institution’s customer
deposit account up to a certain threshold of fiat currency.

To maintain the over-collateralization status of all the borrowing
positions, lending pools need to fetch the prices of cryptocurrencies
from price oracles. Once a borrowing position has insufficient col-
lateral to secure its debts, liquidators are allowed to secure this posi-
tion through liquidations. Liquidation is the process of a liquidator
repaying outstanding debts of a position and, in return, receiving

7

the collateral of the position at a discounted price. At the time
of writing, there are two dominant DeFi liquidation mechanisms.
One is the fixed spread liquidation, which can be completed in one
blockchain transaction [61], while the other one is based on auc-
tions that require interactions within multiple transactions [103].
Under-collateralized borrowing still exists in DeFi (e.g., Alpha
Homora [27]), while being implemented in a restricted manner. A
borrower is allowed to borrow assets exceeding the collateral in
value, however, the loan remains in control of the lending pool
and can only be put in restricted usages (normally through the
smart contracts deployed upfront by the lending pool). For example,
the lending pool can deposit the borrowed funds into a profit-
generating platform (e.g., Curve [13]) on behalf of the borrower.

Flash Loans A novel lending mechanism, which only exists
in DeFi, are flash loans [158]. A flash loan is initiated and repaid
within a single, atomic blockchain transaction, in which a borrower
𝐵 performs the following three actions:

(1) 𝐵 requests assets from a flash loan lending pool.
(2) 𝐵 is free to use the borrowed assets arbitrarily.
(3) 𝐵 repays the flash loan plus interests to the lending pool.

The transaction atomicity property (cf. Section 2.3) ensures that, if
the borrower cannot repay the flash loan by the end of the trans-
action, the on-chain state remains unmodified (i.e., as if no flash
loan was granted) [65, 158]. Therefore, although the borrowers do
not provide collateral for the loan, the lenders can be sure, that the
borrowers cannot default on their debt.

Flash loans are widely applied in DeFi arbitrages and liquidations,
as they allow to eliminate the monetary risks of holding upfront
assets [158, 183]. Flash loans, however, also facilitate DeFi attacks
that have caused a total loss of over 100M USD to victims in the
year 2020 alone [15, 28, 33, 158]. Despite the fact that flash loans
are not the root vulnerability of these DeFi attacks, they do give
adversaries instant access to billions of USD, costing only a minor
upfront cost (i.e., the blockchain transaction fees). To our knowledge
such instantaneous loans have no counterpart in CeFi.

Insight 4: Flash loans facilitate DeFi attacks

Flash loans are typically not the cause, but facilitate DeFi
attacks by granting adversaries instant access to billions
of USD of capital. In essence these loans therefore democ-
ratize access to capital, lowering the barriers of entry to a
market which traditionally is exclusive to few in CeFi.

Risk Free Rate of Return The risk-free rate of return is a cru-
cial concept in CeFi, referring to the theoretical rate of return that
an investor expects to earn from a risk-free investment [43]. The
notion is critical to a functioning financial system and underpins
valuation of almost every major financial product, bank deposit,
loans, government/corporate bond, and the valuation of stocks. Al-
though there exists no absolutely risk-free investment opportunity
in practice, the interest rate of some investments with a negligible
risk is commonly considered as the risk-free rate. For instance, U.S.
government bonds are generally used as risk-free rates because it
is unlikely that the U.S. government will default on its debt [58].
It is unclear whether a risk-free investment opportunity exists in

8

DeFi, especially when we consider the various risks imposed by
the underlying smart contracts and blockchain consensus (e.g., po-
tential smart contract program bugs). We, however, observe that
several DeFi protocols may yield revenue in a risk-free manner, if
we only consider the high-level economic designs while ignoring
the risks from the underlying layers3. For example, MakerDAO,
the organization behind the stablecoin DAI (cf. Section 4.3), offers
interests to the investors who deposit DAI into a smart contract at
the so-called DAI saving rate (DSR). DSR is a fixed non-negative
interest rate, which is convertible through a governance process.
Similarly, the interests generated from the aforementioned lending
platforms (e.g., Aave, Compound) are generally considered low-risk.
The lending interest rate is typically determined algorithmically
through the supply and demand of the lending pool, which is hence
more variable than the DAI saving rate. At the time of writing,
MakerDAO offers a DAI saving rate of 0.01%. The estimated an-
nual percentage yield (APY) of DAI on Compound and Aave is
3.18% and 5.65%, respectively. As a comparison, the U.S. 10-year
government bond has a 1.623% yield [51].

4.3 CeFi vs. DeFi Stablecoins
Cryptocurrencies are notoriously known for their price volatility
which appeals to speculators. However, conservative traders may
prefer holding assets that are less volatile. Stablecoins are hence
designed to satisfy such demand and offer better price stability.
The price of a stablecoin is typically pegged to a fiat currency (e.g.,
USD), which is less volatile than most cryptocurrencies. Following
related work [144], we proceed to summarize the dominating DeFi
stablecoin mechanisms.
Reserve of Pegged Asset One method to create a stablecoin is to
collateralize the asset that the stablecoin should be pegged to (e.g.,
USD) in a reserve to back the value of the minted stablecoin. Such
mechanism commonly requires a centralized and trusted authority
to manage the collateralized assets. This authority is permitted
to mint the stablecoin, while any entity is allowed to burn the
stablecoin in exchange for the collateral at the pegged price (e.g.,
burning one unit of USD stablecoin allows to redeem $1). When
the stablecoin price declines below the pegged price, arbitrageurs
are incentivized to purchase the stablecoin to redeem the collateral,
which in return supports the stablecoin price. Conversely, when
the price rises above the peg, more stablecoins are minted and
hence the expanded supply may depreciate its price. In this way,
such mechanism aims to stabilize the minted stablecoin value to
the pegged asset. With an accumulated volume of over 49B USD,
USDT and USDC are the most circulated stablecoins following the
above mechanism. According to our CeFi-DeFi decision tree (cf.
Figure 1), the stablecoins adopting the asset reserve mechanism are
non-custodial. Second, a stablecoin transaction cannot be censored
by a third party. However, given the blacklist functionality (cf.
Section 3), the stablecoin issuing authority can censor the protocol

3In CeFi, the risk free rate of return is typically defined regionally. Local currency
investors use the central bank bond yields of their respective countries to estimate their
individual risk-free rate. For example, an investor based in Brazil whose P&L currency
is BRL will rely on the interest rate of Brazilian government bonds for estimating
premium of their investments over their BRL-denominated risk-free rate. In such
context, we deem a DeFi investment opportunity risk-free, when it is programmatically
guaranteed to offer a positive return in the same invested cryptocurrency.

Figure 4: Prices of USD stablecoins, USDT, USDC, DAI, AMPL, and ESD from January, 2020 to May, 2021. We crawl the price
data from https://www.coingecko.com/.

execution. Therefore, such stablecoins are instances of centrally
governed DeFi. Moreover, the main drawback of this stablecoin
mechanism is the necessity of a trusted authority. The authority’s
ability to blacklist addresses may help with regulatory compliance
(cf. Section 3) but harms the decentralization of DeFi.
Leveraged Loans The mechanism of leveraged loans also relies
on collateral to secure the value of a stablecoin. Instead of collat-
eralizing fiat assets, which demands a centralized authority, the
leveraged loan mechanism accepts cryptocurrencies (e.g., ETH) as
collateral. DAI is the most prominent stablecoin that follows this
mechanism. To mint DAI, a user creates a Collateralized Debt Posi-
tion (CDP) by locking cryptocurrencies into a smart contract. In the
following, we refer to this user as the CDP owner. The CDP owner is
allowed to mint DAI from the CDP, where the minted DAI becomes
the owner’s debt. A CDP is required to be 1.5× over-collateralized,
i.e., the value of the collateral represents at least 150% of the debt.
Otherwise, the CDP would become available for liquidations (cf.
Section 4.2). When compared to the asset reserve mechanism, the
over-collateralization design makes the leveraged loan mechanism
less capital efficient. For instance, a collateral of 150B USD can mint
at most 100B USD of leveraged loan stablecoins.
Algorithmic Supply Adjustments Instead of collateralizing fiat
or other cryptocurrencies, an algorithmic stablecoin attempts to
maintain the stablecoin price autonomously. Specifically, the algo-
rithmic supply adjustment mechanism adjusts the supply of the
stablecoin in response to price fluctuations. The main idea of an
algorithmic stablecoin is that the adjustment of the supply can
effectively drive the price of the stablecoin towards the desired
target. Typically, the adjustment algorithm is encoded within a

smart contract. Therefore, the supply adjustment can be processed
autonomously without a central entity.

In Figure 4, we present the prices of five stablecoins. USDC
and USDT are reserve-based, while DAI relies on leveraged loans.
AMPL and ESD, are algorithmic stablecoins. We find that the re-
serve mechanism appears the most stable among the dominating
stablecoin solutions, with a price fluctuation range between $0.99
and $1.01 since January 2020. DAI is less stable than USDC and
USDT, but shows increasing stability since January 2021. To our
surprise, the mechanisms of algorithmic supply adjustments appear
ineffective in stabilizing the price. AMPL fluctuates between $0.50
and $3.83. ESD presents a downtrend deviating from the $1 target
price, closing at $0.1 at the time of writing.

Although the term stablecoin emerged in DeFi, CeFi aims for
decades to stabilize currency prices [37]. The Hong Kong dollar
(HKD), for example, is pegged to the US dollar [57], permitted to be
traded at a tight interval between 7.75 and 7.85 USD [59]. Within
this price range, the Hong Kong Monetary Authority intervenes
through buying or selling the currency.

Insight 5: Algorithmic stablecoins are less stable in practice
Given empirical data, we observe that stablecoins based on
the mechanism of algorithmic supply adjustments offer less
stability than reserve and loan based stablecoin models.

5 Case by Case — Economics & Manipulation
Next we dive into the economic and market manipulation aspects
of CeFi and DeFi.

9

$0.99$1.00$1.01USDT$0.99$1.00USDC$1.00$1.05Price(USD)DAI$1.00$2.00$3.00AMPL2020-012020-032020-052020-072020-092020-112021-012021-032021-05YYYY-MM$1.00$5.00$9.00$13.00ESD5.1 CeFi vs. DeFi Inflation
Inflation is defined as the devaluation of an existing currency supply,
through the addition of more supply [120]. While inflation is the loss
of purchasing power of a currency, the relationship between supply
and inflation may not always manifest itself directly — sometimes
money supply increases, but does not cause inflation [86].

In CeFi, central banks retain the authority to create their re-
spective fiat currency, and inflation is typically measured against
the value of “representative basket of consumer goods”, or a con-
sumer price index (CPI) [119]. The official policy goal of central
banks in developed markets is to keep the inflation at or around
2.0% [75, 152]. Inflation in developed countries in recent decades
has rarely diverged from central bank official targets. While there
have been several notable instances of high inflation or hyperinfla-
tion historically (Germany 1923, USA in 1970s, certain emerging
market countries like Argentina, Venezuela, Zimbabwe), in recent
decades official inflation figures in the USA, Europe, and other
major economies have rarely been above 3.0%.

However, despite the positive picture painted by central banks,
many market participants doubt whether the basket of consumer
goods is representative. Various social group baskets can vary dra-
matically, making the 2.0% headline inflation rate irrelevant in their
context. In the USA, in recent decades the richest 1% of the popu-
lation have seen their incomes rise at a much faster pace than the
bottom 50%, who have seen little inflation-adjusted increase. For
example, as of mid-April 2021, the year-to-date increase in price
of Lumber is circa 40% [176], the main cost component in house
construction, while the CPI in the USA is at 2.6% [154]. This, and
similar increases in prices of many goods, have cast doubts whether
the official inflation figures really measure inflation accurately.

Central banks have learned to print money without causing
broad CPI-inflation - rather than giving money directly to con-
sumers like in 1920s Germany, money is now effectively distributed
to asset holders — so they can purchase more risky assets, driving
their prices up. This, in turn, supports the economy by ensuring peo-
ple with capital continue investing and creating jobs. The flipside
is that people who do not own assets, see the value of their savings
inflated away. Bitcoin’s fixed supply protects from the risk of the
currency being printed into zero (like Venezuela or Zimbabwe did),
however, whether having a fixed supply is advantageous is not yet
clear. Fiat currencies also used to have a fixed supply system similar
to that of Bitcoin - until 1974 when the gold standard was scrapped,
and each dollar no longer had to be backed by a specific quantity
of gold [97]. The standard was scrapped because it constrained
countries’ ability to support economic activity.

Some cryptocurrencies have variable asset supply. Bitcoin even-
tually is likely to run into the issue where supply has a hard cap
— while the economic activity it has to support does not have a
cap — leading to a shortage of currency. Related work suggests
that Bitcoin, or blockchains in general, without a block reward, and
hence without inflation, might be prone to security instabilities [87].
Whether Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies end up suffering from
high income inequality from the inflation built into the fiat system
is yet to be seen — there is no conclusive track record as of yet to
suggest cryptocurrencies solve this problem. Many people have
come to see cryptocurrencies as a way to liberate themselves from

Figure 5: Example of money laundering with a DeFi attack.

the influence of central banks [169]. Ethereum, however, bears an
inflation rate of about 4%. This metric is most directly comparable
to measures of monetary mass, such as M1 [101], which, by contrast,
increased by circa 250 percent in 2020, due to money printing by
the Federal Reserve.

5.2 Mixer and DeFi Money Laundering
To our knowledge, for blockchains without native privacy preserv-
ing functionality, address linkability (i.e., the process of linking 𝑛
blockchain addresses to the same entity) can only be broken with
a mixing service. A mixer allows users to shuffle their coins with
the coins of other users [68, 104, 118, 142, 166]. This may appear
similar to CeFi’s traditional money laundering techniques, in which
the money launderer mixes tainted, or “dirty”, and “clean” money.
The literature contains a number of proposals for mixer services
that can be either centralized or governed by smart contracts. Be-
cause of DeFi’s traceability, the source and amounts of both benign
and illicit assets, as well as the anonymity set sizes, the source
code and the mixing cost, are all public. Ironically, from a technical
standpoint, this transparency greatly reduces the risk of the money
launderer. Worryingly, mixer services have begun to reward their
users for participation, providing an economic reason for DeFi users
to provide untainted assets to help money laundering [49, 132].

5.3 CeFi vs. DeFi Security and Privacy
DeFi attacks can be broadly classified into five attack types: (i) net-
work layer; (ii) consensus layer; (iii) financial institution; (iv) smart
contract code; and (v) DeFi protocol and composability attacks. At-
tacks of type (iii) and (iv) use a mixer to perform money laundering
(cf. Figure 5). In the following sections, we outline each attack type.

Network Layer Attacks Previous research has revealed how
an adversary can partition the blockchain P2P network without
monopolizing the victim’s connections. This allows an adversary
to control the victim node’s view of the blockchain activity. Eclipse
attacks can occur at the infrastructure layer (such as BGP hijack-
ing [73, 167]) or during blockchain message propagation [106].
Other types of common network attacks, such as DDoS [163],
MitM[98], and wireless network attacks [151], are also possible in
DeFi. An attacker could, for example, use the evil twin attack [130]
to impersonate a wireless access point to trick users into connecting
to bogus DeFi smart contracts. For further information, we refer
the interested reader to previous literature [162].

Consensus Layer Attacks Consensus attacks such as double
spending [124, 125] and selfish mining [99, 108, 164] endanger the
stability and integrity of the DeFi settlement layer. For more details,
we refer the reader to extensive previous studies [105, 134, 135].

10

CeFiDeFiFinancial InstitutionwithdrawwithdrawCryptocurrency MixerproﬁtDeFi ProtocolsattackdepositTainted WallettransferBenign WalletdeposittransferdepositwithdrawFinancial Institution Attacks Ideally and to maintain its de-
centralized vision (cf. Figure 1), DeFi should solely rely on smart
contracts ignoring third party intermediaries. However, in practice,
DeFi is still heavily reliant on centralized intermediaries such as wal-
let providers (MetaMask [34], Coinbase wallet [7], etc.), blockchain
API providers (Infura [30]), mining pools (SparkPool [47], Ether-
mine [22], etc.) and oracles [173]. Aside the risks of downtime and
code vulnerabilities, it is important to note that these intermediaries
are typically run by physical businesses that may be forced to close
due to local laws and regulations [3].

Smart Contract Code Attacks Smart contract vulnerabilities
in DeFi have already caused at least 128M USD of losses to users (cf.
Table 3) [16, 29, 40, 42, 52]. Common vulnerability patterns include
integer overflow, reentrancy, timestamp dependencies, etc [74]. For
example, in April 2020, the lending platform “Lendf.Me" suffered a
re-entry attack, resulting in the loss of 25M USD in funds [29]. To
our knowledge, the most significant smart contract code vulnera-
bility resulted in an adversarial profit of 57M USD on the “Uranium
Finance" platform in April 2021 [52].

DeFi Protocol and Composability Attacks DeFi’s atomic com-

posability can result in creative economic attacks (cf. Table 3). To
our knowledge, “Value DeFi” is the target of the most severe compos-
ability attack on Ethereum, in which the adversary manipulated the
price oracle in November 2020 to extract 740M USD in profit [54].
“PancakeBunny” suffered the to date most severe composability
attack on the Binance Smart Chain in May 2020, resulting in a total
loss of 45M USD [46].

DeFi Privacy While CeFi institutions are professionals at pre-
serving their customer’s privacy, DeFi’s transparency discloses ex-
tensive information about the users’ assets and transactions. There-
fore, multiple corporations offer services to governmental bodies,
and law enforcement to trace and analyze blockchain-related finan-
cial transactions [21, 88]. Achieving privacy in DeFi hence appears
as one of the most challenging future research directions. Related
work goes as far as claiming an impossibility result on automated
market makers [71].

5.4 CeFi vs. DeFi Market Manipulation
Market manipulation describes the act of intentional or willful con-
duct to deceive or defraud investors by controlling the price of
financial instruments [45]. Market manipulation harms market fair-
ness and honest traders’ rights and interests, regardless of whether
the maleficent actor is the exchange or an internal/external trader.

Figure 6: Classification of market manipulation techniques.

Market manipulations can be broadly classified into two cat-
egories based on whether they involve an exchange, namely (a)
external manipulation and (b) exchange-based manipulation (cf.

Figure 6). Previous research has further classified market manipu-
lations into four sub-categories [64, 171]: (i) Action-based, where
the manipulator alters the actual or perceived value of the finan-
cial instrument without trading activities; (ii) Information-based
manipulation, through the dissemination of false information or
rumors. (iii) Trade-based manipulation, where a manipulator buys
or sells financial instruments in a predetermined manner; and (iv)
Order-based manipulation, where a manipulator cancels the placed
orders before their execution.

It appears that action- and information-based manipulations are
less reliant on the technical details of the underlying financial sys-
tem. Therefore, external manipulation techniques for CeFi and DeFi
are similar. However, exchange-based market manipulations, espe-
cially order-based HFT manipulations, rely heavily on the technical
architecture. In Table 2, we present a taxonomy for DeFi related ma-
nipulation techniques. We omitted CeFi manipulation techniques
that are not viable in DeFi4.

MEV and Market Manipulation as a Service Miner Extractable

Value (MEV) can be captured by miners [96], as well as non-mining
traders. When miners create a block, they have the unilateral power
to momentarily decide what transactions to include, in what order.
As a result, MEV extraction is frequently associated with trade-
based market manipulation techniques like front-running [96],
back-running [157], and sandwich attacks [191]. Worryingly, re-
lated work found that miners collaborate with centralized interme-
diaries to sell market manipulation as a service (MMaas) [35, 157].
Although MMaas lacks underlying principles or concepts of fair-
ness and social benefits in general [122], at the time of writing this
paper, there is no regulation prohibiting MEV extraction or market
manipulations in DeFi.

Insight 6: DeFi Market Manipulations and the Wild Wild West
At the time of writing, world-wide regulations mostly do
not account for the possible market manipulations feasible
in DeFi, such as front-, back-running and sandwich attacks.
As such, it appears that DeFi regulations remain at a state
where CeFi was before the securities act of the year 1933.

6 Synergies between CeFi and DeFi
DeFi is still in its infancy. Due to the blockchain settlement layer,
DeFi maintains unique properties to CeFi, such as non-custody,
transparency, and decentralization. However, the blockchain also
limits DeFi’s transaction throughput, transaction confirmation la-
tency, and privacy. Ultimately, DeFi and CeFi share the same goal:
to provide customers with high-quality financial products and ser-
vices, and to power the entire economy. Summarizing, DeFi and
CeFi each have their own set of advantages and disadvantages, and
we cannot find a trivial way to combine the best of both systems.
Therefore, we believe that these two distinct but intertwined finan-
cial systems will coexist and improve each other. In the following
we present selected synergy opportunities.

4benchmark manipulation, wash sales, scalping, layering etc. [112, 113, 121, 136, 171]

11

Market Manipulation Techniques(a) External Manipulation(b) Exchange Based Manipulation(i) Action Based(ii) Information Based(iii) Trade Based(iv) Order BasedTable 2: Taxonomy of market manipulation techniques. CeFi manipulation techniques that are not viable in DeFi are omitted.

Category
Action-

Info-

Trade-

Order-

Technique
Ponzi scheme
Honeypot
Fraudulent financial statements
Pump and dump/Short and distort
Wash trade/Matched orders/Painting the tape
Insider trading
Cornering
Capping
Marking the close
Front-/back-running, sandwich
Clogging/ Jamming
Churning
Ramping/Advancing the bid/ Reducing the ask
Spoofing/Pinging
Quote stuffing

Differences compared with CeFi
Payout rules are clearly written in smart contracts, which cannot be changed once deployed.
A new type of market manipulation in DeFi that combine security issues with scams.
On-chain data is transparent, but intermediaries may reveal fraudulent financial statements.
-
CeFi exchanges can fabricate volume, while DeFi wash traders must pay transaction fees.
-
-
-
DeFi does not have market opening or closing times.
Blockchain transaction orders are enforced by miners, which can be bribed.
Clogging on the blockchain was used to win gambling applications.
A centrally governed DeFi application may misuse users’ assets to generate excessive fees.
In DeFi, transaction fees may deter an adversary from these practices.
These attacks are nearly free of cost on the DeFi network layer.
Related works observed quote stuffing through back-run flooding.

References
[77, 78, 89, 90, 143]
[175]
[109]
[110, 123, 133, 186]
[66, 95, 158, 181]
[67, 179]
-
-
-
[96, 157, 189, 191]
[157]
-
-
[172]
[190]

6.1 Bridges
Financial institutions are bridging DeFi and CeFi to improve their ef-
ficiency. Oracles such as Chainlink transfer CeFi data to DeFi [173];
Synthetix allows users to trade CeFi financial instrument as deriva-
tives on DeFi [174]; and the Grayscale Bitcoin Trust enables users
to trade Bitcoin on CeFi over-the-counter market (OTCQX) [26].

6.2 DeFi: An Innovative Addition to CeFi
We observe that DeFi protocols not only copy fundamental CeFi
services, but optimize them to the unique blockchain properties.
For example, a new exchange mechanism called Automated Mar-
ket Maker (AMM) [191] replaces in DeFi the prevalent order-book
model of CeFi. An AMM is a smart contract that takes assets from
liquidity providers. Traders hence trade against the AMM smart
contract instead of interacting with liquidity providers directly. The
AMM design requires fewer interactions from the market makers
than a CeFi order book, which reduces transaction costs. We no-
tice that CeFi is absorbing such innovations in turn. Centralized
exchanges (e.g., Binance) start to provide market making services
following an AMM model [56]. Certain CeFi markets, such as FX
have employed a blend of the AMM model with human interven-
tion, are well-positioned to enter the market-making business in
DeFi, while incumbent DeFi AMM providers may adopt some of
the CeFi techniques to reduce their customers’ exposure to arbi-
trageurs [153]. We anticipate more innovative DeFi protocols, e.g.,
liquidity mining and lending pools with algorithmic interest rates,
will be ported over to CeFi in the near future.

6.3 DeFi Collapse: A Lesson for CeFi?
On the 12th of March, 2020, the cryptocurrency market collapsed,
with the ETH price declining over 30% within 24 hours [18]. On
the 19th of May, 2021, the ETH price again dropped by more than
40% [11]. CeFi markets experienced a similar degree of distress
(although with less extreme daily movements), with the Dow Jones
Industrial Average declining by 9.99%, with the day earning the
name of “Black Thursday”.

Both CeFi and DeFi experienced severe stress throughout these
crashes. Centralized exchange services were interrupted due to an
unprecedented number of trading activities (e.g., Coinbase halted
trading for over one hour [6]) and exchanges were temporarily

closed down after hitting pre-determined daily movement lim-
its [94]. Similarly, on Ethereum, the gas price increased sharply,
to the point that a regular ETH transfer costed over one hundred
USD. The resulting network congestion delayed the confirmation of
users’ transactions and caused the failure of MakerDAO liquidation
bots [32] in February 2020. Unlike CeFi, DeFi services are technically
always available because of the distributive nature of blockchains.
However, in the aforementioned extreme cases, the DeFi systems
become prohibitively expensive for most users. Since then, more
attention was given to the robustness of DeFi protocols [31].

Although CeFi and DeFi have different settlement mechanisms
and user behaviors, DeFi’s stress tests may be invaluable lessons for
CeFi. While CeFi relies on circuit-breakers to ease excessive asset
volatility [4] (markets halt trading upon volatility beyond custom
thresholds), DeFi has to date apparently well coped without such
interruptions and may help CeFi to better understand its limits.

Who’s responsible? The presence of a centralized counter-
party in CeFi, puts an implicit degree of responsibility on the central
counterparty to maintain an orderly marketplace. Although not
specifically codified, there is an implicit market expectation, built
over the recent years, that the central bank will step at in times of
severe crashes, either through verbal support, or through increasing
the supply of money (lowering the central bank interest rates or
printing more money through repurchases of government debt)
to support asset prices. For example, in March 2020, the Federal
Reserve drastically expanded money supply, slashed interest rates
to near-zero, prompting a rapid recovery in equity prices. By con-
trast, in DeFi, there is no such central counterparty responsible for
supporting asset prices in times of crises, and the closest equivalent
to the CeFi mechanism are “show of confidence” measured by cryp-
tocurrency influencers — founders of major cryptocurrencies, social
media influencers, exchanges, and well-regarded adopters. Market
crashes can be extremely destructive to the economic well-being
of a society, and through history of CeFi market participants have
sought to reduce the incidence of crashes. DeFi, so far, has gone
through fewer crashes, and is likely to need to adopt some of the
CeFi crash-prevention features as it gains mainstream adoption.

12

Insight 7: CeFi and DeFi

We expect CeFi and DeFi to co-exist, to complement, to
strengthen and to learn from each others’ experiences,
mistakes and innovations. CeFi and DeFi are already today
tightly intertwined (e.g., through centrally controllable
stablecoins) and have jointly allowed the onboarding of a
wider (e.g., technical) user demographic.

7 Conclusion
Under the above scrutiny, CeFi and DeFi may not appear as different
as one might expect. The most prevalent distinguishing features are
(i) who controls the assets, (ii) how transparent and accountable
is the system, and (iii) what privacy protections exist for the end
user? In this work, we provide a first taxonomy to objectively differ-
entiate among CeFi and DeFi systems, its services, and ultimately
find that DeFi already deeply incorporates CeFi assets (e.g., USD-
C/USDT stablecoins) and practices (such as market manipulations).
We ultimately hope that this work provides a bridge for both the
CeFi and the DeFi audiences, to work together, learn from each
others’ mistakes towards constructing resilient, user friendly and
efficient financial ecosystems.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Philipp Jovanovic for providing
helpful comments on an earlier version as well as Xihan Xiong for
collecting DeFi attacks in Table 3.

References

[1] Analysis: Proposed fatf guidance for virtual assets and vasps - ciphertrace.
https://ciphertrace.com/analysis-proposed-fatf-guidance-for-virtual-assets-
and-vasps/.

[2] Anti-money laundering regulation for all crypto exchanges on austrac’s wish
list | zdnet. https://www.zdnet.com/article/anit-money-laundering-regulation-
for-all-crypto-exchanges-on-austracs-wish-list/.

[3] China crypto mining business hit by beijing crackdown, bitcoin tumbles. https:
//www.reuters.com/world/china/crypto-miners-halt-china-business-after-
beijings-crackdown-bitcoin-dives-2021-05-24/.

[18] Defi status report post-black thursday - defi pulse. https://defipulse.com/blog/
defi-status-report-black-thursday/#:~:text=On%20Thursday%20March%2012%
2C%202020,%2C%20bolstering%20collateral%20ratio%2C%20etc.

[19] Documents - financial action task force (fatf). https://www.fatf-gafi.org/pu
blications/fatfrecommendations/documents/public-consultation-guidance-
vasp.html.

[20] Eip-20: Erc-20 token standard. https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-20.
[21] Elliptic. https://www.elliptic.co.
[22] Ethermine. https://ethermine.org.
[23] Fatf-gafi.org - financial action task force (fatf). https://www.fatf-gafi.org/.
[24] Fatf’s new guidance takes aim at defi - coindesk. https://www.coindesk.com/f

atfs-new-guidance.

[25] The future of client onboarding - fintech futures. https://www.fintechfutures.co

m/2018/09/the-future-of-client-onboarding/.

[26] Grayscale bitcoint trust. https://grayscale.com/products/grayscale-bitcoin-

trust/.

[27] Home - alpha finance lab. https://alphafinance.io.
[28] Home | prevent flash loan attacks. https://preventflashloanattacks.com/.
[29] How did lendf.me lose $25 million to a reentrancy attack? [an analysis]. https:
//hackernoon.com/how-did-lendfme-lose-dollar25-million-to-a-reentrancy-
attack-an-analysis-091iy32s7.

[30] Infura. https://infura.io.
[31] Liquidations 2.0: Technical summary - governance / proposal ideas - the maker
forum. https://forum.makerdao.com/t/liquidations-2-0-technical-summary/46
32.

[32] The market collapse of march 12-13, 2020: How it impacted makerdao. https:
//blog.makerdao.com/the- market- collapse- of - march- 12- 2020- how- it-
impacted-makerdao/.

[33] Market dynamics of the 1st bzx hack: Flash loans and the insolvent loan. https:
//quantstamp.com/blog/market-dynamics-of-the-1st-bzx-hack-part-1.

[34] Metamask. https://metamask.io/.
[35] Mev monster. https://mev.monster.
[36] Ml 7.1 the money laundering reporting officer - fca handbook. https://www.ha

ndbook.fca.org.uk/handbook/ML/7/1.html?date=2005-04-02.

[37] Monetary policy: Stabilizing prices and output - back to basics: Finance &
development. https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/fandd/basics/monpol.htm.

[38] Nasdaq. https://www.nasdaq.com.
[39] New fatf draft guidance to regulate p2p transfers, defi, dexs, nft and stablecoins
- sygna. https://www.sygna.io/blog/fatf-draft-guidance-on-rba-to-virtual-
assets-and-vasps-public-consultation-march-2021/.

[40] Origin dollar incident: Root cause analysis. https://peckshield.medium.com/or

igin-dollar-incident-root-cause-analysis-f27e11988c90.

[41] Outages continue to plague online brokerages - wsj. https://www.wsj.com/arti

cles/outages-continue-to-plague-online-brokerages-11611768827.

[42] Paid network exploit mints attacker 60m tokens: Report. https://www.coindesk

.com/paid-network-exploit-mints-attacker-60m-tokens-report.

[43] Risk-free rate of return definition. https://www.investopedia.com/terms/r/risk-

freerate.asp.

[44] Robinhood restricts trading in gamestop, other names involved in frenzy. https:
//www.cnbc.com/2021/01/28/robinhood-interactive-brokers-restrict-trading-
in-gamestop-s.html.

[45] Sec market manipulation and case studies. https://www.sec.gov/files/Market%

20Manipulations%20and%20Case%20Studies.pdf.

[4] Circuit breaker definition. https://www.investopedia.com/terms/c/circuitbrea

[46] Slowmist: Pancakebunny hack analysis. https://slowmist.medium.com/slowmi

ker.asp.

[5] Coinbase. https://www.coinbase.com.
[6] Coinbase, binance outage: exchanges go offline during crypto sell-off | fortune.
https://fortune.com/2021/05/19/coinbase-binance-outage-crypto-bitcoin-
crash/.

[7] Coinbase wallet. https://wallet.coinbase.com.
[8] Cover protocol. https://www.coverprotocol.com/.
[9] Credit definition. https://www.investopedia.com/terms/c/credit.asp.
[10] Creditworthiness definition. https://www.investopedia.com/terms/c/credit-

worthiness.asp.

[11] The crypto collapse: Here’s what’s behind bitcoin’s sudden drop. https://ww
w.cnbc.com/2021/05/19/the-crypto-collapse-heres-whats-behind-bitcoins-
sudden-drop.html.

[12] Crypto lending rates - earn crypto interest by defi lending. https://defirate.co

m/lend/.

[13] Curve.fi. https://curve.fi/.
[14] Decentralized finance needs regulatory clarity and smarter compliance. https:
//www.withersworldwide.com/en-gb/insight/decentralized-finance-needs-
regulatory-clarity-and-smarter-compliance.

[15] Defi deep dive – what is the bzx protocol? https://academy.ivanontech.com/blo

g/defi-deep-dive-what-is-the-bzx-protocol.

[16] Defi project akropolis drained of $2m in dai. https://www.coindesk.com/defi-

project-akropolis-token-pool-drained.

[17] Defi status report post-black thursday - defi pulse. https://www.starlink.com.

13

st-pancakebunny-hack-analysis-4a708e284693.

[47] Sparkpool. https://www.sparkpool.com.
[48] Sr 955.0 - federal act of 10 october 1997 on combating money laundering and
terrorist financing in the financial sector (anti-money laundering act, amla).
https://www.fedlex.admin.ch/eli/cc/1998/892_892_892/en.
[49] Tornado anonymity mining. https://app.tornado.cash/mining/.
[50] Tornado.cash. https://tornado.cash/.
[51] United states government bonds - yields curve. http://www.worldgovernmentb

onds.com/country/united-states/.

[52] Uranium finance - rekt. https://www.rekt.news/uranium-rekt/.
[53] U.s. bank savings account rates | bankrate. https://www.bankrate.com/banking

/savings/us-bank-savings-rates/.

[54] Value defi incident: Root cause analysis. https://blog.peckshield.com/2020/11/

15/valuedefi/.

[55] What exactly is a virtual asset service provider (vasp)? - ciphertrace. https:
//ciphertrace.com/what-exactly-is-a-virtual-asset-service-provider-vasp/#:~:
text=When%20a%20digital%20asset%20entity,role%20as%20a%20money%20tr
ansmitter.

[56] What is liquid swap? | binance support. https://www.binance.com/en/support/f

aq/85d614205d334128b76c0275aba61ea6.

[57] What is the hong kong-us dollar peg and how does it work? - yp | south china
morning post. https://www.scmp.com/yp/discover/advice/article/3093224/what-
hong-kong-us-dollar-peg-and-how-does-it-work.

[58] What is the risk-free rate of return? https://www.thebalance.com/what-is-risk-

free-rate-of-return-5097109.

[59] Why trump administration threat to hurt hong kong’s dollar peg won’t work.
https://www.cnbc.com/2020/07/13/why-trump-administration-threat-to-
hurt-hong-kongs-dollar-peg-wont-work.html#:~:text=The%20Hong%20Kong
%20dollar%20has,selling%20or%20buying%20the%20currency.

[60] Foreign exchange manipulation: FINMA issues six industry bans, 2019.
[61] Aave. Aave Protocol. https://github.com/aave/aave-protocol, 2020.
[62] Hamda Al-Breiki, Muhammad Habib Ur Rehman, Khaled Salah, and Davor
Svetinovic. Trustworthy blockchain oracles: review, comparison, and open
research challenges. IEEE Access, 8:85675–85685, 2020.

[63] Irene Aldridge. High-frequency trading: a practical guide to algorithmic strategies

and trading systems, volume 604. John Wiley & Sons, 2013.

[64] Franklin Allen and Douglas Gale. Stock-price manipulation. The Review of

Financial Studies, 5(3):503–529, 1992.

[65] Sarah Allen, Srđjan Čapkun, Ittay Eyal, Giulia Fanti, Bryan A Ford, James
Grimmelmann, Ari Juels, Kari Kostiainen, Sarah Meiklejohn, Andrew Miller,
et al. Design choices for central bank digital currency: Policy and technical
considerations. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2020.
[66] Arash Aloosh and Jiasun Li. Direct evidence of bitcoin wash trading. Available

at SSRN 3362153, 2019.

[67] John P Anderson. Insider trading and cryptoassets: The waters just got muddier.

Iowa L. Rev. Bull., 104:120, 2019.

[68] Elli Androulaki, Ghassan O Karame, Marc Roeschlin, Tobias Scherer, and Srdjan
Capkun. Evaluating user privacy in bitcoin. In International Conference on
Financial Cryptography and Data Security, pages 34–51. Springer, 2013.
[69] James J Angel and Douglas McCabe. Fairness in financial markets: The case of
high frequency trading. Journal of Business Ethics, 112(4):585–595, 2013.
[70] Guillermo Angeris and Tarun Chitra. Improved price oracles: Constant function

market makers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.10001, 2020.

[71] Guillermo Angeris, Alex Evans, and Tarun Chitra. A note on privacy in constant

function market makers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.01193, 2021.

[72] Jun Aoyagi. Strategic Speed Choice by High-Frequency Traders under Speed

Bumps. ISER DP, (1050), 2019.

[73] Maria Apostolaki, Aviv Zohar, and Laurent Vanbever. Hijacking bitcoin: Routing
attacks on cryptocurrencies. In 2017 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy
(SP), pages 375–392. IEEE, 2017.

[74] Nicola Atzei, Massimo Bartoletti, and Tiziana Cimoli. A survey of attacks on
In International conference on principles of

ethereum smart contracts (sok).
security and trust, pages 164–186. Springer, 2017.

[75] European Central Bank. Monetary Policy. https://www.ecb.europa.eu/mopo/h

tml/index.en.html, 2021.

[76] Matthew Baron, Jonathan Brogaard, Björn Hagströmer, and Andrei Kirilenko.
Risk and return in high-frequency trading. Journal of Financial and Quantitative
Analysis, 54(3):993–1024, 2019.

[77] Massimo Bartoletti, Salvatore Carta, Tiziana Cimoli, and Roberto Saia. Dissect-
ing ponzi schemes on ethereum: identification, analysis, and impact. Future
Generation Computer Systems, 102:259–277, 2020.

[78] Massimo Bartoletti, Barbara Pes, and Sergio Serusi. Data mining for detecting
bitcoin ponzi schemes. In 2018 Crypto Valley Conference on Blockchain Technology
(CVCBT), pages 75–84. IEEE, 2018.

[79] Abdeljalil Beniiche.

A study of blockchain oracles.

arXiv preprint

arXiv:2004.07140, 2020.

[80] Iddo Bentov, Yan Ji, Fan Zhang, Lorenz Breidenbach, Philip Daian, and Ari Juels.
Tesseract: Real-time cryptocurrency exchange using trusted hardware. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2019 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications
Security, pages 1521–1538, 2019.

[81] Iddo Bentov, Yan Ji, Fan Zhang, Yunqi Li, Xueyuan Zhao, Lorenz Breidenbach,
Philip Daian, and Ari Juels. Tesseract: Real-Time Cryptocurrency Exchange
using Trusted Hardware. Conference on Computer and Communications Security,
2019.

[82] Daniele Bianchi and Alexander Dickerson. Trading volume in cryptocurrency

markets. Available at SSRN 3239670, 2019.

[83] Lorenz Breidenbach, Christian Cachin, Benedict Chan, Alex Coventry, Steve
Ellis, Ari Juels, Farinaz Koushanfar, Andrew Miller, Brendan Magauran, Daniel
Moroz, et al. Chainlink 2.0: Next steps in the evolution of decentralized oracle
networks. 2021.

[84] Jonathan Brogaard et al. High frequency trading and its impact on market
quality. Northwestern University Kellogg School of Management Working Paper,
66, 2010.

[85] Eric Budish, Peter Cramton, and John Shim. The high-frequency trading arms
race: Frequent batch auctions as a market design response. The Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 130(4):1547–1621, 2015.

[86] Tong Cao. Paradox of Inflation: The Study on Correlation between Money
Supply and Inflation in New Era. https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/79576314.pdf,
2015.

[87] Miles Carlsten, Harry Kalodner, S Matthew Weinberg, and Arvind Narayanan.
On the instability of bitcoin without the block reward. In Proceedings of the
2016 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security, pages
154–167, 2016.

[88] Chainanalysis. Decoding increasingly sophisticated hacks, darknet markets,

and scams. Technical report, 2019.

[89] Weili Chen, Zibin Zheng, Jiahui Cui, Edith Ngai, Peilin Zheng, and Yuren Zhou.
Detecting ponzi schemes on ethereum: Towards healthier blockchain technology.
In Proceedings of the 2018 World Wide Web Conference, pages 1409–1418, 2018.
[90] Weili Chen, Zibin Zheng, Edith C-H Ngai, Peilin Zheng, and Yuren Zhou. Ex-
ploiting blockchain data to detect smart ponzi schemes on ethereum.
IEEE
Access, 7:37575–37586, 2019.

[91] Raymond Cheng, Fan Zhang, Jernej Kos, Warren He, Nicholas Hynes, Noah
Johnson, Ari Juels, Andrew Miller, and Dawn Song. Ekiden: A platform for
confidentiality-preserving, trustworthy, and performant smart contracts. In 2019
IEEE European Symposium on Security and Privacy (EuroS&P), pages 185–200.
IEEE, 2019.

[92] Michael Chlistalla, Bernhard Speyer, Sabine Kaiser, and Thomas Mayer. High-

frequency trading. Deutsche Bank Research, 7:3–4, 2011.

[93] Arka Rai Choudhuri, Matthew Green, Abhishek Jain, Gabriel Kaptchuk, and Ian
Miers. Fairness in an unfair world: Fair multiparty computation from public
bulletin boards. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer
and Communications Security, pages 719–728, 2017.

[94] CNBC, Bloom Michael, Cox Jeff, and Franck Thomas. ‘Circuit breaker’ triggered
again to keep stocks from falling through floor. https://www.cnbc.com/2020/
03/12/stock-futures-hit-a-limit-down-trading-halt-for-a-second-time-this-
week-heres-what-that-means.html, 2020.

[95] Lin William Cong, Xi Li, Ke Tang, and Yang Yang. Crypto wash trading. Available

at SSRN 3530220, 2020.

[96] Philip Daian, Steven Goldfeder, Tyler Kell, Yunqi Li, Xueyuan Zhao, Iddo Bentov,
Lorenz Breidenbach, and Ari Juels. Flash Boys 2.0: Frontrunning, Transaction Re-
ordering, and Consensus Instability in Decentralized Exchanges. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1904.05234, 2019.

[97] Barry J Eichengreen, Barry Eichengreen, and Marc Flandreau. The gold standard

in theory and history. Psychology press, 1997.

[98] Parinya Ekparinya, Vincent Gramoli, and Guillaume Jourjon. Impact of man-
in-the-middle attacks on ethereum. In 2018 IEEE 37th Symposium on Reliable
Distributed Systems (SRDS), pages 11–20. IEEE, 2018.

[99] Ittay Eyal and Emin Gün Sirer. Majority is not enough: Bitcoin mining is vul-
nerable. In Financial Cryptography and Data Security, pages 436–454. Springer,
2014.

[100] Frank J Fabozzi and Pamela Peterson Drake. What is finance. FRANK J. FABOZZI

PAMELA PETERSON DRAKE, 3, 2009.

[101] St Louis Fed. M1 Money Stock. https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/M1, 2021.
[102] Compound Finance. Compound finance. https://compound.finance/, 2019.
[103] The Maker Foundation. Makerdao. https://makerdao.com/en/, 2019.
[104] Arthur Gervais, Srdjan Capkun, Ghassan O Karame, and Damian Gruber. On the
privacy provisions of bloom filters in lightweight bitcoin clients. In Computer
Security Applications Conference, pages 326–335, 2014.

[105] Arthur Gervais, Ghassan O Karame, Karl Wüst, Vasileios Glykantzis, Hubert
Ritzdorf, and Srdjan Capkun. On the security and performance of proof of work
blockchains. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer
and Communications Security, pages 3–16. ACM, 2016.

[106] Arthur Gervais, Hubert Ritzdorf, Ghassan O Karame, and Srdjan Capkun. Tam-
pering with the delivery of blocks and transactions in bitcoin. In Conference on
Computer and Communications Security, pages 692–705. ACM, 2015.

[107] Globalcustodian.com. Global Custodians. https://www.globalcustodian.com/di

rectory-type/global-custodians/, 2021.

[108] Johannes Göbel, Holger Paul Keeler, Anthony E Krzesinski, and Peter G Taylor.
Bitcoin blockchain dynamics: The selfish-mine strategy in the presence of
propagation delay. Performance Evaluation, 104:23–41, 2016.

[109] John M Griffin and Amin Shams. Is bitcoin really untethered? The Journal of

Finance, 75(4):1913–1964, 2020.

[110] JT Hamrick, Farhang Rouhi, Arghya Mukherjee, Amir Feder, Neil Gandal, Tyler
Moore, and Marie Vasek. The economics of cryptocurrency pump and dump
schemes. 2018.

[111] Mark Handley. Delay is not an option: Low latency routing in space.

In
Proceedings of the 17th ACM Workshop on Hot Topics in Networks, pages 85–91,
2018.

[112] Jon D Hanson and Douglas A Kysar. Taking behavioralism seriously: Some
evidence of market manipulation. Harvard law review, pages 1420–1572, 1999.
[113] Jon D Hanson and Douglas A Kysar. Taking behavioralism seriously: The

problem of market manipulation. NYUL Rev., 74:630, 1999.

[114] Martin Harrigan and Christoph Fretter. The unreasonable effectiveness of
address clustering. In 2016 Intl IEEE Conferences on Ubiquitous Intelligence &
Computing, Advanced and Trusted Computing, Scalable Computing and Commu-
nications, Cloud and Big Data Computing, Internet of People, and Smart World
Congress (UIC/ATC/ScalCom/CBDCom/IoP/SmartWorld), pages 368–373. IEEE,

14

2016.

[115] Martin Harrigan, Lei Shi, and Jacob Illum. Airdrops and privacy: a case study in
cross-blockchain analysis. In 2018 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining
Workshops (ICDMW), pages 63–70. IEEE, 2018.

[116] Larry Harris. What to do about high-frequency trading, 2013.
[117] Eyal Hertzog, Guy Benartzi, and Galia Benartzi. Bancor protocol. 2017.
[118] Abraham Hinteregger and Bernhard Haslhofer. An Empirical Analysis of Mon-

ero Cross-Chain Traceability. CoRR, abs/1812.02808, 2018.

[119] Investopedia. Basket of Goods. https://www.investopedia.com/terms/b/baske

[145] John V Monaco. Identifying bitcoin users by transaction behavior. In Biometric
and Surveillance Technology for Human and Activity Identification XII, volume
9457, page 945704. International Society for Optics and Photonics, 2015.
[146] Wouter H Muller, Christian H Kalin, and John G Goldsworth. Anti-Money

Laundering: international law and practice. John Wiley & Sons, 2007.

[147] Nexus Mutual. Nexus Mutual. https://nexusmutual.io/, 2020.
[148] Satoshi Nakamoto and A Bitcoin. A peer-to-peer electronic cash system. Bitcoin.–

URL: https://bitcoin. org/bitcoin. pdf, 4, 2008.

[149] Nasdaq. Initial Listing Guide. https://listingcenter.nasdaq.com/assets/initialgui

t_of_goods.asp, 2021.

de.pdf, 2021.

[120] Investopedia. Inflation. https://www.investopedia.com/terms/i/inflation.asp,

2021.

[121] Robert A Jarrow. Market manipulation, bubbles, corners, and short squeezes.

Journal of financial and Quantitative Analysis, 27(3):311–336, 1992.

[122] Ari Juels, Ittay Eyal, and Mahimna Kelkar. Op-ed: Miners, front-running-as-a-

service is theft. https://mev.monster.

[123] Josh Kamps and Bennett Kleinberg. To the moon: defining and detecting cryp-

tocurrency pump-and-dumps. Crime Science, 7(1):1–18, 2018.

[124] Ghassan O Karame, Elli Androulaki, and Srdjan Capkun. Double-spending fast
payments in bitcoin. In Proceedings of the 2012 ACM conference on Computer
and communications security, pages 906–917. ACM, 2012.

[125] Ghassan O Karame, Elli Androulaki, Marc Roeschlin, Arthur Gervais, and Srdjan
Čapkun. Misbehavior in bitcoin: A study of double-spending and accountability.
ACM Transactions on Information and System Security (TISSEC), 18(1):2, 2015.

[126] Aggelos Kiayias, Hong-Sheng Zhou, and Vassilis Zikas. Fair and robust multi-
party computation using a global transaction ledger. In Annual International
Conference on the Theory and Applications of Cryptographic Techniques, pages
705–734. Springer, 2016.

[127] Ahmed Kosba, Andrew Miller, Elaine Shi, Zikai Wen, and Charalampos Papa-
manthou. Hawk: The blockchain model of cryptography and privacy-preserving
smart contracts. In 2016 IEEE symposium on security and privacy (SP), pages
839–858. IEEE, 2016.

[128] Peter Koudijs and Hans-Joachim Voth. Leverage and beliefs: personal experience
and risk-taking in margin lending. American Economic Review, 106(11):3367–
3400, 2016.

[129] Aurora Labs. Idex: A real-time and high-throughput ethereum smart contract

exchange. Technical report, January 2019.

[130] Fabian Lanze, Andriy Panchenko, Ignacio Ponce-Alcaide, and Thomas Engel.
Undesired relatives: protection mechanisms against the evil twin attack in ieee
802.11. In Proceedings of the 10th ACM symposium on QoS and security for wireless
and mobile networks, pages 87–94, 2014.

[131] CFA Larry Harris, PhD. STRUCTURE OF THE INVESTMENT INDUSTRY.
https://www.cfainstitute.org/-/media/documents/support/programs/investme
nt-foundations/13-structure-of-the-investment-industry.ashx, 2021.

[132] Duc V Le and Arthur Gervais. Amr: Autonomous coin mixer with privacy
preserving reward distribution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.01056, 2020.
[133] Tao Li, Donghwa Shin, and Baolian Wang. Cryptocurrency pump-and-dump

schemes. Available at SSRN 3267041, 2020.

[134] Xiaoqi Li, Peng Jiang, Ting Chen, Xiapu Luo, and Qiaoyan Wen. A survey
on the security of blockchain systems. Future Generation Computer Systems,
107:841–853, 2020.

[135] Iuon-Chang Lin and Tzu-Chun Liao. A survey of blockchain security issues and

challenges. IJ Network Security, 19(5):653–659, 2017.

[136] Tom CW Lin. The new market manipulation. Emory LJ, 66:1253, 2016.
[137] Joshua Lind, Ittay Eyal, Peter Pietzuch, and Emin Gün Sirer. Teechan: Payment
channels using trusted execution environments. arXiv preprint arXiv:1612.07766,
2016.

[138] Joshua Lind, Oded Naor, Ittay Eyal, Florian Kelbert, Peter R Pietzuch, and
Emin Gün Sirer. Teechain: Reducing Storage Costs on the Blockchain With
Offline Payment Channels. In Proceedings of the 11th {ACM} International Systems
and Storage Conference, {SYSTOR} 2018, HAIFA, Israel, June 04-07, 2018, 2018.

[139] Bowen Liu, Pawel Szalachowski, and Jianying Zhou. A first look into defi oracles.

arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.04377, 2020.

[140] Sarah Meiklejohn, Marjori Pomarole, Grant Jordan, Kirill Levchenko, Damon
McCoy, Geoffrey M Voelker, and Stefan Savage. A fistful of bitcoins: characteriz-
ing payments among men with no names. In Proceedings of the 2013 conference
on Internet measurement conference, pages 127–140. ACM, 2013.

[141] Albert J Menkveld. The economics of high-frequency trading: Taking stock.

Annual Review of Financial Economics, 8:1–24, 2016.

[142] Ian Miers, Christina Garman, Matthew Green, and Aviel D Rubin. Zerocoin:
Anonymous distributed e-cash from bitcoin. In Symposium on Security and
Privacy, pages 397–411, 2013.

[143] Tian Min, Hanyi Wang, Yaoze Guo, and Wei Cai. Blockchain games: A survey.

In 2019 IEEE Conference on Games (CoG), pages 1–8. IEEE, 2019.

[144] Amani Moin, Kevin Sekniqi, and Emin Gun Sirer. Sok: A classification framework
for stablecoin designs. In International Conference on Financial Cryptography
and Data Security, pages 174–197. Springer, 2020.

[150] Till Neudecker and Hannes Hartenstein. Could network information facilitate
address clustering in bitcoin? In International conference on financial cryptogra-
phy and data security, pages 155–169. Springer, 2017.

[151] Mardiana Mohamad Noor and Wan Haslina Hassan. Wireless networks: develop-
ments, threats and countermeasures. International Journal of Digital Information
and Wireless Communications (IJDIWC), 3(1):125–140, 2013.

[152] Bank of England. Inflation and the 2 percent target. https://www.bankofenglan

d.co.uk/monetary-policy/inflation, 2021.

[153] Bank of International Settlements. FX execution algorithms and market func-

tioning. https://www.bis.org/publ/mktc13.pdf, 2020.

[154] US Bureau of Labor Statistics. Consumer prices increase 2.6 percent for the 12
months ending March 2021. https://www.bls.gov/opub/ted/2021/consumer-
prices-increase-2-6-percent-for-the-12-months-ending-march-2021.htm,
2021.

[155] Financial Conduct Authority of the UK. Primary Markets. https://www.fca.org.

uk/markets/primary-markets, 2021.

[156] Joseph Poon and Thaddeus Dryja. The bitcoin lightning network: scalable

off-chain instant payments, 2016.

[157] Kaihua Qin, Liyi Zhou, and Arthur Gervais. Quantifying blockchain extractable

value: How dark is the forest? arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.05511, 2021.

[158] Kaihua Qin, Liyi Zhou, Benjamin Livshits, and Arthur Gervais. Attacking the
defi ecosystem with flash loans for fun and profit. Financial Cryptography and
Data Security: 25th International Conference (FC 2021), 2021.

[159] Venkatesh U Rajput. Research on know your customer (kyc). International

Journal of Scientific and Research Publications, 3(7):541–546, 2013.

[160] Fergal Reid and Martin Harrigan. An analysis of anonymity in the bitcoin
system. In Security and privacy in social networks, pages 197–223. Springer, 2013.
[161] Hubert Ritzdorf, Karl Wüst, Arthur Gervais, Guillaume Felley, and Srdjan Cap-
kun. TLS-N: Non-repudiation over TLS Enabling Ubiquitous Content Signing.
In NDSS, 2018.

[162] Muhammad Saad, Jeffrey Spaulding, Laurent Njilla, Charles Kamhoua, Sachin
Shetty, DaeHun Nyang, and Aziz Mohaisen. Exploring the attack surface of
blockchain: A systematic overview. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.03487, 2019.
[163] Muhammad Saad, My T Thai, and Aziz Mohaisen. Poster: deterring ddos
attacks on blockchain-based cryptocurrencies through mempool optimization.
In Proceedings of the 2018 on Asia Conference on Computer and Communications
Security, pages 809–811, 2018.

[164] Ayelet Sapirshtein, Yonatan Sompolinsky, and Aviv Zohar. Optimal selfish min-
ing strategies in bitcoin. In International Conference on Financial Cryptography
and Data Security, pages 515–532. Springer, 2016.

[165] Corina Sas and Irni Eliana Khairuddin. Design for trust: An exploration of the
challenges and opportunities of bitcoin users. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pages 6499–6510, 2017.

[166] Eli Ben Sasson, Alessandro Chiesa, Christina Garman, Matthew Green, Ian
Miers, Eran Tromer, and Madars Virza. Zerocash: Decentralized anonymous
payments from bitcoin. In Security and Privacy (SP), 2014 IEEE Symposium on,
pages 459–474. IEEE, 2014.

[167] Sarwar Sayeed and Hector Marco-Gisbert. Assessing blockchain consensus and
security mechanisms against the 51% attack. Applied Sciences, 9(9):1788, 2019.
[168] Fabian Schär. Decentralized finance: On blockchain-and smart contract-based

financial markets. Available at SSRN 3571335, 2020.

[169] Linda Schilling and Harald Uhlig. Some simple bitcoin economics. Journal of

Monetary Economics, 106:16–26, 2019.

[170] Paul Allan Schott. Reference guide to anti-money laundering and combating the

financing of terrorism. World Bank Publications, 2006.

[171] Michael Siering, Benjamin Clapham, Oliver Engel, and Peter Gomber. A taxon-
omy of financial market manipulations: establishing trust and market integrity
in the financialized economy through automated fraud detection. Journal of
Information Technology, 32(3):251–269, 2017.

[172] Antoon Spithoven. Theory and reality of cryptocurrency governance. Journal

of Economic Issues, 53(2):385–393, 2019.

[173] Sergey Nazarov Steve Ellis, Ari Juels. Chainlink: A decentralized oracle network,

2017.

[174] Synthetix. Synthetix: Decentralized synthetic assets. https://www.synthetix.io/,

2020.

[175] Christof Ferreira Torres, Mathis Steichen, et al. The art of the scam: Demystifying
honeypots in ethereum smart contracts. In 28th {USENIX} Security Symposium
({USENIX} Security 19), pages 1591–1607, 2019.

15

[176] Tradingview. Random length lumber futures. https://www.tradingview.com/ch

art/?symbol=CME%3ALBS1!, 2021.

[177] European Union. Payments, Transfers, and Cheques. https://europa.eu/yo
ureurope/citizens/consumers/financial-products-and-services/payments-
transfers-cheques/index_en.htm, 2021.

[178] Uniswap.io, 2018. https://docs.uniswap.io/.
[179] Andrew Verstein. Crypto assets and insider trading law’s domain. Iowa L. Rev.,

105:1, 2019.

[180] Friedhelm Victor. Address clustering heuristics for ethereum. In International
Conference on Financial Cryptography and Data Security, pages 617–633. Springer,
2020.

[181] Friedhelm Victor and Andrea Marie Weintraud. Detecting and quantifying
wash trading on decentralized cryptocurrency exchanges. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2102.07001, 2021.

[182] Christopher Viney and Peter Phillips. Financial institutions, instruments &

markets. McGraw-Hill Australia, 2012.

[183] Dabao Wang, Siwei Wu, Ziling Lin, Lei Wu, Xingliang Yuan, Yajin Zhou, Haoyu
Wang, and Kui Ren. Towards understanding flash loan and its applications in
defi ecosystem. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.12252, 2020.

[184] Will Warren and Amir Bandeali.

0x: An open protocol

for decen-
URl: https://github.

tralized exchange on the ethereum blockchain.
com/0xProject/whitepaper, pages 04–18, 2017.

[185] Karl Wüst and Arthur Gervais. Do you need a blockchain? In 2018 Crypto Valley
Conference on Blockchain Technology (CVCBT), pages 45–54. IEEE, 2018.
[186] Jiahua Xu and Benjamin Livshits. The anatomy of a cryptocurrency pump-and-
dump scheme. In 28th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 19), pages
1609–1625, 2019.

[187] Fan Zhang, Ethan Cecchetti, Kyle Croman, Ari Juels, and Elaine Shi. Town crier:
An authenticated data feed for smart contracts. In Proceedings of the 2016 aCM
sIGSAC conference on computer and communications security, pages 270–282.
ACM, 2016.

[188] Fan Zhang, Deepak Maram, Harjasleen Malvai, Steven Goldfeder, and Ari Juels.
Deco: Liberating web data using decentralized oracles for tls. In Proceedings of
the 2020 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security,
pages 1919–1938, 2020.

[189] Liyi Zhou, Kaihua Qin, Antoine Cully, Benjamin Livshits, and Arthur Gervais.
On the just-in-time discovery of profit-generating transactions in defi protocols.
2021 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP), 2021.

[190] Liyi Zhou, Kaihua Qin, and Arthur Gervais. A2mm: Mitigating frontrunning,
transaction reordering and consnsus instability in decentralized exchanges.
2021.

[191] Liyi Zhou, Kaihua Qin, Christof Ferreira Torres, Duc V Le, and Arthur Ger-
vais. High-frequency trading on decentralized on-chain exchanges. 2021 IEEE
Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP), 2020.

16

Table 3: Smart contract code and DeFi protocol/composability attacks on Ethereum as well as the Binance Smart Chain.

Amount (USD)
60,000,000
30,000,000
23,500,000
38,000
355,880
665,840
25,236,849
135,229
523,617
2,408
900,000
371,000
170,000,000
250,000
220,000
160,000

Platform
ETH
ETH
ETH
ETH
ETH
ETH
ETH
ETH
ETH
ETH
ETH
ETH
ETH
ETH
ETH
ETH

Victim
The DAO
Parity
Bancor
Spankchain
bZx
bZx
Lendf.Me
Bancor
Balancer
Balancer
VETH
Opyn
YFValue
SoftFinance
Uniswap
Soda.Finance

Eminence
DeFi Saver
Harvest Finance
Axion Network
Cheese Bank
Akropolis
ValueDeFi
OUSD
88mph
Pickle.Finance
SushiSwap
Warp.Finance
Nexus Mutual
Cover Protocol
SushiSwap
BT.Finance
Yearn.Finance
Cream.Finance
Meerkat Finance
Paid Network
Furucombo
Iron.Finance
Uranium.Finance
PancakeSwap

Uranium.Finance
Spartan
ValueDeFi
EasyFi
ValueDeFi
Rari Capital
xToken
FinNexus
PancakeBunny
Bogged Finance
AutoShark Finance
DeFi100
WLEO
UniCats
Web3 DeFi
bZx
MakerDAO

15,000,000
30,000
33,800,000
500,000
3,300,000
2,030,000
740,000,000
7,700,000
100,000
20,000,000
15,000
7,800,000
8,000,000
3,000,000
103,842
1,500,000
11,000,000
37,500,000
31,000,000
27,418,034
15,000,000
170,000
13,000,000
1,800,000

57,200,000
30,500,000
10,000,000
59,000,000
11,000,000
14,000,000
24,000,000
7,000,000
45,000,000
3,600,000
822,800
32,000,000
42,000
200,000
100,000
8,000,000
8,320,000

Source
https://hackingdistributed.com/2016/06/18/analysis-of-the-dao-exploit/
https://medium.com/solidified/parity-hack-how-it-happened-and-its-aftermath-9bffb2105c0
https://medium.com/@theoceantrade/hack-attack-volume-3-bancor-55abfa9aefe2
https://medium.com/swlh/how-spankchain-got-hacked-af65b933393c
https://blog.peckshield.com/2020/02/17/bZx/
https://blog.peckshield.com/2020/02/18/bZx/
https://blog.peckshield.com/2020/04/19/erc777/
https://blog.bancor.network/bancors-response-to-today-s-smart-contract-vulnerability-dc888c589fe4
https://blog.peckshield.com/2020/06/28/balancer/
https://cointelegraph.com/news/hacker-steals-balancers-comp-allowance-in-second-attack-within-24-hours
https://hacked.slowmist.io/en/?c=ETH%20DApp
https://blog.peckshield.com/2020/08/05/opyn/
https://valuedefi.medium.com/yfv-update-staking-pool-exploit-713cb353ff7d
https://cointelegraph.com/news/jackpot-user-turns-200-into-250k-thanks-to-a-buggy-defi-protocol
https://medium.com/consensys-diligence/uniswap-audit-b90335ac007
https://anchainai.medium.com/soda-finance-hack-could-formal-verification-have-prevented-it-code-included-
71b6e9f94ea5
https://www.rekt.news/eminence-rekt-in-prod/
https://slowmist.medium.com/slowmist-how-was-the-310-000-dai-of-defi-saver-users-stolen-91de37a4ade2
https://www.rekt.news/harvest-finance-rekt/
https://cointelegraph.com/news/certik-dissects-the-axion-network-incident-and-subsequent-price-crash
https://blog.peckshield.com/2020/11/16/cheesebank/
https://blog.peckshield.com/2020/11/13/akropolis/
https://blog.peckshield.com/2020/11/15/valuedefi/
https://blog.peckshield.com/2020/11/17/ousd/
https://peckshield.medium.com/88mph-incident-root-cause-analysis-ce477e00a74d
https://www.rekt.news/pickle-finance-rekt/
https://slowmist.medium.com/slowmist-a-brief-analysis-of-the-story-of-the-sushi-swap-attack-c7bc6709adea
https://blog.peckshield.com/2020/12/18/warpfinance/
https://www.certik.io/blog/technology/nexus-mutual-attack-8-million-lost
https://blog.peckshield.com/2020/12/28/cover/
https://www.rekt.news/badgers-digg-sushi/
https://www.rekt.news/the-big-combo/
https://www.rekt.news/yearn-rekt/
https://www.rekt.news/alpha-finance-rekt/
https://www.rekt.news/meerkat-finance-bsc-rekt/
https://www.rekt.news/paid-rekt/
https://www.rekt.news/furucombo-rekt/
https://ironfinance.medium.com/iron-finance-vfarms-incident-post-mortem-16-march-2021-114e58d1eaac

ETH
ETH
ETH
ETH
ETH
ETH
ETH
ETH
ETH
ETH
ETH
ETH
ETH
ETH
ETH
ETH
ETH
ETH
BSC
ETH
ETH
BSC
BSC,ETH https://www.certik.org/blog/uranium-finance-exploit-technical-analysis
BSC

https://cryptopwnage.medium.com/1-800-000-was-stolen-from-binance-smart-chain-pancakeswap-lottery-pool-
ca2afb415f9

https://blog.peckshield.com/2021/05/02/Spartan/
https://www.rekt.news/value-rekt2/
https://www.rekt.news/easyfi-rekt/
https://blog.peckshield.com/2021/05/08/ValueDeFi/
https://nipunp.medium.com/5-8-21-rari-capital-exploit-timeline-analysis-8beda31cbc1a
https://medium.com/xtoken/initial-report-on-xbnta-xsnxa-exploit-d6e784387f8e
https://news.yahoo.com/latest-defi-hack-drains-7-050841516.html

BSC,ETH https://www.rekt.news/uranium-rekt/
BSC
BSC
Layer 2
BSC
ETH
ETH
ETH,BSC
BSC,ETH https://slowmist.medium.com/slowmist-pancakebunny-hack-analysis-4a708e284693
BSC
BSC
ETH
ETH
ETH
ETH
ETH
ETH

https://blog.peckshield.com/2021/05/22/boggedfinance/
https://authorshark.medium.com/
https://www.coindesk.com/people-behind-crypto-protocol-defi100-may-have-absconded-with-32m-in-investor-funds
https://leofinance.io/@leofinance/wrapped-leo-white-paper-investigative-report-lp-refunds-and-wleo-relaunch
https://hacked.slowmist.io/en/?c=ETH%20DApp
https://medium.com/mycrypto/phishing-campaigns-take-aim-at-web3-defi-applications-19e224d9f207
https://bzx.network/blog/incident
https://www.coindesk.com/mempool-manipulation-enabled-theft-of-8m-in-makerdao-collateral-on-black-thursday-
report
https://blog.peckshield.com/2018/07/24/fomo3d/

Fomo 3D

18,000,000

ETH

17

Table 4: Definitions of DeFi market manipulation techniques.

Category
Action-

Info-

Trade-

Order-

Technique
Ponzi scheme
Honey pot
Fraudulent financial statements
Pump and dump/Short and distort
Wash trade/Matched orders/Painting the tape
Insider trading
Cornering
Capping
Marking the close
Front-/back-running, sandwich
Clogging/Jamming
Churning
Ramping/Advancing the bid/ Reducing the ask
Spoofing/Pinging
Quote stuffing

Definition
An adversary raises funds from investors while paying to previous investors, creating the illusion of high returns.
An adversary feigns a financial instrument, luring market participants into making erroneous trades.
Intentional misrepresentation of a company’s financial health via disclosure violations and improper accounting.
Adversary buying positions to increase the price, disseminating positive information, and then selling.
Creating fictitious transactions to imply market activity.
Trading based on non-public information.
Obtaining a large quantity of a specific financial instrument to manipulate the market price.
Preventing the rise/decrease in the financial instrument’s price.
Pumps or dumps the opening or closing price of an instrument.
Using pending information about incoming transaction to perform a financial action.
Clogging the network to prevent other market participants from issuing transactions.
Purchasing and selling of financial instruments on behalf of a client for profit.
In/decreasing the bid for an asset to artificially in/decrease its price, or to simulate an active asset interest.
Places trading orders that are not intended to be executed, to observe or mislead other participants’.
Placing and canceling a many orders to overload a financial system, similar to a DoS attack.

18

