Date of publication xxxx 00, 0000, date of current version xxxx 00, 0000.

Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/ACCESS.2018.DOI

Blockchain and AI-based Solutions to
Combat Coronavirus (COVID-19)-like
Epidemics: A Survey

DINH C. NGUYEN1, (Graduate Student Member, IEEE), MING DING2, (Senior Member, IEEE),
PUBUDU N. PATHIRANA1, (Senior Member, IEEE), ARUNA SENEVIRATNE3, (Senior
Member, IEEE)
1School of Engineering, Deakin University, Waurn Ponds, VIC 3216, Australia
2Data61, CSIRO, Australia
3School of Electrical Engineering and Telecommunications, University of New South Wales (UNSW), NSW, Australia

Corresponding author: Dinh C. Nguyen (cdnguyen@deakin.edu.au)

1
2
0
2

n
u
J

8
2

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
1
3
6
4
1
.
6
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

ABSTRACT The beginning of 2020 has seen the emergence of coronavirus outbreak caused by a novel
virus called SARS-CoV-2. The sudden explosion and uncontrolled worldwide spread of COVID-19 show
the limitations of existing healthcare systems in timely handling public health emergencies. In such contexts,
innovative technologies such as blockchain and Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) have emerged as promising
solutions for ﬁghting coronavirus epidemic. In particular, blockchain can combat pandemics by enabling
early detection of outbreaks, ensuring the ordering of medical data, and ensuring reliable medical supply
chain during the outbreak tracing. Moreover, AI provides intelligent solutions for identifying symptoms
caused by coronavirus for treatments and supporting drug manufacturing. Therefore, we present an extensive
survey on the use of blockchain and AI for combating COVID-19 epidemics. First, we introduce a new
conceptual architecture which integrates blockchain and AI for ﬁghting COVID-19. Then, we survey the
latest research efforts on the use of blockchain and AI for ﬁghting COVID-19 in various applications. The
newly emerging projects and use cases enabled by these technologies to deal with coronavirus pandemic are
also presented. A case study is also provided using federated AI for COVID-19 detection. Finally, we point
out challenges and future directions that motivate more research efforts to deal with future coronavirus-like
epidemics.

INDEX TERMS Blockchain, Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI), security, privacy, machine learning, deep learning,
coronavirus (COVID-19), SARS-CoV-2, epidemic.

I. INTRODUCTION

The coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak in late 2019 com-
prises a serious threat around the world [1]. The severity of
the epidemic was so huge that the World Health Organization
(WHO) was compelled to declare it as a pandemic within a
month of its wide-scale expansion. The virus spread causes
the global economic shock with the massive interruptions
of many sectors such as supply chain, industry, insurance,
agriculture, transport, and tourism, forcing governments and
owners to shut stop operations on a worldwide scale [2].
According to the Organisation for Economic Cooperation
and Development (OECD), the global economy could grow
at its slowest rate since 2009 in this year [3] due to the
coronavirus outbreak as the forecasts in Fig. 1. As the number

of infections rises, many governments around the world
have instituted drastic lock-downs and curfews and called
for social distancing and work from home for virus spead
ﬁghting [4].

With the deadly coronavirus spreading globally, every
attempt is being made to ensure help for victims as well as
to stop the spread. As governments scramble to address these
problems, technology-empowered solutions can help deal
with the worldwide health crisis. Applications of innovative
technologies such as Blockchain and Artiﬁcial Intelligence
(AI) could have the answers in response to coronavirus crisis
[5], [6], [7]. Blockchain can support to combat the COVID-
19 pandemic by enabling early detection of outbreaks, fast-
tracking drug delivery, and providing a consensus on the

VOLUME 4, 2020

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
Author et al.: Preparation of Papers for IEEE TRANSACTIONS and JOURNALS

Indeed,

• In such a pandemic scenario, blockchain provides
to support ﬁghting
promising security solutions
COVID-19.
the blockchain constructs im-
mutable ledgers of transactions for medical data sharing
systems. Transactions (e.g., COVID-19 data) recorded
in the blockchain cannot be modiﬁed or altered by
any entities. Also,
transactions are only written to
blockchain while recovery actions or modiﬁcations
are not allowed. Moreover, all health data storage
servers, e.g., cloud in the COVID-19 data collection,
would be controlled autonomously by the blockchain
and data usage over the network is always reﬂected
on the blockchain for tracing [11]. More importantly,
blockchain coupled with the smart contract technology
eliminates the reliance on central servers to ensure fair-
ness among transaction parties, e.g., patients, hospitals,
governments and provide effective access control over
data usage. Each entity in the blockchain-based COVID-
19 data management system has an equal right to control
all healthcare operations. Specially, blockchain with its
distributed nature can work well when any party fails
due to its decentralized nature [12]. Such traceability
and decentralization are among the key unique features
of blockchain that cannot be found in other traditional
security techniques.

• Moreover, blockchain can support well for reliable
COVID-19 analytics. Collecting COVID-19 data is an
important step of disease analytics. During the data
collection, how to ensure the reliability of collected data
is of practical signiﬁcance to ensure the high quality of
COVID-19 data analytics [4]. The use of wrong data or
unreliable database sources may result in biased analyt-
ical results, which can lead to fatal consequences like
incorrect COVID-19 diagnosis. Moreover, in the emer-
gency epidemic situation, many sources of COVID-19
data are collected from hospitals, the public, or media
without being protected which can result in COVID-19
data modiﬁcations. These issues would deﬁnitely affect
the correctness of the collected data which consequently
reduces the reliability of the COVID-19 analysis pro-
cess. In such contexts, blockchain is high of need to
ensure the reliability of the collected data thanks to
its security nature. Blockchain also ensures the correct
ordering of the COVID-19 data records from the data
sources to the destinations (e.g., hospitals or clinical
labs) due to consensus mechanisms, which also ensures
the high quality of data collection. These features of
blockchain would ensure correct data collection and
thus support reliable COVID-19 analysis.

• Also, the incentive mechanisms offered by blockchain
can be very useful
to provide solutions for ﬁght-
ing COVID-19, by combining with crowdsourc-
ing/crowdsensing
Indeed,
crowdsourcing enables to use the crowd to collect in-
formation that is needed for the detection of COVID-19
patients. Besides, these frameworks incentivize patients

technologies

[13]–[16].

FIGURE 1: The impact of COVID-19 on global economic
growth (Source: OECD).

ordering of the COVID-19 data records. Furthermore, AI
with supervised and unsupervised machine learning provides
intelligent solutions for monitoring real-time epidemic out-
breaks, pandemic trend forecasting, identifying symptoms
caused by coronavirus for treatments, and supporting drug
manufacturing [8]. It is also argued that the present coro-
navirus crisis should be seen as a "call to arms for the
technology industry" where blockchain and AI may be the
key enablers for radically changing the landscape of crisis
response and the management of the coronavirus outbreak
[9], [10].

A. MOTIVATIONS OF USING BLOCKCHAIN AND AI FOR
CORONAVIRUS FIGHTING
1) Limitations of Current Healthcare Systems
The COVID-19 outbreak could push the existing healthcare
systems to their limits. At present, there is a lack of a
reliable data surveillance system that would instantly give
relevant healthcare organizations the information they need
about potential outbreaks. In fact, most of the current coro-
navirus information comes from separate sources such as
the public, hospitals, clinical labs with a large amount of
inaccurate data without being monitored thoroughly. The use
of unreliable information makes it challenging for potential
outbreak identiﬁcation and quarantine. Another limitation
is the current time-consuming and in-accuracy coronavirus
detection procedure that often takes several hours to complete
the virus tests. Thus, how to accelerate coronavirus detection
speed with high accuracy is an urgent need. Furthermore, it
is very challenging to process coronavirus data with com-
plex patterns and large volumes by using human-depending
medicine tools.

2) Why we need blockchain and AI for ﬁghting COVID-19
In this subsection, we will explain why there is a requirement
of using blockchain and AI technologies for COVID-19
disease. More speciﬁcally, the reasons on why we need to
use blockchain for such a disease are explained as follows.

2

VOLUME 4, 2020

Author et al.: Preparation of Papers for IEEE TRANSACTIONS and JOURNALS

and individuals to share information through payments,
such as blockchain coins. For example, an artiﬁcial
potential ﬁeld-based incentive allocation mechanism is
proposed in [17] to incentivize IoT witnesses to pursue
the maximum monitoring coverage and crowdsensing
deployment in tracking human activities in the COVID
pandemic using a decentralized and permissionless
blockchain protocol.

• Admittedly, the truthfulness of each medical data trans-
action is hard to verify since the involved medical
entities might lie about the uploaded data. This make
one wonder about the value of blockchain in ﬁghting
COVID-19, i.e., what is the use of a blockchain if it
is full of lies? 1 Here, we argue that the immutability
feature of blockchain would make the data fabrication
signiﬁcantly more difﬁcult since the reported data shall
be under scrutiny in the future by statistical and longitu-
dinal data analysis. Hence, the true value of blockchain
for combating COVID-19 is to immensely raise the
difﬁculty and cost for the entities who dare to cheat and
make up data.

In addition, there are two key reasons on why we need to use
AI for such a disease.

• In the epidemic, monitoring the trajectory of virus in-
fection and estimating the potential outbreak are of
paramount importance in the objective of controlling
the COVID-19 disease. AI is able to learn from huge
datasets on relevant factors including the number of
cases, deaths, demographics, and related environments
conditions. The learning capability of AI would help
forecast future coronavirus cases and the size of a poten-
tial outbreak. It also helps build prediction models that
can be used to estimate the outbreak in the future, which
is very useful for governments in preparing necessary
solutions in response to COVID-19.

• To prevent the COVID-19 disease, modelling the coro-
navirus structure is very important to shed lights on
which drugs could work against COVID-19. Due to
the massive database collected from ubiquitous sources,
developing a data learning and estimation system to
estimate the COVID-19 virus structure is an urgent need
that humans are unable to do without machine support.
AI algorithms based on computer computation can learn
data and predict how the proteins that make up an
organism curve or crinkle based on their genomes to
identify the shape of the receptor. This would facilitate
the process of ﬁnding suitable drugs against COVID-19.

3) Beneﬁts of using blockchain and AI for solving the
coronavirus epidemic
Blockchain and AI are able to provide viable solutions to
cope with the coronavirus epidemic from various aspects.

1It should be noted such an issue of fake data has been mitigated in our
ﬁnancial system thanks to the digital signature mechanism, e.g. veriﬁcation
will be performed for all of the transactions associated with network bank-
ing, online purchasing using debit/credit cards, etc.

tracing,

In fact, blockchain has been applied to other infectious epi-
demics, such as Ebola [18] where blockchain was employed
to conduct real-time Ebola contact
transmission
pattern surveillance and vaccine delivery. This project also
reveals that the cryptographic feature of blockchain can help
prevent unsecure data sharing between patients and health
entities such as healthcare providers. In the coronavirus out-
break ﬁghting, blockchain can actively simplify the process
of fast-tracking drug trials, and recording and tracking all
fundraising activities and donations, in an immutable fashion,
which can support the management of outbreaks and treat-
ment.

Moreover, AI has been applied to COVID-19-like epi-
demics. For example, AI techniques such as neural network
architectures based on Long Short Term Memory (LSTM)
were used to predict the inﬂuenza-like illness dynamics for
military populations using neural networks and social media
[19]. Moreover, Bayesian ML was employed in [20] to build
predictive data learning models for identifying compounds
active against the Ebola virus. These real-world use cases
have demonstrated the potential of AI in supporting the
ﬁghting of infectious epidemics by forecasting the spread
of virus and helping the drug production for treatment of
infectious diseases. In the coronavirus epidemic, AI can
also provide solutions in several ways. AI can be used to
detect virus and predict how the virus is going to spread
by analysing the combined information of environmental
conditions, access to healthcare, and the way it is transmitted.
Based on that, AI can identify coronavirus within localized
outbreaks of the disease and help reveal the nature of the
virus [21]. The coronavirus can cause severe symptoms
such as pneumonia, severe acute respiratory syndrome, and
kidney failure. AI-based algorithms such as genome-based
neural networks already built for personalized treatment can
prove very useful in controlling these adverse events or
symptoms caused by a coronavirus, especially when the
impact of the virus depends on immunity and the genome
structure of individuals and no standard treatment can treat
all symptoms effectively at present. For example, ML-based
regression models have been used in [22] to estimate ad-
verse outcome in COVID-19 pneumonia, by using chest CT
scans with reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction
for severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus. More
speciﬁcally, logistic regression models were used to evaluate
the relationship between clinical parameters and CT metrics
versus patient outcome (intensive care unit admission or
death versus no ICU admission or death). The area under
the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) was then
computed to determine the adverse effects which support
the clinical decision making for appropriate patient care.
Further, the use of AI may be very helpful in identifying
the relationship of novel coronavirus and related viruses such
as SARS [23] to accelerate the ﬁnding of a new vaccine.
Finally, AI approaches can automatically build a model or
relationship between treatments documented in healthcare
records and the eventual patient outcomes. These models can

VOLUME 4, 2020

3

quickly identify diagnosis and treatment choices that assist to
guide the process of developing clinical guidelines for future
coronavirus-like epidemics. With these promising beneﬁts,
recently the White House urgently calls for using AI to aid
the US Government’s response to the coronavirus pandemic
[24].

B. COMPARISONS AND OUR CONTRIBUTIONS
Recently, there are several recent research efforts made to
survey the use of blockchain and AI for COVID-19 pan-
demic. The paper in [25] focuses on analysing the roles of
blockchain to address the crisis of trust during the COVID-
19 pandemic. The authors in [26] explain brieﬂy the oppor-
tunities and limitations of the applications of blockchains
in healthcare management, including COVID-19-related do-
mains. The beneﬁts of using blockchain for ﬁghting COVID-
19 are also explored in [27], with several speciﬁc use cases
such as contact tracing, disaster relief, patient information
sharing, e-government, supply chain management, online
education, and immigration management.

Moreover, the roles of AI in ﬁghting COVID-19 pan-
demic are also investigated recently. More speciﬁcally, the
authors in [28] explore the use of technologies including
AI to help mitigate the impact of COVID-19 outbreak. The
work in [29] provides a very brief discussion of the roles
of DL for COVID-19 data analytics, along with a short
introduction to blockchain in the pandemic. Another study
in [30] provides an extensive survey on the contributions
of AI in combating COVID-19 from the aspects of disease
detection and diagnosis, virology and pathogenesis, drug
and vaccine development, and epidemic and transmission
prediction. Furthermore, the use of popular AI techniques
such as neural systems, classical SVM, and edge signiﬁcant
learning battling COVID-19 is analyzed in [30]. Meanwhile,
a survey paper in [31] provides a systematic study of deep
learning, deep transfer learning and edge computing to mit-
igate COVID-19. Other works in [32], [33] also survey the
applications of AI techniques in screening, tracking, and
predicting the spread of COVID-19.

Different from these survey works, our paper provides a
comprehensive review on the use of both blockchain and
AI for ﬁghting COVID-19 pandemic. The key purpose of
this paper is to provide the readers with an overall picture
and road map of how blockchain and AI can support to
solve the coronavirus epidemic and related healthcare crisis.
Therefore, in this paper we present an extensive survey on the
applications and use cases of blockchain and AI technologies
speciﬁc to coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic by using the
rapidly emerging literature and the latest research reports. A
case study is then provided using federated AI for COVID-
19 detection. The unique challenges and future direction are
also highlighted. The comparison of the related works and
our paper is summarized in Table 1. To this end, our survey
provides the following contributions:

1) We introduce a conceptual systematic architecture that
integrates blockchain and AI for ﬁghting COVID-19,

Author et al.: Preparation of Papers for IEEE TRANSACTIONS and JOURNALS

aiming to provide the key solutions in response to coro-
navirus epidemic.

2) We identify a number of speciﬁc applications using
these technologies for solving coronavirus-related is-
sues detection. Particularly, we highlight the potentials
of blockchain and AI through a comprehensive analysis
and discussion in different applied scenarios.

3) We explore the latest use cases and projects using

blockchain and AI for coronavirus ﬁghting.

4) A case study is then provided using federated AI for
COVID-19 detection, aiming to demonstrate the bene-
ﬁts of the discussed technique in the pandemic.

5) Based on the extensive survey, we identify possible
research challenges and future directions to encour-
age scientists and stakeholders to put more efforts in
developing innovative solutions to combat the future
coronavirus-like epidemics.

C. METHODS AND MATERIALS
A systematic mapping study [34] was selected as the research
method for this survey paper, aiming to provide an overview
of the research related to the use of blockchain and AI for
ﬁghting the COVID-19 pandemic, including the following
key steps. First, we recognize the limitations of current
healthcare systems and highlight the motivations on why we
should use blockchain and AI for ﬁghting COVID-19. The
second stage is to search for all the relevant scientiﬁc papers
on the research topic. We map the papers related to technical
aspects of blockchain and AI for in supporting activities for
COVID-19 pandemic prevention. Here we use the terms such
as blockchain, machine learning, deep learning, COVID-19
as the search strings so that we can ﬁlter and select the most
relevant technical papers for our survey. Then we chose the
scientiﬁc databases for the searches. We decided to focus on
peer-reviewed, high-quality papers published in conferences,
workshops, symposiums, books and journals related to the
research topic. We used four scientiﬁc databases for paper re-
trieval, including (1) IEEE Xplore, (2) ACM Digital Library,
(3) Springer Link, and (4) ScienceDirect. The third stage is to
screen all related papers based on their titles. Meanwhile, we
exclude papers without high content quality, papers without
text availability and papers that were not written by English.
The fourth stage is keywording. We read the abstract and
identiﬁed keywords and concepts that reﬂected the contri-
bution of the paper. Then, we used the keywords to cluster
and form categories for the mapping of the studies. The ﬁnal
stage is data extraction that gathers all information needed to
survey technical aspects and contributions of bloclchain and
AI in the context of COVID-19.

D. ORGANIZATION
The structure of this survey is organized as follows. Section
II presents the background of coronavirus epidemic, and
two key technologies including blockchain and AI, along
with a conceptual architecture that integrates blockchain and

4

VOLUME 4, 2020

Author et al.: Preparation of Papers for IEEE TRANSACTIONS and JOURNALS

Related
works
[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]

[30]

[31]

[32]

[33]

Our
paper

TABLE 1: Comparison our survey paper with existing works.

Topic

Key contributions

Limitations

in

trust

Blockchain
for
COVID-19
pandemic
Blockchain
in healthcare
management
Blockchain
for COVID-
19
AI
COVID-19
DL
COVID-19

for

for

AI
COVID-19

for

for

DL and edge
computing for
COVID-19
AI
COVID-
19 prediction
AI techniques
for COVID-
19
Blockchain
and AI
COVID-19

for

A discussion of the roles of blockchain to address the
crisis of trust during the COVID-19 pandemic.

A brief discussion of the opportunities and limitations
of the applications of blockchains in healthcare man-
agement, including COVID-19-related domains.
A survey on the use of blockchain for COVID-19 pan-
demic via several speciﬁc use cases.

A overview of the use of technologies including AI to
help mitigate the impact of COVID-19 outbreak.
A very brief discussion of the roles of DL for COVID-
19 data analytics, along with a limited introduction to
blockchain in the pandemic.
A survey on the contributions of AI in combating
COVID-19, from disease detection and diagnosis to
transmission prediction.
provides a systematic study of deep learning, deep
transfer
learning and edge computing to mitigate
COVID-19.
A survey of the applications of AI techniques in screen-
ing, tracking, and predicting the spread of COVID-19.

A discussion of AI algorithms for COVID-19 data ana-
lytics.

A comprehensive survey on the applications of
blockchain and AI for COVID-19.

The potential of blockchain for ﬁght-
ing COVID-19 such as secure outbreak
monitoring, reliable supply chain has
not been investigated.
The analysis of blockchain usage for
COVID-19 is very limited.

The potential of AI and its connection
with blockchain for blockchain has not
been discovered.
The extensive survey on the blockchain
for COVID-19 has not been provided.
The scope of the review of the DL and
blockchain in COVID-19 is limited.

The extensive survey on the blockchain
for COVID-19 has not been provided.

The paper mostly focuses on comput-
ing aspects in the network edge for
ﬁghting COVID-19.
The real beneﬁts of AI for COVID-19
have not been veriﬁed.

The analysis of the roles of AI for
COVID-19 outbreak monitoring and
prediction is missing.
-

AI for coronavirus ﬁghting. In Section III, we analyse the
solutions using blockchain for coronavirus ﬁghting. Next,
in Section IV, we present a review on the use of AI for
coronavirus epidemic ﬁghting. Section V summarizes the
most popular use cases on blockchain and AI adaption in
response to coronavirus ﬁghting. We present a case study
toward using federated AI for COVID-19 to demonstrate the
feasibility of our approach in Section VI. Then, we point out
several important challenges and potential future directions
in Section VII for applying these technologies in COVID-19
epidemic. Finally, Section VIII concludes the paper. A list of
key acronyms and abbreviations used throughout the paper is
given in Table 2.

II. BACKGROUND
In this section, we provide brieﬂy the coronavirus pandemic,
and then summarize blockchain and AI technologies used
for ﬁghting coronavirus. Then we introduce a systematic
architecture for coronavirus ﬁghting.

TABLE 2: List of key acronyms.

Acronyms
COVID-19
WHO
CDC
IoT
AI
ML
DL
FL
DNN
CNN
GAN
CT

Deﬁnitions
Coronavirus
World Health Organization
Centres for Disease Control
Internet of Things
Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Machine Learning
Deep Learning
Federated Learning
Deep Neural Network
Convolutional Neural Network
Generative Adversarial Network
Computed Tomography

A. CORONAVIRUS (COVID-19) PANDEMIC
The ﬁrst outbreak of the COVID-19 virus epidemic took
place in Wuhan, a city of 11 million, the capital of Hubei
Province, China, starting in December 2019 [35], [36]. It is
not yet clear which animal the new coronavirus is associated
with, although several data suggests it is similar to those
found in bats. Coronaviruses affect the breathing passages,
or respiratory tract. The number of infected citizens grew

VOLUME 4, 2020

5

exponentially until Chinese authorities declared a complete
lockdown of the affected region, the 60-million-people Hubei
province. Symptoms can be mild like the common cold,
including a runny nose and cough or they can be more
severe and can cause difﬁculty in breathing. Other common
symptoms includes fever, cough, and feeling tired. A few
people become seriously ill but this seems more likely in
the elderly and those with health problems [37]. According
to the statistics reported by WHO on 21 September 2020
[38], there have been 30,949,804 conﬁrmed cases of COVID-
19, including 959,116 deaths. The COVID-19 disease has
been spreading rapidly around the world, especially in the
US, Southeast Asia and Europe. The COVID-19 epidemic
results in great harm to people’s daily life and country’s eco-
nomic development. Governments have locked down cities,
restricted movements of millions and suspended business
operations that will slow down the global economy in the
coming years. Undoubtedly, the virus outbreak has become
one of the biggest threats to the global economy and ﬁnancial
markets [39], [40].

B. BLOCKCHAIN
Blockchain is mostly known as the technological platform
behind Bitcoin [41]. The key concept of a blockchain is de-
centralization. In fact, its database does not place in a central
location, but is distributed across a network of participants
(e.g., computers). This decentralized concept provides high
robustness and security for database stored on blockchain
with no single-point failure. Importantly, blockchain is vis-
ible to each member in the network. This is enabled by a
mechanism called consensus which is a set of rules to ensure
the agreement among all participants on the status of the
blockchain ledger. A concept of how blockchain works is
shown in Fig. 2. In general, blockchains can be classiﬁed as
either a public (permission-less) or a private (permissioned)
blockchain [42]. A public blockchain is accessible for every-
one and anyone can join and make transactions as well as
participate in the consensus process. The best-known public
blockchain applications include Bitcoin and Ethereum [43].
Private blockchains on the other hand are an invitation-only
network managed by a central entity. A participant has to be
permissioned using a validation mechanism. Each blockchain
consists of three main components, including data block,
distributed ledger (database), and consensus algorithms.

Each data record (e.g., medical data) in the blockchain can
be stored in the form of a transaction. Multiple transactions
form a block, and multiple blocks are linked together to form
a blockchain [44]. The header ﬁeld of each block contains
the hash of the previous block, thus creating an ordered chain.
The unique advantage of blockchain is its ability to ensure the
chronological order of data records such as COVID-19 data.
These data records are permanently stored on the chain in a
chronological order. The consensus mechanism such as Proof
of Work (PoW) in the blockchain ensures that the state of the
entire blockchain is consistent and secure without the need
for any third parties. In the distributed ledger, each record

Author et al.: Preparation of Papers for IEEE TRANSACTIONS and JOURNALS

contains a unique cryptographic signature decoupled with a
timestamp which makes the ledger resistant to be modiﬁed.
In terms of consensus algorithms, the process of transacting
the block over the chain should not be controlled by any
entity so that each block is managed by all participants with
equal rights to avoid security issues, e.g., double-spending
attacks. This can be done by a mechanism called consen-
sus. From the view of blockchain, the consensus process
mainly provides a guarantee for agreement on each data
blockchain among entities. For instance, Bitcoin uses PoW
algorithm [44] as a main consensus scheme for its transaction
management. The nodes with high computational capability
can join the mining process and compete with each other
to be a ﬁrst one to verify the block. In return, the winner
can receive a certain amount of coin as the reward for its
mining effort. Along with the advance of blockchain, there
are several new consensus algorithms such as Proof-of-stake
(PoS), Byzantine Faulty Tolerant (BFT) [45].

In the blockchain ecosystem, a smart contract is an innova-
tive technology for many applications, including healthcare
[46]. A smart contract is a programmable application that
runs on a blockchain network. The term "smart contract"
was deﬁned by Nick Szabo as "a computerized transaction
protocol that executes the terms of a contract. The gen-
eral objectives of smart contract design are to satisfy com-
mon contractual conditions (such as payment terms, liens,
conﬁdentiality, and even enforcement), minimize exceptions
both malicious and accidental, and minimize the need for
trusted intermediaries". These condition scripts are placed
on blockchain with a unique address. One can trigger a
smart contract by sending a transaction to it. Due to the
elimination of the involvement of external authorities, smart
contracts potentially provide strong transparency for the
involved blockchain network. Blockchain nodes within the
network can execute the smart contract and derive the same
results from the execution, which are reﬂected and recorded
on the blockchain.

Blockchain can connect with the Internet of Things (IoT)
[47] in the context of healthcare for biomedical operations.
In fact, IoT devices like sensors, gateways can collect real-
time sensory data from patients and submit this data to
a blockchain for sharing and storage in a secure manner.
Specially, blockchain enables decentralized communication
between IoT devices and IoT users (e.g., doctors, patients
in healthcare) without the need of any central authority.
Whenever an IoT activity (e.g., sensor data collection) is
engaged, the blockchain nodes such as users in the network
can monitor and agree on the transaction conditions and
control the network operations. This process can be updated
on the public ledger which is accessible to all network mem-
bers while the role of central authority is eliminated [48].
Up to date, blockchain has proved its success in healthcare
and biomedical applications with promising performances in
terms of healthcare data security [49], secure data manage-
ment [50], [51], and transparent medical data storage [52],
[53]. Therefore, it is possible to apply in solving healthcare

6

VOLUME 4, 2020

Author et al.: Preparation of Papers for IEEE TRANSACTIONS and JOURNALS

FIGURE 2: The concept of blockchain operation.

issues related to coronavirus epidemic.

C. ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE (AI)
AI techniques have been used recently as a powerful tool
for coronavirus data analytics, prediction and drug/vaccine
discovery [54], [55]. Recent studies show that AI has been
mostly used for solving coronavirus-related issues via two
key approaches: machine learning (ML) and deep learning
(DL) [56]. ML is a subﬁeld of AI. The objective of ML in
general is to understand the structure of data and match that
data into models that can be expressed and utilized by people
[57]. ML algorithms instead allow computers to perform
training on data inputs and employ statistical analysis solu-
tions to output values that fall within a speciﬁc range. Based
on this, ML can provide building models from sample data to
automate decision-making processes using data inputs. For
example, several preliminary studies in [58] use temperature
checking-based techniques such as facial and body temper-
ature detection with smart helmet [59] for detecting people
with abnormal temperature, aiming to identify potentially
infected persons. For example, recently an AI company in
the US specialising has utilized ML-powered interactive
graphs are tracking the virus migration across China [60],
for creating an alert system, whereby users will be able to
receive information about whether an infected individual has
travelled within their vicinity. This solution will help ﬁnd
infected individuals and provide medical resources to them.
Meanwhile, AI methodologies such as DL have been also
exploited to implement intelligent coronavirus ﬁghting solu-
tions. Conceptually, DL uses multiple neural network layers
in a deep architecture [61]. The neural network use multiple
neurons connected via weighted connections among neural
layers. For example, a basic deep neural network contains an
input layer for receiving data samples, a single hidden layer
for training and an output layer for generating training out-
comes. Here, the number of hidden layers reﬂects the depth
of the deep learning architecture. To generate the desired out-
put, supervised or unsupervised learning techniques are used
with the labeled or unlabeled data samples, associated with
the adjustment of weight values among perceptrons [62].
DL is known for AI applications such as speech recogni-
tion, computer vision, image processing, object detection for
healthcare applications [63], [64], [65] and thus coronavirus
tackling can be a speciﬁc domain that DL can be applied

for coronavirus ﬁghting. Many AI companies have devel-
oped DL-enabled solutions to predict coronavirus infection
and produce drugs and vaccines necessary for coronavirus
disease [66].

In the open literature, various AI-based approaches have
been considered for COVID-19 detection, diagnosis and
prediction. However, in the pandemic, collecting sufﬁcient
data to implement intelligent algorithms becomes more chal-
lenging and the user privacy concerns are growing due
to the public data sharing with datacentres for COVID-19
data analytics. In this context, federated learning (FL) [67]
has emerged as a promising AI solution for realizing cost-
effective COVID-19 analytic-related applications with im-
proved privacy protection. Conceptually, FL is a distributed
AI approach which enables training of high-quality AI mod-
els by averaging local updates aggregated from multiple
hospitals and medical centres without the need for direct
access to the local data. This potentially prevents disclosing
sensitive user information and user preference, and thus
mitigates privacy leakage risks in this pandemic. Moreover,
since FL attracts large computation and dataset resources
from a number of COVID-19 data sources to train AI models,
the COVID-19 data training quality, e.g., accuracy, would
be signiﬁcantly improved which might not be achieved by
using centralized AI approaches with less data and limited
computational capabilities.

D. PROPOSED BLOCKCHAIN-AI ARCHITECTURE FOR
CORONAVIRUS FIGHTING
In this paper, we present an architecture as shown in Fig. 3
that integrates blockchain and AI for coronavirus ﬁghting.
The architecture is conceptually organized into four layers,
including coronavirus data sources, blocchain functions, AI
functions, and stakeholders. The work ﬂow is explained as
follows.

Initially, all the data from clinical labs, hospitals, social
media, and many other sources are consolidated and create
raw data that subsequently develops in scale to big data.
In the context of COVID-19, coronavirus data can include
historic infectious cases, information of outbreak areas and
coronavirus database in the formats of time series data, ra-
diology images, X-ray reports and virus structure sequences
that can be collected from various sources such as CDC,
World Health Organization, clinical labs, the public and
media. For example, recently China has built a large database
to summarize the daily numbers of infected cases in time
series updated from National Health commission Updates
[68]. The scientiﬁc community has also recently shared the
database of chest X-ray or CT images on the open Github
website for research usage [69]. These representative data
sources would be valuable resources for both researchers
and governments for the monitoring, analysis, estimation of
COVID-19 epidemic.

The data from these sources needs to be ensured for secu-
rity during the coronavirus outbreak tracking and analytics,
by using blockchain. Here, blockchain can offer a number of

VOLUME 4, 2020

7

    An blockchain entity (i.e. a computer) requests a transaction.The transaction is broadcast to all nodes in the P2P network.P2P network of nodesThe network of nodes validates the transaction using public key cryptography.Verified transaction (i.e. contract, record)The verified transaction is linked to other transactions to create a new data block.A new block is appended to the existing blockchain.The transaction is complete.Old blocksNew blockAuthor et al.: Preparation of Papers for IEEE TRANSACTIONS and JOURNALS

FIGURE 3: Blockchain and AI for coronavirus ﬁghting.

viable solutions for coronavirus-related services such as out-
break monitoring, safe day-to-day operations, medical supply
chain, and donation tracing. Secure data collected from the
blockchain network is analysed using intelligent AI-based
solutions. By using reliable prediction and accurate analysis
ability on big data collected from coronavirus sources, AI
can provide support for coronavirus ﬁghting via ﬁve main
applications, namely outbreak estimation, coronavirus detec-
tion, coronavirus analytics, vaccine/drug development, and
prediction of any future coronavirus-like outbreak. Finally, at
the top of the hierarchy comes the stakeholder layer which
includes parties such as governments, healthcare providers
who are beneﬁting from blockchain-AI solutions. Note that
blockchain can build secure communication networks and
protocols to establish a fast and reliable data exchange with
the stakeholders thanks to its decentralized nature [70]. With
this architecture, several blockchain-AI systems can be de-
veloped. For example, blockchain can establish the com-
munication with hospitals and COVID-19 research centers
and transfer securely COVID-19 data to the cloud com-
puting where AI functions are located for data processing
and computation. Then, analyzed data can be returned via
blockchain so that doctors physicians can do further steps
for COVID-19 analytics [71]. The working ﬂowchart of our

proposed blockchain-AI architecture for ﬁghting COVID-
19 is summarized in Fig. 4. An illustrative use case from
the proposed architecture is shown in Fig. 5. To be clear,
data collected from hospitals can be shared with the data
centre via blockchain. In the data centre, AI tools can be
employed, such as a neural network, for COVID-19 data
analytics, e.g., classiﬁcation, regression, etc. Blockchain is
also used to establish secure exchange of analyzed outcomes
between the data centre, hospitals and the stakeholders via
the decentralized ledger.

Note that the blockchain networks in COVID-19-related
applications can include private and public ones. In the
case of private blockchains, several solutions can be adopted
to enhance security. For example, by introducing atomic
meta-transactions proposed in [72], blockchain entities can
commit to their obligations during the data exchange (e.g.,
a private blockchain network between doctors and patients
in a hospital). Particularly, smart contracts can be used to
provide reliable authentication over the blockchain network
where transactions and data exchange events can be veriﬁed
in a transparent and reliable manner. In the case of public
blockchains, secure data usage can be also accomplished
according to the predeﬁned access permissions of patients
through the smart contracts of blockchain [73]. Another

8

VOLUME 4, 2020

COVID-19 Data SourcesData sourcesClinical labsHospitalsSocial mediaPatientsNetwork operatorsStakeholdersGovernmentsPublicResearchersHealthcare providersRegulators...Coronavirus DetectionAI functions for COVID-19 fightingBlockchain functions for COVID-19 fightingOutbreak MonitoringSafe day-to-day  OperationsFuture OutbreakPrediction Vaccine/drug Development Coronavirus AnalyticsSecurity ProtectionOutbreak EstimationMedical Supply ChainDonationTracingPopular COVID-19 data formats: time series data, radiology images, X-ray reports, virus structure sequences, and other public datasets. Author et al.: Preparation of Papers for IEEE TRANSACTIONS and JOURNALS

FIGURE 4: The working ﬂowchart of our proposed
blockchain-AI architecture for ﬁghting COVID-19.

solution is also proposed in [74] using a public Ethereum
blockchain to prevent fake information, by enabling to trace
and track the provenance and history of digital content to its
original source even if the digital content is copied multiple
times. The smart contract utilizes the hashes of the inter-
planetary ﬁle system (IPFS) used to store digital content
and its metadata so that the content can be credibly traced
to a trusted or reputable source. These proposed solutions
are promising to improve the security and performance of
blockchain systems for ﬁghting COVID-19.

In the following sections, we present an extensive survey
on the latest research efforts on using blockchain and AI for
coronavirus epidemic.

III. BLOCKCHAIN-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR
CORONAVIRUS FIGHTING
In this section, we analyse the role of blockchain for
coronavirus ﬁghting via four key solutions, including out-
break monitoring, safe day-to-day operations, medical supply
chain, and donation tracing, as shown in Fig. 3.

A. OUTBREAK MONITORING
Blockchain can provide feasible solutions for monitoring
the coronavirus outbreak. Indeed, the blockchain can realize
provide data visualization tools for deadly coronavirus moni-
toring. Blockchain can be seen as distributed database ledgers
that can receive multiple updates in near real-time and store

them on blocks linked together in a immutable manner. In
the coronavirus epidemic, blockchain is potential to support
the thousands of coronavirus victims by recording immutably
patient symptoms of infection [75]. This is highly important
to monitor the spread of coronavirus because several patients
can deliberately declare wrong their symptoms for avoiding
hospital visits, which can lead to patient quarantine failure.
Governments and healthcare organization can use blockchain
to provide real-time data about affected areas and safe zones
for providing ﬁghting efforts [76]. Information of safe zones
such as population, location, current coronavirus outbreak
status is recorded via a chain of blocks, and each block can
store an update of the outbreak in a certain time. Note that
such data can be collected from surveillance providers who
use a combination of technologies like AI and geograph-
ical information systems (GIS). Based on that, healthcare
service professionals can identify the free-virus zones from
the infected ones to implement quarantine requirements [77].
Blockchain hence can provide practical approaches to protect
the community against virus spread.

Another major problem in the coronavirus pandemic at
this time is the outbreak of fake news circulated through
social media channels and websites. We are facing an un-
precedented crisis of public understanding. In February 2020,
Turkey and North Korea have been under scrutiny for claim-
ing they have no diagnosed cases, but in fact the actual
statistic from the WHO is different [78], while the accuracy
on the case number given by Iran has been called into
question, with lower numbers of infected cases and deaths.
Nowadays, people rely on social media platforms such as
Facebook, Twitter to update the coronavirus pandemic, but
these platforms are facilitators and multipliers of COVID-
19-related misinformation. The incorrect information trans-
mission really increases public confusion about who and
what information sources to be reliable. The outbreak of
fake news also generates fear and panic due to unveriﬁed
rumours and exaggerated claims, and promotes racist forms
of digital vigilantism and scapegoating [79]. Governments,
digital corporations and public health authorities should ﬁnd
solutions to verify and authenticate any information and
news related to the pandemic which plays an important
role in controlling public panic and facilitating coronavirus
management. Importantly, blockchain is able to provide a
consensus on the ordering of the COVID-19 data records
in the blockchain, aiming to achieve an agreement on the
data among distributed entities such as healthcare providers,
hospitals, and governments for better data management.

B. SAFE DAY-TO-DAY OPERATIONS
In the coronavirus crisis, blockchain has emerged as a
promising platform that enables to conduct day-to-day ac-
tivities in virtual environments to reduce the risk of virus
contraction. In light of the ongoing coronavirus pandemic,
customer services via virtual environments such as digital
blockchain networks would become feasible to mitigate the
spread of virus. For example, the UAE’s Ministry of Com-

VOLUME 4, 2020

9

Stage 1: Datasets are collected from clinical labs, hospitals, social media, and many other sources in the formats of time series data, radiology images, X-ray reports, virus structure sequences, etc.Stage 2:  Blockchain is adopted to build secure data sharing platforms for COVID-19 analytics, and enable related services, such as secure outbreak monitoring, safe day-to-day operations, reliable medical supply chain, and  donation tracing.Stage 3:  Secure data collected from the blockchain network is analysed using AI which can support COVID-19 fighting via services, e.g., outbreak estimation, coronavirus detection, coronavirus analytics, vaccine/drug development, and prediction of any future coronavirus-like outbreak.Stage 4: The analysed results from AI analytics will serve the participating stakeholders such as governments, healthcare providers, insurance companies for COVID-19 policy making, treatment planning, and payment. Blockchain can be also used to build secure communication networks to provide reliable data exchange among stakeholders.Author et al.: Preparation of Papers for IEEE TRANSACTIONS and JOURNALS

FIGURE 5: A illustrative use case with blockchain and AI for COVID-19 data analytics.

munity Development has switched to using digital channels
via blockchain for civil services [80]. Instead of visiting
government ofﬁces and service centres for paper works, the
government services such as the digital authentication of
ofﬁcial certiﬁcates and other documents are implemented
by blockchain. The trial results indicate that blockchain
can process 2,919 different types of documents, which is
even faster than the traditional working approaches. More
importantly, this blockchain-based solution really helps to
reduce the risk of infection from face-to-face contact that
accordingly mitigates the possibility of virus spread in the
community.

Furthermore, economic activities can be continued using
virtual platforms based on digital blockchain. In fact, elec-
tronic payment among customers and companies now can
be performed via blockchain instead of cash which may
be a source of coronavirus spread [81]. Blockchain is well
known to make digital money such as Bitcoin [82] which
proves efﬁciency in certain digital transactions such as digital
auction. In the coronavirus crisis that people should not use
banknotes as Merchants are encouraging, electronic payment
via blockchain may be an ideal choice. The decentralized
concept of blockchain ensures payments in a secure, trans-
parent, and immutable interface, which is free from human
interaction. Another example is Ant Financial which has
been launching a blockchain-enabled online bid opening
system to replace the cash-based approaches [83]. It allows
customers to perform in contactless bidding from remote
locations when they take quarantine measures to combat the
COVID-19 outbreak. This bidding system is operated on a
consortium blockchain platform which ensures that materials
and processes of bid openings are tamper-proof, and the

contactless bidding is transparent and trustworthy.

C. MEDICAL SUPPLY CHAIN
Blockchain has proved extremely useful in supply chain
applications such as goods supply chain, trading supply chain
[84], [85], [86], [87]. In this pandemic crisis, maintaining
a continuous supply of medicines and food has become a
challenge for the healthcare sector. The blockchain technol-
ogy can help the supply chain companies in achieving a fast
ﬂow of supply by tracking the ﬂow from the origins to the
destinations in a reliable manner.

Recently, Alipay, along with the Zhejiang Provincial
Health Commission and the Economy and Information Tech-
nology Department, China has launched a blockchain-based
platform that allows users to track the demand and the
supply chains of medical supplies [88]. This consists of the
recording and tracking of coronavirus epidemic ﬁghting ma-
terials, such as masks, gloves and other protective gear. The
company claims that blockchain can ensure high tracebility
for the medical supply chain by secure linking among blocks
and transactions and fast data ﬂow thanks to blockchain de-
centralization. When an outbreak occurs, a quick reaction and
fast supply chain is the most important weapons authorities
have to tackle the problem. By using blockchain, the supply
chain issues can be solved, helping to save thousands of lives
and billions of dollars [89]. In summary, blockchain can offer
ﬁve key solutions to support the medical supply chain in the
coronavirus crisis:

• Product requirements: provide a solution to update real-
time demands and medical factories for fast response
(e.g., supply chain rate adjustment).

• Supply creditability: provide a solution to control the

10

VOLUME 4, 2020

...Hospital NHospital 1Step 3: Data analytics with AI, e.g., neural networks. .............................................Step 2: Blockchain is used to establish secure data sharing and reliable storage via decentralized ledger.Attack MonitorAttack MonitorAttack MonitorAttack MonitorData centreStep 1: Data collection with X-ray imagesStep 1: Data collection with X-ray imagesStakeholders  (governments, doctors and health organizations)Stakeholders  (governments, doctors and health organizations)DatabaseBlockchainBlockchainBlockchainBlockchainStep 4: Sharing analysed outcomes with stakeholders via blockchain.Step 4: Sharing analysed outcomes with local hospitals via blockchain. Step 4: Sharing analysed outcomes with local hospitals via blockchain. Author et al.: Preparation of Papers for IEEE TRANSACTIONS and JOURNALS

quality of goods from the factory side, e.g., product
speciﬁcation, supply volumes.

• Transportation tracking: Goods, medical supplies need
to be traced to guarantee transparency in the medical
supply chain, which can be done by a blockchain net-
work with transaction recording and monitoring capa-
bilities.

• Financial payments: blockchain can be used as a pay-
ment platform between the suppliers and the customers
(e.g., users in quarantine areas). All digital payments are
recorded on the blockchain with timestamp, signature
without being changed or modiﬁed.

• Customs certiﬁcations: customer behaviours such as
buying, payment actions can be reﬂected on the
blockchain with digitally signed certiﬁcates that shows
the negotiation between the suppliers and the users.

D. DONATION TRACING
The potential of blockchain in donation tracing applications
has been investigated in recent works [90], [91]. In the
coronavirus crisis, donation is one of the most important ac-
tivities to support livings and healthcare services for infected
victims. A critical question raised is how to trace the donation
activities to ensure that donated goods, money are transferred
to the targeted victims. Blockchain can be a feasible solution
where the donation process can be traced through blockchain
which issues signature and certiﬁcate to mark each of the
donation updates, e.g., when, where, donation volumes, list
of targeted receivers, etc. As an example, blockchain has
been recently applied to trace the donation of food and
protective gear like N95 masks to support citizens in the
infected area [92]. Blockchain also allows all parties such
as suppliers, healthcare professionals, charity organizations
to monitor the progress of donations. Any updates will be
informed to all related parties to ensure transparency over
the donation network. The Italian Red Cross is now also
seeking Bitcoin donations to purchase highly needed med-
ical equipment to infected areas [93]. Binance Charity, a
blockchain-based donation platform [94], also launches a
million-dollars-campaign to seek donations via blockchain
coins that are then exchanged to purchase supplies for sup-
porting affected countries and regions.

The Fig. 6 presents a use case on how to integrate
blockchain to support ﬁghting COVID-19. COVID-19 data
can be collected from different dataset sources such as
outbreak area information, infected case history, X-ray re-
ports and patient health records. Blockchain would build a
database platform where COVID-19 data is attached with
timestamps for data tracking in an immutable manner. In
the COVID-19 context, many related parties are involved
in a common blockchain ecosystem, such as governments,
doctors, and healthcare organizations. Here, governments
may need blockchain for epidemic tracking, and doctors want
to collect reliably data for efﬁcient COVID-19 prediction
and diagnosis associated with the support of AI models (like
ML, DL). Moreover, healthcare organizations can also use

blockchain to provide timely donations or medical supports
to the patients. From our observation and discussions, the use
of blockchain has the great potential to support strategies to-
wards ﬁghting the COVID-19 disease and control effectively
the COVID-19 epidemic.

IV. AI-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR CORONAVIRUS
FIGHTING
In this section, we present a review on the use of AI for coro-
navirus epidemic ﬁghting. AI can support by providing ﬁve
main applications, namely outbreak estimation, coronavirus
detection, coronavirus analytics, vaccine/drug development,
and prediction of future coronavirus-like outbreak, as shown
in Fig. 3.

A. ESTIMATION OF CORONAVIRUS OUTBREAK SIZE
AI can help combat COVID-19 spread by its ability to
estimate the coronavirus outbreak size through analysing
people’s phone usage patterns. In fact, when people are
sick, dead due to coronavirus infection or taking care of
family members, they tend to change their patterns of phone
usage, which can be detected by AI algorithms run on the
datasets provided by wireless operators. For example, if we
can get access to the wireless operators’ data in Wuhan from
November 2018 to March 2020, then we may be able to ﬁnd
out the activity patterns of cell phones.

These patterns can include abnormal usage (e.g., frequent
calls in early morning) from sick people, non-calling activ-
ities from people died from coronavirus infection, or new
phone appearance in another city from people sneaked out of
the lockdown city. Moreover, during home conﬁnement in the
lockdown period, sleep timing has markedly changed, with
people going to bed and waking up later, and spending more
time in bed [95]. During outbreaks of infection, people are
likely to experience fear of falling sick or dying themselves,
feelings of helplessness, and stigma [96]. In addition to
that, the upcoming economic downturn caused by COVID-
19 crisis also leads to more consumption of unhealthy foods
as they are cheaper. For example, according to a recent
study [97], from December 2019 through February 2020 as
the pandemic spread, the populations with a higher rate of
poverty showed an increased consumption of unhealthy food.
In these situations, AI can analyse such different activities
which can reveal the patterns of mobile users accordingly
[98]. For instance, ML is able to model and predict the per-
sonalized diverse activities of a user through learning from
his phone usage records [99]. Furthermore, DL would be a
promising AI technique that relies on deep data learning and
high-performance model prediction, aiming to estimate ac-
curately the mobile application usage, e.g., abnormal calling
behaviours, phone service inactivity [100]. Therefore, such
AI applications can be applied in the context of coronavirus
epidemic to reveal the user patterns so that the agencies can
estimate the size of coronavirus outbreak.

Moreover, a mobile operator can detect and track infected
people’s movement to predict the outbreak using AI analytics

VOLUME 4, 2020

11

Author et al.: Preparation of Papers for IEEE TRANSACTIONS and JOURNALS

FIGURE 6: The use case of blockchain for controlling COVID-19.

based on their cellular network location data. For exam-
ple, AI can analyse the user movement patterns to estimate
the locations where crowds are still gathering and specify
certain geographic quarantine areas. Meanwhile, stemming
from the fact that people in several Chinese cities rely on
their mobile phone for daily public transportation, Chinese
railway authorities use AI to track the customers’ movement
and identify people who were near a passenger infected
with COVID-19 [101]. Human mobility patterns can be also
estimated by using AI analytics based on geo-located Twitter
social media data records [102]. This solution can trace the
geographical location of infected patients and keep track their
movement to predict the coronavirus spread.

B. CORONAVIRUS DETECTION
Several recently emerging solutions using AI for coronavirus
detection have been proposed in the literature. A measure is
to detect temperature on human face so that we can identify
potential symptoms of COVID-19 disease. AI can come up
with solutions thanks to its capability in face recognition
applications. The work in [103] presents an improvement in

masked face detection using AI with real-world datasets in
response to the coronavirus epidemic. Through deep learn-
ing, the dataset is trained to build an accurate masked face
detection model, which then serves for the masked face
recognition task, aiming to determine whether a person is
wearing a mask. Different from this study, the authors in
[104] rely on breathing characteristics to detect potential peo-
ple infected with COVID-19. In the coronavirus detection,
accurate identiﬁcation of the unexpected abnormal respira-
tory pattern of people in a remote and unobtrusive manner
is highly signiﬁcant. Deep learning (DL) has been used for
respiratory pattern classiﬁcation, aiming to to classify six
clinically signiﬁcant respiratory patterns related to COVID-
19 (Eupnea, Tachypnea, Bradypnea, Biots, Cheyne-Stokes
and Central-Apnea). The work in [105] uses image analysis-
based techniques for coronavirus detection. An array of
convolutional neural network based models (ResNet50, In-
ceptionV3 and InceptionResNetV2) is leveraged to analyze
the chest X-ray radiographs, aiming for detecting coron-
avirus pneumonia infected patients. The ResNet50 model
can provide the highest classiﬁcation performance with 98%

12

VOLUME 4, 2020

Blockchain NetworkPrevious HashMerkle RootNonceBLOCK N-1TimestampPrevious HashMerkle RootNonceBLOCK NTimestampPrevious HashMerkle RootNonceBLOCK N+1TimestampOutbreak area information Infected case historyX-Ray reportsPatient health records Blockchain nodes (governments, doctors and health organizations)COVID-19 Data SourcesBlockchain database (Cloud/server)Reliable COVID-19 Analytics using data on blockchainSecure healthcare networkSupport COVID-19 prediction (combined with AI)Support COVID-19 outbreak analyticSupport COVID-19 diagnosisAuthor et al.: Preparation of Papers for IEEE TRANSACTIONS and JOURNALS

accuracy among the other two proposed models, as conﬁrmed
from simulations.

To further improve the accuracy of COVID-19 detection,
the authors in [106] leverage a deep convolutional neural
network that is able to automatically extract features starting
from the genome sequence of the virus. Experiments using
the 2019nCoVR dataset show a correct classiﬁcation perfor-
mance in detecting SARS-CoV-2, and distinguishing it from
other coronavirus strains, such as MERS-CoV, SARS-CoV.
Meanwhile, a research effort in [107] is toward diagnostic un-
certainty veriﬁcation in the COVID-19 detection. A Bayesian
Convolutional Neural Network (BCNN) is considered to
estimate uncertainty in DL solutions. The objective of this
study is to improve the diagnostic performance of the human-
machine combination using a publicly available COVID-
19 chest X-ray dataset. Another interesting work in [108]
presents a scheme for detecting coronavirus disease COVID-
19 using on-board smartphone sensors. The proposed model
enables us to read the signal measurements from smartphone
sensors to identify viral pneumonia which can potentially
identify coronavirus-related symptoms. It would be useful for
radiologists with a smart phone in tracking the development
of the disease.

C. CORONAVIRUS DIAGNOSIS AND TREATMENT
In the coronavirus ﬁghting, developing innovative and ef-
ﬁcient diagnostic and treatment methods has great signiﬁ-
cance, deciding the success of ﬁghting COVID-19 disease.
AI can come up with solutions to help understand and
ﬁght COVID19 via intelligent data analytics [109], [110]. A
methodology is the thoracic CT image analysis to diagnose
coronavirus positive patients [111]. Non-contrast thoracic CT
has been shown to be an effective tool in diagnosis, quan-
tiﬁcation and follow-up of corona-similar diseases. Given a
potentially large number of thoracic CT exams, an analysis
system is proposed that uses both robust 2D and 3D DL
models coupled with existing AI models and combining them
with clinical understanding. CT image analysis is also imple-
mented in [112] to early diagnose COVID-19 patients. The
ﬁnding results indicate that the manifestations of computed
tomography imaging of COVID-19 had their own character-
istics, which are different from other types of viral pneu-
monia, such as Inﬂuenza-A viral pneumonia. Using these
features, a 3D DL-based a location-attention classiﬁcation
model is developed using a pulmonary CT image set for
symptom classiﬁcation, showing a high accuracy with 86.7%
for three groups: COVID-19, Inﬂuenza-A viral pneumonia
and healthy cases. Moreover, the work in [113] introduces
the AI-based model, called COVIDX-Net that includes seven
different architectures of deep convolutional neural network
models, such as the modiﬁed Visual Geometry Group Net-
work (VGG19) and the second version of Google MobileNet,
for COVID-19 diagnosis. Each deep neural network model is
able to analyze the normalized intensities of the X-ray image
to recognize and classify the patient status either negative
or positive COVID-19 case. Based on the current situation

where there is a lack of public COVID-19 datasets, the
learning-based scheme is validated on 50 Chest X-ray im-
ages with 25 conﬁrmed positive COVID-19 cases, showing
good performances in terms of high accuracy in COVID-19
classiﬁcation. DL has been also used for the quantiﬁcation
of COVID-19 infection in CT images, as reported in [114].
More speciﬁcally, a VB-Net neural network is employed to
segment COVID-19 infection regions in CT scans, with a
training dataset from 249 COVID- 19 patients, and then the
model is validated using 300 new COVID-19 patients. The
proposed scheme potentially assists radiologists to reﬁne the
automatic annotation of each infected case.

ML has been also utilized to facilitate coronavirus treat-
ment. The study in [115] presents an example on using ML
to design antibody for supporting COVID-19 treatment as
shown in Fig. 7. In this work, the authors collects 1933
virus antibody sequences from clinical patient IC50 data. The
graph featurization of antibody sequences has been integrated
to provide molecular representation that is then trained by an
ML model, such as a neural network, to generate thousands
of potential candidates. Then, several ML classiﬁers such as
random forest, support vector machine are used to classify
these sequences to select the most optimal sequences and
evaluate the stability of proposed antibodies. This workﬂow
using ML would enable the rapid screening of potential
antibodies that support the treatment of COVID-19 with high
conﬁdence.

The work in [116] also considers a based alignment-free
approach for an ultra-fast, scalable, and accurate classiﬁca-
tion of whole COVID-19 genomes. Decision tree coupled
with supervised learning has been also used for genome
analysis from a large dataset of over 5000 unique viral
genomic sequences. The authors claim that their scheme can
achieve high levels of classiﬁcation accuracy and discov-
ers the most relevant relationships among over 5,000 viral
genomes within a few minutes. Additionally, the research
in [117] suggests an ML-based miRNA prediction analysis
for the SARS-CoV-2 genome to identify miRNA-like hairpin
which can impact the COVID-19 virus. Learning can help
to realize potential miRNA-based interactions between the
viral miRNAs and human genes as well as human miRNAs
and viral genes, which are important to identify the mecha-
nisms behind the SARS-CoV-2 infections. Furthermore, un-
derstanding personalized therapy is also an efﬁcient approach
for COVID-19 treatment [118]. The remdesivir trials [119]
and preliminary data made available from recovery trial indi-
cate that these therapies (antiviral and steroids, respectively)
may have more beneﬁt for certain patient populations and
at certain timepoints within the illness. Understanding which
patient and at what time would have maximum beneﬁt from
which cocktail of therapies would be clinically useful.

D. VACCINE/DRUG DEVELOPMENT
In order to ultimately combat the emerging COVID-19 pan-
demic, it is desired to develop effective vaccines against
deadly disease caused by COVID-19 virus. AI can come as an

VOLUME 4, 2020

13

Author et al.: Preparation of Papers for IEEE TRANSACTIONS and JOURNALS

FIGURE 7: An application of machine learning to design antibody against COVID-19 [115].

attractive tool to support vaccine production. A few rapidly
emerging studies suggest to use AI for this task. For example,
the work in [120] employs Vaxign-ML tool to predict 24
COVID-19 vaccine candidates by using the S protein and
ﬁve non-structural proteins that aims investigating the entire
proteome of CoV-2. By applying reverse vaccinology and
machine learning, the authors can predict potential vaccine
targets for effective and safe COVID-19 vaccine develop-
ment. Another vaccine trial is in [121] which leverages HLA-
binding prediction tools using an peptide stability assay.
777 peptides were assessed that were predicted to be good
binders across 11 MHC allotypes with high prediction bind-
ing scores. Preliminary results can make important contribu-
tions to the design of an efﬁcacious vaccine against COVID-
19.

Up to now, there is no effective treatment for this COVID-
19 epidemic. However, the viral protease of a coronavirus
can be extracted and replicated for drug discovery. The
work in [122] suggests that the potential anti-SARS-CoV
chemotherapies can be potential 2019-nCoV drugs. A ma-
chine intelligence-based generative network complex model
is derived to generate a family of potential 2019-nCoV drugs,
inherited from HIV-1 protease [123]. The results from this
work can open up new opportunities to seek new drugs for
ﬁghting COVID-19 in this crisis.

Unlike the previous work, the study in [124] uses DL
to develop a drug-target interaction model called Molecule
Transformer-Drug Target Interaction (MT-DTI) to identify
commercially available drugs that can act on viral proteins of
2019- nCoV. They suggest that atazanavir, an antiretroviral
medication used for HIV ﬁghting, can be useful to develop
a chemical compound speciﬁc for COVID-19. The efﬁciency
of the discovered drug is under the trial stage before possibly
using on corona-infected patients. Moreover, the work in
[125] designs a data-driven drug repositioning framework,
by integrating ML and statistical analysis approaches to
systematically mine large-scale knowledge graph and tran-
scriptome data. Results from trials show that ML can predict

effective drug candidates against SARS-CoV-2. Meanwhile,
drug repositioning is a possible solution for combating the
global coronavirus crisis [126]. A panel of 49 FDA-approved
drugs that have been selected by an assay of SARS-CoV is
monitored to recognize the potential drug candidates against
COVID-19 infection. This trial drugs target to be tested on
animals for tracking their antiviral activities before using on
human.

E. PREDICTION OF FUTURE COVID-19 OUTBREAK
The recent emergence of coronavirus has highlighted the
need for prediction of future outbreak like COVID-19. Epi-
demic models of COVID to predict and control the outbreak
should be taken into consideration in the coronavirus ﬁghting
activities [127], [128], [129]. Recently, AI has been applied
to predict outbreak like coronavirus. For example, an predic-
tion model using AI to estimate the size, lengths and ending
time of Covid-19 across China [130]. An auto-encoder is
designed for modelling the transmission dynamics of the epi-
demic based on dataset collected from WHO sources. Clus-
tering algorithms may be useful to classify different cities,
regions for investigating the virus transmissions for outbreak
prediction. Another model is developed for outbreak predic-
tion in Mexico, as reported in [131]. The biological features
of the virus and the possible pathophysiological mechanisms
of its disease and a stochastic model based on a Markov chain
are used to express the probability distribution of cases in
Mexico states. This also can estimate the number of cases in
Mexico that facilitates the government in the estimation of
virus spread making appropriate actions for future ﬁghtings.
From the statistics collected from the COVID-19 outbreak,
a research group in China built a prediction model for future
infectious diseases using ML [132]. The key idea is to extend
causal inference theory and ML to identify and quantify
the most important factors that cause zoonotic disease and
COVID-19 outbreaks. Based on that, the model can generate
visual tools to illustrate the complex causal relationships of
animal infectious diseases and their correlation with COVID-

14

VOLUME 4, 2020

Training SetHIVEbolaH1N1SARSGP+AB10Patient IC50GPABGraphFeaturizationHypothetical Antibodies for COVID-19 Stability ofAntibody Machine Learning10,0000 Candidates1000 Candidates10 CandidatesML ModelBio-informaticsComputer SimulationPatient classification Author et al.: Preparation of Papers for IEEE TRANSACTIONS and JOURNALS

19 diseases. Meanwhile, the authors in [133] model the non-
deterministic data distributions via DL network and fuzzy
rule induction for obtaining better the stochastic insight about
the epidemic development. Based on the model outputs,
policy makers can have a better picture about the coronavirus
spread and estimate the possibility of future similar outbreak.
DL has been also tested in [134] to build a virus host predic-
tion model for identifying the way the virus transmits, with
different sources such as bat coronaviruses, mink viruses
and ﬁnding the relation with COVID-19. This research po-
tentially discovers the origins of infection and predicts how
coronavirus transmits for appropriate preventive actions.

F. FEDERATED AI FOR PRIVACY-AWARE COVID-19
DATA ANALYTICS
Many AI-based approaches have demonstrated signiﬁcant
promise in the intelligent COVID-19 data analytics for de-
tection, diagnosis and prediction. However, in the pandemic,
collecting sufﬁcient data to implement intelligent algorithms
becomes more challenging and the user privacy concerns
are growing due to the public data sharing with datacentres
for COVID-19 data analytics [135]. FL can be an ideal
candidate for assisting COVID-19 detection, by its federation
and privacy protection features. In this way, each institution
participates in training their DL model using their local
COVID-19 images, e.g., X-ray and computed tomography
(CT) images, and only model parameters such as gradients
are exchanged while there is no need to share actual data and
sensitive user information. For example, a number of hospi-
tals can cooperatively communicate via the blockchain to run
CNN updates locally for identifying CT scans of COVID- 19
patients [136]. At each hospital, a deep capsule network is de-
veloped to enhance image classiﬁcation performance, while
FL provides guidance for transmissions of model updates to
perform the model aggregation at a data centre. Simulations
from 34,006 CT scan slices (images) of 89 subjects verify
a high COVID-19 X-ray image classiﬁcation and low data
loss in the FL algorithm running. FL is also used in [137]
to provide privacy-promoting AI solutions for COVID-19
chest X-ray image analytics. The preliminary experiments
have been implemented, where multiple COVID- 19 X-ray
image owners run a CNN-based model for image classiﬁca-
tion, and then share the computed parameters with a data
centre for mobile averaging while the data ownership of
each user is guaranteed. Four state-of-the-art CNN models,
e.g., MobileNet, ResNet18, MoblieNet and COVID-Net, are
used in the federated setting for evaluation, where ResNet18
is proven with the best COVID-19 detection performance
(98.06%) in federated X-ray image learning settings.

Moreover, a dynamic fusion-based FL method is proposed
in [138] for CT scan image analysis to diagnose COVID-19
infections via two stages, including client participation and
client selection. First, each client such as a medical institution
make a decision to participate in the FL round based on the
performance of the newly trained model. The central server
also makes the decision to select which clients are permitted

to update their local gradients by calculating the updating
time. If a client cannot update its gradient within a predeﬁned
time interval, it is excluded from the FL aggregation. Another
FL approach is designed in [139] for COVID-19 screening
from Chest X-ray images by the collaboration of multiple
medical institutions. The focus is on Chest X-ray images
classiﬁcation to identify COVID-19 from non-COVID-19
cases, where the feature extraction and the classiﬁcation of
X-ray images are performed based on a CNN to detect the
COVID-19 disease. At each hospital, a CNN model is trained
by allowing each X-ray image to be put into a convolutional
layer and output the probability of COVID-19 infection, and
then a central server is used to aggregate synchronously
with the local institutions for building a strong classiﬁca-
tion model for COVID- 19 detection without compromising
signiﬁcantly user privacy which is valuable in the pandemic
[140]. Moreover, FL is also combined with DL to build a
deep collaborative learning solution for detecting COVID-
19 lung abnormalities in CT [141]. The internal datasets
are collected from a total of 75 patients conﬁrmed COVID-
19 infection at three local hospitals in Hong Kong for FL
simulations, and then the generalizability is validated on
external cohorts from Mainland China and Germany.

V. BLOCKCHAIN AND AI USE CASES FOR
CORONAVIRUS FIGHTING
The use of blockchain and AI for solving coronavirus pan-
demic has been attracted much attention from industry and
research community with projects and use case trials. In
this section, we highlight the most popular use cases on
blockchain and AI adaption in response to coronavirus ﬁght-
ing.

A. BLOCKCHAIN USE CASES
1) Hashlog
The ﬁrst project is Hashlog that was created by a Georgia-
based health tech startup Acoer [142]. They has come up
with a HashLog blockchain solution to combat and control
the coronavirus from spreading. This can be enabled by the
distributed blockchain ledger technology which ensures log-
ging and data visualization of the coronavirus outbreak from
the public data of US Centres for Disease Control (CDC)
and WHO. Hashlog potentially provides real-time updates
on the transmission of virus by tracking the movement of
infected people which allows the healthcare authorities to
make decisions for ﬁghting further infections.

2) Hyperchain
The next blockchain project related to coronavirus is Hyper-
chain [143], which has built a donation tracking platform for
supporting governments and healthcare organizations in the
donation process to the infected victims in China. Hyperchain
can ensure the transparency of the donation records from
the origins to the destinations without being changed or
modiﬁed. Moreover, the Hyperchain is able to connect up to
millions of nodes so that more users can reach donated goods

VOLUME 4, 2020

15

and necessary medical equipment from the factories, helping
to solve the facility shortage issues during the epidemic.

3) VeChain
One interesting blockchain use case is VeChain which is
a blockchain-based platform built for monitoring vaccine
production in China [144]. All activities related to vaccine
manufacturing from materials, codes to package are recorded
and stored on distributed ledgers. This project also provides a
reliable method to reduce the risk of potential modiﬁcations
on vaccine information. VeChain also ensures that vaccine
records are immutable and permanent to achieve high vaccine
quality which is highly important in the healthcare sector, like
COVID-19 epidemic.

4) PHBC
Another promising blockchain platform is PHBC [145] that
is a monitoring blockchain for the continual and anonymous
veriﬁcation of communities and workplaces that are free from
coronavirus COVID-19 as well as other high-risk viruses,
bacteria, to aid them in staying free of deadly diseases. An
interesting feature of this blockchain platform is the ability
of monitoring the movement of uninfected persons, while
restricting their return if they have gone to the areas known to
be infected. PHBC can also automatically identify zones with
and without validated incident reports by integrating the real-
time information collected from virus surveillance providers
with AI and geographical information systems.

B. AI USE CASES
Various AI companies are also making a play towards efﬁ-
cient detection and diagnostic of diseases caused by COVID-
19 virus. The important use cases and projects will be high-
lighted as follows.

1) Bluedot
Bluedot is an AI project developed by a Toronto-based
startup that aims to detect coronavirus in the epidemic [146].
Bluedot use AI algorithms to build prediction models for
virus ditection. It even identiﬁed the coronavirus outbreak
in Wuhan hours before the local authorities had diagnosed
the ﬁrst cases of the virus. Bluedot collects information from
social media, government documents, data of healthcare or-
ganizations to build intelligence enabled by natural language
processing (NLP) and machine learning. It is able to track
outbreaks of over 100 different diseases, every 15 minutes
around the clock.

2) Infervision
Another emerging AI use case in response to coronavirus
pandemic is Infervision [147] that aims to help clinicians
detect and monitor the disease efﬁciently. Infervision has
been used at the center of the epidemic outbreak at Tongji
Hospital in Wuhan, China. Infervision AI has improved the
CT diagnosis speed, which is highly important to accelerate

Author et al.: Preparation of Papers for IEEE TRANSACTIONS and JOURNALS

pneumonia diagnosis for early detection of suspected pa-
tients. This AI solution has proved very useful in supporting
healthcare services in the emergency situations, like coron-
avirus outbreak.

3) AlphaFold system, Google DeepMind
Very recently, Good DeepMind has introduced an AI tool
called AlphaFold [148] which enables the structure pre-
dictions of several under-studied proteins associated with
SARS-CoV-2 virus that causes the coronavirus outbreak.
This AI platform is empowered by a DL system and an ML-
based free modelling technique to help it estimate protein
structures when no similar structures of protein are available.
Up to date, AlphaFold is under the trial stages and experi-
ments have yet not been veriﬁed.

4) NVIDIA’s AI
Last month, a team of physicians at the Zhongnan Hospi-
tal, Wuhan China, used GPU-accelerated AI software called
NVIDIA’s AI, which was primarily used to detect cancer in
lung CTs, to identify the visual signs of the COVID-19 virus
[149]. Data training was performed by using over 2,000 CT
images from several of the ﬁrst coronavirus patients in China,
aiming to build AI models for detecting signs of pneumonia
caused by coronavirus. This AI solution assist doctors in the
virus recognition for fast diagnosis and treatment.

5) Federated AI
Recently, a real-world federated AI project using FL for
COVID-19 region segmentation in chest CT with the partic-
ipation of medical institutions from China, Italy, and Japan
is presented in [150]. Speciﬁcally, a multi-national database
consisting of 1704 scans from these three countries is col-
lected for setting up the FL framework and compare with
the traditional local training approach using 945 scans with
the support of expert radiologists. Given the strict regulatory
policy on data privacy, FL is proven as a promising solution
for countries to collaborate in the COVID-19 segmentation
and detection without worrying the user information leakage
and lacks of dataset.

C. COMBINING BLOCKCHAIN AND AI FOR COMBATING
COVID-19
Recently, several efforts have been made to combine
blockchain and AI technologies to build innovative solutions
against the COVID-19 epidemic. For example, a research
group in Spain leverages these two technologies to develop a
blockchain and AI-based app that is able to predict the evolu-
tion of the COVID-19 pandemic [151]. Blockchain has been
used to ensure that people comply with the social distancing
rules by creating digital identities and licenses that keep track
of the daily activities of a person. Meanwhile, a deep learning
architecture empowered by neural networks and rules-based
symbolic systems is designed to build an estimation model
by using the datasets of genetic proﬁles, medical records,
and medical treatments. This AI-based model would help

16

VOLUME 4, 2020

Author et al.: Preparation of Papers for IEEE TRANSACTIONS and JOURNALS

FIGURE 8: Performance of discriminator loss.

government ofﬁcials to make appropriate decisions regarding
social distancing and quarantine measures.

Moreover, the Immuno-oncology company that specialises
in RNA therapeutics Mateon is recently cooperated with the
startup Meridian IT to build a new drug manufacturing sys-
tem for COVID-19 disease, by combining both blockchain
and AI technologies [152]. Due to regulatory concerns, much
of current drug manufacturing faces many challenges with
complex legacy processes and the manufacturing operations
are largely human-involved. These working procedures are
less effective and potentially remains production errors due
to human involvement. The new application is proposed by
exploiting AI-based neural networks to automate the oper-
ating procedure for rapid drug production. Blockchain has
been also used to ensure that the production line complies
with the FDA regulations (the law set of Food, Drug, and
Cosmetic Act policies). The combination of blockchain and
AI thus would bring drug manufacturing to an advanced
stage with a faster, more accurate, and more reliable working
procedure that would enable timely drug supply for COVID-
19 prevention.

VI. A CASE STUDY
This section presents a case study towards the application of
AI for COVID-19 detection, by developing a federated AI
approach using FL for COVID-19 classiﬁcation. The details
of our AI approach with FL will be provided as follows.

A. SYSTEM MODEL
We consider a system model for the federated AI-based
COVID-19 detection, including a set of medical institutions
(e.g., hospitals) and a cloud server. Each institution partici-
pates in the FL process using its own COVID-19 X-ray image
dataset, e.g., X-ray images, to build a global GAN with the
cloud, aiming to generate high-quality synthetic COVID-19
X-ray images for improving the overall COVID-19 detection.
Speciﬁcally, at each institution we design a GAN consisting
of two components, namely a generator and a discriminator

based on CNNs which alternatively train via a min-max
game [153]. To implement the FL process, each institution
participates in training its local GAN model by updating the
parameters of the discriminator and the generator in each
global round and exchanges them with the cloud server for
parameter aggregation. For every global epoch, each insti-
tution collaboratively trains its discriminator and generator.
First, the generator produces minibatches of fake samples
from the noise probability distribution. Also, the discrimina-
tor samples minibatches of real data from the actual image
distribution. Then, each institution simultaneously updates
the discriminator and generator by ascending its stochastic
gradients to update its own weights. After local training, all
institutions transmit the learned updates to the cloud server
for model averaging, while actual COVID-19 X-ray images
are kept at local institutions which thus ensures data privacy.
Then, the cloud server sends the new global update back to
all participating institutions to prepare for the next round of
FL training [154]. The learning process is iterated until the
global loss function converges with a desired accuracy, where
the synthetic COVID-19 X-ray images are generated with
high-quality with respect to actual images.

B. SIMULATION RESULTS
We report simulation results obtained when training a
COVID-19 dataset [23] of 620 X-ray images in three classes:
COVID-19, normal, and pneumonia in an FL system with
ﬁve institutions. By using the proposed FL model, we gen-
erate 1500 synthetic X-ray images which are then combined
with an actual dataset for COVID-19 classiﬁcation. We use
a CNN-based classiﬁer with three convolutional layers and
Adam optimizer. We evaluate our approach and compare with
the state-of-the-art schemes, including the standalone scheme
(training dataset from an institution without federation), the
standalone scheme with GAN [39], the FL scheme without
GAN [23], and the centralized scheme (all datasets are trans-
mitted to the cloud for classiﬁcation). For reliable evaluation,
the reported results are averaged from ﬁve runs of numerical
simulations.

In Fig. 8, we compare the discriminator loss of our ad-
vanced FL scheme and the standalone scheme with GAN
[39], which only trains the GAN model using its dataset
without the federation. It is observed that the standalone
scheme is unable to achieve an optimal performance due to
the lack of access to the full dataset which thus limits the
quality of generated synthetic data. Meanwhile, our advanced
FL scheme with GAN can learn over the entire data span
from distributed institutions which achieves better minimum
loss and helps extract better image features for efﬁcient data
augmentation.

We also evaluate the performance of COVID-19 detection
via common quality metrics including precision, sensitivity,
and F1-score. As illustrated in Table 3, our advanced FL
scheme outperforms all other state-of-the-art schemes in
terms of these three metrics. For instance, for the COVID-
19 class, the precision of our scheme is the best (0.983),

VOLUME 4, 2020

17

0100200300400500Training epochs012345678Discriminator loss performanceOur advanced FL schemeStandalone GAN schemeAuthor et al.: Preparation of Papers for IEEE TRANSACTIONS and JOURNALS

TABLE 3: Comparison of performance results for COVID-19 detection.

Classes

COVID-19
Normal
Pneumonia

Standalone scheme without GAN
F1-score
Sensitivity
Precision
0.921
0.865
0.891
0.833
0.996
0.820
0.601
0.448
0.822

Standalone scheme with GAN
Sensitivity
0.872
1
0.964

Precision
0.914
0.928
0.912

F1-score
0.927
0.980
0.963

FL scheme without GAN
Sensitivity
0.973
0.981
0.796

Precision
0.950
0.936
0.942

F1-score
0.986
0.944
0.884

Our advanced FL scheme
Sensitivity
0.993
1
0.854

Precision
0.983
0.946
0.964

F1-score
0.995
0.962
0.918

while the standalone scheme without GAN, the GAN-based
approach, and the FL scheme achieve lower performances,
with 0.891, 0.914, and 0.950, respectively. Our scheme is also
much better in sensitivity and F1-score performances. The
intuition behind these observations is that our advanced FL
scheme allows the cooperation of distributed institutions to
enrich the global GAN model with a better COVID-19 X-ray
image feature learning and a complete global COVID-19 X-
ray image construction. As a result, our scheme can generate
better realistic X-ray images that leads to higher detection
rates.

sensitive information, such as home address, banking details,
shopping records, etc. The governmental agencies may im-
pose privacy laws on the user tracking mobile apps to ensure
the safety and security to the public [156]. Besides, nowadays
many healthcare organizations and institutions are collecting
data from their patients via electronic healthcare records that
helps monitor the COVID-19 disease symptoms and serve
treatment [157]. In such healthcare activities, the conﬂict
between data collection and user privacy is inevitable that
needs to solved by laws and reinforcement from the related
authorities.

VII. CHALLENGES AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
The application of blockchain and AI technologies is promis-
ing to help deal with the coronavirus epidemic. However,
the provided throughout survey also reveals several criti-
cal challenges and open issues that should be considered
carefully when applying these technologies in the context
of healthcare sector for epidemic. We ﬁrst highlight the
research challenges, then we point out several potential future
directions in this ﬁeld.

A. CHALLENGES
We here analyse the challenges from four main aspects: reg-
ulatory consideration, people’s privacy preservation, security
of blockchain and AI ecosystem, and the lack of uniﬁed
databases.

1) Regulatory Consideration
The use of blockchain and AI in the healthcare sector like
coronavirus ﬁghting should be considered carefully with
regulatory laws. While the features of blockchain and AI
can bring beneﬁts, they also poses a legal and regulatory
challenge if there is no party that is responsible and can be
held accountable. For example, in the blockchain network,
it will be important to consider what law might apply to
transactions and what appropriate risk management should
be put into place [155]. Regarding AI, it might be easier to
create several forms of legal schemes and internal governance
models that will dictate the governing law for AI operations
in healthcare. Specially, we also consider legal issues about
content, personal information running on blockchain and AI
platforms, such as problems with copyright infringement and
defamation.

2) People’s Privacy Preservation
In the coronavirus tracking applications, how to protect peo-
ple’s privacy is highly important. The governments can use
mobile location data to help track the outbreak spread, but
this solution must ensure the privacy of user data, especially

3) Security of Blockchain and AI Ecosystem
Blockchain is widely regarded as secure monitoring platform
to ensure safety and privacy healthcare applications, such
as COVID-19 tracking. However, recent research reports
have revealed inherent security weaknesses in blockchain
which are related to medical and healthcare systems [44].
Data threats or adversaries can enter the blockchain software
to hold the control of the blockchain, which can lead to
serious consequences, like modiﬁcations of medical trans-
action or patient data information, raising privacy concerns
[158]. Security is also a critical concern of AI systems for
healthcare applications in the context of COVID-19 crisis.
Data collected from patients, clinical labs and hospitals can
be modiﬁed by data threats. More importantly, malicious
attacks can inject false data or adversarial sample inputs
which makes AI learning invalid, while the AI model can
be tampered with [159]. Therefore, security issues related to
blockchain and AI deployment when solving the healthcare
issues in the epidemic should be given high priority during
the design and development stages.

4) Lack of Uniﬁed Databases
A critical challenge in the coronavirus ﬁghting is the lack
of uniﬁed database related coronavirus epidemic such as
infected cases, affected areas, and medical supply status.
Most of the current coronavirus-related databases come from
individual resources, e.g., social media [160], patient col-
lection [161], [162], but they are not sufﬁcient for large-
scale AI operations that potentially creates greater impacts
on ﬁghting COVID-19, compared to the current results.
Countries are now reluctant to share database, that make
international healthcare organizations like WHO challenging
to evaluate the epidemic for ﬁghting effectively the virus
spread. In fact, WHO cannot provide appropriate public
health guidance without disaggregated data and detailed local
epidemic information.

18

VOLUME 4, 2020

Author et al.: Preparation of Papers for IEEE TRANSACTIONS and JOURNALS

5) Implementation Challenges
Another challenge comes from the implementation of
blockchain and AI platforms for COVID-19 prevention. In
fact, the operation of blockchain requires powerful hardware
and storage for running blockchains [163]. Therefore, devel-
oping hardware speciﬁc to blockchain is vitally important
to accelerate mining by a combined usage of computing
elements within machines in blockchain networks, including
private and public platforms such as Ethereum for COVID-19
tracing [164]. Another critical issue is the extensive energy
consumption and high network latency caused by running
consensus processes such as PoW in the blockchain. This
may hinder the applications of blockchain in distributed
healthcare networks with resource-constrained IoT devices.
Another problem is the limited throughput of blockchain
systems. For example, Bitcoin can only process a maximum
of four transactions/second, and the throughput of Ethereum
achieved is about 20 transactions/second, while Visa can
process up to 1667 transactions/second [44]. Therefore, to
make the applications of blockchain in COVID-19-related
systems reliable, developing lightweight and throughput-
efﬁcient blockchain platforms are highly essential [165].

Moreover, the unprecedented increase of data volumes
associated with advances of analytic techniques empowered
from AI has promoted big data analysis, big data searching
and big data mining activities for ﬁghting COVID-19 [166].
The provision of big data platforms and their uniﬁed integra-
tion to the current COVID-19-related application of analyt-
ics, monitoring and research tools is thus highly needed.

B. FUTURE DIRECTIONS
We discuss several of the future research directions on
blockchain and AI adoption for ﬁghting COVID-19 pan-
demic.

1) Performance Improvement of Blockchain
Blockchain platforms should be optimized to achieve better
performances from different technical perspectives, such as
scalability and network efﬁciency in terms of resource con-
sumption, throughput, and network latency, aiming to make
blockchain an ideal choice for emergency healthcare applica-
tions like the COVID-19 epidemic. For example, scalable and
lightweight blockchain designs in healthcare are necessary to
optimize data veriﬁcation and transaction communication for
ultralow-latency information broadcasting [167]. In this re-
gard, low-latency mining mechanisms with optimized block
veriﬁcation can be considered to mitigate delays in block
processing for fast data sharing services that is necessary for
efﬁcient COVID-19 data analytics. Another feasible solution
for blockchain performance enhancement is to minimize
the size of blockchain by establishing local and private
blockchain networks, one of these is responsible to monitor
the outbreak in a certain area for fast response. To realize
this, building customized ledgers that can placed on local
servers in the outbreak area can help reduce latency in block
broadcasting in the blockchain operations [168].

2) Security Issues of Blockchain
Despite its great potential, blockchain still exists security
issues, such as 51% attack in the block mining and double
spending attacks on data storage on blockchain. Therefore,
innovative solutions should be considered for improving the
security of blockchain. For example, a mining pool strategy
is proposed in [169] to enhance the efﬁciency of the min-
ing process, by solving security bottlenecks such as 51%
vulnerability with reduced block and transaction propagation
delays. In this regard, defense mechanisms is integrated for
ﬁghting against data threats in the consensus process in the
blockchain. Moreover, to mitigate double spending attacks
in blockchain, a solution with recipient-oriented transaction
processing is introduced in [170], aiming to validate the
transaction before appending to the block. This is enabled by
using the concept of stealth address and master-node, where
both transaction senders and recipients actively join the
veriﬁcation for each transaction in the propagation process.
This allows for preventing double spending attacks using the
veriﬁcation time of the recipient and blocking time of the
transaction.

3) Improved AI Algorithm for Better Analytic Accuracy
The efﬁciency of intelligent healthcare data analytics, e.g.,
virus information analysis, mainly depends on the AI algo-
rithms. Developing AI architectures specialized in medical
applications might be the key for empowering future intel-
ligent data analytics with the ability to handle multimedia
healthcare data. Adaptive AI models should be developed in
response to COVID-19-like emergency healthcare, such as
AI in predictive modeling, AI in patient monitoring, and AI
in emergency department operations [171].

4) Combination with Other Technologies
To achieve better efﬁciency in solving epidemic-related is-
sues, blockchain and AI can be incorporated with other
technologies to build a comprehensive healthcare system.
For instance, Alibaba has integrated AI with cloud com-
puting for supporting coronavirus data analytics [172]. The
resourceful storage and high computation capability are the
key features that cloud can provide to facilitate AI analytics.
More interesting, China has recently exploited the mobility of
drones [173] to improve the provisions of medical supplies
[174]. In fact, using drones would be the fastest way to
deliver essential facilities to the victims in the quarantine
areas where all modes of transport are interrupted. Besides,
drones also help to reinforce the contactless monitoring of
the outbreak. In the near future, these promising technologies
can be integrated to build highly advanced medical system for
coping with the coronavirus-like epidemics.

VIII. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we have presented an state-of-art survey on the
utilization of blockchain and AI technologies to combat the
coronavirus (COVID-19) epidemic. We have ﬁrst introduced
a conceptual architecture which integrates blockchain and

VOLUME 4, 2020

19

AI towards the ﬁghting of coronavirus crisis. Specially, we
have extensively discussed the key roles of blockchain for
solving the pandemic via ﬁve important solutions, including
outbreak tracking, user privacy protection, safe day-to-day
operations, medical supply chain, and donation tracking.
Moreover, the potential of AI for coping with the COVID-
19 crisis has been also analysed though ﬁve main application
domains, namely outbreak estimation, coronavirus detection,
coronavirus analytics, vaccine/drug development, and predic-
tion of future coronavirus-like outbreak. The important use
cases and projects using blockchain and AI towards ﬁghting
COVID-19 have been also highlighted, followed by a case
study. Finally, we have pointed out several potential chal-
lenges and future directions. We believe our timely survey
will shed valuable light on the research of the blockchain and
AI for ﬁghting COVID-19 as well as motivate the interested
researchers and stateholders to put more efforts into using
these promising technologies to combat future coronavirus-
like epidemics.

REFERENCES

[1] P. Zhou, X.-L. Yang, X.-G. Wang, B. Hu, L. Zhang, W. Zhang, H.-R. Si,
Y. Zhu, B. Li, C.-L. Huang et al., “A pneumonia outbreak associated with
a new coronavirus of probable bat origin,” Nature, pp. 1–4, 2020.

[2] C.-C. Lai, T.-P. Shih, W.-C. Ko, H.-J. Tang, and P.-R. Hsueh, “Severe
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) and corona virus
disease-2019 (COVID-19): the epidemic and the challenges,” Interna-
tional journal of antimicrobial agents, p. 105924, 2020.
[Online].

[3] Economic

Available:

Outlook
https://www.oecd.org/economic-outlook/.

2020.

[4] D. H.-T. T. H. W. P. P. Pham, Q.; Nguyen, “Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) and
big data for coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic: A survey on the state-
of-the-arts,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 130 820–130 839, 2020.

[5] S. Reddy, J. Fox, and M. P. Purohit, “Artiﬁcial intelligence-enabled
healthcare delivery,” Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine, vol. 112,
no. 1, pp. 22–28, 2019.

[6] M. Hölbl, M. Kompara, A. Kamišali´c, and L. Nemec Zlatolas, “A
systematic review of the use of blockchain in healthcare,” Symmetry,
vol. 10, no. 10, p. 470, 2018.

[7] A. A. Monrat, O. Schelén, and K. Andersson, “A survey of blockchain
from the perspectives of applications, challenges, and opportunities,”
IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 117 134–117 151, 2019.

[8] N. L. Bragazzi, H. Dai, G. Damiani, M. Behzadifar, M. Martini, and
J. Wu, “How Big Data and Artiﬁcial Intelligence Can Help Better Man-
age the COVID-19 Pandemic,” International Journal of Environmental
Research and Public Health, vol. 17, no. 9, p. 3176, May 2020.

[9] S. Johnstone, “A viral warning for change. COVID-19 versus the red
cross: Better solutions via blockchain and artiﬁcial intelligence,” COVID-
19 Versus the Red Cross: Better Solutions Via Blockchain and Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (February 3, 2020). University of Hong Kong Faculty of Law
Research Paper, no. 2020/005, 2020.

[10] Blockhain, AI and the Wuhan Coronavirus.

[Online]. Available:
https://www.law.ox.ac.uk/business-law-blog/blog/2020/02/blockhain-ai-
and-wuhan-coronavirus.

[11] H.-N. Dai, M. Imran, and N. Haider, “Blockchain-enabled internet of
medical things to combat COVID-19,” IEEE Internet of Things Maga-
zine, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 52–57, 2020.

[12] L. Garg, E. Chukwu, N. Nasser, C. Chakraborty, and G. Garg,
“Anonymity preserving iot-based COVID-19 and other infectious disease
contact tracing model,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 159 402–159 414, 2020.
[13] M. Kadadha, H. Otrok, R. Mizouni, S. Singh, and A. Ouali, “Sensechain:
A blockchain-based crowdsensing framework for multiple requesters and
multiple workers,” Future Generation Computer Systems, vol. 105, pp.
650–664, 2020.

[14] N. More and D. Motwani, “A blockchain-based decentralized framework
for crowdsourcing,” in International Conference on Image Processing and
Capsule Networks. Springer, 2020, pp. 448–460.

Author et al.: Preparation of Papers for IEEE TRANSACTIONS and JOURNALS

[15] M. Kadadha, R. Mizouni, S. Singh, H. Otrok, and A. Ouali, “ABCrowd:
an auction mechanism on blockchain for spatial crowd sourcing,” IEEE
Access, vol. 8, pp. 12 745–12 757, 2020.

[16] Y. Lu, Q. Tang, and G. Wang, “Zebralancer: Private and anonymous
crowdsourcing system atop open blockchain,” in 2018 IEEE 38th Inter-
national Conference on Distributed Computing Systems (ICDCS), 2018,
pp. 853–865.

[17] W. Lv, S. Wu, C. Jiang, Y. Cui, X. Qiu, and Y. Zhang, “Towards large-
scale and privacy-preserving contact tracing in COVID-19 pandemic:
A blockchain perspective,” IEEE Transactions on Network Science and
Engineering, 2020.

[18] J. B. Kangbai, P. B. v, S. Mandoh, A. B. Fofanah, A. George, A. Briama,
M. Massaquoi, and J. L. McBrayer, “Tracking Ebola through cellphone,
internet of things and Blockchain technology,” Current Research: Inte-
grative Medicine, 2018.

[19] S. Volkova, E. Ayton, K. Porterﬁeld, and C. D. Corley, “Forecasting
inﬂuenza-like illness dynamics for military populations using neural
networks and social media,” PLOS ONE, vol. 12, no. 12, p. e0188941,
Dec. 2017.

[20] M. Anantpadma, T. Lane, K. M. Zorn, M. A. Lingerfelt, A. M. Clark,
J. S. Freundlich, R. A. Davey, P. B. Madrid, and S. Ekins, “Ebola Virus
Bayesian Machine Learning Models Enable New in Vitro Leads,” ACS
Omega, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 2353–2361, Jan. 2019.

[21] J. Mushtaq, R. Pennella, S. Lavalle, A. Colarieti, S. Steidler, C. M.
Martinenghi, D. Palumbo, A. Esposito, P. Rovere-Querini, M. Tresoldi
et al., “Initial chest radiographs and artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) predict
clinical outcomes in COVID-19 patients: analysis of 697 italian patients,”
European radiology, vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 1770–1779, 2021.

[22] D. Colombi, F. C. Bodini, M. Petrini, G. Mafﬁ, N. Morelli, G. Milanese,
M. Silva, N. Sverzellati, and E. Michieletti, “Well-aerated Lung on
Admitting Chest CT to Predict Adverse Outcome in COVID-19 Pneu-
monia,” Radiology, vol. 296, no. 2, pp. E86–E96, Aug. 2020.

[23] Z. Ma, “Spatiotemporal ﬂuctuation scaling law and metapopulation mod-
eling of the novel coronavirus (COVID-19) and sars outbreaks,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2003.03714, 2020.

[24] H. Chesbrough, “To recover faster from Covid-19, open up: Managerial
implications from an open innovation perspective,” Industrial Marketing
Management, vol. 88, pp. 410–413, 2020.

[25] A. Khurshid, “Applying blockchain technology to address the crisis of
trust during the COVID-19 pandemic,” JMIR medical informatics, vol. 8,
no. 9, p. e20477, 2020.

[26] A. Fusco, G. Dicuonzo, V. Dell Atti, and M. Tatullo, “Blockchain in
healthcare: Insights on COVID-19,” International Journal of Environ-
mental Research and Public Health, vol. 17, no. 19, p. 7167, 2020.
[27] A. Kalla, T. Hewa, R. A. Mishra, M. Ylianttila, and M. Liyanage,
“The role of blockchain to ﬁght against COVID-19,” IEEE Engineering
Management Review, vol. 48, no. 3, pp. 85–96, 2020.

[28] V. Chamola, V. Hassija, V. Gupta, and M. Guizani, “A comprehensive
review of the COVID-19 pandemic and the role of IoT, drones, AI,
blockchain, and 5G in managing its impact,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp.
90 225–90 265, 2020.

[29] D. S. W. Ting, L. Carin, V. Dzau, and T. Y. Wong, “Digital technology
and COVID-19,” Nature medicine, vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 459–461, 2020.
[30] A. A. Hussain, O. Bouachir, F. Al-Turjman, and M. Aloqaily, “AI
techniques for COVID-19,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 128 776–128 795,
2020.

[31] A. Suﬁan, A. Ghosh, A. S. Sadiq, and F. Smarandache, “A survey on
deep transfer learning to edge computing for mitigating the COVID-19
pandemic,” Journal of Systems Architecture, vol. 108, p. 101830, 2020.
[32] A. Bansal, R. P. Padappayil, C. Garg, A. Singal, M. Gupta, and A. Klein,
“Utility of artiﬁcial intelligence amidst the COVID 19 pandemic: a
review,” Journal of Medical Systems, vol. 44, no. 9, pp. 1–6, 2020.
[33] S. Bhattacharya, P. K. R. Maddikunta, Q.-V. Pham, T. R. Gadekallu, C. L.
Chowdhary, M. Alazab, M. J. Piran et al., “Deep learning and medical
image processing for coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic: A survey,”
Sustainable cities and society, vol. 65, p. 102589, 2021.

[34] J. Yli-Huumo, D. Ko, S. Choi, S. Park, and K. Smolander, “Where is
current research on blockchain technology? a systematic review,” PloS
one, vol. 11, no. 10, p. e0163477, 2016.

[35] Z. Wu and J. M. McGoogan, “Characteristics of and important lessons
from the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) outbreak in China:
summary of a report of 72 314 cases from the chinese center for disease
control and prevention,” Jama, 2020.

20

VOLUME 4, 2020

Author et al.: Preparation of Papers for IEEE TRANSACTIONS and JOURNALS

[36] L. Li, Q. Zhang, X. Wang, J. Zhang, T. Wang, T.-L. Gao, W. Duan, K. K.-
f. Tsoi, and F.-Y. Wang, “Characterizing the propagation of situational
information in social media during COVID-19 epidemic: A case study
on weibo,” IEEE Transactions on Computational Social Systems, 2020.
[37] J. M. Read, J. R. Bridgen, D. A. Cummings, A. Ho, and C. P. Jewell,
“Novel coronavirus 2019-ncov: early estimation of epidemiological pa-
rameters and epidemic predictions,” MedRxiv, 2020.

[38] WHO Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) Dashboard. [Online]. Available:

https://covid19.who.int/.

[39] C. Albulescu, “Coronavirus and ﬁnancial volatility: 40 days of fasting

and fear,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.04005, 2020.

[40] T. Fetzer, L. Hensel, J. Hermle, and C. Roth, “Coronavirus perceptions

and economic anxiety,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.03848, 2020.

[41] X. Wang, X. Zha, W. Ni, R. P. Liu, Y. J. Guo, X. Niu, and K. Zheng,
“Survey on blockchain for internet of things,” Computer Communica-
tions, vol. 136, pp. 10–29, 2019.

[42] D. C. Nguyen, P. N. Pathirana, M. Ding, and A. Seneviratne, “Blockchain
for 5G and beyond networks: A state of the art survey,” Journal of
Network and Computer Applications, p. 102693, 2020.

[43] C. C. Agbo, Q. H. Mahmoud, and J. M. Eklund, “Blockchain technology
in healthcare: a systematic review,” Healthcare, vol. 7, no. 2, p. 56, 2019.
[44] D. C. Nguyen, P. N. Pathirana, M. Ding, and A. Seneviratne, “Integration
of Blockchain and Cloud of Things: Architecture, Applications and
Challenges,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, pp. 1–1, 2020.
[45] T.-T. Kuo, H.-E. Kim, and L. Ohno-Machado, “Blockchain distributed
ledger technologies for biomedical and health care applications,” Journal
of the American Medical Informatics Association, vol. 24, no. 6, pp.
1211–1220, 2017.

[46] S. Rouhani and R. Deters, “Security, performance, and applications of
smart contracts: A systematic survey,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 50 759–
50 779, 2019.

[47] H.-N. Dai, Z. Zheng, and Y. Zhang, “Blockchain for internet of things: A
survey,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 8076–8094,
2019.

[48] P. P. Ray, D. Dash, K. Salah, and N. Kumar, “Blockchain for IoT-based
healthcare: Background, consensus, platforms, and use cases,” IEEE
Systems Journal, 2020.

[49] A. Hasselgren, K. Kralevska, D. Gligoroski, S. A. Pedersen, and A. Fax-
vaag, “Blockchain in healthcare and health sciences–a scoping review,”
International Journal of Medical Informatics, p. 104040, 2019.

[50] D. C. Nguyen, P. N. Pathirana, M. Ding, and A. Seneviratne, “Blockchain
for secure EHRs sharing of mobile cloud based e-health systems,” IEEE
Access, vol. 7, pp. 66 792–66 806, 2019.

[51] D. C. Nguyen, K. D. Nguyen, and P. N. Pathirana, “A mobile cloud based
IoMT framework for automated health assessment and management,” in
2019 41st Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in
Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC), 2019, pp. 6517–6520.

[52] S. Jiang, J. Cao, H. Wu, Y. Yang, M. Ma, and J. He, “Blochie: a
blockchain-based platform for healthcare information exchange,” in 2018
ieee international conference on smart computing (smartcomp), 2018, pp.
49–56.

[53] X. Zheng, R. R. Mukkamala, R. Vatrapu, and J. Ordieres-Mere,
“Blockchain-based personal health data sharing system using cloud stor-
age,” in 2018 IEEE 20th International Conference on e-Health Network-
ing, Applications and Services (Healthcom), 2018, pp. 1–6.

[54] F. Shi, J. Wang, J. Shi, Z. Wu, Q. Wang, Z. Tang, K. He, Y. Shi, and
D. Shen, “Review of artiﬁcial intelligence techniques in imaging data
acquisition, segmentation and diagnosis for COVID-19,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2004.02731, 2020.

[55] T. T. Nguyen, P. N. Pathirana, T. Nguyen, Q. V. H. Nguyen, A. Bhatti,
D. C. Nguyen, D. T. Nguyen, N. D. Nguyen, D. Creighton, and M. Ab-
delrazek, “Genomic mutations and changes in protein secondary structure
and solvent accessibility of SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19 virus),” Scientiﬁc
Reports, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 1–16, 2021.

[56] D. C. Nguyen, P. Cheng, M. Ding, D. Lopez-Perez, P. N. Pathirana, J. Li,
A. Seneviratne, Y. Li, and H. V. Poor, “Enabling AI in Future Wireless
Networks: A Data Life Cycle Perspective,” IEEE Communications Sur-
veys & Tutorials, pp. 1–1, Sep. 2020.

[57] C. M. Bishop, Pattern recognition and machine learning. springer, 2006.
[58] K. P Rane, “Design and Development of Low Cost Humanoid Robot
with Thermal Temperature Scanner for COVID-19 Virus Preliminary
Identiﬁcation,” International Journal of Advanced Trends in Computer
Science and Engineering, vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 3485–3493, Jun. 2020.

[59] M. Mohammed, H. Syamsudin, S. Al-Zubaidi, R. R. AKS, and E. Yusuf,
“Novel COVID-19 detection and diagnosis system using IoT based smart
helmet,” International Journal of Psychosocial Rehabilitation, vol. 24,
no. 7, 2020.

[60] N. Lu, K.-W. Cheng, N. Qamar, K.-C. Huang, and J. A. Johnson,
“Weathering COVID-19 storm: successful control measures of ﬁve Asian
countries,” American journal of infection control, vol. 48, no. 7, pp. 851–
852, 2020.

[61] S. Pouyanfar, S. Sadiq, Y. Yan, H. Tian, Y. Tao, M. P. Reyes, M.-L. Shyu,
S.-C. Chen, and S. Iyengar, “A survey on deep learning: Algorithms, tech-
niques, and applications,” ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), vol. 51,
no. 5, pp. 1–36, 2018.

[62] A. Shrestha and A. Mahmood, “Review of deep learning algorithms and

architectures,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 53 040–53 065, 2019.

[63] G. Litjens, T. Kooi, B. E. Bejnordi, A. A. A. Setio, F. Ciompi, M. Ghafoo-
rian, J. A. Van Der Laak, B. Van Ginneken, and C. I. Sánchez, “A survey
on deep learning in medical image analysis,” Medical image analysis,
vol. 42, pp. 60–88, 2017.

[64] F. Jiang, Y. Jiang, H. Zhi, Y. Dong, H. Li, S. Ma, Y. Wang, Q. Dong,
H. Shen, and Y. Wang, “Artiﬁcial intelligence in healthcare: past, present
and future,” Stroke and vascular neurology, vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 230–243,
2017.

[65] R. Miotto, F. Wang, S. Wang, X. Jiang, and J. T. Dudley, “Deep learning
for healthcare: review, opportunities and challenges,” Brieﬁngs in bioin-
formatics, vol. 19, no. 6, pp. 1236–1246, 2018.

[66] T. T. Nguyen, Q. V. H. Nguyen, D. T. Nguyen, E. B. Hsu, S. Yang,
and P. Eklund, “Artiﬁcial intelligence in the battle against coronavirus
(COVID-19): a survey and future research directions,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2008.07343, 2020.

[67] D. C. Nguyen, M. Ding, P. Q.-V, P. N. Pathirana, L. B. Le, A. Seneviratne,
J. Li, D. Niyato, and H. V. Poor, “Federated learning meets blockchain in
edge computing: Opportunities and challenges,” IEEE Internet of Things
Journal, 2021.

[68] C. You, Y. Deng, W. Hu, J. Sun, Q. Lin, F. Zhou, C. H. Pang, Y. Zhang,
Z. Chen, and X.-H. Zhou, “Estimation of the time-varying reproduction
number of COVID-19 outbreak in China,” International Journal of Hy-
giene and Environmental Health, vol. 228, p. 113555, 2020.

[69] Open database of COVID-19 cases with chest X-ray or CT images. [On-

line]. Available: https://github.com/ieee8023/covid-chestxray-dataset.

[70] S. P. Novikov, O. D. Kazakov, N. A. Kulagina, and N. Y. Azarenko,
“Blockchain and smart contracts in a decentralized health infrastructure,”
in 2018 IEEE International Conference" Quality Management, Trans-
port and Information Security, Information Technologies"(IT&QM&IS),
2018, pp. 697–703.

[71] T. P. Mashamba-Thompson and E. D. Crayton, “Blockchain and artiﬁcial
intelligence technology for novel coronavirus disease-19 self-testing,”
2020.

[72] A. Dorri, F. Luo, S. S. Kanhere, R. Jurdak, and Z. Y. Dong, “Spb: A
secure private blockchain-based solution for distributed energy trading,”
IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 57, no. 7, pp. 120–126, 2019.
[73] J. Liu, X. Li, L. Ye, H. Zhang, X. Du, and M. Guizani, “Bpds: A
blockchain based privacy-preserving data sharing for electronic medical
records,” in 2018 IEEE Global Communications Conference (GLOBE-
COM), 2018, pp. 1–6.

[74] H. R. Hasan and K. Salah, “Combating deepfake videos using blockchain
and smart contracts,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 41 596–41 606, 2019.
[75] S. M. Idrees, M. Nowostawski, and R. Jameel, “Blockchain-based dig-
ital contact tracing apps for COVID-19 pandemic management: Issues,
challenges, solutions, and future directions,” JMIR Medical Informatics,
vol. 9, no. 2, p. e25245, 2021.

[76] M. M. Arifeen, A. Al Mamun, M. S. Kaiser, and M. Mahmud,
“Blockchain-enable contact tracing for preserving user privacy during
Covid-19 outbreak,” 2020.

[77] S. Saleh and F. Shayor, “High-level design and rapid implementation of
a clinical and non-clinical blockchain-based data sharing platform for
COVID-19 containment,” Frontiers in Blockchain, vol. 3, p. 51, 2020.

[78] Iran minister accuses ’some countries’ of not declaring their coronavirus
https://www.cnbc.com/2020/03/06/iran-

cases.
minister-accuses-some-countries-of-not-declaring-coronavirus-
cases.html.

[Online]. Available:

[79] M. Cinelli, W. Quattrociocchi, A. Galeazzi, C. M. Valensise, E. Brugnoli,
A. L. Schmidt, P. Zola, F. Zollo, and A. Scala, “The covid-19 social media
infodemic,” Scientiﬁc Reports, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 1–10, 2020.

VOLUME 4, 2020

21

[80] Blockchain and AI Amidst the Coronavirus Crisis: ’A Call to Arms’
. [Online]. Available: https://www.cryptonewsz.com/blockchain-and-ai-
amidst-the-coronavirus-crisis-a-call-to-arms/.

[81] A. Jain, A. Sarupria, and A. Kothari, “The impact of COVID-19 on e-
wallet’s payments in Indian economy,” International Journal of Creative
Research Thoughts, pp. 2447–2454, 2020.

[82] R. Bhatia, P. Kumar, S. Bansal, and S. Rawat, “Blockchain-the technol-
ogy of crypto currencies,” in 2018 International Conference on Advances
in Computing and Communication Engineering (ICACCE), 2018, pp.
372–377.

[83] How blockchain
COVID-19

technology
outbreak

is
in

helping
China.

businesses
[Online].

overcome
Available:

the
https://irishtechnews.ie/blockchain-businesses-overcome-COVID-
19-China/.

[84] H. Juma, K. Shaalan, and I. Kamel, “A survey on using blockchain in

trade supply chain solutions,” IEEE Access, 2019.

[85] P. Gonczol, P. Katsikouli, L. Herskind, and N. Dragoni, “Blockchain
implementations and use cases for supply chains-a survey,” Ieee Access,
vol. 8, pp. 11 856–11 871, 2020.

[86] M. Kouhizadeh and J. Sarkis, “Blockchain practices, potentials, and
perspectives in greening supply chains,” Sustainability, vol. 10, no. 10,
p. 3652, 2018.

[87] H. Wu, J. Cao, Y. Yang, C. L. Tung, S. Jiang, B. Tang, Y. Liu, X. Wang,
and Y. Deng, “Data management in supply chain using blockchain:
Challenges and a case study,” in 2019 28th International Conference on
Computer Communication and Networks (ICCCN), 2019, pp. 1–8.
[88] Alipay Launches Blockchain Based Platform To Help Combat
CoronaVirus. [Online]. Available: https://coingape.com/alipay-launches-
blockchain-based-platform-to-help-combat-corona-virus-as-China-
shuts-down-mining-farms/.

[89] Five Ways

Can

Unblock

The

Blockchain
Supply

Medical

avirus
forbes.com/sites/nishandegnarain/2020/03/22/5-ways-blockchain-
can-unblock-the-coronavirus-medical-supply-chain/.

[Online].

Chain.

Coron-
Available:

[90] N. S. Sirisha, T. Agarwal, R. Monde, R. Yadav, and R. Hande, “Proposed
solution for trackable donations using blockchain,” in 2019 International
Conference on Nascent Technologies in Engineering (ICNTE), 2019, pp.
1–5.

[91] H. Saleh, S. Avdoshin, and A. Dzhonov, “Platform for tracking donations
of charitable foundations based on blockchain technology,” in 2019
Actual Problems of Systems and Software Engineering (APSSE), 2019,
pp. 182–187.

[92] S. Singh, R. Kumar, R. Panchal, and M. K. Tiwari, “Impact of COVID-19
on logistics systems and disruptions in food supply chain,” International
Journal of Production Research, pp. 1–16, 2020.

[93] A. Rangone and L. Busolli, “Managing charity 4.0 with blockchain: a
case study at the time of covid-19,” International Review on Public and
Nonproﬁt Marketing, pp. 1–31, 2021.

[94] D. Marbouh, T. Abbasi, F. Maasmi, I. A. Omar, M. S. Debe, K. Salah,
R. Jayaraman, and S. Ellahham, “Blockchain for COVID-19: Review,
opportunities, and a trusted tracking system,” Arabian Journal for Science
and Engineering, pp. 1–17, 2020.

[95] N. Cellini, N. Canale, G. Mioni, and S. Costa, “Changes in sleep pattern,
sense of time and digital media use during COVID-19 lockdown in Italy,”
Journal of Sleep Research, vol. 29, no. 4, Aug. 2020.

[96] A. V. Mattioli, S. Sciomer, C. Cocchi, S. Maffei, and S. Gallina, “Quar-
antine during COVID-19 outbreak: Changes in diet and physical activity
increase the risk of cardiovascular disease,” Nutrition, Metabolism and
Cardiovascular Diseases, vol. 30, no. 9, pp. 1409–1417, Aug. 2020.
[97] N. J. Ashby, “Impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on unhealthy eating in
populations with obesity,” Obesity, vol. 28, no. 10, pp. 1802–1805, 2020.
[98] I. H. Sarker, “Context-aware rule learning from smartphone data: survey,
challenges and future directions,” Journal of Big Data, vol. 6, no. 1, p. 95,
2019.

[99] I. H. Sarker, A. Kayes, and P. Watters, “Effectiveness analysis of machine
learning classiﬁcation models for predicting personalized context-aware
smartphone usage,” Journal of Big Data, vol. 6, no. 1, p. 57, 2019.
[100] J. Shen and M. O. Shaﬁq, “Learning mobile application usage-a deep
learning approach,” in 2019 18th IEEE International Conference On
Machine Learning And Applications (ICMLA), 2019, pp. 287–292.
[101] M. Javaid, A. Haleem, R. Vaishya, S. Bahl, R. Suman, and A. Vaish,
“Industry 4.0 technologies and their applications in ﬁghting COVID-
19 pandemic,” Diabetes & Metabolic Syndrome: Clinical Research &
Reviews, vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 419–422, 2020.

Author et al.: Preparation of Papers for IEEE TRANSACTIONS and JOURNALS

[102] X. Huang, Z. Li, Y. Jiang, X. Li, and D. Porter, “Twitter reveals human
mobility dynamics during the COVID-19 pandemic,” PloS one, vol. 15,
no. 11, p. e0241957, 2020.

[103] Z. Wang, G. Wang, B. Huang, Z. Xiong, Q. Hong, H. Wu, P. Yi, K. Jiang,
N. Wang, Y. Pei et al., “Masked face recognition dataset and application,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.09093, 2020.

[104] Y. Wang, M. Hu, Q. Li, X.-P. Zhang, G. Zhai, and N. Yao, “Abnormal
respiratory patterns classiﬁer may contribute to large-scale screening of
people infected with COVID-19 in an accurate and unobtrusive manner,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.05534, 2020.

[105] A. Narin, C. Kaya, and Z. Pamuk, “Automatic detection of coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) using x-ray images and deep convolutional neural
networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.10849, 2020.

[106] A. Lopez-Rincon, A. Tonda, L. Mendoza-Maldonado, E. Claassen,
J. Garssen, and A. D. Kraneveld, “Accurate identiﬁcation of sars-cov-2
from viral genome sequences using deep learning,” bioRxiv, 2020.
[107] B. Ghoshal and A. Tucker, “Estimating uncertainty and interpretability
in deep learning for coronavirus (COVID-19) detection,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2003.10769, 2020.

[108] H. S. Maghdid, K. Z. Ghafoor, A. S. Sadiq, K. Curran, and K. Ra-
bie, “A novel ai-enabled framework to diagnose coronavirus covid 19
using smartphone embedded sensors: Design study,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2003.07434, 2020.

[109] M. L. Chiusano, “The modelling of covid19 pathways sheds light on
mechanisms, opportunities and on controversial interpretations of med-
ical treatments. v2,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.11614, 2020.

[110] M. R. Basiri, “Theory about treatments and morbidity prevention of
corona virus disease (COVID-19),” Journal of Pharmacy and Pharma-
cology, vol. 8, pp. 89–90, 2020.

[111] O. Gozes, M. Frid-Adar, H. Greenspan, P. D. Browning, H. Zhang,
W. Ji, A. Bernheim, and E. Siegel, “Rapid ai development cycle for
the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic: Initial results for automated
detection & patient monitoring using deep learning ct image analysis,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.05037, 2020.

[112] X. Xu, X. Jiang, C. Ma, P. Du, X. Li, S. Lv, L. Yu, Y. Chen, J. Su,
G. Lang et al., “Deep learning system to screen coronavirus disease 2019
pneumonia,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.09334, 2020.

[113] E. E.-D. Hemdan, M. A. Shouman, and M. E. Karar, “Covidx-net: A
framework of deep learning classiﬁers to diagnose COVID-19 in x-ray
images,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.11055, 2020.

[114] F. Shan+, Y. Gao+, J. Wang, W. Shi, N. Shi, M. Han, Z. Xue, D. Shen,
and Y. Shi, “Lung infection quantiﬁcation of COVID-19 in ct images with
deep learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.04655, 2020.

[115] R. Magar, P. Yadav, and A. B. Farimani, “Potential neutralizing anti-
bodies discovered for novel corona virus using machine learning,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2003.08447, 2020.

[116] G. S. Randhawa, M. P. Soltysiak, H. El Roz, C. P. de Souza, K. A. Hill,
and L. Kari, “Machine learning using intrinsic genomic signatures for
rapid classiﬁcation of novel pathogens: COVID-19 case study,” bioRxiv,
2020.

[117] M. D. S. Demirci and A. Adan, “Computational analysis of microrna-

mediated interactions in sars-cov-2 infection,” bioRxiv, 2020.

[118] Garcia-Vidal et al., “Personalized therapy approach for hospitalized

patients with COVID-19,” Clinical Infectious Diseases.

[119] J. H. Beigel et al., “Remdesivir for the Treatment of Covid-19 - Prelim-
inary Report,” New England Journal of Medicine, p. NEJMoa2007764,
May 2020.

[120] E. Ong, M. U. Wong, A. Huffman, and Y. He, “COVID-19 coron-
avirus vaccine design using reverse vaccinology and machine learning,”
BioRxiv, 2020.

[121] M. Prachar, S. Justesen, D. B. Steen-Jensen, S. P. Thorgrimsen, E. Ju-
rgons, O. Winther, and F. O. Bagger, “COVID-19 vaccine candidates:
Prediction and validation of 174 sars-cov-2 epitopes,” bioRxiv, 2020.

[122] D. D. Nguyen, K. Gao, R. Wang, and G. Wei, “Machine intelligence

design of 2019-ncov drugs,” bioRxiv, 2020.

[123] M. R. Dayer, “Old drugs for newly emerging viral disease, COVID-19:

Bioinformatic prospective,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.04524, 2020.

[124] B. R. Beck, B. Shin, Y. Choi, S. Park, and K. Kang, “Predicting com-
mercially available antiviral drugs that may act on the novel coronavirus
(2019-ncov), wuhan, China through a drug-target interaction deep learn-
ing model,” bioRxiv, 2020.

[125] Y. Ge, T. Tian, S. Huang, F. Wan, J. Li, S. Li, H. Yang, L. Hong, N. Wu,
E. Yuan et al., “A data-driven drug repositioning framework discovered a
potential therapeutic agent targeting COVID-19,” bioRxiv, 2020.

22

VOLUME 4, 2020

Author et al.: Preparation of Papers for IEEE TRANSACTIONS and JOURNALS

[126] S. Jeon, M. Ko, J. Lee, I. Choi, S. Y. Byun, S. Park, D. Shum, and S. Kim,
“Identiﬁcation of antiviral drug candidates against sars-cov-2 from fda-
approved drugs,” bioRxiv, 2020.

[127] S. S. Nadim, I. Ghosh, and J. Chattopadhyay, “Short-term predictions
and prevention strategies for covid-2019: A model based study,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2003.08150, 2020.

[128] G. Vattay, “Predicting the ultimate outcome of the COVID-19 outbreak

in Italy,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.07912, 2020.

[129] D. Fanelli and F. Piazza, “Analysis and forecast of COVID-19 spreading
in China, Italy and France,” Chaos, Solitons & Fractals, vol. 134, p.
109761, 2020.

[130] Z. Hu, Q. Ge, L. Jin, and M. Xiong, “Artiﬁcial intelligence forecasting of

COVID-19 in China,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.07112, 2020.

[131] A. Vivanco-Lira, “Predicting COVID-19 distribution in mexico through a
discrete and time-dependent markov chain and an sir-like model,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2003.06758, 2020.

[132] L. Jia, K. Li, Y. Jiang, X. Guo et al., “Prediction and analysis of
coronavirus disease 2019,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.05447, 2020.
[133] S. J. Fong, G. Li, N. Dey, R. G. Crespo, and E. Herrera-Viedma,
“Composite monte carlo decision making under high uncertainty of novel
coronavirus epidemic using hybridized deep learning and fuzzy rule
induction,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.09868, 2020.

[134] H. Zhu, Q. Guo, M. Li, C. Wang, Z. Fang, P. Wang, J. Tan, S. Wu,
and Y. Xiao, “Host and infectivity prediction of wuhan 2019 novel
coronavirus using deep learning algorithm,” bioRxiv, 2020.

[135] M. Loey, F. Smarandache, and N. E. M. Khalifa, “Within the lack of chest
COVID-19 X-ray dataset: A novel detection model based on GAN and
Deep Transfer Learning,” Symmetry, vol. 12, no. 4, p. 651, Apr. 2020.

[136] R. Kumar, A. A. Khan, S. Zhang, J. Kumar, T. Yang, N. A. Golalirz,
Zakria, I. Ali, S. Shaﬁq, and W. Wang, “Blockchain-federated-learning
and deep learning models for COVID-19 detection using CT imaging,”
arXiv:2007.06537 [cs, eess], Dec. 2020, arXiv: 2007.06537.

[137] B. Liu, B. Yan, Y. Zhou, Y. Yang, and Y. Zhang, “Experiments of Fed-
erated Learning for COVID-19 Chest X-ray images,” arXiv:2007.05592
[cs, eess], Jul. 2020, arXiv: 2007.05592.

[138] W. Zhang, T. Zhou, Q. Lu, X. Wang, C. Zhu, H. Sun, Z. Wang, S. K. Lo,
and F.-Y. Wang, “Dynamic fusion-based Federated Learning for COVID-
19 detection,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, pp. 1–1, 2021.

[139] I. Feki, S. Ammar, Y. Kessentini, and K. Muhammad, “Federated learn-
ing for COVID-19 screening from Chest X-ray images,” Applied Soft
Computing, vol. 106, p. 107330, Jul. 2021.

[140] F. Qian and A. Zhang, “The value of federated learning during and post-
COVID-19,” International Journal for Quality in Health Care, vol. 33, no.
mzab010, Mar. 2021.

[141] Q. Dou, T. Y. So, M. Jiang, Q. Liu, V. Vardhanabhuti, G. Kaissis, Z. Li,
W. Si, H. H. C. Lee, K. Yu, Z. Feng, L. Dong, E. Burian, F. Jungmann,
R. Braren, M. Makowski, B. Kainz, D. Rueckert, B. Glocker, S. C. H.
Yu, and P. A. Heng, “Federated deep learning for detecting COVID-19
lung abnormalities in CT: a privacy-preserving multinational validation
study,” npj Digital Medicine, vol. 4, no. 1, p. 60, Dec. 2021.

[142] Acoer Coronavirus Tracker, Powered by Hedera Hashgraph, Now Freely
Available to General Public with Added Clinical Trial Data. [Online].
Available:
https://www.hedera.com/blog/acoer-coronavirus-tracker-
powered-by-hedera-hashgraph-now-freely-available-to-general-public-
with-added-clinical-trial-data.

[143] HyperChain-Blockchain Charity Platform to Fight Against the Coron-

avirus. [Online]. Available: https://www.hyperchain.cn/en.

[144] VeChain Announces Blockchain Vaccine Tracing Solution for
China. [Online]. Available: https://www.nasdaq.com/articles/vechain-
announces-blockchain-vaccine-tracing-solution-China-2018-08-16.
[145] Public Health Blockchain Consortium: PHBC . [Online]. Available:

https://www.phbconsortium.org/.

[146] BlueDot:

Outbreak
https://bluedot.global/.

Risk

Software.

[Online].

Available:

[147] J. Huang, F. Liu, Z. Teng, J. Chen, J. Zhao, X. Wang, and R. Wu, “Care
for the psychological status of frontline medical staff ﬁghting against
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19),” Clinical Infectious Diseases,
vol. 71, no. 12, pp. 3268–3269, 2020.

[148] S. Dananjayan and G. M. Raj, “Artiﬁcial intelligence during a pandemic:
The COVID-19 example,” The International Journal of Health Planning
and Management, 2020.

[149] AI Helps Doctors Diagnose the Coronavirus. [Online]. Available:
https://news.developer.nvidia.com/ai-helps-doctors-diagnose-the-
coronavirus/.

[150] D. Yang, Z. Xu, W. Li, A. Myronenko, H. R. Roth, S. Harmon, S. Xu,
B. Turkbey, E. Turkbey, X. Wang, W. Zhu, G. Carraﬁello, F. Patella,
M. Cariati, H. Obinata, H. Mori, K. Tamura, P. An, B. J. Wood, and D. Xu,
“Federated semi-supervised learning for COVID region segmentation in
chest CT using multi-national data from China, Italy, Japan,” Medical
Image Analysis, vol. 70, p. 101992, May 2021.

[151] I. Fenemigho, E. Ukponmwan, E. C. Nnakwue, I. Udoete, C. Asuzu,
A. Adaralegbe, and U. Efﬁong, “COVID-19, ﬂattening the curve: rec-
ommendations towards control and managing a second wave,” Journal of
Global Health Reports, vol. 4, p. e2020074, 2020.

[152] Blockchain and AI Technologies Combined to Battle Coronavirus
Immuno-Oncology Company Mateon Partners
- COVID-19 as
[Online].
with Meridian IT to Fast Track Drug Manufacturing.
Available: https://www.the-blockchain.com/2020/03/19/blockchain-and-
ai-technologies-combined-to-battle-coronavirus-COVID-19-as-immuno-
oncology-company-mateon-partners-with-meridian-it-to-fast-track-
drug-manufacturing/.

[153] Z. Che, Y. Cheng, S. Zhai, Z. Sun, and Y. Liu, “Boosting deep learn-
ing risk prediction with generative adversarial networks for electronic
health records,” in 2017 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining
(ICDM), 2017, pp. 787–792.

[154] D. C. Nguyen, M. Ding, P. N. Pathirana, A. Seneviratne, J. Li, and
H. V. Poor, “Federated learning for internet of things: A comprehensive
survey,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, 2021.

[155] N. Fabiano, “Internet of things and blockchain: legal issues and pri-
vacy. the challenge for a privacy standard,” in 2017 IEEE International
Conference on Internet of Things (iThings) and IEEE Green Computing
and Communications (GreenCom) and IEEE Cyber, Physical and Social
Computing (CPSCom) and IEEE Smart Data (SmartData), 2017, pp.
727–734.

[156] N. Ahmad and P. Chauhan, “State of data privacy during COVID-19,”
IEEE Annals of the History of Computing, vol. 53, no. 10, pp. 119–122,
2020.

[157] T. Sharma and M. Bashir, “Use of apps in the COVID-19 response and
the loss of privacy protection,” Nature Medicine, vol. 26, no. 8, pp. 1165–
1167, 2020.

[158] X. Li, P. Jiang, T. Chen, X. Luo, and Q. Wen, “A survey on the security

of blockchain systems,” Future Generation Computer Systems, 2017.

[159] Q. Liu, T. Liu, Z. Liu, Y. Wang, Y. Jin, and W. Wen, “Security analysis
and enhancement of model compressed deep learning systems under
adversarial attacks,” in 2018 23rd Asia and South Paciﬁc Design Au-
tomation Conference (ASP-DAC), 2018, pp. 721–726.

[160] E. Chen, K. Lerman, and E. Ferrara, “COVID-19: The ﬁrst public

coronavirus twitter dataset,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.07372, 2020.

[161] J. P. Cohen, P. Morrison, and L. Dao, “COVID-19 image data collection,”

arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.11597, 2020.

[162] W. Liu, P. T.-W. Yen, and S. A. Cheong, “Coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19) outbreak in China, spatial temporal dataset,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2003.11716, 2020.

[163] J. A. Dev, “Bitcoin mining acceleration and performance quantiﬁcation,”
in 2014 IEEE 27th Canadian conference on electrical and computer
engineering (CCECE), 2014, pp. 1–6.

[164] H. R. Hasan, K. Salah, R. Jayaraman, J. Arshad, I. Yaqoob, M. Omar, and
S. Ellahham, “Blockchain-based solution for COVID-19 digital medical
passports and immunity certiﬁcates,” 2020.

[165] A. I. Sanka and R. C. Cheung, “Efﬁcient high performance fpga based
nosql caching system for blockchain scalability and throughput improve-
ment,” in 2018 26th International Conference on Systems Engineering
(ICSEng), 2018, pp. 1–8.

[166] J. P. Costa, M. Grobelnik, F. Fuart, L. Stopar, G. Epelde, S. Fischaber,
P. Poliwoda, D. Rankin, J. Wallace, M. Black et al., “Meaningful big
data integration for a global COVID-19 strategy,” IEEE Computational
Intelligence Magazine, vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 51–61, 2020.

[167] Y. Liu, K. Wang, Y. Lin, and W. Xu, “Lightchain: A lightweight
blockchain system for industrial internet of things,” IEEE Transactions
on Industrial Informatics, vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 3571–3581, 2019.

[168] W. J. Gordon and C. Catalini, “Blockchain technology for healthcare: fa-
cilitating the transition to patient-driven interoperability,” Computational
and structural biotechnology journal, vol. 16, pp. 224–230, 2018.
[169] X. Li, P. Jiang, T. Chen, X. Luo, and Q. Wen, “A survey on the security
of blockchain systems,” Future Generation Computer Systems, vol. 107,
pp. 841–853, 2020.

[170] H. Lee, M. Shin, K. S. Kim, Y. Kang, and J. Kim, “Recipient-oriented
transaction for preventing double spending attacks in private blockchain,”

VOLUME 4, 2020

23

in 2018 15th Annual IEEE International Conference on Sensing, Com-
munication, and Networking (SECON), 2018, pp. 1–2.

[171] N. Liu, Z. Zhang, A. W. Ho, and M. E. H. Ong, “Artiﬁcial intelligence in
emergency medicine,” Journal of Emergency and Critical Care Medicine,
vol. 2, p. 82, 2018.

[172] Y. Wang, T. Wang, Y. Cui, H. Mei, X. Wen, J. Lu, and W. Chen, “COVID-
19 data visualization public welfare activity,” Visual Informatics, vol. 4,
no. 3, pp. 51–54, 2020.

[173] D. Chi-Nguyen, P. N. Pathirana, M. Ding, and A. Seneviratne, “Secrecy
performance of the uav enabled cognitive relay network,” in 2018 IEEE
3rd International Conference on Communication and Information Sys-
tems (ICCIS), 2018, pp. 117–121.

[174] A. Kumar, K. Sharma, H. Singh, S. G. Naugriya, S. S. Gill, and R. Buyya,
“A drone-based networked system and methods for combating coro-
navirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic,” Future Generation Computer
Systems, vol. 115, pp. 1–19, 2021.

Author et al.: Preparation of Papers for IEEE TRANSACTIONS and JOURNALS

PUBUDU N. PATHIRANA (Senior Member,
IEEE) was born in 1970 in Matara, Sri Lanka,
and was educated at Royal College Colombo.
He received the B.E. degree (ﬁrst class honors)
in electrical engineering and the B.Sc. degree in
mathematics in 1996, and the Ph.D. degree in
electrical engineering in 2000 from the University
of Western Australia, all sponsored by the gov-
ernment of Australia on EMSS and IPRS schol-
arships, respectively. He was a Postdoctoral Re-
search Fellow at Oxford University, Oxford, a Research Fellow at the School
of Electrical Engineering and Telecommunications, University of New South
Wales, Sydney, Australia, and a Consultant to the Defence Science and
Technology Organization (DSTO), Australia, in 2002. He was a visiting
professor at Yale University in 2009. Currently, he is a full Professor and
the Director of Networked Sensing and Control group at the School of
Engineering, Deakin University, Geelong, Australia and his current research
interests include bio-medical assistive device design, human motion capture,
mobile/wireless networks, rehabilitation robotics and radar array signal
processing.

DINH C. NGUYEN (Graduate Student Member,
IEEE) is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree at the
School of Engineering, Deakin University, Vic-
toria, Australia. His research interests focus on
blockchain, deep reinforcement learning, mobile
edge/cloud computing, network security and pri-
vacy. He is currently working on blockchain and
reinforcement learning for Internet of Things and
5G networks. He has been a recipient of the presti-
gious Data61 PhD scholarship, CSIRO, Australia.

MING DING (M’12-SM’17) received the B.S. and
M.S. degrees (with ﬁrst-class Hons.) in electronics
engineering from Shanghai Jiao Tong University
(SJTU), Shanghai, China, and the Doctor of Phi-
losophy (Ph.D.) degree in signal and informa-
tion processing from SJTU, in 2004, 2007, and
2011, respectively. From April 2007 to September
2014, he worked at Sharp Laboratories of China
in Shanghai, China as a Researcher/Senior Re-
searcher/Principal Researcher. Currently, he is a
senior research scientist at Data61, CSIRO, in Sydney, NSW, Australia. His
research interests include information technology, data privacy and security,
machine learning and AI, etc. He has authored over 140 papers in IEEE
journals and conferences, all in recognized venues, and around 20 3GPP
standardization contributions, as well as a Springer book "Multi-point Coop-
erative Communication Systems: Theory and Applications". Also, he holds
21 US patents and co-invented another 100+ patents on 4G/5G technologies
in CN, JP, KR, EU, etc. Currently, he is an editor of IEEE Transactions
on Wireless Communications and IEEE Wireless Communications Letters.
Besides, he has served as Guest Editor/Co-Chair/Co-Tutor/TPC member for
many IEEE top-tier journals/conferences and received several awards for his
24
research work and professional services.

ARUNA SENEVIRATNE (Senior Member,
IEEE) is currently a Foundation Professor of
telecommunications with the University of New
South Wales, Australia, where he holds the Ma-
hanakorn Chair of telecommunications. He has
also worked at a number of other Universities in
Australia, U.K., and France, and industrial orga-
nizations, including Muirhead, Standard Telecom-
munication Labs, Avaya Labs, and Telecom Aus-
tralia (Telstra). In addition, he has held visiting
appointments at INRIA, France. His current research interests are in physical
analytics: technologies that enable applications to interact intelligently
and securely with their environment in real time. Most recently, his team
has been working on using these technologies in behavioral biometrics,
optimizing the performance of wearables, and the IoT system veriﬁcation.
He has been awarded a number of fellowships, including one at British
Telecom and one at Telecom Australia Research Labs.

VOLUME 4, 2020

