1
2
0
2

n
u
J

8

]

Y
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
5
2
0
1
1
.
6
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Come back when you are charged!
Self-Organized Charging for Electric Vehicles

Benjamin Leiding[0000−0002−9191−7548]

Clausthal University of Technology
Institute for Software and Systems Engineering
Clausthal-Zellerfeld, Germany
benjamin.leiding@tu-clausthal.de

Abstract. Dwindling nonrenewable fuel reserves, progressing severe en-
vironmental pollution, and accelerating climate change require society
to reevaluate existing transportation concepts. While electric vehicles
(EVs) have become more popular and slowly gain widespread adoption,
the corresponding battery charging infrastructures still limits EVs’ use
in our everyday life. This is especially true for EV owners that do not
have the option to operate charging hardware, such as wall boxes, at
their premises. Charging an EV without an at-home wall box is time-
consuming since the owner has to drive to the charger, charge the vehicle
while waiting nearby, and ﬁnally drive back home. Thus, a convenient
and easy to use solution is required to overcome the issue and incentivize
EVs for daily commuters. Therefore, we propose an ecosystem and a ser-
vice platform for (semi-)autonomous electric vehicles that allow them
to utilize their “free”-time, e.g., at night, to access public and private
charging infrastructure, charge their batteries, and get back home be-
fore the owner needs the car again. To do so, we utilize the concept
of the Machine-to-Everything Economy (M2X Economy) and outline a
decentralized ecosystem for smart machines that transact, interact and
collaborate via blockchain-based smart contracts to enable a convenient
battery charging marketplace for (semi-)autonomous EVs.

Keywords: Electric Vehicles · Blockchain Technology · Smart Contracts
· Internet of Things · Circular Economy.

1

Introduction

The catastrophic worsening of climate change, severe environmental pollution,
and dwindling nonrenewable fuel reserves force society to abandon – or at least
to minimize – fossil fuel-based transportation. Especially daily commuters burn
large amounts of gas every year to drive to their workplace and back home. Elec-
tric vehicles (EVs) – preferably powered with solar energy or other regenerative
energy sources – provide an alternative. However, even though EVs’ prices are
declining and closing in on gasoline-powered vehicles, they are still expensive
in comparison – despite the governmental ﬁnancial promotion of EVs, e.g., in
Germany [2].

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

B. Leiding

Moreover, a limited battery charging infrastructure further constraints the
use of EVs in our everyday life [29]. EV drivers who own houses have the op-
portunity to install the corresponding charging infrastructure, e.g., wall boxes,
on their premise (and even install solar panels to power the charger), thereby
circumventing the problem of limited charging infrastructure – at least in the
context of daily commuting. Charging an EV without an at-home wall box is
time-consuming since the owner has to drive to the charger, charge the vehicle
while waiting, and ﬁnally drive back home. This issue applies especially to people
living in apartment buildings without underground parking who have to park
their EVs on public streets that usually do not have an option to charge vehicles
overnight. Even with a growing charging infrastructure, such parking spots will
continue to lack suﬃcient, easy-to-use, and convenient access to charge EVs on
public roads. As a result, potential buyers are disincentivized to purchase an EV
not only due to the higher price but also due to the additional time-requirements
and complexity of EV charging and the experimental nature of EVs. A conve-
nient and easy to use solution is required to overcome the issue and incentivize
the use of EVs for a daily commute.

This work proposes a solution for (semi-)autonomous electric vehicles that
allows them to utilize their “free”-time, e.g., overnight, to access public and
private charging infrastructure, charge their batteries and get back home be-
fore the owner needs the car to drive to work. To do so, we utilize the concept
of the Machine-to-Everything Economy (M2X Economy) as suggested in [10].
We present a decentralized ecosystem for smart machines that transact, inter-
act and collaborate via blockchain-based smart contracts with other machines
(Machine-to-Machine – M2M), humans (Machine-to-Human – M2H), and in-
frastructure components (Machine-to-Infrastructure – M2I) – thereby joining
the M2X Economy – to enable a convenient battery charging market place for
(semi-)autonomous EVs. Finally, we outline how the presented solution incen-
tivizes private wall-box owners to participate in this ecosystem, thereby fostering
a private and decentralized P2P EV charging market in addition to the com-
mercial charging infrastructure operators.

The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: Section 2 sets the idea
of self-charging vehicles in the context of the M2X Economy, introduces related
works as well as supplementary literature. Section 3 focuses on the operational
details of our solutions. Next, Section 4 details selected system-engagement pro-
cesses, while Section 5 discusses the ﬁndings of our paper. Finally, Section 6
concludes this work and provides an outlook on future work.

2 Preliminaries and Related Work

Subsequent Section 2.1 details the concept of the M2X Economy, while Sec-
tion 2.2 provides background information on blockchain technology. Section 2.3
outlines related work.

Come back when you are charged!

3

2.1 The M2X Economy

The development and adoption of EVs and the development of autonomous self-
driving vehicles are not necessarily correlated. However, EVs are often used to
showcase the latest technological advancements in this ﬁeld, e.g., Tesla. Nev-
ertheless, no production-ready fully autonomous vehicles exist yet. The idea of
fully autonomous vehicles in combination with the ubiquitousness of smart de-
vices in general, the continuous growth and expansion of the Internet of Things
(IoT) [18,22] as well as the progressing digitalization of our daily life, e.g., [7,30],
new technical and economical business models. While nowadays, business trans-
actions almost exclusively focus on human-to-human transactions, the IoT en-
ables business transactions without human intervention via autonomously acting
smart machines, a concept that we refer to as the Machine-to-Machine (M2M)
Economy. Besides M2M interactions, machines interact with humans (Machine-
to-Human – M2H) or infrastructure components (Machine-to-Infrastructure –
M2I). The Machine-to-Everything Economy [10] is the result of business inter-
actions, transactions, and collaborations among participants of the correspond-
ing ecosystem. It represents a more general view on use cases that involve au-
tonomous smart devices while also encompassing M2M, M2H, and M2I scenarios.
In the M2X Economy, smart sensors may oﬀer collected sensor data such as
temperature or air contamination to interested buyers that rely on the aforemen-
tioned data for their own computations. In the context of autonomous and self-
driving vehicles, scenarios such as automated tollbooth payments, autonomous
battery charging services, as well as general Transportation-as-a-Service (TaaS)
applications [12] and business models are among the most discussed use cases.
More complex scenarios focus on Smart Homes and Smart Cities [15] and In-
dustry 4.0 [34]. Even potential successors of Industry 4.0 with fully automated
and autonomous smart factories that independently handle supply and demand
management and corresponding logistics – including supply-chain management
– are part of the M2X Economy.

Besides the technical perspective, the upcoming M2X Economy also poses
sociotechnical problems and challenges. In an M2X scenario, we are not only
enabling interactions, transactions, and collaborations among machines, or be-
tween machines and infrastructure components, but also among machines and
humans. One of the main requirements is integrating humans and smart de-
vices into a well-functioning sociotechnical system that puts the M2X concept
in a human-centered context. When considering collaborations, interactions, and
transactions of autonomous smart devices, even M2M and M2I can be seen in a
sociotechnical context similar to humans interacting with each other or humans
interacting with machines of the M2X ecosystem. In order to provide non-trivial
services or products, smart devices are not only required to interact with their
potential clients; they may also have to collaborate, interact and transact on-
demand with other entities to be able to achieve a shared goal. While providing
services or products, they might even migrate to various geographical locations
based on supply and demand. The interleaved on-demand collaborations, in-
teractions, and transactions among autonomous, heterogeneous, and highly dy-

4

B. Leiding

namic entities (humans, machines, software agents, etc.) lead to a decentralized,
distributed, and heterogeneous socio-technical system consisting of a large num-
ber of micro-services of diﬀerent vendors and solution as well as infrastructure
providers.

2.2 Digital Smart Contracts

An alternative approach to the traditional oral or paper written contracts for
transactions and collaborations are electronic blockchain-based smart contracts
that allow to govern business transactions using a computerized transaction pro-
tocol such as a blockchain. A blockchain [21] consists of a sequentially ordered
number of blocks that records transaction events, e.g., transfer of a currency from
one person to another. Transactions are cryptographically signed and represent
an incremental, consistent over the network, time-stamped, and veriﬁable list of
records [21]. Hashes of their previous ancestor block link blocks, thereby chain-
ing all blocks together. As a result, changing information in one block results in
a hash mismatch of the succeeding block. Thus, tampering with one block re-
quires the recalculation of all succeeding blocks. Blocks are publicly available and
synchronized via a global, distributed, and decentralized P2P storage system.

Furthermore, blockchain-based smart contracts allow for the automated, globally-

available orchestration and choreography of heterogeneous socio-technical sys-
tems with a loosely coupled, P2P-like network structure. Finally, blockchain-
based smart contract-driven platforms enable fact tracking, non-repudiation,
auditability, and tamper-resistant storage of information among distributed par-
ticipants without a central authority.

2.3 Related Works

The growing popularity of EVs results in increased research interest in EV appli-
cations and/or solutions to challenges that prevent their widespread adoption,
e.g., [12] outlines a platform- and manufacturer-agnostic Vehicle-to-Everything
(V2X) interaction and transaction layer for a vehicle-based economy. [10] ex-
pands this research to a general M2X Economy for autonomous smart devices.
Both works focus on an abstract layer that enables a multitude of application
scenarios within the V2X, or M2X space. However, this work extends [10,12] by
instantiating an explicit application for EV charging based on their work.

Other research focuses on a blockchain-supported autonomous selection of
charging stations [27] or planning of ﬂeet sizing and charging for autonomous
EVs [36]. Two recently started research projects explore the idea of charging
driving vehicles via induction [9,28,32] – both have to be considered early-stage
research. Moreover, decentralized sustainable energy markets have been consid-
ered in [17,20] as well as [13] in great depth. Nevertheless, they do not consider
issues addressed in this work such as the utilization of free charging infrastruc-
ture components at times when the EVs are not use by their owners as well as
the integration of EV charging into the a machine-driven M2X Economy.

Come back when you are charged!

5

Besides academic research, various private companies prototype alternative
charging infrastructure components. Volkswagen presented a prototype of a mo-
bile charging robot for underground parking facilities with limited charging ca-
pacity [5]. Tesla [31] focuses on a snake-like charging connector that automat-
ically connects to Tesla EVs approaching a charging station, charges the EV,
disconnects once the battery is suﬃciently charged, and enables the EV to empty
the charging spot without the driver being presented. As a result, the unnec-
essary blocking of charging stations can be minimized. The German company
Ubitricity [33] oﬀers self-developed charging kits that can be installed in stan-
dard streetlights, thereby utilizing existing power supply and converting them
into EV charging stations. Except for the Ubitricity kit, all of the solutions pre-
sented above are still early prototypes and not ready for production yet. None
of the presented solutions single-handedly solves the issues of limited and ﬁxed
charging infrastructures for EV owners without direct access to charging stations
at their own premise or close to their home. However, they are either comple-
mentary or compatible with our proposed solution, as outlined in subsequent
sections.

While Ubitricity is already available in some European cities, it suﬀers from
similar issues as standard charging stations, e.g., EVs parked on public roads
without streetlights still lack suﬃcient, easy-to-use, and convenient access to
charging points.

Finally, most recent EVs, e.g., the Hyundai Kona Electric [8], are already
equipped with timing mechanisms to charge the vehicle in pre-deﬁned time-
slots. However, the mechanism requires the EV to be connected with a charging
station.

3 Self-Charging Electric Vehicles

While the idea of bringing the charging station to the EV [5] – as presented in
Section 2.3 – is tempting, it lacks scalability and involves complex logistics. A
suﬃciently sized mobile battery to charge multiple EVs is diﬃcult to handle.
It requires a lot of space and might be dangerous to maneuver through a city
due to its high energy capacity. However, small battery packs that cannot even
charge a single EV or only one EV require the mobile battery pack to drive back
to the charging station after every single use. Thus, instead of guiding the mobile
battery pack to a nearby charging station, we propose a self-organized ecosystem
of distributed, private, and/or public charging stations that routes the EV to a
nearby charging system when the owner does not need the EVs services.

3.1 Overview

Figure 1 presents the running case that we use throughout the paper to illus-
trate the initial problem as well as various aspects of our service platform and its
ecosystem1. The running case assumes that Alice lives in an apartment building

1 For easier readability we refrained from adding arrows between all charging stations

and the service platform.

6

B. Leiding

at location A. Due to missing underground parking or dedicated parking spots,
she has to park her EV just right in front of the building along the street with no
EV charging opportunities available. However, locations B, C and D oﬀer dif-
ferent kinds of EV charging in her neighborhood. Location B is the closest and
represents a public Ubitricity-like streetlight charging station powered by a coal-
ﬁred power plant. Location D is also solar-powered but further away and owned

Fig. 1: Self-charging EV ecosystem overview.

by the private individual Bob who is willing to let other EV owners utilize his
charging station when he does not use it himself. Finally, location C is even fur-
ther away than location D but oﬀers multiple, publicly-available, wind-powered
charging stations. As a result, Alice can choose from three diﬀerent neighborhood
charging options in various locations and diﬀerent charging properties.

On-boarding private individuals such as Bob not only allows for distributed
P2P electricity trading but also increases the number of available charging sta-
tions. Furthermore, Bob is incentivized to do so by selling his solar energy sur-
plus to EV owners. Even without a surplus, he could sell power from the power
grid and add an extra fee for parking, providing the charging infrastructure and
compensating for his eﬀorts.

Come back when you are charged!

7

Alice commutes ﬁve days a week from her apartment to her workplace and
needs to charge the EV twice a week. Due to her busy schedule, it would be
great to do so overnight in such a manner that her EV is ready right before she
leaves for work. Therefore, instead of relying on Alice to actively be involved in
the charging process, Alices’ EV utilizes its “free” time to collaborate with the
available charging infrastructure to charge itself while Alice is asleep.

3.2 Coordination and Routing

Guiding the EV from Alice apartment parking spot at location A to any of
the charging stations and back is essential to the proposed solution. We brieﬂy
outline diﬀerent approaches for routing and coordination of EVs since this work’s
contribution focuses on such a system’s system engagement processes rather than
the engineering aspects.

Assuming the existence and widespread adoption of fully autonomous EVs
would be the easiest solution to navigate any EV to an appropriate charging sta-
tion. However, this will not be the case for at least another decade. Therefore,
semi-autonomous EVs that can navigate on their own in constrained scenarios,
e.g., highways or slow driving in speciﬁc areas [16] might be an option. Alterna-
tively, [9] describes an approach to charge EVs while driving via induction coils.
Besides charging, the coils also guide the EV. A similar approach of beacons
(e.g., integrated into the street, traﬃc lights, streetlights, etc.) or other guiding
mechanisms for low-speed, urban driving could be used in our scenario. Finally,
platooning [11] could be another option to lead groups of EVs to locations with
multiple charging stations. The platoon leader could be one of the few fully
autonomous EVs that might be available in the near future before widespread
adoption is reached. Charging infrastructure providers may also utilize small au-
tonomous machines that act as platoon leaders, roam the streets at night, and
guide groups of EVs to their less frequented charging stations. As a result, less
complex and futuristic EV hardware is required compared to fully autonomous
navigation.

4 System-Engagement Processes

The previous Section 3 presents the running case, describes the ecosystem, and
outlines potential routing mechanisms for EVs guiding them to charging sta-
tions. However, thus far, we spared to answer how to decide which charging
station to choose, which constraints apply, and how to organize the process in a
self-organized, automated, and distributed manner with minimal human involve-
ment? A core element of the use case presented above is a smart contract-based
negotiation and contract enactment among entities resulting from collaborating
tasks and sub-processes, e.g., an EV and a set of charging stations negotiating
the terms and conditions of a battery charge. This process involves payment
processing, local and global communication, and local match-making between

8

B. Leiding

the vehicle and the charging infrastructure. On an abstract level, battery charg-
ing negotiations are similar to many other M2X-related business enactments,
e.g., road-space negotiations or parking spot fees. Therefore, we propose a spe-
ciﬁc implementation of an abstract interaction, transaction, and collaboration
lifecycle that was developed for business enactments among autonomous smart
devices [10,12].

In the following, Section 4.1 details our EV charging instantiation of the
abstract transaction and negotiation contract lifecycle, followed by Section 4.2
that details an eﬃcient auction mechanism for M2X use cases.

4.1 Digital Contract Transaction and Collaboration Lifecylce

In [10,23,24,25], the authors introduces a conceptual digital smart contract based
transaction and negotiation lifecycle as illustrated in Figure 2. The abstract
nature of the proposed conceptual lifecycle allows the utilization of the same
approach for various M2X-related services that rely on any kind of interactions,
transactions and collaborations for M2X business enactments. The instantiated
lifecycle for EV charging, as illustrated in Figure 2, is divided into the following
stages: i.) initialization, ii.) negotiation, iii.) preparation of charging enactment
iv.) EV charging enactment v.) rollback, and vi.) termination.

Fig. 2: Digital
on [10,23,24,25,26]

contract negotiation and transaction lifecycle – Based

During the initialization stage, information regarding the involved entities,
such as identiﬁers and wallet addresses, are incorporated into the contract based

Digital Contract LifecycleStartInitializeCharging TemplateNegotiationrenegotiateNoYesagree?EndViolationEnact EVChargingRollbackDisruptive rollbackRegularTerminationPrepareEV ChargingCome back when you are charged!

9

on pre-conﬁgured templates. Additionally, the conditions of the requested con-
tract are formally deﬁned by specifying, e.g., the content and target of the con-
tract. In the context of EV charging, this includes the charging station location,
the source of power for charging the EV (e.g., nuclear vs. solar), the charging
timeframe, charging speed, expected charging capacity, and the price per kWh.
However, the requested charging contract conditions mainly depend on infor-
mation such as the distance to the charger, price per kWh, and the available
charging timeframe. In case the charging station and the EV agree on the nego-
tiated conditions in stage ii)., they digitally sign the contract and express their
approval. If no agreement is reached, a contract rollback is triggered.

In stage iii.), a smart contract between the two parties is established and
serves as a coordinating agent. Each participating entity receives a local con-
tract copy containing the respective obligations of each party [25], e.g., charging
the EV, providing suﬃcient energy to charge the battery, and charging speed.
The participants “obligations are observed by monitors and assigned business-
network model agents (BNMA) that connect to IoT-sensors” [4] such as the
EV’s GPS-sensor. Moreover, the required process endpoints (e.g., payment pro-
cessing) are provided and prepared. “Once the e-governance infrastructure is
set up, technically realizing the behavior in the local copies of the contracts re-
quires concrete local electronic services. After picking these services follows the
creation of communication endpoints so that the partners’ services can commu-
nicate with each other. The ﬁnal step of the preparation is a liveness check of
the channel-connected services” [25].

Afterward, in stage iv.), the contract execution phase is triggered, the charg-
ing station connects to the EV and starts charging the EV’s battery. The con-
tract terminates or expires either after the EV is charged or when the contract is
prematurely terminated. Failing to charge the EV as agreed upon might result
in an immediate rollback of the smart contract or invokes a mediation process
that is supervised by a conﬂict resolution escrow service that is not depicted in
Figure 2.

Besides, the presented lifecycle includes incentives in case the stakeholders
behave correctly as well as penalization of bad behavior, e.g., by paying a penalty.
A severe violation of the contract from any of the involved parties might result in
early termination or a rollback. While some conﬂicts may be handled in a calming
manner that allows continuing the business enactment, others may cause early
termination.

The lifecycle in Figure 2 presents the speciﬁc instantiation of the abstract
M2X-focused lifecycle for EV charging. Collaborations for platooning and other
types of M2X service enactments could be easily implemented using the lifecycle
template and follow the same structure.

4.2 Pricing and Negotiations

Existing charging infrastructure providers already introduced a variety of pricing
mechanisms for EVs. Usually, users pay a ﬁxed price per kWh (kilowatt-hour)

10

B. Leiding

that varies depending on the charging speed – faster charging is more expen-
sive. Other pricing mechanisms combine ﬂat rate mechanisms with additional
ﬁxed fees. An open, interoperable, automated, and machine-focused charging
infrastructure as described above allows for more complex and tailored pricing
mechanisms. Besides a ﬁxed price per kWh or a ﬂat rate, pricing structures may
include current and predicted demand for given timeframes, weather forecasts
– sunny weather implies solar power availability. In contrast, windy weather in-
creases wind power plant output, thereby reducing energy prices. The opposite
is true for weather conditions with no sunshine or wind. Moreover, a charging
stations’ utilization also depends on its location and the time of the day, e.g.,
highway chargers might be highly-frequented throughout the day but almost
empty overnight. Thus, it might be worth incentivizing EVs to drive a longer
distance to a highway charger in exchange for a lower price at night. Finally,
pricing also depends on the constraints set by the EV owner, e.g., the maximum
price paid per kWh, the maximum distance the EV is allowed to travel, time-
frame for charging, type of energy used to power the charging station (solar,
wind, nuclear, coal, etc.).

For our service platform, we utilize the beneﬁts of fully automated machine-
driven negotiations with no human-intervention. When trading goods and ser-
vices, the buying and the selling party usually have contrary goals in terms of
pricing. The seller’s goal is to maximize proﬁts while the buyer tries to minimize
the costs. Auctions are a common approach to reach a consensus on a price be-
tween buyer and seller, but auctions among humans or humans and machines are
tedious and slow. However, machine-driven auctions do not require a human-in-
the-loop and conduct various auctions and many rounds in parallel. Therefore,
we rely on an auction algorithm based on the concept of Vickrey auctions [19,35]
that we developed for the M2X economy [10,12].

In a Vickrey auction, participants exchange sealed (encrypted) bids, where
each bidder submits a written and signed bid without having any knowledge of
the bids of the other participants. After submitting all bids, the sealed bids are
opened, and subsequently, the highest bidder wins. But instead of paying the
price of the highest oﬀer, the price paid is of the second-highest bid. Due to
this paper’s technical nature, we refer the interested reader to supplementary
literature that covers additional economic and game-theoretical implications of
Vickrey auctions, e.g., [1,6,14,19,35].

Figure 3 presents the sequence diagrams of the auction algorithms that is
executed during the negotiation stage of Figure 2. Auctions may occur either
locally (oﬀ-chain) between auction participants that reside close to each other or
on-chain when interacting on a global scale. Only one auction round is conducted
in order to minimize the runtime of the algorithm.

The auction in Figure 3 illustrates a simpliﬁed example that only focuses
on the price per kWh for the following charging process and assumes that any
further constraints (location, time, required charging time,fairness, etc.) have
been agreed upon earlier. In case of a one-to-one auction with only one buyer
and one seller, we assume that the buying EV is not willing to pay more than

Come back when you are charged!

11

Fig. 3: One-to-one Vickrey auction for EV charging – Based on [10,12]

e 0.35 per kWh (slow charging), and the charging station is not selling for less
than e 0.33. Both entities prepare a sealed (encrypted) and signed bid before
exchanging the bids. As soon as both parties received the other party’s bid, the
encryption keys are exchanged as well. EV and charging station decrypt the bids
and compare the oﬀers. Given the case that the EV oﬀered more than e 0.33,
the auction is successful, and due to the second-price rule of Vickrey auctions,
the buyer pays e 0.33 to the seller. In case the EV oﬀers less than the charging
station’s minimum price, the auction ends without an agreement. A scenario
with multiple buyers, e.g., platooning vehicles, works analogously. The auction
algorithm even supports scenarios with multiple sellers, i.e., competing charging
stations and scenarios with multiple buyers and sellers. In the end, the highest
bidding EV is paying the second-highest price to the charging station with the
highest minimum price, and so on – as long as the paid price is higher than the
matched seller’s minimum price.

5 Discussion

The presented ecosystem and the charging service platform predominantly focus
on solving the issue of limited and ﬁxed charging infrastructures for EV owners

EVCharging StationRequest charging withintimeframe XACK service requestPay 0.33€Seal price inenvelopeSeal price inenvelopeExchange sealed envelopesExchange encryption keysOpen envelopeOpen envelopeProvide charging service12

B. Leiding

without direct access to charging stations at their own premises or in close
proximity to their home.

The service platform, its smart contracts, the auction mechanism, and the
digital contract lifecycle management merely require additional software and
communication-interface upgrades. However, the corresponding hardware up-
grades for the EVs and the routing-related smart city components, i.e., beacons
for precise navigation, may require more time, upfront investments, and further
research. Waiting for fully autonomous EV navigation is also not a short-term
option and rather an additional feature for future EV generations.

Further limitations arise from the required interoperability among EVs and
charging stations. A one-stop platform is desirable but not a manufacturer-
focused platform with deliberately forced or functional lock-ins. As suggested
in [10], interoperability allows for the exploitation of economies of scale and in-
creased eﬃciency. Moreover, a smart contract-driven service platform and its
corresponding ecosystem, as described in previous sections, not only “enable an
interoperable platform for autonomous smart devices (e.g., vehicles), but also
further reduces dependency on intermediaries. Furthermore, a blockchain-based
solution enables the decentralized settlement of value added in the form of crypto
tokens; these can be created entirely without central instances or intermediaries
and exchanged directly P2P [3]” while at the same time increasing transaction
speed [10].

Finally, legal concerns may apply in the context of machine-driven business
enactments with no or minimal human supervision regarding liability and the
legally binding nature of contracts among machines.

6 Conclusion and Future Work

This paper introduces a transaction and service platform for distributed EV
charging and its corresponding ecosystem to overcome the issue of limited ﬁxed
charging infrastructures for EV owners without direct access to charging sta-
tions at their own premises or in close proximity to their home. We introduce
a service platform for (semi-)autonomous EVs that allows them to utilize their
“free”-time, e.g., at night, to access public and private charging infrastructure,
charge their batteries, and get back home before the owner needs the EV again.
To do so, we utilize the concept of the Machine-to-Everything Economy and
outline a decentralized ecosystem for autonomously acting smart devices that
transact, interact and collaborate via blockchain-based smart contracts to en-
able a convenient battery charging market place.

First, we present a decentralized ecosystem and our service platform for
(semi-)autonomous EVs that transact, interact, and collaborate via blockchain-
based smart contracts with other machines (Machine-to-Machine – M2M), hu-
mans (Machine-to-Human – M2H), and infrastructure components (Machine-
to-Infrastructure – M2I) – thereby joining the M2X Economy – to enable a
convenient battery charging marketplace. The ecosystem incorporates charging
stations owned by individuals and businesses as well as public charging stations.

Come back when you are charged!

13

The blockchain enables smart contract-based matchmaking and further monitors
and tracks all contract-related activities.

Digital smart contracts allow for a high degree of self-organization and au-
tomation among EVs. The smart contract-driven service platform oﬀers match-
making services among charging stations and EVs and enables smart contract-
based transactions and collaborations using a digital contract lifecycle man-
agement. Moreover, it uses pre-deﬁned contract templates in combination with
the contract lifecycle management to cover the whole process of routing vehi-
cles to the charging station as well as all charging-related business enactments
in an automated manner – including conﬂict-resolution mechanisms. Moreover,
smart contracts ensure fact tracking, non-repudiation, auditability, and tamper-
resistant storage of information among all entities and orchestrate related het-
erogeneous software services of involved stakeholders.

Pricing and negotiations among stakeholders rely on a Vickrey auction al-
gorithm for the M2X Economy that allows reaching an eﬃcient consensus on
a price between EV and charging station. The algorithm is suitable for one-to-
one auctions, one-to-many auctions as well as many-to-many auctions. Finally,
the presented solution incentivizes private wall box owners to participate in this
ecosystem and sell free charging capacities to EV owners without a wall box on
their own premise, thereby fostering a private and decentralized P2P EV charg-
ing market in addition to the commercial charging infrastructure operators.

Future work focuses on a prototype implementation of the smart contract-
driven service platform and deﬁning contract templates for charging and routing-
related business enactments. Moreover, we will test the proposed solution in a
testbed or lab-environment with small UAVs. Finally, we will explore the ap-
plicability of the proposed solution beyond EVs to UAVs, e.g., drones or other
(semi-)autonomous smart devices that fall within the context of the M2X Econ-
omy.

References

1. Ausubel, L.M., Milgrom, P.: The Lovely but Lonely Vickrey Auction. Combinato-

rial Auctions 17, 22–26 (2006)
f¨ur Wirtschaft

2. Bundesamt

(Inno-
vationspraemie)
https://www.bafa.de/DE/Energie/
Energieeffizienz/Elektromobilitaet/Neuen_Antrag_stellen/neuen_antrag_
stellen.html (2020), (Accessed January 14, 2021)

und Ausfuhrkontrolle: Umweltbonus

- F¨orders¨atze. URL:

3. Cap, C.H., Leiding, B.: Blogchain – Disruptives Publizieren auf der
Blockchain. HMD Praxis der Wirtschaftsinformatik 55(6), 1326–1340 (2018).
https://doi.org/10.1365/s40702-018-00470-w,
https://doi.org/10.1365/
s40702-018-00470-w

4. Dai, P., Mahi, N., Earls, J., Norta, A.: Smart-Contract Value-Transfer Protocols on
a Distributed Mobile Application Platform - White Paper. URL: https://qtum.
org/user/pages/01.home/Qtum%20whitepaper_en%20v0.7.pdf (2017), (Accessed
February 11, 2021)

5. Donath, A.: VW-Laderoboter

im R2D2-Style kommt zum Autox. URL:

https://www.golem.de/news/prototyp-vorgestellt-vw-laderoboter-im-

14

B. Leiding

r2d2-style-kommt-zum-auto-2012-153079.html (2020), (Accessed January 27,
2021)

6. Edelman, B., Ostrovsky, M., Schwarz, M.: Internet Advertising and the Generalized
Second-Price Auction: Selling Billions of Dollars Worth of Keywords. American
Economic Review 97(1), 242–259 (2007)

7. Horst, H.A., Miller, D.: Digital Anthropology. A&C Black (2013)
8. Hyundai: Hyundai Kona Electric – Electric Vehicle System Overview. URL:
https://www.hyundaicanada.com/-/media/hyundai/feature/ownerssection/
manuals/english/2019/kona-ev/os-ev-eng-system-intro.pdf/ (2019),
cessed March 13, 2021)

(Ac-

9. Kunde, D.: Elektroautos – Unendliche Reichweite. URL: https://www.zeit.de/
mobilitaet/2020-11/elektroautos-induktives-laden-elektromobilitaet-
technik-ladesaeulen-alternative-verkehrswende (2020), (Accessed January
27, 2021)

10. Leiding, B.: The M2X Economy – Concepts for Business Interactions,Transactions
and Collaborations Among Autonomous Smart Devices. PhD Thesis, University
of G¨ottingen, G¨ottingen, Germany (2020)

11. Leiding, B., Memarmoshreﬁ, P., Hogrefe, D.: Self-Managed and Blockchain-Based
Vehicular Ad-Hoc Networks. In: The Adjunct Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Inter-
national Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing. pp. 137–140.
ACM, Heidelberg, Germany (2016). https://doi.org/10.1145/2968219.2971409,
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2968219.2971409

12. Leiding, B., Vorobev, W.V.: Enabling the V2X Economy Revolution Using a
Blockchain-based Value Transaction Layer for Vehicular Ad-hoc Networks. In:
The 12th Mediterranean Conference on Information Systems - MCIS 2018. Corfu,
Greece (2018)

13. Liu, C., Chai, K.K., Zhang, X., Lau, E.T., Chen, Y.: Adaptive Blockchain-based
Electric Vehicle Participation Scheme in Smart Grid Platform. IEEE Access 6,
25657–25665 (2018)

14. Lucking-Reiley, D.: Vickrey Auctions in Ppractice: From Nineteenth-Century Phi-
lately to Twenty-First-Century e-Commerce. Journal of Economic Perspectives
14(3), 183–192 (2000)

15. Lynggaard, P., Skouby, K.: Complex IoT Systems as Enablers for Smart Homes in

a Smart City Vision. Sensors 16(11), 1840 (2016)

16. M¨anni, M.: Tallinn’s new Self-Driving Bus Emerged from a University Robotics
Course. URL: https://estonianworld.com/technology/tallinns-new-self-
(Ac-
driving-bus-emerged-from-a-university-robotics-course/
cessed February 11, 2021)

(2020),

17. Mengelkamp, E., Notheisen, B., Beer, C., Dauer, D., Weinhardt, C.: A blockchain-
based Smart Grid: Towards Sustainable Local Energy Markets. Computer Science-
Research and Development 33(1), 207–214 (2018)

18. van der Meulen, R.: Gartner Says 8.4 Billion Connected “Things” Will Be in Use
in 2017, Up 31 Percent From 2016. URL: https://www.gartner.com/newsroom/
id/3598917 (2017), (Accessed January 27, 2021)

19. Moldovanu, B., Tietzel, M.: Goethe’s Second-Price Auction. Journal of Political

Economy 106(4), 854–859 (1998)

20. Musleh, A.S., Yao, G., Muyeen, S.: Blockchain Applications in Smart Grid – Review

and Frameworks. Ieee Access 7, 86746–86757 (2019)

21. Nakamoto, S.: Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System. URL: https://

bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf (2008), (Accessed January 22, 2021)

Come back when you are charged!

15

by

2020

22. Nordrum, A.: Popular

Internet of Things Forecast of 50 Billion De-
https://spectrum.ieee.org/tech-

Is Outdated. URL:

vices
talk/telecom/internet/popular-internet-of-things-forecast-of-50-
billion-devices-by-2020-is-outdated (2016), (Accessed January 27, 2020)
23. Norta, A.: Creation of Smart-Contracting Collaborations for Decentralized Au-
tonomous Organizations. In: International Conference on Business Informatics Re-
search. pp. 3–17. Springer (2015)

24. Norta, A.: Establishing Distributed Governance Infrastructures for Enacting Cross-
Organization Collaborations. In: International Conference on Service-Oriented
Computing. pp. 24–35. Springer (2015)

25. Norta, A.: Designing a Smart-Contract Application Layer for Transacting Decen-
tralized Autonomous Organizations. In: International Conference on Advances in
Computing and Data Sciences. pp. 595–604. Springer (2016)

26. Norta, A., Othman, A.B., Taveter, K.: Conﬂict-Resolution Lifecycles for Gov-
erned Decentralized Autonomous Organization Collaboration. In: Proceedings of
the 2015 2nd International Conference on Electronic Governance and Open Soci-
ety: Challenges in Eurasia. pp. 244–257. ACM (2015)

27. Pustiˇsek, M., Kos, A., Sedlar, U.: Blockchain-based Autonomous Selection of Elec-
tric Vehicle Charging Station. In: 2016 International Conference on Identiﬁcation,
Information and Knowledge in the Internet of Things (IIKI). pp. 217–222. IEEE
(2016)

28. Schaefer, P.: RWTH-Projekt forscht am induktiven dynamischen Laden. URL:
https://www.springerprofessional.de/en/ladeinfrastruktur/multimodale-
mobilitaet/rwth-projekt-forscht-am-induktiven-dynamischen-laden/
18666406 (2020), (Accessed January 27, 2021)

29. She, Z.Y., Sun, Q., Ma, J.J., Xie, B.C.: What are the barriers to widespread adop-
tion of battery electric vehicles? A survey of public perception in Tianjin, China.
Transport Policy 56, 29–40 (2017)

30. Su, K., Li, J., Fu, H.: Smart City and the Applications. In: Electronics, Commu-
nications and Control (ICECC), 2011 International Conference on. pp. 1028–1031.
IEEE (2011)

31. Tesla, Inc.: Charger prototype ﬁnding its way to Model S. URL: https://www.
youtube.com/watch?v=uMM0lRfX6YI&feature=youtu.be (2015), (Accessed Jan-
uary 27, 2021)

32. TU Braunschweig: Keine Kabel, kein Warten: E-Auto laden beim Fahren
(German). URL: https://magazin.tu-braunschweig.de/pi-post/keine-kabel-
kein-warten-e-auto-laden-beim-fahren/ (2021), (Accessed February 05, 2021)
33. Ubitricity – Gesellschaft f¨ur verteilte Energiesysteme mbH: Ubitricity – Electricity
for Everyone, Everywhere. URL: https://www.ubitricity.com/ (2021), (Accessed
January 27, 2021)

34. Vaidya, S., Ambad, P., Bhosle, S.: Industry 4.0 – A Glimpse. Procedia Manufac-

turing 20, 233–238 (2018)

35. Vickrey, W.: Counterspeculation, Auctions, and Competitive Sealed Tenders. The

Journal of Finance 16(1), 8–37 (1961)

36. Zhang, H., Sheppard, C.J., Lipman, T.E., Moura, S.J.: Joint Fleet Sizing and
Charging System Planning for Autonomous Electric Vehicles. IEEE Transactions
on Intelligent Transportation Systems 21(11), 4725–4738 (2019)

