1 

Blockchains  for Spectrum Management  in 
Wireless  Networks: A Survey 

Matthew K. Luka, Okpo U. Okereke, Elijah E. Omizegba and Ejike C. Anene 

 

of 

by 

factors 

towards 

involves 

dynamic 

schemes 

for  emerging  applications 

technological  developments  and 
spectrum 

(5G)  wireless  networks.  In  simple 
spectrum  management 

is 
Abstract—Regulatory  radio  spectrum  management 
evolving  from  traditional  static  frequency  allocation  and 
spectrum 
assignment 
is 
management  and  access  schemes.  This  evolution 
a 
necessitated 
including 
number 
licensed  spectrum  bands,  changing 
underutilization  of 
increased 
market  and 
demand 
in 
for 
internet-of-things  and  fifth 
multimedia  communications, 
generation 
terms 
allowing 
dynamic 
unlicensed users  known as  secondary users  (SUs) to  access 
the  licensed  spectrum  of  a  licensed  user  also  known  as 
primary  user  (PU).  This 
is  primarily  achieved  using 
spectrum  sharing  schemes  that  leverage  spectrum  database 
and  cognitive  radio 
the  use  of 
spectrum  database  and  cognitive  radio  techniques  faces 
reliability,  security  and  privacy  concerns  for  spectrum 
sharing. There is  also a  need to  support other  requirements 
of  dynamic  spectrum  management  such  as  secondary 
spectrum  trading  market  and  dynamic  spectrum  access 
coordination. In  this work,  we review  the use  of  blockchains 
for enabling  spectrum sharing  and other  aspects of  dynamic 
spectrum  management.  The  review  covers  the  use  of 
blockchain  to  record  spectrum  management  information 
such  as  spectrum  sensing  results  and  spectrum  auction 
transactions in a secure manner.  The article also covers  the 
use  of  smart  contracts  to  support  complex  service-level-
agreements (SLAs) between  network operators  which is  key 
to  supporting  a  self-organized  secondary  spectrum  sharing 
market  and  enforcement  of  regulatory  policies.  A  taxonomy 
of the  intersection  between  blockchain  and  various  concepts 
of dynamic  spectrum  management  is also provided. 

techniques.  However, 

Index Terms—Blockchains; Mobile communications; Wireless 
Network;  spectrum  management;  smart  contract;  consensus 
protocols 

I.  INTRODUCTION 

R 

adio  spectrum  is  a  valuable  and  limited  resource  that  is 
used for wireless applications including satellite telemetry, 
tracking,  and  control; 
television  and  radio  broadcasts; 
aeronautical  and  maritime  navigation,  broadband  internet 
connections and  aviation  communication systems.  Access  to 
broadband internet helps improve  quality of lives, creates  job 
and  market  opportunities  and  drives  economic  growth  [1]. 
Wireless networks such as cellular and Wi-Fi networks are the 
most viable means of providing broadband internet connection 
in  underserved  communities  and  developing 
especially 
countries.  As the shown in Fig.1, the bandwidth required p er 
internet user has progressively grown due to increasing demand 
for  mobile  broadband  internet  and  other  emerging  wireless 
applications. However, there is big divide between the available 
bandwidth  for  internet  users  in  developing  countries  and 
developed countries due to lack  of adequate infrastructure and 
unfavorable  economics.  Even  in  the  most  developed  nations 
there are gaps in wireless  coverage, base stations and  access 
points become overloaded in busy areas, thereby driving up the 
price  [2].    Thus,  there  is  a  need  to  maximize  radio  spectrum 
using  various  spectrum  management  regimes  aimed  at 
maximizing  gains  from  the  use  of    the  available  spectrum  by 
enforcing  efficient  usage  of  the  spectrum  while  minimizing 
interference among users [3].  Traditionally, 
exclusive 
licensing  spectrum  management  model  is  used  by  national 
spectrum  managers 
interference  protection 
guarantees and allow  higher power output  for licensed  users. 
However, 
two 
fundamental  limitations  [4].  Firstly,  significant  parts  of  the 
licensed  spectrum  is  underutilized.  Secondly,  this  command-
and-control  regime  of  spectrum  management  is  slow  to 
changing  market  and  technological  developments.    These 
challenges  coupled  with  the  ever  increasing  demand  for 
spectrum  probed  by  multimedia  and  emerging  services  and 
application  such  as  internet-of-things  (IoT),  smart  grids, 
emergence  of  5G  (fifth  generation)  wireless  network  etc.  has 
informed the  need for  new spectrum  management methods  to 
satisfy  emerging  connectivity  needs  [5].  Under  exclusive 

this  spectrum  management  regime  faces 

to  provide 

M.  K.  Luka  is  with  the  Department  of  Electrical  and  Electronics 
Engineering, Modibbo Adama University of T echnology, Yola, Nigeria. He is 
currently a PhD  student at  Abubakar T afawa  Balewa University,  Bauchi, 
Nigeria, (email: matthewkl@mautech.edu.ng)  

O. U.  Okereke is  a professor  of communication  Engineering with  the 
Electrical and Electronic Engineering Department, Abubakar T afawa Balewa 
University, Bauchi, Nigeria (e-mail: uokereke@gmail.com) 

E. E. Omizegba is a professor of control and systems Engineering with the 
Electrical and Electronic Engineering Department, Abubakar T afawa Balewa 
University, Bauchi, Nigeria.,  (e-mail: eeomizegba@atbu.edu.ng). 

E. C. Anene is a professor of Machine Control with the Electrical  and 
Electronic Engineering Department, Abubakar T afawa Balewa University, 
Bauchi, Nigeria.,   (e-mail: eanene@atbu.edu.ng). 

 
 
 
 
  
 
regulatory  scheme,  spectrum  efficiency  can  be  achieved 
through  spectrum  re-farming.  An  example  of  spectrum  re-
farming  is  the  reallocation  of  spectrum  obtained  from  the 
transition  of  analogue  television  service  to  digital  terrestrial 
television for mobile  services.  

Fig.1 Bandwidth Demand per Internet User (Source:  IT U World 
T elecommunication /ICT  Indicators database) 

A  complimentary  spectrum  management  tool  is  the  use  of 
license-exemption  of  spectrum  bands  such  as  2.4  GHz  ISM 
(Industrial  Scientific  and  Medical)  band  to  facilitate  fast 
network  deployment  without  incurring  spectral  license  and 
associated costs.  License-exempt spectrum  management  does 
not provide interference protection to radio services and its use 
is limited short-range devices (SRDs). Another  complimentary 
method is to use frequency sharing to improve the utilization of 
existing spectrum resources. Spectrum sharing can be achieved 
at different levels [2]: 

1)  Between  various  radiocommunications  applications  or 
services  in  accordance  with  international,  regional  or 
national level  regulatory arrangements; 

2)  Between various of users or entities (e.g commercial versus 

governmental); 

3)  Between licensed users of the same application (e.g mobile 

network operators); 

4)  Between  licensed-exempt  secondary  users  and  protected 
regional 

television  station  and 

primary  users 
broadband wireless network); 

(e.g 

5)  Between license-exempt users  (e.g Wi-Fi  and short  range 

devices) 

However,  using  spectrum  sharing  for  dynamic  spectrum 
management faces  some challenges  which  are outlined  in  the 
next  section.  The  rest  of  the  article  is  organized  as  follows. 
Section II is a discussion on the challenges of various spectrum 
sharing  schemes  used  for  spectrum  management.  Section  III 
provides an overview of the blockchain technology. In section 
IV, a comprehensive survey of various applications and uses of 
the blockchain technology for dynamic spectrum management 
is  provided.  Future  research  perspectives  and  challenges  are 
discussed in section V. Finally, section VI concludes the article. 

II. CHALLENGES OF SPECT RUM SHARING SCHEMES 

2 

Dynamic  spectrum  sharing  for 

the  various  spectrum 
management  models  can  be  achieved  using  cognitive  radio 
technology. A cognitive radio  system (CRS) uses  technology 
that enables the system to derive knowledge of its geographical 
and  operational  environment,  internal  state  and  established 
policies to autonomously and dynamically adjust its operational 
protocols and parameters according to its obtained knowledge 
in  order  to  learn  from  the  results  obtained  and  achieve 
predefined  objectives 
that 
[6].  The 
characterize  a  cognitive  radio  system  are  illustrated  in  Fig.2. 
The  most  popular  means  of  facilitating  dynamic  spectrum 
sharing  and  access  using  CRS  techniques  in  mobile  and 
wireless network  are  spectrum sensing  and  geo-location  with 
database  access  [7].  The  salient  aspects  and  challenges  of 
spectrum sharing based on these techniques are outlined in this 
section.   

technical 

features 

A.  Spectrum Sensing Approach 

Spectrum  sensing  is  a  cognitive  radio  technique  used  to 
detect  spectrum  holes  or  ‘whitespace’.  It  is  also  used  by 
secondary users (SU) to  detect the arrival  of primary users  in 
the spectrum hole occupied by the SU. A taxonomy of various 
spectrum sensing techniques based on the size of the band of 
interest  is  presented  in  [8].  Narrowband  spectrum  sensing 
schemes decides whether a given portion of the spectrum is a 
whitespace or not while wideband sensing involves classifying 
individual  channels  of  the  spectrum  to  be  either  vacant  or 
occupied. The main challenges  of using spectrum sensing  for 
spectrum sharing are outlined below [9]: 
1)  Hidden Node Problem:  

This problem occurs when a cognitive radio node  cannot 
sense  the  presence  of  a  receive-only  node  or  another 
transmitting  node  (probably  due  to  radio  prop agation 
conditions). When this happens, the cognitive radio node 
may assume that frequency channel is vacant. 

2)  Sensing Capabilities:  

spectrum sensing requires high sampling rate, sensitivity, 
high speed signal processors, high resolution and analogue-
to-digital  converters  with  large  dynamic  range.  These 
requirements  are  difficult  to  fulfil  with  cognitive  radio 
system devices that  have constrained  energy and  limited 
processing capacity.   
3)  Reliability of Sensing: 

 The reliability  of  spectrum  sensing  results  is  one  of  the 
main  challenges  impeding  the  widespread  use  of  the 
technique for opportunistic spectrum access. The presence 
of external noise sources such  as electric motors and  AC 
power  system  can  influence  the  reliability  of  spectrum 
sensing results.  
In addition to this key challenges, other issues associated 
with  spectrum  sensing  are:  sensing  signaling  cost; 
algorithm complexity with respect to power and processing 
demands;  and  cost  of  realizing  cooperative  sensing 
operations.  

 
 
 
 
3 

it is necessary  to develop means  of ensuring that  TVWS 
database operators comply with regulatory, technical  and 
operational procedures.  It  is  also  pertinent  to  verify  that 
cognitive  users  comply  with  requirements  for  spectrum 
access 

6)  Query language and format:  

various TVWS database operators use different high-level 
language  such  as  HTML,  XML,  Python  and  PHP. 
Therefore,  there  is  a  need  to  adopt  a  universal  scripting 
language for uniformity  and facilitating innovative ideas  

Moreover, the use  of database to  manage fast varying  and 
dynamic  spectrum  sharing  can  be  challenging  as 
the 
information  stored  in  the  repository  can  quickly  become 
outdated [9]. The use of spectrum database also raises security 
and privacy concerns.  Sensitive user information stored on the 
database  must  be  protected  from  any  unauthorized  or 
unexpected access. Spectrum management can be seen as either 
a  regulatory  process  or  as  a  means  of  utilizing  spectrum 
resources [11]. As a regulatory process, spectrum management 
can  be  defined  as 
the  implementation,  coordination  or 
realization of radio spectrum in order to meet the objectives of 
stakeholders. Based on this definition, spectrum management is 
regulatory 
and 
process  of 
frameworks  to  achieve  spectrum  harmonization,  spectrum 
allocation  and  other  socio-economic  benefits  by  regulatory 
authorities.  Spectrum  management  can    also  be  defined  as 
controlling and making decisions on the utilization of spectrum 
resources  to  meet  the  objectives  of  various  stakeholder  [11]. 
This  complementary  definition  reflects  the  evolution  of 
spectrum management towards efficient utilization of spectrum 
as a resource,  driven by  technology and  business use  cases.  
Spectrum utilization is very crucial in the sub-6 GHz frequency 
band 
in  spectrum 
requirements.  

towards  addressing 

the  deficiency 

implementing 

rulemaking 

Fig.3 Spectrum Regulatory Models 

 Fig.2. Illustration of Cognitive Radio System Concept [9] 

B. Database Approach 

Spectrum database  provides  information  about  locally  usable 
frequencies  with  the  objective  of  providing  protection  to 
incumbent services from harmful interferences. The location of 
the CRS node in a database access scheme is determined using 
geo-location. Location information is needed to obtain correct 
information  from  the  spectrum  database  for  a  given  location. 
The database approach is mandatory in the TVWS technology 
and is  the  basis  of  both  Licensed  Shared  Access  (LSA)  and 
Shared  Access  System  (SAS)  hierarchical  spectrum  sharing 
schemes. Some of these practical challenges as outlined in  [10] 
include: 

1)  Need 

for  cross-national  TVWS  database  carrier 

harmonization:  
TVWS  database  should  be  capable  of  meeting  the 
regulatory regime of different countries and regions while 
supporting interoperability to facilitate global and regional 
roaming  of Television Whitespace Networks  

2)  Need  for  a  common 

inter-database  communication 

protocol:  
a particular country may have a number of TVWS database 
operators competing  with each  other in  terms of  network 
coverage, Quality of Service and broker fees. Thus there is 
a  need  for  common  communication  protocol  for  TVWS 
database operators to coordinate TVWS information 
3)  Lack of standardized validity period for database Queries:  
Different  spectrum  operators  specify  different  database 
query times.  

4)  Establishment  of  a  framework  for  contracting, 
authenticating and qualifying prospective database 
operators:  
There  is  a  need  to  outline  clear-cut  procedures  to  be 
adopted for qualifying a TVWS  database operator 

5)  Lack of standard procedure for framework testing:  

Learning Obtaining KnowledgeDecision and AdjustmentRadio environmentGeographical environmentInternal stateEstablished policiesUsage patternsUser’s needsOutput powerFrequency rangeModulation typeRadio access technologyProtocols Wireless Control Channel Cognitive Control      Channel Cognitive Pilot Channel Spectrum sensingDatabase access Geo-location Multi-dimensionsADJUSTMENTReconfigurable base station (RBS) managementService Oriented Radio (SOR) architecture reconfigurationDECISION MAKINGCentralizeddistributedSpectrum Regulatory ModelsDynamic Spectrum ManagementCommand-and-ControlLicense-exemptOpportunistic Spectrum AccessConcurrent Spectrum AccessSecondary Spectrum TradingMarket-basedTechnology-basedAdministrative 
 
 
 
 
4 

The  spectrum  regulatory  models  for  mobile  and  wireless 
communication  can  be  categorized  into  three  broad  classes 
namely:  Command  and  Control  Model,  Dynamic  Spectrum 
Management  Model  and  Spectrum  Commons  Model  as 
illustrated  in  Fig.3.  The  various  ways  blockchain  can  be 
leveraged to provide a veritable platform for implementing  the 
multi-faceted aspects of spectrum management are discussed in 
the next section.   

 DLT  network  to  reach  consensus  and  record  information 
without the  need  for  a  central  authority.  The  main  feature  of 
Blockchain  based  DLT  implementation  that  differentiates  it 
from  other  DLT  solutions  is  the  storage  of  information  in 
groups known as blocks, which are arranged as an ever growing 
chain  of  blocks  with  each  validated  block  cryptographically 
linked to the previous block. A typical DLT system consist of 
DLT  nodes,  DLT  user,  service  providers,  and  user  group  as 
illustrated in Fig.  4.

III.  OVERVIEW  OF BLOCKCHAIN  TECHNOLOGY 

  Blockchain  is  an  implementation  of  Distributed  Ledger 
Technology (DLT)  which enables large groups of nodes in the 

Fig. 4 DLT  Actors and Components  for use Case of Spectrum Sharing in TVWS 

(private  or  consortium). 

Nodes within the distributed ledger are responsible for storing 
ledger data, transferring the data to other nodes and validating 
newly added blocks. A service provider is a component of the 
DLT  ecosystem  that  provides  DLT  based  services  to  users 
through  the  interfaces  it  provides.  Users  consume  services 
offered by the service provider. A certain user may be a service 
provider to another consumer. A user group is a collection  of 
DLT users with a common feature. Blockchain networks can be 
broadly  categorized  as  either  permissionless  (public)  or 
permissioned 
  Permissionless 
blockchains are synonymous to the internet, where any user can 
participate  and  publish  a  new  block  without  requiring 
permission from any authority. A user wishing to participate in 
a permissionless blockchain network can download any of the 
open-source  blockchain  software  which  are  freely  available 
online. Since anyone can read and write to the distributed ledger 
of  a  public  blockchain,  consensus  algorithms  are  used  to 
prevent malicious users from subverting the system. A number 
of  consensus  algorithms  such  as  proof-of-work  (PoW)  and 
proof-of-stake  (PoS)  which  requires  users  to  maintain  or 
expend  resources  for  transactions  are  used  to  discourage 
malicious  behavior  in  the  network.  Permissioned  Blockchain 
network  on  the  other  hand  is  similar  to  an  intranet  network 
where only authorized users are allowed to update the network 
ledger or publish a new block. Permissioned network can either 

be private permissioned or consortium permissioned. A private 
permissioned  Blockchain  is  limited  to  a  single  organization 
while a  consortium  permissioned  Blockchain  is  made  up  of  a 
number of  decentralized  organizations.  The  complexity  of  the 
consensus system used in a permissioned Blockchain network 
depends on the level of trust between participating users. Since 
the use  of a  computationally expensive  algorithm may  not  be 
transaction 
needed  in  a  permissioned  Blockchains, 
processing  speed  of  these  networks  are  faster  than  public 
blockchains.  Different  user  access  rights  can  be  granted  or 
revoked  by 
the  network  authority  of  a  permissioned 
Blockchain.  The  Key  features  of  Blockchain  which  include 
decentralization,  transparency,  immutability,  availability  and 
security are  useful for  spectrum management  in the  following 
ways [13]: 
1)  Decentralization  

the 

 Implies  that  no  third  party  is  needed  to  validate 
transaction;  users  control  their  own  data.  This  can 
potentially  help 
the  need  for  database 
administrators 
2)  Transparency 

to  remove 

Since  the  ledger  is  shared  among  multiple  nodes,  the 
history  of  transaction  and  Blockchain  algorithms  are 
available for any component to review. This provides better 

BlockchainTV StationSU APTV StationSpectrum SensorsSpectrum SensorsSU AP 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3) 

for  effective 

implementation  of  spectrum 

visibility 
management rules. 
Immutability 
Blockchains  are  immutable  and  cryptographically  secure, 
thus  it  is  very  hard  to  alter  data  on  a  Blockchain.  This 
facilitating  accurate  auditing, 
feature 
is  useful 
regulatory  or 
enforcement  and 
contractual rules. 

in 
implementation  of 

4)  Availability 

Blockchain  ledgers  are  shared  among  nodes,  thereby 
increasing the availability of the information stored on the 
blockchains.  This  makes  Blockchain  a  more  reliable 
spectrum management database for providing protection to 
incumbent users.  

5 

5)  Security 

All entries in  the Blockchain  ledger are  cryptographically 
secured. Additionally  all  transactions between  nodes  are 
digitally signed and access to the blockchain by users is via 
a private/public cryptographic key pairs. This enhances the 
security  of  the  wireless  network  infrastructure  against 
attacks 

In  the  next  section,  we  will  explore  the  use  of  blockchain 
technology as a platform for realizing a secure database scheme 
and  implementing  other  aspect  of  spectrum  sharing  and 
dynamic spectrum management 

.  

Application 

Spectrum 
Sensing (SS)   

Spectrum 
T rading (ST ) 

Spectrum 
Access 
Coordination 
(SAC) 

Secure 
Database and 
Policy 
Enforcement 
(SDE) 

T ABLE 1:  AP P LICATIONS OF BLOCKCHAIN FOR SP ECTRUM MANAGEMENT IN MOBILE AND WIRELESS NETWORKS 
Reference  Description 

Other Aspects of Spectrum 
Management  covered 

[16] 
[17] 
[18] 
[19] 
[20] 

[21] 

[22] 

[23] 
[24] 

[25] 
[26] 
[27] 
[28] 
[29] 
[30] 

[31] 

[32] 

[33] 
[34] 
[35] 

[36] 

[37] 

[38] 

[39] 

Spectrum trading based on spectrum sensing and advertisement in ISM band 
Cooperative Spectrum Sensing scheme for cognitive radio network 
Cooperative Spectrum Sensing scheme based on helper nodes for mobile networks 
Cooperative Spectrum Sensing scheme based on helper nodes for mobile networks 
Blochain based reputation score system for sensor nodes used for spectrum 
enforcement 
An auction based spectrum sharing scheme in which spectrum usage  right is leased 
in exchange for digital currency 
Similar to the work in [21], with emphasis on the performance of the scheme under 
different fading channels 
Spectrum T rading between AP and UEs in a Blockchain-based RAN   
Spectrum trading using blockchain as a brokering system between WiFi access 
points 
Spectrum trading between MNOs using game theory 
Spectrum trading based on k-Vickrey auction mechanism in a spacecraft network 
Contract based spectrum sharing platform for M2M devices in a 5G network 
Spectrum trading using Stackelberg game theory between UAVs and MNOs 
Spectrum trading based on auction and free-market techniques for MNOs 
Spectrum access coordination scheme based on consensus algorithm in a cognitive 
radio network 
Spectrum access coordination modelled as a call admission process in a cognitive 
radio network 
Spectrum access coordination based on Game theory in the  unlicensed ISM band 
between MNOs 
Spectrum access coordination based on T it-for-Tat game theory for 5G-IoT devices 
Spectrum access coordination for smallcells in a 5G network 
Spectrum access coordination in license-exempt spectrum using blockchain mining 
and spectrum auction 
Blockchain platform for implements service level agreement between PWNOs and 
VMNO. Enforcement is ensured by the participation of regulatory body. 
BC was used to interface secondary users with SAS database in order to ensure 
privacy of users while enforcing SAS policies via smart contracts. 

Blockchain used as a secure platform to implement a learning-based MAC spectrum 
sharing protocol for battlefield equipment. 

Use blockchain to manage service level agreements between MNOs in a software 
define network. 

SS 
 
 
 
 
 

ST  
   
x 
x 
x 
x 

SAC 
   
 
 
 
x 

SDE 
x 
x 
x 
x 
 

x 

x 

x 
x 

x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 

x 

x 

x 
x 
x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

 

   

 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
x 

x 

x 

x 
x 
 

   

   
   

   
   
   
   
x 
 

 

 

 
 
   

 

   

x 

x 

x 

 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 
x 

x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 

x 

x 

x 
 
x 

 

 

 

 

IV.  APPLICATIONS  OF BLOCKCHAINS  FOR 
SPECTRUM  MANAGEMENT 

Blockchain  is  new  technology  that  could  have  a  disruptive 
effect  when  used  to  replace  existing  solutions.  Thus  it  is 
important  to  determine  if  a  Blockchain  is  really  needed  for  a 
particular application. In [14], the authors outlined a number of 
questions on a chart to determine if Blockchain technology can 
solve a particular problem. The following provides answers to 
the questions with respect to spectrum management: 

1)   Can a traditional database meet your need?  

Traditional centralized database approach has been used for 
spectrum management in various access systems such as the 
Spectrum Access  System, Licensed  Spectrum Access  and 
TVWS  whitespace  networks.  Traditional  geolocation 
database  approaches  cannot  meet  the  needs  of  a  self-
organized spectrum market in which primary users can lease 
their spectrum for a fee. It cannot also enforce the  complex 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
contractual  agreements  and  policy  regulations  associated 
with market  driven spectrum management  [15]. 

2)  Does more than one participant need to be able to update 

the data?  
Spectrum  management  involves  multiple  stakeholders 
such as regulatory agencies, primary users and secondary 
users. Secondary Users need to provide geo-location and 
sensing  information  for  coordinated  access  to  spectrum 
resources.  Primary  Users  can  advertise 
available 
frequencies for spectrum trading. Spectrum regulators may 
also need  to  audit  spectrum  usage  or  enforce  regulatory 
policies. 

3)  Do all those updaters trust one another? 

 There is no trust among updaters; there exist a possibility 
for  a  malicious  Secondary  User  to  report  false  location 
information. A dishonest Primary User can also attempt to 
sell the same spectrum to two Secondary Users in the same 
location.  

4)  Would all the participants trust a third party?  

Participants are  unlikely  to  trust  a third  party  due  to  the 
possibility of harvesting sensitive user data such as location 
for adversarial  aims.  Participants  need  to  directly  control 
the data to guarantee accuracy of information.   

5)  Does the data need to be kept private?  

Spectrum  management  data  should  be  shared  amon g 
network  participant  but  not  necessarily  with  the  general 
public. 

6)  Do  you  need  to  control  who  makes  changes  to  the 

Blockchain software?  

In order to address the challenge of governance, the spectrum 
regulatory  body  of  a  country  can  be  saddled  with  the 
responsibility of managing the Blockchain 

Based on this guide, a permissioned Blockchain network can be 
recommended for spectrum management in wireless and mobile 
networks.  A  literature  review  of  recent  research  articles 
presented  in  Table  1,  shows  that  both  permissioned  and 
permissionless Blockchains can be used for various  aspects of 
spectrum  management  including  spectrum  sensing,  spectrum 
sharing and policy enforcement. Blockchains are also amenable 
to other components of dynamic spectrum management such as 
realizing  a  geolocation  database  and  facilitating  secondary 
spectrum trading markets. This section discusses some of  the 
applications  of  Blockchains  for  spectrum  management  in 
wireless networks 

A.  Spectrum Sensing platform 

Blockchain can  be  leveraged  to implement  a  secure  spectrum 
sensing framework and to enable cooperative sensing, both of 
which  enhances  the  reliability  of  spectrum  sensing  results.  
Using  spectrum  sensing  allows  MNOs  to  aggregate  usable 
vacant frequencies  with  their licensed  frequencies  to  achieve 
increased  network  capacity.  The  work  in  [16]  leverages 
blockchain to implement a smart contract for spectrum sensing 
and spectrum trading. A SU first carries out spectrum sensing 
to identify a vacant channel. Once a vacant channel is identified, 
the  SU  invokes  a  smart  contract  function  requesting  for  the 
vacant channel  from the  PU. If  the PU  agree to  the price  and 
time duration of lease proposed by the  SU, the spectral usage 

6 

right  is  leased  in  exchange  for  a  native  cryptocurrency. 
However, the PU may not always cooperate with SUs to lease 
its frequency on a contractual basis. In this case, SUs will seek 
to opportunistically access any unused spatiotemporal channel. 
  The reliability of spectrum sensing results can be  improved 
through cooperative sensing, which involves fusing the sensing 
results from a number  of SUs or  sensors. This helps  minimize 
the  adverse  effect  of  shadowing,  multipath  fading  and  noise 
uncertainty.  In  [17],  a  cooperative  spectrum  sensing  scheme 
based  on  blockchain  mobile  networks  was  proposed.  In  this 
work,  SUs  can  participate  in  the  communication  network  as 
spectrum  sensors  and  as  mining  nodes  in  the  blockchain 
network. Each spectrum sensor broadcast its sensing result to 
other nodes on the blockchain network. The sensing results are 
then added as  a transaction  block on  the blockchain  thro ugh 
mining process. A user  who wish to  access a vacant  channel 
invokes  a  smart  contract  that  allows  it  bid  for  the  vacant 
channel. The best bid  for the vacant channel  is selected by  a 
module of the  smart contract, which  activates the payment  of 
cryptocurrencies to miners and transfer of spectral usage right 
to the winner of the bid. However, both spectrum sensing and 
blockchain  mining  operations  are  energy  intensive  and 
computationally  expensive  tasks  that  may  cause  additional 
operational cost and latency. 
  The work in [19] is also a cooperative sensing scheme that is 
similar in concept to the work in [18] but with variations in the 
smart  contract  formulation  and  malicious  helper  nodes 
detection  algorithm.  The  smart  contract  spectrum  trading 
platform facilitates crowd-sourcing of spectrum sensing from a 
heterogeneous pool of helper nodes. Malicious nodes detection 
is achieved by the smart contract using a cluster-based Helper 
Identification algorithm. The sensing reports from helpers  are 
transaction  cost  of  executing 
compressed 
transaction  on  the  blockchain.  Honest  helper  nodes  are  paid 
after  verification  that  they  have  provided  spectrum  service. 
Shifting  the  responsibility  of  spectrum  sensing  to  helpers 
reduces  the  prohibitively  high  cost  of  deploying  sensors  by 
mobile network operators. The security concerns that may arise 
as a result of malicious or false helper nodes activities can  be 
handled  by  smart  contract  algorithms  running  on 
the 
blockchain.  The  use  of  multiple  helpers  also  improves  the 
accuracy  of  the  distributed  cooperative  spectrum  sensing 
scheme  enabled  by  blockchain.  The  work  in  [16]  places  the 
responsibility of coordinating spectrum access on the PU, while 
the  works  in  [17],  [18]  and  [19]  allows  SU  to  coordinate 
spectrum  using  cooperative  spectrum  sensing  schemes  
implemented on  blockchain.    Distributed  cooperative  sensing 
implemented  on  blockchain  can  also  be  used  by  spectrum 
regulators  to  realize  distributed  enforcement  of  spectrum 
polices.  The  authors  in  [20]  use  blockchain  to  evaluate  the 
trustworthiness of sensor nodes used in a spectrum enforcement 
system. Each sensor is assigned a reputation score based on its 
reported location and signal-to-noise ratio. The works uses the 
most difficult chain rule rather than the popular longest chain to 
resolve  multiple  forks  for  all  nodes  to  converge  at  the  same 
blockchain state 

to  minimize 

 
 
 
B.  Self-Organized Spectrum Trading Market 
Implementation  of  secondary  spectrum  trading  requires 
due  consideration  for  techno-economic  factors.  Some  of  the 
technical  solutions  supported  by  TVWS  networks  include, 
network  optimization,  determination  of  accurate  terrain  data 
and  channel  propagation  model  as  well  as  effective  geo -
location database  design  to  realize  practical  deployment  [10]. 
Although different economic models such as the auction model, 
contract model, spot market model and commodity model have 
been developed to augment the technical solutions, there are a 
number of economic challenges that impede real world roll out 
of the technology.   Some of the economic challenges associated 
with database-assisted spectrum management approach  include 
[10]: 
1)  The  need  for  design  specifications  for  currency  and 

payment platforms 

2)  The  need  for  universal  standards,  bidding  language  and 
economic models  for the  various database  administrators 
and spectrum lessor and lessee. 

3)  Lack of specifications for contract enforcement modules to 
ensure primary user satisfaction while meeting  secondary 
user’s quality of service requirements.   

The inherent characteristics and features of blockchain can be 
used to address these challenges associated with the economics 
of spectrum trading. Blockchain was originally implemented as 
a peer-to-peer payment platform. Thus it inherently lends itself 
as a solution for realizing a veritable spectrum payment system 
using  digital  currency  that  can  be  easily  converted  to  fiat 
money.  The  various  function  of  geo-location  database  and 
requirements  of  spectrum  administrators  can  be  implemented 
on  blockchain  platform.  The  bidding  language,  economic 
model,  primary  user  protection  requirements,  QoS  needs  of 
users  and  other  contract  enforcement  modules  can  be 
implemented  on blockchain platforms using smart contracts. 

the  blockchain 

 Real-time auction mechanisms can be used for secondary 
spectrum  markets  using 
framework  as 
demonstrated in [21] and [22]. In both works, the primary user 
advertises its vacant channel using a smart contract deployed on 
a blockchain platform. Users who wish to access the available 
channel submit bids within a slotted time frame. The PU leases 
the  spectrum  usage  right  to  the  winning  bid  based  on  first-
come-first-served basis. The exchange of spectrum usage right 
and  payment  for  the  lease  is  broadcast  in  the  blockchain 
network. Secondary users with enough computational resources 
compete  to  mine  the  transaction  using  a  variant  of  proof-of-
work  consensus  algorithm  and  are  compensated  using  a 
cryptocurrency which  can be  used to  bid for  spectrum in  the 
next spectrum auction timeframe. The work in  [22] differs from 
the work in [21] by taking into account the effect of multipath 
diversity on simulation results. 

Spectrum  sharing  in  heterogeneous  spacecraft  network 
belonging to different organization must meet trust and privacy 
concerns  of  the  operators  due  to  the  sensitivity  of  their 
operations.  In  [26],  the  authors  use  the  K-Vickrey  auction 
mechanism  to  implement  a  smart  contract  application  on  a 
blockchain  for  a  heterogeneous  spacecraft  network.  The 
regulatory organization  publishes a  smart contract  containing 
information about the available channels and the length of time-
slot for spectrum access. The security of the auction mechanism 

7 

is  enhanced  through  the  use  of  EIGamal  homomorphic 
cryptosystem in the distributed ledger for both encryptions and 
decryptions of bid prices, bidders’ addres ses and clearing price.  
Auctions mechanisms for spectrum trading can be regarded 
as  a    game  with  the  objective  of  analyzing  the  dominant 
equilibrium  between  sellers  and  buyers  [10].  The  work  in 
reference [25] use smart contact on a consortium blockchain  to 
implement a spectrum trading spectrum sharing scheme based 
on game theory. PWNO compete with each other using the non -
cooperative  game  of  pricing  to  attract  secondary  mobile 
network  operators.  However,  the  amount  of  spectrum  shared 
between the lessor and the lessee depends on parameters such 
as  the  number  of  connected  end  users,  the  modulation 
technology, the total  spectrum owned  by the  PWNO and  the 
spectrum utilization. The result of the game model gives a Nash 
Equilibrium, which is a combination of series of strategies such 
that the strategy  of each  player in the  combination is  optimal 
with  respect  to  the  strategies  of  other  players.  Similarly,  the 
relationship  between  spectrum  sellers  and  buyers  was 
formulated  as  a  Stackelberg  game  strategy  in  [28].  The 
Stackelberg  game  formulation  consist  of  a  leader  (spectrum 
owner, in this case a MNO) and followers which are Unmanned 
Aerial Vehicles (UAV). The Stackelberg game is formulated  to 
derive the optimal spectrum pricing and purchasing  strategies 
to maximize the revenues of the UAV and MNO operators. The 
MNO  advertises  available  spectrum  based  on  its  spectrum 
pricing  policy  using  a  smart  contract  on  a  consortium 
blockchain.  Each  UAV  then  responds  with  its  spectrum 
purchasing policy based on the price given by the MNO. The 
smart contract then selects the winning bid by determining the 
Stackelberg Equilibrium point which meets profit objectives of 
both the MNO and UAVs. 

In  [27],  a  consortium  blockchain  is  used  to  support 
spectrum  trading  between  primary  users  and  Machine-to-
Machine (M2M) SUs. The base station (BS) which acts as the 
gateway for the M2M devices publishes a smart contract on the 
blockchain to motivate PUs with vacant spectrum resources for 
spectrum sharing. The contract specifies the amount of required 
spectrum and the corresponding reward. The contract between 
a  PU  and  the  BS  gateway  is  added  to  the  blockchain  using 
Proof-of-work  consensus  algorithm.  The  spectrum  shared  by 
the PUs is  allocated to  SUs using  a combinatorial  one-to-one 
matching between PUs and SUs.  

Blockchain is being considered as an enabling technolog y 
for  providing  decentralized  security  and  efficient  spectrum 
sharing  for  the  sixth-generation  (6G)  wireless  network  [40]. 
The  implementation  of  a  blockchain  radio  access  network 
(RAN) in [23] considers spectrum as the basic digital asset that 
is traded  between  the  access point  (AP)  and  user  equipment 
(UE). Under  this  platform,  spectrum asset  represents  a  short-
term  right  to  exclusively  transmit  or  receive  with  fixed  power 
over  a  specific  channel  within  a  particular  geographic  area. 
Information  about  any  s pectrum  asset  is  recorded  on  the 
blockchain. The AP allocates the asset based on current status 
of  information  stored  on  the  blockchain.  A  cached  smart 
contract concept is used for fast and paid access to the RAN. 
The work in [24] also proposes the use of spectrum brokering 
between WiFi APs to alleviate the problem of congestion in the 
ISM band. Although the work describes a centralized brokering 

 
 
 
platform,  a  distributed  platform  based  on  blockch ain  was 
proposed  for  future  implementation  to  facilitate  spectrum 
trading in the ISM band. 

Blockchains  provides  an  enhanced  platform  to  support 
secondary spectrum trading market where a MNO can choose 
to  be  spectrum  seller  or  spectrum  buyer;  depending  on  its 
spectrum  demand  during  a  time  period.  The  work  in  [29] 
leverages  a  consortium  blockchain  to  propose  a  spectrum 
trading  platform  between  MNOs.  In  this  framework,  the 
spectrum demand of each MNO is predicted by its Operations 
Administration  and  Maintenance  (OAM)  servicer  based  on 
spectrum  usage  results  collected  from  the  operator’s  base 
stations. Spectrum buyers and sellers exchange spectrum usage 
rights using a double auction strategy which comprises of two 
phases. In the first  phase, the selling  price and buying  prices 
advertised by  sellers and  buyers  are matched  and  successful 
matches are added as transactions to the blockchain to complete 
transfer  of  spectral  usage  rights.  In  the  second  stage, 
unsuccessful  auctions  bids  and  asks  are  adjusted  to  realize 
additional transactions within a given time period.   

C.  Spectrum Access Coordination 

The interaction between primary users and secondary users 
or  between  secondary  users 
in  a  dynamic  spectrum 
management system  can  be  modelled  using  machine  learning 
models,  biologically  and  socially  inspired  models  or    game 
theoretical  models  [41].  According  to  game  theory,  players 
makes  decisions  for  different  actions  to  attain  various  goals 
[42].  Game  theory  can  be  used  as  a  mathematical  framework 
for  spectrum  management  and  spectrum  access  coordination 
since the choice of each player determines the outcome of the 
game.  Several  researchers  leverage  blockchain  to  implement 
spectrum sharing coordination and cooperation schemes based 
on  game  theory.  The  Nash  Equilibrium  game  theoretical 
technique  proposed  in  [32]  assumes  that  all  Mobile  Network 
Operators  (MNO)  participating  in  the  spectrum  sharing  are 
allocated equal amount of cryptocurrency tokens to be used for 
accessing the unlicensed spectrum band. The token spent by a 
MNO for accessing  the spectrum  is shared  equally among  all 
other participating MNO. In order for the operator to maximize 
its use of its limited token, it has to balance its spectrum access 
strategy using the Nash Equilibrium  function: 

 ,    𝑘 ∈ [1, 𝑛],                                              (1) 

𝑤𝑘 =

𝑊

𝑛

Where  𝑘 is  the  number  of  MNOs,  𝑊  is  the  total  available 
bandwidth and 𝑤𝑘  is the amount of utilized spectrum. The work 
in [33] expresses spectrum sharing as a non-zero game in which 
the outcomes of gains and losses attained by each player is not 
zero;  using  a  Tit-for-Tat  (TFT)  game  theory  that  can  be 
implemented  as  a  smart  contract  on  a  blockchain.  The  TFT 
strategy  allows  spectrum  users  to  cooperate  first  and  then 
retaliate if other peers betray and cooperate again if other users 
cooperate. Thus the strategy seeks to combine the features of 
cooperative and  non-cooperative game  theory for  internet-of-
things  (IoT)  devices  to  participate  in  coordinated  spectrum 
access.  

Spectrum access coordination among secondary users can 
also be achieved using a consensus algorithm as shown in the 
consensus-before-talk (CBT) scheme in [30]. The CBT scheme 

8 

aims to achieve a collision-free distributed spectrum access by 
exchanging spectrum access requests and reaching consensus 
on  spectrum  access  using  the  distributed  ledger.  The  CBT 
framework consists of a spectrum access transaction (SAT), a 
consensus  policy  module  (CPM)  and  a  distributed  spectru m 
ledger (DSL). A SU’s spectrum access request is embedded in 
a  SAT  and  exchanged  with  all  other  SUs.  The  consensus 
protocol is applied  to each  SAT broadcast  on the  blockchain 
network. Once a SAT is validated, the result is stored in  each 
SU’s  local  DSL.  The  CPM  implements  the  Byzantine  Fault 
Tolerance  (BFT)  consensus  algorithm  to  ensure  liveliness, 
correctness  and  consistency  of  SATs.  Before  applying  the 
consensus algorithm to new SATs, the SATs are stored in the 
SU’s  Spectrum  Access  Queue  (SAQ)  segment  of  the  local 
ledger. After applying the consensus algorithm, the SATs  are 
stored the SU’s Spectrum Access History (SAH) segment of the 
DSL. SAT  scheduling  can  be based  on  either  a  first-verified-
first-served basis of SATs in SAQ or using a fairness scheme 
for least served SATs in the SAH. 

Under the scheme proposed in [34], each small cell in a 5G 
network requests  a  particular amount  of  unlicensed  spectrum 
for a specified amount of time. This request is broadcast to other 
small cells in a cluster of small cells on the blockchain network. 
Each member of the cluster votes to either grant or deny access 
to the requesting small cell. If majority of the cluster nodes vote 
to grant spectrum access to the small cell node, the node allows 
its  user  equipments  (UEs)  to  transmit  or  receive  on  the  new 
spectrum.  The  UEs  then  pay  for  spectrum  access  using 
cryptocurrency.  Similar  to  the  approach  in  [34],  the  work  in 
[35] is also based on the election of  a leader who becomes the 
exclusive  owner  of  a  portion  of  the  spectrum  for  a  period  of 
time. The election process  is achieved using PoW  consensus 
protocol. Where more than one  leader emerges from the  PoW 
consensus protocol,  the  PoS  consensus algorithm  is  used  to 
select the overall winner. The winner can choose to either use 
the spectrum or lease the usage right to other users for a fee in 
an auction.  

Another approach  to  spectrum access  coordination  is  to 
model  the  process  as  a  call  admission  control  optimization 
problem  using  Continous  Time  Markov  Decision  Process 
(CTMDP)  as  proposed  in  [31].    Spectrum  access  requests  of 
opportunistic secondary users are queued using a  blockchain 
before  they  can  access  a  vacant  spectrum  channel.  The 
parameters  of  the  CTMDP  were  applied  to  a  feed-forward 
neural  network  to  derive  the  optimal  policy  to  maximize 
rewards of the threshold policy for accepting SUs.   

D.  Secure Spectrum Sharing Database and Policy 

Enforcement 

One of the challenges of using a centralized database system is 
the  dynamic  nature  of  wireless  networks  arising  from  SU 
mobility  and  variation  of  traffic  demands  of  PUs.  Using 
blockchain  to  dynamically  record  information  of  vacant 
spectrum  bands  and  geo-location  of  users  is  envisioned  to 
improve  the  efficiency  of  spectrum  access  and  utilization. 
Blockchain  can  be  used  to  record  information  regarding 
interference protection needs of PUs as well as spectrum usage 
and availability of  TV whitespaces with  respect to  frequency, 
geo-location and time [15].  The use of blockchain allow users 

 
 
 
9 

that 

to control data in the ledger and ensure accuracy of information.  
The reference in [37] seeks to address security and privacy 
concerns  of  SUs  (second  tier  and  third  tier  users)  in  a 
centralized spectrum access system (SAS).  This is to prevent 
sensitive user data such as identities , spectrum usage, location, 
and  transmission  power  from  being  exploited  for  adversarial 
purposes. The framework uses blockchain to interface General 
Authorized Access (GAA) to SAS database administrators so 
as to address privacy concerns while complying with regulatory 
design  requirements.  The  smart  contract  is  implemented  as  a 
interfaces  multiple  database 
distributed  application 
administrators to the regulatory body and GAA users. The GAA 
users are  SUs that  seek  to opportunistically  access  spectrum 
whitespaces.  The  spectrum  regulator  registers  both  database 
administrators and  GAA users  who wish  to participate  in  the 
spectrum sharing scheme. Registered GAA users form clusters 
and choose a cluster leader which anonymously authenticates 
with  the  geo-location  databases  through  the  blockchain 
platform.  This  is  done  to  enhance  scalability  and  privacy  of 
cluster members. Each cluster leader queries the database after 
which members  of the  cluster  reach a  consensus on  how  the 
spectrum  resources  are  to  be  shared  among  them.  After  a 
spectrum assignment consensus is reached, the cluster  leader 
notifies  the  database  administrators  regarding  the  spectrum 
channels  used  by  its  members  as  required  by  spectrum 
regulation policy. The database administrator and other cluster 
leaders serve as blockchain nodes to reach a consensus on the 
validity  of  this  information  using  Byzantine  Fault  Tolerance 
(BFT)  consensus algorithm.  

Applications  of  internet-of-thing  in  battlefield  equipment 
used for military operations are  expected to be robust  against 
security  threats  such  as  denial  of  service  attacks  and  data 
falsification.  The  work  in  [38]  devised  a  blockchain  based 
spectrum sharing protocol  for secure  operations of  battlefield 
equipment  against  denial-of-service  attacks.  The  denial-of-
service  attack  is  assumed  to  originate  from  an  adversary 
equipment that  generates  false  data  in  order  to  influence  the 
spectrum  access  decision  so  as 
to  degrade  network 
performance. It  is also  assumed  that the  malicious  equipment 
has large computation and storage resources and is capable of 
mimicking one of the equipment. This security threat is further 
mitigated by  using  a  parameter known  as  Decision  Parameter 
(DP)  which  is  incorporated  into  a  PoW-variant  consensus 
protocol.  The  DP  of  each  equipment  is  computed  from  the 
average number of back-offs per seconds experienced by other 
equipment that used  the blocks it  added for making  spectrum 
access decision in previous timeframes.  Using the DP improves 
the chances of user with good data to add blocks and penalizes 
users that have previously provided false spectrum sensing data. 
In addition to preventing malicious users from adding false data 
to the blockchain, every equipment that wants to trans mit data 
is expected to use the historic data from the latest 7 blocks to 
make spectrum  access  decision  using a  learning  based  MAC 
protocol. 

Blockchain can be used to implement secure service level 
agreements  (SLAs)  between  Mobile  Network  Operators 
(MNOs)  and  Mobile  Virtual  Network  Operators  (MVNOs) 
These SLAs deployed as smart contacts can be used for sharing 
spectrum resources and network infrastructure between MNOs 

regulatory  bodies 

and  MVNOs.  A  blockchain  framework  that  brings  together 
MNOs,  MVNOs  and 
for  spectrum 
management  is  proposed  in  [36].  The  SLAs  coded  as  smart 
contracts on the blockchain implements the regulatory policies 
of  the  regulatory  body  as  well  as  the  spectrum  sharing 
conditions  between  MNOs  and  MVNOs.  This  ensures  that 
subscribers of the participating MVNO are provided with better 
quality of service than subscribers of an opportunistic MVNO. 
The  work  in  [36]  also  combines  blockchain  with  software 
defined  networking  (SDN)  to  enhance  spectrum  management 
process and facilitate  seamlessly roaming  of subscribers  from 
one MNO to another. SDN enable users to dynamically switch 
between MNOs whenever an operator’s service is unavailable. 
Smart  contracts  used  on  the  unified  platform  implement  the 
spectrum sharing  agreements and  manage the  complexities  of 
SLAs among stakeholders. The smart contract also automates 
the  process  of  billing  and  the  task  of  roaming  settlements 
between MNOs.  

V.FUTURE  RESEARCH  PERSPECTIVES  AND 
CHALLENGES 

The  use  of  blockchains  for  spectrum  management  is  an 
emerging application that has a lot of prospects and challenges. 
Some of the future research perspectives are discussed in this 
section.  

A. Large Scale spectrum Sensing Campaigns 

TVWS Technology  was  originally designed  to  be  driven 
by  spectrum  sensing  algorithms  [10].  However,  results  of 
occupancy measurements done with low cost devices such as 
Short  Range  Devices 
(SRDs)  and  Radio  Frequency 
Identification  (RFID)  at  a  limited  number  of  locations  have 
shown that spectrum sensing cannot satisfactorily help identify 
possible bands that might be used for white space applications 
[7].  The  use  of  cooperative  spectrum  sensing  and  the 
deployment of helper spectrum sensors have shown promise for 
use as part of a dynamic spectrum access. Thus, there exist an 
opportunity  to  leverage  blockchain,  cooperative  spectrum 
sensing  techniques  and  large  scale  deployment  of  fixed 
receiving stations and other mobile data harvesting techniques 
to carry out spectrum occupancy campaigns. This approach is 
likely  to  generate  meaningful  complimentary  information  to 
facilitate  spectrum management.   

B. Combining Spectrum Sensing and Geo-Location Database 

The  two  main  methods  of  facilitating  dynamic  spectrum 
access  are  spectrum  sensing  and  Geo-location  database. 
Previous research  works  have considered  this  approaches  as 
disparate techniques. Blockchain being a database technology 
can be leveraged to develop a unified approach where spectrum 
sensing techniques and geo-location database technology can 
be used  as  complimentary  to each  other.  Combing  these  two 
spectrum access techniques will result in a more robust dynamic 
spectrum management  framework.   

C. Decentralized Artificial Intelligence 

Artificial  Intelligence  (AI)  techniques  such  as  statistical 
machine  leaning,  deep 
learning  and  deep  reinforcement 
learning  have  been  used  for  various  aspects  of  spectrum 

 
 
 
management  such  as  spectrum  sensing  [43]  and  dynamic 
spectrum access [44].   These AI  algorithms work better  when 
data is obtained from a database that is trusted, credible, reliable 
and  secure  [45].  Combining  blockchain  and  AI  creates  a 
framework  for  Dynamic  Spectrum  Management  that  ensures 
secure  data  sharing,  decentralized  intelligent  computing, 
explainable AI decisions, and coordinating untrusting devices 
[46]. Other benefits of this synergy include: secure and scalable 
blockchains, privacy-preserving personalization and automated 
governance  and  referee.  Spectrum  usage  data  stored  on  the 
blockchain can  be  used to  achieve  periodic re-training  of  the 
machine learning algorithms, thereby enhancing robustness to 
the  dynamic  wireless  radio  environment.  Thus,  there  is  an 
opportunity 
and  Artificial 
consolidate  blockchain 
Intelligence to achieve superior spectrum management decision 
and spectrum access performance.  

to 

D.Latency and Throughput Performance 

The  throughput  of  a  blockchain  framework  measured  in 
transactions  per  seconds  (TPS)  and  latency  (measured  in 
seconds)  are  largely  determined  by  the  consensus  algorithm 
used to validate transactions in the network. The architectural 
model of the blockchain network also plays a significant role in 
the  performance  of  the  network.  Existing  public  blockchain 
networks such as Bitcoin and Ethereum tend to have very low 
throughput and high latency due to the complexity of consensus 
protocols used. Private and Consortium blockchains have much 
higher throughput and lower latency. Hyperledger consortium 
combines flexible consensus algorithms and an  execute-order-
validate architectural model to achieve performance throughput 
of  up  to  10,000  tps  and  a  latency  of  around  0.5  s.  However, 
further  studies  are  required  on  the  impact  of  blockchain 
performance  on  the  different  aspects  dynamic  spectrum 
management in wireless networks. 

E. Blockchain Network Deployment 

There is a need to study the deployment of the blockchain 
with the communication network. The blockchain network can 
be  deployed  as  an  overlay  of  the  communication  network  to 
allow nodes in the communication network act as full nodes on 
the blockchain  network.  However,  this  network  setup  can  be 
energy consuming and requires a dedicated control channel for 
exchanging  transactions  and  blocks  over  the  blockchain 
networks [15].  Dependence on the control channel pos es a risk 
to operation of the blockchain network due to susceptibility of 
the  control  channel  to  jamming  by  malicious  users.    An 
alternative network deployment approach is to use a dedicated 
blockchain  platform  so  that  the  blockchain  works  as  an 
independent  database.  While  this  approach  is  desirable  for 
the 
offloading 
blockchain  network,  it  deprives  users  of  the  opportunity  to 
directly  verify  transactions.  Thus,  a  third  option  is  for 
communication nodes to participate in the blockchain network 
as  user  nodes  to  enable    users  participate  in  the  transaction 
verification process but offload the mining task to full nodes of 
the  blockchain  network.  Additional  studies  is  needed  to 
establish the  relationship  between these  network  deployment 
options and other factors such competition among  secondary 
users,  revenue  maximization  for  communication  network 

the  energy-intensive 

task  of  mining 

to 

10 

operators, throughput and latency performance  etc.  It is  also 
important to  investigate the  performance of  blockchain -based 
spectrum  management  system  when  combined  with  other 
emerging  networking 
techniques  such  as  mobile  edge 
computing and software defined networking. 

F. CONCLUSION 

In  this  work,  a  survey  of  recent  literature  on  the  use  of 
blockchain  for  spectrum  sharing  and  dynamic  s pectrum 
management is presented. Using blockchain offers a number of 
technical and  business  benefits  over  centralized  geo-location 
database. Some  of  the  technical  benefits  include:  transparent 
ledger 
for  spectrum  auditing  and  management;  high 
availability; strong security and use of smart contracts to handle 
complex sharing  arrangements  and  enforcement  of  regulatory 
policies. The business benefits  include: incentivizing users  to 
share spectrum or perform spectrum sensing; users maintaining 
control  over  own  data  and  removing  the  need  for  central 
database operator. The survey also provides a taxonomy of the 
various  ways  blockchain  is  used  for  spectrum  management. 
Works  of  spectrum  sensing,  spectrum  access  coordination, 
secondary spectrum trading market and use of blockchain as a 
secure spectrum database were covered. The survey of literature 
shows  that  blockchain  is  a  veritable  platform  for  spectrum 
management. 

REFERENCES 

[1] 

McKinsey,  “Internet  Matters:  T he  Net’s  Sweeping  Impact  on 

Growth, Jobs and Prosperity,” Online and Upcoming: The Internet’s 

Impact  on  Aspiring  Countries,  2011.  [Online].  Available: 

http://www.mckinsey.com/insights/high_tech_telecoms_internet/int

ernet_matters. [Accessed: 10-Mar-2020]. 

[2] 

IT U-R, “Draft  Final  Report  for Resolution  9:  Participation  of 

Countries,  Particularly  Developing  Countries,  in  Spectrum 

Management,” 2017. 

[3] 

M. Cave, C. Doyle, and W. Webb, Essentials of Modern Spectrum 

Management. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007. 

[4] 

P. Anker, “From spectrum management to spectrum governance,” 

Telecomm. Policy, no. May 2016, pp. 1–12, 2017. 

[5] 

M. Massaro, “Next generation of radio spectrum  management : 

Licensed shared access for 5G,” Telecomm. Policy, no. November 

2016, pp. 0–1, 2017. 

[6] 

IT U-R, “Introduction to Cognitive Radio Systems in the Land Mobile 

Service.” Geneva, pp. 1–17, 2011. 

[7] 

IT U-R, “Spectrum Management Principles, Challenges and Issues 

Related to Dynamic Access to Frequency Bands by Means of Radio 

Systems Employing Cognitive  Capabilities.” Geneva, pp.  1–71, 

2017. 

[8] 

A.  Ali  and  W.  Hamouda,  “Advances  on  Spectrum  Sensing  for 

Cognitive  Radio  Networks :  T heory  and  Applications,”  IEEE 

Commun. Surv. Tutorials, vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 1277–1304, 2017. 

[9] 

IT U-R, “Cognitive Radio Systems in the Land Mobile Service,” vol. 

 
 
 
 
11 

1–71. IT U, Geneva, 2014. 

[26] 

L.  Yu,  J.  Ji,  Y.  Guo,  Q.  Wang,  T .  Ji,  and  P.  Li,  “Smart 

[10] 

A. H. Kelechi, R. Nordin, and N. F. Abdullah, “Database-Assisted 

Communications  in  Heterogeneous  Spacecraft  Networks :  A 

T elevision White Space T echnology: Challenges, T rends and Future 

Blockchain Based Secure Auction Approach,” in IEEE Cognitive 

Research Directions,” IEEE Access, vol. 4, pp. 8162–8183, 2016. 
IEEE  Std  1900.1 TM-2019,  “IEEE  St andard  for  Definitions  and 

[11] 

Communications for Aerospace Applications Workshop, 2019, pp. 1–

4. 

Concepts for Dynamic Spectrum Access: T erminology Relating to 

[27] 

Z.  Zhou,  X.  Chen,  Y.  Zhang,  and  S.  Mumtaz,  “Blockchain -

Emerging Wireless Networks, System Functionality, and Spectrum 

Empowered  Secure  Spectrum  Sharing  for  5G  Heterogeneous 

Management.” IEEE, 2019. 

Networks,” IEEE Netw., vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 24–31, 2020. 

[12] 

IT U-T , “Distributed Ledger T echnology T erms and Definitions.” 

[28] 

J. Qiu, D. Grace, and G. Ding, “Blockchain-Based Secure Spectrum 

IT U-T , 2019. 

T rading for Unmanned Aerial Vehicle Assisted Cellular Networks : 

[13] 

M. B. H. Weiss, K. Werbach, D. C. Sicker, and C. E. C. Bastidas, 

An Operator’s Perspective,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 7, no. 1, 

“On the Application of Blockchains to Spectrum Management,” 

pp. 451–466, 2020. 

IEEE Trans. Cogn. Commun. Netw., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 193–205, 2019. 

[29] 

S. Zheng,  T .  Han, Y.  Jiang,  and X.  Ge,  “Smart  Contract -Based 

[14] 

M. E. Peck, “Do you need a Blockchain?,” IEEE Spectr., pp. 38–39, 

Spectrum  Sharing  T ransactions  for  Multi-Operators  Wireless 

2017. 

Communication Networks,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 88547–88557, 

[15] 

Y. Liang, Dynamic Spectrum Management: From Cognitive Radio to 

2020. 

Blockchain and Artificial Intelligence. Singapore: Springer, 2020. 

[30] 

H. Seo, J. Park, M. Bennis, and W. Choi, “ Consensus-Before-Talk : 

[16] 

T . Ariyarathna, P. Harankahadeniya, S. Isthikar, N. Pathirana, H. M. 

Distributed Dynamic Spectrum  Access via Distributed  Spectrum 

N. D. Bandara, and A. Madanayake, “Dynamic Spectrum Access via 

Ledger T echnology,” in IEEE International Symposium on Dynamic 

Smart Contracts on Blockchain,” in IEEE Wireless Communications 

Spectrum Access Networks (DySPAN), 2018, pp. 1–7. 

and Networking Conference, 2019, pp. 1–6. 

[31]  W. Ni,  Y. Zhang,  and W.  Li, “Optimal  Admission Control  For 

[17] 

Y. Pei, S. Hu, F. Zhong, D. Niyato, and Y. Liang,  “Blockchain -

Secondary Users using Blockchain T echnology In Cognitive Radio 

enabled Dynamic Spectrum Access : Cooperative Spectrum Sensing 

Networks,” in IEEE 39th International Conference on Distributed 

,  Access  and  Mining,”  in  2019  IEEE  Global  Communications 

Computing Systems, 2019, pp. 1518–1526. 

Conference (GLOBECOM), 2019, pp. 1–6. 

[32] 

T . Maksymyuk, J. Gazda, L. Han, and M. Jo, “Blockchain -Based 

[18] 

S. Bayhan, A. Zubow, and A. Wolisz, “Spass : Spectrum Sensing as 

Intelligent  Network  Management  for  5G  and  Beyond,”  in  3rd 

a Service via Smart Contracts,” in IEEE International Symposium on 

International  Conference  on  Advanced  Information  and 

Dynamic Spectrum Access Networks (DySPAN), 2018, pp. 1–10. 

Communications Technologies, 2019, pp. 36–39. 

[19] 

S.  Bayhan,  A.  Zubow,  P.  Gawłowicz,  and  A.  Wolisz,  “Smart 

[33] 

Y. Choi and I. Lee, “Game T heoretical Approach of Blockchain -

contracts for spectrum sensing as a service,” in IEEE Transactions on 

based Spectrum Sharing for 5G-enabled IoT s in Dense Networks,” in 

Cognitive Communications and Networking, 2019, pp. 1–13. 

IEEE 90th Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC2019-Fall), 2019, 

[20] 

M. A. A.  Careem and A.  Dutta, “SenseChain: Blockchain  based 

pp. 1–6. 

Reputation System for Distributed Spectrum Enforcement,” in 2019 

[34] 

V. Sevindik, “Autonomous 5G Smallcell Network Deployment and 

IEEE  International  Symposium  on  Dynamic  Spectrum  Access 

Optimization in  Unlicensed Spectrum,”  in IEEE  2nd 5G  World 

Networks (DySPAN), 2019. 

Forum , 2019, pp. 446–451. 

[21] 

K. Kotobi and S. G. Bilen, “Blockchain Enabled Spectrum Access in 

[35] 

X. Fan and Y. Huo, “Blockchain Based Dynamic Spectrum Access 

Cognitive Radio Network,” in 2017 Wireless Telecommunications 

of Non-Real-T ime Data in Cyber-Physical-Social Systems,” IEEE 

Symposium , 2017. 

Access, vol. 8, pp. 64486–64498, 2020. 

[22] 

K.  Kotobi  and  S.  g.  Bilén,  “Secure  Blockchains  for  Dynamic 

[36] 

D. B. Rawat and A. Alshaikhi, “Leveraging Distributed Blockchain-

Spectrum Access,” IEEE Veh. Technol. Mag., vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 32–

based Scheme for Wireless Network Virtualization with Security and 

39, 2018. 

QoS  Constraints,”  in  International  Conference  on  Computing, 

[23] 

Y. Le, X. Ling, J. Wang, and Z. Ding, “Prototype Design and Test of 

Networking and Communications, 2018, pp. 332–336. 

Blockchain Radio Access Network,” in 2019 IEEE International 

[37] 

M.  Grissa,  A.  A.  Yavuz,  and  B.  Hamdaoui,  “T rustSAS:  A 

Conference on Communications Workshops, 2019, pp. 1–6. 

T rustworthy Spectrum Access System for the 3.5 GHz CBRS Band,” 

[24] 

F. Den Hartog, F. Bouhafs, and Q. Shi, “T oward secure trading of 

in IEEE Conference on Computer Communications, 2019, pp. 1495–

unlicensed  spectrum  in  cyber-physical  systems,”  in  16th  IEEE 

1503. 

Annual Consumer Communications & Networking Conference, 2019. 

[38] 

M. Patnaik, G. Prabhu, C. Rebeiro, V. Matyas, and K. Veezhinathan, 

[25] 

S.  Han  and  X.  Zhu,  “Blockchain  Based  Spectrum  Sharing 

“ProBLeSS :  A  Proactive  Blockchain  based  Spectrum  Sharing 

Algorithm,” 

in 

IEEE  19th  International  Conference  on 

Protocol against SSDF Attacks in Cognitive Radio IoBT Networks,” 

Communication Technology, 2019, pp. 936–940. 

IEEE Netw. Lett., vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 67–70, 2020. 

 
 
 
12 

[39] 

A.  A.  Okon,  I.  Elgendi,  O.  S.  Sholiyi,  J.  M.  H.  Elmirghani,  A. 

Jamalipour, and K. Munasinghe, “Blockchain and SDN Architecture 

for Spectrum Management in Cellular Networks,” IEEE Access, vol. 

8, pp. 94415–94428, 2020. 

[40] 

T . Huang, W. Yang, J.  Wu, J. Ma, X.  Zhang, and D. Zhang,  “A 

Survey on Green 6G Network : Architecture and T echnologies,” 

IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 175758–175768, 2019. 

[41] 

M. A. Shattal, A. Wisniewska, A. Al-fuqaha, S. Member, B. Khan, 

and K. Dombrowski, “Evolutionary Game T heory Perspective on 

Dynamic Spectrum Access Etiquette,” IEEE ACCESS, vol. 6, pp. 1–

15, 2017. 

[42] 

A. S. M.  Z. Shifat and  M. Z. Chowdhury,  “Game T heory  Based 

Spectrum  Sharing  for  QoS  Provisioning  in  Heterogeneous 

Networks,” in 2016 5th International Conference on Informatics, 

Electronics and Vision (ICIEV), 2016, pp. 272–275. 

[43] 

K. M. T hilina, K. W. Choi, N. Saquib, and E. Hossain, “ Machine 

Learning T echniques for Cooperative Spectrum Sensing in Cognitive 

Radio Networks,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 31, no. 11, pp. 

2209–2221, 2013. 

[44] 

N. Zhao,  Y.-C.  Liang,  D.  Niyato,  Y.  Pei,  and  Y.  Jiang,  “ Deep 

Reinforcement  Learning  for  User  Association  and  Resource 

Allocation  in  Heterogeneous  Networks,” 

in  EEE  Global 

Communications Conference (GLOBECOM’18), 2018, pp. 1–6. 

[45] 

K.  Salah,  M.  H.  Rheman,  N.  Nizamuddin,  and  A.  Al-Fuqaha, 

“Blockchain for AI: Review and Open Research Challenges,” IEEE 

Access, vol. 4, pp. 1–23, 2018. 

[46] 

T . N. Dinh  and M.  T . T hai,  “AI and  Blockchain: A  Disruptive 

Integration,” Cimputer, pp. 48–53, 2018. 

 
 
 
 
