Blockchain-enabled Network Sharing for O-RAN in
5G and Beyond

Lorenza Giupponi and Francesc Wilhelmi

1

1
2
0
2
c
e
D
0
1

]
I

N
.
s
c
[

2
v
5
0
0
2
0
.
7
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—The innovation provided by network virtualization
in 5G, together with standardization and openness boosted by
the Open Radio Access Network (O-RAN) Alliance, has paved
the way to a collaborative future in cellular systems, driven by
ﬂexible network sharing. Such advents are expected to attract
increasing
new players like content providers and verticals,
competitiveness in the telecom market. However, scalability and
trust issues are expected to arise, given the criticality of ownership
traceability and resource exchanging in a sharing ecosystem. To
address that, we propose integrating blockchain technology for
enabling mobile operators and other players to exchange RAN
resources (e.g., infrastructure) in the form of virtual network
functions (VNF) autonomously and dynamically. Blockchain will
provide automation, robustness, trustworthiness, and reliability
to mobile networks, thus bringing conﬁdence to open RAN
environments. In particular, we deﬁne a novel O-RAN-based
blockchain-enabled architecture that allows automating RAN
sharing procedures through either auction or marketplace-based
mechanisms. The potential advantages of the proposed solution
are demonstrated through simulation results. The used simulation
platform is openly released.

Index Terms—5G, architecture, auction, blockchain, O-RAN,

RAN sharing

I. INTRODUCTION

As of today, 5G is a reality, with 100+ operators worldwide
already deploying it. Despite that, no matter the better capacity
and latency offered by 5G, an increment in average revenue
per user (ARPU) is unclear, and the past trends show that
this indicator has been steadily decreasing for over a decade.
A remarkable aspect in the economics of 5G is that 70%
of network management costs are concentrated in the radio
access network (RAN), where novel requirements (e.g., to
pursue the millimeter-wave vision) entail using more spectrum,
upgrading equipment, or deploying large-scale small-cells [1].
This has generated an increasing interest to cut both capital and
operational expenditures (CAPEX and OPEX) and increase
automation in the RAN [2]. An appealing solution for cost
effective management of the network has been identiﬁed
by industry and academia in the concept of network and
RAN sharing. This allows operators and service providers to
exchange network resources to satisfy the increasing users’
demands, without the need for signiﬁcant investments to enter
the market and remain competitive [3].

The need for economic sustainability of future networks
has paved the way to two main trends in the industry. First,
evolving inside 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) and
Next Generation Mobile Networks (NGMN), next-generation

The authors are with Centre Tecnol`ogic de Telecomunicacions de Catalunya

(CTTC/CERCA).

self-organizing networks (NG-SON) for 5G and beyond are
meant to introduce automation through artiﬁcial intelligence
(AI) techniques. Second, Network Function Virtualization
(NFV) has attracted a lot of interest by allowing to split out
dedicated capacity through network slicing [4], and deploy
custom virtual network functions (VNFs) to meet speciﬁc user
demands and minimize network investments.

To leverage the potential of AI and network virtualization in
next-generation communications, novel architectural transfor-
mations are proposed for the RAN through global initiatives
like Open-RAN (O-RAN) [2], which aims to introduce virtu-
alized network elements, openness, and intelligence to RAN
management. O-RAN has been targeted as a strong enabler
for RAN sharing since it allows dealing with multi-vendor
deployments by dynamically managing and orchestrating both
radio and cloud resources [2], supported by embedded AI
functionalities. The novel architecture proposed by O-RAN
generates new opportunities related to the offering, distribu-
tion, and execution of VNFs by other operators. Stakeholders
can quickly contract and deploy VNFs from catalogs (i.e.,
marketplaces) to support user equipment (UE) demands. Oper-
ators with available resources on their site can openly expose
their service conditions and prices so that any other player can
pick the most suitable offer. With this approach, competition
is open, but quite static, as prices are not adapted to speciﬁc
RAN users’ demands. Moreover, considering the openness of
O-RAN sharing environments, novel mechanisms are required
to enable dynamic and real-time competitive resource trading
securely and reliably.

To support and provide trust in these emerging open mar-
kets, we propose the introduction of blockchain and smart
contracts technologies in O-RAN management, which offer
immutable and permanent records, for interested parties to
audit. The smart contract is used to describe the RAN user’s re-
quirements and allow for SLA enforcement. On top of the au-
tomation and the network management efﬁciency proposed by
NG-SON and O-RAN, blockchain removes the need for costly
intermediaries (e.g., bank, credit rating agency) and enables
unprecedented levels of transparency and trustworthiness, with
the potential for high savings. In addition, blockchain reduces
the delay required to establish agreements facilitating a real
dynamism in RAN sharing.

Through blockchain-enabled RAN sharing for 5G and be-
yond, where O-RAN is the baseline architecture, operators dy-
namically sublease their resources to capitalize on the available
infrastructure and allow other operators to increase coverage
and capacity. Each operator is allowed to optimally choose
investment and resource use continuously,
between capital

 
 
 
 
 
 
and not only at the time of RAN sharing contract signature,
or network deployment. Dynamic resource trading allows
for the establishment of new competitive markets, where
new stakeholders appear, democratizing and decentralizing the
telecom market. The overall concept is depicted in Fig. 1,
where we introduce two O-RAN-based operators (OP1 and
OP2), which agree on leasing certain network resources in
the form of VNFs, relying on blockchain and smart contract
as technologies enabling trust and automation. More details
regarding the purpose and interfaces of O-RAN components
are provided next.

Fig. 1. Blockchain-enabled RAN sharing ecosystem.

The introduction of blockchain in network management
has, however, also well-documented limitations (see [5] and
references therein). Maintaining a blockchain among a wide
number of peers incurs heavy costs in computation, power, en-
ergy consumption, and memory usage. Running a blockchain
in a mobile network represents a high trafﬁc overhead due to
the distribution of blocks across blockchain participants. The
additional delay is another aspect that affects the performance,
the service perception, and the stability of the blockchain
itself. Taking into account these limitations is essential when
designing solutions such as the one proposed in this pa-
per (e.g., whether to use a public or a private blockchain,
which type of consensus mechanism to apply, how to tune
blockchain parameters). The target of this paper is to propose
a blockchain-enabled O-RAN-based architecture for beyond
5G and to evaluate the advantages and disadvantages incurred
by the introduction of the blockchain in O-RAN management.
Evaluation is done in terms of delay and overhead for service
establishment as a function of the number of participating
operators and blockchain parameters.

II. BACKGROUND ON O-RAN ARCHITECTURE

The O-RAN Alliance was born in February 2018 to con-
tinue the evolution of 3GPP RAN architecture in areas like
non-public networks, self-organized networks, and integrated
access and backhaul. At
the O-RAN initiative
has received great acceptance in the industry, with over 160
companies supporting it [6]. The major purpose of O-RAN
is to deﬁne open interfaces between elements implemented in
general-purpose hardware. It is the ﬁrst standard to enable

this time,

2

multi-vendor RAN, and RAN virtualization,
thus favoring
efﬁcient splits over the protocol stack for network slicing
purposes. This ﬂexibility allows to bring in new radio players
and gives plenty of opportunities to operators to optimize
deployments for speciﬁc performance requirements at a much
better cost.

The O-RAN architecture, based on the original 3GPP pro-
posal in TS 38.401, is shown in Fig. 2 for two operators
sharing a coverage area. Speciﬁcally, the ﬁgure represents
a RAN sharing-compliant O-RAN architecture that allows
operators to remotely conﬁgure the shared network resources
independently from conﬁguration and operating strategies of
the hosting operator. This RAN sharing use case is extensible
to MVNOs, service providers, and verticals requesting RAN
resources. The main O-RAN modules (outer lined in blue),
deployed as VNFs or containers, and whose interfaces are
deﬁned by O-RAN in [2], are as follows:

it oversees all

• System management and orchestration (SMO): The
SMO, similar
to other architectures based on ETSI
NFV’s, provides a variety of network management func-
In the context of O-RAN and for what
tionalities.
concerns the RAN functionalities,
the
orchestration, management, and automation aspects. It
includes fault, conﬁguration, accounting, performance,
security (FCAPS) support for O-RAN functions, such
as installation, conﬁguration, or performance, fault, and
ﬁle management. In addition, it includes the newly in-
troduced non-real-time (non-RT) Radio Intelligent Con-
troller (RIC) for intelligent RAN optimization. These
functionalities are supported by newly introduced inter-
faces such as A1, O1, and O2.

• O-RAN centralized unit (O-CU): It hosts the gNB
protocols of Radio Resource Control (RRC), Service Data
Adaptation Protocol (SDAP), and Packet Data Conver-
gence Protocol (PDCP), and is connected to the O-DU
via F1-C and F1-U interfaces, for control and data planes,
respectively. The O-CU controls the operation of multiple
O-DU over midhaul interfaces. This split architecture,
the only possible one, enables different
although not
distributions of protocol stack between O-CU and O-DU,
depending on the midhaul availability and the network
design.

• O-RAN decentralized unit (O-DU): It hosts the radio
link control (RLC), the medium access control (MAC),
and PHY-high layers of the gNB, and is connected to the
O-RU via the Open Fronthaul interface. This node in-
cludes a subset of the eNB/gNB functions, depending on
the functional split option, and its operation is controlled
by the O-CU.

• O-RAN radio unit (O-RU): It hosts the PHY-low layers
of the gNB, and carries out tasks related to RF processing,
following the functional split provided by the O-RAN
architecture.

• Radio intelligent controller (RIC): O-CUs are con-
trolled by the non-RT and the near-RT RIC modules,
supporting tasks with more or less than one second
latency, respectively. Through these modules, the O-RAN

O-RU2O-RU1,1O-RU1,2Cell A (OP1)SMO2O-CU1O-DU1O-CU2O-DU2SMO 1Cell B (OP2)Distributed ledgerUE1(1) Make anoffer to OP1  (2) Receiveoffer from OP2UnconfirmedtransactionsMinedblocksSmartContract(5) OP2 controlsvirtual resourcesallocated in O-RU1,1BC adapterRANmanagementappsRICBC adapterRICSMO1O-Cloud (OP2)O-Cloud (OP1)(3) Generate SC(4) Receive SCRANmanagementapps(5)3

Fig. 2. Functional blockchain-enabled O-RAN architecture.

architecture strives the industry to introduce embedded
AI in the system. RICs are based on software apps to
orchestrate and manage the RAN. Functionalities like mo-
bility management, admission control, and interference
management are available as apps on the RIC, which
enforces network policies to the radio segment. Non-
RT RIC is implemented inside the SMO and includes
service and policy management, RAN analytics, and
model training for the near-RT RIC. The trained model
is managed by the SMO for deployment and received
by the near-RT RIC through A1 interface. The near-RT
RIC uses the E2 interface to collect information at UE
and cell basis and perform self-optimization tasks across
the heterogeneous RAN (e.g., formed by macros, massive
MIMO, small cells).

O-RAN has studied different options for CU/DU/RU de-
ployment, including location in regional clouds, or operator-
speciﬁc sites. The so-called Scenario B is the initial priority
of O-RAN, where O-CU and O-DU are located together in a
cloud, while the O-RU is located in a proprietary cell site.

III. A PRIMER ON BLOCKCHAIN-ENABLED
NETWORK/RAN SHARING IN CELLULAR NETWORKS

A blockchain is a type of distributed ledger technology
(DLT) compiling transactions in blocks that are sequentially
and cryptographically chained one after the other. A peer-
to-peer (P2P) network is in charge of maintaining the trans-
actions’ record on the blockchain. The miners organize the
unconﬁrmed transactions into blocks and append them to

the blockchain after achieving consensus. The consensus is
executed by all the blockchain participants to validate new
blocks without the need to rely on a central trusted authority.
Blockchain was ﬁrstly introduced with the cryptocurrency Bit-
coin. Successively, with the irruption of smart contracts, i.e.,
computer programs that run on top of the blockchain and self-
execute the terms of a contract when speciﬁc conditions are
met, blockchain’s applications appeared in multiple domains.

The advent of blockchain raises issues related to memory
usage, overhead, power consumption, or latency, and require
to be optimized by the blockchain protocol itself. Besides,
interoperability issues, both at a technical level (how interfaces
talk to each other) and at a semantic level (how information
is understood by the parties involved), need to be addressed
by standardization activities [7]. In this regard,
important
organizations such as the International Telecommunication
Union (ITU) and the European Telecommunications Stan-
dards Institute (ETSI) have released documentation concerning
blockchain terminology, use cases, ecosystem, or architec-
tural aspects (see, e.g., [8, 9]). Other initiatives like the EU
Blockchain Observatory, or the standardization of some DLT
properties by W3C or Open Timestamps are also active.

As a counterpart, the offered automation and trust are among
the most valuable features of blockchain for trading in future
mobile networks. In telecommunications, much research work
has been ongoing in the area of blockchain-based Internet
of Things and beyond 5G [10]. Blockchain has been widely
envisioned to manage network sharing and trading of network
slices for vertical applications [11]. Accordingly, blockchain

BSSSMO                Admission controlNon-RT RICNear-RT RICO-RUE2E2A1F1F1O-CUO-CUVNF1VNF2O-DUO-DUVNF1VNF2Distr. RAN sharing broker       BC adaptorAuctionengineSC creatorBSSSMO                Admission controlNon-RT RICDistr. RAN sharing broker       BC adaptorAuctionengineSC creatorMarketplace VNFsInfr./ resourcesItf-BC3 BC/SC system    OTT / VerticalsItf-BC4 Open FHSite operator iSite operator jShared infr. in site iO-RAN/3GPP elements/interfacesProposed BC elements/interfacesETSI/NFV elements/interfacesRAN sharing appRAN sharing appNear-RT RICO-RUE2E2A1F1F1O-CUO-CUVNF1VNF2O-DUO-DUVNF1VNF2Open FHE2 (remote)O1/O2 (remote)E2 (remote)Itf-BC4 SCEFItf-BC1 Itf-BC1 Itf-BC3 Itf-BC2 Itf-BC2 4

may become the basis of a decentralized and transparent
platform for multi-party negotiation between the increasing
number of stakeholders (e.g., VNF providers, multiple admin-
istrative domains) offering end-to-end network slicing.

Recent architectural O-RAN [2] evolutions already account
for the RAN sharing use case, where multiple operators can
conﬁgure and control shared resources via remote, open, and
newly standardized interfaces. In this context, the introduc-
tion of blockchain technologies can automate, accelerate, and
secure the deﬁnition of the relationship with a well-deﬁned
SLA for the trade of resources. The authors of [12] introduced
an O-RAN-based architecture to conduct zero-trust mutual
authentication over the unique blockchain-enabled routers, and
switch functions with the identiﬁcation exchanged over the
blockchain. The main novelty proposed by [12] is to introduce
blockchain to decentralize RAN security aspects, in contrast to
the current centralized solutions based on authentication and
third-party trust. Additionally, other contributions target the
vision of blockchain to facilitate resource trading in the RAN
segment [13, 14].

• ItF-BC1: an SMO internal interface between the admis-

sion control and the RAN sharing broker.

• ItF-BC2: different broker internal interfaces across its

elements.

• ItF-BC3: an interface between the BSS and the BC/SC

system.

• ItF-BC4: an interface between the SMO and the BC/SC
system, which can be newly deﬁned or can reuse already
available interfaces proposed by O-RAN and 3GPP (i.e.,
O2, Itf-N, Itf-B, and Type 5 interface).

• Vertical industries and OTT providers may also inter-
act with the blockchain and the operators providing
infrastructure through the so-called Service Capability
Exposure Function (SCEF).

The distributed RAN sharing broker manages and offers
RAN VNFs. The concept of broker has been previously
introduced in [3] for network slicing, as a management point to
gather requests from multiple parties such as MVNOs, OTTs,
or vertical providers, and to perform admission control. The
blocks included in the distributed RAN sharing broker are:

IV. BLOCKCHAIN-ENABLED O-RAN

We propose to enrich the O-RAN architecture with new
functional blocks for automatic, dynamic sharing of RAN
resources through blockchain. The functional architecture is
depicted in Fig. 2, where the newly proposed modules are
outer lined in red. The introduction of blockchain can auto-
mate, accelerate and secure the RAN sharing start-up phase
between operator i (Oi) and operator j (Oj) to deﬁne the
relationship with SLAs for resource trading. Fig. 2 represents
the simple example of two operators, but multiple parties
can take part in this start-up phase, which is facilitated by
the introduction of BC. Furthermore, we assume that both
operators have the same coverage and service capabilities, and
leave open the analysis of the proposed sharing mechanisms
under heterogeneous conditions (e.g., different coverage areas,
capacities, technologies, frequencies, prices). Speciﬁcally, Oi
makes its O-RAN infrastructure available and hosts the virtual
RAN functions of Oj (notice that the antenna resources are
shared as well). Remote conﬁguration and monitoring of
instantiated VNFs in the host infrastructure of Oi is allowed
through O1, O2, and E2 interfaces (deﬁned as entity/remote in
the ﬁgure). Performance monitoring is implemented during the
running phase and complemented by AI functionalities offered
by RIC modules, to ensure SLA enforcement.

The proposed architecture includes different additions to the
O-RAN baseline, like the Business Support System (BSS),
also present in ETSI-NFV architecture, for the operator to
deliver product, customer, and revenue management (billing).
The SMO, besides the already introduced non-RT RIC, in-
cludes the admission control functionality that decides whether
new VNFs can be leased on the site infrastructure. This infor-
mation is fed to the newly introduced distributed RAN sharing
broker. In addition, we propose a marketplace (potentially
managed by a third party) where operators can opt to advertise
the infrastructure they are willing to offer, a BC/SC system, and
the following set of new interfaces:

• Smart contract (SC) creator: It is in charge of mapping
requirements and preferences into a smart contract format
so that other operators are informed about the selected
service from a marketplace, or about
information to
participate in an auction. The smart contract deﬁnes the
SLA that needs to be monitored during the running phase,
including information such as the resources type, required
QoS, service duration, or tolerance indicators. Once the
smart contract is compiled and distributed, the auction
engine is triggered (where applicable).

• Auction engine: It is in charge of handling the auction
process. For the requesting operator, the auction engine
collects the bids submitted by the operators, selects the
winner based on a precise algorithm for UEs’ expected
satisfaction, and triggers the communication between
the SMOs of the requesting and winner operators. The
auction starts after deploying the smart contract, and is
concluded after a predeﬁned period (e.g., maximum time,
bids number limit, achievement of target price). For can-
didate operators, the auction engine deﬁnes the bid to be
submitted based on internal bid algorithms depending on
business variables, available resources, resources price,
special discounts, and expected return of investment.
• Blockchan (BC) adaptor: It is the entity in charge of
handling the communication with the blockchain and
registering the operator to it.

The blockchain in the proposed architecture is private, so
only operators deploying a RAN sharing broker can join it.
Two mechanisms for RAN sharing are analyzed (see Fig. 3):
• Marketplace-oriented: All operators with VNFs,

in-
frastructure, and resources to offer, advertise them with
speciﬁc prices in a catalog, where other stakeholders
select the desired service. To participate in the market-
place, the operator registers the information of interest
(e.g., available resources, prices) in the blockchain. In
the ﬂow diagram, Oj is interested in leasing a VNF
from another operator, so it accesses the marketplace

to acquire one. After selecting a sharing provider Oi
(based on, e.g., price, availability, coverage area), the
smart contract creator in Oj’s broker prepares the SLA
with the offer from the marketplace. This is distributed in
the blockchain and received by Oi’s broker, which trans-
lates the smart contract into requirements for admission
control. If the request is accepted, a VNF is instantiated in
Oi’s infrastructure to be remotely conﬁgured (during the
conﬁguration phase) by Oj through the open interfaces
deﬁned in O-RAN (O1/O2 remote). During the running
phase, the SLA is monitored through RICs at Oj site.
Monitoring support from the hosted VNFs, with radio
state reports, is realized through the O-RAN native E2-
remote interface. Service updates are sent to the broker
for preparing new smart contracts, which are registered
in the blockchain and evaluated for admission control.
• Auction-oriented: In this procedure, the serving Oi is
selected using an auction procedure, which is expected
to better ﬁt the offer of service and provide a more
efﬁcient resource usage. The Oj interested in leasing
resources from another operator deﬁnes the requirements
and desired price for the needed resources and sends them
to the smart contract creator of the RAN sharing broker of
Oj. The smart contract creator prepares a smart contract,
which is distributed through the blockchain. Other opera-
tors interested in offering to lease their resources, evaluate
availability through admission control functionality, and
if the resources are available, participate in the auction
submitting a bid through their auction engine. The auction
engines distribute the bids from the candidate operators
through the blockchain. Oj’s auction engine collects
the bids and decides the target Oi to host the desired
VNFs. From this moment, the procedure is similar to
the marketplace case. The provisioning request is sent
to the hosting operator, to the RAN sharing broker, and
an instantiation request is sent to the orchestrator to be
instantiated in the platform of Oi site.

The marketplace is expected to boost the speed at which
network resources are shared, to allow for fast price com-
parison and to provide ready-to-go deployable solutions. In
contrast, the auction mechanism can provide more personal-
ized services, thus potentially improving efﬁciency. A further
evaluation of the marketplace and the auction solutions is
provided in what follows.

V. BLOCKCHAIN-ENABLED RAN SHARING:
OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES

The introduction of blockchain-enabled RAN sharing offers
operators new opportunities for new revenue incomes by capi-
talizing on available infrastructure. In this section, we analyze
the different opportunities and challenges, as well as the
trade-offs among them, of the proposed blockchain-enabled
RAN sharing architectural framework. The most important
opportunities offered by Blockchain and smart contracts to
traditional RAN sharing are:

1) Automated management: By removing long interac-
tions with third parties in the negotiation for sharing

5

Fig. 3. Flow diagram of the blockchain-enabled O-RAN functional architec-
ture, for marketplace and auction-oriented cases.

resources, improved network management efﬁciency is
expected.

2) Resources efﬁciency: Through automated RAN sharing,
resources can be fully harnessed by multiple parties, thus
leading to a higher resources availability, more coverage,
and, consequently, improved UEs’ satisfaction.

3) Competitiveness: With the entry of new actors to the
RAN sharing ecosystem, competitiveness is expected to
be boosted, which leads to further service diversiﬁcation
and additional possibilities to improve the network in-
frastructure. This is expected to attract more investments
in the network.

4) Auditablity: The traceability of every interaction in a
blockchain allows for improved trust and transparency
in RAN sharing. This is an important aspect to take into
account, considering the recent issues raised by, e.g.,
Ericsson warning on O-RAN security [15].

Concerning the challenges, Blockchain systems have sev-
eral well-documented drawbacks to take into account when
considering their inclusion in an established trading system:

1) Communication overhead: The communication among
peer nodes and miners in blockchain generates overhead,
which increases with the number of participants and the
duration of the requested services (accurate short-term
requests vs long-term ﬁxed contracts).

2) Transaction conﬁrmation latency: The distribution

Operator i     O-RAN site i (near-RT RIC)Cloud iBCPull offersSelect offerand OPSC service requestSCservicerequestAccept/RejectInstantiateCreateO-CU(VNF1)CreateO-DU(VNF2)Notify instantiationUpdate service requestUpdate SCAdmissioncontrolAccept/RejectAccept/RejectUpdateSCNotify acceptance/rejectionDecideserviceSC service requestSCservicerequestBidInst.requestCreateO-CU(VNF1)CreateO-DU(VNF2)Notify instantiationAccept/RejectBidcollectionBid collectionAuctionresolution(winner Op. i)InstantiateNotify auction winnerSCSetup (Marketplace-based)Setup (Auction-based)Running [11]Charging Charging Accept/ rejectPaymentEnd of serviceEnforce SCAdmissioncontrol iBrokerinon-RTRIC iSMO iOperator j     SMO jO-RAN site j (near-RT RIC)Admissioncontrol jnon-RTRIC jBrokerjCloud jMarketplacePerformance monitoringSchedule updateInstantiationrequestAdmissioncontrolAdmissioncontrolof transactions and blocks across the blockchain de-
termines the delay for instantiating RAN functions in
the infrastructure providers’ platform. The transaction
conﬁrmation delay in a blockchain strongly depends on
the adopted consensus mechanism and other parameters
like the mining difﬁculty. A detailed model to estimate
the transaction conﬁrmation latency based on those
parameters can be found in [5].

3) Stability: The stability of a blockchain is strongly
related to the network consensus. In this regard, forks
may threaten the blockchain stability. A fork is a split of
a blockchain, which occurs when the difference in time
between two nodes ﬁnding the nonce is lower than the
time required by a node to distribute the winning block
through the blockchain. As a result, the performance
of a blockchain may be jeopardized by a low network
capacity. Moreover, game-theoretical aspects may mo-
tivate selﬁsh behaviors among miners (e.g., releasing a
block at the appropriate time to gain an advantage), thus
adding instability to the blockchain.

4) Scalability: Given the nature of blockchain, whereby
all the transactions need to be propagated and stored,
an increase in the number of blockchain users and
transactions can represent both a communication and a
storage issue. Besides, blockchain is originally limited
by the block size and the mining difﬁculty (e.g., the case
of Bitcoin), which limits the effective transactions rate.

For performance evaluation, we run simulation campaigns
on typical cellular random deployments of up to up to 19 cells
and 200 UEs, where operators owning phyisical infrastructure
can virtually split it for RAN sharing.1. Fig. 4 compares per-
formance in terms of capacity, UE satisfaction, and efﬁciency
for (i) static scenario where RAN sharing is not enabled,
(ii) marketplace, and (iii) auction-oriented approaches. In
particular, we compute (1) the UE capacity (in Mbps), as a
function of the set of resources allocated from the operator and
its signal to noise and interference ratio (SINR); (2) the UE
satisfaction (between 0 and 1), as a function of the obtained
service and the price paid for it; (3) the efﬁciency of each
approach (as a ratio), by indicating the degree to which base
station resources are appropriately assigned to UEs to meet
their needs.

As shown in Fig. 4, both auction and marketplace solu-
tions outperform the static one. The automation provided by
blockchain allows improving the utilization of the infrastruc-
ture, which leads to increased gains and proﬁts for both sharing
and leasing operators. In particular, the marketplace provides
higher capacity and satisfaction than the auction approach,
since new UEs can be served earlier with the spare capacity
already available at the operator side. Regarding efﬁciency, the
auction approach outperforms the marketplace option, because
the resources allocated to the UEs can be perfectly adjusted
to their demands (a resource sharing contract is done on a
per UE basis), instead of mapping to pre-conﬁgured offers in

1All the source code and background information of simulation results
are openly available at https:// github.com/ fwilhelmi/ blockchain enabled ran
architecture, accessed on Oct. 15, 2021

6

Fig. 4. Performance achieved by the different blockchain-enabled sharing
mechansism compared to the static situation, for M = {2, 4, 8} operators.

the marketplace. The marketplace offers a simpler allocation
protocol, but at the price of lower ﬂexibility and less tailored
service (sharing requests are only submitted when the available
resources are not enough to fulﬁll UE demands).

We now showcase trade-offs by focusing on the overhead
and delay incurred by the proposed RAN sharing solutions.
Notice that we consider the total time needed to deﬁne the
smart contract with the agreed service and to distribute it
through the blockchain. This delay is added to the baseline O-
RAN delay between the service request and the instantiation
of the VNF at a given operator’s infrastructure site. In the
marketplace case, the blockchain delay includes the time for
propagating the service request and automatically enforcing it
based on marketplace offers, whereas the auction-based proce-
dure also includes the distribution of bids over the blockchain.
Fig. 5 and Fig. 6 illustrate the blockchain delay and overhead,
respectively, associated to both auction and marketplace-based
solutions. The results include different numbers of operators
(M = {2, 4, 8}), UE request rates (λ = {1, 5, 10} requests per
second), and block size values (from 3,000 to 30,000 bits).

Fig. 5. Blockchain delay experienced by the auction and marketplace-oriented
RAN sharing solutions.

We observe that, in spite of the beneﬁts introduced by
blockchain, in terms of security and immutability, the auction-
based mechanism leads to higher delay and overhead than the
marketplace approach. The reason is that the auction leads

7

static solution in terms of capacity, satisfaction, and efﬁciency.
However, the new overheads and delays introduced by the
blockchain need to be carefully considered in the design of fu-
ture blockchain-enabled RAN architectures. Future works will
include technical contributions aimed to optimize operators’
selection criteria and to overcome the limitations associated
with the introduction of blockchain in O-RAN architectures, as
already identiﬁed in this work. Furthermore, deeper analyses
and proof-of-concept implementations are required to properly
understand the costs and beneﬁts associated with blockchain-
enabled RAN sharing.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was funded by the IN CERCA grant from the
Secretaria d’Universitats i Recerca del departament d’Empresa
i Coneixement de la Generalitat de Catalunya, and partially
from the Spanish MINECO grant TEC2017-88373-R (5G-
REFINE) and Generalitat de Catalunya grant 2017 SGR 1195.

REFERENCES

[1] W. Webb, The 5G myth. De— G Press, 2018.
[2] O-RAN Alliance, “O-RAN Architecture Description 3.0 & O-RAN Use
Cases detailed speciﬁcations,” https://www.o-ran.org/resources, [Ac-
cessed on 3 December 2021].

[3] K. Samdanis, X. Costa-Perez, and V. Sciancalepore, “From network
sharing to multi-tenancy: The 5G network slice broker,” IEEE Comm.
Mag., vol. 54, no. 7, pp. 32–39, 2016.

[4] X. Foukas, G. Patounas, A. Elmokashﬁ, and M. K. Marina, “Network
slicing in 5g: Survey and challenges,” IEEE Comm. Mag., vol. 55, no. 5,
pp. 94–100, 2017.

[5] F. Wilhelmi and L. Giupponi, “Discrete-time analysis of wireless
blockchain networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.05586, 2021, [Ac-
cessed on 3 December 2021].

[6] A. Garcia-Saavedra and X. Costa-Perez, “O-ran: Disrupting the virtual-

ized ran ecosystem,” IEEE Comm. Standards Mag., 2021.

[7] L. K¨onig et al., “Comparing blockchain standards and recommenda-

tions,” Future Internet, vol. 12, no. 12, p. 222, 2020.

[8] ITU-T Rec. X.1400, “Terms and deﬁnitions for distributed ledger

technology,” 2020.

[9] European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI), “Permis-
sioned Distributed Ledger (PDL); Landscape of Standards and Tech-
nologies; Technical Report,” 2020.

[10] N. D. Nguyen et al., “Blockchain for 5G and beyond networks: A state

of the art survey,” JNCA, p. 102693, 2020.

[11] H. Xu et al., “Blockchain-enabled resource management and sharing for
6G communications,” Digital Comm. and Networks, vol. 6, no. 3, pp.
261–269, 2020.

[12] ——, “BE-RAN: Blockchain-enabled RAN with Decentralized Identity
Management and Privacy-Preserving Communication,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2101.10856, 2021, [Accessed on 3 December 2021].

[13] T. Maksymyuk et al., “Blockchain-Empowered Framework for Decen-
tralized Network Management in 6G,” IEEE Comm. Mag., vol. 58, no. 9,
pp. 86–92, 2020.

[14] M. A. Togou et al., “DBNS: A Distributed Blockchain-Enabled Network
Slicing Framework for 5G Networks,” IEEE Comm. Mag., vol. 58,
no. 11, pp. 90–96, 2020.

and

Boswell
Open

considerations
[15] J.
https://www.ericsson.com/en/security/
of
security-considerations-of-open-ran, 2020, [Accessed on 3 December
2021].

S.
RAN,”

“Security

Poretsky,

Lorenza Giupponi (lorenza.giupponi@cttc.es) holds a PhD from Universitat
Politecnica de Catalunya (2007). She is a Research Director in CTTC, and a
member of the CTTC Executive Committee.

Francesc Wilhelmi (fwilhelmi@cttc.cat) holds a Ph.D. in Information and
Communication Technologies (2020), from Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF).
He is currently a researcher at CTTC.

Fig. 6. Blockchain overhead experienced by the auction and marketplace-
oriented RAN sharing solutions.

to a higher number of blockchain transactions, which result
from generating tailored service requests and auction bids.
This trend is exacerbated as the number of RAN user requests
and operators increases. Provided that admission control is
properly done, the marketplace option ensures that the delay
and overhead do not increase exponentially with the number
of operators, which makes it a cost-effective solution for
automating RAN sharing procedures in future communications
systems. Otherwise, the delay would increase. Moreover, the
marketplace delay decreases with the number of RAN user
arrivals, which improves the blockchain’s efﬁciency by re-
ducing the overhead (blocks are ﬁlled with transactions) and
leading to lower waiting times between mined blocks (blocks
are generated faster). As for the block size (included in each
boxplot), a higher variability is observed in the auction-based
approach, which is more susceptible to performance changes
for different blockchain parameters.

VI. CONCLUSIONS

The virtualization of network functions provided by 5G is
disrupting the way RAN resources are shared. The O-RAN
Alliance is contributing to the development of standards on
intelligent, open, virtualized, and fully interoperable mobile
networks, paving the way to a sharing ecosystem for future
RAN with providers operating from the cloud. In such an
emerging ecosystem, the advertisement of services and au-
tomation of administrative negotiations in the form of an
open marketplace may become a fundamental piece to trade
resources as-a-service. To foster trustworthiness, automation,
and an economically driven management of the network, we
have proposed to extend the baseline O-RAN architecture
with the introduction of a programmable trust concept. More
speciﬁcally, we have envisioned the utilization of blockchain
technology, which is expected to provide trust and traceability
to the automation of O-RAN management. The novel O-RAN-
based blockchain-enabled architecture deﬁnes new compo-
nents and procedures to carry out two proposed automated
RAN sharing mechanisms, based on auctioning and open
marketplaces. Finally, as a prelude to future research, we have
analyzed the main trade-offs offered by the proposed solution
through simulation results. We have shown the superiority
of the auction and marketplace approaches compared to a

