Hygiea: A secure, smart, privacy-preserving and interoperable
Blockchain solution for the Covid-19 pandemic

Soﬁa Maria Dima1, Alexandros Hasikos2, Stylianos Kampakis3, Theodosis Mourouzis4, and
Andreas Papageorgiou5

2UPF Barcelona
1, 2, 3, 4, 5Electi Consulting Ltd
3, 4UCL CBT
4LBS

1
2
0
2

l
u
J

2
2

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

2
v
6
2
9
9
0
.
7
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract

In this article we present Hygiea, an end-to-end blockchain-based solution for the Covid-19 pandemic.
Hygiea has two main objectives. The ﬁrst is to allow governments to issue Covid-19 related certiﬁcates to
citizens that can be veriﬁed by designated veriﬁers to ensure safer workplaces. The second is to provide the
necessary tools to experts and decision makers to better understand the impact of the pandemic through
statistical models built on top of the data collected by the platform. This work covers all steps of the
certiﬁcate issuance, veriﬁcation and revocation cycles with well-deﬁned roles for all stakeholders. We also
propose a governance model that is implemented via smart contracts ensuring security, transparency and
auditability. Finally, we propose techniques for deriving statistical models that can be used by decision
makers.

1

Introduction

The COVID-19 pandemic has caused major disruptions in society, economy, business and healthcare. At the
time of this writing, the pandemic caused death to millions of people [1]. Governments, along with the World
Health Organisation and other experts, had to propose and enforce tough measures such as social distancing,
masks and lock-downs in an attempt to contain the virus and oﬄoad the health system.

The scientiﬁc community, pharmaceutical companies and regulators are working hard to fabricate and license
vaccines that will be provided to people in order to increase the resistance against the virus’ symptoms and
as result contain the spread. So far, the process has been proven hard for all stakeholders given the time
constraints. In addition, the rapid spread of the virus has generated an enormous demand for vaccines, a fact
that imposes additional challenges to the supply chain.

While the healthcare industry is working hard towards the manufacture and supply of vaccines there is
a need for an eﬃcient mechanism to collect data that will assist in better understanding and analysis of the
virus. Examples of data can be type of symptoms, intensity, antibodies and geographic location. In addition,
analysis of the data will signiﬁcantly improve the quality of actions taken by decision makers and authorities
as they attempt to contain the spread and return back to normality. Another aspect of data collection is the
standardisation of the format as well as the protocols followed to collect them and make them available to the
relevant parties while considering privacy.

The transition to normality is not expected to happen instantly, thus the term “new normality” has been
introduced which will require people to continue keeping precautions such as social distancing in order to contain
the spread. In addition, travelling, commuting and working will require people to present various types of proof
in a form of certiﬁcates to verify their health condition. Examples of these certiﬁcates are COVID-19 negative
tests, vaccination and recovery. Although this “new normality” is considered inconvenient and has been heavily
criticised[2][3] in terms of its ethical, social and practical consequences, several countries[4] across the globe are
considering a digital solution that will speed-up the recovery from the pandemic.

In an attempt to address the consequences of the pandemic, the European Commission has published a call
for proposals for a Digital Green Certiﬁcate[5] which will facilitate safe and free movement during the COVID-19
pandemic within the EU. According to the proposal, the Digital Green Certiﬁcate (DGC) system must cover
three types of certiﬁcates. Vaccination, COVID-19 test and recovery. All citizens of the EU are eligible to be
issued certiﬁcates and the certiﬁcate will include only a minimum set of information necessary to conﬁrm the
holder’s status.

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
2 Related Work

In [6] authors propose a blockchain-based solution that implements digital medical passports and immunity
certiﬁcates for COVID-19 test takers. The solution is based on the public Ethereum blockchain and utilizes
smart contracts, IPFS and proxy re-encryption techniques. The architecture of the system includes both on-
chain and oﬀ-chain entities that are governed through a central trusted authority. Certiﬁcates of the users
are stored encrypted in a distributed ﬁle system (IPFS) and users can reveal the contents of the certiﬁcates
to interested parties using a technique called “proxy re-encryption” through a trusted entity.
In [7] authors
propose an immunity passport system that is based on W3C’s Veriﬁable Credentials[8] standard, the Solid[9]
decentralised data platform and a consortium blockchain. The system covers three roles, namely.
Issuers,
holders and veriﬁers who are onboarded to and authenticated by system. Issuers can issue certiﬁcates to holders
in a form of veriﬁable credentials that are signed by both the issuer and the holder and stored on the holder’s
Solid Pod (wallet). A hash of the certiﬁcate is also stored on the consortium based blockchain for veriﬁcation.
Veriﬁers verify both the digital signatures and the hash on the claimed certiﬁcates. In [10] authors propose a
simple COVID-19 test certiﬁcation framework where, similarly to [7], certiﬁcate issuers, holders and veriﬁers are
onboarded to a platform. Holders are assigned a decentralised identity that is used by issuers to issue COVID-19
related certiﬁcates. The certiﬁcate takes the form of a hash and is stored on a consortium blockchain. Veriﬁers
can verify certiﬁcates by comparing the hash found on the blockchain and the hash of the actual medical
information presented by users. In [11] authors propose a protocol for the issuance and veriﬁcation of antibody
certiﬁcates for COVID-19. Although this proposal does not involve the use of blockchain, it still achieves
all the necessary functionality of secure and privacy preserving issuance and veriﬁcation of certiﬁcates.
In
addition, it covers both paper and digital certiﬁcates. In [12] authors propose a blockchain-based framework for
digital identity veriﬁcation, record attestation and record sharing using veriﬁable credentials in a decentralised
setup. In their work, they present as a use-case the COVID-19 certiﬁcates problem. In [13] authors discuss
several applications of blockchain against the COVID-19 pandemic. One of the applications discussed in their
work is the vaccination certiﬁcates and immunity passports for which they give a high level architecture of
the proposed system. The system, similarly to [6], uses the Ethereum blockchain, smart contracts, IPFS and
In [14] authors consider a setup in which all EU countries participate. The system is
proxy re-encryption.
based on decentralised identiﬁers and veriﬁable credentials for issuance and veriﬁcation of vaccine certiﬁcates.
The Hyperledger[15] blockchain is used for storing hashes of the certiﬁcates.
In this work, authors provide
implementation details with performance metrics. In [16] authors address the problem of user authentication
by proposing the use of biometrics and speciﬁcally the extraction of iris templates and a hashing mechanism to
store them on the blockchain. The system uses a permissioned blockhain and digital signatures for certiﬁcate
authentication.

3 Our Contribution

In this work, we propose a multi-purpose platform named Hygiea. Hygiea is a platform designed for the
issuance and veriﬁcation of Covid-19 certiﬁcates that combines blockchain, smart contracts and cryptography
and is realistic to implement in practice, ﬂexible to adapt in various scenarios, secure for all participants and
respects user’s privacy.

The main purpose of Hygiea is to provide an ecosystem on which regulators, certiﬁcate issuers, certiﬁcate
holders and veriﬁers can operate on, in order to streamline the process of issuance and veriﬁcation of Covid-
19 certiﬁcates. In addition, through the use of Hygiea we aim to prevent falsiﬁcation of certiﬁcates[17] and
increase trust through decentralization by using the blockchain. Another goal of our system is to assist the health
community to better understand the virus by providing a way of collecting anonymized data from patients and
deriving analytics.

The system is built on top of Ethereum deployed in a permissioned setup which enables to deﬁne all the
business logic encoded in the form of smart contracts. In addition, all the stakeholders can co-exist in the system
while having well-deﬁned processes and responsibilities. The permissioned setup also enables both trusted and
non-trusted entities to operate in the same environment. The eﬃciency and performance mostly found on public
blockchains is solved by using Proof-Of-Authority as a consensus mechanism.

The governance rules are encoded in the form of smart contracts. A trusted entity, namely the governing
body, is the owner of the governance smart contract and can, for example, onboard other entities which have a
predeﬁned list of operations that are allowed to perform. The integrity of the operations on the blockchain as
well as the data are secured through the use of solid cryptographic operations already provided by Ethereum.
Hygiea is an end-to-end proposal meaning that it covers all steps of the process. Starting from the gover-
nance of the system, speciﬁcation of the stakeholders and their roles, protocols for the issuance and veriﬁcation
of certiﬁcates as well as certiﬁcate revocation. To our knowledge, Hygiea is the ﬁrst blockchain-based system
that conforms with EU’s proposal for the implementation of the Digital Green Certiﬁcate. In fact, Hygiea can

2

operate both together with and independently from with the European Union’s (EU) DGC. Another advantage
of Hygiea is that it provides a tool for scientists and decision makers to create analytics in order to combat
the virus more eﬀectively. The modular design of the system can include further stakeholders such as drug,
vaccine and medical equipment manufactures in order to address supply chain challenges that occurred during
the pandemic.

4 Hygiea components and technologies

In this section, we will introduce all the terms necessary and components to understand all the operations and
interactions in the Hygiea protocol.

4.1 Blockchain

Blockchain has been famously introduced through the Bitcoin cryptocurrency [18] in 2009. Blockchain is a
distributed ledger technology (DLT) that runs on multiple nodes in a peer-to-peer (P2P) network and is used to
record and secure transactions. Changes on the state of the distributed ledger are achieved through a consensus
protocol which ensures that all participating nodes in the network agree on what the new state is. There exist
several consensus protocols depending on the application and each of them has pros and cons but the idea
behind is the same (a mechanism to help non-trusted nodes come into consensus). In the case of Bitcoin the
consensus protocol used is called Proof-of-Work (PoW). In this protocol, the participating nodes in the network
are required to solve a hard cryptographic problem that requires computational resources(a.k.a mining). The
miner who manages to solve the problem is the one that will update the state (or create a new block) of the
blockchain and get rewarded. Apart from PoW several other consensus protocols, namely Proof-of-Stake (PoS)
and Proof-of-Authority (PoA) are being used to address the increased costs and scalability limitations of PoW.
In a PoS setup, stakeholders vote with their stakes meaning that every account has a certain chance per second
of generating a valid block and this chance is proportional to the account’s balance. In PoA, which is a less
decentralised architecture, only certain validators can create new blocks. Validators can be selected according
to the system’s governance rules. A resulting property of blockchain is that all transactions on the ledger are
tamper-proof and easily veriﬁable making it ideal for storing information requiring resistance to tampering.

Certain blockchains, such as Ethereum and the Hyperledger family, can be deployed in a private or permis-
sioned setup. Permissioned blockchains, as opposed to public, allow only a number of trusted network nodes to
exist in the network and are usually deployed in business applications where consensus can be achieved based on
authority(using validator nodes). Since trust is an implied property in such a setup, consensus can be achieved
using a more scalable and eﬃcient protocol such as PoA. Another reason for deploying private blockchain is
the requirement of data conﬁdentiality in the network as well as reduced costs and increased performance. In
a private setup, miners can be authorised nodes that are responsible for validating transactions and changing
the state of the distributed ledger.

In this work we will only consider the Ethereum blockchain deployed in a permissioned setup and using
the Proof-Of-Authority consensus protocol. The reasons behind the choice are the combination of trusted and
non-trusted stakeholders in the system, the reduced cost and the performance requirements of the application.
The use of a public blockchain would involve signiﬁcant costs for the deployment and operation of the smart

contracts as well as performance bottlenecks resulting from the slow mining process.

4.2 Smart Contracts

Smart contracts in the context of the blockchain technology simply refers to computer code that runs on the
blockchain and can be used to build custom decentralised applications (DApps). A rough analogy of smart
contracts in the context of relational databases are stored procedures where operations can be applied on the
data stored.

Smart contracts allow us to run programs that can perform actions by following rules when certain events
are triggered. Ethereum [19] was the ﬁrst blockchain to utilise smart contracts that allowed people to build
applications by providing a dedicated programming language called Solidity[20].

There are two parts in a smart contract. The ﬁrst one is its state which is all the data that is stored and the
second are the functions that can be used to change the state. A powerful feature of smart contracts is that all
state changes are recorded on the blockchain, making it transparent and auditable. In addition, all transactions
are cryptographically signed and secured using digital signatures.

A smart contract, once deployed, gets assigned with an address which can be used as a reference for interac-
tion. Interaction with a smart contract can be either updating or reading the state. Updating refers to calling
a function which changes the values of member variables of the code and reading refers to viewing the values of

3

Figure 1: Digital Signatures

the member variables. Both actions can be achieved through the Application Binary Interface (ABI) which is
one of the artifacts generated when compiling the source code of a smart contract.

For transactions that update the state of the smart contract, there is an associated cost which reﬂects the
eﬀort required to run a certain piece of code as well as the amount of memory required for storage. In the
case of permissioned blockchains, this can be omitted since the cost of operation can be distributed over the
members of the consortium.

A smart contract can be used in numerous applications such as the exchange digital assets (cryptocur-
rencies, non-fungible tokens), Decentralized Finance (DeFi), online service subscriptions, electronic voting,
healthcare[21] and many others.
In a decentralized system in which there is no trust, smart contracts are
deployed to provide transparency in terms of its governance and functionality.

4.3 Digital Signatures

A digital signature is an asymmetric cryptographic scheme that allows the veriﬁcation of authenticity of a
digital piece of data or document. Suppose we have Alice who has a document and wishes to generate a piece of
information that can be used to prove that Alice herself approves of the document, similarly to the signatures
placed in ordinary paper. Anyone in possession of the document and the associated digital signature can verify
that indeed Alice was the one who generated the signature on that particular document.

Figure 1 depicts how a digital signature scheme works. A typical digital signature scheme involves the use
of a cryptographic keypair consisting of the secret key sk, that must be kept private to the owner, and a public
key pk, which can be publicly available, a message m, a signature algorithm Sign and a verifying algorithm Vf.
The owner of the secret key sk can perform a signing operation Signsk(m) with inputs the secret key sk and
the message m and output a signature s. Veriﬁers can then use the verifying algorithm Vf with inputs the
signature s, the message m and the public key pk such that Vfpk(s, m) and obtain the output which can be 0
or 1.

The Ethereum blockchain uses the Elliptic Curve Digital Signature Algorithm (ECDSA) with secp256k1[22]
parameters. ECDSA is a direct analogue of the Digital Signature Algorithm (DSA)[23] and its security relies
on the hardness of the elliptic curve discrete logarithm problem. ECDSA is a very eﬃcient digital signature
scheme that is in widespread use especially in situations where the signature size is important.

4.4

Identiﬁcation schemes

An identiﬁcation scheme is an interactive protocol that allows a party (the prover) to prove its identity to
another (the veriﬁer). The class of identiﬁcation schemes that are of interest are the public-key based ones
where the prover is not required to share any private information in order to prove their identity to the veriﬁer.
The execution of such a scheme requires that the two parties interact in order to exchange messages. An example
three-round identiﬁcation scheme is depicted in ﬁgure 2 and the ﬁve round in Figure 3. In the ﬁrst step of the
protocol, the prover uses an algorithm P1 and the secret key to obtain an initial message I, which is sent to the
veriﬁer, along with some state st. The veriﬁer generates a challenge r from some set and sends it to the prover.

4

Figure 2: Three round identiﬁcation protocol

Figure 3: Schnorr’s three-round identiﬁcation scheme

The prover runs function P2 with inputs being the secret key, the state and the challenge. The output s is sent
to the veriﬁer who runs function V and checks if it matches the initial message I.

Schnorr’s[24] identiﬁcation scheme is a three-round scheme based on the hardness of the discrete logarithm
problem similarly to ECDSA. In Hygiea, Schnorr’s identiﬁcation scheme is used for the authentication during
issuance and veriﬁcation of certiﬁcates. Figure 3 depicts the execution of the protocol.

5 Stakeholders

In this section we will explain in detail each stakeholder in the system as well as the roles associated.

5.1 Governing Body

The Governing Body is the stakeholder responsible for the governance of the system. In practice, the Governing
Body can be represented by the Ministry of Heath (MoH) or the National Health System (NHS). The existence
of a trusted entity simpliﬁes governance and gives additional assurance to the security of the system.

We identiﬁed the following responsibilities of the Governing Body within the system:

• Set up the blockchain consortium: The Governing Body acts as a trusted entity within the sys-
tem. The governance of the consortium is speciﬁed in the form of smart contracts and deployed on the
blockchain. Participating entities such as Certiﬁcate Issuers and Veriﬁers must comply with the governance
rules in order to have valid status in the system.

• Run a validator node: The Governing Body is in control of a validator node within the system. As
the name implies, the validator node has the authority to validate transactions on the blockchain. The
transactions will be submitted by other transaction nodes participating in the network according to the
governance rules of the network.

• Register Certiﬁcate Issuers: Certiﬁcate Issuers (see section 5.2) are entities that are identiﬁed by a
unique public address. The Governing Body can add Certiﬁcate Issuers in a registry that is encoded in a
smart contract and must be publicly accessible by all participants in the system including the Certiﬁcate
Holders. The registration of a Certiﬁcate Issuer consists of both an on-chain and oﬀ-chain process whereby
it must be ensured by the Governing Body that the particular Certiﬁcate Issuer is eligible for participation
in the system. Apart from the registration process the Governing Body also designates which types of
certiﬁcates a given Certiﬁcate Issuer is allowed to issue (speciﬁed by the governance rules).

• Register Veriﬁers: Veriﬁers (see section 5.3) are also required to be onboarded to the system. The
registration process is identical to the Certiﬁcate Issuer and there exists a public registry on which all

5

approved Veriﬁers are listed. Similarly to Certiﬁcate Issuers, Veriﬁers are identiﬁed by a unique public
address.

• Change access rights to Certiﬁcate Issuers and Veriﬁers: The Governing Body has the right to
revoke or change access rights to any misbehaving Certiﬁcate Issuer or Veriﬁer. A revocation of rights
simply means that a Certiﬁcate Issuer will not be able to issue certiﬁcates or a Veriﬁer will not be able
to verify any certiﬁcates. In the case of revocation of a given entity, the Governing Body updates the
corresponding registry by removing the public address from the list. Any change to the state is transparent
as it is an inherent property of the blockchain.

• Revoke certiﬁcates: The Governing Body will have the functionality to revoke certiﬁcates belonging
to certiﬁcate holders. This means that the holders who claim revoked certiﬁcates will not be able to pass
the veriﬁcation process. Certiﬁcate revocation can be triggered in the case where there was an accidental
issuance or due to a faulty batch of test equipment.

5.2 Certiﬁcate Issuers

Certiﬁcate Issuers in Hygiea are entities that are authenticated and authorised by the Governing Body to issue
certiﬁcates to holders. Certiﬁcate Issuers can be Hospitals, Clinics, Test Labs, GPs or any other eligible entity.
Each Certiﬁcate Issuer will be given access to a DApp from which they will be able to issue certiﬁcates. A
Certiﬁcate Issuer must generate their own cryptographic key pair which must be stored in a dedicated wallet
and will be used for signing and veriﬁcation of issued certiﬁcates. A Certiﬁcate Issuer can issue certiﬁcates to
holders if and only if its public address has been registered by the Governing Body (its identity exists on the
public registry on the blockchain). In summary, Certiﬁcate Issuers:

• Authenticate Certiﬁcate Holders: A Certiﬁcate Holder (see section 5.4) visiting a Certiﬁcate Issuer
in person needs to be authenticated both physically and digitally. Authentication is required to prevent
malicious Certiﬁcate Holders from being issued certiﬁcates that are not entitled (impersonation attacks).

• Issue certiﬁcates: Certiﬁcate Issuers can issue certiﬁcates to Certiﬁcate Holders. Certiﬁcates are issued
in the form of smart contracts and submitted as transactions to the blockchain through designated trans-
actions nodes. The validator node, belonging to the Governing Body, is responsible for validating the
transaction and update the state of the blockchain. Each certiﬁcate contains, apart from the necessary
data ﬁelds, a digital signature of the issuer. Note that Certiﬁcate Issuers whose access has been revoked
will not be able to issue certiﬁcates.

• Data collection: Certain Certiﬁcate Issuers can be healthcare providers who can perform medical ex-
aminations. In this case, given a person’s consent, anonymous data can be collected for further analysis.
The anonymised data will be stored in a special repository in which authorised entities will be granted
access. The data collection process will be done through the same application used for issuing certiﬁcates.

5.3 Veriﬁers

Veriﬁer can be any oﬃcial or unoﬃcial entity participating in the system and has been approved by the Governing
Body. Veriﬁers need to be registered by the Governing Body in a similar fashion to Certiﬁcate Issuers and are
identiﬁed by a public address. Veriﬁers will have to generate their own cryptographic keys and store them into
a dedicated wallet. In Hygiea, two classes of Veriﬁers are supported. The ﬁrst class is the one that is allowed
to change the state of the blockchain and the second is the one that can only read the blockchain. The main
functionalities of Veriﬁers are:

• Verify certiﬁcates: Certiﬁcates claimed by Certiﬁcate Holders to Veriﬁers in a form of a smart contract
that exists on the blockchain. Veriﬁers are required to ensure the authenticity of the certiﬁcate by using
standard cryptographic techniques such as hash functions and digital signatures. Each certiﬁcate contains
certain data, depending on the type, that are digitally signed by the issuer who is a trusted entity in the
system. Veriﬁers need to ensure that the particular certiﬁcate has not been revoked, the issuer’s public
identity exists in the registry of the Governing Body and ﬁnally that digital signature is veriﬁed.

• Update the blockchain: Certain Veriﬁers are required to log when a particular certiﬁcate has been
veriﬁed. Whenever a user claims a certiﬁcate, the Veriﬁer must update the blockchain with the a timestamp
of the veriﬁcation. An analogy is the process where a citizen enters another country and a stamp is issued
on the passport.

• Authenticate Certiﬁcate Holders: Veriﬁers must authenticate both the physical and digital identities
to minimise the possibility of a forgery. Authentication processes will be presented in later sections.

6

5.4 Certiﬁcate Holders

Certiﬁcate Holders in Hygiea are deﬁned as all physical entities with an associated digital identity that are
entitled to be issued a certiﬁcate. Holders can participate in the system by using a mobile application that can
be used to store their cryptographic keys and the addresses of their certiﬁcates. Each Certiﬁcate Holders will be
responsible for the generation and storage of their keys and no other stakeholder will have any access to them.

Certiﬁcate Holders will:

• Generate and store keys: Holders are responsible for creating and storing their own cryptographic
keys. The keys associate themselves with their digital identity and this is required for authentication by
both Certiﬁcate Issuers and Veriﬁers. The keys and the references to the certiﬁcates on the blockchain
are held in a dedicated mobile application.

• Authenticate Certiﬁcate Issuers and Veriﬁers: Approved Certiﬁcate Issuers and Veriﬁers exist in
a smart contract published on the blockchain by the Governing Body. Certiﬁcate Holders are required
to authenticate Certiﬁcate Issuers and Veriﬁers in order to ensure that they follow the Governing Body
guidelines and that their access has not been revoked before to issuance or veriﬁcation of a certiﬁcate.

• Proving their identity: Certiﬁcate Holders are required to present their certiﬁcates to the Veriﬁers. In
addition, they are required to prove their identity in order to convince the Veriﬁers that the certiﬁcate
presented belongs to them. This is achieved through standard cryptographic operations such as hash
functions and digital signatures.

6 Hygiea

6.1 Blockchain Network

Hygiea uses a private Ethereum blockchain running the PoA consensus protocol. PoA is a consensus algorithm
that is practical, eﬃcient, scalable and it is best suitable for private blockchain. In a PoA setup, a validator
which is considered as trustworthy is chosen based on its identity and reputation as opposed to a Proof-of-
stake(PoS) where validators are staking their coins. The number of validators is limited and must be veriﬁed
by all participants of the system. The rest of participants run a transaction node which simply can submit
transactions that are validated by the validator node. The formation of the consortium can be rearranged to
accommodate diﬀerent requirements for validator and transaction nodes. For example, consider a scenario in
which there is more than one validator or the validator is determined by vote majority from the participants.
Figure 4 depicts the network architecture.

In Hygiea, the validator node is run by the Governing Body and is responsible for validating transactions
and appending them to the blockchain. The Governing Body is a trustworthy entity within the system and is
publicly veriﬁed.

Transaction nodes, run by Certiﬁcate Issuers and Veriﬁers, are nodes that are used to submit transactions

which are validated by the validator of the consortium.

In private PoA network such as the one we are considering for this application, the concept of gas does not
apply. Transaction nodes can submit their transactions without having to worry about processing and memory
as the network is run privately on powerful cloud infrastructure.

Another inherent property of the private network is privacy. All the data existing on the private blockchain
are not exposed to the public since access control is enforced through the design. This makes the private
blockchain more attractive to the applications where private or medical data might be stored.

6.2 Smart Contracts

6.2.1 Governance

Governance is one of the most important aspects of Hygiea as it formalises and secures all the processes for
the registration of the stakeholders, issuance and veriﬁcation of the certiﬁcates. All the governance rules are
encoded in a smart contract that is owned and deployed by the Governing Body.

The primary purpose of the governance smart contract provides a mechanism for the Governing Body to
register Certiﬁcate Issuers and specify their rights within the system. Each Certiﬁcate Issuer generates its own
Ethereum keys that make them identiﬁable and unique within the system. The registration process simply
means that the Governing Body, adds the public key of a given Certiﬁcate Issuer to a list within the smart
contract and associates the respective attributes:

• Country: The country in which the issuer is based in.

7

Figure 4: PoA Blockchain Network

• Name: Name of the issuer in a human readable form.

• Id: The identiﬁer of the issuer.

• Allowed certiﬁcate types: Types of certiﬁcates (Vaccine, Recovery, Test) the issuer is allowed to issue.

The types are set by the Governing Body.

• Valid from: The timestamp from which the issuer is allowed to start issuing certiﬁcates.

• Status: The status(Active, Inactive) of the issuer dictates whether it is able to issue certiﬁcates. The

status can be set and changed by the Governing Body.

• Public key: The public key of the issuer is its identity on the blockchain. All certiﬁcates issued by a

given issuer will include this public key.

• Signature: All the above ﬁelds are concatenated and signed with the private key of the Governing Body.
The signature can be publicly veriﬁed to ensure that only the Governing Body performed the registration.

The list as well as the attributes can only be modiﬁed by the Governing Body. This is ensured through the
blockchain as the respective functions allowing the modiﬁcation of the data structures can only be executed
through transactions signed by the private key of the Governing Body. Another important feature of the data
structure holding the attributes of Certiﬁcate Issuers is the signature. All the data ﬁelds related to a given
Certiﬁcate Issuer are cryptographically signed by the Governing Body thus providing an extra attestation.

A similar approach is followed for the Veriﬁers. A certiﬁcate veriﬁer as discussed in section 5.3 needs to be
approved by the Governing Body. Although a Veriﬁer is not entitled to issue certiﬁcates, it can also submit
transactions that log when and where a particular certiﬁcate has been veriﬁed.

The second purpose of the governance smart contract is to become a trustful registry for certiﬁcate holders

and veriﬁers. The address of the governance smart contract must be publicly visible for:

• Certiﬁcate holders: A certiﬁcate holder visiting a test lab, hospital or clinic has to be ensured that the
issuer is indeed veriﬁed by the Governing Body and has a valid status. The governance smart contract
originating from a trustworthy organisation can provide the required trust to the holder. Same applies
for Veriﬁers. A Certiﬁcate Holder needs to also trust whoever is claiming to be authorised to verify the
certiﬁcate presented.

• Veriﬁers: A veriﬁer must know if the issuer of a certiﬁcate belongs to the list of approved and active

issuers in order to verify a certiﬁcate.

8

6.2.2 Certiﬁcate Factory

The certiﬁcate factory smart contract is owned by the Governing Body and is designed to provide templates
to the various certiﬁcate types supported within Hygiea. The rationale behind this smart contract follows the
factory design pattern[25] from software engineering principles.

The data ﬁelds as well as the functions that must be present in a certiﬁcate are templated and Certiﬁcate
Issuers eligible to issue certiﬁcates to holders, use the certiﬁcate factory smart contract to issue certiﬁcates. In
addition, the smart contract implements controls to prevent Certiﬁcate Issuers with invalid status from issuing
certiﬁcates as well as other checks for input sanitisation.

The addresses of all certiﬁcates issued are recorded into data structures for the Governing Body to derive
analytics as to how many certiﬁcates have been issued and what is their address on the blockchain. Certiﬁcate
holders use the certiﬁcate factory smart contract to look up for their certiﬁcates and add them to their wallet.
The beneﬁt of the certiﬁcate factory smart contract is that it serves as a tool for both certiﬁcate issuers,
holders and veriﬁers as it contains all the necessary information. The integrity of the information is ensured
through the blockchain and it is ensured that at any given moment all stakeholders have a common and identical
state of the data.

6.2.3 Certiﬁcate

Each holder within Hygiea will be issued multiple certiﬁcates which he can store on his wallet. A certiﬁcate
in the context of Hygiea is a smart contract that has been designed to include the necessary information and
functionality in order to prove possession and verify the authenticity of the data.

The purpose of the certiﬁcate smart contract is to encode the business logic of the certiﬁcates supported.
Typically, what matters in a certiﬁcate is its status (whether valid or not) and depending on the Governing
Body’s speciﬁcation it can be set accordingly. For this use case the validity of a certiﬁcate smart contract
depends on:

• Expiration date: If the expiration date of certiﬁcate has passed then the state of the smart contract
becomes invalid. The exact data is set during the creation of the certiﬁcate and cannot be altered in the
future.

• Revocation: The Governing Body has the authority to change the status of a certiﬁcate to be revoked.
This means that only a transaction signed with the Governing Body’s private key can alter the state. In
such a case then the status of the certiﬁcate is invalid.

• Invalid signature: If the signature included in the certiﬁcate smart contract does not belong to any of

the approved Certiﬁcate Issuers then it cannot be accepted by a Veriﬁer.

Certiﬁcate smart contracts hold the following data ﬁelds:

• Personal identiﬁer: According to the identity binding mechanism used, this ﬁeld will hold all the

information relevant to authenticate the physical identity of a user.

• Certiﬁcate type: This can be any of Vaccine, Test or Recovery.

• Issuance date: The timestamp which the certiﬁcate was issued.

• Valid from date: The vaccination certiﬁcate becomes valid three weeks from the day it is issued. This
ﬁeld speciﬁes the timestamp from which the certiﬁcate becomes valid. If the holder attempts to verify the
certiﬁcate before that date it will get rejected.

• Certiﬁcate Issuer address: The public key of the issuer who issued the certiﬁcate.

• Governance smart contract address: The address of the governance smart contract. This will be

used in case of revocation where only the Governing Body will be allowed to perform this action.

• Status: This is a ﬂag to specify whether a certiﬁcate has been revoked.

• Signature: All the above ﬁelds except from the status are concatenated and signed using the private key

of the issuer.

Hygiea supports 3 types of certiﬁcates:

1. Vaccination: Issued to citizens who received at least one dose of a Covid-19 vaccine.

2. Recovery: Issued to citizens who recovered from Covid-19.

3. Test: Issued to citizens who tested positive or negative to Covid-19.

9

Figure 5: Registration process

6.3 Certiﬁcate Issuer Registration

The Certiﬁcate Issuer registration is a process in which Certiﬁcate Issuers are registered and instantiated into
the system as depicted in ﬁgure 5. It assumed that the Governing Body has deployed the governance smart
contract as described in 6.2.1.

The governance contract, retains a mapping data structure that, for each Certiﬁcate Issuer public key,
maps the corresponding attributes and can only be altered by the Governing Body who is responsible for the
governance of the system and owner of the contract. The mapping is considered as a trustworthy source of
information regarding which issuers are approved by the Governing Body. If a Certiﬁcate Issuer misbehaves or
gets compromised, the Governing Body can remove the list or revoke access to the Certiﬁcate Issuer in question,
making it unable to submit any new transactions.

Before the registration, it is assumed that the Governing Body has deployed and owns the governance smart
contract. Let (pki, ski) be the key pair of each Certiﬁcate Issuer. Also let, (Li · · · Ln) the set of attributes which
correspond to each Certiﬁcate Issuer.

Algorithm 1 Certiﬁcate Issuer registration

Governing Body

Set P

Certiﬁcate Issuer
(pki, ski), (Li · · · Ln)

pki, (Li · · · Ln)

Schnorr protocol

If pki is veriﬁed
S = Signskgb
P ∪ (pki, Li · · · Ln, S)

(pki, Li · · · Ln)

The Certiﬁcate Issuer sends their public key pk along with the set of corresponding attributes (Li · · · n). The
Governing Body and the Certiﬁcate Issuer run Schnorr’s identiﬁcation scheme[24]. Upon the successful run of
the protocol, the Governing Body is convinced that the Certiﬁcate Issuer holds the secret key that was used
to generate the public key. The Governing Body then updates the governance smart contract with the address
and attributes received.

10

Figure 6: Certiﬁcate issuance

6.4 Veriﬁer Registration

Veriﬁers shall be registered into Hygiea by following the same approach as described in section 6.3. The
practical diﬀerence between a Veriﬁer and a Certiﬁcate Issuer is that Veriﬁers do not issue certiﬁcates thus it is
not necessary to specify the certiﬁcate types data ﬁeld.

6.5 Certiﬁcate Issuance

Certiﬁcate issuance involves the most interactions compared to the rest of the processes in Hygiea. The
stakeholders participating are the Certiﬁcate Holder, the Certiﬁcate Issuer and the Governing Body. The ﬂow
of the process is depicted in Figure 6. It is assumed that the Governing Body has deployed the smart contracts
on the blockchain and has registered at least one Certiﬁcate Issuer.
In addition, the Certiﬁcate Issuer has
downloaded the mobile application on his mobile device and has generated his cryptographic keys. The process
described here is an indicative example in order to demonstrate the functionalities of Hygiea.

The Certiﬁcate Holder visits a Certiﬁcate Issuer in order to undertake an examination or get vaccinated.
The Certiﬁcate Issuer is required to authenticate the Certiﬁcate Holder in a hybrid manner. He ﬁrst veriﬁes
the identity of the holder by requesting an identiﬁcation document(national id, passport, driving license etc.)
in order to minimise the possibility of impersonation and bind the physical identity with the certiﬁcate. The
second phase of authentication is to run Schnorr’s identiﬁcation scheme, similarly to section 6.3. The purpose
of this step is to verify the public key of the Certiﬁcate Holder. At this point, the Certiﬁcate Issuer should be
convinced that the Certiﬁcate Issuer is who he claims to be.

The holder then proceeds for the medical examination and asks to provide his consent on sharing anonymous

metadata with oﬃcial authorities for further analysis.

As soon as the Certiﬁcate Issuer has all the data required including the test result/vaccination, he then
proceeds with the issuance of the corresponding certiﬁcate. The certiﬁcate, as discussed in 6.2.3, is essentially
a smart contract that holds the relevant data. The Certiﬁcate Issuer, using the certiﬁcate factory, submits a
transaction to the blockchain and deploys the certiﬁcate contract.

Once the transaction containing the certiﬁcate is submitted to the blockchain, the Governing Body validates
the transaction and updates the state. The address of the certiﬁcate is sent to the Certiﬁcate Holder in order
to store it on his mobile wallet. The certiﬁcate can then be used for veriﬁcation.

Algorithm 2 shows the process of certiﬁcate issuance. Let (Ai, · · · , An) be all the attributes that correspond
to the certiﬁcate, (skI , pkI ) be the keypair of the Certiﬁcate Issuer, and (skH , pkH ) the keypair of the Certiﬁcate
Holder. Let BH be the identity binding data of the holder.

11

Algorithm 2 Certiﬁcate Issuance

Certiﬁcate Issuer
(skI , pkI ) ←$ KGen1λ

Certiﬁcate Holder
(skH , pkH ) ←$ KGen1λ
BH ← Identity binding data

pkH

Schnorr protocol

BH

C

Store C

(pkH , Ai · · · An, BH )

O = SignskI
C = address(pkH , O)

6.5.1

Identity binding

At the certiﬁcate issuance step it is essential to have some sort of mechanism to prevent impersonation attacks.
We must ensure malicious users are not issued certiﬁcates and malicious users should not be allowed to claim
Identity binding is the mechanism which binds someone’s civil identity
a stolen certiﬁcate and be veriﬁed.
(national id, passport, driving license) with the digital identity (public key). One of the main objectives of
Hygiea is to preserve the privacy of users and on the same time be resistant to impersonation attacks. In
this section we consider a non-exhaustive list of identity binding mechanisms that achieve the various tradeoﬀs
between privacy and security.

The ﬁrst mechanism we consider is partial personal information binding. This binding mechanism requires
that only partial information is included in the certiﬁcate smart contract. The exact amount of information
depends on the accepted tolerance on collisions that could occur. For example, partial information could be
considered as the initials of someone’s name, last 4 digits of the national identiﬁcation document and the full
date of birth.

The second mechanism is more aggressive where full personal information is included in the certiﬁcate smart
contract. This option minimises the risk of impersonation but sacriﬁces privacy. Essentially, if a certiﬁcate
smart contract holds all personal information then the risk of impersonation is the same as the risk of forging
a national identiﬁcation document. This mechanism has been selected by the European Union’s DGC.

A third mechanism requires the use of a hash function such as SHA-3[26]. All personal information of the
user(i.e. name, surname, date of birth etc.) can be the input to the hash function and the output will be a ﬁxed
length digest. The digest can be embedded to the certiﬁcate smart contract and signed along with the rest of
information. For a malicious actor with access to any smart contract there will be no practical way to recover
any personal information from the digest or forge it to impersonate the legitimate user.

6.6 Certiﬁcate Veriﬁcation

Certiﬁcate veriﬁcation is the process whereby a holder presents certiﬁcates to a veriﬁer and the veriﬁer must
authenticate the holder and the certiﬁcate. Figure 7 depicts the process.

To better understand the process consider the following scenario. A citizen who has been issued a certiﬁcate
visits a hospital or an airport and is required to present a valid vaccination certiﬁcate. The citizen using
the dedicated mobile application presents the certiﬁcate to the veriﬁer. The veriﬁer scans the address of the
certiﬁcate on the blockchain and checks whether the claimed certiﬁcate is valid or not. A veriﬁcation process
involves the following steps:

• Check if the public key on the smart contract pk(cid:48)
H

matches the public key pkH

sent by the holder.

• Check all the relevant attributes of the certiﬁcate (see section 6.2.3).

• Obtain the public key pkI

of the Certiﬁcate Issuer who signed the certiﬁcate.

12

Figure 7: Certiﬁcate Veriﬁcation

• Verify the signature using the public key of the issuer.

• Verify that the certiﬁcate is bound to the holder by checking the identiﬁer ﬁeld.

If the above are successful, then the veriﬁer has validated the certiﬁcate and ensured that it belongs to the
identity that it has been issued to. Algorithm 3 shows the interactions between the veriﬁer and the certiﬁcate
holder. Let CH be the address of the certiﬁcate on the blockchain and BH the binding information of the holder.
Let Ai · · · An be the certiﬁcate attributes retrieved from the smart contract.

Algorithm 3 Certiﬁcate Veriﬁcation

Veriﬁer
(skV , pkV ) ←$ KGen1λ

Certiﬁcate Holder
(skH , pkH ) ←$ KGen1λ
BH ← Identity binding data
CH ← Certiﬁcate

BH , CH , pkH

Schnorr protocol

Check if pkH ∈ CH

Vf pkI (pkH , Ai · · · An, BH ) ?= 1

Hygiea supports two modes of veriﬁcation. The online veriﬁcation mode requires that the veriﬁer has a
real-time view of the blockchain which implies that there is network connectivity. In this mode, the veriﬁer
apart from verifying the signature of the certiﬁcate against the data, he can also check whether the Governing
Body has revoked the certiﬁcate. The oﬄine veriﬁcation mode does not real-time access to the blockchain to
perform a veriﬁcation, however, if a certiﬁcate has been revoked there will be no way to know. To overcome
this limitation in places where network connectivity is not an option, the veriﬁer can keep a relatively recent
list of revoked certiﬁcates that is updated when possible.

7 Analytics

Hygiea’s second objective is to assist healthcare professionals into better understanding virus spread as well
as decision makers towards improved decisions based on accurate data. This can be achieved through analytics
derived from data collection and processing during the medical examination or vaccination process.

13

Figure 8: Analytics ﬂow

For healthcare professionals, such analytics can assist into better understanding the behaviour of the virus,
the potential mutations and ultimately improve the eﬃciency of vaccines and medicine. The ability to predict
potential areas of infection can be used for better preparation of healthcare service providers. Analytics can
also be derived after vaccination campaigns in order to assess the eﬀectiveness of the campaign and potentially
improve the process.

For decision makers in governments or regulatory bodies, real-time analytics can greatly inﬂuence the quality
of the decisions taken to contain the virus. It may also serve to enforce more eﬀective lockdowns and measure
the impact with better accuracy. In addition, analytics can improve the allocation of both human resources and
medical equipment in order to prevent over-crowded hospitals. Figure 8 depicts the ﬂow of information from
the healthcare providers to the analytics engine.

7.1 Data collection

The design of Hygiea covers the data collection aspect during the certiﬁcate issuance process where the citizen
may opt in for anonymous data collection. Certiﬁcate issuers who perform examinations or vaccinations will
be given access to a web application that will collect data in a structured way in order to produce real-time
analytics. The process is straight-forward. During an examination or vaccination, the certiﬁcate issuer will ask
for the consent of the citizen to provide anonymised data. Upon conﬁrmation of the citizen’s identity, the issuer
will ﬁll in a certain form and will submit the data into a dedicated database.

Below we list the Covid-19 related data ﬁelds that have been identiﬁed by the Cyprus Institute of Neurology

& Genetics[27] who served as a subject matter expert in this work:

• Fever or chills

• Cough

• Shortness of breath or diﬃculty breathing

• Fatigue

• Muscle or body aches

• Headache

• Loss of smell

• Loss of taste

• Sore throat

• Congestion or runny nose

• Nausea or vomiting

14

Figure 9: Covid-19 cases forecast

• Diarrhea

• Age

• Geolocation

• Travel history

• Past infections

7.2 Analytics engine

Hygiea supports general analytics related to the pandemic spread, vaccinations and tests. Some examples of
the supported analytics are the total number of cases, distribution of cases across regions or the performance
of vaccination and testing initiatives.
In a such a system where there is a signiﬁcant ﬂow of information it
is required that an automatic inference mechanism is in place. This mechanism constantly analyses the data
and detects suspicious patterns in space and time that might require closer attention. Examples include the
deviations in the rate of exposure between diﬀerent areas or across time. The extraction of such patterns is done
through the use of statistical methodologies and automated machine learning. Figure 10 depicts an example
virtualisation of how the system detects and plots diﬀerences in the total number of cases across diﬀerent areas.
Figure 9 depicts an example of a Covid-19 case forecast.

In addition to inferencing, Hygiea can be used by experts for automatic estimation and forecasting. It is
possible to derive parameters, such as the infection rate using the susceptible-infected-removed (SIR) or other
modiﬁcations of it such as [28]. More sophisticated forecasting algorithms based on Bayesian structural time
series [29] models can be used in order to forecast transmission trends.

Finally, Hygiea automatically plots the distribution of symptoms, and can give early insights which help

the authorities understand which symptoms are most prominent, in order to inform policy.

7.3 Data quality checks

One of the key challenges of ﬁghting pandemics has been the accurate collection and recording of data. Hygiea
implements automated data checks, which ensure that there are no signiﬁcant errors in the data. As more
data is collected, then the platform detects any outliers or unusual data points which need special attention.
When the platform runs analyses, it conducts these analyses both with and without the potentially problematic
data points, and it automatically compares and contrasts the results. This allows scenario analysis of multiple
conﬁdence levels. This is based on a blend of anomaly and outlier detection algorithms, which combines isolation
forests[30], one-class SVM[31], and local outlier factor[32].

15

Figure 10: Example virtualisation of how the system can automatically detect and plot diﬀerences in the total
number of cases across diﬀerent areas

7.4 Compliance with government policies

The key stakeholders (e.g. governments or hospitals) are able to add smart contracts that track the compliance
with key government policies. For example, in the UK, minorities were hit harder by COVID-19. The UK
Oﬃce for National Statistics recently released a comment [33] regarding that. Hygiea automatically detects
such instances and issues warnings on cases like diﬀerences in the number of people inﬂicted by the virus based
on their demographics. Furthermore, it detects diﬀerences between rates of vaccination or testing and gender
or ethnicity. Finally, it includes methodologies like the sequential probability ratio test to detect signiﬁcant
increases in the number of cases.

8 Conclusions

In this work we have designed and implemented a blockchain-based platform, namely Hygiea, that addresses
the Covid-19 certiﬁcate problem. Governments deploying Hygiea are ensured it is suﬃciently hard for citizens
to forge Covid-19 certiﬁcates and on the same time citizens are ensured on their privacy is preserved.

The system covers all the steps involved from the governance, issuance and veriﬁcation of Covid-19 related
certiﬁcates. The platform has well-speciﬁed roles for all stakeholders and utilises smart contracts to deﬁne its
business logic. The governance of the system is implemented via smart contracts and is coordinated by a trusted
entity in the system. Smart contracts and the blockchain oﬀer transparency, security and auditability. User
data and interactions are designed with privacy in mind and users are in full control over to whom they disclose
their data.

Hygiea’s secondary objective is to provide tools to experts and decision makers to better understand the
spread of the disease. In this work we have shown how our system can be used to collect anonymous data and
process them in order to generate valuable inferences and forecasts that will help experts to better understand
the disease and decision makers towards improved decisions related to the pandemic.

16

References

[1] COVID-19 Dashboard by the Center for Systems Science and Engineering (CSSE) at Johns Hopkins Uni-

versity (JHU). https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/map.html. Accessed: 2021-03-20.

[2] Harry Halpin. Vision: A critique of immunity passports and w3c decentralized identiﬁers. In Thyla van der
Merwe, Chris Mitchell, and Maryam Mehrnezhad, editors, Security Standardisation Research, pages 148–
168, Cham, 2020. Springer International Publishing.

[3] Teck Chuan Voo, Hannah Clapham, and Clarence C Tam. Ethical Implementation of Immunity Passports

During the COVID-19 Pandemic. The Journal of Infectious Diseases, 222(5):715–718, 06 2020.

[4] International monitor: vaccine passports and COVID status apps. https://www.adalovelaceinstitute.
org/project/international-monitor-vaccine-passports-covid-status-apps/. Accessed: 2021-04-
08.

[5] Coronavirus: Commission proposes a Digital Green Certiﬁcate. https://ec.europa.eu/commission/

presscorner/detail/en/ip_21_1181. Accessed: 2021-03-17.

[6] H. R. Hasan, K. Salah, R. Jayaraman, J. Arshad, I. Yaqoob, M. Omar, and S. Ellahham. Blockchain-based
solution for covid-19 digital medical passports and immunity certiﬁcates. IEEE Access, 8:222093–222108,
2020.

[7] Marc Eisenstadt, Manoharan Ramachandran, Niaz Chowdhury, Allan Third, and John Domingue. Covid-
19 antibody test/vaccination certiﬁcation: There’s an app for that. IEEE Open Journal of Engineering in
Medicine and Biology, 1:148–155, 2020.

[8] Veriﬁable Credentials W3C. https://www.w3.org/TR/vc-data-model/. Accessed: 2021-03-31.

[9] Solid Project. https://solidproject.org/. Accessed: 2021-03-31.

[10] Untung Rahardja, Ankur Singh Bist, Marviola Hardini, Qurotul Aini, and Eka Purnama Harahap. Au-
thentication of covid-19 patient certiﬁcation with blockchain protocol. International Journal of Advanced
Science and Technology, 29(8s):4015 – 4024, Apr. 2020.

[11] Chris Hicks, David Butler, Carsten Maple, and Jon Crowcroft. Secureabc: Secure antibody certiﬁcates for

covid-19, 2020.

[12] Mehmet Aydar, Serkan Ayvaz, and Salih Cemil Cetin. Towards a blockchain based digital identity veriﬁ-

cation, record attestation and record sharing system, 2020.

[13] Raja Wasim Ahmad, Khaled Salah, Raja Jayaraman, Ibrar Yaqoob, Samer Ellahham, and Mohammed

Omar. Blockchain and COVID-19 Pandemic: Applications and Challenges. 9 2020.

[14] José Luis Hernández-Ramos, Georgios Karopoulos, Dimitris Geneiatakis, Tania Martin, Georgios Kam-
bourakis, and Igor Nai Fovino. Sharing pandemic vaccination certiﬁcates through blockchain: Case study
and performance evaluation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.04575, 2021.

[15] Hyperledger. https://www.hyperledger.org//. Accessed: 2021-03-31.

[16] Sarang Chaudhari, Michael Clear, and Hitesh Tewari. Framework for a dlt based covid-19 passport, 2021.

[17] EUROPOL WARNING ON THE

ILLICIT SALE OF

TEST

19
europol-warning-illicit-sale-of-false-negative-covid-19-test-certificates.
2021-04-12.

CERTIFICATES.

FALSE NEGATIVE COVID-
https://www.europol.europa.eu/newsroom/news/
Accessed:

[18] Satoshi Nakamoto. Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system. Cryptography Mailing list at

https://metzdowd.com, 03 2009.

[19] Gavin Wood et al. Ethereum: A secure decentralised generalised transaction ledger. Ethereum project

yellow paper, 151(2014):1–32, 2014.

[20] Solidity. https://docs.soliditylang.org/. Accessed: 2021-03-20.

[21] Anton Hasselgren, Katina Kralevska, Danilo Gligoroski, Sindre A. Pedersen, and Arild Faxvaag. Blockchain
International Journal of Medical Informatics,

in healthcare and health sciences—a scoping review.
134:104040, 2020.

17

[22] ECDSA secp256k1 parameters. http://www.secg.org/sec2-v2.pdf. Accessed: 2021-05-18.

[23] Digital Signature Standard. https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/FIPS/NIST.FIPS.186-4.pdf. Ac-

cessed: 2021-05-21.

[24] C. P. Schnorr. Eﬃcient identiﬁcation and signatures for smart cards. In Gilles Brassard, editor, Advances
in Cryptology — CRYPTO’ 89 Proceedings, pages 239–252, New York, NY, 1990. Springer New York.

[25] Erich Gamma, Richard Helm, Ralph Johnson, and John Vlissides. Design Patterns: Elements of Reusable

Object-Oriented Software. Addison-Wesley Longman Publishing Co., Inc., USA, 1995.

[26] Keccak implementation overview. https://keccak.team/files/Keccak-implementation-3.2.pdf. Ac-

cessed: 2021-05-20.

[27] Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics. https://www.cing.ac.cy/. Accessed: 2021-05-28.

[28] Herbert W Hethcote. The mathematics of infectious diseases. SIAM review, 42(4):599–653, 2000.

[29] Kay H. Brodersen, Fabian Gallusser, Jim Koehler, Nicolas Remy, and Steven L. Scott. Inferring causal
impact using bayesian structural time-series models. Annals of Applied Statistics, 9:247–274, 2015.

[30] Fei Tony Liu, Kai Ming Ting, and Zhi-Hua Zhou. Isolation forest. In 2008 Eighth IEEE International

Conference on Data Mining, pages 413–422, 2008.

[31] K. Li, Houkuan Huang, S. Tian, and W. Xu. Improving one-class svm for anomaly detection. Proceedings
of the 2003 International Conference on Machine Learning and Cybernetics (IEEE Cat. No.03EX693),
5:3077–3081 Vol.5, 2003.

[32] Hans Peter Kriegel, Peer Kröger, Erich Schubert, and Arthur Zimek. Loop: Local outlier probabilities.
In Proceedings of the 18th ACM conference on Information and knowledge management, pages 1649–1652,
United States, December 2009. Association for Computing Machinery. ACM 18th International Conference
on Information and Knowledge Management ; Conference date: 02-11-2009 Through 06-11-2009.

[33] UK Oﬃce

for National Statistics.

https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/

healthandsocialcare/conditionsanddiseases/articles/whyhaveblackandsouthasianpeoplebeenhithardestbycovid19/
2020-12-14. Accessed: 2021-05-31.

18

