Blockchain Technology: Bitcoins, Cryptocurrency and Applications  

arXiv:2107.07964v1 [cs.CR]  16 Jul 2021 

Bosubabu Sambana 

Assistant Professor,  Department of Computer Science and Engineering, 
Raghu Engineering College (A), Visakhapatnam, 
Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University Kakinada, Andhra Pradesh, India. 
bosukalam@gmail.com 

Abstract  —  Blockchain  is  a  decentralized  ledger  used  to  securely 
exchange  digital  currency,  perform  deals  and  transactions  efficient 
manner,  each  user  of  the  network  has  access  to  the  latest  copy  of  the 
encrypted  ledger  so  that  they  can  validate  a  new  transaction.  The 
blockchain ledger is a collection of all Bitcoin transactions executed in the 
past. Basically, it’s a distributed database that maintains continuously 
growing  tamper-proof  data  structure  blocks  that  holds  batches  of 
individual transactions. The completed blocks are added in a linear and 
chronological order. Each block contains a timestamp and information 
link which points to a previous block. Bitcoin is a peer-to-peer permission-
less network that allows every user to connect to the network and send 
new  transactions  to  verify  and  create  new  blocks.  Satoshi  Nakamoto 
described the design of Bitcoin digital currency in his research paper posted 
to a cryptography listserv 2008.  

Nakamoto’s suggestion has solved the long-pending problem 
of cryptographers and laid the foundation stone for digital currency. This 
paper  explains  the  concept  of  Bitcoins,  its  characteristics,  the  need  for 
Blockchain, and how Bitcoin works. It attempts to highlight the role of 
Blockchain in shaping the future of banking, financial services, and the 
adoption of the Internet of Things(IoT), Artificial Intelligence and future 
Technologies. 

Keywords—Blockchain; Artificial Intelligence, Bitcoin; Genesis Block; Rehash; 
LevelDB; SHA-256; IBM Bluemix; IoT; Bitfinex; BitTorrent; Ethereium 

1.  INTRODUCTION 

The  cost  of  cyber-crime  costs  quadrupled  from 
2013 to 2015 however a large portion of cybercrime 
goes undetected. Gartner report says cost of cyber-
crime is expected to reach $2 trillion by 2019. IBM’s 
CEO, Ginni Rometty said that cyber- crime is the 
greatest  threat  to  every  company  in  the  world  at 
IBM  Security  Summit.  Around  two  years  ago 
Standard  Chartered  lost  around  $250  million  in  a 
fraud  at  China’s  Qingdao  port.  Banking  and 
financial  institutions  are  using  Blockchain  based 
technology to reduce risk and prevent cyber fraud.  

Bosubabu Sambana 

For  example,  Nasdaq  has  announced  its  plan  to 
launch Blockchain  based digital  ledger technology 
which will help to boost their equity management 
capabilities. Standard Chartered is partnering with  

DBS Group to develop an electronic invoice ledger 
using a Blockchain. 

can 

autonomously  perform 

Blockchain  can  play  crucial  role  in  Internet  of 
Things  (IoT)  and  development  of  smart  systems 
since we can track the history of individual devices 
by tracking a ledger of data exchanged. It can enable 
smart  devices  to  act  like  an  independent  agent 
which 
several 
transactions. For example, smart home appliances 
competing  with  one  another  for  priority  so  that 
laundry  machine,  thermostats,  dishwasher  and 
smart  lighting  run  at  an  appropriate  time  to 
minimize  cost  of  electricity  against  current  grid 
prices.  Another  example  could  be  smart  vehicles 
which  can  diagnose  any problem  and  schedule  to 
pay for its maintenance. 

2.  RELATED WORK 

Blockchain is a transaction database which contains 
information about all the transactions ever executed 
in the past and works on Bitcoin protocol. It creates 
a  digital  ledger  of  transactions  and  allows  all  the 
participants  on  network  to  edit  the  ledger  in  a 
secured  way  which  is  shared  over  distributed 
network of the computers. For making any changes 
to the existing block of data, all the nodes present 
in  the  network  run  algorithms  to  evaluate,  verify 
information  with 
and  match  the  transaction 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
arXiv:2107.07964v1 [cs.CR]  16 Jul 2021 
transactions  is  created,  it  gets  added  to  the 
Blockchain.  

The  new  transaction  records  are  continuously 
added to Bitcoin's public ledger and this process  is 
called  Bitcoin  mining.  Secure  Hash  Algorithm  2 
(SHA-2) which is  a cryptographic hash function is 
used  by  Bitcoin.  We  can  determine  integrity  of  a 
given  data  by  comparing  the  execution  output  of 
SHA-2  algorithm  called  "hash"  with  an  already 
known  and  expected  hash  value  [4].  A  hash 
algorithm converts a large volume amount of data 
into a fixed-length hash. And same data will always 
produce  same  hash but any  slight modification in 
data will completely change the hash. 

Blockchain history[1]. If majority of the nodes agree 
in favor of the transaction, then it is approved and 
a new block gets added to the existing chain. 

The  Blockchain  metadata  is  stored  in  Google’s 
LevelDB by  Bitcoin Core  client. We can visualize 
Blockchain as vertical stack having blocks kept on 
top of each other and the bottommost block acting 
as  foundation  of  the  stack.  The  individual  blocks 
are linked to each other and refers to previous block 
in the chain [2]. 

The individual blocks are identified by a hash which 
is generated using secure hash algorithm (SHA-256) 
cryptographic hash algorithm on the header of the 
block. A block will have one parent but can have 
multiple  child  each  referring  to  the  same  parent 
block  hence  contains  same  hash  in  the  previous 
block  hash  field.  Every  block  contains  hash  of 
parent block in its own header and the sequence of 
hashes  linking  individual  block  with  their  parent 
block creates a big chain pointing to the first block 
called as Genesis block. 

Figure.1: Blockchain enhanced digital transformation in 
enterprise architecture 

What is Bit Coin 

Bitcoin  is  digital  currency  released  as  an  open-
source  software  in  2009.  It  is  a  decentralized 
cryptocurrency  produced  by  all  the  participating 
nodes in the system at a defined rate. The chain of 
Bitcoins  created  over  period  and  linked  to  each 
other called Blockchain [3]. It can be used to search 
any  past  transaction  happened  over  the  network 
between  Bitcoin  addresses.  When  a  new  block  of 

Bosubabu Sambana 

Figure.2: Types of Cryptocurrencies 

Genesis Block  

in  Blockchain.  It 

The  first  block  #0  created  in  2009  is  referred  as 
Genesis  block 
is  common 
ancestral parent of all the new blocks created and if 
traversed  backward  in  time  we  will  reach  genesis 
block in the end. 
Genesis block is common ancestor of all the blocks 
and  was  created  in  2009.  It  is  encoded  within 
bitcoin client software and can’t be tampered.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
All the node always knows the hash and structure 
of genesis block which is secure root. The statically 
encoded  genesis  block  can  be  seen  inside  the 
Bitcoin  Core  client  in  chainparams.cpp.  We  can 
look for exact block hash: 

“000000000019d6689c085ae165831e934ff763ae46
a2a6c1  72b3f1b60a8ce26f”    in  the  block  explorer 
websites  to  find  details  of  Genesis  block,  latest 
transactions and  all the  newly created  blocks  with 
BlockHash, height, next block, size in bytes . 

Genesis block contains a text message "The Times 
03/Jan/2009 Chancellor on brink of second bailout 
for banks". The message was embedded in the first 
block by Bitcoin’s creator Satoshi Nakamoto.  

It  offers  proof  of  date  when  Genesis  block  was 
created  which  refers 
to  headline  of  British 
newspaper  The  Times.  The  donation  for  Genesis 
block was made by John Wnuk and Jayden McAbee 
on  June  9,  2016  which  contains  the  first  Bitcoin 
wallet. 

arXiv:2107.07964v1 [cs.CR]  16 Jul 2021 

Benefits of Bitcoins  

 Fast & Cheaper: The transactions made using 
Bitcoin’s  wallets  are  fast  and  transaction  fees 
are minimal. 

 Decentralized Registry:  Bitcoin  currency  is 
decentralized and no central authority has full 
control  and  hence  central  government  or 
banks can’t take it away from you and there is 
no  chargeback.  The  Central  Bank  during 
financial crisis in Cyprus wanted to take back 
all uninsured deposits more  than $100,000 in 
2013 to help recapitalize itself . But this is not 
possible  with  Bitcoins  since  currency 
is 
decentralized. 

 Secure Payment Information: Bitcoin 
transactions use a public key and a private 
key. When a bitcoin is sent, the transaction is 
signed by public and private keys together 
which creates a certificate. 

  Bitcoin Mining: You can create your own 
money by setting up a Bitcoin Miner 

Prerequisites of Bit Coin 

How Bitcoins works  

  Authentication:  BitID  which 

a 
decentralized  authentication  protocol  allows 
users to connect with Bitcoin. BitID uses Bitcoin 
wallets  and  QR  codes  to  provide  service  or 
platform access points. 

is 

  Integrity:  Bitcoin’s  use  of  digital  signatures 
ensures  transactional  integrity  and  transactions 
can't be modified later. 

  Non-Repudiation: The person who sent the 
message had to be in possession of the private key 
and  therefore  owns  the  Bitcoins.  The  sender 
needs  to  sign  the  previous  hash  and  the 
destination public key. 

Bosubabu Sambana 

Figure.3: How do Bitcoins works 

Bitcoin  uses  Elliptic  Curve  Digital  Signature 
Algorithm(ECDSA)  cryptographic  algorithm  to 
make sure only rightful owners have the access to 
funds. When Bitcoin is sent, it creates a transaction 
message and attaches new owner's public ECDSA 
key. Each Bitcoin is associated with public ECDSA 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
key  of  its  current  owner[5].  A  new  transaction  is 
broadcasted  over  Bitcoin  network  to 
inform 
everyone  that  new  owner  of  these  coins  is  the 
owner of the new key. 

Bitcoin kiosks are machines which are connected to 
the internet and allow to deposit cash in exchange 
of  Bitcoin’s given as a paper receipt or by moving 
money to a public key on the Blockchain. Whenever 
a Bitcoin is sent, it attaches the new owner's public 
key and sign it with the sender’s private key.  

The sender’s signature on the message verifies that 
the message is authentic and transaction history is 
kept by everyone so it can be easily verified. It uses 
Public Key Cryptography Asymmetric Encryption 
algorithm and concept of public and private keys to 
encrypt  and decrypt data. If message  is encrypted 
using public key(Pk), then private or secret key(Sk) 
is necessary to decrypt. However, when message is 
encrypted using private or secret key(Sk) then public 
key(Pk)is necessary to decrypt [7]. 

The  public  key  can  be  shared  with  anyone  but 
private key needs to be kept secret. One participant 
can  create  multiple  public  key(Pk)  and  secret 
key(Sk) pair. Bitcoin does not require third party as 
it publicly distributes the ledger called Blockchain. 
The interested users in devoting CPU power to run 
a special piece of software are called Bitcoin miners 
and they ultimately form a network to maintain the  
Blockchain [8]. In the Bitcoin mining process, users 
create  new  Bitcoin  currency  and  transaction  is 
broadcasted over the network [9]. 

All the computers running the software in network 
compete  to  solve  cryptographic  puzzles  which 
contains  data  from  several  transactions.  The  first 
miner who solves each puzzle get 50 new Bitcoins 
and  the  corresponding  block  of  transactions  gets 
added  to  the  existing  Blockchain.  The  difficulty 
level of each puzzle is directly proportional to the 
number  of  Bitcoin  miners  present  [11].  As  the 
number of miners increases, the difficulty level of 
puzzle is also increased to ensure production of one 
block of transactions for every 10 minutes. 

Bosubabu Sambana 

arXiv:2107.07964v1 [cs.CR]  16 Jul 2021 
Bitcoin  works  on  decreasing  supply  algorithm 
which means the reward for mining Bitcoin block is 
reduced  to  half  after  every  210,000  blocks.  The 
block creation rate is adjusted every 2016 blocks to 
ensure creation of roughly 6 blocks per hour. The 
number  of  Bitcoins  generated  per  block is  set  to 
decrease  geometrically  and  it  will  reduce  by  50% 
every  210,000  blocks  which  is  approximately  04 
years’ time. The aim is to ensure number of Bitcoins 
in  existence  never  exceeds  21  million  since 
monetary  base  of  Bitcoins  cannot  be  expanded 
therefore  Bitcoin  currency  would  undergo  severe 
deflation if it becomes widely used [12]. 

Bitcoin Advanced standards 

Bitcoin transactions are made using script which is 
stack- based and processed from left to right. The 
script  contains  list  of  instructions  recorded  with 
each  transaction  having  description  on  how 
receiver can gain access to it. The transactions are 
valid if script returns true. 

if  

verify_signature( 
transaction.signature,   
transaction.input.public_key): 
return True 
else 
return False 

The standard transactions  on Bitcoin  network  are 
called  single-signature 
it 
requires  just  one  signature  from  the  owner.  But 
Bitcoin  also  supports  complex  transactions  which 
require signature of more than one people.  

transactions  because 

It  supports  Multisignature  (Multisig)  transaction 
which sends funds from a multi-signature address 
and  referred  as  M-of-N  transactions  which  is 
associated  with  N  private  keys  and  requires 
signatures  from  at  least  M  keys Lock  times  is  a 
bitcoin  feature  which  makes  a  transaction  not 
allowed to the network until a certain time [13].  

The locked transaction will spend the coins it uses 
as inputs at a certain time in the future, unless those 
coins are first spent by a prior transaction. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Micropayment  channels  use  both  multi-sig 
technology and a lock time. Bitcoin multisig wallets 
have potential for increasing the security of funds 
and  giving  technology  tools  to  enforce  better 
corporate governance.  Each transaction is added to 
the  blockchain  after  consensus  among  nodes  and 
verification to protect against double spending. The 
transactions  are  validated  when  a  mathematical 
problem is solved [14].  

The  Bitcoin  transactions  require  a  time  window 
before they  are confirmed  which is  an issue since 
speedy transaction is expected from digital currency 
in the modern world. But using marker address also 
called as green address approach we can reduce the 
time taken for confirmation of Bitcoin transaction. 
The  marker 
addresses  use  Bitcoin’s  own 
communication  channel  and  parties  can  establish 
trust sine a receiver is already waiting for an address 
to send money [15].  

Pay to script hash (P2SH) transactions is supported 
by Bitcoin which allow transactions to be sent to a 
script  hash  instead  of  a  public  key  hash.  The 
recipient  must  provide  a  script  matching  to  the 
script hash to spend bitcoins sent via P2SH and the 
data which makes script evaluation true. 

We can send bitcoins using P2SH to an address that 
is  secured.  The  bitcoins  can  be  sent  to  ~34-
character  P2SH  address  and  recipient  needs 
signatures of several people to spend bitcoins or a 
password  or  there  could  be  entirely  unique 
requirements. Byzantine consensus problem is used 
in a large peer-to-peer network .  

All the processes in the network should come to a 
common  agreement.  The  networks  without 
admission controls are vulnerable to the Sybil attack 
in  which  malicious  processes  can  claim  multiple 
fraud identities[15].  

Satoshi Nakamoto inventor of the Bitcoin protocol 
published  his  research  paper  called  "Bitcoin:  A 

Bosubabu Sambana 

arXiv:2107.07964v1 [cs.CR]  16 Jul 2021 
Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System" in 2008. This 
paper  talked  about  peer-  to-peer  electronic  cash 
transfer directly from one party to another without 
going through the channel of financial institutions  

Ethereum is a public Blockchain based distributed 
computing platform which runs smart applications 
without any downtime or third party interference. 
run  on  a  custom  built 
These  applications 
Blockchain  which  enables  to  store  registries  of 
debts  or  promises  and  move  funds  without 
requiring a middle man or counterparty risk [16].  

contracts 

peer-to-peer 

Ethereum provides a decentralized virtual machine 
called Ethereum Virtual Machine (EVM) which can 
execute 
a 
cryptocurrency called Ether. Ethereum project was 
bootstrapped by an Ether pre-sale during 2014 and 
developed  by  a  Swiss  nonprofit  group  called 
Ethereum Foundation. Blockchain based DNS and 
Blockchain based internet could be future.  

using 

The  DNS  Chain  offers  a  free  and  secure 
decentralized 
remaining 
backwards compatible with traditional DNS. 

alternative  while 

Blockchain adoption Trends  

Price  Waterhouse  Coopers  (PwC)  reports  show 
Blockchain  is  being  explored  and  adopted  at  an 
unprecedented speed. Blockchain is still five to ten 
years  from  mainstream  adoption  but  it’s  already 
reached  peak  of  inflated  expectations  reported  by 
Gartner in Hype Cycle for Emerging Technologies 
2016 Blockchain stores multiple transactions in one 
centralized ledger which is accessible to all parties 
and  activities  are  regulated  by  a  decentralized 
network. There are around dozens of offerings on 
distributed-ledger  products  in  the  market  but 
Bitcoin is most popular and proven among all. 

The 3 trends appearing in Gartner Hype Cycle for 
emerging technologies 2016 are Blockchain, Smart 
machines giving transparent immersive experiences 
like  4D  printing    and  Internet  of  Things  (IoT) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
leading  to  perceptual  smart  machine  transparency 
age    in  land  registry.  They  are  using  Blockchain 
technologies  to  update  and  maintain  land  registry 
records  to  prevent  corruption  since  once  land 
records are verified it can't be tampered.  

IBM  and  Samsung  are  working  on  a  proof  of 
concept (PoC) to build next generation Internet of 
Things(IoT) which will be  based on Autonomous 
Decentralized  Peer-to-Peer  Telemetry(ADEPT) 
which  uses  BitTorrent  peer-to-peer  file  sharing 
protocol,  Rehash  peer-to-peer  communication 
protocol, Bitcoin cryptocurrency & Ethereium.  

Everledger  is  using  Blockchain  to  tackle  conflict 
diamonds  and  insurance  fraud  since  tracking  of 
diamonds from mine to retail stores is a lengthy and 
complex  process.  They  are  combining  data  from 
insurance  companies  and  police  departments  to 
provide  an accurate  database  which  can  be  made 
available to everyone on Blockchain [17]. 

Distributed Autonomous Organization(DAO) is an 
organization  meant  to  support  Ethereum-related 
projects.  DAO  has  received  over  $50m  worth  of 
digital  token  called  ethers  (ETH)  from  investors. 
People  supporting  DAO  receive  voting  rights  in 
form of digital token to determine future direction 
of  the  organization  and  support  startups  and 
projects  by  dispensing  ethers 
(ETH).  The 
participants  in  the  voting  and  decision  making 
process  receive  dividends  for  supporting  the 
project. 

Nasdaq has announced plan to launch Blockchain-
enabled digital ledger technology which will help to 
expand  and  enhance 
its  equity  management 
capabilities. They will initially leverage Open Assets 
Protocol  which  is  a  Bitcoin  based  colored  coins’ 
implementation. 

Bitfinex  is  Hong  Kong  based  world’s  leading 
Bitcoin exchange which one of the most advanced 
cryptocurrencies exchange offering margin trading, 
advanced order types & margin funding for low-risk 
returns. 
Bosubabu Sambana 

arXiv:2107.07964v1 [cs.CR]  16 Jul 2021 

Figure. 4:  Gartner Hype Cycle 2016 

applications 

IBM Blockchain service on Bluemix provides four-
node development and test blockchain network to 
write 
and  deploy  chain  code 
immediately instead of creating Blockchain network 
from  the  scratch.  It  is  basically  a  peer-to-  peer 
permissioned  network  which  is  built  on  top  of 
Hyperledger  Fabric  from  Hyperledger  Project  of 
Linux Foundation. 

The land registry system is broken in Honduras, a 
Central  American  country  due  to  corruption. 
Government  of  Honduras announced a  deal with 
Factom Inc, a Texas-based Blockchain company to 
implement Factom’s Land Registry Tool to create 

3.  SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION 

Venture capital(VC) firms are betting big on Bitcoin 
and  the  Blockchain.  CoinDesk's  Bitcoin  Venture 
Capital  data  shows  that  VC  firms  are  investing 
heavily in bitcoin startup projects. Blockchain can 
act  as  ledgers  or  record-keeper  for  billions  of 
transactions generated by Internet of Things (IoT) 
since sharing, storing data and information is always 
a risk.  Mckinsey  report  says  that  Blockchain  have 
potential  to  reshape  the  capital  markets  industry 
with impact on business models, reductions in risks, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
arXiv:2107.07964v1 [cs.CR]  16 Jul 2021 

References 

[1].  Cyber Crime Costs Projected To Reach $2 Trillion by 2019, 
http://www.forbes.com/sites/stevemorgan/2016/01/17/cyber-
crime- costs-projected-to-reach-2-trillion-by-
2019/#768e4f293bb0 

[2].  Banks Look To Blockchain To Reduce Fraud In $4 Trillion 

Trade Finance Field, https://www.cryptocoinsnews.com/banks-
blockchain- trade-finance-fraud/ 

[3].  Blockchains 

and 

the 

Internet 

of 

Things, http://www.postscapes.com/blockchains-and-the-
internet-of-things/ 

[4].  Chapter 7. The Blockchain, 

http://chimera.labs.oreilly.com/books/1234000001802/ch07.ht
ml/ 

[5].  bitcoin/src/chainparams.cpp, 

https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/3955c3940eff83518c18
6facfec6f 50545b5aab5/src/chainparams.cpp#L123 
[6].  Bitcoin Block Explorer, https://blockexplorer.com 
[7].  Why Use Bitcoin? http://www.coindesk.com/information/why-

[8].  How 

use- bitcoin/ 
to 
Bitcoin
Miner, http://www.coindesk.com/information/how-

Set 

Up 

a 

to-set-up-a-miner 

[9].  Elliptic-curve 

digital 

signatures,

http://davidederosa.com/basic- blockchain-

programming/elliptic-curve-digital-signatures/ 

[10]. How to 

sell 

bitcoins 

using 

Bitcoin  ATM, 

https://coinatmradar.com/blog/how-to-sell-bitcoins-using-
bitcoin-atm/ 

[11]. The 

Rise 

and 

Fall 

of

  Bitcoin, https://www.wired.com/2011/11/mf_bitcoin 
[12]. State Of Bitcoin 2016 – A Summary For Bitcoin Investors, 

http://cryptorials.io/state-of-bitcoin-2016-investors-summary 

[13]. Currency with Finite Supply, 

https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Controlled_supply 

[14]. Bitcoin  Monetary  Inflation, 

https://plot.ly/~BashCo/5.embed?share_key=ljQVkaTiHXjX2
W41Uiqz Cn 
is 
Do? https://coincenter.org/entry/what-is-multi-sig-

Multi-Sig,  and 

What 

Can

[15]. What 
It 

and-what-can-it-do 

[16]. Bitcoin Developer Guide, https://bitcoin.org/en/developer-

guide#block- chain-overview 

[17]. How Consensus Algorithms Solve Issues with Bitcoin's Proof 
of Work, http://www.coindesk.com/stellar-ripple-hyperledger-
rivals-bitcoin- proof-work/ Tendermint: Consensus
  without Mining, 
http://tendermint.com/docs/tendermint.pdf 

cost  and  capital  savings.  The  adoption  of 
Blockchain technology will have significant benefits 
and  reduce  number  of  ledgers  required  to  be 
maintained  by  financial  institutions  and  ensure 
more precise audit trails. 

A  recent  study  from  IBM  Institute  for  Business 
Value (IBV) shows that 70 percent of early adopters 
surveyed  are  prioritizing  Blockchain  efforts  to 
reduce barriers in creating new business models to 
reach  new  markets.  The  seven  out  of  10  early 
adopters  surveyed  in  financial  market  institutions 
have  Blockchain  efforts  focused  mainly  on  four 
areas:  clearing  and  settlement,  equity  and  debt 
issuance,  wholesale  payments  and  reference  data. 
The device cost is decreasing and computing power 
is 
increasing  every  day  therefore  Blockchain 
presents  an    immense  possibility  in  Internet  of 
Things(IoT) and providing security. Blockchain can 
offer  a  trustless  system  having  peer-  to-peer 
messaging  protocols  and  secured  distributed  data 
sharing. 

Bosubabu Sambana 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
