Trends in Blockchain and Federated Learning for
Data Sharing in Distributed Platforms

Haemin Lee and Joongheon Kim
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Korea University, Seoul, Republic of Korea
E-mails: haemin2@korea.ac.kr, joongheon@korea.ac.kr

1
2
0
2

l
u
J

9
1

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
4
2
6
8
0
.
7
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—With the development of communication technolo-
gies in 5G networks and the Internet of things (IoT), a massive
amount of generated data can improve machine learning (ML) in-
ference through data sharing. However, security and privacy con-
cerns are major obstacles in distributed and wireless networks.
In addition, IoT has a limitation on system resources depending
on the purpose of services. In addition, a blockchain technology
enables secure transactions among participants through consen-
sus algorithms and encryption without a centralized coordinator.
In this paper, we ﬁrst review the federated leaning (FL) and
blockchain mechanisms, and then, present a survey on the
integration of blockchain and FL for data sharing in industrial,
vehicle, and healthcare applications.

I. INTRODUCTION

Internet of things (IoT) technologies have been applied in
various areas, and thus they generate a massive volume of
data. Rapidly increasing IoT network size and accumulated
data volume broaden the performance of artiﬁcial intelligence
(AI) and create new values in various industry applications.
The collected data should be processed with low latency while
assuring security and reliability. Distributed multiple devices
can work collaboratively to show better performance [1].
Therefore, effective deployment and intelligent utilization of
IoT are needed. However, classical centralized learning algo-
rithms in the IoT are vulnerable to security [2]. Centralized
machine learning methods which involve data sharing from
end devices to the centralized third-party server have privacy
and data leakage issues. In addition, when data size is large,
centralized machine learning algorithms have difﬁculties in
terms of accuracy and efﬁciency. with these challenges, fed-
erated learning (FL) can be one of alternative solutions that
enables on-device machine learning without directly transfer
the private end-user data to a central server [1].

Despite the beneﬁts,

there are still remaining issues in
FL computation. Since blockchain has been widely used to
address security issues in distributed scenarios, recently, there
are many approaches to enhance the privacy and security
problems by replacing the federated learning server with
blockchain [3], [4]. In this paper, we ﬁrst present the existing
blockchain and FL frameworks. Then, we present the privacy-
preserving data sharing for a distributed industrial, vehicle,
and healthcare IoT applications. Finally, we present several
open research challenges with their possible solutions. The
rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II discusses
the background of blockchain and federated learning tech-
nologies and how blockchain helps in existing FL techniques.

Section III describes blockchain applications for AI. Open
research challenges and issues are discussed in Section IV.
Section V concludes the paper.

II. RELATED WORK

A. Federated Learning (FL)

FL is a technique in which multiple local clients, i.e., IoT
devices, smartphones, and one central server work together to
learn a global model in a decentralized context. Each local
client computes an update to the current global model main-
tained by the server, and only this update is communicated
instead of the whole dataset. The FL is deﬁnitely useful in
twofold: data privacy and communication efﬁciency. First,
FL has less communication cost as it simply transfers its
updates while transferring the local data to a central server
put more burden on network trafﬁc and storage costs. Second,
the dataset of the local client is never uploaded to the server,
which reduces the data leakage. The advantage is decoupling
of model training from the need for direct access to the raw
training data [5]. For applications where the training objective
can be speciﬁed on the basis of data available on each client,
FL can signiﬁcantly reduce privacy and security risks by
limiting the attack surface to only the device, rather than
the device and the cloud [5]. However, there are still other
issues associated with FL. Malicious actors may attempt to
compromise the global model or access the client’s dataset.
In addition, the lack of incentive or motivation for the client
to cooperate in the FL system. To this end, adopting and
leveraging blockchain features for FL applications can be a
solution.

B. Blockchain

Blockchain is a distributed, open-source, immutable, public
digital ledger which is distributed among networked peers.
Fundamentally, blockchain is a chain of blocks that make
up the ledger with consensus algorithms and encryption.
This ledger holds a permanent record of transactions and
interactions that took place among participants accessing the
distributed and decentralized blockchain network [6]. This net-
work conﬁguration that consists only of agreed blocks between
users is robust to malicious attacks. Consensus protocols such
as proof-of-work (PoW), proof-of-steak (PoS) is the method
to reach a consensus in a distributed environment that can
impact the performance. Blockchain can also be applied to
ﬁnancial services, smart contracts, IoT, and security services.

 
 
 
 
 
 
A. Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT)

IIoT devices have some different requirements, unlike the
consumer IoT that focuses more on user’s comfort and
convenience. IIoT is deployed in mission-critical industries
and must carry out an advanced task, not simply feeding
sensed data to control systems. IIoT-enabled industry requires
additional security implementations throughout the operation
process, and it must be highly reliable even in harsh condi-
tions. Moreover, effective decision-making is required through
sophisticated data analysis. As a sequence, the distributed IIoT
can utilize collaborate data sharing to meet the quality of
service. However, in the existing data sharing scheme with the
distributed multiple parties has the risk of data leakage. Data
leakage may take place during data storage, data transmission,
and data sharing, which may lead to severe issues for both
owners and providers.

Authors in [9], propose a collaborative architecture that
incorporates federated learning into permissioned blockchain
to share data to reduce the risk of data leakage. Permissioned
blockchain establishes secure connections among all the end
IoT devices through its encrypted records, which are main-
tained by the entities equipped with computing and storage
resources. Different from the existing consensus such as PoW,
they applied federated learning empowered consensus, i.e.,
proof-of-quality (PoQ) which makes better use of the node’s
computing resources.

B. Internet of Vehicles (IoV)

With the development of communication technologies in
5G networks and IoT, the automotive industry continues to
accelerate towards connected cars [12], [13]. The Internet of
Vehicles (IoV) is a distributed network that supports the use
of data created by connected cars and vehicular networks. In
IoV settings, a massive amount of diverse types of data is
constantly generated by the moving vehicles, which includes
additional data such as trajectories, trafﬁc information, and
multimedia data. Through the data sharing, each contributor
can make better use of their data by utilizing them together to
implement a collaborative task like trafﬁc prediction. However,
data sharing in IoV faces two critical challenges [10]. First, the
vehicles need to share data efﬁciently despite unreliable inter-
vehicle communications. Second, data providers, i.e., IoV are
increasingly concerned about data security and privacy issues
that can discourage them from providing the data available
with them for analysis.

The presented research results in [10] integrate blockchain
and FL, which can support reliable and secure data sharing
among distributed users. The vehicular networks in [10] con-
sist of vehicles, road side units (RSUs), macro base stations
(MBSs). The MBS ﬁrst distributes the global model to the
blockchain. Then the participating vehicles download the
global model from blockchain and train their local models. A
certiﬁcate authority performs the identiﬁcation of participants
to access the permissioned blockchain. Node selection stage
formulates and solves an optimization problem using the deep
reinforcement learning (DRL) algorithm to select participating

Fig. 1. Blockchain Federated learning application

Businesses that require high reliability and honesty can use
blockchain to attract customers. Besides,
is distributed
and can avoid the single point of failure situation [7]. With
these characteristics, the combination of AI and blockchain
technologies has paved the way for many stable systems that
support the interaction of multiple devices while providing
conﬁdentiality, authentication, and integrity [6].

it

C. Framework

In the blockchain-based FL (BCFL) framework, the decen-
tralized nature of blockchain can replace the central server [8].
The functions of the centralized server can be implemented
by the smart contract (SC) instead, and be actuated by trans-
actions on the blockchain. That is, the participating nodes
perform FL via blockchain, which maintains the global models
and local updates. The mechanism consists of blockchain
storage, committee consensus mechanism, and model training
part. The storage of BCFL is a blockchain system that only
authorized devices can access the FL training contents. In
the committee consensus mechanism, a few honest nodes
constitute a committee that validates the updates and assigns
a score on them. Only the qualiﬁed updates will be packed
onto the blockchain. And at the beginning of every round, a
new committee is formed. For the model training, the nodes
other than committees perform local training each round.

III. DATA SHARING IN DISTRIBUTED PLATFORMS

In this section, we describe the integrated blockchain and FL
for various applications as Fig. 1. The authors in [9] propose
a mechanism for distributed multiple parties in IIoT applica-
tions, which incorporates federated learning into permissioned
blockchain. In [10], a decentralized approach for the vehicle
to relieve transmission load and address privacy concerns of
providers is proposed. In [11], the combination of federated
learning and blockchain technology adds progressive value to
the healthcare sector.

vehicles [14], [15]. Then the selected vehicles perform local
training on their data by computing the local gradient descent.
Vehicles then send the parameters of the trained local model
to the nearby RSU and upload it to the blockchain for further
veriﬁcation and aggregation. Then the MBS retrieves the
parameters and executes global aggregation.

issues. Moreover, we presented an application of a blockchain
federated learning framework in the industrial, vehicle net-
work, and healthcare sectors. Our paper concludes by showing
that adopting blockchain for federated learning can deﬁnitely
leverage the performance of traditional federated learning, but
there still exist many research challenges to be addressed.

C. Internet of Health Things (IoHT)

With the advent of the Internet of Health Things (IoHT),
such as wearable and implantable medical devices, distribut-
edly produced medical data supports real-time analytics and
medical tracking, remote monitoring. However, the Internet
of Health Things (IoHT) collects very sensitive health and
ambience data that requires privacy. In addition, there are some
restrictions on the centralized data collection process.

The presented research results in [11] present a lightweight
hybrid FL framework in blockchain which smart contracts
manage the authentication of participating federated nodes,
distribution of global or locally trained models. The IoHT
interfaces with the edge nodes and the edge nodes have their
local, private data for local training and inferencing. The edge
nodes are also capable of acting as a local blockchain client
or FL worker. The communication module of the edge nodes
ﬁrst performs differential privacy and then securely shares the
encrypted model and training data to the blockchain App for
further processing. The blockchain client processes the block
creation and shares the smart contract of the hybrid blockchain
node for global analysis.

IV. OPEN ISSUES

A. FL

In FL, various communication and networking technolo-
gies can be additionally considered in order to improve the
performance. First, caching-related technologies can be con-
sidered for local training and aggregation [16]–[20]. In ad-
dition, trafﬁc-aware [21] and video/contents-aware [22]–[24]
application-speciﬁc learning should be additionally considered
in order to improve the performance.

B. Blockchain

In this section, we present the challenges to guarantee data
privacy by applying blockchain technique efﬁciently. First,
blockchain itself has security issues such as 51 % attack,
forking attack and, double spending attack. Moreover, AI-
speciﬁc consensus protocols can be designed considering
proofs based on the quality of learning models or provenance
of data [6]. Another challenge is the delay and errors of
both communications and blockchain on FL. Therefore, some
directions need to be taken to minimize the latency.

V. CONCLUSIONS

In this paper, we surveyed and reviewed the privacy-
preserving data sharing related to the use and applicability of
blockchain features for Federated learning. We gave a short
overview of blockchain and federated learning and showed
how blockchain technology can enhance and solve privacy

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

This research is supported by the National Research Foun-
dation of Korea (NRF-Korea, 2021R1A4A1030775). J. Kim
is a corresponding author of this paper.

REFERENCES

[1] J. Park, S. Samarakoon, A. Elgabli, J. Kim, M. Bennis, S.-L. Kim,
and M. Debbah, “Communication-efﬁcient and distributed learning over
the
wireless networks: Principles and applications,” Proceedings of
IEEE, vol. 109, no. 5, pp. 796–819, May 2021.

[2] N.-N. Dao, T. V. Phan, U. Sa’ad, J. Kim, T. Bauschert, D.-T. Do,
and S. Cho, “Securing heterogeneous IoT with intelligent DDoS attack
behavior learning,” IEEE Systems Journal, pp. 1–10, 2021.

[3] M. Saad, J. Choi, D. Nyang, J. Kim, and A. Mohaisen, “Toward
characterizing blockchain-based cryptocurrencies for highly accurate
predictions,” IEEE Systems Journal, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 321–332, March
2020.

[4] E. Boo, J. Kim, and J. Ko, “LiteZKP: Lightening zero-knowledge proof-
based blockchains for IoT and edge platforms,” IEEE Systems Journal,
pp. 1–12, 2021.

[5] B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A. y Arcas,
“Communication-efﬁcient learning of deep networks from decentralized
data,” in Artiﬁcial intelligence and statistics. PMLR, 2017, pp. 1273–
1282.

[6] K. Salah, M. H. U. Rehman, N. Nizamuddin, and A. Al-Fuqaha,
“Blockchain for ai: Review and open research challenges,” IEEE Access,
vol. 7, pp. 10 127–10 149, 2019.

[7] Z. Zheng, S. Xie, H. Dai, X. Chen, and H. Wang, “An overview of
blockchain technology: Architecture, consensus, and future trends,” in
2017 IEEE International Congress on Big Data (BigData Congress),
2017, pp. 557–564.

[8] Y. Li, C. Chen, N. Liu, H. Huang, Z. Zheng, and Q. Yan, “A blockchain-
based decentralized federated learning framework with committee con-
sensus,” IEEE Network, vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 234–241, 2020.

[9] Y. Lu, X. Huang, Y. Dai, S. Maharjan, and Y. Zhang, “Blockchain and
federated learning for privacy-preserved data sharing in industrial iot,”
IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 4177–
4186, 2019.

[10] J. Kang, R. Yu, X. Huang, M. Wu, S. Maharjan, S. Xie, and Y. Zhang,
“Blockchain for secure and efﬁcient data sharing in vehicular edge
computing and networks,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 6, no. 3,
pp. 4660–4670, 2018.

[11] M. A. Rahman, M. S. Hossain, M. S. Islam, N. A. Alrajeh, and
G. Muhammad, “Secure and provenance enhanced internet of health
things framework: A blockchain managed federated learning approach,”
IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 205 071–205 087, 2020.

[12] M. Shin, J. Kim, and M. Levorato, “Auction-based charging scheduling
with deep learning framework for multi-drone networks,” IEEE Trans-
actions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 68, no. 5, pp. 4235–4248, May
2019.

[13] S. Jung, W. J. Yun, M. Shin, J. Kim, and J.-H. Kim, “Orchestrated
scheduling and multi-agent deep reinforcement
learning for cloud-
assisted multi-UAV charging systems,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular
Technology, vol. 70, no. 6, pp. 5362–5377, June 2021.

[14] S.

Jung,

J. Kim, M. Levorato, C. Cordeiro, and J.-H. Kim,
“Infrastructure-assisted on-driving experience sharing for millimeter-
wave connected vehicles,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology,
pp. 1–1, 2021.

[15] M. Choi, A. No, M. Ji, and J. Kim, “Markov decision policies for dy-
namic video delivery in wireless caching networks,” IEEE Transactions
on Wireless Communications, vol. 18, no. 12, pp. 5705–5718, December
2019.

[16] M. Choi, J. Kim, and J. Moon, “Wireless video caching and dynamic
streaming under differentiated quality requirements,” IEEE Journal on
Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 36, no. 6, pp. 1245–1257, June
2018.

[17] ——, “Dynamic power allocation and user scheduling for power-
efﬁcient and delay-constrained multiple access networks,” IEEE Trans-
actions on Wireless Communications, vol. 18, no. 10, pp. 4846–4858,
October 2019.

[18] A. Malik, J. Kim, K. S. Kim, and W.-Y. Shin, “A personalized preference
learning framework for caching in mobile networks,” IEEE Transactions
on Mobile Computing, vol. 20, no. 6, pp. 2124–2139, June 2021.
[19] M. Choi, A. F. Molisch, and J. Kim, “Joint distributed link scheduling
and power allocation for content delivery in wireless caching networks,”
IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 19, no. 12, pp.
7810–7824, December 2020.

[20] M. Choi, A. F. Molisch, D.-J. Han, D. Kim, J. Kim, and J. Moon,
“Probabilistic caching and dynamic delivery policies for categorized
contents and consecutive user demands,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless
Communications, vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 2685–2699, April 2021.

[21] S. Jung, J. Kim, and J.-H. Kim, “Intelligent active queue management
for stabilized QoS guarantees in 5G mobile networks,” IEEE Systems
Journal, pp. 1–10, 2021.

[22] J. Kim, G. Caire, and A. F. Molisch, “Quality-aware streaming and
scheduling for device-to-device video delivery,” IEEE/ACM Transactions
on Networking, vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 2319–2331, August 2016.

[23] J. Koo, J. Yi, J. Kim, M. A. Hoque, and S. Choi, “Seamless dynamic
adaptive streaming in LTE/Wi-Fi integrated network under smartphone
resource constraints,” IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, vol. 18,
no. 7, pp. 1647–1660, July 2019.

[24] J. Yi, S. Kim, J. Kim, and S. Choi, “Supremo: Cloud-assisted low-
latency super-resolution in mobile devices,” IEEE Transactions on
Mobile Computing, pp. 1–1, 2021.

