Zero-knowledge Based Proof-chain
A methodology for blockchain-partial system

Yuqi Bai
Department of Computer Science
Hebei Petroleum Vocational
Technical University
Chengde, Hebei Province, China
cdpc_byq@cdpc.edu.cn

Lei Luo
Department of Computer Science
Hebei Petroleum Vocational
Technical University
Chengde, Hebei Province, China
cdpc_ll@cdpc.edu.cn

ABSTRACT
Intuitively there is drastic distinction between the “pure”
decentralized block-chain systems like Defis and those that only
utilizes block-chain as an enhancing technology but remains
centralized with real-world business model and conventional
technologies like database, application server etc.
Our study
explores extensively this distinction from a methodological point
of view, classifies them into blockchain-complete and blockchain-
partial, analyzes key features of the two types, and reveal the root
cause of this distinction. We analyze the function or, in more
strong words,
the “ultimate purpose” of blockchain in the
blockchain-partial systems, and present a conceptual model we
named proof-chain that quite satisfactorily represented the general
paradigm of blockchain in blockchain-partial systems. A universal
tension between strength of proof-chain and privacy is then
revealed and the zero-knowledge based proof-chain takes shape.
Several case studies demonstrate the explaining power of our
proof-chain
proof-chain methodology. We
methodology to the analysis of the ecosystem of a collaborating
group of blockchain-partial systems, representing the paradigm of
public and private data domain whose border the proof-chain
crosses. Finally, some derived guidelines from this methodology
speaks usefulness of our methodology.

apply

then

KEYWORDS
Blockchain, methodology, proof-chain, zero-knowledge proof,
privacy-preserving

1 Introduction

Blockchain is nowadays a far-reaching technology quite
beyond its role played in crypto world and start having huge
impact on extant traditional real-world systems with the list of its
applications ever expanding1. Path of this expansion leads from
cryptocurrency to more complex crypto financial organizations,
then to meet and merge with the whole world of information

1 LINDA PAWCZUK ， ROB MASSEY, J.H. Deloitte's 2019 Global Blockchain
Survey: Blockchain gets down to business. Deloitte [report] 2019; Available
from:
https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/se/Documents/risk/DI_2019
-global-blockchain-survey.pdf.

in private or public sector. It

systems that serving and supporting every aspect of our business
and life,
is not necessary to
enumerate some or all of them, the point of significance here is
that there is a milestone in this path of expansion worthy of great
attention.

When we use decentralized ledger (blockchain) technology in
information systems that support some business process like
supply-chain, social credit-rating or any other systems that are the
result of decades of endeavors of informatization in every aspect
of our life, we are in a position which differs drastically (also
essentially) with those in the new-born Defi
(decentralized
finance)2. A Defi organization is completely closed on the ledger,
meaning all its transactions, activities or events are handled by
smart contracts and recorded by the ledger; it is operated inside a
secure “sandbox”. But in those information systems only part of
the business domain can be transferred onto distributed ledger, or
in other words, it is not closed on ledger. This is not a trivial
difference and not one of only technological nature but of great
the
significance. Our work is
methodological
problems raised by this situation and recommend a solution called
“zero knowledge-based proof chain”.

to analyzes

To make notations simple, we will call systems like Defi
“blockchain-complete” and those information systems that is not
closed on-chain “blockchain-partial” in following text.

This division between blockchain-partial and blockchain-
complete is intuitive but its signification of methodology will
come to the surface with the unfolding of our work.

2This distinction has already caused some attention and expressed quite
clearly in a report from Deloitte
William Bible, J.R., Peter Taylor. Blockchain Technology and Its Potential Impact
on the Audit and Assurance Profession. Available from:
https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/us/Documents/audit/us-
audit-blockchain-technology-and-its-potential-impact-on-the-audit-and-
assurance-profession.pdf.

is extremely costive. (Some effort in the decentralization sector
has been made to transfer whole application on-chain,
the
opportunity for its success is dubious and still remain to see [2]).
Blockchain-partial systems takes half or more of the blockchain
application domain. A methodology for blockchain-partial
systems is vital for adoption of blockchain technology.

1.2 Previous research

Distinction between application of blockchain technology in
defi
systems and business process(the so-called enterprise
application) is recognized and some particular issues like tension
between immutability and upgradability is studied[3] [4] [5].
Blockchain in IOT[6] [7], supply-chain system[3, 8, 9], human
are focuses of
resource management[10], medical-care[8, 11],
extensive research from alleged methodological perspective. The
fundamental
the benefit or value of blockchain
technology in certain scenarios also is touched topic[12].

issue of

We find something missed by these researches:
Where does the border of separation located that

is of
significance from methodological perspective? IOT, supply-chain
system, human resource management and medical-care, all these
specific systems raise specific issues when meeting blockchain; In
fact, as we said before and analyzed in the following, the most
important fact that is of most significance is when core activities,
events or data of the system breaks out of the enclosed sandbox of
blockchain, or in other words, when only part of the activities,
events or data of the system is transferred onto blockchain. This
distinction is what calls for a methodology with which particulars
of systems in specific domain is better framed.

Enterprise applications as a far-reaching domain enclosing
many expertized types of system but still is narrow from highest-
level methodological perspective. SaaS platform, government-
authorized social-credit rating systems, in one word, more large-
scale systems, ecosystems in industry-scale or social-scale faces
common issues because of its blockchain-partial property. More
important is the fact that benefits or value of blockchain appears
and becomes significant just when systems collaborate across
borders of enterprise.

The division of permissionless and permissioned blockchain is
an important aspect of blockchain-supported system[12] but not of
major concern in our work.

1.3 Our contributions
1.

for

blockchain-partial

It is time for Blockchain to become widespread choice of
technology supporting traditional
real-world information
system whatever they are. Our work provides a general
unified methodology
systems
enclosing all kinks of systems that is outside of the scope of
the new-born pure on-chain crypto world, presently most of
them defi organizations constructed by smart contracts. This
methodology abstracts away from specific application
domains.
of
The
blockchain-partial system and thus constitutes the most
important insights of our work. Even the value or motive of

proof-chain

concept

catches

crucial

issues

Figure 1: blockchain-complete and blockchain-partial

1.1  Blockchain-partial system is of relevancy

this model

the key concept

In methodologies of

the so-called enterprise information
system analysis and design[1],
is something
called “business model”3 which is certain conceptual abstraction
of the corresponding real world business entities, activities, events
and processes;
is a common language in the
information system construction and evolution life cycle. From
view-points of this conceptual business model, in blockchain-
complete system, the whole implementation of the business model
exists inside the secure blockchain, this is what we mean by
saying it is closed on-chain or blockchain complete. Instead, for
block-partial systems, only part of the business model extends into
this secure sandbox, the rest still exposed to off-chain weakness.
We use abstract business model as a measure to cut the line
between the two type of systems because in concrete domain the
boundary tends to be obscured and difficult to divide them: even
systems with its business model completely inside the sandbox
has various components off chain like user-interaction or some
other peripheral parts, and from an abstract view they are
supportive instead of core components and can be abstracted away,
or, in languages that is more sophistical they are more being of
representation character that is some representation of the essence
expressed by the business model. This methodology makes things
much clearer though we still cannot give technically precise
delineation of the blockchain-partial and blockchain-complete
systems. Defi organizations (MakerDao, Compound) are typical
blockchain-complete systems because all its core transactions are
on-chain, there is no off-chain business process to handle its
functions like borrowing, lending or mortgage as n real world
financial intermediaries, their business model is closed on-chain,
they are blockchain-complete. A supply-chain system that utilizes
blockchain as a ledger to store hashes for some key data is
blockchain-partial for the main body of its transactions and data
still exists in relational databases or some cloud storage. The
boundary is quite clear.

It is obvious that when we step out of the utopia like Defi and
traditional
try to utilize blockchain technology in some
information system supporting real world business, in private or in
public sector, almost always we are handling blockchain-partial
systems. The reasonableness of this pattern is evident because
security by means of decentralization is not without cost, in fact it

3 This word is used in context of system development instead of some commercial
one.

2.

Zero-knowledge Based Proof-chain

using blockchain in blockchain-partial system is not always
plain and clear for stake-holders, in what mechanism the
blockchain has made or will make a blockchain-partial
system trustworthy causes lots of confusion in users and
designers during every phase of system lifecycle. The
purpose and usage of proof-chain methodology is to make
people clear-sighted; this is what a methodology means and
why it matters.
Intrinsic conflicts between strength of proof-chain and
privacy-preserving is revealed and a solution based on zero-
knowledge is then presented.
A paradigm of private and public data domain is a highest-
ecosystem which
level view of block-chain partial
proof-chain
of
power
demonstrating
methodology.
Some practical guidelines are listed as derivations from our
methodology.

explaining

3.

4.

5.

3 Proof chain

3.1 Value provided by blockchain for blockchain-

partial system

It is not necessary for us to dive into technical details to ask
the question: Why we need blockchain as data storage in certain
system? And further, why we are confident that the usage of
trust-worthy? These are not
blockchain in a system makes it
questions that can be readily answered by just listing appreciable
features of blockchain technology, decentralization,
tamper-
resistance, etc., just as a civil engineer cant said his work is
worthy just because much steel is used. He is to explain from a
structural mechanistic point of view instead of that of construction
material.

For blockchain-complete systems like Defi, value provided by
this technology is not quite problematic; they are executed inside
this “secure sandbox” without anything crossing the border; there
is no security hole and the protective intensity is uniform
everywhere. But not for blockchain-partial system: part or main
part of it has to remain outside of the protection of the blockchain
is this situation that make value in
as mentioned before. It
blockchain-partial system problematic because firmness depends
on the weakest
link. Here is where we need a methodology
without which the value of blockchain in blockchain-partial
systems is clouded and dubious.

We cannot make people believe the building is worthy to live
in just because we put some steel inside the wall, what is needed
is some construction mechanics concerning usage of steel material.
Blockchain is this steel material for information system design
and construction, it is new material, its application will influence
and change old construction theory, without this new theory the
new material is useless.

In business practice,

lack of methodology for blockchain-
partial systems has already brought up quite many pseudo-
blockchain applications and caused much waste of resources. A

platform selling fake goods can put its data on blockchain but this
will not make its fake goods more worthy.

In this section we view block-chain-partial and blockchain-
complete system from perspective of conceptual business model
and in this view the delineation is much clearer so we give the
definition and a remark:

Definition of Blockchain-complete and blockchain-partial:
If all data (transactions, activities, and events) defining the core
business model of a system is on-chain, this system is block-
chain-complete; otherwise, it is blockchain-partial.

Remark 1: Blockchain

for
is
information system as steel is material for buildings; we need a
theory and methodology for using this new material as we need
mechanics for building using steel.

construction material

3.2 Intrinsic natural order in transactions, events,

activities and data, and the concept of proof
chain

In blockchain-partial systems only part of its business model is
on-chain, what makes this business model is transactions, events,
activities, and data, it is a set of transactions, events, activities and
data, and what blockchain-partial system does is to transfer some
of them onto the blockchain. The question is how to select, the
general principle of this section is what we call methodology of
blockchain-partial system. To be less verbose we will use “data”
to notate transactions, events, or activities.

Here the key point is: data is not some chaotic entities; they
have intrinsic natural order between them. meaning of this order
might be of time-dependent physical cause-effect or logical or
highly relevant from statistical view. Physical cause-effect and
logical relationship is naturally directional, statistical relevant
relationship can be made directional in context, so we can view all
of them as directional, and whatever properties this relationship
between data entities is of, existence of starting entities constitutes
proof of existence of the end, or, to put it more precisely, the
integrity of one constitutes proof of integrity of the other. This
proof linkage between data entities further makes proof chain.

its value. put

the proof-chain will present

3.3 Chronology and detail-summary in proof-chain
Although we cannot enumerate all possible features of the
order or linkage of the proof-chain, it almost necessarily implies
some chronological or detail-summary meaning, and entities that
recorded earlier always be the one that is more detailed, or vice
it simply:
versa.
Attacker have much more difficulty to compromise the system if
he has to put his hands on the detailed data at a much earlier time
point to prepare for a future attack. Just imagine someone that is
required to provide five years tax capability to be qualified for
something. He has to be a prophet to plan for this years ago and
this further will be much harder due to the task to handle many
detailed data entities. Back upon the proof chain difficulty level
for attacker rises precipitately and when this difficulty reaches
some limit it becomes economically infeasible for attackers to do
it.

It

is this mechanism of proof-chain that constituents the

fundamentals of the blockchain-partial system.

3.4 Some insights

Proof-chain makes it clear that application of blockchain
technology is not a black-white issue; instead, it is an issue of
broad spectral with blockchain-complete systems on one extreme
and applications with none or almost meaningless on-chain proof
on the other extreme. Between them value of blockchain proof
should be considered and analyzed in light of strength of the proof
chain which is in positive relationship with its length. Longer
length of proof chain implies more security, which level of
security is necessary is contingent on specific domain problems.
Proof-chain is a methodology, not a solution for blockchain
application, solutions are principled by it.

We say that data entities are not a chaotic but is ordered by
intrinsic natural order, in fact this order is what gives the data
topological structure and constitutes an integrated “business
model”, and proof-chain is a sub-graph of this topology or
business model. In light of this, proof-chain of Blockchain-
complete system is this full topology or the business model itself.

the root cause, or to be more precise,

It is not inappropriate to say that blockchain-complete system
is so called because the complete business model is closed on-
chain, of course not in a causal sense but just a synonym of the
same concept. Whether a system is blockchain complete or partial
is due to some essence or intrinsic nature of it. Defi can be and is
the
closed on-chain,
rationality of this is that Defi system is the combination of the
effort of financial freedom and technological potential (smart
contracts) created by blockchain. Defi
is long-time aspired
economic Utopia made possible by technology. But the scenario is
totally different for blockchain-partial system, here blockchain is
taken as a new technological element for existed or traditional
information system supporting real world business: supply-chain,
auditing, credit-rating etc. The business of this kind of system is
part of real world, from a metaphysical viewpoint there is no
clear-cut border separating them form real world. But for such
economic utopia like Defi the border do exists. This difference of
the two types means a lot for their proof-chain: Proof-chain in
blockchain-complete systems terminate at edge of the utopia, but
in blockchain-partial
in
metaphysical sense, but is terminated when enough security is
obtained.
Remark 2: proof-chain is a sub-graph of the topology of business
entities or, put it simply, sub-graph of business model
Remark 3: Whether a system is blockchain complete or partial is
due to some essence or intrinsic nature of it

really terminates

it never

systems

4. proof -chain

4.1Conflict between privacy-preserving and proof-

strength in proof chain

When proof -chain grow to its upper stream, chain length
become longer, proving power increments, attacks become more
difficult even infeasible. This scenario is what we described until

now, here a constraint emerges. As we said before, data on upper
position of proof-chain generally tends to be more detailed and
detailed data tends to be on the verge of invading privacy,
personal or commercial. Strength of proof-chain conflicts directly
with privacy-preserving.

is

This conflict

inherent and ubiquitous.

In application
domains like auditing and credit-rating detailed financial data on
upper stream of proof-chain is heavily private. Citizens or
organizations have responsibility to expose statistical report of
their financial conditions to be credited in the mean time keeping
their everyday bank or
In supply-chain
transparency theory and practice parties (manufacturers, logistics,
wholesalers, and retailers) are encouraged to publish their data,
but here also a balance between transparency and privacy exists.
The inherent and ubiquity of this conflict is a fundamental aspect
of proof-chain

tax record secret.

4. 2 Zero-knowledge proof as a solution for the

conflict

zero-knowledge proof

is the choice everywhere privacy-
preserving is critical, so for our proof-chain. This article is not
from an
about ZKP technology itself but
methodological viewpoint, its core functionality in solving the
intrinsic conflicts of the proof-chain as core methodology for
blockchain-partial systems, no time is wasted in any introductory
of it because enough material can be found for readers45. What we
will do in following is to consider some typical application
scenarios to frame the general mechanism of zk-based proof-chain.

to study it

4.3 Case studies of zero-knowledge based proof

chain

Identity Information Service
As we said before,

it

is that

is modelling part of

the root cause that makes a system
blockchain-partial
real-world
business, and this fact also makes anonymity almost impossible in
most application case, thus identity is one of its critical elements
and is actively researched[13, 14]. Every blockchain-partial
system takes “Identity wallet” as its functionality entry point.
Users will have to provide the necessary part of their personal
information (name, age, sex, location etc.) to be qualified for
some social or commercial goods, like in requesting certification
or licenses for some investment instruments or to be credited for
something. This raises the question:

1.

To prove that
sources.

the information comes from authoritative

2. Only necessary information instead of sophisticated personal

archive is presented.

Here the structure of the proof-chain is “personal archive to
personal
the authority of some national
archive manage center terminates the chain and no further back

information digest”,

4 Goldreich, O. & Oren, Y. Definitions and properties of zero-knowledge proof
systems. Journal of Cryptology 7, 1-32 (1994).
5 Goldreich, O. & Krawczyk, H. On the composition of zero-knowledge proof
systems. SIAM Journal on Computing 25, 169-192 (1996).

Zero-knowledge Based Proof-chain

tracing to some historical story. In such system some well-known
authority with good traditional common social confidence
provides practical and acceptable limit of proof chain This is what
we have analyzed previously.

The zero-knowledge proof solution of this proof-chain is

described:

1. Authoritative archive manager put hash of

someone’s
personal archive on chain (like some smart contract
invocation) and will update it when necessary.
Some service provider (maybe) needs to know age of its
customer and the service provider request the service API of
the authoritative archive manager to get age with zero
knowledge proof
The service provider does verification with the proof
(including age) by invocation of smart contract. The smart
contract does it by the proof and archive hash that
is
managed by the Authoritative archive manager.

2.

3.

We implemented the process described above using zk-Snarks
but here technical steps like “setup” phase is not mentioned.
Technical details of zero-knowledge implementation is not
essentials of our topic.

tends

to consider

This might be viewed as the simplest form of zero-knowledge
based proof-chain, it depends directly on some authority as its last
resort. People
everything related with
blockchain as being certain kind of pure decentralization with no
authority stepping into this utopia, but at least this is not the case
for blockchain-partial systems, authorities are good and necessary
anchor point for system and in our topic, termination point for
proof chain. The specific meaning of “authority” itself
is
contextual, it might be administrative institutions with little or
huge or any extent of arbitrary power or something based on
representative democracy or some professional societies with
good tradition whatever. It is not reasonable for us to take values
originated from decentralization of blockchain as the only one
worthy and throw away existed values away. In blockchain
partials, values of blockchain are more of a frictionless
transferring carrier of trust instead of origin of trust.

Auditing

To some extent, auditing is itself a process of building up a
proof-chain and the proof -chain mechanism or methodology can
be viewed as methodological generalization of auditing in
domains other
than financial auditing. Thus Zero-knowledge
comes to be the suitable mathematical tools to solve the conflict
of proof-strength and privacy-preserving in auditing[15-17].

[17] constructs a stereotyped accounting system of banks that
leverages on-chain mechanism and off-chain databases and zero-
knowledge ； what makes it conspicuous from methodological
view is its effort to separate part of the business of real banks and
makes a blockchain-complete system. Still the root cause as we
analyzed previously does not vanish by this effort and such a
stereotyped system does not fit into realistic financial auditing
landscape; auditing supported by blockchain is essentially

blockchain-partial as described by the report from Deloitte6.
Accounting is not a profession suitable for some specialized
distributed ledger to contain every auditing-related data of any
real-world business of real bank which is different with Defi
system. What we do is to find some suitable proof-chain;

In fact, from view point of proof-chain, the zero-knowledge
auditing data and computations in[17] consist a proof-chain, only
if we open up its closedness like checking integrity of all
transaction (This kind of closedness exists only in a narrow-
minded paly-around one: all banks and all business of all banks is
transferred on-chain overnight; with one piece left off-chain the
closedness is lost). This auditing proof-chain stops at everyday
detailed record and Description:

1. Hashes of everyday accounting data go on-chain.
2. Auditor requests for statistical report from audited entity and

get result with proof.

3. Auditor invocate smart contract to verify this result.

Specific technological respect worth mention. Granularity of
data blocks of everyday records is a design problem; some
intermediary statistical report might be made on-chain(hash) to
save time and resources; zk-Snarks is an alternative to those in
[17].

The structure of proof-chain in auditing is “everyday records
to statistical reports” whose strength lies in the time-span and the
detail both making it much more difficult for attackers to plan and
implements an effective attack. This is in stark comparison with
those in the identity information service case which take some
confidence in authority as termination point for proof-chain.

Supply-chain transparency

Supply chain is typical in its crossing-organization feature for
which the problems of trust arise to considerate level which makes
blockchain quite attractive; transparency of supply chain[18-20]
means a lot: Trackability of goods, credit-rating of entities are all
aspects under the hood of transparency. As is said in [19],
“Blockchain cannot supersede the existing technologies, but can
complement them”, the transparent supply chain necessarily be
blockchain partial and proof-chain be the method in analyzing it.
Nothing particular for this.

What is interesting is, transparency, as a targeted value of
supply chain, will push the border of privacy of supply chain
entities
suppliers and
retailers) to more contracted area, but of course also balanced
between them:

(manufacturer or producer,

logistics,

1. More transparency means less privacy, a balance is reached.

2.

Data is divided into transparent domain and privacy domain.
Enough strength of proof-chain is necessary which is not
guaranteed to be with transparency domain. the objective in

on

the Audit

6 William Bible, J.R., Peter Taylor. Blockchain Technology and Its Potential
and Assurance
Impact
from:
https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/us/Documents/audit/us-
audit-blockchain-technology-and-its-potential-impact-on-the-audit-and-
assurance-profession.pdf.

Profession. Available

3.

4.

transparency in

-chain and those of

design of Proof
independent of each other.
If proof chain stays within limit of transparency, the privacy
domain is not invaded and no zero-knowledge proof needed.
If proof-chain extends into the privacy domain, data within
this domain has a responsibility to prove data within
transparent domain.

This relationship between transparency, privacy and proof-
chain is illustrated in figure 3. This analysis is a demonstration of
the explaining capability of our proof-chain as a methodology,
and for methodology the power of interpretation means its power
in directing and guiding system constructing activity.

Some problems concerning proof-chain in supply chain
In most cases, what

the supply chain entities exposed is
statistical report of operational record data of the system, or data
in transparency domain tends to be statistical report (data in
privacy domain tends to be operational transaction records). The
meaning that the transactional data is proof of statistical report is
the same with those in auditing. What the proof-chain in supply-
chain transparency can do and actually do is to guaranteed that
those shared data originated from real
transactions, detailed
operational transaction is the anchor point of proof-chain, no
further anchor points is available.

A corrupted supply chain ecosystem with all

its members
profiting from an economy of fake goods will not be restrained
only by such proof-chain. This is another conclusion made clear
by our methodology which is not less important in significance
due to the danger of blockchain being utilized as a pretense.

Privacy-preserving Prediction model-weak proof link

Semantics of the proof chain might be heterogenous: causality
or logical necessity(mathematics), or of a Bayesian probabilistic
nature,
in the adoption of certain prediction model. Machine
learning, deep or not deep, makes up another constructive
mechanism for proof-chain that needs some deliberation from
these methodological viewpoints.

Interpretability of

to application scenarios.

Enough strength of chain link is preamble and of course,
contextual
this
prediction model is critical without which input features of model
cannot be treated as proof of output of this model, like those
models that compute credit-ratings for social entities. Ubiquitous
confidence or acceptance of
this model should have been
established. Every effort of enhancement made, this proof link
being set up by correlation is essentially weaker than physical
causality or logical and mathematical reference.

The zero-knowledge problem for proof-chain in ML prediction
model is a sophisticated domain under intense research.
[21]
“develop an end-to-end optimizer that compiles a floating-point
pyTorch model to R1CS constraints”, and the R1CS constraints
then can be translated to quadratic arithmetic program (QAP) to
fit into zk-Snark environments like libsnark or zokrates.

4.4 Pattern of zero-knowledge link

We identify a pattern of zero-knowledge link in proof-chain
and
deserving

description

studies

some

case

from our

interpretation. We say “link” since here the focus is on one piece
of the proof-chain, a connection from preserved data to shared
ones. The pattern consists of four components: preserved data,
shared data, blockchain and zero-knowledge enabled computation
unit.
1.
2.
3.
4.

preserved data
shared data
blockchain
zero-knowledge enabled computation unit

Figure 2: pattern of zero-knowledge link

1.

2.

3.

function of this pattern:
the preserved data
is encrypted and put onto
blockchain at appropriate time point which is an issue
of design
zero-knowledge
preserved data and output the shared data with proof
a validator takes preserved data encryption and the
shared data with proof to validate that the shared data
is a trusted result of right data source and right
computation.

enabled computation unit

takes

This is a rough outline of a pattern in need of quite a lot of
explanations, in fact it is a conceptual framework, an abstract
pattern instead of a concrete one in design activity.
1.

The preserved data tends to be transactional and is created
and maintained by conventional off-chain business
system; they are in a sense “first-hand” which makes
to second hand ones. The
them certified as proof
opportunity of
their being encrypted and put onto
blockchain is design decision of the business transactional
system. Another issue is the granularity of the data
encryption which has big impact on computation and
validation logic and is vital for design but
is not of
concern for our methodology.
The ZKCU (zero-knowledge enabled computation unit) is
much more abstract component of the pattern; it might be
as simple as taking one field from a data structure or
complicated as execution of some prediction model. Type
of zero-knowledge technology used also varies.
The validator illustrated in figure 2 is implemented by
smart contract but an off-chain implementation is
acceptable and reasonable in some scenario, the choice
also an issue of system design.
Shared data and its proof might be persisted with some
high-frequency
updating
for
invocation

arrangement
of ZKCU. Another

consideration

preventing

2.

3.

4.

6 Pragmatic guidelines and Principles

If a system is Blockchain-partial for good reason, efforts to
make it blockchain-complete are almost always futile, the right
reality and find ways to
thing is to accept
compromise with it. This division of partial and complete is not
superfluous but reveals essentials.

this imperfect

In situations where no cross-organization data-sharing exists
the necessity of blockchain is dubious. We usually do not give
proofs in administrative activities to people within a hierarchical
ordered organization. Only organization-crossing makes
the
problem of trust conspicuous enough for trust enhancement by
technology like blockchain indispensable.

if

If a blockchain-partial system does not present a proof-chain
that is sufficiently strong, then the worthiness of blockchain in it
tends to be dubious;
the proof-chain is open to simple
fraudulence,
this is a silly blockchain project no matter how
heavily blockchain is utilized. A proof-chain mental testing and
discussion is critical before and during lifecycle of system. If no
hope of
finding valid proof-chain for a business it means
blockchain is useless here, at least before you can find that proof-
chain.

The utilization of Zero-knowledge proof technology should be
scrutinized under the proof-chain methodology. We find a project
that use zk-Snarks to prove to supervisors that some ship has not
crossed over border of some geographical area but the input of
location is almost free to fake, no proof-chain design to make this
kind of fraudulence less easy.

Finding established authority is important for design of proof-
chain because it is good anchor points of trust and termination
point of proof-chain. This is where blockchain compromise with
authority in real-world.

Semantics and strength of proof-chain are both contextual and
should be paid enough attention in design. Correlation is
incorporated into proof-chain when prediction model
from
machine leaning or deep learning is adopted and this is of great
significance and acceptance of the correlation as proof is not a
straight-headed question. Good interpretability and massive
acceptance are crucial.

Last, Zero-knowledge proof

is not necessarily needed in
specific proof-chain when privacy is not so sensitive although it is
in most cases. Save it if situation permits because zero-knowledge
is expensive in cost and limited in ability of business modelling,
still.

Zero-knowledge Based Proof-chain

persistence of shared data is its participation in further
computation to extend the proof-chain.

5 Paradigm of zero-knowledge based proof-chain

ecosystems
The problem of trust arises when data is shared between
organizations and blockchain is alleged to be the technology in
solving this cross-organization trust problem. Cross-Organization
collaboration or data-sharing is the target for blockchain without
which this technology lost its proper and becomes meaningless
and futile. Blockchain provide a trust infrastructure above which a
cross-organization ecosystem thrives. This is quite obviously
demonstrated by our supply-chain transparency case study for in it
the
supply-chain
entities(members) is made explicit, but in all other domains where
blockchain played its appropriate part, this paradigm emerges
repeatedly. The division of data into transparent domain and
privacy domain and the existence of zero-knowledge based proof-
chain with this context is a generic paradigm. Let us change some
word to make things looks more general: we use public and
private instead of transparency and privacy to abstract away from
the supply chain transparency context:

and data-sharing between

collaborations

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

this

Private data domain: data in this domain tends to be internal,
operational, more detailed with finer granularity, and
transactional, they are generated locally by a system and
tends to be privacy-sensitive. They also prone to strict
constraint by business rule and this constraint makes them
much more difficult to be modified with integrity undamaged.
Public data domain: data in this domain are shared or
exposed to collaborators or thoroughly public and tends to be
some digest or statistical computation of the data from
private domain.
Proof chain links the public domain to private domain,
the link is a correct one. Strength or
demonstrates that
semantics of
link are contextual, being logical,
mathematical, causal, or correlational, securitized by system
stake-holders to evaluate if it
is strong enough for the
specific business supported.
Zero-knowledge proof makes the border between private and
public unchanged in implementing the proof link.
From viewpoint of trust, proof-chain makes attacks much
more difficult by transforming attacks to data in public
domain into attacks to private domain where there are much
more authority or business-rule constraint and with a much
longer time-span.
The public data domain exits in the service API layer of the
member of ecosystems and they constitute the infrastructure
of
this
infrastructure and functions through zero-knowledge based
proof-chain. This is the highest-level big picture of the
paradigm.

ecosystem, block-chain is

elements of

this

All the cases we studied above fits into this general paradigm.

Figure 2: pattern of zero-knowledge link

Remark 4: The big story behind proof-chain is organization
collaboration and data-sharing in an ecosystem with proof-chain
making the shared public data trusted by its root into operational
private data

7 Limit of applicability of our methodology

Blockchain technology and its application is in the process of
rapid expanding and deepening, it is an evolving landscape. The
co-existence of blockchain-complete and blockchain-partial is in a
pattern of fluid and morphism.

More radical practitioners tend to disrupt existent business
model and start from scratch7, and this tends to be the promotion
of business model complete on-chain because of the freedom from
constraint of the legacy. This is one force that pull and push
blockchain-partials to blockchain-completes.

We analyzed the root cause behind blockchain-partials in
previous section to demonstrate that blockchain-partial or not is
not an issue of complete arbitration, this is another force speaking
for blockchain-partials.

From pure view pint of rationality regardless of legacy, some
business model as a whole naturally legitimizes blended
architecture of blockchain and conventional technology, this fact
is the necessary precondition that blockchain-partial exist, but not
one of sufficiency. If those parts of business model that is suitable
to be on-chain is well-defined into some self-sufficient box, the
proof-chain breaks and there emerges blockchain-complete
subsystems embedded in the container business model. This
embedding architecture is much preferred and is one force from
blockchain-partials
but whose
realization is also a phenomenon of ecosystem evolution.

blockchain-completes,

to

an off-chain business model

Blockchain -partials tends to evolve into a mixture of clear-cut
and embedded
divisions of
blockchain-complete subsystems, but this is not the end of the
story. It will always be necessary for the off-chain business model
to share some of its data just as demonstrated by the private and
public data domain paradigm of ecosystem, so blockchain-partials
do not perish and our proof-chain methodology keeps its territory
of applicability.

Blockchain-partial systems is also a phenomenon of ecosystem
evolution. Our methodology is applicable whenever and where
ever it appears in this ecosystem.

7 LINDA PAWCZUK ， ROB MASSEY, J. H. Deloitte's 2019 Global Blockchain
Survey: Blockchain gets down to business. Deloitte (2019).
“

Where enterprise organizations seek ways to integrate blockchain into their
existing business models—or, more accurately, how to transform existing
processes and systems to work with blockchain—emerging disruptors built
their businesses around blockchain from the start

”

Figure 2: embedded blockchain-complete and blockchain-
partial

blockchain-partial
Remark
methodology survive with evolution of the ecosystem

systems

and

5:

proof-chain

Confidential computing or Privacy computing

for

domains

forefront

We are not ambitious enough to allege that proof-chain is a
suitable methodology
like
those
Confidential computing and Privacy computing[22-27], although
the paradigm in these applications can be fixed into the zero-
knowledge based proof-chain pattern just by take the computation
as a kind of proving process. But here in these next-generation
data-oriented applications the is no issue as raised by integration
with legacy business model and value of our methodology in this
context is questionable.

Conclusion
Proof-chain as a methodology for blockchain-partial system
demonstrates its explanatory power; it reveals essentials lurking
deeply inside the entangle of confusing issues when blockchain
technology is taken to be integrated into a complex of business
model. This lucidness from methodological view of blockchain-
partial systems is not a solution itself but helps greatly in
searching the right solution in specific domain.
Our research of proof-chain methodology is extensive, reaching
out to every important aspect:

1.

2.
3.

4.

5.

6.

From perspective of conceptual business model, we get the
insight that essentially proof-chain is a subgraph of the
whole business model that is t be enhanced by blockchain.
The semantics and strength of proof-chain is analyzed
Intrinsic tension of proof-strength and privacy is revealed
and a zero-knowledge based solution
The private and public data domain paradigm of proof-chain
from the level of ecosystem provides clear-sighted view of
this ecosystem and is of significance
A set of pragmatic guidelines is derived which is helpful for
practitioners.
Its condition of applicability is studied in context of
ecosystem evolution.

Future work

Zero-knowledge Based Proof-chain

Our team is participating several blockchain-enabled projects
of local governments which engages in building up platforms for
social credit-rating. This application of blockchain is typical of
blockchain-partial and suitable public-sector use-cases of our
libsnark and zokrates as
proof-chain methodology. We adopt
implementation of the zero-knowledge part for our proof-chain.

Blockchain technology and its application is of high priority
in China propelled by government policy; more important, the
application of this technology in refactoring current business is
greatly encouraged, in dark contrast with a policy of banning
cryptocurrency. This is where blockchain-partial systems take
place. But
is quite worrisome, even
dangerous ： the lack of a general theory, a methodology and
guidelines for this thriving movement. Our work is meant for this.

there is situations that

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We are grateful for the support from university administration
local
and computer science department;
government in applying our methodology in the public-sector
blockchain-enabled projects.

the cooperation of

REFERENCES
1.

Evans, E. and E.J. Evans, Domain-driven
design: tackling complexity in the heart of
software. 2004: Addison-Wesley Professional.
Hanke, T., M. Movahedi, and D. Williams,
Dfinity technology overview series, consensus
system. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.04548,
2018.
Andreou, A.S., P. Christodoulou, and K.
Christodoulou, A decentralized application
for logistics: Using blockchain in real-world
applications. The Cyprus Review, 2018.
Nanayakkara, S., et al., A methodology for
selection of a Blockchain platform to develop
an enterprise system. Journal of Industrial
Information Integration, 2021. 23: p. 100215.
Hebert, C. and F. Di Cerbo, Secure
blockchain in the enterprise: A methodology.
Pervasive and Mobile Computing, 2019. 59: p.
101038.
Ibba, S., et al. CitySense: blockchain-oriented
smart cities. in Proceedings of the XP2017
Scientific Workshops. 2017.
Alfa, A.A., et al., Blockchain technology in
IoT systems: current trends, methodology,
problems, applications, and future directions.
Journal of Reliable Intelligent Environments,
2021. 7(2): p. 115-143.
Sharma, R., et al., Design of Blockchain-
based Precision Health-Care using soft

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

systems methodology. Industrial Management
& Data Systems, 2019.
Bettín-Díaz, R., A.E. Rojas, and C. Mejía-
Moncayo. Methodological approach to the
definition of a blockchain system for the food
industry supply chain traceability. in
International Conference on Computational
Science and Its Applications. 2018. Springer.
Kübra, Ö., Software Development
Methodology Selection with Human Resource
Management Approach and a New System
Design on Database: Blockchain Application.
Quantrade Journal of Complex Systems in
Social Sciences, 2019. 1(1): p. 28-39.
Shae, Z. and J.J. Tsai. On the design of a
blockchain platform for clinical trial and
precision medicine. in 2017 IEEE 37th
international conference on distributed
computing systems (ICDCS). 2017. IEEE.
Wüst, K. and A. Gervais. Do you need a
blockchain? in 2018 Crypto Valley
Conference on Blockchain Technology
(CVCBT). 2018. IEEE.
Feige, U., A. Fiat, and A. Shamir, Zero-
knowledge proofs of identity. Journal of
cryptology, 1988. 1(2): p. 77-94.
Yang, X. and W. Li, A zero-knowledge-proof-
based digital identity management scheme in
blockchain. Computers & Security, 2020. 99:
p. 102050.
Boynton, W.C. and R.N. Johnson, Modern
auditing: Assurance services and the integrity
of financial reporting. 2005: John Wiley &
Sons.
Cao, S., L.W. Cong, and B. Yang, Auditing
and blockchains: Pricing, misstatements, and
regulation. Misstatements, and Regulation
(Oct 9, 2018), 2018.
Narula, N., W. Vasquez, and M. Virza.
zkledger: Privacy-preserving auditing for
distributed ledgers. in 15th {USENIX}
Symposium on Networked Systems Design
and Implementation ({NSDI} 18). 2018.
Francisco, K. and D. Swanson, The supply
chain has no clothes: Technology adoption of
blockchain for supply chain transparency.
Logistics, 2018. 2(1): p. 2.
Sunny, J., N. Undralla, and V. Madhusudanan
Pillai, Supply chain transparency through

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

blockchain-based traceability: An overview
with demonstration. Computers & Industrial
Engineering, 2020. 150: p. 106895.
Venkatesh, V., et al., System architecture for
blockchain based transparency of supply
chain social sustainability. Robotics and
Computer-Integrated Manufacturing, 2020.
63: p. 101896.
Feng, B., et al., ZEN: An Optimizing
Compiler for Verifiable, Zero-Knowledge
Neural Network Inferences.
Cheon, J.H., et al. Privacy-Preserving
Computations of Predictive Medical Models
with Minimax Approximation and Non-
Adjacent Form. 2017. Cham: Springer
International Publishing.
Dou, Q., et al., Federated deep learning for
detecting COVID-19 lung abnormalities in
CT: a privacy-preserving multinational
validation study. NPJ Digit Med, 2021. 4(1):
p. 60.
Kirienko, M., et al., Distributed learning: a
reliable privacy-preserving strategy to
change multicenter collaborations using AI.
Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging, 2021.
Loukil, F., et al., Privacy-Preserving IoT
Data Aggregation Based on Blockchain and
Homomorphic Encryption. Sensors (Basel),
2021. 21(7).
Lu, Y., et al., Multicenter privacy-preserving
Cox analysis based on homomorphic
encryption. IEEE J Biomed Health Inform,
2021. PP.
Lu, Y., et al., Web-Based Privacy-Preserving
Multicenter Medical Data Analysis Tools Via
Threshold Homomorphic Encryption: Design
and Development Study. J Med Internet Res,
2020. 22(12): p. e22555.

