1
2
0
2

l
u
J

6
2

]

Y
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
6
8
9
3
1
.
7
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

User-Centric Health Data Using Self-sovereign Identities*

Alexandre Siqueira1, Arlindo Flavio da Conceic¸ ˜ao1, Vladimir Rocha2

1 Universidade Federal de S˜ao Paulo (UNIFESP)

2Universidade Federal do ABC (UFABC)

{alexandre.siqueira, arlindo.conceicao}@unifesp.br,

vladimir.rocha@ufabc.edu.br

Abstract. This article presents the potential use of the Self-Sovereign Identi-
ties (SSI), combining with Distributed Ledger Technologies (DLT), to improve
the privacy and control of health data. The paper presents the SSI technology,
lists the prominent use cases of decentralized identities in the health area, and
discusses an effective blockchain-based architecture. The main contributions
of the article are: (i) mapping SSI general and abstract concepts, e.g., issuers
and holders, to the health domain concepts, e.g., physicians and patients; (ii)
creating a correspondence between the SSI interactions, e.g., issue and verify
a credential, and the US standardized set of health use cases; (iii) presenting
and instantiating an architecture to deal with the use cases mentioned, effec-
tively organizing the data in a user-centric way, that uses well-known SSI and
Blockchain technologies.

1. Introduction

Personal health records reveal a conﬂict between privacy protection laws and the ability to
share personal information. Throughout life, people interact with doctors and healthcare
service providers countless times, either for routine appointments or medical treatment. In
these interactions, clinical information is obtained that could constitute a signiﬁcant batch
of medical records for future use. However, a single patient might have his/her medical
data spread across several healthcare service providers, and thus create siloed databases
that, in the current state — fragmented, are useless for clinical application outside those
silos. Added to this scenario, the increasing adoption of wearable devices, for collecting
information about health and lifestyle, is creating a new patient-generated health data silo.

The fragmented nature of personal medical records prevents someone from having
a unique and usable person’s health track record that could help physicians make an accu-
rate diagnosis. Thus, new methods are needed for creating a decentralized data structure,
controlled by the users, to maintain their medical records. This appears to be the pathway
to enabling health providers to store medical information while granting data ownership
to the rightful owners — the patients.

In health domain, the problem of data ownership can be overcome by the use of
Decentralized Digital Identities, Decentralized Ledger Technologies, and Self-sovereign
Identity. Decentralized Digital Identities (DIDs) [W3C 2021] are a set of attributes that

*This research is part of the INCT of the Future Internet for Smart Cities funded by CNPq, proc.

465446/2014-0, CAPES proc. 88887.136422/2017-00, and FAPESP, proc. 2014/50937-1.

 
 
 
 
 
 
uniquely identify and represents an entity (e.g., patients) in a digital context. The Self-
sovereign Identity (SSI) are designed to enable entities to control its DIDs, using cryp-
tographic tools, such as digital signatures [L´opez 2020]. With that, users in the health
domain could use these identiﬁers to interact among them (exchanging their identi-
ties), in a secure and reliable way, without loosing the data ownership. Decentralized
Ledger Technologies (DLTs), such as Blockchain, had been investigated by Kassab et
al. [Kassab et al. 2019] and Houtan et al. [Houtan et al. 2020] as core mechanisms for
electronic health record systems. The use of this kind of technology and identities could
be a means of confronting the challenge of sharing and securing sensitive medical infor-
mation among healthcare parties, as well as ensuring patients maintain sovereignty over
their data.

In the remaining of this article, Section 2 discusses related work. Section 3
presents the principles of SSI. Section 4 lists some use cases of SSI in medical data and
personal health data. Section 5 proposes the architecture based on SSI and DLT frame-
works. Section 6 discusses the practical open problems related to the application of SSI
in healthcare. Finally, in Section 7 we present ideas for future works and our conclusions.

2. Related work

In recent years, several authors explored the idea of using intelligent agents in health-
to provide interoperability [Isern and Moreno 2016, Barru´e et al. 2015,
care context
Wimmer 2014].
some authors explored blockchain technol-
ogy [Shrier et al. 2016, Liu 2016, da Conceic¸ ˜ao et al. 2018], most of them proposing
strategies to improve mobility and security in EHRs using distributed ledgers.

More recently,

Regarding using both SSI and DLT in the healthcare context, to the best of our

knowledge, we found few works directly related to ours, two of them discussed below.

Bouras et al. [Bouras et al. 2020] discuss several aspects to achieve a decentral-
ized identity management, using blockchain, in health systems. Among those aspects,
they identify the key players, their roles, and the different health scenarios in which SSI
and DLT technologies can be applied. In the ﬁrst aspect, stakeholders (key players) were
divided into: regulators (e.g., government), representatives (e.g., insurance and equipment
companies), providers (e.g., physicians and nurses), and consumers (e.g., patients). In the
second aspect, all players have the same roles (Issuer, Inspector, Holder), but with dif-
ferent functionalities, depending on the context. In these roles: the Issuer is responsible
for creating claims; the Inspector is responsible for verifying the claims; the Holder is re-
sponsible for storing and control the claims. In the third aspect, the scenarios are divided
into data exchanging, online pharmacy, payment, and research projects. In these scenar-
ios, the authors identify the players associated and the requirements necessary (such as
interoperability, data standards, anonymity, scalability, etc.) to deploy them in the real
world. Besides these aspects, the work also lists several decentralized identity manage-
ment solutions that use the SSI and DLT technologies, but only one of them (Evernym)
has the Healthcare domain as an industry target.

Houtan et al. [Houtan et al. 2020] as well as the aforementioned work, also dis-
cuss on how the SSI and Blockchain can be applied in the health domain. The difference
is in the focus on the challenges that arise when creating a healthcare information system
(HIS) that must be decentralized, private, and secure in order to exchange patients’ data.

Among the challenges in using DLTs, the authors identify that the blockchain category
(e.g., public, private, hybrid), smart contract programming language, and consensus pro-
tocol create trade-off that must be analyzed by the architects and designers in order to
avoid functional and non-functional misbehavior or security problems. Among the chal-
lenges to maintain the system private and secure, in the SSI context, they identify that
the data collection (source of the data), interoperability, and access scenarios could lead
to reveal some information to unauthorized parties (information leakage) or to lose infor-
mation because the data is controlled and owned by the users. This work presented and
analyzed several solutions using blockchain as the core for creating HIS, but concludes
that most of them are not ready to be deployed in real-world scenarios.

3. Self-Sovereign Identity (SSI)
A person walks into a bar and asks for a drink. The bartender then asks to show some
identiﬁcation to conﬁrm that he/she is old enough to buy liquor. The person presents
his/her state-issued driver’s license, containing the name, photo, date of birth, mother’s
name, and other personal information. The bartender recognizes the presented document,
notices the resemblance between the photo and the person, ﬁgures the persons’ age by his
date of birth, and, ﬁnally, conﬁrms that the person can place the order.

The described scenario, proposed by Windley [ComputerWorld 2018], depicts ex-
amples of identiﬁcation (the person presents his/her document to the bartender), authenti-
cation (the document proofs that the person is who he claims to be), and authorization (the
person is old enough to buy a drink). Ordinary interactions like this are the inspiration
behind a concept called self-sovereign identity. Windley describes:

“Self-sovereign identity starts with the notion that we all are the makers
of our own identity, online and off. Because they do not rely on any
centralized authority, self-sovereign identity systems are decentralized,
mirroring the way identity works in real life.” [ComputerWorld 2018]

The SSI represent the user-centric identity model because it grants the users
control over their data. User-centric approaches for managing digital identities date
back to 2005 when Josang described a model where users would store their identi-
ﬁers and credentials in a portable hardware device secured by a local secret, like a
PIN [Jøsang and Pope 2005]. The advancements in portable devices and distributed
ledger technologies brought improvements to the user-centric model, enabling the cre-
ation of two essential elements for SSI [L´opez 2020]:

• Decentralized ledgers: distributed records structures that store cryptographic
proofs such as digital signatures and timestamps, allowing anyone to verify digital
credentials issued by entities without the need of a central source of trust.

• Digital wallets: portable and secure personal repositories that allow users to man-
age identities and veriﬁable credentials within the phones, completely protected
and under their control [L´opez 2020]. It also enables voluntary information dis-
closure situations: users can select what information to disclose to whom.

4. Use cases of SSI in health applications
There are several use cases in which SSI could be applied in the health do-
main [Bouras et al. 2020]. The selected use cases described below were adapted from
the United States Core Data for Interoperability (USCDI) standards [USCDI 2020].

4.1. Allergies and intolerances

Context: allergies and intolerances represent harmful or undesirable physiological re-
sponses presented by patients when exposed to a particular substance. Allergens can
group into the following categories: drugs (e.g. penicillin or aspirin), food (e.g. milk or
gluten), environmental (e.g. dust or mold), and non-medication (e.g. latex).

Problem/Challenge: checking for existing allergies
and intolerances is essential to provide proper care for pa-
tients. Failing to capture this information during admis-
sion in the healthcare system can cause severe harm or even
death. Allergic and intolerant patients usually inform of their
known conditions, but an unconscious patient cannot warn
his/her physician.

Storytelling: Lisa wakes up with a severe menstrual
cramps. She goes to the hospital and asks for something
for the pain. The physician asks Lisa to present her medical
conditions history, looking speciﬁcally for existing allergies,
and current medications. Lisa uses her digital wallet to cre-
ate a veriﬁable presentation with the information requested.
While examining the claims, the physician notices she is al-
lergic to a substance common in painkillers. Therefore, he
searches for another medication to alleviate her pain.

Figure
Allergies
intolerances

1.
and

Beneﬁts: using veriﬁable credentials to present known conditions for healthcare
providers helps to automate speciﬁc inquiries that impact the diagnosis and treatment of
patients without having to ask them explicitly.

4.2. Clinical notes

Context: clinical notes are records taken during a medical
evaluation [USCDI 2020]. Those records can be structured
(checklist) or unstructured (free text) data and may comprise
items as consultation notes, history & physical notes, etc.

Problem/Challenge: clinical notes are the most fre-
quent, most sensitive, and the least normalized pieces of
patients’ health records. Keeping this data into a personal
record that can be shared privately with a healthcare provider
would improve the quality of the health assessment while re-
specting patient privacy.

Storytelling: Charles goes on an appointment with
a new cardiologist. He is seeking a second opinion about
a health assessment he received from another physician.
The cardiologist reviews the past medical evaluation from
Charles’ electronic health record and discover that the previ-

Figure 2. Clinical
Notes

ous physician did not consider further lab tests to support his assessment.

Beneﬁts: addressing clinical notes as claims in an SSI digital wallet allows pa-

tients to consolidate their health history, breaking the silos of information.

4.3. Immunizations

Context: the COVID-19 pandemic highlighted the need for
mass immunization to ﬁght the spread of diseases. Even be-
fore the pandemic, proof of immunization was required for
certain activities: traveling abroad, school enrollment, etc.

Problem/Challenge: despite previous attempts to
create an international standard for proving immunization
status, such as the International Certiﬁcate of Vaccination or
Prophylaxis [ICPV 2005], required when arriving from ar-
eas at risk of Yellow Fever, there is no easy way to validate
the legitimacy of a person’s reported immunization status.
Reliable proof of vaccination is essential to support the reg-
ulations that, for instance, require students to be immunized
to attend in-person classes at schools [ALESP 2020].

3.

Figure
Immunization
records

Storytelling: Louise has a business trip. In order to
board a ﬂight to her destination, she must show proof of a
SARS-CoV-2 immunization. She was vaccinated, and the
proof of immunization has been recorded as a veriﬁable credential, by an accredited vac-
cination center, in her digital wallet. On the day of the travel, she goes to the airline
counter and presents a QR code containing a veriﬁable record of her vaccination status.
The airline employee scans the QR code and validates the immunization record, stating
that Louise is ready to embark.

Beneﬁts: the success of many efforts to bring society back to normal after the
COVID-19 pandemic depends on reliable proof of vaccination, the so-called COVID pass-
port. International Air Travel Association, for example, is adopting SSI technologies to
provide a travel pass app [IATA 2021] that allows travelers to present veriﬁable proof of
negative test results and vaccine shots taken without disclosing personal information.

4.4. Laboratory tests

Context: Lab tests examine human-derived samples to provide information for the diag-
nosis, prevention, treatment of disease, or health assessment of patients [USCDI 2020].
Test results main contain reports, diagnostic images and videos, etc.

Problem/Challenge: the history of laboratory test results can provide valuable in-
formation for physicians regarding the evolution of patients’ health conditions. However,
labs usually keep the actual digital records of the tests and give the patients cumbersome
printed copies of the results that tend to be discarded with time.

Storytelling: Mark is ﬁghting liver cancer for many years. After two surgeries
and many chemotherapy sessions, the disease appears to be under control. Every six
months, however, Mark follows up with his oncologist to check his condition and have
routine checkups.

During the appointment, Mark’s physician asks for the images from the last 3 MRI
scans to compare with the most recent one. Mark recovers the lab results from his digital
wallet and shares the ﬁles with the physician.

Beneﬁts: patients should own their medical records:
laboratories can issue test results to patients as veriﬁable cre-
dentials in an SSI digital wallet, allowing them to maintain
the history of their private health information. Labs would
beneﬁt from reducing their liability as they would not have
to keep conﬁdential records in their possession.

4.5. Control methods for prescription drugs

Context: prescription drug abuse represents a health chal-
lenge worldwide. According to US [NIDA 2016], in 2014,
more than 47.000 people died due to an unintentional drug
overdose.

Problem/Challenge: health agencies regulate con-
trol mechanisms for purchasing prescription medication, of-
ten requiring patients to present valid medical prescriptions.
Among many difﬁculties to implement such controls, false
prescriptions and identity forgery are the most common.
Also, enforcing centralized systems to control medical pre-
scriptions cause adoption friction in pharmacies and health-
care providers.

Figure
Laboratory
test results

4.

Storytelling: Brianna is having a hard time healing
after a car accident. Her broken leg hurts. So, Brianna asks
the doctor for pain relievers to help her. The doctor issues
Brianna a prescription for a controlled painkiller, using his
digital ID to sign the prescription straight to Brianna’s digi-
tal wallet. To prove she can purchase the prescription drug,
Brianna presents a QR Code to the drug store attendant con-
taining a veriﬁable credential issued by her physician, with
the drug designation, dosage, quantity, and posology. The attendant is able to conﬁrm the
presented information and proceed with the sale.

Figure
Prescription
drugs

5.

Beneﬁts: prescription drug regulation can beneﬁt from the SSI approach by lever-
aging blockchain features such as immutability and decentralized trust to combat coun-
terfeit and identity fraud. In addition, selective disclosure allows patients to prove they
are entitled to purchase prescription medicine without exposing their personal data.

4.6. Medical procedures

Context: the [USCDI 2020] describes a procedure as “an activity that is performed with
or on a patient as part of the provision of care”. Examples of medical procedures include
surgeries, biopsies, amputations, general anesthesia, chemotherapy, and endoscopy.

Problem/Challenge: detailed reports on medical procedures are the type of in-
formation that is usually siloed, kept by the organizations that perform the procedures.
Health professionals must be informed about procedures undertaken by patients in order
to offer proper treatment and avoid any health damage.

Storytelling: Sophia has had a stomachache for two days. She goes to the emer-
gency room, tells the doctor about the symptoms, and points out where it hurts. She also

recalls that she went through an endoscopy two days ago and started feeling bad since
then. After assessing the endoscopic report Sophia shared electronically with him, the
doctor speculates that she may be suffering from minor internal bleeding. The doctor
then forwards her for further tests before prescribing the proper treatment.

Beneﬁts: keeping medical records as credentials in
an SSI digital wallet allow patients to break the information
silos by creating a repository to aggregate reports on previ-
ous procedures, known medical conditions, etc.

4.7. Vital signs
Context: Vital signs are “physiologic measurements of a
patient that indicate the status of the body’s life sustaining
functions.” [USCDI 2020]. This patient-generated health in-
formation can be collected from people in Intensive Care
Units (ICUs) that require constant monitoring, but also from
wearable devices that record health and lifestyle information.

Figure 6. Medical
Procedures

Problem/Challenge: from smartwatches to peace-
makers, going through ICU medical monitors and glucome-
ters, many devices can measure and collect vital signs. How-
ever, few devices follow any standard for structuring and
storing this data, creating silos of health information that could produce valuable sources
of information for physicians during medical evaluations.

Storytelling: Phil is late with his annual checkup.
During the consultation, Phil’s doctor orders routine screen-
ings and a complete physical test. Phil recalls that his smart-
watch has a heart rate and blood pressure monitor, and all
these measurements are collected and stored in his digital
wallet. Then, Phil uses it to generate a downloadable report
of his vital signs from the past two months and share it with
his doctor. This data, along with other reports, provides a
rich data set that helps to assess his health condition.

Beneﬁts: vital signs express individual features the
same way identity claims do. SSI credential schemas can be
used to model biomedical data structures that support col-
lecting vital signs using wearables, IoT medical devices, and
regular medical monitors. UCIs immediately beneﬁt from
this technology, using SSI digital wallets as electronic health
records for their inpatients.

Figure 7.
signs

Vital

5. Architecture
This section presents the proposed architecture of the blockchain-based self-sovereign
health registry system. Figure 8 portrays a context view, where the concentric circles
depict the layers of the system.

The two inner layers are the foundation of the architecture. They represent the
blockchain network and are common to all actors in the system. The innermost layer

Figure 8. Context diagram representing layers and responsibilities

describes the blockchain ledgers, public information repositories that store data using a
DLT. The blockchain ledgers hold the following information:

• Public DIDs: identity records containing public keys and authentication parame-

ters. Those DIDs enable veriﬁers to check if a presented claim is legit.

• Schemas: list of attributes used as data models for the credentials.
• Credential deﬁnitions: instances of schemas created for a particular issuer. It
hold cryptographic hashes, bound to the issuer, for every attribute described in the
schema. These deﬁnitions allow that veriﬁers can check the validity of individual
claims without disclosing the complete information.

• Revocation registry: even though ledgers do not store private credentials (hold-
ers keep those in their digital wallets), there must be a repository for revoked
credentials where veriﬁers can assert if a presented credential is still valid.

The layer that surrounds the ledgers represents the blockchain nodes. Those
nodes are the machines that support the blockchain network, managing the data that is
stored in the ledgers. The consensus management algorithms ensure that every node
has a synchronized copy of the ledgers. There can be as many nodes as needed to keep
the blockchain network running efﬁciently, but the initial nodes are known as “Gene-
sis nodes”. Those initial nodes provide a unique identiﬁcation of the network and are
described in a ﬁle called Genesis ﬁle. The nodes and the messaging agents (explained be-
low) must hold this ﬁle to connect to the network. The nodes are responsible for writing

and reading data from the ledgers, and therefore, they need their own DIDs. Part of the
node’s DIDs is stored in their digital wallets, named steward wallets.

The messaging agent layer is responsible for holding digital wallets encrypted
and protected, and for connecting with others blockchain nodes and agents. These two
different connections are essential for understanding how information ﬂows among enti-
ties and are explained in detail in the following sections. In summary, those connections
can be described:

using HTTP protocol,

• Node communication:

to the
blockchain network to write and read public data from the ledgers. The agents
also expose messaging APIs to user interface components for credential handling.
• DIDComm: a protocol for secure peer-to-peer communication between agents,
DIDComm allows entity agents to establish trusted relationships and exchange
private messages and credentials.

the agents connect

The outermost layer represents the user interface, where speciﬁc business logic is
implemented. The user interface provides entity users with credential handling capabil-
ities, such as credential issuance, credential veriﬁcation, and relationship establishment.
In straight terms, the user interface layer allows users to interact with the system.

5.1. Actors and interactions

Once the overview of the architectural layers is presented, it is essential to describe the
actors and their roles in the system. The diagrams in Figure 9 depict the use cases covered
by the proposed architecture and the interactions among actors.

5.1.1. Issuer/holder interactions

Issuers and holders are actors that represent the roles of entities in a SSI context. In the
proposed architecture, their interaction is depicted in Figure 9(a).

The “issues credential” use case refers to a generic capability that describes the act
of an issuer that asserts claims about a holder through the issuance of veriﬁable creden-
tials. The system allows this use case to be extended to more speciﬁc scenarios, covering
detailed interactions among specialized versions of the actors. An issuer also “estab-
lishes relationship” with holders before issuing credentials. This use case describes the
exchange of DIDs between the issuer and holder. These DIDs and the issued credentials
are stored in the holder’s digital wallet (“store credentials” use case).

As part of the issuer/holder interactions, there are use cases that illustrate actions

that issuers perform in the blockchain. These use cases are depicted in Figure 9(b).

A peripheral use case “create a schema” is also represented in the diagram: to
issue a credential, the issuer must reference an existing schema. Schemas must be regis-
tered in the blockchain by health authorities, restricting the number of available schemas
according to the capabilities implemented in the system.

Figure 10 depicts a detailed sequence diagram that explains the interaction be-
tween issuers and holders. In a step-by-step representation: an issuer (e.g., a physician)
wants to issue a credential (e.g., medical prescription for a controlled drug) to a holder

(a) Interaction Issuer/Holder

(b) Interaction Issuer/blockchain

Figure 9. Use case diagram.

(e.g., a patient) and this involves establishing a relationship, exchanging digital IDs and
transferring the credential use cases as mentioned earlier.

5.1.2. Veriﬁer/holder interactions

Veriﬁers and holders are actors that also represent the roles of entities in a SSI context. In
the proposed architecture, their interaction is depicted in Figure 11(a).

The “present claims” use case refers to a generic capability that describes the
act of an issuer that present its claims to a veriﬁer. The system allows this use case to
be extended to more speciﬁc scenarios, covering detailed interactions among specialized
versions of the actors. A holder “establishes relationship” with veriﬁers before presenting
their credentials. This use case describes the exchange of DIDs between the veriﬁer and
holder. Once the relationship is established, the veriﬁer can “request proof” from issuers,
selecting which attributes the holder must present. The holder then “fetches the creden-
tials” that match the criteria deﬁned by the veriﬁer to create the credential presentation.

As part of the veriﬁer/holder interactions, there are use cases that illustrate actions

that veriﬁer perform in the blockchain. These use cases are depicted in Figure 11(b).

Veriﬁers perform credential validation through “verify credentials” use case,
fetching the holder an issuer public DIDs to evaluate the presented cryptographic proofs.

5.2. Components and adopted technologies

The proposed architecture is comprised of several software components. Figure 12 depicts
a diagram that groups these components in software packages and distributes them in the
architectural layers shown in Figure 8, represented as stacked blocks.

The Blockchain ledgers layer uses Hyperleger Indy’s Plenum module to handle
the storage of public identity information in distributed ledgers and Hyperledger Ursa’s
library to perform the necessary cryptographic primitives. Hyperledger Indy and Hyper-
ledger Aries also reference Ursa’s crypto library to reuse complex cryptographic prim-
itives across Hyperledger projects. The Blockchain node layer runs over Hyperledger
Indy’s Node, Plenum and SDK modules, managing the blockchain network and its con-
sensus mechanisms.

Figure 10. Sequence diagram - interactions issuer/holder

The Messaging agent layer represents the clients of the Blockchain network and
runs over the Hyperledger Aries agent and embedded Indy SDK module. The User inter-
face layer is an abstraction for the healthcare software that uses Messaging agent APIs to
provide speciﬁc business journeys for Issuers, Holders, and Veriﬁers.

6. Discussion

We implemented the proposed architecture for validation, using the Indy/Aries architec-
ture, installed on a cloud server, and the Trinsic wallet1.

The main paradigm shift in system design is the ownership of data, which are
under the control of the patient. This reduces the amount of data held by third parties,

1https://trinsic.id

(a) Interaction holder/veriﬁer

(b) Interaction veriﬁer/blockchain

Figure 11. Use case diagram.

therefore reducing the potential for data leakage. However, it is possible to highlight new
challenges.

The ﬁrst challenge is client-side storage. In an ideal scenario, this storage should
be in a local repository (e.g., patient’s cell phone) with automatic backup to the cloud,
similar to how Dropbox currently operates. The techniques to manage secure local writing
and automatic cloud backup must be developed. In addition, we have to ﬁnd out whether
the storage medium on a modern cell phone is adequate for storing basic health data. Of
course, some data, such as images and videos, should only be stored in the cloud.

Another challenge is the usability of the system. We believe that soon, the popu-
lation will use services based on reading QRCodes and digital signatures. Still, the ease
of using these interfaces should also be a determining factor for its wide adoption. An im-
portant line of research is to make the exchange of health data between Issuer and Holder
automatic — or almost automatic, especially when data collection takes place through
sensors of Internet of Things.

A third challenge is the maintenance of the computing infrastructure. It is clear
that patients must maintain local nodes, and Issuers and Veriﬁers must maintain messag-
ing agents. But who should support the blockchain Indy nodes? The business model is
not well deﬁned.

Finally, we believe there is a signiﬁcant economic potential in developing soft-
ware, as each entity, Issuer or Veriﬁer, may need to customize their messaging agents to
meet their business. We also believe in the emergence of new business chains based on
the trustworthiness of credentials and data availability. For example, a heart test could be
used to enroll in a gym; attendance at the gym can generate discounts on health insurance;
health coverage can create discounts on life insurance, and so on.

7. Conclusions

This work exploits the main applications of SSI in healthcare scenarios. In our proposal,
all data is owned by the patients. And it relies on SSI, blockchain technology and well-

Figure 12. Architectural layers and stacked software packages

known standards.

The architecture is ﬂexible in order to satisfy several standardized uses cases. It
does not solve dilemmas related to data accessibility versus privacy, but it provides ap-
propriate means for the explicit consideration of each of these issues.

For the future, we plan to implement a functional prototype of the proposed ar-
chitecture, shown in Section 5, and obtain feedback from patients and healthcare profes-
sionals and institutions about the usability of the system. In addition, after to validate the
basic solution, we could create more complex data health management models.

References

[ALESP 2020] ALESP (2020). Lei nº 17.252, de 17 de marc¸o de 2020. ´Ultimo Acesso em:

01.06.2021.

[Barru´e et al. 2015] Barru´e, C. et al. (2015). Using multi-agent systems to mediate in an
assistive social network for elder population. In Proceedings of the 18th International
Conference of the Catalan Association for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, volume 277, page
120.

[Bouras et al. 2020] Bouras, M. A., Lu, Q., Zhang, F., Wan, Y., Zhang, T., and Ning, H.
(2020). Distributed Ledger Technology for eHealth Identity Privacy: State of The Art
and Future Perspective. Sensors, 20(2).

[ComputerWorld 2018] ComputerWorld

(2018).

How

self-sovereign

identities
makes
https://www.computerworld.com/article/3244128/
how-blockchain-makes-self-sovereign-identities-possible.
html. ´Ultimo Acesso em: 06.04.2021.

Dispon´ıvel

possible.

blockchain
em:

[da Conceic¸ ˜ao et al. 2018] da Conceic¸ ˜ao, A. F., da Silva, F. S. C., Rocha, V., Locoro, A.,
and Barguil, J. M. (2018). Electronic health records using blockchain technology.
In WBlockchain, in conjunction with Simp´osio Brasileiro de Redes de Computadores
(SBRC).

[Houtan et al. 2020] Houtan, B., Haﬁd, A. S., and Makrakis, D. (2020). A survey on
blockchain-based self-sovereign patient identity in healthcare. IEEE Access, 8:90478–
90494.

[IATA 2021] IATA (2021). IATA - travel pass initiative. ´Ultimo acesso em: 01/06/2021.

[ICPV 2005] ICPV (2005). WHO — International certiﬁcate of vaccination or Prophylaxis

(ICPV). ´Ultimo acesso em: 01/06/2021.

[Isern and Moreno 2016] Isern, D. and Moreno, A. (2016). A systematic literature review

of agents applied in healthcare. Journal of medical systems, 40(2):43.

[Jøsang and Pope 2005] Jøsang, A. and Pope, S. (2005). User centric identity management.
In AusCERT Asia Paciﬁc information technology security conference, page 77.

[Kassab et al. 2019] Kassab, M. et al. (2019). Blockchain: A panacea for electronic health
records? In 1st International Workshop on Software Engineering for Healthcare, pages
21–24.

[Liu 2016] Liu, P. T. S. (2016). Medical record system using blockchain, big data and
tokenization. In Information and Communications Security, pages 254–261. Springer.

[L´opez 2020] L´opez, M. A. (2020). Self-sovereign identity: The future of identity: Self-
sovereignity, digital wallets, and blockchain. ´Ultimo Acesso em: 11.04.2021.
[NIDA 2016] NIDA (2016). Director’s message. ´Ultimo Acesso em: 06.06.2021.

[Shrier et al. 2016] Shrier, A. A. et al. (2016). Ofﬁce of the national coordinator for health

information technology us department of health and human services.

[USCDI 2020] USCDI (2020). HealthIt.gov - United States Core Data for Interoperability

(USCDI) v1. ´Ultimo acesso em: 01/06/2021.

[W3C 2021] W3C (2021). Decentralized Identiﬁers (DIDs) v1.0 - Core architecture, data
model, and representations. Dispon´ıvel em: https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/. ´Ultimo
acesso em: 11.04.2021.

[Wimmer 2014] Wimmer, H. (2014). A multi-agent system for healthcare data privacy. In

AMCIS.

