1
2
0
2

r
a

M
1
1

]

Y
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
2
3
7
6
0
.
7
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Opportunities and challenges of
Blockchain-Oriented systems in the tourism
industry.

Fabio Caddeo
University of Cagliari
Cagliari, Italy
fabio.caddeo@yahoo.it

Andrea Pinna
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science
University of Cagliari
Cagliari, Italy
pinna.andrea@unica.it

Abstract—The tourism industry is increasingly inﬂuenced by
the evolution of information and communication technologies
(ICT), which are revolutionizing the way people travel. In this
work we want to investigate the use of innovative IT technologies
by DMOs (Destination Management Organizations), focusing on
blockchain technology, both from the point of view of research in
the ﬁeld, and in the study of the most relevant software projects.
In particular, we intend to verify the beneﬁts offered by these IT
tools in the management and monitoring of a destination, without
forgetting the implications for the other stakeholders involved.
These technologies, in fact, can offer a wide range of services
that can be useful throughout the life cycle of the destination.

Index Terms—Blockchain, BOSE, Tourism industry, E-

Tourism

I. INTRODUCTION

Nowadays, tourists are increasingly involved in creating
they
the travel experience, becoming promoters of what
experience ﬁrst-hand and consequently contributing to the
improvement of a destination. In other words, they become
protagonists of a process of co-creation of value that can
affect both the destination in general and individual companies
operating in the sector; examples are ”Expedia”, one of the
largest worldwide Online Travel Agencies (or OTA), and
”TripAdvisor”, a travel platform that offers the opportunity
of reviewing the tourist services that you have enjoyed on
just accommodations, restaurants, or airlines,
holiday (not
but also experiences and attractions). In fact,
through the
involvement of their customers / travellers, they have managed
to increase their importance in the travel industry. With the
spread of the Internet, the world of tourism has undergone a
ﬁrst transformation, leading to the spread of the so-called e-
tourism. More precisely, according to the deﬁnition provided
by Buhalis (2003) [2], e-tourism means ”the digitization of all
processes and value chains in the tourism, travel, hospitality
and catering sectors that allow organizations to maximize their
efﬁciency and effectiveness ”. This situation has given a strong
impetus to the tourism sector, as it has allowed the various
destinations to exploit this technology to improve their attrac-
tiveness by implementing appropriate online communication
strategies. Recently, however, we are witnessing the transition
from e-tourism to smart tourism.

In truth, however, rather than smart tourism it would be
more right to talk about smart destinations, which Lopez de
Avila (2015) [6] deﬁnes as: ”an innovative tourist destination
technology infrastructure, which
built on a state-of-the-art
ensures the sustainable development of tourist areas, accessible
to all, and which facilitates the visitor’s integration with its
environment,
increasing the quality of the experience and
improving the quality of life of residents”. This deﬁnition
clearly shows the importance of ICTs for their integration into
the physical infrastructure of the destinations.

The use of information technologies is therefore an essential
requirement of new forms of tourism. On the one hand, they
help tourists in identifying and purchasing the tourist products
they prefer, making them increasingly involved in co-creation
and co-promotion of travel experiences, and on the other hand
they allow suppliers of such products to make their offerings
known around the world.

One of the problems arising from the use of new technolo-
gies in tourism is the lack of public conﬁdence. Blockchain
technology would seem to provide a solution, as the strength-
ening of trust represents one of the potential effects deriving
from its application to tourism, especially in a period of great
uncertainty like the one we are currently experiencing. The
formation of trust in the hospitality industry, in fact, is still
a little-known aspect, since it depends on the subjectivity of
individual tourists, or rather on the risk that they are willing to
accept in travel experiences. In the speciﬁc case of blockchain
technology, the protocols on which it is based are structured
in such a way as to ensure greater involvement by the various
tourism stakeholders and thus improve their experience in the
sector.

As highlighted by Porru et al. (2017) [14], the growing
focus on the world of blockchain technology has led to the
need to create tools for the development of speciﬁc software
oriented towards it (called blockchain-oriented software, or
BOS). In general, BOS is deﬁned as a system that works
through the implementation of a blockchain. An example is
the Ethereum platform, which can be deﬁned as the largest
decentralized digital platform in the world that uses blockchain
technology for the realization not only of transactions, but

 
 
 
 
 
 
also of particular programs called smart contracts, ensuring
security, reliability and transparency [10], [12]. More precisely,
”Smart Contracts” are programs written in a programming
language and registered in the blockchain that self-execute
when certain predetermined conditions occur. Pinna et al.
(2019) [13] deﬁne Smart Contracts as programs stored within
the public register of Ethereum and associated with a particular
blockchain address, aimed at implementing a logical sequence
of steps according to some well-deﬁned rules.

In this work we want to investigate the use of innovative
IT technologies by DMOs, focusing attention on blockchain
technology. In particular, we intend to verify the potential
offered by these tools in the management and monitoring of
a destination, without forgetting the implications for the other
stakeholders involved. Such technologies, in fact, can offer
a wide range of services that can be useful throughout the
entire destination life-cycle. They represent an indispensable
tool both to provide DMOs with different advantages from
the management point of view (for example in monitoring or
marketing) in order to achieve the sustainability objective [16],
both to ensure that tourists and operators in the sector have a
satisfactory experience.

The investigation discussed in this paper is guided by the

following research questions.

RQ1: to what extent does the scientiﬁc community address
the problems relating to the use of blockchain technology in
tourism? and

RQ2: what is the state of the art of the practical use of

blockchain technology in tourism and DMOs?

To answer the ﬁrst question, we examined the scientiﬁc
literature on the SCOPUS database, and we deepened the
study by examining the content of the works more related
to technical and socio-economic issues, the results of which
are presented in Section II. To answer the second question, we
collected information regarding the most relevant blockchain-
oriented projects for tourism, analyzing both the functionalities
and the technology used. Section 3 presents the study of eleven
software projects currently operational or under development.
Through the study of the scientiﬁc literature of reference
and documentation on specialized websites,
is intended
to ﬁrstly evaluate the contribution of these technologies to
tourism managers, by laying the foundations for subsequent
implementations. Furthermore,
the Section 4 of the paper
allows us to discuss the two directions towards which the
tourism industry is moving towards thanks to the use of
blockchain technology, i.e disintermediation and coordinaion
& coopetition, as is arising from our investigation. Finally,
Section 5 concludes the paper.

it

II. LITERATURE REVIEW

Although the scientiﬁc literature on the topic of blockchain
is increasingly extensive, there are still few contributions that
analyse it in relation to the tourist industry, but all are suitable
for new insights. To conﬁrm this, in Fig. I you can check the
number of articles published (or added to the lists of papers in
press) annually dealing with the issue of blockchain related to

Fig. 1. Number of resulting publication per year by quering TITLE-ABS-KEY
( ”blockchain” AND ”tourism” ) in SCOPUS. For the years 2020 and 2021,
the symbol * indicates the presence of incomplete data, updated to November
2020.

tourism. The data were recovered in November 2020 through
the use of the Scopus database, setting the search by query
T IT LE − ABS − KEY (”blockchain” AN D ”tourism”)
with which were extracted scientiﬁc papers containing the
words “blockchain” and “tourism” in the title, in the abstract or
among the keywords. The graph shows that since 2016, with
no article published on this theme, the number has doubled
from year to year, which highlights the growing interest of
the scientiﬁc community towards the application of blockchain
technology in the tourism sector.

A. Selected literature

The selection process consisted of the following steps.
From the list of 65 papers obtained from the above described
query, the papers whose abstracts dealt with the application
of blockchain technology to tourism as the main topic of the
study were selected. Of these, the availability of the full text
was veriﬁed (either by publishers’ websites and by courtesy
of the authors). Then, we have focused our attention on the
scientiﬁc contributions of the last two years in relation to
the general principles of the BOSE [14]. In particular, we
chose the papers that discussed the opportunities offered by
blockchain technology applied in the tourism sector. We have
also included the papers that discussed the challenges that
the tourism industry will have to face with the adoption of
blockchain technology, both from a technological point of
view and from an economic-organizational point of view. Tab.
I reports the summary of the scientiﬁc literature chosen and
analysed in this work about the application of blockchain
technology in tourism.

The analysis of the articles in Tab. I, aims to be an op-
portunity to present the general framework of studies that ad-
dress the relationship between blockchain technology and the
tourism sector, to identify what may be its contribution to the
development of this industry. In our survey, the important con-
tribution of ¨Onder and Treiblmaier stands out. They are among
the most proliﬁc authors dealing with the issue of the applica-
tion of blockchain technology in tourism and enrich the ideas
of reﬂection on this issue. In 2018, ¨Onder and Treiblmaier

20162017201820192020*2021*0510152025303548173330YearNumber of publicationsTABLE I
SUMMARY OF THE RESEARCH PAPERS ANALYZED IN THIS STUDY

YEAR

TITLE

AUTHORS

2018

Blockchain and Tourism: Three Research Propositions

[8] ¨Onder I. & Treiblmaier H.

2019

2019

2019

2019

2019

2019

The Impact of Blockchain on the Tourism Industry:
A Theory-Based Research

[18] Treiblmaier H. & ¨Onder I.

Is blockchain technology a watershed for tourism
development?

[5] Kwok A. O. J. & Koh S. G. M.

Blockchain technology for smart city
and smart tourism: Latest trends and challenges

[7] Nam K., Dutt C. S.,
Chathoth P. & Khan M. S.

Assessment of blockchain applications in travel and
tourism industry

[9] Ozdemir A. I., Ar I. M. & Erol I.

Blockchain Technology in Tourism:
Applications and Possibilities

[15] Rejeb A. & Rejeb K.

A blockchain approach for the sustainability in
tourism management in the Sulcis area

[1] Baralla G., Pinna A., Tonelli R.,
Marchesi M. & Mannaro K.

2020

Blockchain and Tourism

[17] Treiblmaier H.

2021

Applications of Blockchain and Smart Contract
for Sustainable Tourism Ecosystems

[4] Joo J., Park J. & Han Y.

MAIN CONTRIBUTIONS
Authors formulate three research hypotheses
about the impact of blockchain on tourist
industry.
Understanding the potential impacts of
blockchain technology on tourist facilities and
how to cope with the changes induced by it.
Opportunities and main challenges arising
from the use of blockchain technology for
small island economies.
Latest blockchain technology trends and
challenges for smart cities and smart tourism
and their inﬂuences for the sector.
A basic set of blockchain criteria is proposed
for the comparison of various decentralized
applications.
Potential effects and applications offered by
blockchain technology to the tourism
industry.
A blockchain platform is proposed for
traceability and certiﬁcation of agri-food
products origin and for the promotion of
tourist activities of a destination.
Economic potential of blockchain technology
for the future of the tourism industry.
Analysis of some cases of blockchain
technology application and smart contracts to
the tourism industry and identiﬁcation of
opportunities to innovate existing companies.

[8] conducted a study in which they formulated three research
hypotheses concerning the impact of the blockchain on the
tourist industry, claiming that this will bring: the activation
of reliable systems for evaluating tourism products through
the use of new forms of assessment and review technologies;
the creation of new consumer-to-consumer (C2C) markets
through the adoption of cryptocurrencies; disintermediation of
the tourist industry. Before buying a trip and its related services
online, it is normal for any traveller to ﬁrst read the reviews
of those who have already used the same service, considering
this information more up-to-date and reliable than that given
directly by travel service providers. Indeed, it is well known
that online reviews of tourism products have a signiﬁcant
inﬂuence on potential consumers. However, these reviews are
often subject to falsiﬁcation by industry players themselves
(such as hotel or restaurant owners). They seek to orient
customers to their advantage by creating a not entirely truthful
evaluation of their products by posting fake reviews; this is
complicated by the fact that anyone can publish travel reviews
without being asked for proof of having completed the tourist
experience. To overcome this situation, and thus have correct
online reviews, through blockchain technology it is possible
to create evaluation systems that provide individuals with
traceable identities through unique private keys, in order to
avoid distortions in reviews and make them more reliable. This
would create a decentralized, impartial, and transparent system
that guarantees authentic and reliable reviews to potential trav-
ellers, which once entered in the blockchain register would no
longer be possible to modify or delete. In such a system, would

still be guaranteed the privacy of users, who could also be
more encouraged in making reviews with any ﬁnancial rewards
in the form of tokens and cryptocurrencies to be received as
a reward. Most tourism products often involve the transfer
of money between partners located in different countries. This
may require intervention by trusted intermediaries to conclude
the transaction, with the consequence of having to pay ad-
ditional large commissions; think for example of the 20%
charged by Booking to hoteliers, overpricing which inevitably
affects ﬁnal consumers. Using cryptocurrencies, however, it
is possible to ensure an easy exchange of money without
the help of third parties intermediaries and participate in the
emergence of new forms of C2C markets of tourism products.
Cryptocurrencies could therefore change the way tourists and
operators exchange money and avoid the intervention of third
parties (banks) in transactions, with consequent cost reduc-
tions. This is especially important where tourists’ personal
information, including ﬁnancial data, cannot be entrusted to
intermediaries. There are many systems that use blockchain
to ensure high standards of security in transactions and at the
same time greater protection of travellers’ information. One
of these is TripEcoSys (10), which aims to be the largest
decentralized tourism platform in the world based on the
Ethereum blockchain. It is a system in which it is possible
to ﬁnd in a single space all the providers of the different
travel services (ﬂights, accommodation, excursions, etc.) that
normally the visitor should book independently of each other,
and where you can earn cryptocurrency rewards by sharing
your own experiences. Furthermore, given the characteristics

of cryptocurrencies, through blockchain networks it is also
possible to avoid the problem of converting foreign curren-
cies and, consequently, further limit the inﬂuence exerted by
intermediaries, making transactions safer. If, on the one hand,
tourists would no longer have to convert money when travel-
ling, thus eliminating all the risks associated with the exchange
of foreign currencies, on the other hand companies would be
free to adjust their prices according exchange rate variability.
The advent of information technologies also in the tourism
sector can therefore signiﬁcantly reduce the intermediation
chain towards the fruition of the tourist offer. The removal and
replacement of intermediaries (also called disintermediation)
is just one of the prerogatives of blockchain technology that
in a short time will revolutionize the distribution and use of
travel products and services, bringing signiﬁcant beneﬁts not
only of an economic nature (cost savings). In general, it can be
said that consumers will be more independent in organizing
their travels. This disintermediation, however, does not only
concern money transactions, but also directly affects the supply
of tourism products. An initial form of disintermediation has
already occurred with the advent of OTAs, but now also
these could be replaced by blockchain-based, open source
and decentralized travel platforms, such as WindingTree as
discussed in the next section, which can eliminate the power
exercised by intermediaries on the market. Another example is
the Locktrip platform (see Table 2), which allows travellers to
book hotels and other travel services without the intervention
of any intermediary and, at the same, time provide feedback
on the quality of the service. All this by using blockchain
technology. From these simple examples, one can already
understand the extent of the blockchain in the future of the
tourist industry. In another study, Treiblmaier & ¨Onder [18]
also set out to analyse the potential impacts of blockchain
technology on tourism facilities and how organizations could
cope with the changes it induces. In general, by interviewing
the managers of ten European Destination Management Or-
ganizations (DMOs), they highlighted that blockchain can be
an important resource for many tourist organizations because
it has the potential to change market structures. However,
this is still a complex technology as it requires a certain
investment by organizations, but they may not have the neces-
sary ﬁnancial resources and appropriate know-how to exploit
it adequately. It follows, therefore, that this technology can
be a new (important) resource only for those organizations
it for their own beneﬁt,
that are in a position to exploit
especially in a sector such as tourism. In 2020, Treiblmaier
[17] summarizes and discusses the current state of the art,
describing a list of twelve use cases of blockchain adoption in
tourism, and the most relevant theoretical aspects, according
to the academic literature. It focuses attention on the economic
aspects of tourism disintermediation, highlighting this use case
as looming in the tourism sector, and as a challenge that the
tourism organization must be ready to face.

Kwok and Koh (2018) [5] conﬁrm the high potential of
blockchain technology, analysing its opportunities in relation
to the economies of small islands, which could exploit it

to their advantage to compete with larger and often more
renowned destinations. According to the two authors,
in
fact, blockchain technology represents a valid aid for such
economies, strongly limited by their small size and their
insularity, to implement tourism policies that encourage their
economic growth. For example, Aruba is seeking to increase
tourism revenue through the creation of a blockchain-based
platform for travel bookings, while the Caribbean islands are
promoting the adoption of their own regional cryptocurrency.
In particular, the effects resulting from the application of the
blockchain to small island tourism can be traced back to four
categories that can create beneﬁcial effects for both tourists
and destinations. In summary, these are: the general offer
of a better tourist experience to visitors; greater speed and
security in transactions with foreign countries thanks to the
use of cryptocurrencies; diversiﬁcation of the ﬁnancial offer
and use of state-owned cryptocurrencies; ﬁnally, a reduction
in costs for host destinations. All this, however, can only be
possible if foreign tourists are able to understand it and if local
operators are able to accept it, thus avoiding limiting its use
to a restricted group of experienced users.

Nam et al. (2019) [7] analysed the latest trends and chal-
lenges regarding blockchain technology for smart cities and
tourism, focusing their attention on the comparison
smart
of thirteen decentralized applications (Dapps) of the tourism
industry. In particular, scholars have formulated some research
proposals about its evolution and inﬂuence in the industry,
coming to the conclusion that the adoption of blockchain
technology, and especially Dapps, will lead in the future to the
creation of new business models and new market structures.
Although a limited number of solutions have been analysed,
especially when compared to the totality of existing blockchain
solutions, their analysis revealed three characteristics common
to all Dapps: cost reduction, increasing adoption of cryptocur-
rencies and development of new all-encompassing ecosystems.
More precisely, a market will be created with strong competi-
tion between new online travel platforms based on blockchain
and those already existing on the market, that to survive will
be forced to change their business models and adapt to new
emerging trends. Furthermore, since it will not be easy to
ensure the adoption of blockchain technology by travellers
and other stakeholders, some operators may also provide for
the granting of incentives for the use of cryptocurrencies (the
greater the incentives, the faster the adoption of blockchain
technology). This will therefore lead to the identiﬁcation of
some ”dominant players”, that is those platforms with the
largest number of users, which will impose themselves on the
market.

Ozdemir et al. (2019) [9] also made a comparison between
several DApps, providing some practical examples of how
these are used in tourism. In particular, they have focused,
however, on proposing a basic set of blockchain technology
criteria that may prove useful for evaluating decentralized
applications. For this purpose, according to the authors, it is
necessary to consider the governance model of the blockchain,
the platform on which it is implemented, the type of consent,

TABLE II
ACTIVE OR PROPOSED BLOCKCHAIN ORIENTED SOFTWARE SYSTEM FOR TOURISM INDUSTRY

NAME AND URL
(1) WindingTree
https://windingtree.com/
(2) LockTrip
https://locktrip.com/
(3) FoodChain
https://food-chain.it/
(4) Bagtrax
https://bagtrax.eu/
(5) Yookye
https://yookye.com/it
(6) DTCM Tourism 2.0
https://dubai10x.ae/
(7) WICKET
https://www.wicketevents.com/
(8) Trippki
https://trippki.com/
(9) Travelchain
https://travelchain.io/
(10) TripEcoSys
https://www.tripecosys.com/
(11) Sardcoin
https://www.sardcoin.eu/

NATIONALITY

ACTIVITY STATUS KIND OF APPLICATION

BLOCKCHAIN

Switzerland

Bulgaria

Italy

Operating

Operating

Operating

Booking hotels and ﬂights

Ethereum

Booking hotels, holiday homes and ﬂights

Ethereum

Traceability of food products

Quadrans

United Kingdom

Operating

Baggage tracking

Italy

Operating

Organization of the holiday
(holiday home, services, experiences)

ND

Ethereum

United Arab Emirates

Announcement

Check occupancy status of hotel in Dubai

ND

Italy

Operating

Ticketing

United Kingdom

Operating

Hotel booking

Russia

Prototype

Travel ecosystem

United Kingdom

Prototype

Travel ecosystem

Ethereum

Ethereum

ND

Ethereum

Italy

Prototype

Smart coupon ecosystem

Hyperledger Fabric

the use of cryptocurrencies [], the use of smart contracts and
ﬁnally tokens. They argue that understanding these elements
is the key to understand and improve any blockchain applica-
tion. For example, the identiﬁcation of the governance model
applied to the blockchain is of fundamental importance to
determine its characteristics, as well as the type of platform
on which it is implemented can affect its performance [11].
However, their considerations need further development, es-
pecially considering the sample of DApps analysed: some of
these applications, in fact, seem to no longer exist.

The study conducted by Baralla et al. (2019) [1], however,
aims at proposing a blockchain platform for traceability and
certiﬁcation of origin of Sardinian agri-food products and for
the promotion of tourist activities in Sulcis area, in Sardinia,
with a view to a sustainability. Thanks to the blockchain
characteristics, in fact, it is possible to guarantee secure and
transparent information and ensure that it reaches all the stake-
holders involved. Following this logic, the system proposed
by Baralla et al. makes use of a series of smart contracts
to ensure traceability and provenance of products, giving
tourist/consumer the opportunity to verify their authenticity
and provide their own feedback by posting messages, photos,
and videos. In this way, tour operators can simultaneously
improve their services and enrich the tourist offer of the area.
Although the proposed system is still in progress and limited
to a ﬁnite territory, it is still very promising also for the future
tourist management of much larger territories.

Finally, Joo et al. (2021) [4] focused their attention on the
study of blockchain technology and related smart contracts
in the sustainable tourism sector and on identifying the best
opportunities to innovate existing companies, providing some
application examples. They also conﬁrm the evidence already
highlighted by other scholars about
the usefulness of the
blockchain to improve the transparency and safety of travel

operations, users’ trust, and the reduction of transaction costs.
The proposed examples can also help as a stimulus for tour
operators who want to make their businesses more innovative.

III. PROJECTS AND APPLICATIONS OF BLOCKCHAIN
TECHNOLOGY IN TOURISM

A. Relevant Business initiatives and Research Projects

In Tab. II we report eleven blockchain oriented software that
are used in the tourism industry. The list presented is the result
of two considerations: there are some software that are cited
as relevant examples in the reference literature, and others
that have emerged from a speciﬁc research on the main uses
of blockchain technology in the tourism sector. In addition
to the name and their URL, for each of them are indicated:
the nationality, the activity status (distinguishing the operating
software, from the announcements and the prototypes), their
main functionality and, where available, the type of blockchain
technology used.

B. Fields of application of blockchain technology

Although some of them have already been mentioned pre-
viously, in the tourism and hospitality industry there may be
many potential applications of blockchain technology, some of
which may also integrate with each other. Some of the main
applications of blockchain in tourism and those that could be
implemented to add value to the sector are summarized below.
1) Inventory management: Blockchain technology can be
used in an inventory management system which in the hos-
pitality sector can refer to the number of rooms available in
hotels or the number of seats available on airplanes. Speciﬁ-
cally, it can provide information on availability and coverage
rate by sharing it with the various interested stakeholders,
thus replacing any Property Management System (PMS) and
CRS, with the consequent removal of intermediaries and

related expenses. An example of this is the Swiss platform
WindingTree (1) , which allows hoteliers and airlines to list
their availabilities, and tourists to book them. Another example
is given by ”BedSwap”, a project on which the German
group TUI (Tourism Union International) is working for an
effective management of the hotel rooms of its partners in the
markets served by the company itself. The Dubai Department
of Tourism and Commerce (6), on the other hand, in 2018
launched ”Tourism 2.0”, with the aim of making Dubai the
world’s ﬁrst destination for global travel and events by 2020.
It is a system that allows you to check hotel occupancy and
room rates, allowing other tour operators to prepare their offers
more effectively for customers.

2) Traceability of food products: In an increasingly glob-
alized tourism context, it is important to provide destinations
with tools to ensure traceability in the supply of food chain
products, especially in those sectors of food and wine tourism
whose competitive advantage derives from the use of organic,
local, and sustainable products. Here blockchain can be used to
create a system that allows people to access data on the origin
of food products and then reconstruct the path of products
from the ﬁeld to the table. In practical, this could be done by
scanning a QR Code or directly barcodes of products through
devices registered in the blockchain. For example, Foodchain
(3) is an Italian system that, also using the Internet of Things
(IoT), traces food products from origin to the ﬁnal consumer
using blockchain technology. The information made public by
the participating companies is accessible to end consumers
through a QR Code applied on the packaging of products.
This helps to increase their conﬁdence in companies given the
possibility to check all the information on the product.

3) Baggage tracking: Despite the progress made by airlines
in handling luggage, many travellers continue to experience
problems with lost luggage, which leads to a loss of time
and money for both passengers and airlines themselves.
Blockchain technology is proposed as a solution in this sense
since it allows the tracking of baggage, which can be moni-
tored at various essential points, through the automatic entry
of the data collected in a public register, thus also speeding
up check-in and effectively reducing waiting times at
the
airport. For example, Bagtrax (4) uses a sensor which, once
attached to suitcases, allows you to locate your luggage during
transfers and to claim immediate compensation in case of
loss. This system uses blockchain technology to make tracking
sequences protected and guarantee the data security of all
the actors involved in the service: passengers, airlines, airport
managers and insurance companies.

4) Reservations and ticketing: In this case, the blockchain’s
usefulness lies in possible uses related to making reservations,
for the issuance of tickets and to contrast the black market, for
example by creating standard protocols allowing buyers to use
their electronic wallets to prove ownership of the ticket. This
includes WICKET (7), an app launched by an Italian startup
that uses a special protocol based on blockchain technology
to digitize tickets and limit the phenomenon of speculation. It
uses the GET (Guaranteed Entrance Token) protocol, already

used in the Netherlands and Singapore for the sale of tickets
for sporting events or other events such as concerts, fairs
and congresses. This year, however, following the pandemic
that has affected the entire planet, was proposed to bathing
establishments to allow bathers to book their place on the
beach and pay directly online. The system associates the ticket
with the buyer’s phone number, generating a unique QR code
in a special wallet, and will make it accessible to the user via
an app to allow the latter to access the facility.

5) Travellers loyalty: Travel industry operators can beneﬁt
from the creation of dedicated loyalty programs that issue
tokens as rewards to travellers. In fact, it has been demon-
strated that companies that use such systems are able to obtain
a competitive advantage over their competitors, reach new
potential customers and improve the perception of the brand in
their eyes, thus strengthening the link between travellers and
destinations. The startup Loyyal has launched a blockchain-
based platform through which companies can manage their
loyalty programs by offering various types of reward systems.
The Arab Group Jumeirah, in collaboration with Dubai Hold-
ing, uses this platform to improve the efﬁciency of its loyalty
programs. Trippki (8) , on the other hand, has devised a loyalty
program to allow customers and companies in the tourism
sector to enter directly into contact with each other, thus
promoting the disintermediation of the sector. Speciﬁcally,
customers are given some tokens (that are registered in the
blockchain without expiration date) to stay in a certain hotel,
thus ensuring the possibility to redeem them at any time.

6) Identity, credential management and privacy: In order
to improve the sector safety and protect the privacy of trav-
ellers, we could think of the deﬁnition of a (digital) global
traveller identity through a system that allows to determine
unequivocally the identity of a person. At the same time, it
is also possible ﬁnding a solution to the problem of identity
theft that tourists often encounter. For example, it will be
possible to add biometric information (especially ﬁngerprints
and facial recognition) to the other registered information thus
also simplifying the work of hotels, that will have only to
record in the blockchain the arrival and departure dates of
guests, without having to report them to the police or other
authorities. From this point of view, the telecommunications
company of air transport SITA (Soci´et´e Internationale de
T´el´ecommunications A´eronautiques) is studying how the use
of virtual or digital passports can reduce document checks
during passenger journeys, thus eliminating the need to possess
various travel documents. Through a single token containing
biometric data and other personal information, and stored on
mobile or wearable devices, travellers can in fact be quickly
identiﬁed only once by any authority.

C. Technology

Apart from their functionality in the tourism sector, there
are two main blockchain technologies adopted: smart contracts
and DApps.

1) Smart contracts: Their programmability and automated
execution independently of human interference offers many

potentials for the tourism industry. For example, these allow:
the activation of immediate payment systems in transactions,
thus facilitating collaboration between hotels and travel agen-
cies; the allocation of rooms to guests via digital keys on the
blockchain; airlines can facilitate ﬂight insurance by paying
automatically as agreed in case of delay or cancellation. Most
of the applications mentioned as an example in this section
use, in fact, different smart contracts in their systems.

2) dApps for smart tourism: Are in the process of deﬁning
projects for online review systems,
travel planning, direct
communication with property owners, personalized marketing.
For example, the innovative Italian startup Yookye (5) aims
to offer tourists travel proposals tailored by local experts
on the needs and aspirations of users. On the basis of the
preferences found, the local experts, making use of their ter-
ritorial knowledge and artiﬁcial intelligence, then create some
travel proposals from which the user can choose. Everything
is made more reliable thanks to the blockchain technology,
which guarantees transactions in total security. In this way,
users enjoy a secure and reliable short-term property booking
service, which combines traditional payment methods with the
most famous cryptocurrencies and the YOOK token of the
same platform.

3) Breaking technological barrier: Through the promotion
of transparent transactions, blockchain technology guarantees
a higher level of trust and security in online travel platforms,
since all data will only be upgradable through a consensual
agreement between all participants in the network. From this,
it is clear that blockchain can be a valid tool for neutrality
and objectivity in travel information systems. In this kind of
system, in fact, customers/tourists feel more comfortable in
sharing their travel experiences in a more open and sincere
way. Examples include TravelChain (9) and WindingTree(1).
The ﬁrst is a blockchain-based travel business that rewards
travellers for the transparent sharing of information regarding
their experiences; the other, instead, is a decentralized and
open-source platform that aims to ﬁnd a solution to several
problems in the travel industry (such as high commissions,
obsolete technology, high entry barriers and lack of innova-
tion), all linked to a high degree of centralization. This is a
system in which transaction data is grouped into blocks and
replicated among all participants to ensure greater transparency
and control of the travel package. In this way, customers are
able to ascertain the actual value of a tourism product and
gain more control and power over the planning of their travel
experience.

IV. DISCUSSION

The analysis carried out revealed two main effects that

blockchain technology can bring to the tourism sector.

1) Disintermediation: The progressive removal of interme-
diaries has already been widely discussed. Today, travel agen-
cies add a level of intermediation to the tourism chain, capable
of generating end-to-end trust, that is, between the consumer
(the tourist) and the tourist operator (i.e the DMO). Thanks to
the presence of a trustless mechanism, blockchain technology

makes the role of travel agencies accessory, that will have
to review their role in the tourism system (as experts in the
sector or as facilitators). This is a challenging opportunity for
traditional travel agencies (which will be able to count on
direct human relations). What has not been said, however, is
that, speciﬁcally in the tourism sector, blockchain can lead
to the replacement of Global Distribution Systems (GDS)
that allow transactions between different service providers
(for example hotels, airlines, travel agencies , etc.) and OTAs
through systems that allow peer-to-peer communications and
transactions.

2) Coordination and coopetition: Thanks to the blockchain
technology it is possible to create systems that see the ag-
gregation of different travel products and services in such
a way as to reduce any inefﬁciencies and achieve greater
coordination between the various proposals. The aforemen-
tioned Yookye platform (5), for example, brings together in
a single system numerous services and utilities for tourists,
simplifying the organization of their vacation. Its users, there-
fore, will no longer need multiple Apps, but can ﬁnd and
book accommodation, tours and other services in a single
App. Similarly, Sardcoin (11), a project of the University of
Cagliari, offers a platform for the sale of Sardinian tourist
services based on blockchain technology. That typology of
systems implements the concept of coopetition, that is the
constructive and collaborative competition between companies
from which both beneﬁt: participating companies will be able
to use the infrastructure to include services, integrate their
offers or to set up tourism promotion strategies with other
existing infrastructures.

V. CONCLUSIONS

On the basis of what has been said so far, it can be also
said that tourism is one of the most promising sectors for the
development of blockchain technology.

According to the results reported in this paper, we are able
to answer the research questions which guided us in this
investigation. In particular, for what concerns the ﬁrst research
question we can say that even if the number of the published
research paper is still limited (to a total of 65 in the SCOPUS
database), the number of published paper per year doubles
every year. We examined the content of nine selected paper
from which we can analyze the directions of scientiﬁc research
in this domain. The second research question allowed us to
explore the blockchain-oriented software projects for tourism.
We reviewed 11 software projects, many of them operational,
providing a classiﬁcation of their core functionality and the
related technological aspects.

However, regardless of what the scope of the investigation,
some other important aspects need to be taken into account
in further research. First of all, it is necessary to consider
that the blockchain is just a collective term that synthesizes a
series of different tools; in fact, there are numerous blockchain
protocols that determine as many implementations. Secondly,
it must be borne in mind that it is a constantly developing
technology which involves from the simplest protocols that

[12] Fenu, G., Marchesi, L., Marchesi, M., Tonelli, R. (2018). ”The ICO
phenomenon and its relationships with ethereum smart contract en-
vironment”. In 2018 International Workshop on Blockchain Oriented
Software Engineering (IWBOSE) (pp. 26-32). IEEE. DOI: 10.1109/IW-
BOSE.2018.8327568

[13] Pinna, A. Ibba, S. Baralla, G. Tonelli, R., Marchesi, M. (2019). “A
Massive Analysis of Ethereum Smart Contracts. Empirical Study and
Code Metrics”. IEEE Access, DOI: 10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2921936

[14] Porru, S., A. Pinna, M. Marchesi, R. Tonelli. (2017) ”Blockchain-
Oriented Software Engineering: Challenges and New Directions,”
IEEE/ACM 39th International Conference on Software Engineering
Companion (ICSE-C), Buenos Aires, pp. 169-171, DOI: 10.1109/ICSE-
C.2017.142

[15] Rejeb, A., Rejeb, K. (2019). “Blockchain Technology in Tourism:
Applications and Possibilities”. World Scientiﬁc News, volume 137, pp.
119-144, Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3480457
[16] Pinna A., Baralla G., Marchesi M., Tonelli R. (2021). ”Raising Sustain-
ability Awareness in Agile Blockchain-Oriented Software Engineering”.
In 2021 International Workshop on Blockchain Oriented Software En-
gineering (IWBOSE). DOI: 10.1109/SANER50967.2021.00088
[17] Treiblmaier H. (2020). “Blockchain and Tourism”. In: Xiang Z., Fuchs
M., Gretzel U., H¨opken W. (eds) Handbook of e-Tourism. Springer,
Cham. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-05324-6 28-1

[18] Treiblmaier, H., ¨Onder, I. (2019). “The Impact of Blockchain on the
Tourism Industry: A Theory-Based Research Framework”. In Business
Transformation through Blockchain – Volume II (pp. 3–21). DOI:
http://doi-org-443.webvpn.fjmu.edu.cn/10.1007/978-3-319-99058-3 1

[19] World Economic Forum. (2017) “Digital Transformation Initiative. Avi-

ation, Travel and Tourism Industry”, White paper

form the basis of it, up to real new applications. This progress
is aimed above all at reducing the complexity of the technology
regarding the difﬁculties of understanding (and consequently
also of application). Finally,
it must be said that, despite
continuous progress, blockchain technology cannot be tied to
a single use but lends itself to numerous purposes, even if
sometimes conﬂicting with each other. In addition, it can also
be combined with other technologies, such as the Internet of
Things (IoT) or artiﬁcial intelligence, which integrate with
each other to achieve increasingly innovative applications. This
is conﬁrmed by the blockchain technology application cases
reported in this paper. This is the case of FoodChain (3)
and Bagtrax (4), which integrate blockchain with the IoT to
achieve their goals, or even of the startup Yookye (5), which
combines blockchain technology and artiﬁcial
intelligence
tools.

In this work we highlighted the most relevant issues of
the blockchain technology applied to the tourism industry.
However, it has emerged that the uses of blockchain tech-
nology are limited to initiatives by individual companies, so
we recommend destination managers to deepen and encourage
its application in the tourist management of the territories. Re-
searchers could conduct empirical studies to assess the design
of comprehensive systems that help managers in promoting
this innovative tool.

REFERENCES

[1] Baralla, G., Pinna, A., Tonelli, R., Marchesi, M., Mannaro, K. (2019).
“A blockchain approach for the sustainability in tourism management in
the Sulcis area”. In C. Gargiulo & C. Zoppi (Eds.), Planning, nature and
ecosystem services (pp. 904-919). Naples: FedOAPress. ISBN: 978-88-
6887-054-6, DOI: 10.6093/978-88-6887-054.6

[2] Buhalis, D. (2003). ”eTourism: Information Technology for Strategic

Tourism Management”. Pearson Education Limited, Harlow.

[3] Gretzel, U., Sigala, M., Xiang, Z., Koo, C. (2015) “Smart tourism:
foundations and developments”. Electron Markets 25, 179–188, DOI:
10.1007/s12525-015-0196-8

[4] Joo, J., J. Park, and Y. Han. (2021) “Applications of Blockchain and
Smart Contract for Sustainable Tourism Ecosystems”, in Evolutionary
Computing and Mobile Sustainable Networks. Lecture Notes on Data
Engineering and Communications Technologies, vol 53, pp. 773-780,
DOI: 10.1007/978-981-15-5258-8 71

[5] Kwok, Andrei O.J., Sharon G.M. Koh. (2019) ”Is blockchain technology
a watershed for tourism development?”, Current Issues in Tourism 22.20:
2447-2452, DOI: 10.1080/13683500.2018.1513460

[6] Lopez de Avila, A. (2015) “Smart destinations: XXI century tourism”.
ENTER2015 Conference on Information and Communication Technolo-
gies in Tourism, Lugano, Switzerland, February 4-6, 2015.

[7] Nam, K., Dutt, C. S., Chathoth, P., Khan, M. S. (2019). “Blockchain
technology for smart city and smart tourism: Latest trends and chal-
lenges”. Asia Paciﬁc Journal of Tourism Research, 0(0), 1–15. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1080/10941665.2019.1585376
¨Onder,
I., Treiblmaier, H.
Three
Research
search, Volume
72,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annals.2018.03.005.

“Blockchain and Tourism:
Tourism Re-
ISSN 0160-7383, DOI:

Propositions”.

180–182.

(2018).

Annals

pp.

[8]

of

[9] Ozdemir, A. I., Ar, I. M., Erol, I. (2020). “Assessment of blockchain
applications in travel and tourism industry”. Quality and Quantity, vol.
54, no. 5-6, 2020, pp. 1549-1563. doi:10.1007/s11135-019-00901-w

[10] Pierro, G. A, Tonelli R., Marchesi. M. (2020). ”An Organized Repository
of Ethereum Smart Contracts. Source Codes and Metrics.” Future
internet 12.11 (2020): 197. DOI: 10.3390/ﬁ12110197

[11] Destefanis, G., Ortu, M., Bowes, D., Marchesi, M., Tonelli, R. (2018).
”On measuring affects of github issues’ commenters.” Proceedings of
the 3rd International Workshop on Emotion Awareness in Software
Engineering. 2018. DOI: 10.1145/3194932.3194936

