Noname manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)

A Decision Model for Decentralized Autonomous Organization Platform
Selection: Three Industry Case Studies

Elena Baninemeh · Siamak Farshidi · Slinger Jansen

1
2
0
2

l
u
J

7

]

Y
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
3
9
0
4
1
.
7
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Received: date / Accepted: date

Abstract
Context: Decentralized autonomous organizations as a new
form of online governance are collections of smart contracts
deployed on a blockchain platform that intercede groups of
people. A growing number of Decentralized Autonomous
Organization Platforms, such as Aragon and Colony, have
been introduced in the market to facilitate the development
process of such organizations. Selecting the best ﬁtting plat-
form is challenging for the organizations, as a signiﬁcant
number of decision criteria, such as popularity, developer
availability, governance issues, and consistent documenta-
tion of such platforms, should be considered. Additionally,
decision-makers at the organizations are not experts in every
domain, so they must continuously acquire volatile knowl-
edge regarding such platforms and keep themselves updated.
Accordingly, a decision model is required to analyze the de-
cision criteria using systematic identiﬁcation and evaluation
of potential alternative solutions for a development project.
Method: We have developed a theoretical framework to as-
sist software engineers with a set of Multi-Criteria Decision-

E. Baninemeh
Department of Information and Computer Science at Utrecht Univer-
sity, Utrecht, the Netherlands
Tel.: +31 6 15 373 513
E-mail: e.baninemeh@uu.nl

S. Farshidi
Informatics Institute at University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the
Netherlands
Tel.: +31 6 15 373 513
E-mail: s.farshidi@uva.nl

S. Jansen
Department of Information and Computer Science at Utrecht Univer-
sity, Utrecht, the Netherlands
Department of Software Engineering at Lappeenranta University of
Technology, Lappeenranta, Finland
Tel.: +31 6 19 884 880
E-mail: slinger.jansen@uu.nl

Making problems in software production. This study
presents a decision model as a Multi-Criteria Decision-
Making problem for the decentralized autonomous organi-
zation platform selection problem to capture knowledge re-
garding such platforms and concepts systematically.
Results: We conducted three industry case studies in the
context of three decentralized autonomous organizations to
evaluate the effectiveness and efﬁciency of the decision
model in assisting decision-makers. The case study partici-
pants declared that the decision model provides signiﬁcantly
more insight into their selection process and reduces the cost
of the decision-making process.
Conclusion: We ﬁnd that with empirical evidence from the
case studies, that decision-makers can make more rational,
efﬁcient, and effective decisions with the decision model
when they meet their requirements and priorities. Further-
more, the captured reusable knowledge regarding platforms
and concepts while building the decision model can be em-
ployed by other researchers to develop new concepts and
solutions for future challenges.

Keywords decentralized autonomous organization;
decision model; multi-criteria decision making; decision
support system; decentralized autonomous organization
platform; case study research;

1 Introduction

First Bitcoin in 2008 [47], and later Ethereum in 2014 [60],
held a powerful promise: decentralized governance, without
third party authorization, not just for ﬁnance applications
such as cryptocurrencies but for any organization. Decen-
tralized Autonomous Organizations (DAOs) were expected
to fulﬁll such promises, enabling people to organize online,
relying on blockchain-based systems and smart contracts,
and automating their governance [58].

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

Elena Baninemeh et al.

No widely accepted deﬁnition for DAO exists yet. For
instance, Buterin [3] explains DAOs as a way to explore
those new organizations’ governance rules that could be au-
tomated and transparently embedded in a blockchain. Alter-
natively, Dhillon et al. [10] deﬁne it as a blockchain entity
built on a consensus of decisions by its members, and Beck
et al. [1] deﬁne it as a decentralized, transparent, and se-
cure system for operation and governance among indepen-
dent participants which can run autonomously. This study
uses the following statements to refer to a decentralized or-
ganization: a DAO offers services or resources to third par-
ties or even hires people to perform speciﬁc tasks. Hence,
individuals can transact with a DAO in order to access its
service or get paid for their contributions [32]. DAOs are
virtual, decentralized entities such as corporations and insti-
tutions running entirely autonomously and decentralized on
a distributed ledger [52].

A variety of DAO platforms have recently emerged to fa-
cilitate the deployment of DAOs in the blockchain by signif-
icantly reducing the technological knowledge required and
providing DAO software as a service. These DAO platforms
enable users with insufﬁcient knowledge on how blockchain
works to create a DAO using a template that typically can
be customized [81]. A signiﬁcant number of DAO platforms
such as Aragon 1, DAOstack2, and Colony3 with a broad
list of features and criteria are available in the market. This
study focuses on these particular DAOs. The main challenge
is selecting the best ﬁtting platform from an extensive set
of alternatives based on an extensive list of project require-
ments. Besides, for the domain experts, the DAO is typically
not their expertise, and they have limited time for acquiring
the needed knowledge.

Technology selection problems in the software produc-
tion domain can be modeled as a Multi-Criteria Decision-
Making (MCDM) problem that deals with evaluating a set of
alternatives and consider a set of decision criteria [17]. Re-
cently, we introduced a technology selection framework [19]
that is used to build decision models for MCDM problems
and assist decision-makers at software-producing organiza-
tions with their decision-making processes [19]. Addition-
ally, we have designed and implemented a Decision Sup-
port System (DSS) [22, 18] for supporting decision-makers
with their MCDM problems in software production. The
DSS provides a decision model studio for building deci-
sion models based on the technology selection framework.
Such decision models can be uploaded to the knowledge
base of the DSS to facilitate the decision-making process for
software-producing organizations according to their require-
ments and preferences. The DSS provides a discussion and
negotiation platform to enable decision-makers at software-

1 https://aragon.org/
2 https://daostack.io/
3 https://colony.io//

producing organizations to make group decisions. Further-
more, the DSS can be used over the full life-cycle and can
co-evolve its advice based on evolving requirements.

In this study, the DAO platform selection process is
modeled as an MCDM problem, and the technology selec-
tion framework is employed to build a decision model for
this MCDM problem. In order to evaluate the efﬁciency and
effectiveness of the decision model in assisting decentral-
ized autonomous organizations, three real-world case stud-
ies have been conducted.

The structure of this article is as follows: Section 2 de-
scribes layers of the blockchain technology stack and po-
sitions the DAO platform selection problem among other
blockchain technology selection problems in this domain.
Section 3 formulates the DAO platform selection problem
as an MCDM problem, deﬁnes the research questions of
the study, and explains our research method, which is based
on the design science, expert interviews, document analysis,
and case studies. This study reports on the following contri-
butions:

– Section 4 elaborates on how we have mapped the ex-
plicit knowledge of DAO experts to the explicit knowl-
edge of DAO platforms that we have captured based on
an extensive literature study.

– Section 5 explains our empirical observations in the con-
text of three real-world case studies that have been con-
ducted to evaluate the effectiveness and usefulness of the
decision model in addressing the DAO Platform selec-
tion problem.

– Section 6 analyzes the results of the case studies and
compares the outcomes of the DSS with the case study
participants’ shortlists of feasible DAO platforms. The
results show that the DSS recommended nearly the same
solutions as the case study participants suggested to their
organizations after extensive analysis and discussions
and does so more efﬁciently.

Section 7 highlights barriers to the knowledge acquisi-
tion and decision-making process, such as motivational and
cognitive biases, and argues how we have minimized these
threats to the validity of the results. Section 8 positions the
proposed approach in this study among the other DAO plat-
form selection techniques in the literature. Section 9 summa-
rizes the proposed approach, defends its novelty, and offers
directions for future studies.

2 Blockchain Technology Stack

Decentralized applications based on blockchain technology
operate within a larger ecosystem of Internet applications
that run according to their protocols and rules. A blockchain
technology stack [9] can be imagined to distinguish such

A Decision Model for Decentralized Autonomous Organization Platform Selection: Three Industry Case Studies

3

Fig. 1: This ﬁgure is adopted from authors [42] and shows the layers
of the blockchain stack.

applications and protocols. Each layer of the stack inher-
its the protocols and rules of the layer below, including the
lower layers’ governance. Figure 1 illustrates the blockchain
technology stack, which consists of the following main three
main layers: the Internet, blockchain, and application layers.

2.1 The Internet layer

Blockchain platforms [24], such as Bitcoin and Ethereum,
exist at the bottom layer of the blockchain technology stack,
but their operations depend on another technology stack:
the Internet stack. Indeed, as a rule, blockchain platforms
are unable to operate without Internet connectivity. Because
these platforms operate on top of the Internet, their proper
functioning is ultimately reliant on transmission control pro-
tocol/Internet protocol (TCP/IP)—the protocols responsible
for routing and transferring packets between nodes on the
Internet. Accordingly, decisions at the Internet level can
have a dramatic impact on the operation and governance of
blockchain platforms built on top of the Internet stack [42].

2.2 The blockchain layer

As aforementioned, blockchain platforms operate on top of
the Internet layer and inherit the capabilities and limitations
of that underlying layer, including its technical architecture
and governance processes. While Internet Service Providers
(ISPs) are responsible for routing packets through the Inter-
net according to speciﬁc protocols (e.g., TCP/IP and border
gateway protocol or BGP), nodes in a blockchain platform
are responsible for validating and recording transactions into
the underlying blockchain according to a particular set of
rules. Each blockchain platform also introduces its own de-
sign decisions and governance mechanisms, including de-
signing the underlying peer-to-peer network and the consen-
sus protocol that facilitates agreement between the various
nodes of the platform. For example, Bitcoin miners operate
according to the Bitcoin proof-of-work protocol, which stip-
ulates that miners should always add to the “longest chain”
as deﬁned by the amount of hashing power required to com-
pute the chain [9].

2.3 The application layer

Generally speaking, an application layer is an abstraction
level that masks the technical details of a communication
channel and serves as a user interface on a network. The
application layer in the blockchain technology stack focuses
on developing blockchain solutions for use across different
applications and industries. This layer contains three sub-
layers: Decentralized applications (DApp), DAO Layer 1,
and DAO Layer 2.

2.3.1 Decentralized applications

In Ethereum, developers can develop their web applica-
tions, known as Decentralized Applications (DApps), with-
out knowing the underlying mechanisms such as peer-to-
peer networks, blockchain, and consensus rules. DApps are
composed of at least: (1) a smart contract that acts as a soft-
ware agent running on the blockchain performing predeﬁned
or preapproved tasks without any human involvement, and
which is under the control of a set of business rules [54]; and
(2) a web user interface or web app allows users to interact
with content through a web browser.

DApps in Ethereum may also use decentralized stor-
age, such as the Inter-Planetary File System (IPFS), where
data, ﬁles or websites, are stored in a distributed ﬁle sys-
tem. DApps may also use a decentralized message service,
such as Whisper, which provides one-to-one communication
and acts as a ’decentralized chat’ on the Ethereum platform,
working on a peer-to-peer protocol, without servers but also
without blockchains involved in the process [45].

Blockchain PlatformsEthereumRSKxDaiEOSDac...QTUMDashInternet ProtocolsHTTPSICMPRSVPTCP...UDPFTPInternet Layer Application LayerBlockchain LayerDecentralized applications (DApp)PolymarketAugurSablier...EtheriscZapperZerionDAO Layer 2DAO Layer 1Independent DAO PlatformsAragonMolochDAODAOStackColony...MakerDAOOpenLawExtended DAO PlatformsDXdaoMstable 1HiveDAOThe LAO...UNI DAODistrict0x4

Elena Baninemeh et al.

From the Ethereum point of view, a DAO could be de-
ﬁned as a DApp that may be composed of other DApps,
all running on the Ethereum platform, and whose business
logic is encoded in terms of one or more smart contracts. In
this way, the code (i.e., smart contracts) enforces at least
part of a speciﬁc DAO’s governance rules (i.e., decision-
making rules). The fundamental distinction is the word ”Au-
tonomous”. DAO could be viewed as one type of DApp,
the fully autonomous DApp. Note, DApp is not necessarily
DAO [77].

2.3.2 DAO Layer 1

The development process of a DAO is signiﬁcantly compli-
cated, even for experienced software practitioners. One of
the fundamental challenges for the Ethereum community is
the lack of compliance standards and practical use cases of
DAOs deployed on the blockchain, particularly when com-
paring their added value (e.g., efﬁciency or new services)to
traditional and centralized organizations. As a response to
this issue, some open-source software frameworks or inde-
pendent DAO platforms have emerged to facilitate the im-
plementation of DAOs [58].

Independent DAO platforms represent toolkits to more
easily spin up organizations on public blockchains that
partly provide opinionated decision making and market
mechanisms, partly leave everything open for the devel-
oper. Community and team members have been discussing
that combining the frameworks could be promising as well,
while some mechanisms pioneered by one framework team
might also be implemented by another or a developer build-
ing a module on top. These platforms that provide DAO de-
ployment as-a-service allow users with insufﬁcient knowl-
edge on how blockchain works to create a DAO using a tem-
plate that typically can be customized [15].

Independent DAO Platforms are no-code platforms
(such as Aragon, DAOstack, DAOhaus, and Colony) and
provide tools to coordinate community resources alloca-
tion without the need for a central point of contact and a
high degree of technical aptitude. For instance, Aragon is a
software framework or Independent DAO Platform oriented
to developing DAOs built on the Ethereum platform and
creating conﬁgurable governance structures. Aragon states
that it “gives internet communities unprecedented power
to organize around shared values and resources” [65] and
that it is software for creating and governing organizations
such as clubs, companies, gaming guilds, cooperatives, non-
proﬁts, open-source projects, and any other type of orga-
nization [64]. DAOstack is another example of such in-
dependent DAO platforms. It is an open-source, modular
DAO project, which leverages the technology and adoption
of decentralized governance, enabling people to create the
[66].
DApps(decentralized apps), DAOs, and DAO tools.

As the last example, Colony is a DAO framework based on
a reputation system (the user reputation weights, i.e., deci-
sion power). It aims to help organizations create their DAOs,
named ‘colonies’, providing ﬁnancial management, owner-
ship, structure, and authority. The Colony network is com-
posed of a suite of smart contracts which are deployed on
the Ethereum blockchain [58].

2.3.3 DAO Layer 2

Extended DAO platforms have been developed based on
DAO platforms of Layer 1. For instance, the dxDAO is
built on top of DAOstack, and Reputation is the intrinsic
DAOstack voting power signiﬁer. District0x is a platform of
decentralized markets that have been built based on Aragon.
Initially, organizations can build their own DAO by us-
ing DAO platforms of Layer 1 and then extend it based on
services offered by DAO platforms of Layer 2. For instance,
Aragon-based DAOs can extend their functionality using
pre-installed Aragon apps or modules as following [57]: To-
kens manage membership and voting power in a DAO, with
the ability to mint (i.e., create) new tokens, assign existing
tokens, and create vestings (i.e., tokens that are held aside
for a while for the team, partners, advisors, and others who
are contributing to the development of the project, and that
can be released later). Voting mechanisms create votes that
execute actions on behalf of token holders, with the ability
to see all open and closed votes, start a new vote and token
poll holders in a DAO about a speciﬁc issue. Finance man-
agement modules handle assets of a DAO, budget expenses,
and record ﬁnal transactions to have a history of past trans-
fers, with the ability to create new transfers from this mod-
ule. Agents interact directly with any other smart contract on
the Ethereum platform.

3 Research Approach

Knowledge acquisition is the process of capturing, structur-
ing, and organizing knowledge from multiple sources [31].
Human experts, discourse, internal meetings, case studies,
literature studies, or other research methods are the pri-
mary sources of knowledge. The rest of this section outlines
the research questions and elaborates on a mixed research
method based on design science research, expert interviews,
documentation analysis, and case study research to capture
knowledge regarding DAO platforms, to answer the research
questions, and to build a decision model for the DAO plat-
form selection problem.

3.1 Problem Deﬁnition

In this study, we formulate the DAO Platform selection
problem as an MCDM problem:

A Decision Model for Decentralized Autonomous Organization Platform Selection: Three Industry Case Studies

5

Fig. 2: This ﬁgure shows an MCDM approach for the DAO plat-
form selection problem in a 3-dimensional space. Note, the degree
of the decision-makers’ satisfaction with a solution according to
their priorities and requirements (e.g. voting mechanism, decentral-
ized type) ranges between the best and worst ﬁt solutions (e.g. Aragon,
DAOStack), which is represented by a range of colors from red to dark
green.

in the market

Let P latf orms = {p1, p2, . . . p|P latf orms|} be a
set of DAO platforms
(i.e., Aragon,
DAOStack, and Colony). Furthermore, F eatures =
{f1, f2, . . . t|F eatures|} be a set of DAO features (i.e., De-
centralization Types, Voting Mechanism) of the DAO plat-
forms, and each platform p, where p ∈ P latf orms, sup-
ports a subset of the set F eatures. The goal is ﬁnding the
best ﬁtting DAO platforms as solutions, where Solutions ⊂
P latf orms, that support a set of DAO feature require-
ments, called Requirements, where Requirements ⊆
F eatures. An MCDM approach for the selection prob-
lem receives P latf orms and their F eatures as its input,
then applies a weighting method to prioritize the F eatures
based on the decision-makers’ preferences to deﬁne the
Requirements, and ﬁnally employs a method of aggrega-
tion to rank the P latf orms and suggests Solutions. Ac-
cordingly, an MCDM approach for the DAO platform selec-
tion problem can be formulated as follows:

completely objective because humans, as the main decision-
makers, have to make decisions. Figure 2 visualises the
MCDM approach for the DAO platform selection problem
in a 3D space. It shows that the degree of satisfaction of the
decision-makers with a suggested solution is fuzzy, which
means that the satisfaction degree from a decision-maker
perspective may range between completely true (best ﬁt) and
completely false (worst ﬁt) [14] which is represented by a
range of colors from red to dark green.

3.2 Research Questions

The Main Research Question (MRQ) of this study is as fol-
lows:

MRQ: How can knowledge regarding DAO platforms be
captured and organized systematically to support decentral-
ized autonomous organizations with the decision-making
process?

We formulated the following research questions to cap-
ture knowledge regarding the DAO platform systematically
and to build a decision model for the decision problem based
on the framework [20]:

RQ1: Which DAO concepts should be considered as
DAO features in the decision model?
RQ2: Which DAO platforms should be considered in the
decision model?
RQ3: Which software quality attributes can be used to
evaluate DAO platforms?
RQ4: What are the impacts of DAO features on the qual-
ity attributes of DAO platforms?
RQ5: Which DAO platforms currently support the DAO
features?

3.3 Research Method

M CDM : P latf orms × F eatures×

Requirements → Solutions

(1)

Typically, a unique optimal solution for an MCDM prob-
lem, including DAO platform selection, does not exist, and
it is essential to apply decision-makers’ preferences to dif-
ferentiate between solutions [17, 55]. Particular DAO plat-
forms might ﬁt into an organization; however, some might
be better than others. It is tough to state which DAO plat-
form is the best one, partially because we can not predict the
future or know how the organizations would have evolved if
a different DAO platform was selected. Moreover, we must
note that such a technology selection process can never be

Research methods are classiﬁed based on their data collec-
tion techniques (interview, observation, literature, etc.), in-
ference techniques (taxonomy, protocol analysis, statistics,
etc.), research purpose (evaluation, exploration, description,
etc.), units of analysis (individuals, groups, process, etc.),
and so forth [44]. Multiple research methods can be com-
bined to achieve a fuller picture and a more in-depth under-
standing of the studied phenomenon by connecting comple-
mentary ﬁndings that conclude from the methods from the
different methodological traditions of qualitative and quan-
titative investigation [38].

Recently, we designed a framework [20] and imple-
mented a DSS [22] for supporting software engineers

Decision-Makers(DAO owners)Requirements (e.g., voting  mechanism,  decentralized type)...Best FitWorst Fit6

Elena Baninemeh et al.

(decision-makers) with their MCDM problems in soft-
ware production. The framework provides a guideline for
decision-makers to build decision models for MCDM prob-
lems in software production following the six-step of the
decision-making process [43]: (1) identifying the objective,
(2) selection of the features, (3) selection of the alterna-
tives, (4) selection of the weighing method, (5) applying the
method of aggregation, and (6) decision making based on
the aggregation results. In this study, we used the framework
to build a decision model for the DAO platform selection
problem. We employed design science, expert interviews,
and document analysis as a mixed data collection method to
capture DAO platforms’ knowledge and answer the research
questions.

3.4 Design science

Design science is an iterative process [50] has its roots in
engineering [33], is broadly considered a problem-solving
process [29], and tries to generate generalizable knowledge
concerning design processes and design decisions. The de-
sign process is a collection of hypotheses that can ultimately
be proven by developing the artifact it describes [59]. The
research approach for building decision models for MCDM
problems in software production is Design Science, which
addresses research by developing and evaluating artifacts to
meet deﬁned business requirements [34].

In the previous study, we designed a theoretical frame-
work and implemented a DSS for supporting software prac-
titioners with their MCDM problems in software produc-
tion [17]. This study employs the framework to build a de-
cision model for the DAO platform selection problem. Ad-
ditionally, we employed the DSS to reduce the cost of the
decision-making process.

3.5 Expert Interviews

Expert Interview is an essential knowledge acquisition tech-
nique [5] in qualitative research. The main source of knowl-
edge to build a decision model based on the framework [20]
is domain expertise. A series of qualitative semi-structured
interviews based on Myers’ and Newman’s guidelines [46]
has been conducted to explore tacit knowledge of domain
experts regarding DAO Platforms and evaluate the out-
comes of our study. Ten domain experts, including DAO
developers, decentralized autonomous organizations, and
blockchain experts from different organizations, have par-
ticipated in the research to assist us with answering the re-
search questions. Note that this set of interviews were differ-
ent from the interviews we conducted during the case study
research with the case study participants.

A role description was developed before contacting po-
tential domain experts to assist their expertise and to ensure
the right target group. Next, we contacted the selected ex-
perts by email using the role description and information
about our research topic. Note, the expert selection pro-
cess has been done pragmatically and conveniently based
on the reported expertise and experience mentioned on the
LinkedIn proﬁle of the experts. We considered a set of expert
evaluation criteria (including “Years of experience”, “Exper-
tise”, “Skills”, “Education”, and “Level of expertise”) to se-
lect the experts.

Each expert interview followed a semi-structured inter-
view protocol (See Appendix A) and lasted between 45 and
60 minutes. Additionally, we used a number of open ques-
tions to elicit as much information as possible from the ex-
perts minimizing prior bias. All interviews were done virtu-
ally through meeting platforms, such as Skype and Zoom,
and recorded with the interviewees’ permission, then tran-
scribed for further analysis.

Captured knowledge after each interview was typically
propagated to the next one to validate the acquired knowl-
edge incrementally. Finally, our ﬁndings and interpretations
were sent back to the interview participants for their ﬁnal
approval. Note, for the validity of the results, the research’s
data collection phases were not affected by the case study
participants; furthermore, none of the interviewees or re-
searchers were involved in the case studies.

3.6 Document analysis

Document analysis is a systematic procedure for reviewing
or evaluating documents, including manuscripts and illus-
trations, that have been published without a researcher’s in-
tervention [2]. Document analysis is one of the analytical
methods in qualitative research that requires data investiga-
tion and interpretation to elicit meaning, gain understanding,
and develop empirical knowledge [8].

There is not a signiﬁcant number of academic literature
available about DAO platforms and related concepts due to
their novelty and, in part, due to the fast growth and devel-
opment of the industry. For this reason, we have also added
gray literature to our knowledge base, which resulted in a
signiﬁcant increase in the amount of information we could
ﬁnd. Currently, around 59% of the sources are web pages,
11% are peer-reviewed articles, and 16% are documentation
of the platforms themselves. The rest (14%) are a collection
of videos, white papers, forum discussions, and books. In
these sources, we speciﬁcally identiﬁed features from each
of the platforms.

It is essential to highlight that the selected sources of
knowledge in the document analysis phase of this research
that discuss the DAO platforms are spread across the early

A Decision Model for Decentralized Autonomous Organization Platform Selection: Three Industry Case Studies

7

years of the emergence of the DAO concepts (2014) [3] to
the present (2021). Additionally, the possibility of existing
trends among software practitioners and researchers in se-
lecting DAO platforms has been investigated in this study.
Accordingly, we observed that DAO platforms and their se-
lection process gained more attention in the past four years
(see Figure 3).

Fig. 3: This ﬁgure shows the distribution of the selected studies in the
document analysis phase based on their publication year.

We created an extraction form for collecting knowledge
and ensure that they are consistent with relevant knowledge,
and also we checked that the knowledge gathered answered
the research questions. The collected knowledge, which cor-
responds to the research questions, have been classiﬁed
into ﬁve categories: DAO platforms, DAO features, mapping
among the DAO features and the quality attributes, Qual-
ity Attributes and mapping among the DAO features and the
DAO platforms.

3.7 Case Study

Case study research [37] is an empirical methodology that
investigates a phenomenon within a particular context in the
domain of interest. Case study research can be employed
for collecting data regarding a particular phenomenon or for
applying and evaluating a tool to understand its efﬁciency
and effectiveness using interviews. Yin [62] identiﬁes four
types of case study designs based on holistic versus embed-
ded and single versus multiple. This study employs holistic
multiple case designs: examining multiple real-world decen-
tralized autonomous organizations as multiple cases within
their context to understand one speciﬁc unit of analysis and
evaluating the decision model for the DAO platform selec-
tion problem.
Objective: Building a valid decision model for the DAO se-
lection problem was the main goal of this research.
The cases: The analysis units were three industry case stud-
ies, performed in the Netherlands, the United States, and
Iran, in the context of three decentralized autonomous or-
ganizations.

Methods: We conducted multiple expert interviews with
the case study participants to understand their requirements,
concerns, and preferences regarding the DAO platform se-
lection problem.
Selection strategy: In this study, we selected multiple case
study [61] to analyze the data both within each situation and
across situations, to more extensive exploring the research
questions and theoretical evolution, and to create a more
convincing theory.
Theory: The proposed decision model is a valid reference
model to support decentralized autonomous organizations
with the DAO platform selection problem.
Protocol: To conduct the case studies and evaluate the pro-
posed decision model, we followed the following protocol:

Step 1. Requirements elicitation: The participants de-
ﬁned their DAO language feature requirements and pri-
oritized them based on the MoSCoW prioritization tech-
nique [7]. Furthermore, they identiﬁed a set of DAO plat-
forms as potential solutions for their DAOs.
Step 2. Results and recommendations: We deﬁned
three separate cases in the knowledge base of the DSS
according to the case studies’ requirements and priori-
ties. Next, the DSS recommended a set of feasible DAO
platforms as alternative solutions per case individually.
Next, the outcomes were discussed with the case study
participants.
Step 3. Analysis: We compared the DSS suggested fea-
sible solutions with the case study participants’ prese-
lected solutions that they had suggested to their organi-
zations based on extensive analysis. Furthermore, we an-
alyzed the outcomes and observations and then reported
them to the case study participants and subsequently re-
ceived their feedback on the results.

4 Multi-Criteria Decision-Making

We follow the framework [25] as modeled in Figure 4
to build a decision model for the DAO platform selec-
tion problem. Generally speaking, a decision model for an
MCDM problem contains decision criteria, alternatives, and
mappings. Figure 4 represents the main building blocks of
the decision support system besides the proposed decision
model.

4.1 RQ1: DAO Platforms

We identiﬁed 90 DAO platforms as our initial hypothesis
and ended up with 28 DAO platforms based on literature
and expert interviews to answer the ﬁrst research question.
Accordingly, we explored literature based on the following

46963411743Count of Type2021202020192018201720162014020406080Publication Years8

Elena Baninemeh et al.

Fig. 4: This ﬁgure is adapted from this study [20] and shows the main building blocks of the decision support system beside the proposed decision
model for the DAO Platform selection problem.

search keywords: “DAO”, “DeFi”, “DAO As Service”, and
“decentralized autonomous organization” platforms. Addi-
tionally, we exploit our network of domain experts, includ-
ing software engineers and academics. We reviewed the
published surveys and reports from well-known communi-
ties, including Medium [71], Github [67], IEEE [69], Hack-
ernoon [68], YouTube [78], LinkedIn [70], Twitter [76],
Springer [74], Reddit [73], Messari [72].

We conducted a set of expert interviews with ten ex-
perts to gain more insight into the popular and applicable
DAO platforms and to evaluate our ﬁndings. It is interesting
to highlight that most of the domain experts were familiar
with a limited number of the list’s DAO platforms (See the
ten Domain Experts’ columns on Table 1). We only consid-
ered the DAO platforms mentioned on at least ﬁve sources of
knowledge (including communities and domain experts) to
prevent potential biases. Finally, we analyzed the data and
ended with 28 alternative DAO platforms mentioned on at
least three resources. Table 1 shows the complete list of the
DAO platforms that we have selected in the decision model.

4.2 RQ2: DAO Features

Domain experts were the primary source of knowledge to
identify the right set of DAO features, even though docu-
mentation and literature studies of DAO platforms can be
employed to develop an initial hypothesis about the DAO

feature set. Each DAO feature has a data type, such as
Boolean and non-Boolean. For example, the data types of
DAO features, such as the popularity in the market and sup-
portability of Quadratic voting, can be considered as non-
Boolean and Boolean, respectively.

The initial set of DAO features was extracted from the
following sources: web pages, white papers, scientiﬁc pa-
pers, documentation, forum discussion, books, videos, and
dissertation. we distinguished 118 Boolean and ten non-
Boolean features in our initial list. Afterward, ten domain
experts have participated in this phase of the research to
identify a potential list of DAO features.

Accordingly, 77 Boolean and ﬁve non-Boolean DAO
features4 were identiﬁed and extracted from the outcomes
of the expert interviews. Eventually, the validity and relia-
bility of the ﬁnal list of the DAO features were evaluated
and conﬁrmed by the domain experts.

4.3 RQ3: Software Quality Attributes

According to IEEE Standard Glossary of Software Engi-
neering Terminology [6,49], the quality of software prod-
ucts is a model to which a system, component, or process

4 The entire lists of the DAO features and their mapping with the
considered DAO platforms are available and accessible on the DAO
Platform Selection website (https://dss-mcdm.com)

Source of KnowledgeA Decision model for DAO Platform SelectionDecision Support SystemAlternativesDomainFeaturesISO/IEC 25010Ext. ISO/IEC 9126Exclude Infeasible SolutionsScore CalculationFeasible DAO PlatformsFeature Requirements (MoSCoW)    Domain Experts- Blockchain and DAO experts- Software ArchitectsSoftware Quality Expertshas1..*1..*impacts on1..*1..*DAO PlatformAragonMakerDAODAOStackColony...RQ1MolochdaoOpenLawDAO FeatureDecentralization TypesGovernanceVoting MechanismFundraisingSoftware Quality AttributeISO/IEC 25010Ext. ISO/IEC 9126Inference EngineKnowledge BaseDecision-MakerDocumentation, Literature, etc....RQ2RQ3RQ4RQ5A Decision Model for Decentralized Autonomous Organization Platform Selection: Three Industry Case Studies

9

Table 1: This ﬁgure shows the DAO platforms that were mentioned
at least ﬁve sources of knowledge (communities and domain experts).
This list has been considered as the DAO platform alternatives in the
decision model.

The last columns of Table 4 denote the outcomes of the
analysis concerning the common criteria and alternatives of
this study with the selected studies. Let us deﬁne the cover-
age of the i-th selected study as follows:

Coveragei =

CQi + CFi
Ci

× 100

Where CQi and CFi signify the numbers of common
quality attributes (column #CQ) and features (column #CF)
of the i-th selected study, respectively, furthermore, Ci de-
ﬁnes the number of suggested criteria by the i-th selected
study. The last column (Cov.) of Table 4 shows the percent-
age of the coverage of the considered criteria within the se-
lected studies. On average, 79.24% of those criteria are al-
ready considered in this study.

4.4 RQ4: Impacts of the DAO Platform Features on the
Software Quality Attributes

The mapping between the sets software quality attributes
and DAO platforms was identiﬁed based on domain experts’
knowledge. Four domain experts participated in this phase
of the research to map the DAO platforms (F eatures) to the
quality attributes (Qualities) based on a Boolean adjacency
matrix (Qualities × F eatures → Boolean). For instance,
Infrastructure decentralization as a DAO feature inﬂuences
the Operability quality attribute. The framework does not
enforce a DAO feature in a single quality attribute; DAO
features can be part of many quality attributes.

– Functional appropriateness is deﬁned in ISO/IEC
25010 as the degree to which the functions of DAO plat-
forms facilitate the accomplishment of speciﬁed tasks
and objectives.

– Operability is the degree to which a DAO platform has

attributes that make it easy to operate and control.

– Interoperability deﬁne the degree to which two or more
DAO platforms can exchange information and use the
information that has been exchanged.

– Functional correctness deﬁnes the degree to which
a DAO platform provides the correct results with the
needed degree of precision.

– Ownership Attributes in relation to the intellectual

property rights.

– Functional completeness is the degree to which the set
of functions of DAO platforms covers all the speciﬁed
tasks and user objectives.

4.5 RQ5: Supportability of the DAO Platform Features by
the DAO Platforms

A DAO platform contains a set of DAO features that can
be either Boolean or non-Boolean. A Boolean DAO feature

meets deﬁned requirements (such as availability, scalabil-
ity, security, and Operability) and the degree to which a sys-
tem, component or process addresses the requirements or
expectations of a user. It is essential to ﬁnd quality attributes
widely supported by other researchers to estimate the sys-
tem’s characteristics.

The ISO/IEC 25010 [36] presents best practice recom-
mendations based on a quality assessment model. The qual-
ity model deﬁnes which quality characteristics should be
considered when assessing a software product’s properties.
A set of quality attributes should be speciﬁed in the decision
model [20]. In this study, we used the ISO/IEC 25010 stan-
dard [36] and extended ISO/IEC 9126 standard [4] as two
domain-independent quality models to investigate DAO fea-
tures based on their impact on quality attributes of DAO plat-
forms. The key rationale behind employing these software
quality models is that they are a standardized way of mea-
suring a software product. Furthermore, they explain how
efﬁciently and reliably a software product can be used.

The literature study results show that researchers and
practitioners do not agree upon standard criteria for assess-
ing DAO platforms, including quality attributes and features.
See Table 4).

AgreementMediumHackernoonGithubIEEEYoutubeLinkedInTwitterSpringerRedditMessariDomain Expert 1Domain Expert 2Domain Expert 3Domain Expert 4Domain Expert 5Domain Expert 6Domain Expert 7Domain Expert 8Domain Expert 9Domain Expert 10Aragon100.00%✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓Colony95.00%✓✓✗✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓DAOStack95.00%✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✗✓✓✓✓✓MakerDAO70.00%✓✓✗✓✗✓✓✓✓✓✓✗✗✓✗✗✓✓✓✓Holochain60.00%✓✓✓✗✓✓✓✗✗✓✓✓✓✓✗✗✗✗✓✗Molochdao60.00%✓✓✓✓✗✗✓✓✓✗✓✓✓✓✗✗✗✗✗✓OpenLaw60.00%✓✓✓✗✓✓✓✓✗✓✓✗✗✓✗✗✗✓✗✓Daohaus55.00%✓✗✓✓✗✗✓✓✗✓✓✓✗✓✗✓✗✓✗✗1Hive DAO55.00%✓✓✓✗✓✓✓✓✗✗✗✓✓✓✓✗✗✗✗✗Nexus mutual55.00%✓✓✓✗✓✓✓✗✗✓✓✗✓✗✗✓✗✗✗✓Compound 55.00%✓✓✓✗✓✓✓✗✓✓✓✗✗✗✗✓✗✗✗✓The Commons Stack50.00%✓✗✓✗✓✓✓✗✗✗✓✓✓✓✗✗✗✗✓✗Pocket Network45.00%✓✗✓✗✓✓✓✗✗✓✗✓✗✓✗✓✗✗✗✗The LAO45.00%✓✗✓✗✗✗✓✓✗✗✓✓✗✓✗✓✗✗✗✓DXdao45.00%✓✓✗✗✓✗✓✗✓✓✗✓✗✓✗✗✓✗✗✗BalancedDAO45.00%✓✓✓✗✗✗✓✗✓✗✗✓✗✓✗✓✓✗✗✗Mstable DAO45.00%✓✗✓✗✓✓✓✗✗✓✗✓✗✓✗✗✗✓✗✗Wings40.00%✓✓✓✗✗✗✓✗✗✓✗✓✗✓✗✓✗✗✗✗Kleros40.00%✓✓✗✗✗✓✓✗✗✓✓✓✗✓✗✗✗✗✗✗Ventuary DAO40.00%✓✗✗✗✗✓✓✓✓✗✗✓✗✓✗✓✗✗✗✗MetaCartel40.00%✓✓✓✓✗✗✓✗✗✓✗✓✗✓✗✗✗✗✗✗UNI DAO40.00%✓✗✓✗✓✗✓✗✗✗✗✓✗✓✗✓✗✗✓✗GovBlocks40.00%✓✗✓✗✓✓✓✗✗✗✓✗✗✗✓✗✗✗✓✗Infinity economics35.00%✓✗✓✗✗✗✓✗✗✓✗✓✗✓✗✓✗✗✗✗WhalerDAO35.00%✓✗✓✗✓✗✓✗✗✗✗✓✗✓✓✗✗✗✗✗SourceCred35.00%✓✗✓✗✓✗✓✗✓✗✓✗✗✗✗✗✓✗✗✗PhutureDAO30.00%✓✗✗✗✗✗✓✗✓✗✗✗✗✓✓✗✗✗✗✓Tezos25.00%✓✗✗✗✗✓✓✗✗✓✗✗✗✓✗✗✗✗✗✗Daohub25.00%✗✗✓✗✗✗✗✓✗✗✗✓✗✓✗✓✗✗✗✗10

Elena Baninemeh et al.

(F eatureB) is a feature that is supported by the DAO plat-
form, for example, supporting the Quadratic Voting. A non-
Boolean DAO feature (F eatureN ) assigns a non-Boolean
value to a particular DAO platform; for example, the pop-
ularity in the market of a DAO platform can be “high”,
“medium”, or “low”. Accordingly, this study’s DAO features
are a collection of Boolean and non-Boolean features, where
F eatures = F eatureB ∪ F eatureN .

The mapping BF P : F eatureB × P latf orms →
{0, 1} deﬁnes the supportability of the Boolean DAO fea-
tures by the platforms. So that BF P (f, p) = 0 means that
the platform p does not support the DAO feature f or we did
not ﬁnd any evidence for proof of this feature’s supportabil-
ity by the DAO platform. Moreover, BF P (f, l) = 1 sig-
niﬁes that the platform supports the feature. The mapping
BFP is deﬁned based on documentation of the DAO plat-
forms and expert interviews. Tables 5 and 6 in the appendix
present the Boolean Features that we have considered in the
decision model.

The experts deﬁned ﬁve non-Boolean DAO features,
including “Popularity in the market”, “Maturity level of
the company”, “Developer Resources (People)”, “Upgrad-
ability”,and “Scalability”. The assigned values to the non-
Boolean DAO features for a speciﬁc DAO platform is based
on a 3-point Likert scale (High, Medium, and Low), where
N F P : F eaturesN ×P latf orms → {H, M, L}, based on
several predeﬁned parameters. For instance, the “popular-
ity in the market” of a DAO platform was deﬁned based on
the following parameters: the number of the “Google hits”,
“Twitter (follower)”, “LinkedIn (follower)”, and the popu-
lar forums and reports that considered the platform in their
evaluation. Table 7 in the appendix shows the non-Boolean
DAO features, their parameters, and sources of knowledge.

4.6 DAO Feature Requirements

weights

(WM oSCoW

DSS [22] receives the DAO feature requirements based on
the MoSCoW prioritization technique [7]. Decision-makers
should prioritize their DAO feature requirements using a set
=
of
{wM ust, wShould, wCould, wW on(cid:48)t}) according to the deﬁ-
nition of the MoSCoW prioritization technique. DAO fea-
ture requirements with Must-Have or Won’t-Have priori-
ties act as hard constraints and DAO feature requirements
with Should-Have and Could-Have priorities act as soft con-
straints. So that the DSS excludes all infeasible DAO plat-
forms which do not support DAO features with Must-Have
and support DAO features with Won’t-Have priorities. Then,
it assigns non-negative scores to feasible DAO platforms ac-
cording to the number of DAO features with Should-Have
and Could-Have prioritizes [20].

5 Empirical Evidence: The Case Studies

Three industry case studies have been conducted to evaluate
and signify the decision model’s efﬁciency and effectiveness
to address the DAO platform selection problem. We selected
the case study organizations from three different domains,
including web3 development, open-source software secu-
rity, and decentralized ﬁnance (DeFi), for increasing variety
in our evaluation. Moreover, the selected case study organi-
zations were located in three different countries: the United
States, Iran, and the Netherlands.

5.1 Case Study 1: dOrg

dOrg is a decentralized autonomous collective of develop-
ers specialized in Web3 design and development that works
with industry-leading projects. dOrg is a freelancer collec-
tive with over 25 members that work remotely to build so-
lutions for dApps, smart contracts, prototypes, and experi-
ences. The collective is run in a decentralized manner by
worldwide DAO builders through the use of smart contracts.
In other words, dOrg is a cooperative of blockchain software
engineers that build DAO-related software. dOrg provides
the DAO with continuous product development and opera-
tional support services.

The experts at dOrg have created a Blockchain-Based
Limited Liability Company (BBLLC): dOrg LLC, an
Ethereum-based DAO with legal status in the United States.
Doing that dOrg team demonstrated how a DAO could have
ofﬁcial legal status, making it possible for DAOs to enter
contractual agreements and offer participants liability pro-
tections.

The collective is releasing a new integration model for
smart contracts that brings the simplicity of Web2 APIs to
Web3. Web3 API enables app developers to interact with
smart contract protocols from any programming language
by GraphQL. It eliminates the need to embed language-
speciﬁc Software Development Kits (SDKs) into dApps.
dOrg has found this path to seamless app integration from
numerous experiences bridging the gap between smart con-
tracts and applications.

Their rigorous freelancer activation process and trans-
parent workﬂow have resulted in collaborations with crypto
brands such as Gnosis, eToro, Balancer, DAOstack, The
Graph, and more. No centralized governing has the author-
ity to control the interaction between freelancers and em-
ployers. There is direct contact between employers and em-
ployees without the need for any middleman. Every free-
lancer would be able to compete for any consignment which
is posted on the platform. The cryptocurrency helps in elim-
inating the frauds involving a repudiation of payment and
false claims on assets. The cryptocurrency wallets are se-
cured, and payments can only be made by the wallet owner

A Decision Model for Decentralized Autonomous Organization Platform Selection: Three Industry Case Studies

11

Table 2: This table shows the DAO feature requirements, based on the MoSCoW prioritization technique (Must-Have (M), Should-Have (S),
Could-Have (C), and Won’t-Have(W)). Note, the Coverage column denotes the percentage of DAO platforms that support each feature. The most
vulnerable features changed from Must-Have to Should-Have or Won’t-Have to None (Note “>S” indicates that Must-have changed to Should-have
and “>N” denotes Won’t-Have to None.)

and do not need any information to be shared with any in-
termediary. The payments are made between crypto wallets
which are highly secured by cryptographic keys. The net-
work can be trusted because every transaction is veriﬁed
by the network and subsequently written on an immutable
ledger. The smart contracts release payments instantly once
the transaction conditions are satisﬁed and there are no in-
termediate holders to delay payments. Anyone can apply for
a job from anywhere in the world; there are no limitations

on global access and payments. The smart contract holds
the security amount and is trusted by both parties involved
in the system as it is locked based on mathematical logic.
Everyone in the network has access to a distributed ledger
to verify that the system is working correctly at any instant.
The experts at dOrg stated that they use DAOStack as their
selected DAO platform to develop DAOs for their clients.

CoveragedOrgSecureSECO AratooCoveragedOrgSecureSECO AratooInfrastructure decentralization85.71%MMMR01Funding Queues21.43%CCSR42On-chain78.57%MMMR02Reputation assignment46.43%MCR43Upgradeable contract82.14%MSMR03External activity21.43%SCR44Token distribution67.86%MMSR04Utility Token Offering (UTO)46.43%CSSR45Documentation100%MSMR05Off-chain53.57%MCR46Scalability100%SMMR06Linked discretionary17.86%> SCR47Upgradability100%MSMR07Authorization (Voting Right)50.00%SCR48Political decentralization 39.29%MSSR08Legally proper KYC14.29%> SCR49Funds82.14%MSSR09Domains17.86%SSR50Transparency portal28.57%SSMR10Recovery25.00%CCSR51Token-based voting57.14%> NMMR11Ethereum89.29%MCCR52Reputation-based voting25.00%MSMR12Manual Reputation Flow25.00%> S> NR53Structure-changing proposals17.86%> SCSR13Liquid DAO Governance46.43%SCR54Governance upgrade32.14%CSMR14Quadratic voting7.14%CCCR55Authentication/Identification50.00%> S> SCR15Rage Quit10.71%> SCR56Extensibility42.86%MCSR16Revenue Sharing10.71%SR57Active community100%MSMR17Budget Box21.43%CSR58Developer Resources (People)100%SSSR18Multiple payment types28.57%CCCR59Direct DAO Governance46.43%MSCR19IPFS78.57%SCR60Smart contracts100.00%CMSR20xDai39.29%> SCR61Intellectual Property10.71%> SC> SR21Maturity level100%SCR62Research & Development28.57%MCMR22Popularity in the market100%CSCR63Funds allocation64.29%MCCR23Representative DAO Governance7.14%CCCR64Collective data curation25.00%CSSR24Conviction voting21.43%CCR65Inflation Funding28.57%CSMR25Content or registry curation14.29%CCCR66Permissionless78.57%MSR26Meetups21.43%CCCR67Onchain tools60.71%SCMR27Security Token Offering (STO)14.29%CCR68Analytics Dashboard32.14%SCSR28Initial coin Offering (ICO)10.71%CCCR69Legal Entity21.43%> SSCR29Independent Platform75.00%CR70Automatic Reputation Flow14.29%S> SR30Storj7.14%CCR71Offchain tools57.14%SCSR31Ethereum Swarm10.71%CCR72Reputation46.43%MC> NR32Token-weighted Voting10.71%R73Membership management71.43%CS> NR33Physical Asset7.14%CR74Delegatable voting7.14%SCR34Extension25.00%CR75Lazy consensus10.71%> SSR35TCR Based Voting10.71%C> NR76Arbitrary transactions28.57%CSCR36On-Chain Resources82.14%SR77Shared Resource85.71%MR37Natural person25.00%CR78Proposals67.86%MR38Legal framework10.71%R79Service contracts7.14%> SCCR39RSK7.14%CCR80Professional services14.29%MCCR40Off-Chain Resources35.71%CR81Reward-for-work proposals39.29%CCCR41Registry14.29%R8212

5.1.1 Requirements

The experts at dOrg deﬁned the following subset of require-
ments for their DAO (for more detail, see Table 2):

– The dOrg needs the DAO that people decide on policy

initiatives directly (R03).

– The DAO must be able to use on-chain resources to al-
low a DAO to directly exert control and initiate action
via a smart contract (R14, R15).

– The DAO must support those token holders who can
become contractors by submitting proposals for their
project’s funding by using the DAO funds (R18).

– They need to approve the proposal in Research & Devel-
opment, Service contracts, Professional services, Repu-
tation, Structure-changing proposals in their DAO (R28,
R29, R30, R32, R36).

– Upgradability, scalability, and Maturity level were part
of their quality concerns, so that they preferred to hire
highly mature DAO (R78, R79, and R80).

– Besides their current knowledge and experience, the de-
velopers’ availability is an essential factor that has pro-
foundly impacted their decision-making process (R82).

5.1.2 Results

The case study participants identiﬁed 69 DAO feature re-
quirements, including 17% hard-constraint features (Must-
Have) and 83% soft-constraint features (Should-Have and
Could-Have). Table 3 shows that Colony was the ﬁrst,
Aragon was the second, and DAOStack was the third fea-
sible platform for this case study.

The DSS scored DAOStack as the third solution, and
only it supports “delegable voting ” as a should-have feature.
Moreover, “Automatic Reputation Flow” is another should-
have feature supported by Aragon and DAOStack, respec-
tively, the second and the third solution. because the effect
of Could Have features

The Should-Have features have higher priorities than the
Could-Have features, so DAO platforms that support more
Should-Have features score higher. However, because the
Could-Have features supported by Colony are a lot, the DSS
offers Colony as the ﬁrst solution.

5.2 Case Study 2: SecureSECO

The cybersecurity project SecureSECO intends to make the
worldwide software ecosystem a safer place by maintaining
a distributed ledger of facts about software used in the ﬁeld.
The data collected and maintained in the ledger can be used
to prevent vulnerabilities in a software conﬁguration from
being abused by malicious attackers.

The SecureSECO project is a collaboration between ﬁve
companies and ﬁve universities with over ten researchers

Elena Baninemeh et al.

and tool developers who collaboratively contribute to the
vision of a safer and more secure worldwide software
ecosystem. They perform academic research, participate in
hackathons, and provide academic research data for other
research groups about software.

The SecureSECO project collectively calculates trust
metrics for software packages and software-producing orga-
nizations. SecureSECO follows the open-source mantra that
if there are enough participants, any software problem can
be solved, and it is the community that should be in charge
of a trust mechanism. For this reason, decisions about the
trust calculation mechanism are taken by the collective in-
stead of a centralized entity. For this reason, SecureSECO is
managed in a DAO. In this way, they can provide meta-data
on software trustworthiness as a commons, similar to the air
we breathe and the water we swim in.

5.2.1 Requirements

The experts at SecureSECO deﬁned the following subset of
requirements for Implementing the DAO (for more detail,
see Table 3):

– They need a DAO that should endure if some parts (com-

puters, nodes, etc.) are broken (R01).

– The DAO must provide a mechanism that people can buy

tokens, vote, and sell the tokens (R11).

– The DAO must support smart contracts that a set of roles
are predeﬁned by computer code in a smart contract,
which is replicated and executed by all network nodes,
and it should be upgradeable (R77, R03, R20).

– They need a DAO that can conﬁgure and update its gov-

ernance system (R14).

– The popularity in the market (R63), Scalability (R06),
Maturity level (R62), and upgradeability (R55) are the
main quality concerns of the experts at SecureSECO
when they want to select potential DAO.

– The potential DAO should be mature enough and trendy
in the market because they have comprehensive docu-
mentation and friendly communities (R05, R17).

5.2.2 Results

The case study participants at SecureSECO identiﬁed 46
DAO feature requirements. They prioritized over 50% of
them as soft constraints (Could-Have and Should-Have) fea-
tures based on their assumptions. The SecureSECO experts
indicated Aragon, Colony, as their top potential DAO plat-
forms.

Table 3 shows that Colony was the ﬁrst feasible platform
for SecureSECO. Additionally, Aragon, DAOStack, Maker-
DAO, Molochdao, and Kleros were scored as the second to
sixth potential solutions. They only identiﬁed a small num-
ber of Must-Have features and deﬁned a limited number of

A Decision Model for Decentralized Autonomous Organization Platform Selection: Three Industry Case Studies

13

Must-Have features. They identiﬁed Could-Have features
more than others. Thus, the DSS had to suggest more fea-
sible solutions.

5.3 Case Study 3: Aratoo

Aratoo is an Iranian decentralized autonomous organization
that aims to liberate the Iranian cryptocurrency market. They
are developing, amongst other products, a DeFi wallet for
managing cryptocurrencies. A DeFi crypto wallet is a non-
custodial wallet where the users have complete access and
control of their private keys and funds. DeFi wallets are at
the core of the concept “be your own bank”.

Aratoo is a transparent platform that uses smart con-
tracts and native protocol to reduce investment risk, increase
proﬁts, and expand blockchain technology and decentral-
ized systems. They have employed DeFi ecosystems, such
as MakerDAO and CurveDAO, for lending, borrowing, ex-
changing, and governing.

The DAO will allow liquidity providers to make de-
cisions on adding new pools, changing pool parameters,
adding token incentives, and many other aspects of the pro-
tocol. A pool is a smart contract that implements the Sta-
bleSwap invariant and thereby allows for exchanging two or
more tokens.

A DeFi wallet serves the primary purpose of allowing

users to store their funds without reliance on a third party.

The DAO is essential for the Aratoo because people
can trust the governing to update feeds promptly and under
changes that are made across the DeFi ecosystem accurately.
In other words, the role of DAO is for protocol governance
and value accrual. There needs to be strong incentives for
the people involved in the DAO to report accurate updates,
vote on them, and maintain that reporting/voting behavior
into perpetuity.

Aratoo needs a DAO for governance and control of the
protocol admin functionality and implementation of the Vot-
ing App.

5.3.1 Requirements

The experts at this company indicated the following subset
of requirements of their DAO (for more detail, see Table 2):

– They need a DAO that a single individual or organization

does not control (R08).

– They need a mechanism that investigates the grid re-
sources’ trustworthiness through a reputation system
and then decides the results (R12).

– The DAO must support that proposers receive an auto-
matic reputation reward if their proposal passes (R30).
– The DAO must provide a feature that an organization can
manage its collective databases of objects and maintain
their curation (R24).

– The DAO must provide a feature that can set a rate at
which a DAOs token is minted and a ceiling to the supply
(R25).

– They need an analytic dashboard that shows real-time

system feedback (R28).

– Scalability and upgradability of the DAO were two key
quality concerns of the case study participants (R06,
R07).

5.3.2 Results

The case study participants at Aratoo identiﬁed 75 DAO fea-
ture requirements, including 19% hard-constraint features
(Must-Have) and 82% soft-constraint features (Should-Have
and Could-Have).

The case study participants looked for a platform sup-
porting “Token distribution” (R04) and “Lazy consensus”
(R35) as two Should-Have features. Based on our assess-
ment, Aragon, Colony, and DAOStack support both of these
features. “Revenue Sharing” (R57) as a Should-Have feature
does not support by Aragon.

The ﬁrst time the DSS suggested infeasible solutions;
hence we had to relax part of the hard constraints (Must-
Have and Won’t-Have features) and converted them into soft
constraints (Should-Have and Could-Have). for instance, the
case study participants identiﬁed “Intellectual Property” fea-
ture as Must Have feature. However, we had to convert it
into a Should-Have feature as a soft constraint. Moreover,
the “Membership management” feature had been identiﬁed
as a Won’t-Have feature by case study participants, and we
converted it into None(without prioritization).

6 Analysis of the Results

The DSS suggests that Colony, Aragon, and DAOStack can
be feasible solutions for all three case studies (see Table 3),
which means that these DAO platforms support all of the
features with Must-have priority. It makes sense as these
DAO platforms are in the top-5 list of popular solutions in
the market (see Table 7); moreover, their maturity levels are
relatively high, as they support most of the DAO features
that we have considered in this study (see Tables 5 and 6).

Scalability and upgradability of the DAO platforms were
two key quality concerns of the case study participants (see
Table 2) so that they considered at least one of the top-5
DAO platforms as their potential solutions. Table 3 repre-
sents that the DSS can come up with more feasible DAO
platforms than human experts (For instance, SecureSECO
case study).

Table 2 shows that supporting Infrastructure decen-
tralization, On-chain, Upgradeable contract, Token-based
voting, Transparency portal, Funds allocation, Scalability,

14

Elena Baninemeh et al.

Table 3: This table indicates the context of the case study companies (Context), the feature requirements (Requirements), the case study partici-
pants’ ranked shortlists (CP). Moreover, the numbers of feature requirements (#Feature Req) and the percentages of the MoSCoW priorities are
shown in the table. For instance, the percentage of the Must-Have priority for dOrg is 17%, and ﬁnally, the outcomes of the DSS for the case
studies (DSS Solutions), which are based on their requirements and priorities. These numbers in percentages in this section of the table signify the
calculated scores by the DSS. For instance, the score of the Aragon platform for SecureSECO is 88%.

Upgradability, Reputation-based voting, Governance up-
grade, Extensibility, Permissionless, Shared Resource, and
Proposals were DAO features that all of the case studies as-
signed priorities to them and deﬁned them as their DAO fea-
ture requirements. All of the case study participants some-
how declared that the upgradeable smart contract is essential
as allows us to iteratively add new features to our DAO, or
ﬁx any bugs that may ﬁnd in production.

It is not surprising that infrastructure decentralization
and on-chain governance were prioritized as two essential
features for all case studies, as these two features are crucial
in a DAO. One of the case study participants mentioned that
with using infrastructure decentralization, there is no single
point of failure; every department has the internal infrastruc-
ture to handle, analyze and manage data. Thus they are not
reliant on a single central server to handle all the processes.

Another case study participants about on-chain gover-
nance mentioned the main advantage of on-chain gover-
nance is the codiﬁcation of rules that govern the entire net-
work and can be known by all participants in the network.
Also, they mentioned that On-chain governance has several
beneﬁts over its informal counterpart, including a decentral-
ized decision-making process, binding code changes, trans-
parency, quicker consensus, fewer malicious hard forks.

Table 3 shows that the case study participants who indi-
cated the feature requirement with more conﬁdence were ad-
vised a limited set of alternative solutions. Hence, the higher
number of hard-constrained feature requirements (Must-
Have) on unique programming language features leads to
fewer alternative solutions.

For instance, dOrg prioritized their feature requirements
according to their current main solutions (DAOStack and
Aragon ), so they have assigned Must-Have priority to the
particular features, such as supporting Infrastructure de-
centralization and Reputation-based voting. In other words,
their feature requirements were biased to the features that
their shortlist of DAO platforms supported them.

The results show that ﬂexibility on the feature require-
ments leads to a higher number of alternative solutions. For
instance, the DSS suggested a broader list of alternative so-
lutions to the case study participants at SecureSECO as they
did not emphasize particular feature requirements and de-
ﬁned more soft-constrained (Should-Have and Could-Have)
features.

ContextCase Study 1Case Study 2Case Study 3Company NamedOrgSecureSECO projectAratooCountryUnited StatesNetherlandsIranProject NamedOrgSecureSECO DAOAkino protocolDomainWeb3 developmentOpen source software securityDefi (Decentralized finance)#Decision-Makers34 (active) - 50 (reputation holders)46Requirements#Feature Req694675Must-Have17%13%19%Should-Have48%41%31%Could-Have35%46%51%Won't-Have0%0%0%None19%78%9%Coverage84%56%91%CP1DAOStackAragonMakerDAO2Aragon ColonyDSS Solutions1Colony76%Colony              94%Colony                          91%2Aragon 72%Aragon               88%Aragon                       90%3DAOStack 58%DAOStack         86%DAOStack                      80%4MakerDAO83%5Molochdao     48%6Kleros37%A Decision Model for Decentralized Autonomous Organization Platform Selection: Three Industry Case Studies

15

7 Discussion

The validity metric is deﬁned as the degree to which an ar-
tifact works correctly. There are two ways to measure valid-
ity: (1) the results of the DSS compared to the predeﬁned
case-study participant shortlist of potentially feasible DAO
platforms, and (2) according to the domain experts’ opinion.
Concerning effectiveness, the case study participants
stated that the updated and validated version of the decision
model is useful and valuable in ﬁnding the shortlist of feasi-
ble DAO platforms. Moreover, the DSS reduces the time and
cost of the decision-making process. The case study partic-
ipants expressed that the DSS enabled them to meet more
detailed DAO feature requirements. Furthermore, they were
surprised to ﬁnd their primary concerns, especially when
different experts’ opinions are combined.

7.1 Case Studies

We conducted a set of interviews with the experts at three
case study organizations and asked them to indicate their
feature requirements based on the MoSCoW prioritization
technique. If the DSS suggests infeasible solutions, we need
to relax part of the hard constraints (Must-Have and Won’t-
Have features) and convert them into soft constraints (or
Should-Have and Could-Have). Sometimes, the case study
participants misunderstood the meaning of the Won’t-Have
priority. So, they use it to indicate what they do not care
about.

If the DSS suggests infeasible solutions, we need to re-
lax part of the hard constraints (Must-Have and Won’t-Have
features) and convert them into soft constraints (or Should-
Have and Could-Have). Sometimes, the case study partici-
pants misunderstood the meaning of the Won’t-Have prior-
ity. So, they use it to indicate what they do not care about.
We faced the same problem when we tried to deﬁne the fea-
ture requirements of case studies on the DSS. So, we have
relaxed the constraints to come up with some feasible solu-
tions on the DSS.

Hence, we have ranked the feature requirements based
on the number of DAO platforms that they support. We can
identify the features that lead to infeasible solutions if they
are prioritized as Must-Have or Won’t-Have. Then, We have
changed the most vulnerable features from Must-Have to
Should-Have or Won’t-Have to None (without priorities).
We have done it iteratively until We ﬁnd at least a feasible
solution.(See table 2)

7.2 Expert Interviews

be termed incremental concept development. During the lit-
erature study and interviews, concepts were identiﬁed that
were relevant. Candidate qualities and features were identi-
ﬁed, deﬁned, and ﬁne-tuned with the interviewees and later
conﬁrmed by asking the interviewees for a post-analysis of
the interview and literature results. While this did not con-
stitute formal coding, we did mark concepts related to the
domain, came up with the literature study, and came up with
the interviews. Secondly, these concepts were incrementally
ﬁne-tuned until an agreement was reached with the intervie-
wees [25].

One of the experts asserted that smart contracts deﬁne
a decentralized autonomous organization. However, a good
organization also needs liquid funds. It needs to make good
decisions and communicate with all instances. There is no
management within a DAO, only decision-making capabili-
ties that are executed by a code distributed across thousands
of computers. Hence, smart contracts play an essential role
in the DAO.

The experts expressed that technical vulnerabilities of
DAOs include cybersecurity, voting procedure, and voter
manipulation. They mentioned that the immutable nature of
blockchain ledgers could also make the DAO vulnerable to
attacks because it is so difﬁcult to alter the essential con-
struction of the DAO if a bug in the code appears. So almost
all of the experts mentioned that considering the security is-
sues on DAO is crucial.

7.3 The Decision Model

The case study participants conﬁrm that the updated and val-
idated version of the DSS is helpful and valuable in ﬁnd-
ing the shortlist of feasible solutions. Finally, it decreases
the time and cost of the decision-making process. Our web-
site5 is up and running to keep the decision support system’s
knowledge base up-to-date and valid. The supported DAO
platform features are going to change due to technological
advances. As such, the decision model must be updated reg-
ularly. We envision a community of users of the DSS who
maintain and curate the system’s knowledge and consider
building such a community as future work.

Decision support systems can be employed to make de-
cisions quicker and more efﬁciently; however, they suffer
from adoption problems [11]. A DSS supports rational de-
cision making by recommending alternative solutions basis
the objectivity. Although limited rationality plays a crucial
role in a decision-making process, subjectivity should not be
discarded. A DSS promotes objectivity and dismisses sub-
jectivity, which can have a drastic consequence on the deci-
sions’ reliability.

We did not use formal coding for the analysis of the inter-
views and the literature. What we did do, however, could

5 https://dss-mcdm.com

16

Elena Baninemeh et al.

We believe that the theoretical contribution and the an-
swer of the main research question (see section 3.2) of this
study is a decision model that can be used to make informed
decisions in software production, and models from software
engineering, such as the ISO standard quality model and the
MoSCoW prioritization technique, are fundamental build-
ing blocks in such decisions. Researchers can replace the
ISO standard quality model with more speciﬁc quality at-
tributes to customize the decision model. Although we em-
ploy the MoSCoW prioritization technique to simplify the
understanding and manage priorities, other researchers can
employ other types of prioritization techniques to deﬁne the
feature requirements.

Researchers can more rapidly evaluate DAO platforms
in the market by using the knowledge available through
the decision model, and also They can add more platforms
or features to the decision model systematically according
to the presented guideline, employ the reusable knowledge
(presented in Tables 5, 6, 7, and 2) to develop new concepts
and solutions for future challenges.

7.4 Limitations and Threats to Validity

The validity assessment is an essential part of any empir-
ical study. Validity discussions typically involve Construct
Validity, Internal Validity, External Validity, and Conclusion
Validity.
Construct validity refers to whether an accurate operational
measure or test has been used for the concepts being stud-
ied. In literature, decision-making is typically deﬁned as a
process or a set of ordered activities concerning stages of
problem identifying, data collection, deﬁning alternatives,
selecting a shortlist of alternatives as feasible solutions with
the ranked preferences [27, 39]. To mitigate the threats to the
construct validity, we followed the MCDM theory and the
six-step of a decision-making process [43] to build the deci-
sion model for the DAO platform selection problem. More-
over, we employed document analysis and expert interviews
as two different knowledge acquisition techniques to capture
knowledge regarding DAO platforms. Additionally, the DSS
and the decision model have been evaluated through three
real-world case studies at three different real-world enter-
prises in the Netherlands, United States, and Iran.
Internal validity attempts to verify claims about the cause-
effect relationships within the context of a study. In other
words, it determines whether the study is sound or not. To
mitigate the threats to the decision model’s internal validity,
we deﬁne DSS success when it, in part, aligns with the case
study participants’ shortlist and when it provides new sug-
gestions that are identiﬁed as being of interest to the case
study participants. Emphasis on the case study participants’
opinion as a measurement instrument is risky, as they may
not have sufﬁcient knowledge to make a valid judgment. We

counter this risk by conducting more than one case study,
assuming that the case study participants are handling their
interest and applying the DSS to other problem domains,
where we ﬁnd similar results [20,21,22,24,18,26,23].
External validity concerns the domain to which the re-
search ﬁndings can be generalized. External validity is
sometimes used interchangeably with generalizability (fea-
sibility of applying the results to other research settings). We
evaluated the decision model in the context of Dutch enter-
prises. To mitigate threats to the research’s external validity,
we captured knowledge from different sources of knowledge
without any regional limitations to deﬁne the constructs
and build the decision model. Accordingly, we hypothesize
that the decision model can be generalized to all decentral-
ized companies and organizations that face uncertainty in
the DAO platform selection problem. Another question is
whether the framework and the DSS can be applied to other
problem domains as well. The problem domains [20,21,24,
26] were selected opportunistically and pragmatically, but
we are convinced that there are still many decision prob-
lems to which the framework and the DSS can be applied.
The categories of problems to which the framework and the
DSS can be applied successfully can be summed up as fol-
lows: (1) the problem regards a technology decision in sys-
tem design with long-lasting consequences, (2) there is co-
pious scientiﬁc, industry, and informal knowledge publicly
available to software engineers, and (3) the (team of) soft-
ware engineer(s) is not knowledgeable in the ﬁeld but very
knowledgeable about the system requirements.
Conclusion validity veriﬁes whether the methods of a study
such as the data collection method can be reproduced, with
similar results. We captured knowledge systematically from
the sources of knowledge following the MCDM frame-
work [20]. The accuracy of the extracted knowledge was
guaranteed through the protocols that were developed to de-
ﬁne the knowledge extraction strategy and format (See ap-
pendix A). A review protocol was proposed and applied by
multiple research assistants, including bachelor and master
students, to mitigate the threats to the research’s conclusion
validity. By following the framework and the protocols, we
keep consistency in the knowledge extraction process and
check whether the acquired knowledge addresses the re-
search questions. Moreover, we crosschecked the captured
knowledge to assess the quality of the results, and we had at
least two assistants extracting data independently.

8 Related Work

In this study, Snowballing was applied as the primary
method to investigate the existing literature regarding tech-
niques that address the DAO platform selection problem. Ta-
ble 4 summarizes a subset of selected studies that discuss the

Table 4: This table compares a subset of selected studies from the literature that addresses the DAO platform selection problem. The ﬁrst two columns indicate the selected study (Study) and the
publication year (Year).The next column (MCDM) denotes whether the corresponding decision-making technique is an MCDM approach. The next three columns Quality Attribute(QA) determines
the type of quality attributes, the data collection type (Data Col.) of the corresponding selected studies, respectively. The sixth column (Approach) indicates the decision-making approach that the
studies have employed to address the DAO platform selection problem. the seventh and eighth column indicate research methods (R. Method) (including Expert Interview, Document Analysis,
Design Science and Case Study) and publication type (including Research Paper, Dissertation, Chapter and Report) of the corresponding selected studies, respectively. The ninth and tenth and
eleventh and twelfth columns(#F and #QA and #C and #A) signify the number of features and quality attributes and criteria and alternatives considered in the selected studies. The next three
columns indicate the numbers of features (#CF), common quality attributes (#CQA), and alternatives (#CA) of this study (the ﬁrst row) with the selected studies. The last column (Cov.) shows the
percentage of the coverage of the considered criteria (quality attributes and features).

Study

Year MCDM QA

Data Col.

Approach

R. Method

publication type

#F

#QA

#C

#A

#CF

#CQA

#CA

Cov.)

Our study

2021

Yes

ISO/IEC 25010
Ext. ISO/IEC 9126

Mixed

DSS

2020
2020

2020

No
No

No

Domain speciﬁc
Domain speciﬁc

Qualitative
Qualitative

Benchmarking
Benchmarking

N/A

Qualitative

Benchmarking

2020

Yes

Domain speciﬁc

Mixed

Domain speciﬁc
Domain speciﬁc
Domain speciﬁc
Domain speciﬁc
Domain speciﬁc
Domain speciﬁc

Qualitative
Quantitative
Quantitative
Qualitative
Quantitative
Qualitative

AHP
ANP
NGT
Benchmarking
Benchmarking
Statistical analysis
Benchmarking
Statistical analysis
Benchmarking

Domain speciﬁc

Qualitative

Benchmarking

Domain speciﬁc

Mixed

Fuzzy logic

Domain speciﬁc

Qualitative

Benchmarking

Domain speciﬁc
Domain speciﬁc
Domain speciﬁc
Domain speciﬁc
Domain speciﬁc
Domain speciﬁc
Domain speciﬁc

Qualitative
Qualitative
Qualitative
Qualitative
Qualitative
Qualitative
Qualitative

Benchmarking
Benchmarking
Benchmarking
Benchmarking
Benchmarking
Benchmarking
Benchmarking

2020
2020
2020
2019
2018
2018

2017

2018

2017

2020
2020
2020
2020
2019
2019
2019

No
No
No
No
No
No

No

Yes

No

No
No
No
No
No
No
No

[58]
[41]

[63]

[40]

[53]
[51]
[16]
[48]
[15]
[12]

[57]

[35]

[13]

[83]
[42]
[79]
[82]
[75]
[84]
[80]

Case Study
Expert interview
Document Analysis

Case Study
Document Analysis
Document Analysis
Expert Interview

Document Analysis
Expert Interview

Document Analysis
Document Analysis
Document Analysis
Expert interview
Document Analysis
Document Analysis
Document Analysis
Case Study
Document Analysis
Document Analysis
Grounded theory
Document Analysis
Document Analysis
Document Analysis
Document Analysis
Document Analysis
Document Analysis
Document Analysis

Research paper

82

46

128

28

82

46

28

100%

Research paper
Research paper

Research paper

Research paper

Research paper
Research paper
Research paper
Research paper
Research paper
Research paper

Research paper

Dissertation

Chapter

Report
Report
Report
Report
Report
Report
Report

9
4

3

4

13
6
4
3
7
9

9

9

2

2
8
9
7
24
8
3

2
0

0

2

5
0
1
0
0
0

0

4

0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0

11
4

3

6

18
6
4
3
7
9

9

13

2

2
8
9
7
24
8
3

3
3

3

3

1
6
4
1
4
1

3

9

1

8
9
8
3
6
1
4

8
4

2

4

12
6
4
2
1
2

8

5

2

2
8
5
7
24
5
2

2
0

0

2

4
0
1
0
0
0

0

3

0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0

3
3

2

1

0
2
4
0
4
1

3

0

1

2
8
4
10
6
1
4

91%
100%

67%

100%

89%
100%
25%
67%
14%
22%

89%

62%

100%

100%
100%
56%
100%
100%
63%
67%
79.24%

A
D
e
c
i
s
i
o
n
M
o
d
e
l

f
o
r

D
e
c
e
n
t
r
a
l
i
z
e
d
A
u
t
o
n
o
m
o
u
s
O
r
g
a
n
i
z
a
t
i
o
n
P
l
a
t
f
o
r
m
S
e
l
e
c
t
i
o
n
:

T
h
r
e
e

I
n
d
u
s
t
r
y
C
a
s
e
S
t
u
d
i
e
s

1
7

18

Elena Baninemeh et al.

problem. As aforementioned, the last column (Cov.) of Ta-
ble 4 indicates the percentage of the coverage of the consid-
ered criteria within the selected studies. On average, 79.24%
of those criteria are already considered in this study. In other
words, the decision model contains a signiﬁcant number of
criteria, including features and quality attributes, that have
been mentioned in the literature.

concepts. Decision-making based on such analysis can be
challenging as decision-makers cannot assess all their re-
quirements and preferences simultaneously, especially when
the number of requirements and alternatives is signiﬁcantly
high. Furthermore, benchmarking and statistical analysis are
likely to become outdated soon and should be kept up to date
continuously, which involves a high-cost process.

8.1 Benchmarking and Statistical Analysis

8.2 MCDM approaches

Some studies employed Benchmarking and Statistical Anal-
ysis to evaluate and compare a collection of DAO platforms
against each other in literature. For instance, Valiente et
al. [58] perform an analytical comparison of three DAO soft-
ware frameworks: Aragon, DAOstack, and Colony. They fo-
cus on their current functionalities for building DAOs, and
they present a case study using the Aragon framework. They
are performed with the case study of a sample DAO that sup-
ports researchers participating in a typical project to manage
the different tasks they have to carry out.

Liu et al. review the most recent research activities on
academic and engineering scenarios, including governance
problems and solutions, typical DAO technologies, and re-
lated areas. They perform such an overview by identifying
and classifying the most valuable proposals and perspectives
related to the combination of DAO and blockchain technolo-
gies [41].

Ziolkowski et al. [63] explore multiple case study
consisting of three famous DAOs, Aragon, Tezos, and
DFINITY. This study introduced each case by depicting
the DAOs’ organizational and technological structure and
brought forward concepts. Second, They have created an
understanding of how these days are governed by examin-
ing their governance systems in terms of applied/envisioned
coordination, control, and incentive mechanisms. As they
study fewer DAO features and DAO platforms, our work
could be considered more comprehensive. They studied only
three DAO platforms and four DAO features against our
study that we have considered 82 DAO features and 28 DAO
platforms.

Faqir et al. [15] introduce the concept of DAO and re-
view the primary software platforms that offer DAO cre-
ation as a service, which simpliﬁes the use of DAOs to non-
blockchain experts, namely: Aragon, DAOstack, DAOhaus,
and Colony. These platforms are compared by showing their
key features. Finally, the authors will review the available
visualization tools for DAOs. They introduced their open-
source tool to plot DAOs activity and to analyze.

Studies based on benchmarking and statistical analy-
sis are typically time-consuming approaches and mainly
applicable to a limited set of alternatives and criteria, as
they require a thorough knowledge of DAO platforms and

Selecting the best ﬁtting DAO platform is a decision-making
process that evaluates several alternatives and criteria. The
selected DAO platform should address the concerns and pri-
orities of the decision-makers. Conversely to MCDM ap-
proaches, studies based on Benchmarking and Statistical
Analysis principally offer generic results and comparisons
and do not consider individual decision-maker needs and
preferences.

The tools and techniques based on MCDM are math-
ematical decision models aggregating criteria, points of
view, or features [28]. Support is a fundamental concept in
MCDM, indicating decision models are not developed fol-
lowing a process where the decision maker’s role is pas-
sive [14]. Alternatively, an iterative process is applied to an-
alyze decision-makers’ priorities and describe them as con-
sistently as possible in a suitable decision model. This iter-
ative and interactive modeling procedure forms the underly-
ing principle of decision support tendency of MCDM, and
it is one of the main distinguishing characteristics of the
MCDM as opposed to statistical and optimization decision-
making approaches [30].

A variety of MCDM approaches have been introduced
by researchers recently. A subset of selected MCDM meth-
ods is presented as follows: The Analytic Hierarchy Process
(AHP) is a structured and well-known method for organizing
and analyzing MCDM problems based on mathematics and
psychology. The analytic network process (ANP) is struc-
tured on the same basis as AHP; however, it differs from
AHP in two ways. (1) ANP does not assume that the alterna-
tives and criteria are independent. The feedback mechanism
handles their potential dependencies. (2) ANP has a network
structure that forms subnetworks and submodels. The nomi-
nal group technique (NGT) is a group decision-making pro-
cess including problem identiﬁcation, solution generation,
and decision-making.

Yosep et al. [40] examined the decision-making process
and tools applicable to a decentralized autonomous organi-
zation. This paper studied a decision-making process that
features iteration, visualization, and applicability to DAO
with six steps in total and a decision-making tool based on
this paper’s process. Traditional methods such as AHP, ANP,
and NGT have been studied in this paper.

A Decision Model for Decentralized Autonomous Organization Platform Selection: Three Industry Case Studies

19

Fuzzy logic is an approach to computing based on de-
grees of truth rather than the usual Boolean logic. Valiente
et al. [35] considered a set of DAO platforms for ﬁnding the
right option for a case study. They performed fuzzy logic
in their analysis as a tool for decision-making. Additionally,
the authors explained the conceptualization of DAOs and the
deﬁning features of coordination mechanisms within DAOs.
The majority of the MCDM techniques in literature de-
ﬁne domain-speciﬁc quality attributes to evaluate the alter-
natives. Such studies are mainly appropriate for speciﬁc case
studies. Furthermore, the results of MCDM approaches are
valid for a speciﬁed period; therefore, the results of such
studies will be outdated by DAO platform advances. Note
that, in our proposal, this is also a challenge, and we pro-
pose a solution for keeping the knowledge base up to date in
section 7.

8.3 Strengths and liabilities of the decision model

Determining the best DAO platform for an organization is a
decision-making process that involves evaluating various al-
ternatives and criteria. Hence, the selected platform should
address the concerns and priorities of the decision-makers.
Studies based on ’Benchmarking’ and ’Statistical Analysis’,
in contrast to MCDM techniques, primarily provide gen-
eral results and comparisons and do not consider individual
decision-maker requirements and preferences. Benchmark-
ing and Statistical Analysis (SA) methods are often time-
consuming and only apply to a small number of alternatives
and criteria. Furthermore, benchmarking and statistical anal-
ysis are likely to become obsolete quickly and must be main-
tained up to date regularly, which is a costly operation.

Researchers have presented a range of MCDM ap-
proaches in the literature. To evaluate the alternatives, the
majority of MCDM approaches establish domain-speciﬁc
quality attributes. Some approaches, such as Fuzzy and
AHP, are not scalable; the evaluation process needs to be
performed if the list of alternatives or criteria is changed.
Accordingly, these approaches are expensive and only apply
to a limited set of criteria and alternatives.

This study has considered 82 criteria and 28 alternatives
to building a decision model for the DAO platform selec-
tion problem. MCDM approach is an evolvable and expand-
able approach that divides down the decision-making pro-
cess into four maintainable phases.

In contrast to the methods mentioned above, the cost
of creating, evaluating, and applying the proposed decision
model is not penalized exponentially by the number of cri-
teria and alternatives [21] . Additionally, we introduce sev-
eral parameters to estimate the values of non-Boolean crite-
ria, such as the maturity level and market popularity of the
DAO platforms. The proposed decision model addresses the

most important aspects of knowledge management, such as
knowledge capture, sharing, and maintenance. Furthermore,
it uses the ISO/IEC 25010 [36] as a standard set of quality at-
tributes. This quality standard is a domain-independent soft-
ware quality model and provides reference points by deﬁn-
ing a top-down standard quality model for software systems.
Recently, we have built six decision models based on
the framework to model the selection of database manage-
ment systems [21], cloud service providers [20], blockchain
platforms [24], software architecture patterns [26], model-
driven platforms [25], and programming languages [23].
These case studies were conducted to evaluate the DSS’s ef-
fectiveness and usefulness in addressing MCDM problems.
The results conﬁrmed that the DSS performed well to solve
the mentioned problems in software production. We believe
that the framework can be employed as a guideline to build
decision models for MCDM problems in software produc-
tion.

9 Conclusion and Future Work

In this study, the DAO platform selection process is mod-
eled as a multi-criteria decision-making problem that deals
with evaluating a set of alternatives and considering a set
of decision criteria [56]. Moreover, we presented a deci-
sion model for the DAO platform selection problem based
on the technology selection framework [20]. The approach
provides knowledge about DAO platforms to support un-
informed decision-makers while contributing a sound deci-
sion model to knowledgeable decision-makers. The frame-
work incorporates deeply embedded requirements engineer-
ing concepts (such as the ISO software quality standards and
the MoSCoW prioritization technique) to develop the deci-
sion model.

The scientiﬁc contributions of this work are threefold.
First, the methodical collection of features from a multitude
of resources supports researchers who need a comprehensive
overview of DAOs and their features. Secondly, we prove
that the MCDM approach and its supporting decision sup-
port system are valuable in new contexts for technology se-
lection. Finally, we show that case studies are an excellent
research method for evaluating designed artifacts, such as
the MCDM framework.

We conducted three industry case studies to evaluate the
decision model’s usefulness and effectiveness to address the
decision problem. We ﬁnd that while organizations are typ-
ically tied to particular ecosystems by extraneous factors,
they can beneﬁt signiﬁcantly from our DSS by evaluating
their decisions, exploring more potential alternative solu-
tions, and analyzing an extensive list of features.

The case studies show that this article’s decision model
also provides a foundation for future work on MCDM prob-

20

Elena Baninemeh et al.

lems. We intend to build trustworthy decision models to ad-
dress the Consensus Algorithm selection problem and the
self-sovereign identity framework selection problem as our
(near) future work.

References

1. R. Beck, C. M¨uller-Bloch, and J. L. King. Governance in the
blockchain economy: A framework and research agenda. Journal
of the Association for Information Systems, 19(10):1, 2018.

2. G. A. Bowen. Document analysis as a qualitative research method.

Qualitative research journal, 2009.

3. V. Buterin et al. A next-generation smart contract and decentral-

ized application platform. white paper, 3(37), 2014.

4. J. P. Carvallo and X. Franch. Extending the iso/iec 9126-1 quality
model with non-technical factors for cots components selection.
In Proceedings of the 2006 international workshop on Software
quality, pages 9–14. ACM, 2006.

5. W. K. Chen. The electrical engineering handbook. Elsevier, 2004.
6. S. E. S. Committee et al. Ieee standard for software maintenance.

IEEE Std, pages 1219–1998, 1998.

7. D. Consortium et al. The dsdm agile project framework. Ashford,

Kent, UK: DSDM Consortium, 2014.

8. J. Corbin and A. Strauss. Basics of qualitative research: Tech-
niques and procedures for developing grounded theory. Sage pub-
lications, 2014.

9. P. De Filippi and G. McMullen. Governance of blockchain sys-
tems: Governance of and by Distributed Infrastructure. PhD the-
sis, Blockchain Research Institute and COALA, 2018.

10. V. Dhillon, D. Metcalf, and M. Hooper. The hyperledger project.
In Blockchain enabled applications, pages 139–149. Springer,
2017.

11. P. Donzelli. Decision support system for software project man-

agement. IEEE software, 23(4):67–75, 2006.

12. S. Dube and M. M. Katende. Information technology governance
in decentralised autonomous organisations. University of Johan-
nesburg Institutional Repository, 2021.

13. Q. DuPont. Experiments in algorithmic governance: A history
and ethnography of “the dao,” a failed decentralized autonomous
organization. Bitcoin and beyond, pages 157–177, 2017.

14. O. Dvoˇr´ak, R. Pergl, and P. Kroha. Affordance-driven software as-
sembling. In Enterprise Engineering Working Conference, pages
39–54. Springer, 2018.

15. Y. El Faqir, J. Arroyo, and S. Hassan. An overview of decentral-
In Proceed-
ized autonomous organizations on the blockchain.
ings of the 16th International Symposium on Open Collaboration,
pages 1–8, 2020.

16. Y. Faqir-Rhazoui, J. Arroyo Gallardo, and S. Hassan. A scalable
voting system: Validation of holographic consensus in daostack.
Complutense University of Madrid, 2020.

17. S. Farshidi. Multi-Criteria Decision-Making in Software Produc-

tion. PhD thesis, University Utrecht, 2020.

18. S. Farshidi and S. Jansen. A decision support system for pattern-
In Proceedings of the 14th Eu-
driven software architecture.
ropean Conference on Software Architecture, ECSA 2020,, vol-
ume 1, pages 1–12. ACM, 2020.

19. S. Farshidi, S. Jansen, R. De Jong, and S. Brinkkemper. A deci-
sion support system for cloud service provider selection problem
in software producing organizations. In 2018 IEEE 20th Confer-
ence on Business Informatics (CBI), volume 1, pages 139–148.
IEEE, 2018.

20. S. Farshidi, S. Jansen, R. de Jong, and S. Brinkkemper. A deci-
sion support system for cloud service provider selection problem
in software producing organizations. In 2018 IEEE 20th Confer-
ence on Business Informatics (CBI), volume 1, pages 139–148.
IEEE, 2018.

21. S. Farshidi, S. Jansen, R. de Jong, and S. Brinkkemper. A deci-
sion support system for software technology selection. Journal of
Decision Systems, 27(sup1):98–110, 2018.

22. S. Farshidi, S. Jansen, R. de Jong, and S. Brinkkemper. Multiple
criteria decision support in requirements negotiation. In the 23rd
International Conference on Requirements Engineering: Founda-
tion for Software Quality (REFSQ), 2018.

23. S. Farshidi, S. Jansen, and M. Deldar. A decision model for
programming language ecosystem selection: Seven industry case
Information and Software Technology, page 106640,
studies.
2021.

24. S. Farshidi, S. Jansen, S. Espa˜na, and J. Verkleij. Decision sup-
port for blockchain platform selection: Three industry case stud-
ies. IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management, 2020.
25. S. Farshidi, S. Jansen, and S. Fortuin. Model-driven development
platform selection: four industry case studies. Software and Sys-
tems Modeling, pages 1–27, 2020.

26. S. Farshidi, S. Jansen, and J. M. van der Werf. Capturing soft-
ware architecture knowledge for pattern-driven design. Journal of
Systems and Software, 2020.

27. D. R. Fitzgerald, S. Mohammed, and G. O. Kremer. Differences
in the way we decide: The effect of decision style diversity on
process conﬂict in design teams. Personality and Individual Dif-
ferences, 104:339–344, 2017.

28. C. A. Floudas and P. M. Pardalos. Encyclopedia of optimization.

Springer Science & Business Media, 2008.

29. D. Fortus, J. Krajcik, R. C. Dershimer, R. W. Marx, and
Design-based science and real-world
International Journal of Science Education,

R. Mamlok-Naaman.
problem-solving.
27(7):855–879, 2005.

30. J. Gil-Aluja. Handbook of management under uncertainty, vol-

ume 55. Springer Science & Business Media, 2013.

31. T. R. Gruber. Automated knowledge acquisition for strategic
In Knowledge Acquisition: Selected Research and

knowledge.
Commentary, pages 47–90. Springer, 1989.

32. S. Hassan. P2p models white paper. decentralized blockchain-
based organizations for bootstrapping the collaborative economy,
2017.

33. A. R. Hevner, S. T. March, J. Park, and S. Ram. Design science
in information systems research. MIS quarterly, pages 75–105,
2004.

34. A. R. Hevner, S. T. March, J. Park, and S. Ram. Design science in
information systems research. Management Information Systems
Quarterly, 28(1):6, 2008.

35. Y.-Y. Hsieh. The rise of decentralized autonomous organizations:
coordination and growth within cryptocurrencies. PhD thesis, The
University of Western Ontario, 2018.

36. ISO. Iec25010: 2011 systems and software engineering–systems
and software quality requirements and evaluation (square)–system
and software quality models. International Organization for Stan-
dardization, 34:2910, 2011.

37. S. Jansen. Applied multi-case research in a mixed-method re-
search project: Customer conﬁguration updating improvement. In
Information Systems Research Methods, Epistemology, and Appli-
cations, pages 120–139. IGI Global, 2009.

38. R. B. Johnson and A. J. Onwuegbuzie. Mixed methods research: A
research paradigm whose time has come. Educational researcher,
33(7):14–26, 2004.

39. L. Kaufmann, S. Kreft, M. Ehrgott, and F. Reimann. Rationality
in supplier selection decisions: The effect of the buyer’s national
task environment. Journal of Purchasing and Supply Manage-
ment, 18(2):76–91, 2012.

40. Y. Lee and Y. B. Park. A decision making tool for decentralized
autonomous organization. Journal of the Semiconductor & Dis-
play Technology, 19(2):1–10, 2020.

A Decision Model for Decentralized Autonomous Organization Platform Selection: Three Industry Case Studies

21

42. F. Machart.

41. L. Liu, S. Zhou, H. Huang, and Z. Zheng. From technology to
society: An overview of blockchain-based dao. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2011.14940, 2020.
The

governance.
https://medium.com/greenfield-one/the-state-
of-blockchain-governance-governance-by-and-
of-blockchains-f6418c46077/, 2020.

blockchain

state

of

43. M. Majumder. Multi Criteria Decision Making, pages 35–47.

Springer Singapore, Singapore, 2015.

44. J. R. Meredith, A. Raturi, K. Amoako-Gyampah, and B. Kaplan.
Alternative research paradigms in operations. Journal of opera-
tions management, 8(4):297–326, 1989.

45. D. Mohanty. Ethereum for architects and developers. Apress Me-

dia LLC, California, pages 14–15, 2018.

46. M. D. Myers and M. Newman. The qualitative interview in is
Information and organization,

research: Examining the craft.
17(1):2–26, 2007.

47. S. Nakamoto and A. Bitcoin. A peer-to-peer electronic cash sys-
tem. Bitcoin.–URL: https://bitcoin. org/bitcoin. pdf, 4, 2008.
48. O. Rikken, M. Janssen, and Z. Kwee. Governance challenges of
blockchain and decentralized autonomous organizations. Informa-
tion Polity, 24(4):397–417, 2019.

49. D. Samadhiya, S.-H. Wang, and D. Chen. Quality models: Role
and value in software engineering. In 2010 2nd International Con-
ference on Software Technology and Engineering, volume 1, pages
V1–320. IEEE, 2010.

50. H. A. Simon. The sciences of the artiﬁcial. MIT press, 2019.
51. A. Sims. Blockchain and decentralised autonomous organisations
(daos): The evolution of companies? Available at SSRN, 2019.
52. M. Singh and S. Kim. Blockchain technology for decentralized
In Advances in Computers, volume

autonomous organizations.
115, pages 115–140. Elsevier, 2019.

53. A. Skarzauskiene, M. Maciuliene, and D. Bar. Developing
blockchain supported collective intelligence in decentralized au-
tonomous organizations. In Proceedings of the Future Technolo-
gies Conference, pages 1018–1031. Springer, 2020.

54. M. Swan. Blockchain: Blueprint for a new economy. ” O’Reilly

Media, Inc.”, 2015.

55. E. Triantaphyllou. Multi-criteria decision making methods.

In
Multi-criteria decision making methods: A comparative study,
pages 5–21. Springer, 2000.

56. E. Triantaphyllou, B. Shu, S. N. Sanchez, and T. Ray. Multi-
criteria decision making: an operations research approach. Ency-
clopedia of electrical and electronics engineering, 15(1998):175–
186, 1998.

57. M.-C. Valiente, S. Hassan, and J. Pav´on. Results and experiences
from developing daos with aragon: A case study. IEEE Std, 2017.
58. M.-C. Valiente Bl´azquez, S. Hassan, and J. Pav´on Mestras. Evalu-
ating the software frameworks for developing decentralized au-
tonomous organizations. Complutense University of Madrid,
2020.

59. J. G. Walls, G. R. Widmeyer, and O. A. El Sawy. Building an infor-
mation system design theory for vigilant eis. Information systems
research, 3(1):36–59, 1992.

60. G. Wood et al. Ethereum: A secure decentralised generalised
transaction ledger. Ethereum project yellow paper, 151(2014):1–
32, 2014.

61. R. K. Yin. The case study as a serious research strategy. Knowl-

edge, 3(1):97–114, 1981.

62. R. K. Yin. Case study research and applications: Design and

methods. Sage publications, 2017.

63. R. Ziolkowski, G. Miscione, and G. Schwabe. Exploring decen-
tralized autonomous organizations: Towards shared interests and
‘code is constitution’. Association for Information Systems (AIS)
eLibrary, 2020.

Online References

64. Aragon help desk. https://help.aragon.org/article/

4-about-aragon. (Accessed on 01/08/2021).
65. Aragon main site. https://aragon.org/.

(Accessed on

01/08/2021).

66. Daostack. https://daostack.io/.
67. Github. https://github.com/.
68. Hackernoon. https://hackernoon.com/.
69. Ieee. https://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
70. Linkedin. https://linkedin.com/.
71. Medium. https://medium.com/.
72. Messari. https://messari.io/.
73. Reddit. https://www.reddit.com/.
74. Springer. https://www.springer.com/.
75. Theory and praxis of daos — binance research. https://
research.binance.com/en/analysis/dao-theory.

76. Twitter. https://twitter.com/.
77. What’s the difference between dapp, idapp and dao? https:

//medium.com/swlh/whats-the-difference-
between-dapp-idapp-and-dao-and-why-they-
are-the-future-of-blockchain-52758f50474e.

78. Youtube. https://youtube.com/.
79. Dao overview, 2020.
80. Aragon, DAOstack, Colony, Moloch, 2021.
daostack,
81. D. Kronovet.

Aragon,

colony, moloch.

http://kronosapiens.github.io/blog/2019/06/
16/aragon-daostack-colony-moloch.html, 2019.
82. G. Samman. A decentralized governance layer for the internet
of value. http://sammantics.com/blog/2020/5/20/
dao-a-decentralized-governance-layer-for-
the-internet-of-value/, 2020.

83. G.

Samman.

Tan,

joshua.

https://

thelastjosh.medium.com/introducing-govbase-
97884b0ddaef/, 2021.

84. E. Weller.
terms.

An explanation of daostack in fairly sim-
https://medium.com/daostack/an-

ple
explanation-of-daostack-in-fairly-simple-
terms-1956e26b374, Sep 2019.

22

A Expert Interview Protocols

[Evaluation of the DAO features and platforms]

Step 1- A brief description of the project, the decision model, the DSS,
and the main goal of the interview.

Step 2- Introductory questions:
- What do you understand about DAO?
- Which features of DAO do you familiar with?
- Which DAO Platform are you familiar with?
- How long have you worked on DAO platforms?

Step 3- Decision-making questions:
- Why do you need a DAO for your company?
- How do a decentralized organization typically select DAO platforms?
- What are the essential features from your perspective for selecting the
best ﬁtting DAO platform?
- Which DAO platforms are typically considered as alternative solutions
by decentralized organizations?

Step 4- Evaluation of the sets of DAO platform / features:
- What do you think about these DAO platform / features?
- Which DAO platform / features should be excluded from the list?
- Which DAO platform /features should be added to the list?

Step 5- Closing
- What do you think about our work?
- May we contact you if we have any further questions?
- Can we use the name of your company in the scientiﬁc paper, or do
you prefer an anonymous name?
- Can we use your name in the scientiﬁc paper, or do you prefer an
anonymous name?
- Do you have any questions?

Elena Baninemeh et al.

[Mapping between the DAO features and the quality attributes]

Step 1- A brief description of the project, the decision model, the DSS,
and the main goal of the interview.

Step 2- Introductory questions:
- What do you understand about DAO?
- Which features of DAO do you familiar with?
- Are you familiar with the ISO/IEC quality models?

Step 3- Mapping between the DAO features and the quality attributes:
(Note: this step will be repeated for all of the features and quality
attributes).
- Does the DAO feature [X] have a positive impact on the quality
attribute [Y]? For instance, if a DAO platform supports Conviction
Voting means that it has positive impacts on Functional appropriateness
and Stability.

Step 4- Closing
- What do you think about our work?
- May we contact you if we have any further questions?
- Can we use the name of your company in the scientiﬁc paper, or do
you prefer an anonymous name?
- Can we use your name in the scientiﬁc paper, or do you prefer an
anonymous name?
- Do you have any questions?

A Decision Model for Decentralized Autonomous Organization Platform Selection: Three Industry Case Studies

23

Table 5: This table shows the ﬁrst part of the Boolean Features (F eatureB), DAO Platforms (P latf orms), and the “BFP” mapping. Note, 1s
on each row indicates that the corresponding platforms support the DAO feature of that row, and 0s signify the corresponding platforms do not
support that feature, or we did not ﬁnd any strong evidence of their supports based on the documentation analysis. Moreover, the rows in black
indicate the categories of the features, and the rows in blue show the features, and the rows below them are their sub-features.

BFA(BooleanFeaturesAlternatives)43.42%77.11%81.93%69.88%74.70%38.55%55.42%37.35%36.14%34.94%34.94%49.40%50.60%32.53%33.73%27.71%32.53%39.76%26.51%37.35%36.14%31.33%36.14%48.19%31.33%49.40%46.99%34.94%30.12%AragonColonyMakerDAODAOStackTezosMolochdaoWingsKlerosInfinity economicsOpenLawDXdaoPocket Network DAOHolochainVentuary DAOMetaCartelDaoHubDaohausThe Commons StackThe LAOBalancedDAOPhutureDAOWhalerDAOUNI DAOMstable DAOGovBlocks1HiveDAONexus mutualCompound Decentralization Types89.29%1111111111111010111111111101Political decentralization 39.29%1111000101100010000000100101Infrastructure decentralization85.71%1111111111111010111111011101Governance78.57%1111111110110000111111111101Direct DAO Governance46.43%1111001010110000011001100100Representative DAO Governance7.14%0000011000000000000000000000Liquid DAO Governance46.43%0010111100000000110111011001Voting Mechanism82.14%1111110101110110111111101111Quadratic voting7.14%0000010000000000000001000000Conviction voting21.43%0100100000010010010001000000Reputation-based voting25.00%1101010001000000101000000000Token-weighted Voting10.71%0100000000000000000000000011Token-based voting57.14%1111010101110000101110101100TCR Based Voting10.71%0000000000000110010000000000Delegable Voting7.14%0001000000000000000000000001Lazy consensus10.71%1101000000000000000000000000Resource Management82.14%1111111101110001101111111111On-Chain Resources82.14%1111111101110001101111111111Upgradeable contract82.14%1111111101110001101111111111Off-Chain Resources35.71%1111010001110000001000100000Natural person25.00%1111000000110000000000100000Legal Entity21.43%1110010001000000001000000000Autonomy (Self-governance)100.00%1111111111111111111111111111Smart contracts100.00%1111111111111111111111111111Arbitrary transactions28.57%0111000100101000010000010000Rage Quit10.71%0000010000000010100000000000DAO Design Specification100.00%1111111111111111111111111111Shared Resource85.71%1111011111000111111111111111Funds82.14%1111011111000111111111110111Physical Asset7.14%0000000010000000000000000001Registry14.29%1001000000000001000000001000Intellectual Property10.71%1110000000000000000000000000Proposals67.86%1111111100111111010101001010Research & Development28.57%1111000000010100010001000000Service contracts7.14%1100000000000000000000000000Professional services14.29%1111000000000000000000000000Content or registry curation14.29%1111000000000000000000000000Reputation46.43%1111011000111110000100001000Meetups21.43%1110100000000011000000000000Reward-for-work proposals39.29%1110001100010101000100001010Structure-changing proposals17.86%1110000100000000000000001000Funding Queues21.43%1111010100000000000000000000Reputation system32.14%1111010100100000100000001000Manual Reputation Flow25.00%0111010000100000100000001000Automatic Reputation Flow14.29%100100010000000000000000100024

Elena Baninemeh et al.

Table 6: This table shows the second part of the Boolean Features (F eatureB), DAO Platforms (P latf orms), and the “BFP” mapping. Note, 1s
on each row indicates that the corresponding platforms support the DAO feature of that row, and 0s signify the corresponding platforms do not
support that feature, or we did not ﬁnd any strong evidence of their supports based on the documentation analysis. Moreover, the rows in black
indicate the categories of the features, and the rows in blue show the features, and the rows below them are their sub-features. The deﬁnitions of
the features are available on the data repository [25].

BFA(BooleanFeaturesAlternatives)43.42%77.11%81.93%69.88%74.70%38.55%55.42%37.35%36.14%34.94%34.94%49.40%50.60%32.53%33.73%27.71%32.53%39.76%26.51%37.35%36.14%31.33%36.14%48.19%31.33%49.40%46.99%34.94%30.12%AragonColonyMakerDAODAOStackTezosMolochdaoWingsKlerosInfinity economicsOpenLawDXdaoPocket Network DAOHolochainVentuary DAOMetaCartelDaoHubDaohausThe Commons StackThe LAOBalancedDAOPhutureDAOWhalerDAOUNI DAOMstable DAOGovBlocks1HiveDAONexus mutualCompound DAO Application82.14%1111011110111100111101111111Token distribution67.86%1111011110111100100101110101Funds allocation64.29%1111011110110000111101100110Reputation assignment46.43%1111001010101000000101101100Collective data curation25.00%1111000000100000000000100100External activity21.43%1101000000100000000000100100Governance upgrade32.14%1111000010100000000000100110Inflation Funding28.57%1111000010100000000000100100Fundraising57.14%1111010010111010101010101100Security Token Offering (STO)14.29%1000000000010000000000100100Utility Token Offering (UTO)46.43%1101010010110010101010100100Initial coin Offering (ICO)10.71%0101000000100000000000000000Revenue Sharing10.71%0111000000000000000000000000Budget Box21.43%1101010000001000000000001000Discussion & Negotiation Type82.14%1111111101111101101011111110On-chain78.57%1111111101111101100011111110Off-chain53.57%1111110101011001101000011000Linked discretionary17.86%0111000000011000000000000000DAO Member Management92.86%1111111011111111101111111111Authorization (Voting Right)50.00%1111100001110001001000101101Membership management71.43%1100110011011111100111111110Authentication/Identification50.00%0000110011001111000111011010Permissionless78.57%1111110011111111101011111100Legally proper KYC14.29%0000101000000000001000000010Architecture100.00%1111111111111111111111111111Independent Platform75.00%1111111111001111010111001011Extension25.00%0000000000110000101000110100Toolkit75.00%1111111010111101101010111110Onchain tools60.71%1111110000111101000010111110Offchain tools57.14%1111110000111101101000101100Extensibility42.86%1111110010011101000000001000Transparency portal28.57%1111000010000101000000000010Legal framework10.71%0000001000010000000000000010Domains17.86%1111100000000000000000000000General Feautures64.29%1111111011010100010100101111Recovery25.00%1111000000000000000100100100Multiple payment types28.57%1101010011000100000100000000Analytics Dashboard32.14%0000101001010000010100001011Decentralized Storage Systems82.14%1101111111111110101011111101IPFS78.57%1101111111111110101001111101Storj7.14%0000001000000000000010000000Ethereum Swarm10.71%1000000000000000000000100100Infrastructure (Network)92.86%1111111111111011111011111111Ethereum89.29%1111111111111011111011111011RSK7.14%0000001000000000000000001000xDai39.29%0000110001100000110001010111A Decision Model for Decentralized Autonomous Organization Platform Selection: Three Industry Case Studies

25

Table 7: This table shows the NFP mapping between the Non-Boolean DAO Features and Platforms.

NFA (5)AragonColonyMakerDAODAOStackTezosMolochdaoWingsKlerosInfinity economicsOpenLawDXdaoPocket Network DAOHolochainVentuary DAOMetaCartelDaoHubDaohausThe Commons StackThe LAOBalancedDAOPhutureDAOWhalerDAOUNI DAOMstable DAOGovBlocks1HiveDAONexus mutualCompound Source of KnowledgePopularityHighHighHighHighHighMediumHighMediumHighMediumMediumHighHighMediumLowLowLowLowMediumLowLowLowMediumMediumMediumLowHighHighDomain ExpertsFounded Date20172014201420172018201920192017201720172019201720172017201920182019201920162020202020202019201920172,0182,0172,017crunchbase.comGoogle (#hits)11100001160000104000031800047000001080001080000069700022400000260,00095000024200001500001190043100398013,300620,0003060000007058,27070291,400,000876,00015,00023,40012,100,000156,000,000Google.comTwitter (#followers)724828392477087,405720004,8993380787851,8598,4393,683120832900377005,365N/A1,3491,5543,72574847173212611,8002992,03021,50083,500Twitter.com#LinkedIn ( followers)158331241304674141N/AN/A1382N/A1,098N/A287179525113N/AN/A115N/AN/AN/AN/AN/A184225N/A515N/ALinkedIn.comMaturity levelHighHighHighHighMediumMediumMediumMediumLowMediumMediumMediumLowLowLowLowMediumLowLowLowLowMediumMediumLowMediumMediumLowLowDomain ExpertsSupported features71.43%75.32%61.04%67.53%33.77%48.05%33.77%31.17%29.87%32.47%42.86%42.86%28.57%28.57%25.97%29.87%32.47%23.38%27.27%28.57%24.68%32.47%41.56%27.27%41.56%40.26%29.87%25.97%DocumentionDeveloper Resources (People)HighHighHighHighHighLowHighMediumHighHighLowHighHighLowHighLowLowHighMediumLowLowLowMediumMediumMediumMediumMediumMediumDomain ExpertsGithub (#projects)11368N/A51N/A610N/A1437N/A81145N/A2713724363N/A6201310971535Github.comLinkedIn (#People)3300001840002568555322340001366,7001102261852012191214N/AN/AN/AN/AN/A149N/A3,600N/ALinkedIn.comUpgradabilityHighHighHighHighHighHighLowLowLowLowHighHighHighHighLowHighLowLowLowLowLowLowMediumMediumHighMediumMediumLowDomain ExpertsUpgradeable contractYesYesYesYesYesYesYesYesNoYesYesYesNoNoNoYesYesNoYesYesYesYesYesYesYesYesYesYesDocumentionArbitrary transactionsNoYesYesYesNoNoNoYesNoNoYesNoYesNoNoNoNoYesNoNoNoNoNoYesNoNoNoNoDocumentionOnchain toolsYesYesYesYesYesYesNoNoNoNoYesYesYesYesNoYesNoNoNoNoYesNoYesYesYesYesYesNoDocumentionOffchain toolsYesYesYesYesYesYesNoNoNoNoYesYesYesYesNoYesYesNoYesNoNoNoYesNoYesYesNoNoDocumentionTransparency portalYesYesYesYesNoNoNoNoYesNoNoNoNoYesNoYesNoNoNoNoNoNoNoNoNoNoYesNoDocumentionDomainsYesYesYesYesYesNoNoNoNoNoNoNoNoNoNoNoNoNoNoNoNoNoNoNoNoNoNoNoDocumentionScalabilityHighHighHighHighHighHighHighMediumHighMediumLowLowHighHighMediumHighLowMediumLowHighMediumMediumLowLowHighLowMediumMediumDomain ExpertsCryptocurrencyN/AN/AMKR(Maker)N/AXTZN/AWINGSN/AXINN/AN/AN/AHolo N/ASeedN/AN/AN/AN/ABWTPHTRN/AN/AN/AN/AHNY(Honey)NXM N/ADocumentionThe base platformN/AN/AN/AN/AN/AN/AN/AN/AN/AN/ADAOStackAragonN/AN/AN/AN/AMolochDAON/AMolochDAON/AN/AN/AAragonAragonN/AAragonN/AN/ADocumentionSmart contractsYesYesYesYesYesYesYesYesYesYesYesYesYesYesYesYesYesYesYesYesYesYesYesYesYesYesYesYesDocumentionExtensibilityYesYesYesYesYesYesNoNoYesNoNoYesYesYesNoYesNoNoNoNoNoNoNoNoYesNoNoNoDocumention