Digital Passport and Visa Asset Management Using
Private and Permissioned Blockchain

Keenu Chandra
Department of Computer Science
Nitte Meenakshi Institute of Technology
Bangalore, India
1nt17cs085.keenu@nmit.ac.in

Maroof Mushtaq
Department of Computer Science
Nitte Meenakshi Institute of Technology
Bangalore, India
1nt17cs102.maroof@nmit.ac.in

Dr. Nalini N.
Professor, Dept. of CS&E NMIT
Bangalore, India
nalini.n@nmit.ac.in

is

of

one

currently

Abstract—Blockchain

the
fastest-growing technologies in the field of Computer Science.
It has found a prevalent use in financial applications like
cryptocurrency, for example, Bitcoin and Ethereum. They have
been able to bring an unforeseen disruption in the field of
finance. However, permissionless Blockchains like these have
some downsides, namely the computation cost of the Proof of
Work algorithm, maximum allowed size for a block, decrease
in intelligibility with the increase of the number of blocks in
the chain, domination of nodes with higher computing power
as miners and validators. These factors have restricted the
adoption of permissionless blockchain technology outside the
field of finance, such as in medical or legal fields. This paper
proposes a solution to these problems using a permissioned
blockchain. It does not require a computationally expensive
consensus mechanism as permissioned chains call for trust
between participating organizations which is achieved via
exclusive invitations. We have utilized a third-party orderer to
maintain the trust between organizations.

Keywords—blockchain, asset management, permissioned,

passport, VISA, hyperledger

INTRODUCTION

The traditional asset management system for physical
VISA and passports has numerous limitations that arise
essentially due to the asset control and storage dynamics. It
is still paper-based despite all the advancements in digital
technology. Traditionally assets are regulated by a single
organization and stored at a central database, which on its
own is susceptible to human error, forgery, or theft. The
process of applying for a passport or a VISA is quite
complicated and involves manual labour and time, and is
vastly inefficient. This process can also get overly repetitive
in case multiple VISA is required for the same country [1].
There have also been numerous cases of passport frauds[2]
that may lead to a bigger disaster depending on the
to national and
fraudster’s
international trust and security. Apart from that, the problem
of passport confiscation of immigrant labourers is extremely
common which leads to their exploitation and other human
rights issues[3][4]. There can also be honest accidents of
people losing their physical passport or VISA that can land
them into trouble abroad[5]. Reissuing passports in such
cases is a time and resource-consuming, repetitive, and
tedious process. Many countries are trying to find a more

is a threat

intentions.

It

efficient solution to this problem[6].

In this paper, we propose a solution using Hyperledger, a
that will allow simplifying

permissioned blockchain,

passport and VISA issuing, verification, and validation
processes to make it streamlined and seamless. It creates a
distributed ledger to store the passport data of all the
citizens of a country along with their visa application record
and travel history. We have decided to utilize CouchDB, an
on-chain database, to store the data that ensures security and
immutability, which is highly essential for sensitive data like
this. There are four main components in the proposed
issuing authority, a visa office, a
system: a passport
third-party orderer that acts as the channel admin in the
framework that can read, write, and update data to and from
the chain, and a web-based interface for users (citizens of
the country) where they can apply for passport or VISA,
the application, and produce a
check the status of
trustworthy digital copy of passport or VISA wherever and
whenever
required. The final product automates many
processes and makes the whole process much simpler for all
the humans involved.

and

(Bitcoin

blockchain

architecture

We will first provide background information about
and
permissionless
Ethereum)
permissioned blockchain architecture
(Hyperledger) in section II. In section III, we will discuss
previous attempts at digitizing passports and other works
related to our project. In section IV, we will describe our
proposed solution, its implementation, and the architectural
model in detail. We provide the summary of our work and
the scope of future work in section V of this paper.

BACKGROUND

are

Blockchain is a distributed and immutable ledger that is
shared among all the participants of a business network but
does not have any central authority[7]. It allows the network
to record transactions and track assets. An asset can be any
intangible or tangible object that holds value. Blockchain
maintains a list of records of all the assets that are called
encrypted using complex
blocks. These blocks
cryptographic
to
functions
tampering. The three key elements of blockchain are
distributed ledger technology, immutable records, and smart
contracts[8]. Together they allow all the participants of the
network to access the distributed ledger and perform
authorised actions on it. All the transactions are recorded
only once and no participant can change or tamper with the
transaction after it has been recorded in the shared ledger.
The smart contract is a set of rules that is stored on the chain
and is responsible for defining conditions for the allowed
transactions[8].

them immune

to make

Figure 1. Transaction in Bitcoin

Permissionless Blockchain

Permissionless blockchain is

essentially a public
blockchain framework. It is a shared network that does not
impose any restriction on participation[9]. Anyone from
around the globe can join and become a validator in such
blockchain networks. These networks are truly decentralised
and have maximum security and transparency. All
the
popular blockchains that we know of today such as Bitcoin,
Ethereum, and Litecoin are permissionless or public
blockchain. Complete copies of the ledger in these chains
are copied and stored around the globe, granting it extreme
immunity to hacking and tampering. The participants can
remain anonymous as there is no need to provide identity to
gain access to the system[10].

Bitcoin was developed to invent an electronic payment
that is based on cryptographic proof instead of just vesting
trust third parties to process the payments. In Bitcoin, the
owner of an electronic coin can transfer it to someone
digitally by signing a hash of the previous transaction and
the public key of the next owner. The second party will then
verify the signatures to complete the transaction[11]. A
trusted central authority is established to check transactions
for double spending.

Ethereum aims to create an alternative protocol for building
decentralized applications. It provides a blockchain with
built-in Turing-complete programming language. It allows
anyone to write their own smart contracts[12]. Although
both the technologies work well for their applied field, using
a permissionless blockchain is not adequate for our project.

Permissioned Blockchain

Contrary to permissionless blockchains, a permissioned
blockchain requires explicit approval from the network to
access the chain and ledger. These can be thought of as
private networks that act as closed ecosystems and allow
only those to view or validate the transactions that are
approved by the central authority[10]. They are much less
transparent as compared to permissionless chains, hence are

Figure 2. Mining process in Ethereum

Figure 3. Core structure of Hyperledger Fabric

suitable for instances where sensitive data is being handled.
They are useful for institutions that want complete control
over their data, such as banks and private companies.

Examples of permissioned blockchain are Ripple and

Hyperledger.

Hyperledger is a joint initiative by the Linux Foundation
and IBM. It started in 2015 with the cooperation of many
different companies along with the Linux Foundation. It has
many frameworks like Hyperledger Burrow, Hyperledger
Sawtooth, Hyperledger Quilt, and Hyperledger Fabric. It is
designed to be modular, highly secure interoperable
cryptocurrency agnostic and complete with APIs[17][19].
For our project, we are going to use Hyperledger Fabric. It
is a permissioned blockchain where all the nodes have an
identity and there exists a Membership Service Provider
that uses a public key to issue cryptographic
(MSP)
certificates
It uses a consensus
mechanism that reduces computational complexity many
fold when compared to proof of work mechanism. Fabric
also has smart contracts, Chaincode, and the ability to create
channels. The architecture of Hyperledger Fabric is modular
in nature and allows the user flexibility in consensus
mechanism, MSP, certificate authority, and interface SDK. It
can be used to build an efficient, secure, and flexible
blockchain platform for enterprise use[17-20].

to the participants.

RELATED WORKS

The "Known Traveler Digital Identity" [13] was initiated
at the World Economic Forum (WEF) aiming to unlock the
potential of digital identity for safe and seamless travel. This
system exploits different innovations such as blockchain,
IoT and machine learning technologies to build a prototype.
The main goal of this project is to minimize trans-border
and cybersecurity threats. The Known Traveler Digital
Identity system allows travellers to use a mobile application
to store and share their travel documents with authorities
before the screening process. All the data related to the
international passengers will be stored on the blockchain.

This system uses Consortium Blockchain, a semi-private
blockchain that
is controlled by a trusted group of
organisations but any organisation can use it as a public
blockchain. VeriDoc global [14] is a digital passport storage
and verification system. This software solution tackles fake
documentation problems and verifies documents. When a
user or a citizen gets a passport from the Government
Passport Office, VeriDoc scans the passport, puts a QR code
on it and converts it into a PDF format. The PDF is stored
on secure servers and hash is generated for the pdf URL and
placed into the blockchain. VeriDoc maintains the off-chain
database to match the pdf URL to the hash. Users or citizens
can simply log in to the server, provide their hash ID and the
passport, in the form of a PDF, will be retrieved. Knowledge
Media Institute (KMI) which is a part of Open University
UK (OU) has built an asset management and verification
system to share and verify course completion certificates
and badges. KMI's system uses permissionless blockchain
technology, like Ethereum. KMI is collaborating with other
institutes to build a universal system, which will make it
easy for students to share their certificates and badges
institutes seamlessly and securely[15].
among different
Another
certificate
similar
verification has also been proposed by O. S. Saleh et al [16].

educational

solution

for

SYSTEM IMPLEMENTATION

In this section, we will discuss our proposed system in
detail. Our proposed system provides a safe and secure
alternative to physical and digital passport and VISA
documents. This system implements an e-Identification
system to verify the users across passport and VISA offices.
We will describe the logic of how the Passport office can
verify and issue a passport to a citizen and how citizens can
conveniently apply for a VISA. We will also discuss
different parts of Smart Contract that form our business
logic.

System Structure

Like any other system based on Hyperledger Fabric
technology, our proposed system also includes components
such as organisations, orderer, channel and ledger.

Organisations:

These are the companies that define the rules and
regulations to be implemented on the blockchain. In our
case, these companies (or organisations) are the Indian
Passport office and VISA offices of other nations. Every
organisation in Hyperledger Fabric has a CA (Certificate
Authorities),
peer(s), MSP (Membership Service
Provider), and a copy of the shared ledger.

Certificate Authorities and MSP:

CAs are the nodes that issue certificates of identity to
all
these
the peers or users. The abstraction of
identities is provided by the MSP
certificates or
definitions. MSP provides an abstraction of membership
operations. It defines all the protocols and mechanisms
for generating, issuing and verifying the certificates as
well as user authentication.

Peer(s):

the organisation. Usually a

organisation that hosts Chaincode and ledgers. A peer is
the user of
single
organisation is composed of multiple peers. MSP assigns
each peer
their permission to interact with the
blockchain and defines which operations are allowed. A
peer can have multiple chaincodes installed or can host
multiple ledgers.

Ledger:

A ledger is the database system of a blockchain. It
stores transactions in the form of key-value pairs.
Hyperledger Fabric ledger has two parts - World state
and Blockchain. World state is a Database that stores the
current values of a ledger state. Blockchain is a
transaction log that stores all the changes that have been
made to the world state.

Smart Contract:

a

the

contains

computer

technology)

programming

A Smart Contract (also known as "Chaincode" in
Hyperledger
executable
business logic. It defines the rules and permissions on
how the businesses interact with each other, as well as
the blockchain network. It is a piece of code written
using
like
JavaScript, Go, or Java. This code allows the users to
perform operations like read and write on the ledger.
Users interact with it using SDK's. It also defines the
structure of objects (or assets) that can be stored,
retrieved, or updated on the blockchain. Chaincode
interface has three major components: a Deploy method
to install the chaincode on a peer, an Invoke method to
update or write a smart contract, and a Query method to
read or query the current state of the ledger.

language,

Definition of assets in our Smart Contract is shown

below:

User asset:

abstract asset User identified by userId {

o String userId

o String name

o String email

o Integer phoneNumber

o String address

o Integer aadhaarNumber

}

Passport asset:

abstract asset Passport identified by passportId {

o String passportId

o String name

o String email

o Integer phoneNumber

o String address

o Integer aadhaarNumber

o DateTime issueDate

A peer is an essential component of the

}

VISA asset:

abstract asset VISA identified by visaId {

o String visaId

o String country

o String visaType

o String passportId

o String name

o String email

o String address

o Integer aadhaarNumber

o DateTime visaIssueDate

o DateTime visaExpireDate

}

Smart Contracts are essential

in maintaining the
permissions and the operations allowed to a user or a peer.
These ensure that
the data is read or queried by the
permissible users only and data written to the ledger is
entered by the authorized user with permission to write on
the ledger.

Policies:

Readers:

Type: Signature
Rule: "OR('OrdererMSP.member')"

Writers:

Type: Signature
Rule: "OR('OrdererMSP.member')"

Admins:

Type: Signature
Rule: "OR('OrdererMSP.admin')"

In order to ensure that the data present on the blockchain is
valid and verified by the authorized users, we have used a
strong permission logic. For example, permission logic for
passport issuing authority to view user applications, verify
users, issue a passport and write passport details on the
ledger. Similarly permission logic for VISA issuing
authority to view only valid users, verify users with the
passport office of the users country, issuing a VISA and
writing VISA details to the ledger.

Algorithms
The algorithms used in this paper are as follows:

ALGORITHM 1- Issuing Passport

Step 1: Start
Step 2: Passport issuing agent logs in using correct
credentials.
Step 3: These credentials are matched with the credentials
stored on the blockchain.

Step 4: If the credentials are correct:

Step 5: A list of Passport applications are
queried from the blockchain and displayed
to the agent.
Step 6: The agent reviews the applications
Step 7: If the application is accepted:

Step 8: Agent write the passport
details on the blockchain.

Step 9: Else, Application request and data
is deleted from the blockchain.
Step 10: Repeat Step 4 for other pending requests.
Step 11: Else, the page returns to the login page.

Step 12: Stop.

ALGORITHM 2- Issuing VISA

Step 1: Start
Step 2: VISA issuing agent logs in using correct credentials.
Step 3: These credentials are matched with the credentials

stored on the blockchain.
Step 4: If the credentials are correct:

Step 5: The list of VISA applications are
queried from the blockchain and displayed
to the agent.
Step 6: The agent reviews and verifies the
application with the passport office of the
user’s country.
Step 7: If the application is accepted:

Step 8: Agent write the VISA
details on the blockchain.
Step 9: Else, Application request and data
is deleted from the blockchain.

Step 10: Repeat Step 4 for other pending requests.
Step 11: Else, the page returns to the login page.

Step 12: Stop.

ALGORITHM 3- Querying Passport and VISA

Step 1: Start
Step 2: User logs in using correct credentials.
Step 3: These credentials are matched with the credentials
stored on the blockchain.

Step 4: If the credentials are correct:

Step 5: The corresponding Passport is
queried from the blackchain and displayed
to the user.
Step 6: The user can also query the
approved VISA’s.

Step 11: Else, the page returns to the login page.

Step 12: Stop.

WORKFLOW

First, a user has to apply for a passport, if they don’t one
already. Passport registrations don’t need any credentials as
fthe user is new to the system. After filling and submitting
an application form online, this application form is written
on the blockchain. Passport issuing authorities, which need
credentials to log in to the system, query all the pending
passport application forms from the blockchain database.
User verification is done based on the information submitted
by the user through the application. If the user verification is
successful then the passport issuing agent writes the user
data
identification on the
blockchain. If the user verification fails, the application
request is deleted from the blockchain. If a passport is
issued successfully to the user, the user can access the
passport by logging in to the system with the correct

along with the passport

Figure 4.  Activity diagram for the user applying for
passport

credentials.User with a passport can log in to the system,
query the passport as well as apply for a VISA.Valid User
applies for a VISA by choosing a country, VISA type and
VISA duration. VISA application is submitted to the
blockchain ledger and is queried by the VISA issuing agent.

VISA issuing agent needs correct credentials to log in to
the
the system and query pending VISA requests. All
queries are verified by the Passport Office of the user’s
country. A VISA agent can accept or reject the passport
based on the details entered by the user. VISA requests have
two ways of getting rejected: the passport office of the user's
country denies the verification or the VISA agent denies the
VISA application.

CONCLUSION

Existing solutions for maintaining assets like Passport
and VISA based on blockchain cost unnecessary charges
and work with the organisation sharing similar protocols
and maintaining a shared chain network. This is not feasible
in the current scenario, as the rules for immigration and
VISA policy change from country to country. Hyperledger
technology based on blockchain has a solution for both
problems, cutting overhead cost every time transaction is
done because it has no native tokens or cryptocurrency and
solves latter problems by working with organisations even
though different organisations use different protocols.It also
supports  multi-chain asset transfers.

Figure 5. Activity diagram for user applying for VISA

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

We gratefully acknowledge Dr. Thippeswamy M. N.,
HoD, Department of Computer Science, Nitte Meenakshi
Institute of Technology and our project guide Dr. Nalini N.
Professor, Department
of Computer Science, Nitte
Meenakshi Institute of Technology for their valuable time
and guidance.

REFERENCES

[1]

[2]

[3]

International Comparison of Passport Issuing Authorities 2011-2012,
[Online]. Available:
http://www.cic.gc.ca/english/department/consultations/passport/pdf/2
012-03-compare-eng.pdf
IdentityFraud – A Study. [Online] Available:
http://www.statewatch.org/news/2004/may/id-fraud-report.pdf
Japan should ban confiscation of foreign employees' passports, lawyer
Available:
says
https://www.reuters.com/article/us-japan-immigration-idUSKBN1ZM
0T8

[Online]

[4] Lebanon: Investigate Seizure of Human Rights Lawyer's Passport
[Online]
Available:
https://www.hrw.org/news/2010/03/08/lebanon-investigate-seizure-hu
man-rights-lawyers-passport

[5] Ecuadorean player appeals for help after losing passport [Online]

Available:
https://www.reuters.com/article/soccer-ecuador-int-idUSKBN27Y2E
N

[6] Replace a lost, stolen or damaged passport. [Online] Available:
http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20100104183022/http://dir
ect.gov.uk/en/TravelAndTransport/Passports/Loststolenordamagedpas
sports/DG_174163

[7] BlockChain

TechnologyBeyond

Bitcoin[Online]

Available:

https://scet.berkeley.edu/wp-content/uploads/BlockchainPaper.pdf

[8] What

is

blockchain

technology?

[Online]

Available:

https://www.ibm.com/in-en/topics/what-is-blockchain

[9] Nicholas Stifter, Aljosha Judmayer, Philipp Schindler, Andreas Kern,
Permissionless
and Walid
Blockchains?”,International Association for Cryptologic Research,
Available:https://eprint.iacr.org/2021/023.pdf

is Meant

Fdhila,

“What

by

[10] Toshendra Kumar Sharma,

“Permissioned and Permissionless
Blockchains: A Comprehensive Guide”,[Online] Available:
https://www.blockchain-council.org/blockchain/permissioned-and-per
missionless-blockchains-a-comprehensive-guide/

[11] Y S. Nakamoto, “Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash sys- tem,”

White Paper, 2008.

[12] “A Next-Generation Smart Contract and Decentralized Application

Platform”, Ethereum white paper, 2013

[13] The Known Traveller: Unlocking the potential of digital identity for
secure
Available:
http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_The_Known_Traveller_Digital
_Identity_Concept.pdf

seamless

[Online]

travel,

and

based

Journal

framework
of

[14] VeriDoc Global. https://veridocglobal.com/Passport
[15] Omar S. Saleh, Osman Ghazali, Muhammed Ehsan Rana,
certificates
Available:

educational
“Blockchain
verification”,
Reviews.
http://www.jcreview.com/fulltext/197-1583403182.pdf
[16] John Domingue, “Blockchains as a Component of
Internet”,

the Next
Generation
Available:
https://www.ngi.eu/wp-content/uploads/sites/48/2017/10/blockchain-a
s-a-component-of-the-next-generation-internet-hub4ngi-v-3.0-public.
pdf

for
Critical

[Online].

[17] “An Introduction to Hyperledger”, White paper, 2018
[18] Hyperledger Fabric documentation, [Online]. Available:

https://hyperledger-fabric.readthedocs.io/en/release-2.2/whatis.html

[19] Hyperledger. https://www.hyperledger.org/

“What is Hyperledger Fabric?”, [Online]. Available:
https://www.ibm.com/in-en/topics/hyperledger

