1
2
0
2

l
u
J

7
2

]

C
D
.
s
c
[

1
v
1
8
9
2
1
.
7
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Cross-Referencing Method for Scalable Public Blockchain

Takaaki Yanagihara and Akihiro Fujihara

Department of Information and Communication Systems Engineering,
Chiba Institute of Technology,
2-17-1 Tsudanuma, Narashino, Chiba 275-0016, JAPAN

Abstract

We previously proposed a cross-referencing method for enabling multiple peer-to-peer

network domains to manage their own public blockchains and periodically exchanging

the state of the latest ﬁxed block in the blockchain with hysteresis signatures among all

the domains via an upper network layer. In this study, we evaluated the effectiveness of

our method from three theoretical viewpoints: decentralization, scalability, and tamper

resistance. We show that the performance of the entire system can be improved be-

cause transactions and blocks are distributed only inside the domain. We argue that the

transaction processing capacity will increase to 56,000 transactions per second, which

is as much as that of a VISA credit card system. The capacity is also evaluated by

multiplying the number of domains by the average reduction in transaction-processing

time due to the increase in block size and reduction in the block-generation-time in-

terval by domain partition. For tamper resistance, each domain has evidence of the

hysteresis signatures of the other domains in the blockchain. We introduce two types

of tamper-resistance-improvement ratios as evaluation measures of tamper resistance

for a blockchain and theoretically explain how tamper resistance is improved using our

cross-referencing method. With our method, tamper resistance improves as the num-

ber of domains increases. The proposed system of 1,000 domains are 3-10 times more

tamper-resistant than that of 100 domains, and the capacity is 10 times higher. We con-

clude that our method enables a more scalable and tamper-resistant public blockchain

balanced with decentralization.

Email address: s1522313qq@s.chibakoudai.jp,

akihiro.fujihara@p.chibakoudai.jp (Takaaki Yanagihara and Akihiro Fujihara)

Preprint submitted to Elsevier

July 28, 2021

 
 
 
 
 
 
Keywords: Bitcoin, Blockchain, Cross-referencing method, Hysteresis signature,

Scalability, Evaluation measures of tamper resistance

1. Introduction

Since Bitcoin [1] appeared in 2008, blockchain technology has been gaining con-

siderable public attention. The words “block chain” were born from a dialogue between

the Bitcoin inventor, Satoshi Nakamoto, and a cryptographer, Hal Finney, on the cryp-

tography mailing list [2]. A blockchain is a chain of block-structured databases where

each block is connected in a time-series order by a cryptographic hash function, and

works as a timestamp server. A blockchain is not a new idea, as the citing of Massias

et al.’s paper published in 1999 [3] in Nakamoto’s white paper suggests. However, it

has become an iconic image for related technology.

All transactions in Bitcoin, including the issuance and exchange of electronic cash,

are disclosed on the blockchain. Therefore, nodes participating in the peer-to-peer

(P2P) network can verify which address (not user) holds how many bitcoins by track-

ing transaction records. However, since users can keep as many bitcoins addresses as

they want, it is difﬁcult for others to know how many bitcoins one owns in total. There-

fore, a minimum level of users’ privacy is considered. Personal transaction information

has generally been kept private due to privacy concerns. However, Bitcoin has made

all transaction records public with privacy in mind (although anonymity is not guaran-

teed). This makes it possible for an unspeciﬁed number of nodes to reach a (extended)

consensus about transaction records on the blockchain on the basis of the longest chain

rule. Because this consensus algorithm was essentially a new idea, compared with

known ones in distributed systems, it is called Nakamoto Consensus.

Transaction processing is completed when a transaction is saved to the blockchain

through a high-load computational process called proof of work (PoW) [4]. Any

node can become an authority that connects a block with several transactions to the

blockchain by presenting evidence to other nodes that it is able to execute the PoW

correctly and quickly. Therefore, the system is designed so that no particular node can

remain as an unjustiﬁed authority. In addition, PoW makes transaction records on the

2

blockchain tamper-resistant.

The essential value of Bitcoin is micropayment, which is possible by reducing the

transaction fee to an extremely low level, such as less than one cent or one yen. Micro-

payment has the potential to create a new decentralized economy, as it enables charg-

ing for various operations performed on the Internet. For example, Wikipedia, which

is always struggling to collect donations, may be able to collect server maintenance

fees from very small donations from some article readers by introducing micropay-

ment. However, the current blockchain technology is practically incapable of support-

ing micropayment because the transaction processing capacity is restricted by the block

transfer speed between nodes and the limit of block size, which is known as the Bitcoin

scalability problem.

Several technologies have been studied to solve this problem. Off-chain scaling

technologies, such as Lightning Network [6], are currently attracting attention. Off-

chain technologies leave less transaction records in the blockchain. Bitcoin has been

used as a payment means of conducting illegal transactions in darknet markets, and

there have been many reports on the managers and users of these markets being arrested

[7, 8, 9]. These arrests are attributable to Bitcoin’s disclosure of all transaction records

with tamper resistance, which are available as legal evidence. If off-chain scaling tech-

nologies become widespread, transactions that cannot be audited by our societies and

governments can be easily created and off-chain services might become hotbeds of il-

legal transactions in darknet markets for money laundering and ﬁnancing of terrorism

by criminal organizations. Thus, when we consider the use of blockchain technology

on the basis of law and ethics, it is ultimately necessary to solve the scalability problem

on-chain. Existing blockchains, such as Bitcoin, are based on the premise that only one

blockchain can be globally integrated and managed. As a result, blocks are transferred

and shared among nodes all over the world, which slows down transaction processing.

As a way of speeding up transactions, we have proposed a mechanism for allocating

domains to geographically close nodes, similar to the country code top-level domain

in the Domain Name System, and managing blockchains in each domain [10, 11, 12].

Through this mechanism. it is possible to distinguish between the inside and outside

of a domain by the communication speed with the central node, which is the entrance

3

to the P2P network. In addition, our mechanism allows domain-speciﬁc geographic

information to be handled by connecting secure Internet-of-Things devices to some

of the nodes. However, the domain partition entailed by our mechanism reduces the

number of nodes participating in each domain, which degrades the decentralization

and tamper resistance of the blockchain. It is possible to distinguish between the inside

and outside of a domain by the communication speed with the central node which is

the entrance to the P2P network. In addition, domain-speciﬁc geographic information

can be handled by connecting secure Internet-of-Things devices to some of the nodes.

However, domain partition reduces the number of nodes participating in each domain,

which degrades the decentralization and tamper-resistance of the blockchain.

To solve this problem, we previously proposed a cross-referencing method for pe-

riodically exchanging the state of the latest ﬁxed block in the blockchain with hystere-

sis signatures [13] among all the domains via the upper network layer [14]. We also

designed a communication protocol to autonomously executes our cross-referencing

method among domains. We explained the effectiveness of this method only in terms

of a deﬁnition of tamper resistance.

In this study, we evaluated the effectiveness of our method from the viewpoints of

decentralization and scalability, as well as tamper resistance. We deﬁne decentraliza-

tion as the ability of every participating node to affect the entire system by creating

blocks. With our method, in-domain decentralization is equivalent to that of usual

public blockchains, such as Bitcoin, while out-domain decentralization is preserved by

hysteresis signatures, which affect some of the blocks in other domains. Regarding

scalability of transaction processing capacity, the performance of the entire system is

improved because transactions and blocks are distributed only inside the domain. We

theoretically demonstrate that the transaction processing capacity should increase to

that of a typical credit card system, such as VISA, meaning that the capacity can be

evaluated by multiplying the number of domains by the average improvement ratio

of transaction processing speed due to the increase in block size and reduction in the

block-generation-time interval by domain partition. For tamper resistance, each do-

main has evidence of the hysteresis signatures of the other domains in the blockchain.

Therefore, to tamper with a block in a domain, one must also tamper with the blocks

4

containing the relevant hysteresis signatures in all domains. We introduce two types

of tamper-resistance-improvement ratios R and R′ and theoretically show that, in the

terms of both measures, tamper resistance improves when using our cross-referencing

method through Monte Carlo simulations. We conclude that it is possible to achieve

a more scalable and tamper-resistant public blockchain balanced with decentralization

by using our cross-referencing method.

The main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows.

• We formulate the Bitcoin scalability problem to show an upper limit of transac-

tion processing capacity.

• We clarify the deﬁnition of decentralization and elaborate that the scalability of

public blockchains potential to dramatically improved to increase the transaction

processing capacity to that of a VISA credit card system.

• We deﬁne two tamper-resistance-improvement ratios, R and R′, to explain that

our cross-referencing method can also improve the tamper-resistance of public

blockchains. We also discuss how the ratios change when some nodes fail.

2. Related Work

There are naive methods for solving the problem on-chain: increasing the block

size and shortening the block-generation-time interval. Both are possible by increasing

the communication speed between nodes, but it is difﬁcult for nodes with slow com-

munication speed to join the network. The former method is being evaluated on the

Bitcoin Scaling Test Network (STN) [15]. While the maximum block size of Bitcoin

Core is 1 MB, STN has eliminated the block size limit and achieved an average pro-

cessing speed of 2,596 transactions per second in 24 hours [15] (Accessed 13 April

2021). The latter method is being evaluated by bloXroute [16], a project that proposes

to alleviate the scalability problem by introducing a backbone network to propagate

large blocks in a shorter time.

Hysteresis signatures [13] enhance the tamper resistance of ordinary electronic sig-

natures by adding a nested structure with other past electronic signatures. A typical

5

structure of a hysteresis signature is shown in Fig. 2. A nested structure is naturally

created by signing the content including the previous signature.

By repeating the nested structure, the electronic signatures are chained to create a

time-series context. For example, let the previous hysteresis signature be Sn−1 and the

content to be signed be the block data of m domains in total (BD1, · · · , BDm ). In this
case, the hysteresis signature is created by signing the concatenation of the summary

of the previous hysteresis signature H(Sn−1) and hashed contents H(BD1), · · · , H(BDm ).
The created signature Sn is also added to the hysteresis signature, as shown in Fig.2.

Transaction signatures in Bitcoin was used to prove the legitimacy of a transac-

tion by having the holder of the Bitcoin sign the transaction using his or her private

key. In hysteresis signature, the central core node of the domain signs the latest con-

ﬁrmed block in order to prove the validity of the block.

In addition, the summary

ﬁnalized blocks of all past domains are aggregated and stored in the cross-referencing

part, which enables tamper detection and correction among domains.

Ordinary electronic signatures can be tampered if the private key is leaked, and it

is often impossible to detect tampering. In hysteresis signatures, since the signature is

signed in the nested structure, an attacker would have to tamper with all nested signa-

tures after the tampered content, which makes tampering signiﬁcantly more difﬁcult.

This is similar to the block structure in the public blockchain. If a contradiction in a

hysteresis signature is found, it is almost certain that the content has been tampered

with.

BBc-1 [17] is a distributed ledger technology, with which a distributed system man-

ages a consistent ledger, but it does not handle any public blockchain. The system

stores private transaction records in a tamper-resistant manner by using hysteresis sig-

natures. There is a reference implementation of the node, and the effectiveness of the

system can be conﬁrmed. With BBc-1, all the transaction data have a hysteresis sig-

nature, which is exchanged across domains to increase tamper resistance. The energy

cost is also low compared with a typical public blockchain, such as Bitcoin, because of

the absence of the PoW. However, it is difﬁcult to estimate how much tamper resistance

is improved by introducing the hysteresis signature.

Atomic Swap is a technique that allows the exchange of cryptocurrencies recorded

6

on different blockchains without needing to trust any third party [18]. This technique is

also useful for coexisting multiple blockchains and exchanging their native cryptocur-

rencies.

3. Cross-referencing Method

The structure of the P2P network used in this study is shown in Fig. 1. The whole

Figure 1: Two-layer P2P network used in this study

network consists of two P2P layers, i.e., Layers 0 and 1. Layer 1 assumes that there

are multiple P2P networks of typical public blockchains which share transaction and

block data. Each P2P network in Layer 1 is called a domain, and it is assumed that

there is a set of core nodes in each domain. There are two types of core node: central

core nodes (CCNs) and peripheral core nodes (PCNs). It is assumed that at least one

CCN is selected as a leader in each domain beforehand. In this study, we assumed that

the number of domains is m and the CCNs of multiple domains (D1, D2, · · · , Dm) have a

Figure 2: Hysteresis signature

7

prior agreement to share their block records and domain hysteresis signatures to use the

cross-referencing method. In Layer 0, the CCNs are connected to each other to form

another consortium-type P2P network, which is disconnected from that of Layer 1. For

simplicity, we consider the case in which the number of CCNs for each domain is one,

but it is also possible to generalize the case in which the number of CCNs is more than

one. Note that the addition of Layer 0 over Layer 1 is common with bloXroute [16],

but the difference is that Layer 0 is also another P2P network with our method, while

Layer 0 in bloXroute is a faster network transport layer for both transaction and block

records.

The block structure of our cross-referencing method is shown in Fig. 3. The dif-

Figure 3: Block structure of our cross-referencing method

ference between the block structure in ordinary public blockchains and that with our

method is the cross-reference part. In this part, a hysteresis signature is created by

signing the concatenation of the summary of the previous hysteresis signature H(Sn−1)

and hashed contents H(BD1), · · · , H(BDm ). The created signature Sn is the same as that
shown in Fig. 2. The block records with the cross-reference part are shared between

CCNs via the P2P network in Layer 0.

The timeline of our cross-referencing method in a normal case, meaning that no

8

stop failure occurs in CCNs, is shown in Fig. 4. The timeline is divided into three

Figure 4: Timeline of our cross-referencing method in normal case in which no stop failure occurs in CCNs

phases. The details of each phase are explained as follows.

1. In Phase 1, a CCN in a domain notiﬁes the other CCNs to start cross referencing

by sending a message. Then, each CCN transfers a message including the l-

conﬁrmed block to the other CCNs, where l is a positive integer and l-conﬁrmed

means the block approved l blocks before the latest block. Phase 1 ﬁnishes if all

the CCNs collect all the l−conﬁrmed block records by sharing them with each

other.

2. In Phase 2, each CCN ﬁrst generates a hysteresis signature, as shown in Fig. 2.

The CCN then sends a request message with the hysteresis signature to PCNs in

the same domain to mine the block having the cross-reference component. After

independently mining the latest block, a PCN sends a message with the mined

block back to the CCN, and the CCN checks whether the block has been properly

mined. If the block has not been properly mined, the CCN waits until a properly

mined block is received and than Phase 2 ﬁnishes.

3. In Phase 3, each CCN broadcasts the mined block to announce that the cross-

9

referencing was successful.

We designed a distributed algorithm [19] for our cross-referencing method. The

details of which are shown in Fig. 5. We also considered a distributed algorithm that is

Figure 5: Flowchart 1 (Phase 2 is omitted because it consists of usual mining process on Layer 1)

tolerant of t-stop failures (CCNs in t domains do not respond because they experienced

a stop failure or refuse to execute cross referencing) as shown in Fig. 6.

10

Figure 6: Flowchart 2 (Phase 1 only; other phases are common to those in Flowchart 1)

There are three assumptions under which these ﬂowchart work properly.

1. The P2P network in Layer 0 is synchronous and its structure should be a com-

plete graph.

2. All the CCNs are reliable, meaning that they execute the cross-referencing method

following the ﬂowchart to share the requested block data with each other.

3. In Flowchart 1, none of the CCNs exhibit any experience stop failure and in

Flowchart 2, The CCNs allow t-stop failures, which means that our cross-referencing

method works even if at most t CCNs do not cooperate to share their block

records.

Note that we can assume that the number of nodes having experiencing stop failure

is small because each domain needs to strengthen tamper resistance with the cross-

11

referencing method. If it takes a long time to repair a failed CCN, the blockchain in its

domain becomes vulnerable to malicious tampering attacks. Therefore, each domain

should recover from the stop failure as soon as possible.

The efﬁciency of these distributed algorithms can be evaluated by measuring both

communication and time complexity. The communication complexity of Flowchart 1 is

O(m2 · b), where m is the number of CCNs (equivalent to the number of domains), and

b is the bit size of the message to send between CCNs. The communication complexity

of Flowchart 2 is O((t + 1)(m2 · b)). Assume that the time complexity of Flowchart 1

is T1 + T2 + T3, where Ti(i = 1, 2, 3) is the waiting time taken for Phase i in Flowchart

1. Then, the time complexity of Flowchart 2 is (t + 1)T1 + T2 + T3.

4. Theoretical Evaluation

Our cross-referencing method can improve the scalability and tamper resistance

of the blockchain while preventing degradation of decentralization. We theoretically

evaluated the effectiveness of the proposed method from three viewpoints: decentral-

ization, scalability, and tamper resistance.

4.1. Evaluation of decentralization

The deﬁnition of decentralization is often ambiguous, so, we will deﬁne it as the

ability of every participating node to affect the entire system by creating blocks. With

our method, in-domain decentralization is equivalent to that of usual public blockchains,

such as Bitcoin. Out-domain decentralization is preserved by hysteresis signatures,

which affect some of the blocks in other domains. Note that this governance structure

between in-domain and out-domain decentralization is similar to modern democratic

systems in our society.

4.2. Theoretical formulation of Bitcoin scalability problem

The block-generation-time interval of blockchain T is a stochastic variable, and T

obeys the exponential distribution, i.e.,

F(t) = P(T ≤ t) =

t

Z
0

λe−λt′

dt′ = 1 − e−λt,

(1)

12

where λ is the inverse of the average block-generation-time interval [5]. In Bitcoin

Core, the average interval 1/λ is 10 minutes (600 seconds). The latency required to

transfer a block of size b = 1 MB in Bitcoin Core to 90% of the nodes on the P2P

network was experimentally evaluated as t = τf ork(b) ; 12 seconds [16]. Therefore,

the probability of a blockchain fork (branching) is estimated as

F(τf ork) = P(τf ork) = 1 − e−λτf ork ; λτf ork = 12/600 = 0.02.

(2)

If the blockchain forks, some of the block-generation capacities are wasted because one

of the branches will be rejected. Therefore, the fork probability is kept small enough

by using a difﬁculty adjustment algorithm [20].

There are two simple ways of increasing the transaction processing capacity: (1) in-

creasing the block size b and (2) shortening the average block-generation-time interval

1/λ. As shown in Eq. (2), however, the fork probability increase with both methods,

which means the transaction processing capacity is reduced. Therefore, it is generally

difﬁcult to resolve this tradeoff of transaction processing capacity, which is called the

scalability problem in public blockchains.

It is estimated that the transaction processing capacity of Bitcoin is 5-7 transactions

per second. However, it is known that the credit card company VISA, Inc. has a

capacity of 56,000 transactions per second. We explain below that it is difﬁcult for

Bitcoin Core to reach this level of the capacity. From Eq. (2), the unfork probability,

which only contributes to creating valid blocks, is calculated as

Pun f ork = 1 − P(τf ork) = e−λτf ork = e−τf ork/τ,

(3)

where τ = 1/λ is the average block-generation-time interval. In this case, the blockchain

does not fork and it is effective on the transaction processing capacity. Therefore, the

transaction processing capacity per second is roughly

G(τ) =

C
τ

e−τf ork/τ,

(4)

where C is the average number of transactions in a block. In Bitcoin Core, τ = 600
seconds, τf ork = 12 seconds, the unfork probability is e−τf ork/τ = 1 − 0.02 = 0.98, and
G(τ = 600) = 7 transactions per second at maximum. Substituting these values into

Eq. 4, the average number of transactions in a block is about C = 4, 286 transactions.

13

We can further consider the optimal transaction processing capacity τopt. To this

end, we estimate the maximum G(τ) by changing τ, i.e.,

max
τ

G(τ) = C max

(e−τf ork/τ/τ).

τ

(5)

It is easily calculated that τopt = τf ork = 12 seconds. Therefore, the optimal transaction

processing capacity per second is calculated as

max
τ

G(τ) = G(τf ork) = Ce−1/τf ork.

(6)

Substituting C = 4286 transactions and τf ork = 12 seconds into Eq. (6), the optimal G

turns out to be about 132 transactions per second, which is considered to be the upper

bound of the transaction processing capacity in the Bitcoin Core blockchain.

4.3. Improvement in scalability of transaction processing capacity

As we explained in the previous subsection, an upper bound to the transaction

processing capacity seems to exist, which causes the scalability problem. Existing

blockchains including Bitcoin are based on the premise that only one chain is glob-

ally integrated and managed. Therefore, it is necessary to transfer and share blocks

among nodes located all over the world, which dramatically reduces the transaction

processing capacity. Therefore, we considered a mechanism for allocating domains to

geographically close nodes and managing one chain for each domain.

Regarding scalability in transaction processing speed, the performance of the entire

system can be improved because transactions and blocks are distributed only inside

the domain. For example, if the block size is increased from 1 to 10 MB, block-

generation-time interval from 10 to 2 minutes, and number of domains from 1 to 200,

the transaction processing capacity can reach an equal or better level compared with

that of VISA, Ltd.

5tx./sec. × (

7tx./sec. × (

10
1
10
1

) × (

) × (

10
2
10
2

) × (

) × (

200
1
200
1

) = 50, 000tx./sec. ≃ 56, 000tx./sec.

) = 70, 000tx./sec. > 56, 000tx./sec.

(7)

(8)

It is highly possible that the transaction processing capacity will exceed that of VISA

credit card system, but the actual performance needs to be evaluated experimentally,

which is left for our future work.

14

4.4. Evaluation of tamper resistance

Our cross-referencing method can improve the tamper resistance of blockchains.

We will use two tamper-resistance-improvement ratios R and R′ to evaluate tamper

resistance. Let the total number of core nodes in the distributed system be N and the

hash rate of core node i be hi. Note that the hash rate is the number of times that a

cryptographic hash function can be computed per unit time.

With R, tamper resistance can be estimated by the maximum hash rate because we

assume that the node with the highest hash rate has the highest probability of generating

blocks, so it continues mining. On the other hand, most nodes with relatively smaller

hash rates have a smaller probability of generating blocks, so they tend to quit mining.

Therefore, tamper resistance is proportional to the following value, i.e.,

max{h1, h2, · · · , hN}.

(9)

Suppose that the total number of core nodes in the m-th domain is Dm. The tamper

resistance of each domain is given by the maximum hash power of the nodes for each

domain, i.e.,

A1 = max{h11, · · · , h1D1},

A2 = max{h21, · · · , h2D2},

...

Am = max{hm1, · · · , hmDm }.

(10)

(11)

(12)

When only one domain has N = D1 + D2 + · · · + Dm core nodes, the tamper resistance

of the domain without the cross-referencing method can be estimated as

A = max{A1, A2, · · · , Am}.

(13)

With R′, tamper resistance can be estimated by the accumulated hash rates of the top

X% nodes with high hash rates. Tamper resistance is then proportional to the following

value, i.e.,

A′ =

∑
i ∈ nodes with top X% hash rate

hi.

(14)

15

Equation (13) evaluates the maximum hash rate as tamper resistance, and Eq. (14) is an

expression that evaluates the sum of the hash rates of the top X% as tamper resistance.

By applying our cross-referencing method among m domains, tamper resistance

can be estimated by the sum of all the highest hash rates in the domains, i.e.,

B =

m
∑
i=1

Ai,

B′ =

m
∑
i=1

∑
j ∈ nodes with top X% hash rate

Ai j,

(15)

(16)

Similarly, Eq. (15) is an expression that evaluates the maximum hash rate in the

domain as tamper resistance. Equation 16 evaluates the sum of the hash rates of the top

X% that contributes to tamper resistance.

Therefore, R is deﬁned as

R =

B
A

(> 1),

(17)

and, R′ is deﬁned as

B′
A′ .
To estimate typical values of R and R′, we conducted Monte Carlo simulations in

R′ =

(18)

which the hash rate hi j (i is the domain number, and j is the serial number of nodes in

a domain) was randomly assigned in accordance with a Pareto distribution, i.e.,

P(hi j) =

α
h1+α
i j

(hi j > 1),

(19)

where α is a scale parameter. This distribution is often used to explain wealth distri-

bution in economics. The rate represents the total amount of computational resources,

which is proportional to the amount of capital of the miner, so using the Pareto distri-

bution is considered appropriate.

It is known that the tamper resistance of a blockchain for PoW is determined by

the hash rate of the mining nodes on the P2P network [21]. This hash rate is generally

considered to follow the Pareto distribution in Eq. (19) because computing resources

of nodes are unequal. Therefore, the hash rate depends on the ﬁnancial strength of the

miner who owns the nodes. Also, since only a handful of miners succeed in mining on

16

a regular basis, we deﬁned the tamper resistance improvement ratio as shown in Eqs.

(17) and (18).

We assume that the total number of core nodes is N = 10, 000 and that the number of

core nodes in each domain is uniform, i.e., 10, 100, and 1000 nodes when the number

of domains is 1000, 100, and 10, respectively. Typical simulation results are shown

below.

Fig. 7 and 8 show the results when the maximum hash rate is used as tamper

resistance. Fig. 9 and 10 show the results of R′ with the top X = 10%. Fig. 11 and

12 show the results of R′ with the top X = 30%. A comparison of Figs. 9, 10, 11 and

12 indicates that the peak of the distribution of R′ is the position slightly higher than

one. As m increases, the peak of the histograms in both R and R′ generally shifts to a

higher position. As m increases, the tamper resistance gets higher. In Figs. 7 and 8,

the tamper resistance with m=1,000 is about 3-5 times higher than that with m=100. In

Figs. 9 and 11, comparing the peak positions of the distribution of R’, we can see that

the tamper resistance with m=1,000 is 10 times higher that that with m=100. In Figs. 9

and 11, there is no signiﬁcant difference between them in both the top 10% and 30%.

There is similar tendency in Figs. 10 and 12. In addition, these ﬁgure show that the

variance of the distribution increases as m increases.

17

Figure 7: Simulation results of probability density function of tamper-resistance-improvement ratio R when

scale parameter α = 2

Figure 8: Simulation results of probability density function of R when α = 3

18

Figure 9: Simulation results of probability density function of R′ when α = 2 and X = 10%

Figure 10: Simulation results of probability density function of R′ when α = 3 and X = 10%

19

Figure 11: Simulation results of probability density function of R′ when α = 2 and X = 30%

Figure 12: Simulation results of probability density function of R′ when α = 3 and X = 30%

20

4.5. Effect of stop failures on tamper resistance

We also estimated the effect of stop failures on tamper resistance in the entire sys-

tem. We show Monte Carlo simulation results when CCNs in f = 1, 3, 5 domains

become stop failure. As shown in Figs. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17 and 18, the number of failed

CCNs is sufﬁciently large (f = 3 or 5), the tamper resistance in the entire system de-

teriorates signiﬁcantly. However, R and R′ shifts higher as m increases indicating that

the effect of stop failures on tamper resistance is relatively small. If failure occurs, the

R improved as well. As f increases, the peak of the histograms in R generally shifts

toward a higher position.

However, R′ did not improve compared with R. If f is small and the number of

stop-failed CCNs is sufﬁciently large, the tamper resistance in the entire system can

degrade signiﬁcantly. However, as m increases, R′ shifts toward the higher position,

and the effects on tamper resistance can be relatively small.

Each domain has a demand to strengthen tamper-resistance by joining the system to

execute our cross-referencing method. Therefore, CCNs with stop failure are assumed

to be repaired quickly. It is reasonable to assume that only a small number of CCNs

experience stop failure.

21

Figure 13: Simulation results of probability density function of R when m = 10 and α = 2

Figure 14: Simulation results of probability density function of R when m = 100 and α = 2

22

Figure 15: Simulation results of probability density function of R′ when m = 10, X = 10%, and α = 2

Figure 16: Simulation results of probability density function of R′ when m = 100, X = 10%, and α = 2

23

Figure 17: Simulation results of probability density function of R′ when m = 10, X = 30%, and α = 2

Figure 18: Simulation results of probability density function of R′ when m = 100, X = 30%, and α = 2

24

5. Conclusion

We explained our previously proposed cross-referencing method for enabling mul-

tiple domains of P2P networks to manage their own blockchains and periodically ex-

change among each other the state of the latest conﬁrmed block in the blockchain with

the hysteresis signatures. We also discussed the design of a communication protocol

that autonomously executes our cross-referencing method among the domains.

We theoretically evaluated the effectiveness of our method from three viewpoints:

decentralization, scalability, and tamper-resistance. The method improved the scal-

ability and tamper-resistance of a blockchain while reducing the degradation of de-

centralization. With our method, in-domain decentralization is equivalent to a usual

public blockchain, such as Bitcoin, while out-domain decentralization is preserved by

hysteresis signatures, which affects some blocks.

We theoretically formulated the Bitcoin scalability problem by estimating the trans-

action processing capacity per second G(τ). We found that G(τf ork) is the optimal

upper bound of transaction processing capacity in Bitcoin-type blockchain systems,

which is the cause of the scalability problem. We demonstrated that our cross-referencing

method can break through the limit of the upper bound and capacity can reach the same

level as that of a the credit card company VISA, Ltd. in theory. It is highly possible that

the transaction processing capacity will exceed that of VISA credit card system, but the

actual performance needs to be evaluated experimentally, which is left for our future

work. The effectiveness of our method was examined from the theoretical perspective

by deﬁning two tamper-resistance-improvement ratios R and R′. As the number of do-

mains increases, the peaks of the distributions of R and R′ generally shift toward the

higher position. We conﬁrmed that the dispersion of this distribution increases as the

number of domains increases. We assumed that the hash rate obeys a Pareto distri-

bution, and the comparison of the scale parameter of the Pareto distribution α = 2, 3

showed that as α decreases, the peak of the distribution of R shifts to the smaller posi-

tion. The proposed system of 1,000 domains are 3-10 times more tamper-resistant than

that of 100 domains, and the capacity is 10 times higher. We also estimated the effect of

stop failures on tamper resistance in the entire system. We showed that R improves but

25

R′ does not. However, as the number of domains increases, the peak of the histograms

in R and R′ shift toward the higher position, so performance degradation due to stop

failures is relatively small.

We are currently developing a program of CCNs for conducting experimental eval-

uations on our cross-referencing method as a reference implementation of the com-

munication protocol between CCNs. The program is open to the public at our Github

website [22]. We will present experimental results elsewhere.

For future work, we will determine if our cross-referencing method can be suc-

cessfully applied to various situations, for example, when the starting CCN for cross-

referencing is not ﬁxed and frequently changes and when multiple cross-referencing

requests are sent from multiple domains at the same time. It is also important to con-

sider security issues in Layer 0 where CCNs can share block information securely with

each other.

This work was partially supported by the Japan Society for the Promotion of Sci-

ence (JSPS) through KAKENHI (Grants-in-Aid for Scientiﬁc Research) Grant Num-

bers 17H01742 and 20K11797.

References

[1] S. Nakamoto, “Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System” (2008),

https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf, (Accessed on April 15, 2021).

[2] A record of when the word “block chain” was ﬁrst used:, https://www

.metzdowd.com/pipermail/cryptography/2008-November

/014827.html, https://satoshi.nakamotoinstitute.org

/emails/cryptography/6/#selection-37.36-37.47 (Accessed

on April 15, 2021).

[3] H. Massias, X. S. Avila, and J.-J. Quisquater, “Design of a secure timestamping

service with minimal trust requirement,” 20th Symposium on Information Theory

in Benelux (1999).

26

[4] A. Back, “Hashcash - A Denial of Service Counter-Measure”,

(2002)

http://www.hashcash.org/papers/hashcash.pdf (Accessed on

April 15, 2021).

[5] C. Decker and R. Wattenhofer, “Information propagation in the Bitcoin network,”

IEEE P2P 2013 Proceedings, Trento, pp. 1-10, (2013).

[6] J. Poon and T. Dryja, “The Bitcoin Lightning Network: Scalable Off-Chain In-

stant Payments,” (2016) https://lightning.network/lightning

-network-paper.pdf, (Accessed on April 15, 2021).

[7] FBI, “Manhattan U.S. Attorney Announces Seizure of Additional $28 Million

Worth of Bitcoins Belonging to Ross William Ulbricht, Alleged Owner

and Operator of “Silk Road” Website ” (2013),

https://archives.fbi.gov/archives/newyork/press

-releases/2013/manhattan-u.s.-attorney-announces

-seizure-of-additional-28-million-worth-of-bitcoins

-belonging-to-ross-william-ulbricht-alleged-owner-and

-operator-of-silk-road-website, (Accessed on April 15, 2021).

[8] The US Department of Justice, “AlphaBay, the Largest Online ’Dark Market,

’ Shut Down” (2017) https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/alphabay

-largest-online-dark-market-shut-down, (Accessed on April 15,

2021).

[9] The US Department of Justice, “South Korean National and Hundreds of Others

Charged Worldwide in the Takedown of the Largest Darknet Child Pornography

Website, Which was Funded by Bitcoin” (2019), https://www.justice

.gov/opa/pr/south-korean-national-and-hundreds-others

-charged-worldwide-takedown-largest-darknet-child, (Ac-

cessed on April 15, 2021).

[10] A. Fujihara, “Proposing a system for collaborative trafﬁc information gathering

and sharing incentivized by blockchain technology,” Advances in Intelligent Net-

working and Collaborative Systems, pp.170 -182, Springer (2019).

27

[11] A. Fujihara, “PoWaP: Proof of Work at Proximity for a crowdsensing sys-

tem for collaborative trafﬁc information gathering,” Internet of Things, Vol. 10,

No.100046, Elsevier (2019).

[12] A. Fujihara, “Proposing a Blockchain-Based Open Data Platform and Its Decen-

tralized Oracle,” Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing, Vol. 1035, pp.

190-201, Springer (2019).

[13] S. Susaki and T. Matsumoto, “Alibi Establishment for Electronic Signatures”

(in Japanese), Transactions of Information Processing Society of Japan, Vol.43,

No.8, pp.2381-2393 (2002).

[14] T. Yanagihara and A. Fujihara, “Considering Cross-Referencing Method for Scal-

able Public Blockchain,” Proceedings of the 9-th International Conference on

Emerging Internet Data & Web Technologies (EIDWT-2021), Springer (2021).

[15] Bitcoin Scaling Test Network https://bitcoinscaling.io/ (Accessed

on April 15, 2021).

[16] U. Klarman, S. Bsu, A. Kuzmanovic, and E. G. Sirer,

“bloXroute: A Scalable Trustless Blockchain Distribution Network,

”BLOXKROUTE LABS, WHITEPAPER, ver. 1.0 (2018).

https://bloxroute.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/

bloXroute-whitepaper.pdf (Accessed on April 15, 2021).

[17] K. Saito, T. Kubo, “BBc-1: Beyond Blockchain One” (2018).

https://beyond-blockchain.org/public/bbc1-design

-paper.pdf (Accessed on April 15, 2021).

[18] Atomic swap, Bitcoin Wiki, https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Atomic

_swap, (Accessed on April 15, 2021).

[19] A. D. Kshemkalyani and M. Singhal, Distributed Computing: Principles, Algo-

rithms, and Systems, (Cambridge University Press, 2011).

28

[20] S. Noda, K. Okumura, and Y. Hashimoto, “An Economic Analysis of Difﬁ-

culty Adjustment Algorithms in Proof-of-Work Blockchain Systems,” Available

at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3410460 (Accessed on April

15, 2021).

[21] S.Kasahara and J.Kawahara, “Effect of Bitcoin fee on transaction-conﬁrmation

process,” Journal of Industrial and Management Optimization, 15 (1): 365-386,

2019.

http://www.aimsciences.org/article/doi/10.3934/

jimo.2018047

[22] T. Yanagihara and A. Fujihara, “Experimental implementation of the cross-

referencing method for scalable public blockchain”, https://github.com

/cit-fujihalab/crossref_BC, (Accessed on April 15, 2021).

29

