White Paper 

A Blockchain-based Carbon Credit Ecosystem 

Dr. Soheil Saraji 
Dr. Mike Borowczak 

Assistant Professor, Department of Petroleum Engineering, University of Wyoming 
Assistant Professor, Department of Computer Science, University of Wyoming 

Abstract. Climate change and global warming are the significant challenges of the 
new  century.  A  viable  solution  to  mitigate  greenhouse  gas  emissions  is  via  a 
globally  incentivized  market  mechanism  proposed  in  the  Kyoto  protocol.  In  this 
view,  the  carbon  dioxide  (or  other  greenhouse  gases)  emission  is  considered  a 
commodity,  forming  a  carbon  trading  system.  There  have  been  attempts  in 
developing this idea in the past decade with limited success. The main challenges 
of current systems are fragmented implementations, lack of transparency leading to 
over-crediting and double-spending, and substantial transaction costs that transfer 
wealth to brokers and agents. We aim to create a Carbon Credit Ecosystem using 
smart contracts that operate in conjunction with blockchain technology in order to 
bring  more  transparency,  accessibility,  liquidity,  and  standardization  to  carbon 
markets.  This  ecosystem  includes  a  tokenization  mechanism  to  securely  digitize 
carbon credits with clear minting and burning protocols, a transparent mechanism 
for distribution of tokens, a free automated market maker for trading the carbon 
tokens, and mechanisms to engage all stakeholders, including the energy industry, 
project verifiers, liquidity providers, NGOs, concerned citizens, and governments. 
This approach could be used in a variety of other credit/trading systems. 

1.  Introduction 

1.1.  Carbon Emission. The global Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emissions trend has increased since 
the  beginning  of  the  21st  century  compared  to  the  three  previous  decades,  mainly  due  to  the 
increase  in  CO2  emissions  from  the  emerging  economies.  As  a  result,  the  atmospheric 
concentrations  of  greenhouse  gases  substantially  increased,  worsening  the  natural  greenhouse 
effect, which negatively affects the life on the Earth. CO2 emissions, the main gas responsible for 
global  warming,  are  still  increasing  at  the  world  level  despite  climate  change  mitigation 
agreements1. The 2018 GHG emissions amounted to 55.6 GtCO2 eq. Present GHG emissions are 
about 57% higher than in 1990 and 43% higher than in 2000 2. Figure 1 shows the increasing trend 
of main GHG emissions based on sector. 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Under  Kyoto  Protocol  (1997),  seven  greenhouse  gases  are  considered  as  the  significant 
contributors  to  global  warming:  Carbon  dioxide  (CO2),  Methane  (CH4),  Nitrous  oxide  (N2O), 
Hydrofluorocarbons  (HFCs),  Perfluorocarbons  (PFCs),  Sulphur  hexafluoride  (SF6),  Nitrogen 
trifluoride (NF3)3. CO2 emissions from fossil fuels are the largest source of global GHG emissions, 
with a share of about 72%, followed by CH4 (19%), N2O (6%), and F-gases (3%)  2. The direct 
drivers of CO2 are the combustion of coal, oil, and natural gas, representing 89% of global CO2 
emissions, with respective shares of 39%, 31%, and 18% 2. For CH4, there are three large sources: 
agriculture,  fossil  fuel  production,  and  waste/wastewater.  Together,  fossil  fuel  production  and 
transmission account for a third of global methane emissions 2.  

Figure 1. Global GHG emission per type of gas and emission source 3.  

1.2.  Carbon  Credits.  In  December  2015,  the  Paris  Agreement  brought  all  nations  into  a 
common cause to undertake ambitious efforts to combat climate change. It required all parties to 
agree  to  put  forward  their  best  efforts  through  ‘nationally  determined  contributions’1.  At  the 
national  level,  policymakers  have  three  options  to  reduce  greenhouse  gas  emissions:  (1)  set  a 
specific limit that a company cannot exceed, (2) introduce a carbon tax where the company pays 
for the amount of CO2 they produce, (3) implement an emission trading scheme – to create a carbon 
market. The last solution has been gaining traction recently because of the positive encouragement 
of clean producers of energy and incentivizing the Fossil fuel industry to become more efficient 
and gradually reduce their emissions. This led to the creation of carbon credits. A carbon credit is 
a tradable permit or certificate that gives the right to emit one ton of carbon dioxide or an equivalent 

2 

 
 
 
 
of another greenhouse gas. There are currently two types of carbon credits: (1) voluntary emissions 
reduction  (VER):  a  carbon  offset  exchanged  in  the  over-the-counter  or  voluntary  market  for 
credits,  (2)  certified  emissions  reduction  (CER): emission  units  (or  credits)  created  through  a 
regulatory framework with the purpose of offsetting a project’s emissions. The main difference 
between the two is that there is a third-party certifying body that regulates the CER as opposed to 
the VER. 
1.3.  Carbon Credit Markets. Kyoto protocol regards the market mechanism as a way to solve 
the  greenhouse  gas  emission  reduction  problem.  In  this  view,  carbon  dioxide  emission  is 
considered  a  commodity,  forming  a  carbon  trading  system.  According  to  the  United  Nations, 
carbon offsetting is particularly crucial for meeting the Paris Climate Agreement’s goal. There 
have been efforts to mitigate this problem using a carbon tax or credit. Carbon offsetting allows 
companies and individuals to reduce carbon emissions by purchasing carbon credits from carbon 
reduction projects. These projects include planting new trees, avoiding deforestation, investment 
in renewable energy, carbon capture, and sequestration projects. The voluntary carbon market co-
exists with the compliance carbon markets, driven by regulatory caps on greenhouse gas emissions, 
and operates at a significantly larger scale. The New York Times reported that greenhouse gas 
(GHG) emissions trading held the potential to become the world’s largest commodity market  4. 
According  to  the  World  Bank’s  tally,  the  carbon  emission  trading  market  reached  about  10.9 
billion USD in 2005 when the Kyoto Protocol took effect and continued to grow at an annual rate 
of 108%, growing to 143.7 billion USD in 2009 5. Recently, carbon offset and emissions trading 
volume grew 34% and peaked at 215 billion USD in 2019, with over 80% of the total volume 
accounted for by the EU’s Emissions Trading System (ET ETS) 6. 
1.3.1.  How it works. The number of permits in the market is capped. At the beginning of a trading 
phase, emission permits are either allocated to businesses for free or have to be bought at auction. 
The  number  of  available  permits  decreases  over  time,  putting  pressure  on  the  participating 
companies to invest in cleaner production options and reduce their CO2 outputs. In the long run, 
this fuels innovation and drives down the price of new technologies. On the other hand, carbon 
reduction projects will be awarded carbon offsetting credits for the removal of GHGs from the 
atmosphere.  These  projects  include  planting  new  trees,  avoiding  deforestation,  investment  in 
renewable  energy,  carbon  capture,  carbon  sequestration  projects  in  the  deep  saline  aquifers  or 
depleted  oil  and  gas  reservoirs,  etc.  Carbon  emitters  could  buy  carbon  credits  from  the  carbon 
reduction projects to temporarily increase their emission amount if they fail to achieve their set 
emission  caps.  For  instance,  assume  the  regulatory  body  allots  company  A  100  units  of  GHG 
emissions. This company ends up emitting 120 units of GHG by the end of the year. Landowner 
B preserves forest and receives 50 carbon offset credits. Company A buys 20 offset credits from 
landowner B at the market price to increase its emission cap.  
1.3.2.  Current  Challenges.  The  growth  of  the  global  GHG  emissions  markets  has  caused  the 
emergence of an array of global and regional credits, markets, and trading mechanisms  7,8. The 
prominent  examples  are  the  European  Emission  Trading  Scheme  (EU  ETS),  New  Zealand 
Emissions Trading (EZ ETS), Midwestern Greenhouse Gas Accord (MGA), and California’s cap-

3 

 
and-trade  program  8.  This  naturally  resulted  in  the  fragmented  implementation  of  the  cap-and-
trade-scheme  and  lack  of  cross-market  exchange  of  value.  These  programs  have  also  been 
criticized for  over-crediting, unclear life-cycle of issued carbon credits, and promoting  double-
spending  due  to  the  lack  of  transparency  and  inter-regional  communications  9.  The  other 
significant problem with the current carbon trading markets is substantial transaction costs that 
transfer wealth to brokers and agents. Traders and brokers often get a commission of 3 to 8 percent 
of the value of the credit (with an industry average of 5 percent)  7. Furthermore, these schemes 
rely on third-party verifiers to check claims and often are paid by project developers, meaning they 
have an incentive to approve all clean projects they investigate 7. The confluence of these factors 
may explain why global (and regional) carbon markets have failed to make a meaningful difference 
in mitigating greenhouse gas emissions so far. 

2.  Blockchain Technology 

2.1.  Background.  Blockchain  technology  enables  an  immutable  ledger  that  is  distributed, 
validated,  and  agreed  upon  by  the  parties  that  participate  in  its  operation.  The  foundations  for 
Blockchain are rooted in the ability to achieve a consensus of distributed parties, a problem that 
has been solved in one way or another since the early 1980s (by Lamport et al.)10. Redundant, 
consensus-backed  systems  have  existed  in  mission-critical  spaces  for  decades,  but  technology 
limitations  meant  that  the  implementation  overhead  made  these  systems  impractical  and  cost-
ineffective until the late 2000s. The collapse of the financial markets exposed critical trust-based 
issues  related  to  double-spending,  which  formed  the  impetus  for  Satoshi’s  seminal  work  to 
leverage  peer-to-peer  distributed  systems  to  generate  computational  proof  of  chronologically 
ordered transactions 11. With a way to order and link transactions, Vitalik proposed the formation 
of  decentralized  autonomous  organizations  (DAOs)  controlled  by  automated  pre-programmed 
rules 12. These automated smart contracts could contain assets, encode, and execute bylaws of an 
entire organization. The automated transactions from these contracts could be collected at some 
regular intervals and placed in a block, and chained together. 
Blockchain  technology  finds  its  name  rooted  in  the  structure  of  the  data  it  captures.  The 
fundamental component of a blockchain is a block of new transactions as well as information about 
the previous block. The ability to link the new block to the previous block in proof of work systems 
requires  a  cryptographic  puzzle  that  is  computationally  hard  to  solve  by  easy  to  validate  its 
solution.  Once  linked,  information  about  the  newly  added  block,  which  recalls  also  includes 
information from the previous block, is passed along for inclusion in the next block of transactions, 
and the process repeats. The inclusion of information about a block’s “parent block” or proceeding 
block creates a structure that would require immense computational power to subvert. 
2.2.  Benefits of Blockchain for Carbon Trading. Blockchain technology provides a safe and 
reliable,  efficient  and  convenient,  open,  and  inclusive  platform  that  is  uniquely  suited  for 
implementing  Carbon  Credit  Markets.  The  immutable  cryptographically-secured  distributed 
ledger  on  the  Blockchain  allows  for  reliable  issuance  and  tracking  of  carbon  credits.  Public 
blockchains  are  easily  accessible  to  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises,  reducing  the  entry 
threshold for the carbon trading market. Furthermore, the information provided by companies is 

4 

 
transparent and accessible to everyone. Recently, free automated market makers (AMMs) have 
been  developed  on  blockchains  allowing  for  the  trading  of  digitized  assets  directly  on  the 
Blockchain without intermediary and minimal algorithmic fees. They provide the infrastructure 
required to create a digital carbon credit ecosystem and engage all the stakeholders. 

3.  A Blockchain-based Carbon Credit Ecosystem 

3.1.  Vision. We aim to create a Carbon Credit Ecosystem on Blockchain to bring more liquidity, 
transparency,  accessibility,  and  standardization  to  carbon  markets.  This  ecosystem  includes  all 
stakeholders, a tokenization mechanism with clear minting and burning protocols, a transparent 
distribution of tokens, and an AMM for trading these carbon tokens. 
3.2.  Work  Plan.  In  this  project,  different  stakeholders  involved  are  “Generators”  of  carbon 
credit  (i.e.,  wind  farms,  tree-planting  operations,  CO2 sequestration  projects,  etc.)  and 
“Consumers” of carbon credit (i.e., carbon emitters or polluters of any kind such as the energy 
industry)  as  well  as  other  stakeholders  such  as  regulators,  concerned  citizens,  and  validators. 
“Validators”  are  an  essential  part  of  this  ecosystem.  They  are  accredited,  globally  distributed, 
technically competent consultants incentivized to parameterize appropriately and onboard projects 
to an open architecture marketplace that matches interested parties generating and retiring carbon 
credits.  
We will transfer carbon credits to the Blockchain by converting them into digital tokens distributed 
to carbon credit generators after properly validating their projects. Buyers and sellers of carbon 
credit will use a decentralized exchange platform on Blockchain to trade Carbon credits. The price 
will be determined by market dynamics driven by supply and demand. The Carbon Tokens would 
be retired via a “buy and burn” model by sending the given Carbon Tokens to a smart contract or 
defined blockchain address whose private key is not known by any party and can be visible to the 
collective of validators as well as regulators or other stakeholders. The companies and individuals 
who successfully burn their Carbon Tokens will be issues non-fungible tokens as a carbon removal 
certificate. 
3.3. 
Smart  Contracts.  This  project's  minimal  requirement  involves  four  (4)  smart  contracts 
interacting with three (3) stakeholders and liquidity providers. A simplified flow-chart is illustrated 
in Figure 2, and the design requirements for each smart contract are listed below. 
3.3.1.  Smart Contract 1. A registry system on the Blockchain to record the essential information 
for  the  following  stakeholders:  (a)  Verifiers:  They  validate  carbon  credits  from  credit  holders. 
They  also  verify  that  carbon  tokens  burnt  are  equivalent  to  burning  a  proportionate  amount  of 
emissions.  (b)  Credit-holders:  They  are  organizations  that  already  hold  carbon  credits  in  the 
emissions  trading  ecosystem.  (c)  Customers:  They  are  individuals  and  companies  interested  in 
offsetting their carbon footprint by buying carbon credits and burning the carbon token. 
3.3.2.  Smart Contract 2. A smart contract to mint digital tokens called carbon tokens based on 
studied and approved carbon credits through a series of functions: (a) Approve credits entered by 
the  credit-holders,  which  is  certified  by  the  verifiers,  (b)  Mint  the  Carbon  token,  (c)  Make  the 
Carbon  token  transferrable  and  burnable,  (d)  Burn  offset  carbon  tokens,  (e)  Mint  non-fungible 
tokens as a badge of successful burning carbon tokens, representing offsetting carbon emissions 

5 

 
3.3.3.  Smart Contract 3. A smart contract with a multi-signature allows verifiers to verify the 
minting and burn the carbon tokens. This contract will require approval by at least 70% of the 
verifiers to be automatically executed. 
3.3.4.  Smart  Contract  4:  An  automated  market  maker  (AMM)  smart  contract  that  allows:  (a) 
automated trading of Carbon tokens with digital money (e.g., stable coins or future central bank 
digital currencies), (b) provides incentives for liquidity providers (LPs) by charging a transaction 
fee (example: 0.3%) and distributing it among LPs, (c) provides a dynamic price discovery for the 
Carbon tokens in a free market. 

Carbon Credit Project

Smart Contract 1
(Registry)

Liquidity Providers

Credit Holders 

Customers

Smart Contract 3
(Multi-sig Verifier)

Certified Validators

Smart Contract 4
(AMM)

Smart Contract 2
(Digital Token)

Figure 2. Flow diagram showing the proposed Carbon credit ecosystem on a blockchain. 

3.4. 
Previous Work. The PI attended the Ethglobal Hackathon in Fall 2020. There, he led a 
group  of  international  developers  to  create  the  first  version  of  this  project  on  the  Ethereum 
blockchain. The project was called Carbon Project and involved three smart contracts deployed on 
an Etheremu testnet. More information about this project is provided below.   
3.4.1.  The public URL for the Carbon Project in Ethglobal Hackathon  

hack.ethglobal.co/showcase/carbon-credit-project-recye9DJnVvSE8vPG 
3.4.2.  Github repository including smart contracts for Carbon Project 

https://github.com/CarbonCreditProject/Carbon-Project.git 

6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References: 

1.  Crippa, M., Guizzardi, D., Muntean, M., Schaaf, E., Solazzo, E., Monforti-Ferrario, F., 
Olivier, J.G.J., Vignati, E., Fossil CO2 emissions of all world countries - 2020 Report, 
EUR 30358 EN, Publications Office of the European Union, Luxembourg, 2020, ISBN 
978-92-76-21515-8, doi:10.2760/143674, JRC121460. 

2.  Olivier, J.G.J., and Peters, J.A.H.W., (2019), Trends in global CO2 and total greenhouse 
gas emissions: 2019 report. PBL Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency, The 
Hague. 

3.  European Commission, Joint Research Centre (EC-JRC)/Netherlands Environmental 
Assessment Agency (PBL). Emissions Database for Global Atmospheric Research 
(EDGAR), release EDGAR v5.0 (1970 - 2015) of November 2019. 

4.  Kanter, J., (2007), Banks Urging US to Adopt Trading of Emissions, New York Times, 

26 September 2007. 

5.  Kim, S.-K., and Huh, J.-H., (2020), Blockchain of Carbon Trading for UN Sustainable 

Development Goals, Sustainability, 12, 4021; doi:10.3390/su12104021 
6.  Nordeng, A., et al., (2020), Refinitiv Carbon Market Survey, May 2020. 
7.  Sovacool, B.K., (2011), Four Problems with Global Carbon Markets: A Critical Review, 

Energy & Environment · Vol. 22, No. 6, 201.  

8.  Gale, K., Langer, D., Waterman, R. (2010), Global Carbon Credit Markets – Issues and 
opportunities, pfi market intelligence/Financing clean energy, Section 4, chapter 39. 
9.  Haya, B., Cullenward, D., Strong, A. L.,  Grubert, E., Heilmayr, R., Sivas D. A., Wara, & 

M. (2020) Managing uncertainty in carbon offsets: insights from California’s 
standardized  approach, Climate Policy, 20:9, 1112-1126, DOI: 
10.1080/14693062.2020.1781035. 

10. Lamport, L.; Shostak, R.; Pease, M. (1982). The Byzantine Generals Problem. ACM 

Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems. 4 (3): 387–389. 
doi:10.1145/357172.357176. 

11. Nakamoto, S. (2008), Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System, Bitcoin White 

Paper. 

12. Buterin, V. (2016), A Next Generation Smart Contract and Decentralized Application 

Platform, Ethereum White Paper. 

7 

 
 
