1
2
0
2

l
u
J

2
1

]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

1
v
7
2
5
5
0
.
7
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Collective intelligence and the blockchain:

Technology, communities and social experiments

Andrea Baronchelli1,2,3,*

1City University of London, Department of Mathematics, London EC1V 0HB, UK
2The Alan Turing Institute, British Library, 96 Euston Road, London NW12DB, UK
3UCL Centre for Blockchain Technologies, University College London, London, UK.
*abaronchelli@turing.ac.uk

Blockchains are still perceived chieﬂy as a new technology. But each blockchain is also
a community and a social experiment, built around social consensus. Here I discuss three

examples showing how collective intelligence can help, threat or capitalize on blockchain-
based ecosystems. They concern the immutability of smart contracts, code transparency

and new forms of property. The examples show that more research, new norms and,
eventually, laws are needed to manage the interaction between collective behaviour and

the blockchain technology.
society rise up to the challenge.

Insights from researchers in collective intelligence can help

For most people, blockchain technology is about on-chain consensus. And it certainly is. A blockchain

provides users with a method and incentives for validating and storing a value or transaction without the
need to trust a central authority, or any other participants in the system. Once approved, the transaction

is recorded in an open ledger that cannot be altered retroactively. Since the system is trustless, everyone

can join the network and read, write, or participate within the blockchain (in this article, I am considering
only public and permissionless blockchains).1

But a public blockchain is not a self-contained universe. As a socio-technical system, its life extents

behind the user base. For example, a blockchain can provide competition to existent socio-economic
players, and it is shaped by what users do with it and, eventually, by the law.2, 3 Continuous updates
and strategic decisions are therefore required to keep up with such a rapidly evolving landscape, meaning
that blockchains are not self-suﬃcient. This has two implications. The ﬁrst is that blockchains need

governance, deﬁning how the community of users, developers and immediate stakeholders can (agree on
how to) make decisions.4, 5 The second implication is that, in order for those decisions to be meaning-
ful, the governing community needs to have a clear understanding of the social experiment they have
launched, i,e., how norms and behaviours are impacting, and will be impacted by, the blockchain itself.

Considering that each blockchain is also a community and a social experiment is key to understand the
evolution and impact of the technology.6 Yet it is often overlooked both by blockchain stakeholders, who
may be too absorbed by the technical aspects, and by researchers, who have traditionally been slow to

detect societal transformation. The latter is unfortunate since most data are public and the challenges
raised by the blockchain technology, even just in the form of cryptocurrency, have been increasing

steadily. Here, I focus on three examples showing what can happen when collective intelligence meets

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
the blockchain, and the design and incentives built in the latter turn out to be incomplete or problematic.

The ﬁrst two examples concern blockchains and their communities, the last one is about the unpredicted
fortune of what is now a large-scale socio-economic revolution. In all cases, I will highlight the challenges

for researchers and society as a whole.

Coping with the (im)mutability of smart contracts

Who makes decisions about a blockchain? This question, initially overlooked, became urgent as soon as
Bitcoin gained the ﬁrst users. An eﬃcient governance guarantees that a blockchain keeps oﬀering its
users a competitive environment.3, 5, 7, 8 Most companies and organisation adopt a centralised governance
system with a leadership team at its top. However, blockchain systems tend to prefer decentralisation
almost by nature. Thus, governance becomes a community problem, and every decision - including the

decision on how to make decisions - a consensus problem in itself.

The complex interplay between governance and decentralisation manifested clearly in June 2016, when
a large amount of ethers suddenly “disappeared” from the Ethereum ecosystem.7, 9 They got hacked from
a complex smart contract known as “The DAO”. Described “as a new paradigm of economic cooperation
[..] a digital democratization of business”,10 i.e. a grandiose social experiment, the DAO had been funded
with $120 millions obtained through a crowdfunding campaign.11 The DAO contained around 15% of
all ethers, and the hack aﬀected approximately 30% of those, i.e. 5% of all available ethers.

The size of the hack put the whole Ethereum ecosystem under major stress, undermining its cred-
ibility. The price of ether fell by more than 35%.12 Furthermore, Ethereum aimed (and still aims) at
switching to a proof of stake governance model, where the mining or validating power is proportional to

the owned amount of coins, so an entity with 5% of all ethers would become extremely inﬂuential.

The community had several possibilities12 including (1) Accepting the hack and its consequences,
including the possible devaluation of the ecosystem. This would potentially imply the end of Ethereum

and the loss of a lot of real money; (2) Blocking the account of the hacker. This proposal, dubbed “soft

fork”, was extensively discussed by the community, but had several problems, including legal risks; or (3)
Rewriting history by invalidating all the transactions that followed the hack and start a parallel universe

where the hack had never occurred and investors would get their money back (blockchains, parallel
universes and rewriting history is a fascinating topic but unfortunately outside of our scope here).

Option (3) would make it possible for everyone who participated in the DAO to withdraw their

funds. With the support of the miners, and because nothing had been spent so far, nothing would
be lost. Critics warned that rewriting history would undermine the perception that blockchains are

immutable, with devastating consequences for Ethereum. Yet the community chose to proceed this way,
performing an unprecedented “hard fork”. Ethereum went back to square one, to before the hack. A

minority of “rebels”, approximately 15% of those who were involved in the decision process, continued
instead using the unaltered original blockchain, now called “Ethereum Classic”, which has survived to
today.13 The operation was successful. Ethereum is still in good health, ranking second for market
capitalisation behind Bitcoin. There was no drop in price after the hack and, in fact, a few months later

Ethereum became one of the main characters of the 2017 boom of cryptos.

The DAO story shows the importance of oﬀ-chain decisions on the life of a blockchain. Consensus,
or lack thereof, among developers, governance, users and miners does aﬀect the economic interests of

thousands of individuals. It also highlights how society and researchers need to reﬂect on how to deal

2

with the immutability of smart contracts (not only in relation to the foreseeable and partially already
started proliferation of DAOs8), in order to confront bugs or changed circumstances that may make the
contract obsolete. For “code is law”14 to be an opportunity and not a prison, we need new norms. This
requires both more research and a broader societal discussion.

The role of developers and code transparency as a systemic property

The classic risk associated to the “code is law” approach14 is that developers would acquire too much
power.15 The accepted antidote has been to open up the code. Open source code would limit the
inﬂuence of developers by allowing everyone to monitor what they write.15 Of course, the assumption
that someone will in fact (be able to) read the code can appear a bit naive, but the mere possibility
to read it would be enough to guarantee transparency. This argument is crucial to crytpocurrencies,

at present the most advanced use case of blockchains. Every cryptocurrency is entirely deﬁned by its
code, which determines its security, functionality, availability, transferability, and general malleability.16
Hence, the code of most of them is open source.

However, the open source argument has a weakness. It assumes that cryptocurrencies (or, in general,
any coded objects) are isolated entities, each one living in its own silo. Starting from this observation, my

collaborators and I looked at cryptocurrency codes stored in GitHub and found that 4% of developers
contributed to the code of two or more cryptocurrencies.17 This group included some of the most
active coders. Taken together, they are responsible for 10% of all edits. Hence, at the code level,
cryptocurrencies are not independent. Does this matter?

The cryptocurrency market is the natural place to assess the impact of developers working on more

than one project. Since cryptos are traded, their price trends can be used to compare their life beyond the
code. It turns out that the temporal evolution of the network of co-coded crypto-currencies anticipates

market behaviour. In particular, the ﬁrst time two independent codes get connected via the activity of

one shared developer marks, on average, a period of increased correlation between the returns of the
corresponding cryptocurrencies.17

Of course, such an analysis can not reveal ‘why’ such correlation is established. We can speculate,

for example, that developers are either directly ‘rich’ in one of the two cryptocurrencies or employed by
some wealthy actor, and that their activity correlates with some ﬁnancial interest (typically pairs of co-

developed cryptos include a major and a smaller coin). However, the point is that the correlation between
returns of co-coded cryptos would be virtually impossible to discover if we ignored the collaborative

activity of the developers, and that correlations are important to consider for example when assessing
the risks of an investment portfolio.

In this example, the main actors were developers but it is easy to see how governance could have

an even more dramatic impact. Cryptos are entirely deﬁned by their code, true. But their behaviour
- in this case their market price - is shaped also by the community that builds them. Future research

clarifying how this may happen will have an impact that transcends cryptocurrencies. Understanding
whether and how ﬁnancial markets and technological - code - development interact is an open and debated
question.18–21 More broadly, today several code-based ecosystems challenge traditional institutions, from
national laws to ﬁnancial markets3, 22, 23 and code transparency will be more and more crucial to prevent
societal risks.

3

How a blockchain game revolutionised the art market

Fungibility is a crucial feature of money, where individual units must be interchangeable. One euro

coin is identical, from the practical point of view, to any other euro coin. The same is true for one
gram of gold. Since the blockchain was originally conceived to enable electronic cash, fungibility was

not questioned. At least until 2014, when the ﬁrst experiments with non-fungibility were proposed to
the community of Ethereum developers;24 and then 2017, when Non Fungible Tokens (NFTs) gained
popularity in the form of a an Ethereum game called Cryptokitties,? that allowed players to purchase,
collect, breed and sell virtual cats.

The game was broadly considered a symptom of the ‘cryptocurrency madness’,25 but the underlying
technology had some interesting properties. At its roots, an NFT is a smart contract that points to

some other data, like an image or video. Living on a public blockchain, predominantly Ethereum, NFTs
allow everyone to verify their authenticity and their past history. After years of relative calm, the NFT

attracted major media attention in March 2021, when the artist Beeple sold an NFT of his work for
$69.3 million at Christie’s26 (the third-highest auction price achieved for a living artist, after Jeﬀ Koons
and David Hockney27). Several other multi-million sales followed.28 NFTs proﬁtability has attracted
several celebrities, who created their own NFTs, as well as the most popular sports, with collectibles of
NBA and famous football players that are currently sold for hundreds of thousands dollars.29 At the
moment of writing, the market has surpassed $1 billion30 and it will likely grow even further as NFTs
are being used to commodify digital objects in diﬀerent contexts beyond art, such as gaming (the ﬁrst
industry to make proﬁt of the technology), sport collectibles, music and even physical objects such as
fashion items.30

Collective intelligence expanded the original idea associated to the blockchain technology by dropping
fungibility, a key feature of Bitcoin. The new NFT technology was then perfected through a series of

protocol improvements and eventually landed in - and revolutionised - unforeseen territories, starting
with digital art. As NFTs are now conquering also physical objects, new norms and regulations will have

to decide how they interact with existent property and trade laws. The social experiment has gone well.
It is time for society to make the most of it.

Conclusion

The above examples highlight some of the challenges and opportunities raised by the blockchain tech-
nology, namely the immutability of code-based contracts, the concentration of power in the hands of few

code-savvy individuals, and the friction between new social norms and existing laws to deﬁne property.

It is easy to see that more challenges will come in the future, and many others are already with us. The
understanding of the interplay between collective behaviour and the technology will help design better

incentives and better blockchains, but it is diﬃcult to imagine that design will ever be able to anticipate
everything. For now, we need grounded answers for questions such as when decentralisation oﬀers real

advantages, how we can help design new social norms, how law and norms interact, what the impact of
code on society is, how unregulated markets emerge and self-organise, how several currencies can coex-

ist, and what level of individual identity or anonymity is needed to guarantee social coordination and
everyday transactions. Many of these issues - in diﬀerent forms - have long been familiar to researchers

in collective intelligence, and the ﬁeld can give a tremendous contribution towards understanding and
shaping the imminent blockchain revolution.

4

References

[1] Nicolas Kube. Daniel drescher: Blockchain basics: a non-technical introduction in 25 steps, 2018.

[2] Andrea Baronchelli. The emergence of consensus: a primer. Royal Society open science, 5(2):172189,

2018.

[3] Primavera De Filippi and Aaron Wright. Blockchain and the law: The rule of code. Harvard

University Press, 2018.

[4] Wessel Reijers, Fiachra O’Brolch´ain, and Paul Haynes. Governance in blockchain technologies &

social contract theories. Ledger, 1:134–151, 2016.

[5] Joshua Tan and Michael Zargham. Introducing govbase: An open database of projects and tools
in online governance. https://thelastjosh.medium.com/introducing-govbase-97884b0ddaef
Accessed July 9, 2021, 2020. Medium.

[6] Nick Paumgarten. The prophets of cryptocurrency survey the boom-and-bust. The New Yorker.

Oct 22, 2018.

[7] Quinn DuPont. Experiments in algorithmic governance: A history and ethnography of “the dao,”

a failed decentralized autonomous organization. pages 157–177. Routledge New York, NY, USA,
2017.

[8] Roman Beck, Christoph M¨uller-Bloch, and John Leslie King. Governance in the blockchain economy:
A framework and research agenda. Journal of the Association for Information Systems, 19(10):1,
2018.

[9] Wikipedia contributors. The dao (organization), 2021. [Online; accessed 06-July-2021].

[10] Seth

Bannon.

of

“the

dao”

or:

How

the

The
is

tao
already

tonomous
https://www.cnbc.com/2016/05/17/automated-company-raises-equivalent-of-120-million-in-digital-currency.html

TechCrunch. May

corporation

here.

17,

au-
2016.

Accessed June 22, 2021.

Waters.

company
[11] Richard
$120m
TechCrunch.
https://techcrunch.com/2016/05/16/the-tao-of-the-dao-or-how-the-autonomous-corporation-is-already-here/

equivalent
17,

of
2016.

Automated

currency.

digital

raises

May

in

Accessed June 22, 2021.

[12] David

Siegel.

dao
https://www.coindesk.com/understanding-dao-hack-journalists Accessed June 22, 2021.

Understanding

CoinDesk.

attack.

June

the

25,

2016.

[13] Wikipedia contributors. Ethereum classic, 2021. [Online; accessed 06-July-2021].

[14] Lawrence Lessig. Code and other laws of cyberspace. Basic Books, 1999.

[15] Michael W. Brooks and Joshua Robichaud. The crypto paradox: Code is law and consensus rules.

The National Law Review, 2019.

[16] Andreas M Antonopoulos. Mastering Bitcoin: unlocking digital cryptocurrencies. O’Reilly Media,

Inc., 2014.

5

[17] Lorenzo Lucchini, Laura Alessandretti, Bruno Lepri, Angela Gallo, and Andrea Baronchelli. From
code to market: Network of developers and correlated returns of cryptocurrencies. Science Advances,
6(51):eabd2204, 2020.

[18] Asher Trockman, Rijnard van Tonder, and Bogdan Vasilescu. Striking gold in software reposito-
ries?: an econometric study of cryptocurrencies on github. In Proceedings of the 16th International
Conference on Mining Software Repositories, pages 181–185. IEEE Press, 2019.

[19] Sha Wang and Jean-Philippe Vergne. Buzz factor or innovation potential: What explains cryp-

tocurrencies’ returns? PloS one, 12(1):e0169556, 2017.

[20] Dirk G Baur, Daniel Cahill, Keith Godfrey, and Zhangxin Frank Liu. Bitcoin time-of-day, day-of-
week and month-of-year eﬀects in returns and trading volume. Finance Research Letters, 31:78–92,
2019.

[21] Shaen Corbet, Brian Lucey, Andrew Urquhart, and Larisa Yarovaya. Cryptocurrencies as a ﬁnancial

asset: A systematic analysis. International Review of Financial Analysis, 62:182–199, 2019.

[22] Lawrence Lessig. Code: Version 2.0. Basic Books, 2006.

[23] Robby Houben and Alexander Snyers. Cryptocurrencies and blockchain: Legal context and impli-
cations for ﬁnancial crime, money laundering and tax evasion. EU publications; Directorate-General
for Internal Policies of the Union, 09 2018.

[24] Anil Dash. Nfts weren’t supposed to end like this. https://www.theatlantic.com/ideas/archive/2021/04/nfts-werent-supposed-end-like/618488/

Accessed May 4, 2021, 2021. The Atlantic.

[25] Fitz Tepper. People have spent over $1m buying virtual cats on the Ethereum blockchain.

https://techcrunch.com/2017/12/03/people-have-spent-over-1m-buying-virtual-cats-on-the-ethereum-blockchain/

Accessed May 4, 2021, 2017. TechCrunch.

[26] Rebecca Riegelhaupt. Results: Beeple’s purely digital NFT-based work of art achieves $69.3 million

at Christie’s. https://www.christies.com/about-us/press-archive/details?PressReleaseID=9970&lid=1
Accessed May 4, 2021, 2021. Christie’s Press Release.

[27] Scott Reyburn.

JPG ﬁle

sells

for

$69 million,

as

“NFT mania”

gathers pace.

https://www.nytimes.com/2021/03/11/arts/design/nft-auction-christies-beeple.html

Accessed May 4, 2021, 2021. The New York Times.

[28] Daniel

Phillips.

The

10

most

expensive

NFTs

ever

https://decrypt.co/62898/the-10-most-expensive-nfts-ever-sold Accessed May
2021, 2021. Decrypt.

sold.
20,

[29] JohnJo

collectible
https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-56413186 Accessed May 20, 2021, 2021. BBC.

“insane”

trading

Devlin.

money

The

in

cards.

[30] Matthieu Nadini, Laura Alessandretti, Flavio Di Giacinto, Mauro Martino, Luca Maria Aiello, and

Andrea Baronchelli. Mapping the nft revolution: market trends, trade networks and visual features.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.00647, 2021.

6

