1
2
0
2

g
u
A
3
1

]

Y
C
.
s
c
[

2
v
2
1
3
4
1
.
7
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Decentralized Basic Income: Creating Wealth with On-Chain
Staking and Fixed-Rate Protocols

Hakwan Lau1,* and Stephen Tse2,†

1Center for Brain Science, Riken Institute, Japan
2Harmony.ONE
*Correspondence to: hakwan@gmail.com
†Correspondence to: s@harmony.one

Abstract

1 Background

In this review, we evaluate the mechanisms
behind the decentralized ﬁnance protocols
for generating stable, passive income. Cur-
rently, some savings interest rates can be
as high as 20% annually, payable in tradi-
tional currency values such as US dollars.
Therefore, one can beneﬁt from the growth
of the cryptocurrency markets, with mini-
mal exposure to their volatility risks. We
aim to explain the rationale behind these
savings products in simple terms. The key
here is that asset deposits in cryptocurrency
ecosystems are of intrinsic economic value,
as they facilitate network consensus mecha-
nisms and automated marketplaces. There-
fore, savings in cryptocurrency are associ-
ated with some unique advantages unavail-
able in traditional ﬁnancial systems. We
will go through the implementations of how
savings can be channeled into the staking
deposits in Proof-of-Stake (PoS) protocols,
through ﬁxed-rate lending protocols, and
staking derivative tokens. We will discuss
potential pitfalls, assess how these protocols
may behave in market cycles, as well as sug-
gest areas for further research and develop-
ment. We end by discussing the notion of
decentralized basic income – analogous to
universal basic income but guaranteed by ﬁ-
nancial products on blockchains instead of
public policies.

As of year 2021, the interest rates for savings in tra-
ditional ‘ﬁat’ currencies such as the US dollar and
the Japanese yen are at historic lows, at around
0.07% and 0.01% respectively[1]. Because of the
large national debts held by these major economies,
some may anticipate that interest rates may remain
relatively low for the near future. At low interest
rates, the traditionally lauded act of regular house-
hold savings becomes less rewarding. This may
have a particularly strong impact on aging popula-
tions which rely on saved money as pension income,
for the long-term sustenance of quality of life after
retirement[2].

Meanwhile, during the pandemic triggered by
COVID-19, major governments have printed large
amounts of money to support their economic stim-
ulation eﬀorts [3]. This has led some to worry that
inﬂation, i.e. the rising of nominal prices of goods,
will eventually become inevitable. Although mod-
ern economists have disputed the basis of this worry
[4, 5, 6], historically this has been the consequences
of excessive increases in circulating currency, such
as in the cases of Germany in 1923 [7] and Ar-
gentina in 1989 [8]. To many, these dramatic cases
likely reinforces the pessimistic narrative about in-
ﬂation as a source of potential concern. As of 2021
May, the US inﬂation rate for consumer goods was
reported to be 5% for the past annual period, con-
siderably higher than anticipated [9].

These may be some of the reasons why, somewhat
paradoxically, despite the obviously negative eco-

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
nomic impact of COVID-19, stocks and real es-
tate prices have generally gone up since March 2020
[10, 11]. As investors lose conﬁdence in the future
value of savings in ﬁat currencies, they look for
options that would give higher expected returns.
Accordingly, the cryptocurrency market has also
ﬂourished during this time [12, 13, 14].

However, this puts the common household savers
into an unfavorable position. To the socio-economic
groups who may have the most need to hedge
against possible inﬂation, ﬁxed-term saving and
government bonds have historically been the ma-
jor go-to options for the steady accumulation of
wealth. To the average saver, the stock market may
seem like a rather complex and potentially risky
place. While real estate may be perceived as a rel-
atively stable asset, the threshold for investment
entry is higher. Above all, cryptocurrency remains
very far from a mainstream investment option. Im-
portantly, the perceived risk is in fact supported by
the evidently high volatility of the market.

But what if one can beneﬁt from the staggering
growth of the cryptocurrency market without ever
‘investing’ into it? That is, what if one can sidestep
the ﬁnancial risks directly associated with the ac-
knowledged volatility of the market, and yet gener-
ate stable income via interest rates on the order of
several hundred times higher (i.e. 20% annual rate)
than what the current traditional ﬁnancial market
can oﬀer? What if this can happen even when the
market is contracting instead of growing, at least
to some extent?

This possibility is obviously of strategic concern
for those who are already invested into cryptocur-
rency technology, who see mass adoption as a de-
sirable and necessary next step for the development
of the industry. But more importantly, there is also
a moral argument behind this consideration, even
for the technologically uninitiated. Given the cur-
rent economic context, the widening gap between
the rich and the poor may increasingly turn into a
gap between savvy investors and traditional savers.
The former group can aﬀord taking higher risks due
to larger initial capital, while the latter may lack
the means and the know-how to truly beneﬁt from
anything other than the anemic ﬁat saving rates.

Fortunately, certain existing cryptocurrency proto-
cols may be able to help us bridge this gap. To

anticipate, the general rationale behind is simple:
in many modern blockchain systems the integrity
of the ledger is supported by the Proof-of-Stake
(PoS) consensus mechanism [15, 16], rather than
the Proof of Work (PoW) protocol used in e.g. Bit-
coin. This means that to validate a transaction, one
does not need to dedicate an excessive amount of
energy and computational power to solve a crypto-
graphic puzzle, to ‘mine’ a coin. Instead, in PoS
networks, a validator needs to show that one holds
a suﬃcient amount of the currency (i.e.
stake)
within the system such that it would be against
one’s interest to act maliciously. By lending money
to validators, one is allowing them to qualify to do
their jobs. This process, sometimes called ‘staking’,
means that putting money down for a ﬁxed term
can be of intrinsic economic value, as staking is key
to the ﬁnancial eﬃciency, security, and guaranteed
integrity of the blockchain bookkeeping system. As
long as a PoS ecosystem is able to derive utility and
value with decentralized ﬁnance applications, e.g.
for trading, there will be demand for staking. As
such, savers can be rewarded in a sustainable way,
as they support the generation of ﬁnancial services
and products provided by the PoS network - not
entirely unlike why bankers and corporate lawyers
are paid good salaries in the traditional ﬁnancial
system, even during downturns.

2 Stablecoins and Lending Markets

Besides the existence of PoS blockchain systems,
the protocols for the generation of stable interest
assumes the availability of several instruments and
decentralized ﬁnance (DeFi) products [17]. The
most basic of these include stable currencies (some-
times called stable coins) pegged to real-world
ﬁat currencies. Examples include Tether (USDT)
[18], MakerDAO’s DAI [19], Binance’s BUSD [20],
Terra’s UST [21]. These are all pegged to the US
dollar. There are also stablecoins for other cur-
rencies, such as Korean won [22], British pound
[23], etc. The diﬀerent mechanisms for how the peg
is achieved have been reviewed elsewhere [24, 25].
One interesting fact is that they do not necessarily
have to be backed by real-world ﬁat assets. Some
are backed by other cryptocurrencies, yet others
maintain their value by algorithmically adjusting
the supply. Accordingly, they come with varying

2

degrees of absolute stability. Nevertheless, overall,
for the major stablecoins including the ones men-
tioned above, the stabilization mechanisms have
been shown to be generally eﬀective over the past
couple of years, withstanding considerable market
volatility. Also, insurance options are now available
to mitigate the risks of unpegging [26, 27].

Stablecoins are important for our purposes; for the
stable interest rates to be meaningful to the typi-
cal household savers, both the savings and the in-
terest have to be in terms of everyday currencies.
With them, one can already earn savings interest
without exposing oneself directly to the volatility of
the cryptocurrency market. Protocols like COM-
POUND [28], Maker [19], and AAVE [29] allow
loans to be provided to borrowers who put down
cryptocurrencies as collateral. Savers can deposit
money into these protocols to form a pool for the
loans. Because borrowers have to pay interest on
their loans, part of that translates into the interest
to be paid back to the savers in return. These in-
terest rates are determined by market mechanisms
[30], reﬂecting the expected values of future assets.

In part due to the semi-anonymized nature of ﬁ-
nancial engagement with cryptocurrency, with few
exceptions [31], long-term loans tend to be over-
collateralized, meaning that one has to put down
a higher amount of ‘collateral’ in order to borrow.
This overcollateralization ratio is typically up to
150% to 200%, meaning that for every $1 borrowed
one has to put down as collateralization something
worth up to $1.5 or $2. This way, if a borrower
defaults, the lender would be protected. Also, the
collateral itself is typically in a cryptocurrency that
ﬂuctuates in price. Should the worth of the col-
lateral diminishes so that the expected overcollat-
eralization ratio cannot be maintained, the lender
can seize the collateral (in accordance with prior
agreement) and sell it immediately to avoid a loss.
With overcollateralization, even slippage during a
ﬂash crash should not lead to a loss on the lender’s
part. If the process of liquidation is achieved more
eﬃciently and quickly, some lenders can even af-
ford to oﬀer a lower overcollateralization rate e.g.
at just 110% [32]. Accordingly, ‘bad debt’ as we
traditionally understand it does not really occur as
such in decentralized ﬁnance. Given the nature of
contracts in advanced blockchain systems (known
as Smart Contracts [33, 34]), theoretically they are

completely binding and frictionless to execute.

In terms of economic incentives, some borrowers
may be willing to put down collateral because they
expect the value of them to go up in the future. So
they do not want to sell the collateral at the current
price. And yet, while ‘holding’ the cryptocurrency
for the longer term, if the asset is deposited as col-
lateral, the loan gives them instant liquidity, which
may allow them to reinvest further into the mar-
ket via leverage. This is part of the reason why
they are willing to pay for the loan interest. In this
sense, at least part of the savings interest ultimately
comes from the expected growth of the cryptocur-
rency market, even though the savers do not have
to partake into the market speculation directly in
order to enjoy the interest as income.

However, as of the time of writing, the interest rate
for borrowing and lending tends not to exceed 10%
annual rate [35]. This is already far higher than
current ﬁat interest rates.
In fact, this is on par
with, or just outperforms in some cases, most other
major forms of low-risk investments, like national
bonds, pension accounts, etc. And if one is to be
paid back in stablecoins, the risks involved are like-
wise relatively small. However, one caveat is that it
is unclear if borrowers would be willing to pay high
interest during a bear market. Importantly, as we
will discuss below, it may also be possible to gener-
ate stable interests at as high as 20% annual rate,
by capitalizing on other sources of revenue besides
anticipated market growth.

3 Fixed-Rate Lending Protocols and

Derivatives

One other issue in treating lending interest as sta-
ble income is that until recently, in decentralized ﬁ-
nance, borrowing and lending interest rates tended
to ﬂuctuate ﬂexibly according to market conditions.
However, ﬁxed-rate lending protocols are now avail-
able [36]. The key idea here is that we can trade the
value of a loan on the market. That is, if a token
is to give its holder the right to be paid $100, as a
settlement of a loan, at a certain future date, then
the token itself could be traded at a certain price.
Assuming one generally prefers money right now
over money in the future, one could probably only
be willing to buy this token at a discount. How

3

deep that discount is, in turn, should depend on
when the loan matures. For loans that are to be
settled further in the future, buyers may be willing
to buy such a token only at a deeper discount. That
is to say, the interest for longer-term loans should
be higher. By setting up automated markets for
these tokens [37], one can work out the general in-
terest rates for loans for diﬀerent durations - what
is sometimes called a yield curve [38]. This curve is
not entirely ﬁxed in the long run. But it can allow
relatively stable predictions to be made within a
certain timeframe.

The token described above is essentially a bond.
Speciﬁcally, it is what is called a zero-coupon bond,
meaning that the bond itself generates no interests
or other additional beneﬁts; the attractiveness is
just that it may be bought at a current price lower
than the eventual loan settlement.

In traditional ﬁnancial terms, bonds are a kind of
derivatives, which are simply contracts that ‘de-
rive’ their value based on some other asset. Some
other types of derivatives include options for buy-
ing a certain asset at a certain price X at a certain
future date. The holder may exercise the option
only if the price turns out to be favorable. This
could be useful, for example, for hedging purposes.
That is, given that a party is obligated to fulﬁl a
transaction in the future in a particular currency,
such as to pay up for some consumed services. The
party could end up suﬀering an unexpected loss if
the price of the currency goes up. By holding the
option token mentioned above, the party can be
sure that the actual total cost would not exceed a
certain point; if the price of the currency goes up
above expectation, one can then exercise the option
to buy the currency at the agreed price X, making
a proﬁt that would exactly compensate for the loss.

Notably, the derivatives market in the traditional
ﬁnancial world is large, in which the most traded
type of derivatives are interest rate swaps. The
trade volume for these alone are on the order of 10
times larger than the stock market [39]. These in-
struments allow two parties to trade on the future
yield of an underlying asset. This can be useful for
turning ﬂoating interest rate incomes into a ﬁxed-
rate income, or vice versa. For example, if I have
lent out money to someone who is to pay me back at
whatever current ﬁat interest rate is, I may be able

to ﬁnd a third party to swap my interest income
into a ﬁxed rate. The third party may demand a
lump sum, or may only oﬀer a relatively low ﬁxed
rate. But if the deal is made, the third party will
absorb the variability in future changes in ﬁat in-
terest rates.

We will return to interest rate swaps in section 8.
For now, what is important is that this sets the
context for a type of derivative that is unique to
decentralized ﬁnance, and is key to the problem of
generating stable income.

4 Staking Derivatives

In a PoS network, staking derivatives are tokens
that can be generated when one lends money to
validators to allow them to qualify for the job of ap-
proving transactions [40, 41]. Without such tokens,
there will be a number of risks involved in staking.
The ﬁrst is due to the fact that staking generally
requires locking in the staked currency for a ﬁxed
period, typically up to a few weeks, during which
the validators are considered qualiﬁed for the role
(by demonstrating that they have enough stake).
If the currency drops in value over this time, the
lender may not be able to ‘unstake’ fast enough,
i.e. to extract the money back from the validator,
to stop the losses. The second is that if the valida-
tor fails to do the job correctly, such as not being
present frequently enough to approve new transac-
tions on time, there will be penalties, i.e. part of
the staked currency will be ‘slashed’.

By having staking derivatives, it addresses the ﬁrst
problem by making the staked value essentially liq-
uid. The staking derivative can be the contract
allowing whomever holding the token to claim the
staked currency, as the time matures. Therefore,
by trading the staking derivative, one is essentially
selling oﬀ the loan to the validator to someone else,
in exchange for instant liquidity. As diﬀerent peo-
ple may have diﬀerent speculations on the future
value of the staked currency, general market mech-
anisms will determine its current price. Depending
on the nature of the contract, the risk of slashing
can also be taken into account.

Currently, not all PoS networks oﬀer staking
derivatives, at least not natively. However, the con-
cept behind is straightforward and attractive, and

4

we expect implementation and adoption to occur
widely in the near future. As we will see in the
next section, most relevant to the protocols for the
generation of high stable interest is the fact that
these staking derivatives can be used as collaterals
for borrowing money.

5 Staking Fees as Stable Interest

Because staking is essential for a PoS ledger system
to maintain its integrity, staking fees on the order
of 10% annual rate or higher are typically oﬀered to
incentivize stakers [42]. Importantly, these fees are
relatively stable. Depending on how the derivative
contract is set up, the fee can go entirely towards
the holder of the relevant staking derivative.
In
the Anchor protocol [43], one can put down staking
derivatives as collateral, for borrowing money in a
stable currency. Instead of forfeiting all the staking
fees, the borrower can continue to earn a portion of
it. The exact percentage of this split is not a con-
stant, as we will explain in the next section. But
for illustration we can assume that this split will be
1:5, meaning the borrower gets to retain 1/6 of the
staking fees earned. That means they give up 5/6
of the staking fees yield, in exchange of the instant
liquidity provided by having the loan. (Nominally,
the ‘splitting’ is more complex in the Anchor pro-
tocol, in that the borrower pays an interest, and
receives certain tokens of value, ANC, in return.
But the sum total of the transaction is equivalent
to losing part but not all of the staking fees earned,
and for simplicity we will continue to conceptualize
and present it this way.)

Like other lending protocols discussed in section 2,
the Anchor protocol thereby also functions a bit
like a bank in a traditional ﬁnancial system. To ac-
cumulate a pool of deposited money for lending to
borrowers, it accepts savings in a stable currency
from savers. Because it takes a split of the stak-
ing fees from the borrower’s collaterals, that can
be used to contribute towards the interests to be
paid to the savers. Using the example above of a
1:5 split of the staking fees between the borrowers
and the protocol, at an overcollateralization ratio
of 200%, the maximum aﬀordable interest rate can
be as high as 167% the staking fee itself; each dol-
lar borrowed attract twice as much worth of collat-
eral, which in turn attracts 5/6 of the staking fees

per collateral unit (5/6 x 2 = 167%). This is why
the Anchor protocol can oﬀer such competitive in-
terest rates, currently at about 20% annual rate,
given that the staking yield is at 12% on the na-
tive LUNA network [22] for staking (12% x 167%
≈ 20%). In other words, it exploits a source of in-
come that is not available in traditional ﬁnancial
systems, and is unique to PoS networks: staking
fees.

But if the interest ultimately comes from staking
fees, why do savers not stake the money themselves
and earn the staking fees directly? Or, assuming
some savers may lack the technical knowhow and
familiarity with cryptocurrencies to engage in such
activity, why does the savings protocol (such as An-
chor) not directly stake the savers’ money on their
behalf, and use the generated staking fees to pay
the interest? Why do we need to involve the bor-
rowers at all?

There are several advantages in doing so. The
ﬁrst is that staking is inherently risky, as explained
brieﬂy in the last section. During the period of
staking, the value of the staked currency may ﬂuc-
tuate. Also, if the savings protocol collects money
from many savers, and proceeds to stake the entire
pool of money, this may also create an unhealthy
situation for the staked network. Ultimately, the
PoS consensus mechanisms work well when there
are many diﬀerent independent stakeholders, all in-
centivized to make honest and reliable decisions,
none of whom are ‘too big to fail’. If all the valida-
tors are chosen and supported by a single source of
money, the security of the network could be com-
promised [41]. By having borrowers who indepen-
dently make their staking decisions, and contribute
staking derivatives voluntarily as collaterals, the
risks and control are both diluted over many indi-
viduals. Because the loans are overcollateralized,
the protocol itself is protected against the risks
of defaults or unexpected falls in the value of the
staked currency.

Importantly, another key advantage is that because
loans are overcollateralized, if the split of staking
fees mostly go towards the protocol rather than
the borrower, this leads to higher staking yield
than would have been achievable via direct stak-
ing (167% in the example above).

5

6 Stabilization Mechanisms

7 Some Caveats

But the scenario of always being able to oﬀer sav-
ings interest rates as high as staking fees yield is an
unrealistic ideal. It assumes that all of the savings
deposited by savers will be successfully loaned to
borrowers. In reality, borrower demands ﬂuctuate.
If the terms of the loans are suﬃciently favorable,
enough borrowing should happen. It is understand-
able that borrowers will ﬁnd a lower overcollater-
alization ratio attractive, as it allows them to bor-
row a higher amount with the same collateral size.
But not maintaining a high overcollateralization ra-
tio would mean that the protocol is exposed to a
higher level of risks, so the room for maneuver in
this regard is not unlimited.

This leaves the other parameter, the ratio for the
split of the staking fees, as the primary leverage for
regulatory control. In the Anchor protocol, when
there is insuﬃcient borrowing, the split changes so
that the borrower can keep a relatively higher por-
tion of the staking fee; when enough of the savings
are successfully loaned out, this split changes in the
other direction so that an increased amount of the
staking fee goes towards the savers.

It is possible that depending on the availability of
other borrowing opportunities in the market, even
at a very favorable split of the staking fees there
may not be enough borrowing demand. Some other
lenders may oﬀer a lower interest rate; some are
already oﬀering 0% [32]. Others may also be able
to oﬀer a lower overcollateralization ratio. We will
discuss more about these possible competitions in
the next section.

As such, borrower demand will necessarily ﬂuctu-
ate over diﬀerent market conditions. This is why
the current Anchor interest rate for savings is set
at a few percentage points below expected staking
fees income. This allows the extra income to go
into a reserve. So if future staking fees income is to
fall, the interest rate for savings does not have to
change immediately without suﬃcient warning to
the savers. By using the money from the reserve,
the interest rate can be maintained temporarily
even if staking fees income cannot sustain the rate
in the longer run.

At the time of writing, the initially oﬀered 20% an-
nual rate Anchor interest rate has been maintained
around the same level successfully since inception
earlier this year (2021). Notably, even during the
market crash in May 2021 when the price of Bitcoin
dropped by over 50%, the Anchor rate sustained at
around 18% which was within the expected limit.
It has been suggested that this highly competitive
rate may become a new industry standard [44].

However, staking derivatives are a relatively new
type of ﬁnancial instrument. The market is still
at an early stage of development, with new trends
emerging rapidly. At the time of writing, Anchor
only accepts staking derivatives from the native
Luna network as collaterals. Although there are
plans to accept staking derivatives from other ma-
jor PoS networks in the near future, it may be more
diﬃcult to fully anticipate what that would entail.
One reason is that staking derivative tokens gener-
ated by staking the native Luna currency are per-
haps not so widely accepted as collateral for loans
yet. Therefore, holders of these derivative tokens
do not have many other options for generating im-
mediate liquidity via borrowing.

But if this general protocol design is to scale up,
and to accept other staking derivatives as collat-
erals, one has to face the market competition of-
fered by other lenders. As mentioned in the last
section, some other lenders may be able to aﬀord
taking a higher level of risk, by requiring a rela-
tively marginal overcollateralization ratio as low as
just 110% [32]. At such a tight margin, should the
value of the staked currency suddenly drop sub-
stantially during a ﬂash crash, one would have to
seize the collateral and sell it very quickly to avoid a
loss. The Liquity protocol [32], for instance, is able
to do so because of a more eﬃcient and automated
liquidation process supported by an internal liquid-
ity pool. Furthermore, they are also able to oﬀer
zero interest rate for the borrowers. Currently Liq-
uity only accepts Ethereum (not its staked deriva-
tives) as collateral. But it is conceivable that sim-
ilar forms of competition may soon come into play
for other major cryptocurrencies, as well as their
staking derivatives.

According to one analysis [45], the Anchor proto-

6

col may do particularly well during a bear market.
On the savings side, this seems intuitive; saving
demands should increase as riskier investment op-
portunities do not look promising. However, the
borrower demands are again more diﬃcult to pre-
dict. In a mild downturn, it is possible that some
‘HODLers’ may be more inclined to stake their
cryptocurrencies, to wait for the expected market
recovery. But if the market is perceived to be in a
strong downward trend, or if it is highly volatile,
fewer people may be willing to stake.

Importantly, the main motivation for borrowing
may be to create leverage for further investment.
In a downturn, the risk of liquidation (as one fails
to maintain the overcollateralization ratio, such as
during a ﬂash crash) may render this rather unap-
pealing. Accordingly, since May 2021, the Anchor
Protocol have had to oﬀer extremely generous stak-
ing fee splits to attract borrowing. At such splits,
even if borrowing demand is high, the earned fees
cannot fully support the high interests paid out to
savers. That is because the income of the proto-
col is just a multiplicative product of total staking
derivative deposited as collateral and the fees split
earned per collateral unit. As such, in July 2021,
external funds had to be injected into the reserve in
order to sustain the high savings interest rate [46].

Despite these caveats, like many others [44, 45], we
agree that Anchor is a very timely product, with
elegant protocol design and stimulating foresight.
Below we outline some areas of further develop-
ment, for achieving similar goals.

8 Diversiﬁcation, Interest Rates

Swaps, and Tranching

As reviewed so far, the key idea behind the gener-
ation of highly competitive interest rates in decen-
tralized ﬁnance is to make use of the staking fees
as a source of income for savings. In section 4 we
mentioned some advantages of not directly staking
the savings, and only receiving staking yield via the
lending market. However, there may also be advan-
tages in directly engaging with generating income
with the deposited savings, rather than lending the
money out to borrowers. One such advantage is the
economy of scale.

For example, the Yearn protocol [47] systematically

searches for maximal gain with a combination of
lending interest rates, staking fees, leveraged rein-
vestments of the borrowed money, etc , and can
achieve much higher return than simple staking
strategies. It takes considerable eﬀort to keep track
of the changing fee rates, availability of new yield-
earning products, etc. But for a decentralized or-
ganization at the scale of a bank, the overhead cost
incurred is more likely to be worthwhile.

One lucrative way of generating passive income is
liquidity pool yield farming [48]. In decentralized
ﬁnance, in order to create a market to exchange,
rather than relying on a traditional central market
maker, one needs to create a pool of funds to al-
low trades to happen instantly and smoothly. By
contributing to such a liquidity pool, one earns fees
in return, when transactions take place. In other
words, for an automated market to be able to allow
trades between two currencies X and Y, that mech-
anism needs to have enough ﬂowing infantry of both
currencies. But merely putting down these curren-
cies into the mechanism, one is thereby facilitating
trades. So, in a way not unlike staking, one earns
the deserved reward through the process; accord-
ingly this kind of ‘investment ‘ is sometimes called
liquidity pool ‘staking’, even though it is distinct
from the type staking in PoS networks mentioned
earlier.

The fees one can earn in joining liquidity pools are
typically on the order of under 10% annual rate.
However, when a new pool is formed, often there
are extra incentives to attract initial endowment,
and those can be extremely lucrative, sometimes
reaching over 100% annual rate. The process of
earning these high annual rates is sometimes called
yield farming, as one is essentially investing into a
new pool hoping that it would grow as expected,
to allow yields to be ‘harvested’.

As expected, at such high annual rates there are
also risks involved. The incentives in yield farm-
ing are typically given in the native currency of the
protocol, which may not turn out to be so valuable
in the long run if the protocol does not turn out
to be successful. Besides that, similar to staking,
the value of the assets deposited into the liquidity
pool may ﬂuctuate in time. Besides simple depreci-
ation, when the balance of the two deposited assets
changes (e.g. one increases in value while the other

7

does not), this can create another kind of deﬁcit
known as impermanent loss [49, 50].

Despite these risks, there are arguments to be made
that as a bank-like organization, these are invest-
ment opportunities worth pursuing. One reason is
that at a large enough scale, one can methodically
and eﬀectively make use of insurance and hedging
instruments. For example, earlier in section 3 we
mentioned the use of interest rate swaps to turn a
variable-rate future income into ﬁxed-rate income.
In decentralized ﬁnance, protocols like Horizon [51]
are also creating opportunities for doing so. Even in
the absence of a ﬂuid interest rates market, Horizon
makes use of game theoretic and auction-like mech-
anisms to facilitate the swaps. This way, one can
opt to take a smaller but ﬁxed yield from farming
liquidity pools.

To manage risks, protocols like Barnbridge [52] and
Saﬀron [53] also allow one to break down an invest-
ment or loan into ‘tranches’, each representing dif-
ferent risk levels. For example, a ‘senior’ tranche
may lead to a lower yield overall, but the rate will
be more guaranteed. A bank-like organization can
select the appropriate risk level given the reserve
level at the moment, with the guiding principle that
higher risks are only aﬀordable when there is suﬃ-
cient excess in reserve.

These strategies are not mutually exclusive with
extracting staking fees via borrowers’ collateral,
which is admittedly virtually risk-free. That is
because when there is enough borrowing demand,
essentially the borrowers absorb most of the risk
involved. However, these riskier and higher yield
strategies can be employed in parallel, especially
when borrowing demand is low. As with compet-
itive banks in the real world, ﬁnancial institutions
typically participate in various activities including
both investment and lending. If the goal is to give
savers the highest stable interest rates at minimal
risks, an algorithm that explicitly optimizes for the
ideal combination of diﬀerent strategies to achieve
this goal should be in principle more advantageous
than ﬁxating onto a single strategy a priori.

9 Towards Universal Basic Income

tive of common household savers. Currently, few of
them have access to investment opportunities with
such stable high yield. However, the availability of
these products will naturally also be accessible by
the wealthier, seasoned investors too. Therefore,
are they actually going to help the common house-
hold savers, or are they just going to make the rich
richer still?

There are perhaps reasons to be optimistic (from
an egalitarian perspective). The ﬁrst is that even
if these products do allow the wealthier to beneﬁt,
the margin of this beneﬁt is unlikely to be as high
as that for the common savers. That is because cur-
rently the savvy and capital-rich investors already
have access to various high return investment op-
tions, including high-entry, actively managed hedge
funds.

Secondly, with social and keyless wallets [54], one
ultimate goal is to allow everyday smartphone users
to be able to access decentralized ﬁnance applica-
tions securely with ease. For many of these new
adopters, having access to such high stable return
investment options will likely help level the playing
ﬁeld.

However, we must also acknowledge that it is not
easy to foresee a future where such high-yield, low-
risk products will become commonplace. The im-
pact of this for traditional ﬁnancial products will
lead to a chain of consequences that would ulti-
mately depend on relatively unpredictable factors,
including possible governmental intervention. Ac-
cordingly, we cannot expect that the lofty vision
of universal basic income will naturally material-
ize out of market forces. Rather, we should see the
availability of these new decentralized ﬁnance prod-
ucts as providing opportunities for such an agenda.

For example, there are already projects in the cryp-
tocurrency space which aim at providing universal
basic income to those who can prove their iden-
tity [55]. Capitalizing on the high yield generated
by the Anchor, the Angel protocol [56] also allows
charity donations to become virtually perceptual
(as supported by the future yields). These may
provide the platform for some universal basic in-
come schemes to be implemented.

We started by considering the high stable interests
of decentralized ﬁnance protocols from the perspec-

As a longer-term vision, radical markets [57] on
blockchain can also help to enforce overall fairness.

8

Because of the permanent and immutable nature of
transaction records in cryptocurrency ecosystems,
taxation will eventually become automatically en-
forced, with evasion becoming extremely diﬃcult.
Importantly this can also open up venues for novel
and interesting ways of redistributing wealth. For
example, under a Harberger taxation scheme [57],
the value of a property can be self-assessed, i.e. de-
termined by the owner. The owner may be incen-
tivized to not to overvalue the property, in order
to minimize taxation. At the same time, trans-
action of the ownership can be made mandatory
if any buyer oﬀers a price above the self-assessed
value. Therefore the owner should also not under-
value the property. With a well-deﬁned true value
to the owner, properties can be ﬂuidly and fairly
transferred. Economic analyses have shown that
this can motivate and orchestrate the entire com-
munity into maximizing common good, while main-
taining market eﬃciency. Similar mechanisms can
also be implemented to implement highly progres-
sive and quadratic wealth redistribution.

Importantly, even in the shorter-term, there is also
an argument to be made that allowing the rich to
become richer should not always be a concern, even
for equalitarian purposes. An individual’s ﬁxed or
basic income may be dwarfed by the wealth of oth-
ers, if such income is paid in a currency that is sub-
ject to inﬂation. If the rich can oﬀer higher prices
for goods, amid competition there may be a con-
cern that one’s income may lose purchasing power.
However, this would not be an issue if the basic in-
come is to be paid out in a currency that is truly
resistant to inﬂation. The US dollar is supposedly
(loosely) pegged to the prices of goods. However,
there has been criticism that the consumer price
index (CPI) provided by the government is biased
towards goods that do not truly reﬂect the qual-
ity of life of an average individual [58]. Currently,
there are projects such as Frax’s stable peg and in-
dex which aim to rectify this situation [59, 60, 61],
to create a stable currency in decentralized ﬁnance
pegged not to the inﬂation-prone US dollar, but to
a more meaningful representation of the true cost
of living.

Imagine if a stable yield of as high as over 10% per
annum is to be paid out in this inﬂation-resistant
currency. With such a product, to support the
universal basic income for a person’s lifetime, one

would need a few times the individual’s annual liv-
ing cost, as a one-time endowment. This is regard-
less of the future conditions of the economy, or how
the wealthy may become richer - if the currency
truly reﬂects the cost of living at the moment, in
a stable peg. This could be the basis on which
a meaningful universal basic income can be made
feasible.

10 Closing Remarks

We have reviewed the logic of how the generation of
a stable savings interest rate at as high as 20% an-
nual rate is possible. In traditional ﬁnancial invest-
ments, such a high and stable rate is above what
even some of the best investors can achieve these
days [62]. The key innovation here is to capitalize
on the unique features of decentralized networks
and lending marketplaces. In particular, ordinary
savers can participate in multiple network stakings
and ﬁxed-rate saving products.

It is important to recognize that this is not a tech-
nical sleight of hand. The economics behind it are
straightforward. Through staking, one contributes
to a process that allows highly eﬃcient and ro-
bust ﬁnancial services and products to be deliv-
ered, along with other applications [63, 64] of the
blockchain system. Outside of the context of net-
work staking, the same concept applies for liquidity
pools, which allow automated decentralized mar-
kets to take place. To capture the growth of the
cryptocurrency market, one can also turn these into
relatively ﬁxed-rate future incomes via interest rate
swapping mechanisms, and thereby use the income
to further ﬁnance stable income for the savers.

In the traditional ﬁnancial world, some bankers
may lose part of their bonuses during economic
downturns. But it rarely cuts into their base salary
level, because their services are supposedly still val-
ued. Likewise, even as the cryptomarket sees ad-
justments, staking fees in decentralized networks
are here to stay, for staking contributions to the
automation of jobs akin to those done by bankers
and corporate lawyers. The very premise of decen-
tralized ﬁnance is that everybody can participate
fairly in the market mechanisms. Unlike in the tra-
ditional ﬁnancial system, in decentralized ﬁnance
everyone can be a ‘banker’ – even if only passively,

9

indirectly, on a smaller scale. This is the economic
basis of how we can possibly provide the household
savers with meaningful basic wealth.

[9] G. Guilford. U.s. inﬂation is highest in 13 years
as prices surge 5%. (Wall Street Journal, East-
ern ed. 2021).

11 Acknowledgements

We thank Sahil Dewan, Giv Parvaneh, and Boris
Polania for helpful discussions and comments. HL
has previously received consulting fees and research
funding from Harmony.

References

[1] M. Gordon. What is the average interest rate
for savings accounts? https://www.bankra
te.com/banking/savings/average-savings
-interest-rates/.

[2] U. Bindseil. Financial stability implications of
a prolonged period of low interest rates. (BIS,
2018).

[3] R. Wolverson. Fed-style money printing is
fueling inﬂation in poor countries. https:
//qz.com/1970022/fed-style-money-pri
nting-is-fueling-inflation-in-poor-c
ountries/.

[4] FRB.

Speech, bernanke–some thoughts on
monetary policy in japan. https://www.fe
deralreserve.gov/boarddocs/speeches/20
03/20030531/default.htm/.

[5] S. Kelton. The deﬁcit myth: Modern mone-
tary theory and how to build a better economy.
(Hachette, UK, 2020).

[6] Thomas I Palley. Money, ﬁscal policy, and in-
terest rates: A critique of modern monetary
theory. Review of Political Economy, 27(1):1–
23, 2015.

[7] Constantino Bresciani-Turroni.

The Eco-
nomics of Inﬂation: A study of currency de-
preciation in post-war Germany, 1914-1923.
Routledge, 2013.

[8] Miguel Kiguel and Pablo A Neumeyer.

In-
ﬂation and seignorage: The case of ar-
gentina. Journal of Money Credit and Bank-
ing, 27(3):672–82, 1995.

[10] Cimini. K. Real estate prices soar during pan-
demic, climbing 25% in parts of california.
(CAP Radio), 2020.

[11] P. Domm. How the pandemic drove massive
stock market gains, and what happens next.
https://www.cnbc.com/2020/12/30/how-th
e-pandemic-drove-massive-stock-marke
t-gains-and-what-happens-next.html.

[12] R. Jabotinsky, H. Sarel. How the pandemic
drove massive stock market gains, and what
happens next. https://clsbluesky.law.c
olumbia.edu/2021/03/26/how-the-covid
-19-pandemic-affected-the-cryptocurr
ency-market/.

[13] Ender Demir, Mehmet Huseyin Bilgin,
Gokhan Karabulut, and Asli Cansin Doker.
The relationship between cryptocurrencies
and covid-19 pandemic. Eurasian Economic
Review, 10(3):349–360, 2020.

[14] Samuel Asumadu Sarkodie, Maruf Yakubu
Ahmed, and Phebe Asantewaa Owusu. Covid-
19 pandemic improves market
signals of
cryptocurrencies–evidence from bitcoin, bit-
coin cash, ethereum, and litecoin. Finance Re-
search Letters, page 102049, 2021.

[15] Sunny King and Scott Nadal. Ppcoin: Peer-to-
peer crypto-currency with proof-of-stake. self-
published paper, August, 19(1), 2012.

[16] P Rajitha Nair and D Ramya Dorai. Evalu-
ation of performance and security of proof of
work and proof of stake using blockchain. In
2021 Third International Conference on Intel-
ligent Communication Technologies and Vir-
tual Mobile Networks (ICICV), pages 279–283.
IEEE, 2021.

[17] Sam M Werner, Daniel Perez, Lewis Gudgeon,
Ariah Klages-Mundt, Dominik Harz, and
William J Knottenbelt. Sok: Decentralized ﬁ-
nance (deﬁ). arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.08778,
2021.

[18] Tether. https://tether.to/.

10

[19] MakerDAO. https://makerdao.com/white

[32] https://www.liquity.org/.

paper.

[20] Binance USD Whitepaper. https://www.al
lcryptowhitepapers.com/binance-usd-w
hitepaper/.

[21] D. Kwon. Announcing terrausd (ust)— the
interchain stablecoin. https://medium.com/t
erra-money/announcing-terrausd-ust-t
he-interchain-stablecoin-53eab0f8f0ac.

[22] Evan Kereiakes, Marco Di Maggio Do Kwon,
and Nicholas Platias. Terra money: Stability
and adoption, 2019.

[23] London block exchange launches ﬁrst-ever
gbp-backed stablecoin. https://tokenist
.com/london-block-exchange-launches-
first-ever-gbp-backed-stablecoin/.

[24] Amani Moin, Kevin Sekniqi, and Emin Gun
Sirer. Sok: A classiﬁcation framework for sta-
In International Conference
blecoin designs.
on Financial Cryptography and Data Security,
pages 174–197. Springer, 2020.

[25] Jeremy Clark,

Didem Demirag,

and
Seyedehmahsa Mahsa Moosavi. Sok: Demys-
tifying stablecoins. Communications of the
ACM, Forthcoming, 2019.

[26] B. Mutual. Bridge mutual whitepaper v1. ht
tps://bridgemutual.medium.com/bridge-m
utual-whitepaper-v1-released-6004fe1
58c5a, 2021.

[27] Unleased ﬁnance documentation. https://do
cumentation.unslashed.finance/, 2021.

[28] Robert Leshner and Geoﬀrey Hayes. Com-
pound: The money market protocol. White
Paper, 2019.

[29] Aave. https://aave.com/.

[30] Massimo Bartoletti, James Hsin-yu Chiang,
and Alberto Lluch-Lafuente. Sok: Lending
pools in decentralized ﬁnance. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2012.13230, 2020.

[31] Trust Token. Introducing trueﬁ, the deﬁ pro-
tocol for uncollateralized lending.
https:
//blog.trusttoken.com/introducing-tr
uefi-the-defi-protocol-for-uncollate
ralized-lending-9bfd6594a48, 2020.

[33] Massimo Bartoletti and Livio Pompianu. An
empirical analysis of smart contracts: plat-
In
forms, applications, and design patterns.
International conference on ﬁnancial cryp-
tography and data security, pages 494–509.
Springer, 2017.

[34] Vitalik Buterin et al. A next-generation smart
contract and decentralized application plat-
form. white paper, 3(37), 2014.

[35] Crypto lending rates - earn crypto interest by
deﬁ lending. https://defirate.com/lend/.

[36] Rai. R. Fixed income protocols-the next wave
of deﬁ innovation. https://messari.io/art
icle/fixed-income-protocols-the-next
-wave-of-defi-innovation.

[37] Dan Robinson and Allan Niemerg. The yield
protocol: On-chain lending with interest rate
discovery. URl: https://yield. is/Yield. pdf,
2020.

[38] J. Purdy. The yield curve cometh: Why ﬁxed-
rate loans in crypto matter. https://messar
i.io/article/the-yield-curve-cometh-
why-fixed-rate-loans-in-crypto-matter,
2020.

[39] https://www.icmagroup.org/Regulatory-P
olicy-and-Market-Practice/Secondary-
Markets/bond-market-size/.

[40] G Konstantopoulos. On staking pools and
staking derivatives. https://research.par
adigm.xyz/staking, 2021.

[41] Tarun Chitra and Alex Evans. Why stake
when you can borrow? Available at SSRN
3629988, 2020.

[42] J. Major. Cryptocurrency staking — deﬁnitive
guide 2021 — ada, xtz, dot, algo, eth. https:
//finbold.com/guide/cryptocurrency-sta
king-guide/, 2021.

[43] https://docs.anchorprotocol.com/.

[44] N. Mansor. Resurrecting the saver: Walking
tall with anchor. https://arringtonxrpcapi
tal.com/2021/03/17/resurrecting-the-
saver-walking-tall-with-anchor/, 2021.

11

[62] S. Ro. The truth about warren buﬀett’s in-
vestment track record. https://www.yahoo.
com/now/the-truth-about-warren-buffe
tts-investment-track-record-morning-
brief-113829049.html.

[63] N. Miller. How non-fungible tokens will be
present at events and how to start applying
them now. https://www.specialevents.co
m/event-tools/how-non-fungible-token
s-will-be-present-events-and-how-sta
rt-applying-them-now.

[64] Davinci. https://davinci.gallery/.

[45] C.Y. Sin. What is anchor protocol (anc)? ht
tps://www.theancientbabylonians.com/wh
at-is-anchor-protocol-anc/, 2021.

[46] Bolstering anchor’s sustainability. https://
agora.terra.money/t/bolstering-anchors
-sustainability/1516, 2021.

[47] https://yearn.finance.

[48] What is yield farming in decentralized ﬁnance
(deﬁ)? https://academy.binance.com/en
/articles/what-is-yield-farming-in-d
ecentralized-finance-defi.

[49] Jiahua Xu, Nazariy Vavryk, Krzysztof Paruch,
and Simon Cousaert.
Sok: Decentral-
ized exchanges (dex) with automated mar-
ket maker (amm) protocols. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2103.12732, 2021.

[50] Andreas A Aigner and Gurvinder Dhaliwal.
Impermanent loss and risk pro-
arXiv preprint

Uniswap:
ﬁle of a liquidity provider.
arXiv:2106.14404, 2021.

[51] https://horizonprotocol.com/.

[52] https://barnbridge.com/.

[53] https://medium.com/saffron-finance/int
roduction-to-saffron-9a46f2693612.

[54] https://docs.harmony.one/home/network/
wallets/browser-extensions-wallets/o
ne-wallet.

[55] https://www.proofofhumanity.id/.

[56] Angel protocol: The gift (that keeps on giv-
ing). https://eventornado.com/submissi
on/the-gift-that-keeps-on-giving.

[57] Eric A Posner and E Glen Weyl. Radical Mar-

kets. Princeton University Press, 2019.

[58] https://www.ssa.gov/history/reports/bo

skinrpt.html.

[59] Olympus - the decentralized reserve currency.

https://www.olympusdao.finance/.

[60] Frax cryptocurrency - the ﬁrst fractional-
reserve, algorithmic stablecoin. https://fr
ax.finance/.

[61] Reﬂexer labs. https://reflexer.finance/.

12

