Barizon & La Rovere                                                    Smart Cities: Potentialities and Challenges in a Context of Sharing Economy 

SMART CITIES: POTENTIALITIES AND CHALLENGES IN A CONTEXT OF 
SHARING ECONOMY 

Ben Hur Monteiro Barizon, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, ben-hur.barizon@pped.ie.ufrj.br 

Renata Lèbre La Rovere, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, renata@ie.ufrj.br 

Abstract:  The purpose of the present paper is to show how blockchain and IoT technologies can 
benefit smart city projects, which tend to spread in the context of the sharing economy. 
The article also aims to describe the challenges and potentialities of smart city projects. 
It  was  found  that  technology  platforms  can  serve  as  a  strategy  to  build  the  basis  for 
product development (goods and services) and technology-based innovation. 

Keywords:  Smart  Cities;  Internet  of  Things,  Service  Innovation;  Blockchain;  Technology 

Platforms; Sharing Economy. 

1.  INTRODUCTION 
Smart cities are designed to create efficient and sustainable urban spaces that meet the demands of 
the  citizens  in  an  inclusive  way  using  tools  and  technological  management  systems  based  on 
Information and Communication Technologies (ICT). The recent development of ICT, particularly 
blockchain  systems,  the  Internet  of  things  (IoT),  and  communication  networks,  can  improve  the 
quality  of  life,  providing  more  efficient  infrastructure  and  generating  positive  impact  on  other 
indicators related to the innovation processes described by ISO standard 37122. 

The sharing economy is highly compatible with the smart city model. This is because the adoption 
of key ICT and of blockchain and IoT systems consolidates a new model of construction and renewal 
of urban spaces. Smart city applications are aimed at improving the quality of life, but the outcome 
of the implementation of this model also includes the generation of new businesses, which impacts 
the economy as well. (McKinsey & Company, 2019). Moreover, it should be noted that even though 
the sharing economy precedes the aforementioned technologies (La Rovere & Punzo, 2019), the 
advent of sharing platforms has accelerated the spread of this economic model. 

The  aim  of  the  present  article  is  to  identify  how  smart  city  projects,  which  use  blockchain 
technologies and IoT, can accelerate the development of a sharing economy in urban systems. Thus, 
we intend to contextualize and show how smart cities can restructure city life and improve urban 
centers  with  innovative  goods  services.  To  this  end,  section  2  describes  the  concept  of  sharing 
economy. In section 3, we will discuss how valuable blockchain and IoT technologies are for city 
projects. Section 4 presents the potentialities and challenges of smart city models in a context of 
social and economic transformations related to the sharing economy. In section 5, a conclusion and 
a synthesis of the results will be presented, as well as the implications for future studies.   

2.  SHARING ECONOMY 
It is important to note that there is no consensus regarding the definition of the sharing economy. 
The difficulty to find a single definition for this phenomenon is to some extent due to its multiple 
interpretations and to the many concepts that are often associated with it,  such as digital economy, 
gig  economy,  platform  economy,  peer  economy,  crowd  economy,  collaborative  consumption, 
among many others. (Suciu et al., 2020) 

Proceedings of the 1st Virtual Conference on Implications of Information and Digital Technologies for Development, 2021  659 
 
 
 
 
 
Barizon & La Rovere                                                    Smart Cities: Potentialities and Challenges in a Context of Sharing Economy 

La Rovere and Punzo (2019) defined the sharing economy as a phenomenon related to the growth 
of  collaborative  consumption.  The  main  features  of  this  type  of  consumption  are:  direct  user-
producer interaction; traceability, transparency and trust among agents; and customer participation. 
Tigre (2019) described the sharing economy as a recent phenomenon driven by the dissemination 
of  online  services  and  by  widespread  technology  platforms.  These  innovative  services  seek  to 
achieve hybrid synergy between the possession and the use of a product (goods or services). In other 
words, the sharing economy is a new business model aimed to meet the immediate and essential 
expectations of the user by using various resources that are idle or underused in a more dynamic 
way. Thus, the sharing economy aims to meet customers’ needs while reducing new investments. 
This  economic model is  a good fit for  a new type of consumer who values a more personalized 
experience  focused  on  their  identity  and  on  their  sense  of  community,  without  eliminating 
intermediaries  from  the  value  chain,  but  efficiently  using  new  digital  distribution  models.  The 
sharing economy is based on the development and application of ICT and on innovative services 
that can meet society’s newest purchase and consumption habits. In that vein, smart city projects 
can accelerate the dissemination of innovative services related to the sharing economy. 

In his studies on the importance of the factors of the sharing economy, Tigre (2019) states that the 
application  of  smart  cities  can  include  the  technological  platforms  that  are  used  in  the  sharing 
economy and that are the foundation of the development of products (goods and services). This new 
platform model comprises a set of standardized technologies and components, which indicates that 
sharing economy strategies may involve diverse ecosystems whose disruptive innovations promote 
new economic activities, which then can become new business models. These new business models 
may  range  from  the  selling  of  products  to  aggregate  and  more  complex  services  focused  on  the 
customer  experience,  which,  in  turn,  can  promote  disruptive  models  of  customer  service.  These 
online platforms rely mainly on the technological capabilities made available through the Internet 
and seek to facilitate and optimize the resource allocation (connecting supply and demand) through 
ICT and data processing system infrastructures, creating new and innovative organizational models. 
Structures, assets and resources can be accessed directly on the aforementioned platforms or shared 
in  a  complementary  and  competitive  way.  The  flexibility  of  the  sharing  economy  represents  an 
opportunity to achieve economies of scope, in which it is possible to adapt the supply to different 
activities, circumstances and to the needs of the demand. 

A research by Davidson and Infranca (2016) identified that sharing has become an important feature 
of  urban  systems,  since  the  society’s  needs  and  resources  have  increased.  However,  several 
implications are still not clear and transparent and, consequently, are not completely understood. In 
most large cities, sharing is a matter of necessity. Cars, bicycles, and even homes are shared, like 
numerous activities that are part of our daily lives. All of this was possible due to the extensive and 
intensive growth of communication technologies, positioning control technology (GPS), and to the 
widespread use of the Internet. Although new and innovative platforms are extensively studied by 
scholars from several research areas, there are still many fields to be explored in order to raise the 
understanding of how these platforms have changed the urban landscape, the social experience of 
living in cities, and even social interactions. 

Curtis  and  Lehner  (2019)  showed  that  even  without  a  precise  definition,  the  sharing  economy 
emphasizes  the  importance  of  ICT  systems,  which  provides  a  means  of  communication  and 
interconnection  that  can  facilitate  people's  access  to  the  products  and  services  that  drive  this 
economy.  The  authors  also  mention  how  the  sharing  economy  is  compatible  with  smart  cities’ 
processes and models as the former increases efficiency, improves the quality of life and, above all, 
promotes effective cost reduction. On the other hand, as mentioned by Suciu et al. (2020),  many 
authors  have  different  opinions  about  the  importance  of  the  sharing  economy  when  it  comes  to 
sustainability and viability. For instance, Botsman and Rogers (2011) praised the social impact of 
this economic model in urban spaces, since it promotes trust and social collaboration, whereas Belk 
(2010)  points  out  that  the  use  of  idle  capacity  in  the  sharing  economy  can  be  good  for  the 

Proceedings of the 1st Virtual Conference on Implications of Information and Digital Technologies for Development, 2021  660Barizon & La Rovere                                                    Smart Cities: Potentialities and Challenges in a Context of Sharing Economy 

environment due to the reduction in energy consumption and also to the reduction of solid and liquid 
waste, actions that support sustainability within a community. 

Other authors such as Frenken et al. (2015) and Kallis (2013) note that the sharing economy is a 
business  model  based  on  ICT  that  takes  advantage  of  loopholes  in  regulatory  norms,  once  it 
functions with unorthodox labor practices and it implements profitable or even offensive practices 
since, for the most part, workers are self-employed professionals who do not have any perks nor 
permanent contracts. 

3.  SMART CITIES, BLOCKCHAIN AND IoT 

3.1.   Blockchain 

One  of  the  main  applications  that  can  consolidate  communication  and  exchange  of  information 
within the smart cities model using ICT, is available through the use of blockchain technology. This 
communication  system,  which  is  known  worldwide  by  the  virtual  currency  application  base 
(cryptocurrencies),  being  bitcoin  one  of  the  best  known  examples,  also  represents  a  new 
communication system (transactions and proofs) in a safe way that can be implemented over the 
Internet and can even become a management model in which smart cities will be able to enjoy the 
synergy of this process in the form of an urban coordination service. The main objective is to use 
blockchain as a tool that allows the expansion of the reach and implementation of new technologies 
applied to smart cities. 

Tigre (2019) describes blockchain as a chain of blocks of data or chained data. The author states 
that blockchain technology connects chunks of content in a process that resembles a fingerprint cross 
check. In other words, information is separated into different pieces, that is, the blocks. Each new 
block of data is stored, and it contains pieces of information from the previous block in the chain 
plus  its  own  new  content.  Then,  the  new  content  is  scanned  and  cross-checked.  The  process 
continues  indefinitely  as  new  data  blocks  generate  the  next  “fingerprints”.  That  is  why  the 
technology is called blockchain; these data blocks are somewhat chained to one another. The name 
refers quite literally to the architecture of the process. Blockchain technology aims to preserve trust 
in cryptographic transactions by avoiding the centralization of these data blocks. The technology 
also eliminates the disparities that users may come across in this type of transaction. Blockchains 
could be applied to various contexts and its benefits include the creation of smart contracts, and the 
promotion of self-pay and of more efficient decision-making in smart cities, so that the obstacles 
imposed by bureaucracy are removed and wealth generation becomes less complex for the society 
as a whole. 

According to forecasts prepared by the American bank Merrill Lynch (2018), blockchain technology 
can assure that today's cities can be prepared to become, in the future, smart metropolises that will 
house a global population of 6.3 billion people by 2030. Additionally, it is worth mentioning that 
the blockchain technology generated global investments that amounted to nearly 1.3 trillion Euros 
in 2020. 

To  expand  the  scope  of  this  technology  in  synergy  with  smart  cities,  a  project  called 
Blockchain4cities (BC4C) was created by the United Nations (UN) in 2016, which was initially a 
study group with representatives from different countries to control, integrate and coordinate various 
urban services more efficiently and transparently within urban management models. In this project 
a  working  group  was  created  to  identify  examples  of  innovations  in  services  within  systems  of 
digitization, urban management and sustainability, energy efficiency, mobility, citizen participation, 
waste  treatment,  among  other  activities.  This  study  was  attended  by  26  specialists  from  several 
countries and four selected cities: Dubai (Middle East), Singapore (Asia), Chicago (America) and 
Gothenburg (Europe). The specialists were able to measure, among the main results of the research, 

Proceedings of the 1st Virtual Conference on Implications of Information and Digital Technologies for Development, 2021  661Barizon & La Rovere                                                    Smart Cities: Potentialities and Challenges in a Context of Sharing Economy 

the  potential  that  blockchain  technology  has  in  of  municipal  governance,  ensuring  security, 
flexibility, in the safe transmission of information without intermediaries, under specific conditions 
applied to urban management problems and can serve as an example to be implemented on a larger 
scales to other countries around the world. The researchers within the Blockchain4Cities - BC4C 
(2016)  project  were  able  to  measure  some  benefits  and  observe  competitive  advantages  in  the 
functioning of the cities that incorporated the blockchain system, which include: a) Connectivity  
and transparency => cities can generate interconnection with digital services (energy, mobility and 
security) using a real-time system that is open, single, transversal and accessible in the transmission 
of  data  to  citizens;  b)    Direct  Communication  =>    cities  can  eliminate  bureaucratic  and  time-
consuming  processes  (notary  offices  and  City  Halls)  allowing  a  direct  communication  without 
digital intermediaries between the public administration and citizens; c) Integrity of information => 
the use of technology allows encryption of information by sharing the data privately, securely and 
without risks of manipulation; d) Efficient management => the use of technology allows efficient 
control of resources in addition to ensuring citizen privacy in any public service. 

Xie et  al.  (2019) is  another study that highlights the potential that blockchain  technology has of 
promoting  the  development  and  of  improving  services  in  smart  cities.  The  study  compared  this 
technology  with  a  database  (shareable,  immutable,  decentralized  and  public).  The  authors  then 
mention  the  main  advantages  of  the  blockchain  system,  which  include:  a)  Decentralization      => 
Blockchain systems normally work peer-to-peer without a centralized third party; b) Pseudonym: in 
the blockchain system, each node is linked to a pseudonymous public address, keeping real-world 
identities hidden. The inherent pseudonym is suitable for cases where the users' identities must be 
kept confidential; c) Transparency: Blockchain technology allows everyone to access all transaction 
records, which makes them transparent; d) Democracy: consensus algorithms are executed by all 
decentralized nodes to reach an agreement before a block is included in the blockchain. Thus, in the 
blockchain system, decisions are made by all nodes in a peer-to-peer way, which makes it more 
democratic; e) Security: In blockchain-based decentralized systems, it is rare to have a single point 
of  failure.  Thus,  network  security  is  improved;  f)  Immutability:  In  the  blockchain  system,  all 
transactions are signed using digital signatures. In addition, data blocks are linked and protected 
through unilateral cryptographic hash functions. Any small modification generates a different hash 
and can be detected immediately, which makes the shared ledger immutable. 

3.2.  IoT (Internet of Things) 

According to the description of the Internet Society (2015), the term Internet of things (IoT) is an 
emerging  topic  of  technical,  social  and  economic  significance.  It  intends  to  cover,  among  other 
things, a universe of products (consumption, durable goods, cars and trucks, industrial and utility 
components, sensors and other everyday objects that will be connected to the Internet and have data 
analysis  resources).   IoT  was  designed  to  transform  the  way  we  work,  live  and  play.  The  study 
estimated the impact of IoT on the Internet and on the economy, and the results are impressive. In 
some cases, the estimation projected up to 100 billion devices connected to the Internet, and a global 
economic impact of over $ 11 trillion by 2025. At the same time, as it happens with any projection, 
there are significant challenges that can constraint the unrealized potential of IoT. Some limitations 
include: cyber attacks to the devices connected to the Internet, surveillance issues, and the fear that 
the privacy of citizens and corporations may be at risk. Technically, it may be possible to restrict 
these effects, but there are still other political, legal, and personal challenges that will have to be 
addressed. 

Regarding IoT, a study prepared by CISCO (2016) describes that the construction of an intelligent 
city  is  necessary,  and  the  following  aspects  are  indispensable  in  the  process:  a)  Communication 
networks; (b) intelligent sensors; (c) mobile devices. All these components will have to be part of 
this great system that will be managed by a new technology called the Internet of things (IoT) that 
will be the backbone of the construction of smart cities, which will stimulate various initiatives that 

Proceedings of the 1st Virtual Conference on Implications of Information and Digital Technologies for Development, 2021  662 
Barizon & La Rovere                                                    Smart Cities: Potentialities and Challenges in a Context of Sharing Economy 

can improve and make the city more efficient and dynamic for all the people involved. Within this 
theme, this study shows that this model brings about guidelines in which new technologies called 
smart will have to deal with some of the problems crucial in urban planning, namely: a) Safety and 
Environment  => it will be necessary to implement sensors that will monitor several different factors, 
from pollution control, water flow in the city to the verification and measurement of infrastructure 
conditions of bridges, streets, roads, signs, etc.; b)  Buildings and Edifices => it will be necessary to 
plan and monitor the initial phases of new constructions and adaptation of the old ones considering 
the innovations that can have controlled energy efficiency (lighting , energy, gas emission, water 
flow, air conditioning, etc.); c)  Urban Mobility  => With the spiked urban population growth there 
will  be  a  greater  need  that  transportation  is  efficient.  This  quality  control  can  be  carried  out  by 
sensors that are monitored in real time, in order to have integrated solutions to handle heavy traffic 
and  bottlenecks  in  urban  systems  (this  includes  the  subway,  bus,  ferry,  train,  VLT  and  new 
technologies such as driverless cars and buses or people movers); d) Public Services => In an urban 
environment, we need to focus our energy on a synergy of options that can improve the way citizens 
live. Thus, a smart network project that manages the efficient use of energy and water is fundamental 
for the development and operation of the city. 

3.3.   Smart Cities 

According to a report elaborated by the UN – World Urbanization Prospects (2014), by 2050 70% 
of the global population will be living in urban spaces, Therefore, it is necessary to build one or 
several models of smart cities that are inclusive and sustainable. The model of intelligent cities seeks 
to modify the dynamics and restructure the lives of the citizens, improving and promoting efficiency 
in the infrastructure of urban centers by supporting digital technologies. Blockchain technologies 
provide  safer  transactions  and  information  and,  in  turn,  by  using  IoT  we  will  have  more  robust, 
comprehensive and resilient connection networks, facilitating the access to basic digital services that 
respond quickly and conveniently to the society’s demands. With planning, structure, and strategic 
public  policies,  this  model  can  be  implemented  effectively  in  any  city  that  follows  the  required 
procedures and makes use of innovative and efficient technologies such as those used by blockchain 
and IoT. It is imperative to categorize the sectors involved in the application of smart cities, and the 
most promising areas to explore in the process. It is also important to explore the main applications 
of services focusing on the society’s demands, and what lessons can be learned by using this model, 
comparing  successful  cases  that  have  succeeded  coupling  public  policies  with  technological  and 
infrastructure input. 

According  to  another  study  developed  by  the  UN  (United  Nations)  for  their  “2030  Agenda  for 
Sustainable  Development”  initiative,  the  substantial  population  growth  and  the  technological 
evolution have had exponential increase, especially during the 21st century. In this scenario, urban 
spaces and the society must adapt to globalization and to the migration phenomenon that occurs in 
many countries.  Hence,  it is  indispensable that public and private managers have discussions on 
how to improve and adapt their urban and technological planning. In this context, smart cities are 
becoming more and more relevant. 

A  study  conducted  by  the  consulting  firm  McKinsey  &  Company  (2019)  showed  that  the 
intelligence of a city is  not causally related to the installation of digital models and connections, 
basic infrastructure facilities, or to the strategic and digital operationalization of cities, but rather the 
correct  use  of  all  forms  of  technology  as  tools  provide  fast  and  accurate  data  and  information 
analysis. According to the study, this is important so that public and private managers are able to 
make the best decisions to help the construction of processes that improve the quality of life of the 
population.  The research presented the most important factors that can be listed as priorities to turn 
urban spaces into smart cities. Based on the results, it is possible to understand which indicators 
should be applied in the smart cities’ model, as shown below:: 

Proceedings of the 1st Virtual Conference on Implications of Information and Digital Technologies for Development, 2021  663Barizon & La Rovere                                                    Smart Cities: Potentialities and Challenges in a Context of Sharing Economy 

Figure 1 - Indicators of application of smart cities 

Source: McKinsey Consulting 

The McKinsey & Company study (2019) found that there was an improvement in the quality of life, 
evidence shown in Figure 1, in which it is possible to see that the several models of implementation 
of ICT have the potential to improve key indicators by 10-30 percent. 

4.  POTENTIALITIES AND CHALLENGES OF SMART CITY MODELS 

Suciu et al. (2020) show that a study developed by the European Commission (2020) defined smart 
cities as places where traditional networks and traditional services become more efficient through 
digital and telecommunications technologies to the benefit of residents, enterprises, and the society 
as a whole. 

However, smart city projects face many challenges in their implementation. Xie et al. (2019), based 
on a study by Biswas  and Muthukkumarasamy (2016), mapped out  these challenges listing both 
technological  and  non-technological  factors.  Among  the  latter,  it  is  possible  to  mention  high 
financial  investments  and  the  availability  of  skilled  labor.  Technological  factors  include:   a) 
Effective data treatment => the efficient collection and analysis of data, maintaining its reliability 
and integrity,  promoting strategic planning that allows the provision of accessible public services 
and  improves  city  management;  b)   Connection  of  devices  in  a  decentralized  way  =>  in  a 
decentralized system all nodes and connections can function in a flexible manner, adjusting each 
network  to  the  dynamic  scenario  in  which  they  are  inserted,  even  with  the  increased  number  of 
electronic devices and sensors and complex applications, and with the increased volume of data; c) 
Participatory  and  transparent  Public  and  Private  Management  =>  in  this  model  government 
managers can disseminate information about city management (government affairs, environmental 

Proceedings of the 1st Virtual Conference on Implications of Information and Digital Technologies for Development, 2021  664  
 
 
Barizon & La Rovere                                                    Smart Cities: Potentialities and Challenges in a Context of Sharing Economy 

processes, decision-making) and companies (information about their clients) to meet the citizens’ 
desire  for  participation,  democracy  and  transparency;  d)  Efficient  data  sharing  =>  efficient  data 
sharing (IoT, organizational, personal) generates positive effects on the population, improving the 
supply  of  high-valued  services,  improving  management,  and  promoting  more  accurate  decision-
making, because when the governments fail to share with organizations and individuals, it generates 
a lack of incentives and increases mistrust among agents. 

A solution that could generate the necessary level of trust among agents, which is one of the pillars 
of the sharing economy, is the establishing of governance mechanisms from government institutions. 
According  to  Fernandez-Añes  (2016),  the  aspects  related  to  governance,  sustainability  and 
technological processes are considered by society to be the most important aspects in an intelligent 
city project. The establishment of transparent governance mechanisms are valuable to cities because 
they allow the provision of more efficient services that create change that favor the society, playing 
a fundamental role in improving the quality of life of the population. 

To  highlight  the  importance  of  governance  services  within  smart  city  models  as  a  public  policy 
strategy,  Mechant  and  Walravens  (2018)  show  that  these  services  have  had  a  significant  and 
substantial demand in the most recent years both in quantity of activities and in complexity. A study 
developed by the UN in 2014 showed an increase in demand for governance services by 46% within 
the countries of the European Union.  Features such as ease of use, accessibility, trust value, and 
friendly  services  were  pointed  out,  which  is  evidence  of  all  the  efforts  governments  have  been 
making to provide services that meet the demands of their citizens. 

Mechant  and  Walravens  (2018)  focused  on  the  three  main  aspects  of  smart  city  projects:  data, 
governance and participation. Concerning data, the authors stated that governments hold a wealth 
of information related to some aspects of a city and, consequently, of the citizens' lives. However, 
these data are not openly available, nor can they be easily interpreted, as they require mechanisms 
to  process  them. This  lack of openness  and transparency  raised a movement  that sought  to  have 
these data made available, structured, and machine-readable. The movement is now known as "open 
data", which gained significant strength in local  and national  governments. The second aspect is 
governance.  The authors mentioned that new forms of governance and social innovation are related 
to the interactions between public managers and citizens, in which smart cities models are discussed 
and proposed. These interactions promote greater responsiveness of the public servants and more 
participative  citizenship.  This  enhances  the  presence  of  governance  mechanisms  to  provide 
synergies among governments, enterprises, Non-governmental Organizations (NGOs) and citizens. 
The third aspect is participation, in which the government explores new forms of collaboration and 
cooperation with the use of technology in a participatory design process (collection of principles 
and  practices  that  include  citizens  as  part  of  the  design  process  of  objects,  services,  spaces,  and 
technologies), stimulating the creation of platforms that facilitate participation in lawmaking and 
policymaking. 

A study by Suciu et al. (2020) pointed out the implications and strategies of the sharing economy in 
a smart city. In 2019, the authors had already identified that 54% of the world population lived in 
urban spaces. At the time, the degree of urbanization in Europe had already reached 74% of the total 
population of the continent. These projections corroborate the findings of a study conducted by the 
UN (2018) which estimated that over the course of 30 years the urban population worldwide would 
increase by 2.5 billion people, assuming geometric growth. In this context, it is worth mentioning 
that  urban  growth  includes  smaller  cities  and  the  so-called  megacities.  Hence,  many  are  the 
challenges  to  be  faced  on  all  topics  regarding  the  ISO  standard  37120  (2014),  including 
transportation,  energy  systems,  housing,  education,  health,  employability,  among  other  types  of 
infrastructure.  In  this  regard,  smart  cities  are  designed  to  improve  the  quality  of  life  of  the 
population, turning cities into more inclusive and more sustainable urban spaces, stimulating the 
development  of  new  business  models  that  cross  the  borders  between  suppliers  and  consumers, 

Proceedings of the 1st Virtual Conference on Implications of Information and Digital Technologies for Development, 2021  665Barizon & La Rovere                                                    Smart Cities: Potentialities and Challenges in a Context of Sharing Economy 

aiming to reduce and restrict idle capacity and generating income for many new workers. Thus, the 
sharing economy model fits perfectly into this new global order. 

Gori  et  al.  (2015)  describe  that  even  with  the  current  use  of  innovative  platforms,  the  sharing 
economy has been growing for over 10  years. This has drawn the attention of organizations and 
institutions which have researched sharing economies in order to try to explain and also to evaluate 
their full potential. These studies show that smart cities and sharing economies have synergies as 
both promote innovative ideas that meet the needs of consumers to share resources, time, efficiency, 
skills and data first and foremost. Both smart cities and sharing economies rely on the support of 
ICT. 

The scenario shown by Suciu et al. (2020) indicates that these new sharing technologies used in 
smart  cities  seek  to  change  the  way  the  citizens,  the  user  or  the  customer,  perceive  access  and 
consumption, depending on different types of resources. The authors also mention how they believe 
that  new  urban  lifestyles  are  seen  differently  around  the  world.  New  purchase  and  consumption 
models  transform  the  urban  landscape,  including  the  transportation,  tourism,  food,  and  retail 
industries that are creating new financial opportunities for the working class through the creation of 
new business models which represent a challenge for many traditional companies and institutions, 
forcing them to adapt in order to promote transparency to their consumers, thus paving the way and 
contributing to a more sustainable business culture. 

5.  FINAL REMARKS AND CONCLUSION 

The present article showed that smart city projects can accelerate the trend of the current sharing 
economy, that is, the use of platforms for agents to interact freely and openly with transparency and, 
consequently, promoting higher levels of trust among agents. 

It was seen in section 3 that new technologies such as blockchain and IoT are highly beneficial for 
smart city projects. However, as shown in section 4, the current context of the sharing economy 
requires data transparency and higher levels of trust among the agents who may not necessarily be 
present in these projects. Therefore, it is important to define governance of projects by establishing 
clear  and  open  communication  channels  between  the  local  government  and  the  society  through 
electronic government tools. 

The use of blockchain technology and the IoT system in the context of the sharing economy will 
only be possible with the use of technology platforms that offer standardized preference services 
that  optimize  the  existing  resources  in  an  innovative  way  by  using  ICTs.  Moreover,  these 
technologies stimulate the creation of more innovative and efficient organizational models, helping 
businesses adapt to provide new services that meet the society’s demands and needs. 

With strategic planning, investment in infrastructure, and public policies, smart city projects can be 
implemented effectively in any city that follows the required procedures. Therefore, it is important 
to categorize the sectors involved in the development of these cities to identify the most promising 
economic activities. Smart city projects can meet the society’s wants and needs. In this sense, the 
guidelines for transparency of data are also important as they facilitate access to information on best 
practices and analysis of the possibilities of application of these practices to other cities. 

Thus, it is important to note that smart city projects can only succeed if integration and commitment 
between public and private actors occur, allowing citizens to enjoy healthier and more sustainable 
lives. These projects can highly benefit from the blockchain technology and from interactions with 
the IoT system. Hence, this is an indication that investments made to favor the society can turn urban 
spaces  into  a  universe  in  which  everyone  can  share,  take  action,  and  contribute  to  promote 

Proceedings of the 1st Virtual Conference on Implications of Information and Digital Technologies for Development, 2021  666Barizon & La Rovere                                                    Smart Cities: Potentialities and Challenges in a Context of Sharing Economy 

sustainable development. In this context, knowledge generation will be indispensable for the growth 
and evolution of smart cities. 

REFERENCES AND CITATIONS 

Agyeman, J., & Mclaren, D. (2014). “Smart Cities” Should Mean “Sharing Cities”. Time Magazine. 
Retrieved  January  20,  2021,  from:  <  https://time.com/3446050/smart-cities-should-mean-
sharing-cities/>.  

Belk, R. (2010). Sharing. Journal of Consumer Culture, 36(5), 715-734. Retrieved January 20,2021, 

from: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/46553775_Sharing. 

Biswas, K., & Muthukkumarasamy, V. (2016). Securing smart cities using blockchain technology. 
Proceedings  IEEE  HPCC/SmartCity/DSS.  Retrieved  January  20,  2021,  from:  <  
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7828539>.  

Botsman, R., & Rogers, R. (2011).  What's  mine  is  yours: How  collaborative  consumption  is 

changing the way we live. Collins.  

Cisco. (2016). The Internet of Things.  IBSG (Internet Business Solutions Group).   
Curtis, S. K., & Lehner, M. (2019). Defining the sharing economy for sustainability. Sustainability, 

11(3), 567. Retrieved Mach 22, 2021, from: <https://doi.org/10.3390/su11030567>.  

Davidson, N. M., & Infranca, J. J. (2016). The Sharing Economy as an Urban Phenomenon. Yale 
Law  &  Policy  Review,  34(2),  215-279.  Retrieved  March  22,  2021, 
from: 
https://ylpr.yale.edu/sharing-economy-urban-phenomenon.  

European  Commission. 

(2020).  Smart  Cities.  Retrieved  March  22,  2021, 

from: 
and-urban-development/topics/cities-and-urban-

https://ec.europa.eu/info/eu-regional- 
development/city-initiatives/smart- cities_en. 

Evans,  D.  (2011).  The  Internet  of  Things.  How  the  Next  Evolution  of  the  Internet  Is  Changing 

Everything. CISCO. IBSG (Internet Business Solutions Group).  

Fernandez-Anez,  V.  (2016).    Stakeholders  approach  to  smart  cities:  A  survey  on  smart  city 

Definitions. Proceedings Smart-CT.  

Frenken, K., Meelen, T., Arets, M., & Van de Glind, P. (2015). Smarter regulation for the sharing 
from: 
regulation-

economy. 
<http://www.theguardian.com/science/political-science/2015/may/20/smarter 
for-the-sharing-economy>.  

Guardian. 

Retrieved 

March 

2021, 

The 

22, 

Getszko,  D.  (2020).  Information  and  communication  technologies  in  urban  management:  
challenges for the mediation of smart cities. Information Center and Coordination of ponto 
BR.  

Gori, P., Parcu, P. L., & Stasi, M. L. Smart  Cities  and  Sharing  Economy. European University  
Institute  - Robert  Schuman  Centre  for  Advanced  Studies. Retrieved March 21, 2021, 
from: http://cadmus.eui.eu/bitstream/handle/1814/38264/RSCAS_2015. 

IBM. (2016). Device democracy: Saving the future of the Internet of Things. International Business 
  <http://www-

Machines  Corporation.  Retrieved 
935.ibm.com/services/us/gbs/thoughtleadership/internetofthings>.  

January  20,  2021, 

from: 

Internet Society. (2015). The Internet of Things  (IoT): An Overview. Internet Society. Retrieved 
March 20, 2021 from: https://www.internetsociety.org/resources/doc/2015/iot-overview.  
ITU.  (2020).  United  4  Smart  Sustainable  Cities.  ITU.  Retrieved  May  15,  2020,  from: 

<https://www.itu.int/en/ITU-T/ssc/united/Pages/default.aspx>. 

Kallis, G. (2013). AirBnb is a rental economy, not a sharing economy. The Press Project. Retrieved 
March  20,  2021,  from:  <http://www.thepressproject.net/article/68073/AirBnb-is-a-rental-
economy-not-a- sharing-economy.  

Lanza, J., Sanchez, L., Muñoz, L., Galache, J. A., Sotres, P., Santana, J. R., & Gutierrez, V.  et al. 
(2015).  Large-scale  mobile  sensing  enabled  Internet-of-Things  testbed  for  smart  city 

Proceedings of the 1st Virtual Conference on Implications of Information and Digital Technologies for Development, 2021  667 
 
Barizon & La Rovere                                                    Smart Cities: Potentialities and Challenges in a Context of Sharing Economy 

services.  International  Journal  of Distributed Sensor Network,11(8). Retrieved March 20, 
2021, from: <https://doi.org/10.1155/2015/785061>. 

La Rovere, R. L., & Punzo L. (2019). Inovações em turismo na Economia do Compartilhamento. 
In:  P.  Tigre,  &  A.  Pinheiro.  Inovação  em  Serviços  na  Economia  do  Compartilhamento. 
Saraiva. 

Mckinsey & Company. (2018). Smart Cities: Digital Solutions for a more livable future.  McKinsey 

Global Institute.  

Mclaren, D., & Agyeman, J. (2015). Sharing Cities: A Case for Truly Smart and Sustainable Cities. 

MIT Press.  

Mechant, P., & Walravens, N. (2018). E-Government and Smart Cities: Theoretical Reflections and 

Case Studies.  Media and Communication, 6(4), 119–122.  

Palmisano, S. J. (2008). A Smarter Planet: The Next Leadership Agenda. IBM, 6. 
Suciu, M., Nasulea, D.F., & Nasulea, C. (2020). Smart City Innovation within the Sharing Economy:  
Urban  Innovation  and  Collaborative  Consumption.  Proceedings  of  the  14th  International 
Conference on Business Excellence, 14 (1), 1147-1157. 

Sun,  J.,  Yan,  J.,  &  Zhang,  K.  (2016).  Blockchain-based  Sharing  services:  What  blockchain 

technology can contribute to smart cities. Spring Open, 26. 

Tigre, P. B. (2019). Plataformas tecnológicas e a economia do compartilhamento. In: P. Tigre, A. 

Pinheiro. Inovação em Serviços na Economia do Compartilhamento. Saraiva. 

Xie,  J.,  Tang,  H.,  Huang,  T.,  Yu,  F.,  Xie,  R.,  Liu,  J.  &  Liu,  Y.  (2019).  Survey  of  Blockchain 
Technology Applied to Smart Cities: research issues and challenges. IEEE communications 
surveys & tutorials.  

Proceedings of the 1st Virtual Conference on Implications of Information and Digital Technologies for Development, 2021  668 
