SINA - Smart Interoperability Architecture 

An architecture fostering the interoperability between smart building 
technology from different manufacturers and smart grid infrastructure 
to enable new business models for energy services 

Andreas Rumsch1*, Christoph Imboden2, Alberto Calatroni1, Martin Camenzind1, Edith Birrer1, Andrew Paice1 

1iHomeLab, Institute of Electrical Engineering 

2Competence Center Power Economy, Institute for Innovation and Technology Management  

Both at Lucerne University of Applied Sciences and Arts, Engineering and Architecture, Horw, Switzerland 

* Correspondence: Andreas Rumsch, andreas.rumsch@hslu.ch 

Abstract 

More and more household appliances connect to the Internet and exchange data freely. This is the foundation for true smart 
buildings.  However,  there  is  still  no  uniform  communication  technology  available,  which  can  connect  all  the  different 
appliances  from  different  vendors.  Standards  and  protocols  differ  from  manufacturer  to  manufacturer,  which  makes 
interoperability  difficult  or  even  impossible.  Manufacturers  cannot  rely  on  a  reference  for  the  implementation  and  real 
estate  developers  and  operators  are  reluctant  to  commit  to  a  system  until  it  is  clear  which  one  will  prevail,  providing 
investment  security.  A  similar  situation  is  evident  in  the  area  of  smart  grids  and  applies  equally  to  the  energy  supply 
industry. This fragmentation ultimately leads to  missed opportunities in terms of business models which could connect 
customers with service providers. 

To overcome these limitations, we present a first draft of an architecture, which we call SINA - Smart Interoperability 
Architecture. SINA is based on existing decentralized infrastructure, which avoids creating a dependency of the market 
participants on an overpowering service provider.  The core element of the technical solution is an open-source module 
integrated in the private clouds of the manufacturers, energy suppliers and service providers. The architecture particularly 
solves problems of data ownership, privacy and data security and avoids central administrative structures. It manages data 
access and transfer in a decentralized and distributed system, without needing dedicated hardware. SINA uses a blockchain 
and smart contracts to make sure that the pieces of information about which data are accessed, by whom they are accessed, 
how  they  are  processed,  and  which  monetary  transactions  take  place  are  immutably  stored  and  made  available  in  a 
decentralized fashion. This allows providers to offer services to users in a transparent and trustworthy manner. Finally, 
SINA includes a matchmaking block which should automatically help service providers find potential customers and vice 
versa. This set of features makes SINA unique. 

With the SINA project we are still at the very beginning. Therefore, this article is a position paper and does not show results 
from a running system. It describes proposals to tackle the questions that arise in the field of interoperability. We encourage 
readers to send us their thoughts and feedback. 

Keywords: interoperability, smart grid, smart building, smart contract, blockchain, data ownership, privacy, internet of 
things. 

 
 
 
 
1 

Introduction 

Due to an increase in new renewable energy sources and 
associated  challenges,  energy  suppliers  and  distribution 
network operators start to create intelligent networks and 
automate  their  processes.  In  addition,  more  and  more 
consumer  products  can  connect  to  the  Internet  and 
exchange data  freely,  many  of  them  with  remote  control 
capabilities already enabled. 

The growth of connected technologies with automatic and 
remote-control  possibilities  may  be  observed  at  the  grid 
and building level, giving rise to two independent domains 
–  smart  grids  and  smart  buildings.  Exploiting  these  two 
application  domains  in  combination  provides  a  huge 
advantage  to  enable  the  intelligent  shifting  of  residential 
loads  to  increase  grid  stability.  However,  realizing  such 
intelligent  control  mechanisms  requires  communication 
across  the  boundaries  between  smart  grid  and  smart 
buildings. Due to the lack of consistent standards, a large 
number  of  protocols  and  proprietary  solutions  have 
emerged which renders interoperability and the creation of 
services  that  cross  this  boundary  difficult  or  even 
impossible. Manufacturers cannot rely on a reference for 
the 
implementation  and  real  estate  developers  and 
operators will not commit to a system until it is clear which 
one  will  prevail.  This 
the 
development of business models for service providers. 

issue  also  complicates 

the 

initiatives 

Ongoing 
introduction  of 
rely  on 
decentralized infrastructure such as field gateways and data 
concentrators.  Such  equipment  is  rarely  acceptable  for 
home  appliance  manufacturers,  since  they  operate  in  a 
price  sensitive  market.  Manufacturers  prohibit  any 
additional  decentral  hardware  cost 
if  not  deemed 
absolutely  necessary.  This  also  applies  to  any  additional 
decentral installation and maintenance cost.  

Thus,  a  reasonable  system  architecture  which  overcomes 
these issues must build on existing infrastructure such as 
smart  meters  and  smart  appliances,  since  manufacturers 
have  them  already  integrated  in  their  private  networks, 

2 

State of the art 

From a technical point of view, SINA fosters new business 
models  by  connecting  devices  from  the  domains  smart 
building and smart grid. We therefore regard SINA as an 
architecture  for  the  Internet  of  Things  (IoT).  In  the 
following, we refer to several established IoT architectures 
and  one  smart  grid  architecture.  We  illustrate  in  which 
respect SINA differs or goes beyond the existing state of 
the art. 

2.1 

IoT architectures 

The  European  Telecommunication  Standards  Institute 
proposed the oneM2M architecture for heterogeneous IoT 

providing  monitoring  and  remote-control  services  within 
their  own  domains.  In  order  to  develop  this  architecture, 
we  held  a  series  of  discussion  and  workshops  with 
stakeholders  from  the  smart  grid  and  smart  building 
ecosystems,  identifying  pains,  gains  and  needs  for  the 
intelligent integration of all relevant systems at the grid and 
building level. The result of these discussions is the Smart 
Interoperability Architecture (SINA). In the remainder of 
this document, we use SINA to denote both the architecture 
and the working group who develops it. 

The  architecture  deals  with  the  following  important 
features: 

•  Solving  the  problems  of  data  ownership  and  data 

security in general.  

•  Only the data owner manages data access. 
•  Avoiding technical central administrative structures.  
•  Managing  data  access  and  data 
in  a 
decentralized and distributed system. 

transfer 

•  Automating  the  matching  between  potential  service 

providers and potential customers. 

In  this  paper,  we  present  a  first  draft  of  the  architecture 
addressing data ownership, data security and management 
of data access across the boundary of smart grid and smart 
buildings, based on a decentralized, distributed approach. 
In a working group, several industrial companies, utilities 
and  associations  together  with  academia  have  elaborated 
requirements to an interoperability architecture as well as 
use cases that have to be realizable with SINA. In section 
2  we  illustrate  the  state  of  the  art  and  why  SINA  goes 
beyond 
the 
requirements  engineering  as  identified  by  the  working 
group. Section 4 then describes the proposed architecture, 
comprising  workflows  and  building  blocks.  Section  5 
shows  how  existing  solutions  integrate  into  SINA.  In 
section 6, we give an outlook on how we plan to proceed 
with the concrete implementation of SINA, including test 
and verification procedures. 

it.  Section  3  contains 

the  results  of 

systems [1], [2], which describes how things are connected 
via  a  network  layer  to  the  application  in  the  application 
layer. The oneM2M architecture seeks to connect devices 
from  different  manufacturers  to  the  cloud  to  make  them 
available  for  applications.  For  example,  a  BACnet-
automated  air  conditioning  system  should  connect  to 
temperature  sensors  that  communicate  with  LoRa.  The 
BACnet  system  and  LoRa  run  on  completely  different 
systems and there is no natural connection point. oneM2M 
architecture  addresses  this  problem  with  its  horizontal 
framework  and  RESTful  APIs.  This  enables  the  LoRa 
system to interact with the building automation system via 
an  IoT  network.  oneM2M  solves  technical  problems 

 
 
regarding  communications  but  does  not  provide 
functionalities such as matchmaking.  

functions.  Security 

In 2014, the IoTWF Architectural Committee published a 
reference model for an architecture with seven layers [3]. 
This  reference  model  provides  a  clear  and  simplified 
perspective  on  IoT  and  includes  edge  computing,  data 
storage  and  access.  Each  of  the  seven  layers  contains 
specific 
relevance 
throughout  the  model.  This  reference  model  tackles  the 
issue of interoperability by a layered approach, where the 
communication  takes  place  at  the  data  abstraction  layer. 
SINA  tackles  the  interoperability  at  different  levels, 
depending whether we need to achieve communication on 
the  semantic  level  (through  an  ontology)  or  on  a  lower 
level, where we employ adapters. 

is  of  great 

A  scalable  and  self-configuring  peer-to-peer-based 
architecture  for  a  large-scale  IoT  network  has  been 
proposed  in  [4].  The  architecture  aims  to  provide 
automated  service  and  resource  discovery  mechanisms 
without human intervention. The architecture is based on 
an  IoT  Gateway  which 
takes  care  of  connecting 
heterogeneous items. The members of the SINA working 
group  expressed  their  reluctance  toward  such  a  solution 
and  SINA  will  rather  use  adapters  to  connect  the 
manufacturers’ clouds directly. 

Z.  Qin  et  al.  [5]  designed  a  software-defined  network 
(SDN)-based architecture for the IoT with the objective of 
providing  high-level  quality  of  service  (QoS)  to  the 
different  IoT  tasks  in  heterogeneous  wireless  network 
environments like electric vehicles, electric charging sites 
and smart grid infrastructure. The SDN-based architecture 
implements  semantics  (ontologies  and  rules)  to  match 
abstract  functions  with  lower-level  data  communication 
protocols,  offering  a  first  step  towards  matchmaking. 
However, SINA aims to push the matchmaking up to the 
business  level,  where  customers,  service  providers  and 
manufacturers are automatically proposed scenarios which 
could lead to a contract. 

In [6], the authors proposed a new IoT architecture called 
3G-PLC where they combined power line communication 
(PLC)  and  third generation  (3G)  network  to  increase  the 
scalability. This approach is quite specifically focusing on 
the  communication  layer  and  requires  extra  hardware, 
which is not the direction which we need for SINA. 

they  showed 

In [7], the authors studied mobile phones as spontaneous 
gateways for wireless sensor networks in IoT systems. By 
using name-based future internet architecture (FIA) called 
that  many  challenges 
MobilityFirst, 
associated with mobile phone gateways can be addressed. 
While  this  is  an  interesting  approach,  using  phones  as 
spontaneous gateways is not always possible or desirable, 
and does not cover all the use cases that we envision with 
SINA. 

J.  Zhou  et  al.  [8]  presented  an  IoT-enabled  smart  home 
scenario to analyse the IoT application requirements. The 

SINA – Smart Interoperability Architecture 

authors  proposed  the  CloudThings  architecture  which 
accommodates platform as a service (PaaS), software as a 
service  (SaaS)  and  infrastructure  as  a  service  (IaaS)  to 
accelerate IoT applications. The CloudThings architecture 
is focusing on the smart home domain and lacks automatic 
mechanisms  to  interact  with  the  smart  grid  on  the  data, 
semantic and business level. 

Open-source  architectures  like  the  Distributed  Services 
Architecture (DSA) are also available. The DSA is an IoT 
platform that facilitates device inter-communication. This 
network topology consists of multiple Distributed Service 
Links  running  on  edge  devices  connected  to  a  tiered 
hierarchy of brokers. This allows the system as a whole to 
be scalable, resilient to failure and to take advantage of all 
computing  resources  available  to  it  from  the  edge,  the 
datacenter, the cloud and everything in between (http://iot-
dsa.org/). The DSA is quite close in its spirit to what SINA 
wants to achieve, but is lacking the ontological reasoning 
and  the  smart  contract  execution  which  will  enable 
matchmaking and provide the necessary level of trust. 

Figure 1: Simplified IoT 

The  authors  in  [9]  describe  a  simplified  architecture 
(Figure  1)  representing  the  commons  of  most  IoT 
architectures: they divide the IoT into layers, enabling the 
more or less independent development of technologies and 
standards on the individual layers. They also assume that 
the  IoT  endpoints  are  connected  to  a  network  that 
transports the data that is ultimately used by applications. 
In the Core IoT Functional Stack the resulting architecture 
describes how things are connected via the different layers 
known  from  other  architectures  to  the  applications.  An 
additional point of view, the data processing, shows the IoT 
Data Management Stack. Here, the layers cloud, fog and 
edge  are  differentiated.  Also 
this  architecture, 
matchmaking  and  decentralised  smart  contracts  are 
missing. 

in 

Fog  computing  is  one  good  example  of  a  distributed 
architecture  where  edge  devices  (like  routers,  switches, 
gateways, or other small computers) carry out a substantial 
amount  of  computation,  storage  and  communication 
locally  while  routing  the  information  over  the  internet 
backbone.  Fog  computing  therefore  bridges  the  gap 
between  cloud  and  end  devices  (IoT-nodes).  Fog  nodes 
reside close to IoT nodes, which in turn reduces latency. 

3 

 
 
 
 
 
Yousefpour et al. [10] provides a classification of typical 
computing paradigm where fog computing is a subset of 
the 
traditional  cloud  computing.  Other  distributed 
computing  paradigms  are  mobile  computing,  edge 
computing, mobile cloud computing, mobile ad hoc cloud 
computing and mist computing. SINA strives to seamlessly 
important  and  complementary 
integrate  all 
paradigms. 

these 

2.2 

Smart grid architectures 

Among the architectures developed in the context of smart 
grids,  we  discuss  briefly  the  Smart  Grid  Architecture 
Model  (SGAM)  [11].  The  SGAM  is  a  comprehensive 
model  covering  interoperability  and  business  cases  over 
different  layers,  focusing  on  the  electrical  grid.  The 
reference  description 
that  home 
automation and buildings are not in the scope of SGAM. 
On the contrary, SINA aims to enable the interplay of smart 
grid services and the appliances present in each building, 
such as heating, ventilation and air conditioning, boilers, 
heat pumps and electric vehicles.  

states  explicitly 

Another  aspect  where  SINA  goes  beyond  SGAM  is  the 
definition  of  special  building  blocks  and  operational 
procedures. The most prominent ones are the matchmaking 
algorithm / phase and the use of smart contracts to execute 
code and data sharing in a transparent and immutable way. 
It is also worth mentioning that SGAM is meant to guide 
standardization bodies and technical groups into modelling 
their processes along the lines of the architecture described 
in SGAM. SINA is rather an IoT architecture enhanced by 
procedures  which  can  be  directly  implemented  as  a 
middleware 
last 
difference  between  SGAM  and  SINA  is  in  the  data 
modelling approach. SGAM suggests a top-down approach 
and explicitly recommends to avoid data translators which 
increase  the  complexity,  whereas  SINA  builds  explicitly 
on  top  of  existing  protocols  and  systems  in  a  bottom-up 
fashion.  We  deem  this  necessary  to  maximize  the 
acceptance  and  reuse  of  existing  building  blocks  and  to 
reduce the extra modelling work to a minimum. 

in  existing  decentral  hardware.  A 

3 

Vision, requirements and use cases 

In focus group discussions with several energy supply and 
industrial  companies,  we  identified  pains  and  gains 
concerning  the  main  challenge,  interoperability.  The 
technical  and  commercial  potential  of  a 
smart 
decentralized infrastructure in the framework of the smart 
grid is promising and all the participants of the focus group 
see  the  advantages  of  an  architecture  that  enables 
interoperability  and  of  SINA  in  particular.  In  general, 
companies  want  to  build  new  business  models  based  on 
interoperability  between  smart  buildings  and  the  smart 
grid, but there are some issues hindering them to do so: 

SINA – Smart Interoperability Architecture 

SGAM defines cross-cutting issues which affect all model 
layers. These issues are relevant also for SINA and similar 
considerations were made within the working group while 
designing the SINA concept. 

2.3 

SINA compared to existing architectures 

While the specific differences between SINA and each of 
the  architectures  are  outlined  above,  the  most  prominent 
distinction between SINA and the other IoT architectures 
is  that  SINA  defines  a  matchmaking  phase,  executed  by 
matchmaking  algorithms,  and  a  decentral  infrastructure 
coupled with smart contracts. The former makes it easier 
for service providers and/or manufacturers to find potential 
customers, generating value and useful services; the latter 
makes sure that the contracts are immutable and executed 
on  an  infrastructure  which  is  not  dependent  on  a  single 
vendor, avoiding the emergence of a dominant position. 

to 

the 

cloud 

defining 

protocols 

from  different  manufacturers, 

The  second  aspect  handled  by  SINA  is  the  following: 
Established  IoT  architectures  describe  how  devices 
connect 
and 
communication. The aim of the architectures is that devices 
from  different  manufacturers  connect  to  the  system  built 
upon the respective architecture. Therefore, a manufacturer 
has  to  decide  which  architecture  it  wants  to  support.  To 
connect  devices 
the 
architectures imply that every device implements the same 
protocol  and  that  they  connect  to  the  same  cloud  server. 
Often manufacturers do not want to share data with other 
clouds,  particularly  for  security  relevant  devices  such  as 
locking systems or monitoring systems. SINA overcomes 
this  situation  by  providing  an  architecture  that  enables 
interoperability across the boundaries of systems built on 
different IoT architectures. SINA allows to make existing 
building  blocks  interoperable instead  of  having  to  model 
the whole semantic, communication and data layers from 
ground  up.  Only  where  no  appropriate  approach  is 
available,  we  will  create  it.  An  analysis  of  existing 
protocols,  technologies,  associations,  and  their  relevance 
for  SINA  is  available  for  the  interested  reader  in  the 
Appendix (chapter 10) 

• 

It  is  difficult  to  connect  systems  such  as  the  Smart 
Meter  infrastructure  with  the  building  automation 
system because of the lack of well-defined interfaces. 
•  Even if protocols are in place, it is not always possible 
to  use  them  because  of  incompatibilities  between 
implementations. 

•  Data from important devices such as heat-pumps and 
boilers are not available and there is no standardized 
way of controlling them. 

4 

 
 
 
 
 
3.1  Vision and requirements 

Architecture 

SINA – Smart Interoperability Architecture 

The vision of the focus group members is manifold. As a 
result of the discussions, we summarize the most important 
aspects of the vision as follows: 

•  SINA  builds  on  the  existing  hardware  infrastructure 
(manufacturer cloud) and does this in a decentralized 
way. 

•  A 

service  provider 

the  provided 
communication  infrastructure,  to  enable  new  and 
innovative services. 

can  use 

•  The  system  architecture  should  be  simple  and  offer 
service  providers  the  greatest  possible  flexibility  in 
implementing the services.  

•  A  unified  system  architecture,  protocols  and 
joining 

interfaces  should  allow 

communication 
arbitrary components together. 

•  Multiple  services  are  able  to  access  the  same  data, 
supporting  the  sharing  of  expensive  communication 
infrastructure between services. 

•  Existing  virtual  private  networks  of  appliance 
manufacturers should continue to function as of today, 
assuring the support of the manufacturers for the SINA 
open access solution. 

•  Negative  impacts  on  the  business  of  appliance 

manufacturers must be avoided as much as possible. 

•  The  management  of  data  access  is  easy  even  for 
untrained  data  owners,  and  responsibility  for  data 
access management is with the data owners. 

•  Additional  overhead  because  of  data  security  and 

privacy should be minimal. 

•  Sharing  of  data  and  functionality  should  provide 
benefits  for  all  participants  (customer,  manufacturer 
and service provider). 

•  A  dependence  on  a  single  market  participant  is 

avoided.  

To be able to transform this vision into reality, we set out 
to find the important requirements, which we divide into 
the 
four  groups:  Governance,  Service, 
Architecture and Security 

following 

•  SINA  must  provide  reference  implementations  to 
make  it  easy  to  integrate  the  SINA  interface  in  any 
existing infrastructure – be it a manufacturer’s private 
network  and  own  server  or  a  field  device  offering 
direct SINA access. 

•  The SINA architecture shall be made available as open 
source,  reducing  the  risk  for  the  energy  service 
providers  and  manufacturers  of  a  hold-up  or  lock-in 
situation. 

•  The  SINA  architecture  shall,  as  much  as  reasonably 
possible,  utilize  existing  standards  and  solutions,  in 
order to increase the acceptance of the solution among 
the different parties and, at the same time, reduce the 
implementation cost and risk. 

Data security 

•  Considering  data  security,  ownership  and  privacy 
from the start up is one of the most important aspects 
of SINA. 

•  Only the data owner – which in many cases may be a 
non-technical person - can provide access to the data. 
This includes, among other things, that the data owner 
determines which service provider may evaluate and 
use his data or control devices and how. 

•  The  SINA  system  must  prevent  data  misuse  by 
employing  strong  authentication,  encryption  and 
access control mechanisms. 

3.2  Challenges 

Open standard 

Open  standards  and  protocols  are  the  foundation  of  the 
SINA system and increase the acceptance among industry 
partners  involved.  The  definition  of  new  standards  and 
protocols is difficult because it requires the agreement of 
all affected parties on a final set of features. To simplify 
this  process,  we  seek  to  integrate  existing  standards  as 
much as possible, which broadens the circle of interested 
parties and helps SINA in gaining support.  

Governance 

Security 

SINA  should  develop  a  set  of  governance  rules  that 
further 
guarantee  maintenance,  operation,  and 
development  of  the  solution,  while  ensuring  that 
sovereignty  over  the  solution  is  exercised  by  an 
organization  that  acts  for  the  benefit  of  the  general 
public and not for profit. 

Service 

Subscription  to  services,  for  both  data  provision  as 
well  as  data 
shall  consider  quality 
requirements such as real-time capability, resolution, 
etc. 

request, 

The data owner alone must be able to manage the access to 
data  points,  which  complies  with 
today’s  societal 
expectations on security. The system must therefore offer 
a  way  to  manage  access  control  in  a  way  non-technical 
people can handle and understand. This also means that the 
manufacturer and technical provider of the data access can 
delegate  responsibilities,  trusting  in  the  security  of  the 
SINA system. 

5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Privacy 

Data  owners  have  the  right  to  decide  which  service  can 
access the data and for how long. Data owners also have 
the right to revoke all rights to process and analyze data. 
SINA must always provide ways to ensure the privacy of 
all users. This also includes ways to enforce the deletion of 
previously distributed data used to provide the respective 
services by any service provider.  

Computational overhead 

Because  SINA  is  a  decentralized,  distributed  framework 
and  should  be built  upon  existing  cloud  infrastructure of 
appliance manufacturers, we expect additional computing 
capacity needed to implement the required functionality in 
the SINA modules. This extra computing capacity can be 
explained by the increased computational complexity for 
security and adaption to existing standards and protocols. 
Additionally,  service  providers  might 
the 
frequency and amount of data transferred. This increase in 
traffic must be carefully analyzed and balanced. 

increase 

3.3  Use cases 

Accessing data from the energy infrastructure can enable 
new  and  innovative  services,  for  example  in  the  field  of 
elderly  care.  Likewise,  energy  management  systems  get 
access to additional data points from different sensors, such 
as presence control, access control, etc. Having access to 
additional  data  points  is  considerably  improving  the 
quality  of  state  analysis  and  load  forecasting.  The  full 
potential  of  advanced  energy  management  algorithms  is 
realizable. 

SINA provides the possibility to create new services based 
on the interconnection of appliances and the integration of 
the smart grid. Some examples are: 

•  Smart building services 
•  Local monitoring & management 
•  Remote maintenance 
•  Facility management 
•  Security services 
•  Ambient assisted living 
•  Health care services 
•  Smart grid services 
•  E-contracting 
•  Alternative pricing models 
•  Peak shaving 
•  Balancing services 

SINA – Smart Interoperability Architecture 

•  Voltage regulation 
•  Self-balancing 
•  Energy portfolio optimization 
•  Grid planning 
•  Congestion management 

3.4 

Selected sample use case: “Ancillary Services” 

In this section we illustrate in more depth a concrete use 
case  which  would  be  enabled  by  using  SINA.  The 
electrification of the transportation sector is progressing at 
an increasing pace, posing challenges to the electrical grid, 
but  also  offering  important  opportunities  for  several 
stakeholders.  In  fact,  having  a  fleet  of  electric  vehicles 
(EVs), which stay most of the time attached to the electric 
grid through charging points, offers the possibility of using 
the  large  batteries  embedded  in  the  EVs  as  a  collective 
energy  reserve  for  ancillary  services.  These  services 
exploit  so-called  flexibilities,  such  as  batteries  providing 
stored energy which can be used as a backup to guarantee 
the stability of the electrical grid whenever there is excess 
in electricity demand compared to generation. To explain 
the use case and how SINA would support it, let us start by 
outlining the stakeholders: 

•  Distribution  system  operators  (DSOs),  or  electrical 

network providers. 

•  Flexibility aggregators – companies providing backup 

ancillary services to DSOs. 
•  Charging point operators (CPOs). 
•  Car sharing companies. 
•  EV  owners  living  in  buildings  equipped  with  a 

building management system (BMS). 

time,  charging  point  aggregators, 

The use case consists in having EV owners and car sharing 
companies  using  bidirectional  chargers,  therefore  selling 
electricity  back  to  the  DSO  whenever  the  grid  operator 
needs  urgent  access  to  a  primary  electricity  reserve,  i.e., 
one which has to be made available quite quickly. At the 
same 
flexibility 
aggregators participate in the value chain by providing the 
control  algorithms  which  can  decide  when  to  activate 
which  flexibility.  EV  owners  are  remunerated  with  a 
lucrative  price  for  each  kWh of  energy  sold  back.  DSOs 
covering  short-term  electricity  needs  by  flexibilities  can 
avoid  costly  upgrades  of  the grid  infrastructure.  We  will 
explain how SINA supports this use case in chapter 5, after 
having  described  in  detail  the  SINA  architectural  blocks 
and operation.

6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 

The SINA architecture in detail 

4.1  General description 

As  we  described  in  chapter  2,  most  manufacturers  have 
their own cloud solution, each of them representing an IoT 
system. Not all manufacturers use the same architecture or 
the same standards and protocols for the IoT system. Nor 
they do not want to change their existing systems to enable 
interoperability  with  a  uniform  IoT  architecture.  Indeed, 
this  option  may  not  be  possible  at  all,  because  the 
requirements  for  the  IoT  infrastructure  in  the  smart 
building sector are different from those in the smart grid 
sector, which is ultimately a critical infrastructure. 

SINA – Smart Interoperability Architecture 

Our  idea  is  to  build  an  ecosystem,  where  manufacturers, 
service providers and customers – acting as data owners – 
are connected with each other using the SINA architecture 
(see  Figure  2).  A  customer  owns  devices  from  various 
manufacturers.  The  devices  typically  connect  to  the 
manufacturer’s cloud. The customer grants access to data 
and  to  remote  control  functions  from  those  devices  he 
wants to provide to a service provider. The service provider 
then in turn can offer his services based on the provided 
data and control options. 

Figure 2: SINA Ecosystem with customers, manufacturers and service providers participating in the SINA ecosystem. 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A more detailed view of the architectural design is shown 
in Figure 3. The customer connects his or her devices to the 
manufacturer’s cloud via Internet using their own network 
infrastructure.  Devices  from  different  manufacturers  are 
thus  connected  to  different  cloud  solutions.  In  turn,  the 
devices  of  all  customers  from  one  manufacturer  are 
integrated  into  the  manufacturer’s  cloud  solutions.  The 
manufacturer  makes  the  data  and  control  options  that 
customers have released available to the service providers 
via a SINA adapter. The service providers in turn request 

the data required for the service from the SINA system via 
APIs.  The  customer  agrees  directly  with  the  service 
provider  on  which  data  the  service  provider  will  receive 
and which control options it can use by means of electronic 
(smart) contracts. Further, data is not stored centrally but is 
exchanged directly between the manufacturer’s cloud and 
a  service  provider  (Figure  3).  Additionally,  there  is  no 
provision for centralised management of the system. SINA 
is a distributed, decentralized system.

Figure 3: Proposed architectural approach for SINA. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The  most  important  functions  of  the  SINA  system  are 
ensuring  data  security,  granting  privacy,  authentication, 
trust  management  and  matchmaking  (Figure  4).  The 
functionalities are described in the following sections. We 
first describe the building blocks of SINA. We then explain 

how SINA works, distinguishing between the preparation 
phase, in which customers and service providers meet and 
agree  on  the  service  to  be  provided,  and  the  operational 
phase, in which the service is provided.

Figure 4: Proposed approach for distributed functionality. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.2  Building blocks 

Manufacturers  and  service  providers  must  integrate  the 
the  SINA 
corresponding  modules 

to  participate 

in 

ecosystem.  These  modules  consist  of  several  building 
blocks.  Figure  5  shows  the  building  blocks  for  a 
manufacturer,  Figure  6  those  for  a  service  provider. 
Descriptions  of  the  building  blocks  follow  in  the  next 
sections.

Figure 5: Building blocks of a SINA integration for manufacturers. 

Figure 6: Building blocks of a SINA integration for service providers. 

 
 
 
 
 
4.2.1  Registration, authorization, authentication 

4.2.4  Smart contracts 

To  participate  in  the  SINA  ecosystem,  the  identity  of 
people  and  devices  must  be  proven  by  a  corresponding 
registration  process.  This  process  is  handled  by  this 
building block. Due to the distributed nature of SINA, the 
registration of customers can be handled at every instance 
at any manufacturer. A customer that has registered with 
one  manufacturer  is  identified  for  the  whole  SINA 
ecosystem. The customer is not obliged to register multiple 
times. This implies that SINA further needs a registration 
process for manufacturers. 

Devices typically are identified by a serial number by the 
corresponding  manufacturer.  Through  the  registration 
process, the manufacturer guarantees for the identity of the 
device in the whole SINA ecosystem. A device has not to 
register at multiple manufacturers. 

4.2.2  Data release management 

Each manufacturer must manage the release of customer’s 
data. The customer is responsible to define which data he 
wants to release. The release of data is controlled by an app 
where the customer can either select individual data or a 
profile  provided  by  the  manufacturer.  Profiles  contain  a 
predefined  set  of  data  optimized  for  commonly  used 
services. 

The manufacturer’s responsibility is to guarantee that only 
data and control options where the customer has granted 
access to is provided to selected service providers. This is 
one of the main functionalities of the SINA module. 

4.2.3  Matchmaking 

One of the challenges in SINA is to link service providers 
with  suitable  customers  ready  to  share  the  required  data. 
Where  customers  define  which  data  and  which  control 
access  they  want  to  release,  service  providers  provide  a 
definition  of  data  they  need  to  perform  the  service.  The 
definition comprises the type and quality of data. The type 
of  data  includes  attributes  such  as  temperature,  energy 
consumption,  state  etc.  of  appliances,  but  also  metadata 
such as information on the place of residence or eventually 
the  person  himself.  The  quality  of  the  data  defines 
accuracy, temporal resolution, real-time capability, etc. 

The matchmaking unit searches for customers fulfilling a 
service  provider’s  requirement  or  for  service  providers 
being  able  to  work  with  the data  a  customer has  granted 
access  for.  The  matchmaking  unit  operates  in  the 
distributed  system  of  SINA  and  is  realized  through 
ontological  reasoning  or  search  algorithms  able  to  query 
distributed databases. 

from  different  manufacturers,  which 

When a customer and a service provider agree on a service, 
they  conclude  a  smart  contract.  The  service  is  then 
provided using the executable code in the smart contract. 
to  external  data, 
The  smart  contract  needs  access 
is 
potentially 
provided  through  the  SINA  system.  The  use  of  smart 
contracts  is  an  important  prerequisite  for  the  trust  in  the 
system,  since  every  stakeholder  knows  that  the  kind  of 
data,  services  and  remuneration  are  bundled  within  an 
immutability  and 
immutable 
traceability  are  guaranteed  by  using  a  blockchain  / 
distributed ledger (see 4.2.7 below). 

smart  contract.  The 

4.2.5  Data exchange 

This  building  block  implements  all  functionality  to 
exchange data between the manufacturer’s cloud and the 
service  providers.  Additionally,  if  data  from  different 
manufacturers are involved, this building block at service 
provider’s side coordinates the exchange of data. 

4.2.6  Encryption / decryption 

The building block implements encryption and decryption 
of data using established encryption technologies. 

4.2.7  Distributed ledger technologies / blockchain 

traceable, 

This building block provides an essential functionality to 
thereby 
inalterable  and 
make  processes 
contributing to the trust management of the whole system. 
Mainly  two  use  cases  will  rely  on  the  functionality:  The 
execution of smart contracts, and the exchange of certain 
data. Not every data transaction has to be inalterable and 
traceable. These properties apply only to use cases where 
valuables are exchanged with help of SINA. An example 
is  energy  trading  where  the  traded  energy  represents  a 
certain  value.  The  exchange  of  temperature  data,  for 
example, does not fall into this category. 

4.2.8  Adapter for protocols 

To enable SINA to be compatible with existing protocols, 
this  building  block  adapts  the  manufacturer’s  or  service 
provider’s cloud to the respective protocol. This means that 
protocols are translated from and to the protocols used by 
the manufacturer or service provider. The architecture will 
allow  to  implement  several  adapters  for  protocols  in 
parallel.  This  makes  SINA  compatible  with  a  variety  of 
protocols. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SINA – Smart Interoperability Architecture 

customers  define  which  data  they  grant  access  to,  and 
service providers announce their requirements on data to 
offer services. The latter includes the type of data but also 
the required quality of the data, e.g. in terms of real-time 
requirements. The matchmaking phase succeeds when data 
released by a customer meet the requirements of a service 
provider.  The  SINA  system  shows  such  matches  to  the 
customer  who  then  chooses  a  service  provider  and 
explicitly executes his or her rights as data owner to release 
the  data 
the  defined 
that  explicit  service  for 
to 
functionality.  

SINA  will  use  distributed  ledger  technology  and  smart 
contracts  to  establish  the  contract  between  the  customer 
and the service provider, so that this contract is unalterable 
and traceable. Thus, after the identification process, this is 
a further element of trust management offered by SINA. 

4.3 

Preparation phase 

level  of 

The deployment of SINA starts with a preparation phase. 
To  ensure  a  high 
trustworthiness,  SINA 
implements a trust management. One element of the trust 
management  is  to  ensure  the  identity  of  participating 
customers,  customer’s  devices,  service  providers  and 
manufacturers.    To  gain  access  to  a  service  in  the  SINA 
ecosystem,  customers  must  first  register  themselves  and 
their devices in the SINA system, Figure 7. Because of the 
decentralized  nature  of  the  solution,  this  can  be  done  on 
any  cloud  system  which  implements  the  SINA  module. 
Through the registration, the identity of people and devices 
is  ensured.  As  far  as  possible,  SINA  will  use  electronic 
identification  technologies  that  are  already  in  use  in 
different countries. 

Manufacturers  provide  access  to  their  private  cloud 
solutions and devices in a well-defined way and guarantee 
data  security  and  data  protection  using  SINA.  Only  data 
and  control  options  for  which  the  customer  has  granted 
access will be released. The registration process alone does 
not release any data but signals a potential service provider 
the availability of certain devices and the willingness of the 
customer to participate.  

Figure 7: Preparation and Matchmaking phase. 

4.4  Matchmaking phase 

Due  to  the  potentially  large  amount  of  service  providers 
and  customers,  the  system  implements  a  decentralized 
matchmaking  algorithm  which  finds  suitable  pairs  of 
service  providers  and  customers.  The  matchmaking 
algorithm  was  defined  in  section  4.2.3.  In  this  phase, 

12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.5  Operational phase 

SINA – Smart Interoperability Architecture 

Figure 8: Operational phase. 

After setting up the contract, the service provider gets data 
from the devices in the smart buildings and/or smart grid 
domains on request or on a scheduled base, Figure 8. It then 
evaluates the data to perform the service. Depending on the 
service,  recipients  get  messages  or  devices  get  control 
commands.  Messages  to  recipients  may  be  all  kind  of 
messages,  for  example  simple  notifications  about  critical 
states  or  invoices  for  energy  usage.  Data  and  control 
commands  are  encrypted  to  ensure  data  integrity.  If  a 
service  requires  traceability  and  inalterability,  SINA  will 
offer these based on distributed ledger technology. 

4.6 

SINA as an IoT architecture 

The  proposed  draft  architecture  is  not  a  replacement  for 
classical  IoT  architectures  but  is  a  complement  to  them. 
SINA  summarizes  various  systems,  each  representing  an 
IoT system, provided by its manufacturer, and makes the 
single  systems  transparent  to  service  providers  offering 
their services based on the data provided by the underlying 
systems.  Therefore,  manufacturers  and  service  providers 
need not to decide to which system they want to implement 
in their products and services. They have the freedom to 
choose  the  most  appropriate  architecture  and  system  for 
their  requirements  and  can  add 
interoperability  by 
integrating the SINA modules. 

SINA  defines  security  and  privacy  related  requirements 
and  provides  corresponding  mechanisms.  It  defines  and 
integrates functionality for registration, data management 
and data exchange and uses the concept of smart contracts 
and distributed ledger technology. 

SINA architecture enables to connect things from different 
worlds like smart building and smart grid and makes the 
things interoperable. SINA makes the things and services 
discoverable by providing a matchmaking. The result is an 
IoT system with supporting functionality and a high level 
of security and privacy. 

4.7 

Integration of existing approaches into SINA 

To integrate existing approaches, SINA relies on various 
levels  of  integration  ranging  from  using  technologies  to 
adapting to protocols. Existing solutions can integrate the 
required SINA modules to become SINA-compliant. For a 
set of existing protocols, see the Appendix (chapter 10). 

4.7.1  Using technology 

Particularly  for  blockchain  and  smart  contracts,  SINA 
intends  to  rely  on  already  established  solutions.  Such 
solutions should already be introduced to market and have 
a certain prevalence. We consider this necessary in order 
to achieve a high level of acceptance for SINA right from 
the  start.  In  addition,  all  components  of  the  architecture 
must be evaluated to determine whether their functionality 
can be realized with existing technology. We will develop 
software or alternatively adapt the most suitable available 
technology only for functionalities which are not covered 
by existing technology. 

4.7.2  Adapt to protocols 

In SINA we do not aim towards the development of new 
protocols: Several suitable protocols exist (see Appendix, 
chapter 10). As an example, Smart Grid Ready can be well 
integrated  to  SINA  through  adapters  for  protocols  (see 
Figure 5 and Figure 6). The architecture will allow several 
adapters to be integrated simultaneously to gain the highest 
possible compatibility with existing systems in the area of 
smart buildings and smart grids. 

13 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SINA – Smart Interoperability Architecture 

4.8  Existing products 

Existing products are, in the sense of SINA, manufacturer 
or  service  provider  solutions.  As  an  example,  Tiko  is  a 
product connecting several devices in households through 
local  gateways  and  providing  a  virtual  power  plant.  To 

integrate Tiko into SINA means to implement the required 
SINA modules in the Tiko solution. Tiko then continues to 
offer  its  original  service  and,  additionally,  can  add  more 
business  opportunities  using  the  potential  of  the  SINA 
ecosystem.

5 

Application of SINA to the “Ancillary Services” sample use case 

Whenever a group of EV owners or a car sharing provider 
accept to execute a contract with the flexibility aggregator, 
a smart contract is generated, if possible, by picking from 
existing  templates  provided  by  the  aggregator  itself. 
Within  the  smart  contract,  the  code  which  extracts  the 
necessary  data  is  stored  together  the  algorithms  which 
decide  when  to  extract  energy  from  a  certain  vehicle, 
together with the financial conditions or the remuneration 
for the involved parties. The smart contract is stored on the 
blockchain  or  distributed  ledger  so  that  it  becomes 
immutable  and  traceable.  If  a  contract  is  terminated,  the 
involved  party  can  then  shut  down  the  data  access  to  its 
cloud or edge device. 

In the operational phase, the smart contract is executed so 
that  the  data  coming  from  various  vehicles,  the  signals 
coming from the DSO and the schedules or use forecasts 
for the EVs are queried by the aggregator through SINA 
adapters or SINA APIs. The aggregator runs the planning 
algorithm  contained  in  the  smart  contract  to  create  real-
time signals to be sent to the charging points or to the BMS 
to enact the desired charging / discharging profiles. These 
signals are also sent through SINA adapters or APIs. The 
monetary transactions which emerge during the execution 
are  stored  on  the  blockchain  to  guarantee  a  correct  and 
transparent invoicing for all the involved parties. 

As  new  EVs  become  available  or  car  sharing  companies 
switch to an EV fleet, new stakeholders participate in the 
matchmaking process dynamically, allowing them to profit 
from the services. 

In this section, we pick up again the use case “Ancillary 
Services” illustrated in section 3.4. and elaborate on how 
SINA facilitates its implementation. 

Within  the  use  case,  we  have  several  IoT  devices 
connected  to  the  cloud  of  manufacturers  and  service 
providers.  The  IoT  devices  are  in  this  case  the  EVs, 
charging points and the smart meters in the homes of EV 
owners. The DSOs, CPOs, car sharing companies and EV 
manufacturers have their own cloud solutions. 

Each  of  the  Information  Technology  and  Operation 
Technology systems involved runs the SINA modules. In 
the  preparation  phase,  each  stakeholder  registers  with 
SINA,  so  that  the  identities  can  be  trusted.  Each  data 
provider provides a semantically structured description of 
the type and quality of the available or needed data: 

•  The charging points share the charging power in real 

time. 

•  The  car  sharing  company  shares 
containing the bookings of their fleet. 

the  schedule 

•  The  car  manufacturer  shares  the  charge  status  and 

characteristics of the batteries. 

•  The EV owner shares forecasts or intentions about the 
planned  EV  use  in  the  next  few  hours  or  days  and 
whether the charger / EV support bidirectional energy 
flux. 

•  The flexibility aggregator advertises that an ancillary 
service can be made available by using the data above. 
•  The  DSO  shares  data  concerning  the  flexibility 

requests. 

In  the  matchmaking  phase,  SINA  recognizes  that  the 
stakeholders  above  can  be  brought  together  to  provide  a 
service and added value. Each EV owner and car sharing 
company who advertise having bidirectional charging can 
be  matched  with  the  flexibility  aggregator  and  with  the 
DSO. 

14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 

Conclusions and outlook 

The SINA architecture and the concepts related to it are a 
promising  way  to  bind  the  worlds  of  smart  buildings, 
mobility and energy grids together to provide new business 
possibilities.  SINA  goes  beyond  the  state  of  the  art  by 
providing at the same time interoperability and automatic 
ways  to  find  matches  between  stakeholders,  as  well  as 
using  the  blockchain  and  smart  contracts  to  provide  a 
trustworthy  environment  where  contracts  are  immutable 
and  traceable.  Furthermore,  the  SINA  components  are 
implemented in existing edge / fog / cloud infrastructures 
without the need of extra hardware deployments. 

As  one  of  the  next  steps,  we  will  elaborate  the  detailed 
SINA  architecture  including  the  analysis  of  existing 
standards  and  protocols.  Those  with  relevance  to  the 
ecosystem  will  be  integrated.  The  midterm  goal  is  to 
provide  a  reference  implementation  as  open  source  to 
facilitate  the  dissemination.  In  parallel  we  develop  a 
governance model, which we regard as necessary to lead 
SINA  to  success  by  defining  how  the  SINA  ecosystem 
develops  in  future  and  how  it  is  kept  open  for  every 
interested partner. 

The matchmaking building block will be implemented by 
relying on and extending existing ontologies, such as the 
SAREF [12] and creating an appropriate reasoning engine 
which  can  find  sets  of  customers,  service  providers  and 
manufacturers which can be combined to provide a service. 
Furthermore,  we  implement  a  first  set  of  SINA  adapters 
and  the  blockchain-based  smart  contracts  engine,  which 
will allow the first roll-out. 

With the reference implementation we will start first tests 
in a laboratory setting to prove the feasibility of the SINA 
system.  Together  with  partnering  industrial  companies, 
utilities  and  associations,  the  business  models  for  these 

SINA – Smart Interoperability Architecture 

then 

implemented.  The 
tests  will  be  defined  and 
implementation requires the participants to implement the 
SINA  modules 
the 
manufacturer for household appliances must integrate the 
corresponding SINA adapter. Any of the partners may act 
as the service provider in this test phase, e.g., a utility or an 
academic partner. 

infrastructure,  e.g., 

their 

into 

Together with industrial partners we will test and verify the 
SINA  system  in  pilot  and  demonstration  (P+D)  projects. 
We plan to start by implementing single business ideas. As 
an  example,  such  a  business  case  could  be  an  energy 
trading platform for prosumers, comparable to the project 
Quartierstrom in Walenstadt, Switzerland [13], [14]. For a 
service provider offering the trading platform, SINA will 
foster the realization of the business model by providing 
access to the required devices and data through the SINA 
system.  The  service  provider  therefore  benefits  from 
existing  infrastructure.  In  this  case  the  photovoltaic 
systems  connect 
respective 
manufacturer, and the utility provides access to the smart 
meters.  Further,  the  service  provider  can  focus  on  the 
development of his service. Data security, privacy and trust 
management  are handled  by  the  SINA  system.  The  P+D 
projects  shall  prove 
larger  scale 
applications. 

the  cloud  of 

the  feasibility 

the 

in 

to 

SINA will not only cover energy-related business models 
but  also  such  for  elderly  care  or  comfort.  The  choice  of 
business models will depend on the partners in the SINA 
ecosystem. The governance model will ensure the further 
development of the SINA system so that new partners with 
new  business  ideas  can  start  their  participation  in  the 
ecosystem at any time.

7 

Ethical approval 

The  focus  group  discussions  focused  on  the  participants' 
expectations regarding interoperability. We did not collect 
personal  data,  nor  did  we  carry  out  studies  on  humans. 

Therefore,  an  ethical  review  and  approval  was  not 
required, written informed consent is not applicable.

8 

Author contribution 

The  main  authors  are  Andreas  Rumsch  and  Christoph 
Imboden.  They  both  are  the  drivers  behind  SINA  and 
developed the architecture presented in this article. Edith 
Birrer, Martin Camenzind, Alberto Calatroni and Andrew 

Paice  assisted  and  advised  throughout  the  project  and 
writing. All authors have read and agreed to the published 
version of the manuscript.

15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SINA – Smart Interoperability Architecture 

9 

Acknowledgements 

The  authors  want  to  express  their  thankfulness  to  those 
responsible  at  the  Innovationspark  Zentralschweiz  – 
Building Excellence. They enabled the development of the 
first  drafts  of  an  architecture  for  SINA  by  providing  a 
relevant  network  of  companies  and  their  representatives 
from  which  we  have  assembled  the  working  group.  The 
discussions with the members of the working group have 
been very inspiring and helpful to find an approach to an 
architecture that suits the needs of industry. The following 
companies  are  represented  in  the  working  group  and 

support  SINA.  Utilities:  EWL,  WWZ/allthisfuture. 
Industry:  Zehnder  Group,  dormakaba,  Siemens  Smart 
Infrastructure,  bonainvest.  Associations:  Smart  Grid 
Ready. Research: Lucerne University of Applied Sciences 
and Arts, CSEM. 

Lucerne University of Applied Sciences and Arts allowed 
us to pick up and work on the idea of a smart interoperable 
architecture by providing the time needed to develop the 
idea.

10 

Appendix: Existing Protocols or Technologies 

In this section we present a collection of relevant protocols, 
technologies,  ontologies,  and  associations  which  will  be 
considered when implementing the concrete embodiment 
of the SINA architecture. 

10.1  Relevance of existing approaches 

10.1.1 Associations 

Often associations define standards, protocols or languages 
for a specific domain or use case. SINA intends to foster a 
variety  of  business  models  each  with  its  use  case. 
Therefore, SINA seeks to integrate what associations have 
developed.  We  see  the  following  associations  with 
complementary activities as relevant for SINA: 

EEBUS  is  a  non-profit  association  [15].  The  aim  is  to 
create  a  uniform 
for  energy 
communication  that  enables  all  home  devices  networked 
with the system to communicate with each other. 

language 

standard 

interoperability 

Smart Grid Ready is a non-profit association striving to 
enable  a  smart  and  successful  energy  world 
that 
communicates [16]. The association develops a protocol-
(ontology) 
independent 
for 
communication 
flexibility.  The 
SmartGridReady  label  shall  become  an  internationally 
accepted  quality  label.  For  this  purpose,  EEBUS  and 
SmartGridready cooperate at different levels. It is expected 
that Smart Grid Ready concepts can be integrated in SINA. 
A  Smart  Grid  Ready  representative  participates  in  the 
SINA team. 

layer 
to  energy 

related 

SGReady is a label to indicate that a Heat Pump is enabled 
to select 4 operation modes based on two digital input lines 
[17]. 

industry  standard 

VHP Ready is a non-profit industry alliance with the aim 
the 
to  develop  an 
networking  of  decentralized  energy 
the 
certification  program,  as  well  as  the  appropriate  testing 
tools in a cooperative and transparent manner together with 
the alliance members [18]. 

to  encourage 
systems, 

to  support 

the  development, 

Open ADR Alliance is an industry alliance [19]. Industry 
stakeholders  intend  to  build  the  foundation  of  technical 
testing  and 
activities 
deployment  of  commercial  OpenADR  and  facilitate  its 
acceleration and widespread adoption from it. It provides 
an open, highly secure, and two-way information exchange 
model and a global smart grid standard. It standardizes the 
message format used for Auto-DR and distributed energy 
resources management so that dynamic price and reliability 
signals can be exchanged in a uniform and interoperable 
fashion among utilities, ISOs, and energy management and 
control systems.  

Open Charge Alliance (OCA) is an industry alliance of 
EV  charging  hardware  and  software  vendors  fostering 
global development, adoption, and compliance of the Open 
Charge  Point  Protocol  and  the  establishment  of  related 
standards  through  collaboration,  education,  testing  and 
certification [20]. 

Smart  Building  Alliance  for  Smart  Cities  (SBA)  is  an 
industry  alliance  for  smart  buildings  organizing  the 
promotion of the smart buildings sector within smart cities 
by associating a group of professionals [21]. 

to 

foster 

Energy Web (EW) is a global non-profit organization that 
to  use  blockchain  and  other  decentralized 
aims 
technologies 
low-carbon,  customer-centric 
electricity  systems.  EW  focuses  on  building  a  core 
infrastructure  and  a  shared  technology.  EW  provides  a 
toolkit to develop distributed apps using their energy web 
decentralized operating system [22]. The toolkit contains 
several  building  blocks  that might  be  relevant  for  SINA. 
Particularly,  it  contains  a  Ethereum-based  blockchain 
implementation and is able to perform smart contracts. 

G3-PLC Alliance is a German based alliance with the aim 
to support, promote and implement G3-PLC in smart grid 
applications [23]. 

Universal Smart Energy Framework (USEF) consists of 
seven key players that are active across the smart energy 
industry, with a shared goal: one integrated smart energy 
that  benefits  all  stakeholders,  from  energy 
system 

16 

 
 
 
 
companies  to  consumers  founded  USEF  [24].  USEF 
Foundation  manages  USEF’s  ongoing  development.  The 
foundation 
tasked  with 
coordinating  expertise,  projects  and  partners  while 
safeguarding the integrity and objectives of USEF. 

is  a  dedicated  core 

team 

10.1.2 Protocols, guidelines 

SINA does not develop protocols or guidelines when they 
already  exist.  We  have  identified  several  protocols  and 
guidelines  that  might  be  relevant  for  SINA.  In  further 
work, with a deeper analysis of each, we will identify those 
that should be implemented in SINA. 

For  Smart  Meter  Gateways  the  technical  guideline  TR-
03109  from  German  “Bundesamt  für  Sicherheit  in  der 
Informationstechnik”  (BSI)  defines  requirements  and 
technical  specifications  to  obtain  a  secure  exchange  and 
processing of data [25, p. 03109]. 

The Common Data Security Architecture (CDSA) is a 
layered  security  services  and  cryptographic 
set  of 
frameworks  that  provides  an  infrastructure  for  creating 
cross-platform, 
security-enabled 
interoperable, 
applications  for  client-server  environments  [26].  CDSA 
covers all the essential components of security capability, 
to  equip  applications  for  electronic  commerce  and  other 
business  applications  with  security  services  that  provide 
facilities  for  cryptography,  certificate  management,  trust 
policy management, and key recovery. 

The Smart Appliances REFerence (SAREF) ontology is 
a shared model of consensus that facilitates the matching 
of existing assets (standards/protocols/data models/etc.) in 
the domain of smart appliances [27]. The SAREF ontology 
provides  building  blocks  that  allow  separation  and 
recombination of different parts of the ontology depending 
on specific needs. 

(WoT) 

intends 

to  enable 
The  Web  of  Things 
interoperability  across  IoT  platforms  and  application 
domains.  WoT  wants  to  reach  this  by  using  existing 
protocols  and  defining  a  set  of  building  blocks  and 
software patterns. The core concept of WoT is the exposure 
of a machine interpretable description for each thing. The 
descriptions cover behaviour, interaction affordances, data 
schema, security configuration and protocol bindings [28]. 

Project  Haystack  is  an  open  source  initiative  that  helps 
simplify to work with data from the Internet of Things by 

SINA – Smart Interoperability Architecture 

standardizing semantic data models and web services [29]. 
Using  it  will  make  it  easier  to  unlock  value  from  data 
produced  by  smart  devices.  Target  applications  include 
automation,  control,  energy,  HVAC,  lighting,  and  other 
environmental systems. 

to 

(MUD) 

IoT  device  makers 

is  an 
Manufacturer  Usage  Description 
embedded  software  standard  defined  by  the  IETF  that 
allows 
advertise  device 
specifications,  including  the  intended  communication 
patterns for their device when it connects to the network 
[30].  The  network  can  then  use  this  intent  to  author  a 
context-specific access policy, so the device functions only 
within these parameters. In this manner, MUD becomes the 
authoritative identifier and enforcer of policy for devices 
on the network. 

10.1.3 Technologies 

Several  technologies  might  be  relevant  for  SINA.  The 
following list of technologies describes some of the newer 
concepts and makes no claim to completeness in the sense 
that these are all the relevant technologies. 

Message  Queuing  Telemetry  Transport  (MQTT)  is  a 
transport 
client  server  publish/subscribe  messaging 
protocol [31]. It is lightweight, open, simple, and designed 
such  as  to  be  easy  to  implement.  These  characteristics 
make  it  ideal  for  use  in  many  situations,  including 
constrained  environments  such  as  communication  in 
Machine to Machine (M2M) and Internet of Things (IoT) 
contexts  where  a  small  code  footprint  is  required  and/or 
network bandwidth is at a premium. 

In  the  context  of  blockchain  technology  the  concept  of 
Smart Contracts has been created. A smart contract is a 
computer protocol designed to facilitate, verify or enforce 
digitally the negotiation or performance of a contract [32]. 
Smart  contracts  enable 
the  execution  of  credible 
transactions  without  third  parties.  These  transactions  are 
traceable and irrevocable. 

The Blockchain technology itself will play an important 
role for SINA because blockchains are designed to operate 
decentralized and without the need of a trusted authority 
[33]. Blockchains rely on permanent storage of data; also, 
critical,  personalized  data  that  can  never  be  completely 
erased.  This  interferes  at  least  partially  with  the  general 
data protection regulation (GDPR).

17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 

References 

[1]  J. Swetina, G. Lu, P. Jacobs, F. Ennesser, and J. Song, 
‘Toward a standardized common M2M service layer 
platform:  Introduction  to  oneM2M’,  IEEE  Wirel. 
Commun., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 20–26, Jun. 2014, doi: 
10.1109/MWC.2014.6845045. 

[2]  ‘oneM2M 

- 

Published 

Drafts’. 

https://www.onem2m.org/technical/published-drafts 
(accessed Jun. 04, 2020). 

[3]  ‘Resources  |  Internet  of  Things  World  Forum’. 
https://www.iotwf.com/resources/71  (accessed  Jun. 
04, 2020). 

[4]  S.  Cirani  et  al.,  ‘A  Scalable  and  Self-Configuring 
Architecture for Service Discovery in the Internet of 
Things’,  IEEE  Internet  Things  J.,  vol.  1,  no.  5,  pp. 
508–521, 
doi: 
10.1109/JIOT.2014.2358296. 

2014, 

Oct. 

[5]  Z. Qin, G. Denker, C. Giannelli, P. Bellavista, and N. 
Venkatasubramanian, 
Software  Defined 
‘A 
Networking  architecture  for  the  Internet-of-Things’, 
in 2014 IEEE Network Operations and Management 
Symposium (NOMS), Krakow, Poland, May 2014, pp. 
1–9. doi: 10.1109/NOMS.2014.6838365. 

[6]  H.-C.  Hsieh  and  C.-H.  Lai,  ‘Internet  of  Things 
Architecture  Based  on  Integrated  PLC  and  3G 
Communication  Networks’,  in  2011  IEEE  17th 
International Conference on Parallel and Distributed 
Systems,  Tainan,  Taiwan,  Dec.  2011,  pp.  853–856. 
doi: 10.1109/ICPADS.2011.73. 

[7]  J. Li, Y. Zhang, Y. Chen, K. Nagaraja, S. Li, and D. 
Raychaudhuri,  A  Mobile  Phone  based  WSN 
Infrastructure 
Internet 
Architecture 1.  

IoT  over  Future 

for 

[8]  J. Zhou et al., ‘CloudThings: A common architecture 
for  integrating  the  Internet  of  Things  with  Cloud 
Computing’,  in  Proceedings  of  the  2013  IEEE  17th 
International  Conference  on  Computer  Supported 
Cooperative Work in Design (CSCWD), Whistler, BC, 
Canada, 
doi: 
pp. 
10.1109/CSCWD.2013.6581037. 

651–657. 

2013, 

Jun. 

IoT 

[9]  D. Hanes, G. Salgueiro, P. Grossetete, R. Barton, and 
J.  Henry, 
Fundamentals:  Networking 
Technologies,  Protocols,  and  Use  Cases  for  the 
Internet of Things. ciscopress, 2017. Accessed: Dec. 
Available: 
09, 
http://www.ciscopress.com/store/iot-fundamentals-
networking-technologies-protocols-9781587144561 

[Online]. 

2018. 

[10] A.  Yousefpour  et  al.,  ‘All  one  needs  to  know  about 
related  edge  computing 
fog  computing  and 
paradigms: A complete survey’, J. Syst. Archit., vol. 
98, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.sysarc.2019.02.009. 

289–330, 

2019, 

Sep. 

pp. 

SINA – Smart Interoperability Architecture 

‘CEN-CENELEC-ETSI 

[11] CEN_CENELCE_ETSI  Smart  Grid  Coordination 
Group, 
Smart  Grid 
Coordination  Group  Smart  Grid  Reference 
Architecture’.  Nov.  2012.  Accessed:  Jun.  09,  2021. 
Available: 
[Online]. 
https://ec.europa.eu/energy/sites/ener/files/document
s/xpert_group1_reference_architecture.pdf 

[12] ‘SAREF Portal’. https://saref.etsi.org/ (accessed Jun. 

09, 2021). 

[13] L. Ableitner, A. Meeuw, S. Schopfer, V. Tiefenbeck, 
F.  Wortmann,  and  A.  Wörner,  ‘Quartierstrom  -- 
Implementation of a real world prosumer centric local 
energy  market 
in  Walenstadt,  Switzerland’, 
ArXiv190507242  Cs,  Jul.  2019,  Accessed:  Jun.  07, 
2020. 
Available: 
http://arxiv.org/abs/1905.07242 

[Online]. 

[14] A. Brenzikofer, A. Meeuw, S. Schopfer, A. Wörner, 
and  C.  Dürr,  Quartierstrom:  A  Decentralized  Local 
P2P  Energy  Market  Pilot  On  A  Self-Governed 
Blockchain.  AIM,  2019.  Accessed:  Jun.  07,  2020. 
[Online]. 
https://www.cired-
repository.org/handle/20.500.12455/181 

Available: 

[15] EEBus  Initiative  e.V.,  ‘EEBus  Whitepaper  2.0.pdf’, 
2013. 
http://www.eebus.org, 
https://www.eebus.org/fileadmin/Mediapool/Downlo
ad/downloads_en/2013_08_EEBus_e_V_Whitepaper
_2.0__e_.pdf (accessed Mar. 14, 2014). 

[16] ‘Smart Grid Ready | Schweiz | Home’, SMART GRID 
READY.  https://www.smartgridready.ch  (accessed 
Jun. 07, 2020). 

[17] ‘SG 

Ready-Label’. 

https://www.waermepumpe.de/normen-technik/sg-
ready/ (accessed Jun. 07, 2020). 

[18] ‘Der  Kommunikationsstandard  für  Smart  Grids.  - 
VHPready 
GmbH’. 
Services 
https://www.vhpready.de/de/home/ (accessed Jun. 07, 
2020). 

[19] ‘OpenADR  Alliance’. 
(accessed Jun. 07, 2020). 

https://www.openadr.org/ 

[20] ‘Open 

Alliance’. 
https://www.openchargealliance.org/  (accessed  Jun. 
07, 2020). 

Charge 

[21] ‘Smart  Builgins  Alliance  for  Smart  Cities’,  Smart 
Alliance. 

Buildings 
https://www.smartbuildingsalliance.org/en/home 
(accessed Jun. 07, 2020). 

[22] N.  Gavhane 

et 

al., 

‘EnergyWeb-EWDOS-
VisionPurpose-vFinal-20200309.pdf’.  Dec.  2019. 
Accessed:  Apr.  21,  2020.  [Online].  Available: 
https://www.energyweb.org/wp-

18 

 
 
 
SINA – Smart Interoperability Architecture 

content/uploads/2019/12/EnergyWeb-EWDOS-
VisionPurpose-vFinal-20200309.pdf 

[23] ‘G3-PLC 

Alliance 

Home’. 

http://www.g3-

plc.com/home/ (accessed Jun. 07, 2020). 

[24] ‘Usef Energy – Universal Smart Energy Framework’. 
https://www.usef.energy/ (accessed Jun. 07, 2020). 

[25] Bundesamt für Sicherheit in der Informationstechnik 
(BSI),  ‘Technische  Richtlinie  BSI  TR-03109-1 
Anforderungen 
der 
die 
Interoperabilität 
intelligenten 
eines 
Kommunikationseinheit 
Messsystems’, Bonn, Version 1.0. 

an 

[26] ‘Common  Security:  CDSA  and  CSSM,  Version  2 
corrigenda)’. 
(accessed 

(with 
https://publications.opengroup.org/c914 
Jun. 07, 2020). 

[27] S.  Dahmen-Lhuissier,  ‘ETSI  -  Smart  Appliances  - 
Smart  Domestic  &  Industrial  Appliances’,  ETSI. 
https://www.etsi.org/technologies/smart-appliances 
(accessed Jun. 07, 2020). 

[28] ‘W3C  Web 

of 

Things 

at  W3C’. 

https://www.w3.org/WoT/ (accessed Jun. 07, 2020). 

[29] ‘Project  Haystack  -  Home’,  Project  Haystack. 
http://project-haystack.org/ (accessed Dec. 15, 2016). 

[30] E.  Lear, 

‘Manufacturer  Usage  Description 
2018. 

May 

Specification’, 
https://tools.ietf.org/id/draft-ietf-opsawg-mud-
22.html (accessed Jun. 07, 2020). 

25, 

[31] ‘MQTT’. https://mqtt.org/ (accessed Jun. 07, 2020). 

[32] P.  D.  A.  Mitschele,  ‘Definition:  Smart  Contract’, 

https://wirtschaftslexikon.gabler.de/definition/smart-
contract-54213. 
https://wirtschaftslexikon.gabler.de/definition/smart-
contract-54213 (accessed Jun. 07, 2020). 

[33] P.  D.  A.  Mitschele, 

‘Definition:  Blockchain’, 

https://wirtschaftslexikon.gabler.de/definition/blockc
hain-54161. 
https://wirtschaftslexikon.gabler.de/definition/blockc
hain-54161 (accessed Jun. 07, 2020). 

19 

 
 
 
 
 
