1
2
0
2

g
u
A
0
2

]

M
M

.
s
c
[

1
v
5
8
9
8
0
.
8
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Metaverse for Social Good: A University Campus Prototype

Haihan Duan
The Chinese University of Hong
Kong, Shenzhen
Shenzhen Institute of Artificial
Intelligence and Robotics for Society
Shenzhen, China
haihanduan@link.cuhk.edu.cn

Jiaye Li
The Chinese University of Hong
Kong, Shenzhen
Shenzhen Institute of Artificial
Intelligence and Robotics for Society
Shenzhen, China
jiayeli@link.cuhk.edu.cn

Sizheng Fan
The Chinese University of Hong
Kong, Shenzhen
Shenzhen Institute of Artificial
Intelligence and Robotics for Society
Shenzhen, China
sizhengfan@link.cuhk.edu.cn

Zhonghao Lin
The Chinese University of Hong
Kong, Shenzhen
Shenzhen Institute of Artificial
Intelligence and Robotics for Society
Shenzhen, China
zhonghaolin@link.cuhk.edu.cn

Xiao Wu
White Matrix Inc.
Nanjing, China
wuxiao@whitematrix.io

Wei Cai∗
The Chinese University of Hong
Kong, Shenzhen
Shenzhen Institute of Artificial
Intelligence and Robotics for Society
Shenzhen, China
caiwei@cuhk.edu.cn

ABSTRACT
In recent years, the metaverse has attracted enormous attention
from around the world with the development of related technolo-
gies. The expected metaverse should be a realistic society with more
direct and physical interactions, while the concepts of race, gender,
and even physical disability would be weakened, which would be
highly beneficial for society. However, the development of meta-
verse is still in its infancy, with great potential for improvement.
Regarding metaverse’s huge potential, industry has already come
forward with advance preparation, accompanied by feverish invest-
ment, but there are few discussions about metaverse in academia
to scientifically guide its development. In this paper, we highlight
the representative applications for social good. Then we propose
a three-layer metaverse architecture from a macro perspective,
containing infrastructure, interaction, and ecosystem. Moreover,
we journey toward both a historical and novel metaverse with a
detailed timeline and table of specific attributes. Lastly, we illus-
trate our implemented blockchain-driven metaverse prototype of a
university campus and discuss the prototype design and insights.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Human-centered computing → Interactive systems and to-
ols; Collaborative and social computing systems and tools; • Soft-
ware and its engineering → Software system structures.
KEYWORDS
Metaverse; Multimedia; Blockchain; Human-centered Computing

∗Wei Cai is the corresponding author (caiwei@cuhk.edu.cn).

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
MM ’21, October 20–24, 2021, Virtual Event, China
© 2021 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-8651-7/21/10. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3474085.3479238

ACM Reference Format:
Haihan Duan, Jiaye Li, Sizheng Fan, Zhonghao Lin, Xiao Wu, and Wei
Cai. 2021. Metaverse for Social Good: A University Campus Prototype. In
Proceedings of the 29th ACM International Conference on Multimedia (MM
’21), October 20–24, 2021, Virtual Event, China. ACM, New York, NY, USA,
9 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3474085.3479238

1 INTRODUCTION
The term “metaverse" originates from the science fiction novel, Snow
Crash [25], written by Neal Stephenson. Metaverse is a combination
of “meta" (meaning beyond) and the stem “verse" from "universe",
denoting the next-generation Internet in which the users, as avatars,
can interact with each other and software applications in a three-
dimensional (3D) virtual space. There has been approximately 30
years’ development behind the evolution of this term. In 2018, the
success of the film Ready Player One [24] brought the concept of
metaverse back to the forefront of cutting-edge discussions. This
film describes a virtual world named "OASIS", in which everyone
could connect to the virtual world, act as their own customized
avatar, and do everything they wanted to, based on the basic rules.
The film Ready Player One shows many seemingly reachable tech-
nologies, e.g. head-mounted display (HMD) for virtual reality (VR)
rendering, ubiquitous sensing, haptic feedback, and modeling of
the physical world, which brings the public feasible opportunities
to achieve the metaverse.

However, progress in the development of multimedia technolo-
gies (VR/AR, etc.) alone cannot solve all of the problems in the
development of the metaverse, since multimedia technologies can-
not ensure the digital economy is transparent, stable, and sustain-
able. For example, the current digital economy is maintained by
centralized operators (e.g., large companies), which means that
digital properties actually belong to the operators, rather than the
users. Fortunately, recent explosive blockchain-related technolo-
gies [3] can be helpful. First proposed by Chaum [6], blockchain
applications in tamper-resistant decentralized ledgers [18] have
attracted tremendous attention due to the success of Bitcoin [16].
In 2013, Vitalik Buterin proposed a decentralized platform named

 
 
 
 
 
 
Ethereum [4], which introduces a smart contract for autonomous
and transparent program execution, with thousands of novel decen-
tralized applications (DApps) developed [5], e.g. blockchain games
[15]. Specifically, decentralized finance (DeFi) could ensure that
digital properties are unique, persistent, and tradable. Evidently,
the metaverse, as an interactive multimedia community relying on
massive numbers of online users, may benefit from the technical
advances of blockchain to build a fair, free and sustainable society.
Realistic demands and the prospect of feasibly constructing the
metaverse motivate the industry, which has been working hard to
prepare with fervor. For example, The Sandbox1 is a blockchain-
based virtual sandbox game that obtained more than $2 million in
financing in 2020. Similarly, Roblox2, an online game platform and
creation system, reached more than $40 billion in value at its peak.
For industrial applications, NVIDIA has built a platform named
Omniverse to support real-time virtual collaboration in industrial
design and visualization. In addition, there are many giant com-
panies that are preparing to join the metaverse venture. Facebook
purchased VR device manufacturer Oculus for deeper development
of VR and augmented reality (AR) technologies. Epic Games claimed
they raised $1 billion to put toward building the metaverse, and
Sony also invested $200 million to support Epic’s vision. More-
over, many giants (Tencent, Bytedance) have paid a great deal of
attention to constructing metaverse-related applications.

The exploding focus and investments in metaverse from indus-
try would speed up the development and breakthrough of related
technologies, but this rapid progress also leads to many problems.
Thus, academia has a responsibility to study related problems and
give advice to instruct on the development of the metaverse. In re-
cent years, some papers focused on the metaverse have been made
available to the public. In 2013, Dionisio et al. [7] published a survey
about 3D virtual worlds and the metaverse. This paper describes
five phases of virtual world development and specifies four features
of a viable metaverse, including realism, ubiquity, interoperability,
and scalability, and looks forward to the future evolution of each
phase. In 2016, Nevelsteen [17] sampled a list of technologies using
grounded theory to classify technologies that implement a virtual
world, and provided a detailed definition of a "virtual world". The
above-mentioned two papers clearly explain the concept of the
metaverse and its relationship with the virtual world, and guide
subsequent research on the metaverse.

However, with rapid technology development, especially block-
chain-related technology, many novel metaverse applications have
matured, but are not included in the existing surveys. On the other
hand, there is a lack of related discussion about the metaverse archi-
tecture. Therefore, focusing on the above situation, we summarize
the main contributions of this paper as follows:

• We propose a three-layer architecture of the metaverse from
a macro point of view, including (from bottom to top): in-
frastructure, interaction, and ecosystem. Specifically, we in-
troduce the decentralized ecosystem based on blockchain as
a novel trend in metaverse development.

• We raise open research questions based on the proposed
architecture of metaverse that are imperative to solve.

1https://www.sandbox.game/
2https://www.roblox.com/

• We review existing novel and representative metaverse appli-
cations, most of which are not included in previous surveys,
and systematically conclude their attributes.

• We implement a blockchain-driven metaverse prototype of
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen (CUHKSZ),
in which we are continuously constructing the system and
conducting user studies for further research.

2 METAVERSE FOR SOCIAL GOOD
Although the metaverse is a virtual world, regarded as human-
centered computing, it indeed shows a significantly positive impact
on the real world, especially in terms of accessibility, diversity,
equality, and humanity. In this section, we list some representative
applications that reflect metaverse for social good.

2.1 Accessibility
Currently, global communication and cooperation among countries
has become more and more frequent with the rise of globaliza-
tion, but geographical distance is an objective obstacle that would
increase costs during the process. Moreover, influenced by the
COVID-19 pandemic, many events are suspended due to pandemic
prevention requirements. However, the metaverse could provide
great accessibility to serve different social requirements. For exam-
ple, many events have been converted to virtual form, supported
by the metaverse. In 2020, UC Berkeley held its graduation cere-
4, there are many virtual
mony on Minecraft
events held every day, such as a Travis Scott concert. According
to the above-mentioned examples, the metaverse has already be-
come an extension of our daily lives, which could satisfy our social
requirements, with lower costs and higher security.

3. Moreover, on Fortnite

2.2 Diversity
Restricted to physical limitations (such as geography, language, etc.),
the real world cannot integrate various elements in one place to sat-
isfy the requirements of different people. However, the metaverse
has unlimited extension space and seamless scene transformation,
which could effectively achieve diversity. There are various inter-
esting scenarios that can be held in the metaverse. For example,
5 held a presidential campaign for Joe Biden, and
Animal Crossing
students at Stanford University exhibited their posters in Second
6. Not limited by the above examples, various activities can be
Life
found in the metaverse, such as education, shopping, political cam-
paign, artwork, pets, haunted houses, etc. Therefore, the diversity
requirements of physical society have been greatly satisfied.

2.3 Equality
Equality is a spiritual pursuit for human beings, but, in reality,
there are many factors that influence equality, such as race, gen-
der, disability, and property. In metaverse, everyone can control
customized avatars and exercise their power to build a fair and
sustainable society. For example, as an autonomous ecosystem, the
metaverse includes an attribute of democracy, allowing participants

3https://www.minecraft.net
4https://www.epicgames.com/fortnite/en-US/home
5https://animal-crossing.com/
6https://secondlife.com/

7, there
to maintain order and normal operation. In Decentraland
is a Decentralized Autonomous Organization (DAO) where users
could propose and vote on the policies created to determine how
the world behaves (e.g., what kinds of wearable items are allowed).
8, a Pokémon-inspired universe where anyone
The Axie Infinity
can earn tokens through skilled gameplay and contributions to the
ecosystem, also introduces a decentralized organization mechanism,
in which Axie Infinity Shards (AXS) holders can stake their tokens
through a staking dashboard and participate in governance votes.

2.4 Humanity
Humanistic spirit is a kind of universal human self-care, which is
manifested in the maintenance, pursuit, and concern for human
dignity, value, and destiny. In society, humanity cherishes various
spiritual and cultural phenomena left behind by previous genera-
tions as a legacy for humanity. The metaverse could be an excellent
approach for cultural communication and protection. For example,
the metaverse has included cultural relics protection. Experiencing
years of weathering, cultural relics in the physical world are fragile
and likely easily broken by manmade damage or natural disasters.
The Notre Dame de Paris caught fire in 2019, sustaining serious
damage to the cathedral’s wooden sections. Fortunately, Ubisoft
reconstructed the Notre Dame de Paris as a digital 3D model in
Assassin’s Creed Unity, which will be utilized to support its recon-
struction. In China, the National architects & Cthuwork have made
great efforts to reconstruct Chinese cultural relics as 3D voxel mod-
els in Minecraft, containing buildings, like the Forbidden City, and
famous paintings, such as Qingming Shanghe Tu (Ascending the
River at Qingming Festival). In the metaverse, the digital recon-
struction of cultural relics not only takes place anywhere in the
world, but can also provide evidence for relic restoration.

3 ARCHITECTURE OF THE METAVERSE
Currently, the development of metaverse is still in the early stages,
so its architecture does not have a consistent definition in either
academia or industry. For example, Jon Radoff proposed a seven-
layer metaverse architecture, where the layers from bottom to
top are: infrastructure, human interface, decentralization, spatial
computing, creator economy, discovery, and experience [22]. This
architecture is built from an industrial division based on the value
chain of the expected market. In contrast, we intend to conclude
the architecture of metaverse from a more macro perspective, so a
three-layer architecture is proposed, as shown in Figure 1, including
(from bottom to top): infrastructure, interaction, and ecosystem.

For the metaverse’s fundamental requirements, we consider that
the architecture should cross from the physical world to the virtual
world. In Figure 1, the left two circles denote the virtual world and
physical world, and there is an intersection between the two worlds.
The structure of these two circles corresponds to three layers in
the central part of Figure 1, named infrastructure, interaction, and
ecosystem from bottom to top. And we list some key components of
each layer right beside the layer name in Figure 1. Note that the key
components listed will be discussed in this paper, but there are other
components in each layer that we will not emphasize, due to this

7https://decentraland.org/
8https://axieinfinity.com/

Figure 1: Three-layer Architecture of the Metaverse

paper’s limited purpose and scope. The proposed three-layer archi-
tecture of metaverse can effectively embrace the components that
constitute a metaverse, and the details and open research questions
of each layer will be discussed further in the following subsections.

3.1 Infrastructure
The infrastructure layer contains the fundamental requirements for
supporting the operation of a virtual world, including computation,
communication, blockchain and storage.

Computation and communication. The metaverse is a large-
scale multimedia system, so its operation requires huge compu-
tational costs. On the other hand, since the expected metaverse
should be accessible at any time and any place, communication
technologies are another basic support. In fact, improvements in
computation and communication are always cutting-edge research
topics, which is not limited to the metaverse. Therefore, in this
paper, we pay more attention to how the development of computa-
tion and communication could enhance the user experience of the
metaverse. We summarize the following open research questions
for developing computation and communication for the metaverse
as follows: (1) How to design specific computational devices to sup-
port the huge computational consumption of the metaverse? (2) How
to coordinate different computational resources, such as cloud com-
puting or mobile devices, to enhance the user experience in different
terminals? (3) What kind of data structure or encoding method could
effectively present and transmit large-scale data of the metaverse?

Blockchain and storage. The expectations for the metaverse
are that it will connect everyone around the world, so an enor-
mous amount of data, such as maps, roles, etc., would be generated
and stored in mass storage, which is another basic infrastructure.
More importantly, to guarantee decentralization and fairness, the
blockchain must be introduced to support sustainable ecosystem
operation in the metaverse [3, 5]. Advanced blockchain systems,
like Ethereum [4], introduce a smart contract that could support
the operation of DApps, which greatly extend the blockchain’s
application scope, and make it feasible for metaverse to construct
a decentralized social ecosystem [5]. In this paper, we regard the
blockchain as an infrastructure component of the metaverse, since
the essence of blockchain is a distributed ledger, a special kind of
storage [6], and the detailed usability of blockchain in the ecosys-
tem layer will be introduced in Section 3.3. We list the following
open research questions that should be considered when building
the metaverse: (1) How to effectively store and retrieve the enormous
amount of data in the metaverse? (2) What consensus model should

the blockchain adopt to support the sustainable economics of the meta-
verse? (3) How to reasonably allocate and coordinate data stored in
mass storage and the blockchain?

3.2 Interaction
In this subsection, we emphasize the immersive user experience,
digital twins, and content creation, which are important parts in
the interaction layer that bridges the physical and virtual worlds.
Immersive user experience. To achieve an immersive user
experience, there are two main components that should be con-
sidered in interactions between users and the metaverse. First, the
metaverse should receive data from the physical world so that
users could control their avatars to finish corresponding actions. As
shown in the film Ready Player One [24], the lead character stands
on a treadmill-like machine and wears HMD, gloves, and a special
suit so that all user actions could be captured. Second, real-time 3D
rendering-related technologies like VR/AR are regarded as the main
interaction interface. Moreover, haptic feedback is also necessary,
which has already equipped most game controllers, like Nintendo
Switch9. However, existing technologies can only support specific
areas, but cannot provide an immersive user experience, which
formulates the following research questions: (1) How to understand
the affections of users and enhance their experience during interac-
tions with the metaverse? (2) How to integrate the input and output
modalities to build a holistic user experience during interactions?

Digital twins. With the exception of metaverse users, other
objects or things in the physical world could also interact with the
metaverse, presented as digital twins [8] in the virtual world. The
parameters of physical devices can be collected by ubiquitous sens-
ing technologies to maintain the same states as their corresponding
digital twins. This is an interdisciplinary area that should cover a
large number of related subjects, such as material science, signal
processing, Internet of Things (IoT), pattern recognition, etc. [9, 21].
On the contrary, after operation and processing in metaverse, the
parameters in virtual environments can be sent back to physical
devices and their real world states can be changed. However, the
development of digital twins in the metaverse is still in its early
stages, and the following research questions deserve further study:
(1) What in the physical world should be mapped as digital twins
within the metaverse? (2) How to use digital twins in the metaverse
to effectively benefit the real world?

Content creation interface. The metaverse is a evolving vir-
tual world with unlimited scalability and interoperability. The op-
erators need to construct the basic elements, while innovative
user-generated content (UGC) fulfill the universe through users.
Therefore, high efficiency content creation is another significant
component for interactions between users and the metaverse. For
buildings, objects, and environments that exist in the physical world,
we can apply 3D reconstruction approaches to build digital twins
in the metaverse [14]. To generate 3D models, users can utilize
3D modeling software, such as 3ds Max10, Blender11, or Maya12,
but these modeling systems are highly dependent on professional

9https://www.nintendo.com/switch/
10https://www.autodesk.com/products/3ds-max/overview
11https://www.blender.org/
12https://www.autodesk.com/products/maya/overview

knowledge and experience, which is difficult for amateurs to repli-
cate. So we summarize the following open research questions: (1)
How to accurately reconstruct existing objects and their physical at-
tributes in the virtual world? (2) How can the existing interaction
modalities facilitate content creation to enhance the user experience?

3.3 Ecosystem
The ecosystem can provide a breathing and parallel living world
that continuously serves all of the world’s inhabitants. Specifically,
people may have social experiences that are completely different
from the real world in activities, like befriending AI-driven non-
player character (NPC). In this paper, we mainly discuss three parts
consisting of the ecosystem layer: UGC, economics, and AI.

User-generated content. The UGC is any form of content that
has been created by users rather than the developers/operators of
online platforms [12, 15]. Different from traditional game commu-
nities like Steam Workshop13, players’ goals are not to follow the
developer’s rules, but rather to explore freely and create content in
their own style. Hence, UGC in the metaverse tends to be heteroge-
neous and requires ownership. Blockchain-based Non-Fungible To-
ken (NFT) provides a new approach to UGC in the metaverse, which
could certify a digital asset to be unique and not interchangeable.
Specifically, users can store their UGC as an NFT on the blockchain,
and trade UGC through smart contracts to achieve liquidity. The
free creation of UGCs can motivate the innovation of users, but it
also brings some open research questions: (1) How to design more
UGC-based applications to reflect and promote the value of UGCs? (2)
How to design a reasonable mechanism to guarantee the uniqueness
and reduce the malicious duplication of UGCs?

Economics. Economics is an important factor considered in the
ecosystem, which could offer rich content and a vibrant community
in the metaverse. Decentralized Finance, based on smart contracts
and Fungible Token (FT), offers a way to innovate economic models
in the metaverse. Existing successful solutions, such as Uniswap
[1], a Decentralized Exchange (DEX) on Ethereum, automatically
provide users with liquidity for their tokens. At present, the main
economic activities in the metaverse mainly include the auction of
virtual assets, such as land, scarce items and precious real estate,
development and leasing of land, rewards for finishing game tasks,
and profits from investing in cryptocurrency. So the metaverse
invokes a new form of funding that draws inspiration from both
the real world and virtual world. However, the implementation of
smart contract applications has the potential for external attacks,
and the metaverse lacks decentralized financial applications. Hence,
we summarize the research questions as follows: (1) How to design
immutable yet sustainable smart contacts to maintain a balanced
economic system for the metaverse? (2) How to design efficient DeFi
models to improve the liquidity of NFTs in the metaverse?

Artificial intelligence. AI facilitates our physical lives in many
areas, including intelligent transportation [20], smart healthcare
[26], environmental monitoring [19], and public safety [13]. Mean-
while, the key concept in the metaverse lies in its sophisticated data
analytics for understanding, monitoring, regulating, and planning.
Apart from the above-mentioned applications, AI-driven NPCs will
be an indispensable part of our metaverse. Specifically, NPCs are

13https://steamcommunity.com/workshop/

Figure 2: Brief Timeline of the Metaverse Development

computer-operated characters who act as enemies, partners, and
support characters to provide challenges, offer assistance, and sup-
port the storyline. State-of-the-art AI mostly uses deep learning
(DL) and reinforcement learning (RL), and achieves breakthrough
progress in computer vision (CV) and natural language process
(NLP). To give users a better user experience with NPCs, we for-
mulate the following research questions: (1) How to facilitate users’
operation using AI technology to enhance user experience in the meta-
verse? (2) What kind of AI technology can be used to effectively im-
prove the comprehension and communication ability of NPCs?

4 JOURNEY TOWARDS THE METAVERSE
In fact, we are still on the way to exploring the metaverse, although
this concept has been proposed for more than 30 years, as men-
tioned in Section 1. Referring to fictional literature, such as True
Names [27], Neuromancer [10] and Snow Crash [25], they could
help us picture a promising future about the metaverse. However,
although there is no perfect example that meets all of the require-
ments of an ideal metaverse, various existing works possess several
features that are worthy of summary. In this section, we will briefly
introduce some remarkable metaverse forerunners, and illustrate a
brief timeline, as shown in Figure 2.

4.1 Pioneering Work
4.1.1 Text-based Interactive Games. Text-based interactive game is
the primary category of pioneering metaverse [7], which uses rules
like the famous board game Dungeons & Dragons for reference.
The typical examples are MUDs (originally multi-user dungeon,
with later variants, multi-user dimension and multi-user domain
[2, 11]) and MUSHs (Multi-User Shared Hallucination) [23]. Text-
based interactive games build an online platform where players can
communicate in real-time through texts and play collaboratively.
After that, MUDs and MUSHs gradually evolved into different ver-
sions, such as AberMUD, TinyMUD, LPMud and DikuMUD with
more features. Among them, TinyMUD allows the user to create
a game world for other players to explore, which marks the ap-
pearance of the UGC. The above-mentioned works represent the
beginning of building the metaverse. We have selected Colossal
Cave Adventure as the representative prototype. Colossal Cave

Adventure, Between 1975 and 1977: Colossal Cave Adventure is
a role-playing and rogue-like game where players can move and
interact with items through text commands, which describes the
environment in text and gives results for certain actions.

4.1.2 Virtual Open Worlds. In the 1990s, with rapid advances in
computational power and computer graphics, people were no longer
satisfied with text-based interactions. Virtual worlds equipped with
3D graphics and more open-ended socialization appeared at that
time. Those virtual worlds built an online 3D virtual environment
where people can log in as their corresponding avatar, who can cre-
ate and construct UGCs in these worlds. Communication methods
are also enriched to both text and voice for people to better share
their experiences. Here are some typical examples: Web World,
1994; Worlds Inc., 1994; Active Worlds, 1995: This is a series of
virtual worlds with the development of graphic technologies from
2.5D to 3D. Thereinto, Active Worlds allows users to travel among
3D virtual worlds and environments built by others.

4.2 Modern Prototypes of the Metaverse
In this section, we will introduce some existing and promising
works that have representative features of the metaverse. Com-
pared to the pioneers, these works are more technologically so-
phisticated and involve a larger group of users. According to their
characteristics, we divide them into two categories as follows.

4.2.1 Massive Multiplayer Online Video Games. Massive multi-
player online (MMO) video games are probably the most popular
version of metaverse today. These games enable a massive amount
of people to interact with each other in highly sophisticated 3D envi-
ronments with convenient communication, UGC creation, economy,
VR/AR, and so on. We list some representative examples of MMO
video games as follows. Note that others like Grand Theft Auto
Online, Pokemon Go, Animal Crossing and Super Mario Maker 2 are
also considered but not listed, due to limited space. Second Life,
2003: Second Life is an online virtual world with a large amount
of UGCs, with its own virtual currency, the Linden Dollar, which
can be exchanged with real-world currency. Roblox, 2006: Roblox
is a platform where players can play games created by others. In
Roblox, players can use Roblox Studio to create games and virtual
items, such as clothes, body parts, and gears, which can be bought

Table 1: Features of representative metaverse examples

Metaverse Examples

Infrastructure

Interaction

Ecosystem

Blockchain

VR/AR Digital twins Creator UGC Economics AI

Text-based Games

MUDs & MUSHs

Virtual Open
Worlds

MMO Video
Games

Active World

Solipsis

Second Life

Roblox

Minecraft

Grand Theft Auto Online

Pokémon Go

Super Mario Maker 2

Fortnite

Animal Crossing: New Horizons

Decentralized
Virtual World

Cryptovoxels

Decentraland

(cid:37)

(cid:37)

(cid:37)

(cid:37)

(cid:37)

(cid:37)

(cid:37)

(cid:37)

(cid:37)

(cid:37)

(cid:37)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:37)

(cid:37)

(cid:37)

(cid:37)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:37)

(cid:33)

(cid:37)

(cid:37)

(cid:37)

(cid:37)

(cid:37)

(cid:37)

(cid:37)

(cid:37)

(cid:37)

(cid:37)

(cid:37)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:37)

(cid:37)

(cid:37)

(cid:37)

(cid:37)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:37)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:37)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:37)

(cid:33)

(cid:37)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:37)

(cid:33)

(cid:37)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

and sold. Roblox also occasionally hosts virtual and real-life events.
Minecraft, 2011: Minecraft is a sandbox video game where players
can interact with a fully modifiable 3D environment made by blocks
and entities. In Minecraft, players can build astonishing architec-
tures and innovative game levels with one-cubic meter-sized blocks,
so Minecraft has a massive number of UGCs. Moreover, Minecraft
supports VR devices, which highly enriches the user experience.
Fortnite, 2017: Fortnite is an MMO shooter game developed by
Epic Games. Fortnite allows players to construct buildings, create
custom islands, and discover featured islands created by the commu-
nity, but some in-game items, such as skins, gestures, and dances,
are provided by the operator, which players could purchase. More
importantly, Epic Games has already hosted many large in-game
events, such as grand vocal concerts in Fortnite.

4.2.2 Decentralized Virtual World. Different from the MMO video
games, the decentralized virtual worlds are supported by blockchain
technology, which has a build-in economy with an impact on the
real economy. We highlight some examples as follows: Cryptovox-
els14, 2018: Cryptovoxels is a virtual world built on Ethereum,
which consists of a city called Origin City, owned by the oper-
ator, and parcels, owned by individuals. Users with an Ethereum
wallet can trade the parcels and UGCs with others, and the parcel
owner can freely modify its blocks and features. It is worth men-
tioning that some artists are displaying and trading their artwork
in Cryptovoxels as NFT. Decentraland, 2018: Decentraland is an-
other virtual world powered by Ethereum. Users can use Ethereum
to trade empty land parcels of Decentraland, and the owners can
call software development kits (SDKs) provided by Decentraland,

14https://www.cryptovoxels.com/

to build social games and applications. More importantly, Decen-
traland has a sustainable creator economic system, in which land,
estates, avatars, wearables, and even names can be traded in its
marketplace. Encouraged by incentive mechanisms, a large number
of UGCs, such as scenes, artworks, challenges, and buildings, are
created by users in Decentraland, constructing a virtuous circle.

4.3 Vision
From the architecture of the metaverse defined in Section 3, we sum-
marize seven main features of a metaverse, including blockchain,
VR/AR, digital twins, UGC creator (denoted by creator), UGC, eco-
nomics and AI, as shown in Table 1. Note that we do not list compu-
tation, communication, and storage, since they are the fundamentals
of a digital world. Then we characterize the features of representa-
tive metaverse examples according to their type. Drawn from the
table, we find that, the UGC and its creator are the only feature for
pioneering metaverse examples. With technology development, the
ecosystem becomes richer, where economics and AI begin to appear
in Virtual Open Worlds. Coming to the era of MMO Video Games,
the metaverse examples almost regard the UGC, economics, and
AI as essential components. On the other hand, the MMO Video
Games also present innovation in interactive modalities. Roblox,
Minecraft and Pokémon Go introduce VR/AR to provide users with
a more immersive user experience, while Grand Theft Auto On-
line and Pokémon Go utilize digital twins to provide interactive
experience refer to the physical world. After the breakthrough of
blockchain-related technologies, novel metaverse examples intro-
duce the blockchain to maintain decentralization and autonomy.
More importantly, the ecosystem innovations resulting from the
introduction of blockchain will be a promising research area.

5 CAMPUS METAVERSE PROTOTYPE
To achieve our goals and vision toward metaverse for social good,
this section presents The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shen-
zhen (CUHKSZ) Metaverse, our early-stage prototype, as a blockch-
ain-driven exemplary system for demonstration and future social
experiments. The proposed system aims to provide our on-campus
students with an interactive metaverse, a mixed environment where
students’ actions in the real world could correspondingly affect the
virtual world, and vice versa. As shown in Figure 3, we illustrate a
corner of CUHKSZ metaverse through the implemented Metaverse
Observer. In the following subsections, we will introduce the key
concepts of our system in detail.

Figure 3: A corner at CUHKSZ through Metaverse Observer

5.1 Infrastructure
The proposed CUHKSZ Metaverse is developed on Unity15, a cross-
platform development engine, thus the application can be deployed
on smartphones, PCs, and browser-based cloud streaming, etc. With
the support of the development platform, thousands of users from
both cable and mobile network are all allowed to communicate and
interact with each other in the CUHKSZ Metaverse. Further, the
3D models are constructed using Blender. More importantly, the
CUHKSZ Metaverse applies blockchain with smart contract to sup-
port the ecosystem, including tokens, DAO, and trading system, etc.
In the current version, we choose FISCO-BCOS16, which is an open-
source high-performance financial-grade consortium blockchain
platform, to deploy CUHKSZ Metaverse. FISCO-BCOS can provide
rich features including group architecture, pluggable consensus
mechanisms, privacy protection algorithms, etc. Also, Solidity17 is
utilized as the smart contract programming language to support
the blockchain-based ecosystem. The introduction of consortium
blockchain in CUHKSZ Metaverse benefits the system operation
and test in the early stages, and avoids the high cost of transactions
in the public blockchain. In the next phase, we intend to connect
the current consortium blockchain with the public blockchain, e.g.,
deploy and synchronize the data and smart contract to the public
blockchain (such as Ethereum).

15https://unity.com/
16http://fisco-bcos.org/
17https://github.com/ethereum/solidity

5.2 Interaction
5.2.1 Metaverse Viewer. The Metaverse Viewer is built for users
to interact with CUHKSZ Metaverse, which provides both a first-
person and a third-person perspective, as shown in Figure 5b. To
implement the Metaverse Viewer, we envision a cross-platform
future that various devices would connect to CUHKSZ Metaverse,
including smartphones, PCs, browser-based cloud streaming, etc.
In the current prototype, we adopt the smartphone as the inaugural
platform for the following reasons: (1) it is convenient to promote
the metaverse concept to our target users, as most are heavy mo-
bile phone users; (2) smartphones provide continuous access to the
metaverse, especially in a mobile environment; (3) smartphones
make it easy to acquire physical data from our users through sen-
sors, cameras, and GPS modules built into the smartphone, which
retains considerable potential for innovation with interactive ap-
proaches. However, the conventional smartphone is not yet to the
ideal metaverse device. In the next phase, we envision providing
an extension of a VR/AR interface to enhance the immersive user
experience utilizing specific sensors, such as LiDAR.

5.2.2 Ubiquitous Sensing-based Service. Most of the existing meta-
verse enables interactions with traditional keyboards and mouses,
which lack accurate control of the avatar and immersive user experi-
ence. The current version of our CUHKSZ Metaverse Viewer utilizes
localization information as a source of sensing input. For instance,
we feature a location-based incentive mechanism to maximize the
social welfare of on-campus students: the students may start the
Metaverse Viewer in Power-Saving mode and voluntarily report
their GPS location for higher token production rates. As depicted in
Figure 4a, the student is now physically studying in the University
Library, thus, he/she will automatically join the University Library
chat room to chat with nearby students through the correspond-
ing metaverse channel, while earning tokens in high-speed mode.
Apparently, this approach may encourage students to leave their
dormitories and study at the library during the day. In the next
phase of CUHKSZ Metaverse, we intend to leverage more sensing
modalities, e.g. eye-tracking, to improve the user experience.

5.2.3 Content Creation. As envisioned in Section 4.3, UGC is a
fundamental element in a metaverse. In CUHKSZ Metaverse, we
also adopt UGC as the core user mechanism. However, it is still a
challenge for an average user to create customized items in a 3D

(a) Location-based Services

(b) Editor for Content Creation

Figure 4: Interaction Layer in CUHKSZ Metaverse

environment, as 3D object quality relies heavily on professional
modeling knowledge and experience, as described in Section 3.2.
To address this issue, we designed and implemented an easy-to-
use UGC editing tool, as shown in Figure 4b. With this editor,
an untrained user can learn to make their imaginary 3D items
with voxels in minutes, as in creating architectures in Minecraft.
Then the UGC editing tool will apply AI-based technologies to
assist the UGC creation process, e.g., using generative algorithms
to generate 3D items based on the voxels made by users. Moreover,
the 3D items could automatically be transformed to a low-poly style
model, which better fits the artistic style of the CUHKSZ Metaverse.
Afterward, the created voxel model will be built as an NFT for more
usage (e.g., trading and collection). In the next phase of CUHKSZ
Metaverse, we intend to expand the UGC scope, e.g., allow users to
create pets with AI-driven actions and emotions.

5.3 Ecosystem
5.3.1 Token-driven Ecosystem. For a modern metaverse, a token-
driven ecosystem is a key element. CUHKSZ metaverse employs
blockchain-based tokens to feature a fair and transparent ecosys-
tem, which are considered to be monetary representations for the
community. In our current implementation, all residents can contin-
uously claim tokens via smart contracts, which specify the number
of tokens the users can collect in a certain period of time. According
to the predefined rules, the token’s production rate may be varied
for each user, subject to residents’ actions and performance in both
the virtual and physical worlds, e.g. location-based incentive mech-
anism, which is discussed in 5.2.2. The tokens can be utilized in
various activities, such as trading in an official store, trading UGCs
with other players, voting, etc.

5.3.2 Autonomous Governance. As discussed in Section 2.3, a well-
designed democratic system may improve equality for the social
good. CUHKSZ Metaverse enforces autonomous governance by in-
troducing a Delegated Proof of Stake (DPoS) voting protocol for any
motions or proposals to revise predefined rules, as described in Sec-
tion 3.3. According to the characteristics of an university, CUHKSZ
Metaverse encourages students to establish a student union and
elect a virtual committee, which could efficiently make decisions for
matters representing users. For convenient discussion, we have also
implemented an online forum to build the user community. This

(a) Trade and Purchase Services

(b) Billboard on Campus

Figure 5: Ecosystem Layer in CUHKSZ Metaverse

series of work assures autonomous governance and maintains the
normal operation of society in the CUHKSZ Metaverse. Moreover,
the iteration of CUHKSZ Metaverse is also based on the proposals
of autonomous governance.

5.3.3 UGC Display and Trading. In CUHKSZ Metaverse, we pro-
vide a UGC creator that allows users to create almost anything,
which is discussed in 5.2.3. In the current stage, metaverse residents
can trade UGCs with others, wear them as ornaments, or display
them in their personal rooms. In addition, the billboard system
provides a channel for users to give full play to their personalities
in public. As illustrated in Figure 5b, a user may rent a certain area
in the virtual campus and set their customized billboard, which
may display their information or links to their personal room.

5.3.4 AI-driven Metaverse Observer. Different from the Metaverse
Viewer, to observe and track key events of CUHKSZ Metaverse, we
develop an AI-driven Metaverse Observer, as shown in Figure 3.
This Metaverse Observer has a wider and higher vision that could
cover an area of CUHKSZ Metaverse. Moreover, by tracking and
analyzing real-time operation data from the Metaverse, this AI-
driven Metaverse Observer can automatically recommend ongoing
intriguing events to users, in which events with a high flow of
users or approved by officials are more likely to be recommended.
Therefore, the Metaverse Observer can provide global information
for users and audiences, to better capture timely events.

6 CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we propose a three-layer architecture for metaverse,
including infrastructure, interaction, and ecosystem, and the key
components in each layer are discussed in detail, where a set of open
research questions are summarized for each component. Afterward,
we journey through the development of metaverse, describing both
pioneering work and the novel metaverse examples. For intuitive
illustration, a timeline of notable metaverse examples is drawn
based on their release time, and a table is concluded to show the
features of the representative metaverse. Lastly, the implemented
blockchain-driven university campus prototype, CUHKSZ Meta-
verse, is illustrated, which could effectively enrich the campus life
of university students and university faculties.

According to the representative applications, the metaverse sig-
nificantly reflects the vision of human-centered computing, which
is highly beneficial for the society in terms of accessibility, diversity,
equality, and humanity. In the future, we will continuously improve
our prototype and continue conducting metaverse-related studies.
Not limited to the proposed questions, there are many research
topics in the metaverse that are imperative to be studied. The core
motivation of this paper is to direct more attention to the metaverse,
and together, make a better society.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This paper is supported in part by Project 61902333 from National
Natural Science Foundation of China, and Project AC01202101038
from Shenzhen Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics for
Society. Thanks for other developers of CUHKSZ Metaverse: Hong-
hao Chen, Nanjun Yao, Qiuhong Chen, Tong Chen, Xiangyu Xu,
Yifan Zhao, Yiyan Hu, Yuyang Liang, Zexin Lin, Zhen Ren.

REFERENCES
[1] Guillermo Angeris, Hsien-Tang Kao, Rei Chiang, Charlie Noyes, and Tarun Chitra.
2019. An analysis of Uniswap markets. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.03380 (2019).
[2] Richard A Bartle. 2003. Designing Virtual Worlds: Bibliography. bearing a date

of (2003), 1–36.

[3] Chris Berg, Sinclair Davidson, and Jason Potts. 2019. Blockchain technology as
economic infrastructure: Revisiting the electronic markets hypothesis. Frontiers
in Blockchain 2 (2019), 22.

[4] Vitalik Buterin et al. 2014. A next-generation smart contract and decentralized

application platform. white paper 3, 37 (2014).

[5] Wei Cai, Zehua Wang, Jason B Ernst, Zhen Hong, Chen Feng, and Victor CM
Leung. 2018. Decentralized applications: The blockchain-empowered software
system. IEEE Access 6 (2018), 53019–53033.

[6] David Lee Chaum. 1979. Computer Systems established, maintained and trusted
by mutually suspicious groups. Electronics Research Laboratory, University of
California.

[7] John David N Dionisio, William G Burns III, and Richard Gilbert. 2013. 3D
virtual worlds and the metaverse: Current status and future possibilities. ACM
Computing Surveys (CSUR) 45, 3 (2013), 1–38.

[8] Abdulmotaleb El Saddik. 2018. Digital twins: The convergence of multimedia

technologies. IEEE multimedia 25, 2 (2018), 87–92.

[9] Irfan A Essa. 2000. Ubiquitous sensing for smart and aware environments. IEEE

personal communications 7, 5 (2000), 47–49.

[10] William Gibson. 2019. Neuromancer (1984). Routledge. 86–94 pages.
[11] Harley Hahn and Rick Stout. 1996. The Internet Complete Reference . Osborne

McGraw-Hill. Technical Report. ISBN 0-07-882138-X.

[12] John Krumm, Nigel Davies, and Chandra Narayanaswami. 2008. User-generated

content. IEEE Pervasive Computing 7, 4 (2008), 10–11.

[13] Xinchen Liu, Wu Liu, Tao Mei, and Huadong Ma. 2016. A deep learning-based ap-
proach to progressive vehicle re-identification for urban surveillance. In European
conference on computer vision. Springer, 869–884.

[14] Zhiliang Ma and Shilong Liu. 2018. A review of 3D reconstruction techniques in
civil engineering and their applications. Advanced Engineering Informatics 37
(2018), 163–174.

[15] Tian Min, Hanyi Wang, Yaoze Guo, and Wei Cai. 2019. Blockchain games: A

survey. In 2019 IEEE Conference on Games (CoG). IEEE, 1–8.

[16] Satoshi Nakamoto. 2019. Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system. Technical

Report. Manubot.

[17] Kim JL Nevelsteen. 2018. Virtual world, defined from a technological perspec-
tive and applied to video games, mixed reality, and the Metaverse. Computer
Animation and Virtual Worlds 29, 1 (2018), e1752.

[18] Michael Nofer, Peter Gomber, Oliver Hinz, and Dirk Schiereck. 2017. Blockchain.

Business & Information Systems Engineering 59, 3 (2017), 183–187.

[19] Bun Theang Ong, Komei Sugiura, and Koji Zettsu. 2016. Dynamically pre-
trained deep recurrent neural networks using environmental monitoring data for
predicting PM 2.5. Neural Computing and Applications 27, 6 (2016), 1553–1566.
[20] Gang Pan, Guande Qi, Wangsheng Zhang, Shijian Li, Zhaohui Wu, and Lau-
rence Tianruo Yang. 2013. Trace analysis and mining for smart cities: issues,
methods, and applications. IEEE Communications Magazine 51, 6 (2013), 120–126.
[21] Fernando V Paulovich, Maria Cristina F De Oliveira, and Osvaldo N Oliveira Jr.
2018. A future with ubiquitous sensing and intelligent systems. ACS sensors 3, 8
(2018), 1433–1438.

[22] Jon Radoff. [n.d.]. The Metaverse Value-Chain. [EB/OL].

https://medium.
com/building-the-metaverse/the-metaverse-value-chain-afcf9e09e3a7 Accessed
April 7, 2021.

[23] Rawn Shah and Jim Romine. 1995. Playing MUDS on the Internet. John Wiley &

Sons, Inc.

[24] Steven Spielberg, Alan Silvestri, Zak Penn, Ernest Cline, and Donald De Line.

2018. Ready player one. Warner Bros USA.
[25] Neal Stephenson. 2014. Snow crash. Bragelonne.
[26] Upkar Varshney. 2007. Pervasive healthcare and wireless health monitoring.

Mobile Networks and Applications 12, 2 (2007), 113–127.

[27] Vernor Vinge. 2001. True names, 1981. True Names and the Opening of the

Cyberspace Frontier,(ed. James Frenkel), TOR, New York (2001).

