1
2
0
2

g
u
A
6
2

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
2
3
0
2
1
.
8
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Gowri Sankar Ramachandran1, Sidra Malik1,
Shantanu Pal1, Ali Dorri1, Volkan Dedeoglu2,
Salil Kanhere3, and Raja Jurdak1
1Queensland University of Technology,
Brisbane, Australia. Email:
{g.ramachandran,s.malik, shantanu.pal,
ali.dorri, r.jurdak}@qut.edu.edu
2CSIRO, Brisbane, Australia. Email:
volkan.dedeoglu@data61.csiro.au
3University of New South Wales, Sydney,
Australia. Email: salil.kanhere@unsw.edu.au

Blockchain in Supply Chain:
Opportunities and Design
Considerations

August 30, 2021

Springer Nature

 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 1
Blockchain in Supply Chain: Opportunities and
Design Considerations

Abstract Supply chain applications operate in a multi-stakeholder setting, demand-
ing trust, provenance, and transparency. Blockchain technology provides mecha-
nisms to establish a decentralized infrastructure involving multiple stakeholders.
Such mechanisms make the blockchain technology ideal for multi-stakeholder sup-
ply chain applications. This chapter introduces the characteristics and requirements
of the supply chain and explains how blockchain technology can meet the demands
of supply chain applications. In particular, this chapter discusses how data and trust
management can be established using blockchain technology. The importance of
scalability and interoperability in a blockchain-based supply chain is highlighted to
help the stakeholders make an informed decision. The chapter concludes by under-
scoring the design challenges and open opportunities in the blockchain-based supply
chain domain.

1.1 Introduction

Supply chains drive many industries in multiple domains, including agriculture
[Kamilaris et al. [2019], Kamble et al. [2020]], electronics[Lee and Pilkington
[2017], Xu et al. [2019]], and manufacturing[Abeyratne and Monfared [2016], Kur-
pjuweit et al. [2021]]. Enterprises procure materials and services from diﬀerent
stakeholders to build, store and deliver products to end-consumers. Information about
the product, referred to as “data," gets exchanged between manufacturers, shipment
companies, auditors, regulators, and retailers in this product pipeline. Businesses
rely on data to understand the status of the supply chain while making an informed
decision about future demands and optimising their operations. Besides, the data
helps the companies manage the regulatory compliance and auditing processes.

To sum up, the information about the supply chain, in the form of digital data, can
enhance the eﬃciency of the supply chain. However, the processes followed by the
supply chain entities must be trustworthy to attain meaningful insights. Blockchain
technology oﬀers mechanisms to enhance trust.

3

4

1 Blockchain in Supply Chain: Opportunities and Design Considerations

Bitcoin[Nakamoto [2019]], a blockchain platform, introduced an innovative ar-
chitecture for creating, managing, and sharing a digital currency without involving a
centralized intermediary such as a bank. It oﬀers decentralization, immutability, and
transparency through a clever combination of a consensus algorithm, cryptographic
primitives, and a distributed ledger. After the arrival of Bitcoin, many blockchain
platforms, including Ethereum[Wood et al. [2014]], Tendermint[Buchman [2016]],
and EOS[Grigg [2017]], entered the market with similar properties and support for
cryptocurrencies. However, the properties of Bitcoin and other blockchain platforms
that followed it seem extremely useful for applications beyond cryptocurrency, that
require decentralization, immutability, and transparency.

Supply chain applications’ natural characteristics include its involvement of mul-
tiple stakeholders in the form of producers, retailers, auditors, shipment companies,
and in some cases, the end consumers. Having a transparent operational infras-
tructure driven by a decentralized architecture combined with an immutable ledger
provide enormous business and practical advantages to the stakeholders. Here, the
integration of blockchain technology into the supply chain requires IT infrastructure.
Many of the supply chain companies already employ an IT infrastructure to manage
their business processes digitally[Wu et al. [2006]]. Integrating blockchain technol-
ogy into the existing supply chain management infrastructure allows the supply chain
participants to gain business advantages by improving traceability and transparency,
automating processes for purchasing and payments, reducing conﬂicts and errors,
improving regulatory compliance and cross-border transactions, and protecting the
supply chain against counterfeiting through an immutable and tamper-proof dis-
tributed ledger. Therefore, the beneﬁts of combining blockchain technology with the
supply chain application are clear. Still, it is crucial to understand how blockchain
technology can be merged reliably and seamlessly with supply chain networks to
gain maximum advantages.

This chapter discusses blockchain applications in the supply chain and highlights
the characteristics and requirements of supply chain applications. We also explain
how supply chain stakeholders can share data and manage trust using blockchain
technology. Besides, we also focus on the need for scalable blockchain technology to
deal with the high transaction throughput and latency demands of real-world supply
chain applications. The section on authentication and access control discusses meth-
ods to set up a trusted and secure supply chain infrastructure. The interoperability
challenges of supply chain systems are also discussed to help companies understand
the existing challenges and potential approaches. We conclude the chapter with an
overview of design considerations and open challenges.

1.2 Characteristics and Requirements of Supply Chain

Applications

A supply chain can be deﬁned as the end-to-end process of producing and delivering
goods and services from the acquisition of raw materials to the delivery of ﬁnal

1.2 Characteristics and Requirements of Supply Chain Applications

5

products to the end-consumers. As depicted in Figure 1.1, a typical supply chain
involves multiple stakeholders and has many characteristics and requirements. This
section provides an overview of these characteristics and common requirements
together with the main challenges facing today’s supply chain.

Fig. 1.1 Characteristics and Requirements of Blockchain-based Supply Chain.

1.2.1 Characteristics of Supply Chain Applications and Networks

In this section, we will review the characteristics of supply chain applications.
• Collaborative: Supply chain applications naturally involve multiple stakeholders
in the form of producers, transporters, auditors, retailers, and regulators as shown
in Figure 1.1. Each of these stakeholders must collaborate with each other to
operate the supply chain in the process of delivering goods and services to end
consumers while gaining ﬁnancial incentives. However, collaboration becomes

6

•

1 Blockchain in Supply Chain: Opportunities and Design Considerations

challenging when the level of trust is low and there is no eﬀective mechanism to
manage and share supply chain data transparently among stakeholders.
International: Globalization of production and trade has given rise to geographic
dispersion of the supply chain, where the stakeholders may operate from diﬀerent
legal jurisdictions and countries. In a global supply chain, raw materials may be
acquired from suppliers, processed by manufacturers and the ﬁnal products may
be delivered to consumers at geographically dispersed locations introducing new
risks and challenges in the ﬂow of goods and services. Note that the stakeholders
may have to comply with the regulations of one or more jurisdictions in this
setting.

• Time-sensitive: Supply chain processes are time-sensitive. Stakeholders rely on
the timely ﬂow of goods and information to make operational decisions. Any
delay in the ﬂow of goods and information may cause supply chain disruptions in
the form of ineﬃciencies, quality degradation of products, lower service quality,
market loss, and reduced gains.

• Distributed: In a supply chain, the information technology (IT) and operation
technology (OT) infrastructure that manages the ﬂow of goods, documents, cer-
tiﬁcations, and other information is distributed among multiple stakeholders.
These infrastructures are typically connected through enterprise systems and data
sharing frameworks.

• Regulated: Supply chains are subject to national and international (import and
export) regulations. Stakeholders must comply with the laws and regulations of
their jurisdiction. In some cases, they may have to comply with jurisdictions
associated with both the producer and consumer. Such complexities make regula-
tory compliance challenging, in particular for supply chains operating in multiple
jurisdictions.

• Heterogenous: Supply chains involve multiple stakeholders using heterogeneous
data standards and disparate systems. Note that diﬀerent standards may introduce
compatibility issues, which could make collaboration challenging and diﬃcult in
a supply chain application.

• Demand-driven: The dynamic nature of consumer behaviour requires supply
chains to be resilient against shifting consumer demand. Demand-driven supply
chain management focuses on the demand signals and forecasts for the planning
and operation of processes to optimize the delivery of goods and services to
consumers. Building a supply chain that is able to respond to changing consumer
demand may require supply chain stakeholders to invest in technology to collect,
share, and react to real-time demand data.

• Dynamic and Unpredictable: Supply chains are dynamic systems due to ongo-
ing changes in stakeholders, oﬀered services and products, regulations, market
dynamics, and technological advancements. For example, when a ship acciden-
tally blocked the Suez Canal in 2021, many ships could not cross the Suez Canal
for up to six days, which disrupted the supply chain massively. To respond to such
unpredictable real-world events, ﬂexible and agile supply chain mechanisms are
required.

1.2 Characteristics and Requirements of Supply Chain Applications

7

• Data-centric: For improved performance, supply chain operations should be
based on data-driven decision making, which relies on real-time, accurate, and
actionable data ﬂow. Digitisation of supply chains, data provenance and trust
mechanisms, big data analytics, and eﬀective data sharing systems help stake-
holders make informed business decisions to enhance the eﬃciency of their
supply chain.

1.2.2 Requirements of Supply Chain

In this section, we will review the common requirements of supply chain applications.
• Trust: Trust is a pivotal factor in enabling collaboration in supply chains. Since
supply chains are complex constructs, establishing trust among the stakeholders
and the systems used is a challenging requirement for the integrity of supply
chains.

• Payment: In a supply chain transaction, a seller provides goods and services to
a buyer and receives a payment in return. Payment systems enabling business-to-
business payments without relying on third parties, accelerating the ﬂow of funds,
reducing the transaction costs, and lowering the risk of ﬁnancial frauds improve
the sustainability and eﬃciency of supply chains.

• Compliance: In a supply chain, stakeholders need to comply with various regu-
lations, standards, and policies. Non-compliance may result in ﬁnancial loss due
to legal ﬁnes, potential loss of market, loss of non-compliant assets, and supply
chain disruptions as well as brand and reputation damage for companies. Thus,
supply chain stakeholders need to implement mechanisms to ensure regulatory
compliance. Recently, regulatory technology (RegTech) has been proposed as a
potential solution to address the complexities of compliance through digitization
and automation of the compliance process.

• Provenance: Due to the rising consumer demand on the information related to
the origin of products, the processes for manufacturing and production, transfer
of custody and ownership, provenance mechanisms become critical. In a supply
chain, provenance improves consumer conﬁdence and trust in the authenticity of
the products and accountability among stakeholders.

• Privacy: To improve the operational eﬃciency of supply chains, the stakeholders
are required to share their data between stakeholders in a supply chain network.
However, supply chain data includes commercially sensitive information. Compa-
nies may feel that revealing such data may cause a business to lose its competitive
advantage. Thus, privacy preservation mechanisms are required for enabling data
sharing while protecting the sensitive business data.

• Automation: In a typical supply chain, there are many time-consuming, error-
prone and repetitive processes that can be automated, such as processing orders
and payments, inventory management, transportation arrangements, and manu-
facturing workﬂows. Using emerging technologies such as artiﬁcial intelligence,
robotics, IoT, and big data, supply chain processes can be automated to enhance

8

1 Blockchain in Supply Chain: Opportunities and Design Considerations

the eﬃciency by lowering operational costs, reducing manual labor, improving
inventory management, and increasing productivity and accuracy while ensuring
continuous compliance to regulations.

•

• Data sharing: Data sharing improves coordination and trust among stakeholders,
eﬃciency of production, quality of products and services, while reducing oper-
ational costs and risk of non-compliance. Furthermore, establishing end-to-end
provenance requires supply chain stakeholders to share their data with each other
and the end-consumers. Therefore, trusted and eﬀective mechanisms are needed
to enable data sharing among distributed and heterogeneous stakeholders. Lack of
incentives may constitute a barrier for data sharing. Thus, incentive mechanisms
can be utilized to encourage stakeholders to share their data.
Identity management: Supply chains are distributed and complex networks,
where the veriﬁcation of the identities and credentials of interacting stakeholders
and the digital identities for the products and devices involved is crucial for
the cooperation among stakeholders and the operation of supply chains. However,
stakeholders may not be willing to disclose or share the data related to supply chain
identities due to business sensitivities and to uphold competitive advantage. As a
consequence, supply chains may suﬀer from lack of transparency, which becomes
a bigger problem as the supply chains grow. Traditional centralised and federated
identity management approaches establish trust between stakeholders relying on
centralised entities or platforms, which introduces data ownership and security
problems. Thus, decentralised mechanisms are required to manage supply chain
identities, where entities control their data shared with other stakeholders without
relying on third parties while enabling authorities to verify the identities and
credentials of the stakeholders.
Interoperability: Due to the interconnected and interdependent nature of supply
chain networks, interoperability is required to facilitate collaboration among the
stakeholders. While interoperability can be achieved through standards, proce-
dures, and inter-organisational protocols at the service and business levels, digital
interoperability requires mechanisms and protocols for application interfaces, in-
tegration services, and data communications to enable reliable and seamless data
sharing among the distributed and heterogeneous supply chain systems.

•

Supply chain applications could become trustworthy, transparent, and eﬃcient if
the above requirements are fulﬁlled. While existing supply chain systems fulﬁll
these requirements through a combination of manual and automated processes, they
broadly rely on systems managed by a single organization. Relying on a single
organization introduces a single point of failure, wherein the entity may misbehave
or tamper with the supply chain information. In the rest of this chapter, we will
introduce blockchain technology and its application in supply chain to fulﬁll some
of these requirements.

1.3 Overview of Blockchain Technology

9

1.3 Overview of Blockchain Technology

The characteristics and requirements of the supply chain applications demand so-
lutions that can operate in a distributed setting while oﬀering trust, security, data
sharing, payment, and transparency guarantees. Supply chain operators can set up
an infrastructure to share information with other stakeholders using a custom-built
and centrally managed platform. However, such solutions are susceptible to central
points of failure, wherein the organization that runs the platform has complete control
of the infrastructure. In a supply chain network, a centrally managed infrastructure
could be compromised by a malicious stakeholder, resulting in incorrect dispersion
of information. The stakeholders may not be willing to reveal essential traces and
logs in the case of a dispute or unexpected events due to their error. Note that the
organizations would like to ensure that their reputation is not damaged when they
mismanage the supply chain. Therefore, the centrally managed infrastructure is not
guaranteed to provide complete transparency to the stakeholders in the network.

1.3.1 Introduction to BitCoin

Blockchain technology provides support for distributed and decentralized infrastruc-
ture. At its core, it consists of a consensus algorithm, cryptographic protocols, and
immutable storage. The ﬁrst peer-to-peer electronic cash system, BitCoin[ Nakamoto
[2019]], introduced a blockchain that cleverly distributes the data validation process
to the computation nodes in the public network. Following the BitCoin protocol,
any computationally capable node can create blocks that make up the blockchain
using a consensus mechanism called Proof-of-Work (PoW). PoW lets the public Bit-
Coin nodes solve a computationally intensive cryptographic puzzle, which demands
signiﬁcant computation resources. On average, the nodes in the network require 10
minutes to solve the puzzle. When a node solves the puzzle, it is selected as a winner
for that round. The winning node gets to verify the new transactions and propose the
new block. Subsequently, all the nodes in the network receive the newly proposed
block, verify them, and append to their local copy of the blockchain ledger.

The ledger used by the blockchain technology oﬀers immutability support, which
means, once the data is written to the blockchain, it cannot be modiﬁed. When a
malicious entity tries to alter the data on the blockchain, he gets to modify only
his local copy of the ledger. Besides, other nodes in the network will not accept
such modiﬁcations because the modiﬁed version will fail the integrity check when
it is compared with the original blockchain ledger maintained by the majority of the
nodes in the network. Note that hundreds to thousands of nodes in the network keep
a copy of the ledger. It is nearly impossible to update the ledger on all of those nodes.
Therefore, the write-once property of blockchain technology is one of the powerful
features for applications that require trust and transparency.

Blockchain technology also enables the nodes in the network to maintain some
level of anonymity through the use of public-key cryptography. Users submit trans-

10

1 Blockchain in Supply Chain: Opportunities and Design Considerations

actions by using their public key and a signature, which forms the basis of their
identity. When a transaction is submitted by the user, for example, to spend a Bit-
Coin, the user digitally signs the transaction using her private key and then presents
the signature and a public key to the network. Anyone in the BitCoin network can
verify the authenticity of the signature using the public key. Note that the user need
not share his private key.

In summary, the BitCoin platform, which started the blockchain revolution, uses
PoW to create and manage blocks without a central intermediary securely. Besides,
public-key cryptography protects users’ privacy while allowing them to exchange
digital currencies in a trusted manner. Lastly, the immutable ledger maintains a
distributed and trusted record of all the transactions to provide complete transparency.

1.3.2 Other Blockchain Platforms

Following the introduction of BitCoin, many blockchain platforms entered the indus-
try, oﬀering immutability, transparency, and trust guarantees. Notably, Ethereum[Wood
et al. [2014]] is one of the most popular blockchain platforms, after BitCoin. While
Ethereum’s architecture closely resembles BitCoin, including its use of PoW 1,
public-key cryptography, and immutable ledger, it introduced smart contracts as
a new feature. Smart contracts allow the users to run computations within the
blockchain platform to enable automation. For example, users can code up the supply
chain events in the smart contract and let the smart contract automatically transfer
payments to the relevant stakeholders when the event associated with the product
delivery event triggers the smart contract on the blockchain. This functionality of
Ethereum resulted in many innovations in the ﬁnance, supply chain, and banking
domains.

When BitCoin and Ethereum became popular blockchain technology for decen-
tralized and trusted computing, a new blockchain deployment model entered the
industry. Platforms such as BitCoin and Ethereum use an open and public network
model; wherein anyone can join the blockchain network to participate in the creation
and management processes. A new permissioned deployment model was introduced
to let enterprises set up a private blockchain ledger to manage multi-stakeholder
transactions. Hyperledger Fabric[Androulaki et al. [2018]] is one of the most popu-
lar permissioned blockchain platforms. It is a lightweight blockchain platform with
a trusted and immutable ledger. In Hyperledger Fabric, the consensus process is
managed by an orderer, which veriﬁes the integrity of the transactions. And a set
of nodes are assigned to manage the ledger for the entire network. While a permis-
sioned blockchain network follows a private setup, it still oﬀers trust, immutability,
and transparency properties. However, users must prove their identity and follow
an on-boarding process to become part of a permissioned blockchain network. In

1 Note that the Ethereum community is developing a new Proof-of-Stake consensus protocol, which
may soon replace the energy-ineﬃcient PoW protocol.

1.4 Real-world Applications of Blockchain in Supply Chain

11

contrast, the nodes’ identities are unknown in the public blockchain platforms such
as BitCoin and Ethereum.

To sum up, blockchain technology provides a decentralized infrastructure with
support for trust, transparency, immutability, payment, and computation (through
smart contract). Supply chain applications could leverage these functionalities to
fulﬁll the requirements listed in Section 1.2. The following section will review the
popular blockchain-based supply chain applications.

1.4 Real-world Applications of Blockchain in Supply Chain

Many blockchain-based supply chain applications have been discussed in the litera-
ture[Sternberg et al. [2021], Lee and Pilkington [2017], Blockchain [2019], Jensen
et al. [2019]]. In this section, we will review two of the most popular and active
real-world blockchain-based supply chain applications.

1.4.1 IBM FoodTrust

IBM developed a food supply chain system using blockchain technology to address
the food ineﬃciency problems. Improper management of the food supply chain and
the lack of visibility into the food production processes lead to high food waste,
increased carbon footprint, health issues due to contamination, and high pricing of
goods. To overcome these ineﬃciencies, IBM created FoodTrust[Blockchain [2019]],
which connects industries, farmers, and other stakeholders in the food and agriculture
industry through a blockchain-based system. The key features of FoodTrust include
Insights, Trace, and Documents modules, which are discussed below:

•

Insights: This module uses blockchain technology in combination with the In-
ternet of Things (IoT) to provide visibility to the supply chain. With this module,
the supply chain stakeholders can understand how fresh a food product is in near
real-time.

• Trace: This module provides end-to-end traceability for the supply chain stake-
holders. It allows the members to trace the location and the status of the food
products in a secure and trusted manner.

• Documents: This module helps the members in the supply chain network securely
manage certiﬁcates and other digital documents. Regulators and auditors can
ensure compliance through this module.

Through these modules, IBM FoodTrust allows the stakeholders to enhance their
reputation in the market. IBM manages this project through the Platform-as-a-Service
model. Organizations interested in providing transparency and provenance can join
IBM’s FoodTrust to manage their supply chain.

12

1 Blockchain in Supply Chain: Opportunities and Design Considerations

1.4.2 TradeLens

TradeLens[Jensen et al. [2019]] is a blockchain-based platform for a global sup-
ply chain. IBM and GTD Solution Inc jointly develop the platform. In particular,
TradeLens focuses on shipping and transportation processes to cater to the demands
of the logistics operators. As of June 2021, the TradeLens platform handled more
than 2 billion events, millions of documents, and more than 40 million contain-
ers. It is a permissioned platform with support for privacy preservation, immutable
storage, enterprise-grade security, and standards-compatible. Figure 1.2 provides an
overview of TradeLens’ architecture.

TradeLens provides Open APIs to let organizations interact with a platform. The
supply chain operators, including port authorities, shipping companies, and con-
signment owners, can easily leverage the TradeLens platform through interoperable
and standard-based APIs. Stakeholders with legacy enterprise and IT systems have
to invoke the REST APIs, which securely register the supply chain data in the
blockchain.

Fig. 1.2 Architecture of TradeLens Platform [Jensen et al. [2019]].

1.4.3 Other applications

In addition to the platforms managed by IBM, a few other applications also em-
ploy blockchain technology in the supply chain. EverLedger Underwood [2016]
tracks the journey of diamond using blockchain technology. Another notable ap-
plication is BeefLedger Cao et al. [2020], which tracks the beef supplies using

1.5 Blockchain-based Data sharing for Supply Chain

13

Ethereum and Proof-of-Authority consensus. Besides, the healthcare domain also
explores blockchain technology to track medicines and manage patient’s healthcare
data Radanović and Likić [2018], Garcia et al. [2021].

1.5 Blockchain-based Data sharing for Supply Chain

Supply chain applications constantly share data with other organizations in the appli-
cation network. This information includes the product’s status, invoices, regulatory
requirements, demands, and customer feedback. A combination of digital and man-
ual processes is needed to collate the information and then forward them to the
necessary stakeholders through either their ERP systems or email messages.

Fig. 1.3 Overview of Publish-Subscribe Broker.

In a multi-stakeholder environment, each organization may have a digital in-
frastructure and an operational procedure to exchange information relevant to their
business. In some cases, a third-party data-sharing platform is leveraged by all the
stakeholders for data sharing. Businesses that rely on a third-party data sharing
platform hand over the management responsibility to an organization that is not nec-
essarily part of the supply chain network. In such circumstances, all the organizations
in the supply chain networks must trust the third party. Such an architecture could
fulﬁll the stakeholders’ business and data sharing demands, but it assumes that the
third party is honest and trustworthy.

Blockchain technology oﬀers a decentralized, distributed, and transparent plat-
form for application developers. Supply chain applications could leverage blockchain
technology in a multi-stakeholder environment. Using blockchain technology, each
organization that is part of the supply chain network could participate in the data
sharing process while having access to the transparent and immutable ledger. In the
rest of this section, we will review Trinity, a distributed publish-subscribe broker
with blockchain-based immutability.

Multiple data sharing modalities have been considered for supply chain appli-
cations including publish-subscribe messaging model. Because of its lightweight

14

1 Blockchain in Supply Chain: Opportunities and Design Considerations

Fig. 1.4 The Architecture of Trinity: A Distributed Publish-Subscribe Broker[Ramachandran et al.
[2019]].

design, resource eﬃciency, and scalability, the publish-subscribe messaging model
is widely used in supply chain applications, which is evident from the list of customers
including McDonald’s that use PubNub, a publish-subscribe service provider. In a
nutshell, the pub-sub messaging model connects the data providers (denoted as pub-
lishers) with the data consumers (denoted as subscribers) through a topic-based inter-
action model, which is shown in Figure 1.3. For example, a shipment dispatched from
a manufacturer’s hub could be labelled as “stakeholderA/countryX/shipmentid6576"
and the data associated with this shipment could be accessed by all the relevant stake-
holders by simply subscribing to topic “stakeholderA/countryX/shipmentid6576".
Following this design philosophy, a topic can be created for each shipment to let the
stakeholders both send (publish) and receive (subscribe) data.

Despite its advantages, the publish-subscribe system follows a centralized ar-
chitecture, wherein the data publishers and subscribers interact via a centralized
broker. Here, the broker receives the data from publishers and routes it to the rel-
evant subscribers. In this architecture, it is clear that the broker is critical for data
sharing. Therefore, the organisation that runs the broker must act honestly and it
should not tamper with the data. Recall that the centralized solutions are prone to
Byzantine failures. Trinity[ Ramachandran et al. [2019]] is a Byzantine fault-tolerant
and distributed publish-subscribe broker, that can operate in a multi-stakeholder
setting while preventing Byzantine failures and without breaking the fundamental
interaction behaviour of publish-subscribe messaging model. Figure 1.4 shows the
architecture of Trinity[ Ramachandran et al. [2019]].

Trinity is a distributed Byzantine fault-tolerant pub-sub broker[ Ramachandran
et al. [2019]]. It is created for multi-stakeholder applications, in which each stake-
holder is assumed to be operating a broker and a consensus node within their domain
to serve its local publishers and subscribers. All the domains are connected through

1.5 Blockchain-based Data sharing for Supply Chain

15

a consensus layer, which is responsible for validating published messages. Each
message must be approved by more than one-third of the consensus nodes, before it
is sent to the subscribers via a broker. Trinity ensures that when a subscriber in one
of the domains receives a message, all the other subscribers in a non-faulty domain
also receive the same message, provided more than one-thirds of the domains are
non-faulty. A set of safety and liveness properties are presented here, if any reader is
interested in understanding the trust and safety guarantees in detail [Ramachandran
et al. [2019]].

Streaming Data Payment Protocol: Streaming data payment protocol (SDPP)
is another blockchain-based data sharing platform, which incentivizes the data pro-
ducers. In a supply chain setting, SDPP can be used to handle payments whenever
the data associated with the supply chain is shared among stakeholders. It enables a
data provider and data consumer to easily connect and transact with each other us-
ing micropayments for streaming data[ Radhakrishnan and Krishnamachari [2018],
Radhakrishnan et al. [2019]]. SDPP is a peer-to-peer data sharing protocol. Its de-
sign carefully separates out three key components: the oﬀ-chain data communication
channel (which is operated as a traditional Internet client-server application-layer
protocol, atop TCP), a payment channel (implemented using a cryptocurrency pro-
tocol), and a records medium (implemented using a distributed ledger technology),
as shown in Figure 1.5.

Fig. 1.5 Overview of Streaming Data Payment Protocol[ Radhakrishnan et al. [2019]].

Alternatively, applications can interface with third-party blockchain-as-a-service
platforms such as IBM’s FoodTrust and TradeLens, discussed in Section 1.4. Note
that the supply chain systems may have to integrate with a blockchain through
the APIs oﬀered by the blockchain platform. When the protocols and hardware
used by the existing supply chain systems are not compatible with the blockchain’s
API, it becomes challenging to interconnect a supply chain system with blockchain.
While solutions such as Trinity, FoodTrust, and TradeLens provide a way to connect
blockchain with the supply chain, it is still essential to develop interoperable APIs
and protocols for the broader adoption of blockchain in the supply chain.

16

1 Blockchain in Supply Chain: Opportunities and Design Considerations

1.6 Trusted authentication and access control for supply chain

Supply chain applications and their management demand appropriate security in
terms of access control and trust. In this section, we discuss the importance of access
control and trust in the supply chain, and explore some available proposals.

1.6.1 Managing Access Control in Supply Chains

Multiple organizations collectively provide and consume information in a supply
chain network. Within each organization, a number of employees and devices may
be responsible for registering supply chain data. Enabling access to the right entity
with the right permission level is critical for the security of the supply chain. Note
that a security breach at one organization could compromise the integrity of the
entire supply chain. That said, the importance of access control in the supply chain
is paramount. Access control is a security mechanism that assures the safe access of
resources by the authorized objects. Access control places selective restrictions to
access certain resources only by the trusted and authorised entities. These restrictions
are governed by a set of access control policies that are controlled by an organization
(or a number of organizations) that regulate access Pal et al. [2018b].

The access control mechanisms in the supply chain should take into consideration
the various characteristics of a supply chain (e.g., distributed, time-sensitive, data-
centric, etc) system from a multi-stakeholder point of view. Traditional access control
mechanisms e.g., Role-Based Acess Control (RBAC), Attribute-Based Access Con-
tro (ABAC), Organization-Based Access Control (OrBAC), and Capability-Based
Access Control (CapBAC) cannot, in isolation, provide a ﬁne-grained and robust
access control solution for the supply chain Hussein et al. [2017] Pal [2021]. In
RBAC, access is enforced based on the speciﬁc roles of an entity. In other words,
in RBAC, access is granted for a certain resource to a speciﬁc role, and the users
who belong to this role can then access the resource. However, RBAC is highly cen-
tralised, therefore, given the distributed and collaborative nature of a supply chain,
it is not an ideal solution at scale.

Alternatively, ABAC uses attributes (e.g., date, time, location, etc.) for enforcing
access control policies, conditions and regulations. This approach provides much
more ﬂexibility in managing the identities of entities. However, ABAC does not use
the concrete unique identity of an entity. This feature of ABAC may be promising for
access control in the supply chain since it could provide some level of anonymity for
the stakeholders. However, ABAC systems are also centralised in nature. Moreover,
when the number of entities grows within the supply chain, ABAC by itself cannot
handle the access control issues at scale Pal et al. [2018a].

OrBAC uses entities (e.g., subject, action, and object) to control access over
the resources. It allows the policy designer to explicitly mention security policies
independent of the implementation. However, access control enforcement in OrBAC
is highly centralised in nature, thus reduces commercial ﬂexibility. CapBAC provides

1.6 Trusted authentication and access control for supply chain

17

access control solutions based on capabilities. A capability can be deﬁned as a
communicable, unforgeable token of authority. It contains access control policies
(and associated conditions) for speciﬁc resources. These capability tokens can be
evaluated at the edge nodes at the time of access. However, given the scale and
requirements of a supply chain network, managing the number of capabilities and
their distribution is diﬃcult Pal et al. [2017b].

Access control for supply chain systems should be scalable, ﬂexible, usable, trust-
worthy, and recognise the inherently decentralised nature of such systems. At the
same time, the access control mechanism must be suﬃcient to protect the privacy, in-
tegrity, and conﬁdentiality of the supply chain and its components Pal et al. [2019b].
The issues noted above around the existing approaches to access control in the supply
chain mean that further consideration of access control for the area is needed. Fur-
thermore, the traditional access control models are user-centric and therefore they do
not consider the relationship among various users, services, companies, and organi-
sations. As noted earlier (cf. Section 1.1), supply chain applications typically involve
multiple stakeholders like producers, transporters, auditors, retailers, and regulators.
Therefore, it is important to build trust between these entities for a scalable, ﬂexi-
ble, and robust access control for the global supply chain network Zavolokina et al.
[2020].

We note that the use of blockchain in the supply chain attracted the interest
of stakeholders. Blockchain technology is distributed and does not depend upon
a centralised trusted authority - this minimizes the amount of trust required from
a unit node in the blockchain ledger. To provide trust by commonly used access
control mechanisms, in general, a centralised entity or a trusted third party acts as
the intermediary to guarantee authenticity. In the case of blockchain, every node
in the network is equal and ensures transaction authenticity by using consensus
algorithms. So blockchain has the ability to provide a robust and ﬂexible access
control by providing distributed, secure, and trust-less features, which cannot be
achieved using traditional access control solutions discussed above Song et al. [2021].
From a supply chain point of view, the core business and the sub-processes must
create a trusted environment for a long-term partnership. That is, to increase cus-
tomer value and ensure sustainable collaboration between the supply chain parties.
However, this collaborative relationship needs a foundation of trust among the vari-
ous entities within the supply chain network Kidd et al. [2003]. Commonly, supply
chain managers are not able to foster a trusting relationship among the various part-
ners over the supply chain. Therefore, it is signiﬁcant to incorporate diﬀerent aspects
of access control as well as other contexts (e.g., social, behavioral, etc.) that help to
integrate a number of perspectives for the development of trust in products, suppliers,
and customer relationships Sahay [2003]. Next, we discuss the signiﬁcance of trust
and its management in supply chain.

18

1 Blockchain in Supply Chain: Opportunities and Design Considerations

1.6.2 Trust Management in Supply Chain

There is no coherent and universal deﬁnition of trust Pal et al. [2019a]. It is a multi-
dimensional and intangible concept without a clear understanding. This further
creates diﬃculty in trust measurement, in particular, for large and complex supply
chains. In diﬀerent disciplines (e.g., social sciences and computing systems) the
representation of trust is diﬀerent.

• Trust in social sciences: It depends on social inﬂuences. This may come from
characteristics and the individual behavior of an entity (e.g., a human) and are
measured as honesty, cooperativeness as well as willingness to cooperate in a
social setup. According to Samarati and de Vimercati [2000], trust can be seen as
“the extent to which one party is willing to depend on somebody, or something,
in a given situation with a feeling of relative security, even though negative
consequences are possible”.

• Trust in computing systems: It is diﬀerent in diﬀerent areas. That said, in com-
puting the deﬁnition of trust diﬀers depending on the domain e.g., networking,
security, artiﬁcial intelligence, e-commerce, etc. According to Cho et al. [2010],
it is a subjective belief, as follows: “an agent’s trust is a subjective belief about
whether another entity will exhibit behaviour reliably in a particular context
with potential risks. The agent can make a decision based on learning from past
experience to maximize its interest (or utility) and/or minimize risk”. In Jøsang
et al. [2007], trust is deﬁned as “the subjective probability by which an individual
expects that another performs a given action on which its welfare depends”.

Overall, trust can be referred to as the honesty, truthfulness, or even the reliability
of a trustee. Trust is always context-dependent and seen the way it is used. From
a supply chain point of view trust can be seen as: “at the heart of collaborative
innovation capabilities. Without a foundation of trust, collaborative alliances can
neither be built nor sustained. But, few companies are able to leverage trust for a
sustainable competitive advantage; most companies lack high levels of trustworthy
collaborations” Fawcett et al. [2012].

Recall, supply chain applications are comprised of stakeholders that may situate
in multiple countries and typically function in a distributed infrastructure (with
internal partners, supplier, and buyer). In such a mobile and dynamic operational
infrastructure, businesses are making decisions based on the data shared by diﬀerent
entities. Therefore the propagation of trust in the supply chain plays an important role
in the logistic integration and collaboration of various components in the network to
uphold the integrity of the supply chain Su et al. [2014]. The organizations should
not only trust the data values coming from diﬀerent entities, but they should also
rely on a trusted infrastructure.

In Figure 1.6, we illustrate an outline of propagation of trust in the supply chain
and its integration in collaborative supply chain operation. On the left side of the
ﬁgure, we show various antecedents of trust for the supply chain. They are: (1) shared
information among the diﬀerent entities that help to build up mutual expectations,
(2) commitment to the long-term orientation with both parties cooperating in supply

1.6 Trusted authentication and access control for supply chain

19

Fig. 1.6 Propagation of trust and its integration in collaborative supply chain operation.

chain values to maintain a trusted relationship, (3) communication must be eﬃcient
and eﬀective and should allow for feedback, (4) reputation is an important factor
to building trust by monitoring suppliers (and other components) to evaluate the
performance, (5) social behavior eﬀectively highlights the issues of cooperation
trust for making awareness and sensitivity on social and environmental issues, (6)
ethical approach represents corporate social responsibility to produce products and
services, and (7) satisfaction helps to improve on-time service, production, and
delivery to the supply-chain members Kac et al. [2016].

However, the integration of these trust ‘components’ is highly inﬂuenced by the
uncertainty and conﬂict present in the environment. Uncertainty may come from
unpredictable events, for example, ﬂuctuations in supply requirements, malicious
activities, and frequent modiﬁcations to the parts of a supply chain management
system. Similarly, conﬂicts may arise due to disagreements of opinions, business
processes, and goals between the buyers and suppliers. Trust in the supply chain
has a greater impact on the integration and management of the business process,
management components, and network structure for improving operational perfor-
mance Kolluru and Meredith [2001]. Blockchain plays a signiﬁcant role in this case
- in the aggregation of diﬀerent trust values (can be seen as the measurement of trust
from various entities) that help the stakeholders validate the quality of information
in supply chain Hou et al. [2014].

Chen et al. [2017] discuss a trust-based supply chain quality management frame-
work supported by blockchain technology. The discussion is focused on the various
use-cases to build a trust management framework within a supply chain network.
With a similar view, proposal Agrawal et al. [2021] discusses the a blockchain-
based traceability framework for traceability in multi-level supply chain in textile
and clothing industries. Al-Rakhami and Al-Mashari [2021], discuss the integration
of blockchain technology in the supply chain to address trust issues and how to
preserve data integrity between supply chain parties. The proposal also focuses on
the eﬃcient transmission of information between the partners in the supply chain.
Blockchain is used to verify logged data and reproduces the actual observation of

20

1 Blockchain in Supply Chain: Opportunities and Design Considerations

the entities within the supply chain. It helps in trust establishment for the actual
(i.e., original) data by ensuring that the blockchain-logged data will be considered
trustworthy.

Shahid et al. [2020] discuss a trust management framework for agricultural sup-
ply chain supported by blockchain technology. In this model, every transaction is
written inside the blockchain which ﬁnally uploads the data to a Interplanetary File
Storage System (IPFS) - which is a protocol and peer-to-peer network that store and
share data. The storage system then returns a hash of the data (stored inside the
blockchain) to ensure trusted cooperation between the entities in the supply chain
network. Similarly, Bai et al. [2021], discuss a trust management framework to man-
age the equipment in agricultural supply where the trust values of sensors are stored
in the blockchain. Malik et al. [2019] present a trust management framework, called
‘TrustChain’, for supply chain management using blockchain technology. The pro-
posed framework uses a reputation model that evaluates the quality of commodities
as well as the trustworthiness of entities based on multiple observations of supply
chain events. The reputation score comes from various segments of a supply chain
network - separate from participants and products. Blockchain helps in a transparent,
eﬃcient, secure, and automated calculation of reputation score to build trust in the
supply chain. In Longo et al. [2019], a software connector is developed to connect
a blockchain with the enterprises’ information systems. This proposal aims to allow
various companies to share information with one another with diﬀerent levels of
visibility. This in turn, build the trust by checking data authenticity, integrity and
invariability over time through the blockchain.

1.6.3 Section Summary

In summary, access control and trust are two signiﬁcant components for building a
secure, safe and reliable supply chain infrastructure. Access control preserves con-
ﬁdentiality, integrity, and availability, and trust helps to maintain the integrity of
information and relation among the various components. Access control, therefore,
helps in trust-building in a supply chain infrastructure Pal et al. [2017a] Rabehaja
et al. [2019]. Typically, trust can be observed as a metric that is gathered by the inter-
actions and observations based on the actors involved in a supply chain infrastructure.
Finally, blockchain integration in the supply chain can provide secure, scalable, and
interoperable communication of information with their trading partners with better
access control management and addressing trust issues.

1.7 Interoperability

Supply chain networks are increasingly decentralised and global. The distributed,
heterogeneous and regulated characteristics of supply chain demand blockchain

1.7 Interoperability

21

systems to have inherent features for interoperability. Interoperability can be deﬁned
as the ability to communicate and access information across various blockchain
systems. As there may be multiple small scale solutions and use-cases within supply
chains, interoperability of these solutions is important for compliance and data
sharing purposes.

Interoperability is needed as blockchain solutions within supply chain co-exist
on enterprise level. These solutions diﬀer depending upon the mutual interest of
stakeholders, for example, technology and platform choices, commercial sensitivity
of the data, governance and access control, scalability, etc. Furthermore, multiple
blockchain ecosystems can be utilised together in a supply chain for various ser-
vices and functionalities, e.g., a public blockchain can be used for digital payments,
whereas a separate consortium blockchain can be used to record supply chain trans-
actions and provide identity and trust management services as in Malik et al. [2021b].
These blockchain solutions must be able to communicate seamlessly without hav-
ing to worry about the technical and design diﬀerences within each ecosystem. To
enable these independent blockchain solutions to eﬀectively communicate, careful
categorization of the interoperability challenges is required.

1.7.1 Interoperability Challenges

In this section, we will review the main challenges with respect to interoperability
of blockchain enabled supply chain systems.
• Governance and Data Privacy As discussed in Section 1.2, one of the signiﬁcant
requirements of supply chain applications is the regulatory compliance that varies
according to the country and diﬀerent legal jurisdictions. More importantly, au-
diting and regulation heavily relies on the stakeholders and their willingness to
share data across global boundaries. Due to the obvious competitive advantage,
data privacy remains of utmost importance which may lead to interoperability bar-
riers. Thus, lack of standardization and governance is a challenge for traceability
as well as interoperability.

• Platform and Data Heterogeneity: Blockchain platforms are heterogeneous in
nature even within the use-case of supply chain systems. There must exist some
technical compatibility among two blockchain platforms to communicate with
each other in terms of consensus mechanisms, smart contract operations and
data format. Furthermore, blockchain systems can store various types of data, for
example, raw data, hashed event data, and encrypted data. Thus, in addition to
blockchain platform heterogeneity, data heterogeneity also introduces challenges
for interoperability.

• Blockchain Infrastructure: The components that enable blockchain services
may include the network infrastructure, back-end oracles, network nodes, cloud
servers, etc. Enabling disparate blockchain systems with propriety and legacy
enterprise systems to communicate and work seamlessly with each other is another
interoperability challenge.

22

1 Blockchain in Supply Chain: Opportunities and Design Considerations

1.7.2 Existing Approaches for Interoperability

Blockchain interoperability has been a topic of recent interest in literature. Most of
these approaches target the interoperability challenge in general, without focusing
on the application speciﬁc blockchains such as in supply chain or healthcare. In this
section, we ﬁrst discuss some of the literature in interoperability of blockchains and
then categorise these approaches towards the end.

Lafourcade and Lombard-Platet [2020] discuss the possibility of two blockchains
to be inter-operable. According to their analysis, two public blockchains are only
inter-operable if they follow the same transaction, consensus and block structure
which is conceptually equal to having a single blockchain. Similarly, Hardjono et al.
[2018], present a design philosophy for interoperability of blockchains. Blockchain
interoperability can be categorised into mechanical and value levels. Mechanical
level involves protocols, encryption standards, consensus mechanisms, transaction
structure, etc. whereas value level corresponds to real assets, ﬁat currencies, etc.
which can be associated with coins or tokens. The authors highlight that interoper-
ability at the mechanical level is necessary for interoperability at the value level but
it may not guarantee it. In their subsequent work Hardjono et al. [2019], they present
blockchain gateways as a key notion of interoperability between two blockchains.
Dedicated gateways within each blockchain system interact with each other for an
asset transfer from one blockchain to another.

A distributed publish/subscribe model, Trinity, with blockchain-based immutabil-
ity is presented by Ramachandran et al. [2019]. Instead of using a centralized broker,
the authors propose a blockchain enabled pub-sub broker system. The data to be
exchanged is distributed among all the brokers in the network through a consensus
mechanism, validated through smart contracts and then stored on the ledger. Trinity
evaluations exhibit that it consumes minimal resources, and the data management
processes can be automated using the smart contracts.

Ghaemi et al. [2021] present an interoperability solution for permissioned
blockchains using a similar publish/subscribe architecture. The proposed solution
uses a broker blockchain network as opposed to any third-party. Broker blockchain
uses its connector and topic smart contracts to provide connectivity among two other
types of blockchains: a publisher blockchain network and a subscriber blockchain
network. Publisher blockchain is the source from which the information is required
by a subscriber blockchain. The broker blockchain stores the topic, a copy of the
information that needs to be shared between the two blockchain networks. The pub-
lisher blockchain not only creates a topic on broker blockchain but is also responsible
to update any change in the information constituting to the topic. A PoC was de-
veloped using Hyperledger Besu, an Ethereum client, and two diﬀerent versions of
Hyperledger Fabric.

An interoperability architecture between private and public blockchain platforms
is proposed by Ghosh et al. [2021]. The proposed solution, CollabFed, leverages
on decentralised gateways and smart contracts. A consumer request for information
is generated from an open network and logged on the public blockchain network.
The consortium members of the private blockchain also take part in endorsing these

1.7 Interoperability

23

user requests by a two-third majority vote. The logged requests trigger the smart
contracts in private blockchains which propagate and schedule the requests based on
a predeﬁned business logic. The results are then transferred back to the consumers.
PoC implementation of CollabFed was developed using Ethereum as the public
blockchain platform and Hyperledger Fabric, and Burrow as the private blockchain
platforms.

HyperService is a platform proposed by Liu et al. [2019] that delivers inter-
operability and programmability across heterogeneous blockchains. HyperService
contributes a programming framework that allows developers to build cross-chain ap-
plications in a uniﬁed programming model. In addition, it also provides the cryptog-
raphy protocol that enables realising these cross-chain applications on blockchains.
An interoperability API implementation, called Bifrost is presented by Scheid
et al. [2019]. Bifrost allows users to store and retrieve arbitrary data on multiple
blockchain systems. Bifrost consists of three components: APIs, blockchain adapters
and a database. The API consists of store, migrate and retrieve function calls. The
blockchain adapters covert user data into a transaction or a query based on store or
retrieve function calls. Each blockchain must possess an adapter for communicat-
ing with other blockchains. Finally, the database stores the transaction hashes and
necessary credentials required to retrieve data.

A token based cross blockchain platform for blockchain interoperability is pre-
sented by Borkowski et al. [2018a,b]. A cross blockchain asset transfer token, PAN,
is introduced using claim-ﬁrst transactions. The authors describe a method of gen-
erating a cryptographic Proof of Intent (PoI). PoI certiﬁes that the sender on source
blockchain system is willing to transfer a given amount of assets to a wallet address
on a destination blockchain. This PoI then can be used on the destination blockchain
to claim the transferred assets. To update the asset records on source blockchain,
observing parties (called witnesses) are incentivised for their role.

Various other literature outline the need and requirements of blockchain interop-
erability. A good survey on blockchain interoperability is provided by Johnson et al.
[2019] and Belchior et al. [2020]. To summarize, the interoperability approaches can
be categorised into the following broad categories:
• Side chains, Management chains and Relays: Side chains are considered to be
the blockchains which are typically the extension of the main chain. A cross-
chain communication protocol is then used for asset exchange between the two
chains. Sometimes they are also used as relays to incorporate oﬄine payment
or query mechanisms from a ﬁnancial chain to the main chain. A few examples
of such interoperability mechanisms are Broker blockchain by Ghaemi et al.
[2021], Polkadot Wood [2016], Ethereum 2.0 Sharding with beacon chain, AION,
Blocknet, etc.

• Notaries: A notary is a trusted entity or an organization who acts as an in-
termediary between the two blockchain systems and monitors transactions and
triggers. It is responsible for exchange of information from the source to desti-
nation blockchain. These schemes are employed as centralised or decentralised
exchanges, such as Uniswap by Adams et al. [2021], and Liquid by Blockstream
[2021].

24

1 Blockchain in Supply Chain: Opportunities and Design Considerations

• APIs/Gateways: An application programming interface (API) is a piece of code
that governs the access point to a server and the rules developers must follow
to interact with a database, library, software tool or programming language.
APIs or gateways act as a translator, taking requests from source blockchain
and converting them to language or format understandable by the destination
blockchain. Application of such approaches are discussed above in Liu et al.
[2019] and Bifrost by Scheid et al. [2019]. A very well known application is
Hyperledger Cactus, a blockchain integration framework which validates cross
chain transactions using a validator network.

• Hashed/Time locked contracts (HTLCs): These approaches use hashlocks and
time locks to enforce operational atomicity between the two parties, typically
on disparate blockchain systems. A trader provides a cryptographic proof of
committing to a transaction before a time-out. HTLCs enable cross-chain atomic
operations or atomic swaps, such as for conditional payments from Bitcoin to
Ethereum. Few other examples include Bitcoin lightening network and BTC
relay.

• Pub-Sub Models and Tokens: Pub-Sub models employ the concept of mes-
sage exchange between publisher and subscriber blockchain networks. Publisher
blockchains are often termed as the source of information whereas the subscriber
is the requester. The message exchange can be done through either tokens, APIs
or side-chains such as systems proposed by Ramachandran et al. [2019], Ghaemi
et al. [2021] and Borkowski et al. [2018a,b].

1.7.3 Suitability of Interoperability Approaches in Supply Chains

The approaches discussed in the previous section can widely be adopted depending
upon the interoperability requirement. In supply chains, governance and regulatory
compliance is very important for monitoring and auditing purposes, which can be
achieved by adopting an interoperability approach based on side chains combined
with notaries. A consortium of notaries may play an important role in deﬁning access
policies for privacy sensitive data. For integrating ﬁnancial transactions with physical
asset exchanges, tokenization and Pub-Sub models are best suited. Similarly, the APIs
and gateways may help to reduce the infrastructure challenges by translating data
read/write requests. Although HTLCs and smart contract approaches are complex in
terms of implementation and may not be generalised in their design, these approaches
are well suited for supply chain systems to enforce standardization based on legal
jurisdictions across various chains.

1.8 Importance of Scalable Blockchains for Supply Chain

25

1.8 Importance of Scalable Blockchains for Supply Chain

Supply chain involves multiple stakeholders that communicate through transactions
and smart contracts leading to a huge volume of transactions in blockchain. Conven-
tional blockchains are not directly applicable in supply chain as they suﬀer from low
scalability which is rooted by blockchain resource consumption, latency, eﬃciency
and throughput which are discussed in greater details below.
• Resource Consumption: Recall that blockchains are managed distributively by
all participating nodes. The conventional methods that facilitate the distributed
management of blockchain incur signiﬁcant computation, memory, and band-
width overheads which limits its scalability. The computational overhead of the
blockchains is rooted by resource consuming consensus algorithms. Additionally,
Once a new transaction/block is generated, all participants shall verify the same.
The veriﬁcation of transactions also involves verifying the history of transactions
which requires the veriﬁes to store blockchain database. However, the size of
the blockchain database will signiﬁcantly increase as due to its immutability, re-
moving or modifying previously stored data is not possible and will compromise
the blockchain consistency. Blockchain broadcast the blocks/transactions which
consumes signiﬁcant bandwidth due to large number of participants in supply
chain applications.

• Latency: There is a non-trivial delay associated with committing a new transac-
tion in the blockchain and receiving conﬁrmation. This delay involves the delay in
committing the transaction (i.e., following the consensus algorithm) and the delay
in receiving conﬁrmation. The latter involves waiting for a particular number of
blocks to be appended to the block in which a particular transaction is stored
which in turn protects against double spending and ensures the transaction will
not be placed in forked blocks. However, as shown in Figure 1.1, supply chain
involves transactions that require real-time transaction settlement.

• Eﬃciency: In most of the existing consensus algorithms, multiple validators, i.e,
miners, work simultaneously to commit the same block in the blockchain and
only the one that follows the consensus algorithm ﬁrst is permitted to commit
the block and thus receive incentive while the resources of other nodes will be
wasted. This in turn limits the blockchain eﬃciency.

• Throughput: Conventional blockchains suﬀer from limited throughput, i.e., total
number of transactions that can be committed in blockchain per second. How-
ever, supply chain applications demand high throughput due to high transaction
generation rate. The number of transactions is continuously increasing as new
applications and users join the system which highlights the demand for a through-
put management algorithm. The latter ensures that the blockchain throughput can
accommodate the load in the network.

Blockchain optimization for applications beyond cryptocurrency, including sup-
ply chain, has received signiﬁcant attention in recent years. The authors in Thakur
and Breslin [2020] employed oﬀ-chain transactions to increase the blockchain scal-
ability. The participating nodes that are involved in the life time of a product, jointly

26

1 Blockchain in Supply Chain: Opportunities and Design Considerations

create a channel where all transactions related to the product are stored. This in turn
reduces the number of transactions that needs to be committed in the blockchain as
for each channel only two transactions will be committed in the blockchain. The rest
of the communication happens in the channel.

To increase the blockchain scalability, the authors in Malik et al. [2018] employed
the concept of sharding. In general, sharding refers to dividing the network into
smaller groups, i.e., shards where the transactions/blocks generated in each shard
are broadcast and veriﬁed inside the shard. Thus, sharding increases the blockchain
scalability by limiting the scope of the ledger. Sharding improves the blockchain
throughput and reduces delay linearly as the improvement rate is directly impacted
by the number of shards that exist in the network.

The authors in Dorri et al. [2021] introduced a veriﬁcation and communication
model for blockchain, known as Vericom, to the blockchain bandwidth consumption
by introducing a dynamic multicasting and traﬃc routing algorithms. To route traﬃc,
i.e., blocks and transactions, the authors employed a PK-based routing algorithm
where the traﬃc is routed based on the PK of the destination. A group of high
resource available nodes in the network jointly form a backbone network. Each
backbone node is allocated to a particular routing character which refers to the most
signiﬁcant characters of the hash function output. Depending to the hash of their PK,
the participating nodes join a backbone node to receive transactions sent for them.
The backbone nodes use conventional IP-based routing algorithms to route traﬃc
in backbone. Unlike conventional blockchains where transactions are broadcast,
Vericom multicasts the transactions to a randomly selected group of nodes known
as veriﬁer sets. The latter is unique per transaction/block and is selected based on
the hash function output of the transaction/block content.

The consensus algorithm is fundamental in blockchain scalability. Most of the
conventional consensus algorithms consume signiﬁcant resources, limit throughput,
lack eﬃciency, and involve signiﬁcant delay in committing and conﬁrming trans-
actions. Various optimized consensus algorithms have been introduced in recent
years Sankar et al. [2017]. Intel introduced Proof of Elapsed Time (POET) Sankar
et al. [2017] consensus algorithm which relies on the Trusted Execution Environ-
ment (TEE) in Intel CPUs. When a validator aims to commit a new block to the
blockchain, it needs to wait for a random period of time identiﬁed by TEE. In case
during the waiting period, it receives a block consisting the same transactions, it
shall drop the block and start committing a new block.

In Dorri and Jurdak [2020] the authors introduced a scalable fast consensus
algorithm with near real-time transaction settlement which is known as Tree-chain.
Tree-chain is a leader-selection consensus algorithm where a leader is selected for
a particular period of time and commit transactions, with speciﬁc features, to the
blockchain. Tree-chain relies on the hash function output to achieve randomization
in two levels: blockchain level and transaction level. In blockchain level, a Consensus
Code Range (CCR) is distributed randomly and in an unpredictable way between
the validators. CCR refers to the most signiﬁcant characters of the hash function
output. Each potential character in the hash function output is associated with a
weight deﬁned in a weight dictionary. The validators calculate a Key Weight Metric

1.9 Design Considerations and Open Challenges

27

(KWM) which is essentially the sum of the weight of all the characters in the hash
of a PK. The KWMs are then stored in a list in descending order and the node with
the highest value of KWM is dedicated to the ﬁrst CCR range.

In transaction level, the validator of each transaction is randomly selected based on
the hash of the transaction content. The validator whose CCR matches with the most
signiﬁcant characters of the hash of a particular transaction, is the validator in charge
for committing that particular transaction in the blockchain. Each validator creates a
unique ledger chained to the genesis block for committing its corresponding blocks
which ensures fast transaction settlement. Thus, Tree-chain, by design, embraces the
concept of forking.

1.9 Design Considerations and Open Challenges

This section reviews the design considerations and open challenges to help stake-
holders carefully adopt blockchain technology for their supply chain applications.

1.9.1 Public vs. Permissioned Blockchains

A blockchain-based supply chain application can be designed using either a permis-
sioned or a public blockchain. When selecting a blockchain platform, the stakeholders
must carefully weigh the pros and cons of these approaches.

A public blockchain primarily relies on nodes maintained by the community
members. In the case of BitCoin[Nakamoto [2019]] and Ethereum[Wood et al.
[2014]], any community member with a computationally capable node can join the
network and participate in the PoW consensus process. As discussed in Section 1.3,
the node that successfully solves the cryptographic puzzle gets rewarded with a
cryptocurrency. Here, the reward comes from the users that submitting transactions
to the network. It is important to note that the user must pay a transaction fee whenever
a transaction is submitted to the blockchain network. Therefore, applications that rely
on public blockchain platforms must consider the transaction fees. Note that a supply
chain application that produces hundreds of transactions per day must spend tens to
hundreds of dollars per day for leveraging the services of a public blockchain.

Alternatively, applications can use a permissioned or private blockchain for a sup-
ply chain application. Following this model, the stakeholders that are part of a supply
chain network would share their computing nodes for managing and maintaining the
blockchain in a distributed and trusted fashion. Technically, a private blockchain
network can be established with platforms such as Hyperledger Fabric[Androulaki
et al. [2018]], Tendermint[Buchman [2016], Androulaki et al. [2018]], or a cus-
tomized private version of Ethereum. Such platforms typically employ a lightweight
consensus algorithm, which diﬀers from a computationally expensive PoW consen-
sus model. Since the blockchain network is established among the stakeholders that

28

1 Blockchain in Supply Chain: Opportunities and Design Considerations

are part of a supply chain network relevant to their business following a lightweight
consensus process, users are not required to pay a transaction fee. It is essential to
note the operational cost of running a private blockchain network are covered by
businesses that leverage them. Besides, the cost would be marginal since the compa-
nies are using the Internet and computing code without relying on computationally
intensive consensus processes. And, the blockchain itself does not demand users to
pay a transaction fee, as seen in public blockchains. Therefore, private blockchain
platforms are cost-eﬀective while allowing organizations to leverage trust and im-
mutability in a distributed and multi-stakeholder settings.

In summary, the stakeholders must weigh in these pros and cons when selecting
a blockchain platform as the operational cost of a blockchain may discourage some
stakeholders from submitting transactions to a public network, potentially reduc-
ing the eﬀectiveness of a blockchain-based supply chain application [De Giovanni
[2020]].

Fig. 1.7 Garbage-In-Garbage-Out problem: Storing data in a blockchain ledger alone does not
guarantee authenticity and trust. All the layers of a blockchain-based supply chain requires trusted
methods.

1.9.2 Preventing Garbage-In-Garbage-Out Problem

Blockchain technology allows the stakeholders to track and trace their products
throughout the supply chain reliably. When products and goods move through a
supply chain, each stakeholder must gather and log data associated with them. For
example, the arrival time, temperature, humidity, and expiry date of a product must
be logged at each supply chain endpoint to ensure that the food products are in
edible condition. Under this operational setting, blockchain technology can receive
information about the products and store them in an immutable ledger following
a consensus process involving multiple stakeholders in a distributed network. It is
essential to underscore how blockchain can also receive incorrect information from
the stakeholders and store them in a blockchain. Note that blockchain technology
does not oﬀer any mechanism to verify the correctness of the data submitted by
a user. This issue is referred to as Garbage-In-Garbage-Out problem[Ziolkowski
et al. [2020]], which means the blockchain technology can also store inaccurate
information in the ledger and present them to the users in the future. Stakeholders
may think that blockchain technology is helping them provide transparency to the
end-users. On the contrary, inaccurate provenance information may mislead the end

1.9 Design Considerations and Open Challenges

29

consumers while ruining the reputation of the organizations that are part of the
supply chain network. Therefore, the stakeholders must ensure that the blockchain
ledger’s information is accurate for a genuinely dependable supply chain ecosystem.
Figure 1.7 highlights the importance of end-to-end trust.

Garbage-In-Garbage-Out problems require solutions outside of the blockchain. In
particular, the interface between the physical and the digital world must be built using
robust methods to ensure end-to-end trust and transparency. Therefore, supply chain
applications must include approaches involving humans, sensing devices, trusted
third parties including regulatory bodies and certiﬁcation laboratories to weed out
false claims in a multi-stakeholder supply chain system.

1.9.3 Automated Veriﬁcation of Compliance

A supply chain network is established involving multiple stakeholders operating
from numerous jurisdictions. Within each jurisdiction, stakeholders must comply
with the regulations enforced by the local government and other regulatory bodies.
In a supply chain network, examples of regulations include export controls and
technical regulations. Contemporary supply chain applications rely on paperwork,
and many human operators at various jurisdictions ensure regulatory compliance.
When leveraging blockchain technology for the supply chain, it may be easier to
automate the compliance veriﬁcation process through a smart contract[Bocek et al.
[2017]]. Recall that smart contracts allow the stakeholders to track and manage the
supply chain autonomously. Authorities could translate the regulatory standards into
one or more smart contracts to speed up the compliance veriﬁcation process.

It is important to note that the automated veriﬁcation of regulatory compliance
requires accurate data from the stakeholders. For regulatory authorities to adopt
automation in this context, the Garbage-In-Garbage-Out problem discussed in Sec-
tion 1.9.3 must be solved.

1.9.4 Lack of Common Data Standard

When establishing a supply chain network involving multiple stakeholders from
multiple jurisdictions, each stakeholder may follow a custom data standard local to
their country. An absence of a common data standard in a distributed and multi-
stakeholder setting would result in interoperability issues, wherein each stakeholder
may have to develop new extensions to their existing infrastructure, which would
hamper adoption [Renner et al. [1996]]. It is important to note that an organization
responsible for shipping products may be dealing with several products belonging
to various stakeholders. For such an organization, it is almost impossible to develop
new extensions to interface with each organization seamlessly.

30

1 Blockchain in Supply Chain: Opportunities and Design Considerations

Besides, supply chain applications may want to store a combination of media
ﬁles such as images and videos and digital data to enable provenance. Blockchain
technology can handle a few bytes of data, but it is not a good ﬁt for storing large
data items such as videos and images. In such cases, stakeholders may have to keep
the data either locally and store the hash on the blockchain or in decentralized ﬁle
storage such as IPFS [Benet [2014]] and store the ﬁle pointer on the blockchain, as
discussed here [Ramachandran et al. [2018]].

Given these issues around the absence of a common data standard and large data
ﬁles, supply chain applications must develop and adopt a universal and application-
agnostic data standard.

1.9.5 Privacy Concerns

The information about the products helps the stakeholders understand the status of
the supply chain. Depends on the product and the supply chain network, the stake-
holder may have to share sensitive details, including the ingredients used (in the
case of a food producer) and location (in the case of shipping companies). Stake-
holders may not be willing to openly share sensitive details since it may leak their
intellectual property or other business secrets. In transportation and shipping com-
panies, people’s location information gets exposed to several stakeholders. Stenberg
et al.[Sternberg et al. [2021]] reports that the truck drivers are not comfortable
with live tracking of their location in a real-world supply chain. Besides, the data
protection regulations [Pantlin et al. [2018] such as General Data Protection Regu-
lation (GDPR), California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA), and Australian Privacy
Act (APA) provide guidelines about the use of data associated with products and
companies operating from a particular jurisdiction. Such regulations and the privacy
concerns of the stakeholders must be considered when designing a blockchain-based
supply chain application. Malik et al. introduce PrivChain[Malik et al. [2021a]], a
blockchain-based solution for protecting the privacy of the supply chain stakeholders
using Zero-knowledge proof and Pederson commitments.

1.9.6 Lack of Interoperability with Legacy IT Systems

Many supply chain organizations have been using enterprise systems to manage their
supply chain processes. Such systems enable stakeholders to share information about
their products, handle payments, and generate paperwork for regulatory compliance.
Note that organizations may have made signiﬁcant investments to build and deploy
these systems[Sternberg et al. [2021]]. Connecting these legacy systems with a
blockchain-based supply chain may require a considerable overhaul, making it more
expensive and disruptive. Therefore, blockchain-based supply chain applications
must support protocols and services leveraged by legacy and enterprise systems.

1.9 Design Considerations and Open Challenges

31

1.9.7 Operational Costs

Supply chain systems need a set of new processes and methods to establish a trusted
blockchain-based supply chain. Such extensions may require personnel with spe-
cialized skills. Besides, organizations may also have to invest in new hardware and
software infrastructure. Such issues may make organizations hesitate to adopt a new
blockchain-based supply chain system. Allowing organizations to leverage legacy
systems and processes would reduce the operational cost to a large extent.

In addition, organizations have to deploy consensus nodes and manage them if
they are part of a private blockchain network. The deployment and management
of consensus nodes introduce a signiﬁcant overhead both in terms of hardware
and networking. IBM’s TradeLens and FoodTrust oﬀer blockchain-as-a-service to
organizations. Following this model, companies need not deploy new hardware for
leveraging blockchain for traceability and provenance. However, organizations must
trust the third-party service provider since the blockchain infrastructure is not owned
and managed by multiple organizations in a distributed and transparent setting.

1.9.8 Lack of Engagement from Field Operators

A supply chain application involves ﬁeld operators responsible for driving trucks or
manually recording information at a supply chain terminal. The information entered
by these ﬁeld operators is highly critical for tracking the ﬂow of goods in a supply
chain. The integration of blockchain to a supply chain network may expose some
of the data entered by these ﬁeld operators to other entities in the supply chain
in a raw format. Note that current systems may record the raw data in a server
belonging to the ﬁeld operator’s organization. As part of the information sharing
process, each organization may only share a summary or high-level statistics with
other organizations, ﬁltering sensitive information recorded by the ﬁeld operators.
With the introduction of blockchain, sensitive information may get stored directly
on the blockchain, which may infringe the privacy of the ﬁeld operators. Due to
the perceived risk of privacy violation, ﬁeld operators may hesitate to record data,
which would reduce the eﬀectiveness of blockchain-based supply chain applications.
The integration of privacy-preserving features may provide conﬁdence to the ﬁeld
operators, which would increase their engagement with the system.

In addition, blockchain-based supply chain systems should not include cumber-
some processes demanding additional eﬀort from ﬁeld workers. For example, a truck
driver may not favor logging into a terminal every few minutes to register the status
of the supply chain [Sternberg et al. [2021]]. Therefore, it is essential to consider
how the new processes aﬀect the day-to-day work of the ﬁeld operators.

32

1 Blockchain in Supply Chain: Opportunities and Design Considerations

Fig. 1.8 A Decision-tree for Selecting the Suitable Solution for Supply Chain Applications

1.9.9 Payment Processing Challenges

In a supply chain application, multiple stakeholders provide products and services to
other stakeholders. When a physical product moves in a forward direction towards the
end consumers, the payment associated with products ﬂows in the reverse direction.
The literature on supply chain argues the need for the inclusion of a digital infras-
tructure and automation processes to prevent payment delays [Viriyasitavat et al.
[2021]]. Having a cumbersome manual process with paper-based documents would
be detrimental to supply chain eﬃciency. Therefore, digitization and the automation
of the payment process would be massively beneﬁcial to the supply chains.

1.10 Decision Tree for Supply Chain

33

Blockchain technology includes smart contracts, an innovative and decentralized
computation engine. Using smart contracts, businesses can code up the payment
process, which supply chain events could trigger. However, the events that drive
the smart contracts must carry accurate information since the organizations may
not want to make the payment without having conﬁdence in the data. Therefore,
the garbage-in-garbage-out problem discussed in Section 1.9.3 must be resolved to
conﬁdently automate payments.

1.9.10 Sustainability Demands

Global warming and ever-growing carbon emissions force authorities to impose
stricter regulations around sustainability. Supply chain companies are asked to in-
corporate sustainable standards and practices in their operations. Many of the existing
blockchain-based supply chain systems predominantly track the ﬂow of products to-
wards the end-consumers and process payments in the reverse direction. Recycling
of products is not given much importance. The emerging sustainability standards
emphasize the importance of recycling. Many blockchain-based solutions have been
created to incentivize sustainable behavior in the food supply chain [Chidepatil et al.
[2020], Zhang and Guin [2019]]. Following these initiatives, the supply chain stake-
holders must introduce mechanisms to manage the recycling and decommissioning
processes. Note that the blockchain technology oﬀer support for tokens, which can
be used to incentivize end consumers for their sustainable actions [Patel et al. [2020],
Saraji and Borowczak [2021]].

1.10 Decision Tree for Supply Chain

Figure 1.8 provides a guideline for supply chain stakeholders. It helps the stake-
holders choose a suitable solution for their supply chain based on the design and
operational constraints. In a nutshell, applications producing hundreds to thousands
of events have to opt for a private blockchain to minimize the operational costs.
From the cost perspective, the number of transactions is a good indicator, but other
constrains including privacy and need for interoperability warrant new solutions at
the periphery of the blockchain. While we acknowledge that this decision tree is
not comprehensive for a supply chain domain, but it highlights the importance of
minimizing the operational cost at the early design phases to establish an eﬀective
and sustainable supply chain.

34

1 Blockchain in Supply Chain: Opportunities and Design Considerations

1.11 Chapter Summary

Supply chain applications operate in a distributed and collaborative environment
involving multiple stakeholders from various jurisdictions. Stakeholders including
producers, regulatory bodies, logistics companies, and end consumers increasingly
demand transparency and provenance to fully understand the history of products.
Centralized digital and enterprise systems oﬀer a viable solution for tracking products
in a supply chain, but they suﬀer from single point of failure, wherein the organization
that runs and manages the infrastructure may misbehave compromising the integrity
of the entire supply chain. Blockchain technology oﬀers features such as immutable
ledger, decentralization, and smart contracts, which are tailor-made for the creation
of a trusted and decentralized supply chain networks.

This chapter introduced the challenges and the requirements of a supply chain ap-
plication. In particular, it introduced how blockchain technology can be used to share
data in a multi-stakeholder supply chain environment. The discussions on trust and
access control underscores the importance of security and authentication require-
ments. To help the supply chain stakeholders decide on the choice of blockchain
platforms, this chapter discussed the scalability challenges of blockchain-based sys-
tems. The section on interoperability highlighted the need to support legacy systems
and multi-blockchain frameworks to enable broad adoption.

Lastly, the section on open challenges and opportunities provided guidelines to
supply chain stakeholders as they start to adopt blockchain technology for their supply
chain. This chapter showed that blockchain technology oﬀers several advantages to
supply chain applications, but the issues around scalability, interoperability, privacy,
regulations, and data trust must be solved to establish a dependable multi-stakeholder
supply chain.

References

S. A. Abeyratne and R. P. Monfared. Blockchain ready manufacturing supply chain
using distributed ledger. International Journal of Research in Engineering and
Technology, 5(9):1–10, 2016.

H. Adams, N. Zinsmeister, M. Salem, R. Keefer, and D. Robinson. Uniswap v3 core.

Technical report, Tech. rep., Uniswap, 2021.

T. K. Agrawal, V. Kumar, R. Pal, L. Wang, and Y. Chen. Blockchain-based framework
for supply chain traceability: A case example of textile and clothing industry.
Computers & industrial engineering, 154:107130, 2021.

M. S. Al-Rakhami and M. Al-Mashari. A blockchain-based trust model for the

internet of things supply chain management. Sensors, 21(5):1759, 2021.

E. Androulaki, A. Barger, V. Bortnikov, C. Cachin, K. Christidis, A. De Caro,
D. Enyeart, C. Ferris, G. Laventman, Y. Manevich, et al. Hyperledger fabric: a
distributed operating system for permissioned blockchains. In Proceedings of the
thirteenth EuroSys conference, pages 1–15, 2018.

References

35

Y. Bai, K. Fan, K. Zhang, X. Cheng, H. Li, and Y. Yang. Blockchain-based trust
management for agricultural green supply: A game theoretic approach. Journal
of Cleaner Production, page 127407, 2021.

R. Belchior, A. Vasconcelos, S. Guerreiro, and M. Correia. A survey on blockchain
interoperability: Past, present, and future trends. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.14282,
2020.
J. Benet.

Ipfs-content addressed, versioned, p2p ﬁle system.

arXiv preprint

arXiv:1407.3561, 2014.

I. Blockchain. Ibm food trust. a new era for the world’s food supply. Retrieved Oct,

15:2019, 2019.

Blockstream. Liquid network: Faster, more conﬁdential bitcoin transactions, 2021.

URL https://blockstream.com/liquid/.

T. Bocek, B. B. Rodrigues, T. Strasser, and B. Stiller. Blockchains everywhere - a use-
case of blockchains in the pharma supply-chain. In 2017 IFIP/IEEE Symposium
on Integrated Network and Service Management (IM), pages 772–777, 2017. doi:
10.23919/INM.2017.7987376.

M. Borkowski, C. Ritzer, D. McDonald, and S. Schulte. Caught in chains: claim-ﬁrst
transactions for cross-blockchain asset transfers. TU Wien: Technische Universität
Wien, Tech. Rep, 2018a.

M. Borkowski, C. Ritzer, and S. Schulte. Deterministic witnesses for claim-ﬁrst

transactions. TU Wien: Technische Universität Wien, Tech. Rep, 2018b.

E. Buchman. Tendermint: Byzantine fault tolerance in the age of blockchains. PhD

thesis, 2016.

S. Cao, U. Dulleck, W. Powell, C. Turner-Morris, V. Natanelov, and M. Foth.
Beeﬂedger blockchain-credentialed beef exports to china: Early consumer in-
sights. 2020.

S. Chen, R. Shi, Z. Ren, J. Yan, Y. Shi, and J. Zhang. A blockchain-based supply chain
quality management framework. In 2017 IEEE 14th International Conference on
e-Business Engineering (ICEBE), pages 172–176. IEEE, 2017.

A. Chidepatil, P. Bindra, D. Kulkarni, M. Qazi, M. Kshirsagar, and K. Sankaran.
From trash to cash: how blockchain and multi-sensor-driven artiﬁcial intelligence
can transform circular economy of plastic waste? Administrative Sciences, 10(2):
23, 2020.

J.-H. Cho, A. Swami, and R. Chen. A survey on trust management for mobile ad
hoc networks. IEEE communications surveys & tutorials, 13(4):562–583, 2010.
P. De Giovanni. Blockchain and smart contracts in supply chain management:
International Journal of Production Economics,
A game theoretic model.
228:107855, 2020.
ISSN 0925-5273. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ĳpe.2020.
107855. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0925527320302188.

A. Dorri and R. Jurdak. Tree-chain: A fast lightweight consensus algorithm for iot
applications. In 2020 IEEE 45th Conference on Local Computer Networks (LCN),
pages 369–372. IEEE, 2020.

A. Dorri, S. Mishra, and R. Jurdak. Vericom: A veriﬁcation and communication
architecture for iot-based blockchain. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.12279, 2021.

36

1 Blockchain in Supply Chain: Opportunities and Design Considerations

S. E. Fawcett, S. L. Jones, and A. M. Fawcett. Supply chain trust: The catalyst for

collaborative innovation. Business Horizons, 55(2):163–178, 2012.

R. D. Garcia, G. A. Zutião, G. Ramachandran, and J. Ueyama. Towards a decentral-
ized e-prescription system using smart contracts. In 2021 IEEE 34th International
Symposium on Computer-Based Medical Systems (CBMS), pages 556–561, 2021.
doi: 10.1109/CBMS52027.2021.00037.

S. Ghaemi, S. Rouhani, R. Belchior, R. S. Cruz, H. Khazaei, and P. Musilek.
A pub-sub architecture to promote blockchain interoperability. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2101.12331, 2021.

B. C. Ghosh, T. Bhartia, S. K. Addya, and S. Chakraborty. Leveraging public-private
blockchain interoperability for closed consortium interfacing. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2104.09801, 2021.

I. Grigg. Eos-an introduction. White paper. https://whitepaperdatabase. com/eos-

whitepaper, 2017.

T. Hardjono, A. Lipton, and A. Pentland. Towards a design philosophy for interop-

erable blockchain systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.05934, 2018.

T. Hardjono, A. Lipton, and A. Pentland. Toward an interoperability architecture
for blockchain autonomous systems. IEEE Transactions on Engineering Manage-
ment, 67(4):1298–1309, 2019.

Y. Hou, Y. Xiong, X. Wang, and X. Liang. The eﬀects of a trust mechanism on a
dynamic supply chain network. Expert Systems with Applications, 41(6):3060–
3068, 2014.

D. Hussein, E. Bertin, and V. Frey. A community-driven access control approach in
distributed iot environments. IEEE Communications Magazine, 55(3):146–153,
2017.

T. Jensen, J. Hedman, and S. Henningsson. How tradelens delivers business value

with blockchain technology. MIS Quarterly Executive, 18(4), 2019.

S. Johnson, P. Robinson, and J. Brainard. Sidechains and interoperability. arXiv

preprint arXiv:1903.04077, 2019.

A. Jøsang, R. Ismail, and C. Boyd. A survey of trust and reputation systems for

online service provision. Decision support systems, 43(2):618–644, 2007.

S. M. Kac, I. Gorenak, and V. Potocan. The inﬂuence of trust on collaborative
relationships in supply chains. E+ M Ekonomie a Management, 19(2):120–131,
2016.

S. S. Kamble, A. Gunasekaran, and R. Sharma. Modeling the blockchain enabled
International Journal of Information

traceability in agriculture supply chain.
Management, 52:101967, 2020.

A. Kamilaris, A. Fonts, and F. X. Prenafeta-Bold ´𝜈. The rise of blockchain technology
in agriculture and food supply chains. Trends in Food Science & Technology, 91:
640–652, 2019.

J. Kidd, F.-J. Richter, and X. Li. Learning and trust in supply chain management.

Management Decision, 2003.

R. Kolluru and P. H. Meredith. Security and trust management in supply chains.

Information Management & Computer Security, 2001.

References

37

S. Kurpjuweit, C. G. Schmidt, M. Klöckner, and S. M. Wagner. Blockchain in
additive manufacturing and its impact on supply chains. Journal of Business
Logistics, 42(1):46–70, 2021.

P. Lafourcade and M. Lombard-Platet. About blockchain interoperability. Informa-

tion Processing Letters, 161:105976, 2020.

J.-H. Lee and M. Pilkington. How the blockchain revolution will reshape the con-
sumer electronics industry [future directions]. IEEE Consumer Electronics Mag-
azine, 6(3):19–23, 2017.

Z. Liu, Y. Xiang, J. Shi, P. Gao, H. Wang, X. Xiao, B. Wen, and Y.-C. Hu. Hyper-
service: Interoperability and programmability across heterogeneous blockchains.
In Proceedings of the 2019 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Commu-
nications Security, pages 549–566, 2019.

F. Longo, L. Nicoletti, A. Padovano, G. d’Atri, and M. Forte. Blockchain-enabled
supply chain: An experimental study. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 136:
57–69, 2019.

S. Malik, S. S. Kanhere, and R. Jurdak. Productchain: Scalable blockchain frame-
work to support provenance in supply chains. In 2018 IEEE 17th International
Symposium on Network Computing and Applications (NCA), pages 1–10. IEEE,
2018.

S. Malik, V. Dedeoglu, S. S. Kanhere, and R. Jurdak. Trustchain: Trust manage-
ment in blockchain and iot supported supply chains. In 2019 IEEE International
Conference on Blockchain (Blockchain), pages 184–193. IEEE, 2019.

S. Malik, V. Dedeoglu, S. Kanhere, and R. Jurdak. Privchain: Provenance and
arXiv preprint

privacy preservation in blockchain enabled supply chains.
arXiv:2104.13964, 2021a.

S. Malik, N. Gupta, V. Dedeoglu, S. S. Kanhere, and R. Jurdak. Tradechain: Decou-
pling traceability and identity inblockchain enabled supply chains. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2105.11217, 2021b.

S. Nakamoto. Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system. Technical report,

Manubot, 2019.

S. Pal. Internet of Things and Access Control: Sensing, Monitoring and Controlling
Access in IoT-Enabled Healthcare Systems, volume 37. Springer Nature, 2021.
S. Pal, M. Hitchens, and V. Varadharajan. On the design of security mechanisms
for the internet of things. In 2017 Eleventh International Conference on Sensing
Technology (ICST), pages 1–6. IEEE, 2017a.

S. Pal, M. Hitchens, and V. Varadharajan. Towards a secure access control architec-
ture for the internet of things. In 2017 IEEE 42nd Conference on Local Computer
Networks (LCN), pages 219–222. IEEE, 2017b.

S. Pal, M. Hitchens, V. Varadharajan, and T. Rabehaja. Fine-grained access control
for smart healthcare systems in the internet of things. EAI Endorsed Transactions
on Industrial Networks and Intelligent Systems, 4(13), 2018a.

S. Pal, M. Hitchens, V. Varadharajan, and T. Rabehaja. Policy-based access control
for constrained healthcare resources. In 2018 IEEE 19th International Symposium
on" A World of Wireless, Mobile and Multimedia Networks"(WoWMoM), pages
588–599. IEEE, 2018b.

38

1 Blockchain in Supply Chain: Opportunities and Design Considerations

S. Pal, M. Hitchens, and V. Varadharajan. Towards the design of a trust management
framework for the internet of things. In 2019 13th International Conference on
Sensing Technology (ICST), pages 1–7. IEEE, 2019a.

S. Pal, T. Rabehaja, A. Hill, M. Hitchens, and V. Varadharajan. On the integration
of blockchain to the internet of things for enabling access right delegation. IEEE
Internet of Things Journal, 7(4):2630–2639, 2019b.

N. Pantlin, C. Wiseman, and M. Everett. Supply chain arrangements: The abc to
gdpr compliance—a spotlight on emerging market practice in supplier contracts
in light of the gdpr. Computer law & Security review, 34(4):881–885, 2018.
D. Patel, B. Britto, S. Sharma, K. Gaikwad, Y. Dusing, and M. Gupta. Carbon
credits on blockchain. In 2020 International Conference on Innovative Trends in
Information Technology (ICITIIT), pages 1–5. IEEE, 2020.

T. Rabehaja, S. Pal, and M. Hitchens. Design and implementation of a secure and
ﬂexible access-right delegation for resource constrained environments. Future
Generation Computer Systems, 99:593–608, 2019.

I. Radanović and R. Likić. Opportunities for use of blockchain technology in
medicine. Applied health economics and health policy, 16(5):583–590, 2018.
R. Radhakrishnan and B. Krishnamachari. Streaming data payment protocol for the
internet of things. The 1st International Workshop on Blockchain for the Internet
of Things, held in conjunction with IEEE Blockchain, 2018.

R. Radhakrishnan, G. S. Ramachandran, and B. Krishnamachari. Sdpp: Streaming
data payment protocol for data economy. In 2019 IEEE International Conference
on Blockchain and Cryptocurrency (ICBC), pages 17–18. IEEE, 2019.

G. S. Ramachandran, R. Radhakrishnan, and B. Krishnamachari. Towards a de-
centralized data marketplace for smart cities. In 2018 IEEE International Smart
Cities Conference (ISC2), pages 1–8, 2018. doi: 10.1109/ISC2.2018.8656952.
G. S. Ramachandran, K.-L. Wright, L. Zheng, P. Navaney, M. Naveed, B. Krishna-
machari, and J. Dhaliwal. Trinity: A byzantine fault-tolerant distributed publish-
subscribe system with immutable blockchain-based persistence. In 2019 IEEE
International Conference on Blockchain and Cryptocurrency (ICBC), pages 227–
235, 2019. doi: 10.1109/BLOC.2019.8751388.

S. A. Renner, A. S. Rosenthal, and J. G. Scarano. Data interoperability: standardiza-

tion or mediation. In 1st IEEE metadata conference. Citeseer, 1996.

B. S. Sahay. Understanding trust in supply chain relationships. Industrial Manage-

ment & Data Systems, 2003.

P. Samarati and S. C. de Vimercati. Access control: Policies, models, and mecha-
nisms. In International School on Foundations of Security Analysis and Design,
pages 137–196. Springer, 2000.

L. S. Sankar, M. Sindhu, and M. Sethumadhavan. Survey of consensus protocols
on blockchain applications. In 2017 4th International Conference on Advanced
Computing and Communication Systems (ICACCS), pages 1–5. IEEE, 2017.
S. Saraji and M. Borowczak. A blockchain-based carbon credit ecosystem. arXiv

preprint arXiv:2107.00185, 2021.

References

39

E. J. Scheid, T. Hegnauer, B. Rodrigues, and B. Stiller. Bifröst: a modular blockchain
interoperability api. In 2019 IEEE 44th Conference on Local Computer Networks
(LCN), pages 332–339. IEEE, 2019.

A. Shahid, A. Almogren, N. Javaid, F. A. Al-Zahrani, M. Zuair, and M. Alam.
Blockchain-based agri-food supply chain: A complete solution. IEEE Access, 8:
69230–69243, 2020.

Q. Song, Y. Chen, Y. Zhong, K. Lan, S. Fong, and R. Tang. A supply-chain sys-
tem framework based on internet of things using blockchain technology. ACM
Transactions on Internet Technology (TOIT), 21(1):1–24, 2021.

H. S. Sternberg, E. Hofmann, and D. Roeck. The struggle is real: Insights from
a supply chain blockchain case. Journal of Business Logistics, 42(1):71–87,
2021. doi: https://doi.org/10.1111/jbl.12240. URL https://onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/jbl.12240.

Z. Su, M. Li, X. Fan, X. Jin, and Z. Wang. Research on trust propagation models in
reputation management systems. Mathematical Problems in Engineering, 2014,
2014.

S. Thakur and J. G. Breslin. Scalable and secure product serialization for multi-party
perishable good supply chains using blockchain. Internet of Things, 11:100253,
2020.

S. Underwood. Blockchain beyond bitcoin. Communications of the ACM, 59(11):

15–17, 2016.

W. Viriyasitavat, D. Hoonsopon, and Z. Bi. Augmenting cryptocurrency in smart
supply chain. Journal of Industrial Information Integration, 21:100188, 2021.
G. Wood. Polkadot: Vision for a heterogeneous multi-chain framework. White Paper,

2016.

G. Wood et al. Ethereum: A secure decentralised generalised transaction ledger.

Ethereum project yellow paper, 151(2014):1–32, 2014.

F. Wu, S. Yeniyurt, D. Kim, and S. T. Cavusgil. The impact of information technol-
ogy on supply chain capabilities and ﬁrm performance: A resource-based view.
Industrial Marketing Management, 35(4):493–504, 2006.

X. Xu, F. Rahman, B. Shakya, A. Vassilev, D. Forte, and M. Tehranipoor. Electronics
supply chain integrity enabled by blockchain. ACM Transactions on Design
Automation of Electronic Systems (TODAES), 24(3):1–25, 2019.

L. Zavolokina, N. Zani, and G. Schwabe. Designing for trust in blockchain platforms.

IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management, 2020.

Y. Zhang and U. Guin. End-to-end traceability of ics in component supply chain
for ﬁghting against recycling. IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and
Security, 15:767–775, 2019.

R. Ziolkowski, G. Miscione, and G. Schwabe. Decision problems in blockchain
governance: Old wine in new bottles or walking in someone else’s shoes? Journal
of Management Information Systems, 37(2):316–348, 2020.

