JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

1

Blockchain-empowered Edge Intelligence for
Internet of Medical Things Against COVID-19

Hong-Ning Dai, Senior Member, IEEE, Yulei Wu, Senior Member, IEEE, Hao Wang, Senior Member, IEEE,
Muhammad Imran, Senior Member, IEEE, Noman Haider, Member, IEEE

1
2
0
2

g
u
A
4

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
0
0
1
2
0
.
8
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—We have witnessed an unprecedented public health
crisis caused by the new coronavirus disease (COVID-19), which
has severely affected medical institutions, our common lives, and
social-economic activities. This crisis also reveals the brittleness of
existing medical services, such as over-centralization of medical
resources, the hysteresis of medical services digitalization, and
weak security and privacy protection of medical data. The
integration of
the Internet of Medical Things (IoMT) and
blockchain is expected to be a panacea to COVID-19 attributed
to the ubiquitous presence and the perception of IoMT as well
as the enhanced security and immutability of the blockchain.
However, the synergy of IoMT and blockchain is also faced
with challenges in privacy,
latency, and context-absence. The
emerging edge intelligence technologies bring opportunities to
tackle these issues. In this article, we present a blockchain-
empowered edge intelligence for IoMT in addressing the COVID-
19 crisis. We ﬁrst review IoMT, edge intelligence, and blockchain
in addressing the COVID-19 pandemic. We then present an
architecture of blockchain-empowered edge intelligence for IoMT
after discussing the opportunities of integrating blockchain and
edge intelligence. We next offer solutions to COVID-19 brought
by blockchain-empowered edge intelligence from 1) monitoring
and tracing COVID-19 pandemic origin, 2) traceable supply
chain of injectable medicines and COVID-19 vaccines, and 3)
telemedicine and remote healthcare services. Moreover, we also
discuss the challenges and open issues in blockchain-empowered
edge intelligence.

Index Terms—Blockchain, Edge Computing, Artiﬁcial Intelli-

gence, Internet of Medical Things, COVID-19

I. INTRODUCTION

T HE epidemic of the newly-found coronavirus disease

(COVID-19) has adversely affected our common lives,
overloaded medical institutions, and paralyzed aviation and
tourist industries. By October 2020, there are more than 41.6
million conﬁrmed COVID-19 cases and more than 1,100,000
deaths over 218 countries, areas, or territories across the
world according to the report of the world health organization
(WHO). The outbreak of the epidemic has severely overloaded
existing medical institutions and healthcare facilities. As a
consequence, hospitals have been overcrowded and healthcare

H.-N. Dai is with Faculty of Information Technology, Macau University of

Science and Technology, Macau. email: hndai@ieee.org.

Y. Wu is with the College of Engineering, Mathematics and Phys-
ical Sciences, University of Exeter, Exeter, EX4 4QF, U.K. e-mail:
y.l.wu@exeter.ac.uk.

H. Wang is with Department of Computer Science, Norwegian University

of Science and Technology, Gjøvik, Norway. email: hawa@ntnu.no.

M. Imran is with College of Applied Computer Science, King Saud

University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. email: dr.m.imran@ieee.org.

N. Haider is with College of Engineering and Science at Victoria University,

Australia. email: noman90@ieee.org.

workers have been overloaded. Meanwhile, many elderly peo-
ple and patients with chronic diseases cannot be provided with
immediate and proper healthcare services.

The recent technological advances in the Internet of Medical
Things (IoMT) may help to address the challenges posed
by COVID-19, especially in the digitalization of medical
services. IoMT connects diverse medical devices, wearable
medical sensors, biosensors, and medical instruments with the
Internet so as to offer a ubiquitous monitoring service on
patients [1]. Assisted by artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) and big
data analytics technologies, massive IoMT data can be used to
diagnose, recognize, analyze, and make decisions for medical
practitioners and healthcare experts.

However, both privacy leakage concerns and security vul-
nerabilities of IoMT systems have shrunk back public desires
of the wide adoption of IoMT. On the one hand, IoMT devices
typically have limited computing capabilities and storage
capacity. Consequently, a common practice is to outsource
IoMT data to remote cloud services, which are nevertheless
possessed by services providers who may unintentionally (by
mistakes) or intentionally breach the privacy of medical data.
Another adverse effect of outsourcing IoMT data to remote
clouds is the high latency due to data transmissions across
diverse networks. On the other hand, IoMT systems are also
in peril of other mischievous attacks due to the deﬁciency of
security schemes imposed in IoMT systems.

The emerging blockchain and edge intelligence technolo-
gies can potentially address the above challenges in IoMT.
Blockchain, characterized by decentralization, immutability,
and security can enhance the security of IoMT systems and
protect the privacy of IoMT data. Meanwhile, edge computing,
as a new computing paradigm can ofﬂoad the computing tasks
from remote clouds in approximation to IoMT devices so as
to reduce the latency and improve privacy preservation since
IoMT data can be processed and stored close to the IoMT data
owner. The convergence of edge computing and AI algorithms
can bestow edge computing nodes with context-aware edge
intelligence. The in-depth blockchain with edge intelligence
can offer trusted edge intelligence in order to foster the wide
adoption of IoMT.

Although there are some recent studies on exploring
blockchain for IoMT or machine learning/deep learning for
IoMT [2], [3], most of them only consider one technology
alone instead of multiple technologies together. To bridge
this gap, we investigate the blockchain-empowered edge in-
telligence for IoMT to address the COVID-19 crisis in this
article. We ﬁrst brieﬂy introduce IoMT technologies and

 
 
 
 
 
 
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

2

TABLE I
OVERVIEW OF IOMT FOR COVID-19 PANDEMIC

Crowd monitoring & prevention

Diagnosis & treatment

Wide area

‘Pandemic’ drones

Disinfection drones, medical/delivery drones

Local area

Health monitoring robots, indoor IoT air quality monitor

Disinfection (remote controlled or autonomous) robots, telehealth systems

Body area

Tracing apps, wearables, e.g., wristbands or tags, for social distancing

Social robots, wearable sensors, e.g., temperature and respiratory signs

review edge intelligence as well as blockchain technologies
to explore the inclusive potentials of blockchain-empowered
edge intelligence. We then present a framework of blockchain-
empowered edge intelligence for IoMT, exhibiting in three
different levels: trusted device intelligence, trusted edge intel-
ligence, and trusted cloud intelligence. We next offer solutions
of blockchain-empowered edge intelligence to IoMT against
COVID-19 from three different perspectives: 1) monitoring
and tracing COVID-19 pandemic origin, 2) traceable supply
chain of injectable medicines and COVID-19 vaccines, and 3)
telemedicine and remote healthcare services. Finally, research
challenges and open issues are also discussed.

II. INTERNET OF MEDICAL THINGS

One of the key enablers for the so-called “Healthcare
4.0” [4] is IoMT, which connects all
types of (medical
or general) devices in different scales of health and public
networks to facilitate health-related functionalities and pro-
cesses. Important to note that we have expanded the notion of
IoMT commonly found in existing literature, e.g., “Internet
of Medical Things (IoMT) designates the interconnection
of communication-enabled medical-grade devices and their
integration to wider-scale health networks in order to improve
patients’ health” [5]. This is because we observe that general
IoT and public networks are also participants in health-related
processes, especially in this pandemic era.

The medical context casts strict requirements on IoMT
in terms of reliability, safety, and security. This becomes
especially challenging due to the fast expanding nature of the
COVID-19 epidemic where ethical dilemmas often arise with
different alternatives to contain and isolate the spreading of
the virus. In this kind of scenarios, effective, reliable and trust-
worthy solutions for acquiring and storing all necessary data
and careful management of data access become of paramount
importance.

As summarized in Table I, we look at IoMT for COVID-
19 in two axes. The ﬁrst axis is healthcare phases, we
differentiate: a) crowd monitoring; b) diagnosis and treatment.
The second axis is the scopes and areas, we differentiate: a)
wide area mainly refers to public places, especially crowded
locations such as trafﬁc hubs, sports stadiums, tourist attrac-
tions, shopping centers, and school public spaces. b) local area
refers to localized spaces such as care homes, community
health centers, hospitals, homes, classrooms, and ofﬁces. c)
body area, refers to the body of a person, with or without
COVID-19 symptoms.

Contact tracing and social distancing have been essential
to contain the spreading of the virus. Based on the high

percentage of smart phone ownership, especially in developed
areas in the world, many countries developed and announced
(some enforce the use of) smartphone apps. Many of these
apps make use of the global positioning system (GPS), Wi-
Fi, Bluetooth modules in the smartphones to remind/enforce
social distancing and tracking of person-to-person and person-
to-place histories. Wristbands and tags attached to helmets or
clothing have been developed to ensure social distancing.

Drones, robots, and surveillance devices for human ofﬁcials
(e.g., helmets and glasses) have been developed to both
wide and local areas to monitor crowd for social distancing,
temperature and respiratory signs. When infected cases are
conﬁrmed, all
logged visited places should be traced and
disinfected. Remote controlled or autonomous robots or drones
have also been developed for these types of tasks. Data on
crowd activities can then be acquired and analyzed [3]. As
the coronavirus is airborne, air quality monitor sensors and
actuators are relevant for both wide and local areas.

Telehealth systems for remote treatment of COVID-19 pa-
tients in both care homes and residential homes can relieve
the pressure on hospital facilities. Social robots can help with
mental issues due to isolation for COVID-19 patients.

III. EDGE INTELLIGENCE AND BLOCKCHAIN

A. Edge intelligence

Edge computing is a computing paradigm that brings the
computing capability in close proximity to where a computing
task is needed. Edge computing, along with an increasing pen-
etration of AI into network edge, brings the edge intelligence
into diverse vertical services. In the event of IoMT against
COVID-19, edge intelligence can primarily help with the
computing needs in the following two aspects: contact tracing
and aerosol surveillance, as shown in Fig. 1. In practice, edge
computing can be deployed at IoMT gateway, Wi-Fi Access
Point (AP), and evolved NodeB (eNB).

1) Contact tracing: Bluetooth has been widely discussed
and shown as one of the feasible wireless technologies for
digital contact tracing. Apple1 and Google2 have launched
a solution with developer toolkits for iOS and Android,
that include application programming interfaces (APIs) and
system-level technologies to assist in enabling contact tracing.
The working principle behind tracing using Bluetooth is to
collect and store the Bluetooth signals broadcasting by other
devices in the vicinity. The contact Bluetooth signals are then
uploaded and stored in the remote cloud through an application

1https://developer.apple.com/bluetooth/
2https://developer.android.com/guide/topics/connectivity/bluetooth-le

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

3

Fig. 1. Edge intelligence for contact tracing and aerosol surveillance.

in the IoMT devices. With a conﬁrmed COVID-19 case, the
contact IoMT devices will be identiﬁed through the stored
Bluetooth signals and be notiﬁed.

Although the Bluetooth contact tracing can in principle
work, the accuracy of identifying contact IoMT devices in
terms of distance between devices is a big issue. That is
because Bluetooth is a peer-to-peer technology, triangulation
cannot be used to achieve accurate measurement of distance.
This in turn affects the performance of Bluetooth contact trac-
ing. There are existing studies using AI techniques to improve
the accuracy of distance measurement based on Bluetooth Low
Energy (BLE) beacons. For example, a COVID-SAFE tool
[6], with the cooperation of the Internet of Things (IoT), a
smart phone application, and the edge intelligence for data
analytics, has been developed for healthcare and physical
distance monitoring.

In addition to Bluetooth, many other wireless technologies
including Wi-Fi, GPS, LoRa and cellular techniques such as
4G/LTE/5G, have been used for localization and positioning
in indoor and/or outdoor environment. They have been expe-
riencing the accuracy issues due to many factors, such as low-
quality of signal data. Several research works [7] have been
carried out by employing machine learning techniques, such
as generative adversarial networks, to enhance the quality of
signal data and thus in turn improve the accuracy of localiza-
tion and positioning. Edge computing has provided a powerful
nearby computing capability to reduce the computation time
of machine learning algorithms and improve the data privacy
issues to some extent.

2) Aerosol surveillance: An aerosol is essentially a droplet
in a liquid or solid form in air. A contaminated environment
is a key role in transmitting the disease like COVID-19 via
aerosol transmission. Aerosol transmission has been agreed as
one of the main COVID-19 transmission methods and needs to
be effectively monitored. On the one hand, if aerosol surveil-
lance and analysis could be performed in a real-time manner,
the transmission can be quickly intervened and limited, and
the relevant people in that region can be swiftly notiﬁed.
The fast analysis of aerosol transmission largely depends on
the edge intelligence, which provides the necessary nearby
and distributed computing capability along with the required
data analytics services. On the other hand, the contact tracing
solutions have not considered the possibility of a contaminated
environment. Edge intelligence can effectively bridge contact
tracing and aerosol surveillance and provide a more effective
solution for COVID-19 pandemic mitigation.

Fig. 2. Key features of blockchain.

B. Blockchain

Privacy is one of the biggest concerns of digital contact
tracing. It is not transparent of how the collected signal data
are anonymized, how they are used to track people outside
the bounds of limiting COVID-19 pandemic transmission, and
whether only the necessary signal data are collected. The
blockchain technology has shown its merits on mitigating the
privacy and many other issues in digital contact tracing. A
blockchain is a peer-to-peer technology. It is essentially a
distributed and secure ledger that records transactions into
a chain of blocks [8]. In what follows, how blockchain can
ﬁght against the issues encountered by digital contact tracing
will be discussed. Fig. 2 shows a summary of key features of
blockchain.

1) Decentralization: Blockchain provides decentralized
computing where the participating nodes have an equal oppor-
tunity in the decision making process. It can work closely with
edge computing and many peer-to-peer wireless technologies
such as Bluetooth [9] when analyzing contact tracing results.
2) Consensus: Blockchain uses consensus mechanisms to
achieve necessary agreement between participating nodes on
the newly generated blocks such as recording contact tracing
events. Consensus mechanisms can be treated as a fault-
tolerant solution where mistrusting participating nodes are
allowed to agree on the global state of the chain. It usually
requires high computation, where edge computing is a good
candidate to compensate.
3) Immutability: All

the transactions are validated and
stored immutably in the blockchain, and thus the falsiﬁcation
to any transactions can be easily detected. This can ensure
the tamper-prooﬁng of the transactions. For example, a per-
son’s travel data that are used for contact tracing analysis is
immutable.

4) Distributed ledger: Blockchain allows a copy of the
ledger of transaction records stored in each participating node.
This ensures the transparency of the transactions, i.e., the use
of signal data for contact tracing is transparent.

5) Smart contract: A smart contract is a piece of software
code, where it is executed automatically if electronic terms and
conditions are met. The execution of each contract statement
will be recorded as an immutable transaction in the blockchain.
This can enable automation in many decision making in the
contact tracing and notiﬁcation in the event of a conﬁrmed
COVID-19 case.

Aerosol SurveillanceContactTracingEdgeIntelligenceCoronavirusBluetoothContaminatedAirNovelCoronavirus1) Decentralization 2) Consensus 3) Immutability 4) Distributed Ledger 6) Enhanced Security 5) Smart Contract Blockchain JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

4

Fig. 3. Blockchain-empowered edge intelligence for Internet of Medical Things.

6) Enhanced security: Blockchain uses a set of encryption
techniques such as PKI, digital signatures, hashing, etc. This
can also provide enhanced security to the stored signal data
that are used for contact tracing [2].

IV. BLOCKCHAIN-EMPOWERED EDGE INTELLIGENCE FOR
INTERNET OF MEDICAL THINGS
A. Opportunities of integrating blockchain with edge intelli-
gence

The integration of blockchain and edge intelligence can
bring mutual beneﬁts to each other. First, blockchain can
improve the trustworthiness of edge intelligence. Second,
AI algorithms running on edge devices can also enhance
blockchain systems.

Despite advances in AI technologies, there are emerging
security and privacy concerns in AI algorithms as well as
their-fostered cloud intelligence and edge intelligence. The
security threats to AI include stealing, modifying, and even
contaminating (or poisoning) the training data [10], while most
AI algorithms (especially for deep learning (DL) algorithms)
require substantial training on massive data. Moreover, there
are also rising concerns on the accidentally or intentionally
privacy leaks of IoMT data. The advent of blockchain brings
opportunities to address both the security and privacy concerns
of AI. In particular, blockchain can offer effective authen-
tication and authorization on the sensory data during data
sharing. Any modiﬁcations can be detected on time due to
the immutability of the blockchain. Moreover, authentication
and authorization can be enforced on either edge devices or
cloud-service providers through blockchain systems.

On the other hand, AI can greatly enhance the blockchain
ecosystem. Massive data have been generated from diverse
blockchain systems. AI-empowered blockchain data analysis
can help to extract valuable information and also strengthen
blockchain itself. In particular, data analysis of blockchain data
can be beneﬁcial to discover the possible defects, predict the
failures, and determine the bottleneck factors affecting the sys-
tem throughput. Consequently, intelligent countermeasures can

be made. For example, it is shown in [11] that log data analysis
can discover the possible faults in the blockchain. Moreover,
data analytics on smart contracts (running on the blockchain)
can help to detect and identify the vulnerable contract codes,
thereby putting forth effective countermeasures.

B. Architecture of blockchain-empowered edge intelligence for
IoMT

Fig. 3 presents an architecture of blockchain-empowered
edge intelligence for IoMT. In particular, the integration of
blockchain with AI algorithms can provide the trusted intelli-
gence in three different levels (from bottom to top): 1) device
level, 2) edge level, and 3) cloud level.

1) Trusted device intelligence: There are diverse IoMT
devices including sensors, Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation
(RFID) tags, thermometers, wristbands, and thermal cameras
at the device level. Due to the resource limitation, IoMT
devices typically cannot store and process massive IoMT data.
Moreover, IoMT devices have limited data protection capabil-
ity, since computationally-complex cryptographic algorithms
are not applicable to them. However, edge computing nodes
and remote cloud servers can complement IoMT devices in
computing and storage capability. For example, IoMT data can
be uploaded to nearby edge computing nodes or outsourced to
remote cloud servers for further data processing, storage, and
analysis. Moreover, the integration of blockchain technologies
with IoMT devices can assure the trustworthy management of
IoMT devices. In particular, blockchain can facilitate authen-
tication and access control management of IoMT devices. In
addition, blockchain can also ensure the anonymity of IoMT
devices, since IoT devices only use the generated addresses to
interact with each other in the system.

2) Trusted edge intelligence: Edge computing nodes are
typically deployed at eNB or gNodeB (gNB in 5G systems),
Wi-Fi APs, and IoT gateways, in proximity to IoMT devices,
which typically connect with eNB, gNB, APs and IoT gate-
ways via wireless links. Compared with IoMT devices that

Edge levelDevice levelCloud levelBlockchain-empowered AISensorSensorCameraWiFi APPrivate cloudReaderTrusted cloud intelligenceTrusted edge intelligenceTrusted device intelligenceFull blockchainPartial blockchainWireless linkWired linkBlockchain networkData blockHash function…Digital signatureBlockchain node internal structureSmart contractAI algorithmseNBIoT GatewayIoT GatewayData storagePublic cloudEdge deviceDroneRobotJOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

5

(a) Monitoring and tracing COVID-19 pandemic ori-
gin

(b) Supply chain of injectable medicines

(c) Telemedicine and remote healthcare services

Fig. 4. Solutions of Blockchain-empowered Edge Intelligence to IoMT against COVID-19

have limited computing capability, edge computing nodes can
temporarily store (or cache) and process IoMT data due to
the enhanced computing capability and storage capacity [12].
Meanwhile,
lightweight machine learning algorithms have
recently been adopted to analyze IoMT data to extract useful
information, such as patient symptom identiﬁcation, contact
tracing, and recognizing high-fever infected persons. In con-
trast to remote cloud computing services, which are far from
IoMT devices, edge computing facilities can process time-
sensitive tasks. Moreover, edge computing nodes can also
protect data privacy since IoMT data can be stored locally
at edge computing nodes, at which lightweight cryptographic
schemes are also deployed to protect conﬁdential data. Mean-
while, ofﬂoading time-sensitive tasks to edge computing nodes
can further assure real-time requirements. The integration of
edge computing with blockchain can further strengthen the
trustworthiness of edge computing nodes in IoMT systems,
due to the immutability and the enhanced security brought by
blockchain [2].

3) Trusted cloud intelligence: Cloud servers and data cen-
ters are mainly responsible for computationally-complex tasks
and massive data storage. In particular, DL algorithms can
be used to analyze patient medical data so that healthcare
practitioners (e.g., medical doctors) can easily identify the
symptoms, trace the sources, and make appropriate therapies.
However, DL algorithms have stringent demands on the com-
puting facilities, e.g., Tensor Processing Units or Graphics
Processing Units to fasten the training process. Meanwhile, DL
models also require substantial training on massive IoMT data
to achieve outstanding performance (e.g., prediction accuracy).
Since IoMT devices and edge devices cannot fulﬁll such
stringent computing requirements, the common practice is to
outsource IoMT data to cloud servers, which are often owned
by third parties (e.g., MS Azure, Amazon cloud, Alibaba
cloud services). Uploading IoMT data to untrusted third par-
ties may intentionally or accidentally leak the data privacy.

The introduction of blockchain technologies can protect data
privacy and guarantee the trust of cloud intelligence through
the effective authentication and authorization of IoMT data.
Moreover, the immutability of blockchain can also ensure non-
falsiﬁable IoMT data when it is outsourced to cloud-service
providers.

V. SOLUTIONS OF BLOCKCHAIN-EMPOWERED EDGE
INTELLIGENCE TO IOMT AGAINST COVID-19
Blockchain-empowered edge intelligence for IoT can solve
the challenges posed by COVID-19. Fig. 4 summarizes the
solutions. We next elaborate them in details.

A. Monitoring and tracing COVID-19 pandemic origin

We take monitoring and tracing COVID-19 pandemic origin
as a case study to illustrate how the proposed blockchain-
empowered edge intelligence works. This case study includes
two parallel processes: contact tracing and aerosol surveil-
lance, as shown in Fig. 4(a). In the process of contact tracing,
a number of trusted IoMTs with diverse wireless connectivity
technologies, such as Bluetooth, LoRa, near-ﬁeld communi-
cation (NFC), 4G/LTE/5G, and Wi-Fi are involved in the
contact measurement by virtue of localization and positioning
techniques. The trusted edge intelligence is in place to improve
the accuracy of contact measurement. The signals of close
contact IoMTs, e.g., less than 2 meters, will be collected and
uploaded to the trusted cloud. The cloud intelligence provides
a fast lookup service to quickly ﬁnd a sequence of close
contact IoMTs if a COVID-19 case is conﬁrmed, and the
cloud intelligence provides effective data analytics services to
identify the origin of this conﬁrmed case through the contact
tracing data. All the affected IoMTs will then be notiﬁed [13].
the related IoT
devices (such as Vortex IoT’s SalixAir3) at the device level

In the process of aerosol surveillance,

3https://www.vortexiot.com/products/air-quality-monitoring-aqm/

Contact tracing WiFi AP eNB eNB IoT Gateway Bioprocess Raw materials Manufacturing Filling Quality control Packaging Logistics Warehouse Medical institutions Injection Sensor IoT Gateway Sensor WiFi AP Vaccine R&D WiFi AP IoT Gateway Healthcare center Clinic Hospital Pharmacy Remote area IoT Gateway Disinfection Robot Ward eNB First aid Ambulance JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

6

monitor the contaminated environment and work with trusted
edge intelligence to detect aerosol transmission of COVID-
the results will
19. In the event of a positive detection,
be stored in the trusted cloud for further processing, and
the IoMTs in the affected region will be alerted. Contact
tracing and aerosol surveillance are two intertwined processes
to achieve more accurate identiﬁcation of the origin. The
proposed blockchain-empowered edge intelligence provides
intelligence at the device level, edge level, and cloud level
to carry out data analytics and perform decision making.
In addition, the blockchain-empowered capability ensures the
transparency of signal data storage and usage as well as
data processing with the promise of ensuring personal data
anonymization.

B. Traceable supply chain of
COVID-19 vaccines

injectable medicines and

Vaccines are expected to be the most effective medicines
to prevent the outbreaks of COVID-19. Many countries have
devoted huge efforts to vaccine development. There are more
than 150 COVID-19 vaccines in development, many of which
are in the ﬁnal test stage across the world. However, the mas-
sive production of COVID-19 vaccines may cause a shortage
of other critical injectable medicines (e.g., inﬂuenza vaccines)
considering billions of COVID-19 vaccine demands. Thus, it
is a necessity to establish traceable supply chains of injectable
medicines and vaccines to maintain enough supply of critical
medicines.

Blockchain-empowered edge intelligence for IoMT can also
address this emerging issue. In particular, IoMT deployed in
the entire pharmaceutical supply chain can trace the produc-
tions of medicines in each phase, as shown in Fig. 4(b).
For example, it is reported4 that Sandoz, an American phar-
maceutical company launched a new pharmaceutical supply
chain armed with RFID tags so that hospitals can trace the
inventory of three injectable medicines from production lines
to warehouses. The integration of IoMT with blockchain can
further improve the traceability and immutability of medicines
in pharmaceutical supply chains. Meanwhile, AI technologies
as well as edge intelligence can analyze the massive data of
pharmaceutical supply chains so as to optimize the manufac-
turing process and forecast the coming demands (e.g., a new
COVID-19 vaccine).

C. Telemedicine and remote healthcare services

The outbreaks of COVID-19 brought not only heavy loads
to public medical institutions but also revealed the brittleness
of medical and healthcare systems. For example, the strong
transmission capability of COVID-19 and long incubation
period are also the root cause of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Meanwhile, the average recovery period of patients infected
with COVID-19 is from 6 to 41 days in contrast
to the
inﬂuenza with a recovery period within one week. As a
consequence, hospitals have been overcrowded and medical

4https://www.sandoz.com/news/media-releases/sandoz-launches-its-ﬁrst-

rﬁd-tagged-critical-injectable-medicines-kit-check

practitioners have been overloaded. Many elderly people and
patients with chronic diseases cannot get immediate and proper
healthcare services.

Blockchain-empowered edge intelligence also brings solu-
tions to the healthcare crisis caused by COVID-19 pandemic,
as shown in Fig. 4(c). First, the recent technological advances
promote the miniaturization of diverse wearable IoMT de-
vices, such as body sensors, sphygmomanometers, glucose
meters, and smart bands, which can be connected to remote
hospitals or healthcare centers with the provision of real-time
monitoring on patients and elderly people. In addition, robots
and drones in IoMT systems also play an important role in
healthcare digitalization. For example, disinfectant robots or
drones can be deployed to disinfect hospitals or contaminated
areas so as to reduce the chances of healthcare workers being
infected. Moreover, drones can be used to deliver medicines
or medical equipment to the remote locked-down area. In both
the above cases, IoMT systems need to fulﬁll both privacy and
real-time requirements, which can be addressed by blockchain-
empowered edge intelligence. On the one hand, blockchain can
effectively protect the privacy of patients’ data via enhanced
security and pseudonymity of blockchains. On the other hand,
edge intelligence can dynamically allocate the resources (e.g.,
bandwidths and network slices) to fulﬁll various demands [14].

VI. RESEARCH CHALLENGES AND OPEN ISSUES

Despite the potential of blockchain-empowered edge intel-
ligence, there are a number of challenges and open issues to
be addressed.

A. The role of edge intelligence

Edge intelligence plays a key role in the proposed
blockchain-empowered edge intelligence for IoMT. It essen-
tially has three roles. The ﬁrst is to provide intelligence on en-
hancing the accuracy of digital contact tracing. The second is
to provide intelligence on data analytics and decision making
of aerosol surveillance. The third role is to provide intelligence
on integrating and fusing the results from the ﬁrst two roles
and make effective identiﬁcation of the origin and a sequence
of affected IoMTs. There are many challenges that need to
be tackled in making each role. For example, in the ﬁrst role,
there are many wireless technologies that have been used in
contact tracing by virtue of distance measurement. How to
provide a uniﬁed service at the edge intelligence to improve the
accuracy of distance measurement is a challenge. In the second
role, how to make an accurate and online detection as well as
data analytics in the presence of the changing contaminated
environment is hard. In addition, making the third role itself
is not an easy task.

B. Ofﬂoading

The cooperation among trusted device intelligence, trusted
edge intelligence, and trusted cloud intelligence is a necessity
in the proposed blockchain-empowered edge intelligence for
IoMTs. Ofﬂoading is therefore an essential mechanism in
this framework. On the one hand, ofﬂoading decisions shall

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

7

consider different metrics at different levels. For example,
energy efﬁciency is an important factor in the device level.
On the other hand, necessary local data processing is crucial
in reducing the amount of data to be stored in the blockchain,
which is an important consideration in terms of sustainability
of the proposed framework. For example, light-weight ma-
chine learning algorithms can enable device intelligence on
deciding the collection of only useful data, e.g., only useful
Bluetooth signals are collected.

VII. CONCLUSION

This article presented blockchain-empowered edge intelli-
gence for IoMT for combating COVID-19. We ﬁrst re-visited
IoMT technologies as well as the challenges of IoMT. We
elaborated blockchain-empowered edge intelligence to address
the challenges of IoMT and offer solutions of IoMT to
COVID-19. We also outlined potential challenges and open
research issues in blockchain-empowered edge intelligence for
IoMT in the context of COVID-19.

C. Scalability of blockchain

Despite immutability, enhanced security, and decentraliza-
tion of blockchain, many existing blockchain systems are
suffering from poor scalability, exhibiting low transactional
throughput and high latency (between a transaction being
submitted and being conﬁrmed). There are several possible
solutions to improve the scalability of blockchains: 1) de-
signing more scalable consensus algorithms, 2) exploring off-
chain solutions, 3) resorting to new blockchain structures.
With respect to 1), more scalable consensus algorithms include
Proof-of-authority (PoA), Practical Byzantine Fault Tolerance
(PBFT), Delegated Proof of Stake (DPoS), and their variants.
For example, EOSIO with DPoS can reach nearly 1,000
transactions throughput per second (TPS). The main idea
of off-chain solutions is to process transactions outside the
blockchain, consequently reducing the loads at the main chain.
In addition, new blockchain structures like directed acyclic
graphs (DAG) were proved to be cost-efﬁcient [15].

D. Future AR/VR-based medical applications

Future telemedicine may support many emerging medical
applications based on virtual reality (VR)/augmented reality
(AR) technologies. AR/VR-based medical applications include
training, and educa-
telesurgery, remote surgical planning,
images can be
tion. For example, high-resolution medical
reconstructed into 3D medical images via AR and computer
vision (CV) algorithms. The ultra-precise 3D medical images
can then be used for surgeons to have the better diagnosis,
training to junior
make surgery plans, and offer surgical
surgeons. Integrated with other haptic simulators or tools
(e.g., haptic gloves) and AR/VAR technologies, surgeons can
mimic surgeries so as to practice and sharpen their surgery
skills. These AR/VR-based medical applications have stringent
requirements on the reliability,
latency, and bandwidth of
communication networks. The emerging 5G technologies may
fulﬁll
these requirements with the provision of enhanced
Mobile BroadBand (eMBB) and ultra-reliable low latency
communications (URLLC). However, it is still challenging to
fully support telesurgery applications since such complicated
medical applications involve different types of 5G services,
e.g., eMBB services to transmit ultra-precise 3D images while
URLLC to support surgical operations. The convergence of
network slicing technology and AI algorithms may potentially
solve this problem [14]. In particular, different network slices
may be allocated for different medical applications while AI
algorithms can help to allocate network resources in a ﬂexible
manner.

REFERENCES

[1] P. Yang, J. Qi, S. Zhang, X. Wang, G. Bi, Y. Yang, B. Sheng, and
X. Mad, “The effect of multiple interventions to balance healthcare de-
mand for controlling COVID-19 outbreaks: a modelling study,” Scientiﬁc
Reports, vol. 11, no. 3110, 2021.

[2] H.-N. Dai, M. Imran, and N. Haider, “Blockchain-enabled Internet
of Medical Things to Combat COVID-19,” IEEE Internet of Things
Magazine, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 52–57, 2021.

[3] X. Zhou, W. Liang, I. Kevin, K. Wang, H. Wang, L. T. Yang, and
Q. Jin, “Deep learning enhanced human activity recognition for internet
of healthcare things,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 7, no. 7, pp.
6429–6438, 2020.

[4] A. Gatouillat, Y. Badr, B. Massot, and E. Sejdi´c, “Internet of medical
things: A review of recent contributions dealing with cyber-physical
systems in medicine,” IEEE internet of things journal, vol. 5, no. 5, pp.
3810–3822, 2018.

[5] P. Yang, D. Stankevicius, V. Marozas, Z. Deng, E. Liu, A. Lukosevicius,
F. Dong, L. Xu, and G. Min, “Lifelogging data validation model for
internet of things enabled personalized healthcare,” IEEE Transactions
on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems, vol. 48, no. 1, pp. 50–64,
2018.

[6] S. S. Vedaei, A. Fotovvat, M. R. Mohebbian, G. M. E. Rahman, K. A.
Wahid, P. Babyn, H. R. Marateb, M. Mansourian, and R. Sami, “COVID-
SAFE: An IoT-based System for Auto-mated Health Monitoring and
Surveillance in Post-Pandemic Life,” IEEE Access, pp. 1–1, 2020.
[7] V. Chamola, V. Hassija, S. Gupta, A. Goyal, M. Guizani, and B. Sikdar,
“Disaster and pandemic management using machine learning: A survey,”
IEEE Internet of Things Journal, pp. 1–1, 2020.

[8] S. Hakak, W. Z. Khan, G. A. Gilkar, M. Imran, and N. Guizani,
“Securing smart cities through blockchain technology: Architecture,
requirements, and challenges,” IEEE Network, vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 8–14,
2020.

[9] W. Lv, S. Wu, C. Jiang, Y. Cui, X. Qiu, and Y. Zhang, “Towards Large-
Scale and Privacy-Preserving Contact Tracing in COVID-19 pandemic:
A Blockchain Perspective,” IEEE Transactions on Network Science and
Engineering, pp. 1–1, 2020.

[10] D. J. Miller, Z. Xiang, and G. Kesidis, “Adversarial Learning Targeting
Deep Neural Network Classiﬁcation: A Comprehensive Review of
Defenses Against Attacks,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 108, no. 3,
pp. 402–433, 2020.

[11] P. Zheng et al., “XBlock-ETH: Extracting and Exploring Blockchain
Data From Ethereum,” IEEE Open Journal of the Computer Society,
vol. 1, pp. 95 – 106, 2020.

[12] Y. Abdulsalam and M. S. Hossain, “COVID-19 Networking Demand: An
Auction-based Mechanism for Automated Selection of Edge Computing
Services,” IEEE Transactions on Network Science and Engineering, pp.
1–11, 2020.

[13] H. Rohmetra et al., “AI-enabled remote monitoring of vital signs for
COVID-19: methods, prospects and challenges,” Computing, pp. 1–27,
2021. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/s00607-021-00937-7
[14] X. Cheng et al., “Safeguard Network Slicing in 5G: A Learning
Augmented Optimization Approach,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas
in Communications, vol. 38, no. 7, pp. 1600–1613, 2020.

[15] Y. Wu et al., “Convergence of Blockchain and Edge Computing for
Secure and Scalable IIoT Critical Infrastructures in Industry 4.0,” IEEE
Internet of Things Journal, vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 2300–2317, 2021.

Hong-Ning Dai [Senior Member] is currently with Faculty of Information
Technology at Macau University of Science and Technology as an associate

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

8

professor. He obtained the Ph.D. degree in Computer Science and Engineering
from Department of Computer Science and Engineering at
the Chinese
University of Hong Kong. His current research interests include Internet of
Things and blockchain technology. He has served as associate editors/editors
for IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, IEEE Systems Journal,
Connection Science, Ad Hoc Networks, and IEEE Access. He is a senior
member of Association for Computing Machinery (ACM).

Yulei Wu [Senior Member] is a Senior Lecturer with the Department
of Computer Science, College of Engineering, Mathematics and Physical
Sciences, University of Exeter, United Kingdom. He received the B.Sc. degree
(First Class Honours) in Computer Science and the Ph.D. degree in Computing
and Mathematics from the University of Bradford, United Kingdom, in 2006
and 2010, respectively. His expertise is on intelligent networking, and his
main research interests include computer networks, networked systems, and
network security and privacy. He is an Editor of IEEE Transactions on
Network and Service Management, IEEE Transactions on Network Science
and Engineering, Computer Networks (Elsevier) and IEEE Access. He is a
Fellow of the HEA (Higher Education Academy).

Hao Wang [Senior Member] is an Associate Professor in the Department
of Computer Science in Norwegian University of Science and Technology,
Norway. He has a Ph.D. degree and a B.Eng. degree, both in computer
science and engineering, from South China University of Technology. His
research interests include big data analytics, industrial internet of things, high
performance computing, and safety-critical systems. He served as a TPC co-
chair for IEEE DataCom 2015, IEEE CIT 2017, ES 2017, and IEEE CPSCom
2020, a senior TPC member for CIKM 2019, and reviewers/TPC members
for many journals and conferences. He is the Chair for Sub TC on Healthcare
in IEEE IES Technical Committee on Industrial Informatics. He is also a
member of the ACM.

Muhammad Imran [Senior Member] is working as an associate professor in
the College of Applied Computer Science, King Saud University. His research
interests include mobile and wireless networks, Internet of Things, cloud
and edge computing, and information security. He has published more than
200 research articles in reputable international conferences and journals. His
research is supported by several grants. He serves as an associate editor for
many top ranked international journals. He has received various awards.

Noman Haider is a working as a lecturer in the College of Engineering and
Science at Victoria University, Australia. He received his Ph.D. in engineering
from the University of Technology Sydney, Australia in 2019. His research
interests include mobile and wireless networks, Internet of Things, data
science, and information security.

