1
2
0
2

p
e
S
1

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
7
4
0
1
0
.
9
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Crypto Currency Regulation and Law
Enforcement Perspectives

Nicolas T. Courtois1, Kacper T. Grado´n2,3, and Klaus Schmeh4

1 Department of Computer Science, University College London, UK
2 Faculty of Law and Administration, University of Warsaw, Poland
3 Department of Security and Crime Science, University College London, UK
4 Cipherbrain.net, Gelsenkirchen, Germany

Abstract. This paper provides an overview of how crypto currency and
blockchain engineering interacts with the law enforcement. We point out
that a large proportion of crypto users are amateur investors and the
dominant and the largest segment in crypto crime are simply investment
scams (!). We look at various questions of criminal use and misuse of
technology, especially in the areas of money laundering or cashing out the
proﬁts originating from illicit activities. The aim of the paper is to raise a
set of concerns arising in the criminal justice and policing circles, based
on the interviews with law enforcement practitioners, and to see how
cryptos could be reconciled with public security and safety. We propose a
simpliﬁed classiﬁcation of crimes related to crypto currency. We study the
development of blockchains in a broader context of applied cryptography
and payment technology. Ransomware is a big threat but we also need
protection against corporate misconduct or negligence, with untested
ﬁnancial services breaching customer trust or government regulations.
Not paying taxes is illegal, but there is more at stake: exposing crypto
holders to losing all their savings in scams or thefts. Interestingly, privacy
helps to defend on multiple fronts: against social engineering, targeted
crime, scams, and also against cybersecurity thefts and hacks.

Keywords: Blockchain, Crypto currencies, Applied Cryptography, Smart
Cards, Payment, Blockchain Forensics, Crime Science, National Secu-
rity, Law Enforcement, Criminal Justice, Investment Scams, Organized
Crime, Crypto Currency Thefts, Crypto Mining, Money Laundering,
Ransomware.

1

Introduction

Blockchain and associated payment methods are the emerging technolo-
gies, which have 220 million of users [24]. In our view, the current crypto
landscape and ecosystem must be considered to be more than just an
evolution of an electronic payment system invented by a certain Satoshi
Nakamoto [56]. It has then in fact “diversiﬁed” from the initial intended
function of transferring coins between peers. Crypto and blockchain tech-
nology is now becoming a major disruptor of how our economy and our
society functions. The challenge goes far beyond small niche sectors such

 
 
 
 
 
 
as trans-border foreign currency activity. It is now entering substantially
larger parts of the economy: like competing with banks and potentially
also stock markets, on attracting investor deposits and investment activ-
ity fees. It is a powerful programmable toolset capable of doing so many
things in ﬁnance and beyond [34]. Many of these are new and entirely
impossible to do without cryptography and some form of decentralized
or “trustless” consensus. New ideas and new forms of distributed coop-
erative social and economic order are proposed.
This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we introduce the main
directions and we show that there exists more than one point of view
about the role of privacy. In Section 3, we elaborate on the central role
played by crypto exchanges and discuss related risks. In Section 4, we
discuss the major emerging risks at the center stage of crypto currency. In
Section 5, we look at the concerns emanating from the law enforcement
sector. In Section 6, we investigate the dangers of open source and explain
how much engineers are responsible for the crime and theft landscape,
which is also simply part of the DNA of our systems. In Section 7, we
explain how cryptographers have been trying to improve the privacy of
the original bitcoin in the last 10 years. In Section 8, we address certain
misconceptions, which exaggerate the purpose and the type of anonymity
we obtain with privacy-enhanced crypto currencies. In Section 9, we look
at how law enforcement and regulators can cope with new emerging
challenges. In Section 10, we look at three main types of crime by volume
of activity: thefts, scams and ransomware. In Section 11, we look at the
idea of a criminal battleﬁelds. In Section 12, we look at how the emerging
crypto economy can be better protected rather than banned. In Section
13, we study how investors and asset holders may need legal protection
and crime policing. Then comes our conclusion section with some public
policy recommendations.

2 Main Directions and Historical Development
of Crypto Currency

2.1 Legal and Technical Qualiﬁcations of Crypto
Currency

There exist various legal, regulatory and technical qualiﬁcations of crypto
currency systems. These qualiﬁcations are not exclusive. While courts of
law or the United States CFTC recognized bitcoin as a “currency”, the
SEC has ﬁned many companies for improperly issuing a “security”, the
police have been chasing bitcoins related to major crimes and recognizes
that crypto currency poses unique challenges around increased privacy.
Then, national tax authorities e.g. IRS decided to consider bitcoin as
“property”, imposing truly excessive transaction reporting obligations
and discouraging mainstream adoption.
This list is not exhaustive. For example, almost no one is calling bit-
coin a lottery, even though the current proof of work (POW) mechanism
creates a winner every 10 minutes, see [51], and the winner is system-
atically awarded a substantial amount of 6.25 freshly created bitcoins.

Moreover we could also claim that bitcoin is a voting protocol. In fact it
is a self-governing ﬁnancial cooperative: the entities making the winning
blocks are able to co-decide which transactions are accepted and also
which version of the protocol and software is dominant. This aspect of
self-governance is substantially more developed in Ethereum and other
blockchain systems where the smart contract functionality seems to be
the main one. Most crypto currency systems are essentially also tools
of ”disintermediation”: they provide secure methods of holding and con-
trolling property and ﬁnancial assets in ”direct” ways, without trusted
intermediaries, banks, notaries etc. This is achieved with help of crypto-
graphic keys stored on secure devices controlled by users. Likewise, they
provide ways of controlling assets in completely new or decentralized
ways. Blockcahin and crypto currency systems are an ongoing challenge
to our ideas. They force us to revisit our ideas about questions such as
how the focus of crime policing should change with new technology. We
probably need to think twice about what is socially desirable to do in a
market economy, or how ﬁnancial services regulation in the 21st century
should look like.

2.2 Waves of Disruption

The story begins with users who needed bitcoins for their para-banking
ability: to store and transfer money. An anarchic system initially, oper-
ating without too much consideration for national boundaries and regu-
lations. Such users will be, for example, families who send their children
to study abroad or small businesses which operate across borders. All
this is however far from being the primary function of bitcoin as of 2021.
Bitcoin has yet failed so far to become a champion of small payments or
to be adopted in the Internet retail commerce. In 2020-21 we ﬁnally have
the lightning network, a major enhancement in this direction. Yet elec-
tronic commerce has not changed yet, it is working primarily with Visa
and Mastercard, as it did for decades. Nevertheless a very substantial
disruption is here. We see it in particular in the world of investment.
If the ﬁrst somewhat primary function of bitcoin is trans-border money
transfer, the second would be the store of value. Bitcoin has for more than
a decade managed to establish itself as a reliable store of value with a
peculiar ultra deﬂationary monetary policy [23,51]. Since late 2014, there
have been very substantial press blogosphere and mass-media coverage
related to the crypto currencies and how they disrupt the world of banks
and businesses. For example, in 2019, twenty years after the creation of
the Euro single currency, Google search showed more searchers about bit-
coin than about Euro. This is happening, even though we buy our food
in Euro 100 % of the time, and 0 % of our house loans are denominated
in bitcoins. As of 2021, bitcoin is and remains a curiosity from the main-
stream economy point of view. Half-way between oﬀshore para-banking,
it is also a super-famous club of cyber-punk innovators and disruptors.
More recently we hear about institutional adoption and the ability of
bitcoin to go up faster than inﬂation, while governments are creating
excessive quantities of fresh money in order to alleviate the pandemic-
driven recession. Investors have eventually diversiﬁed their portfolios and

bitcoin became a mainstream ﬁnancial asset in the recent years and hun-
dreds of millions of people own bitcoins, cf. [24].
It is totally incorrect to believe that crypto is just an investment bubble.
It is way more. If it is a “bubble”, it involves an incredibly large amount
of coder, developer, R&D and cryptographic engineering activity, open
source software. We have a plethora of hardware and business infrastruc-
ture projects developed by expert ﬁrms. Bitcoin adoption has increased
by 880 % in 2021, according to Chainalysis [58]. It also involves a very
substantial amount of academic research activity, which is not less sig-
niﬁcant than some of to the very major intellectual endeavours of the
human civilisation, such as sending a man into space, or tackling the
Covid pandemics. It is also a “bubble” which leads to shortage of cer-
tain types of GPU computing hardware, as much as bitcoins are in short
supply also. Hackers, cryptographers and coders have created a monu-
mental new technology development movement, which is self-funded. It
is somewhat funded precisely, by inﬂated investment expectations... and
the unreasonable crazy ride which it oﬀers to investors. Crypto economy
is poorly integrated with mainstream economy, yet it has created a huge
economic and startup company activity, which is unprecedented.
Bitcoin is a brand, a cultural movement, and it is religious at times. Bit-
coin maximalists believe that bitcoin prevails no matter what. Bitcoin is
an epic story, at the crossroads of “geek mythology” and libertarian anar-
chist cyberpunk ideas. Blockchains are distributed electronic ledgers run
with peer-to-peer cooperative consensus. They allow keeping money out-
side of the presumably “evil” establishment and banks. As a result, law
enforcement is not facilitated. It is more diﬃcult, for example, to seize
assets or to undo a transfer. Beneﬁciaries can be anonymous, transac-
tion ﬂows can be obfuscated, and income can be possibly concealed for
taxation purposes.

2.3 Privacy - A Two Sided Coin

There is a substantial amount of ambiguity about whether privacy is
socially desirable, and to what extent privacy enhancing methods and
techniques are legal or ethical. Privacy, is a tool of choice which can be
used to obscure your ﬁnancial history for wrong reasons or an illegiti-
mate purpose. However there are also many strong arguments in favor
of privacy.
Privacy is a basic and constitutional human right. People have a legiti-
mate desire to escape the prying eyes and mass surveillance. The Article
8 of the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) establishes the
Right to Privacy. Initially this seems to have a limited scope, with focus
on family life and protection of private correspondence and relationships
with other human beings. However, many courts and lawyers give it a
much broader interpretation, like to be free from “unlawful” indiscrim-
inate searches done at a large scale. A recent ruling of the European
Court of Justice CJEU of 6 August 2020 makes mass surveillance pro-
grams run by the UK, French and Belgian governments simply illegal,
cf. [47].

There are “public beneﬁts” from increased anonymity, for example we
have reasonable expectations not to reveal to your spouse, your employer
or neighbor which political or social cause we support ﬁnancially [41], for
example with political donations in bitcoins. Lack of privacy in ﬁnancial
transactions greatly exposes individuals to be easy targets for numerous
serious crimes such as “identity theft, mugging, kidnapping and black-
mailing” [41]. For example, we consider investment scams which account
for some 54 % of bitcoin criminal activity. Here we observe that pri-
vacy and law enforcement are also at stake. The more all sorts of data
items pertaining activity are exposed, collected, stored, used, re-used,
compromised, shared or sold, the more criminals can operate sophisti-
cated targeted scams. Or they will simply succeed in hacking into our
accounts. A nice example of how the law can positively impact cyberse-
curity is Texas law HB 3222 from 2009 which forces businesses to comply
with payemnt card industry security standards which in particular forbid
storing certain items such as 3 digits printed at the back of credit card,
cf. PCI DSS section, cf. slide 99 in [21]. We see that orderly and legal
business activity also requires privacy. Data collection and storage needs
some form of regulation. Bruce Schneier has as early as 2005 advocated
that we need to “reduce” and “limit” data collection and “how it can be
used”, see slide 92 in [21]. In general large-scale indiscriminate bulk data
collection, or retention, or negligence when information is leaked out, is
against the law in most jurisdictions. Large companies have been ﬁned
hundreds of millions of dollars or euros, for failing to secure personal
information under the new GDPR regulations in the EU, or older laws
such as the U.S. GLBA regulations [41].

2.4 Privacy vs. Law Enforcement - A Balancing Act

Privacy is not only a political and legal question. It is also a technical
question where we can try to achieve a certain equilibrium. Privacy can
help to evade taxes or circumvent business or ﬁnancial sector regulations.
However, poor privacy of ﬁnancial transactions is precisely a key factor
which makes it easier for hackers and thieves to operate. If we have too
much privacy, criminal activity is facilitated. Then also if we have too
little privacy, crime is also facilitated. In order to achieve a reasonable
balance between privacy and law enforcement we need to consider several
key questions.
Even though blockchains, in theory, are self-policing for certain questions
such as theft of funds in transit, they are not very good on protecting
customer privacy. Initially, the whole idea of “public” ledgers is corrosive
for our privacy: they expose our ﬁnancial and personal data. Then we
add privacy to these systems, for example with some cryptographic tech-
niques, or simply through mixing and obfuscation. At the end privacy
becomes potentially too strong or so it seems, cf. Section 8, and criminal
activity is potentially facilitated. A question is not quite to see who wins:
the policemen of the thieves. It is a classical problem in technology and
in law enforcement. Both sides follow a certain curve: security and safety
improves, and criminals and thieves also evolve. The question is really

about achieving a better more detailed understanding of how technology
actually impacts our lives.
We need to put things in proportion. Expert studies show that the crimi-
nal segment is small in bitcoin, or small in relative terms; it is about 0.17
% on average and yet smaller in many jurisdictions, for example it is only
0.06 % in Germany, cf. [18]. Very similar statistic were observed in credit
card payments in the last two decades: the fraud is 0.15 % typically and
signiﬁcantly smaller in well-policed jurisdictions [21]. Yet nobody says
that credit cards are best friends of criminals. In both cases, we see that
the legit payment activity is substantially larger. To summarize, criminal
activity is small in bitcoin and elsewhere, and 99.9 % of crypto currency
activity is legitimate trading or commercial activity. This part arguably
should get more attention than the relatively small illicit activity.

2.5 Investment: Major Not Minor

A major angle to consider is gambling and investment questions, which
are very hard to tell apart. On the one hand, we have a legitimate desire
of the public to support and invest in crypto currency startups, as such
businesses which are not listed on the stock market. On the other hand,
we have the gambling question. In the eyes of millions of small investors,
crypto currency markets are an oﬀshore-operating casino with less strin-
gent regulations. We have the popular “rich-kid” dream of making money
through the crazy appreciation of bitcoin and other crypto assets [25].
Here bitcoin competes with the stock market, Internet casinos, and ama-
teur Forex trading to oﬀer some thrills and hopes to millions of investors,
frequently millennials.
According to [48] as many as 11 % of Americans own bitcoins. Every
single day, 1 million bitcoin wallets are active. There are more than 25
million bitcoin traders worldwide and “speculating is the most popular
use of bitcoin” cf. [48]. In addition, according to a detailed industry
report, the rate at which the number of users of crypto currency has
been growing faster than exponentially. In just four months between
March 2021 and July 2021, the global number of crypto currency users
has doubled from 100 to 200 million approximately, cf. page 9 in [24].

3 Main Business Players - Crypto Exchanges

In theory, Satoshi have imagined a utopian peer-to-peer economy where
we exchange coins against goods and services. In reality we already have a
way more sophisticated economy, with intangible assets and major extra
features: debt and leverage, network eﬀects, business competition, and
non-linear behaviour. The central players where the old and new worlds
meet are the crypto exchanges.

3.1 Geography of Crypto Exchanges

It is not true that bitcoin operates outside of the scope of law and order.
In fact, as much as 20 % of all bitcoins sent to exchanges globally are
sent to exchanges based inside the U.S. At the same time, 59 % of the
volume goes to the so-called ‘high-risk’ exchanges [17]. These exchanges
are notorious for being lax on KYC (Know Your Curstomer) and AML
(Anti-Money Laundering). At the same time, they are also simply small
independent oﬀshore companies where customers are at risk of losing ev-
erything. It is important to see that these companies themselves can be
scams, and they can just disappear tomorrow with funds belonging to
na¨ıve crypto currency holders. Users do however use them on a massive
scale. Following [17] about 24 % of volume from US-based exchanges
goes to these ‘high-risk’ exchanges, while for Russian exchanges this per-
centage goes up to 69 %.

3.2 On Neeed for Investor Privacy

We have seen that for all sorts of reasons, which could include tax eva-
sion, individuals use and trust riskier crypto exchanges with their coins.
A major reason for that is that these companies ask less questions and
it is easier to pass various veriﬁcation levels required and to remain
anonymous. We hypothesize that it is NOT in order to escape govern-
ment surveillance that crypto currency privacy is aiming at. Regardless
of whether we like it or not, amateur trading is a big industry and in-
vestors need to be protected. First of all against losing all they have in
investment scams and magical get-rich-quick schemes. Some 16 billion
dollars were lost in some 132 major crypto currency scams cf. [11] and
[40].
In fact, there is a balancing act to make: tax evasion deprives govern-
ments from some revenue, but there are substantially larger losses at
sight. Would these amateur investors lose all their savings, governments
worldwide will be facing larger bills for healthcare, social housing etc.,
over extended periods of time. Governments are the ultimate risk takers
for amateur investors, for example assuring minimal income for pension-
ers robbed from their savings, which normally should allow them to retire
comfortably. Thus, very clearly, investor privacy can indirectly protect
the governments, against future liabilities at an astronomical scale.
This is given our aging population and the immense popularity of ama-
teur investing. We need to defend small investors against private sector

predatory surveillance. Activities meant to deprive investors of their fun-
damental rights such as freedom to buy and sell with some privacy and
without being “gamed” or manipulated. We have the right to participate
in a fair and open market economy. One which is not rigged by current
omni-scient monopolistic big data and AI players, which tend to abuse
their dominant position.

3.3 On the Neeed to Police the Investment Platforms

Crime and law enforcement occur when people avoid paying taxes. Larger
crimes occur when companies do help tax evaders and organise the tax
evasion at a large scale. In November 2020 the U.S. Department of Justice
pressed criminal charges for BitMex, an exchange based in the Seychelles
for ”serving U.S.-based customers” making it very clear that U.S. law
will be applied in such cases [61]. Law enforcement also occurs when SEC
ﬁnes companies that raised money in an ICO, selling a token which is
considered to be a security. Several businesses have been instructed to
return vast sums of money to investors by the policeman of the ﬁnancial
markets, the powerful SEC.
Market manipulation is also criminal. Policing this crime can arguably
involve increasing citizen security against predatory banks. Banks have
been ﬁned huge sums in billions of dollars in the last decade. One research
question is the one of adversarial trading and front-running cf. [61]. A key
problem is that blockchains has so far focused on how to solve consensus
problem, which is mainly about blocks that are eventually approved and
ﬁnal. Now there is a larger space for adversarial traders: the question
of incentives and selection of transactions accepted within one block [61].
Then we have the questions of adversarial AI: predicting the behavior of
humans, in order to play games against users in the marketplace. This
does not seem illegal per se, but in fact it will clearly be unethical and
fraudulent, if you pay a bank or the exchange some fees or subscription,
in order to advise you about investment opportunities.

4 Major Risks and Threats at the Center

It is estimated that hundreds millions of dollars per year are made by
criminals in extortion of ransom payments, which have plagued countless
businesses worldwide, small and large [42] and Section 10.2. Yet the
illicit activity amounts to just 0.1 % of crypto deposits typically, and
this ﬁgure went down by 60 % in two years [18]. Millions of people go to
crypto currency markets not in order to acquire illegal goods, but rather
to simply acquire bitcoins, which for most users are perfectly legal to
own. Then we sell them at proﬁt or at a loss. Individuals can also mine
bitcoins at home, see Section 6.2.

4.1 Is Bitcoin Itself a Financial Scam?

For more than 10 years, bitcoin has been traded. The value if bitcoin
did not go to zero. Bitcooin holds hundreds of billions of dollars in funds

belonging to hundreds of millions of users [24]. The public perception
of the evils and dangers of bitcoin has been distorted by the idea, that
certain incumbents in the ﬁnancial industry, and some governments alike,
would like to make something like bitcoin or blockchain illegal. However.
The interests of small investors and the monopolistic established industry
incumbents are not the same. Here we present both points of view.
In some sense, bitcoin potentially IS an investment scam, or we need to
consider that it could be one, for example as a precautionary safety mea-
sure to protect investors. It is a fact that banks are losing their deposits,
which go to a para-banking oﬀshore space, with less regulations and no
borders. This makes laws harder to enforce. The world of investment is
extremely old-fashioned slow and rigid: for example it is very hard to
buy and sell stocks from Asia for an investor who lives in Europe. New
blockchains, currently under development, promise to allow anyone to
trade any asset freely. We see that banks and stock exchanges are losing
some of their sources of income and the competition is increasing.
This ongoing process of disrupting a multi trillion-dollar global ﬁnancial
industry increases the risks due to bad choice of a ﬁnancial partner or
broker and due to the new technology itself such as hacking. It creates
countless opportunities for negligence, misconduct, careless or “frivolous”
behavior cf. [22] where a small individual investor will ﬁnd it very diﬃcult
to know which companies and which technical standards they can trust.
Investors can lose everything when hackers steal private keys. Open-
source software can be malicious [46,22] or just insecure. Current laws
and regulations favor the incumbents, and maybe only very large com-
panies can apply. The ﬁnancial industry remains highly regulated and is
a subject of intense government oversight and scrutiny. Law enforcement
must simply expand and regulate as much it can. We need to extend
the safety net, allow smaller business to operate, and protect individual
investors. Law enforcement needs to follow the investor money, and con-
tribute to deﬁning how the crypto industry should be run as a whole.
We also need to forbid or allow and regulate more clearly.
As already explained, the criminal or illicit segment is very small essen-
tially 0.1 % [18]. The next level will be “Joe the Plumber” stashing some
cash for his retirement at an oﬀshore crypto exchange, which income pos-
sibly he forgot to declare with IRS, which raises serious questions [19].
Here the source of funds is not illegal itself. It is not illegal either for Joe
to avoid his bank, which pays very little dividend or/and charges him
large commissions on his retirement investment. We live in a free market
economy, and it is not a crime at all for anyone, to seek a place to deposit
money, where they can generate a better income. When local economy
and or the established investment providers suﬀer some setbacks, in-
vestors do and will go to exotic places. One day it was gold, or some tech
companies, today bitcoin is a popular asset for 1 million amateur traders
each day [48] worried about inﬂation or maybe a Covid-induced reces-
sion. The question is now simply, that startups and oﬀshore ﬁrms which
do not have a banking license, and yet are oﬀering ﬁnancial services to
Joe. Potentially they are incompetent, cheating, or just too easygoing
optimistic startups relying on untested cryptography and software, or
neglecting public safety for the sake of new exciting functionalities. The

risks for small investors are simply enormous, and banks are regulated for
a reason. The main idea is that small or amateur investors deserve accu-
rate information and some protection against fraud, misrepresentation,
or more ordinary ”preventable technical incidents”.

5 Anarchy Meets Law Enforcement

Our sources of information are academic research, the chaotic world of
Internet forums and collaborative platforms, the abundant press cover-
age of crypto industry, and interviews with law enforcement profession-
als. Throughout the duration (2014-2017) of the European Commission
FP7 PRIME Project (Preventing, Interdicting and Mitigating Extrem-
ist Events) we have interviewed 132 front-line investigators and law en-
forcement oﬃcers with security merit from Australia, Austria, Canada,
Germany, Georgia, Hungary, India, Italy, Japan, Mexico, New Zealand,
Poland, Portugal, Spain and United States, cf. [36]. We also asked our
interlocutors for their opinion on the abuse of modern technologies by
violent extremists. If this paper contains certain statements which are
a matter of opinion, this will not be necessarily ours: they come from
interviews with law enforcement professionals.
We found that the awareness of blockchain technology among our target
audience (specialists with a wide array of law enforcement backgrounds:
police, border guard, intelligence, counterintelligence, military, govern-
ment and special services) is very low and vague. In 2017 only a small
number (less than 10 %) of our interlocutors understood the signiﬁcance
of blockchain and appreciated the potential for the criminal abuse of
technology. It needs to be stressed that these oﬃcers were experts in
ﬁnancial analysis and represented top-level law enforcement institutions
in their respective countries. Those specialists indicated that the ﬁnan-
cial analysis techniques can and are used to retroactively study the
cash ﬂows and money transfers (including crypto currency such as bit-
coin) in the cases of known lone-actor extremists, in order to search for
patterns that could be later applied to investigate radicalized individuals
[30]. However this approach is potentially ineﬀective and ineﬃcient for
the purpose of regulating ordinary crypto market activity. It does not
prevent thefts and scams, and does not help customers to recognise re-
liable providers and reliable investment opportunities. On the contrary.
Many people are lured by exotic places where maybe the taxman or their
spouse are no longer watching, and take substantial risks for no reason
other than, a quite naive expectation of better privacy. It is naive, be-
cause unregulated oﬀshore service providers are in fact MORE likely to
sell data to criminals than reputable crypto companies. Arguably we
need more ”legit” providers of ﬁnancial privacy. A UK government re-
port explains that Suspicious Activity Reports (SARs) do not help a lot
[65]. They are ﬁled in ”huge numbers” and are typically just personal
living expenses. The safeguards which help to catch terrorists or to tackle
organized crime, are potentially not that useful in regulating a broader
para-banking activity. A broader population of legitimate participants in
these markets lacks suﬃcient protection against poor security standards
or negligent service providers.

5.1 Risk Awareness, Blockchain Education, Trends and
Geography

When consumer protection and technology fail, or when regulating or
banning does not help, or when policing does not reduce crime and
fraud, we need to work on public awareness and education. First of all,
we should not underestimate the educational beneﬁts of crypto currency
markets. Instead of unemployed youngsters depressed by anti-capitalist
propaganda and gloom, we have a game of building a new world order
by geeks, coders and hackers. A dream, of becoming a banker, creating
money out of nothing, being a stakeholder participating in the economy
of the future in active ways. The term “cryptographer’s dream” is some-
times used [49]. A new form of cooperative decentralized and inclusive
economy is possible. Middle class people worldwide learn about new tech-
nology, maths and cryptography, consult various blogs and websites, and
develop a feeling of being autonomous players and exploring the world
of alternative ﬁnance. Coders and designers are empowered to build ﬁ-
nancial systems, which work the way they think is ethical and socially
desirable.
Even though blockchains were invented more than 12 years ago [56], it
is still – in 2021 – a new and emerging phenomenon and the knowl-
edge about it is poor. This is clearly indicated by the patterns in search
queries indicated by Google Trends analytics. We have seen a 10-fold
increase in searches about the word “blockchain” in 2017, then it goes
down 3-fold but never reaches the pre-2017 levels, and again a 3-fold
increase occurs at the end of 2020. The curve has two sharp peaks which
correspond exactly to moments when bitcoin price has peaked at the end
of 2017 and again at the end of 2020. The pattern is similar among the
law enforcement and intelligence/security communities. Google trends
also show that peripheral or emerging countries do more searches than
Western countries. The ability of bitcoin to oﬀer alternative international
money transfer services in various countries was just the starting point.
Blockchains have now become an important piece of the liberal global-
ized English-speaking economy. Among 78 countries Ghana and China
are those, where most searches about blockchain originate from, with
a scores of 100 and 92/100. Most EU countries and the United States
are way more conservative: they arrive at positions 30-50 out of 78 with
scores between 12/100 to 20/100. Another detailed research report found
that Vietnam followed by India and Pakistan lead the crypto currency
adoption in 2021, [58], when adjusted w.r.t. the purchasing power per
capita. We discover that new tech such as blockchain catalizes progres-
sive pro-business and pro-education forces in emerging countries. This is
great news.

6 On Critical Technical Choices

6.1 Trusting the Cryptographers

There is a level of disconnection between traditional crypto research and
development of industry standards (e.g. in telecom, smart cards, and at
NIST, or in EU-funded R&D projects) and the nascent crypto industry
since 2009. Developers in bitcoin and other crypto currencies have made
many deliberate choices in their speciﬁcations which are peculiar, risky
or non-standard features. This contrasts a lot with the dominant culture
in crypto research, which have been for 50 years very cautious, assuming
that the attackers are more powerful than they really are, and engineer-
ing in truly paranoid ways. Traditional cryptographers have been very
cautious and always considered that when something is very special it
should be banned.
For example AES is the most important standardized encryption algo-
rithm today. For this reason alone it is also used by the bad guys, e.g.
in ransomware [60]. When the AES was standardized in 2000, there was
some controversy around the special choice of S-box used, with New
Scientist title “Cipher Crisis” in 2003 [45]. Bitcoin and crypto currency
developer communities have ignored many traditional rules of careful
security engineering, and are in general very easy-going: ship it ﬁrst,
tell users this payment system is experimental, and hope that hackers
and thieves do not have suﬃcient expertise to steal coins and exploit
numerous vulnerabilities in existence. Bitcoin does not use AES, it uses
SHA256, RIPEMD-160 and ECDSA with secp256k1. The last part is par-
ticularly controversial cf. [23]. In fact secp256k1 is not what other people
in the industry use for securing Internet commerce with TLS (secp256r1
is used 90 % of the time). The crypto currency community has developed
its own set of incompatible crypto standards. Similar but not quite the
same or not exactly the same, as found in more traditional security in-
dustry such as in smart cards or in TLS. Bitcoin does not obey global
de-facto crypto standards such as deﬁned by the U.S. NIST, rather it de-
ﬁnes its own standards used primarily in crypto currencies and virtually
nowhere else. They diﬀer from security protocols used by major com-
panies which deﬁne the technical standards in major operating systems
and Internet commerce (Microsoft, Apple, Google etc.).
Many advanced cryptographic protocols specify further new elliptic curves
with further very special properties. For example, Ethereum, ZeroCash,
Algorand and Chia network use a special curve called BLS12 381. Inter-
net Computer (a.k.a. DFINITY) uses also more exotic pairing-friendly
curves such as BN254N, BN SNARK1, BN382M, BN462, see [66]. In
general the more advanced is the crypto market functionality or privacy
enhancement functionality we ﬁnd in blockchain technology, the more
risky and untested is the cryptography used there, see [9] and how re-
searchers are “cavalier about proposing untested cryptosystems”, see [39]
and [57]. Innovation requires some “riskier than usual” security assump-
tions, and this is normal.
However. New cryptography standards are made and broken each year.
History knows numerous examples of faulty cryptography standards,

which has nevertheless dominated the market very heavily. For example,
the Data Encryption Standard (DES) was developed in the mid 1970s
and is still used in 2021. Hundreds of millions of people use DES every
day, when they use their Chip and Pin bank card, and also in today’s
contactless payments. This cryptographic algorithm is far from being
perfect, see in particular page 6 in [7]. For example in the key scheduling
in DES there ”is no interaction across the two halves”, plus countless
other known problems with DES, cf. [62,50]. Yet DES has thrived for
50 years and remains massively used in ﬁnancial systems. More recently
the cryptographic hash function SHA-256 is used to secure the integrity
of bitcoin transactions and to secure the chain of events in essentially
all current blockchain systems. If this cryptographic hash function was
faulty, it would be extremely diﬃcult to upgrade.
Current systems do not consider that cryptographic algorithms could be-
come obsolete overnight, and we would need to switch and use a diﬀerent
crypto algorithm. This question of the “strategic” choice of the crypto
hash function is also related to feasibility of speciﬁc types of attacks and
crimes, as we will see below.

6.2 How Speciﬁc Crypto Engineering Choices Inﬂuence
Fraud and Crime

An interesting example to learn from, is a story of an electric scooter
one of the authors purchased in 2020. Then he visited a large bike store
and found that no lock currently on the market had the dimensions and
shape, which would allow one to attach this scooter reliably. The market
does not provide a solution. As result the scooter was stolen 3 days after
purchase. In addition, it did not have at all any unique serial number
which could be communicated to the police. How does it relate to crypto
currency market? It is a question of market regulation: potentially
certain models of electric scooters should be banned from the EU or
US markets, because they lack consumer protection or any protection
against theft whatsoever. It is a problem of industry standards, holistic
crime prevention and reconciling government and private sector industry
regulation when new technology is sold in the marketplace.
Going back to crypto currencies, there is no doubt that several technical
features of bitcoin facilitate speciﬁc types of crime, cf. last point in Ben-
eﬁts section page 9 in [43]. Is it possible to claim that some features of
bitcoin could be banned? Yes without any doubt, and the key problem
is that bitcoin failed so far to become decentralized, on the contrary, cf.
p.17 in [43]. One can argue that bitcoin developers could have, in early
days, mandated a diﬀerent hash function in bitcoin. One, which could be
mined with GPUs which are readily accessible in every computer store.
Sticking with current NIST crypto standard, which however is GPU-
incompatible, namely SHA-256 for mining, has immense consequences.
In some sense bitcoin mining is not a mainstream system, because bit-
coin developers decided not to go this way. When crypto miners started
making specialist ASIC bitcoin mining equipment, such devices were not
sold in any of traditional trusted merchants of electronics. They were

just sold by mail/Internet order by extremely few small companies in
remote countries. As a result, there were multiple scams, and compa-
nies who failed to deliver these machines. Thus, bitcoin mining has been
monopolized by larger investors. They were the only ones able not to
fall victim of dishonest providers (a repeated game). This is NOT possi-
ble for individuals, who just order one unit from a foreign manufacturer
advertised on the Internet. All this is a consequence of a questionable
choice of a crypto hashing algorithm, which has led to a large degree of
centralization of bitcoin mining. Criminals have sold non-existing bitcoin
miners to na¨ıve investors, and a key problem was that there was no reli-
able supply chain whatsoever for small individual buyers, cf. [51]. There
are additional problems which also lead to centralization. The reward
from one block is very high which leads to mining with pools, which are
a centralizing force and which have heavily distorted the Satoshi original
dream of a peer to peer anarchic cooperative system. Then, the incred-
ibly large electricity consumption by bitcoin creates serious problems.
One problem is that for many years critics claimed that bitcoin is a de
fact Chinese crypto currency: as it is controlled by a few large Chinese
miners1. Why this matters? It is easy to see that miners can inﬂuence the
future of bitcoin, such as adoption of upgrades. They can also potentially
censor individual bitcoin transactions, or simply privilege transactions
originating from China.
Looking beyond China, there is a group of countries which oﬃcially are
recognized as supporters of terrorism. These countries are then logically
subject to international sanctions which attempt to prevent them from
selling their oil and gas. It follows logically that they may use bitcoin
in order to re-sell their energy production surplus. We see that bitcoin
hash function is an unfortunate choice upheld by generations of devel-
opers in 2009-2021. It makes that terrorists, or just ordinary authori-
tarian regimes, are likely to mine bitcoins, which makes wider adoption
of bitcoin problematic. However, due to the choice of the hash function,
this was never a problem with Ethereum, which can be mined with ev-
ery GPU available in most computer stores worldwide. More recently
in 2021 we have seen GPUs which are decidated for gamers, and where
crypto mining is disabled and its performance is degraded. We have also
seen the emergence of Chia crypto currency which make extensive use
of computer hard drives. We see that a bad crypto hash function choice
can be toxic (in bitcoin) and a good choice can be beneﬁcial to some
segments of the computer industry.
This consideration was here for a long time, and countless other crypto
currencies had in contrast mandated a hash function, which can be mined
even with ordinary PCs. However, this choice can backﬁre on the crime
front. There are hackers who break into computers of millions of people,
in order to run networks of zombie machines, which are sold on the black
market in order to be rented to other criminals. We also have scammers
and spammer activity. It appears that the most frequently mined crypto
currency by such zombie networks is Monero. This is precisely because,

1 This has started changing in 2018-2021 when Chinese authorities have taken numer-

ous decisive steps in order to ban or discourage bitcoin mining.

it can be mined on more or less any PC. This has serious consequences
[26].
There is yet another side to this debate about the choice of a hash func-
tion. GPU mining with any PC is what we need if we want privacy-
enhanced tech to protect us against mass surveillance, or just say bur-
glars, who will use the Internet to ﬁnd out that when we are not at home.
Privacy can only improve, if millions of users can eﬀectively conceal our
precious transaction data in a larger cloud of user activity. Thus, it is
preferable that a privacy enabling coin can be mined on any device. With
more users, we obtain better privacy for our ﬁnancial transactions, and
credentials used to access them (password, cookies, etc). Privacy is a
basic right [41], and also a necessity, in order to prevent various forms
of crime and theft, such as targeted phishing attacks against banks and
trading platforms, or targeted kidnapping cf. Section 10.3.

7 Privacy Enhanced Payments

It is important to see what kind of privacy enhancing techniques are
available today in blockchain and bitcoin space. For bitcoin we refer to
Section V in [43], dated 2017. A high level overview of various bitcoin
anonymization techniques and main privacy altcoins can be found inside
[43,41,9] and many others. In this section we also brieﬂy review these
techniques. Our approach is to look at the history of ideas and crypto
technology adoption. The legality of privacy-enhanced coins and AML
regulations are covered in [41].
Bitcoin was a ﬁrst very approximative creation of Satoshi Nakamoto [56].
It is easy to see that later bitcoin is NOT at all as Satoshi has imagined
it [23]. Nakamoto describes a system with a large number of participants
where everybody is mining, connecting to peers and engaging in trans-
actions. He did not anticipate that these 3 groups of people are going
to become almost entirely disjoint, and that we will have huge for-proﬁt
mining farms using huge amount of energy, millions of wallets connecting
through trusted gateways and vast amounts of activity, which are not at
all recorded on the bitcoin blockchain. Moreover the number of people
who actually run the P2P network remains very low, between 5,000 and
11,500 in recent 5 years, source: www.bitdes.io. Bitcoin has many serious
problems [23,43] and this is precisely the challenge for the next genera-
tions of crypto engineers. It has led to creation of hundreds of “altcoins”
with distinct technical features trying to ﬁx some of these problems like
cost, speed [53], number of transactions per second, resistance to attacks
by powerful entities, etc. Among others, anonymity is not as good as it
initially seemed.
Initially, bitcoins are attributions of certain amounts of coins to pub-
lic keys. A possibility inherent to the so-called public key cryptography.
The owner of the private key can spend the coins. We have a pair of
cryptographic keys which match each other. To a large extent bitcoin
is an evolution of the French invention of the Chip-and-Pin bank card.
A card has a private cryptographic key, which allows to certify that one
speciﬁc transaction was approved by the owner; the date the amount and

other details are digitally signed. This is in fact done more than once,
with DES and with a public key algorithm, and at several stages ever
before the transaction is completed [21]. Then, with bitcoin the card is
no longer issued by a bank but by a community of peers, which creates
their own coins and attribute them to each other. Bitcoin is simply the
next logical step in an evolution of commerce underpinned by public key
cryptography. The reliance on security and secrecy of cryptographic keys
increases tremendously, and bitcoins which are not stored on exchanges
are typically stored on secure hardware devices. These devices are evolu-
tions of a Chip and Pin banking smart card. More than 1 million Ledger
Nano devices have been sold in the last 5 years (source: ledger.com).
Bitcoin can already oﬀer pseudonymity: a user can use many diﬀerent
public keys, which do not identify him easily. Coins from diﬀerent sources
can be mixed at will. This works, if we do one transaction, however the
more activity we do, the more information is leaked to attackers. We need
to use more advanced cryptography to do better. Interestingly, almost all
known ways to enhance privacy are simply and directly linked to more
advanced types of public key cryptography. For example, with stealth
address techniques cf. [23], coins can be sent to a recipient and we are not
able to link this recipient to the address the recipient himself advertises
or makes public. It is simply a more private form of PK cryptography
with additional tricks, where it is the sender not the receiver, who creates
ephemeral bitcoin public keys used to receive incoming payments. This
is used in Monero crypto currency, one of the most frequently cited as
used or mined by criminals [19]. As a result, Monero is now an object
of sophisticated de-anonymization eﬀorts for law enforcement purposes
[18].
Then ring signatures, also in Monero, are anonymous decentralized group
signatures. A signer can be any of say 5 signers selected in one trans-
action. The power of this technique is that the other 4 signers do not
need to cooperate. Anyone is by default involved or can participate in
anonymous transactions without their approval, enhancing the privacy
for everyone. Then Zero-Knowledge proofs can be used to create methods
of generating transactions with a far larger degree of ambiguity about
who the signer is. It is a type of advanced public key cryptography, which
is notoriously diﬃcult to make.
We see that crypto currency privacy innovation is primarily technical.
Possibly and arguably the market and the economy does not yet require
such high levels of privacy, however tomorrow it will. Cybersecurity is
a never-ending quest of enhancing privacy and anonymity and security
against fraud and theft and standards are always improved and extended,
in order to eventually do more than necessary, and they rarely get sim-
pler. There is no end to this process. We need to understand that ad-
vanced cryptographic techniques are primarily here in order to police bad
actors who cheat or steal the funds in various ways. They prevent crime
and fraud as much as they might help criminals. When anonymity weak-
ens the certitudes, new types of thefts and attacks can emerge. There is
a genuine expectation to enhance privacy, with intention to build bet-
ter, fairer, and more secure payments systems. However, unquestionably
there exist evil geniuses of crime, enabled by new opportunities such as

with ransomware and investment scams. Then we have rogue engineers
with dubious goals, or the fact that cryptography and computer systems
fail most of the time and good security is very hard to achieve. Which
brings again the question of the quality of the source code [46] and of
regulating or just better organizing (self-regulation) the chaotic payment
and investment innovation world.

8 The Myth of Crypto Anonymity

A popular misconception in the existing literature press and blogosphere
is the alleged full-anonymity (or at least pseudonymity) of diﬀerent crypto
currencies. In eﬀect, the services responsible for maintaining public se-
curity and safety fall victim to the misconceptions and fear-mongering
related to blockchain and crypto currencies, which is further ampliﬁed by
the pressures of the governmental agencies supervising the work of law
enforcement, with some countries going as far as endorsing the idea of
making blockchain “illegal” or supporting the all-inclusive state control
over it [55]. In recent years we had multiple events of crypto currency
exchanges in regulated territories such as US or South Korea oﬃcially
de-listing several privacy coins due to regulatory pressure. It seems that
they have been asked by law enforcement agencies to produce excessive
quantities of SARs, which imply a certain cost burden, and yet are not
the useful in crime prevention, cf. pages 58 and 66 in [65]. According
to the aforementioned interviews completed throughout the duration of
the European Commission PRIME Project, as well as the further stud-
ies performed during the preparation of this paper, the most serious
concern among law enforcement community is the potential use of the
crypto currencies as a vehicle for the ﬁnancing of terrorism [36,30,65]
and speciﬁcally, transacting with countries subject to international sanc-
tions. This is conﬁrmed by the existing (and scarce) literature, where
the authors explicitly refer to blockchain or bitcoin (or maybe Monero
and similar privacy coins [19]) as an obvious method of providing funds
to extremist and terrorist organizations and radicalized individuals (so-
called lone-actor terrorists or “lone wolves”) [2], [3]. Such observations
are ampliﬁed by the (exaggerated) popular perception of crypto currency
being again completely anonymous [27] with some authors claiming that
the payments and transfer completed with bitcoin are untraceable [42,4].
The claim becomes more serious when security researchers indicate the
existence of techniques such as crypto currency “tumblers” or “mixers”,
with speciﬁc examples of existing services which combine transfers that
are happening at roughly the same time, and/or then re-route them to
the ﬁnal destinations [6]. In general, tumbling techniques obfuscate the
provenance, possession, and movement of crypto currencies [12]. This
seems extremely strong but is not, due to the fact that the communi-
cations are in general monitored, and their meta-data are retained and
stored, which is enshrined in legislation in most jurisdictions worldwide.
Until recently the law enforcement community has a very simplistic view
of these issues reﬂected by a very limited vocabulary and simplistic an-
swers (such as: “forbid crypto currency”). Actual criminal or terrorists

operations are very few, and operate with cash primarily cf. [65]. Crypto
currencies are used primarily to solicit donations. According to Chapter
8 in [65] the role of crypto assets in terrorism ﬁnancing has increased in
2020 and the score was changed from low to medium.
It is not productive to just claim pretended anonymity or lack thereof
depending on who is talking. Inevitably a specialist view is emerging with
a more detailed vocabulary. In recent years, criminal investigations have
just shifted to specialized high-tech entities, which have developed the
necessary expertise and tools [18]. From an applied cryptography point of
view, nothing is completely new and there is a long game where payment
cryptography and security develop in many steps [21]. Even Monero was
discovered to be traceable in open academic research, which methods
are now implemented by specialist ﬁrms [18]. The main point is that
privacy is temporary, and can be disappear if additional future events
take place, or if additional countermeasures against anonymity are in
place, or if additional data are collected and appropriate actions are taken
by certain entities. When some academics are trying very hard to enhance
anonymity [4], others are wiser showing that privacy is impossible to
achieve in general [35].
We need to get the basic facts right. The primary reason to use cryp-
tography is to prevent theft and enable more business to make remote
payments easier. Cryptography makes owning and controlling assets eas-
ier. It also creates new types of thefts which have never existed before, cf.
[52], [54] however this is now within limits of cryptographic engineering
which is fragile and knows many points of failure. In particular prob-
lems at operation due to human factors cf. [52], [54] and unexpected
additional events which are deliberately engineered [35]. A mix of cryp-
tography and secure hardware devices with anti-cloning protections is
nevertheless an undeniable helper at the heart of our “Chip and Pin”
bank cards and today’s bitcoin wallets. Users can physically control pay-
ments and authorize transactions themselves and this crypto + secure
hardware revolution was inevitable and was started by the banks them-
selves as early as in the 1980s [21]. A secure hardware device [21] with a
private cryptographic key has three primary functions. One is to prove
authenticity and to authorize payments or transfers remotely, over large
distances while minimizing disclosures. Another is to prevent theft, for
example through tamper-resistance and user authentication with a PIN.
The third is an anti-clone functionality, which is very strong with digital
signatures, because the private key can be used but not compromised,
and it will never even leave the secure element inside the smart card. No
one can obtain or extract it, and the bank card is already a trustless pay-
ment system because users need only to trust themselves, so that they
no longer need to trust the bank which does not know the secret keys.
Inevitably, payment industry embraced this technology, as on all the
three accounts (remote acceptance, anti-cloning, anti-theft), it is vastly
superior to any payment technology, which was developed earlier, for ex-
ample with paper money and bank notes. New forms of electronic money
and new payment technologies are driving old solutions out of business
(potentially) where cryptography is a crucial ingredient. There is no end
in making ﬁnancial systems more robust and less prone to subtle insider

threats and attacks, and such systems naturally distrust every single
transaction participant, including the banks and their computer systems
themselves. Interestingly, anonymity was yet totally absent. It arrives to-
day, three decades later, and it comes in many diﬀerent ﬂavors, such as
receiver anonymity, sender anonymity or un-linkability, trace-ability for
transfers, etc. Now it crucial to see that anonymity is not something that
cryptographers produce, or something they are good at (!). Cryptogra-
phy can traditionally encrypt data, which is not really done in blockchain
where ledgers are highly transparent, designed for broader veriﬁability.
Instead, cryptography is meant to authenticate payments and transac-
tions through hashing and digital signatures. This part of cryptography
is very solid, and the primary reason to use cryptography is that it solves
the theft and remote authorization problems extremely well, as no one
can steal bitcoins by forging a digital signature. This strong ability is the
primary reason why bitcoin does not need a bank or a notary anymore,
and anyone can be their own bank if they wish to. However, it is a mis-
conception or it is rather na¨ıve to believe that cryptography is here or
even that it can at all solve personal and ﬁnancial privacy problems. We
have a broad spectrum of “privacy enhancing technologies” and a lot of
innovation such as Zero-Knowledge proofs, all of which however are in
fact imperfect. Yet privacy is potentially impossible to achieve in general
[35]. All we need is to apply current law enforcement and AML rules [41].
Privacy does not really exist, when the law enforcement has the ability
to monitor all our communications metadata, which is a strong legally
enforced capability in most jurisdictions. There is only a handful of well-
identiﬁed geographical hotspots for illicit activity [18]. Cybersecurity is
in general an endless game between attackers and defenders, and even
if cryptography makes unbreakable locks, so that bitcoins cannot be al-
tered or stolen even by very powerful entities, modern cryptography is
yet weak and poorly suited to solve or address our privacy preoccupa-
tions. In fact potentially no technology can solve these problems in a
satisfactory way [35]. The law enforcement and security services simply
need to adapt and pay more attention to technology (and cryptography),
which works on both sides, helping attackers and defenders alike.

9 Challenges for Law Enforcement

A more balanced assessment comes from the United Kingdom National
Risk Assessment of Money Laundering and Terrorist Financing [64] which
– in 2015 – rated digital currencies as a low risk, saying that (at the time)
the criminal use of crypto currency is focused predominantly on the on-
line market places for the sale and purchase of certain illicit goods and
services. The same report indicated that such risk could rise in the future
and the current use of digital currency as a method by which terrorists
raise or move money out of the UK provides a viable and working method
of doing so [8].
Law enforcement serious concerns also include the relative ease in which
the perpetrators, such as the terrorist organizations or organized crimi-
nal group operatives, can increase and enhance their operational security.

They may, for example, use anonymous email services for the purpose of
setting-up the crypto currency wallets and – for further authentication
– use the anonymous prepaid phones [2]. Although some countries intro-
duced laws which theoretically require the identiﬁcation and registration
of the mobile phone and SIM-card buyers, it is technically very easy to
obtain any number of SIM-cards using the services of the so-called “straw
buyers” or “smurfs”, that is persons who oﬀer their identiﬁcation docu-
ments in exchange for money [37], the alternative being the purchase of
virtual, pre-registered SIM-cards.
From the point of view of the law enforcement, the additional enhance-
ment of operational security for the criminal oﬀenders and terrorists
wishing to exploit blockchain technologies in the form of crypto currency
is the availability of bitcoin (or other virtual currency) at Automated
Teller Machines (ATMs) and the freestanding electronic payment con-
soles enabling purchase of and payments in bitcoin. For example, such
un-monitored (lacking any kind of surveillance) consoles are available in
Romania – and they may be used with the application of the simple op-
erational security techniques mentioned above (single-use, anonymous e-
mail accounts, single-use “burner” mobile phone and prepaid SIM-card)
[8].
The examples of the threats that raise the concerns of the law enforce-
ment and counter-terrorism agencies in regards to crypto currencies in-
clude the online postings by the supporters of the so-called ISIS (or ISIL:
the Islamic State or Iraq and the Levant) that include YouTube videos,
discussion forum links and links to research and anonymity provided by
bitcoins, where direct references are made to using digital currencies to
transfer funds into countries where conventional or traditional methods
of ﬁnancial transactions are diﬃcult because of lack of network capacity
or government surveillance and regulation [3]. The analysts suggest that
Bitcoins were used in a number of successful attacks, such as the bomb-
ing attacks conducted by the ISIS-inspired lone wolf on the shopping
mall in Jakarta, Indonesia in 2015, and in the November 2015 coordi-
nated terror attacks in Paris. The same authors indicate, that the Inter-
net sites associated with terrorist organizations have started to collect
donations in bitcoins [3]. Other researchers state explicitly that, given
the lack of adequate controls over transactions with bitcoin, the risk of
the anonymous transactions between entities ﬁnancing terrorism is ex-
tremely high [55]. Some scholars consider crypto currency to be the next
step in the evolution of the more traditional ways of ﬁnancing terrorism
internationally. They refer to the ancient system called Hawala, used
in the Middle East and Asia to transfer funds across borders in a safe
and convenient manner: funds are deposited with the hawala broker who
arranges for the funds to be available from another hawala broker in a
diﬀerent country (both hawala brokers then settle accounts through the
normal process of trade). Hawala can be used for terrorism ﬁnancing and
money laundering because funds do not actually cross borders, removing
the international money trail [3]. The process may be considered slow
and ineﬃcient nowadays, but with the development of new technologies,
such as crypto currency, it can be signiﬁcantly accelerated, providing
that the contemporary “brokers” (or intermediaries) are trusted, thus

minimizing the risk of the authorities learning about the illegal activity.
Some security experts indicate, that – apart from the terrorism ﬁnanc-
ing - crypto currencies are an ideal vehicle for money laundering, bribery
and ﬁnancing of illegal activities. The rationale behind it is to disguise
the origins of illicit proceeds throughout a series of transactions prior to
integrating the crime proceeds into the legitimate ﬁnancial system. In re-
gards to use of crypto currency, the process (divided into three stages of:
placement, layering and integration) looks as follows [14]: In the place-
ment stage the crime proceeds are introduced into the ﬁnancial system
by acquiring crypto currencies. After the crime proceeds have entered
the ﬁnancial system, the perpetrator engages in a series of transactions
to distance the funds from their source. It is the layering stage, where the
funds may be channeled through the purchase of crypto currencies or by
transferring money electronically through a series of crypto currency ac-
counts. It can be further disguised as payment for goods and services or
through the use of intermediaries who purchase crypto currencies under
the reporting threshold in countries where such currencies are regulated
(to avoid triggering identiﬁcation or reporting requirements). In the ﬁnal
stage of integration, the “cleaned” money is introduced to the legal mar-
ket, where it appears to be legally earned [14]. Obviously, such stages of
money transfer and money laundering are present also in the more “tra-
ditional” forms of introducing the proceeds of crime to the regular legal
market, but the aforementioned methods of operational security and the
accessibility plus the sheer speed of transactions facilitated by the use
of crypto currencies signiﬁcantly improves the pace and security of such
dealings, providing that the persons involved maintain the operational
security algorithms at all stages of their behavior.
According to the most recent report by RAND Corporation [10], there
is little evidence of the adoption of crypto currencies by terrorist orga-
nizations, and little motivation to do so. This is changing and lone-actor
extremists and loosely associated groups are now likely to use crypto
currencies, simply because these systems are nowadays very widely used.

10 Crypto Currency Related Crimes: Overview
Classiﬁcation and Stats

Our research indicates that criminality involving crypto currency allows
for proﬁts that are much higher than with conventional felonies. In ad-
dition, stealing virtual money appears to be less risky than robbing a
bank or selling drugs. In this section we will attempt to classify crypto
currency crimes in several categories and sub-categories. We are not the
ﬁrst to propose this type of classiﬁcation, see [13] which document is no
longer publicly available, and has a broader focus on policing the whole
so called dark web activity. Our approach is more basic and centered
around payment technology: we “follow the money”. Our goal is also to
achieve some degree or proportionality: we spend more time on crimes
which were prominent in the recent years and had a large economic or
public policy impact, cf. [17]. Our initial short classiﬁcation has 9 major
categories, which are not entirely disjoint, and which are as follows:

1. Crypto Hacks. Crypto currency itself is hacked. This doesn’t hap-
pen very often but the impact can be enormous. Major issues can
be as follows.
(a) The peer network malfunctions or attackers achieve important
network advantage (e.g. censoring or undoing transactions).

(b) The integrity and authenticity of digital signatures is broken.
(c) The integrity of blockchain itself is compromised due to a hash

function weakness.

(d) Smart contracts or cross-chain swaps or oracle/reference servers
fail to work correctly e.g. in DAO heist with 50 M$ losses [63].
(e) The system is secure but implementation is insecure (e.g. with
side channel attacks the private key of multiple users can be
compromised and all their coins stolen).

(f) There is failure at operation, for example with bad randoms or

weak passwords [52,54].

2. Thefts. A crypto currency exchange or a business entity is hacked

or dishonest, and money is stolen.
(a) Indiscriminate loss: the whole exchange is a victim of a theft.
Such events are typically widely publicized, e.g. [15] and pages
22-32 in [18], one notable exception was Crex24 hack [18].
(b) Fraudulent withdrawal: a hacker manages to impersonate a user

and withdraw his funds.

(c) Fraud at payment deposit stage: Server that accepts crypto cur-
rency (e.g. online market place) is hacked, money is stolen.
(d) Client using crypto currency is exposed in interaction or hacked,

his money is stolen.

3. Investment Fraud@Exchanges.

(a) Pure ponzi schemes. For example with OneCoin, PlusToken and
Wotoken and similar, several billions of dollars in deposits were
collected from naive investors. cf. [18] and [11].

(b) A crypto currency operator deliberately creates barriers or lim-
itations: disabling withdrawals or deposits, banning certain cat-
egories of users, creating fake technical incidents, etc.

(c) A crypto exchange will list or delist coins on false pretexts in

order to manipulate the market.

(d) Promoting alternative coins which have little or no value. Pro-
duction of fake news about crypto coins. For example the Wall
Street Journal have once written that GAW miners was the
world’s fastest growing bitcoin mining operation. Later the founder
was charged with defrauding hundreds of individuals around the
world for 9 M$, cf. [38].

(e) Dishonest use of information provided by users or traders, e.g.

making ﬁnancial bets against customers.

4. Exit Scams. They can occur not only at exchanges.

(a) Users at a crypto exchange cannot withdraw funds due to arbi-

trary decisions or on false technical pretexts.

(b) Adopters of a speciﬁc crypto currency or ICO investors see the

sellers of this token disappear.

(c) Failure to deliver coins: customer pays for crypto currency but

he doesn’t receive any.

(d) With miners: see 5.c.

5. Software and Hardware Scams provide malicious or fake tools

or services:
(a) Insecure wallets which expose users to thefts.
(b) Criminals recompile and modify some free open-source software.
(c) Failure to deliver miner equipment paid for by customers.
(d) Miners with backdoors [16].

6. Web Scams: a fraudulent web site imitating a legit company which

is attracting investor activity e.g. fake exchanges.

7. Malware can steal crypto currency at one of.

(a) At server/exchange side.
(b) At client wallet side.
(c) Or mining crypto currency at user expense.

8. Ransomware/Extortion. Crypto currency can be used for ransom

payment with blackmail or kidnapping etc.

9. Law Enforcement Failures.

(a) Police cannot seize crypto currency because the owner does not
collaborate, for example he does not reveal his password.

(b) Crimes are speciﬁcally crafted to operate across jurisdiction bound-

aries or with unreliable oﬀshore business entities.

(c) Concealing monetary ﬂows from the authorities, e.g. money laun-

dering with crypto currency.

10.1 Scams, Ransoms and Other Blockchain Fraud

According to a recent crime report by CipherTrace from February 2021,
cf. [17], ever since 2019, fraud and misappropriation are the dominant
form of crypto currency crime. Then come the thefts, and ﬁnally we
have ransomware which comes 3rd. According to [11] scams account for
54 %, while ransomware accounts for 7 % of criminal activity. We cover
ransomware in more detail in Section 10.2 below. In 2019 scams have
received an enormous 10 billion dollars from naive investors, cf. [18,11].
Another author have identiﬁed 132 scams defrauding investors for a total

of 16 billions of dollars since 2012, see [40]. Interestingly after 2019, in
2020 the scam activity has apparently substantially declined cf. Fig. 1
in [17]. In 2020-21 we have seen many scams related to Covid. Scams
remain a very major problem at all times. They concern an extremely
large population of more than 200 million amateur crypto investors [24]
and beyond.

10.2 Ransoms Are Back

A very major area of concern for the law enforcement agencies and se-
curity services is the potential behind the use of crypto currencies in
ransomware attacks. In the famous older case of the CryptoLocker mal-
ware of 2013, the trojan in question was using the 256-bit AES cryp-
tography to encrypt user ﬁles so that they became irrecoverable. Nearly
250,000 individuals and businesses around the world suﬀered because of
the CryptoLocker attack, which earned an estimated 30 million USD for
its developer [27] in a period of just 100 days between mid-2013 and May
2014 [42]. Following [11] the total amount of ransoms paid in 2019 was
about 100 M$ in one year in 2019, and this amount has more than tripled
in 2020 to reach an estimated 350 M$. The ransomware attacks pose the
extremely serious threat where they victimize not only the individuals
and small business, where the potential ransom is relatively small, but
when they target banks, telecoms, health service and critical national in-
frastructure. Since CryptoLocker, ransomware oﬀenders tried to attack
among others: the telephone provider TalkTalk in November 2015, many
banks etc. Bitcoin remains the primary method of paying the ransom [8].
Privacy-enhanced coins such as Dash account for less than 2 %, cf. [44].
A major ransomware attack was certainly the coordinated, worldwide
WannaCry assault of May 2017. It infected 230,000 computers in 150
countries and the total amount of losses was estimated at 4 billion USD
[44]. Among the targeted institutions were the Deutsche Bahn, FedEx,
National Health Service (NHS) in the UK, governmental and Police in-
stitutions in several countries, airlines, universities, automobile manufac-
turers, etc. The attack was stopped within a few days of its discovery due
to emergency patches released by Microsoft, and the discovery of the kill
switch that prevented infected computers from spreading WannaCry fur-
ther. A preliminary evaluation by security experts stated that the attack
originated from North Korea [59]. Then in 2018 and 2019 ransomware
has declined, to explode with more force in 2020, cf. page 31 in [11].
In 2020 the most prominent victims of ransomware were among other
Barnes&Noble, LG or University Hospital of New Jersey [11]. A signif-
icant observation in recent and major attacks, is that criminals publish
some of the data online in order to increase the pressure on the victims
[11]. For example, in February 2021, the source code of the blockbuster
video game maker CD Project was stolen. The company declined to pay
the ransom. Then reportedly the code was then auctioned on dark mar-
kets for 7M $, see [32].
This resurgence of ransoms in 2020 is not at all surprising and seems
to be a logical consequence of two trends. The ﬁrst is that losses are
reported in dollars and clearly the bitcoin price has increased up to 8

times in 2020 making some older ransom strains programmed to request
certain standardized amounts in bitcoins substantially more proﬁtable.
A second observation is that, with the global Covid pandemic, businesses
are more desperate to maintain business continuity at all costs, and thus
more inclined to pay ransoms, for example Travelex reportedly paid 2.3
million in ransom, see [18]. In 2020 we have seen malicious Covid-related
Android applications which spied on users, encrypted ﬁles and asked for
ransoms, cf. page 23 in [18]. Peer to peer ﬁnancial systems are a substan-
tial challenge for the law enforcement and security agencies and have a
set of characteristics making them very attractive to the criminal and
terrorist enterprises [2]: a certain level of anonymity (if the necessary
operational security precautions are implemented), global reach (being
geo-political border agnostic [29] and allowing to carry on the transac-
tions through third countries), the speed (facilitating the quick transac-
tions thus limiting the chance of them being intercepted or blocked), low
cost to use (dependent of the fees of the intermediaries in case of the
crypto currency transfer, tumbling and exchange), relative ease of use
(being increasingly user friendly – as it is true with most of the emerging
technologies, TOR being the prime example), diﬃculty to track by the
authorities, and the lack of legal regulations and control over the decen-
tralized crypto currency ledgers servers and distributed or collaborative
electronic systems.

10.3 On Kindnapping Front

There are several high-proﬁle kidnapping cases where ransoms in millions
of dollars were paid. For example, in 2017, a criminal group kidnapped
an employee of a United Kingdom-registered crypto currency exchange
in Kiev, Ukraine. The kidnappers released the victim on 29 December,
reportedly following a ransom payment equivalent to USD 1 million in
Bitcoin. Several similar events were reported and we refer [20] for a com-
prehensive review of this topic. It appears that crypto currency ransoms
are not the norm or not yet for kidnappings in general. Instead, kid-
nappers are targeting wealthy individuals in general. It appears that in
several cases of kidnapping where crypto currency payments were re-
quested, the kidnappers were able to competently exploit open or public
information to identify individuals, whose crypto currency wealth have
been publicly known.

11 New Criminal Battleﬁeld Revisited

In 2011, when the notion of the “Internet as a new criminal battle-
ﬁeld” was ﬁrst introduced [28], the blockchain concept and the crypto
currencies were virtually unknown outside of the specialists and crypto
enthusiasts’ circles. However, for these and many other technological de-
velopments, the use of any technology for the purposes that are (directly
or potentially) illegal in nature, is somewhat normal, as there is no rea-
son why criminals would not adopt a new tool especially if it is readily

available, easy to use and inexpensive. Additionally, the younger gener-
ation of criminals we are dealing with are more likely to embrace the
Internet and technology and will consider it to be their natural environ-
ment. Therefore, we can assume that the frequency of on-line based and
cyber-enabled crime increases in parallel to the generational changes.
It needs to be stressed that the Internet and new technology are used
at all stages of criminal behavior. From the planning and preparation,
through the completion of an act, destroying or altering the evidence,
up to the stage of preparing an alibi or manipulating witnesses [28]. We
could compare these technologies to a multi-purpose tool, which was not
originally designed to cause harm, but which was later skillfully and cre-
atively adapted, by those who found other and previously unforeseen
applications for it. Now we should not ignore the fact that certain very
speciﬁc types of crimes, and this is primarily ransomware, are specif-
ically enabled by this new technology. In the “old world”, it was harder
for criminals to receive payments without being caught or monitored.
Blockchain technology also oﬀers the possibility to defer the moment at
which the criminal takes the money for potentially unlimited time, and
this is a completely new scenario that has never existed before. There-
fore we must also recognize that beyond being just a tool, blockchain
can genuinely be a disruptive technology and modify the landscape of
criminal activity in which criminals engage.
A useful comparison here is to the credit card payment history: there are
several countries including the UK, France and Malaysia where the in-
troduction of Chip and Pin technology [21] was motivated partly by the
quick increase of crime and fraud rates. In the same way, the very possi-
bility of using credit cards to purchase goods over the Internet has played
a major role in crime, and created a pre-bitcoin situation where stealing
data has become a potential moneymaker. Bitcoin has just ampliﬁed the
necessity to innovate, in the areas of payment and the digital economy,
and is the next logical step after the credit cards. First we had credit
cards since the beginning of the 20th century, cf. [21], then in 1990s the
credit cards have become trustless, in the sense that they possess private
keys which authenticate transactions and they are the only entity able
to authenticate payments so that our money is safe against fraud even
when we do not trust the bank. It is easy to see that even the bank
cannot forge or alter transactions made with Chip and Pin credit cards.
Finally we have various forms of disintermediation. First of all payment
companies such as VISA, Mastercard or PayPal have deprived the banks
from substantial amount of income from payments, and the income goes
to the multinational ﬁrms, rather than traditional high street banks.
Then we have a new wave of disintermediation, which seems “anarchic”
like bitcoin. Strangely, money lands at the end in some large crypto
exchanges which are based in the United States primarily cf. [17]. Busi-
nesses of that kind have enjoyed phenomenal growth rates. Being a fan or
a user of bitcoin currency, in spite of undeniable extremely large impact
and popularity [24], is possibly somewhat a smoke screen which hides a
broader business reality. A large number of new unregulated para-bank
companies are competing for “geek” customers which are fans of bit-
coin and other innovations, and any method to capture their attention

and their deposits is good. Disintermediation and business competition
across borders is the main pattern. We simply observe banks losing busi-
ness and customers to certain oﬀshore businesses. Crypto exchanges can
now also compete wtih banks on getting funding from investors. In 2021,
a major crypto currency exchange, coinbase, has successfully become a
regular traded company on Nasdaq stock exchange with a market cap of
70 billion approximately at the time of writing, which is comparable to
some of the largest banks in the world.
Bitcoin is just a part of an inevitable trend in which payment technol-
ogy and ﬁnancial markets must change to serve the needs of the global
digital economy better, and to respond and adapt to what the new tech-
nology can enable and oﬀer. We have a continuous wave of business
disruption, where jobs and business are moving to diﬀerent jurisdictions.
This is hardly avoidable. The crime is evolving likewise, taking new and
unprecedented forms
An interesting point, is that in parallel, blockchain creates a new liberal
“geek” oﬀshore jurisdiction where maths and code are law. Interestingly
it is also a self-policing jurisdiction. It is meant to regulate itself or to
work in very diﬀerent ways than the incumbent banking sector. We need
to recognise that our old ﬁnancial system was very costly to run, for
example the police forces of the whole planet collaborate on a very large
scale in order to police fake currency crime. This problem disappears
with bitcoins, as un-forge-ability is a standard feature in modern cryp-
tography. It is not true that the security is systematically degraded or
that the lack of regulation is systematically a problem. On one side,
bitcoin facilitates certain speciﬁc forms of crime such as ransoms, cf.
Section 6.2 or certain types of transgressions are allowed or tolerated
in the crypto economy. Then on the other side, security is reinforced at
many places. Accordingly, many crimes do not happen anymore. Many
attacks or thefts occur only in very speciﬁc circumstances and typically
one just cannot take bitcoins which are not theirs, because of strong
cryptography, see Section 6.1 and Section 6.2.

11.1 Law Enforcement Shortcomings

A key problem is that the law enforcement is radically unprepared to
deal with the new types of payment business and supra-national business
disruption, due to – among others – the administrative and legal con-
straints, lack of funding (translating in majority of the countries to the
inability to compete ﬁnancially with the private sector when it comes to
hiring the properly trained and skilled IT experts), lack or expertise and
training, ineﬀective or non-existent exchange of information, inability or
diﬃculty in cross-border cooperation, the general lack of knowledge and
experience in regards to cyber- and cyber-enabled threats [36]. According
to our recent interviews with the Intelligence and security practitioners,
the problem of the abuse of modern technologies by criminals and ter-
rorist requires the multi-disciplinary approach involving the co-operation
of the law enforcement, criminal justice, computer scientists and the in-
dustry [36]. No matter how clich´e it might sound, the most signiﬁcant
improvement in the current situation can probably be achieved just by

raising awareness and education of all parties involved. This speciﬁcally
relates to the law enforcement community. Qualitative studies performed
during the EC FP7 PRIME Project [36], [37] research show that the level
of knowledge about modern technologies among the Police oﬃcers world-
wide is extremely limited. One of the objectives of this paper is to make
the computer science community and IT industry aware of this fact.
Law enforcement professionals have a very vague understanding of the
emerging technologies and their potential for abuse by the criminal and
terrorist enterprises. Moreover, we have unrealistic expectations about
the potential and skills of the Police among the general public and com-
puter science industry representatives. The so-called “CSI Eﬀect” orig-
inally related to the impossibility to achieve (the alleged) “standards”
in forensic sciences is currently starting to impact the popular expecta-
tions towards “cyber investigations”, resulting in na¨ıve and improbable
anticipations about the skills and capabilities of the Police forces. It is
thus necessary to re-consider and re-work the existing strategies and
methodologies of Police education. No matter how idealistic it might
sound, in order to do it, it is necessary to involve the computer science
industry in such a framework, as the rapid changes and developments in
technology render the traditional law enforcement training based on the
well-established and long-term curriculum largely useless. A highly plau-
sible approach [36] is to engage in public-private partnerships, with law
enforcement practitioners, lawyers, computer science experts and cyber-
forensics specialists. We recommend using the approach developed by
the ﬁeld of Crime Science, namely the crime-scripting, understood as a
way of deconstructing an oﬀence into its basic component actions, and
also criminal horizon scanning [31], [5]. Recent developments in the area
are the new EU-funded project Titanium developing blockchain analytic
tools named GraphSense and DarkNet Monitor. Interpol has a working
group and they have published at intepol.int web site a draft taxonomy
under development of crimes involving darknets and crypto currencies,
see [33].

11.2 Diﬃculties and Perspectives

Finally, it is important to re-consider the future of the legal framework in
which the well-established, emerging and forthcoming technologies will
operate. As mentioned earlier [29], cyber-enabled criminal or terrorist
acts are geopolitically border agnostic, as their perpetrators can operate
simultaneously in several jurisdictions, and the ﬂexibility and potentially
high anonymity available to them hamper the potential for prevention,
detection, and prosecution. From the legal standpoint, the international
harmonization and uniﬁcation of the “cyber law” is a slow process. In
theory, it is more likely in the case of operational and procedural do-
main (including problem prevention, identiﬁcation, and recognition; risk
detection and assessment; evidence investigation, gathering, and presen-
tation; and crisis management regulations), although – as our ﬁndings
imply [36] – numerous substantial discrepancies still exist.

11.3 Restoring Audit with Focused AML

Money laundering cannot be just policed by banning some cryptographic
inventions such as ZeroCash, but rather by “focused AML”, term used by
a US law ﬁrm in [41]. In a focused AML approach we disclose additional
private transaction information to our bank or exchange, but not to
a larger crowd. For example, many systems such as Stealth Adress in
Monero or ZeroCash have so called “view keys” for this purpose. The fact
is that these keys enable to establish high standards of proof. They are
cryptographically unforgeable, and potentially they have more value than
current AML reporting standards at crypto exchanges, where documents
submitted could for example be fake, or authentic which were carefully
crafted to show an inaccurate picture.

12 The New Economy is Here and it Deserves
a Legal Protection

In the discussion of the problem of the Internet as a new battleﬁeld, we
see that law enforcement and the criminal oﬀenders compete for domi-
nation [29]. At the same time technology solutions and ﬁnancial services
compete for the sake of business, with well-known moral hazards, namely
compromising public safety and security in order to acquire a larger mar-
ket share. It was noted that although it might seem natural that such
issues should be a domain of politicians and legislators, the design of
universal strategies and intervention measures is actually in the hands of
scientists, industry, and end-users (security services). A central role is in
fact going to be played by new emerging disciplines and new emerging
professions, which are all in sense also new chapters of modern Computer
Science. In particular we have the topics of Big Data, Applied Cryptog-
raphy, Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Deep Learning. We see that anonymity
and innovation is disruptive for law enforcement sector as much as they
are for the banking and payment industry. We can anticipate that the law
enforcement sector needs to change their culture radically in the sense
that they need to become knowledge-based, employ radically more tech-
nicians, research engineers, data scientists, and specialists with PhDs
in related ﬁelds. Following [4] criminal activities involving crypto cur-
rencies require to develop novel analytic methodology and tools. Apart
from the cultural shift, it is very diﬃcult to expect the international
legal community to come up with a comprehensive vision or strategy,
when dealing with challenges related to emerging technologies and busi-
ness and software ecosystems which lead to radical changes in criminal
landscape. This is a process, and it requires collaboration on the inter-
national scale [13]. As of today, we do not yet have an all-inclusive and
up-to-date, universally agreed set of solutions [13]. One of the reasons
for this is that diﬀerent nations have very diﬀerent levels at which they
have embraced new technology and cyber-security. Another problem is
that diﬀerent nations have diﬀerent views on free speech, civil liberties
such as usage of private communication or privacy enhancing technology,
and personal or consumer rights and freedoms. Some countries will be

tempted to address the emerging cybercrime problems from the point of
view of nations, which stay on the top of new technology implementation.
Other nations will try to avoid complication and maybe say: “forbid or
regulate the payment technology we do not understand or master well
enough”. Instead of having the philosophical or typical problem of main-
taining the delicate balance between two fundamental expectations: the
right to privacy which is recognized as a human right, and the right to
safety which is more about how industrial nations protect their citizens
and businesses. We observe that diﬀerent nations approach the problem
diﬀerently due to their culture and history.

12.1 On Risks of Banning or Blacklisting

Money laundering cannot be just policed by banning some powerful cryp-
tographic inventions such as ZeroCash. We need to embrace new tech-
nology rather than see each new technology development as an anomaly,
which we cannot handle. Banning is in fact hurting business, innova-
tion and the 99.9 % of users. In [1] authors study payments from the
point of view of network topology and connectivity and deﬁne ﬁtness
as the ability of the node to attract new connections. Then they show
that the accounts that have high ﬁtness are of two sorts. They are either
short-lived and indulge in malicious or criminal activities, or they are
long-lived and they represent large organizations. Here is the dilemma:
policing crime without negatively impacting businesses.

13 Perspectives of Regulating and Policing
Financial Innovation Provider Businesses

We need a pro-innovation and pro-business agenda: whether the new
technologies such as blockchain are just a “hype” or not, nations are
trying to attract the innovators to create jobs in their countries. In some
sense new technology is always an uncertain bet from the point of view
of investing in it, and assessing how successful or how inﬂuential they
might become. If so, it is perfectly logical for the countries to embrace
disruptive innovations, maintaining their original paradigm of indepen-
dence and freedom, and hoping that some unicorn companies are going
to become rich and pay taxes, in a friendly jurisdiction which ﬁgures out
the right mix of freedom to innovate and regulation. Such philosophy
was attempted in New York with Bit License and in France with AMF
licencing. Then we deal with the associated criminal activity as it comes,
with the idea of proportionality. In contrast, over-regulating and plan-
ning to be ten steps ahead of criminals, is an expensive strategy for law
enforcement agencies and security services.

13.1 Can Safeguards which Prevail In Financial
Regulation Survive in the Immaterial World?

We need to look at the spirit of laws and regulations which have under-
pinned the payment and see that many ideas are obsolete with new tech-
nology, and also with how modern capitalism works at large. The whole
idea is that a company can issue a “security” and this process must be
very heavily policed by lawmakers and law enforcement agencies such as
SEC in order to protect the investors is potentially obsolete. Since 2000
numerous ﬁnancial scandals and investment bubbles have shown that
investors do and will fall into traps and buy the trendy share or coin,
which is not always even trying to do a good job as an investment. Even
properly regulated securities on the stock markets have failed to protect
millions of investors in practice.
The crucial question here is that issuing a security is heavily regulated,
and is expected to be a reliable link between what investors expect to
own or invest in, and some material business operations or assets. We
want investors to know what they are buying and investors are entitled
to be treated fairly and get the same share of corporate proﬁts in pro-
portion, as for example the founders of the company. However the whole
idea of business assets being material and subject to policing by accoun-
tants, have become totally obsolete in the recent years. Now the 5 top
tech companies on S+P500 stock index are worth more than 20 % of the
whole index, and the combined value of US tech companies in general is
more than the whole stock market in Europe. The key observation is that
a great part of what we see on the stock market are immaterial assets
and intangible property, or assets which are non-exclusive. An Internet
platform or system can beneﬁt potentially anyone, and it is not possible
to monopolize the virtual wealth stemming from the network eﬀects, the
economies of scale and collaboration easily. In this light, it is wrong to

believe that bitcoin beneﬁted only some scammers or speculators. On
Internet forums we observe that there is a broad population of people,
who are not unhappy with the proﬁtability of their crypto currency in-
vestments. In some sense investors were right to invest in the Internet
bubble in 2000 and in Tesla stocks or Bitcoin and Ethereum today. They
understood that tremendous amounts of wealth, power and innovation
are at stake, and are going to be created somewhere here, for example
with new electric cars.
In fact it remains diﬃcult to capture, own or monopolize all this wealth.
Stock markets and government regulation of how securities are issued
have frequently and again, failed to protect against investors investing
in wrong assets. Some crypto currency enthusiasts contend that crypto
currency companies will soon be allowed to issue securities and they will
be fully compliant with US Laws and regulations. This is no happen-
ing yet and so far such companies have been facing severe regulatory
backlash. In July 2021 many companies (e.g. Binance, UniSwap) have
suddenly halted trading crypto tokens which get too close into imitat-
ing stock market shares. Arguably however, one day, maybe in 10 or
20 yeas, securities could be eventually issued on blockchains. This is be-
cause blockchains can provide important and extensive new functionality,
which does not exist in current ﬁnancial markets.
In our view, both technology and law enforcement should work in their
own way, on improving technical standards and safeguards. Ultra conser-
vative blacklisting, banning or fear mongering attitudes, are rarely com-
patible with disruptive new technology which creates new jobs, new ways
of doing things, or new ways to secure property or engage in business con-
tracts, and this is how our economy evolves of improves. Crypto market
regulations should protect the small to average investors, primarily not
against taking active part, and eﬀectively co-funding the development
of new disruptive technology, but against rogue traders, rogue develop-
ers, faulty cryptography standards, market manipulators, and predatory
market mass surveillance leading to targeted fraud and crime activities.

14 Conclusion

Financial crime or tax avoidance are serious problems, which however
should not conceal the fact that it is hardly possible to forbid users from
using alternative unregulated ﬁnancial services. Large software ecosys-
tems such as Bitcoin or Ethereum blockchains are nowadays considered
as good investment opportunities, and have year after year gained an im-
mense popularity. Bitcoin did not go to zero, instead it has crossed the
60,000 $ mark. Many crypto currencies have high prices due to artiﬁcially
created scarcity and poor investment opportunities elsewhere. However
there is no scarcity of developers bringing a plethora of innovative DeFi
and crypto protocols to market. The blockchain ledgers grow every day
and occupy hundreds of gigabytes. There is no scarcity of transactions
either. As of July 2021, blockchain has 200 million of users [24]. Every
single day 1 million bitcoin wallets are in use.

14.1 Actionable Recommendations

We need to uphold the free market economy while protecting investors
from predatory forces and thieves through better privacy, better cryp-
tography and better cybersecurity. If we look at the ﬁgures we see that
the biggest threats to individual customers are not thefts or ransoms, but
primarily scams which simply imitate the investment opportunities in the
new economy [11,40]. Then, comes ransomware, a major threat on the
rise, where victims are primarily businesses. Crypto currency coins oﬀer
some unique features such decentralized ownership and programmable
decentralized trading which brings to us, a completely new world of busi-
ness functionalities.
A controversial feature is privacy for all parties involved in ﬁnancial
transactions. Arguably future blockchain and cybersecurity standards
should operate on the principle of proportionality and tackle the actual
cyber crime rather than ban and forbid in advance. Proportionality would
suggest to enable more privacy in the ﬁnancial sector: it beneﬁts the
99.9% of legitimate activity. This even though it also helps the 0.1 % of
illicit activity which remains small [17]. According to a recent paper by
a specialist US lawyer ﬁrm [41] the societal or economic beneﬁts from
privacy coins are substantial and “substantially outweigh their risks”.
According to this law ﬁrm, the situation is broadly under control, and
existing AML regulations already “properly and suﬃciently cover” those
risks w.r.t. money laundering.

Acknowledgements

Although the preparation of this paper was not directly funded by a
designated research grant, our research and expertise have been sup-
ported indirectly from diﬀerent grants and by our universities. Nicolas
Courtois has also worked as a consultant for several crypto currency
companies in UK, France and the US. His background and inspiration
in his security engineering and payment security research and teaching

were eight years spent working as a crypto R&D engineer for the French
smart card industry (Bull CP8, now part of Gemalto), and seven years
of interactions and engagement with the crypto currency community. He
was also funded by the EU with project RIBS on Resilient Infrastruc-
ture and Building Security. Kacper Gradon acknowledges the support of
UCL Jill Dando Institute of Security and Crime Science. Some of the
ideas expressed here arouse during the preparation of the deliverables
of the EU-funded PRIME Project and throughout the duration of the
U.S. State Department Fulbright Scholarship at Institute of Behavioral
Science University of Colorado at Boulder.

References

1. A. Aspembitova, L. Feng, V. Melnikov L. Chew: Fitness pref-
erential attachment as a driving mechanism in bitcoin trans-
action network .
1–20, 2019.
PLOS ONE,
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0219346

14(8),

2. A. Brill, L. Keene: Cryptocurrencies: the next generation of terrorist
ﬁnancing? Defense Against Terrorism Review, 6, no. 1, 7–30, 2014.
3. A. Irwin, G. Milad: The use of crypto-currencies in funding violent
jihad. Journal of Money Laundering Control, 19, iss. 4, 407–425,
2018.

4. Akcora, Purusotham, Gel Krawiec Thayer Kantarcioglu: How
to not get caught when you launder money on blockchain?
arxiv.org/pdf/2010.15082.pdf , 2020.

5. B. Leclerc, R. Wortley (eds.): Cognition and Crime. Oﬀender Deci-
sion Making and Script Analyses. Routledge Crime Science Series,
New York, 2014.

6. Bartlett, J.: The Dark Net. Melville House, Brooklyn, 2015.
7. Brown, Lawrence: A proposed design for an extended des . Vth

Int. Conf. on Computer Security, IFIP/Sec’88, 2018.

8. Brown, S.D.: Cryptocurrency and criminality: the Bitcoin opportu-
nity. The Police Journal: Theory, Practice and Principles, 89 (4),
327–339, 2016.

9. C. D. Clack, N. T. Courtois: Distributed Ledger Privacy: Ring
Signatures, M¨obius and CryptoNote. arxiv.org/abs/1902.02609 ,
2019.

10. C. Dion-Schwarz, D. Manheim, P.B. Johnston: Terrorist use of
cryptocurrencies. Technical and organizational barriers and future
threats. RAND Corporation Report, Santa Monica, 2019.

11. ChainAnalysis: The 2021 crypto crime reportThe 2021 Crypto
Crime Report. Everything you need to know about ransomware,
darknet markets, and more,, February 2021.

12. Chohan, U.: The Cryptocurrency Tumblers: Risks, Legality and
Oversight. University of New South Wales (Canberra) Discussion
Paper Series: Notes on the 21st Century. , 2017.

13. Chohan, Usman W.:

International Law Enforcement Responses
Interpol Working Group,

to Cryptocurrency Accountability:
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3156531
, 2018.

14. Choo, K K.R.: Cryptocurrency and Virtual Currency, Corruption
Handbook
and Money Laundeering/Terrorism Financing Risks?
of Digital Currency. Bitcoin, Innovation, Financial Instruments and
Big Data., pp. 283–307, Boston, 2015. Academic Press/Elsevier.
15. Choudhury, S. R.: More than $30 million worth of cryp-
says.

tocurrency was
https://www.cnbc.com/2017/11/21/tether-hack-attacker-report
edly-steals-30-million-of-digital-tokens.html , 2017.

company

hackers,

stolen

just

by

in

Catalin:

16. Cimpanu,
ered
https://www.bleepingcomputer.com/news/security/backdoor-code-
discovered-in-popular-bitcoin-mining-equipment/
2017.

Discov-
Equipment.

Backdoor

, April

Popular

Bitcoin

Mining

Code

laundering

Cryptocurrency

17. Ciphertrace:
money
Anti-Money
Report.
ciphertrace.com/2020-year-end-cryptocurrency-crime-and-anti-
money-laundering-report/

crime
reportCryptocurrency

and
Crime
February

anti-
and
2021.

Laundering

and
18. CipherTrace.
2020.
Anti-Money
https://ciphertrace.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/06/spring-
2020-cryptocurrency-anti-money-laundering-report.pdf

Cryptocurrency
Report,

Laundering

Crime

June

19. CoinTelegraph:

IRS oﬀers usd 625,000 bounty to break Monero .

https://tinyurl.com/cointelemonero , 2020.

20. controlrisks.com: Global kidnap, extortion and threat response
response .

operational and protective security cyber incident
https://www.controlrisks.com/our-thinking/insights/2019-
kidnapping-and-extortive-crime-trends-in-review
2020.

, April

21. Courtois, N.:

Lecture
technology.

slides

about
taught

card

bank
lege London GA12 Applied Cryptography,
http://www.nicolascourtois.com/papers/sc/CB.pdf

chip and pin and
at University Col-
2006-2011. At

22. Courtois, N.: On The Longest Chain Rule and Programmed Self-
Destruction of Crypto Currencies. arxiv.org/abs/1405.0534 , 2014.
23. Courtois, N.: Features or Bugs: The Seven Sins of Current Bitcoin.
Banking Beyond Banks and Money, A Guide to Banking Services in
the Twenty-First Century, 97–120. Springer, 2018.

24. crypto.com: Measuring Global Crypto Users, A Study to
July 2021.

Measure Market Size Using On-Chain Metrics.
https://crypto.com/images/202107_DataReport_OnChain_Market_
Sizing.pdf

25. D. Yaga, P. Mell, N. Roby and K. Scarfone: Blockchain Technol-
ogy Overview. NIST and U.S. Dep. of Comm. Internal Report.
NISTIR8202, 2018.

26. Felipe Ribas Coutinho, Victor Pires, Claudio Miceli Daniel S.
Menasche: Crypto-Hotwire: Illegal Blockchain Mining at Zero
Cost Using Public Infrastructures. arxiv.org/pdf/2101.00845.pdf
, 2021.

27. Goodman, M.: Future Crimes. Anchor Books, New York , 2016.

28. Grado´n, K.: Internet as a new criminal battleground? An essay on

the future trends in crime. Disputatio, XII, pp. 152–161 , 2011.

29. Grado´n, K.: Crime Science and the Battleﬁeld of the Internet. Se-
IEEE Security

curing the Analogue World from the Digital Crime.
& Privacy Magazine, 11, iss. 5, 0–0, 2013.

30. Grado´n, K.: Countering lone-actor terrorism: speciﬁcation of re-
Studia Iuridica Vol. 70 ,

quirements for potential interventions.
2017.

31. H. Brayley, E. Cockbain, G. Laycock: The Value of Crime Scripting:
Deconstructing Internal Child Sex Traﬃcking. Policing: A Journal
of Policy and Practice, 5 iss. 2, pp. 132–143 , 2011.

Matthew:

32. Humphries,
Stolen
https://uk.pcmag.com/security/131698/cd-projekts-stolen-
source-code-has-been-sold , 2021.

Projekt’s
Sold.

Source

Code

Been

Has

CD

33. Interpol: Helping
digital

police worldwide
consulted
crimes,

vestigate
September
https://www.interpol.int/en/How-we-work/Innovation/
Darknet-and-Cryptocurrencies.

understand
1

and

in-
2021,

34. Javad Zarrin, Phang Hao Wen, Lakshmi Babu Saheer and Bahram
Zarrin: Blockchain for Decentralization of Internet: Prospects,
Trends, and Challenges. arxiv.org/abs/2011.01096 , 2020.

35. Jeﬀerson E. Simoes, Eduardo Ferreira, Daniel S. Menasche and
Carlos A. V. Campos: Blockchain Privacy Through Merge Avoid-
ance and Mixing Services: a Hardness and an Impossibility Result.
arxiv.org/pdf/2101.00851 , 2021.

36. K. Grado´n, A. Gutkowska, P. Karasek and N. Bouhana: PRIME
D7.2 Countermeasures Requirements White Paper. EC Conﬁdential
Report. Cordis, 2017.

38. Kelso, C. E.:

37. K. Grado´n, A. Gutkowska, P. Karasek E. Corner N. Bouhana and A.
Thornton: PRIME D2.6 Context Analysis. Preventing, Mitigating
and Interdicting Extremism. EC Conﬁdential Report. Cordis, 2015.
and
Fined $ 9M over GAW & Paycoin Scam.
Sept. 2018.
https://news.bitcoin.com/josh-garza-imprisoned-and-fined-
9m-over-gaw-paycoin-scam/

Josh Garza

to Prison

Sentenced

39. Koblitz, Neal:

ematics
http://www.ams.org/notices/200708/tx070800972p.pdf

and Cryptography.

The Uneasy Relationship Between Math-
the AMS.
Notices

of

40. Lee, Lihan Hyunwoo:

from stealing

Crypto industry must keep scam-
mers
Feb 2021.
https://cryptoline.org/crypto-industry-must-keep-scammers-
from-stealing-another-16-billion/

another

billion.

16

$

41. LLP,

Coie:

Perkins
of

Anti-Money
enabling

Laundering

Reg-
Cryptocurrencies.

Privacy

ulation
www.perkinscoie.com/images/content/2/3/237411/Perkins-Coie-
LLP-White-Paper-AML-Regulation-of-Privacy-enablin.pdf
2020.

,

42. Lucas, E.: Cyberphobia. Bloomsbury, New York, 2015.
43. M. Conti, S. Kumar, C. Lal S. Ruj: A Survey on Security and
Privacy Issues of Bitcoin. Dec. 2017. arxiv.org/abs/1706.00916

44. M.A. Costandache, M.S. Mihalache, E. Simion: New directions in

the ransomware phenomenon. eprint.iacr.org/2020/1610/

45. Mackenzie, Dana: A Game of Chance. In New Scientist, 7 June 2003

issue, pages 36-40.

46. Maese, Vivian A.: Divining the Regulatory Future of Illegitimate

Cryptocurrencies. Wall Street Lawyer, 188, iss 5, 2014.

47. McCarthy, Kieren: UK, French, Belgian blanket spying systems
ruled illegal by Europe’s top court, Five-year legal battle pays oﬀ.
Now countries have to ﬁgure out what to do, 2020.

48. Mitchell, Eddie: How Many People Use Bitcoin in 2021?, 2020.
bitcoinmarketjournal.com/how-many-people-use-bitcoin/
49. Nicolas Courtois, Lear Bahack: On Subversive Miner Strategies
and Block Withholding Attack in Bitcoin Digital Currency, at
arxiv.org/abs/1402.1718 , Jan. 2014.

50. N. Courtois, G. Castagnos, L. Goubin: What do DES S-boxes Say

to Each Other? ia.cr/2003/184/ , 2003.

51. N. Courtois, M. Grajek and

able Fundamental
arxiv.org/abs/1310.7935 , 2013.

The Unreason-
Incertitudes Behind Bitcoin Mining. At

R. Naik:

52. N. Courtois, N. Song and R. Castellucci: Speed Optimizations in
Bitcoin Key Recovery Attacks. CECC 2016, post-proceedings of
Tatracrypt 2016, 2016.

53. N. Courtois, P. Emirdag and

D. A. Nagy:

Could Bit-
proc. of SECRYPT

coin Transactions Be 100x Faster?
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7509520/ , 2014.

54. N. Courtois, P. Emirdag and F. Valsorda: Private Key Recovery
Combination Attacks: On Extreme Fragility of Popular Bitcoin Key
Management, Wallet and Cold Storage Solutions in Presence of Poor
RNG Events. eprint.iacr.org/2014/848.pdf , 2014.

55. N. Vovchenko, E. Tishchenko, T. Epifanova and M. Gontmacher:
Electronic Currency: The Potential Risks to National Security and
Methods to Minimize Them. European Research Studies, XX iss.
1, 36–48, 2017.

56. Nakamoto, S.: Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System.

published online on. CypherPunks mailing list , 2008.

57. Neal Koblitz, Alfred Menezes: The brave new world of bodacious
357–365

assumptions in cryptography. Notices of AMS,
pdfs.semanticscholar.org/0c3d/5fed9c27c9b5d6cadd43fc239029170c510e.pdf
, 2010.

57,

58. NAMCIOS: Bitcoin Adoption

Year,
coin
chainalysis-global-crypto-adoption-index 19 Aug 2021.

Emerging Markets
Magazine,

880 % In One
Bit-
https://bitcoinmagazine.com/culture/

the Way,

Surged

Lead

In

59. Orcutt, M.: How the North Korean hackers behind WannaCry
got away with a stunning crypto-heist.
MIT Technology
Review https://www.technologyreview.com/2020/01/24/276082/
lazarus-group-dragonex-chainalysis/ , 2020.

60. Peter

Svec, Roderik
Schemes

En-
cryption
Ransomware.
web.math.pmf.unizg.hr/cecc2020/files/svec-ploszek-talk.pdf
, 2020.

Ploszek:
in

A Review

Modern

Used

of

Nathaniel:

61. Popper,
BitMEX,
Criminal
ing
https://www.nytimes.com/2020/10/01/technology/
bitmex-bitcoin-criminal-charges.html , 2020.

Exchange,

Owners

Bitcoin

Face

of

a

Lead-
Charges.

62. Shamir, Adi: On the security of DES. Crypto’85, 280–281. Springer,

1985.
63. Siegel, D.:

Understanding The DAO Attack.
https://www.coindesk.com/understanding-dao-hack-journalists
, 2016.

Coindesk

64. Treasury, Her Majesty’s and Home Oﬃce: United Kingdom Na-
tional Risk Assessment of Money Laundering and Terrorist Financ-
ing. OGL Crown, London , 2015.

65. UK HM Treasury and Home Oﬃce:

National

risk as-
ﬁnancing.

of money

sessment
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/national-risk-assessment-
of-money-laundering-and-terrorist-financing-2020, 2020.

laundering

terrorist

and

66. Y.

Sakemi,

T.

Kobayashi,

Pairing-Friendly
Curves.
draft-irtf-cfrg-pairing-friendly-curves-07.html
2020.

T.

Saito

R. Wahby
https://tools.ietf.org/id/
June

,

