Using Blockchain to Achieve Decentralized Privacy 
In IoT Healthcare 

Sajad Meisami  
 Department of Electrical Engineering 
Sharif University of Technology 
Tehran, Iran 
meysami.sajad@ee.sharif.edu 

Mohammad Beheshti-Atashgah 
Department of Electrical Engineering 
Sharif University of Technology 
Tehran, Iran 
m_beheshti_a@mut.ac.ir 

Mohammad Reza Aref 
Department of Electrical Engineering 
Sharif University of Technology 
Tehran, Iran 
aref@sharif.edu 

into  question 

Abstract— With the advent of the Internet of Things (IoT), 
e-health has become one of the main topics of research. Due to 
the  sensitivity  of  patient  information,  patient  privacy  seems 
challenging.  Nowadays,  patient  data  is  usually  stored  in  the 
cloud  in  healthcare  programs,  making  it  difficult  for  users  to 
have  enough  control  over  their  data.  The  recent  increment  in 
announced  cases  of  security  and  surveillance  breaches 
compromising  patients'  privacy  call 
the 
conventional  model, in  which third-parties gather  and  control 
immense amounts of patients' Healthcare data. In this work, we 
try  to  resolve  the  issues  mentioned  above  by using  blockchain 
technology.  We  propose  a  blockchain-based  protocol  suitable 
for e-health applications that does not require trust in a third 
party  and  provides  an  efficient  privacy-preserving  access 
control  mechanism.  Transactions  in  our  proposed  system, 
unlike  Bitcoin,  are  not  entirely  financial,  and  we  do  not  use 
conventional  methods  for  consensus  operations  in  blockchain 
like Proof of Work (PoW). It is not suitable for IoT applications 
because  IoT  devices  have  resources-constraints.  Usage  of 
appropriate  consensus  method  helps  us  to  increase  network 
security  and  efficiency,  as  well  as  reducing  network  cost,  i.e., 
bandwidth  and  processor  usage.  Finally,  we  provide  security 
and privacy analysis of our proposed protocol.  

Keywords—blockchain,  healthcare,  IoT,  privacy,  e-health, 

access control, Security 

I. 

INTRODUCTION  

Many  societies  in  the  world  are  facing  a  significant 
increase  in  the  number  of  medical  patients,  and  access  to 
primary doctors or medical staff is becoming more difﬁcult for 
patients. Internet of Things (IoT) allows any device to connect 
to other devices and the Internet at any time and any place, and 
researchers hope that more than 75 billion devices will be able 
to connect to the Internet by 2025 [1]. Fortunately, e-health is 
one of the main applications of IoT, and it can help medical 
staff be able to treat more patients and provide more comfort 
and convenience for patients. Patients can stay connected with 
medical  staff  as  required.  It  also  reduces  medical  costs  and 
improves the quality of care and treatment. 

In recent years, the improvement of the IoT has allowed us 
to  use  electronic  wearable  devices  to  implement  e-health. 
Wearable  devices  measure  a  patient’s  vital  signs  like  heart 
rate,  blood  glucose,  body  temperature,  blood  pressure,  etc. 
These  wearable  devices  automatically  collect  patient  health 
data  and  transfer  it  to  central  storage  or  cloud  for  further 
processing  by  medical  staff  to  facilitate  health  monitoring, 
disease diagnosis, and treatment [2]. 

 Patients' healthcare data are highly privacy-sensitive, and 
sharing  of  data  may  raise  the  risk  of  exposure.  These  data 
usually  stored  on  a  server  and  processed  remotely,  and  this 
raises  concerns  regarding  the  privacy  and  confidentiality  of 
patients'  healthcare  data.  Also,  several  security  attacks  are 

possible  in  such  cases;  for  example,  an  attacker  can  track 
patients'  data  on  the  Internet  and  modify  or  replace  it  with 
incorrect  data  in  the  data  center,  or  an  attacker  can  steal 
information from remote servers [3]. 

A.  Organization 

Section II describes the related work involved. Section III 
discusses the challenges we solve in this paper. Sections IV 
provides an overview of the system model, whereas section V 
explains the network protocol in detail. Section VI discusses 
the security and privacy of the proposed model, and section 
VII provides a conclusion. 

them 

II.  RELATED WORK 
To address the privacy issue on personal data, researchers 
developed  various  methods.  One  of 
is  data 
anonymization that attempts to protect personally identiﬁable 
information. For example, in the k-anonymity method used in 
anonymous  datasets,  any  necessary  recorded  data 
is 
indistinguishable from at least k−1 other important recorded 
data  [4].  However,  in  recent  research,  it  has  been  shown, 
anonymized  datasets  can  be  broken  even  with  a  little 
information  (their  anonymity  disappears)  [5].  There  exist 
other  privacy-preserving  methods  like  differential  privacy, 
that perturbs data, or adds noise to the computational process 
before sharing the data [6] and practices on creating noisy data 
or  summarizing  [7].  These  methods  are  not  efficient  in 
healthcare  applications  where  patients’  original  data  are 
required to send to medical staff for medical treatments. 

Attribute-based encryption (ABE) is a useful technology 
that can provide data privacy and ﬁne-grained access control 
when users want to secretly share data stored in a third-party 
cloud server  [8].  Almost  all  ABE  schemes require  a  trusted 
private  key  generator  (PKG)  to  set  up  the  system  and 
distribute for users the corresponding secret key [9]. However, 
in all ABE schemes, the PKG can decrypt all data stored in the 
cloud  server,  which  may  cause  serious  problems  such  as 
privacy  data  leakage  and  key  abuse.  Furthermore,  the 
traditional cloud storage model runs in a centralized  storage 
manner, so existence a single point of failure can collapse the 
system.  Other  encryption  schemes  exist  that  allow  running 
computations and queries over encrypted data that called fully 
homomorphic  encryption  (FHE)  [10]  but  are  currently  too 
unsuitable to use in practice widely. 

In  recent  years,  decentralized  cryptocurrency  systems 
have emerged. Bitcoin was the ﬁrst of these systems, which 
use  blockchain  technology.  Bitcoin allows  users  securely  to 
make transactions and transfer currency (bitcoins) with others 
without the need to trusted third-party [11]. Blockchain works 
as an immutable timestamp ledger of blocks that are shared 
across  all  participating  nodes  in  the  network,  which  can 
bypass the need for a central authority [12]. This technology 

 
 
is used for sharing and storing data in a distributed manner by 
a peer-to-peer network [13]. Nowadays, blockchain is playing 
an effective role in ﬁnancial transactions [14]. Also, it can be 
a facilitator in many other fields. Such as decentralized IoT 
[15], identity-based PKI [16], decentralized supply chain [17], 
decentralized proof of document existence [18], decentralized 
storage [19–21], etc. 

In [22], the work by Zyskind et al. has shown the use of 
blockchain  technology  to  construct  an  access  control  and 
management  platform  for  personal  data.  They  focused  on 
users'  privacy.  And  they  combine  blockchain  and  off-chain 
storage  to  storing  encrypted  data  out  of  blockchain  ledger 
while pointers to the encrypted data exist on the blockchain. 
Recently researchers addressed the security and privacy issues 
on  healthcare  data,  using  blockchain  technology,  and 
proposed new schemes [23–26]. 

In this paper, we combine IoT and blockchain technology 
to  construct  a  novel  platform  for  patients'  healthcare  data 
management that satisfies privacy and security requirements.  

III.  CHALLENGES AND OUR SOLUTIONS 

Secure  transmission  and  preservation  of  privacy  for  the 
patients' healthcare data are the main concerns in the e-health 
application of IoT. However, the decentralized essence of the 
blockchain  and  other  attributes  like  immutability  and 
transparency make blockchain very suitable for e-health.  But 
there are still challenges for applying blockchain into the IoT. 
Now we discuss the challenges and explain our solutions. 

A.  Scalability 

IoT devices are resource-restricted, so it's hard for them 
to  solve  computationally  intensive  problems  to  execute  a 
consensus  algorithm  for  adding  a  new  blocks  to  the 
blockchain ledger, especially in Proof-of-Works (PoW). We 
eliminate the concept of PoW for consensus in our blockchain 
network  and use  a  method  called  Practical  Byzantine  Fault 
Tolerance (PBFT), a consensus method based on voting [27]. 
BPFT involves multiple rounds of voting by all nodes of the 
network  [28].  BPFT  helps  us  to  reduce  network  costs,  i.e., 
bandwidth,  need  for  processors,  and  energy  for  consensus 
operations. 

B.  Data Storage 

It's not practical and suitable to store IoT big data on the 
blockchain ledger. Because of this, we do not store the data on 
the blockchain, but only we store the pointers to the data (hash 
of encrypted data) on blockchain to lighten the storage space 
of  blockchain.  The  data  (encrypted data)  are  stored on  Off-
chain storage (see section IV,  E. Off-chain Storage). 

C.  Security of Data 

Patients' healthcare data are highly sensitive. To satisfy the 
security of data, we use a symmetric key encryption scheme 
(see  section  V,  A.  Cryptographic  Techniques  Used  in  The 
System).  At  first,  The  data  is  encrypted  by  symmetric  key 
encryption and then sent to the blockchain network. So even 
in Off-chain Storage, the information is stored in the form of 
encrypted data. 

D.  Patients' Privacy 
  The  main  concern  that  is  addressed  in  this  paper  is 
preserving patients' privacy because Patients' healthcare data 
is highly privacy-sensitive. We assume that the medical staff 

is  honest-but-curious  (i.e.,  they  follow  the  protocol).  In  our 
system, patients could be remain (pseudo) anonymous. At the 
same  time,  medical  staff  proﬁles  could  be  stored  on  the 
blockchain so that patients can trust medical staff by verifying 
medical  staff  identities.  Our  proposed  platform  satisfies  the 
following Items: 

1)  Patients'  Data  Ownership:  In  our  platform,  patients 
are the only owner of their healthcare data, and only they can 
control  that  data.  As  such,  the  platform  recognizes  the 
medical staff as Service Providers with granted permissions 
set and the patients as healthcare data owners. 

2)  Fine-grained Access Control: Each patient can grant a 
set of permissions to Any desired member of the medical staff 
for accessing a patient's healthcare data. Also, the patient can 
alter or revoke the set of granted access permissions. These 
permissions  are  securely  stored  on  blockchain  ledger  as 
access-control policies, where only the patient can change or 
revoke them. 

3)  Data  Transparency  and  Auditability:  Patients  have 
complete  and  Accurate  transparency  over  their  collected 
healthcare  data,  and  they  can  know  how  medical  staff  can 
access to healthcare data. 

IV.  OUR SYSTEM MODEL 
As demonstrated in Figure 1, our proposed system model 

consists of the following main modules: 

1)  Wearable IoT devices. 
2)  Patient’s smartphone. 
3)  Medical staff. 
4)  Blockchain. 
5)  Off-chain storage. 

A.  Wearable IoT devices 

The wearable IoT devices will collect all healthcare data 
from  the  patient's  body,  such  as  blood  pressure,  body 
temperature, and heart rate. These devices have limitations in 
resources such as low energy, low processing power, and little 
storage space. By considering these limitations, wearable IoT 
devices  send  the  collected  healthcare  data  to  the  patient's 
smartphone  using  short-range  communication,  such  as 
Bluetooth or Zigbee.  

B.  Patient’s Smartphone 

Smartphones  are  more  potent  than  IoT  devices  because 
smartphones have more storing space, more battery life, and 
higher  processing  power.  So  smartphones  can  do  more 
complicated works, such as computational and cryptographic 
operations.  Also,  smartphones  can  transmit  data  via  long-
range  communications  (such  as  cellular  networks)  that  can 
play the role of a gateway and allow patients to interact with 
the blockchain network. 

C.  Medical staff 

Medical  staff,  including  physicians  and  nurses,  should 
receive patients' healthcare data and, after analyzing it, obtain 
information  about  the  patient's  health  status.  Then  they 
provide appropriate treatment for patients. 

D.  Blockchain 

In our work, we use blockchain  to  store  access policies 

and eliminate the need for a third-party that preserves 

 
 
B.  Protocol in Detail 

As illustrated in protocol 1, initially, patient p and medical 
staff m each generates a pair of private and public keys to sign 
and  send  transactions  to  the  blockchain  network  and 
announce their public key (as their address) on the network. 
Patient P also generates a secret key for encrypting data with 
an  AES  symmetric  encryption  algorithm.  Then  the  patient 
shares the secret key with the chosen member of the medical 
staff so that, later, she will be able to decrypt her authorized 
data with that secret key. 

sig) ←Gsig( ) 

Protocol 1 Joining the Blockchain 
1: procedure GENERATING(p,m)  
2:          p executes:  
3:                    (pkp sig, skp
4:                    skp,m 
enc ←Genc( ) 
5:          p shares pkp sig (as address) on the network 
6:          m executes:  
7:                    (pkm sig, skm
8:           m shares pkm sig (as address) on the network 
9:           p shares skp,m 
enc with m from secure channel  
10:         // Both p and m have skp,m 
11:         return pkp sig, pkm sig, skp,m 
12: end procedure 

sig) ←Gsig( ) 

enc 
enc 

a)  Registration  of  access  policy:  We  denote  the  data 
access  permissions  by  POLICYp,m,  which  indicates  the 
permissions that the patient p gives to the selected member of 
the medical staff m so that she can access a particular type or 
all  of  the  patient's  data.  For  example,  POLICYp,m  =  {body 
temperature, blood pressure}. 

By sending a Taccess transaction on the blockchain network 
that  contains  POLICYp,m,  the  patient  gives  the  desired 
permissions to the medical staff. As illustrated in protocol 2, 
this transaction is performed in the nodes of the blockchain, 
and it is checked the patient himself has sent the transaction, 
then  the  set  of  permissions  are  stored  on  the  blockchain 
ledger. 

The patient can send new Taccess transactions and change 
the  permissions  set  granted  to  the  medical  staff.  Also, 
Sending the empty set by the patient can revoke all access-
permissions set previously granted. 

sig ,message) 

sig = pkp sig then  

Protocol 2 Access Control Transaction 
1: procedure ACCESSTX(pkk
2:       s ← 0  
3:       (pkp sig || pkm sig || POLICYp,m ) = message  
4:       if pkk
5:                L[H(pkk
6: 
7:                s ← 1    
8:        end if  
9:        return s  
10: end procedure 

     // L is Blockchain memory 

sig)] ← L[H(pkk

sig)] ∪ message    

Fig. 1. Our proposed system model 

network against DoS attack and single point of failure. It also 
ensures the availability and integrity of the patients' data. 

The  data  is  not  stored  on  the  blockchain,  but  only  the 
pointers to the data (hash of encrypted data) are stored on it 
to lighten the storage space of blockchain. Also, because the 
use  of  PoW  in  IoT  applications  is  not  appropriate,  we  use 
PBFT for consensus operations. 

E.  Off-chain Storage 

We  store  patients'  encrypted  data  on  off-chain  storage. 
For  the  implementation  of  off-chain  storage,  we  use  The 
InterPlanetary File System (IPFS) [21] that is a peer-to-peer 
distributed  ﬁle  system  that  seeks  to  connect  all  computing 
devices  with  the  same  system  of  ﬁles.  It  provides  a  high 
throughput  content-addressed  block  storage  model,  with 
content-addressed  hyperlinks.  IPFS  combines  a  distributed 
hashtable (or DHT), an incentivized block exchange, and a 
self-certifying namespace. IPFS has no single point of failure, 
and nodes do not need to trust each other [21]. In IPFS, we 
distribute the data and store them on different servers all over 
the world. Not using the central server is the reason for the 
advantage of IPFS over conventional cloud storage. 

V.  THE NETWORK PROTOCOL 

In  this  section,  we  describe  the  protocol  used  in  our 

system in detail.  

A.  Cryptographic Techniques Used in The System 

a)   Hash Function: We use SHA-256 [29] to implement 

the hash function (H indicates the hash function). 

b)   Symmetric  Key  Encryption:  Symmetric  algorithm 
uses the same key for encryption of plaintext and decryption 
of ciphertext. We use AES [30] to implement the symmetric 
key encryption (Genc indicates generating algorithm). 

c)   Digital Signature Scheme: Digital signature is added 
to 
the 
the  data 
implementation of the digital signature, we use ECDSA with 
a secp256k1 curve [31] (Gsig indicates generating algorithm). 

for  authentication  purposes.  For 

Medical staffblockchainPatientWearable IoT devices and smartphoneOff-chain StorageData+PoliciesData 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Model Name 

Property 

Access control 

Blockchain-Based 

Privacy Preserving 

IPFS Off-chain storage 

TABLE I.  

COMPARISON OF DIFFERENT EXISTING SYSTEMS 

Yang[33] 

Xia-I[34] 

Xia-II[35] 

Peterson[36] 

Zang[37] 

A.Zhang[38] 

Our Proposed Model 

✓ 

× 

✓ 

× 

✓ 

✓ 

✓ 

× 

✓ 

✓ 

✓ 

× 

✓ 

✓ 

✓ 

× 

✓ 

× 

✓ 

× 

✓ 

✓ 

✓ 

× 

✓ 

✓ 

✓ 

✓ 

b)  Data storage and retrieval: Tdata transaction is used 
to  store  patients'  encrypted  healthcare  data  on  off-chain 
storage  (IPFS)  or  access  stored  data  and  receive  it.  The 
patient (to store and retrieve the data) and the medical staff 
(only to retrieve the data) can send the Tdata transaction to the 
blockchain network. 

If the Tdata transaction (by the patient or the medical staff) 
is sent to the network, the nodes in the blockchain first check 
with  the  following  protocol  (protocol3)  whether  they  have 
access permissions or not? 

instruction cause to send Off-blockchain network message in 
off-chain storage for storing or retrieving data. 

With  the  above  protocols,  the  patient  can  easily  upload 
the  encrypted  healthcare  data  in  the  network.  The  chosen 
members of the medical staff can also receive the encrypted 
data if there is a permission, and then with the skp,m 
enc that 
they  have  received  before  (in protocol 1),  they  can decrypt 
encrypted data and access the original healthcare data. 

VI.  SECURITY AND PRIVACY ANALYSIS 

sig ,T)       //T=type of data 

Protocol 3 Blockchain Permissions Checking  
1: procedure POLICYCHECK(pkk
2:          s ← 0  
3:          if L[H(pkk
sig)] ≠ ∅ then  
4:                 (pkp sig || pkm sig || POLICYp,m )← L[H(pkk
5:         
sig or  
6: 
7:        
      end if  
8:  
end if  
9: 
return s  
10:  
11: end procedure 

sig=pkp
(pkk

      if pkk

  s ← 1 

sig=pkm

sig and T ∈ POLICYp,m) then 

sig)]  

In 

investigate 

this  section,  we  discuss  and 

the 
performance  of  our  proposed  protocol  in  terms  of  security 
and privacy. For security designing in any model, there are 
exist  three  main  security  requirements  that  need  to  be 
addressed: Conﬁdentiality, Integrity, and Availability, known 
as  CIA  [32].  Conﬁdentiality  makes  sure  that  the  system's 
messages should be read by only authorized users who can 
access  the  system.  The  data  integrity  is  responsible  for 
making sure that no one without permission can change the 
stored data, and the availability of the data means that when 
users  needed  to  the  data,  it  is  available  to  them.  Now,  we 
summarize the aforementioned primary security requirement 
evaluation in Table II. 

      Now,  after  checking  the  access  permissions  and  the 
transaction sender's approval, he or she can store or retrieve 
patients'  encrypted  healthcare  data  with  the  following 
protocol. 

sig ,message) 

sig , T)=True then  

Protocol 4 Data Transaction 
1: procedure DATATX(pkk
2:          (C || T || RW) = message   
3:          // C=encrypted data , T=type of data  
4:          //RW=read data(=1) or write data(=0) 
5:          if POLICYCHECK(pkk
6:                    (pkp sig || pkm sig || POLICYp,m ) ← L[H(pkk
7:                    if RW = 0 then           
8:                    
9:                     
10: 
11:  
12:  
13:  
14:         end if  
15: 
return ∅ 
16: end procedure 

 L[pkk
 (IPFS) ds[H(C)] ← C  
 return H(C)   

(IPFS) return ds[H(C)]  

   else if C ∈ L[pkk

sig || T] ← L[pkk

sig || T] ∪ H(C)  

sig || T] then  

          end if  

sig)] 

Note that we used IPFS shorthand notation in lines 9 and 
12  of  Protocol  4  for  accessing  the  off-chain  storage.  IPFS 

TABLE II.  

SECURITY REQUIREMENT EVALUATION 

Requirement 
Conﬁdentiality  Achieved by using symmetric key encryption. 

Model Solution 

Integrity 

Availability 

Hashing of data blocks in blockchain is employed to 
achieve integrity. 
Achieved by limiting acceptable transactions in the 
network. 

Authorization  Using digital signature to achieve authorization. 

In  our  model,  data  ownership  is  emphasized  for 
preserving privacy. That means only the patients (users) can 
control their data. The decentralized nature of the blockchain 
technology and using digital-signature to sign transactions in 
the  network  ensure  that  an  adversary  cannot  be  able  to 
infiltrate the system as a user. Because gaining control over 
the  majority  of  the  network’s  resources  (at  least  51%),  or 
forging  digital-signature  is  almost  impossible  for  the 
adversary. Also, the model ensures other privacy-preserving 
parameters that we previously mentioned (in section III) like, 
Data  Transparency  and  Auditability.  Fine-grained  access 
control  is  satisfied  by  storing  access-control  policies  on  a 
blockchain  ledger,  where  only  the  patient  can  change  or 
revoke them. 

In  Table  I,  we  have  made  a  comparison  between  our 
proposed model and other existing systems. We considered a 
few attacks and analyzed the resilience of our model against 
each of them in Table III. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
    
 
 
 
    
     
 
    
 
 
 
TABLE III.  

SECURITY ANALYSIS AGAINST ATTACKS

Attack 

Definition 

Defence 

Resilience 

Denial  of  Service 
(DOS) Attack 

Attacker  generates  a  large  number  of 
transactions  to  increase  trafﬁc  in  the 
network and disrupt the blockchain. 

Only two types of transactions can be sent in the network. Also, each 

node can send a limited number of transactions, and the blockchain 

network will reject the rest of the user's transactions after receiving a 

few messages from a specific node. 

Modification 
Attack 

Attacker  modifies  or removes  the  stored 
patients'  data  (like  access  policies  and 
hash) on the blockchain ledger. 

Blockchain uses an immutable ledger. 

Public blockchain 
Modification 

Attacker  advertises  a  false  ledger  of 
blocks and makes it as the longest ledger. 

We use the private type of blockchain, so the nodes are from outside 
the organization cannot work as miners to create a malicious block. 

Storage Attack 

Attacker wants to remove, change, or add 
data in the Off-chain storage. 

On blockchain ledger exist a hash of the encrypted data stored in the 
Off-chain  storage;  therefore,  changes  in  the  data  can  easily  be 
detected. 

Appending 
Attack 

Attacker  compromises  a  miner  and 
generates blocks with fake transactions to 
create a false reputation. 

Due to the usage of private blockchain, so the users cannot generate a 
fake  block,  whereas  miners  in  the  blockchain  must  verify  any 
transaction. 

High 

High 

High 

High 

High 

51% Attack 

Attacker  controls  more  than  51%  of 
miners  and  tries  to  compromise  the 
consensus algorithm and generate a fake 
block. 

The  probability  of  occurrence  of  this  attack  is  very  low  due  to  the 
usage of private blockchain and PBFT method for consensus. 

High 

Distributed  DOS 
(DDOS) Attack 

This is a distributed version of the Denial 
of Service (DOS) Attack. 

A valid node can send a limited number of transactions in the network. 
After the blockchain network receives a transaction, miners check that 
received transaction has produced by a valid node then accept it. 

Moderate 

VII.  CONCLUSION 

Patients'  healthcare  data  are  privacy-sensitive  and 
security-sensitive, and for managing them, we should not 
trust  in  the  third-parties,  where  they  are  vulnerable  to 
attacks  and  abuse.  In  this  work,  we  proposed  a  novel 
platform  based  on  the  Internet  of  Things  (IoT)  and 
blockchain  technology,  motivated  by  the  privacy  and 
security challenges of patients' healthcare data in e-health. 
Our proposed platform enables patients to have ownership 
and  full  control  over  their  sensitive  healthcare  data 
collected  by  their  IoT  wearable  devices.  This  ownership 
and  complete  control  over  patients'  data  are  satisfied  by 
storing  access  control  policies  in  a  blockchain  ledger  by 
patients  to  specify  who  from  medical  staff  can  access 
patients'  data.  In  this  platform,  we  use  off-blockchain 
storage to lightening the blockchain storage. Also, we use 
a suitable consensus method in the blockchain network due 
to the resource constraint factor of IoT. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

The authors are thankful to Mr. Mohammad Doost and 
Mr.  Mohammadhadi  Ahmadiashtiyani  for  consulting  and 
lengthy discussions on many of the ideas used in this paper. 

REFERENCES 
[1]  Statista, "Internet of Things (IoT) connected devices installed base 
[Online].  Available: 
to 

worldwide 
https://www.statista.com/statistics/471264/iot-number-of 
connected-devices-worldwide/ 

2025. 

2015 

from 

[2]  S. M. R. Islam, D. Kwak, M. H. Kabir, M. Hossain and K.-S. Kwak, 
"The Internet of Things for Health Care: A Comprehensive Survey," 
IEEE Access, vol. 3, pp. 678 - 708, June 2015. 

[3]  K. Abouelmehdi, A. Beni-Hessane and H. Khaloufi, "Big healthcare 
data  preserving  security  and  privacy,"  Journal  of  Big  Data, 
December 2018. 

[4]  Latanya  Sweeney.  k-anonymity:  A  model  for  protecting  privacy. 
International  Journal  of  Uncertainty,  Fuzziness  and  Knowledge-
Based Systems, 10(05):557–570, 2002. 

[5]  Arvind Narayanan and Vitaly Shmatikov. How to break anonymity 
of the netﬂix prize dataset. arXiv preprint cs/0610105, 2006. 
[6]  Cynthia Dwork. Differential privacy. In  Automata, languages and 

programming, pages 1–12. Springer, 2006. 

[7]  Y.-A.  d.  Montjoye,  E.  Shmueli,  S.  S.  Wang  and  A.  S.  Pentland 
"Protecting the Privacy of Metadata through SafeAnswers,"  PLOS 
ONE vol. 9, July 2014. 

[8]  A.Sahai  and  B.Waters,  ‘‘Fuzzy  identity-based  encryption,’’  in 
Proc.Annu.  Int.  Conf.  Theory  Appl.  Cryptograph.  Techn.  Berlin, 
Germany: Springer, 2005, pp. 457–473. 
J. Zhang, X. A. Wang, and J. Ma, ‘‘Data owner based attribute based 
encryption,’’  in  Proc.  Int.  Conf.  Intell.  Netw.  Collaborative  Syst. 
(INCOS), Sep. 2015, pp. 144–148. 

[9] 

[10]  Craig Gentry. Fully homomorphic encryption using ideal lattices. In 

STOC, volume 9, pages 169–178, 2009. 

[11]  Satoshi Nakamoto. Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system. 

Consulted, 1(2012):28, 2008. 

[12]  A.  Dorri,  S.  S.  Kanhere,  R.  Jurdak  and  P.  Gauravaram,  "LSB:  A 
Lightweight  Scalable  BlockChain  for  IoT  Security  and  Privacy, 
arXiv:1712.02969 , Dec 2017. 

[13]  A. Kosba, A. Miller, E. Shi, Z. Wen and C. Papamanthou, "Hawk: 
The  Blockchain  Model  of  Cryptography  and  Privacy-Preserving 
Smar Contracts," in 2016 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy 
(SP), San Jose, CA, USA, August 2016. 

[14]  Blockchain  for  Financial  Services.  Accessed:  Mar.  25,  2018. 
[Online].  Available:  https://www.ibm.com/blockchain/ﬁnancial-
services 

[15]  A Decentralized Network for Internet of Things. Accessed: Mar. 25, 

2018. [Online]. Available: https://iotex.io 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[40]  J.  Zhang,  N.  Xue,  and  X.  Huang,  “A  secure  system  for  pervasive 
social  network-based  healthcare,”  IEEE  Access,  vol.  4,  pp.  9239–
9250, 2016. 

[41]  Kavousi,  Alireza,  J.  Mohajeri  and  M.  Salmasizadeh.  “Improved 
Secure  Efficient  Delegated  Private  Set  Intersection.”  2020  28th 
Iranian Conference on Electrical Engineering (ICEE) (2020): 1-6. 
[42]  A. Zhang and X. Lin, “Towards secure and privacy-preserving data 
sharing in e-health systems via consortium blockchain,” Journal of 
medical systems, vol. 42, no. 8, p. 140, 2018. 

[43]  Aghabagherloo, Alireza, Javad Mohajeri, Mahmoud Salmasizadeh, 
and  Mahmood  Mohassel  Feghhi.  "An  Efficient  Anonymous 
Authentication  Scheme  Using  Registration  List  in  VANETs."  In 
2020  28th  Iranian  Conference  on  Electrical  Engineering  (ICEE), 
pp. 1-5. IEEE, 2020. 

[16]  C. Fromknecht and D. Velicanu. (2014). A Decentralized Public Key 
[Online].  Available: 

Identity  Retention. 

Infrastructure  With 
https://eprint.iacr.org/2014/803.pdf 

[17]  Blockchain  for  Supply  Chain.  Accessed:  Mar.  25,  2018.  [Online]. 

Available: https://www.ibm.com/blockchain/supply-chain 

[18]  Proof of Existence. Accessed: Mar. 25, 2018. [Online]. Available: 

https://proofofexistence.com 

[19]  S. Wilkinson, T. Boshevski, J. Brandoff, and V. Buterin, ‘‘Storj a 
peerto-peer cloud storage network,’’ White Paper. Accessed: Mar. 
25, 2018. [Online]. Available: https://storj.io/storj.pdf 

[20]  P.  Labs.  (2018).  Filecoin:  A  Decentralized  Storage  Network. 

[Online]. Available: https://ﬁlecoin.io/ﬁlecoin.pdf 

[21]  J.  Benet.  (2014).  ‘‘IPFS-content  addressed,  versioned,  P2P  ﬁle 
system.’’ [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1407.3561 
[22]  Zyskind,  Guy,  and  Oz  Nathan.  "Decentralizing  privacy:  Using 
blockchain  to  protect  personal  data."  In 2015  IEEE  Security  and 
Privacy Workshops, pp. 180-184. IEEE, 2015. 

[23]  T.-T.  Kuo  and  L.  Ohno-Machado,  "ModelChain:  Decentralized 
Privacy Preserving Healthcare Predictive Modeling Framework on 
Private Blockchain Networks," arXiv:1802.01746, Feb 2018. 
[24]  Fan, Kai, Shangyang Wang, Yanhui Ren, Hui Li, and Yintang Yang. 
"Medblock:  Efficient  and  secure  medical  data  sharing  via 
blockchain." Journal of medical systems 42, no. 8 (2018): 136. 
[25]  X.  Yue,  H.  Wang,  D.  Jin,  M.  Li  and  W.  Jiang,  "Healthcare  Data 
Gateways: Found Healthcare Intelligence on Blockchain with Nove 
Privacy Risk Control," Journal of Medical Systems, 2016. 

[26]  Dwivedi,  Ashutosh  Dhar,  Gautam  Srivastava,  Shalini  Dhar,  and 
Rajani  Singh.  "A  decentralized  privacy-preserving  healthcare 
blockchain for IoT." Sensors 19, no. 2 (2019): 326. 

[27]  M. Castro, B. Liskov et al., “Practical byzantine fault tolerance,” in 

OSDI, vol. 99, 1999, pp. 173–186. 

[28]  M. S. Ali, M. Vecchio, M. Pincheira, K. Dolui, F. Antonelli and a. 
M.  H  Rehmani,  "Applications  of  Blockchains  in  the  Internet  of 
Things: A Comprehensive Survey," IEEE Communications Society, 
2018. 

[29]  Federal  Information  and  Processing  Standards.  FIPS  PUB  180-4 

Secure Hash Standard ( SHS ). (March), 2012. 

[30]  Daemen, Joan, and Vincent Rijmen. The design of Rijndael. Vol. 2. 

New York: Springer-verlag, 2002. 

[31]  Don  Johnson,  Alfred  Menezes,  and  Scott  Vanstone.  The  elliptic 
curve  digital  signature  algorithm  (ecdsa).  International  Journal  of 
Information Security, 1(1):36–63, 2001. 

[32]  N. Komninos, E. Philippou, and A. Pitsillides, “Survey in smart grid 
and smart home security: Issues, challenges and countermeasures,” 
IEEE  Communications  Surveys  &  Tutorials,  vol.  16,  no.  4,  pp. 
1933–1954, 2014. 

[33]  Y. Yang and M. Ma, “Conjunctive keyword search with designated 
tester and timing enabled proxy re-encryption function for e-health 
clouds,” IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security, 
vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 746–759, 2015. 

[34]  Q.  Xia,  E.  Sifah,  A.  Smahi,  S.  Amofa,  and  X.  Zhang, 
“Bbds:Blockchain-baseddatasharingforelectronic medical records in 
cloud environments,” Information, vol. 8, no. 2, p. 44, 2017. 
[35]  Doost,  M.,  Alireza  Kavousi,  J.  Mohajeri  and  M.  Salmasizadeh. 
“Analysis  and  Improvement  of  an  E-voting  System  Based  on 
Blockchain.”  2020  28th 
Iranian  Conference  on  Electrical 
Engineering (ICEE) (2020): 1-4. 

[36]  Q. Xia, E. B. Sifah, K. O. Asamoah, J. Gao, X. Du, and M. Guizani, 
“Medshare:  Trust-less  medical  data  sharing  among  cloud  service 
providers via blockchain,” IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp. 14757–14767, 
2017. 

[37]  Khalesi, Ali, Mahtab Mirmohseni, and Mohammad Ali Maddah-Ali. 
"The  Capacity  Region  of  Distributed  Multi-User  Secret  Sharing." 
arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.01568 (2021). 

[38]  K.  Peterson,  R.  Deeduvanu,  P.  Kanjamala,  and  K.  Boles,  “A 
blockchain-based  approach 
information  exchange 
networks,” in Proc. NIST Workshop Blockchain Healthcare, vol. 1, 
2016, pp. 1– 10. 

to  health 

[39]  Masiha,  Mohammad  Saeed,  Amin  Gohari,  Mohammad  Hossein 
Yassaee, and Mohammad Reza Aref. "Learning under Distribution 
Mismatch 
arXiv  preprint 
arXiv:2102.05695 (2021). 

and  Model  Misspecification." 

 
 
