TOKEN-BASED INSURANCE SOLUTIONS ON BLOCKCHAIN 

           Simon, Cousaert,    

           Nikhil, Vadgama,  

                Jiahua, Xu, 

                UCL CBT,   

                 UCL CBT,  

    UCL CBT, 

 simon.cousaert@outlook.com     nikhil.vadgama@ucl.ac.uk        jiahua.xu@ucl.ac.uk 

Abstract 

With the rising demand for protection against new risks such as loss of digital assets, novel 

insurance services and products emerge. In particular, token-based insurance solutions on 

blockchain transform the insurance business by providing cover for new risks and 

streamlined, (semi-)automated underwriting and claim processes. In the chapter, we present a 

general framework of token-based insurance solutions, delegating their fundamental building 

blocks that include core roles, main tokens and assets, as well as key processes and 

operations. We describe three major token-based insurance solutions in the market and 

compare them in terms of native token functionality, tokenized cover types, claim assessment 

process and capital model. Based on the discussion on the general framework and concrete 

examples of token-based insurance solutions, we summarize their advantages and point out 

their drawbacks. We conclude that despite being at a nascent stage, the token-based insurance 

space bears the promise to unseat the incumbent players with increasingly more action taking 

place and more use cases being explored. 

Keywords: Insurance; Decentralized finance; Token economy 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction 

Insurance plays a vital role in dealing with risks and uncertainties in society. It provides us 
with financial compensation when we suffer from losses caused by various unfortunate 
events: from health impairment to job loss, from robbery to traffic accidents. 

As early as two thousand years ago, Indian, Chinese and Babylonian traders practiced 
methods of pooling risk (Dewan, 2008; Vaughan, 1996). For example, Chinese seafaring 
merchants pooled together their goods into a collective fund that would pay out if there was 
any damage to any of the members’ ships (CB Insights, 2021). Today, the global insurance 
industry stands at taking in approximately 6 trillion USD of premiums. To put this number 
into context, this industry is larger than the overall economy of countries such as Germany 
and Japan. The largest market segment has become the non-life insurance segment, 
overtaking life insurance in 2017 (Statista, 2020). 

Despite the long history of insurance in society, the industry is required to constantly evolve 
to tackle, among other things, 

1.  the emergence of new risks, especially due to new technology development, such as 

cyber security breaches; 

2.  the transformation of existing risks, such as increasingly recurring natural 

catastrophes due to climate change; 

3.  shifts in consumer needs, such as rapid access to customized, on-demand insurance, 

quick claim management, as well as transparency in the insurance processes; 

4.  continuous advancement in techniques applied in insurance fraud. 

Against this backdrop, there is a dire need for solutions that allow insurance policies to be 
flexibly designable, insurance holder and claim data to be easily manageable, and insurance 
processes to be openly auditable. Bearing the nature of programmability, traceability and 
transparency, token-based insurance solutions built with blockchains are on the rise. In 
particular, the plethora of token models underpinned by smart contracts enables easy 
configuration of various products and services, as well as cost-efficient record-keeping of 
miscellaneous transactions and activities within the insurance business. 

Within the use case of blockchain as an infrastructure, a large number of start-ups, as well as 
traditional players, are innovating with the technology. Projects that utilize blockchain as an 
infrastructure range from those still at a proof-of-concept phase to those that have gone into 
production. As an example of a start-up project,  Claimshare (2021) combats double payouts 
for the same incident at different insurers, an issue that affects 5-10% of insurers payouts. 
This project has won awards and partnered with Intel and KPMG (CB Insights, 2021). State 
Farm, the largest auto insurer in the US and the USAA (United Services Automobile 
Association) are using blockchain to settle subrogation claims between themselves in the 
property and casualty insurance sector. This system was announced as being in production in 
January 2021, helping automate and secure a previously manual process, thereby speeding up 
approximately 75,000 claims exchanged between these two companies (StateFarm, 2021). 
Finally, industry consortia have also been set up, such as B3i (the Blockchain Insurance 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Industry Initiative), incorporated in 2018 and owned by 21 global insurance participants—
including Allianz, AXA, Generali, Zurich, Swiss Re—with over 40 companies as 
shareholders, customers, and community members. With the vision for “better insurance 
enabled by frictionless risk transfer” (B3i, 2021a), B3i is creating insurance products on the 
blockchain and has released its first application that manages catastrophe excess of loss with 
a pipeline of new features expected to be added (B3i, 2021b). 

The focus of this chapter is the area of novel token-based business models on blockchain. We 
explore how the insurance business can transform through the use of distributed ledger 
technology and tokenization. We first lay out the preliminaries of token-based insurance 
solutions; we then compare in detail three insurance protocols on blockchain, namely Nexus 
Mutual, Etherisc and inSure; this is followed by a discussion on further challenges faced by 
token-based insurance solutions; we conclude the chapter with an outlook of the insurance 
industry in the token economy. 

Preliminaries of Token-based Insurance Solutions 

In this section, we dissect major components of token-based insurance solutions—including 
core roles, main tokens and assets, key processes and operations—and discuss how those 
components are associated with each other. Figure 1 shows a stylized illustration of a general 
token-based insurance solution.

Figure 1: Different actors and actions of a stylized token-based insurance solution 

Roles 

The token-based insurance model requires many actors, each of which has a vital role to play 
in the ecosystem. The main roles in this interplay include the insureds, the insurers, the 

Pay PremiumInsuredClaim CoverageReinsurersUnderwritersAssess RiskReceive InsuranceOracleProvideInformationGovernance tokenholdersGovern ProtocolClaimassessorsAssessClaimsProvideCapitalEarnReturnsFile ClaimGovernancePricingCapital management PayoutCover purchase 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
underwriters, the reinsurers, the claim assessors and, finally, a decentralized autonomous 
organization (DAO) responsible for governance. 

Insureds 
Insureds are protection seekers, the target consumers of insurance products and services. 
They pay premiums—in the form of some cryptocurrency designated by the insurance 
platform (see section “Payment Token” for further details)—to alleviate the potential 
negative impact on future hazards. The insureds are financially compensated—again in the 
form of some cryptocurrency—if the hazard occurs. 

Insurer 
The insurer's role is typically played by the insurance protocol, which consists of smart 
contracts that can hold premiums paid in tokens and redistribute funds to insureds with 
approved claims. For a mutual insurance protocol, insureds are simultaneously owners of the 
protocol and are entitled to the protocols’ premium surplus after claim payout deductions. 

Underwriters 
Underwriters assess risk levels of uncertain events. If empirical data on the occurrences of a 
risk event is available, conventional actuarial models are applicable for risk evaluation. This 
computation can be performed automatically by the protocol itself. In this case, the same 
party can undertake the insuring and underwriting roles: the protocol. 

Absent historical statistics, underwriting can be achieved through the wisdom of the crowd. 
In this case, a group of platform users can express their view on the riskiness of an event by 
staking their tokens with a quantity of their choice. Should the risk event occur, their stake 
will be contributed to the cover; otherwise, the users will be awarded, proportionate to their 
stake, with part of the protocol’s premium income. 

Reinsurer 
Absent reinsurers, an insurance protocol’s payout capacity is limited to premiums received. 
Reinsurance increases an insurance protocol’s solvency through an additional layer of 
financial guarantee. 

In the decentralized space, the role of the reinsurer is typically assumed by risk-taking 
investors, who likely share part of the protocol’s profit as a form of reinsurance premium, 
but, expectedly in rare cases, can also suffer losses (Karpischek et al., 2016). 

In that sense, users who stake tokens on risk events can also be deemed to be reinsurers to a 
certain extent. Indeed, they inject additional capital to the insurance payout pool, and suffer 
loss when a certain level of risk events is exceeded but earn returns otherwise. With the 
contribution of their funds, they reduce the capital required by the other contributors, thereby 
reducing the insurer's risk exposure. 

Claim Assessors 
For certain insured risks, a smart contract can automatically assess the legitimacy of claims 
by reading data feeds provided by oracles (Braun, Haeusle, et al., 2021). It is possible to 
distinguish between centralized oracles and decentralized oracles. Centralized oracles are 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
controlled by a limited number of entities. Data can be fed in through manually emitted 
transactions or automatically through cross-platform protocols such as Chainlink (2021). 
Decentralized oracles are typically operated through on-chain protocols, such as price oracles 
provided by decentralized exchanges with automated market-making protocols (Xu et al., 
2021). 

For claims that are difficult to evaluate automatically, the assessors can be a group of users 
who express their approval or objection towards the claim with the voting power 
proportionate to their token holding (usually designated governance tokens). With the voting 
method, a well-designed incentive and penalty scheme must be in place to encourage honest 
opinion and deter malicious vote manipulation (Braun, Häusle, et al., 2021). 

Decentralized Autonomous Organizations 
Many new token-based insurance solutions have decentralized autonomous organizations 
(DAO) as a key component in governing the protocols. DAO is a collective noun referring to 
everyone eligible to participate in a protocol’s governance. Eligibility is often represented by 
the holding of governance tokens. 

The decentralized nature of tokens means that no single entity controls the mechanics and 
economics behind a token. Still, those decisions are made by a community organized around 
the set of rules imposed by the token (Cointelegraph, 2021). 

DAOs operate using smart contracts that establish the rules. People with a stake in the DAO 
are often rewarded with voting rights, frequently in the form of a governance token. Thus, a 
governance token holder often has a say in how a DAO-governed protocol should change 
elements like protocol parameters, budgeting, and treasury expenditures. In its ultimate form, 
a change to the DAO is proposed by a community member and voted upon by the governance 
token holders, after which the proposal gets implemented or not. A DAO can consist of the 
insurers, insureds, underwriters, claim assessors, and governance token holders. 

Assets and Tokens 

Different from workflows of traditional insurance, token-based insurance solutions are 
underpinned by a multitude of digital assets and tokens. A permissionless and public 
blockchain allows anyone to transact and verify transactions with these tokens. As discussed 
further in this chapter, the token-economics (or “tokenomics”) define the utility of each token 
and the ways the token can be used to incentivize positive behavior in the network. 

Payment Token 
Most protocols have a designated token for premium payments. The designated premium 
token can be the same as the denominating currency of potential payout (e.g. SURE in 
InsurToken). If they differ, the insureds can often purchase cover in a desired payout 
currency, usually a widely-adopted cryptocurrency such as ETH or DAI (e.g. Nexus Mutual). 
For user-friendliness, some protocols (e.g. Etherisc) also allow cover to be purchased directly 
in fiat currency (Braun, Haeusle, et al., 2021).  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
While different currencies can be accepted, some protocols (e.g. Nexus Mutual) convert all 
payments in the back-end into a designated token for the ease of accounting, mostly via a 
decentralized exchange (BraveNewDeFi, 2021). 

Insurance Token 
An insurance token represents a certificate of cover obtained by the insured in return for the 
premium payment. The insurable risk covered by a policy is usually non-transferable, and 
hence naturally, undividable. Therefore, an insurance policy can be represented by a non-
fungible token, corresponding to the exact risk covered by the policy. 

However, not every insurance protocol employs insurance tokens. Some protocols rely on 
immutable on-chain transaction records as proof of cover (such as Nexus Mutual), while 
others implement hybrid bookkeeping systems with a central database to record insurance 
purchases. 

Despite the indivisibility of insurable risk, the beneficiaryship of a policy may be 
fractionalized and transferred. As such, a tokenized insurance policy would be easily tradable 
on a blockchain-based secondary market (e.g. fidentiaX, 2021). 

Governance Token 
In line with decentralization principles, blockchain-based insurance protocols typically 
employ governance tokens for a distributed sovereignty. First and foremost, governance 
token holders have voting rights on issues related to protocol-level rules, such as updating the 
pricing scheme or adding a new insurable risk. Certain protocols also grant governance token 
holders the voting rights to approve or reject a claim. 

Governance tokens sometimes also represent ownership of the protocol, where token holders 
share the profit and loss of the protocol. This representation can be achieved by 
algorithmically setting the price of the tokens such that the market capitalization of the 
governance token corresponds with the total funds locked in with the insurance pool contracts 
(e.g. Nexus Mutual). 

Governance tokens are sometimes also used for payments, which automatically makes 
insureds governance token holders, thereby entitling them to a share of the protocol 
ownership that changes depending on premiums paid and insurance payouts received. Mutual 
insurance protocols often take this approach.  

Processes and Operations 

The workings of a specific solution are tied to its processes and operations. The unique 
selling proposition of a protocol is often embedded in the different use-cases that it offers to 
customers. This section seeks to generalize a set of processes and operations frequently 
observed in token-based insurance solutions. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cover Purchase 
Insureds can purchase cover against risks using tokens or currencies permitted by the 
protocol for premium payment (see section “Payment Token”). Insureds can customize the 
cover by specifying parameters such as the amount insured and coverage period. 

Depending on the protocol specifications, insurable risks may include: 

Financial risks Insurance can cover negative price movements of a crypto-asset below a 
certain reference price. When purchasing such a type of insurance along with the crypto-
asset, a user is buying the equivalent of a put option where the underlying asset's price is 
floored.  

Security risks Insurance can cover malicious attacks targeting protocols that are underpinned 
by smart contracts. This type of coverage can provide insurance against the situation where a 
hacker discovers and exploits a security loophole of a decentralized finance (DeFi) protocol, 
moving funds from the protocol’s smart contract to their address and causing losses on the 
side of protocol users. 

Off-chain hazards Insurance can cover unanticipated, unfortunate events such as flight 
delays. Oracles are needed to feed data of events that are external to the blockchain into the 
smart contract (Braun, Haeusle, et al., 2021). 

Pricing 
Depending on the protocol, premiums are set either actuarially using historical data or based 
on the community's collective view.  

In the case where users stake tokens to signal their belief on the risk level (see section 
“Underwriters”), the less risky a user believes a contingency to be, the more tokens the user is 
willing to stake.  A higher number of tokens staked in a risk pool reduces the cover price, 
which correspondingly reflects a lower risk level. 

In short, pricing of an insurance cover pivots on underwriters’ work: all other things equal, 
the riskier the underwriting result of an event shows, the higher the premium. In addition, the 
price of a particular insurance cover is also positively correlated with the total amount insured 
and the coverage period. 

Payout 
Insurance payouts can either be triggered automatically or processed manually through 
individually filed claims.  

In the former case, once information on the occurrence of the events is fed into the insurance 
smart contract, the payout function is activated, and the affected insureds are immediately 
compensated. For off-chain risk events, the provision of external data is done by oracles. 

In the latter case, the legitimacy of a claim is determined with human judgement by the 
protocol team or a group of claim assessors and through a poll with all eligible protocol 
participants.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Capital Management 
Insurance protocols can have a capital model that determines the minimum capital to be held, 
a metric often set to similar standards as EIOPA’s Solvency II (EIOPA, 2021), which ensures 
a confidence level of 99.5% in solvency over one year.  

Generally, there are two types of cash flows. First, insureds purchase coverage by paying a 
premium to a capital pool and the capital pool pays customers in case there is an accepted 
claim. Secondly, the funds in the capital pool can be invested to generate returns 
(BraveNewDeFi, 2021). 

In the unlikely event that the reserves in the capital pool are completely depleted, capital from 
other sources must be employed. The governance token holders would likely make this 
decision. Out of the six biggest insurance protocols listed on Coinmarketcap (2021), there 
have not yet been any known instances of insolvency and no concrete procedure to handle 
such a situation has been documented. 

Governance 
A governance token holder has a say in how to shape the protocol. In its ultimate form, a 
change to the protocol is proposed by a community member and voted upon by governance 
token holders. A decision is never made by only a select group of developers but rather by the 
whole community that holds voting rights. Governance token holders can take part in 
underwriting, assessing and deciding on larger changes to the entire insurance protocol. 

Comparison of Existing Decentralized Insurance Protocols 

This section compares three major insurance protocols by market capitalization: Nexus 
Mutual, Etherisc and inSure (Table 1). 

Protocol 

Nexus 
Mutual 

Native 
token 

NXM 

Market cap 
(million USD) 

815.8 

inSure 

SURE 

108.4 

Native token functionality 

Tokenized 
cover 

Claim 
assessment 

Capital model 

-  Governance 
-  Cover purchase 
-  Claim assessment  

-  Governance 
-  Cover purchase 
-  Claim assessment 

No 

Yes, SURE 
token itself 

Decentralized, 
through NXM 
holders 

Based on EIOPA 
Solvency II, 99.5% 
confidence 

Based on EIOPA 
Solvency II, 99.9% 
confidence 

Centralized and 
decentralized, 
through 
auditing 
companies and 
SURE holders 

Etherisc 

DIP 

25.0 

-  Reward risk taking 
-  Monetizing services 

Yes, via Risk 
Pool tokens 

Depends on 
product 

Based on EIOPA 
Solvency II, 99.99% 
confidence 

Table 1: Comparison between major token-based insurance solutions. Market cap equals native token price 
times its circulating supply, data retrieved on 31 August 2021 from https://coinmarketcap.com/. 

The dominant market position of these protocols indicates a certain level of industry 
recognition. With a heterogeneous pool of actions, these protocols each have their unique 
take on a generalized framework.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nexus Mutual 

Nexus Mutual is a decentralized insurance protocol. The platform token, NXM, has several 
functionalities, including governance, the ability to purchase cover and the ability to vote on 
claims. The first version of the application went live on the Ethereum mainnet in May 2019. 
As of August 2021, the protocol has an active cover amount of over 500 million USD 
(Richard Chen, 2021). 

Customers of Nexus Mutual can insure themselves against three main types of risks: the risk 
of a yield token losing its peg (“yield token cover”), the risk of protocol failures (“protocol 
cover”) and the risk of hacks or halted withdrawals on exchanges or custodial wallets 
(“custody cover”). Customers can pay in ETH or DAI to buy a cover, which gets 
automatically converted to NXM by the smart contracts. Bought covers are not tokenized but 
kept by a central system. 

If a customer suffers a loss and believes this loss qualifies for the bought cover, they can file 
a claim. The cost of filing a claim is integrated into the initial amount paid for the cover. 
After the claim is correctly filed, the outcome is determined by “claim assessors”, NXM 
holders who stake a portion of their NXM. Assessors acting in good faith are rewarded. 
Those who act fraudulently can be punished by having part of their staked NXM burned.  
With the help of “Incentivai”, a machine learning algorithm that checks user behavior, the 
advisory board of Nexus Mutual determines whether or not an act is “fraudulent” (Nexus 
Mutual, 2021). 

A final functionality of the NXM token is its use in a process called “risk assessment”. “Risk 
Assessors” can stake NXM in a specific cover of which they believe the risk of an eventual 
payout is small. This extra capital decreases the premium for that specific cover. Through 
staking, Risk Assessors earn proportional rewards in NXM equivalent to 50% of the cover 
premium paid by insureds. This way of incentivizing investors allows the Nexus Mutual 
protocol to attract more capital. In the event of a payout, the Risk Assessor loses some or all 
of their deposit. 

The protocol capital requirements are determined by a capital model that borrows heavily 
from EIOPA’s Solvency II (Karp & Melbardis, 2017). Depending on the reserves in the 
capital pool and the required funds, the price of NXM is determined, which affects the whole 
ecosystem. 

Etherisc 

Etherisc is a protocol that allows anyone to create their insurance products by providing 
common infrastructure, product templates and insurance license-as-a-service. At the moment, 
two insurance products have been launched: Crop Insurance and Flight Delay Insurance. 
Other applications such as Hurricane Protection and Crypto Wallet Insurance are either in the 
design or prototype phase (Etherisc, 2021).  

The platform token, DIP, is a core element in the overarching protocol and incentivizes and 
rewards platform users for bringing risk to the network and building and maintaining 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
products. Specifically, the token is used to buy insurance products, reward users for updating 
risk models (similar to the Risk Assessors in Nexus Mutual), reward those that provide 
reliable data/oracles, and reward a multitude of other stakeholders. Next to the platform 
token, Etherisc introduces Risk Pool Tokens, the tokenized versions of insurance products, 
allowing a token marketplace where participants can purchase and redeem tokenized covers. 

The combination of a “risk pool” and a “reinsurance pool” ensure that long-tail events are 
covered and that there is always enough capital to pay claims. The required capital is also 
calculated based on the EIOPA Solvency II model, but Etherisc imposes a 99.99% 
confidence level instead of 99.5%.  

inSure 

inSure is a decentralized insurance protocol that focuses on protecting traders’ portfolios 
against scams, devaluations and stolen funds. The company launched its first features in 2019 
and is currently fully operational and progressing on making the assessment and payment 
processes fully automated.  The platform token, SURE, has multiple functionalities, including 
governance, claim assessments and the ability to purchase cover. 

Customers of inSure buy cover by buying SURE tokens. This model differs from the Nexus 
Mutual cover, where one buys specific covers with the NXM token. SURE tokens are the 
cover, which means they are transferable. The insured buys a certain number of SURE tokens 
to insure oneself corresponding with a specific inSurance plan (inSure, 2021a). After 
acquiring and holding SURE tokens for seven days in their wallet, the insured is covered 
against multiple risks up to a certain level, depending on the insurance plan. 

If a customer’s portfolio is affected by a scam, devaluation or stolen funds, they can file a 
claim. That claim is voted upon by auditing companies and SURE holders if there is a 
challenge to the consensus of the auditing companies.  It is not clear whether these parties are 
incentivized for correct behavior. 

As of August 2021, there remains a lack of publicly available documentation on inSure’s 
capital model. There is a capital pool and a “surplus pool”. The capital pool’s goal is to 
support business development. The surplus pool accrues money by collecting premiums paid 
by customers and is intended to cover all claims. When the surplus pool cannot cover all 
claims, the capital pool will be used to cover the shortfall.  

Other Insurance-related Solutions on Blockchain 

Besides the peer-to-peer coverage applications listed in the section, other protocols have a 
relation to the insurance industry, but are not deemed to be insurance specific in the 
conventional sense. Example applications are insurance marketplaces, financial markets that 
allow hedging positions and protocols offering protection to borrowers against liquidation of 
collateral. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
fidentiaX 

fidentiaX is a marketplace for life insurance trading on blockchain. The company raised 
funds through an ICO (initial coin offering) in late 2017, where the platform’s native FDX 
were distributed to investors in exchange for ETH.  

On fidentiaX, insureds list their life insurance policy that interested buyers can bid for. The 
winning buyer pays the insured a lump sum while the insured transfers the beneficiaryship of 
the policy. After the transaction, the buyer takes over the premium payment and is entitled to 
receive the maturity benefit of the insurance policy (Braun et al., 2020). 

The platform is still in the prototype phase. As per the design, three types of tokens are 
intended to be employed on the platform: (1) ERC-20 to represent insurance policies (2) FDX 
for bidding and (3) stablecoin for payment.  

Opyn 

Options in financial markets can be utilized for multiple purposes, but in the context of 
insurance they function as instruments that can hedge risk. Opyn is a DeFi option and 
insurance platform that provides protection and hedging instruments for DeFi deposits and 
ETH risk. The first version of the Opyn protocol offered protection for USDC and DAI 
deposits on Compound (a decentralized lending platform). The current second version of the 
Opyn protocol allows anyone to buy, sell and create options on any ERC20 asset. These 
options are cash-settled, European options. Opyn option products can be created with 
oTokens, an ERC20 compatible contract that represents the option product. The protocol 
states that over 1,000 million USD notional volume of options have been traded with over 
20,000 trades. Its core developers and investors currently govern the platform. 

Backd 

Backd provides assurance to users of lending protocols such as Compound and Aave. Backd 
describes itself as “reactive liquidity”, preventing undercollateralized loans from becoming 
liquidated. Backd aims to increase the capital efficiency of asset borrowing in DeFi, where 
borrowers do not need to exceedingly overcollateralize their loan position in fear of 
automatically triggered liquidation. Instead, borrowers delegate fund management to the 
Backd protocol, which tops up collateral whenever a loan position is on the verge of being 
liquidated, while using the excess capital for yield farming, an investment activity in DeFi. 

Discussion 

Still, in its infancy, the token-based insurance space is very early within its evolution. While 
the blockchain industry is witnessing a huge wave of interest due to the booming DeFi 
industry,  DeFi projects are currently dominated by lending protocols and decentralized 
exchanges. 

Nexus Mutual, with a total value locked (TVL)—the quantity of tokens secured in the DeFi 
application’s smart contracts—of half a billion USD as of August 2021 (DefiLlama, 2021), 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
prides itself as the largest token-based insurance project but ranks only 24th of all DeFi 
projects by TVL. 

Despite the immaturity of the token-based insurance sector and the lack of attention received 
relative to other DeFi areas, many benefits can already be seen. Indeed, some challenges 
remain unsolved and have not been tested. In this section, we briefly explore these. 

Benefits 

Efficient Risk Transfer 
Conventionally, systemic risks can be transferred to the capital market: for instance, exposure 
to catastrophe risk can be packaged and sold in the form of cat bonds. Similarly, risks can be 
easily passed on to the capital market with tokenization and thus render moot capital 
requirements on the insurer’s side. By shifting the risk completely onto the capital markets, 
blockchain-based insurance protocols can act solely as a risk bundling and dividing machine, 
thus evading regulation applied by conventional insurance companies. 

Tokenization also makes secondary sales easier. If a purchased cover is tokenized, customers 
can create a secondary market for insurances. In that case, buying and selling commonly 
issued covers can be handled outside of a specific ecosystem. A centralized layer on top of 
issuing the covers complicates the selling and transferring of insurance for those who want to 
monetize their policy or simply move their funds or activities to another address. Tokenizing 
purchased cover would address these issues. Fungible tokens can be used to set up a 
secondary market on a decentralized exchange such as Uniswap for people to trade their 
purchased cover. If the cover is highly personalized or unique, a non-fungible token will offer 
similar advantages, although a more specialized market will be needed.  

Transparency 
The fact that all aspects from the purchase of cover to claims and payout are on a blockchain 
means the entire insurance process is visible end-to-end. This transparency enables 
participants in the ecosystem to investigate for themselves whether a protocol is trustworthy. 
Indeed, the growth and success of a protocol depend on good behavior from its community 
concerning the entire underwriting and claims assessment processes—in stark contrast to 
traditional insurance products where this trajectory is opaque, which often leads to poor 
customer experience. Oracles are also utilized to provide relevant information for the 
assessment of claims. These oracles can also be decentralized in nature, meaning that there is 
further transparency in how information relevant to a claim is handled, where this 
information has come from and what relevant references have been taken against it. 

Security 
Security within a token-based insurance protocol is strengthened through several 
technological and systematic features. Starting with technological features, without 
discussing the security features of a blockchain system and smart contracts in detail—one of 
the main points is that the working code of these protocols is visible for anyone to audit. This 
transparency can help create a secure system whereby faults in a protocol are easily spotted 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and corrected. Such an environment also inspires trust in a protocol itself as users (who can 
read the code) are confident in the performance and behavior of the system. 

With respect to security in the sense of trusting the process of underwriting and claims 
management—the Decentralized Autonomous Organizations (DAO) that manage these 
protocols are composed of governance token holders who are able to vote on the management 
and direction of the protocol. This decentralized approach can help improve the ecosystem's 
security as the community is incentivized to act in the best interests of the protocol to support 
an increasing token price. A secure protocol features a good design with a strong incentive 
for correct reporting and a strong disincentive for fraudulent behavior. As such, whenever an 
incident occurs, and a customer files a claim, holders of the platform token can use their vote 
to decide whether that claim is justified and if that incident falls under the bought cover. 

The security of a protocol is dependent on the token design that creates functionalities to 
optimize the operational efficiency of the service. For example, the token can be used to 
incentivize correct behavior and disincentivize fraud, reward participants for the correct 
pricing of the insurance services, or reward people outside of the network to provide reliable 
data through oracles or manual processes. The set of rules of the platform token differentiates 
protocols from each other and means that these systems can generally be perceived as being 
more secure. 

Customization & Agility 
Tokens can have many functions programmed into them, which do not rely on single entity 
intermediaries for overseeing and maintaining those functions, as they are automatically 
enforced by the smart contracts which can be updated or enhanced through community 
governance processes. In the context of insurance protocols, tokens and smart contracts can 
be used to provide customization for cover, connecting insurers and insureds faster. As well 
as customization, there is a great deal of agility in how insurance protocols can deal with 
claims through their community governance systems, and indeed agility in the direction of 
the protocol itself. Insurance protocols operating as DAOs with governance tokens can 
upgrade themselves, altering the practices for underwriting and claims assessment if 
necessary—through invoking voting of governance token holders to pass decisions. This 
gives these new protocols agility in evolving and responding to changes in their markets in a 
way that traditional insurance players just cannot do. 

Challenges  

Lack of contingency plan for insolvency 
Existing protocols do not seem to have any contingency plan for insolvency in place. 
Although most protocols follow the Minimum Capital Requirements (MCR) standards from 
EIOPA’s Solvency II to a certain extent, there is simply not enough data for confident 
actuarial modelling of the risks insured.  According to the UK Financial Services 
Compensation Scheme (FSCS), there have been 38 insurance defaults within the traditional 
insurance sector since 1985 that the FSCS has been involved with (FSCS, 2021). In the UK, 
if an insurer becomes insolvent, the FSCS will cover up to 90% of an insured's claim (subject 
to certain limits and eligibility of the policy). In addition to protecting insureds through 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
government insurance schemes, an efficient reinsurance market enables traditional insurance 
players to diversify risks. Within the token-based insurance sector this reinsurance or 
government backed insurance does not exist and contingencies from protocols have not been 
elucidated.  

Low Competition and Participation 
One could argue that there is a monopoly player within this sector: Nexus Mutual stands as 
the largest player, with other projects not having seen many projects built on top of their 
protocols (e.g., Etherisc with only Crop Insurance and Flight Delay Insurance) or with little 
participation (e.g. inSure).  

Between March to August 2021, only ten insurance claims were raised on inSure (inSure, 
2021b). Out of these, only one was approved. The other nine were rejected due to not 
meeting policy requirements. Furthermore, the participation in voting was extremely low, 
with many claims not receiving any votes.  

These protocols are indeed new and evolving. In the case of Etherisc, many new insurance 
products have been designed and are awaiting licensing. In the case of inSure—their roadmap 
still includes several features to be built to increase participation in the protocol (running 
through to 2022).  

Fragile Incentive and Penalty Mechanism 
Just like insurance companies, the DAO exhibits a reluctance to approve claim requests. 
Understandably, since the DAO has the incentive, at least in the short run, to retain funds 
within the protocol whenever possible instead of disbursing them to cover an individual's 
loss. 

In the long run, one may argue that persistent reluctance to approve claims will result in 
diminishing attraction of the protocol to normal users, which will subsequently lead to a 
depreciation of protocol tokens and thus a devaluation of the DAO’s token holding. This 
negative consequence would discourage the DAO from blindly rejecting all incoming claims 
to ensure the user base, and hence the value of the protocol. Therefore, theoretically, at 
equilibrium, the DAO should exert sufficient discretion to scrutinize claims. On the one hand, 
opportunistic and fraudulent claims are screened out to ensure the profitability of the 
protocol. On the other hand, legitimate claims are getting compensated to ensure users’ 
welfare.  

Unfortunately, current insurance protocol users have exhibited a short-term orientation which 
the pseudonymous nature of blockchain applications may have exacerbated. Fraudulent 
behavior is also an issue from both claimants and voting members. Looking at inSure, several 
claims filed incorrect reference events that did not occur. On Nexus Mutual, there is at least 
one incident where an insured submitted a false claim and then subsequently voted on it 
themselves to approve it (Nexus Mutual, 2021). 

Centralization 
By definition, a decentralized protocol should be designed to operate, evolve, and grow even 
after the original development team and the protocol foundation has disbanded.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
However, current insurance protocols exhibit centralization in many ways. 

Firstly, most protocol teams take full charge in either the pre-screening of claims or the 
ultimate judgement on the legitimacy of claims, representing a concentration of power and a 
single point of failure. 

Secondly, the voting scheme might trigger the so-called Matthew effect. Specifically, users 
who hold a lot of wealth will influence the voting result to their favor, compounding the 
accumulation of wealth and power. Protocols as such are thus vulnerable to majority attacks, 
where a user or a group of colluding users holding a significant proportion of the governance 
token supply can submit false claims and vote in favor of them, pocketing profit from the 
protocol. 

Conclusion and Outlook of Token-based Insurance 

In this chapter, we have described how many players are using blockchain technology and 
tokens, in particular, to create novel insurance products that seek to utilize new technology 
and business models to cover new types of risk and improve customer experience. 

Tokens seek to facilitate flexibly designed openly auditable insurance policies, which is in 
stark contrast with traditional insurance products. However, the new token-based insurance 
industry is at a nascent stage. We have discussed many of the benefits and challenges that 
face this fledgling industry, and the success or failure of the growth of this industry depends 
on secure and sound protocol design and practical tokenomics. In the current stage of the 
industry, there have been many protocols and DeFi projects that have come to the fold but 
have quickly disappeared, either due to poor and insecure protocol design or simply due to 
business models where the tokenomics have not garnered a community to develop them. 

Nexus Mutual is the leading project in the space, and others are still slowly emerging. As 
interest in the whole DeFi sector increases and as the exchange and lending sub-sectors 
mature, the insurance sector is likely to gain increased attention. As in all industries, some 
sub-sectors develop and move at different speeds and certainly within the decentralized 
financial services space, insurance is a lesser evolved beast. 

Nexus Mutual boasted over 1.2 billion USD in cover at its peak in 2021 and currently has 
active cover of approximately 200 million USD out until January 2022. For a new platform 
with a niche insurance product, these are promising numbers.  The Minimum Capital 
Requirements have also been greater than 100%, reaching as much as 200% at times in 2020. 
Finally, of the 95 claims made to date, 18 of these were accepted and paid out over 10 million 
USD (Richard Chen, 2021).  

Although these claims currently relate to DeFi and Smart Contract risk, more conventional 
consumer use case products are also developing and slowly emerging, as we have seen in the 
case of Etherisc. As the DeFi movement increases in size, more attention from new adopters 
will turn to these new insurance products as well. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Finally, the blockchain itself and the use of tokens have seen use in the traditional insurance 
sectors, with many proof-of-concept projects taking place and being delivered to consumers. 
This development is still at an early stage, and inevitably, as the exploration and use of 
blockchain as an infrastructure in the traditional insurance industry increases, so will the use 
of tokens. This moment may be the inflection point for the token-based insurance industry to 
challenge traditional insurance markets. 

References 

B3i. (2021a). B3i - The Blockchain Insurance Industry Initiative. https://b3i.tech/home.html 

B3i. (2021b). What We Do - B3i. https://b3i.tech/what-we-do.html 

Braun, A., Cohen, L. H., & Xu, J. (2020). fidentiaX: The Tradable Insurance Marketplace on 
Blockchain. Harvard Business School Teaching Note, 220–037. 
https://www.hbs.edu/faculty/Pages/item.aspx?num=56189 

Braun, A., Haeusle, N., & Karpischek, S. (2021). Decentralized autonomous risk transfer on the 
blockchain. In The Routledge Handbook of FinTech (pp. 69–78). Routledge. 
https://doi.org/10.4324/9780429292903-7 

Braun, A., Häusle, N., & Karpischek, S. (2021). Incentivization in Decentralized Autonomous 
Organizations. In SSRN Electronic Journal. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3760531 

BraveNewDeFi. (2021). Glossary & Appendices - Nexus Mutual. 
https://nexusmutual.gitbook.io/docs/welcome/glossary-and-appendices#defined-terms 

BraveNewDeFi. (2021). NXM Token. https://nexusmutual.gitbook.io/docs/users/understanding-
nexus-mutual/nxm-token 

CB Insights. (2021, August 2). How Blockchain Is Disrupting Insurance. 
https://www.cbinsights.com/research/blockchain-insurance-disruption/ 

Chainlink. (2021). Blockchain Oracles for Hybrid Smart Contracts. https://chain.link/ 

ClaimShare. (2021). ClaimShare Home page. https://claimshare.intellecteu.com/ 

CoinMarketCap. (2021). Top Insurance Tokens by Market Capitalization. 
https://coinmarketcap.com/view/insurance/ 

Cointelegraph. (2021). What is a Decentralized autonomous organization, and how does a DAO 
work? https://cointelegraph.com/ethereum-for-beginners/what-is-dao 

DefiLlama. (2021). Nexus Mutual Protocol: TVL and stats. https://defillama.com/protocol/nexus-
mutual 

Dewan, N. (2008). Indian Life and Health Insurance Industry. Gabler. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
8349-9788-3 

EIOPA. (2021). Solvency II. https://www.eiopa.europa.eu/browse/solvency-2_en 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Etherisc. (2021). Etherisc - Decentralized Insurance. https://etherisc.com/ 

fidentiaX. (2021). fidentiaX - World’s 1st Marketplace for Tradable Insurance Policies. 
https://www.fidentiax.com/ 

FSCS. (2021). Insolvent insurers - insurance protection. https://www.fscs.org.uk/what-we-
cover/insurance/insurance-insolvencies/ 

inSure. (2021a). Crypto & DeFi Insurance Plans. https://insuretoken.net/plans.html 

inSure. (2021b). inSure Snapshot page. https://snapshot.org/#/insuretoken.eth 

Karp, H., & Melbardis, R. (2017). Nexus Mutual: A peer-to-peer discretionary mutual on the 
Ethereum blockchain. http://www.guycarp.com/content/dam/guycarp/en/documents/ 

Karpischek, S., Mussenbrock, C., Brukhman, J., & Bernstein, R. (2016). Etherisc: A decentralized 
insurance and reinsurance marketplace. 

Nexus Mutual. (2021). Claims Assessment. https://nexusmutual.gitbook.io/docs/welcome/faq/claims-
assessment#have-any-claims-assessors-had-their-nxm-stake-burned-for-fraudulent-voting-during-the-
claims-assessment-process 

Richard Chen. (2021). Nexus Mutual Tracker. https://nexustracker.io/ 

StateFarm. (2021, January 26). Blockchain Solution Solves State Farm®, USAA Subrogation 
Challenge. https://newsroom.statefarm.com/blockchain-solution-solves-state-farm-usaa-subrogation-
challenge/ 

Statista. (2020). Insurance. https://www.statista.com/markets/414/topic/461/insurance/#statistic2 

Vaughan, E. J. (1996). Risk Management. https://www.amazon.co.uk/Risk-Management-Emmett-J-
Vaughan/dp/047110759X 

Xu, J., Vavryk, N., Paruch, K., & Cousaert, S. (2021). SoK: Decentralized Exchanges (DEX) with 
Automated Market Maker (AMM) protocols. http://arxiv.org/abs/2103.12732 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
