Blockchain-based Covid Vaccination Registration and Monitoring

Shirajus Salekin Nabila, Md. Sabbir Alam Prana, Ali Abrar Al Haquea, Narayan Ranjan Chakrabortya, Mohammad Jabed
Morshed Chowdhuryb,∗, Md Sadek Ferdousc

aDaﬀodil International University, Dhaka 1207, Bangladesh
bLa Trobe University, VIC, 3086, Australia
cBRAC University, Dhaka 1212, Bangladesh

1
2
0
2

p
e
S
0
2

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
3
1
2
0
1
.
9
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract

Covid-19 (SARS-CoV-2) has changed almost all the aspects of our living. Governments around the world have imposed lockdown
to slow down the transmissions. In the meantime, researchers worked hard to ﬁnd the vaccine. Fortunately, we have found the
vaccine, in fact a good number of them. However, managing the testing and vaccination process of the total population is a
mammoth job. There are multiple government and private sector organisations that are working together to ensure proper testing
and vaccination. However, there is always delay or data silo problems in multi-organisational works. Therefore, streamlining this
process is vital to improve the eﬃciency and save more lives. It is already proved that technology has a signiﬁcant impact on
the health sector, including blockchain. Blockchain provides a distributed system along with greater privacy, transparency and
authenticity. In this article, we have presented a blockchain-based system that seamlessly integrates testing and vaccination system,
allowing the system to be transparent. The instant veriﬁcation of any tamper-proof result and a transparent and eﬃcient vaccination
system have been exhibited and implemented in the research. We have also implemented the system as ”Digital Vaccine Passport”
(DVP) and analysed its performance.

Keywords: Covid-19, Blockchain, Solidity, Digital Vaccine Passport, Vaccination.

1. Introduction

Information technology (IT) is playing a vital role in the
ﬁght against covid-19. It helps to evaluate the outbreak of the
covid-19 pandemic, coronavirus statistical breakdown, identi-
fying covid-19 through various symptoms, vaccine advance-
ment [1].
It is heavily used for contract tracing around the
world. However, these systems are designed and maintained
independently. Therefore, they cannot communicate with each
other. It is challenging for policymakers to get a consolidated
view of transmission, testing, and vaccination. In addition, trust
in the testing data and vaccination data was in question, espe-
cially in developing countries. For instance, there was a case
of test fraud happened in Bangladesh. Hospitals in Bangladesh
named Regent hospital, JKG healthcare, and Shahabuddin hos-
pital were caught scamming people by creating fake covid tests,
wrong treatment and a series of other irregularities. These cases
raised serious trust issues amongst people both inside and out-
side the country [2][3][4].

Blockchain is a distributed ledger technology, which can ad-
dress the limitations of the current mechanism. It can help to
integrate multiple systems and at the same time allows all the
parties to interact with the plans without interfering with oth-
ers. All the parties will maintain the system, and the system
will automatically update if there is any activity in the system.

∗Corresponding author
Email address: M.Chowdhury@latrobe.edu.au (Mohammad Jabed

Morshed Chowdhury)

It
However, it will automatically stop any unlawful activity.
provides a transparent view of the data to all the parties, and
it helps build trust. It also prevents corruption as nobody can
manipulate the data. If anybody provides wrong input purpose-
fully, it can be detected using traditional audit or re-testing. The
bad actor can be easily identiﬁed and held responsible as they
cannot change the record in the system due to the immutability
of the blockchain.

Blockchain contributes vastly to the healthcare sector. A
blockchain-based medical record system was implemented to
help patients keep their logs more securely. A distributed ledger
like blockchain helps those data to be kept private and safe. Al-
ready Blockchain proved its capability in other health-based re-
search. Blockchain performed amazingly in recording personal
health data where the data privacy, ﬂexibility, and authenticity
were ensured [5] [6] [7]. Blockchain has been useful in diﬀer-
ent aspects of the management of covid-19 pandemic, and thus,
a risk notiﬁcation system and location and bluetooth based con-
tact tracing system had been implemented to ensure tamper-free
services [8]. Furthermore the Chinese University of Hong Kong
has proposed a concept, describing the structure of a blockchain
based vaccine passport with health records [9]. Blockchain can
also assure the safety, security, transparency and traceability
for distributing covid vaccine [10]. Double layer Blockchain
has been used for recording vaccine production and informa-
tion also. Using a timestamp, the information of enterprises
and vaccines becomes tamper-proof, and the validity period of
the vaccine is measured. A data cutting system has been intro-

 
 
 
 
 
 
duced for reducing space [11]. In line with these works, this ar-
ticle presents an integrated blockchain-enabled testing and vac-
cination system. The core contributions of the articles are as
follows:

• Designing a blockchain-based system that can seamlessly

integrate testing and vaccination systems.

• Implementation of a QR-based ”Digital Vaccine Passport”
(DVP) mechanism which will reduce the corruption in
covid testing and vaccination.

We have discussed the the background knowledge in section
2. System requirements and design are discussed in sections
3 and 4 respectively. In section 5, we have discussed about the
implementation. Performance evaluation is presented in section
6. We have concluded the article with future research directions
in section 7.

2. Background & Related Work

As mentioned, there are two diﬀerent aspects of our proposed
model: the testing and the vaccination. We will discuss both
aspects separately in the next two subsections.

2.1. Covid Testing and Reporting Systems

Several works have been done with immunity passports,
covid certiﬁcations, covid testings, “Digital Health Passport”
(DHP) based on blockchain [12]. All of these terms are the
same, but they have been named diﬀerently. Those have been
discussed below. Already a prototype app has been developed
where users testing reports will be generated and transparency
will be achieved as it is developed under blockchain technol-
ogy [13]. Benchmarking results have also been shown there.
Qr code based veriﬁcation system developed where users’ data
become hidden. The ICT division of Bangladesh Government
introduced a centralized app called ”SUROKKHA” [14]. Using
that Bangladesh government is currently running the vaccina-
tion process.

DHP is based on the

secured distributed network
(blockchain) that works as a health passport [15]. DHP
can be used for travelling, work and various places and helps
regain a country’s economy.
It proves that the person is not
aﬀected or the person already has immunity from covid-19.
DHP is a proactive measure that helps to prevent the virus from
spreading more. Works have been done on ”Digital Contract
Tracing” (DCT) also which carries both beneﬁts and some
limitations [16]. A blockchain-based covid-19 vaccination
passport, oﬀering the vaccination status of an individual where
the user’s identity has been ensured by retina scanning [17].
Masesk’s Algorithm has been used for generating greyscale eye
images. One’s vaccine status is updated by taking his/her bio-
metric data and the vaccination info. The encrypted version of
the bio-metric data has been stored in the blockchain platform.
Both bio-metric information and blockchain provide higher
security and scalability. An immunity testing certiﬁcation
based on blockchain has also been proposed where the user’s

data has been registered on a blockchain platform regulated
by the government [18]. Hospitals are also there for testing
purposes. User’s bio-metric data have been gathered, which
enriches security. Contact tracing has also been implemented
by collecting user’s phone number, geolocation and timestamp.
An app has also been developed to store user’s testing informa-
tion on the blockchain platform, which oﬀers trustworthiness
and artiﬁcial intelligence for tracking patient’s location details
and self-testing [19].

2.2. Vaccination Prioritisation

It

is not possible to vaccinate the whole world over
night, even in a month, as vaccine production is limited, a
prioritisation-based vaccination can ease the way of vaccination
to ensure a fair vaccination. Even in countries like Bangladesh,
it is a crying need. To set priorities at ﬁrst, we should consider
the prioritising criteria.

In the case of a ﬂu outbreak, how to distribute ﬁnite vaccina-
tion supply is now being debated [20]. Traditional vaccination
tactics target individuals most at risk for serious consequences,
such as seniors, but they overlook (1) the distinctive pandemic
pattern of mortality risk migrating to younger ages, and (2) the
projected poorer vaccine eﬀectiveness in elderly, and (3) vari-
ations in the number of years left to live as a function of age.
George Washington University combined these factors to pre-
dict the number of life years lost (YLL) at a speciﬁc age and
the number of life years saved in a future pandemic based on
the mortality patterns of the three historical pandemics, vac-
cine eﬃcacy by age and the structure of the US population in
2000. A group of analysts utilised a numerical demonstration
to compare ﬁve age-stratiﬁed prioritisation methodologies for
inoculation [21].

As reported by a study of MIT, calls for disposing of pri-
oritisation for SARS-CoV-2 immunisation are developing in
the midst of concerns that prioritisation decreases inoculation
speed [22]. They utilised an ”SEIR” model to consider the im-
pacts of inoculation dispersion on open well-being, comparing
the prioritisation approach and speed beneath moderation mea-
sures that are either facilitated amid the antibody roll-out or
maintained through the conclusion of the widespread period.
Another model called ”SIDARTHE” was combined for esti-
mating the spread of Covid-19 along with a data-based model
which demonstrates the new cases of fatality rate and the cost
of a healthcare system based on studying the Italian case [23].
According to the US National Academy of Medicine (NAM)
three groups have been emphasised to vaccinate ﬁrst [24].
At ﬁrst, the front line covid-19 health workers like Doctors,
Nurses, and so on. Secondly, the people working in the sectors
like education with in-person attendance, food supply, child-
care, etc., are at high risk for covid-19. Finally, the third cate-
gory is those people who are already sick from severe health
condition. Prioritising the third category has been recom-
mended by both UN and NAM. University of California has
evaluated the ideal allotment of a limited immunisation sup-
ply within the United States over bunches separated by age and
fundamental labourer status, which compels openings for so-
cial separation [25]. In any case, based on the objective, more

2

youthful fundamental labourers are prioritised to control spread
or seniors to straightforwardly control mortality. The prioriti-
sation also done based on age and the occupation where there
exists a high infection rate [26]. However, age was emphasised
more than occupation. For occupation, the people whose pres-
ence in work contributes higher in GDP got more priority.

A Symptom prediction model based on AI has been used to
classify symptoms under 12 classes [27]. Those classes have
been set by analysing health data of 74 hospitals in Tehran, Iran.
Among KNN, ANN, LDN, Random Forest, and Naive Bayes,
Random forest achieved a good ROC and AUC weighted mean.
In our approach, we have developed an algorithm in
blockchain that can set priorities. However, we have empha-
sised the areas which have a higher positive ratio according to
the test result, as such areas are at high risk. After testing every
user of our system, authority’s next work is to set the priori-
ties. By pressing a single button, the system will calculate the
ratio and sort the list in descending order according to the ra-
tio. Then the vaccination will start according to that ratio. The
system will not allow the inoculator to vaccinate people from
fewer priority areas. If he does so, he will get caught because
there will be a miss-match between the vaccine storage data in
our system and the available vaccines in the storage. Because of
using blockchain here, systems data alteration is not possible.
As the most vaccines have multiple doses, we have developed
the system to allow the area with a lower ratio to be vaccinated
only when the ﬁrst dose is completed in the area with a higher
ratio.

2.3. Blockchain

Blockchain is a decentralised system and very useful for pri-
vacy and transparency. It is a tamper-proof digital ledger tech-
nology used to ﬁnd the solution to real-life issues [28]. Since
its invention, blockchain has been utilised in many ﬁelds as a
smart contract and bitcoin transaction system. Blockchain al-
lows monetary functions to be performed in a distributed way
through some cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin, Ethereum, Lite-
coin, Monero and Zerocash [29]. Blockchain have brought the
concept of decentralisation where there will not be any central
authority to take control over a system. While transactions hap-
pen these transaction records are received by the nodes of the
network. Those will not be added to the network as a block until
the acceptance of existing nodes of the network which is called
veriﬁcation. For adding a block in the network, a consensus
needs to be achieved among the validators.

In Bitcoin, a novel consensus algorithm called Proof of Work
(PoW) has been introduced [30]. In this algorithm, the valida-
tors are called miners who are responsible for creating a valid
block of transactions according to predetermined prerequisites.
The block contains the hash of the previous block which has
already been added to the chain and veriﬁed by the nodes Fig-
ure 1. POW implicitly deﬁnes the capability needed for a miner
to add a block in the chain. Miners compete with each other
to ﬁnd a 32 bit number known as nonce. For example, to add a
block miners need to be ﬁnd a 32 bit number in which there will
be a certain numbers of zero as the ﬁrst numbers which change
according to the network conﬁguration. However, one can not

Figure 1: Proof of Work.

make that number by force. To solve this miners have to use lots
of computational power to ﬁnd the number in ﬁrst. Among all,
the ﬁrst miner who solves the puzzle and broadcasts the block
in the network gets reward for their computational eﬀorts. By
that time the others who have been trying to solve that puzzle,
cancel their mining process and take the hash of that block and
try to solve the next block. After competing with this much of
computational eﬀorts it is assured that the miners did not cheat.

3. System Requirements

Many organisations these days ask their employees to show
positive covid-19 test certiﬁcates to get back into the oﬃce.
Furthermore, many countries have restricted their borders from
foreigners unless they produce the evidence that they are vac-
cinated. Besides, the whole vaccination process might create
chaos since there are many candidates but not enough vaccines
to inoculate. On top of that we have seen many cases of fraud
covid-19 tests and unauthentic certiﬁcation, which causes trust
issues. Therefore, we need a proper and eﬃcient system to
bring back the trust in authority.

Considering the above mentioned issues,

the proposed
blockchain-based system need to meet the requirements stated
below:

1. Fairness and Transparency: The vaccine distribution
should be prioritised based on disease severity among the
areas. The area at the top of the red zone list (where the ra-
tio of positive and test cases is higher) must be inoculated
ﬁrst. The candidates who are tested covid-19 negative will
get the higher priority. In this way, the vaccination process
can be done without any chaos with transparency and fair-
ness.To achieve that the system should store all the data
and can automatically prioritise the area and the cohort.
2. Battle Corruption: In a traditional IT (Information Tech-
nology) system, it is always possible to alter the original
data if the authority wants. Since it is centralised, the
authority has the power over the system. Therefore, we
need a decentralised or distributed system which cannot
be changed or manipulated by one single authority.

3. Seamless Integration: In multi-organisational systems, it
always causes delay or data silo decreasing the network’s
throughput, but in our blockchain-based proposed model,

3

Figure 2: Workﬂow and use-case of covid19 test certiﬁcation and vaccination model.

both testing and vaccination system and the prioritisation
for vaccination are seamlessly integrated for transparency
and user ﬂexibility. We need a single platform which can
seamlessly talk/communicate with multiple systems.
4. Cyber Attack Resilient: The system should be designed
in a way that it can withstand any cybersecurity attack.

3.1. Process in the System

Figure 2 gives a visual representation of our model. We have
implemented a web-based blockchain application where all the
operations will be performed.

4. System Design

In this research, our main concern is presenting a covid-19
testing certiﬁcate and prioritisation-based safe vaccination sys-
tem followed by a vaccination passport for Bangladesh that has
not been implemented yet. In our proposed system, there are
ﬁve entities: “Holder”, “Issuer”, “Vaccine Provider”, “Veri-
ﬁer”, and “Authority/Government”. The activities of each entity
are as discussed next.

Authority/Government: Authority will be the person or or-
ganisation who governs the whole system. It has to bear the ini-
tial deployment cost of the project. Veriﬁed registration of each
entity except the veriﬁer will be ensured under the governance
of the authority. It will accept or reject their sign up requests
based on the NID (National Identity) of the holder and licence
number of the issuer and vaccine provider(s). These two will
be checked using the government’s central database. Also, it
will report to the system about new batches of vaccines as soon
as it is received providing every detail of it. Since the whole

system aims to facilitate the holders or citizens of the country
and ensure that no one’s fundamental rights are violated, proper
distribution of vaccines should be established. There is no al-
ternative to prioritise the candidates for vaccination. Authority
will be playing this vital role of prioritisation by pressing a sin-
gle button.

Issuer: Issuers are the designated person who issue test re-
sults of covid19. After the covid-19 tests, test results will be
provided to the holders by issuers in the form of QR code which
will serve as a test certiﬁcate.

Vaccine Provider: Vaccine providers are the hospitals who
have the vaccine for mass inoculation. The priority list is
strictly maintained under the system while the inoculation pro-
cess is ongoing, so there will be no scope for venality. After the
vaccination of each holder, the vaccine provider will provide
them a ”Digital Vaccine Passport” (DVP) in the form of a QR
(Quick Response) code.

Holder: Holders are the general people who will be inocu-
lated. After the test and vaccination, each citizen will receive
two QR codes, the test certiﬁcate and the digital vaccine pass-
port, which will serve them as a gateway license to most re-
stricted areas due to the pandemic. Holder can also control
his/her proﬁle privacy settings and see the information about
priority list and vaccine storage for gaining the trust.

Veriﬁer: Veriﬁers are not required to register into the system,
since they do not have any direct activities in the system. Of-
ﬁces, organisations, educational institutions, airports authority,
etc. can play the role of veriﬁers to check a person’s eligibility
for accessing the restricted areas due to pandemic. For doing
so a veriﬁer can simply scan the QR codes of the holder’s test
certiﬁcate and digital vaccine passport and will conﬁrm the nec-

4

Figure 3: ER Diagram.

essary information about that holder.
Since the entire process is maintained under a blockchain net-
work, it can achieve high transparency and fairness.

Prerequisite/ “On-boarding” step: The on-boarding is a

three-step process as discussed next:

• Step-0: Every vaccine provider, issuer and holder have to
make a request to sign up to the system as per their speciﬁc
roles. It is a two-tesp processes as

• Step-1: For identity authentication, their roles and pro-
fessions are then veriﬁed by the governmental authority.
Their sign up requests will be approved or rejected on
the basis of authentication of their provided data. Pro-
viding false information may cause permanent banning if
detected.

• Step-2: Each user can access the system if and only if
their sign up request is accepted and has an entry to the
blockchain.

Issuing Covid Test Results: The end-users will provide their
information like name, age, location and photo to register them-
selves for testing. Then they will apply for testing. The autho-
rised issuers will provide the test result. In Step-3, the test result
along with the issuer’s ID will be generated as a QR code. This
QR code can be used as a Test Certiﬁcate (QR1).

Vaccine Approval/Settings: The authority has access to store
the vaccines data and update the vaccines storage only by pos-
itive margin if new batches are imported. This is regarded as
Step-4.

Prioritisation: As the vaccine production and distribution to-
ward several countries are limited in quantity. So a monitored
and authentic way is a crying need. At ﬁrst, we have generated
a location-wise ratio of positive cases among total tested cases.
The higher rate locations are then selected as a higher prior-
ity as the aﬀected cases and spreading probability are higher
there. We know that vaccines are essential for those who do not
have any immunity against the virus. So in Step-5, the nega-
tively tested people are prioritised to mitigate the spreading of
this deadly virus. The list of the holders after prioritisation is
stored in blockchain for a fair and transparent vaccination. This
list will be checked at the time of each and every inoculation
(Step-6).

Inoculation: The inoculation is a three-step process as dis-

cussed next:

• Step-7: The vaccine provider is allowed for servicing the
inoculation process and providing the vaccine passport.

• Step-8: Vaccine providers request the authority for vac-

cines to continue the inoculation process in.

• Step-9: Vaccine providers will ask the holder for showing
his/her test certiﬁcate and check whether the holder is eli-
gible or not for the current inoculation wave according to
the priority list.

After inoculation, the holder’s vaccination information along
with the vaccine provider’s ID will be generated as a QR code.
This QR code can be used as a Vaccination Passport (QR2).
By doing these, the proper and eﬃcient way of vaccination of

5

Figure 4: Class Diagram of the Proposed Blockchain-based System

those limited vaccines will be ensured.

Veriﬁcation: The veriﬁer can be any organisation where it
is necessary to ensure public safety. By this, a tamper-proof
authentic result will be generated as these all are happening in
the blockchain platform. Veriﬁers can extract the QR1 code to
verify any individual whether he/she is tested positive or neg-
ative (Test Certiﬁcate) and to verify any individual whether
he/she has taken a vaccine, the Vaccination Passport or QR2
code will be extracted in step-10. The information underneath
the both QR codes are compared to the blockchain hashes for
checking its validity as shown in step-11 on Figure 2.

4.1. Data Storage and Management

Figure 3 is the entity-relationship (ER) diagram of the pro-
posed model, which represents the attributes that are stored for
each entity (authority, issuer, vaccine provider, holder, vaccine)
in their respective database. The hash of each entity’s name, id,
and the hash of the priority list is stored in the blockchain since
they are the primary key of the traditional database and must be
kept securely.

5. Implementation

In this section, we present the detailed implementation1 of
the proposed system. The system was implemented on top of
Ethereum blockchain. The code was written in Solidy program-
ming language on the Remix IDE, which is also used to com-
pile and evaluate smart contracts. We have built three smart

1Source Code: https://github.com/Salekin-Nabil/VDHP

6

contracts so far; namely dhp (Digital Health Passport), vacci-
nation and locationInfo. Figure 4 represents the class diagram
of our project. The attributes of each structure are as shown in
this ﬁgure and the methods are explained below.

The dhp smart contract and vaccination smart contract can be
associated with each other and both can be associated with the
locationInfo smart contract, but the locationInfo smart contract
is fully independent. Firstly, the dhp smart contract is used for
the covid-19 test certiﬁcate. It includes the information about
the issuer and the holder. Secondly, the vaccination smart con-
tract stands for the vaccination passport or a certiﬁcation of
vaccination which includes 3 structures namely: vaccine, au-
thority and vaccine provider. Finally, the locationInfo smart
contract is storing the location information to prioritise them
according to the rate of covid-19 positive cases and utilise them
as per needed (i.e. calculating total number of tests, total covid-
19 positive cases, total vaccine receiving candidates in an area).
The system has been deployed on Ethereum Rinkeby test net-
work [31]. The following parts go into the speciﬁcs of each
smart contract.

5.1. dhp: SignUp (all interfaces in general)

During the sign up process, an individual wallet owner can
sign up for diﬀerent roles (i.e. Authority, Issuer, Vaccine
Provider, Holder) (Figure 5).

To verify a wallet ,there are four checkers created with a view
to identifying whether that wallet belongs to a role or not. It will
also check whether the wallet is already registered for that spe-
ciﬁc role or not. After the initial checkers are satisﬁed, users
can move forward to the main registration process by provid-
ing the necessary details. This function will then send an event
to all of the involved entities, informing them of the change

and the time. When interacting with the relevant entities, the
blockchain client (BC) and gateway can use this event as part
of its ﬁltered events so that their records are modiﬁed appro-
priately. In future, we can also include captcha to improve the
security of the login [32].

After the initial checkers are satisﬁed, the issuer can move for-
ward to the insertion of the test result by providing the neces-
sary details (holder ID, test result). This function will then send
an event to all of the involved entities, informing them of the
change and the time.

Figure 5: Sign Up.

5.2. dhp: SignIn

Figure 6: Test Result Issue.

During sign in, a new hash is generated combining the wal-
let address of the owner, the system ID (SID) of the user and
password for veriﬁcation. To verify the new hash, it is matched
with all other combined hashes that already exist in the system
regarding the speciﬁcation of the user. A ﬂag is used to de-
termine whether the wallet is valid or not and redirected to the
desired role’s menu accordingly in Algorithm 1.

Algorithm 1: dhp: SignIn
Initialisation of SID, Password, Address. (Address holds
the Ethereum Address of the function caller);
Flag = “None”;
if new hash == existing Issuer hash then

else if new hash == existing Holder hash then

else if new hash == existing Authority hash then

Flag = “issuer”;

Flag = “holder”;

Flag = “authority”;

else if new hash == existing Vaccine Provider hash then

Flag = “vaccine provider”;

When interacting with the relevant entities, the blockchain
client (BC) and gateway can use this event as part of its ﬁltered
events so that their records are modiﬁed appropriately.

5.4. Vaccination: Add Vaccine and Update Vaccine (Authority)
The user interface of adding vaccines to the approved list is
shown in Figure 7. In this algorithm, the owner of the authority
wallet is the only authorised entity that can add new vaccines
to the system. To verify a wallet that it belongs to a veriﬁed
authority the address of the function caller would be checked to
increase the security level. After the initial checkers are satis-
ﬁed, the authority can move forward to the insertion of the vac-
cines by providing the necessary details (vaccine name, stor-
age, dose limit) and can also be updated in a similar way.

else

Show an error or failed to Sign In.;

end if

5.3. dhp: Issue Result (Issuer)

In case of issuing a test result the test will be done by the
issuer ﬁrst and then it has to be issued to the system Figure 6.
In this algorithm, the owner of the issuer wallet is the only au-
thorised entity that can issue test results to a holder. To verify
a wallet that it belongs to a veriﬁed issuer, the address of the
function caller would be checked to increase the security level.

Figure 7: Add/Update vaccine.

This function will then send an event to all of the involved
entities, informing them of the change and the time. When in-
teracting with the relevant entities, the blockchain client (BC)

7

and gateway can use this event as part of its ﬁltered events so
that their records are modiﬁed appropriately.

5.6. Vaccination: Authentication and Approval of Issuer, Vac-

cine Provider and Holder Registration (Authority)

5.5. Vaccination: Prioritisation (Authority)

Prioritisation can be done using Algorithm 2. In this algo-
rithm, the owner of the authority wallet is the only authorised
entity that can prioritise the holders for vaccination according
to their location and test results (the negative holders of covid-
19 who belong to the red zone area on the basis of positive case
ratio per total number of tests). To verify a wallet that it be-
longs to a veriﬁed authority, the address of the function caller
would be checked to increase the security level. After the initial
checkers are satisﬁed, the authority can move forward to make
a priority list of all the holders existing at that moment who
have tested themselves with just a single click and everything
else would be executed in the backend.

Algorithm 2: vaccination: Prioritisation - TX
Initialisation of caller address.;
Authority Checker();
j=8, k=0;
while j < 16 do

if Totaltest > 1 then

while traversing the entire holder’s length do

if the holder has Positive result after testing Covid-19 & &

holder location == running location then

Set the holder’s name to the low priority list;
Increase the number that belongs to the running (j) priority;
Holder Priority = j;

else if the holder has Negative result after testing Covid-19

& & holder location == running location then
Set the holder’s name to the high priority list;
Increase the number that belongs to the running (k)

priority;

Holder Priority = k;

end if
j++;
k++;
end while

end if

end while

Since we are prioritising the citizens of the eight divisions
of Bangladesh and each division has two categories of hold-
ers (positive/negative), there are (8x2) 16 levels of priority to
prioritise the holders. The covid-19 negative holders who be-
long to the division which is at the top of the red zone list will
be at the top priority for vaccination and they will be marked
as the ﬁrst level priority which indicates they should be vacci-
nated during the ﬁrst wave of vaccination. Similarly the rest of
the covid-19 negative holders will be marked by a level of pri-
ority from 2 to 8 according to the position of their division at
the red zone list. The covid-19 positive holders will be marked
by the levels of priority from 9 to 16 following the same pat-
tern of the red zone list. This function will then send an event
to all of the involved entities, informing them of the change
and the time. When interacting with the relevant entities, the
blockchain client (BC) and gateway can use this event as part
of its ﬁltered events so that their records are modiﬁed appropri-
ately.

8

Users can be added to the approved list of the respective role
such as issuer, vaccine provider and holder registration using
the following method. In this method, the owner of the author-
ity wallet is the only authorised entity that can approve a user to
enrol themselves to the system. To verify that a wallet belongs
to a veriﬁed authority, the address of the function caller would
be checked internally to increase the security level. After the
initial checkers are satisﬁed, the authority can move forward to
the authentication process with the help of the given details pro-
vided by the users while registering (for vaccine providers and
issuers - license number, for holders - NID). This function
will then send an event to all of the involved entities, informing
them of the change and the time. When interacting with the rel-
evant entities, the blockchain client (BC) and gateway can use
this event as part of its ﬁltered events so that their records are
modiﬁed appropriately.

5.7. Vaccination: Inoculation/Push Vaccine (Vaccine Provider)
The First Dose: Inoculation process can be started in an un-
biased way using Algorithm 3. In this algorithm, the owner of
the vaccine provider wallet is the only authorised entity that can
push vaccines to the holders. To verify that a wallet belongs to
a veriﬁed authority, the address of the function caller would be
checked to increase the security level. After the initial check-
ers are satisﬁed, the vaccine provider can move forward to the
inoculation process. Lower priority holders can not be inoc-
ulated while higher priority holders are yet to inoculate. Due
to the long time interval during each dose, lower priority hold-
ers can be inoculated after all the higher priority holders have
ﬁnished taking their ﬁrst doses. This function will then send
an event to all of the involved entities, informing them of the
change and the time. When interacting with the relevant enti-
ties, the blockchain client (BC) and gateway can use this event
as part of its ﬁltered events so that their records are modiﬁed
appropriately.

The Second Dose and Holder Elimination From The Prior-
ity List: Inoculation process can be successfully completed in
an unbiased way using Algorithm 4. After completing the ﬁnal
dose the holder account will be removed from the vaccination
priority list.

5.8. dhp: Proﬁle Permission (Holder)

A holder can set the permission of his proﬁle about what to
show and what not, the user interface of it is shown in ﬁgure-
8. The owner of the Holder wallet is the only authorised en-
tity that can change his/her proﬁle permission. To verify that a
wallet belongs to a veriﬁed holder, the address of the function
caller would be checked to increase the security level. After
the initial checkers are satisﬁed, the Holder can move forward
to the permission setting process. This function will then send
an event to all of the involved entities, informing them of the
change and the time. When interacting with the relevant enti-
ties, the blockchain client (BC) and gateway can use this event
as part of its ﬁltered events so that their records are modiﬁed
appropriately.

Algorithm 4: vaccination: Inoculation/Push Vaccine -
TX

Input: Authority ID, Vaccine ID, Holder ID, Vaccine NameContinued from

algorithm 3...;
else if j ≥ 16 then
k=0;
while k < 8 do

if HighPriorityComp[k] != 0 then

[HighPriorityComp[k] - The number of holders in k-th priority

who haven’t completed the dose]

break;

end if
k++;
end while
if k < 8 then

if Holder belongs to the running priority then

Push Vaccine;
Vaccine Storage -=1;
Dose Number (Holder) +=1;
HighPriorityComp[k] -=1;
if Dose Number == Dose Limit then

Eliminate the Holder’s name from the vaccination list;

end if

end if

end if
else if k ≥ 8 then
j=0;
while k < 16 do

if LowPriorityComp[j] != 0 then

[LowPriorityComp[j] - The number of holders in j-th

priority who haven’t completed the dose]

break;

end if
j++;
k++;
end while
if k < 16 then

If Holder belongs to the running priority Push Vaccine;
Vaccine Storage -=1;
Dose Number (Holder) +=1;
LowPriorityComp[k] -=1;
if Dose Number == Dose Limit then

Eliminate the Holder’s name from the vaccination list;

end if

end if

end if

end if

location, test result, the name of the issuer) about the covid-
19 test. Since it is just a query, it will not cost any ether.

5.10. dhp: Vaccination Passport (Holder)

A holder can generate a QR code which has the information
of his/her covid-19 vaccination, similar to Figure 9. In this al-
gorithm, the owner of the Holder wallet is the only authorised
entity that generates his/her vaccination passport. To verify that
a wallet belongs to a veriﬁed holder the address of the function
caller would be checked to increase the security level. After the
initial checkers are satisﬁed, it generates a QR code containing
necessary information (holder’s name, vaccine taken, vaccine
name, dose number, priority) about the covid-19 Vaccination.
Since it is just a query, it will not cost any ether.

Figure 8: Permission Settings.

5.9. dhp: Test Certiﬁcate (Holder)

A holder can generate a QR code which has the information

of his/her covid-19 test result (ﬁgure-9).

Algorithm 3: vaccination: Inoculation/Push Vaccine -
TX

Input: Authority ID, Vaccine ID, Holder ID, Vaccine Name;
Vaccine Provider Checker();
j=0, k=0;
while j < 8 do

if HighPriorityNo[j] != 0 then

[HighPriorityNo[j] - The number of holders in j-th priority who have

n0t taken the ﬁrst dose]

break;

end if
j++;
end while
if j < 8 then

if Holder belongs to the running priority then
Push Vaccine;Vaccine Storage -=1;
Dose Number (Holder) +=1;
HighPriorityNo[j] -=1;

end if

end if
else if j ≥ 8 then

while j < 16 do

if LowPriorityNo[k] != 0 then

break;

end if
j++; k++;

end while
if j < 16 then

if Holder belongs to the running priority then
Push Vaccine;Vaccine Storage -=1;
Dose Number (Holder) +=1;
LowPriorityNo[j] -=1;

end if

end if

end if

In this algorithm, the owner of the Holder wallet is the only
authorised entity that generates his/her test certiﬁcate. To verify
that a wallet belongs to a veriﬁed holder, the address of the
function caller would be checked to increase the security level.
After the initial checkers are satisﬁed, it generates a QR code
containing necessary information (holder’s name, age, photo,

6. Performance Evolution

We benchmark our system using diﬀerent parameters, such
as latency, throughput, response time and failure rate. All
the performance has been tested using Apache jMeter as it is

9

diversity as the number of transactions increases which leads to
a non-exponential analysis, transmitting between 6.17 tx/s and
49.51 tx/s for 25 transactions and 8500 transaction with a plenty
of varieties in between.

6.4. No. of Transactions vs Failure Rate

The analysis of failure rate for the transaction is presented
at Figure 10d. The failure rate starts to increase as the num-
ber of transactions increases. The increasing rate of the fail-
ure is almost exponential for comparing the diversity of failure
rate with respect to the number of transactions, occurring be-
tween 0% failure and 93.62% failure for 25 transactions and
8500 transactions.

There occurs no failure with a small number of users (trans-
actions) that is below 1000 and failure starts to occur when 1000
or more users hit for the transaction. Thus it is visible that fail-
ure rate is proportional to the number of users.

6.5. Cost Analysis

The deployment and transaction cost of all interfaces have

been presented below in table 1.

Table 1: Gas Cost in USD on March 6, 2021

Category
Contract Deploy(3)
Set Priority(300 people)
Authority Sign Up
System Initialization
Update Storage
Set Vaccine
Issuer Sign Up
Issue Result
Push Vaccine (2 Dose)
Vaccine Provider Sign Up
Holder Sign Up
Holder Permission

Gas Cost Doller
314.89
0.210641
190.93
0.127718
6.41
0.00429
31.24
0.0209
1.90
0.001269
6.52
0.004362
12.28
0.008051
3.50
0.002292
16.00
0.010489
11.40
0.007475
17.78
0.011652
2.24
0.00147

Due to the increment of ether cost the overall transaction be-
come a great matter of fact. The price of the public crypto-
currencies like bitcoin and ether are unpredictable. How-
ever this issue can be easily tackled by introducing private
blockchain where the mining cost can be reduced. Hyperledger
fabric will be a good alternative solution for that.

7. Conclusion

It has been a year or more that the world is suﬀering with the
invisible enemy sars-cov2 (covid-19). It is diﬃcult to ﬁght or
create antibodies against viruses. In the past we have seen that
the vaccine against viruses like inﬂuenza, ebola and so on took
several years to achieve a suitable vaccine. Fortunately, due to
the massive advancement in technology we have now lots of
approved vaccines within just one year. However, due to pro-
duction limitations, it is impossible to cover all people under

10

Figure 9: QR code of Test Certiﬁcate.

comparatively the best load testing tool among loadrunner, mi-
crosoft visual studio (TFS), and siege [33, 34].

We have run the simulations between 25 to 8500 users where
each user has submitted a transaction (which is the registration
of a holder under the Rinkeby test network) and recorded the
response time, latency, throughput and failure rate. The bench
markings were carried out in a PC with a Windows 10 64-bit
operating system, having Intel Core-i5 8250U 1.80GHz CPU,
8GB DDR4 RAM, 1TB hard disk, 480GB SSD and Intel(R)
UHD Graphics 620. 5 iterations of simulations were carried
out and the average results are presented and discussed in the
subsequent subsections.

6.1. No. of Transactions vs Response Time

The graph of the response time for the transaction is pre-
sented in Figure 10a. The response time starts to increase as
the number of transactions increases. The increasing rate of the
response time is almost exponential for comparing the diversity
of response time with respect to the number of transactions, tak-
ing between 2412.96ms and 51653.7ms for 25 transactions and
8500 transactions respectively.

Thus, we can make an analysis of the system that response

time is proportional to the number of transactions.

6.2. No. of Transactions vs Latency

The comparative latency for the transaction vs latency is pre-
sented in Figure 10b. The latency starts to increase as the num-
ber of transactions increases to 1000 transactions and then again
starts to decrease from its peak value till the number of transac-
tions reaches 8500.The increasing rate of the latency or the de-
creasing rate of it when it reaches the peak value is not as expo-
nential as response time with respect to the number of transac-
tions, taking between 1501.12ms and 12739.08ms for 25 trans-
actions and 1000 transactions respectively and then falls back
to 2320.732ms while reaching 8500 transactions .

6.3. No. of Transactions vs Throughput

We also studied the throughput for the transaction and it is
presented in Figure 10c. The throughput shows an enormous

(a) No. of Transactions vs Response Time

(b) No. of Transactions vs Latency

(c) No. of Transactions vs Throughput

(d) No. of Transactions vs Failure Rate

Figure 10: Performance Analysis

vaccination within a very short period of time. So the possibil-
ity of chaos in vaccination raises. Countries like Bangladesh
with huge populations need an authentic prioritisation based
system, where proper vaccination will be assured without any
chaos. Our implemented system oﬀers all these criteria. Also
authentic test report certiﬁcation has been implemented where
unbiased and counterfeit certiﬁcates have no chance to get rid
from the authority. Recently, we have seen lots of scams re-
cently related to false covid test certiﬁcates. Our blockchain-
enabled deployed system mitigates the tampering possibilities
and creates transparency. We have shown the cost eﬃciency
and benchmark result where we proved that our system will
provide all these services conveniently. Prioritisation oﬀers the
most unique but signiﬁcant feature which will ensure optimised
vaccination. With all these features, we believe that our system
can be an eﬀective tool to ﬁght against covid-19.

References

[2] H.

[1] P. P. Nguyen D.C., Dinh M., S. A., Blockchain and ai-based so-
lutions to combat coronavirus (covid-19)-like epidemics: A survey.,
preprints202004doi:10.20944/preprints202004.0325.v1.
Bangladesh

hos-
covid-
resultsarXiv:https://www.theguardian.com/

pital
19
world/2020/jul/16/global-report-bangladesh/
hospital-owner-accused-of-faking-thousands-of-covid-19/
test-results.

Sullivan,
owner
test

agencies,
accused

Global
of

thousands

report:

faking

of

I.

A. Alif,
2

S.
Tipu,
hospital md,

[3] M.
din
dhakatribune.com/bangladesh/dhaka/2020/07/21/
rab-hands-over-shahabuddin-hospital-md-to-police.
washes

of
https://www.thedailystar.net/frontpage/news/

Covid-19
Shahabud-
remandedarXiv:https://www.

jkgarXiv:

Sabrina

[4] M.

others

scam:

hands

Saad,

her

sabrina-washes-her-hands-jkg-1929997?fbclid=
IwAR2c74VYFBtKLPjOXyDbakaVFv36yiYgrRqjNFMFUc48GuUB_
4WWrI7r3ko.

[5] H. H. Kung, Y.-F. Cheng, H.-A. Lee, C.-Y. Hsu, Personal health record in

fhir format based on blockchain architecture (2020) 1776–1788.

[6] A. Ekblaw, A. Azaria, J. D. Halamka, A. Lippman, A case study for
blockchain in healthcare:“medrec” prototype for electronic health records
and medical research data, in: Proceedings of IEEE open & big data con-
ference, Vol. 13, 2016, p. 13.

[7] M. J. M. Chowdhury, M. S. Ferdous, K. Biswas, N. Chowdhury,
A. Kayes, P. Watters, A. Ng, Trust modeling for blockchain-based wear-
able data market, in: 2019 IEEE International Conference on Cloud Com-
puting Technology and Science (CloudCom), IEEE, 2019, pp. 411–417.
[8] J. Song, T. Gu, X. Feng, Y. Ge, P. Mohapatra, Blockchain meets COVID-
19: A framework for contact information sharing and risk notiﬁcation
system, CoRR abs/2007.10529. arXiv:2007.10529.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2007.10529

[9] K. K. Tsoi, J. J. Sung, H. W. Lee, K. K. Yiu, H. Fung, S. Y. Wong,
The way forward after covid-19 vaccination: vaccine passports with
blockchain to protect personal privacy, BMJ Innovations 7 (2).

[10] M. F. Rotbi, S. Motahhir, A. E. Ghzizal, Blockchain technology for a safe
and transparent covid-19 vaccination, arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.05428.
[11] S. Peng, X. Hu, J. Zhang, X. Xie, C. Long, Z. Tian, H. Jiang, An
eﬃcient double-layer blockchain method for vaccine production super-
vision, IEEE Transactions on NanoBioscience 19 (3) (2020) 579–587.
doi:10.1109/TNB.2020.2999637.

[12] K. K. Tsoi, J. J. Sung, H. W. Lee, K. K. Yiu, H. Fung, S. Y. Wong,
The way forward after covid-19 vaccination: vaccine passports with
blockchain to protect personal privacy, BMJ Innovations 7 (2).

[13] M. Eisenstadt, M. Ramachandran, N. Chowdhury, A. Third, J. Domingue,
Covid-19 antibody test/vaccination certiﬁcation: There’s an app for that,
IEEE Open Journal of Engineering in Medicine and Biology 1 (2020)
148–155. doi:10.1109/OJEMB.2020.2999214.

[14] Covid-19

vaccine

registration
//www.dhakatribune.com/bangladesh/2021/01/27/
covid-19-vaccine-registration-app-site-now-open.

site

now openarXiv:https:

[15] C. M. Angelopoulos, A. Damianou, V. Katos, Dhp framework: Digital
health passports using blockchain–use case on international tourism dur-
ing the covid-19 pandemic, arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.08922.

11

01000020000300004000050000600002550751001251501752002505001000200040008500Response time in msNumber of Transactions0200040006000800010000120002550751001251501752002505001000200040008500Latency in msNumber of Transactions01020304050602550751001251501752002505001000200040008500ThroughputNumber of Transactions01020304050607080901002550751001251501752002505001000200040008500Failure rate in %Number of Transactionson dev2dev (2006) 1–11.

[16] H. Xu, L. Zhang, O. Onireti, Y. Fang, W. J. Buchanan, M. A. Imran, Beep-
trace: blockchain-enabled privacy-preserving contact tracing for covid-19
pandemic and beyond, IEEE Internet of Things Journal.

[17] S. Chaudhari, M. Clear, H. Tewari, Framework for a dlt based covid-19

passport, arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.01120.

[18] A. Bansal, C. Garg, R. P. Padappayil, Optimizing the implementation of
covid-19 “immunity certiﬁcates” using blockchain, Journal of Medical
Systems 44 (9) (2020) 1–2.

[19] T. P. Mashamba-Thompson, E. D. Crayton, Blockchain and artiﬁcial
intelligence technology for novel coronavirus disease-19 self-testing
(2020).

[20] M. A. Miller, C. Viboud, D. R. Olson, R. F. Grais, M. A. Rabaa, L. Si-
monsen, Prioritization of Inﬂuenza Pandemic Vaccination to Minimize
Years of Life Lost, The Journal of Infectious Diseases 198 (3) (2008)
305–311. arXiv:https://academic.oup.com/jid/article-pdf/
198/3/305/18053670/198-3-305.pdf, doi:10.1086/589716.
URL https://doi.org/10.1086/589716

[21] K. M. Bubar, K. Reinholt, S. M. Kissler, M. Lipsitch, S. Cobey, Y. H.
Grad, D. B. Larremore, Model-informed covid-19 vaccine prioritization
strategies by age and serostatus, Science 371 (6532) (2021) 916–921.
[22] N. Agarwal, A. Komo, C. A. Patel, P. A. Pathak, M. U. ¨Unver, The trade-
oﬀ between prioritization and vaccination speed depends on mitigation
measures, Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research (2021).
[23] G. Giordano, M. Colaneri, A. Di Filippo, F. Blanchini, P. Bolzern,
G. De Nicolao, P. Sacchi, P. Colaneri, R. Bruno, Modeling vaccination
rollouts, sars-cov-2 variants and the requirement for non-pharmaceutical
interventions in italy, Nature Medicine 27 (6) (2021) 993–998.

[24] G. Persad, M. E. Peek, E. J. Emanuel, Fairly Prioritizing Groups
for Access to COVID-19 Vaccines, JAMA 324 (16) (2020) 1601–
1602.
arXiv:https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/
articlepdf/2770684/jama\_persad\_2020\_vp\_200200\
_1603319730.01653.pdf, doi:10.1001/jama.2020.18513.
URL https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2020.18513

[25] J. H. Buckner, G. Chowell, M. R. Springborn, Dynamic prioritization of
covid-19 vaccines when social distancing is limited for essential workers,
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 118 (16).

vaccines,

[26] A. Babus, S. Das, S. Lee, The optimal allocation of covid-
medRxivarXiv:https://www.medrxiv.org/

19
content/early/2020/12/03/2020.07.22.20160143.full.pdf,
doi:10.1101/2020.07.22.20160143.
URL https://www.medrxiv.org/content/early/2020/12/03/
2020.07.22.20160143

[27] E. Jamshidi, A. Asgary, N. Tavakoli, A. Zali, F. Dastan, A. Daaee,
M. Badakhshan, H. Esmaily, S. H. Jamaldini, S. Safari, E. Bas-
tanhagh, A. Maher, A. Babajani, M. Mehrazi, M. A. S. Kashi,
M. Jamshidi, M. H. Sendani, S. J. Rahi, N. Mansouri, Symp-
tom prediction and mortality risk calculation for covid-19 using
learning, medRxivarXiv:https://www.medrxiv.org/
machine
content/early/2021/02/06/2021.02.04.21251143.full.pdf,
doi:10.1101/2021.02.04.21251143.

[28] M. J. M. Chowdhury, M. S. Ferdous, K. Biswas, N. Chowdhury,
A. Kayes, M. Alazab, P. Watters, A comparative analysis of distributed
ledger technology platforms, IEEE Access 7 (2019) 167930–167943.
[29] Q. Feng, D. He, S. Zeadally, M. K. Khan, N. Kumar, A survey on pri-
vacy protection in blockchain system, Journal of Network and Computer
Applications 126 (2019) 45–58. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jnca.2018.10.020.
URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1084804518303485

[30] S. Nakamoto, A. Bitcoin, A peer-to-peer electronic cash system, Bitcoin.–

URL: https://bitcoin. org/bitcoin. pdf 4.

[31] rinkeby testnet, rinkeby.

URL https://www.rinkeby.io/#stats

[32] M. J. M. Chowdhury, N. R. Chakraborty, Captcha based on human cog-

nitive factor, arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.7444.

[33] R. Abbas, Z. Sultan, S. N. Bhatti, Comparative analysis of automated
load testing tools: Apache jmeter, microsoft visual studio (tfs),loadrunner,
siege, in: 2017 International Conference on Communication Technolo-
gies (ComTech), 2017, pp. 39–44.
doi:10.1109/COMTECH.2017.
8065747.

[34] D. Nevedrov, Using jmeter to performance test web services, Published

12

