The Convergence of Blockchain, IoT and 6G:
Potential, Opportunities, Challenges and
Research Roadmap

Abu Jahid, Mohammed H. Alsharif and Trevor J. Hall

Abstract

The world is undergoing a profound transformation with the advent of intelligent information era.
The fundamental domains linked with smart living such as transportation, entertainment, healthcare,
and smart cities are anticipated to elevate the level of service quality assuring a high-end user experience.
6G networks envisioned being the game changer in next generation wireless communication systems
that will address the challenges of limited information speed escalated with the augmentation of billions
of data applications encountered by the current ﬁfth generation (5G) networks. Some key radical
technologies in 6G together with existing 5G candidate schemes will guarantee the expected quality of
experience (QoE) to attain ubiquitous wireless connectivity for the Internet of Everything (IoE) ranging
from the telecom industry to digital smart industries. Recently, Internet of Things (IoT) is reforming
the incumbent industry into smart infrastructure featured with 6G data-driven architecture. Blockchain
technology (BCT) has gained signiﬁcant attention due to undertake the decentralization, transparency,
spectrum resource scarcity, inherent privacy and security, poor interoperability, conﬁdentiality, and
emerging smart applications domains including Industrial IoT and Industry 4.0. The mismatch between
the requirements of many data intensive disruptive IoT applications and 5G network capabilities steered
the demand of decentralized BCT based 6G architecture. Inspired by these facts, this paper studies
an extensive survey to draw a new direction of blockchain integration into 6G mobile networks, IoT
technologies, and smart industries focusing the potential merits and challenges in terms of infrastructure
sharing, computational loads, latency, bandwidth overhead, business model, sustainability goals, and
edge intelligence. We highlighted the convergence of IoT in blockchain to enable intelligent distribution
in future industrial IoT and the technical model of 6G networks to realize the successful deployment
of BCT schemes. This paper pointed out the current intriguing challenges, canvassed the mitigation
techniques, and plausible future research opportunities that may beneﬁt the pursuit of this vision.

Keywords— Blockchain, 6G, Internet of Things, Industry 4.0, Industrial IoT, 6G business

model, Privacy and security.

I. Introduction

Beyond the exchanging of voice, image or video information in the ﬁfth generation cellular networks,
researchers are exploring new dimensions of interactions including ﬁve sense communications, ubiqui-
tous instant communications, virtual/augmented reality (VR/AR), the internet of skills, wireless brain-
computer interfaces, holographic communications, and pervasive intelligence, leading a true immersion
towards distant environment [1]–[3]. Concurrently, the evaluation of smart communications in diﬀerent
sectors such as remote learning, autonomous driving, healthcare, industry internet, secured transactions,
and smart cities oﬀered by 5G networks inspired experts to research on 6G. 6G wireless networks are en-
visioned to the provision the future data-intensive smart societies with full automation through seamless
integration of wireless networks aspects spreading from ground, air, space to underwater [4]. With the
enormous growth of data traﬃc and emerging multimedia applications, 6G is envisaged to experience 607
Exabytes by 2025 and 5016 Exabyte by 2030 per month [5], [6]. The 6G mobile networks are anticipated
to be essentially virtualized, software deﬁned, and cloud-based systems with the motivate to substantial
number of ubiquitously connected heterogeneous devices including the internet of everything (IoE), to
enable an incredible range of network services [2]. With this paradigm shift towards 6G, Internet of
Things (IoT) plays a signiﬁcant role by enabling promising applications connecting the physical devices
to the cyberspace of communication world [7].

The advent of future generation wireless networks supports a new set of real time and data intensive
applications including sustainable business models, agile management, network orchestration, network
slicing, spectrum sharing, and many other vertical services [3]. However, these diﬀerentiated services
tend to augment a number of issues such as data privacy, network reliability, immutability, security,
eﬃcient resource utilization, multiple access control, virtual network functions, etc. [8]. Mobile network
operators (MNOs) cannot handle bulky cellular infrastructure eﬀectively especially during the peak
traﬃc demand. This could force cellular operators to raise usage prices for the end mobile users because
of the expensive licensing fees for the additional bandwidth and the increasing number of infrastructure

1
2
0
2

p
e
S
7

]
P
S
.
s
s
e
e
[

1
v
4
8
1
3
0
.
9
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

 
 
 
 
 
 
deployments and management. Therefore, it is essential for MNOs to alter their existing centralized
business model to a ﬂexible decentralized architecture led by software deﬁned networking, network
virtualization, and intelligent management [9], [10]. The decentralized micro-MNOs paradigm demand
a scalable and trustworthy solution for enabling quasi real time infrastructure management in addition
to improved ﬁnancial interactions and service level agreements (SLAs).

Blockchain technology (BCT) plays as an immutable distribute ledger for performing secure ﬁnancial
transactions associated with cryptographic symbols. In other words, BCT establishes trusted secure
communications among unknown entities in untrusted networks. BCT operated as a common, mutual,
and distributed ledger used as a large-scale secure index measuring for all communications architecture
particularly in the cyber security domain. BCT has gained momentum for distributed applications and
is recognized as the key enabling trusted technologies that received deep attention both in research and
industry communities in the context of IoT and 6G mobile communication. Blockchain oﬀers a scalable
and distributed platform to record data permanently and validate transactions among diﬀerent entities
without involving central participants [11]. The integration of blockchain with 6G wireless networks
potentially allows MNOs to monitor and manage resource and spectrum utilization with some added
advantages like improving spectrum auction, reducing administration expenditures, infrastructure shar-
ing, and so on. Due to the inherited beneﬁt of transparency, BC can record real-time resource utilization
and signiﬁcantly improve spectrum eﬃciency through the dynamic allocation of spectrum in accordance
with the demands [12]. With the wireless networks paradigm shifting toward decentralized solutions,
plenty of base stations are deployed by MNOs where billions of multimedia devices communicating with
each other. As an indication of this trend, ﬁxed spectrum allocation and corresponding resource sharing
mechanisms are not eﬀective and scalable as well in the future wireless networks. Implementation of
blockchain with the underlying infrastructure not only provides eﬃcient spectrum sharing and resource
management but also indulge incentive due to service sharing [13].

Bitcoin and Etherum are the most popular implementations of blockchain augmenting classes of
immutable data lists. A decentralized ledger in blockchain technology is used for data recording of each
completed transaction among multiple parties on a distributed peer to peer (P2P) networks eﬃciently
[14], [15]. In addition, BCT provides a trusted, secure, and immutable platform for numerous entities
including individuals and industries in order to collaborate, digital asset exchanging, and pertaining
transactions with no requirement of controlling by the central authority. Beyond the secure payments and
storing ﬁnancial data, the blockchain applications are expanding to other domains, for example, supply
chain management, industrial manufacturing, healthcare, and education sector [16]. BCT 1.0 generally
deals with cryptocurrency (e.g., Bitcoin) and payment, BCT 2.0 handles automated digital ﬁnance, and
the most recent BCT 3.0 is associated with digital society, for instance, Industry 4.0, industrial IoT, and
smart cities [17]. The fourth industrial revolution named Industry 4.0 refers to a smart factory setup
equipped with intelligent IoT devices. On the other hand, industrial IoT (IIoT) is a subset of IoT that
has a narrow focus in transition from conventional industry to smart industry 4.0 ameliorated by the
interconnectivity of our digital society and the eminence of IoT devices.

Albeit IoT empowered applications will smooth human life and facilitates smart living, but it is
a daunting job for 5G networks to support such advanced applications. With IoT evolving, 6G will
overcome the limitations of 5G capabilities supporting ultra-speed data rate, low latency, a wide range
of coverage, localization, and other massive machine type communications. The integration of blockchain
and IoT technologies handling the limitations with solutions is studied in the literature [18] but failed
to identify the exact problems to resolving the complexity aspects. Authors [19] investigated data
sensing integrity in an integrated IoT-blockchain platform objective function to enable eﬀortless access
to the nodes in a diverse area. However, execution time, communication, and computational overhead
issues are ignored. The latency and computational power issues remain unsolved while studying the
eﬀectiveness of BC-enabled intelligent IoT systems with artiﬁcial intelligence [20]. Huang et.al. [21]
surveyed an overview of the green evolution of 6G networks describing architectural transformation and
related potential technologies including blockchain. Authors focused on the blockchain based ultra-dense
cellular IoT architecture and machine learning approach from the perspectives of research challenges and
communication technologies [22]. Reference [23] provided an extensive survey on resource management
in cellular networks and IoT systems leveraging machine learning approaches. Although such works
have laid a solid background and breakthrough technologies on 5G based IoT, the role of blockchain
in 6G enabled massive IoT systems has not been covered in the previous surveys. To ﬁll this gap, this
paper surveyed the functions of blockchain in 6G and industrial IoT in terms of network architecture,
transparency, advanced network management, key achievement of secured transactions, etc. with a wider
range of opportunities. Table I summarize the existing literature surveys and reviews in the context of

TABLE I: Literature reviews on blockchain for IoT and wireless networks

Reference Journals/Book Chapters Year Contributions

[24]

[25]

[26]

[14]

[27]

[28]

[29]

[30]

[31]

[32]

[33]

[34]

[35]

[36]

[37]

[38]

[39]

[40]

IEEE Access

2018 Development, deployment, challenges of BC based IoT applications

IEEE Internet of Things
Journal

IEEE Communications Sur-
veys & Tutorials

IEEE Access

IEEE Access

IEEE Access

IEEE Access

IEEE Communications Sur-
veys & Tutorials

IEEE Communications Sur-
veys & Tutorials

2018

BC based system performance, computational complexity, communica-
tion overhead, security issues for IoT networks

2018 Review BC based urban sustainability and use cases

2019

2019

2019

2019

2019

2019

Surveys BC implementation in industrial IoT and industry 4.0 applica-
tions
Blockchain-based security services including auth entication, conﬁden-
tiality, integrity, privacy, and related challenges

Blockchain use cases in automotive industry, opportunities, and threat
analysis

BCT in gas and oil industry pointed out eﬃciency, management frame-
work, and information security

Contemplating blockchain in edge computing enabling resource manage-
ment, self-organization, computation validity, functions integration

BCT in smart cities in terms of decentralization, transparency, democ-
racy, trust-free, automation, and security

Wireless Networks

2019 BC for privacy and security preserving of e-government system

IT Professional

2019

Reviews the security vulnerabilities in the convergence of IoT and
blockchain

Computer Security Threats

2019 Beneﬁts of blockchain in Industry 4.0 automation

Sustainability

Blockchain Technology for
Industry 4.0

IEEE Access

Digital Communications and
Networks

2020

Surveys BCT in industry 4.0 by means of privacy, integrity, and multi
factor authentications

2020 BC for data management in Industry 4.0 applications

2020

2021

Demonstrate the integration of BC with IoT for automated operations
based on mobile edge computation

Discuss the integration of blockchain in 6G in terms of resource manage-
ment, spectrum sharing, network slicing, device-to-device communication

Computer Communications

2021 Review a blockchain based IoT architecture for smart city applications

National Science Review

2021 Present cross network sharing of the blockchain radio access network

blockchain enabled wireless networks and IoT systems. All the related papers presented the potential
features of blockchain in the context of internet of things pointing to diﬀerent applications. In contrast
to other relevant papers, in this article, we dive deeper in the ﬁeld of BC enabled industrial IoT and 6G
communications with detailed recent trends, challenges, solutions, and future scopes.

A limited number of blockchain research projects have been emerged in past few years on industrial IoT
and 6G communications, hence, the industry-oriented research is still in infancy. Beyond the features
of authentication, accountability, asset tracking, BCT plays a signiﬁcant role in allowing participant
nodes to exchange information mutually in a secured manner in the perspective of smart industries.
The COVID’19 pandemic has led the world to adopt for virtual video meetings, entertainment, live
video communications ranging from education, healthcare to business. Experts have anticipated that the
performance demand for real-time and virtual interactions, the escalation of several data and computa-
tion intensive verticals, for instance, digital transactions using cryptocurrencies, industrial automation,
augmented reality, virtual reality, autonomous driving, and device-to-device communications (D2D) will
increase dramatically after post-pandemic age. A number of signiﬁcant challenges are identiﬁable in
the area of 6G communications and massive IoT implementation to cater envisaged demand surge.
The distributed blockchain ledger technology is the key enablers to address limitations and facilitates
operational standards. To the best knowledge of the authors, no literature review is conducted in the
context of BCT applications in industrial IoT and 6G networks perspectives. The key contributions of
this survey paper can be summarized as follows.

• Demonstrate the potential key features of blockchain technology of future sixth generation wireless

networks and industrial internet of things to shed light in the research communities.

• Discuss an ecosystem focused BC enabled 6G business model for the sustainable global society, IIoT,
industry 4.0 and beyond applications highlighting ﬁnancial stability, technology transfer, ecological
balance and reconstruction, environment conservation, and democratization of government bodies,

Fig. 1: Illustration of BC ledger with block details.

and innovation and entrepreneurship.

• Outline the fundamental implications of distributed ledger technologies for a wide range of 6G
ecosystem centered business model transformations of multiple stakeholders e.g., resource brokers,
micro-operators, and edge cloud operators addressing scalability, sustainability, and replicability
consequences.

• Provide extensive surveys on integrity, security, and privacy issues against cyber threats or unau-
thorized access. After that, necessary steps depend on various exhaustive layer-wise security risks
and extent eﬃcient solutions are contemplated in light of adaptive consensus algorithms and cryp-
tographic mechanisms.

• The challenging issues encountered and the potential mitigation techniques as well as future mega-
trends toward BC empowered 6G cellular and industry applications are extensively pointed out.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II presents the fundamentals of blockchain tech-
nology, architectures, merits and demerits, a broad range of application scenarios, challenges encountered,
and mitigation techniques. The beneﬁts of blockchain in 6G including technical model, BC empowered
decentralized network design, and socio-economic sustainable business model is extensively discussed
in Section III. The convergence of blockchain of IoT systems is presented in section IV. Section V
demonstrates the security and privacy issues. Furthermore, the summary of this survey and the research
challenges, future research directions, and lessons learned are presented in Section VI. Finally, Section
VII concludes the review paper.

A. Overview of Blockchain Technology (BCT)

II. Background

In recent years, BCT has drawn momentum as an emerging technology in both academia and industry
for distributed applications in 6G and industrial IoT applications over the traditional centralized system.
Blockchain is a distributed public ledger technology that circulates across all the nodes in a peer-to-peer
(P2P) network in order to record and verify transactions between participants without involvement
of the central trusted party, where a ledger database maintaining a growing list of information blocks
securely employing public key cryptography [41]. The fundamental features of BCT include transparency,
immutability, security, anonymity, and the least processing time. With the added merits of economic and
legislative features, blockchain has the potential to disrupt mobile network business enabling dynamic
mobile network operator (MNO) switching by end entities, quality enhancement, borderless roaming, and
so on in 6G networks. In blockchain based approach, IoT nodes can be classiﬁed into two categories, full
node and light node, depending on computing and storage capability. The data collected by intelligent
IoT devices combing with the computing resources from nodes enables the distributed IoT providing
services to all participants in the entire system.

B. Blockchain Architecture

A new block is identiﬁed by a hash value using secure hash cryptographic algorithm 256 [32] according
to the information of its parent block where the hash value of current block (parent) is linked and stored
in the subsequent block (child). Note that the hash value changes in accordance with the alteration
of block contents and the updated information are spreading throughout all participants in order to
invalidate that block. However, the nodes have secret keys assigned for digital signature and validation
of the transactions made by the entire mining participants in the network. Thereby, BCT does not need
to involve a trusted third party or any central intermediary authority in the BC architecture and hence,
it minimizes the processing time and cost while performing P2P transactions.

Fig. 2: Illustration of concatenated Merkle tree.

Each block has only a single parent and child that consists of header information and transaction
data. The header primarily comprised a set of following information such as a number of transactions
incurred, timestamp, block version, proof of diﬃculty, and the hash of its parent block, and concatenated
hash values of all transactions in the chain. On the other hand, a chain contains many connected blocks
continuously grows as BC users to perform transactions. A number of transactions are concatenated into
the blocks employing the Merkle root hash tree. The ﬁrst block called the genesis block from where a
chain of blocks is originated as shown in Fig. 1 1. A new block is connected to the blockchain through
a hash value depending on the information of its parent block. A validated block is appended at the
end of BC by the reference implying the parent block. A valid block may contain two or more children
blocks, when two or more nodes are connected to a block simultaneously generating multiple branches
from the same parent. However, timestamp records current time and Merkle root listed hash values of
all transactions linked together in the entire block. Fig. 2 presents the formation of Merkle tree a pair
of transactions are hashed recursively till to form one root at the top of the tree.

C. Features and Potentials of Blockchain Technology

A distributed ledger has the knowledge of network state information and legitimates any necessary
changes to be tracked. Blockchain has proven a trusted eﬀective key enabling technology by means of
scalability, interoperability, security, and privacy in data communication. In addition, BC enables the
digitalization of real world assets using cryptocurrency and exchanges them via smart contracts. This
subsection discusses the fundamental features of BC that make it attractive for 6G wireless networks
and IoT systems.

Decentralization: Blockchain uses numerous consensus algorithms to validate transactions and
maintain the ledger in a distributed way without the intervention of central authority (e.g., government,
bank). The blocks can be replicated and shared throughout the network in order to avoid the failure
risk, ensuring ﬂexibility, and strengthening data persistency.

Immutability: Blockchain does not permit the deletion of conﬁrmed transactions since each block
is connected with others via the hash value. Modiﬁcation of the information or breaking the whole chain
is very limited. This feature solves the altercation among multiple nodes (e.g., MNOs) related to national
law violations, for example, fraudulent transactions by unwanted users.

Security and Privacy: The nature of asymmetric cryptography in BC, a unique cryptographic
has is assigned to each block transaction that guarantees the integrity of the information. The inherent
features of consensus algorithm, immutability, and anonymous identiﬁcation ensure the trustworthiness,
privacy, and security of the entire chain without any modiﬁcation of past transactions.

Transparency: All the participant nodes have equal rights to access all the information of transac-
tions in BC. In other words, any nodes can interact with others while the conﬁrmed transactions remain
unchanged. However, a restriction is not employed for functioning in the entire system.

Trust-less: The participants are not deﬁnite to others in the network. The network entities can con-
verse, assist and team build with others without specialized any digital identity to carry out transactions
among them.

BCT primarily include four elementary components.

Ledger: It is a distributed and shared database containing the information of all performed trans-
actions within the network. Ledger ensures the veriﬁcation and validation of every transaction among
plenty of entities concurrently. The information cannot be deleted or modiﬁed once the transactions are
performed successfully.

TABLE II: Comparison of diﬀerent consensus algorithms.

Algorithm

Transaction/sec

PoW

10

PoS

10

PoW+PoS PBFT DPoS

PoA

100

1000

1000

10000

Latency

Security

Scalability

Throughput

Power consumption

Fairness
Anonymity

Type

Block Creation

10-60 min

5-60 min

5-50 min

<1 sec

<1 sec <1 sec

High

Low

Low

High

Low

Low

Low

Low

Medium
High

Medium
Medium

Medium

Low

Low

Medium

Medium
Medium

Permissionless

Probabilistic

Low

High

High

Low

Low
Low

Low

High

High

Low

Low
High

High

High

High

Low

Low
Low

Permissioned

Deterministic

Consensus: Consensus protocol validates each action in the network in order to avoid single miner
node dominance in terms of the entire blockchain network management and manipulating the transaction
history. However, the participants have to reach an agreement using predeﬁned consensus blockchain
algorithms. Proof of Stake (PoS), Delegated PoS, Proof of Work (PoW), Proof of Data (PoD), Proof of
Authenticity (PoA), Proof of Existence (PoE), and practical Byzantine-Fault-Tolerance (PBFT) [14] are
the diﬀerent consensus mechanisms contemplated to validate transactions. For instance, PoW is used
in Bitcoin whereas Bitshare and Ethureum employ PoS and DPoS [32]. A new block called mining is
created under PoW protocol, which requires to solve a cryptographic puzzle for each individual block. The
winning miner who solves the puzzle ﬁrst and generates new blocks are rewarded using cryptocurrency.
The miner nodes add a new block (mine) in order to solve a complicated mathematical puzzle that
demands signiﬁcant computational power and thereafter, gets rewards in bitcoins [32].

The node possessing more computational and processing power has more chances to be the winning
manner. PoW has a feature that any user can build a block after proving a speciﬁed amount of work.
However, PoW is an expansive consensus process that requires considerable computational resources.
In PoS, a node generates a new block deterministically based on its wealth only to corroborate new
transactions and blocks. Unlike PoS, the PoW consensus protocol does not depend on the mining process
but execute block validation. Each validator who executes block validation owns a security deposit stake
in the network called a bond. In contrast, DPoS employs real time voting and reputation scheme to
solve consensus problems by creating a board of limited trusted delegates for validation. Finally, in
PBFT approach, all the participants have known each other and can select the priority of importance
[42]. It is worth mentioning that the blockchain performance highly depends on a suitable consensus
algorithm since MNO experiences thousands of transactions per second based on user mobility, traﬃc
intensity, and other factors. However, security, scalability, and throughput are three primary concerns
among the aforementioned algorithms. Considering the dynamic deployment scenarios, new consensus
protocols are expected to be conceived in the foreseeable future. Table II shows the comparison among
various consensus algorithms adopted in BCT [43].

Cryptography: This feature secured all network information using asymmetric encryption and al-

lowed the authorized entities to decrypt the original data.

Smart Contracts: This feature allows software-deﬁned algorithm of distinctive transactions auto-
matically with self-executing computations in accordance with the predeﬁned conditions. In other words,
a smart contract is an automated digitalized transaction protocol that executed the contents and terms
involved in a multi-step and distributed way. Moreover, smart contracts can empower the potential of
software deﬁned networks in 6G networks for enhanced network management and ﬂexible agreements
between end users and cellular operators [9]. There have multiple use cases and applications of smart
contracts for facilitating distributed functions such as voting, auctions, crowdfunding, micropayments,
etc. [44]. All peer nodes in the P2P blockchain network can inspect the operations of smart contracts
cryptographically using computerized transaction protocol.

Based on the accessing strategy and permission of entities to write BCT network, BCT can be classiﬁed

into four types [35].

Permission less: Everyone with computing power participates in public BCTs to perform transac-
tions and join in the mining node and consensus process for adding new blocks of transactions in the
chain. This type of BCT normally used PoS or PoW consensus algorithms [24].

Fig. 3: Layered structure of Blockchain.

Permissioned: Only the approved users can participate for speciﬁc business needs in the scheme.

Approved organizations are likely to have connectivity with existing applications.

Public: Limited trusted entities can access the BCT network and be able to write/modify the data,
where entities may opt for consortium BCTs. The public access chain is a permissionless proof based
security scheme, which assures network reliability for every user regardless of their identity at entry level
access. The public chains essentially bring signiﬁcant beneﬁts for adhoc networks where the restriction of
identiﬁcation is broken for panoptic data exchange. In addition, public chains can substantially regulate
the order of participants and increase the eﬃciency of the community [2].

Private: Only the speciﬁc users have the permission to write over BCT is given to a central body.
Private BCT oﬀers ﬂexibility by increasing control over the transaction rules, which can be changed
by overall consensus. The private/consortium is permissioned where the entry of the participants is
controlled but not kept in secret. The private chain has a stable community composition and network
experiences a smaller number of security threats from unknown attacks [2].

Network layer broadcasts transactions and control messages to the entire network. Each participant
fetches unprocessed transactions for newly mined blocks that will require scaling to downsize the number
of incumbent transactions. However, the network topology and the broadcast protocol can be reconﬁgured
to be more eﬃcient and dedicated for the high-speed relay network. Consensus layer assures three way
trade-oﬀ among consensus speed, bandwidth, and security for all participants. Sharding is the potential
extent eﬃcient option that divides the consensus tasks among a set of users in order to enhance consensus
speed. Storage layer is the leger that stores participants’ state changes resulting from read and write
operations. On the other hand, the view layer stores the current state of all nodes and smart contracts,
connected to the storage layer. The oﬀ-chain with cryptographic proof method curtails the computational
burden, and thereby increases system eﬃciency [45]. The operation of transactions, authentication with
blockchain, and ﬁnal execution are performed in the side layer. A details of BCT layered architecture is
demonstrated in Fig. 3.

D. Challenges and Solution Outlines

Apart from the aforementioned features, blockchain based IoT and 6G wireless systems oﬀer some

potential advantages.

Greater reliability and scalability: Data transactions are stored in diﬀerent servers which cannot be
altered unless the consent of all active participants through proper consensus protocol. The BC enabled
system can readily scale up allowing new users and devices to be connected automatically following the
consensus policy.

Improved resiliency and auditability: The system is resilient to DoS, DDoS, malware attacks by
avoiding single point failure. All the transactions history can be traced easily after operations since data
remain unchanged in the system.

Improved accessibility and veriﬁability: Information ownership belongs to each individual where
they are responsible to validate a new entity to access their information. Storing information at diverse
locations increases speedy access easily. However, all new data transactions are veriﬁed by all active
participant nodes before being added to the blockchain.

Enhanced transparency and data quality: All recorded data and new transactions are validated prior
to making the information authentic with desired quality. All the nodes share the same copy in the
network and new transactions are performed in accordance with the associated consensus mechanism.

Higher eﬃciency and low cost: New users can access recorded data based on the accessibility
privilege. New records are distributed to all nodes in the chain. Operational cost is signiﬁcantly reduced
since no middle organization is involved to process transactions.

Albeit the potential beneﬁts of blockchain in 6G and massive IoT applications, numerous challenges
required to be addressed prior its widespread deployment. Some implementation challenges and possible
solutions of blockchain are discussed following.

Scalability: Because of its distributed nature, cryptocurrency such as Bitcoin requires large band-
width, ample storage and computing capacity to pledge the ledger integrity. Bitcoin protocol deals
with a massive number of information being transferred and broadcasted among the participant nodes.
Latency and scalability issues restrict the performance of blockchain enabled applications. For instance,
Bitcoin has maximum achievable throughput of seven transactions per second of a 10-minute latency
for a conﬁrmed block and four days bootstrap time. In contrast, Visa transaction promises about 56000
transactions/ sec [46].

Double spending and other attacks: A user perform two distinct cryptocurrency transactions from
the same amount of currency, thereby, it breaks the integrity of the distributed ledger. However, a miner
may damage honesty of miner blocks in PoW consensus mechanism to achieve more reward under selﬁsh
mining attacks. On the other hand, a user generates multiple BC accounts to leak transaction privacy
and manipulating transactions.

Diﬀerent cryptographic algorithms can be employed to prevent disclosing users’ private information

among participants.

Ring Signature: A digital signature is applicable for a group participant where all users remain
anonymous and ensure that the message is endorsed by the members. A privacy-oriented cryptocurrency
called Monero uses ring signature to guarantee the conﬁdentiality of members’ private information [45].
Zero Knowledge Proof: This method permits honest entities to convince other parties of statement
validation with high degree of conﬁdentiality. The downside is the increasing complexity of transactions
approval. Zcash, a privacy protecting cryptocurrency is the example of zero knowledge arguments in
BCT [45].

Coin Mixing: This method makes obscure the coin owners’ address to assure their anonymity
through shuﬄing the information and coin transferring. CoinShuﬄe is a decentralized coin mixing scheme,
where each node generates an output address before transmitting the information to other participants.
When all the nodes have their own output address, they broadcasted to the whole network. However,
the computation overload and bandwidth usage are further increased in this policy.

E. Blockchain in Industry 4.0 and Industrial IoT

The concept of Industry 4.0 is expected to lead distributed, dynamic, and automated production
networks driven by multiple key technological enablers such as blockchain, industrial IoT, artiﬁcial
intelligence, edge computing, big data, human web integration, robotics automation, and open source
software. It is anticipated that the ICT sector plays signiﬁcant role in sustainable industry automation to
support global socio-economic sustainability. The interconnected cyber physical systems (CPS) enabled
industrial automation in Industry 4.0; thereby, allowing the transformation of autonomous and dynamic
systems from the conventional industrial production process and infrastructure [35]. In other words, BCT
helps to build sustainable development by providing safe and secure communication schemes using key
authentication to assure access control management, nonrepudiation, and authenticity. All the smart
entities communicate autonomously with each other to attain the common goal under such a highly
integrated network. Industry 4.0 is based on the idea of a smart contract in blockchain, which plays a
key role of protecting service level agreement (SLA) speciﬁcation between a supplier and consumers from
violation by enforcing trustability and data integrity [47]. SLA service is integrated with a smart contract
among diﬀerent participants to satisfy SLA speciﬁcations; thus, blockchain technology facilitates SLA
services in Industry 4.0 applications with a greater level of integrity and traceability.

The realization of Industry 4.0 encompasses three paradigms with the diﬀerent functioning processes
including cloud computing, big data analytics, logistics, enterprise resource planning, and product devel-
opment [48]. The smart entities control the resources and regulate the industrial manufacturing process
till the end. Secondly, the conventional production process is converted into distributed, ﬂexible, self-
organizing, and adaptable production lines done by the smart machine in a cyber physical system. An
augmented operator is the third paradigm that facilitates the capability and ﬂexibility of a human
operator by means of handling, monitoring, veriﬁcation of the production process in the manufacturing
industry. Leveraging BCT provides a cooperative environment for augmenting workers using a human-
machine interface collaborating among entities in the whole manufacturing process. For instance, the real-
time information sharing among entities via digital communication network of remote edge computing
and warehouse data storage capability in a secured way.

Industrial IoT (IIoT) is a cyber physical system (CPS), where humans, computers, and machines
empowering intelligent industrial functioning using advanced data analytics for radical business out-
comes. IIoT allows the integration of internet infrastructure, communication protocols, and wireless
sensor networks (WSN) to ease the industrial intelligent automated operations for cognition, analysis,
and management, which enhance eﬃciency and safety [14]. IIoT architecture primarily consists of three
layers namely physical, communication and application layer. The physical layer comprises sensors,
manufacturing equipment, actuators, smart nodes, and intelligent data servers. Numerous access network
technologies such as 5G, WSN, machine-to-machine (M2M) communication, device-to-device (D2D)
connectivity are used in the communication layer enabling services to physical devices in the physical
layers for industrial automation and manufacturing. The physical layer and communication layer form
an industrial CPS to support the production and development of smart supply chains, smart factories
under the application layer. However, the networking, computation, and controlling infrastructures of
IIoT CPS enable the intelligent operations of the manufacturing process.

III. Blockchain Empowered 6G Wireless Network Architecture

Blockchain is regarded as an emerging technology to unleash the potentials of 6G, enabling distributed
network management (e.g., spectrum, caching, computation) systems that can be used for resource
sharing and management, data storage, spectrum regulator, and so on. A distributed ledger records and
audits the resource trading transactions in a simpliﬁed way. Real-time spectrum sharing market using
decentralized BC ledger will bring higher spectrum trading eﬃciencies and nullify spectrum scarcity
managing unused relative frequency bands. Blockchain is considered as a resource-hungry technique
in terms of data transmission and complex computation. Few research works have been carried out
dedicated to BC-enabled spectrum management [49]–[51], but ignored the eﬃciency of blockchain itself
ranging from the framework architecture to the optimization problem.

The spectrum regulator from the government body builds strong-level policies and constraints on BC
enabled smart contracts which are implausible to break. The regulator body maintains fair spectrum
regulation throughout the country, harmonizing various wireless access technologies, handling transceiver
power and interference, controlling spectrum coordination and trading, and so on. On the other hand,
spectrum owners purchase a license from the spectrum regulator in particular frequency bands on a
nationwide basis. Depending on smart contracts, spectrum owners can exploit bandwidth or share with
other MNOs for better spectrum utilization. In addition, network infrastructure owners can share their
resources such as macrocells, microcells, and data servers with other wireless operators relying on smart
contracts. This approach can drive new business models where investment by stakeholders will share with
existing MNOs contemplating the blockchain platform. For instance, a construction company can build
cellular stations for a prospective rental by MNOs. User equipment (UEs) can dynamically switch among
MNOs via service level agreement (SLA) in the blockchain. However, end users can act like infrastructure
owners optionally by using smartphones for device-device (D2D) communications. End users can select
a particular operator among multiple MNOs based on service quality, price of package, volumes, and
coverage areas. The tokenization of infrastructure and spectrum is the key aspect of the aforementioned
trading over the blockchain. The spectrum regulatory body deﬁned the allocated money price of the radio
resource token (RRT) based on the user request, area of deployment, and other economic values [52].
Besides, the infrastructure resource token (IRT) is recognized as a stable coin in ﬁat currency where
the static price is subject to negotiation in BC smart contract based on location, type, energy cost,
and so on. Finally, the national cryptocurrency (i.e, USD, EURO, etc.) is digital equivalent to the ﬁat
currency of the respective country where the cellular networks are deployed. Telecom operators have the
capability to buy and sell RRT or IRT in exchange of nationwide cryptocurrency via a smart contract
platform [52].

A national consortium blockchain ledger process the mobile network information to maintain a con-
siderable number of wireless nodes. Whereas a worldwide public BC ledger contains UE information to
ensure seamless connectivity over the globe. National consortium spectrum ledger embodies information
about system bandwidth, licensing zone, downlink/uplink duplex mode, owner of MNO and assigned
MNOs, licensing fees, frequency allocation, and so on. National consortium infrastructure ledger deals
with each eNode B (eNB) such as frequency band, positioning, cognitive radio technologies, assigned
MNOs, transmit power, coverage area, signal intensity, and so on. National consortium mobile operator
ledger consists of information about the service functional area of each MNO, supported SLAs, token
balance (RTT/IRT), and so on. Worldwide UE ledger comprises end user’s information, for example, NC
balance, uplink data transmission, and tracking area. Notably, the authorized government bodies can
access UE information and should not be exposed to the public. On the other hand, MNO can access
only particular data that is permitted to ensure enhance service quality.

A. Spectrum Management

With the unprecedented growth of high speed data demand of 5G and beyond, the requirement for more
spectrum bands also increases accordingly. A dynamic spectrum management policy has been proposed
in Reference [53], which allows unlicensed participants to access the licensed spectrum opportunistically
without interfering with the licensed users. The implementation of blockchain as a trusted database plat-
form has emerged in various spectrum managing aspects such as spectrum auctions, spectrum sensing,
spectrum lease mapping, data mining outcomes, and idle spectrum details are recorded securely in the
blockchain [54]. It has been also identiﬁed that the features of blockchain bring opportunities to reduce
the administrative expenses related with dynamic spectrum management and able to make signiﬁcant
improvement over the traditional spectrum management approaches. Moreover, blockchain helps to
overcome the incentive conjoined with dynamic spectrum management and the security challenges in
a decentralized manner. A few other advantages of spectrum management recording information are
presented here.

In contrast to the conventional middleman database, BC enables participants to have direct control of
the recorded data, hence guaranteeing the accuracy of the information including underutilized spectrum,
time, interference protection requirements. A smart contract in blockchain ensures access fairness over
the carrier sensing multiple access (CSMA) technique where the access history is not coordinated
and recorded. Enhanced spectrum utilization eﬃciency of both primary and secondary users adjusting
traﬃc demands achieved through BC enabled eﬃcient management scheme. The characteristic of BC
empowered dynamic spectrum resource allocation prevents fraud by providing transparency, restrict
unauthorized users from accessing the allocated spectrum, and pledge the auction payments since all
the executed transactions are validated before recoding in the blockchain database [50].

B. Beneﬁts of BCT in 6G

Infrastructure and Resource Management: The resource management functions including spectrum
sharing, orchestration, computing, communication, caching, and decentralization are challenging tasks
in the massive connectivity demands of next-generation telecom infrastructure. Blockchain technology
solves infrastructure sharing challenges between numerous mobile network operators (MNOs) in multiple
ways. Firstly, tracking the infrastructure usage of each MNO and manage the corresponding payment
using cryptocurrencies. Afterthat, infrastructure resources can be booked in advance using smart con-
tracts. In addition, additional expenses (i.e., internet provider, electricity usage, real state, etc.) can be
equally distributed of infrastructure utilization between MNOs allowing the integration of third parties
in the blockchain [8], [55]. On the other hand, telecom regulatory bodies cannot track real-time spectrum
usage and restrain unfair behavior under existing technology. Moreover, the mixing of diﬀerent types (e.g.,
licensed, unlicensed) of spectrum band from diﬀerent network operators and wireless standard introduce
additional complexity. Furthermore, the complexity of interference handling and real time agreements
escalate incentive issues for dynamic spectrum sharing. The integration of automated spectrum trading
mechanism under blockchain technology with the existing mobile network infrastructure address the
aforementioned problem proving smart contracts agreement among MNOs [49], [50]. A details illustration
of resource management procedure comprising energy infrastructure, communication and computing
architectures using blockchain is demonstrated in Fig. 4.

Network Slicing and Resource Brokerage: The smart contract orders the network slice orchestration
relying on the service level agreement (SLA) from the broker under the blockchain based network slice
trading. A smart contract keeps the record of the usage of each resource and the performance of the service
provider against the SLA. The trustworthiness feature enabled by BCT diminishes the collaboration bar-
rier, thereby, ensure eﬃcient ecosystem and security. Moreover, a BC based approach is used to automate

Fig. 4: Blockchain enabled resource management framework in 6G communications.

the payment, billing, leasing between service providers, and reconciliation in diverse geographies while
ignoring the presence of third party in the service layer. Moreover, BCT based automated resource
brokerage of network slicing provides some additional beneﬁts, for instance, signiﬁcant reduction of
the operational cost, increase operational eﬃciency for each network slice, faster the slicing negotia-
tion process and agreement, uplift the enforcement of straightforward agreement related to brokering
operations. In addition, blockchain technology also facilitates cross-carrier payment and money transfer
across countries, manage license spectrum access, easy provision of roaming terms and agreement among
MNOs, and authorization of network elements.

Authentication, Access Control, Integrity and Accountability: Typically, a mobile user uses a sub-
scriber identity module (SIM) in existing mobile networks. Whenever a subscriber needs to change
MNOs, one must change SIM card either physically or electronically. A unique wallet ID is assigned to
all end users for identiﬁcation among all MNOs that enable operator-agnostic user quality of experience
governed by the competitive mobile network environment [8]. The dispersed ledger technology employed
authority, inspection, and complex security for content-centric 6G wireless networks which remain as
immutable and transparent for each event that can be utilized during auditing.

International Roaming and Service Level Agreement (SLA): Blockchain mostly depends on the
internet connection availability, does not rely on the administrative borders of countries. However,
the conventional international transaction method is signiﬁcantly slow and expensive, while ﬁnancial
transactions using cryptocurrencies across the globe is a matter of few seconds with negligible costs.
Therefore, with the advent feature of borderless networking, BC eliminates the international roaming
constraint as there is no complexity in data connection between domestic and overseas MNOs [56].
It is widely observed that the majority of end users are not entirely satisﬁed with the package plan
because it may be either costly but redundant or cheap but limited data availability. Selecting MNO
and an appropriate mobile package plan include a trade-oﬀ between price plan, signal coverage, quality of
service, and multiple other aspects. Blockchain can address this shortcoming by enabling ﬂexible service
level agreement smart contracts between end subscriber and MNO in quasi real time [57].

Local Area Wireless Networks: Under the current centralized model, very few cellular operators
deploy nationwide wireless networks, experience complex infrastructure development and maintenance.
Owing to expensive license spectrum fees, the micro size local MNOs cannot compete in the market in
a large scale that leads local telecom operators unproﬁtable. Blockchain smart contracts address local
spectrum allocation problem in real time where a small MNO acquire unused frequency band from large
operators over the speciﬁed coverage area and time. In addition, blockchain oﬀers greater level policies
and monitoring spectrum usage by MNOs across the country, to the central regulatory commission. This

Fig. 5: Blockchain enabled framework for 6G business model [61].

feature allows a hybrid spectrum distribution market, where MNOs have the authority to trade parts
of spectrum and the regulatory body may restrict bandwidth usage in particular areas, for example,
military, border defense to avoid interference.

Cloud/Edge Computing: Cloud computing facilitates the oﬄoading of complex computations to
distant servers for the resource-constrained user equipment. Edge computing overcomes the heavy com-
putation burden on backhaul networks, long latency, and privacy compared to cloud oﬄoading [49].
Notably, trustworthiness and security are the primary concerns since sensitive information may involve
while oﬄoading computations. Blockchain can build the desired trust between the edge servers and smart
devices guaranteeing the integrity of the remote resources and oﬄoaded computations [58].

C. Ecosystem Focused 6G Business Model

Given the recent global economic crisis, the business models in 6G will shift toward distributed
local edge small operators, software, and virtualized network service providers from monopolized service
operators since the existing business structure has a considerable impact on the sustainable global society.
Unlike 5G networks, the 6G network oﬀers a wide range of connectivity between real-time dynamic cyber
physical world and multiple upfront KPIs, which will inspire various verticals, technology, product, and
applications developers for the next generation society 5.0. Moreover, the advent features of 6G tangle
with virtualization, intelligence, spectrum sharing between MNOs, edge operations, and a variety of
IoT devices; altogether services will push forward into smart living and will be an integral option of
smart society [59]. Blockchain empowered decentralized architectures envisioned as prospective extension
eﬃcient solutions for sustainability, user experience and business, which support multiple verticals in 6G
wireless networks perspectives [60]. Sustainability, replicability, and scalability are the proposed key
enablers for future 6G business platforms by means of service agility, orchestration, open collaboration,
and zero touch management [60]. Sustainability speciﬁes viability, feasibility, environmental, and social
impact, whereas replicability refers to external ﬂexibility to comply. In contrast, scalability indicates the
potential for internal growth and ﬂexibility. Furthermore, value creation, capture, sharing, and delivery
are regarded as key parameters for functioning the 6G business model. Fig. 5 depicts the blockchain
enabled framework for 6G business model.

It is commonly believed that the future 6G business arena is embodied by an automated and seamless
market data collection from dynamic business platforms and humans. 6G will support a user-friendly
environment of intelligent big data analysis for sustainable high-end products and services to address spe-
cialized demands by the consumers under a wide range of geographic locations. In addition, 6G technology
will assist crowdsourcing and advanced cutting-edge distribution to accelerate fair resource distribution
in order to support MNOs sharing in sustainable business models. Ecosystem focused sustainable 6G
business is key to ﬁnancial stability, human empowerment driven by knowledge creation, technology

Fig. 6: BCT based distributed IoT architecture.

transfer and adaption, innovation and entrepreneurship, ecological balance and reconstruction, envi-
ronment conservation, and democratization of government bodies [61]. The advancement of sustainable
6G business solutions will empower IoT devices and other electronic gadgets to operate remotely in a
standalone manner and simplify human lives. Peer-to-peer cooperative models and distributed business
models under BC enabled 6G solutions is an acceptable approach against a monopoly market that will
support a circular economy both in urban and rural areas [59]. In addition, BC based 6G business models
oﬀer cloud storage for over the top (OTT) companies, cognitive services such as context aware operations,
AI, UAV as a service together with calling and data connectivity features, envisioned to attract customers
and increase their proﬁt. Moreover, digital twins and the FinTech industry will add a new dimension of
business pattern with 6G in addition to the e-government policy regulations. In the case of industry 4.0
and beyond applications, BC empowered business models will provide extreme reliability, privacy-aware
secure communications, zero touch assistance, etc. in prolonged lifetime wireless nodes which will bring
new business evolution using these technologies [59]. As a consequence, the sustainable BC enabled 6G
business model will introduce numerous new forms of business structures and opportunities to uplift
revenue.

IV. Convergence of Blockchain for Massive IoT

In recent years, IoT system integrates multiple distinctive heterogeneous sensors and objects in our
smart living era facilitating the information exchange among all nodes. With the rapid expansion of
network coverage and intelligent evolution of smart devices, conventional IoT systems failed to meet
advanced eﬃcacy, interoperability, network management, privacy, and security vulnerabilities, partic-
ularly in the high degree of complex data handling. The centralized IoT architecture experiences high
maintenance cost, is vulnerable to unwanted attacks and suﬀers scalability problems [33], [62]. To address
these challenges, an autonomous distributed system is more feasible for trusted users to participate
independently. Moreover, multi participants cooperation ensures the system consistency while a node
is crashed by single point failure. A decentralized IoT scheme also reduces the storage load and com-
putational complexity while participants synchronize the entire system copying blockchain leader. The
autonomic interaction of IoT devices attained through smart contracts (when the contract clauses are
satisﬁed) in BC that allowed cooperation among each other without any middleman. A decentralized
blockchain-IoT (BIoT) architecture is shown in ﬁg. 6 illustrating on featured applications.

A. Research Challenges

IoT systems are heterogeneous in nature comprises of distinctive machines, sensors, robots, vehicles,
and so on, which generate diﬀerent types (e.g., structured, non-structured and semi-structured) of mas-
sive data. Moreover, numerous resources such as caching, communication, computing, sensing, control,
and localization need to be considered under resource management challenges. In addition, huge IoT data

TABLE III: Potential contributions and challenges of blockchain enabled IoT system in 6G

Reference Contributions

Limitations

Fundamental functions of blockchain
in IoT privacy issues

High computational cost

[63]

[64]

[18]

[32]

[65]

[19]

[49]

[66]

[67]

[68]

[69]

[70]

[71]

[35]

[37]

BC structure identify the connectiv-
ity between BC and IoT devices for
veriﬁcation
Examined the integration of IoT and
blockchain
a
Proposed
government P2P scheme
BCT including privacy issues

decentralized

e-
using

BC oﬀers solutions for IoT devices
handling in a smart way addressing
limitations
BC integrated IoT platform investi-
gate data sensing integrity in diverse
area of applications

Intelligent and secure architecture
improves the eﬀectiveness using deep
reinforcement learning

Logchian for guaranteeing block in-
tegrity

Poor security issue

Computational complexity high

2018

Suitable consensus algorithms are
not focused

2018

Reliability level not improved

2019

High communication overhead

2019

Privacy level not improved

Security aspect not addressed

BC base edge computing enhance
IoT system performance

Resource optimization not ad-
dressed

Centralized architecture lessens the
computational overhead

Computation power high

BC-IoT prevent hacking and infor-
mation infringement

Authenticity is not validated for
assuring security level

Decentralized and asymmetric cryp-
tographic platform avoid the pres-
ence of central authority for commu-
nication
BC reﬁnes the concept of cybetwin
for secure production

Data conﬁdentiality is not
proved

im-

2020

Privacy issues ignored

Implementation of BCT in Industry
4.0 for cyber threats analysis

Scalability, conﬁdentiality and la-
tency issues are not presented

Investigate security issues of BC en-
abled IoT and mobile edge comput-
ing

Computational cost not addressed

2020

Year

2018

2018

2019

2019

2019

2020

2020

2020

2020

are challenging to manage in terms of transmission, elaboration, and storage under a data management
scheme.

Interoperability: The information exchanging among IoT devices and the capability of data com-
munications with physical systems is termed as interoperability, which is accounted as a key challenging
concern for IoT in 6G due to multiple protocols and cross-layer architectures. Multiple operational
platforms such as radio access operators, caching vendors, edge computing vendors, and so on exist
together to provide a broad range of services to diverse types of IoT devices. It is impractical to
collaborate with multiple service operators, vendors, industrial sectors, diﬀerent data centers, and IoT
systems under existing network architecture. However, a uniﬁed authorization and authentication are
needed to combine individual systems of diﬀerent bodies. Furthermore, the provision of diverse services
and valid payment methods to various service providers and associated vendors is required to be audited
and ensured without the presence of any trusted entity.

Privacy and Security: It is essential to prevent the disclosure of huge data generated by massive
IoT devices without users’ consent, which may include conﬁdential and private information. Owing
to the complexity, decentralization, and heterogeneity of IoT systems, the protection of users’ privacy
and security is a challenging task. Moreover, the recent trend of integrating cloud technologies (e.g.,
fog/edge/cloud) with IoT systems empowering diverse applications which is vulnerable if clouds are
attacked, breaching participants’ privacy [72]. Note that the current IoT methods for ensuring security,
privacy, and information handling capability in 6G heavily rely on third parties.

Standard and Latency: When a greater number of devices are connected in P2P network, the risk of
external attack also increases due to the lack of standard regulation device applications. Guaranteeing the

Fig. 7: Potential challenges and solutions of blockchain-IoT (BoT) scheme.

minimum latency is another key challenge for high-speed communications for various IoT devices while
operating in a large bandwidth range. Table III summarize the potential contributions and challenges
of blockchain enabled IoT system in 6G.

B. Possible Solutions

An integration of IoT in blockchain is termed as Blockchain of Things (BoT). With the inherent
emerging properties of BC, i.e., decentralized nature, distributed consensus, cryptographic encryption,
trust-less system, and non-repudiation pledge, BoT is contemplated as the key enabler of massive IoT
deployment together with the revolution of next generation wireless communication technologies [21].
In addition, BoT oﬀers some extended advantages including interoperability, traceability, scalability,
reliability, data quality, and trustworthiness. A powerful decentralized BoT architecture is constructed
with developer tools for security, smart contracts, and contract execution with a greater level of reliability.
BoT can reform the development of IoT with dependence, open and auditable platform. The integration
of BoT with 6G oﬀer some potential beneﬁts for IoT deployment and end users, particularly in industrial
applications, for example, choosing multiple services from any organization, choosing anything from
anywhere, choosing any route from any network. These features allow BoT to provide some extended
aspects, such as trust building between 6G enabled IoT applications and end users, cost reduction due
to removal of intermediate node and direct service, and real-time rapid transaction service [37]. Fig. 7
presents the possible challenges of blockchain empowered IoT automation with potential solutions.

Decentralization: Paradigm shifting towards decentralization eliminating failure to escalation fault
tolerance performance. BoT restricts the autarchy of resources against corruption while managing data
information [73].

Autonomy and Interoperability: BoT enables autonomy function for implementing industrial IoT
applications by means of cooperating mobile devices with each other. Blockchain composite layer on
P2P network empower the data communications with physical system and have the capability to ex-
change information in the entire IoT system with uniform access by providing a uniﬁed authorization,
authentication, and billing system [74].

Traceability and Reliability: The feature of historic timestamp in blockchain empower the detection
and authentication of IoT data (e.g, temporal-spatial information of data block). The trustworthiness
of data quality is termed as the reliability of IoT data which can be guaranteed through asymmetric
encryption mechanisms, hash inclusions, and digital signature. Each user in the BoT architecture is
allowed for validating the transaction legitimacy with full conﬁdence and responsibility.

Security: Information exchanges between inter-device communications are regarded as transactions
considering new agreements to support security. A manufacturer allows IoT devices for updating securely
incorporating secure code deployment.

TABLE IV: Security issues and common steps [32]

Services

Necessary Steps

Access control

Digital signature and encryption

Authentication

BC address and digital signature

Privacy

Integrity

Availability

Encryption

Encryption & digital signature

Distributed

Trust

Encryption & digital signature, distributed

V. Security and Privacy Aware BC

Since 6G connects diverse types of voluminous and distributed smart devices, services, and appli-
cations, so privacy, security, and reliability are the paramount requirements of data management for
high-end users and industries as well. Developing a reliable ubiquitous trustworthy BC model into 6G
networks coordinate between end users and network entities to collect and prevent suspicious misbehavior
actions including non-repudiation and indirect reciprocity. Despite the potential beneﬁts of BC technol-
ogy, numerous privacy and security issues against cyber threats or unauthorized access have been key
concerns while convergence with 6G networks and IoT devices. It is essential to guarantee the integrity,
conﬁdentiality, and availability of data services for each transaction. However, integrity is attained by
protecting transaction data without any modiﬁcation; preventing information to unauthorized users to
achieved conﬁdentiality; whilst service availability refers data information is available when needed which
is free from denial of service (DoS) attack or other identical service disruption. A DoS attack targets
the services or system availability through ﬂooding with requests to its legitimate users to make the
service unavailable. In other words, the attacker ﬂooded the server with massive requests pushing the
workstation to commit all computer resources and forcing the network server to malfunction leading to
a crash. On the other hand, distributed DoS (DDoS) contribute simultaneous ﬂood requests come from
multiple sources in the network [35].

The buﬀer overﬂow within the server disables security systems, especially the ﬁrewall and intrusion
detection system. In addition, the cloud-based modern intelligent factories and manufacturing production
are highly suﬀered from multiple DoS attacks if the cloud server is not designed to protect against
such threat [75]. Moreover, the impacts of DoS attack can immensely aﬀect Industry 4.0 applications
because of using a substantial range of vulnerable sensors. The fundamental challenge of DoS is the
detection and quantifying of the emerging risks in the network. Reports [35], [76] suggest that the
transition to industrial IoT (IIoT) develops control policies, builds security awareness and authentication
mechanisms including behavioral assessment to prevent hacking and digital encryption technologies. The
data ﬂow in IIoT systems manifests innumerable points of vulnerability, and hackers can steal data at
any point without suitable protective measures. Particularly, hackers can access cyber physical protection
systems which collaborating with surrounding physical systems either physically or logically. With the
escalation of collaborative threats and industrial espionage, many smart industries developing intelligent
security techniques and control policies to guarantee trust and transparency aiming to defend conﬁdential
information [15], [29], [77]. Using the hash function and cryptography proofs among diﬀerent linked smart
contracts can be regarded as a promising solution in blockchain technology by preserving the integrity
and detecting any malicious modiﬁcations. Moreover, contemplating a Mongo database in BC can also
enforce security algorithm, and oﬀers additional cryptography proofs against conﬁdentiality threats and
attacks [35].

Asymmetric encryption and digital signature are employed in the network to pledge security, whereas
a private key is assigned to a particular user for validating the transaction, which enables shield for
unauthorized access or adversarial attempts to data modiﬁcation. To increase the privacy of transaction
data stored in the system, public key cryptography is used employing incomprehensible hashes of all
blocks in the chain. Since the individual user’s data is stored in various nodes in a decentralized
P2P system which ensures the service availability ignoring the single point failure. Notably, any valid
transactions received from the BC network are permitted by the witness particular for the malicious
nodes to prevent unauthorized connections [32]. The diﬀerent sorts of security services and corresponding
necessary steps taken to guarantee adequate security and privacy of transactions are summarized in Table
IV.

The security concerns can be the network and communication security, authentication and iden-
tity management, establishment of trust protocol, distributed cooperation, reliable consensus policy,

and transaction privacy and security in designing distributed 6G networks and industrial IoT. All
the nodes in a distributed IoT system interact autonomously without involving a central server. As
a consequence, such openness may lead to numerous impacts, for example, launching text spooﬁng,
node capture, eavesdropping can ﬁlch system data partially to compromise the stability issue of massive
IoT systems. Compared to RSA based cryptographic algorithm, the Elliptic Curve Digital Signature
Algorithm (ECDSA) outperforms in network security particularly for smaller key strings and faster
operation [78]. In order to improve computational eﬃciency, UE devices will run a lightweight node
to store transactions information instead of entire copy of blockchain which leads to a reduction of
storage burden. However, the elliptic curve cryptography (ECC) method oﬀers a similar privacy level
with Rivest-Shamir-Adleman (RSA) approach, but ECC requires less number of bits for encryption
and digital framework. For example, 256-bit ECC provides the same security level as 3072-bit key in
RSA [32]. However, a shorter asymmetric key occupies low CPU space, faster key production, and
lower memory usage. ECC algorithm has been recognized as a promising solution in terms of safety
and reliability in the blockchain context such as Ethereum and Bitcoin. It is worth mentioning that
IoT sensing devices are energy constrained and subject to limited storage capacity and computational
algorithms. Applying ECC lightweight cryptographic algorithm may fail to meet the demand on limited
memory and computational load under energy constrained aspects. According to [33], ECDSA based
algorithm oﬀers optimum communication performance that realizes to balance between memory limit
and energy consumption.

All the transactions containing content, frequency, destinations are shared in the blockchain which
may lead to potential security and privacy risks that unwanted entities can infer the real identity of
participants. In the convergence of BC and IoE, adversaries can even track physical IP address of wireless
nodes and IoT devices which may eventually make system crashes and destabilization through denial-
of-service attack. Henceforth, it is essential to protect sensitive information such as physical location,
network address, device class, and other private information about the nodes especially during recording
the transactions data. A homographic and zero knowledge proof are potential encryption methods for
privacy safety via ensuring the conﬁdentiality of transaction records in the public blockchain [79].

The ever-increasing number of IoT devices would demand substantial storage and computing capacity
to realize identity authentication. Owing to the high degree of heterogeneity of smart wireless devices,
the typical methods in BC may not be able to cope with the requirements of identity authentication in
the internet of everything (IoE). To tackle such challenges, a public key infrastructure combing the smart
contract with encryption algorithms autonomously handles identity management with a greater level of
reliability. However, the reliability can be enhanced by designing device registration including public
key, manufacturer, expiry date, identity validation, ﬁrmware update, and device obsolescence [80]. In
addition, synchronization of recorded data and querying the full nodes in the blockchain can eﬀectively
implement identity management among all P2P nodes and minimizes the cost of building trust.

An eﬀective collaboration among participants is essential to accomplish speciﬁc functions and services
in P2P network, since it is challenging to maintain reliable trust and cooperation in the BC enable
IoT systems where each node can enter and leave the system at any time, thereby the identity remains
anonymous. The reputation assessment technique is the best way to enhance trust and cooperation in
IoT applications such as crowdsourcing and adhoc networks. In contrast, both entity and data-centric
trust models suﬀers privacy leakage, lack of data information, latency, and free riding problems [81].
Establishing node assessment model by extracting the behavioral data of other participants recorded
in the blockchain and evaluating the transparent block data. However, the calculation of credibility of
each node is done automatically considering their behavior data and timeliness to measure the system
performance. Therefore, it is important to account for the incentives and node preferences while choosing
the proper behavior type and appropriate time scale to better regulate the node behavior and develop
trust.

Owing to the series of problem in the centralized IoT and 6G wireless systems such as inferior
scalability, single/multi-point attack, and privacy leakage, blockchain technology oﬀers an immense
opportunity for developing secured decentralized infrastructures. Advanced encryption algorithms, rep-
utation assessment models, authentication, and consensus protocols are vital technologies to build the
convergence of blockchain, IoT, and 6G networks addressing a high degree of heterogeneity. Table V
summarize the layer based security risks and possible solutions in the blockchain domain.

VI. Research Directions and Opportunities

With the rapid development of IoT technology, a signiﬁcant number of obstacles are incurred to
downsize the adoption of IoT devices across many applications. The centralized structure of IoT and 6G

TABLE V: Layer based security risks and possible solutions.

Layers

Attacks

Challenges

Physical

Eavesdropping

Content modiﬁcation of a tag

Solutions

State detection and data
recovery schemes

Jamming

Physical damage

Cause exhaustion and radio interference
Device connection and recovery

Firmware replacement

Condition monitoring

Network

De-synchronization

Interruption of existing connection

Hierarchical consensus al-
gorithm

denial of service
Byzantine attack

Reduce the activity of devices

Dynamic committee

Consensus protocol

Transport Middleman

Breaking integrity and conﬁdentiality

Zero-knowledge proof

Message spooﬁng

Privacy and security

Flooding

Sybil

Repeating a new connection request and uses
frequent HELLO packets until reaches peak
level
Duplicate a single node in multiple locations

Homomorphic
method

encryption

Lightweight authentication

Application Identity duplication

Authorization and authentication

False injection

Sent untrusted data to server

smart

Customized
contracts
Protocol
cryptographic algorithm

based

Malware

Malicious link can attack web and mail services

Reputation
model

assessment

Selﬁsh attack

Brute force

Coalition and trust building

Attempt to guess password

networks need the owners to trust the entities to keep data safe. With the potential beneﬁts of blockchain
technology, a distributed ledger neglects the challenges of centralized architecture while constructing
trust, privacy, and security with guaranteed reliability. Moreover, BCT minimizes the cost by eliminating
third party middlemen and intermediary overhead. Blockchain oﬀers many solutions to address 6G and
IoT challenges but convergence between technologies create new issues. There are some security and
performance issues that exist without solution. For example, the privacy issue of BCT depends on the
method and usage of the hardware and software implementation. On the other hand, the increasing
number of miners leads to high storage cost, and latency, and lessens the speed of distribution over the
entire network.

Privacy and Security: IoT systems and wireless networks are usually suﬀered from security at-
tacks like eavesdropping attacks and replay attacks [14]. In addition to these security attacks, blockchain
technology brings their own set of security risks such as message hijack, smart contract vulnerabilities,
etc. [82]. The proactive security policies for dynamic environments will uplift the control signaling
cost. However, reactive security techniques are not preferable for 6G networks. Hence, cost eﬀective
proactive mechanisms need to be investigated. Privacy leakage is another key concern in transactions
and recorded stored data in the blockchain. A massive wireless device connectivity, multi-hop data
routing, and heterogeneity in 6G networks manifest the question of data privacy. Numerous adaptive
consensus policies need to be designed to handle a massive number of nodes with guaranteed throughput
and security [83]. Outsourcing a wide range of services at self-organization and edge to attain automation
introduces new security issues, which urge to be studied furthermore. In addition, vibrant research in
the quantum security context seems to be promising.

Energy Eﬃciency and Cost eﬀectiveness: The current consensus mechanisms are greatly
resourced intensive and less eﬃcient, for instance, PoWs consume a great amount of electricity; thus,
make computationally expensive [84]. Note that more power miners need to be deployed to run heavy
algorithms when the dimension of blockchain size is larger. Proof of trust and DPoS are examples of
energy-eﬃcient consensus algorithms store only the recent transaction data instead of recording the
entire blockchain data. Nevertheless, resource and energy constrained IoT and wireless nodes are still
overwhelmed due to the massive amount of data demand. However, the design of more reliable and
eﬃcient consensus protocols is an open issue in order to prevent excessive power consumption and cost
overhead.

Resource Limitations and Spectrum Allocation: The current blockchain deployments demand
stable network connections. Smart IoT devices and wireless nodes are not always ensured reliable
network connectivity, therefore, blockchain implementation is a challenging task under this scenario.
In addition, large network overhead is another challenge for incorporation into future 6G networks and
IIoT applications [85]. Owing to the limited resource allocations, a degree of decentralization in current
blockchain implementations 6G and IoT networks are also limited. Due to resource hungry nature of the
blockchain system, optimal resource allocation needs to be ensured between the wireless networks and
blockchain. However, the proﬁt of cellular operators mostly depends on the volume of oﬀered services
instead of the spectrum band leasing option. A limitation of the implementation of BCT in the next
generation 6G mobile systems is still a big challenge in the near future.

Regulation: Since blockchain operates in a distributed way without the intervention of third-party
central bodies, government regulations, industrial and MNO standards need to be enforced. With the
augmentation of BC platforms, the necessity of timely enforcement of global standards have increased
more [14].

Machine Learning (ML) enabled BC: Real time data prediction and analysis of industrial IoT
nodes are important for the successful deployment of BC enabled IIoT applications. Machine learning
algorithms can be integrated for data analysis in the node itself to avoid the data transit for prediction
and analysis. Notably, ML empowered BCT in industrial IoT applications and 6G cellular architectures
is an emerging technology getting deep attention among industry and research communities owing to
tackling privacy violations and security issues by preventing data movement.

Industry 4.0 applications: Digital transformation is a promising solution to elevate industrial
productivity. Addition of more new technologies could lead to more susceptibility and increasing cyber-
attacks intending to manufacture based industry 4.0. A very few works conducted recently creating a
dataset to handle cyber security threats in the context of IoT under fog/cloud systems using machine
learning and deep learning to develop an adaptive learning framework to address the aforementioned
problem [86]–[88]. However, integration of BCT based new cutting-edge technology for Industry 4.0 and
beyond is a paramount challenge for successful deployment, which is contemplated as a double-edged
sword.

AI enabled blockchain: Typically, AI methods depend on a centralized architecture which may
lead to data tampering and huge communication overhead. Consequently, delaying and erroneous phe-
nomenon incurred while making a decision by AI [89]. Therefore, decentralized AI is a compelling need to
provide reduction of network traﬃc congestion and privacy preservation avoiding data uploading collected
at edge equipment to the central data server. Nonetheless, distributed inference and training still need
communications between a central server and distinctive multiple agents for data sharing. As a result, the
model updates may be disclosed, and it is diﬃcult to assess the contributions of individual agent and so
lacks motivations for data sharing. Distributed AI-based blockchain is considered as an emerging solution
replacing the centralized server where data sharing is performed autonomously through smart contracts.
To unleash the potentials of two individual disruptive technologies such as artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) and
blockchain, it is a promising opportunity to combine these megatrends to make mutual enhancement
and meet the distributed requirements intelligently. AI brought some potential beneﬁts to blockchain
such as AI can manage blockchain operations eﬃciently and AI can fully utilize the encrypted data. The
blockchain operation requires a great amount of computer computation processing power, which makes
the system less eﬃcient. For instance, a brute force approach (i.e., hashing algorithm) for mining nodes
in Bitcoin attempts characters combination until the veriﬁcation of the transaction. Moving away from
the brute approach, AI enabled smart contracts provides better performance and desire level of quality
[90]. The information in a blockchain database held in encrypted state oﬀers security, but experiences
challenges for data usage [91]. AI algorithms address this challenges with further data security and make
full use of the BC database. Research in physical layer security, adaptive channel coding, NFV, network
slicing, SDN employing BCT is still in the initial stage that requires further investigations. The role of
AI with BC to the 6G communications and IoT architectures will make society more eﬃcient and super
smart through solving more complex problems that are often changing dynamically.

Performance enhancement: Blockchain is predominantly resource-hungry in forms of caching,
computation, transmission, and wireless resources particularly at the edge network for new block gen-
eration, validation, ledger storage, consensus policies, etc. BC normally performs as an overlaid layer to
serve the underlaid layer in a large scale services. Hence, the performance enhancement of BC enabled
systems should be further investigated.

Optimization: IoT based applications are largely in heterogenous forms in terms of various tech-
nical requirements, for example, some services require extremely low latency, while some other services

concern only about privacy. Thus, blockchain protocols needs to be modiﬁed with advanced powerful
adaptivity to provide services in 6G networks and IoT systems as well. Notably the properties of BC
such as delay and scalability issues limit its own performance. Therefore, a novel consensus mechanism
aims to be designed to make the full use of blockchain optimization for enhancing the performance in
terms of throughput, security, time to ﬁnality and so on to meet the up-trending demands.

Business Model, Data storage and analytics: Internet of everything (IoE) is more general
form than IoT, which connect users, data, processes, and things seamlessly in an intelligent manner.
With the augmentation of IoE, massive number of things generate real-time data streams continuously.
Consequently, suﬃcient and eﬃcient data storages are required, where blockchain plays an important
role for decentralized storage technologies in diﬀerent domains. However, for the accurate and eﬃcient
decision processing, eﬀective data analyzing research methods are required within the distributed BC
enabled data storage. With the help of digital technologies, processes are optimized and automated that
will re-invent new business models in variety of industries. With the proliferation of business agility
and velocity in IoE platforms, it is essential to investigate numerous possibilities of developing modern
business models. Furthermore, the impact of blockchain based technologies intending of interoperability
functions among multiple businesses needs further research. It is readily agreed that 6G will greatly
support sustainable goals (SDGs), which requires mapping and depth analysis of evaluating KPIs and
social impact. Extensive research works need to be carried out to bring equality in gender, society, and
privacy to support new use cases.

Virtualization of Access Network: Although 6G networks are distributed, still an intelligent
support are needed in terms of visualization and SDN. The virtualization in 6G requires to compatible
with all radio access interfaces including quantum radio, smart surface, THz communications, which
is a big obligation to address. The key concern, will every network node support diﬀerent vertical
requirements such as wireless resources, cloud computation, latency, caching and QoS simultaneously?
Edge Computing and Mobility: In general, satellite networks generate a signiﬁcant delay during
vertical transmission under aerial, terrestrial and space domains. However, high altitude platforms (HAP)
in aerial access networks oﬀer edge caching and data computing facilities minimizing the computations
and delay of satellite networks providing critical services. Therefore, edge caching demand further robust
research in terms of resource allocation, localization, eﬃcient computing, power eﬃciency, etc.

A cell-free communication needs precise synchronization and localization in heterogeneous networks
(HetNets) with beamforming, which requires further investigation. It is infeasible to ensure high precision
beamforming when dealing with high mobility. Hence, location aware mobility tracking for beamforming
looks promising. An eﬃcient integrated protocol design is necessary to maintain communication and
localization during the mobility among diﬀerent access networks.

Sustainable 6G Ecosystem: Shareable resources are the key assets that are not restricted to inter-
domain communication but spread in computing and energy sectors as well, while the communication
section also depends on computing resource and energy provision as illustrated in Fig. 4. Nevertheless,
a trusted and secured blockchain based trading ecosystem considering communication, computing, and
energy can built an eﬃcient sustainable 6G. A distributed energy management is a microgrid system
especially in remote areas, where distributed generation (DG) units, for example, PV solar and wind
ﬁrms are the best example of a sustainable ecosystem approach through distributing electricity to remote
localities. A locally generated distributed energy broke with local providers is a cost-eﬀective approach
of trading energy and power line communications instead of connected to the central grid [92]. The
ecosystem is nurtured while the computing and communication relay services for DG in exchange of
empowering up the hardware. In terms of the security and performance measurements, a public chain is
more preferable to inter-domain blockchain transactions between operators like ﬁrst tier MNOs and the
national grid. However, the private chain can be contemplated for locally oriented resources particularly
for IoT and oﬀ-grid nodes in remote regions [38]. To achieve the best results, an ecosystem may add
numerous consensuses on diﬀerent access chains. However, the sustainable business ecosystem is not
bounded to the scope of communication, computing, energy, rather it can spread itself to augmented
range via cross-ﬁeld integration, such as ﬁnancial, automotive, logistics chain, manufacturing, and so on.
Beyond the implementation of blockchain, hardware deployment plays a crucial role in the ecosystem to
realize portable mobile device solutions like cars, portable IoT devices, and drones.

Future Applications:

Autonomous Driving and V2V communications:

Intelligent vehicle to vehicle (V2V) transportation systems is one of the emerging applications in near
future supported technical capabilities under 6G network services. A BC empowered approach develops
trust management among smart vehicles, but the limitation of contemplating to adhoc network is the

shortcoming. Autonomous driving in 6G oﬄoading from connected autonomous vehicles (CAVs) to edge
servers via space networks is demonstrated in Reference [93]. The implementation of blockchain can
store sensitive information for CAVs and audit the oﬄoading steps, which guarantees the security of the
system. Autonomous deployment including mobility challenges such as multi junction road intersection
requires further investigation.

UAV and Drone:

In recent years, unmanned area vehicles (UAVs) and drones are popularly deployed for civilian usage,
diverging from conventional military applications. The incorporation of blockchain in drone industry
helps to identity management, air traﬃc management eﬃciently with a greater level of accuracy and
security [94]. Integration of blockchain to UAV networks are the potential areas for future exploration
particularly in detection of compromised UAVs under surveillance application. If a compromised UAVs
sending false information (detecting an intruder) will not be able to join in the blockchain with the help
of smart contracts and suitable consensus algorithms.

Remote Learning:

A blockchain enabled platform could record educational databases in a transparent and independent
way, thereby, educational authority easily accesses secure records and transcripts. Besides, it also fa-
cilitates secure collaboration among universities and other institutions. The inherent characteristics of
blockchain allow academic bodies to check educational dishonesty [14]. The addition of BC in educational
sectors also prevents fraudulent activities and tampering via locating transaction records and verifying
the key.

Power Sectors:

With the surge of smart IoT devices ranging from smartphones to smart meters to smart electric
vehicles exploiting variable power demands, the electricity grid is becoming more complex to handle with
mushrooming distinctive types of power generation. Enabling smart contracts among diﬀerent devices
and components in the smart grid infrastructure provides optimized grid operations and accelerates
global energy transformation with the least transaction costs [95]. Blockchain induces consumers to
moves toward prosumers (who consumes and produce simultaneously) facilitating them to save electricity
cost by selling abundant power to the grid with autonomous safe recording information through smart
contracts [96].

Agriculture Field:

The agriculture sectors are largely depending on several external factors such as climate, water supply
availability, reap quality, complex supply chains, etc. This complexity can be addressed transparently
using blockchain technology that could ease the path from the agricultural farm to the supermarket,
giving buyers a sense of control and security [97]. In addition, BCT permits small business farms with
low assets, can easily access a similar set of data likewise rich farms which making the trading market
more transparent.

Retail and E-commerce:

E-commerce based IoT deployment is the emerging business sector which demands the transactions
to be autonomous, secure, and lightweight [98]. The necessity of blockchain in retail industry can be
illustrated in several steps of product tracking. A detail of production including time, place, quantity
from the manufacturer is listed in the blockchain. Then, information of shipped products is properly
logged onto the BC database during transit and data is then updated at the warehouse end with logistic
details. Thereafter, wholesaler and retailer dealers update the received product information in the BC.
Finally, consumers make anonymous feedback on the products that are recorded in the blockchain. This
set of complete procedure brings a good reputation for companies and downsize the overall computational
overhead [99]. BCT essentially eliminate some diﬃculties experienced in the e-commerce and retail
business by providing trust, values, and incentive to the consumers. Such business sectors demand more
robust research in automated and secured transactions in blockchain platform.

Supply Chains:

BCT can considerably reduce time delays and human slip-ups and help to verify the product authen-
tication by tracing their origin. Data accessibility and immutability aspects of blockchain increase the
reliability, eﬃciency, and transparency of the whole supply chain industry [100]. Everyday traders, mer-

chants, shippers, and other logistic support personnel handle plenty of choices while shipping a massive
number of products across worldwide, each progression of the journey requires extensive paperwork and
communication management. In spite of technological advancement, logistics management still needs
improvement for keeping and tracking all the records transparently. Blockchain solves these complexity
and fragmented tasks by tracking resource, recording exchange, developing eﬀective product management
framework for dealing with all archives involved with the logistics procedure [101].

Healthcare:

In the healthcare industry, the data for critical patients can be shared eﬀectively using blockchain,
which can eliminate errors in patient care and potentially enhance healthcare services [102]. Interoper-
ability feature oﬀered by blockchain provides the stakeholders (e.g., healthcare providers, doctors) to
access the patient’s health data with proper authentication in a secured manner. Moreover, BC driven
IoT system accelerate the diseases management and monitoring facilities, for example, smart pills taking,
tracking vital signs, condition investigation remotely, side eﬀects alarm, and providing feedback using
smart wearable devices, and quality control [103]. The fundamental challenge of maintaining patients’
records is that leaving the health-related information scattered across diﬀerent healthcare providers.
Electronic health records cannot ensure to manage lifelong medical records, accessible across various
health service providers. The lack of data management and coordination among medical service providers
create additional obstacles for accessing the records. Blockchain helps in providing a secured data sharing
structure where any entity can gather all the information of respective patients including their personal
details, medicare, medical history, etc.

A. Summary and Lessons Learned

The integration of blockchain technology (BCT) into IoT and 6G networks have clearly demon-
strated a great potential. The fundamental features of BCT include transparency, immutability, security,
anonymity, and the least processing time. BCT does not need to involve a trusted third party or any
central intermediary authority in the BC architecture and hence, it minimizes the processing time
and cost while performing P2P transactions. Shifting the blockchain paradigm toward a distributed
and digitized economy allows smart living with a greater level of integrity in the future. The use of
blockchain technology in next generation ultra high-speed 6G networks and massive IoT systems attain
the expected level of services and ultra-high performances steering to a positive feedback loop. BCT
reduces manmade errors where users’ identity and device are authenticated prior to obtaining access to
the network. Besides, each participant has direct control of its own information, and all participated nodes
are authenticated, thereby, BC technology enhanced public trust. Blockchain enabled 6G will support a
user-friendly environment of intelligent big data analysis for sustainable high-end products and services
to address specialized demands by the consumers. A shared BC ledger marketplace can be employed
in the asset transactions among multiple peers for network resource sharing, roaming, neutral hosting,
network slices, micro-operators, local licensing, software deﬁned networking (SDN), and network function
virtualization (NFV) based networking and specialized services. In the case of industry 4.0 and industrial
IoT applications, BC empowered sustainable business models will provide extreme reliability, privacy-
aware secure communications, zero touch assistance with the advent of green networking, zero carbon
technologies. Additionally, blockchain empowered decentralized architectures oﬀers excellent solution
in 6G business models in terms of service agility, orchestration, open collaboration, and zero touch
management. Moreover, BC based 6G business models oﬀer cloud storage for over the top (OTT)
companies, cognitive services such as context aware operations, AI, UAV as a service together with calling
and data connectivity features, envisioned to attract customers and increase their proﬁt. Furthermore,
blockchain enabled distributed IoT systems address the challenges of conventional IoT architectures by
means of advanced eﬃcacy, interoperability, network management, privacy, and security vulnerabilities,
particularly in the high degree of complex data handling.

Despite the numerous potential advantages of BC enabled 6G communications and IoT system, the
considered architecture is suﬀering distinct types of shortcomings for implementation. Prior joining to
the blockchain, a new block is validated and agreed upon by the active participants in a transparent
way. All the participant node requires the witness of prior data for the validation purpose. Moreover,
the immutability feature of blockchain restricts the modiﬁcation and deletion of conﬁrmed transactions.
BCT supports distributed applications avoiding single point failure and develop augmentation of trust.
As a consequence, blockchain is broadly regarded as a trusted technology in the future generation, but it
suﬀers privacy issues. The appropriate consensus algorithms with asymmetric encryption overcome the
challenges of security and privacy aspects. Smart contracts in blockchain allow software deﬁned contracts

among users as transactions and hence, the ﬂexible smart contracts introduce multiple distinctive new
attacks in the network. However, diﬀerent cryptographic algorithms such as ring architecture, zero
knowledge proof, coin mixing can be used for privacy and security. The reliability of transactions
can be achieved using asymmetric encryption mechanisms, hash inclusions and digital signatures. The
data communications among multiple operational platforms are paramount concerns in BC enabled
cross layer 6G and IoT architectures. Ensuring the least level of latency is another key challenge
for BC based high speed system implementation. The communication overhead and computational
complexity introduced by blockchain may impose a great challenge for the deployment of billions number
of smart devices and corresponding huge transactions experienced by 6G networks and IoT systems.In
addition, the energy consumption of IoT devices, least computational power, low storage capacity,
lack of policies for data security, and compatibility with 6G are some others research challenges IoT
enabled 6G devices. Majority studies related to BC based 6G networks and massive IoT systems are not
experimentally demonstrated, provide theoretical analysis with some simulation works. BoT and BC-
6G system cover a wide area ranging from individual, industry to worldwide business models. Multiple
studies have discussed numerous solutions to resolve distinctive technical issues, however, many aspects
remain unexplored.

VII. Conclusions

With the rapid pace of a massive number of IoT devices, a number of obstacles incur to downsize
the empowering IoT across various applications. IoT device owners and telecom operators must trust
the intermediary node under the centralized architectures. Blockchain technology is an emergent dis-
tributed guarantor in terms of a cost-eﬀective solution, nonrepudiation, convergence between embedded
technologies, and exploiting traceability to verify the unauthorized action aﬀecting the sustainability
charter. This survey paper explored the recent research works directed on the applications of BC in 6G
networks and multiple potentials in industrial IoT areas from the perspective of diﬀerent commercial
implementations. We provide an overview of the blockchain features, potential, drivers, requirements for
massive IoT enabled by 6G addressing numerous challenges such as integrity of personal data protection,
data secrecy, scalability of block contents, adoption cost, privacy of other entities, and governmental
regulations. Then a discussion on core technical elements of blockchain including accessing strategies,
extensive comparison of consensus algorithms to ﬁt the desired applications are carried out. A sustainable
ecosystem focused business model driven by blockchain empowered 6G networks is thoroughly analyzed
to address the contemporary global economic crisis. In addition to support in economic performance,
a smart contract regard as a core component of BCT that curtail the negative external aspects during
manufacturing, enhance the quality of life, promote employability, uplift societal and environmental
performances under a wide range of industrial applications. The use of blockchain in IoT industries and
6G use case applications are expected to grow and beneﬁt of smart living and industry sectors mitigating
security threats and provide integrity solutions. Blockchain deployment is not without limitations, a
lot of challenges lay ahead, and hence, necessary care must be taken to deal with a number of BC
challenges to maintain desired QoS, performance level, and adequate security. We listed the research
challenges and future directions, outlined numerous possible solutions to address the challenges. It is
envisioning that AI, ML, intelligent surfaces, cybertwin, cell-free architecture will likely become promising
candidates in future blockchain implementations. This survey paper provides valuable resource for clear
understanding the contemporary research contribution of blockchain technology in diﬀerent implications
and is anticipated to persuade further eﬀort for the imminent deployment of next generation wireless
networks and industries in the forthcoming years.

References

[1] N. Zhang, P. Yang, S. Zhang, D. Chen, W. Zhuang, B. Liang, and X. S. Shen, “Software deﬁned networking enabled

wireless network virtualization: Challenges and solutions,” IEEE Network, vol. 31, no. 5, pp. 42–49, 2017.

[2] Z. Zhang, Y. Xiao, Z. Ma, M. Xiao, Z. Ding, X. Lei, G. K. Karagiannidis, and P. Fan, “6G wireless networks: Vision,
requirements, architecture, and key technologies,” IEEE Vehicular Technology Magazine, vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 28–41,
2019.

[3] F. Guo, F. R. Yu, H. Zhang, X. Li, H. Ji, and V. C. Leung, “Enabling massive IoT toward 6G: A comprehensive

survey,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 8, no. 15, pp. 11 891–11 915, 2021.

[4] M. Z. Chowdhury, M. Shahjalal, S. Ahmed, and Y. M. Jang, “6G wireless communication systems: Applications,
requirements, technologies, challenges, and research directions,” IEEE Open Journal of the Communications Society,
vol. 1, pp. 957–975, 2020.

[5] F. Tariq, M. R. Khandaker, K.-K. Wong, M. A. Imran, M. Bennis, and M. Debbah, “A speculative study on 6G,”

IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 118–125, 2020.

[6] W. Saad, M. Bennis, and M. Chen, “A vision of 6G wireless systems: Applications, trends, technologies, and open

research problems,” IEEE network, vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 134–142, 2020.

[7] Q. Qi, X. Chen, C. Zhong, and Z. Zhang, “Integration of energy, computation and communication in 6G cellular

Internet of Things,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 24, no. 6, pp. 1333–1337, 2020.

[8] D. C. Nguyen, P. N. Pathirana, M. Ding, and A. Seneviratne, “Blockchain for 5G and beyond networks: A state of

the art survey,” Journal of Network and Computer Applications, vol. 166, p. 102693, 2020.

[9] D. B. Rawat, “Fusion of software deﬁned networking, edge computing, and blockchain technology for wireless network

virtualization,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 57, no. 10, pp. 50–55, 2020.

[10] P. Ahokangas, M. Matinmikko-Blue, S. Yrjölä, V. Seppänen, H. Hämmäinen, R. Jurva, and M. Latva-aho, “Business
models for local 5G micro operators,” IEEE Transactions on Cognitive Communications and Networking, vol. 5,
no. 3, pp. 730–740, 2019.

[11] T. T. A. Dinh, R. Liu, M. Zhang, G. Chen, B. C. Ooi, and J. Wang, “Untangling blockchain: A data processing view
of blockchain systems,” IEEE transactions on knowledge and data engineering, vol. 30, no. 7, pp. 1366–1385, 2018.
[12] M. B. Weiss, K. Werbach, D. C. Sicker, and C. E. C. Bastidas, “On the application of blockchains to spectrum
management,” IEEE Transactions on Cognitive Communications and Networking, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 193–205, 2019.
[13] T. Maksymyuk, J. Gazda, M. Volosin, G. Bugar, D. Horvath, M. Klymash, and M. Dohler, “Blockchain-empowered
framework for decentralized network management in 6G,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 58, no. 9, pp. 86–92,
2020.

[14] T. Alladi, V. Chamola, R. M. Parizi, and K.-K. R. Choo, “Blockchain applications for industry 4.0 and industrial

IoT: A review,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 176 935–176 951, 2019.

[15] D. Puthal, N. Malik, S. P. Mohanty, E. Kougianos, and G. Das, “Everything you wanted to know about the blockchain:
Its promise, components, processes, and problems,” IEEE Consumer Electronics Magazine, vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 6–14,
2018.

[16] P. J. Taylor, T. Dargahi, A. Dehghantanha, R. M. Parizi, and K.-K. R. Choo, “A systematic literature review of

blockchain cyber security,” Digital Communications and Networks, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 147–156, 2020.

[17] D. Efanov and P. Roschin, “The all-pervasiveness of the blockchain technology,” Procedia Computer Science, vol. 123,

pp. 116–121, 2018.

[18] A. Panarello, N. Tapas, G. Merlino, F. Longo, and A. Puliaﬁto, “Blockchain and IoT integration: A systematic survey,”

Sensors, vol. 18, no. 8, p. 2575, 2018.

[19] L. Hang and D.-H. Kim, “Design and implementation of an integrated IoT blockchain platform for sensing data

integrity,” Sensors, vol. 19, no. 10, p. 2228, 2019.

[20] S. K. Singh, S. Rathore, and J. H. Park, “Blockiotintelligence: A blockchain-enabled intelligent IoT architecture with

artiﬁcial intelligence,” Future Generation Computer Systems, vol. 110, pp. 721–743, 2020.

[21] T. Huang, W. Yang, J. Wu, J. Ma, X. Zhang, and D. Zhang, “A survey on green 6G network: Architecture and

technologies,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 175 758–175 768, 2019.

[22] S. K. Sharma and X. Wang, “Toward massive machine type communications in ultra-dense cellular IoT networks:
Current issues and machine learning-assisted solutions,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 22, no. 1,
pp. 426–471, 2020.

[23] F. Hussain, S. A. Hassan, R. Hussain, and E. Hossain, “Machine learning for resource management in cellular and IoT
networks: Potentials, current solutions, and open challenges,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 22,
no. 2, pp. 1251–1275, 2020.

[24] T. M. Fernández-Caramés and P. Fraga-Lamas, “A review on the use of Blockchain for the Internet of Things,” IEEE

Access, vol. 6, pp. 32 979–33 001, 2018.

[25] M. A. Ferrag, M. Derdour, M. Mukherjee, A. Derhab, L. Maglaras, and H. Janicke, “Blockchain technologies for the
internet of things: Research issues and challenges,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 2188–2204,
2018.

[26] C. Shen and F. Pena-Mora, “Blockchain for cities—A systematic literature review,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 76 787–

76 819, 2018.

[27] T. Salman, M. Zolanvari, A. Erbad, R. Jain, and M. Samaka, “Security services using blockchains: A state of the art

survey,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 858–880, 2019.

[28] P. Fraga-Lamas and T. M. Fernández-Caramés, “A review on blockchain technologies for an advanced and cyber-

resilient automotive industry,” IEEE access, vol. 7, pp. 17 578–17 598, 2019.

[29] H. Lu, K. Huang, M. Azimi, and L. Guo, “Blockchain technology in the oil and gas industry: A review of applications,

opportunities, challenges, and risks,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 41 426–41 444, 2019.

[30] R. Yang, F. R. Yu, P. Si, Z. Yang, and Y. Zhang, “Integrated blockchain and edge computing systems: A survey, some
research issues and challenges,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 1508–1532, 2019.
[31] J. Xie, H. Tang, T. Huang, F. R. Yu, R. Xie, J. Liu, and Y. Liu, “A survey of blockchain technology applied to smart
cities: Research issues and challenges,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 2794–2830,
2019.

[32] N. Elisa, L. Yang, F. Chao, and Y. Cao, “A framework of blockchain-based secure and privacy-preserving e-government

system,” Wireless Networks, pp. 1–11, 2019.

[33] L. Wei, J. Wu, C. Long, and Y.-B. Lin, “The convergence of IoE and blockchain: Security challenges,” IT Professional,

vol. 21, no. 5, pp. 26–32, 2019.

[34] O. Lage, “Blockchain: From Industry 4.0 to the machine economy,” in Computer Security Threats.

IntechOpen,

2019.

[35] S. B. ElMamy, H. Mrabet, H. Gharbi, A. Jemai, and D. Trentesaux, “A survey on the usage of blockchain technology

for cyber-threats in the context of Industry 4.0,” Sustainability, vol. 12, no. 21, p. 9179, 2020.

[36] M. Singh, “Blockchain technology for data management in Industry 4.0,” in Blockchain Technology for Industry 4.0.

Springer, 2020, pp. 59–72.

[37] R. Sekaran, R. Patan, A. Raveendran, F. Al-Turjman, M. Ramachandran, and L. Mostarda, “Survival study on
blockchain based 6G-enabled mobile edge computation for IoT automation,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 143 453–143 463,
2020.

[38] H. Xu, P. V. Klaine, O. Onireti, B. Cao, M. Imran, and L. Zhang, “Blockchain-enabled resource management and

sharing for 6G communications,” Digital Communications and Networks, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 261–269, 2021.

[39] A. Kumari, R. Gupta, and S. Tanwar, “Amalgamation of blockchain and IoT for smart cities underlying 6G

communication: A comprehensive review,” Computer Communications, vol. 172, no. 1, pp. 102–118, 2021.

[40] J. Wang, X. Ling, Y. Le, Y. Huang, and X. You, “Blockchain enabled wireless communications: A new paradigm

towards 6G,” National Science Review, 2021.

[41] W. Jiang, B. Han, M. A. Habibi, and H. D. Schotten, “The road towards 6G: A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Open

Journal of the Communications Society, vol. 2, pp. 334–366, 2021.

[42] B. Cao, Z. Zhang, D. Feng, S. Zhang, L. Zhang, M. Peng, and Y. Li, “Performance analysis and comparison of PoW,

PoS and DAG based blockchains,” Digital Communications and Networks, vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 480–485, 2020.

[43] Y. Xiao, N. Zhang, W. Lou, and Y. T. Hou, “A survey of distributed consensus protocols for blockchain networks,”

IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 1432–1465, 2020.

[44] S. Yrjölä, “How could blockchain transform 6G towards open ecosystemic business models?” in IEEE International

Conference on Communications Workshops (ICC Workshops).

IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–6.

[45] T. Nguyen, N. Tran, L. Loven, J. Partala, M.-T. Kechadi, and S. Pirttikangas, “Privacy-aware blockchain innovation

for 6G: Challenges and opportunities,” in 6G Wireless Summit (6G SUMMIT).

IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–5.

[46] X. Ling, J. Wang, T. Bouchoucha, B. C. Levy, and Z. Ding, “Blockchain radio access network (B-RAN): Towards

decentralized secure radio access paradigm,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 9714–9723, 2019.

[47] L. Hang and D.-H. Kim, “SLA-based sharing economy service with smart contract for resource integrity in the internet

of things,” Applied Sciences, vol. 9, no. 17, p. 3602, 2019.

[48] L. D. Xu, E. L. Xu, and L. Li, “Industry 4.0: state of the art and future trends,” International Journal of Production

Research, vol. 56, no. 8, pp. 2941–2962, 2018.

[49] Y. Dai, D. Xu, S. Maharjan, Z. Chen, Q. He, and Y. Zhang, “Blockchain and deep reinforcement learning empowered

intelligent 5G beyond,” IEEE network, vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 10–17, 2019.

[50] J. Qiu, D. Grace, G. Ding, J. Yao, and Q. Wu, “Blockchain-based secure spectrum trading for unmanned-aerial-
vehicle-assisted cellular networks: An operator’s perspective,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 7, no. 1, pp.
451–466, 2020.

[51] Z. Zhou, X. Chen, Y. Zhang, and S. Mumtaz, “Blockchain-empowered secure spectrum sharing for 5G heterogeneous

networks,” IEEE Network, vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 24–31, 2020.

[52] G. Bugár, M. Vološin, T. Maksymyuk, J. Zausinová, V. Gazda, D. Horváth, and J. Gazda, “Techno-economic
framework for dynamic operator selection in a multi-tier heterogeneous network,” Ad Hoc Networks, vol. 97, p.
102007, 2020.

[53] A. Li, G. Han, J. J. Rodrigues, and S. Chan, “Channel hopping protocols for dynamic spectrum management in 5G

technology,” IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 102–109, 2018.

[54] Y.-C. Liang, “Blockchain for dynamic spectrum management,” in Dynamic Spectrum Management. Springer, 2020,

pp. 121–146.

[55] B. Nour, A. Ksentini, N. Herbaut, P. A. Frangoudis, and H. Moungla, “A blockchain-based network slice broker for

5G services,” IEEE Networking Letters, vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 99–102, 2019.

[56] A. Refaey, K. Hammad, S. Magierowski, and E. Hossain, “A blockchain policy and charging control framework for

roaming in cellular networks,” IEEE Network, vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 170–177, 2020.

[57] T. Hewa, G. Gür, A. Kalla, M. Ylianttila, A. Bracken, and M. Liyanage, “The role of blockchain in 6G: challenges,

opportunities and research directions,” in 6G Wireless Summit.

IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–5.

[58] P. Porambage, T. Kumar, M. Liyanage, J. Partala, L. Lovén, M. Ylianttila, and T. Seppänen, “Sec-EdgeAI: AI for

edge security vs security for edge AI,” 6G Wireless Summit,(Levi, Finland), 2019.

[59] J. R. Bhat and S. A. Alqahtani, “6G ecosystem: current status and future perspective,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp.

43 134–43 167, 2021.

[60] S. Yrjölä, P. Ahokangas, and M. Matinmikko-Blue, “Sustainability as a challenge and driver for novel ecosystemic

6G business scenarios,” Sustainability, vol. 12, no. 21, p. 8951, 2020.

[61] A. L. Imoize, O. Adedeji, N. Tandiya, and S. Shetty, “6G enabled smart infrastructure for sustainable society:

Opportunities, challenges, and research roadmap,” Sensors, vol. 21, no. 5, p. 1709, 2021.

[62] W. H. Hassan et al., “Current research on internet of things (IoT) security: A survey,” Computer networks, vol. 148,

pp. 283–294, 2019.

[63] E. F. Jesus, V. R. Chicarino, C. V. De Albuquerque, and A. A. d. A. Rocha, “A survey of how to use blockchain to

secure internet of things and the stalker attack,” Security and Communication Networks, vol. 2018, 2018.

[64] C. Qu, M. Tao, J. Zhang, X. Hong, and R. Yuan, “Blockchain based credibility veriﬁcation method for IoT entities,”

Security and Communication Networks, vol. 2018, 2018.

[65] M. Marouﬁ, R. Abdolee, and B. M. Tazekand, “On the convergence of blockchain and internet of things (IoT)

technologies,” Wireless Communications, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 1–11, 2019.

[66] C. Lee, L. Nkenyereye, N. Sung, and J. Song, “Towards a blockchain-enabled IoT platform using one M2M standards,”
IEEE, 2019, pp.

in International Conference on Information and Communication Technology Convergence (ICTC).
97–102.

[67] A. Damianou, C. M. Angelopoulos, and V. Katos, “An architecture for blockchain over edge-enabled IoT for smart
IEEE, 2019,

circular cities,” in International Conference on Distributed Computing in Sensor Systems (DCOSS).
pp. 465–472.

[68] I. Mistry, S. Tanwar, S. Tyagi, and N. Kumar, “Blockchain for 5G-enabled IoT for industrial automation: A systematic

review, solutions, and challenges,” Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing, vol. 135, p. 106382, 2020.

[69] B.-G. Choi, E. Jeong, and S.-W. Kim, “Multiple security certiﬁcation system between blockchain based terminal and
internet of things device: Implication for open innovation,” Journal of Open Innovation: Technology, Market, and
Complexity, vol. 5, no. 4, p. 87, 2020.

[70] A. K. Biswal, P. Maiti, S. Bebarta, B. Sahoo, and A. K. Turuk, “Authenticating IoT devices with blockchain,” in

Advanced Applications of Blockchain Technology. Springer, 2020, pp. 177–205.

[71] I. Yaqoob, K. Salah, M. Uddin, R. Jayaraman, M. Omar, and M. Imran, “Blockchain for digital twins: Recent advances

and future research challenges,” IEEE Network, vol. 34, no. 5, pp. 290–298, 2020.

[72] Y. Liu, F. R. Yu, X. Li, H. Ji, and V. C. Leung, “Blockchain and machine learning for communications and networking

systems,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 1392–1431, 2020.

[73] P. Mendki, “Blockchain enabled iot edge computing: Addressing privacy, security and other challenges,” in Interna-

tional Conference on Blockchain Technology, 2020, pp. 63–67.

[74] G. Ishmaev, “The ethical limits of blockchain-enabled markets for private IoT data,” Philosophy & Technology, vol. 33,

no. 3, pp. 411–432, 2020.

[75] U. Franke and J. Wernberg, “A survey of cyber security in the Swedish manufacturing industry,” in 2020 International

Conference on Cyber Situational Awareness, Data Analytics and Assessment (CyberSA).

IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–8.

[76] J. Yan, Y. Meng, L. Lu, and L. Li, “Industrial big data in an industry 4.0 environment: Challenges, schemes, and

applications for predictive maintenance,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 23 484–23 491, 2018.

[77] H. Xu, W. Yu, D. Griﬃth, and N. Golmie, “A survey on industrial Internet of Things: A cyber-physical systems

perspective,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 78 238–78 259, 2019.

[78] N. Z. Aitzhan and D. Svetinovic, “Security and privacy in decentralized energy trading through multi-signatures,
blockchain and anonymous messaging streams,” IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing, vol. 15,
no. 5, pp. 840–852, 2017.

[79] Q. Lin, H. Yan, Z. Huang, W. Chen, J. Shen, and Y. Tang, “An ID-based linearly homomorphic signature scheme

and its application in blockchain,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 20 632–20 640, 2018.

[80] M. T. Hammi, B. Hammi, P. Bellot, and A. Serhrouchni, “Bubbles of trust: A decentralized blockchain-based

authentication system for IoT,” Computers & Security, vol. 78, pp. 126–142, 2018.

[81] Z. Lu, W. Liu, Q. Wang, G. Qu, and Z. Liu, “A privacy-preserving trust model based on blockchain for VANETs,”

IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 45 655–45 664, 2018.

[82] X. Li, P. Jiang, T. Chen, X. Luo, and Q. Wen, “A survey on the security of blockchain systems,” Future Generation

Computer Systems, vol. 107, pp. 841–853, 2020.

[83] F. Tang, Y. Kawamoto, N. Kato, and J. Liu, “Future intelligent and secure vehicular network toward 6G: Machine-

learning approaches,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 108, no. 2, pp. 292–307, 2020.

[84] J. Mendling, I. Weber, W. V. D. Aalst, J. V. Brocke, C. Cabanillas, F. Daniel, S. Debois, C. D. Ciccio, M. Dumas,
S. Dustdar et al., “Blockchains for business process management-challenges and opportunities,” ACM Transactions
on Management Information Systems (TMIS), vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 1–16, 2018.

[85] A. Dorri, S. S. Kanhere, and R. Jurdak, “MOF-BC: A memory optimized and ﬂexible blockchain for large scale

networks,” Future Generation Computer Systems, vol. 92, pp. 357–373, 2019.

[86] N. Moustafa, “New generations of internet of things datasets for cybersecurity applications based machine learning:
TON_IoT datasets,” in Proceedings of the eResearch Australasia Conference, Brisbane, Australia, 2019, pp. 21–25.
[87] H.-N. Dai, Z. Zheng, and Y. Zhang, “Blockchain for internet of things: A survey,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal,

vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 8076–8094, 2019.

[88] P. Mishra, V. Varadharajan, U. Tupakula, and E. S. Pilli, “A detailed investigation and analysis of using machine
learning techniques for intrusion detection,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 686–728,
2018.

[89] K. Salah, M. H. U. Rehman, N. Nizamuddin, and A. Al-Fuqaha, “Blockchain for AI: Review and open research

challenges,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 10 127–10 149, 2019.

[90] C. Qiu, H. Yao, X. Wang, N. Zhang, F. R. Yu, and D. Niyato, “AI-chain: Blockchain energized edge intelligence for

beyond 5G networks,” IEEE Network, vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 62–69, 2020.

[91] A. Jäschke and F. Armknecht, “Unsupervised machine learning on encrypted data,” in International Conference on

Selected Areas in Cryptography. Springer, 2019, pp. 453–478.

[92] G. G. Talapur, H. M. Suryawanshi, L. Xu, and A. B. Shitole, “A reliable microgrid with seamless transition between
grid connected and islanded mode for residential community with enhanced power quality,” IEEE Transactions on
Industry Applications, vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 5246–5255, 2018.

[93] Z. Na, Y. Liu, J. Shi, C. Liu, and Z. Gao, “UAV-supported clustered NOMA for 6G-enabled Internet of Things:

Trajectory planning and resource allocation,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 2020.

[94] B. Li, Z. Fei, and Y. Zhang, “UAV communications for 5G and beyond: Recent advances and future trends,” IEEE

Internet of Things Journal, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 2241–2263, 2019.

[95] E. Mengelkamp, B. Notheisen, C. Beer, D. Dauer, and C. Weinhardt, “A blockchain-based smart grid: Towards
sustainable local energy markets,” Computer Science-Research and Development, vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 207–214, 2018.
[96] M. Andoni, V. Robu, D. Flynn, S. Abram, D. Geach, D. Jenkins, P. McCallum, and A. Peacock, “Blockchain
technology in the energy sector: A systematic review of challenges and opportunities,” Renewable and Sustainable
Energy Reviews, vol. 100, pp. 143–174, 2019.

[97] F. Yiannas, “A new era of food transparency powered by blockchain,” Innovations: Technology, Governance,

Globalization, vol. 12, no. 1-2, pp. 46–56, 2018.

[98] D. Liu, A. Alahmadi, J. Ni, X. Lin, and X. Shen, “Anonymous reputation system for IIoT-enabled retail marketing

atop PoS blockchain,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 3527–3537, 2019.

[99] C. Liu, Y. Xiao, V. Javangula, Q. Hu, S. Wang, and X. Cheng, “Normachain: A blockchain-based normalized
autonomous transaction settlement system for IoT-based e-commerce,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 6,
no. 3, pp. 4680–4693, 2019.

[100] G. Perboli, S. Musso, and M. Rosano, “Blockchain in logistics and supply chain: A lean approach for designing

real-world use cases,” Ieee Access, vol. 6, pp. 62 018–62 028, 2018.

[101] S. Mondal, K. P. Wijewardena, S. Karuppuswami, N. Kriti, D. Kumar, and P. Chahal, “Blockchain inspired RFID-
based information architecture for food supply chain,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 5803–5813,
2019.

[102] C. Esposito, A. De Santis, G. Tortora, H. Chang, and K.-K. R. Choo, “Blockchain: A panacea for healthcare cloud-

based data security and privacy?” IEEE Cloud Computing, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 31–37, 2018.

[103] H.-T. Wu and C.-W. Tsai, “Toward blockchains for health-care systems: Applying the bilinear pairing technology to
ensure privacy protection and accuracy in data sharing,” IEEE Consumer Electronics Magazine, vol. 7, no. 4, pp.
65–71, 2018.

