1
2
0
2

p
e
S
9
2

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
0
3
1
4
1
.
9
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

When Blockchain Meets Smart Grids: A Comprehensive Survey

Yihao Guoa, Zhiguo Wana,∗ and Xiuzhen Chenga

aSchool Computer Science and Technology, Shandong University, Qingdao, R.P.China

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Blockchain
Smart Grid
Survey

Recent years have witnessed an increasing interest in the blockchain technology, and many blockchain-
based applications have been developed to take advantage of its decentralization, transparency, fault
tolerance, and strong security. In the ﬁeld of smart grids, a plethora of proposals have emerged to
utilize blockchain for augmenting intelligent energy management, energy trading, security and pri-
vacy protection, microgrid management, and energy vehicles. Compared with traditional centralized
approaches, blockchain-based solutions are able to exploit the advantages of blockchain to realize
better functionality in smart grids. However, the blockchain technology itself has its disadvantages in
low processing throughput and weak privacy protection. Therefore, it is of paramount importance to
study how to integrate blockchain with smart grids in a more eﬀective way so that the advantages of
blockchain can be maximized and its disadvantages can be avoided.

This article surveys the state-of-the-art solutions aiming to integrate the emergent blockchain tech-
nology with smart grids. The goal of this survey is to discuss the necessity of applying blockchain
in diﬀerent components of smart grids, identify the challenges encountered by current solutions, and
highlight the frameworks and techniques used to integrate blockchain with smart grids. We also
present thorough comparison studies among blockchain-based solutions for smart grids from diﬀerent
perspectives, with the aim to provide insights on integrating blockchain with smart grids for diﬀerent
smart grid management tasks. Finally, we list the current projects and initiatives demonstrating the
current eﬀort from the practice side. Additionally, we draw attention to open problems that have not
yet been tackled by existing solutions, and point out possible future research directions.

1. Introduction

The groundbreaking blockchain technology has gained
tremendous attention from governments and companies to
research institutions all over the world in recent years. This
is due to the outstanding advantages of blockchain in decen-
tralization, transparency, immutability, fault tolerance, and
strong security. Essentially, blockchain is a decentralized
consensus ledger managed by multiple maintainers (called
miners or validators), without relying on a centralized server.
For instance, the underlying blockchain of Bitcoin or Ethereum
is maintained by thousands of miners using a speciﬁc con-
sensus mechanism (e.g. proof-of-work or proof-of-stake).
Each transaction sent to the blockchain is veriﬁed and exe-
cuted by all the validators, and it cannot be changed anymore
after it is conﬁrmed on the blockchain. Besides transactions,
blockchains like Ethereum and Hyperledger fabric also sup-
port the so-called smart contracts, which are self-executable
programs running over blockchains. Consequently, blockchain
functions as a highly secure and trustworthy “consensus com-
puter" that can serve as a trusted intermediary.

After the surprising success in the cryptocurrency ﬁeld,
the blockchain technology has been rapidly introduced to
many other ﬁelds ranging from ﬁnancing, banking, insur-
ance, manufacturing, supply chain management, provenance,
healthcare, Internet-of-Things to cloud computing. More
than 70 international banks have joined R3 to develop the
open blockchain platform Corda, aiming to lower cost of ﬁ-
nancing and banking. The Internet giant Facebook has an-

∗Corresponding author

yhguo@mail.sdu.edu.cn (Y. Guo); wanzhiguo@sdu.edu.cn (Z. Wan);

xzcheng@sdu.edu.cn (X. Cheng)

ORCID(s): 0000-0001-5912-4647 (X. Cheng)

nounced its own cryptocurrency Libra, which has drawn the
attention of the whole world. IBM, Amazon, Samsung, and
other companies have also shown their strong interests in
blockchain, e.g. IBM’s supply chain and Walmart’s blockchain.
In addition, a number of countries have already started to ap-
ply blockchain to improve transparency in government man-
agement. In conclusion, blockchain has been employed to
empower various applications in many ﬁelds. In this article,
we focus on the application of blockchain in smart grids.

1.1. Why Smart Grids Need Blockchain

A smart grid is a critical infrastructure that can be sig-
niﬁcantly improved with the blockchain technology. Current
smart grids incorporate communication and control technolo-
gies into the power grids, such that signiﬁcant improvements
on energy eﬃciency and grid safety can be achieved. To
this end, numerous smart devices are distributed throughout
a smart grid to eﬃciently manage power generation, trans-
mission, distribution and consumption. It is critical to eﬀec-
tively manage these smart devices and maintain security and
stability of the smart grid. However, traditional centralized
approaches to manage smart grids face severe challenges in
various aspects, ranging from energy management, electric-
ity trading, security & privacy, microgrid management, to
electric vehicle management, which are further detailed in
the following descriptions.

• Energy Management. The centralized grid manage-
ment mode leads to the single point of failure and se-
vere security issues. A potential attacker would launch
various attacks speciﬁcally targeting at a control cen-
ter to maximize damage. For instance, denial-of-service
attacks against the control center may result in seri-

Yihao Guo et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 1 of 25

 
 
 
 
 
 
When Blockchain Meets Smart Grids: A Comprehensive Survey

ous damages to the whole power grid. Moreover, the
centralized grid management mode cannot make the
best of the distributed renewable energy sources, en-
ergy storage units, and electric vehicles to achieve ef-
ﬁcient energy management. It is challenging for the
control center to make good and timely scheduling de-
cisions for the highly dynamic and distributed renew-
able energy sources and storage units. At the same
time, with the increase number of prosumers, the bur-
den and cost of centralized energy management have
been increased, which makes it impossible to achieve
eﬀective demand response in many cases. Especially
for demand-side management, some consumers are more
inclined to purchase electricity from prosumers accord-
ing to their own wishes, rendering energy manage-
ment even more challenging.

• Electricity Trading. The widespread use of distributed
energy indicates that the transformation of the cen-
tralized smart grid transaction model to a decentral-
ized one is inevitable. The centralized mode cannot
eﬃciently deal with energy trading among distributed
energy providers, consumers, and prosumers through-
out a smart grid. Moreover, the price of centralized
grid energy transactions cannot meet the expectations
of the market, and it is easy to cause unreasonable
monopoly of electricity prices. Therefore, it is impor-
tant to improve energy trading eﬃciency and reliabil-
ity of the smart grid.

• Security & Privacy. There exist growing security
concerns on centralized smart grids. External mali-
cious attacks, third-party reliance, and privacy leak-
age have caused huge economic losses of the power
grids. The traditional centralized power grid has lim-
ited solutions. Most situations rely on human super-
vision. However, it is a challenging task to manage
the large amount of smart devices for status monitor-
ing, grid control and metering in a centralized manner.
On the other hand, numerous smart sensors generate
huge amount of data, which is hard to be stored and
processed by a centralized server. Moreover, it is also
ineﬃcient for the control center to maintain security
for so many smart devices in case of malicious intru-
sions.

• Microgrid Management. As a speciﬁc application
scenario of the power grid, the microgrid has the char-
acteristics of regional management, solving the prob-
lems caused by long-distance energy transmission in
a large power grid. However, as a sub-system of the
large power grid, it still has huge hidden dangers in en-
ergy distribution, security and privacy protection, and
load balancing.

• Electric Vehicle Management. As another applica-
tion scenario of the power grid, the combination of en-
ergy vehicles and the power grid adds a great ﬂexibil-
ity to long-distance power transmission. Being an in-

dependent power storage unit, each vehicle has certain
limitations on its computing power and is extremely
vulnerable to external attacks. Especially in the pro-
cess of charging/discharging and power transmission,
secure payment and demand response are greatly chal-
lenged. Moreover, in V2G (vehicle-to-grid), because
of the need to exchange road conditions, vehicles have
higher requirements for real-time performance.

This survey dedicates to the application of the blockchain
technology in smart grids for various purposes. We divide
our study into 5 broad areas: energy management, energy
trading, security and privacy protection, microgrid manage-
ment, and electric vehicles. This corresponds to the ﬁve
challenges mentioned above. The road map is shown in Fig.
1. For each area, we discuss issues in conventional approaches
and highlight existing problems and issues therein, describe
the blockchain-based solutions that utilize the blockchain
technology to address the corresponding issues, emphasize
the applicability of blockchain in these blockchain-based so-
lutions, and discuss the lessons learned from these studies.
We also summarize existing projects and initiatives that in-
tegrate blockchain with smart grids from a practical side. Fi-
nally we analyze the remaining research challenges and put
forward a number of potential research problems.

Figure 1: Roadmap of blockchain-based smart grids.

1.2. Related works

A number of surveys have been conducted on related
topics recently. Meisel et al. [40] focus on research works
that apply blockchain to microgrids. They study 14 cases
of integrating microgrids and blockchain, and analyze the
advantages in each case. Xie et al. [186] investigate the re-
search works on applying blockchain to smart cities, treating
a smart grid as a part of a smart city. This survey analyzes
about 20 related papers on combination of blockchain and
smart grids. Andoni et al. [10] focus on the development
of the energy sector, particularly the emerging projects in
the energy sector. They examine 140 emerging blockchain
energy enterprise projects, while only summarizing a small
number of research papers. Ref. [106] studies 40 papers on
combining blockchain and smart grids, and discusses several
important aspects of smart grids, including energy trading,
security, electric vehicles, and microgrids. The authors also
describe 3 new frameworks and 10 practical projects that in-
tegrate blockchain with smart grids. Alladi et al. [8] focus

Yihao Guo et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 2 of 25

Blockchain for Smart GridSec. Ⅲ Intelligent Energy Management Electricity distributionDemand side Energy storageSec. Ⅶ Electric VehiclesCharge and dischargeEnergy transmissionSmart citiesSecurity designPower lossesAutomationPower distributionSec. Ⅵ Microgrid Sec. Ⅴ Security and Privacy ProtectionSecurityPrivacyAttacksSec. Ⅳ Energy TradingProsumersP2P energy tradingFair pricingWhen Blockchain Meets Smart Grids: A Comprehensive Survey

on the integration of blockchain and smart grids too. This
survey considers energy transaction, energy trading based
vehicles, security & privacy, and business cases, provides a
number of valuable views, and puts forward the correspond-
ing challenges and prospects.

More recently, Sengupta et al. [149] summarize many
papers on blockchain and IoT/Industrial IoT, among which
20 of them are on smart grid security. Both [11] and [104]
analyze the related works from the aspects of energy trading,
security, microgrids, and electric vehicles, while ignorning
energy management. Ajomand et al. [11] provide a review
on smart grids but they only survey about 20 papers. Ref. [104]
oﬀers a survey on about 40 papers and the related projects.

1.3. Uniqueness of This Survey Article

The survey articles mentioned in the previous subsection
have made outstanding contributions to the understanding
of the state-of-the-art in applying the blockchain technology
to smart grids. Although smart grid is not the focused re-
search subject in some articles [186, 10, 149], the results
of their collation still have high reference values. However,
the shortcomings are also obvious. Particularly, there lacks
enough articles to comprehensively summarize the unique
characteristics of integrating blockchain with smart grids.
Furthermore, smart grid management, which is particularly
important, is only slightly mentioned in [10]. In addition,
some articles only provide a certain concept expression, lack-
ing the description and summary of speciﬁc programs [8,
11]. Finally, the rapid development of blockchain and smart
grids requires a more trendy, comprehensive, speciﬁc, and
innovative article that can summarize the major recent aca-
demic achievements.

These factors motivate us to write this article. We in-
tend to provide a comprehensive survey covering as many
research works as possible, including the latest papers ac-
cepted or published in 2021. We divide the subject of this
survey into 5 areas, involving more than 150 speciﬁc pa-
pers. For each area, we ﬁrst outline the current challenges,
then survey blockchain-based solutions, and ﬁnally provide
an analytical summary and comparison study. Particularly,
we make a lot of eﬀort to outline the main idea of each pa-
per, exemplify representative solutions and key technical de-
tails in the forms of ﬁgures and tables. One can see that the
scope of research and the number of papers surveyed by this
article are both unprecedented. To further improve the com-
pleteness and practicality of this survey, we sort out related
sources, including important ﬁeld experiments and current
projects. Moreover, our survey covers the management of
smart grids that have been overlooked by most related sur-
veys, and divides it into supply side energy distribution man-
agement and demand side management. One can see that
this survey article provides a clear logic for readers to com-
prehensively understand the subject areas, from headlines to
subtitles then to the theme of each paragraph.

1.4. Organization

This article is organized as follows. In the next section,
we provide a brief overview on the blockchain and smart

contract technologies, emphasizing the opportunities and ad-
vantages of the combination of blockchain and smart grids.
In Section 3, we present the blockchain-based schemes on
energy management, covering energy distribution and de-
mand side management. Section 4 discusses the blockchain-
based energy trading schemes for smart grids, emphasizing
how the pricing of a trading process is ensured. Then we de-
scribe the eﬀorts on applying the blockchain technology to
protect security and privacy in Section 5. Section 6 summa-
rizes the blockchain-based approaches to microgrid manage-
ment, demonstrating how safety, automation, and power dis-
tribution in microgrids are realized. Section 7 presents the
blockchain-based solutions on management of electric vehi-
cles, including vehicle charges/discharges and energy trans-
mission. In Section 8, we collect the resources on projects
and initiatives that integrate blockchain and power grids, fo-
cusing on related practical applications and public experi-
ments. Finally, we discuss open research issues to stimulate
further research.

2. Background
2.1. Blockchain and Smart Contract

The blockchain technology is originated from Bitcoin
proposed by Satoshi Nakamoto in 2008. With the deepen-
ing of research, Ethereum, Tendermint, IOTA, ZCash, and
other blockchain platforms have been gradually developed.
They have their own characteristics in terms of delay and
functionality, but their essence is a distributed database. In
a blockchain system, miners play an important role, both as
participants and as maintainers of the blockchain, upholding
the system through actively accounting and packaging veri-
ﬁed transactions to obtain certain rewards. The emergence
of consensus algorithms improves the stability of blockchain
systems and solves the problem of data asynchrony. More
importantly, blockchain systems support various consensus
algorithms such as PoW, PoS, and PBFT, which possess their
own advantages and are suitable for diﬀerent scenarios.

Blockchain systems can be classiﬁed as public blockchains,
consortium blockchains, and private blockchains. These three
categories diﬀer in the restrictions on the members who can
participate. Public blockchains are open to all the people
and thus everyone can participate; consortium blockchains
only allow alliance members to participate; while private
blockchains can only be maintained by a person or an or-
ganization. The speciﬁc diﬀerences are shown in Table 1.
Due to the unique design concepts, blockchain systems have
many characteristics such as decentralization, transparency,
immutability, and trustworthiness.

The idea of smart contracts is originally proposed by
Nick Szabo. A smart contract is essentially a computer pro-
tocol to guarantee trusted transactions without the interven-
tion of third parties. The advantages of smart contracts in-
clude reducing manpower, lowering costs, and realizing the
automation of the system operation. Smart contracts exist in
digital forms, which allow them to integrate perfectly with
computers. They are generally formulated and executed to-
gether with users to better reﬂect their wishes. So far, not

Yihao Guo et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 3 of 25

When Blockchain Meets Smart Grids: A Comprehensive Survey

Table 1: Comparison Of Public, Private And Consortium Blockchain

Blockchain

Participants

Access control

Degree of decentralization

Security level

Transaction speed

Transaction cost

Public blockchain
Private blockchain
Consortium blockchain

All users
Partial users
Partial users

No
Yes
Yes

Completely
Partially
Partially

High
Low
Medium

Slow
Fast
Fast

High
Low
Medium

all blockchain platforms can support smart contracts. The
most famous combination of smart contracts and blockchain
is the implementation of Ethereum. There also exist many
blockchain platforms that do not support smart contracts, in-
cluding Bitcoin, Factom, etc.

2.2. Integrating Blockchain with Smart Grids:

Opportunities and Advantages

Smart grid is an intelligent transformation of traditional
power grid. It solves a series of problems existing in tra-
ditional power grids such as poor elasticity, information is-
lands, and single information ﬂow. In a smart grid, the physi-
cal structure and the division of labor are clear. The informa-
tion of the entire smart grid can be obtained by specialized
agencies to achieve optimal distribution of energy. However,
a smart grid still has a lot of problems and face a number of
challenges (shown in Fig. 1). This provides opportunities
for blockchain to enter the smart grid ﬁeld. More speciﬁ-
cally, blockchain, as a new type of distributed structure, can
be integrated with a smart grid (as illustrated in Fig. 2) and
has a positive impact on the smart grid.

• Blockchain can transform and upgrade centralized grid

management to distributed intelligent management. Firstly,
a blockchain can realize eﬀective management on the
supply side of a grid. For a power grid with a large
number of equipment and distributed energy units, the
blockchain can provide decentralized supervision, ac-
curate demand response, supply-demand balance, and
optimized distribution of electrical energy. This en-
ables the smart grid to cater to the growing trend of
prosumers. Secondly, a blockchain can provide more
democratic management for the demand side. Users
can join the blockchain as nodes for energy data in-
spection, supervision, and even formulating correspond-
ing rules according to their wishes through smart con-
tracts. Finally, the decentralized nature of a blockchain
can transform a smart grid from centralized storage
management to distributed multi-point management.
The smart grid enabled by the blockchain technology
can realize eﬀective scheduling of electricity storage
to minimize energy loss.

• The ﬁnancial nature of blockchain makes it an ideal

platform for electricity trading in smart grids. A blockchain
enabled smart grid can realize optimized data ﬂow,
energy ﬂow and cash ﬂow in the process of energy
trading. On one hand, energy trading in a traditional
grid is usually centralized and thus is easy to cause
monopoly. The decentralized nature of blockchain can
allow prosumers to join the grid and trade electricity

in a P2P manner. The immutability of blockchain can
record the process of energy transactions and the inter-
actions of related data. Meanwhile, the transparency
of blockchain allows users to verify grid data, which
makes grid energy transactions and data more open
and reliable. On the other hand, blockchain can pro-
vide a secure cash ﬂow for energy trading. Cryptocur-
rency has proven its security, credibility and conve-
nience in payment processing. The incentive mech-
anism of blockchain and smart contracts can realize
dynamic pricing and ﬂexible auctions between pro-
sumers. This makes electricity trading in a smart grid
more ﬂexible and convenient.

• Blockchain can greatly improve the security and pri-
vacy of the power grid for its decentralization and fault
tolerance. A blockchain itself is highly tolerant to faults,
which can enhance the underlying security of the power
grid. Speciﬁcally, the consensus algorithm can eﬀec-
tively enhance the robustness of the system and re-
sist malicious attacks. It is worth mentioning that the
blockchain does not rely on third parties, which ef-
fectively prevents leaking private information to third
parties. Considering the large number of users, the
anonymity of blockchain can protect identity informa-
tion.

• Blockchain can also extend its advantages to micro-
grids. Due to the regional characteristics of a micro-
grid, strict access control mechanisms are required.
Blockchains have their own identity management mech-
anisms, which can be adapted to suite the needs of
microgrids. Moreover, a microgrid powered by the
blockchain technology can facilitate electricity trans-
mission within a short distance, thereby signiﬁcantly
reducing electricity loss. The combination of smart
contracts and microgrids can also make the automated
management of microgrids more rational and trans-
parent.

• Blockchain is well-suited for managing the V2G net-
work in smart grids. The ﬁnancial nature and secu-
rity mechanisms of blockchain can ensure informa-
tion security during the charging and discharging pro-
cess. Each vehicle is responsible for energy storage
and transmission, and can be used as a blockchain node
for mining and reaching consensus. Lightweight con-
sensus algorithms require low computing power and
are suitable for energy vehicles.

Yihao Guo et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 4 of 25

When Blockchain Meets Smart Grids: A Comprehensive Survey

Figure 2: Application scenarios of blockchain and smart grids.

3. Blockchain for Intelligent Energy

Management

3.1. Current Issues in Intelligent Energy

Management

Energy management is the general term for scientiﬁc plan-
ning, organization, inspection, control and supervision of the
entire process of energy production, distribution, conversion
and consumption. It can be roughly divided into supplier en-
ergy management and demand side energy management. In
order to achieve intelligent smart grid management, a num-
ber of schemes have been proposed to analyze consumption
data for building models. However, existing methods have
poor scalability and require expensive computation for real-
time and dynamic smart grids. In addition, traditional en-
ergy management has problems with centralized storage, and
hence is prone to single-point failures, which is easy to cause
excessive waste of energy resources.

It turns out that solutions based on blockchain can im-
plement eﬀective management of electrical energy. They
not only improve security of smart grids, reduce energy con-
sumption and manpower, but also achieve higher scalability
and decentralized design. These solutions can be further di-
vided into two groups: eﬀective electricity distribution and
demand side management. For these two speciﬁc groups,
we elaborate on the problems and technical characteristics
of each solution. Finally, we conduct a comparative analysis
on these solutions.

3.2. Eﬀective Electricity Distribution

The goal of energy distribution is to meet electricity de-
mand, so as to achieve reasonable energy management. Tso-
lakis et al. [169] establish a secure demand response plat-
form based on OpenADR and blockchain. In this platform,
OpenADR can make the equipment respond to peaks and
troughs of electricity consumption, thereby reducing power
consumption and realizing a reasonable energy distribution.
In order to enhance robustness and realize supervision of
the system, an information collection center is established
in this system. Like [169], Van et al. [172] design an energy
management platform for smart buildings, aiming to meet
the user’s demand for renewable energy. At the same time,
the authors conduct an experimental test based on Ethereum
and employ smart contracts for automatic management and
monitoring. The results show that this scheme is suitable
in a distributed environment with high power consumption.
Edmonds et al.
[30] propose an energy management plat-
form for smart homes to address demand response. They
make use of smart contracts and propose a privacy protec-
tion mechanism based on a private blockchain.

In addition to meeting demand response, eﬀective en-
ergy distribution can optimize the entire energy system. In
[9], AlSkaif et al. apply a distributed optimal power ﬂow
model to manage the local distribution network based on a
private blockchain. On this basis, the authors propose an
optimization algorithm based on ADMM (alternating direc-
tion method of multipliers), achieving more reasonable and

Yihao Guo et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 5 of 25

When Blockchain Meets Smart Grids: A Comprehensive Survey

eﬃcient energy distribution. Similarly, Yang et.al [190] use
ADMM to achieve cost minimization modeling, which is es-
pecially suitable for ﬂexible appliance scheduling.

Marius et al. [159] utilize reasonable energy distribution
to achieve load optimization in virtual power plants. More-
over, research works [109, 189] aim to realize optimal man-
agement of energy costs. Ref. [109] uses smart contracts to
implement economic scheduling among the prosumers and
protect the interests of each prosumer. Yahaya et al. [189]
propose a model based on smart contracts and the demurrage
technology to optimize consumers’ energy consumption as
well as achieve a reasonable distribution of energy.

Blockchain also shows a great potential in managing re-
newable resources. Ref. [77] uses smart contracts to achieve
automation and transparent design. Lazaroiu et al. propose
a price prediction algorithm to improve the accuracy of en-
ergy allocation. Experiments show that this scheme is par-
ticularly suitable for smart cities and prosumers. In addi-
tion, the main purpose of the scheme [72] is to ensure the
security and privacy of renewable energy in the energy man-
agement process. Kim et al. summarize the potential se-
curity risks when renewable energy sources join the tradi-
tional power grid distribution management, and propose to
use blockchain to improve the management of the smart grid.
Skowronski [157] proposes an energy management solution
for green-ﬁeld energy and realizes a smart grid based on the
GRIDNET protocol. Smart devices in the smart grid are di-
vided into light nodes and full nodes, and the maintenance
of the entire blockchain is managed by the full nodes. Each
node has a certiﬁcate when registering, and all full nodes run
PoW consensus algorithm to manage the blockchain. The
blockchain is utilized to prevent node misbehaviors and mo-
tivate benign behaviors.

Shao et al. [151] propose a DER (Distributed Energy Re-
sources) grid-connected VPP (virtual power plant) model.
This model combines with the incentive measures of DER
and blockchain to realize a reasonable energy distribution.
In [178], a secure crowdsourcing energy platform is pro-
posed to adjust energy distribution. In this scheme, crowd-
sourcing sources come from two types: regular submissions
of crowdsourcing tasks and real-time submissions. In order
to motivate users, Wang et al. [178] design a monetary incen-
tive mechanism, which is based on market demand and game
theory. Furthermore, Utz et al. [171] implement an energy
management platform based on smart contracts to meet the
distributed problems caused by prosumers. This platform
also implements related incentive mechanisms to facilitate
rational use of distributed energy.

CBSG [32] is designed to monitor and manage the data
generated during energy distributions. It combines the data
regulation, signcryption, and aggregation algorithms, ensur-
ing the safety and integrity of energy data (shown in Figure
3). Suciu et al. [162] propose SealedGrid to provide eﬀective
distributed energy management. On this basis, SealedGrid
provides real-time monitoring functions to create a secure
environment for participants.

Figure 3: The workﬂow description of CBSG [32].

3.3. Demand Side Management

Blockchain based demand side management must ﬁrst
solve the problems of price and cost optimization to achieve
economic savings. Afzal et al. [2] apply smart contracts to
realize automated billing functions in the community, and
game theory is used to set a reasonable price. In this scheme,
each user in the community can perform optimal energy man-
agement according to its own situation and protect its own
privacy. Li et al. [86] conduct in-depth research on Singa-
pore’s demand-side energy management. They develop a
scheme based on smart contract and game theory for price
optimization. However, it is worth noting that this scheme
takes into account the uncertainties of renewable resources,
and uses the receding horizon optimization technique to do
demand side management. Ref. [184] proposes a process
optimization scheme based on M2M (Machine-to-Machine)
technology. This solution uses smart contracts to publish
price records, which are analyzed to get a model of demand
response. Similarly, Pop et al. [144] adopt smart contracts
and incentive mechanism in Ethereum, thereby achieving an
accurate demand response mechanism.

Eﬀective demand side management can reduce the neg-
ative impact of peak load. In [180], Wang et al. discuss in
detail the possibility of blockchain for demand-side manage-
ment, and apply smart contracts to achieve load optimization
and price optimization. Dang et al. [21] analyze the demand-
side management of large industries, and use individual load
optimization to achieve optimization for the entire industry.
There exist a number of schemes that focus on the prob-
lem of demand response. The work in [31] explores the fea-
sibility of blockchain to achieve demand response and con-
ducts ﬁeld experiments. In [147] and [48], the authors pro-
pose demand-side energy management for microgrids. The
model [147] reduce the peak-to-average ratio based on game
theory. Hajizadeh et al. [48] use a smart contract to provide
an automated processing mechanism. The smart contract is
negotiated between both parties, so it meets the expectations
of consumers and improves the ﬂexibility of the system.

3.4. Summary

We summarize the design goals, targets, and other blockchain-

related attributes of existing works discussed in this section,
and report the results in Table 2. After reviewing the afore-
mentioned blockchain-based solutions for smart grids, we
obtain the following ﬁndings:

• The decentralized nature of blockchain facilitates eﬃ-
cient energy management in smart grids, including en-
ergy distribution and demand side management. Many

Yihao Guo et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 6 of 25

BlockchainSmart gridUsersDPoSDataSupplierOperatorCCAggregate ciphertextMulti-receivers Smart contractPower exchangeWhen Blockchain Meets Smart Grids: A Comprehensive Survey

Table 2: Blockchain For Intelligent Energy Management

Ref.

Design goal

Target

Consensus

Blockchain

Wang et al.[178]
Cutsem et al.[172]
Pop et al. [144]
Ioannis et al.[169]
Edmonds et al.[30]
Shao et al.[151]
Tarek et al.[9]
Li et al.[86]
Dang et al.[21]
George et al.[77]
Rafal et al.[157]
Fan et al.[32]
Wu et al.[184]
Afzal et al.[2]
Yahaya et al.[189]

Market balance
Demand response
Demand response
Demand response
Demand response
Connection freely
Flow optimization
Flow optimization
Load optimization
Distribution
Distribution
Flexible regulation
Cost optimization
Cost optimization
Cost optimization

Crowdsourcing
Smart building
Prosumer
Prosumer
Smart homes
Any
Prosumer
Prosumer
Big industrial
Prosumer
Any
Any
Any
Smart homes
Smart homes

-
PoW
PoS
-
PoW
iPoW
-
dPoS
PoW
-
Hybrid
dPoS
PoC
-
PoW

Hyperledger
Ethereum
Ethereum
Ethereum
Ethereum
Semi-center
Private
Bitcoin
-
-
Ethereum
Consortium
Bitcoin
Ethereum
Ethereum

solutions use blockchain to carry out distributed trans-
formation of the smart grid so that it can adapt to the
management of new distributed energy sources. Dis-
tributed management can realize the decentralization
of management rights and solve the centralized man-
agement problems of traditional power grids, which
can facilitate the conversion of consumers to prosumers.

• Most management solutions that combine blockchain
and smart grids can realize eﬀective demand response
balance, entire system optimization, distributed stor-
age management of resources, and overall market bal-
ance control [138].

• Some solutions are suitable for various application sce-
narios and have good universality. There are also solu-
tions that target speciﬁc scenarios, such as smart home,
prosumer, and outsourcing ﬁelds. Blockchain has played
an important role in all these schemes.

• The multiple combinations of blockchain platforms and
consensus algorithms provide a huge number of choices
for various application scenarios. At the same time,
some solutions even innovatively propose new blockchain
platforms and consensus algorithms to perfectly adapt
to their needs.

• Smart contracts and incentive mechanisms closely in-
tegrated with blockchain can eﬀectively realize auto-
mated operations of a system, eliminate the interven-
tion of third parties, and attract more users to join. Es-
pecially in the management of smart grids, smart con-
tracts can give full play to their greatest advantages,
eliminate hidden human hazards, increase system se-
curity, and reduce required costs.

• However, the biggest problem with most solutions is
that they all ignore user privacy protection. They sim-
ply mention that their solutions can protect privacy,
but do not provide technical details on privacy protec-
tion.

4. Blockchain For Energy Trading
4.1. Current Issues in Energy Trading

Trading energy in a competitive energy market can sig-
niﬁcantly improve energy eﬃciency, reduce cost of energy
consumers, and increase income of energy providers. How-
ever, because the energy industry is intensive in capital, la-
bor, and resource, only large-scale energy giants can survive
and thus monopolize the energy market.

As the emergence of distributed energy sources such as
solar panels, wind turbines, and electric vehicles, it is im-
portant for smart grids to support prosumers, which may si-
multaneously be energy consumers and providers. Unfor-
tunately, the current wholesale energy market only accom-
modates large-scale electricity plants, while the prosumers
are normally small in capability. Although the retail energy
market may accommodate small-scale prosumers, it is hard
to eﬃciently support so many prosumers. Hence blockchain
is introduced to smart grids for improving energy eﬃciency
and usage of renewable energy.

In this section, we categorize energy trading from two
aspects: peer-to-peer energy trading and transaction pricing.
We also provide a summary on existing schemes.

4.2. Blockchain-Enabled Peer-to-Peer Energy

Trading

The ﬁrst challenge in energy trading comes from the pro-
sumers distributed in a smart grid, because prosumers in
traditional power grids do not have suﬃcient rights, which
makes traditional power grids hard to fulﬁll the current power
market requirements [143]. On the other hand, as more pro-
sumers use the rooftop solar photovoltaic technology to gen-
erate electricity, the surplus electricity of individuals and or-
ganizations become more common. The decentralized na-
ture of blockchain makes it well-suited to solve these prob-
lems. Ref. [75] develops a blockchain-enabled energy trad-
ing platform to realize eﬀective management of renewable
resources, meeting the needs of residents, factories and other
nodes accordingly.

Yihao Guo et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 7 of 25

When Blockchain Meets Smart Grids: A Comprehensive Survey

The diversity of blockchain platforms also provides space
for diﬀerent design options. Sabounchi and Wei [21] pro-
pose a transformation scheme based on Ethereum, which
makes each prosumer a participant and manager of the sys-
tem. At the same time, in order to incentivize participation
of prosumers, the authors combine smart contracts to real-
ize fair auction. Plaza et al. [142] introduce a blockchain-
based solution to serve the energy community sharing so-
lar energy. Like the work in [142], Yang [167] proves the
feasibility of implementing distributed trading of renewable
energy based on the Ethereum platform. Moreover, the au-
thors in [141] propose to use Hyperledger for trading surplus
electricity and compensating the sellers accordingly. Simi-
larly, Jamil et al. [60] use machine learning and Hyperledger
to implement an energy trading platform that realizes elec-
tricity usage forecast and on-demand distribution. In addi-
tion, Kavousi-Fard et al. [67] propose a new consensus algo-
rithm named Relaxed Consensus Innovation (RCI), which is
suitable for the p2p energy trading market, especially micro-
grids.

Pee et al. [139] make use of blockchain and smart con-
tracts to implement automatic transactions, eliminating trusted
third parties and ensuring transparency, immutability and
traceability of energy trading. Similarly, Yu et al. [191] in-
corporate smart contracts to realize transparent and indepen-
dent energy transactions for prosumers. Okoye et al. [110]
improve the access rules of blockchain and greatly increase
the transaction speed.

In addition to the above solutions for prosumers, there
also exist proposals for traditional consumers to achieve su-
pervision and optimization of the transaction system [52,
94]. ElectroBlocks [166] solves the problems of insuﬃcient
demand and supply in traditional power grids through cost
aware and store aware algorithms. Gao et al. [37] use a
sovereign blockchain to implement the supervision function
of a trading system. This solution employs smart contracts to
control consumer access, detect malicious nodes, and make
transactions transparent. Danzi et al. [23] make use of a
layered mechanism based on Ethereum to realize a trans-
parent energy transaction market. They ﬁrst implement a
distributed architecture using blockchain. On this basis, the
second blockchain is combined with smart contracts to achieve
real-time information acquisition, implement fair pricing, and
achieve demand response. The work [179] proposes an op-
timization model based Hyperledger for operating a crowd-
sourcing energy system. In order to improve the rationality
in energy trading, Wang et al. present a two stage arithmetic
algorithm. Furthermore, [70] develops an anonymous loca-
tion proof algorithm, which employs distance and reputation
to determine the most suitable trading partner. Umoren et
al. [170] exploits the latest 5G technology and graphical in-
terface to enhance the eﬃciency and supervision of the trad-
ing system. Like [170], ET-DeaL[76] proposed by Aparna
Kumari also uses the 5G technology. Additionally, it com-
bines IPFS (InterPlanetary File System) with Ethereum to
improve the security and privacy of energy transactions.

4.3. Fair Energy Pricing

The auction platform is of great signiﬁcance in the pric-
ing of energy transactions. Ref. [47] proposes an auction
mechanism based on smart contracts, which achieves rea-
sonable energy pricing and eliminates third parties. More
importantly, the mechanism uses Vickrey auctions to fur-
ther ensure transaction fairness. The scheme presented in
[107] also employs the Vickrey auction. It develops an it-
erative Vickrey–Clarke–Grove method and combines it with
the proof-of-stake consensus blockchain to realize an energy
trading mechanism with incentive functionality. Wang et
al. [176, 177] design a continuous double auction scheme
to address the problem of excessive price ﬂuctuations. In or-
der to ensure security of the auction process, the authors use
the multi-signature technique and the adaptive attack strat-
egy to ensure the accuracy and stability of the pricing pro-
cess. In [160], Marius et al. propose a mechanism similar
to double auction, which optimizes distribution while eﬀec-
tively reducing the computational load of blockchain nodes.
The work in [49] analyzes the technical work of developing
blockchain energy auctions from a green perspective.

Besides auction pricing, there also exist schemes that de-
termine accurate and eﬀective prices based on energy de-
mand and supply. Ref. [192] proposes a dynamic pricing
scheme for a blockchain-based ecosystem architecture, in
which price is determined by an optimization problem be-
tween the microgrid and distributed system operators. This
scheme incorporates smart contracts to realize automatic trans-
action execution. Li et al. [80] develop a pricing scheme to
build a distributed non-cooperative market, which can achieve
Nash equilibrium to ultimately maximize the welfare of the
entire system. Blockchain and smart contracts are employed
in this scheme to establish a transactive energy market. Sim-
ilar to [80], the solution in [168] utilizes smart contracts to
realize demand pricing and automated arrangements. How-
ever, this scheme provides certain rewards to users who ac-
tively adjust the price. Moreover, the solution proposed in [103]
is based on the information exchanged between prosumers.
Prosumers conduct real-time multilateral pricing bids based
on their respective power needs and actual conditions. This
solution uses smart contracts to reﬂect the interests of the
prosumers and encourage them to participate. In [73], Knirsch
et al. make use of load distribution information of power
plants and customers for training and modeling, so as to pre-
dict electricity consumption and realize reasonable pricing.

The combination of blockchain and game theory can achieve

fair and eﬀective pricing in the energy trading market. Ref.
[87] combines consortium blockchain to ensure transaction
security, and uses the Stackelberg game to achieve reason-
able pricing (shown in Figure. 4). Wu et al. [185] imple-
ment a secure energy trading platform to solve the problem
of wind energy heating. The platform is a three-tier struc-
ture and has a side-payment mechanism. It is worth noting
that the authors employ sequential games to achieve Nash
equilibrium, ensuring reasonable and accurate energy pric-
ing. In [46, 45], the authors make use of the Stackelberg
game to achieve fair pricing between a grid and a communit,

Yihao Guo et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 8 of 25

When Blockchain Meets Smart Grids: A Comprehensive Survey

Table 3: Blockchain For Energy Trading

Ref.

Target

Consensus

Demand res.

Contract

Blockchain

Gao et al.[37]
Okoye et al.[110]
Yu et al.[191]
Manisa et al.[141]
Wang et al.[179]
Umoren et al.[170]
Khorasany et al.[70]
Meng et al.[103]
Wang et al.[176]
Hahn et al.[47]
Wu et al.[185]
Danzi et al.[23]
Li et al.[87]
Yue et al.[192]
Li et al.[80]
Guo et al.[46]
Wang et al.[174]
Fabian et al.[73]

Any
Microgrid
Any
Any
Any
V2G
Any
Prosumer
Microgrid
Any
North China
Any
IIoT
Prosumer
Any
Any
Prosumer
Any

-
PoS
-
PoC
RBFT
-
A-PoL
-
-
PoC
-
PoW
PoW
-
-
PoW
-
PoW

No
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
No
No

Used
Used
Used
Used
Used
Unused
Used
Used
Used
Used
Used
Used
Unused
Used
Used
Unused
Used
Used

Sovereign
Consortium
Ethereum
Hyperledger
Hyperledger
Private
Lightweight
Ethereum
Bitcoin
Ethereum
Ethereum
Ethereum
Consortium
-
Ethereum
Bitcoin
Ethereum
-

thyereby obtaining the maximum beneﬁt. In these works, the
blockchain platforms mainly serve to guarantee security and
privacy. Smart contracts can eﬀectively improve transaction
eﬃciency. Guo et al. [45] design a new Byzantine consensus
to improve the success rate. Doan et.al [29] exploit a dou-
ble auction-based Stackelberg game to encourage individual
users to participate in energy trading and achieve maximum
social welfare.

Figure 4: Energy exchange process based on the scheme in
[87].

In addition to the above-mentioned methods, pricing in
the energy trading process is also applied to certain special
scenarios. Chen et al. [17] propose a pricing algorithm for
end devices in edge computing, and blockchain is used to
realize distributed transactions. In [174], Wang et al. apply
smart contracts to implement a bidding system for V2G. This
system employs a particle swarm to analyze and model the
smart grid, so as to realize rational bidding. The authors also
develop genetic algorithms to further optimize the bidding
results and maximize the beneﬁts of the entire system.

4.4. Summary

We summarize the key technologies and blockchain-related

attributes of the works mentioned above in this subsection.
The details are shown in Table 3. Having reviewed the afore-
mentioned blockchain-based solutions for smart grids, we
obtain the following ﬁndings:

• Most of the schemes that integrate blockchain with
energy trading can be applied to any transaction sce-

nario. A few schemes are speciﬁcally developed for
V2G, microgrids, prosumers, and industrial IoTs.

• Blockchain as a carrier of the cryptocurrency or to-
ken has the desirable ﬁnancial property. This makes
blockchain well-suited for payment processes. More
importantly, the decentralized nature of blockchain makes
it both fault tolerant and highly secure. These features
make it an ideal choice as a platform for energy trading
in smart grids [96].

• In the application scenario of energy trading, the in-
centive mechanism of blockchain is particularly im-
portant. It has a positive eﬀect on promoting energy
trading and reasonable pricing. Due to the high re-
quirements for reasonable pricing of energy transac-
tions, current schemes also combine game theory, dy-
namic pricing, and auction technologies on the basis
of incentive mechanism design.

• The consensus mechanism can further ensure security
and eﬃciency of the transaction process. Smart con-
tracts can be employed to realize complex payment
processing logics, such that payment can be made au-
tomatically and securely according to predeﬁned rules.

• In terms of security, we ﬁnd that some schemes can-
not avoid the security and privacy risks that could oc-
cur during the energy trading process. Additionally,
due to the delay of blockchain itself, energy demand
requests may not be responded in real time, which sig-
niﬁcantly aﬀects the eﬀective distribution of energy.

In addition, security and privacy issues are very impor-
tant in energy trading, which are to be discussed in the next
section, while energy trading in microgrids is covered in
Sec. 6.

Yihao Guo et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 9 of 25

BuyersSellersTokenEnergyAggregatorsCreditCreditBlockchainRecordWhen Blockchain Meets Smart Grids: A Comprehensive Survey

5. Security And Privacy Protection
5.1. Current Issues in Smart Grid Security and

Privacy

A smart grid is an important infrastructure, so its se-
curity and privacy protection are the prerequisites for high-
conﬁdence system operations. In recent years, power grids
face serious security risks, threats and various attacks, in-
cluding but not limited to:smart meter attacks, time synchro-
nization attacks, physical network attacks, denial of service
(DOS) attacks, false data injection attacks, replay attacks,
double spend attacks, network attacks and GPS spooﬁng at-
tacks.

Traditional schemes combine Kalman ﬁlter, stochastic
game, sparse optimization and other technologies to prevent
and detect attacks. However, most of these schemes can only
be targeted at speciﬁc situations thus cannot resist all attacks.
Furthermore, most of the traditional schemes are based on
the centralized power grids, which can not adapt to the new
distributed ones. Blockchain, as a transparent distributed
ledger, can adapt to the new smart grids. In addition, the
mining mechanism, consensus mechanism, and the avoid of
third parties of blockchain make it an eﬀective way to resist
most of the attacks and provide a safer environment.

In this section, we summarize the related works from the
perspectives of security and privacy enabled by blockchain.
We analyze each category comprehensively and present our
insights obtained from this study in the end.

5.2. Blockchain for Smart Grid Security

In the process of transition to a distributed structure, the
energy market is prone to potential security risks and cri-
In [55], Hua and Sun propose a trans-
sis of conﬁdence.
action program for energy and carbon markets. In order to
further improve security and robustness of the system, the
authors adopt implement the so-called “payment-to-public-
key-hash” with multi-signatures. Abdella et al. [1] present
a three-layer model to address the distributed energy man-
agement problem. The three-layer structure works in con-
junction with each other to eﬀectively improve security and
eﬃciency. Ref. [164] highlights the important role of dig-
ital grid routers in smart grids, and proposes to integrate
blockchain with digital grid routers to build a safer decen-
tralized energy exchange platform. The work in [101] de-
scribes the method to change Sardinia’s power grid in re-
sponse to security risks caused by distributed transforma-
tion. This project implements a trading system in which
blockchain acts as a middleman for the transaction. When
a producer produces energy units, the smart meter sends the
message to blockchain. Smart contracts automatically real-
ize the interaction between information and tokens. There
is also an agent in the system to help the sellers formulate
strategies to maximize the seller’s interests and facilitate ra-
tional use of resources.

Traditional power grids often rely on reliable third par-
ties, which generally brings unknown security risks to the
system. EnergyChain [4] provides a solution speciﬁcally for
smart homes without third parties.

External attacks are one of the common problems that
cause security risks. In [33], Ferrag and Maglaras propose
an energy framework called DeepCoin based on blockchain
and deep learning. The authors adopt a practical Byzantine
fault-tolerant algorithm to improve eﬃciency.
In order to
counter against the cyber-attacks, diﬀerent solutions have
been proposed in [108, 88]. The program in [108] simu-
lates a power grid system with limited resources. Liang et
al. [88] conduct experiments based on IEEE-118 and smart
contracts to prove the eﬀectiveness of the schemes. In or-
der to enhance privacy protection and power security, Kaur
et al. [66] propose a framework based on software-deﬁned
networking and blockchain. The framework combines a se-
cure and eﬃcient mutual authentication protocol based on
the elliptic curve cryptosystem and a smart contract for de-
mand response. For fake data injection attacks, Samy et al.
[146] develop an abstract model based on blockchain.

On the other hand, many solutions have been optimized
for secure payment and access for the energy market. Re-
searchers make eﬀort to design secure payment platforms for
energy exchange [100, 154]. The work in [100] proposes a
multi-layer grid architecture for consumers. The authors im-
plement a trusted settlement mechanism at the second layer.
Shuaib at al. [154] use smart contracts to verify the possi-
bility of blockchain as a secure payment for distributed en-
ergy (shown in Figure. 5). Except the payment mechanism,
Garg et al. [38] develop a secure access mechanism for V2G
by using elliptic curve cryptography. This scheme can en-
sure strong anonymity and low cost. Ouyang et al. [137] fo-
cus on direct transactions for large scale power consumers.
The framework adopts smart contracts to implement access
and settlement mechanisms to ensure the security of transac-
tions. Bera et al. [15] propose a new access control protocol
named DBACP-IoTSG, which is implemented in a private
chain and has the characteristics of low cost and high secu-
rity. Alcaraz et al. [6] consider the security problems caused
by the high coupling degree of the entities, and propose a
three-tier architecture to reduce the coupling degree. Tang
et al. [165] propose an anonymous authentication scheme
based on ring signatures, which can realize tracking without
exposing user information.

Figure 5: The workﬂow of the scheme in [154].

In [62] and [57], two solutions are mainly proposed for
smart grids as an IoT system. While ensuring security, Jiang
et al. [62] use smart contracts and DPoS consensus to im-
prove eﬃciency. Huang at al. [57] employ Sigfox and Ethereum
to conﬁrm the feasibility of the solution. The work in [155]
mainly describes the security risks in the energy transmis-
sion system and the corresponding solutions making use of

Yihao Guo et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 10 of 25

BlockchainSmart gridProsumersCosumersPurchase contractSelling contractGet powerPower exchangeWhen Blockchain Meets Smart Grids: A Comprehensive Survey

the decentralization, transparency and immutability proper-
ties of blockchain. Moreover, Ref. [58] discusses possible
security issues in the AMI (Advanced Metering Infrastruc-
ture) and proposes a framework that can achieve load bal-
ancing. This framework integrates the blockchain incentive
mechanism and the encryption/signature algorithm to ensure
the security of the energy market and improve the eﬃciency
of demand response. It is worth mentioning that BBARS
[175] employs a variety of public key encryption technolo-
gies to achieve the security of V2G’s anonymous rewards.

Unlike the previous schemes, He et al. [51] discuss the
methods to combine the advantages of the photovoltaic power
and carbon market. This scheme provides a dual-blockchain
structure, in which the two chains cooperate and supervise
each other to achieve data sharing. The authors also prove
the usability on the Ethereum platform.

5.3. Blockchain for Power Grid Privacy

One of the reasons for privacy leaks lies in outside at-
tacks or the introduction of dishonest third parties. It is pointed
out that many solutions use blockchain to transform a smart
grid, but the public ledger may lead to user privacy leakage
due to malicious attacks [35]. This work adopts a consortium
blockchain, where each energy transaction intermediary acts
as a miner node, and the transaction intermediary is com-
posed of energy reserve equipment and token banks. It also
uses smart contracts to design a black box and create a virtual
account for each user. Chen et al. [19] employ group signa-
tures based blockchain to build a platform, which can specif-
ically solve the privacy leakage problems of WSNs (Wire-
less Sensor Networks). In [83], Li et al. propose FeneChain
that makes use of anonymous authentication to strengthen
privacy protection. The authors design a mechanism based
on time commitment to ensure fairness and accuracy of en-
ergy transactions. Lu et al. [98] incorporates a reputation-
based fairness proof mechanism, reducing the user’s compu-
tational burden and lowering the system’s entry barrier. The
scheme divides the electricity market transaction model into
two levels that can cooperate with each other and provide a
secure environment.

Ref. [36] points out that it is easy to launch attacks at the
edge layer. Therefore, this work intends to use edge comput-
ing to enhance the security of edge nodes. At the same time,
encrypted channels are introduced to ensure secure commu-
nications between edge devices. Blockchain can achieve de-
centralization to ensure the authenticity of the data, and users
use pseudonyms to participate in transactions and preserve
their privacy. Smart contracts are adopted to achieve the
In response to
most eﬃcient energy distribution strategy.
the privacy issues of edge devices, Guan et.al [43] propose
the BPM4SG scheme, which combines techniques such as
multi-party secure computation, smart contracts, and ring
signatures. The experimental results prove that this scheme
has good performance advantages.

Sestrem et al. [150] mainly tackle the potential privacy
risks in the optimization process with blockchain. They pro-
tect the privacy of the entire system by establishing sidechains.

Samuel et al. [145] propose an admission control mecha-
nism based on Ethereum to solve the dilemma of service
provision and privacy disclosure. The authors also com-
bine Pagerank to encourage consumers to join. The work
in [42] applies the method of user group management to ad-
dress the privacy leakage problem for smart meters. It estab-
lishes private blockchains to record the data of each group,
and uses multiple pseudonyms to further protect the privacy
of users (shown in Figure. 6). Li et al. [82] develop a pri-
vacy protection scheme in the process of price optimization,
which is based on the secure signature authentication mech-
anism and identity-based proxy re-encryption strategies. In
response to the privacy challenge of data aggregation, Singh
et.al [156] present a scheme called BHDA, which combines
deep learning and homomorphic encryption to improve the
performance of data aggregation and privacy protection with
minimal computational overhead. Lu et.al [97] propose a so-
lution named EBDA to address the privacy issues caused by
data aggregation , which integrates not only blockchain, but
also edge computing technologies.

Figure 6: The description of the key steps of the scheme in
[42].

In the process of decentralization of smart grids, privacy
issues are also extremely easy to arise. In [24] and [158],
the authors aim to achieve privacy protection for prosumers.
Deng et al. [24] use a central operator to summarize the data,
preventing prosumers from obtaining data not belonging to
them. The proposed scheme also presents a new primal-
dual gradient method for rational energy scheduling. Son et
al. [158] make use of functional encryption and smart con-
tracts to improve system security and protect privacy. Lu
et al. [99] propose a solution based on SDN (Software De-
ﬁned Network) technology. Experiments prove that this so-
lution has good accuracy. Keshk et al. [68] develop a two-
level model. The privacy module is mainly an enhanced
blockchain based on proof-of-work. It is used to ensure data
integrity and mitigate data poisoning attacks. The anomaly
detection module employs deep learning to integrate data.
The two modules cooperate with each other, which greatly
increases the security and eﬃciency. Zhang et al. [194] em-
ploy blockchain and ring signature to enhance privacy pro-
tection. The innovation of this work lies in its adoption of
the point multiplication of elliptic curve, which greatly re-
duces the system complexity. The work in [95] demonstrates
a privacy-preserving network protocol based on multi-level
encryption. Guan et al. [41] provide a general model based
on ciphertext-policy attribute-based encryption and credibility-
based equity proof consensus, which can achieve ﬁne-grained
access control through transaction arbitration in the form of

Yihao Guo et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 11 of 25

Center unitMining nodeHome/Industrial usersBlockchainWANBillingControlKMCKeyKeyWhen Blockchain Meets Smart Grids: A Comprehensive Survey

Table 4: Blockchain For Security And Privacy Protection

Ref.

Design goal

Consensus

Contract

Blockchain

Luo et al.[100]
Garg et al.[38]
Huang et al.[57]
He et al.[51]
EnergyChain [4]
Gai et al.[35]
Gai et al.[36]
Guan et al.[42]
Lu et al.[99]
Hua and Sun [55]
Juhar et al.[1]
Deng et al.[24]
Keshk et al.[68]
Son et al. [158]
DeepCoin [33]
Li et al.[83]

Secure payment
Security access
Wireless security
Market integration
Third party
Third party
Service optimization
Service optimization
Distributed design
Distributed design
Distributed design
Distributed design
Distributed design
Distributed design
Anti-attack
Anti-attack

-
-
-
Hybrid
PoW
PBFT
PoW
PoW
-
-
PoS
-
ePoW
-
PBFT
PBFT

Used
Used
Unused
Unused
Unused
Unused
Used
Unused
Unused
Used
Used
Unused
Unused
Unused
Unused
Used

Double-chain
-
Ethereum
Double-chain
EnergyChain
Consortium
Permissioned
Private
-
-
Hybrid
-
-
-
-
Consortium

ciphertext.

5.4. Summary

We summarize the design goals, key technologies, and
other blockchain-related attributes of the existing solutions
mentioned above. The results are reported in Table 4.

Having reviewed the aforementioned blockchain-based
solutions for smart grid security and privacy, we obtain the
following ﬁndings:

• The research works discussed in this section have greatly
improved security and privacy of smart grids. The
transparency, immutability, and anonymity of blockchain
properties can help to eﬀectively protect the supervi-
sion, monitoring and management of smart grids. It is
worth mentioning that security, as a basic attribute, is
reﬂected in all ﬁelds such as wireless networks, smart
homes, smart communities, V2G, and IIoT.

• Blockchain-based solutions can eﬀectively address var-
ious security problems caused by distributed transfor-
mation, third parties, malicious attacks, and other rea-
sons.

• Diﬀerent encryption technologies such as asymmetric
encryption, attribute-based encryption, and functional
encryption, are employed to enhance security and pri-
vacy for smart grids and their users. Blockchain pro-
vides the basis for the implementation of these encryp-
tion algorithms.

• It can be seen that the multi-level and multi-chain in-
formation transfer model can be realized on the basis
of blockchain, and the protection of information pri-
vacy can be enhanced accordingly. We believe that it
is indeed feasible to design solutions based on blockchain
to protect user privacy.

6. Blockchain for Microgrid Management
6.1. Current Issues in Microgrid

The concept of microgrid was ﬁrst proposed by Lasseter.
Although there is no formal standards for a microgrid sys-
tem, this concept has been accepted by the communities and
considerable research works have been dedicated to micro-
grids. We deﬁne a microgrid to be a small- to medium-
sized and low-voltage power grid that combines various dis-
tributed power generations to provide electrical energy for
local loads. A microgrid can improve the reliability of power
supply on the demand side. From the scale perspective, it is
a small-scale power grid structure. But from the function-
ality perspective, a microgrid is an autonomous system that
can realize self control, protection, and management, simi-
lar to a large-scale power grid. However, a microgrid suﬀers
from high management cost and low revenue, so it can nei-
ther meet the requirements of investors nor guarantee trust
for consumers.

As distributed and storage systems, various types of blockchains

have been integrated with large-scale power grids. It is also
possible to apply blockchain to microgrids. Recent years,
many proposals based on the combination of microgrid and
blockchain have been proposed, tackling issues such as se-
curity, power loss issues, automation and energy distribution
in microgrids.

6.2. Security Design of Microgrids

A microgrid must ﬁrst ensure that it can resist malicious
attacks and threats from third-party organizations. The solu-
tion in [25] is based on Tendermint, which eliminates the de-
pendence on third-party organizations. Mbarek et al. [102]
employ removable software to detect FDI (False Data Injec-
tion) attacks. Diﬀerent from the above schemes, [12] intends
to solve the potential MIM (man-in-the-middle) attacks and
DS (Data Spooﬁng) attacks in microgrids. Based on Hy-
perledger, this work develops a blockchain-based system for
sharing status and control information between microgrids.

Yihao Guo et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 12 of 25

When Blockchain Meets Smart Grids: A Comprehensive Survey

It can maintain dynamic stability for electricity generation,
transmission, and distribution. Blockchain provides consen-
sus nodes in the system to achieve trustworthy data commu-
nications between microgrids.

To enhance security and prevent cyber attacks for micro-
grids, Wang et al. [173] use DAG (Directed Acyclic Graph)
to improve traditional microgrids by combining the data re-
covery technology and the UT (Unscented Transform) tech-
nique for better eﬃciency and accuracy. Like [173], [20]
also uses the UT technique to model uncertainties in de-
mands and electricity supplies. The blockchain enabled IoT
scheme can reduce operation cost and enhance security.

In order to further improve privacy protection of a micro-
grid, Zhang et al. [193] make use of a consortium blockchain
and the CDA (Continuous Double Auction) mechanism to
reduce cost and improve transaction eﬃciency. They com-
bine FBS (Fair Blind Signature) and the SSS (Secret Sharing
Scheme) based (𝑡, 𝑛)-threshold scheme to improve security
and traceability of the system. For the purpose of detecting
faults and preventing damages due to fault damage propaga-
tions in a microgrid, Bayati et al. [14] propose a protection
technique based on blockchain. This scheme employs en-
cryption to protect diﬀerential relays from cyber attacks.

The security protection of a microgrid is also reﬂected in
the ﬁeld of ﬁnance. In [61], Jeon et al. use a hybrid blockchain
to solve the hidden danger caused by the problem of double
spending. And the work in [183] takes advantage of trans-
parency and immutability of blockchain to implement an ac-
counting model suitable for renewable energy. Experimen-
tal results show that it can promote the development of dis-
tributed energy resources in the future.

In [5], security problems caused by one-way communi-
cations are addressed, where consumers can only accept pas-
sively and cannot respond their demands. Alam et al. pro-
pose a double-chain structure to optimize the microgrid along
with a negotiation algorithm. The algorithm generates smart
contracts and accomplishes negotiations, thereby promoting
the optimal transactions of credit.

6.3. Power Losses of Microgrids

One problem of the traditional power grid is power losses.
Because a power station is usually far away from its users, it
leads to a large amount of electricity loss during the trans-
mission process. In a microgrid, power loss problems can
be eﬀectively alleviated because the microgrid is an energy
ecosystem within a small area with a short transmission dis-
tance. However, the increasing number of microgrids brings
other power loss problems [148, 53]. Power losses may also
be resulted from issues such as old machines, coal consump-
tion for power supply, and the superposition of energy trans-
actions [27]. We investigate the research works based on
blockchain and ﬁnd that it is indeed feasible to use blockchain-
based solutions for solving the power loss problem in a mi-
crogrid.

With the deep promotion of distributed microgrids and
the massive use of renewable energy sources, the power loss
problem of renewable energy sources have become more se-

rious. Based on blockchain and smart contracts, Danzi et
al. [22] tackle the power loss problem caused by the high
penetration rate of distributed energy resources. For renew-
able energy, the work in [69] explores the challenges fac-
ing Pakistan’s power imbalance, and proposes an anti-power
solution based on Ethereum. Shishkov et al. [153] employ
blockchain to address the power system operation problem
of Russian Federation.

Di Silvestre et al. [26] propose a comprehensive frame-
work of microgrids. This work considers the issue of provid-
ing auxiliary services. In the proposed scheme, each pho-
tovoltaic generator plays a role in voltage regulation, and
blockchain can increase the security of the system. Experi-
mental results show that the scheme can eﬀectively improve
the voltage regulation, thereby enhancing the robustness of
the system.

6.4. Microgrid Automation

Kang et al. [64] use PoW and smart contracts to imple-
ment a smart home system based Ethereum. It aims to auto-
mate the processing of renewable energy and eliminates the
dependence of third parties (shown in Figure. 7). Similarly,
Afzal et al. [3] propose a microgrid solution for smart com-
munities, where smart contracts can realize automation for
the system.

Figure 7: Microgrid energy interaction based on the scheme
in [64].

In [187], the authors mainly address the complexity of
the traditional power grid nanagement process and the high
labor cost. The scheme proposed in Kounelis et al. [74] is
committed to solving the problems of high cost of micro-
grid systems and low user proﬁts. Both solutions [187, 74]
use smart contracts to achieve automated operations, while
greatly reducing operating costs. Furthermore, Gazafroudi
et al. [39] propose an automatic payment scheme that avoid
labor and third parties, thus greatly reducing cost. However,
it is not suitable for large-scale application scenarios.

6.5. Power Distribution of Microgrid

Similar to the traditional large-scale power grids, the en-
ergy distribution of a microgrid is optimized to meet de-
mand response, improve service quality, and optimize price.
Alessandra et al. [7] intend to optimize the microgrid process
to provide better services (shown in Figure. 8).

Like [7], [81] meets the needs of users, and proposes a
demand response mechanism for IoT (Internet of Things).
This work employs game theory to achieve a more reason-
able energy distribution and price. Li and Nair [79] pro-
pose a blockchain based system to generate and trade power,
which can optimize price and cost in microgrids. It employs

Yihao Guo et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 13 of 25

BlockchainPoW pricingPricePurchase intentionEnergyTokenSmart contractWhen Blockchain Meets Smart Grids: A Comprehensive Survey

Table 5: Blockchain For Micogrid Management

Ref.

Consensus

Incentive

Blockchain

Key technique

Alam et al.[5]
Jeon et al.[61]
Wang et al.[173]
Zhang et al.[193]
Danzi et al.[22]
Silvestre et al.[26]
Khalid et al.[69]
Kang et al.[64]
Kounelis et al.[74]
Xue et al.[187]
Afzal et al.[3]
Alessandra et al.[7]
Dimobi et al.[28]
Van et al.[78]
Li et al.[80]
Eric et al.[105]
Li et al.[81]
Li et al.[79]

-
-
-
-
PoW
-
PoA
PoW
PoW
PoW
-
PoW
PoW
-
PoW
-
PoW
-

No
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes

No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
Yes

Double-chain
Hybrid
Private
Consortium
Ethereum
Tendermint
Ethereum
Ethereum
Ethereum
Ethereum
Ethereum
Private
Hyperledger
Ethereum
Permissioned
Ethereum
-
Ethereum

-
Plasma trading
Unscented trans., DAG
Blind signature
Fairness Control
Glow-worm swarm
Asymmetric crypto.
-
Helios Coin
-
Branch and Bound
Machine learning
-
ADMM
Asymmetric crypto.
ADMM
Stackelberg game
Bidding algo.

-

Figure 8: Illustration of the scheme in [7] in the ﬁeld of mi-
crogrid.

LSB (Linear Supply Bidding) to prove the equilibrium of the
electricity market competition. The authors also introduce
a DSB (Distributed Supply Bidding) algorithm to achieve
reasonable pricing. Dimobi et al. [28] analyze several en-
ergy market coordination schemes and propose an energy
exchange scheme based on Hyperledger Fabric, which can
increase the enthusiasm of users for energy investment and
optimize cost.

How to achieve optimal power ﬂow in microgrids has
also attracted interests of researchers. The work in [105]
uses the ADMM algorithm to ensure operational constraints
and fair payment without relying on third-party agencies.
Blockchain and smart contracts are employed to verify the
eﬀectiveness of the solution. With the smart contract tech-
nology, a power grid can run automatically and realize auto-
matic payment of transactions. Van Leeuwen et al. [78] also
incorporate the ADMM algorithm to optimize the system’s
power consumption. The solution utilizes smart contracts
and eliminates third parties. In this scheme, the smart con-
tract helps to distribute data to all participants and execute
the ADMM algorithm.

6.6. Summary

We summarize the key technologies and blockchain-related

attributes of the existing works in this subsection. The spe-
ciﬁc results are presented in Table 5.

Having reviewed the aforementioned blockchain-based
solutions for microgrids, we obtain the following ﬁndings:

• Microgrids are subsystems of a large power grid, and
its users are often communities or islands with rela-
tively close daily connections, which conforms to the
characteristics of the consortium blockchain. There-
fore, we believe that the integration of blockchain with
microgrids is more suitable than with a large power
grid.

• In terms of security, most solutions are based on the
trust platform provided by blockchain, and incorpo-
rate cryptographic technologies such as blind signa-
ture and asymmetric encryption.

• Power loss is mostly caused by long-distance trans-
missions and the excessive use of new renewable en-
ergy. The regional nature of a microgrid and the dis-
tributed structure of a blockchain can solve these prob-
lems. Some solutions combine machine learning and
ADMM technologies to aggregate and analyze the en-
ergy usage data of a microgrid to achieve eﬀective
monitoring and forecasting of electricity.

• Blockchain can provide transparent and unchangeable
records for grid users.
Its consensus and incentive
measures can be exploited to reduce energy consump-
tion. Smart contracts can provide automated manage-
ment and eliminate trusted third parties. Based on the
above characteristics, many schemes combine game
theory and the ﬁnancial characteristics of blockchain
to establish auctions and dynamic pricing markets, mak-
ing energy distribution more reasonable.

• However, We ﬁnd that some solutions for security en-
hancement still have certain ﬂaws and the encryption

Yihao Guo et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 14 of 25

BlockchainMicrogridSolar prosumerSmart furnituresTrading platformJoinInfoSmart energy monitorWhen Blockchain Meets Smart Grids: A Comprehensive Survey

algorithm used is relatively simple. Advanced tech-
niques such as identity-based encryption, attribute-based
encryption, and RSA encryption are rarely adopted in
current research. Privacy protection is also mainly
guaranteed by signature-based access control, which
lacks in-depth research.

All in all, the integration of blockchain and microgrid
is a complementary combination of two technical ﬁelds and
there is still much room for further development.

7. Blockchain For Electric Vehicles
7.1. Current Issues in Electric Vehicles

The scope of smart grids continues to expand, and elec-
tric vehicles are gradually becoming popular, especially in
countries with policy supports such as China and Japan. Due
to high mobility, electric vehicles can be seen as mobile ter-
minals of the power grid, thereby realizing important func-
tions. This is the so-called V2G technology, which can im-
prove the performance of the power grid in terms of reliabil-
ity, eﬃciency, and stability. However, electric vehicles are
not perfectly integrated with smart grids, and there exist a
series of problems such as energy shortage, security risks,
and privacy leak.

As a distributed consensus ledger, blockchain can solve
the problems of trust and privacy and demonstrate a great
potential in the mobile ﬁeld. We survey solutions on the
combination of electric vehicles and blockchain from two
perspectives: charging/discharging of electric vehicles and
energy transmissions of electric vehicles. We elaborate on
each category and summarize and compare related technolo-
gies in the end.

7.2. Charging and Discharging of Electric Vehicles
The blockchain technology can help to address the prob-
lems of excessive charging load and unstable voltage of elec-
tric vehicles. The works [84, 85] propose two models based
on the consortium blockchain technology. It is worth men-
tioning that [84] presents a two-layer model, which can real-
ize optimization of charging/discharging transactions. This
scheme also considers a mixed integer programming prob-
lem, and proposes a new KHA (Krill Herd Algorithm) to
solve the problem. Moreover, the purpose of the scheme [18]
is to forecast the power consumption in future to eﬃciently
distribute power. It is built on an Ethereum platform, and its
core is an auction quotation system and the corresponding
power allocation algorithm.

In addition to load issues, the combination of blockchain
and V2G can realize cost optimization. Liu et al. [92] opti-
mize cost through the combination of IOEA (Iceberg Order
Execution Algorithm) and smart contracts. Similarly, the
authors [89] put forward their own design to optimize cost
and price. The technical core of this solution lies in a JD
(jump-diﬀusion) process for energy exchange. The innova-
tion in [140] is the combination of Ethereum and Lagrange
relaxation. This solution can not only maximize charging
proﬁt but also prevent malicious collusion attacks.

Blockchain’s consensus mechanism and smart contracts
can guarantee security for electric vehicle charging. The de-
sign goal of EVChain [34] is to solve the privacy leakage
and hidden security risks in the charging process. It uses the
𝑘-anonymity technique combined with blockchain, and the
electric vehicles in this scheme can share credits based on
reputation. Liu et al. [91] propose a novel consensus algo-
rithmic mechanism to resist attacks. This consensus is based
on the ONPoB and is specially suitable for V2G environ-
ments. Huang et al. [56] develop the LNSC system, a per-
fect security access mechanism without the dependence on
third parties. In the aspect of computation costs, this system
has a great advantage over traditional ones. In [195], Zhou
et al. conduct experiments based on an Ethereum platform,
which greatly improves security and increases system eﬃ-
ciency.

As an emerging special application ﬁeld, smart commu-
nities face certain problems in private charging piles and
demand response [181]. Like [181], the community often
determines the eﬀective range for vehicle charging and dis-
charging. In addition to security, the decentralization of blockchain
can facilitate electric pile sharing, thereby improving the uti-
lization eﬃciency of electric piles [54]. Su et al. [161] inves-
tigate the community residents’ demand response to electric
vehicle charging. They apply the PBFT consensus and smart
contracts to utilize renewable energy, making the charging
process more rational.

7.3. Energy Transmissions Based on Electric

Vehicles

A smart grid can provide transit points for energy trans-
actions through electric vehicles, which greatly improves the
distance and ﬂexibility of energy transmissions [44] (as il-
lustrated in Figure 9). It can provide energy for edge base
stations or nodes to solve the problem of insuﬃcient energy
at edges when necessary. Blockchain can provide trust, se-
curity, and privacy for the energy transmissions of V2G [71].

Figure 9: The model in [44] involves three components: ve-
hicle, blockchain network and power grid.

Electric vehicles, as movable energy transmission nodes,
combined with blockchain technology can reduce the cost
of long-distance transmissions. Ref. [65] proposes a power
trading model based on a consortium blockchain. The model
mainly implements local power transactions between PHEVs
in a smart grid. In addition, it employs an auction mech-
anism to solve the transaction pricing problem. Hassija et
al. [50] apply DAG to improve the eﬃciency of system oper-
ation, and meanwhile combine it with game theory to achieve
rational pricing between vehicles and the power grid. Liu et
al. [93] make use of the transparency and immutability prop-

Yihao Guo et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 15 of 25

Low loadHigh loadSmart GridDemand infoEthereumChargeDischargeWhen Blockchain Meets Smart Grids: A Comprehensive Survey

erties of Ethereum to implement a price auction mechanism.
Smart contracts in this scheme are used to realize dynamic
[188] employs game theory to balance the
pricing. Ref.
needs and interests of energy trading platforms. The works
[197, 196] combine blockchain, edge computing, and game
theory to achieve fair pricing. On this basis, an ICC (itera-
tive convex-concave) algorithm is designed to maximize the
welfare of the entire system.

The combination of electric vehicles and blockchain can
inherit their respective advantages and achieve demand re-
sponse during energy transmissions. The work [59] discusses
the situation where renewable energy resources cannot meet
vehicle needs at peak times; and the authors put forward their
own opinions at the end of the paper. In [90], the main con-
tribution is to propose a new PoB consensus algorithm to
stimulate demand response. The new consensus algorithm
can be implemented on Ethereum and combined with smart
contracts to eliminate third parties.

Moreover, blockchain can provide security for V2G. Sheikh

et al. [152] mainly address the false data attack problem. The
proposed scheme improves the PBFT consensus and con-
ﬁrms the feasibility of the scheme based on the standard
IEEE33 bus system. Wang et al. [182] propose an incentive
mechanism called BSIS for smart cities. This mechanism
combines a credit-based consensus and the cryptocurrency
technology, which can eﬀectively prevent external attacks.

In addition to resist external attacks, the security risks
brought by third parties cannot be ignored. Bansal et al. [13]
point out that the blockchain technology can provide privacy
protection, contribute an eﬀective consensus mechanism and
eliminate dependence on trusted third parties. As the com-
puting resources of electric vehicles are limited, the authors
design SmartChain, a smart and scalable ledger framework
inspired by blockchain. Sun et al. [163] employ a consor-
tium blockchain to eliminate third parties. Compared with
other schemes, this approach improves the Byzantine algo-
rithm based on DPoS consensus. The authors also design a
new auction mechanism to optimize prices.

Both [63] and [16] propose security solutions based on
SDN networks. The solution reported by Jindal et al. [63]
is named SURVIVOR, which randomly selects validators to
perform security veriﬁcation on all transactions. Chaudhary
et al. [16] present a scheme named BEST. The security of
this scheme is also veriﬁed based on special nodes. This
scheme is mainly used in the ﬁeld of autonomous driving.

7.4. Summary

We summarize the design goals, key technologies and
other blockchain-related attributes of the solutions outlined
in this section and report the results in Table 6.

Having reviewed the aforementioned blockchain-based

solutions for V2Gs, we obtain the following ﬁndings:

• We conclude that using blockchain-based solutions to

the private electric piles public and improve the re-
source utilization of the entire system. In the process
of energy transmission, vehicles can transmit electri-
cal energy to remote areas during peak power periods,
ensuring the stability of the entire system. Blockchain
can provide vehicles with a transparent energy man-
agement platform.

• More speciﬁcally, the combination of blockchain and
V2G is mainly to deal with security risks, demand re-
sponse, and process optimization. Security risks are
mainly caused by external attacks, privacy leaks and
third parties. Many solutions based on blockchain com-
bine ECDSA, asymmetric encryption, and other cryp-
tographic algorithms to greatly improve the security
level of the system. Process optimization can be con-
sidered from the aspects of cost optimization, load op-
timization, service optimization, etc. Blockchain’s own
trust and ﬁnancial attributes can attract a number of
vehicles while reducing price ﬂuctuations. Many schemes
combine game theory and various improved algorithms
on this basis to further realize optimization.

• With the rapid increase in electric vehicles and the

high complexity of traﬃc management, traditional V2G
management consumes a lot of manpower and costs.
The use of smart contracts can replace labor and real-
ize automated operations of the system.

• The diversity of blockchain platforms can provide ap-
plication scenarios for diﬀerent solutions. Due to the
real-time requirements of V2G and the limitation of
vehicle computing power, many solutions have aban-
doned the traditional PoW consensus and proposed
various consensus algorithms such as Kafka, DPoSP
and PoB, which eﬀectively improve the eﬃciency of
the system.

• However, the problem of blockchain transmission de-
lay in long-distance networks still exists. Whether the
vision of blockchain joining V2G can be supported by
most people also requires deeper thinking and further
research.

8. Current Projects and Initiatives

For completeness of this survey, we summarize current
projects and initiatives that apply blockchain to smart grids.
Carbon Asset Development Platform (C.P) [127]. This
platform [127] is proposed by Energy Chain Technology Cor-
poration and IBM, which is mainly used in the carbon market
to achieve energy saving, emission reduction and green en-
ergy. The blockchain is intended to realize the traceability
and transparent management of data, so as to further realize
the validity and authenticity of information.

Russian Carbon Market (R.C.M) [114]. In response
to the call for green energy, Russian company DAO IPCI
employs blockchain technology to facilitate the business of
local carbon industry companies. This platform is safe and

augment electric vehicles can provide safe charging/discharging
and power transmission services.
In the process of
charging/discharging, the use of blockchain can make

Yihao Guo et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 16 of 25

When Blockchain Meets Smart Grids: A Comprehensive Survey

Table 6: Blockchain For Electric Vehicle

Ref.

Design goal

Consensus

Blockchain

Contract

Su et al.[161]
Zhou et al.[195]
Wang et al.[181]
Liu et al.[91]
BEST[16]
Li et al.[84]
Li et al.[85]
Kang et al.[65]
Liu et al.[93]
SmartChain[13]
Sun et al.[163]
Zhou et al.[197]
Zhou et al.[196]
Sheikh et al.[152]
BSIS[182]
Liu et al.[90]

Security and privacy
Security and privacy
Security and privacy
Security and privacy
Security and privacy
Load optimization
Load optimization
Cost optimization
Cost optimization
Third party
Third party
Edge computing
Edge computing
Anti-attack
Anti-attack
Demand response

RDBFT
Hybrid
RDBFT
PoB
PoW
Kafka
Kafka
PoW
PoA
Smartchain
DPoSP
PoW
PoW
Byzantine
PoR
PoB

Permissioned
Ethereum
Permissioned
Ethereum
Consortium
Hyperledger
Hyperledger
Consortium
Ethereum
Smarrchain
Consortium
Consortium
Consortium
Ethereum
Permissioned
Ethereum

Used
Used
Used
Used
Unused
Unused
Unused
Unused
Used
Unused
Unused
Used
Used
Used
Unused
Used

open, and all nodes can monitor the data on the blockchain.
In the implementation process, Hinprom takes the lead in
experimental studies.

Israel Microgrid (I.M) [125]. The Israel microgrid makes

use of blockchain to realize the issuance of green certiﬁcates.
The platform proposed by Greeneum can guarantee the cor-
rectness of energy production and then issue corresponding
green certiﬁcates. On this basis, the project combines arti-
ﬁcial intelligence to achieve electricity prediction and bal-
ance, making P2P transactions more reasonable.

Energy Web Foundation (E.W.F) [118]. Energy Web
Foundation takes advantage of the underlying structure of
Ethereum to integrate more than 100 power companies. Re-
cently, it proposes EW-DOS to create a decentralized oper-
ating system for accelerating the construction of low-carbon
power systems.

Tanzania X-Solar [136]. The X-Solar project is pro-
vided by M-PAYG with the corresponding technical support.
The purpose of X-Solar is to solve the power shortage prob-
lem in developing countries of Africa such as Tanzania. It
can provide solar power monitoring, as well as transaction
and payment functions based on the blockchain.

Iberdrola Energy Tracking (I.E.T) [122]. This project
is established by Iberdrola and Kutxa investment, and has
It employs the blockchain tech-
been successfully tested.
nology to realize the management and monitoring of energy
trading processes. In addition, blockchain is used to provide
trusted energy certiﬁcates.

Poseidon Foundation (P.F) [129]. The Poseidon foun-
dation focuses on reducing carbon emissions. It cooperates
with Ben & Jerry’s to combine carbon trading with ice cream,
eﬀectively reducing carbon emissions. Stellar blockchain
can improve the transparency of transactions. At present,
it is actively working with the LCC (City Council of Liver-
pool) to build a carbon credit mechanism for reducing carbon
emissions and protecting the environment of London.

TenneT and IBM Pilot (T.I.P) [133]. In Germany, Ten-

neT, IBM and Sonnen have cooperated to realize distributed
storage of electricity. This eﬀectively solves the high-cost
management caused by excess energy supply. This project
utilizes Hyperledger to record and trace the corresponding
data information.An application of this project in electric ve-
hicle charging in the Netherlands has also achieved certain
results.

Brooklyn Microgrid (B.M)[111]. In Brooklyn, the lo-
cal power grid company (LO3) proposes to combine Ethereum
with the smart grid and implement it locally. It allows resi-
dents to use solar energy to generate electricity and trade to
obtain token rewards.

IDEO CoLab Solar Panel (I.C.S.P) [123]. This is a
joint project between IDEO CoLab and Filament. They aim
to combine solar panels with the Internet of Things, and the
bottom layer uses blockchain and smart contracts for moni-
toring, energy production, and automatic transactions.

Global Grid (G.G) [120]. Global Grid cooperates with
a local Mexican developer to build a solar blockchain plat-
form and a large photovoltaic grid. It is understood that this
project also intends to expand to other renewable resource
areas such as geothermal.

Electron [115]. Electron conducts community experi-
ments in London based on Ethereum and IPFS. Residents
can trade electricity with their neighbors through Electron.
Scanergy [119]. This project is launched by the Euro-
pean Union, which aims to achieve green energy trading.
Scanergy is based on Ethereum and smart contracts, and uses
NRGcoin as the digital currency. It also makes use of the
cloud market to derive a transparent energy auction platform.
Fremantle Project (F.P) [124]. The Fremantle Project
aims to optimize the use of distributed energy and water re-
sources in Australia. Blockchain is employed to collect dig-
ital information of various energy sources to ensure its in-
tegrity.

De La Salle University Microgrid (D.L.S.U.M) [117].
This is a microgrid system constructed inside the De La Salle

Yihao Guo et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 17 of 25

When Blockchain Meets Smart Grids: A Comprehensive Survey

University. This system uses photovoltaic power generation,
combined with the Qtum blockchain system for P2P transac-
tions. The actual eﬀect shows that the system can eﬀectively
realize the optimization of cost, environment, and safety.

PONTON Enerchain [135]. PONTON is the underly-
ing blockchain platform of Enerchain, which supports the
electricity trading and transmission of more than 30 energy
companies in Europe.

Solar Bankers (S.B) [131]. Solar Bankers is a distributed
solar trading platform proposed by Singapore. In Solar Bankers,
blockchain is adopted to guarantee the security and trans-
parency of solar energy production and transaction processes.
Users can obtain the digital currency SunCoin by trading en-
ergy.

Rotterdam Heat Network (R.H.N) [116]. CGI & Eneco
designs a heat energy trading platform based on Tendermint
and conducts a ﬁeld test in Rotterdam.

Austria Grid Project (A.G.P) [121]. Grid Singularity
is an Austrian energy trading platform. It has conducted ex-
periments on the smart grid locally. It is implementing an
open and secure distributed smart grid system.

Interbit [112]. Interbit is a blockchain system created by
BTL Group. It has conducted ﬁeld experiments in the United
Kingdom, Canada, and other places, and achieves good re-
sults in energy trading.

TEPCO & Blockchain (T.B) [134]. TEPCO is a Tokyo-
based power company that has worked with multiple compa-
nies such as Grid+ to create a new type of distributed smart
grid. It creates a P2P solar trading system together with Con-
joule. Later, TEPCO joins the EWF (Energy Web Foun-
dation) to accelerate the development of the global energy
blockchain and collaborates with Electron on the decentral-
ized transformation of smart grids.

Hoog Dalem LEF (H.D.L) [126]. It is a pilot project
jointly cooperated by Stedin, Energy21, ABB, and iLeco.
In this project, residents conduct P2P transactions and settle
through blockchain.

SunContract [132]. SunContract is a P2P energy trad-
ing platform supported by the European Union. The test in
Slovenia shows that it can eﬀectively reduce energy cost.

Share & Charge (S.C) [130]. The main application area
of the Share & Charge platform is V2G. It makes the free
private charging piles public. Each mobile app acts as an
OCN node. Blockchain makes transactions transparent and
open, and enhances the credibility of the system.

Oxygen Initiative (O.I) [128]. Similar to Share & Charge,

Oxygen Initiative is also used in the charging ﬁeld of vehi-
cles. The predecessor of the Oxygen Initiative is the vehicle
e-wallet project of RWE and ZF company. It is based on the
Ethereum platform, which can provide secure payment ser-
vices for vehicle expenses, and has been simulated in the US
electricity market.

JuiceNet [113]. JuiceNet is a marketing platform cre-
ated by eMotorWerks. The platform realizes the charging
function of P2P based on blockchain. Electric vehicles can
be charged via other people’s private charging piles accord-
ing to demand, and pay the corresponding fees. This not only

provides charging convenience for vehicles, but also encour-
ages more residents to purchase charging piles to earn fees.

We summarize the projects and initiatives mentioned above

in Table 7.

9. Open Issues

Although blockchain has been applied in many ﬁelds, it
still faces huge challenges requiring eﬀective solutions when
adopted by smart grids. In this section, we highlight some of
these challenges and point out future directions to stimulate
further research.
Reliability and safety. Since a power grid is a critical in-
frastructure, its reliability and safety are of paramount im-
portance for all energy providers and consumers. The smart
grid has used digital information and control mechanisms
such as load adjustment/balancing, demand-side management,
and self-healing technologies to achieve reliability and safety.
Blockchain can be used to enhance reliability and safety of a
smart grid, but this demands a deep integration of blockchain
with the smart grid. Such an integration requires interdisci-
plinary collaborations among experts in computer science,
information security, and electric systems.

The inherent fault tolerance of blockchain can help to
enhance reliability of smart grids. Blockchain can be ap-
plied to components of a smart grid like the intelligent con-
trol system and the operational system to make them more
robust against faults or attacks. Meanwhile, because of the
immutability of blockchain, it can be an ideal media to share
critical control information for grid management.
Performance. A smart grid is featured by real-time control,
monitoring, and information exchange, and it has strict per-
formance requirements on the communication latency. Un-
fortunately, blockchain is not designed for real-time applica-
tions, since its consensus latency may be too long for control,
optimization or trading in smart grids. Even fast consensus
algorithms such as DPoS still require seconds to reach a con-
sensus. How to design a blockchain system that can process
data in real time is both interesting and challenging.

It is also important to improve computation and commu-
nication eﬃciency of blockchain to support real-time opera-
tions in smart grids. The blockchain validators/miners need
to synchronize and verify each transaction and block, which
may introduce long delays for smart grids. Thus eﬃcient
algorithms should be speciﬁcally designed for real-time op-
erations in smart grids.
Scalability. As a smart grid consists of many actuators,
measurement units, sensors and smart meters that scatter
over a wide area, the blockchain system must be highly scal-
able to eﬃciently and speedily manage them. This calls for
a scalable blockchain architecture design to support large-
scale smart grids. Such a consideration has not received
enough attention from the research community.

Fortunately, many potential solutions have been proposed
recently to improve blockchain throughput. Blockchain shard-
ing has been a very eﬀective mechanism to improve scala-
bility of a blockchain system. The multi-chain mechanism
divides the entire system into independent components, with

Yihao Guo et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 18 of 25

When Blockchain Meets Smart Grids: A Comprehensive Survey

Table 7: Comparison: Practical Applications and Public Experiments

Design Goal

Ref.

Organization

Energy type

Blockchain

Management

Trading

C. P [127]
R.C.M [114]
I.M [125]
E.W.F [118]
X-Solar [136]
I.E.T [122]
P.F [129]
T.I.P [133]

B.M [111]
I.C.S.P [123]
G.G [120]
Electron [115]
Scanergy [119]
F.P [124]
D.L.S.U.M [117]
Enerchain [135]
S.B [131]
R.H.N [116]
A.G.P [121]
Interbit [112]
T.B [134]
H.D.L [126]
SunContract [132]

-
Russian
Israel
Switzerland
Tanzania
Spain
Liverpool
Germany

Brooklyn
-
Mexico
London
Europe
Australia
Philippines
Germany
Singapore
Rotterdam
Austria
UK
Tokyo
Netherlands
Slovenia

ECTC/ IBM
DAO IPCI
Greeneum
Energy Web Foundation
M-PAYG
Iberdrola/ Kutxa
LCC
TenneT/ IBM/ Sonnen

LO3
IDEO CoLab/ Filament
SAPI de CV
Electron
-
Australian government
Energo Labs
PONTON
Solar Bankers
CGI & Eneco
Grid Singularity
BTL Group
Conjoule/ Electron
Energy21/ Stedin
SunContract

V2G

S.C [130]
O.I [128]
JuiceNet [113]

Germany
US
North America

Innogy/ Slock.it
Oxygen Initiative
eMotorWerks

Carbon
Carbon
Green energy
Electricity
Solar
Renewable
Carbon
Electricity

Solar
Solar
Solar
Electricity
Green energy
Distributed
Solar
Electricity
Solar
Heat
Electricity
Electricity
Electricity
Electricity
Electricity

Electricity
Electricity
Electricity

-
-
Ethereum
Ethereum
-
-
Stellar
Hyperledger

Ethereum
-
-
Ethereum
Ethereum
-
Qtum
Tendermint
Skyledger
Tendermint
-
Interbit
Ethereum
Quasar
Ethereum

Ethereum
Ethereum
-

each running its own blockchain. Sidechain and the corre-
sponding pegged mechanism can also contribute to improve
scalability. For both multi-chain and sidechain, appropriate
cross-chain protocols should be applied to ensure security
for transactions. The oﬀ-chain or layer-2 solutions such as
Lightning Network may be used to shorten the conﬁrmation
delay of transactions in blockchain.
Security issues. Blockchain can help to establish trust and it
is deemed trustworthy, but inappropriate use of the blockchain
technology may lead to severe consequences, especially for
smart grids.

Like most security-critical information systems, the most
important security problem in a smart grid is how to se-
curely manage cryptographic keys. However, many existent
blockchain systems do not adopt eﬀective key management
strategies, and they just allow users to generate random keys
without certiﬁcation. This can result in severe security prob-
lems, e.g.
impersonation attacks and sybil attacks. Entity
and data authentication are basic requirements for security
of smart grids, and this is only possible when eﬀective key
management mechanisms are applied to blockchain.

A number of security threats should be carefully studied
in designing a blockchain system for smart grids. Illegal ac-
cess to critical data of smart grids should be eﬀectively pre-
vented with access control mechanisms, which are important
for data sharing in smart grids. Hardware security should be
considered in case of device compromise in smart grids. For

example, devices like smart meters are easy to be compro-
mised and tamper-proof hardware may be used to guaran-
tee data security. For electricity trading, fairness should be
guaranteed to thwart malicious consumers or providers.
Privacy issues. Privacy issues are even more challenging
than security for both blockchain and smart grids. Blockchain
is well-known for its transparency and public veriﬁability,
which means every validator/miner can access the content of
all transactions. Diﬀerent types of privacy need to be pro-
tected, including identity privacy, location privacy, amount
privacy, relationship privacy, and data privacy.

From the perspective of privacy protection, the single
point of failure in a centralized system is turned into mul-
tiple single points of failures in a blockchain system. An
attacker only needs to compromise one validator/miner to
obtain sensitive information of the smart grid. Therefore,
the privacy problem is both challenging and critical when
applying blockchain to smart grids. In addition, traﬃc anal-
ysis is also a potential threat to secure operations of smart
grids.

Simple encryption cannot solve privacy issues as val-
idators/miners still need to verify the blockchain data. Ad-
vanced cryptographic techniques can be applied to solve pri-
vacy issues. Ring signature, zero knowledge proof, zk-SNARKs,
homomorphic encryption have been proposed recently for
privacy preservation in blockchains. However, these tech-
niques are normally ineﬃcient in computation and/or com-

Yihao Guo et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 19 of 25

When Blockchain Meets Smart Grids: A Comprehensive Survey

munication, so they must be carefully adapted to meet the
requirements of smart grids.
Compatibility for low-end devices. The actuators, sensors,
smart meters and measurement units in a smart grid are usu-
ally resource-constrained, and it is diﬃcult for them to carry
out certain public key cryptographic computations. The se-
curity mechanisms should accommodate these low-end de-
vices, and the computation burden on these devices should
be minimized without losing security and privacy. For ex-
ample, low-end devices should only carry out symmetric en-
cryption and hashing operations, and should avoid frequent
signature generation/veriﬁcation.

10. Conclusion

In this survey, we have reviewed the latest research progress

on applying the blockchain technology to smart grids. We
ﬁrst summarize characteristics of blockchain systems, the
smart contract paradigm, and the advantages of the blockchain
technology. Then we categorize the relevant research works
into 5 groups: intelligent energy management, energy trad-
ing, security and privacy, microgrid management, and elec-
tric vehicles. For each category, we brieﬂy discuss issues
with traditional solutions without using blockchain. Then
we analyze and compare how blockchain is utilized to tackle
the issues. A table is provided to give a clear comparison
among these solutions, followed by a brief summary for each
category. For completeness of this survey we also list and
summarize related projects and initiatives. Finally, we elab-
orate on open problems and research challenges that have not
been suﬃciently investigated by current research.

Apparently, the blockchain technology has many desir-
able properties that can be utilized to construct a better smart
grid. To this end, collaborations among professionals from
diﬀerent areas are very important. We expect that this survey
can provide principle reference and direction guidance for
the future development of blockchain-enabled smart grids.

References

[1] Abdella, J.A., Shuaib, K., 2019. An architecture for blockchain
based peer to peer energy trading, in: 2019 Sixth International Con-
ference on Internet of Things: Systems, Management and Security
(IOTSMS), IEEE. pp. 412–419.

[2] Afzal, M., Huang, Q., Amin, W., Umer, K., Raza, A., Naeem, M.,
2020. Blockchain enabled distributed demand side management
in community energy system with smart homes.
IEEE Access 8,
37428–37439.

[3] Afzal, M., Umer, K., Amin, W., Naeem, M., Cai, D., Zhenyuan, Z.,
Huang, Q., 2019. Blockchain based domestic appliances schedul-
ing in community microgrids, in: 2019 IEEE Innovative Smart Grid
Technologies-Asia (ISGT Asia), IEEE. pp. 2842–2847.

[4] Aggarwal, S., Chaudhary, R., Aujla, G.S., Jindal, A., Dua, A., Ku-
mar, N., 2018. Energychain: Enabling energy trading for smart
homes using blockchains in smart grid ecosystem, in: Proceedings
of the 1st ACM MobiHoc Workshop on Networking and Cyberse-
curity for Smart Cities, pp. 1–6.

[5] Alam, A., Islam, M.T., Ferdous, A., 2019. Towards blockchain-
based electricity trading system and cyber resilient microgrids, in:
2019 International Conference on Electrical, Computer and Com-
munication Engineering (ECCE), IEEE. pp. 1–5.

[6] Alcaraz, C., Rubio, J.E., Lopez, J., 2020. Blockchain-assisted access
for federated smart grid domains: Coupling and features. Parallel
and Distributed Computing .

[7] Alessandra, P., Scarpato, N., Di Nunzio, L., Fallucchi, F., Raso, M.,
2018. Smarter city: Smart energy grid based on blockchain technol-
ogy. International Journal on Advanced Science, Engineering and
Information Technology 8.

[8] Alladi, T., Chamola, V., Rodrigues, J.J., Kozlov, S.A., 2019.
Blockchain in smart grids: A review on diﬀerent use cases. Sen-
sors 19, 4862.

[9] AlSkaif, T., Van Leeuwen, G., 2019. Decentralized optimal power
ﬂow in distribution networks using blockchain, in: 2019 Inter-
national Conference on Smart Energy Systems and Technologies
(SEST), IEEE. pp. 1–6.

[10] Andoni, M., Robu, V., Flynn, D., Abram, S., Geach, D., Jenkins,
D., McCallum, P., Peacock, A., 2019. Blockchain technology in the
energy sector: A systematic review of challenges and opportunities.
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 100, 143–174.

[11] Arjomand, N., Ullah, H.S., Aslam, S., 2020. A review of blockchain-
based smart grid: Applications, opportunities, and future directions.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.05650 .

[12] Banks, C., Kim, S., Neposchlan, M., Velez, N., Duncan, K., James,
J., Leger, A.S., Hawthorne, D., 2019. Blockchain for power grids,
in: 2019 SoutheastCon, IEEE. pp. 1–5.

[13] Bansal, G., Dua, A., Aujla, G.S., Singh, M., Kumar, N., 2019.
Smartchain: a smart and scalable blockchain consortium for smart
grid systems, in: 2019 IEEE International Conference on Commu-
nications Workshops (ICC Workshops), IEEE. pp. 1–6.

[14] Bayati, N., Hajizadeh, A., Soltani, M., 2020. Blockchain-based
protection schemes of dc microgrids, in: Blockchain-based Smart
Grids. Elsevier, pp. 195–214.

[15] Bera, B., Saha, S., Das, A.K., Vasilakos, A.V., 2021. Designing
blockchain-based access control protocol in iot-enabled smart-grid
system. IEEE Internet of Things Journal 8, 5744–5761.

[16] Chaudhary, R., Jindal, A., Aujla, G.S., Aggarwal, S., Kumar, N.,
Choo, K.K.R., 2019. Best: Blockchain-based secure energy trad-
ing in sdn-enabled intelligent transportation system. Computers &
Security 85, 288–299.

[17] Chen, S., Bai, Y., Zhang, Y., Liu, X., Zhang, J., Gao, T., Fang, Z.,
Dai, Y., 2019. A framework of decentralized electricity market based
on the collaborative mechanism of blockchain and edge computing,
in: 2019 IEEE International Conference on Service Operations and
Logistics, and Informatics (SOLI), IEEE. pp. 219–223.

[18] Chen, S., Ping, J., Yan, Z., Wei, W., 2020a. Blockchain for decen-
tralized optimization of energy sources: Ev charging coordination
via blockchain-based charging power quota trading, in: Blockchain-
based Smart Grids. Elsevier, pp. 169–179.

[19] Chen, X., Shen, J., Cao, Z., Dong, X., 2020b. A blockchain-based
privacy-preserving scheme for smart grids, in: Proceedings of the
2020 The 2nd International Conference on Blockchain Technology,
pp. 120–124.

[20] Dabbaghjamanesh, M., Wang, B., Mehraeen, S., Zhang, J., Kavousi-
Fard, A., 2019. Networked microgrid security and privacy enhance-
ment by the blockchain-enabled internet of things approach, in: 2019
IEEE Green Technologies Conference (GreenTech), IEEE. pp. 1–5.
[21] Dang, C., Zhang, J., Kwong, C.P., Li, L., 2019. Demand side load
management for big industrial energy users under blockchain-based
peer-to-peer electricity market. IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid
10, 6426–6435.

[22] Danzi, P., Angjelichinoski, M., Stefanović, Č., Popovski, P.,
2017. Distributed proportional-fairness control in microgrids via
blockchain smart contracts, in: 2017 IEEE International Conference
on SmartGridComm, IEEE. pp. 45–51.

[23] Danzi, P., Hambridge, S., Stefanović, Č., Popovski, P., 2018.
Blockchain-based and multi-layered electricity imbalance settlement
architecture, in: 2018 IEEE international conference on communi-
cations, control, and computing technologies for smart grids (Smart-
GridComm), IEEE. pp. 1–7.

Yihao Guo et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 20 of 25

When Blockchain Meets Smart Grids: A Comprehensive Survey

[24] Deng, L., Zhang, X., Sun, H., 2019. Real-time autonomous trading
in the electricity-and-heat distribution market based on blockchain,
in: 2019 IEEE Power & Energy Society General Meeting (PESGM),
IEEE. pp. 1–5.

[25] Di Silvestre, M., Gallo, P., Ippolito, M., Sanseverino, E.R., Sciumè,
G., Zizzo, G., 2018a. An energy blockchain, a use case on tender-
mint, in: EEEIC/I&CPS Europe, IEEE. pp. 1–5.

[26] Di Silvestre, M.L., Gallo, P., Ippolito, M.G., Musca, R., Sansev-
erino, E.R., Tran, Q.T.T., Zizzo, G., 2019. Ancillary services in
the energy blockchain for microgrids. IEEE transactions on indus-
try applications 55, 7310–7319.

[27] Di Silvestre, M.L., Gallo, P., Ippolito, M.G., Sanseverino, E.R.,
Zizzo, G., 2018b. A technical approach to the energy blockchain in
microgrids. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics 14, 4792–
4803.

[28] Dimobi, I., Pipattanasomporn, M., Rahman, S., 2020. A transactive
grid with microgrids using blockchain for the energy internet, in:
2020 IEEE Power & ISGT, IEEE. pp. 1–5.

[29] Doan, H.T., Cho, J., Kim, D., 2021. Peer-to-peer energy trading in
smart grid through blockchain: A double auction-based game theo-
retic approach. IEEE Access 9, 49206–49218.

[30] Edmonds, L., Liu, B., Zhang, H., Scoglio, C., Gruenbacher, D., Wu,
H., 2020. Blockchain-enabled transactive home energy management
systems in distribution networks, in: 2020 IEEE KPEC, pp. 1–5.

[31] Erenoğlu, A.K., Şengör,

İ., Erdinç, O., Catalão, J.P., 2020.
Blockchain and its application ﬁelds in both power economy and
demand side management, in: Blockchain-based Smart Grids. Else-
vier, pp. 103–130.

[32] Fan, M., Zhang, X., 2019. Consortium blockchain based data ag-
gregation and regulation mechanism for smart grid. IEEE Access 7,
35929–35940.

[33] Ferrag, M.A., Maglaras, L., 2019. Deepcoin: A novel deep learning
and blockchain-based energy exchange framework for smart grids.
IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management 67, 1285–1297.

[34] Firoozjaei, M.D., Ghorbani, A., Kim, H., Song, J., 2019. Evchain:
A blockchain-based credit sharing in electric vehicles charging, in:
2019 17th International Conference on Privacy, Security and Trust
(PST), IEEE. pp. 1–5.

[35] Gai, K., Wu, Y., Zhu, L., Qiu, M., Shen, M., 2019. Privacy-
preserving energy trading using consortium blockchain in smart
grid. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics 15, 3548–3558.

[36] Gai, K., Wu, Y., Zhu, L., Xu, L., Zhang, Y., 2019. Permissioned
blockchain and edge computing empowered privacy-preserving
smart grid networks. IEEE Internet of Things Journal 6, 7992–8004.
[37] Gao, J., Asamoah, K.O., Sifah, E.B., Smahi, A., Xia, Q., Xia, H.,
Zhang, X., Dong, G., 2018. Gridmonitoring: Secured sovereign
blockchain based monitoring on smart grid. IEEE Access 6, 9917–
9925.

[38] Garg, S., Kaur, K., Kaddoum, G., Gagnon, F., Rodrigues, J.J., 2019.
An eﬃcient blockchain-based hierarchical authentication mecha-
nism for energy trading in v2g environment, in: 2019 IEEE ICC
Workshops, IEEE. pp. 1–6.

[39] Gazafroudi, A.S., Mezquita, Y., Shaﬁe-khah, M., Prieto, J., Cor-
Islanded microgrid management based on
chado, J.M., 2020.
blockchain communication, in: Blockchain-based Smart Grids. El-
sevier, pp. 181–193.

[40] Goranović, A., Meisel, M., Fotiadis, L., Wilker, S., Treytl, A.,
Sauter, T., 2017. Blockchain applications in microgrids an overview
of current projects and concepts, in: IECON 2017 - 43rd Annual
Conference of the IEEE Industrial Electronics Society, pp. 6153–
6158.

[41] Guan, Z., Lu, X., Yang, W., Wu, L., Wang, N., Zhang, Z., 2021a.
Achieving eﬃcient and privacy-preserving energy trading based on
blockchain and abe in smart grid. Journal of Parallel and Distributed
Computing 147, 34–45.

[42] Guan, Z., Si, G., Zhang, X., Wu, L., Guizani, N., Du, X., Ma,
Y., 2018. Privacy-preserving and eﬃcient aggregation based on
blockchain for power grid communications in smart communities.

IEEE Communications Magazine 56, 82–88.

[43] Guan, Z., Zhou, X., Liu, P., Wu, L., Yang, W., 2021b. A blockchain
based dual side privacy preserving multi party computation scheme
for edge enabled smart grid. IEEE Internet of Things Journal .
[44] Guo, C., Huang, X., Zhu, C., Wang, X., Cao, X., 2019. Distributed
electric vehicle control model based on blockchain. IOP Conference
Series: Materials Science and Engineering 486.

[45] Guo, J., Ding, X., Wu, W., 2020a. An architecture for distributed
arXiv preprint

energies trading in byzantine-based blockchain.
arXiv:2005.07341 .

[46] Guo, J., Ding, X., Wu, W., 2020b. Combined cooling, heating,
and power system in blockchain-enabled energy management. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2003.13416 .

[47] Hahn, A., Singh, R., Liu, C.C., Chen, S., 2017. Smart contract-based
campus demonstration of decentralized transactive energy auctions,
in: 2017 IEEE Power & energy society innovative smart grid tech-
nologies conference, IEEE. pp. 1–5.

[48] Hajizadeh, A., Hakimi, S.M., 2020. Blockchain in decentralized
demand-side control of microgrids, in: Blockchain-based Smart
Grids. Elsevier, pp. 145–167.

[49] Hassan, M.U., Rehmani, M.H., Chen, J., 2021.

Optimizing
blockchain based smart grid auctions: A green revolution. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2102.02583 .

[50] Hassija, V., Chamola, V., Garg, S., Krishna, D.N.G., Kaddoum,
G., Jayakody, D.N.K., 2020. A blockchain-based framework for
lightweight data sharing and energy trading in v2g network. IEEE
Transactions on Vehicular Technology 69, 5799–5812.

[51] He, H., Luo, Z., Wang, Q., Chen, M., He, H., Gao, L., Zhang, H.,
2020. Joint operation mechanism of distributed photovoltaic power
generation market and carbon market based on cross-chain trading
technology. IEEE Access 8, 66116–66130.

[52] He, T., Gui, X., Zhang, Z., Zhou, D., Hu, Z., Chen, J., Li, W., 2020.
Blockchain-based distributed energy trading scheme, in: 2020 Asia
Energy and Electrical Engineering Symposium (AEEES), pp. 919–
924.

[53] Hernandez-Aramburo, C.A., Green, T.C., Mugniot, N., 2005. Fuel
IEEE transactions on

consumption minimization of a microgrid.
industry applications 41, 673–681.

[54] Hou, Y., Chen, Y., Jiao, Y., Zhao, J., Ouyang, H., Zhu, P., Wang,
D., Liu, Y., 2017. A resolution of sharing private charging piles
based on smart contract, in: 2017 13Th International Conference
on Natural Computation, Fuzzy Systems and Knowledge Discovery
(Icnc-Fskd), IEEE. pp. 3004–3008.

[55] Hua, W., Sun, H., 2019. A blockchain-based peer-to-peer trading
scheme coupling energy and carbon markets, in: 2019 international
conference on smart energy systems and technologies (SEST), IEEE.
pp. 1–6.

[56] Huang, X., Xu, C., Wang, P., Liu, H., 2018. Lnsc: A security
model for electric vehicle and charging pile management based on
blockchain ecosystem. IEEE Access 6, 13565–13574.

[57] Huang, Z., Suankaewmanee, K., Kang, J., Niyato, D., Sin, N.P.,
2019. Development of reliable wireless communication system for
secure blockchain-based energy trading, in: 2019 16th International
Joint Conference on Computer Science and Software Engineering
(JCSSE), IEEE. pp. 126–130.

[58] Inayat, K., Hwang, S.O., 2018. Load balancing in decentralized
smart grid trade system using blockchain. Journal of Intelligent &
Fuzzy Systems 35, 5901–5911.

[59] Islam, M.M., Shahjalal, M., Hasan, M.K., Jang, Y.M., 2020.
Blockchain-based energy transaction model for electric vehicles in
v2g network, in: 2020 International Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence in Information and Communication (ICAIIC), IEEE. pp. 628–
630.

[60] Jamil, F., Iqbal, N., Ahmad, S., Kim, D., et al., 2021. Peer-to-peer en-
ergy trading mechanism based on blockchain and machine learning
for sustainable electrical power supply in smart grid. IEEE Access
9, 39193–39217.

[61] Jeon, J.M., Hong, C.S., 2019. A study on utilization of hybrid

Yihao Guo et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 21 of 25

When Blockchain Meets Smart Grids: A Comprehensive Survey

blockchain for energy sharing in micro-grid, in: 2019 20th Asia-
Paciﬁc Network Operations and Management Symposium (AP-
NOMS), IEEE. pp. 1–4.

[62] Jiang, L., Xie, S., Maharjan, S., Zhang, Y., 2019. Blockchain em-
powered wireless power transfer for green and secure internet of
things. IEEE Network 33, 164–171.

[63] Jindal, A., Aujla, G.S., Kumar, N., 2019. Survivor: A blockchain
based edge-as-a-service framework for secure energy trading in sdn-
enabled vehicle-to-grid environment. Computer Networks 153, 36–
48.

[64] Kang, E.S., Pee, S.J., Song, J.G., Jang, J.W., 2018. A blockchain-
based energy trading platform for smart homes in a microgrid, in:
2018 3rd ICCCS, IEEE. pp. 472–476.

[65] Kang, J., Yu, R., Huang, X., Maharjan, S., Zhang, Y., Hossain,
E., 2017. Enabling localized peer-to-peer electricity trading among
plug-in hybrid electric vehicles using consortium blockchains. IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Informatics 13, 3154–3164.

[66] Kaur, K., Kaddoum, G., Zeadally, S., 2021. Blockchain-based cyber-
physical security for electrical vehicle aided smart grid ecosystem.
IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems .

[67] Kavousi-Fard, A., Almutairi, A., Al-Sumaiti, A., Farughian, A.,
Alyami, S., 2021. An eﬀective secured peer-to-peer energy market
based on blockchain architecture for the interconnected microgrid
and smart grid. International Journal of Electrical Power & Energy
Systems 132, 107171.

[68] Keshk, M., Turnbull, B., Moustafa, N., Vatsalan, D., Choo, K.K.R.,
2019. A privacy-preserving-framework-based blockchain and deep
learning for protecting smart power networks. IEEE Transactions on
Industrial Informatics 16, 5110–5118.

[69] Khalid, S., Maqbool, A., Rana, T., Naheed, A., 2020. A blockchain-
based solution to control power losses in pakistan. Arabian Journal
for Science and Engineering , 1–11.

[70] Khorasany, M., Dorri, A., Razzaghi, R.,

Jurdak, R., 2020.
Lightweight blockchain framework for location-aware peer-to-peer
energy trading. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.14520 .

[71] Kim, S., 2018. Blockchain for a trust network among intelligent
vehicles, in: Advances in Computers. Elsevier. volume 111, pp. 43–
68.

[72] Kim, S., Lee, T., Kim, S., Park, L., Park, S., 2019. Security issues on
smart grid and blockchain-based secure smart energy management
system. MATEC Web of Conferences 260.

[73] Knirsch, F., Unterweger, A., Eibl, G., Engel, D., 2018. Privacy-
preserving smart grid tariﬀ decisions with blockchain-based smart
contracts, in: Sustainable Cloud and Energy Services. Springer, pp.
85–116.

[74] Kounelis, I., Steri, G., Giuliani, R., Geneiatakis, D., Neisse, R., Nai-
Fovino, I., 2017. Fostering consumers’ energy market through smart
contracts, in: 2017 International Conference in Energy and Sustain-
ability in Small Developing Economies (ES2DE), IEEE. pp. 1–6.

[75] Kumari, A., Gupta, R., Tanwar, S., Tyagi, S., Kumar, N., 2020a.
When blockchain meets smart grid: Secure energy trading in de-
mand response management. IEEE Network .

[76] Kumari, A., Shukla, A., Gupta, R., Tanwar, S., Tyagi, S., Kumar,
N., 2020b. Et-deal: A p2p smart contract-based secure energy trad-
ing scheme for smart grid systems, in: IEEE INFOCOM WKSHPS,
IEEE. pp. 1051–1056.

[77] Lazaroiu, G.C., Roscia, M., 2018. Blockchain and smart metering
towards sustainable prosumers, in: 2018 International Symposium
on Power Electronics, Electrical Drives, Automation and Motion
(SPEEDAM), IEEE. pp. 550–555.

[78] van Leeuwen, G., AlSkaif, T., Gibescu, M., van Sark, W., 2020.
An integrated blockchain-based energy management platform with
bilateral trading for microgrid communities. Applied Energy 263.

[79] Li, H.A., Nair, N.K.C., 2018. Blockchain-based microgrid market
and trading mechanism, in: 2018 Australasian Universities Power
Engineering Conference (AUPEC), IEEE. pp. 1–5.

ergy Society General Meeting (PESGM), IEEE. pp. 1–5.

[81] Li, J., Zhou, Z., Wu, J., Li, J., Mumtaz, S., Lin, X., Gacanin, H.,
Alotaibi, S., 2019a. Decentralized on-demand energy supply for
blockchain in internet of things: A microgrids approach. IEEE trans-
actions on computational social systems 6, 1395–1406.

[82] Li, K., Yang, Y., Wang, S., Shi, R., Li, J., 2021. A lightweight
privacy-preserving and sharing scheme with dual-blockchain for in-
telligent pricing system of smart grid. Computers & Security 103,
102189.

[83] Li, M., Hu, D., Lal, C., Conti, M., Zhang, Z., 2020. Blockchain-
enabled secure energy trading with veriﬁable fairness in industrial
internet of things. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics 16,
6564–6574.

[84] Li, Y., Hu, B., 2019. An iterative two-layer optimization charging
and discharging trading scheme for electric vehicle using consortium
blockchain. IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid 11, 2627–2637.
[85] Li, Y., Hu, B., 2020. A consortium blockchain-enabled secure
and privacy-preserving optimized charging and discharging trading
scheme for electric vehicles. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Infor-
matics 17, 1968–1977.

[86] Li, Y., Yang, W., He, P., Chen, C., Wang, X., 2019b. Design and
management of a distributed hybrid energy system through smart
contract and blockchain. Applied Energy 248, 390–405.

[87] Li, Z., Kang, J., Yu, R., Ye, D., Deng, Q., Zhang, Y., 2018. Con-
sortium blockchain for secure energy trading in industrial internet of
things. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics 14, 3690–3700.
[88] Liang, G., Weller, S.R., Luo, F., Zhao, J., Dong, Z.Y., 2018. Dis-
tributed blockchain-based data protection framework for modern
power systems against cyber attacks. IEEE Transactions on Smart
Grid 10, 3162–3173.

[89] Liu, C., Chai, K.K., Lau, E.T., Chen, Y., 2018a. Blockchain based
energy trading model for electric vehicle charging schemes, in: In-
ternational Conference on Smart Grid Inspired Future Technologies,
Springer. pp. 64–72.

[90] Liu, C., Chai, K.K., Zhang, X., Chen, Y., 2019a. Peer-to-peer elec-
tricity trading system: smart contracts based proof-of-beneﬁt con-
sensus protocol. Wireless Networks , 1–12.

[91] Liu, C., Chai, K.K., Zhang, X., Chen, Y., 2019b. Proof-of-beneﬁt:
A blockchain-enabled ev charging scheme, in: 2019 IEEE 89th Ve-
hicular Technology Conference (VTC2019-Spring), IEEE. pp. 1–6.
[92] Liu, C., Chai, K.K., Zhang, X., Lau, E.T., Chen, Y., 2018b. Adaptive
blockchain-based electric vehicle participation scheme in smart grid
platform. IEEE Access 6, 25657–25665.

[93] Liu, H., Zhang, Y., Zheng, S., Li, Y., 2019c. Electric vehicle power
trading mechanism based on blockchain and smart contract in v2g
network. IEEE Access 7, 160546–160558.

[94] Liu, J., Sun, S., Chang, Z., Zhou, B., Wang, Y., Wang, J., Wang, S.,
2020. Application of blockchain in integrated energy system trans-
actions, in: E3S Web of Conferences, EDP Sciences. p. 01014.
[95] Liu, S., Zhang, Q., Liu, H., 2021. Privacy protection of the smart
grid system based on blockchain, in: Journal of Physics: Conference
Series, IOP Publishing. p. 022129.

[96] Lotﬁ, M., Monteiro, C., Shaﬁe-Khah, M., Catalão, J.P., 2020.
Transition toward blockchain-based electricity trading markets, in:
Blockchain-based Smart Grids. Elsevier, pp. 43–59.

[97] Lu, W., Ren, Z., Xu, J., Chen, S., 2021. Edge blockchain as-
sisted lightweight privacy-preserving data aggregation for smart
grid. IEEE Transactions on Network and Service Management 18,
1246–1259.

[98] Lu, X., Guan, Z., Zhou, X., Du, X., Wu, L., Guizani, M., 2019a.
A secure and eﬃcient renewable energy trading scheme based on
blockchain in smart grid, in: HPCC/SmartCity/DSS, IEEE. pp.
1839–1844.

[99] Lu, X., Shi, L., Chen, Z., Fan, X., Guan, Z., Du, X., Guizani, M.,
2019b. Blockchain-based distributed energy trading in energy inter-
net: An sdn approach. IEEE Access 7, 173817–173826.

[80] Li, H.A., Nair, N.K.C., 2019. A blockchain-based distributed non-
cooperative transactive energy market, in: 2019 IEEE Power & En-

[100] Luo, F., Dong, Z.Y., Liang, G., Murata, J., Xu, Z., 2018. A dis-
tributed electricity trading system in active distribution networks

Yihao Guo et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 22 of 25

When Blockchain Meets Smart Grids: A Comprehensive Survey

based on multi-agent coalition and blockchain. IEEE Transactions
on Power Systems 34, 4097–4108.

[101] Mannaro, K., Pinna, A., Marchesi, M., 2017. Crypto-trading:
Blockchain-oriented energy market, in: 2017 AEIT International
Annual Conference, IEEE. pp. 1–5.

[102] Mbarek, B., Chren, S., Rossi, B., Pitner, T., 2020. An en-
hanced blockchain-based data management scheme for microgrids,
in: Workshops of the International Conference on Advanced Infor-
mation Networking and Applications, Springer. pp. 766–775.
[103] Meng, S., Sun, W., Han, D., Zhang, C., 2019. Decentralized
electricity transaction mechanism in distribution network based on
blockchain technology, in: 2019 IEEE PES Asia-Paciﬁc Power and
Energy Engineering Conference (APPEEC), IEEE. pp. 1–5.
[104] Mollah, M.B., Zhao, J., Niyato, D., Lam, K.Y., Zhang, X., Ghias,
A.M., Koh, L.H., Yang, L., 2020. Blockchain for future smart grid:
A comprehensive survey. IEEE Internet of Things .

[105] Münsing, E., Mather, J., Moura, S., 2017. Blockchains for de-
centralized optimization of energy resources in microgrid networks,
in: 2017 IEEE conference on control technology and applications
(CCTA), IEEE. pp. 2164–2171.

[106] Musleh, A.S., Yao, G., Muyeen, S.M., 2019. Blockchain applica-
tions in smart grid–review and frameworks. IEEE Access 7, 86746–
86757.

[107] Muzumdar, A., Modi, C., Madhu, G., Vyjayanthi, C., 2021. A trust-
worthy and incentivized smart grid energy trading framework using
distributed ledger and smart contracts. Journal of Network and Com-
puter Applications 183, 103074.

[108] Mylrea, M., Gourisetti, S.N.G., 2017. Blockchain: A path to grid
modernization and cyber resiliency, in: 2017 North American Power
Symposium (NAPS), IEEE. pp. 1–5.

[109] Nakayama, K., Moslemi, R., Sharma, R., 2019. Transactive en-
ergy management with blockchain smart contracts for p2p multi-
settlement markets, in: 2019 IEEE Power & Energy Society Innova-
tive Smart Grid Technologies Conference (ISGT), IEEE. pp. 1–5.

[110] Okoye, M.O., Yang, J., Cui, J., Lei, Z., Yuan, J., Wang, H., Ji, H.,
Feng, J., Ezeh, C., 2020. A blockchain-enhanced transaction model
for microgrid energy trading. IEEE Access 8, 143777–143786.

[111] Online, a. The brooklyn microgrid: blockchain-enabled community
power. [Online]. Available:https://www.brooklyn.energy/.
[112] Online, b. Btl and interbit. [Online]. Available:http://btl.co/.
[113] Online, c. A cloud-based platform for ev load management and
[Online]. Available:https://evcharging.enelx.com/

optimization.
products/juicenet-software/juicenet.

[114] Online, d. Dao ipci: Blockchain technology for carbon markets,
[Online]. Available:https://

environmental assets and liabilities.
ipci.io/.

[115] Online, e. Electron. [Online]. Available:https://www.electron.org.

uk/.

[116] Online, f. Eneco. [Online]. Available:https://www.eneco.nl/.
[117] Online, g. Energo boost clean energy prod via qtum blockchain
[Online]. Available:https://www.

implementation in philippines.
saurenergy.com/solar-energy-news/.

[118] Online, h. Energy web foundation. [Online]. Available:https://www.

energyweb.org/.

[119] Online, i. Final report summary - scanergy.

[Online]. Avail-

j.
for

Global

able:https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/324321/reporting.
blockchain

[120] Online,
nology
able:https://www.pv-magazine.com/2018/05/10/
global-grid-launches-blockchain-technology-for-solar-in-mexico/.
Available:https://

grid
in mexico.

[121] Online, k.

Grid singularity.

tech-
Avail-

[Online].

[Online].

launches

solar

gridsingularity.com/.

[122] Online, l. Iberdrola uses blockchain to track renewable energy. [On-
line]. Available: https://www.greentechmedia.com/articles/read/
iberdrola-uses-blockchain-to-authenticate-green-energy.
[123] Online, m. Ideo colab solar panel. [Online]. Available:https://www.

8btc.com/article/107633.

[124] Online, n.

In the city of fremantle using the power ledger

platform.
city-of-fremantle-readies-au8m-energy-and-water-blockchain-project/.

[Online]. Available:https://www.zdnet.com/article/

[125] Online,
projects.

o.

[Online].

Israel-u.s.

clean

energy
Available:https://www.

smart-energy.com/industry-sectors/new-technology/
6-million-investment-planned-for-israel-u-s-clean-energy-projects/.

[126] Online, p. Lef in hoog dalem: Layered energy system applied.
Available:https://www.energy21.com/portfolio-item/

[Online].
layered-energy-system/.

[127] Online, q. New tools for carbon asset development and manage-
ment, energy chain technology and ibm use blockchain technology
to help a low-carbon future. [Online]. Available:https://www.8btc.
com/article/109710.

[128] Online, r. Oxygen-initiative.

[Online]. Available:https://www.

crunchbase.com/organization/oxygen-initiative.

[129] Online, s. Poseidon foundation.
poseidon.eco/index.html.

[130] Online,

t.
shareandcharge.com/.

Share & charge.

[Online]. Available:https://

[Online].

Available:https://

[131] Online, u. Solarbankers. [Online]. Available:https://solarbankers.

com/.

[132] Online, v. Suncontract. [Online]. Available:https://suncontract.

org/.

[133] Online,

w.

Tennet.

[Online].

Avail-

able:https://www.tennet.eu/news/detail/
tennet-continuing-with-blockchain-after-successful-pilots/.

[134] Online, x.

Tepco looks to the transformative potential of
blockchain by investing in electron, a uk energy technology com-
pany. [Online]. Available:https://www.tepco.co.jp/en/hd/newsroom/
announcements/archives/2018/an180119-01-e.html.

[135] Online, y. We support the european wholesale market since the year
2004. [Online]. Available:https://www.ponton.de/b2b-integration/
energy/.

[136] Online, z. X-solar. [Online]. Available:https://xsolarsystems.com/.
[137] Ouyang, X., Zhu, X., Ye, L., Yao, J., 2017. Preliminary applica-
tions of blockchain technique in large consumers direct power trad-
ing. Proc. CSEE 37, 3672–3681.

[138] Patil, H., Sharma, S., Raja, L., 2021. Study of blockchain based
smart grid for energy optimization. Materials Today: Proceedings
44, 4666–4670.

[139] Pee, S.J., Kang, E.S., Song, J.G., Jang, J.W., 2019. Blockchain based
smart energy trading platform using smart contract, in: 2019 Interna-
tional Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Information and Com-
munication (ICAIIC), IEEE. pp. 322–325.

[140] Ping, J., Yan, Z., Chen, S., Yao, L., Qian, M., 2020. Coordinating
ev charging via blockchain. Journal of Modern Power Systems and
Clean Energy 8, 573–581.

[141] Pipattanasomporn, M., Kuzlu, M., Rahman, S., 2018. A blockchain-
based platform for exchange of solar energy: Laboratory-scale im-
plementation, in: 2018 international conference and utility exhibi-
tion on green energy for sustainable development (ICUE), IEEE. pp.
1–9.

[142] Plaza, C., Gil, J., de Chezelles, F., Strang, K.A., 2018. Distributed
solar self-consumption and blockchain solar energy exchanges on
the public grid within an energy community, in: 2018 IEEE In-
ternational Conference on Environment and Electrical Engineering
and 2018 IEEE Industrial and Commercial Power Systems Europe
(EEEIC/I&CPS Europe), IEEE. pp. 1–4.

[143] Pop, C., Antal, M., Cioara, T., Anghel, I., 2020. Trading energy as a
digital asset: A blockchain-based energy market. Cryptocurrencies
and Blockchain Technology Applications , 261–279.

[144] Pop, C., Cioara, T., Antal, M., Anghel, I., Salomie, I., Bertoncini,
M., 2018. Blockchain based decentralized management of demand
response programs in smart energy grids. Sensors 18.

[145] Samuel, O., Javaid, N., Awais, M., Ahmed, Z., Imran, M., Guizani,
M., 2019. A blockchain model for fair data sharing in deregulated
smart grids, in: 2019 IEEE Global Communications Conference
(GLOBECOM), IEEE. pp. 1–7.

Yihao Guo et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 23 of 25

When Blockchain Meets Smart Grids: A Comprehensive Survey

[146] Samy, S., Azab, M., Rizk, M., 2021. Towards a secured blockchain-
based smart grid, in: 2021 IEEE 11th Annual Computing and Com-
munication Workshop and Conference (CCWC), IEEE. pp. 1066–
1069.

[147] Sana, N., Wentao, Y., Miao, G., van Dam Koen H., Xiaonan, W.,
2018. Energy demand side management within micro-grid networks
enhanced by blockchain. Applied Energy 228, 1385–1398.
[148] Sanseverino, E.R., Di Silvestre, M.L., Gallo, P., Zizzo, G., Ippolito,
M., 2017. The blockchain in microgrids for transacting energy
and attributing losses, in: 2017 IEEE international conference on
iThings, IEEE. pp. 925–930.

[149] Sengupta, J., Ruj, S., Bit, S.D., 2020. A comprehensive survey on
attacks, security issues and blockchain solutions for iot and iiot. Jour-
nal of Network and Computer Applications 149, 102481–102502.

[150] Sestrem Ochôa, I., Augusto Silva, L., de Mello, G., Garcia, N.M.,
de Paz Santana, J.F., Quietinho Leithardt, V.R., 2020. A cost analysis
of implementing a blockchain architecture in a smart grid scenario
using sidechains. Sensors 20.

[151] Shao, W., Xu, W., Xu, Z., Liu, B., Zou, H., 2019. A grid connec-
tion mechanism of large-scale distributed energy resources based on
blockchain, in: 2019 Chinese Control Conference (CCC), IEEE. pp.
7500–7505.

[152] Sheikh, A., Kamuni, V., Urooj, A., Wagh, S., Singh, N., Patel, D.,
2019. Secured energy trading using byzantine-based blockchain con-
sensus. IEEE Access 8, 8554–8571.

[153] Shishkov, E., Pronichev, A., Soldusova, E., 2019. Microgrid energy
management system for reducing required power reserves, in: 2019
International Youth Conference on Radio Electronics, Electrical and
Power Engineering (REEPE), IEEE. pp. 1–4.

[154] Shuaib, K., Abdella, J.A., Sallabi, F., Abdel-Hafez, M., 2018. Using
blockchains to secure distributed energy exchange, in: 2018 5th In-
ternational Conference on Control, Decision and Information Tech-
nologies (CoDIT), IEEE. pp. 622–627.

[155] Sikeridis, D., Bidram, A., Devetsikiotis, M., Reno, M.J., 2020. A
blockchain-based mechanism for secure data exchange in smart grid
protection systems, in: 2020 IEEE 17th Annual Consumer Commu-
nications & Networking Conference (CCNC), IEEE. pp. 1–6.
[156] Singh, P., Masud, M., Hossain, M.S., Kaur, A., 2021. Blockchain
and homomorphic encryption-based privacy-preserving data aggre-
gation model in smart grid. Computers & Electrical Engineering 93,
107209.

[157] Skowronski, R., 2017. On the applicability of the gridnet protocol
to smart grid environments, in: 2017 IEEE International Conference
on Smart Grid Communications (SmartGridComm), IEEE. pp. 200–
206.
[158] Son, Y.B.,

Jeon, S.Y., Lee, M.K.,
2020. Privacy-preserving peer-to-peer energy trading in blockchain-
enabled smart grids using functional encryption. Energies 13.

J.H., Kwon, H.Y.,

Im,

[159] Stübs, M., Posdorfer, W., Kalinowski, J., 2020a.

Business-
driven blockchain-mempool model for cooperative optimization in
smart grids, in: Smart Trends in Computing and Communications.
Springer, pp. 31–39.

[160] Stübs, M., Posdorfer, W., Momeni, S., 2020b. Blockchain-based
multi-tier double auctions for smart energy distribution grids, in:
2020 IEEE International Conference on Communications Work-
shops (ICC Workshops), IEEE. pp. 1–6.

[161] Su, Z., Wang, Y., Xu, Q., Fei, M., Tian, Y.C., Zhang, N., 2018. A
secure charging scheme for electric vehicles with smart communities
in energy blockchain. IEEE Internet of Things Journal 6, 4601–4613.
[162] Suciu, G., Sachian, M.A., Vochin, M., Dobrea, M., Beceanu, C.,
Iosu, R., Petrache, A., 2019. Blockchain applicability using smart
power management: Sealedgrid architecture, in: 2019 IEEE PES
Innovative Smart Grid Technologies Europe (ISGT-Europe), IEEE.
pp. 1–5.

[163] Sun, G., Dai, M., Zhang, F., Yu, H., Du, X., Guizani, M., 2020.
Blockchain enhanced high-conﬁdence energy sharing in internet of
electric vehicles. IEEE Internet of Things Journal .

[164] Tanaka, K., Nagakubo, K., Abe, R., 2017. Blockchain-based elec-

tricity trading with digitalgrid router, in: 2017 IEEE International
Conference on Consumer Electronics-Taiwan (ICCE-TW), IEEE.
pp. 201–202.

[165] Tang, F., Pang, J., Cheng, K., Gong, Q., 2021. Multiauthority trace-
able ring signature scheme for smart grid based on blockchain. Wire-
less Communications and Mobile Computing 2021.

[166] Tanwar, S., Kaneriya, S., Kumar, N., Zeadally, S., 2020. Elec-
troblocks: A blockchain-based energy trading scheme for smart grid
systems. International Journal of Communication Systems .
[167] Thakur, S., Breslin, J.G., 2018. Peer to peer energy trade among
microgrids using blockchain based distributed coalition formation
method. Technology and Economics of Smart Grids and Sustainable
Energy 3, 5.

[168] Thomas, L., Long, C., Burnap, P., Wu, J., Jenkins, N., 2017.
Automation of the supplier role in the gb power system using
blockchain-based smart contracts. CIRED-Open Access Proceed-
ings Journal 2017, 2619–2623.

[169] Tsolakis, A.C., Moschos, I., Votis, K., Ioannidis, D., Dimitrios, T.,
Pandey, P., Katsikas, S., Kotsakis, E., García-Castro, R., 2018. A
secured and trusted demand response system based on blockchain
technologies, in: 2018 INISTA, IEEE. pp. 1–6.

[170] Umoren, I.A., Jaﬀary, S.S., Shakir, M.Z., Katzis, K., Ahmadi, H.,
2020. Blockchain-based energy trading in electric vehicle enabled
microgrids. IEEE Consumer Electronics .

[171] Utz, M., Albrecht, S., Zoerner, T., Strüker, J., 2018. Blockchain-
based management of shared energy assets using a smart contract
ecosystem, in: International Conference on Business Information
Systems, Springer. pp. 217–222.

[172] Van Cutsem, O., Dac, D.H., Boudou, P., Kayal, M., 2020. Coop-
erative energy management of a community of smart-buildings: A
blockchain approach.
International Journal of Electrical Power &
Energy Systems 117.

[173] Wang, B., Dabbaghjamanesh, M., Kavousi-Fard, A., Mehraeen, S.,
2019a. Cybersecurity enhancement of power trading within the net-
worked microgrids based on blockchain and directed acyclic graph
approach. IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications 55, 7300–
7309.

[174] Wang, B., Liu, W., Wang, M., Shen, W., 2020. Research on bidding
mechanism for power grid with electric vehicles based on smart con-
tract technology. Energies 13.

[175] Wang, H., Wang, Q., He, D., Li, Q., Liu, Z., 2019b. Bbars:
Blockchain-based anonymous rewarding scheme for v2g networks.
IEEE Internet of Things Journal 6, 3676–3687.

[176] Wang, J., Wang, Q., Zhou, N., 2018a. A decentralized electricity
transaction mode of microgrid based on blockchain and continuous
double auction, in: 2018 IEEE Power & Energy Society General
Meeting (PESGM), IEEE. pp. 1–5.

[177] Wang, J., Wang, Q., Zhou, N., Chi, Y., 2017. A novel electricity
transaction mode of microgrids based on blockchain and continuous
double auction. Energies 10.

[178] Wang, S., Taha, A.F., Wang, J., 2018b. Blockchain-assisted crowd-
sourced energy systems, in: 2018 IEEE Power & Energy Society
General Meeting (PESGM), IEEE. pp. 1–5.

[179] Wang, S., Taha, A.F., Wang, J., Kvaternik, K., Hahn, A., 2019c. En-
ergy crowdsourcing and peer-to-peer energy trading in blockchain-
enabled smart grids. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cy-
bernetics: Systems 49, 1612–1623.

[180] Wang, X., Yang, W., Noor, S., Chen, C., Guo, M., van Dam, K.H.,
2019d. Blockchain-based smart contract for energy demand man-
agement. Energy Procedia 158, 2719–2724.

[181] Wang, Y., Su, Z., Xu, Q., Zhang, N., 2018c. Contract based energy
blockchain for secure electric vehicles charging in smart community,
in: 2018 IEEE 16th Intl Conf on Dependable, Autonomic and Secure
Computing, IEEE. pp. 323–327.

[182] Wang, Y., Su, Z., Zhang, N., 2019e. Bsis: Blockchain-based secure
incentive scheme for energy delivery in vehicular energy network.
IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics 15, 3620–3631.
[183] Warutai, W., Thongrod, P.S.W., Charoenlarpnopparut, C., 2019. Op-

Yihao Guo et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 24 of 25

When Blockchain Meets Smart Grids: A Comprehensive Survey

timal energy transaction ledger model for microgrid energy trading,
in: 2019 IEEE 3rd International Conference on Circuits, Systems
and Devices (ICCSD), IEEE. pp. 106–110.

[184] Wu, X., Duan, B., Yan, Y., Zhong, Y., 2017. M2m blockchain: The
case of demand side management of smart grid, in: 2017 IEEE 23rd
International Conference on Parallel and Distributed Systems (IC-
PADS), IEEE. pp. 810–813.

[185] Wu, X., Duan, B., Zhong, Y., Yan, Y., Xu, Y., 2018. Game mecha-
nism design of smart contract for thermal power plants participating
in wind power heating, in: The 11th IET International Conference
on Advances in Power System Control, Operation and Management
(APSCOM 2018), IET. pp. 1–7.

[186] Xie, J., Tang, H., Huang, T., Yu, F.R., Xie, R., Liu, J., Liu, Y., 2019.
A survey of blockchain technology applied to smart cities: Research
issues and challenges. IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials
21, 2794–2830.

[187] Xue, L., Teng, Y., Zhang, Z., Li, J., Wang, K., Huang, Q., 2017.
Blockchain technology for electricity market in microgrid, in: 2017
2nd International Conference on Power and Renewable Energy
(ICPRE), IEEE. pp. 704–708.

[188] Xue, M., Mao, X., Pan, Y., Qin, Q., Li, B., Shi, K., 2020. Design of
blockchain-based trading mechanism under sharing mode of electric
vehicle under smart grid, in: 2020 5th ACPEE, IEEE. pp. 907–911.
[189] Yahaya, A.S., Javaid, N., Alzahrani, F.A., Rehman, A., Ullah, I.,
Shahid, A., Shaﬁq, M., 2020. Blockchain based sustainable local
energy trading considering home energy management and demur-
rage mechanism. Sustainability 12.

[190] Yang, Q., Wang, H., Wu, X., Wang, T., Zhang, S., 2021. Blockchain
for transactive energy management of distributed energy resources
in smart grid. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.02529 .

[191] Yu, S., Yang, S., Li, Y., Geng, J., 2018. Distributed energy transac-
tion mechanism design based on smart contract, in: 2018 China In-
ternational Conference on Electricity Distribution (CICED), IEEE.
pp. 2790–2793.

[192] Yue, J., Hu, Z., Li, C., Moghaddam, A.A., Guerrero, J.M., Dulout,
J., 2019. Dynamic pricing for microgrids energy transaction in
blockchain-based ecosystem, in: 2019 IEEE Innovative Smart Grid
Technologies-Asia (ISGT Asia), IEEE. pp. 1598–1602.

[193] Zhang, S., Pu, M., Wang, B., Dong, B., 2019. A privacy protection
scheme of microgrid direct electricity transaction based on consor-
tium blockchain and continuous double auction.
IEEE Access 7,
151746–151753.

[194] Zhang, S., Rong, J., Wang, B., 2020. A privacy protection scheme
of smart meter for decentralized smart home environment based on
consortium blockchain. International Journal of Electrical Power &
Energy Systems 121.

[195] Zhou, G., Lv, L., Li, G., Huang, Y., Zhen, H., Xiang, Z., 2019a. De-
sign of energy block chain system supporting electric vehicle charge
and discharge trading, in: 2019 IEEE 3rd International Electrical and
Energy Conference (CIEEC), IEEE. pp. 526–533.

[196] Zhou, Z., Tan, L., Xu, G., 2018. Blockchain and edge computing
based vehicle-to-grid energy trading in energy internet, in: 2018 2nd
IEEE conference on energy internet and energy system integration
(EI2), IEEE. pp. 1–5.

[197] Zhou, Z., Wang, B., Dong, M., Ota, K., 2019b. Secure and eﬃcient
vehicle-to-grid energy trading in cyber physical systems: Integration
of blockchain and edge computing. IEEE Transactions on Systems,
Man, and Cybernetics: Systems 50, 43–57.

Yihao Guo et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 25 of 25

