1

A Survey on IoT Smart Healthcare: Emerging
Technologies, Applications, Challenges, and Future
Trends
M. Ali Tunc¸∗, Emre Gures†, Ibraheem Shayea‡
Department of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, Istanbul Technical University
Istanbul, Turkey
Email: ∗tuncmuh@itu.edu.tr, †gurese18@itu.edu.tr, ‡ibr.shayea@gmail.com

1
2
0
2

p
e
S
5

]
T
I
.
s
c
[

1
v
2
4
0
2
0
.
9
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—The internet of things (IoT) refers to a framework
of interrelated, web associated objects that can gather and move
information over a remote network without human interference.
With a quick development in the arrangement of IoT gadgets
and expanding want to make medical care more ﬁnancially savvy,
customized, and proactive, IoT is ready to assume a solid function
in all perspectives of the healthcare industry. In this context, IoT-
based healthcare provides several beneﬁts such as instant and
reliable treatment, cost reduction, improved communication, etc.
by using different new technologies. Wireless Body Area Networks
(WBAN) technologies can enhance the quality of data gathering and
data transferring in smart systems. Machine Learning(ML) are put
to use at every level of smart healthcare systems. Fog computing
reduces communication cost and provides low latency. Software-
Deﬁned Networking (SDN) and Network Function Virtualization
(NFV) technologies provide less complex and more ﬂexible network
structures. Blockchain technology offers a better way of protec-
tion of users’ sensitive information. This paper aims to provide
comprehensive descriptions of ongoing research projects and the
utilization of the above-mentioned technologies in smart healthcare
systems. In this paper, the latest studies, proposed techniques, and
the current solutions of smart healthcare systems are elaborated in
the context of emerging technologies, applications and challenges
of these systems to provide a better understanding of what IoT
means in the healthcare industry now and what it will mean in the
future. 1

.
Index Terms—Internet of Things (IoT), Smart Healthcare,

Healthcare Systems, Internet of Medical Things

I. INTRODUCTION

W ITH the rapid growth of communication and computer

technologies, the IoT term is taking up more and more
space in our daily life day by day and it is estimated that by
2020, 25 billion ”things” will be connected to the internet [1].
In recent years, the healthcare industry realized that there has
been an expanding interest in creating effective and practical
medical care arrangements which encourage medical clinics
and medical care suppliers ease in performing ﬁnding and
encouraging patients. And hence; to obtain solutions to smart
healthcare challenges, the average spending on smart healthcare
in Europe is approximately 10% of gross domestic product
(GDP), and up to 99 billion euros of healthcare costs can be
saved through smart healthcare by 2020 [2]. IoT is a megatrend

1This research has been produced beneﬁting from the 2232 International
Fellowship for Outstanding Researchers Program of T ¨UB˙ITAK (Project No:
118C276) conducted at Istanbul Technical University (ITU).

of cutting edge innovations affecting the entire business range
and is an interconnection of exceptionally recognizable shrewd
items and gadgets.

The developments of IoT and cloud technology has em-
powered pervasive communication by giving availability across
different objects for sharing information. IoT offers a stage
to associate heterogeneous gadgets and gives preparing and
cooperation capacities. It is conveyed in a few zones to assemble
smart homes, smart urban communities, smart healthcare, and so
on. IoT empowers imagining objects that can detect, measure,
impart and share data over the organization of gadgets. These
interconnected objects and sensors gather the information which
is dissected and utilized for different purposes like classiﬁcation,
decision making, arranging and so forth [3].

The healthcare sector is demanding innovations and appli-
cations to provide proper and low latency healthcare and also
new applications are mandatory for handling the rising number
of patients. In many ways,
traditional healthcare has issues
to overcome for a sufﬁcient and reliable healthcare service at
the individual and clinical level. At ﬁrst, traditional healthcare
services have difﬁculties in ensuring the quality of services
demands of individuals as the growth of the population rises.
And also, in traditional healthcare systems, the lack of medical
staff causes late diagnosis and inadequate treatment process
treatment of some of
for the patients. In addition to that,
the critical and insidious diseases such as cancer, Alzheimer’s
disease, etc., needs to early detection process of the diseases and
traditional healthcare services may fail in this task because of
the insufﬁcient and deﬁcient examination of diseases. Besides,
the emergency response of some illnesses may be difﬁcult to
be ensured by traditional healthcare services and this may lead
to deadly consequences. Lastly, it can be said that in rural
areas, transportation to a centralized hospital from small towns
may take a long duration which can cause undesired results for
critical patients.

With the emerging wireless communication technologies,
sensor technologies and above all IoT technologies based on
5G, the home care and remote healthcare applications for the
low, medium and high-risk patients can be applied easily. In this
context, smart healthcare term has turned up into people’s daily
lives for easing and enhancing people’s health care methods.

Smart healthcare is a healthcare administration framework
that utilizes innovations such as wearable gadgets, IoT, and

 
 
 
 
 
 
to data,

different network types to powerfully get
interface
individuals, materials, and foundations identiﬁed with medical
care, and afterwards, effectively oversee and react to the clin-
ical environment needs intelligently. Smart healthcare systems
can use various technologies such as fog computing, cloud
computing, ML, SDN, artiﬁcial intelligence (AI), blockchain
technology, etc.

With emerging technologies such as cognitive computing,
artiﬁcial intelligence, cloud computing, fog computing, edge
computing, so forth; smart healthcare systems are considered
to be pioneer solutions to all challenges that the healthcare
industry suffers. Smart healthcare systems can be used for
analysis and summarization of the huge amount of data and
correlation between the analysis of patients’ medical data and
the other factors such as age, gender, the environment of patients.
For example; in [4], it is introduced that remote healthcare
monitoring systems (RHMS) which are all in all three levels of
design where the ﬁrst level uses astute wearable sensors to accu-
mulate physiological signs. Most wearable sensors constructors
marketed detecting gadgets with Bluetooth low energy (BLE)
correspondence interfaces, which lead to the advancement of
different remote healthcare monitoring systems sending BLE
correspondence interfaces for physiological patient information
gathering. In many cases, due to their basic status, now and
then chronic patients’ well-being goes unnoticed until the in-
fections form into an emergency stage and smart healthcare
systems can provide instant diagnosis and rapid treatment. In
[5], it is proposed that a self-adaptative early admonition scores
framework that regards a hazard assessment approach. It gives a
manual and self-adaptative setup of the crucial signs observing
cycle contingent upon the patient well-being status variety and
the clinical staff choices. Some chronic diseases and critical
conditions of the patients are being monitored at their homes
and it may be needed to make decisions quickly and give
emergency alerts at instant changes in the patients’ health status.
The authors proposed a novel system for coordinating outﬁt
profound learning in Edge registering gadgets and conveyed it
for genuine use of programmed Heart Disease examination [6].
This novel system conveys medical care as a haze administration
utilizing IoT gadgets and proﬁciently deals with the information
of heart patients, which comes as client demands. By employing
AI and machine learning algorithms, IoT has explicitly made
it achievable to anticipate the beginning of deadly episodes.
For example, an armband with the sensors for the discovery
of the surface electromyography signal (sEMG) is planned in
[7] and the information gathered by these factors is handled
by ML-based classiﬁcation estimating algorithms and principal
component analysis. This framework can distinguish the motions
from the sEMG signals with a precision of around 97%.

Along with all of the beneﬁts of smart healthcare systems,
there are several numbers of challenges to be solved and
enhanced eventually. The generation of the huge volume of
data by sensors and IoT gadgets is essential for providing a
better analysis of the patients’ health status. This huge amount
of data can not easily be processed and also produce a high
energy consumption. Low-latency outcomes and diagnosis are
considered life-savers for high-risk patients especially. On the
contrary of the developers and manufacturers of smart healthcare

2

systems, the users of these systems which are doctors, patients,
caregivers can’t have an obligation for understanding the details
of smart healthcare systems so systems’ outcomes and alert
mechanisms should be user-friendly. One of the main challenges
of smart healthcare is the difﬁculty of ensuring the privacy and
security of these systems. the hackers and the third parties are
intrigued by the medical data of the users which consists of
social security numbers, health status, the user’s privacy records,
etc. Unless the solutions to each above-mentioned challenges
are occurred and deployed to the real world’s environments, It
shouldn’t be said that smart healthcare is a new future for the
healthcare industry.

To fully understanding smart healthcare; ﬁrst, we must un-
derstand the different elements and aspects of smart healthcare.
In this paper, ﬁrst, we presented that what IoT and smart
healthcare are in section I and then discussed the emerging
technologies in smart healthcare in section II. The applications
and services were presented in section III. Then, the challenges
of smart healthcare and the latest proposals and techniques that
were offered to solve these challenges were examined in section
IV. Finally, future trends in smart healthcare were addressed in
section V and we discussed our conclusions in section VI. And
also, a literature comparison between this paper and forefront
survey papers in recent years are described in Table I.

II. IOT SMART HEALTHCARE

IoT is the network that contains a variety of physical objects
with embedded technologies for communication and sensing
process. IoT term offers improvements to the modern people
for easing their lives by IoT devices such as sensors, actuators,
smartphones, etc. The growth of mobile users, the development
in communication technologies and the raising capacities of
cloud technologies bring the smart city, smart home, smart
healthcare concepts into people’ daily lives. IoT provides a
global ecosystem where IoT devices can share their measured
data and with cloud servers to accomplish their determined
goals without human interaction and cooperate to create new
applications. Different protocols and communication types such
as Bluetooth, ZigBee, Wiﬁ, 5G and so on, can be utilized in
IoT networks according to network requirements, user satis-
faction and wireless communication ranges. The generated and
transferred data can be analyzed and used for classiﬁcation,
decision making and planning, etc. According to the purpose
of the utilization of the measured data, the outcomes of the
data, opening a door, changing the room temperature, alerting
abnormal situations, changing trafﬁc lights, and so on, are
evaluated instantly or, for example, the generation of databases,
creating useful results from the raw data, are transmitted to cloud
servers or third party components of the network.

The development of 5G wireless communication systems,
which has paved the way for providing high throughput and
low latency for their users, can be considered as a key factor in
the enhancement of IoT applications and services.

Due to the increasing number of connected devices and the
massive growth of data volume generated by IoT sensors, IoT
without 5G technologies cannot meet the user’s demands for
high Quality of Service (QoS). At this point, 5G can support IoT
systems in the context of increasing throughput, transmission

3

Survey

[8]

Year

2017

[9]

2018

Table I: Literature survey comparison.

Description

• The latest IoT healthcare applications, platforms are discussed and the emerging technologies which are utilized for networking,
data processing and sensing in IoT healthcare systems are presented in this paper.
• The fundamental problems related to the high volume of data, sensing interoperability, intelligent data processing mechanisms,
uncontrolled environments etc., are presented in the context of technical challenges and future trends of IoT healthcare systems.

• The requirements of IoT-based healthcare applications for a reliable end-to-end communication process are introduced and the
emerging communication technologies which can fulﬁl these requirements are presented.
• The survey is conducted in four different application scenarios based on different diseases such as infectious diseases,
cardiovascular diseases, musculoskeletal disorders and neuromuscular disorders, respectively.
• Open issues and challenges of IoT-based healthcare applications are mentioned and the fulﬁlment of requirements in different
healthcare applications are discussed by the exploration of the emerging communication technologies and standards.

[10]

2018

• The various IoT-based healthcare systems are discussed at a technical and practical level in the view of four main topics such
as e-health systems, telemedicine and home monitoring systems, RFID based monitoring systems and Named Data Networking
(NDN) based healthcare systems.
• It is presented that these above-mentioned systems can be utilized for providing sufﬁcient and cost-effective healthcare service at
the individual level and overcoming the issues of smart healthcare systems such as reliability, low-latency tolerance, interoperability
and many more.

[11]

2018

• The main application areas of IoT-based healthcare systems and the fundamental communication technologies and protocols are
presented brieﬂy.
• The overall outline of this paper is based on predetermined questions in the view of the essential applications and network
elements, the most important technologies, the main issues and challenges of IoT healthcare systems, respectively.
• The main components and their functions in the latest proposals of IoT-based healthcare systems are compared in a table at the
end of this paper.

[12]

2019

• An extended review of IoT-based applications and services in smart healthcare systems is presented. Different applications and
services are described in the view of their main aims and ﬁelds of usage to offer a useful insight into smart healthcare systems.

[13]

2019

[14]

2019

[15]

2019

[16]

2020

This
work

2021

• An overall review of the state-of-art in the context of different architecture components such as sensing, communication and data
analytics of the current IoT healthcare systems is submitted in this paper.
• The challenges which IoT healthcare systems face are reviewed and open issues, future trends and emerging directions are
discussed.

• The research is conducted based on four topics such as healthcare service delivery, pharmaceutical industry, health monitoring
and e-health, respectively. 5 papers for each topic are selected from the literature research and are mentioned with their advantages
and drawbacks.
•The advantages and weaknesses of other related surveys are presented and the literature research mechanism for this paper is
presented in detail.
• At the end of this paper, the authors indicate their reviews and the open issues in IoT healthcare systems for future works.

• IoT applications and WBAN-based IoT technologies which can ensure the requirements of IoT healthcare systems are presented.
And also, the network architecture of WBAN-based systems are explained brieﬂy.
• The standards, speciﬁcations, advantages and disadvantages of the latest WBAN-based healthcare applications are mentioned in
a table brieﬂy.
• After mentioning IoT healthcare services and applications, open issues the main challenges are discussed at the end of this paper.

• An overall view of the architecture of smart healthcare systems and the main requirements of these systems are presented.
• The outline of this paper is based on various emerging technologies which are used to enhance the performances of smart
healthcare systems such as Big Data, ML, blockchain and SDN. Many related studies of the utilization of these technologies in
smart healthcare are discussed under different topics.
• Future trends and open issues are reviewed at the end of this paper to provide making sufﬁcient and rapid improvements in smart
healthcare systems.

• The requirements of traditional healthcare systems, an overall concept of the smart healthcare network infrastructure and the
current conditions of the emerging technologies which are used in smart healthcare systems are introduced.
• The main applications and services, and the challenges of smart healthcare are discussed to give a proper understanding of the
requirements and the functions of smart healthcare systems.
• At the end of the paper, the future trends of smart healthcare are presented and reviewed in the context of the mentioned
technologies such as fog computing, ML, SDN, NFV and blockchain to navigate the researchers for enhancing healthcare systems.

coverage, energy efﬁciency, reliability, and reducing delay. With
the interaction of different kinds of smart devices, IoT brings
adaptability and comfort in conveying in different conditions for
observing and communication purposes [3]. Embedded sensors
and IoT devices that measure ECG signals, blood pressure,
body temperature, oxygen saturation level, body movements, etc.
can be utilized on a patient’s body or in hospital and home
environments. Smart healthcare enables various information

which can be related to an individual’s health status to utilize
for diagnosing diseases. The utilization of the smart healthcare
frameworks with various IoT abilities allows distant monitoring
and continuous following of patient’s medical issue, long term
review of patient’s wellbeing records, decreasing clinical costs
and expanding the innovation for giving patient-driven care
rather than medical clinic-driven treatment.

Smart Healthcare infrastructure can be divided into ﬁve

units such as physiological sensor unit, processing unit, com-
munication and transmission unit, storage and computing unit,
data analytics and decision making unit [17]. Smart healthcare
devices not only measure and monitor the physiological data but
also process and transmits the medical data to remote healthcare
or other IoT devices. Smart healthcare devices communicate
through short-range communication technologies such as Blue-
tooth, Zigbee, Wiﬁ, etc. to other IoT devices or through long-
range communication technologies such as Worldwide Inter-
operability for Microwave Access (WiMAX), Lora, 4G, 5G,
etc. to remote health centres and clouds. Extracting meaningful
analyses from the raw medical data and decision making by the
utilization of these extracted analyses are very powerful tools to
diagnose diseases and ﬁnd abnormality patterns of the patient’s
health status. The storage of measured and analysed data of
patient’s health status occurs on cloud units to be evaluated
by doctors and medical staff later. For a better understanding,
the basic network architecture of smart healthcare systems is
visualised in Figure 1.

Smart healthcare infrastructures interconnect the neighbour
networks in a little topographical area such as a solitary spe-
cialist to numerous patient records, records of a medical clinic
or assists with interconnecting gadgets at a bigger scope such
as between association of medical clinics inside a city or across
urban areas, the interconnection of specialists with the equivalent
or distinctive specialization across a bigger locale. Information
gathered through smart healthcare networks is stored in the cloud
utilizing distributed computing ideas [18]. Information over the
cloud is processed for a smart medical services framework
utilizing cognitive computing and artiﬁcial intelligence concepts.
The distinctive implanted body sensors, actuators proﬁciently
gather information from the smart intuitive gadgets and sends it
through 5G cell organizations or WiFi to the cloud and to the
primary regulator where the tremendous measure of information
is experienced careful observing the interaction. The progressed
investigation in AI machines can apply to this information
for infection analysis and abnormality detection. The distant
observing of a patient’s health status helps in lessening the length
of clinic stay and forestalls reafﬁrmations. It additionally has a
signiﬁcant effect on diminishing medical care costs essentially
and improving treatment results. The patient commitment as
associations with specialists have gotten simpler and that is just
the beginning proﬁcient that lead to support fulﬁlment. On the
off chance that any confusion or crisis emerges while checking
of patients by information examination, consequently, an alert
will trigger the smart centres like an emergency vehicle with the
patient subtleties like healthcare reports, patient’s careful area,
conceivable essential medicines. Therefore, while the emergency
vehicle will pick the patient and arrive at the clinic, the separate
closest healthcare unit also will get informed about the crisis
case, with the goal that the patient can ready to proﬁt convenient
medical care [19], [20].

III. EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES IN SMART HEALTHCARE

With the acquaintance of new technologies to improve the
above-recorded individual features, the general performance of
smart healthcare is improving. Each below-mentioned emerging
technology provides different enhancements for different layers

4

Figure 1: A basic smart healthcare network architecture. [21]

which can be explicated in the view of their functions and
main requirements which correspond to these functions. To
a better understanding, the main requirements and functions
of the different layers in smart healthcare infrastructure are
summarized in Figure 2.

A. WBAN technologies

For a better understanding of smart healthcare systems,
WBANs which are the fundamental network type in IoT smart
healthcare applications should be mentioned brieﬂy. WBANs are
the creating networks that are planned and produced for the
human body to screen and communicate the continuous physi-
ological boundaries. Independently associated different clinical
sensors and actuators situated on, in, around or/and close to the
human body constituent WBAN to screen physiological signs. A
commonplace WBAN made up with one sink and a few sensor
hubs on, around or embedded in the human body [22]. WBANs
have an enormous potential
to reform the eventual fate of
medical services observing by diagnosing numerous dangerous
illnesses and giving continuous patient checking and because of
that, WBANs are speciﬁed for the various deployment of IoT
healthcare services.

The main wireless communication technologies being uti-
lized are ZigBee, WLAN, and Bluetooth in WBANs. Also,
different protocols have been proposed and intended for WBAN
such as IEEE 802.15.4, IEEE 802.15.6 and IEEE 802.15.1 [23].
These protocols and communication technologies are selected
for providing low power gadgets, low range, and low information
rate.

The information gathered by body sensors such as the
patient’s vital sign or physiological signals such as temperature,
heartbeat, and brain signals blood pressure, etc. After that, these
sensors transmit the data through the wireless channel to the base
stations. The transmitted data are received by remote healthcare
centres or the cloud of smart healthcare services. It is essential to
have reliable, sustainable communication between the elements
of smart healthcare services. In [24], The proposals and the
latest solutions for reﬁnement on the communication of smart
healthcare devices are reviewed and discussed.

B. Machine Learning

ML and AI have a tremendous impact on smart healthcare
systems by enhancing the management of a high volume of

data, ensuring low-latency and reliable outcomes. The critical
effect of AI has been on the detection and prediction of issues
that necessary complex clinical tests and the utilization of ML
can help in the ﬁnding of the problems continuously and give
customized medical care. ML algorithms can be applied to
learn the mobility patterns of the network to provide proactive
solutions to the changing network dynamic. With the acceptance
of AI in medical care units, the immense informational indexes
created from the healthcare units can be prepared through
various AI calculations to do expectation and investigation for
medical services [19]. It is hard for a professional or clinical
expert to investigate any patient’s example and indications to
analyze illness from enormous data of every patient. Which
can be taken care of viably by different machine and profound
learning calculations with the least mistake rate and higher
precision when contrasted with the medical experts. AI algo-
rithms can deal with the immense number of data that are
gathered from various smart IoT gadgets inside a group of
time and anticipate the outcome, which created electronic health
reports at that point ship off the separate clinical allotments for
additional examination and ideas. Herewith, The utilization of
ML in smart healthcare systems are in three signiﬁcant zones to
give customized medical services such as diagnostics, assistive
systems, and patient monitoring and alarm systems. In this paper
[25], the authors propose a recurrent neural network (RNN)
algorithm with a long-short time-domain (LSTM) to provide
energy-efﬁcient, high accessible, predictive medical treatments.
Checking the patient and quickly acting after a basic circum-
stance comprises signiﬁcant tasks of clinical staff, in any case,
a patient might be in a critical circumstance prompting his
demise. First, scoring mechanism for vital signs which are held
by biomedical sensors is conducted. Easing for handling the
huge amount of data and providing a correlation between various
medical information are achieved by this mechanism. Then the
LSTM prediction method applied to the medical information
which means the system can keep the necessary information
for their users and predict the abnormalities by processing the
historical medical data.

DL algorithms need large datasets to provide accurate out-
comes for early diagnosing high-sensitive patients who for
example has signs of dementia. The necessity of large datasets
leads to the consumption of more power and it should be en-
hanced for the real-world usage of early diagnosis mechanisms.
In [26], the authors stated the current diagnosis procedures of
dementia and the implementation of ML methodologies such
as support vector machine, random forest, principal component
analysis, naive Bayes, neural network and deep learning, on
those procedures. So far studies and applications for early accu-
rate diagnosis o dementia are discussed and the most common
ML algorithms are indicated in this paper. It is also emphasised
that discovering new signs of dementia and improving the
current schemes and applications is challenging even in the uti-
lization of ML and DL algorithms. Even though DL algorithms
enhanced the current procedures by ﬁnding neurological signs
more easily and operating speech recognition mechanisms, the
current applications and studies are not sighted on the horizon
for real-world utilization at least not globally-wise.

The diversity of necessary information for an efﬁcient health-

5

care treatment aggravates getting the accurate health status of the
patients. In [27], various ML algorithms such as Support-Vector
Machines (SVM,) K-Nearest Neighbors (KNN), Decision Tree
(DT) and LSTM are evaluated for human activity recognition
by smartphones. Collected data of 12 different type of human
activities such as walking, standing, running, etc. are compressed
and processed by smartphones. ML algorithms allow classifying
and clustering these unlabelled data and specifying classiﬁers
for elderly patient ad young patients differently. According
to simulation results, LSTM-based and SVM-based classiﬁers
obtains the highest accuracy but consumes more energy than the
other ML algorithms and DT-based and KNN-based classiﬁers
provide faster results than the other ML-based classiﬁers.

C. Fog Computing

Fog computing means processing the measured data by
sensors on the sensor devices or the devices that are closed to
sensors instead of on cloud servers or remote healthcare centres.
So basically, it can be said that an enhanced fog computing
algorithm means a low-latency diagnosis or alert mechanism.
Fog computing empowers the organization to convey the cloud
administrations at the organization level with the computational
capacities appropriated locally at the organization level, unlike
the cloud frameworks, which are carefully concentrated. The fog
nodes also help in decreasing energy use by restricting signiﬁ-
cant distance transmissions utilizing a time limit calculation for
choosing the neighbours.

Fog computing and cloud computing is on-demand to be
enhanced vertically with the increased amount of patients’ data.
Through the low latency, high data-rated communication chan-
nels, the health data can easily transmit from one IoT node to
another but processing the health data and making assumptions
and decisions from the data can be still a challenging task.
Computing algorithms that are mostly deep learning-based or
machine learning-based needs more enhanced Graphics Pro-
cessing Unit (GPU), bigger storage capacities on cloud servers
or fog nodes to provide more efﬁcient and accurate results.
In [28], a smart healthcare system comprising of a pathology
location framework, which is created utilizing deep learning
algorithms is proposed. The pathology can be recognized from
the electroencephalogram signals of a patient. In this system,
a smart EEG headset catches EEG ﬂags and sends them to a
mobile fog computing server. The fog node processes the data
and transmits them to a cloud computing server. The cloud
computing server does the principle handling utilizing deep
learning and settles on whether the subject has pathology or not.
Customers and patients of the structure are associated through a
conﬁrmation administrator situated in the cloud server. Analysis
results afﬁrm the suitability of the proposed system.

In addition to the large volume of data generated by sensors
and IoT devices, the measured data varies on the priority of
utilization and the necessary bandwidth of transmission and this
can be considered a major challenge to be solved. In [29], a
bandwidth allocation procedure based on a cooperative game
theory and an ofﬂoading mechanism based on non-cooperative
game theory are proposed. With bandwidth allocation procedure,
sensors and local IoT devices can transmit their data to edge
servers based on their priority of emergency. In the proposed

6

for all or subset of end-users becomes much more manageable.
NFV guarantees the improvement of asset provisioning to the
end-users with high QoS and ensures the exhibition of virtual
organization activities including least latency and failure rate
[30]. In [32], an SDN based smart healthcare framework with
a lightweight authentication scheme is proposed. The proposed
framework uses SDN technology to cope with load balancing
and insufﬁcient utilization of network resources. First, each IoT
device transmits its measured sensor data to edge servers by a
secured channel which is protected by hash functions and secret
keys. After that, edge servers communicates an SDN controller
to obtain an intelligent decision for load balancing and network
resource utilization. By the centralized and intelligent control
mechanism of SDN, the proposed framework can manage an
efﬁcient load distribution mechanism on the edge servers to
ensure a low delayed and high-rated communication. Simulation
results show that the proposed framework beats the present smart
healthcare systems on aspects of latency, network overhead,
throughput and average response time.

With the heterogeneous data that consists of physiological
data, environmental data and health status data, the smart health-
care networks are overhead. In [23], an SDN architecture in
WBANs is detailed. Each IoT devices acts as an SDN device and
controlled by an SDN controller which can provide an overall
view of networks and manage the network trafﬁc. The simulation
results are run on gathered data and generated data respectively.
The results show that The proposed SDN architecture can
provide seamless communication and low network overhead.

E. Blockchain Technology

Blockchain technology is one of the primary inventions that
can be used in smart healthcare systems. Due to the content
of the patients’ medical data, the privacy and the integrity of
the data is a major concern that must be reassured for the
patients. By the decentralized and encrypted data blocks that
the blockchain can provide, it can offer upgrades in decentral-
ized capacity, circulated record, interoperability, conﬁrmation,
dependable, changelessness just as the chance to encourage
secure and astoundingly successful associations between nodes
such as patients, medical care suppliers, providers on the smart
healthcare systems. Besides, such nodes could be dynamically
and proﬁciently increased and managed which means blockchain
technology can handle the constantly increasing number of IoT
devices that can be used. In [33], a blockchain framework
for smart healthcare is proposed to improve encryption and
smart healthcare access control
techniques and enhance the
security and interoperability components to help privacy preser-
vation. The proposed system utilizes a private blockchain swell
chain to build up reliable correspondence by approving nodes
dependent on their operable construction. So that, controlled
correspondence needed to settle combination and coordination
issues are encouraged through various nodes of smart healthcare
infrastructure. Due to the nature of Blockchain technology, each
newly generated block is added to the blockchain and that
can be impractical considering the amount of medical data in
smart healthcare systems. In [34], A system based on blockchain
named Healthchain is proposed. In this model, symmetric keys
are used for decryption and encryption of the medical data and

Figure 2: The main functions/requirements of each layer in
Smart Healthcare Systems

framework, all measured data has a timestamp and data freshness
can be controlled timely. According to the necessary freshness
and the priority of the data, a bandwidth threshold for each
data type is decided cooperatively. The bandwidth allocation
procedure can be executed to reach a minimum cost for the
overall network. In the ofﬂoading mechanism, sensors and IoT
devices decide periodically which edge server are used for
processing and storing data to decrease network overhead and
energy consumption. The simulation results indicate that the
proposed framework decreases overall energy consumption and
provides more low latency than the traditional algorithms. By
looking at
this above-mentioned work and the future need
predictions of smart healthcare systems, dynamic frameworks
and algorithms should be developed to cope with the large
volume of different kind of medical data.

D. SDN-NFV technologies

5G technologies are relied upon to empower the worldwide
ﬁnancial yield of 12.3 trillion by 2035 [30]. With technologies
such as SDN and NFV, network slicing can be used to provide
instant medical treatment. It is achieved by virtualization of
network device functions to suit the requirements of the net-
work in real-time such as efﬁcient energy utilization, improved
resource allocation and management, and enhanced security
and privacy. Network slicing can separate the main physical
layer into an unattached logical network for controlling the
subject to network slice to accomplish the functions for the
particular wearable gadgets[14]. SDN architecture is a key
solution to make the traditional network structures less complex.
SDN provides a global view of the network and a central
control mechanism by separating the SDN control plane and
data plane. Therefore, applications and services can be more
programmable, manageable, ﬂexible and more precise with the
tools and mechanisms provided by SDN [31]. Thereafter; by
using NFV, network resources can be efﬁciently allocated to
virtual networks, and adding, removing, or updating a function

diagnosis on the user node and doctor node respectively. The
medical data which is generated by the user node is stored
on the various servers to reduce the amount of the data in the
blockchain and only the hash strings of the medical data is added
to the blockchain. Besides, traditional security schemes update
the privacy of the user each time a user makes adjustments to
the medical data. Instead of that, the proposed model offers
users an opportunity of updating their keys independently with
the medical data. Simulation results indicate that the proposed
model beats the traditional security schemes at providing low
communication and storage costs and a more reliable and
secured system for their users.

IV. APPLICATIONS AND SERVICES OF SMART HEALTHCARE

In recent years with emerging IoT technologies in the
healthcare area, many applications and services start to be used
extensively in our daily lives. Each application or service is
designed to provide increased patient satisfaction and better self-
management. Some of the main applications and services in
smart healthcare systems are presented in this section, and also
in Table II.

A. Applications

1) Electrocardiogram Monitoring (ECG): An electrocardio-
gram (ECG) is a straightforward test that records the heart’s
electrical action. A standard heart’s movement checking by a
handheld ECG gadget is both compelling and gives long-term
cost investment funds to heart patients. Non-contact, capacitive-
coupled anodes are likewise usually utilized for ECG signal
securing as they don’t require direct contact with the skin,
empowering their utilization as wearable sensors implanted in
dress [35]. In [36], a real-time ECG monitoring system is
proposed. The collected ECG signals can be processed and
transmits to edge servers and cloud servers. With an android-
based application, doctors and patients can access to ECG
information of the patients remotely. Simulation results shows
that this proposed application can provide a reliable and low-
latency interface for the ECG of the patients.

2) Blood Pressure Monitoring: Hypertension is a genuine
hazard factor that may prompt coronary episodes or strokes.
Blood ﬂow may differ from minute to minute and continuous
monitoring of blood pressure by medical sensors helps the
patients for being able to know their health’s status. In [37],
the blood pressure measurement and calibration system are
proposed. The proposed system has two ends namely as sensing-
end and server-end. The sensing end consists of wearable sensors
which can monitor blood pressure and Internal Measurement
Unit (IMU) that can provide a correlation between sensed data
and its physical movement. The server-end provides manage-
ment of network function, processing and analyzing the raw
sensed data. The sensed blood pressure data and IMU data can be
calibrated by extracting features and constructing matrix vectors
of these features. The system utilizes a regressing algorithm
such as KNN, SVM, Bayesian, DT respectively to predict the
future values of blood pressure measurements. The regression
process submits a root means square error of the raw data. At the
same time, users and doctors can access the visualization of data
analysis and working status of the system on the web application

7

of the server system. Simulation results show that the root mean
square values of the original blood pressure data is increased by
the SVM regression model and Decision Tree regression model.
Therefore, The proposed system has good results in analyzing
the sensed data and predicting the future values of the original
data.

3) Body Temperature Monitoring: In the detection of many
viral diseases, high body temperature is considered to be one
of the early symptoms of these diseases. Doctors can provide
more effective treatment in case of getting instant and accurate
alerts by real-time monitoring and body sensors when the body
temperature of patients get out of a certain range.

4) Rehabilitation system: Physical medication and restora-
tion can upgrade, what’s more, reestablish the practical capacity
and personal satisfaction of those with some physical weak-
ness or handicap. The IoT helps all viable remote meetings
in exhaustive rehabilitation. Therefore, a smart rehabilitation
system ﬁlls a crucial part of medication. For example, ın this
paper [38], a smart framework for home rehabilitation of post-
stroke patients is proposed. In this framework called SmartPants,
four biosensors are attached to the patient’s body with plastic
bands and a pressure sensor attached to the patient’s feet
to understand the distribution of patients weights. With these
sensors, the framework can monitor that a patient does the
exercises accurately and gives an alert sign to the patients for
inaccurate exercising. The proposed system can measure and
process the sensed raw data in the context of ﬁve of the most
common exercise types for post-stroke patients. After that, the
framework can classify the 64 features that are obtained from the
sensors by the ML algorithms such as Random Forest, Random
Tree, Naive Bayes and Multilayer Perceptron. The simulation
results show that the recognition and classiﬁcation of complex
movements cause more inaccuracy than simple movements. On
the other hand, the framework can provide good overall accuracy
of around 96.5 percent independent of the ML classiﬁer.

IoT Healthcare Systems
Services
• Adverse Drug Reaction
(ADR)
•
Living(AAL)
• Mobile Internet of Things(m-
IoT)
• Community Healthcare(CH)

Ambient

Assisted

• Children Health Information
(CHI)

Applications
• Glucose Level Sensing

• Body Temperature Moni-
toring
• Blood Pressure Monitoring

• Electrocardiogram Moni-
toring (ECG)
• Oxygen Saturation Moni-
toring
• Wheelchair Management
• Rehabilition System
• Medication Management

Table II: The applications and services of smart healthcare
systems

B. Services

1) Ambient assisted living: Ambient assisted living (AAL)
is a smart healthcare service for elderly people who need
continuous care in their homes. The main purpose of AAL is to
expand the self-sufﬁcient presence of more seasoned individuals
in the homes favourably and securely. AAL can provide an

independent lifestyle for elderly patients. Although the current
home-based AAL care systems for elderly people offer very
sufﬁcient results, most of these systems have little contribution
to providing mobility for their users. One of main causes of
the above-mentioned issue can be considered as the turned off
mobile phones because elderly people may forget to charge their
mobile phones. Another cause is that if communication is lost
between an IoT device and its assigned gateway, a short-range
protocol cannot establish a new communication and transmit the
medical data to an unknown gateway. In [39] , an emergency
situation detection system for AAL is proposed. A BLE-based
IoT sensor can monitor the heart-rate data and fall detection to
transmit to a third party mobile relay. a mobile device which is
called a donor in this system must be located in proximity to
transmit the sensed data to a cloud server. Mobile relays, which
are selected based on their Received Signal Strength Indicator
(RSSI) values, are not responsible for processing the sensed data
but only transmitted to a cloud server. Each IoT sensor can store
the measured data in their storage module for the amount of
this space. After the processing part, a server can send an SMS
or e-mail to carers who are responsible for the patients if an
abnormality has detected from the sensed data.

2) Internet of m-health Things (m-IoT): Physiological signs
of the human body are gathered by methods for various wearable
sensors by the product application. Depending on the situation,
signals in the structure of short messages can inform medical
care experts about health-related crisis foundations and help
them in taking the appropriate activities. Immediate access to
the medical data offers more chances to enhance the quality
of human services, improves persistent fulﬁlment, and supports
convenient mediation [40].

3) Adverse drug reaction: Adverse drug reaction is a con-
dition that is related to taking medicines. With the assistance of
a pharmaceutical insightful database, the medical data is then
planned to detect whether the medication is perfect with its
hypersensitivity proﬁle and the health database [41]. counter-
feit drugs in the pharmaceutical supply chain is a big chal-
lenge to provide sufﬁcient medicine-based healthcare. In [42],
Blockchain-based IoT implementations on medicine manage-
ment are discussed for a secure and controllable drug supply
chain. The integrity of the drugs can be corrupted in four stages.
Due to forgery at the stages of the ingredient’s attainment and
the production of the drug, the produced drugs may not provide
efﬁcacy as needed. At the stage of the distribution, drug delivery
is difﬁcult to trace especially in borders of third-world countries.
And at the pharmacy stage, the black market and online sales
of drugs cause the utilization of insufﬁcient medicines by users.
The transparency of Blockchain technology and the traceability
of IoT systems offer a secure and visible pharmaceutical supply
chain to all participants of today’s pharmaceutical industry.

4) Community healthcare: The widespread of IoT devices
will bring opportunities in healthcare systems such as remote
monitoring of patients and providing instant alert mechanisms.
The beneﬁts of smart healthcare systems provide enhancements
for not just individuals in urban places but also individuals in
rural places where may be difﬁcult to access proper and efﬁcient
healthcare. In [43], an e-health monitoring system is proposed
to reduce hospital’s visits and time-consuming processes. The

8

proposed model collects the individual’s medical data related to
temperature, heartbeat rate, blood pressure and transmits it to a
healthcare expert for the betterment of the rural communities.
Community healthcare means the utilization of medical data
and analysis from a broadband perspective. Especially in crisis
such as ﬂoods, earthquakes, cyclones, and epidemic breakouts,
there is a huge need for an overall analysis of individuals to
take speciﬁc and efﬁcient actions. For example, in [44], a rapid
response plan for smart cities is introduced. The monitoring
unit which consists of a sensor and a fog node can monitor
the vital signs of the patients and process the sensed data in the
proposed model. And also, this unit can transmit the data to node
clustering units which can group the nodes in similar locations
and compare them with optimal parameters. The grouped data
are transmitted from the source to the destination through the
shortest path which calculates in the path designer unit. Path
designer unit
is implemented in cloud servers and provides
communication between a patient and the nearest healthcare
facility. And also, the alert mechanism which is implemented in
the path designer unit can give alerts such as critical, warning
and safe to a user interface. Simulation results indicate that this
proposed model is very efﬁcient to reduce network costs.

V. THE CHALLENGES OF SMART HEALTHCARE

Designers should be aware of the demands and real-life
usage of smart healthcare systems to fulﬁl the requirements
and overcome the challenges of smart healthcare. The challenge
descriptions and the proposals of the researched papers which
are discussed in this section are summarized in Table III.
And also, the main challenges and beneﬁts of smart healthcare
systems are mentioned brieﬂy in Table IV.

A. Large Volume of Data

One of the main challenges of smart healthcare is the
management of a very huge amount of medical data. These
data are produced by IoT sensors that attached to human bodies
and because of that, there is continuously changing data of the
patient’s health status. Also, with the rising need for detailed
health analyses, different kinds of medical data with different
kinds of formats are created on sensors and access points. In
[45], a wearable monitoring node gathers the ECG information,
and using WiFi technology is transmitted directly to the IoT
cloud and is stored on the database for ofﬂine storage. At the
point when any distortion is discovered, a programmed email
is shipped off the clients furthermore, specialists for dissecting
the basic states of the patients and gives crisis health assistance.
In [46], an online medical decision support system is introduced
for chronic kidney disease prediction and the entire experimental
process clearly pointed out
the presented model offers
that
excellent classiﬁcation with the maximum predictive accuracy
of 97.75 on the tested dataset. In [47], the authors propose an
adaptable three-level framework to store and process such a huge
volume of wearable sensor information. Level 1 focuses on the
assortment of information from IoT wearable sensor gadgets,
level 2 deals with storing the huge volume of wearable IoT
sensor information in cloud computing, and level 3 deals with
building up the strategic regression-based expectation model for
heart sicknesses.

The medical data gets bigger, the variety of the medical data
is also affected and increases. Mostly, a healthcare diagnosis
and treatment require various kind of medical data. Traditional
processing algorithms can have difﬁculties ensuring a proper
result for the patients and at this point, DL algorithms can be
life-saver settlements. In [48], a deep neural network (DNN)
model is proposed for predicting depression risk using multiple
regression. The setting of the proposed DNN model consists
of the data to foresee circumstances and conditions affecting
depression in light of setting data. Every setting data identiﬁed
with indicator factors of depression turns into a contribution of
DNN, furthermore, factor for depression expectation turns into a
result of DNN. For DNN association, the regression examination
to foresee the danger of sadness is utilized to anticipate the
potential setting affecting the danger of depression. As indicated
by the presentation assessment, the proposed model was assessed
to have the best execution in regression investigation and similar
examination with DNN.

B. High-Power Consumption

The demands from users are in the directions of executing
multiple tasks such as data gathering, pre-processing, and real-
time transmitting data and because of these reasons, devices
must use high power. Correspondingly, the consistent need for
charging devices can be a burden for most users especially
elderly patients. To solve this challenge, researchers address to
put devices on sleep mode or power-efﬁcient mode at unnec-
essary periods of monitoring or high sophisticated algorithms
for reducing power consumption of smart healthcare devices.
In [49], authors present a novel real-time quasi-random signal
(QRS) detector and ECG compression architecture for energy-
constrained IoT healthcare wearable devices. A lossless com-
pression procedure is incorporated into the proposed design that
utilization the ECG signal ﬁrst subordinate, variable-length en-
coder. Pressure design helps IoT clinical gadgets to accomplish
super low power activity and limit the information that should
have been sent to limit power utilization for gadgets outﬁtted
with remote transmitters. In [50], it is proposed that a light-
weight ECG signal quality assessment (ECG-SQA) method for
automatically assessing the quality of acquired ECG signals
under resting, ambulatory, and physical activity environments.
Thereby, this method is used for improving the battery life
of IoT-empowered wearable gadgets and decreasing the cloud
server trafﬁc burden, data transfer capacity, and treatment costs.
In [24], a novel self-adaptive power control-based enhanced
efﬁcient-aware approach (EEA) is proposed to reduce energy
consumption and enhance battery lifetime and reliability. The
proposed EEA and conventional constant transmission power
control (TPC) are evaluated by adopting real-time data traces
of the activities and cardiac images. This method uses various
network parameters such as targeted RSSI, path loss, the wireless
channel coefﬁcients to provide power level by the battery need
of receiver nodes. In [51], a cluster-based model for smart
healthcare systems is proposed. The proposed model utilizes
the neighbour sensors and IoT devices as a cluster and appoints
a cluster head to each cluster. Cluster heads can communicate
with each other and selects a leader to transmit sensed data to a
base station. Simulation results indicate that the proposed model

9

provides more lifetime to the smart healthcare networks than the
traditional models.

C. Security and Privacy

With the accommodation of smart healthcare devices into our
daily lives, the IoT infrastructure of healthcare must ensure the
security of patient’s private information, the integrity of medical
data, data freshness and authorized access to information, etc. to
complete user’s satisfaction. According to researches, many se-
curity attacks may occur at any layer of communication protocol.
In [52], the security threats such as conﬁdentiality, authentica-
tion, privacy, access control, trust, and policy enforcement of
IoT systems are analyzed and the existing security algorithms
and techniques such as Advanced Encryption Standard, Data
Encryption Standard, Rivest-Shamir-Adleman are compared for
addressing the security challenges. If medication information
of patients is accessed by hackers and falls into the wrong
hands, the treatment of patients can be inﬂuenced badly. In
[53], it is introduced that the noise-aware biometric quantization
framework (NA-IOMBA) capable of generating unique, reliable,
and high entropy keys with low enrollment times and costs with
several experiments. In [54], it is proposed that a reinforcement
learning-based ofﬂoading algorithm for an IoT device achieves
the optimal ofﬂoading policy via trial-and-error without being
aware of the privacy leakage, IoT energy consumption, and
edge computation model. In [55], the authors propose a secure
system to devise a novel two-fold access control mechanism,
which is self-adaptive for both normal and emergency situations.
Besides all of these, the blockchain is contributing to securing
these systems by providing a transparent system of data storage
and leveraging smart contracts to secure the services. In the
blockchain technique, every patient has the power to conceal
their own data from different substances or individuals. The pa-
tient has the power to allow different people to see their reports
whatever the patient needs to show them. Inside the blockchain
innovation, at whatever point exchange or a test, for example,
medication is prescribed to a patient, different elements may
approve the test, medication cost or generally cost of treatment
relating to speciﬁc infections has been reﬂected into the chain.
The specialist or some other middle of the road or outsider may
not proﬁt the patient relating to pointless tests proposal to cover
rock-solid bills of medicines, undesirable medication costs. In
[56], it is given that a security structure of medical services
media information through blockchain procedure by creating the
hash value that is provided to the entities databases so that any
change or adjustment in information or breaking of drugs might
be reﬂected in whole blockchain network clients. The proposed
system uses blockchain technology for guaranteeing the security
and transparency of the patient’s record, report accessibility, and
shipment process among supplier and client.

D. Low-latency Tolerance

Working with such heterogeneous and signiﬁcant amounts of
data may obstruct reaching these data for any time and unless
continuous access to information is provided, consequences may
be very deadly for some critical patients and critical situations.
Critical situations such as reduced blood pressure or rapid chang-
ing of heart rate or just simply fall of an elderly person remote

monitoring healthcare devices must alarm the patients’ doctor
or their caretaker. In [57], this paper presents a truthful and
efﬁcient mechanism that can prevent gateways from strategically
misreporting the priority levels of medical packets, while incen-
tivizing the base station to manage the transmission scheduling
according to the desired manner. In [58], a reduced variable
neighbourhood search-based sensor data processing framework
is proposed to enhance the reliability of data transmission and
processing speed. This reliable transmission mechanism can
recollect lost or inaccurate data automatically. According to the
simulation results, this mechanism can improve the successfully
delivered ratio as well as optimize the resource allocation.

IoT Healthcare Systems
Beneﬁts
• Wide availability

Challenges
• Scalability and Interoper-
ability
• The high power consump-
tion
• Low latency tolerance
• Necessity of user-friendly
devices
• Security and Privacy
• Computational Intensity

• Instant and reliable treat-
ment
• Cost reduction
• Effective medicine and dis-
ease control
• Easy Usage
• Improved communication

Table III: The main challenges and beneﬁts of smart healthcare
systems

Providing an understandable, simple inference of healthcare
status can be difﬁcult because of the amount and the variation
of the medical data. In [59], authors present an IoT based
smart edge framework for remote monitoring, in which wearable
sensors send information into a novel programming motor that
changes voluminous sensor information into clinically important
the proposed architecture can provide a low-latency
results.
transmission and readable data visualization. The implementa-
tion occurs in a super-speciality hospital and a rural region that
is 300 km far away from the hospital. The collected data by
body sensors are transmitted to the edge servers or the cloud.
After the normalization, the results are speciﬁed by the patient’s
medical records and the target disease. The outcomes of this
proposed work are compared to the diagnosis of the real doctors
and health workers and the proposed smart healthcare system has
very efﬁcient outcomes on providing readable visualization of
medical information. In [60], authors submit an android based
framework that consists of data collection and data visualization
modules, and the application development used in this system is
to build a user-friendly interface to know the status of a patient
by a medical expert.

E. Interoperability and Scalability

Standardization of communication technologies for wearable
gadgets and implantable sensors to give consistent availability
is critical [61]. Due to the various features of smart healthcare
devices, many different communication protocols are used to
fulﬁl the requirements of these devices. For example, in the
USA the standardization of wireless medical devices demands a
multiagency regulatory environment, involving three agencies;
Food and Drug Administration (FDA), Centers for Medicare
and Medicaid Services (CMMs), and Federal Communications
Commission (FCC) [21]. In [62], authors have proposed the

10

semantic interoperability model for big-data in IoT (SIMB-IoT)
to convey semantic interoperability among heterogeneous IoT
gadgets in the medical services area. This model is used to
recommend medicine with side effects for different symptoms
collected from heterogeneous IoT sensors.

Each IoT healthcare service manufacturer uses different
platforms to provide communication between their products. In
the context of solving this interoperability issue, the INTER-
IoT European project is introduced in 2020 and INTER-Health
framework has been build upon on this project to provide inter-
operable, user-friendly healthcare services. In [63]; the proposed
INTER-Health platform means to build up a coordinated IoT
framework for observing people’s way of life in a decentralized
portable approach to forestall medical problems coming about
from food and active work problems. This observing cycle can
be decentralized from the medical services community to the
observed subjects’ homes and upheld in portability by utilizing
on-body physical activity screens. The proposed platform can
be deployed over two speciﬁc platforms named universAAL
and BodyCloud. In particular, the computerized observing at the
medical services place would be upheld by universAAL, while
the physical activity checking in versatility would be empowered
by the BodyCloud versatile administrations. At last, a particular
programming application, comprising of a professional web tool
(PWT), is additionally coordinated inside the correspondence
design all together to give all the wellbeing administrations in
an easy to understand route to the specialists. The results from
different use cases demonstrate this proposed platform provides
user-friendly monitoring, accessibility to a high number of users
and a high continuation rate of users.

VI. FUTURE TRENDS IN SMART HEALTHCARE

Along with the challenges that are mentioned in the previous
section, the relevant studies and the interests of governments and
giant-tech companies such as Intel, Google, IBM, Microsoft,
Apple, etc. are rising to solve these challenges. The stability
among diminishing the expense of care and conceivably im-
proving inﬂuenced individual results weighed against inﬂuenced
individual protection, information privacy, and digital security
dangers might be an imperative thing in the broad spread of
smart healthcare. [69].

Wearable devices and smart clothes can be called the back-
bones of smart healthcare for non-ill persons who want to check
their health status as long as they provide unplugged services for
a reasonable period. Communication standards will persistently
develop to supply higher data rates with diminishing power
consumption while IoT technologies will proﬁt from future
very large scale integration(VLSI) technologies that need lower
battery power in their activities [70].

And also, one of the important features of smart healthcare
devices is being easy to carry and new technologies such as
micro-electro-mechanical systems (MEMS) can help this feature
for providing constant data generation. With the improvement
of MEMS-based sensors, shrewd materials, brilliant textures,
and novel bio-materials alongside far off checking, what’s more,
the disease conclusion is a ﬂoating exploration zone [61]. The
advances in the MEMS is prompting a dramatic increment in the

Table IV: Literature paper research.

11

.

Chal-

Description

lenges

Computational
intensity

High
power
consump-
tion

Security
and
privacy

• Loss of information.
• Restricted storage and computa-
tion resources exist in mobile gad-
gets.
• Inability of the traditional data
processing methods to store a huge
volume of data.
• The difﬁculty of providing an ac-
curate correlation between various
medical information.
• The network overhead because of
the heterogeneous data.

In order

to provide real-time
•
monitoring efﬁciently, devices and
nodes must be charged with sufﬁ-
cient energy.
• High power consumption of smart
devices and shutting down of the
devices may cause vital conse-
quences.
• In order to execute multiple tasks
by smart devices,
they must use
high power.

• Incorrect patient identiﬁcation.
• Easily cracked processes and un-
reliable medical information.
• An attacker can estimate the size
of the sensing data newly generated
and thus evaluate the usage pattern.
• The onsite ﬁrst-aid personnel are
not permitted to get the patient’s
historical medical data.

Low
latency
tolerance

• The accuracy of the patients’
health status and instant treatment.
• The accessibility of medical in-
formation and instant diagnosis.
• Inefﬁcient movement, loss of bal-
ance, and inability to walk
• Receiving late results.

Consequences
/Effects

Continuously
data
the patient’s

•
changing
of
health status

• Limited power
batteries for pro-
longed time peri-
ods.

of
• Violation
patient’s private
information,
unreliable
medical
data,
and unauthorized
access
to
information.

• Late or incor-
rect diagnosis.

user-

The
necessity
of
friendly
smart
devices

• Difﬁculty of providing an un-
derstandable, simple inference of
healthcare status because of the
amount and the variation of the
medical data.
• Necessity of assisting medical
experts to view the graph of any
particular parameter and analyze
the data to predict and conclude a
concrete decision

lack of
and

• The
availability
accessibility
of
the medical
data by medical
workers.

Proposal

• When any abnormality is discovered, a pro-
grammed email is shipped off the clients, otherwise,
the medical data can be stored in an SD Card.
• An online decision support system should be used
for disease prediction and alerts.
• Novel architectures should be considered to store
and process such a huge volume of wearable sensor
data.
• A LSTM-based algorithm predicts abnormalities by
processing various medical information.
• An SDN architecture in WBANs can enable an
overall view of networks and manage the network
trafﬁc to provide seamless communication and low
network overhead.

• The performance of the sensor node can be con-
sidered before deciding on the amount of energy to
be given.
• End-devices should control
their energy usage
to enhance the battery lifetime by power control
algorithms.
• Compression architectures can be considered for
energy-constrained IoT healthcare wearable devices.

• A noise-aware biometric framework is capable of
generating unique, reliable, and high entropy keys
with low enrollment times and costs with several
experiments.
• A continuous security solution based on IoT using
biometrics for smart healthcare technologies.
• A RL-based ofﬂoading algorithm for an IoT device
to achieve the optimal ofﬂoading policy via trialand-
error without being aware of the privacy leakage, IoT
energy consumption, and edge computation model.
• A secure system to devise a novel two-fold access
control mechanism, which is self-adaptive for both
normal and emergency situations.

• Online health status prediction models can be used
for instant diagnosis.
• Truthful and efﬁcient data-processing mechanisms
can prevent misreporting the priority levels of medi-
cal packets and manage the transmission scheduling
according to the desired manner.
• It can be used monitoring systems that can recog-
nize a fall, and then automatically send alerts.
• Data processing frameworks can be used to enhance
the reliability of data transmission and processing
speed.

• Software engines should use to transform enormous
sensor data into clinically meaningful summaries.
• Applications that consist of data collection, data
visualization modules, and build user-friendly inter-
face to know the status of a patient by a medical
expert

Ref

[45], [46],
[47], [25],
[23]

[64], [24],
[49],

[53], [65],
[54], [55],

[66], [57],
[67], [58],

[59], [60],

Interoperability
and
scalability

• Extremely heterogeneous IoT de-
vices.
• The delay or variation in the data
analysis.

• The very huge
amount of
IoT
devices.

•An intelligent health cloud can provide semantic
interoperability to data collected from IoT devices.
• Data interoperability methods can provide the
meaning of data from heterogeneous sources while
bringing uniformity for the data format.

[62], [68],

scope of sensor hubs accessible for checking the indispensable
boundaries of the human body.

With the opportunities of the emerging 5G technologies,
smart healthcare systems will be more satisﬁed by the end-
users. At the point of providing well-satisﬁed smart healthcare,
technological
trends of 5G such as massive Multiple Input
Multiple Output, SDN, NFV, extremely small cells, mm-wave
communication, M2M communication have importance to come
through the above-mentioned challenges. Especially the usage
of SDNs is moving IoT from application-explicit frameworks
to a more programmable biological system. The assistance of
SDN makes the reasonability of the entire organization simple
and wipes out the manual order line interface. The future smart
healthcare networks are relied upon to be a blend of 5G and
IoT gadgets which are relied upon to increment cell inclusion,
network execution, and address security-related concerns. For
example, in [2], it was introduced that the detailed audit of
the 5G innovation and its rising job in IoMT for changing
the whole scene of the healthcare industry by diminishing the
size of the sensor hubs. The upsides of blockchain in smart
healthcare are not restricted to make sure about sharing of
patient information over stages, upgrading interoperability of
information, and expulsion of outsiders for access control.

To overcome the aforementioned challenges and provide
much more effective services than the traditional utilization of
IoT devices, the ML ﬁeld is waiting for integration into IoT
healthcare frameworks. The unmatched biomedical and motion
data ensure limited outcomes for the user and the medical staff.
Machine learning techniques such as deep learning and rein-
forcement learning can be used to label the user’ heterogeneous
data. In [71], the authors introduced deep learning improved
activity recognition in IoT conditions. A semi-supervised deep
learning structure is planned and worked for more exact motion
recognition, which productively utilizes and dissect the feebly
named sensor information to prepare the classiﬁer learning
model. To more readily take care of the issue of deﬁciently
named test, an astute auto-marking plan dependent on Deep
Q-Network is created with a recently planned distance-based
prize principle, which can improve the learning effectiveness
in IoT conditions. A multi-sensor based information combi-
nation component is then evolved to consistently incorporate
the on-body sensor information, setting sensor information, and
individual proﬁle information together, and an LSTM-based
arrangement technique is proposed to recognize ﬁne-grained
designs as indicated by the signiﬁcant level highlights logically
removed from successive motion information.

Early diagnosing critical diseases such as Alzheimer’s dis-
ease, brain, lung and breast cancers that can affect the patients
effectively is considered to be a crucial feature for healthcare
systems. Besides traditional healthcare services, smart healthcare
innovations can enhance providing this feature progressively
but they need ML algorithms for accurate classiﬁcation and
diagnosis. In [72], the authors proposed a DL-based model for
feature selection and image classiﬁcation. The proposed model
has three main stages such as pre-processing, feature selection
and image classiﬁcation respectively. In the pre-processing stage,
the algorithm process the raw medical image data to utiliz-
able data for the later stages. In the feature selection process,

12

the algorithm selects only the features that are necessary for
diagnosing speciﬁc above-mentioned diseases. In the image
classiﬁcation stage, the algorithm decides that if the outcomes of
the previous stages indicates are malignant or benign. The results
show that the algorithm provides a high-rated accuracy. ML
and DL algorithms should be considered as the ﬁrst reference
in healthcare systems for providing accurate early diagnosis of
critical diseases in the future.

At present, novel schemes are being introduced to ﬁnding
a novel and functional answer for the early discovery of the
connected neurological indications. As indicated in this paper
[73], there is a solid relationship between the beginning of
these neurological illnesses and outer side effects like the kind
of eye blinking action and a novel scheme is introduced. A
signiﬁcant beneﬁt of this scheme regarding the cutting edge lies
in the way that this execution gives a straightforward approach
to persistently screen commonplace indications identiﬁed with
basic neurological illnesses. This methodology uses the solace
and effectiveness of utilization natural in wearing conventional
glasses while preparing the outline with helpful sensors hence
empowering clever abilities on this gadget. Results show that the
employed solutions can productively perform eye blinking dis-
covery, accomplishing tantamount exactness regarding proﬁcient
clinical instruments, and giving to the patients at a similar time
the advantage of compactness, solace and ease of utilization.
In this context, more solutions should be utilized for the early
diagnosis of neurological diseases in the future.

Blockchain technology should be considered a huge opportu-
nity for providing secure and reliable smart healthcare systems.
The sensitivity of the medical data is very high because of the
content of the medical data which means the protection of the
integrity and the accessibility of the medical data by the autho-
rized users requires development by intelligent security systems.
Blockchain-based security schemes should be developed and
integrated into smart healthcare systems for a more reliable and
secured healthcare experience.

The effects of the Covid-19 pandemic have brought the
issues into open such as the importance of protection of the
individuals and the low-latency healthcare services. Besides,
there is a huge necessity of the large amount of the medical
data which may be related to Covid-19 disease and DL algo-
rithms and blockchain technology can be easily implementable
solutions to the current systems. In [74], a smart healthcare
framework based on DL and blockchain technology with the
utilization of beyond 5g and 6g communication is proposed.
The proposed framework has three stages namely user stage,
edge stage and cloud stage respectively. The medical information
collected by body sensors or in-home gadgets at the user stage
such as cough signals, eye signals, body temperature signals,
etc., can be transmitted to edge servers which is close to the
hospitals or medical centres. The edge nodes process the various
kind of gathered medical data of users and the data which is
collected by CT scans and X-rays. After that, edge nodes use
DL algorithms such as ResNet50, deep tree, and Inception v3 to
make classiﬁcation and predictions for a low-latency diagnosis
and alerts for their users. At the cloud stage, DL algorithms
and blockchain technology is utilized to make accurate decisions
on the large data which is collected and stored from different

regions and countries. In this framework, it is also enabled
that a mass surveillance system and a smartphone app for their
users to make decisions on social distancing, mask-wearing and
risky areas for Covid-19 disease. This framework indicates that
the utilization of beyond 5g and 6g communication systems,
DL algorithms and blockchain technology can be very useful
weapons in the battle to pandemics such as Covid-19 pandemic
and the hardware suppliers and the software designers which
work on smart healthcare systems should develop and enhance
frameworks and schemes such as this proposed one.

VII. CONCLUSION

In the grand scheme of smart healthcare, its main objective is
the high deployment of smart healthcare devices by users in their
daily lives. Besides all of the beneﬁts of the smart healthcare
system, it has its issues such as interoperability, energy, security,
resource management,
low latency tolerance, etc. and along
with the development of IoT technologies. Researchers are in a
tendency to provide better healthcare service by introducing new
methods and techniques to overcome the challenges in section
IV. Therefore, many emerging technologies such as machine
learning, AI, blockchain, fog computing, SDN, NFV, network
slicing, etc. are in demand to develop smart healthcare systems.
In this paper, we discuss the major emerging technologies in
use for smart healthcare. We mention the main applications
and services of smart healthcare systems. We highlight
the
challenges that IoT healthcare systems deal with and we sort and
stated the latest methods and techniques that the authors have
proposed. With all the studies cumulatively, smart healthcare is
proceeding and will be proceeding to spread to our daily lives.

REFERENCES

[1] Hossein Ahmadi, Goli Arji, Leila Shahmoradi, Reza Safdari, Mehrbakhsh
Nilashi, and Mojtaba Alizadeh. The application of internet of things in
healthcare: a systematic literature review and classiﬁcation. Universal
Access in the Information Society, 18(4):837–869, 2019.

[2] A. Ahad, M. Tahir, and K. A. Yau. 5g-based smart healthcare network:
Architecture, taxonomy, challenges and future research directions. IEEE
Access, 7:100747–100762, 2019.

[3] V. P. Darcini S., D. P. Isravel, and S. Silas. A comprehensive review on
the emerging iot-cloud based technologies for smart healthcare. In 2020
6th International Conference on Advanced Computing and Communication
Systems (ICACCS), pages 606–611, 2020.

[4] Lamia Fourati and Sana Said. Remote Health Monitoring Systems Based
on Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) Communication Systems, pages 41–54.
06 2020.

[5] Imen Ben Ida, Moez Balti, Sond`es Chabaane, and Abderrazek Jemai. Self-
adaptative Early Warning Scoring System for Smart Hospital, pages 16–27.
06 2020.

[6] Shreshth Tuli, Nipam Basumatary, Sukhpal Singh Gill, Mohsen Kahani,
Rajesh Chand Arya, Gurpreet Singh Wander, and Rajkumar Buyya.
Healthfog: An ensemble deep learning based smart healthcare system for
automatic diagnosis of heart diseases in integrated iot and fog computing
environments. Future Generation Computer Systems, 104:187 – 200, 2020.
[7] A. Ramachandran, A. R., P. Pahwa, and A. K.R. Machine learning-based
In 2018
techniques for fall detection in geriatric healthcare systems.
9th International Conference on Information Technology in Medicine and
Education (ITME), pages 232–237, 2018.

[8] Jun Qi, Po Yang, Geyong Min, Oliver Amft, Feng Dong, and Lida Xu.
Advanced internet of things for personalised healthcare systems: A survey.
Pervasive and Mobile Computing, 41:132–149, 2017.

[9] M. M. Alam, H. Malik, M. I. Khan, T. Pardy, A. Kuusik, and Y. Le
Moullec. A survey on the roles of communication technologies in iot-
based personalized healthcare applications. IEEE Access, 6:36611–36631,
2018.

13

[10] Yasmeen Shaikh, V. K. Parvati, and S. R. Biradar. Survey of smart
healthcare systems using internet of things (iot) : (invited paper). In 2018
International Conference on Communication, Computing and Internet of
Things (IC3IoT), pages 508–513, 2018.

[11] Hossein Ahmadi, Goli Arji, Leila Shahmoradi, Reza Safdari, Mehrbakhsh
Nilashi, and Mojtaba Alizadeh. The application of internet of things in
healthcare: a systematic literature review and classiﬁcation. Universal
Access in the Information Society, 18(4):837–869, 2019.

[12] N. Hema Rajini. A comprehensive survey on internet of things based
healthcare services and its applications. In 2019 3rd International Confer-
ence on Computing Methodologies and Communication (ICCMC), pages
483–488, 2019.

[13] H. Habibzadeh, K. Dinesh, O. Rajabi Shishvan, A. Boggio-Dandry,
G. Sharma, and T. Soyata. A survey of healthcare internet of things (hiot):
A clinical perspective. IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 7(1):53–71, 2020.
[14] Muhammet Usak, Milan Kubiatko, Muhammad Salman Shabbir, Olesya
Viktorovna Dudnik, Kittisak Jermsittiparsert, and Lila Rajabion. Health
care service delivery based on the internet of things: A systematic and
International Journal of Communication Systems,
comprehensive study.
33(2):e4179, 2020. e4179 IJCS-19-0281.R1.

[15] Mrinai M. Dhanvijay and Shailaja C. Patil. Internet of things: A survey
of enabling technologies in healthcare and its applications. Computer
Networks, 153:113–131, 2019.

[16] Yazdan Ahmad Qadri, Ali Nauman, Yousaf Bin Zikria, Athanasios V.
Vasilakos, and Sung Won Kim. The future of healthcare internet of
things: A survey of emerging technologies. IEEE Communications Surveys
Tutorials, 22(2):1121–1167, 2020.

[17] M. l. Sahu, M. Atulkar, and M. K. Ahirwal. Comprehensive investigation
In 2020 First International
on iot based smart healthcare system.
Conference on Power, Control and Computing Technologies (ICPC2T),
pages 325–330, 2020.

[18] A. Kumar, R. Krishnamurthi, A. Nayyar, K. Sharma, V. Grover, and
E. Hossain. A novel smart healthcare design, simulation, and implemen-
IEEE Access, 8:118433–118471,
tation using healthcare 4.0 processes.
2020.

[19] B. Mohanta, P. Das, and S. Patnaik. Healthcare 5.0: A paradigm
shift in digital healthcare system using artiﬁcial intelligence, iot and 5g
In 2019 International Conference on Applied Machine
communication.
Learning (ICAML), pages 191–196, 2019.

[20] T. Akca, O. K. Sahingoz, E. Kocyigit, and M. Tozal. Intelligent ambulance
management system in smart cities. In 2020 International Conference on
Electrical Engineering (ICEE), pages 1–7, 2020.

[21] Bahar Farahani, Farshad Firouzi, Victor Chang, Mustafa Badaroglu,
Nicholas Constant, and Kunal Mankodiya. Towards fog-driven iot ehealth:
Future
Promises and challenges of iot
Generation Computer Systems, 78:659–676, 2018.

in medicine and healthcare.

[22] S. Chatterjee, S. Chatterjee, S. Choudhury, S. Basak, S. Dey, S. Sain, K. S.
Ghosal, N. Dalmia, and S. Sircar. Internet of things and body area network-
In 2017 IEEE 8th Annual Ubiquitous Computing,
an integrated future.
Electronics and Mobile Communication Conference (UEMCON), pages
396–400, 2017.

[23] F. Sallabi, F. Naeem, M. Awad, and K. Shuaib. Managing iot-based
smart healthcare systems trafﬁc with software deﬁned networks. In 2018
International Symposium on Networks, Computers and Communications
(ISNCC), pages 1–6, 2018.

[24] T. Zhang, A. H. Sodhro, Z. Luo, N. Zahid, M. W. Nawaz, S. Pirbhulal, and
M. Muzammal. A joint deep learning and internet of medical things driven
framework for elderly patients. IEEE Access, 8:75822–75832, 2020.
[25] H. Harb, A. Mansour, A. Nasser, E. M. Cruz, and I. de la Torre D´ıez. A
sensor-based data analytics for patient monitoring in connected healthcare
applications. IEEE Sensors Journal, 21(2):974–984, 2021.

[26] G. Tsang, X. Xie, and S. M. Zhou. Harnessing the power of machine learn-
ing in dementia informatics research: Issues, opportunities, and challenges.
IEEE Reviews in Biomedical Engineering, 13:113–129, 2020.

[27] W. Qi, H. Su, and A. Aliverti. A smartphone-based adaptive recognition
and real-time monitoring system for human activities. IEEE Transactions
on Human-Machine Systems, 50(5):414–423, 2020.

[28] M. S. Hossain and G. Muhammad. Deep learning based pathology
detection for smart connected healthcare. IEEE Network, 34(6):120–125,
2020.

[29] P. Dong, Z. Ning, M. S. Obaidat, X. Jiang, Y. Guo, X. Hu, B. Hu,
and B. Sadoun. Edge computing based healthcare systems: Enabling
IEEE
decentralized health monitoring in internet of medical
Network, 34(5):254–261, 2020.

things.

[30] Alcardo Alex Barakabitze, A. Ahmad, Rashid Mijumbi, and A. Hines. 5g
network slicing using sdn and nfv- a survey of taxonomy, architectures
and future challenges. Comput. Networks, 167, 2020.

14

[31] E. Gures, I. Shayea, A. Alhammadi, M. Ergen, and H. Mohamad. A com-
prehensive survey on mobility management in 5g heterogeneous networks:
Architectures, challenges and solutions. IEEE Access, 8:195883–195913,
2020.

[32] J. Li, J. Cai, F. Khan, A. U. Rehman, V. Balasubramaniam, J. Sun, and
P. Venu. A secured framework for sdn-based edge computing in iot-enabled
healthcare system. IEEE Access, 8:135479–135490, 2020.

[33] E. M. Abou-Nassar, A. M. Iliyasu, P. M. El-Kafrawy, O. Song, A. K.
Bashir, and A. A. A. El-Latif. Ditrust chain: Towards blockchain-
based trust models for sustainable healthcare iot systems. IEEE Access,
8:111223–111238, 2020.

[34] J. Xu, K. Xue, S. Li, H. Tian, J. Hong, P. Hong, and N. Yu. Healthchain:
A blockchain-based privacy preserving scheme for large-scale health data.
IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 6(5):8770–8781, 2019.

[35] V. P. Rachim and W. Chung. Wearable noncontact armband for mobile
IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Circuits and

ecg monitoring system.
Systems, 10(6):1112–1118, 2016.

[36] H. T. Yew, M. F. Ng, S. Z. Ping, S. K. Chung, A. Chekima, and J. A.
Dargham. Iot based real-time remote patient monitoring system. In 2020
16th IEEE International Colloquium on Signal Processing Its Applications
(CSPA), pages 176–179, 2020.

[37] D. Zhong, Z. Yian, W. Lanqing, D. Junhua, and H. Jiaxuan. Continu-
ous blood pressure measurement platform: A wearable system based on
multidimensional perception data. IEEE Access, 8:10147–10158, 2020.

[38] I. Bisio, C. Garibotto, F. Lavagetto, and A. Sciarrone. When ehealth meets
IEEE
iot: A smart wireless system for post-stroke home rehabilitation.
Wireless Communications, 26(6):24–29, 2019.

[39] C. Sandeepa, C. Moremada, N. Dissanayaka, T. Gamage, and M. Liyanage.
An emergency situation detection system for ambient assisted living. In
2020 IEEE International Conference on Communications Workshops (ICC
Workshops), pages 1–6, 2020.

[40] Hossein Ahmadi, Goli Arji, Leila Shahmoradi, Reza Safdari, Mehrbakhsh
Nilashi, and Mojtaba Alizadeh. The application of internet of things in
healthcare: a systematic literature review and classiﬁcation. Universal
Access in the Information Society, pages 1–33, 2019.

[41] S. M. R. Islam, D. Kwak, M. H. Kabir, M. Hossain, and K. Kwak. The
internet of things for health care: A comprehensive survey. IEEE Access,
3:678–708, 2015.

[42] Victoria Ahmadi, Sophia Benjelloun, Michel El Kik, Tanvi Sharma, Huihui
Chi, and Wei Zhou. Drug governance: Iot-based blockchain implementa-
tion in the pharmaceutical supply chain. pages 1–8, 02 2020.

[43] Mohammad Jabirullah, Rakesh Ranjan, Mirza Nemath Ali Baig, and Anish
Kumar Vishwakarma. Development of e-health monitoring system for
remote rural community of india. In 2020 7th International Conference
on Signal Processing and Integrated Networks (SPIN), pages 767–771,
2020.

[44] Prabha Sundaravadivel, Issac Lee, Saraju Mohanty, Elias Kougianos, and
Laavanya Rachakonda. Rm-iot: An iot based rapid medical response
In 2019 IEEE International Symposium on Smart
plan for smart cities.
Electronic Systems (iSES) (Formerly iNiS), pages 241–246, 2019.

[45] T. Shaown, I. Hasan, M. M. R. Mim, and M. S. Hossain. Iot-based portable
In 2019 1st International
ecg monitoring system for smart healthcare.
Conference on Advances in Science, Engineering and Robotics Technology
(ICASERT), pages 1–5, 2019.

[46] Pramila Arulanthu and Eswaran Perumal. An intelligent iot with cloud cen-
tric medical decision support system for chronic kidney disease prediction.
International Journal of Imaging Systems and Technology, 03 2020.
[47] Priyan Malarvizhi Kumar and Usha Devi Gandhi. A novel three-tier
internet of things architecture with machine learning algorithm for early
detection of heart diseases. Computers & Electrical Engineering, 65:222
– 235, 2018.

[48] J. Baek and K. Chung. Context deep neural network model for predicting
depression risk using multiple regression. IEEE Access, 8:18171–18181,
2020.

[49] T. Tekeste, H. Saleh, B. Mohammad, and M. Ismail. Ultra-low power qrs
detection and ecg compression architecture for iot healthcare devices. IEEE
Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers, 66(2):669–679,
2019.

[50] U. Satija, B. Ramkumar, and M. Sabarimalai Manikandan. Real-time signal
quality-aware ecg telemetry system for iot-based health care monitoring.
IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 4(3):815–823, June 2017.

[51] G. Yang, M. A. Jan, V. G. Menon, P. G. Shynu, M. M. Aimal, and M. D.
Alshehri. A centralized cluster-based hierarchical approach for green
IEEE Access, 8:101464–
communication in a smart healthcare system.
101475, 2020.

[52] A. B. Pawar and S. Ghumbre. A survey on iot applications, security
In 2016 International Conference on
challenges and counter measures.
Computing, Analytics and Security Trends (CAST), pages 294–299, 2016.
[53] N. Karimian, M. Tehranipoor, D. Woodard, and D. Forte. Unlock your
heart: Next generation biometric in resourceconstrained healthcare systems
and iot. IEEE Access, 7:49135–49149, 2019.

[54] M. Min, X. Wan, L. Xiao, Y. Chen, M. Xia, D. Wu, and H. Dai. Learning-
based privacy-aware ofﬂoading for healthcare iot with energy harvesting.
IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 6(3):4307–4316, 2019.

[55] Yang Yang, Xianghan Zheng, Wenzhong Guo, Ximeng Liu, and Victor
Chang. Privacy-preserving smart iot-based healthcare big data storage and
self-adaptive access control system. Information Sciences, 479:567 – 592,
2019.

[56] Geetanjali Rathee, Ashutosh Sharma, Hemraj Saini, Rajiv Kumar, and Razi
Iqbal. A hybrid framework for multimedia data processing in iot-healthcare
using blockchain technology. Multimedia Tools and Applications, 06 2019.
[57] C. Yi and J. Cai. A truthful mechanism for scheduling delay-constrained
wireless transmissions in iot-based healthcare networks. IEEE Transactions
on Wireless Communications, 18(2):912–925, 2019.

[58] K. Wang, Y. Shao, L. Xie, J. Wu, and S. Guo. Adaptive and fault-
tolerant data processing in healthcare iot based on fog computing. IEEE
Transactions on Network Science and Engineering, 7(1):263–273, 2020.

[59] R. K. Pathinarupothi, P. Durga, and E. S. Rangan. Iot-based smart edge
for global health: Remote monitoring with severity detection and alerts
transmission. IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 6(2):2449–2462, 2019.

[60] Suneeta S. Raykar and Vinayak N. Shet. Design of healthcare system
using iot enabled application. Materials Today: Proceedings, 23:62 –
67, 2020. Advanced Materials for Clean Energy and Health Applications
(AMCEHA) , University of Jaffna, Jafna, Sri Lanka, 6-8 February, 2019.
[61] Y. A. Qadri, A. Nauman, Y. B. Zikria, A. V. Vasilakos, and S. W. Kim. The
future of healthcare internet of things: A survey of emerging technologies.
IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials, 22(2):1121–1167, 2020.
[62] Farhan Ullah, Muhammad Asif Habib, Muhammad Farhan, Shehzad
Khalid, Mehr Yahya Durrani, and Sohail Jabbar. Semantic interoperability
for big-data in heterogeneous iot infrastructure for healthcare. Sustainable
Cities and Society, 34:90 – 96, 2017.

Ibanez-Sanchez, A. Fides-Valero,

[63] P. Pace, G. Aloi, G. Caliciuri, R. Gravina, C. Savaglio, G. Fortino,
G.
J. Bayo-Monton, M. Uberti,
M. Corona, L. Bernini, M. Gulino, A. Costa, I. De Luca, and M. Mortara.
Inter-health: An interoperable iot solution for active and assisted living
healthcare services. In 2019 IEEE 5th World Forum on Internet of Things
(WF-IoT), pages 81–86, 2019.

[64] Manikandan Rajasekaran, Abdulsalam Yassine, M. Shamim Hossain, Mo-
hammed F. Alhamid, and Mohsen Guizani. Autonomous monitoring in
healthcare environment: Reward-based energy charging mechanism for
iomt wireless sensing nodes. Future Generation Computer Systems, 98:565
– 576, 2019.

[65] Hodjat Hamidi. An approach to develop the smart health using internet
Future

of things and authentication based on biometric technology.
Generation Computer Systems, 91:434 – 449, 2019.

[66] Azadeh Zamanifar and Eslam Nazemi. An approach for predicting health
status in iot health care. Journal of Network and Computer Applications,
134:100–113, 03 2019.

[67] W. Manatarinat, S. Poomrittigul, and P. Tantatsanawong. Narrowband-
internet of things (nb-iot) system for elderly healthcare services.
In
2019 5th International Conference on Engineering, Applied Sciences and
Technology (ICEAST), pages 1–4, 2019.

[68] V. K. Daliya and T. K. Ramesh. Data interoperability enhancement of
electronic health record data using a hybrid model. In 2019 International
Conference on Smart Systems and Inventive Technology (ICSSIT), pages
318–322, 2019.

[69] J. M. Camara Brito. Trends in wireless communications towards 5g
networks — the inﬂuence of e-health and iot applications. In 2016 Inter-
national Multidisciplinary Conference on Computer and Energy Science
(SpliTech), pages 1–7.

[70] P. A. H. Williams and V. McCauley. Always connected: The security
challenges of the healthcare internet of things. In 2016 IEEE 3rd World
Forum on Internet of Things (WF-IoT), pages 30–35.

[71] X. Zhou, W. Liang, K. I. Wang, H. Wang, L. T. Yang, and Q. Jin. Deep-
learning-enhanced human activity recognition for internet of healthcare
things. IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 7(7):6429–6438, 2020.

[72] Joshua Raj, S. Shobana, Irina Pustokhina, Denis Pustokhin, Deepak
Gupta, and Dr Shankar. Optimal feature selection-based medical image
classiﬁcation using deep learning model in internet of medical things. IEEE
Access, PP:1–1, 03 2020.

[73] A. Sciarrone, I. Bisio, C. Garibotto, F. Lavagetto, G. H. Staude, and
A. Knopp. Leveraging iot wearable technology towards early diagnosis of

neurological diseases. IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications,
39(2):582–592, 2021.

[74] M. S. Hossain, G. Muhammad, and N. Guizani. Explainable ai and mass
surveillance system-based healthcare framework to combat covid-i9 like
pandemics. IEEE Network, 34(4):126–132, 2020.

15

