Controlling Resource Allocation using
Blockchain-Based Delegation

Shantanu Pal∗, Ambrose Hill∗∗, Tahiry Rabehaja§, Michael Hitchens§§
∗School of Computer Science, Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, QLD 4000, Australia
∗∗School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia
§Risk Frontiers, Sydney, NSW 2065, Australia
§§Department of Computing, Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW 2109, Australia
shantanu.pal@qut.edu.au, ambrose.hill@data61.csiro.au, tahiry.rabehaja@riskfrontiers.com, michael.hitchens@mq.edu.au

1
2
0
2

t
c
O
4

]

C
D
.
s
c
[

1
v
2
6
1
1
0
.
0
1
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Allocation of resources and their control over multi-
ple organisations is challenging. This is especially true for a large-
scale and dynamic system like the Internet of Things (IoT). One
of the core issues in such a system is the provision of secure access
control. In particular, transfer of access rights from one entity
to another in a secure, ﬂexible and ﬁne-grained manner. In this
paper, we present a multi-organisational delegation framework
using blockchain. Our framework takes advantage of blockchain
smart contracts to deﬁne the interactions and resource allocation
between the consortium of organisations. We show the feasibility
of our solution in a real-world scenario using the allocation of
transportation credits in a multi-level organisational setting as a
use-case. We provide proof of implementation of the proposed
framework using the Hyperledger Fabric blockchain platform.
Our results indicate that the proposed framework is efﬁcient
and can be used for city-wide transport, potentially even scale
country-wide with a shared blockchain with complex access
control rules. It also bestows better transparency to the delegation
of access rights and control over the employees’ transportation
access for the organisations.

I. INTRODUCTION

In an increasingly digitised and decentralised environment,
groups of users will wish to access, employ and expend
resources in ways that are both co-operative and dynamic.
Groups of users will draw on common resources (e.g., digital
currency), to which they have authorised access [1]. However,
even with pre-existing authorisation, the extent and nature of
the use they make of the resource may not be known in detail
in advance. Limiting each user to an average portion of the
resource may not be an efﬁcient use of the resource, as some
users will wish for greater than average access, some for less
than average. Allowing each user access to a greater than
average share of the resource risks over use. For example, a
group of users, may be able to access 100 units of a resource
between them. Say there are 10 members of the group. An
average allowance would be 10 units. However, if not all
users access this much, some of the resource goes to waste.
Allowing all users access to more than 10 units risks over-
allocation. While, in centralised systems, this situation can be
easily handled, in distributed environments, where resources
are supplied by multiple providers and accessed by users
external to that provider, ensuring efﬁcient access without
over-committing the resource is a more complex issue [2]. In
such situations, the providers and consumers of resources may

not want to be at a disadvantage in terms of the control of the
relationship. That is, they may want the relationship supported
by an infrastructure that treats all participants equally.

In situations such as these the issue of access control
delegation is signiﬁcant [3]. In such an environment, multiple
attributes possessed by an entity need to be validated by
multiple different authorities that regulate the access control
policies. Delegation denotes the transfer of access rights from
one entity to another that is governed by a set of access control
policies and associated conditions to access a resource [4].
That said, the delegation of access rights determines the level
of access that must be transferred from one entity to another,
governed by the set of access control policies and associated
access conditions. In a closed environment, such delegation
may be controlled by a central entity employed to perform
this function. But when the system grows, for example, in a
multi-organisational context, the multi-level delegation needs
to be performed over a distributed system spanning across
multiple jurisdictions. Given the scale, dynamic nature, and
massive network complexity of interconnected devices, users,
applications, and services (e.g., in an Internet of Things (IoT)
setting [5]), this becomes a challenging task, in particular, to
control resources allowing access only to the authorised users.

A. Motivation and Problem Statement

Consider the challenge of shared resources discussed above.
Suppose an organisation wants to create an automated credit
system to maintain and manage costs associated with the
transportation-related expenses of employees. This is achieved
through the use of a pool that provides ﬂexibility and ef-
ﬁciency in credit management. Employees access the credit
pool through delegation which has its root in access control
systems. The delegated access to the pool can then be attached
with conditions and tree-like hierarchies which provides an
expressive and ﬂexible platform upon which granular and com-
plex rules can be written. Through delegation, employees have
access to the credit pool under given and speciﬁc conditions
that are automatically veriﬁed. For our purpose, we call this
a transportation credit. Transportation credit can be seen as
an amount of money (virtual) that an employee can spend in
a certain period of time to perform some speciﬁc tasks. For
instance, an employee can travel by bus, train, or ﬂight to join a

 
 
 
 
 
 
Effectively, each organisation can purchase a certain amount of
credit, store them in a ‘pool’ (controlled by the organisation),
and then allow employees to access them on demand, as long
as the access control rules are satisﬁed. Employees, once their
company has joined the network and purchased some amount
of transportation credit, can then request to use, and access
these credits in near-real-time. Access to these transportation
credits (i.e., resources) would be, for example, via a mobile
application that will allow the employees to request, check
and use the credits. Note, we use the term company to show
the business, and the term organisation to show a large-scale
business. In essence, they can be interchangeable, and we use
these two separate terms for ease of reading.

The example just described is an example of the broader
situation described above, that is, one where we may have
an overall budget, and multiple entities that can access that
budget, but where a precise pre-allocation of resources is
non-optimal. To provide ﬁne-grained access control delegation
for controlling resource allocation, several mechanisms can
be used [6] [7]. For example, Role Based Access Control
(RBAC) can provide ﬁne-grained access control over the
resources explicitly using user-to-role mappings. However, in
RBAC, for every access to a resource, there is a need to
deﬁne separate user-to-permission relations. Moreover, RBAC
is highly centralised in nature,
limiting its scalability for
large-scale dynamic systems. Attribute Based Access Control
(ABAC) uses attributes to improve the policy management
rather than depending upon the concrete unique identity of
individual entities. However, ABAC does not, for example,
support mechanisms for grouping together policies with dif-
ferent attribute requirements that allow access to a single
resource or policies with the same attribute requirements
that allow access to different resources. That said, ABAC
requires a policy management mechanism, especially when
the number of policies rises signiﬁcantly [8]. Capability Based
Access Control (CapBAC) provides ﬂexible access control
by distributing capability tokens that contain access rights or
privileges (along with additional conditions) validated at the
edge IoT devices at the time of access to a resource. However,
most of the CapBAC systems are centralised for policy storing
and their management [9]. Therefore, these access control
mechanisms can not provide scalable, robust, and trustworthy
delegation supporting the decentralisation of resources.

We argue that managing such resource delegation in a multi-
level scenario involving various dynamic and large-scale sys-
tems requires scalable, efﬁcient, lightweight, trustworthy, and
robust policy enforcement mechanisms [10]. The delegation
process should scale with the system through decentralisation.
At the same time, there is a need to establish trust between
the various entities within the system to delegate access
rights [11].

Blockchains have the potential to address these issues and
overcome the limitations of traditional access control mech-
anisms in a more efﬁcient and ﬁne-grained way for large-
scale IoT systems spanning multiple jurisdictions [12]. The
distributed platform of blockchain allows an apparent balance

Fig. 1. A conceptual view of the delegation process in multi-organisations.

business meeting, perform remote operational tasks or simply
commute in-between work sites. In general, the conditions can
use spatio-temporal properties as well as other aspects such
as employee ranks or mode of transportation. The company
purchases an amount of transportation credit and allocates
access to employees where the sum of the access can exceed
total purchased. This allows ﬂexibility to meet individual work
requirements while still maintaining an overall budget.

The organisation contacts a preferred transport company (or
several transport companies) to buy some transportation credit
(in exchange for crypto or ﬁat currency). After evaluation of
the request and successful payment, the transportation com-
pany sends the appropriate credit to the organisation. Upon re-
ceipt, the organisation allocates the credits based on the access
control policies and enforceable conditions. The access rights
are delegated to the intended departments, and the department
further delegates access rights (with more conditions, so as
to ensure monotonicity) to the employees working within that
department. In Fig. 1, we illustrate a conceptual view of such a
delegation process. Note, there may be multiple organisations
and multiple transport companies present in the system. There
is a ‘channel’ between the organisations and transportation
companies to mutually agree on the services and the associated
costs. That is, the transportation credit has some top-level
access control between the organisation and consortium of
transportation companies (different companies managing the
various transportation services). For each organisation, there
may be many employees working in various departments.

Purchase Response Transportation CompanyTransportation Credits (Employee)Department (Marketing)Department (Accounting)Delegation (Level 1)Delegation (Level 2)Purchase Request/Response (Employee)Access Transportation CreditAccess Transportation CreditOrganisation-BOrganisation-Aof power where no participating entity has sole control of
the system. This means that agreement must be achieved
by parties regarding any addition, deletion, or update of
contract and payments for every transaction. This creates a
balanced atmosphere for the clients and service suppliers
through an open marketplace platform where supply and
demand are dynamic. In addition, using blockchain as a base
delivers new opportunities by providing distributed storage
and computational framework on which programs can be
executed, which ultimately leads to efﬁciency and automation.
Several properties of the blockchain (e.g., no central authority
and trusted third-party, consensus mechanism,
immutable,
irreversible and tamper-proof, accessibility, auditability, etc.)
offer secure and safe foundations to record and track a list
of transactions for a large number of devices in a highly
transparent, auditable and efﬁcient way [13]. Moreover, our
use of Hyperledger enables the segmentation of the market into
channels where private interactions between an organisation
and multiple transport suppliers is supported on top of the
underlying global blockchain. This means that, even though
the native payment system is universal to all parties, secure
and private interactions can be established dynamically while
inheriting the aforementioned blockchain properties.

B. Contributions

We employ blockchain to provide granular and ﬁne-grained
decentralised management of access control delegation to
resources within a multi-organisational establishment. This
includes an entity-centric delegation tailored to various system
granularities spanning over multiple timescales. The main
contributions of the paper can be summarised as follows:

• We propose a framework that can manage resources
owned by a consortium of entities, and assists allocation
of these resources through access control delegation.

• We present

the system design along with a detailed
framework of the proposed delegation model. We develop
a distributed and decentralised delegation framework for
ﬁne-grained access rights transfer using blockchain.
• We provide a detailed proof of concept prototype imple-
mentation in the Hyperledger Fabric blockchain platform
to show the feasibility of our system.

The rest of the paper is organised as follows. In Section II,
we discuss system components, system functionality, and com-
munication protocol of the proposed delegation framework. In
Section III, we present system implementation and evaluation
of the achieved results. Section IV includes related works.
Finally, we conclude the paper with direction to the future
work in Section V.

Fig. 2. Layer view of the proposed blockchain-based delegation framework.

A. Components

In Fig. 2, we illustrate the proposed framework. It

is

composed of the following major components:

• Employee: Who works within the company and wants
to access transportation credit. We assume that all em-
ployees have a smart device that can be used to access a
resource, as well as able to perform the communication
between the various entities within the organisation.
• Organisation: Where a group of people works together
for a particular purpose in pursuing dedicated objectives
to e.g., a business, institution, or an association. There
may be various departments within a company within
which groups of people function.

• Blockchain Network: A dedicated distributed infrastruc-
ture spanning over the entire network to provide ledger
and smart-contract services autonomously. We select a
private blockchain network as all participating organi-
sations can be identiﬁed, and to restrict access only to
members of those organisations.

• Transportation Company: A dedicated infrastructure (or
business) that provides transportation services to move
people or goods e.g., bus, train, taxi, or ﬂights. It also
provides a chain of services from scheduling timetables,
managing ticketing, and control the logistics process.

II. PROPOSED DELEGATION FRAMEWORK

B. System Functionality

In this section, we discuss (i) the various components of the
proposed delegation framework, (ii) the system functionality,
and (ii) show the communication protocol between the various
components of the framework.

The blockchain network interfaces between businesses
wishing to organise transportation credits for their employees,
and the transportation companies that facilitate those solutions.
We call the overall network a transport chain. We then setup

Response ValidationTransportation CompanyBlockchain NetworkRequest ValidationOrganisationDepartment (Marketing)Department (Accounting)(Employee)Request Transportation CreditResponse Transportation CreditControl Resource Allocation(Delegate Access)private channels on the transport chain for each participating
organisation. A channel here is another distributed ledger that
sits on top of the larger blockchain but is only maintained by a
subset of the participants. For this use case each organisation
would create their own channel and include any transport
companies they want
to conduct business with. With this
design, privacy is guaranteed between organisations. Transport
companies uses a token smart contract on the transport chain
to sell transportation credits (maybe in terms of tokens, tickets,
and passes) to the organisations. As noted above, the currency
used can be any crypto or ﬁat currency, however, the partic-
ipants must agree on the currency. Using a crypto currency
would allow the ﬁnancial transactions to take place on the
transport chain via the smart contracts. Transport companies
would join channels with any organisation looking to purchase
transportation credits for that transport type.

to
The organisation would also use the smart contract
purchase the transportation credits. However, once they have
been purchased the tokens/tickets/etc. can be accessed through
access control rules deﬁned by another smart contract de-
ployed and controlled by the organisation. Employees, once
their company has joined the transport chain network and
purchased some amount of transportation credits, can then
request to use and access these tokens in near-real-time. They
would have access to the transport chain via a mobile app
that will allow them to request, check and use these credits.
Note, when an employee requests transportation credits, the
access control smart contract can automatically check the
access request against the access rules. The rules can be based
on many metrics including amount, time, role, location, or
transport type.

In other words, when an employee requests access to
transportation credits via the organisation’s access control
smart contract – the access request validity and whether
the organisation has enough credits is checked and stored
on blockchain network via a transaction to the token smart
contract. The employee can then use the credits at the point
of transport, which once used will send conﬁrmation back to
the token smart contract, ﬁnalising the trip and using up the
required amount of credits. The reason two smart contracts are
used is so that the organisations have control and privacy over
the access control rules but they are still on the blockchain
to automate the checking process. Transport companies can
guarantee that employees have the right to use credits without
seeing what made them eligible.

C. Communication

In Fig. 3, we illustrate the steps each entity in our system
takes to communicate with and use the system. To give
a more ﬁne-grained view of the interaction, it is split up
into three parts, (i) purchase transportation credit, (ii) access
control setup, and (iii) use transportation credit. These could
be generalised in the obvious fashion if a different resource
was being managed. A detailed description for each of them
is as follows:

Fig. 3. Communications among the different components of the framework.

• Step 1: The organisation and the transportation company
will negotiate a price for transport credit (in terms of
tokens) that can be used with that particular transporta-
tion company. This happens off-chain (i.e., outside the
blockchain) and there is no time limit as the deal will
need to be in the best interest of both parties.

• Step 2a: Once a price has been agreed upon by both
parties, then the blockchain is updated. First, the trans-
portation company will initialise a token smart contract
with the price and submit a transaction that places the
agreed amount of tokens in escrow (i.e., a ﬁnancial and
legal agreement).

• Step 2b: The organisation will send payment, either via
another token or off-chain with a receipt being put on-
chain, to the smart contract.

• Step 3: The contract will wait for both the tokens and
payment before releasing the tokens. There is also a
check here to ensure that
the amount of tokens and
amount paid matches the proposal. This is done as there
is an initialisation step to the contract that requires the
parameters of the proposal to be entered. If any of the
transactions do not match the proposal the transaction is
rolled back and a new contract will have to be deployed.
• Step 4 (a and b): Once the payment and tokens have been
received the smart contract will emit conﬁrmation events
on the channel notifying the transportation company and
organisation that the transaction is successful.

• Step 5: The organisation deploys an access control smart
contract on the channel. This contract will have the cod-
iﬁed rules for accessing the tokens. This is a completely
internal process and the organisation has complete control
over which employees can access the tokens, how much
they can access for certain services, and even delegate
this access control.

• Step 6: When an employee wants to access those tokens
i.e., use the transport service, they will put in their trans-

(1) Negotiate price and tokens(Employee)Control Resource Allocation(Delegate Access)OrganisationTransportation CompanyEmployee Blockchain(2a) Generate and distribute tokens(2b) Send payments(3) Wait for both tokens and payment(4a) Confirm transaction(4b) Confirm transaction(5) Deploy access control contract(6) Request access via mobile app(7) check balance and access control(8) Smart contract processes access control request(9) End trip via mobile app(10) Finalise transactionsPurchase tokensAC setupUse tokensport details (start/end destination, transport type, etc.) into
their mobile app. This can be done in advance or at the
point of interaction with the transportation company.
• Step 7: The system (managed by the transportation com-
pany) will then initiate a transaction that will take conﬁrm
the trip and send it to the access control contract.

• Step 8: The smart contract will process the request
by validating two values. Firstly, it will check that the
organisation has enough balance for the transport, this
could be calculated based on the ﬁnal destination or just
having a maximum spending limit. It then checks that the
employee passes the access control rules. If both checks
are passed, an event
is emitted to the transportation
company to signal that the trip can take place.

• Step 9: At the end of the trip, the employee ﬁnalises the

trip on their mobile app.

• Step 10: The transportation company will also send a
transaction when the trip is complete which will allow
the smart contract to automatically use up the tokens.

III. SYSTEM DESIGN AND EVALUATION

In this section, we discuss (i) the implementation details
of the proposed delegation framework, and (ii) evaluate the
achieved results.

A. Implementation

We use Hyperledger Fabric (HLF) to implement the proof
of concept of our system [14]. HLF is an enterprise-ready
blockchain platform that contains many of the required fea-
tures (e.g., performance, scalability, and levels of trust) that
our system will use. Version 2.2 of HLF is used, and version
0.4.2 of Hyperledger Caliper is used to benchmark the system.
The tests are run on a Dell Latitude 7490 Notebook with 8 GB
of memory and an Intel Core i5 processor. The smart contracts
are written in GO version 1.15.2.

Note, HLF’s inbuilt channel system is used to set up
each organisation on their own private channel that transport
companies can then be added to for price negotiation and token
generation. Having separate channels for each organisation
allows for private negotiation,
the delegation of contracts
and usage whilst still storing all key transactions into the
blockchain state. The channel system can be visualised as a
ledger on a ledger with access control tools placed on top.
Every entity will have access to the foundation ledger and that
will store information that is public or vital for users to interact
with the system, while any of the private information will
be stored on one of the smaller ledgers, and only authorised
entities will be given access to these ledgers.

As we discussed in the previous section, the implementation
consists of two smart contracts, the token smart contract, and
the access control smart contract. There will be one access
control contract per channel which the organisation controls.
This smart contract is where the organisation’s admin can
specify rules (and conditions) for the delegation and usage of
the tokens on this channel. Each transport company that wishes
to interact with this organisation must deploy a token contract

Fig. 4. Studying the throughput and latency of the proposed framework.

which can be done before or after the price negotiations. The
price and amount of tokens for each transportation mode can
be maintained using this contract. There would be one channel
per organisation on the network in a production deployment,
with each channel having one access control contract and as
many token contracts as transport companies on that channel.
Our test network consists of two organisations and two
transport companies, each on its own channel. The transactions
are generated in workloads using caliper. To reduce strain
on the test machine, the two contracts were combined and
deployed together. For testing purposes, two fewer docker
containers are needed, and it functions theoretically the same
as though two contracts were deployed. The simulation was
run ten times, each time simulating over 20,000 transactions.
The transactions simulated were as follows:

• Request Access: The transaction a user would send when
trying to use a transport token. The smart contract will
check that this user has permission to use tokens and that
the organisation has the tokens to be used.

• Finish Trip: The transaction a transport company would
send when it detects a user has completed their trip using
this service. The trip object in the blockchain state is
updated, saying it has been complete and any tokens
associated with that trip are now considered spent.

Each round of testing involved simulating different send
rates for the system, starting at 100 transactions per second
(tps) and ending at 300 tps, increasing the send rate by 50 tps
each time.

B. Results and Discussion

In Fig. 4, we illustrate the achieved results of the average
throughput and latency of the system. Next, we discuss the
throughput, and then the latency in detail. We also discuss the
suitability of the achieved results of the proposed system in
practical scenarios.

We observe that the system reaches throughput saturation
between 175 and 200 transactions per second. Request Access
is the more computationally expensive transaction. It is ex-
than the Finish Trip
pected to have a smaller throughput

Send RateTransactions Per SecondLatency (Seconds)0501001502000246810120100150200300Request_AccessFinish_TripRequest_Access LatencyFinish_Trip Latencytransaction, which can be seen when the send rate is high (i.e.,
more than 200 tps), and the system is past saturation. Below
saturation, the system is able to process these transactions
similarly. With the latency results, it is clear to see that the
latency is trivial before the system reaches saturation as it is
constantly less than 0.5 seconds. When the system does reach
saturation, there is an upwards trend in latency. However, this
is expected as when the system is under stress from many
transactions, for each second there are more transactions than
the system can handle, the backlog of pending transactions
continues to grow, leading to longer wait times for conﬁrmed
transactions. At a workload of 300 transactions per second,
the latency is seen to be 10 seconds for both transactions.

With a throughput of 175 tps and a maximum latency of
10 seconds, the prototype system is more than capable of
handling a transport application of a large size (i.e., many
concurrent users). Transactions such as funding and token
generation can be processed in advance and so do not need to
be taken into account when benchmarking the system. The
critical transactions, such as requesting access, need to be
handled as efﬁciently as possible as they will be executed at
the point of interaction between user and transportation mode.
It can be noted that depending on the size of the organisations
and transport companies, our system would be able to handle a
large number of users all requesting access and ﬁnishing trips
at the same time. Moreover, if the situation does occur where
there are more than 175 requests a second, a user would not
be waiting more than 10 seconds for conﬁrmation.

These results indicate that this system could be used for city-
wide transport, potentially even country-wide, with a sharded
blockchain. Even organisations and transport companies with
complex access control rules will experience short wait times,
transparency into transport usage, trusted digital history of use,
and total control over their employees’ transport access can
easily be achieved to a ﬂexible and ﬁne-grained manner.

IV. RELATED WORK

Recently, there has been signiﬁcant attention on blockchain
and smart contract technology for authentication, access con-
trol and delegation of access rights [15] [16]. Several proposals
have discussed the need for blockchain technology in transport
and logistics to facilitate payments, fulﬁll their tasks, and
deliver goods through a secure supply chain [17] [18] [19].
However, the application of access control delegation using
blockchain in transportation, in particular, for transportation
resource allocation, is lacking in most of these proposals.

For instance, to improve transportation infrastructures, pro-
posal [20] discusses a blockchain-based real-time ride-sharing
service. It mainly focuses on efﬁcient vehicle utilisation so
that the number of vehicles on the road can be minimised,
reducing trafﬁc congestion. In [21], a blockchain-based in-
telligent
transportation system is discussed. Blockchain is
used to establish a decentralised autonomous platform for
the transportation ecosystem. In [22], a blockchain-based
resource allocation technique is discussed. A video analysis
framework is used to improve trafﬁc safety and efﬁciency for

the Internet of Autonomous Vehicles (IoAV) infrastructure.
Blockchain is used to reduce the latency of the system. While
these proposals discuss security, mobility, automation, latency,
and communications issues, they do not focus on speciﬁc
resource allocation (e.g., transportation credits) issue. Unlike
these approaches, in our work, we devise a distributed and
decentralised management of transportation credits among
various organisations. This enhances the delegation issues to
a more ﬁne-grained level for the allocation of access rights.

Proposals [23] and [24] present an ABAC model for secure
distribution of sensitive information of vehicles (e.g., loca-
tion, time, speed, etc.) in an intelligent transportation system.
However, these proposals are built over a highly centralised
component for authorisation and access right delegation. While
they provide scalability to the system by enhancing attributes-
based security policies, unlike our proposal, the allocation of
resources that can be managed for individual entities is missing
in these proposals.

In [25], a collaborative supply chain framework for trans-
portation companies is discussed. It focuses on the com-
pany’s logistic functionalities, e.g., order and capacity sharing.
In [26], a fog-based architecture is discussed for distribution
and data processing of transport network resources at the edge
nodes. It helps seamless and faster responses and coordinates
resources and application queries in real-time. Similar to
[26], proposal [27] present a fog-based resource allocation
techniques for intelligent transportation systems. Proposal [28]
presents an ‘Internet of Vehicles’ (IoV) concept from an
energy management point of view. Based on the energy, it
decides to drive customers to a particular destination. In [29],
a blockchain-based renewable energy management process is
developed for electronic vehicles. It focuses on the improve-
ment of energy efﬁciency at the time of charging the vehicles.
A similar approach can be seen in proposal [30], but it uses a
blockchain-enabled crowdsensing framework. However, these
proposals do not discuss the resource allocation issue.

Our proposed framework takes advantage of blockchain
technology to overcome the limitations of the traditional
approaches (e.g., RBAC, ABAC, and CapBAC) and leverage
the potential of safe, secure, and ﬁne-grained allocation of
transportation credits among various entities without the need
for a centralised trust management system.

V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

In this paper, we have discussed the allocation of re-
sources from a multi-organisational point of view supported
by blockchain technology. We used access control delegation
to transfer, maintain, and control the transportation credits
over the employees within an organisation. The proposed
framework employed blockchain smart contracts to maintain
safe and secure interactions among transportation companies
and organisations without the need for a trusted third-party.
The use of blockchain smart contracts enables the resource
exchange to occur in an open market place without an imbal-
ance of power between the participants. it also allows multiple
providers and consumers to participate in the market. This

provides a ﬂexible, open and secure system leveraging off the
natureof the blockchain.

The proof of implementation prototype showed that the
proposed framework is feasible to use in city-wide transport,
even potentially country-wide large-scale scenarios. HLF is an
enterprise ready blockchain that can achieve a throughput of
up to 10,000 transactions per second. This indicates that a large
scale deployment using HLF would not have network bottle-
necks and would be able to provide a seamless experience for
users. One of the challenges in a large scale deployment would
be how to guarantee decentralisation, i.e., how do we ensure
that no single entity is ever in control of the endorsers and
validators. A potential solution would be to have each transport
company maintain their own endorser and validator. A user
can then set endorsement policies that ensure each transport
company must use at least 30% of total nodes. This reduces the
possibility that a single entity or group of entities can control
the endorsing and validating stages. A limitation of this work
is that even with separate communication channels for each
organisation, there is a security risk of conﬁdential information
leaking. Although this can be mitigated with private data
collections and having anonymous transactions there is still
the inherent risk of those transactions being broadcast. With
these solutions in place, our system could easily scale up to a
large production system without loss of efﬁciency or quality.
In the future, we plan to conduct more experiments to assess
the security level and see the feasibility of our framework
with more complex access control policies. We also plan to
add more application features to transport chain e.g., route
planning and automatic token purchase based on patterns in
the historical transit data. Each of these features would add
another aspect of that can be seen in the traditional transport
sector today, with the goal of creating a transparent and
open transport system that is truly decentralised. We plan
on assessing the effectiveness of such a transport system and
highlighting the major beneﬁts of implementing such a system.

REFERENCES

[1] J. Magiera and A. Pawlak, “Security frameworks for virtual organiza-
tions,” in Virtual Organizations. M Camarinha-Matos, H. Afsarmanesh
H., M. Ollus (eds). Springer, 2005, pp. 133–148.

[2] S. Pal, T. Rabehaja, M. Hitchens, V. Varadharajan, and A. Hill, “On
the design of a ﬂexible delegation model for the internet of things using
blockchain,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 16, no. 5,
2019, pp. 3521–3530.

[3] S. Pal, Internet of Things and Access Control: Sensing, Monitoring and
Controlling Access in IoT-Enabled Healthcare Systems. Springer Nature,
2021, vol. 37.

[4] M. Ghorbel-Talbi, F. Cuppens, N. Cuppens-Boulahia, and A. Bouhoula,
“Managing delegation in access control models,” in the 15th Inter-
national Conference on Advanced Computing and Communications
(ADCOM), 2007, pp. 744–751.

[5] L. Atzori, A. Iera, and G. Morabito, “The Internet of Things: A
survey,” Computer Networks, vol. 54, no. 15, 2010, pp. 2787–2805.
[6] S. Ravidas, A. Lekidis, F. Paci, and N. Zannone, “Access control
in internet-of-things: A survey,” Journal of Network and Computer
Applications, vol. 144, 2019, pp. 79–101.

[7] S. Pal, M. Hitchens, and V. Varadharajan, “Towards a secure access
control architecture for the internet of things,” in the 42nd Conference
on Local Computer Networks (LCN). IEEE, 2017, pp. 219–222.

[8] S. Pal, M. Hitchens, V. Varadharajan, and T. Rabehaja, “Policy-based
for constrained healthcare resources,” in the 19th

access control
WoWMoM Conference. IEEE, 2018, pp. 588–599.

[9] S. Pal, M. Hitchens, T. Rabehaja, and V. Varadharajan, “Policy-based
access control for constrained healthcare resources in the context of
the internet of things,” Journal of Network and Computer Applications,
vol. 139, 2019, pp. 57–74.

[10] T. Rabehaja, S. Pal, and M. Hitchens, “Design and implementation of
a secure and ﬂexible access-right delegation for resource constrained
environments,” Future Generation Computer Systems, vol. 99, 2019,
pp. 593–608.

[11] S. Pal, T. Rabehaja, A. Hill, M. Hitchens, and V. Varadharajan, “On the
integration of blockchain to the internet of things for enabling access
right delegation,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 7, no. 4, 2019,
pp. 2630–2639.

[12] L. Koh, A. Dolgui, and J. Sarkis, “Blockchain in transport and
logistics–paradigms and transitions,” Production Research, vol. 58,
no. 7, 2020, pp. 2054-2062.

[13] M. Pournader, Y. Shi, S. Seuring, and S. Koh, “Blockchain applications
in supply chains, transport and logistics: a systematic review of the
literature,” Production Research, vol. 58, no. 7, 2020, pp. 2063–2081.
[14] E. Androulaki, et al., “Hyperledger fabric: a distributed operating
the 13th

system for permissioned blockchains,” in Proceedings of
EuroSys Conference, 2018, pp. 1–15.

[15] S. Pal, M. Hitchens, V. Varadharajan, and T. Rabehaja, “On design
of a ﬁne-grained access control architecture for securing iot-enabled
smart healthcare systems,” in Proceedings of the 14th MobiQuitous
Conference, 2017, pp. 432–441.

[16] S. Pal, M. Hitchens, and V. Varadharajan, “On the design of security
mechanisms for the internet of things,” in the 11th International
Conference on Sensing Technology (ICST). IEEE, 2017, pp. 1–6.
[17] V. Astarita, V. Giofr`e, G. Mirabelli, and V. Solina, “A review of
blockchain-based systems in transportation,” Information, vol. 11, no. 1,
2020.

[18] M. Mollah, et al., “Blockchain for the internet of vehicles towards
intelligent transportation systems: A survey,” IEEE Internet of Things
Journal, vol. 8 no. 6, 2020, pp. 4157–4185.

[19] U. Lang and R. Schreiner,

“Managing security in intelligent
transport systems,” in the 18th International Conference on Intelligent
Transportation Systems. IEEE, 2015, pp. 48–53.

[20] E. V´azquez and D. Landa-Silva, “Towards blockchain-based ride-

sharing systems.” in ICORES Conference, 2021, pp. 446–452.

[21] Y. Yuan and F. Wang,

“Towards blockchain-based intelligent
transportation systems,” in the 19th International Conference on
Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC). IEEE, 2016, pp. 2663–2668.
[22] X. Jiang, F. Yu, T. Song, and V. Leung, “Intelligent resource allocation
for video analytics in blockchain-enabled internet of autonomous
vehicles with edge computing,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 2020.
[23] M. Gupta, J. Benson, F. Patwa, and R. Sandhu, “Dynamic groups and
attribute-based access control for next-generation smart cars,” in Data
and Application Security and Privacy Conference, 2019, pp. 61–72.
[24] M. Gupta, et al., “An attribute-based access control for cloud-enabled
industrial smart vehicles,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics,
vol. 17, no. 6, 2021, pp. 4288–4297.

[25] L. Verdonck, A. Caris, K. Ramaekers, and G. Janssens, “Collaborative
road transportation companies,”

logistics from the perspective of
Transport Reviews, vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 700–719, 2013.

[26] T. Darwish and K. Bakar, “Fog based intelligent transportation big
data analytics in the internet of vehicles environment: motivations,
architecture, challenges, and critical issues,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp.
2018, pp. 15679–15701.

[27] F. Xhafa, A. Aly, and A. Juan, “Allocation of applications to fog
resources via semantic clustering techniques: With scenarios from
intelligent transportation systems,” Computing, vol. 103, no. 3, 2021,
pp. 361–378.

[28] M. Gerla, E. Lee, G. Pau, and U. Lee, “Internet of vehicles: From
intelligent grid to autonomous cars and vehicular clouds,” in the world
forum on internet of things (WF-IoT). IEEE, 2014, pp. 241–246.
[29] J. Zhao, C. He, C. Peng, and X. Zhang, “Blockchain for effective
renewable energy management in the intelligent transportation system,”
Journal of Interconnection Networks, 2021.

[30] Z. Ning, et al., “Blockchain-enabled intelligent transportation systems:
A distributed crowdsensing framework,” IEEE Transactions on Mobile
Computing, 2021.

