2
2
0
2

n
u
J

2

]
E
S
.
s
c
[

2
v
4
7
3
3
1
.
0
1
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

DEFINING BLOCKCHAIN GOVERNANCE PRINCIPLES: A
COMPREHENSIVE FRAMEWORK

Yue Liu, Qinghua Lu, Guangsheng Yu, Hye-Young Paik, Liming Zhu
Data61, CSIRO, Australia
University of New South Wales, Australia
yue.liu@data61.csiro.au, qinghua.lu@data61.csiro.au
saber.yu@data61.csiro.au, h.paik@unsw.edu.au, liming.zhu@data61.csiro.au

June 3, 2022

ABSTRACT

Blockchain eliminates the need for trusted third-party intermediaries in business by enabling de-
centralised architecture design in software applications. However, the vulnerabilities in on-chain
autonomous decision-makings and cumbersome off-chain coordination lead to serious concerns
about blockchain’s ability to behave in a trustworthy and efﬁcient way. Blockchain governance has
received considerable attention to support the decision-making process during the use and evolution
of blockchain. Nevertheless, the conventional governance frameworks do not apply to blockchain due
to its distributed architecture and decentralised decision process. These inherent features lead to the
absence of a clear source of authority in blockchain ecosystem. Currently, there is a lack of systematic
guidance on the governance of blockchain. Therefore, in this paper, we present a comprehensive
blockchain governance framework, which elucidates an integrated view of the degree of decentralisa-
tion, decision rights, incentives, accountability, ecosystem, and legal and ethical responsibilities. The
above aspects are formulated as six high-level principles for blockchain governance. We demonstrate
a qualitative analysis of the proposed framework, including case studies on ﬁve extant blockchain
platforms, and comparison with existing blockchain governance frameworks. The results show that
our proposed framework is feasible and applicable in a real-world context.

blockchain, governance, decision right, accountability, incentive, ecosystem

1

Introduction

Blockchain is the technology behind Bitcoin [1], which is a decentralised data store that maintains all historical
transactions of Bitcoin network. The concepts of blockchain have been generalised to distributed ledger systems that
ensure distributed trust without the need for third-party intermediaries in business transactions [2]. A large number of
projects have been conducted to explore how to re-architect application system. In particular, after the advent of smart
contracts (i.e., computer programs run on blockchain), blockchain is explored as a general, decentralised computing
and storage environment in which to build new applications and business models [3].

Despite the broad use of blockchain, there are serious concerns about whether the decisions directing a blockchain
are made in a trustworthy and efﬁcient manner. A few infamous incidents occurred in two of the world-renowned
blockchain platforms, Ethereum and Bitcoin, raise the level of concerns. In 2016, within Ethereum, vulnerable code
in smart contracts responsible for operating a DAO (Decentralised Autonomous Organisation) project was exploited
by malicious attackers, which led to massive economic loss. After much debate, Ethereum conducted a hard fork to
reverse the transactions in the DAO attack, and recover the stolen tokens worth over 60 million dollars [4]. Bitcoin
also suffered a split of the platform after a lengthy debate over the block size (from August 2015 to January 2016) [5].
These incidents highlight the need for governance mechanisms that would orchestrate a clear decision-making process
within the context of a decentralised system with different stakeholders. For instance, blockchain platforms need to be

 
 
 
 
 
 
A PREPRINT - JUNE 3, 2022

updated to ﬁx software bugs without causing a hard fork, or different stakeholders need to be coordinated effectively
and efﬁciently to come to a consensus while still respecting the principle of decentralised decision-making processes.

Blockchain governance refers to structures and processes which ensure that the development and use of blockchain
are compliant with legal regulations and ethical responsibilities [6]. This topic has received great attention as it
is considered essential to improve the trustworthiness and efﬁciency of blockchain. Nonetheless, existing IT/data
governance frameworks and standards can hardly be applied to blockchain, as there is no explicit declaration of a
central source of authority within blockchain. Recently, there are some works that discuss governance structures
for blockchain platforms, either focusing on customised governance methods in permissioned blockchain [7, 8],
or investigating regulations about ﬁnancial sectors [9, 10]. Some studies also propose governance frameworks for
blockchain [8, 11, 12]. However, existing blockchain governance frameworks mainly discuss scattered governance
mechanisms lacking stakeholders and process related linkages, which provide limited guidance to relevant stakeholders
and the broader community who are interested in this topic.

Therefore, in this paper, we present a comprehensive blockchain governance framework that provides an integrated
view of decentralisation level, decision rights, incentives, accountability, ecosystem, legal compliance and ethical
responsibilities. The major contributions of this paper are as follows:

• We propose a blockchain governance framework that categorises the governance structures according to the
decentralisation level of governed blockchains. The framework extensively covers the existing governance
structures.

• The framework provides a systematic mapping of blockchain stakeholders and their respective decision rights,
accountability, and incentives. This mapping can help inform stakeholders and the broader public about the
authority, capability, and responsibility in blockchain governance.

• The framework extends governance to the blockchain ecosystem, which is comprised of four layers: data,
platform, application, and community. We identify a set of governance mechanisms and associate each of
them with the respective stage of each layer’s lifecycle.

• The framework emphasises legal compliance and ethical responsibilities in blockchain governance. Using
practical examples, we analyse the integration of existing regulations with the framework, and discuss the
ethical responsibilities in blockchain governance.

We perform case studies on ﬁve well-known blockchain platforms: Bitcoin, Ethereum, Dash, Tezos, and Hyperledger
Fabric. We apply our framework to these platforms to analyse how they implement governance, and examine whether
our principles are considered in a real-world context. We distinguish similarities and differences across these platforms
and identify current gaps. The results show that our framework is feasible and applicable. In addition, we compare the
proposed framework with nine existing blockchain governance frameworks.

The remainder of this paper is organised as follows. The next section provides a literature review. Section 3 explains our
research methodology. Section 4 presents our blockchain governance framework. Section 5 demonstrates the qualitative
analysis of our proposed framework. Section 6 concludes the paper and outlines future work.

2 Related Work

We reviewed existing governance frameworks and standards, including IT governance [13, 14], data governance [15, 16],
open-source software (OSS) governance [17, 18], platform ecosystem governance [19], and corporate governance [20].
IT governance focuses on how to align information technology with organisational goals in enterprises [13]. Data
governance narrows down the subject of governance to data, speciﬁcally, how organisations evaluate, direct, and
monitor the use of data [16]. OSS governance analyses how a group of volunteers contribute to the peer production of
software [18]. Platform ecosystem governance provides platform-agnostic guidance on how decisions are made about a
platform regarding environmental dynamics [19]. Corporate governance highlights code of conduct to retain the trust of
clients [20].

We found that the decentralisation nature of blockchain differentiates its governance from existing governance frame-
works with the absence of a clear source of authority. For instance, in both IT governance and corporate governance,
there is a clear governance structure describing the allocation of responsibility, capability, and authority within an
organisation. Policies and strategies are always decided by top executives, which embodies the centralisation of power.
Further, governance is realised for the beneﬁt of this particular organisation. Data, open-source software (OSS), and
platform ecosystem governance have a similar situation in that they all involve multiple organisations, and there is a
trusted entity acting as the agent between all relevant organisations.

2

A PREPRINT - JUNE 3, 2022

Figure 1: Overview of the research process.

Compared to the above frameworks, blockchain itself has intrinsic characteristics, such as consensus, incentives,
transparency, and immutability, which could potentially create a situation where they conﬂict with human values (e.g.
privacy, security), necessitating a trade-off analysis when implementing governance. In general, the decentralised
environment gives more power to the community and highlights the notion of democracy. All on-chain transactions are
under the algorithmic governance predeﬁned by the blockchain project team, while other stakeholders can shift the
direction of a blockchain via voting. Since there are no trusted third parties to coordinate the business relationships,
the governance process may involve complex coordination among differential stakeholders. Consequently, reaching
consensus from diverse intentions is considered the key point of blockchain governance. Besides, the codebase of
blockchain is relatively static due to the immutable data structure design. Based on the above factors, any revision to
the blockchain platform code or on-chain historical data will lead to a voting process for proposal acceptance and hard
fork to update the on-chain protocol. Accordingly, the concepts of self-governance [21] and adaptive governance [22]
are consistent with blockchain governance to satisfy the needs of decentralisation and inherent democracy spirit, and
desires for risk management.

Further, there are nine studies that proposed governance frameworks for blockchain. Katina et al. [23] propose seven
interrelated elements (philosophy, theory, axiology, methodology, axiomatic, method and applications) for further
exploration of this topic. Allen and Berg [24] provide a descriptive framework to understand the exogenous and
endogenous governance in blockchain. John and Pam [25] and Pelt et al. [11] both study the on-chain and off-chain
development processes to realise governance. Beck et al. [8] formulate a blockchain governance framework that is
centred on the three dimensions of decision rights, accountability, and incentives adopted from IT governance. Howell
et al. [26] focus on the membership and transacting relationships. Werner et al. [27] develop a taxonomy of platform
governance for blockchain. Hofman et al. [12] propose a high-level analytic framework, regarding six aspects (i.e. why,
who, when, what, where, how) in the governance of blockchain. Tan et al. [28] analyse this research topic from the
perspective of social sciences.

Nevertheless, existing frameworks do not present an extensive view of blockchain governance. Consequently, they can
only provide limited guidance to the community with scattered governance mechanisms. In this paper, we propose a
comprehensive blockchain governance framework, which formulates nine core governance aspects into six high-level
principles, to support a better governance process for the overall blockchain ecosystem.

3 Methodology

This section introduces the methodology of this study. As shown in Fig. 1, this study is conducted through mainly ﬁve
steps. First, a systematic literature review (SLR) was performed following Kitchenham’s guidelines [29] to understand
state-of-the-art of blockchain governance. Secondly, we also reviewed extant governance frameworks and standards, to
analyse the characteristics of blockchain governance. Afterwards, we identiﬁed six high-level governance principles,
and proposed a new blockchain governance framework. Finally, we performed a qualitative analysis to conﬁrm the
feasibility and applicability of our proposed framework.

The SLR consists of four main steps: • keyword search, • selection based on predeﬁned criteria, • backward and
forward snowballing, and • data extraction and synthesis. We collected the literature from ﬁve reference databases:
ACM Digital Library, IEEEXplore, ScienceDirect, SpringerLink, and Google Scholar. 1061 papers were retrieved,
while after the removal of duplicates, and title/abstract screening, there were 75 papers in the initial selection set.

3

Existing governance framework reviewSystematic literature reviewGovernance aspects identificationGovernance framework developmentFramework evaluationIT/Data governance frameworks IT/Data governance frameworks 37 primary studies37 primary studies5 blockchain systems5 blockchain systems9 refined aspects9 refined aspects6 high-levelprinciples6 high-levelprinciplesA PREPRINT - JUNE 3, 2022

We then conducted a full-text screening, and scoped down to 27 papers as the tentative selection. Subsequently, the
snowballing process identiﬁed 10 more papers, and the ﬁnal selection set had 37 papers for data extraction, analysis,
and synthesis. Table 1 illustrates our inclusion/exclusion criteria. The primary studies were analysed with six research
questions (i.e. what, why, where, when, who, and how), which cover core aspects of blockchain governance [6]. The
major ﬁndings of this SLR are as follows:

• Governance is applied for blockchain to address software qualities and human values such as adaptability,
upgradability, security, and fairness. The ultimate goal of preserving these attributes is the prosperity of
blockchain in various application scenarios by improving the trustworthiness of a blockchain platform.

• Blockchain governance can be split up into on-chain and off-chain regarding where governance methods are
enforced. Speciﬁcally, on-chain governance aims at the operations and decisions for a blockchain platform
itself and the stored data, while off-chain governance emphasises collaborations of the blockchain community
in the real world.

• The community consists of different stakeholders who join a blockchain platform and hold the rights for
governance issues. Major stakeholders include the project team, node operators, users, application providers,
and regulators.

• Governance methods can be categorised into process mechanisms and product mechanisms. The former type
supports blockchain development by determining meta-rules for governance, whilst the latter ones are coded
as features and functionalities of blockchain to regulate the behaviour of stakeholders.

Table 1: Selection of Primary Studies in SLR.

Inclusion
criteria

A paper that proposes a solution for the governance of blockchain.

A paper that proposes principles or frameworks for developing governance of blockchain.

Papers that focus on “governance through blockchain” instead of “governance of blockchain”.

Older version of a study that has a more comprehensive version.

Exclusion
criteria

Papers that are not written in English.

Papers that are not accessible.

Survey, review and SLR papers. We do not conduct data extraction or synthesis from these studies as they
are considered the related work of this literature review.

We reviewed extant governance frameworks and speciﬁcations, as discussed in Section 2. We included the literature of
IT governance, data governance, and platform ecosystem governance adhering to a previous work of data governance
for platform ecosystem process management [30], whilst OSS governance [5, 11] was selected based on the primary
studies in our SLR. For corporate governance, VISA was selected as it is often compared to blockchain platforms
regarding ﬁnancial issues.

We identiﬁed nine core aspects of blockchain governance from the literature review, including decentralisation level,
incentive, decision rights, accountability, stakeholder, ecosystem, lifecycle, legal compliance, and ethical responsibility.
The identiﬁed aspects are then formulated into a blockchain governance framework, consisting of six high-level
principles, as follows.

• Principle 1 elucidates different decentralisation levels of blockchains, which is extracted from the research
question “What is blockchain governance?” in our SLR. The decentralisation level determines both the
underlying infrastructure and governance structure of a blockchain.

• Principles 2-4 explore the mapping of incentive, decision rights, accountability and divergent stakeholders.
The former three governance dimensions are extracted from the research question “What is blockchain
governance?”, while blockchain stakeholders are identiﬁed in “Who is involved in blockchain governance”).

• Principle 5 extends governance to the overall blockchain ecosystem with elaborate governance mechanisms and
their expected effects. This principle integrates four research questions from the SLR: “Where is blockchain
governance enforced?” “When is blockchain governance applied?” “How is blockchain governance de-
signed?” “Why is blockchain governance adopted?”

• Principle 6 is extracted from the research question “Why is blockchain governance adopted?” Legal and
ethical responsibilities represent the essential guidelines for human behaviours in the blockchain ecosystem.

4

A PREPRINT - JUNE 3, 2022

We demonstrate a qualitative analysis of the proposed framework. We apply the framework to ﬁve blockchain platforms
as case studies, to conﬁrm its feasibility and applicability. The selected blockchain platforms are Bitcoin, Ethereum,
Dash, Tezos and Hyperledger Fabric. Bitcoin and Ethereum are included regarding their market values and active users,
while Dash and Tezos blockchain are chosen because they have representative novel governance structures. Speciﬁcally,
Dash introduces the concept of “masternodes”, and Tezos enables smooth on-chain protocol replacement instead of hard
fork. Hyperledger Fabric is a representative case of permissioned public blockchains. Data collection was performed on
the ofﬁcial websites and documents of these ﬁve blockchains. We analysed the collected data using our framework
design, to scrutinise the implementation of governance in different blockchain platforms. Afterwards, we compare nine
existing blockchain governance frameworks with our framework, which are retrieved from our previous SLR [6] and
continuing literature review. We use identiﬁed governance aspects as the comparison factors.

4 Blockchain Governance Framework

In this section, we present a framework to provide guidance for all relevant stakeholders, to support a better governance
process, especially for practitioners as the discussion involves technical aspects of blockchain-based architectures and
applications. The overview of our blockchain governance framework is illustrated in Fig. 2, which consists of six
principles.

4.1 Principle 1: Consider the level of decentralisation

Blockchain platforms can be classiﬁed into three types to meet different requirements. Different types of blockchain
may have a divergent focus on certain attributes, e.g., performance, ﬂexibility. These types also reﬂect the different
levels of decentralisation, and affect the governance structure regarding allocation of decision rights, accountability, and
incentives. The essential classiﬁcation criteria include permission of joining a blockchain, and the extent to which users
are allowed to participate in the operation of a blockchain. They both lead to differences among three blockchain types,
such as cost efﬁciency, performance, ﬂexibility, etc. Hereby, “operation” denotes services a blockchain provides (e.g.
generating and reading transactions), and contributions to the use of blockchain (e.g. the capability of installing a full
node).

Permissioned private blockchain. Permissioned private blockchains have the lowest level of decentralisation among
the three types. The access and operation of a permissioned private blockchain are both restricted to certain entities. This
type of blockchain platform has an explicit single source of authority, and is deployed within an institute/organisation.
Hence, there is a clear hierarchy structure between stakeholders in blockchain, which should align with the off-chain
corporate structure. All involved individuals are identiﬁable and have ﬁxed user privileges. Compared to the other two
types, governance of permissioned private blockchains is more ﬂexible and requires less effort to orchestrate decisions
from different stakeholders, as every choice directing the blockchain is made by entities on the top of interior hierarchy.

Permissioned public blockchain. Permissioned public blockchains only require approval for participation, while
operation-related rights are open to the participants. The applicable business context of this type of blockchain is usually
a consortium of several organisations maintaining a cooperative relationship. Identity veriﬁcation in permissioned
public blockchains is similar to permissioned private ones. The governance structure is comprised of the hybrid of
multiple authorities, each of which may make decisions for its own organisational beneﬁts. Consequently, governance
in this type of blockchain usually focuses on the coordination of involved authorities for collective goals.

Permissionless public blockchain. In permissionless public blockchains, the entries and operations are both open to
entities, as there are no preset privileged stakeholders. Such openness, however, may result in higher complexity of
governance in terms of two main aspects: 1) Since each individual is recognised via on-chain pseudonymous addresses
without real-world identiﬁcation, stakeholders may be unwilling to bear the responsibility of making decisions; 2)
Stakeholders may need to go through a cumbersome negotiation process to reach an agreement, as everyone focuses
more on personal interests, which may cause conﬂicts in decision-making processes. Consequently, permissionless
public blockchains usually improve the governance participation rate by incentives, and exploit consensus mechanisms
for decision ﬁnalisation.

4.2 Principle 2: Provide stakeholders aligning incentives to achieve consensus

The second principle is to be addressed to a wide range of blockchain stakeholders. There are collective areas aligning
diverse stakeholder objectives, giving incentives wide applicability. In blockchain governance, incentives are generalised
to factors that may inﬂuence stakeholders’ behaviours. The governance structure needs to provide incentive mechanisms
to drive desirable behaviours (e.g., participation in governance), and resolve conﬂicts between stakeholders (e.g.,
ﬁnalising a decision), which usually end up with the ﬁnding of a Schelling point. In permissionless public blockchains,

5

A PREPRINT - JUNE 3, 2022

Figure 2: Blockchain governance framework.

incentive mechanisms may incorporate game theory to align different directions of blockchain governance. In this case,
incentives are mostly rewarded on-chain, hence, can be traced by any other stakeholder. Meanwhile, incentives may be
distributed off-chain according to institutional rules preset by the top executives in permissioned private blockchains, or
based on commercial agreements among the multiple authorities in permissioned public blockchains.

6

Principle 1: Consider the level of decentralisationPrinciple 2: Provide stakeholders aligning incentives to achieve consensusPrinciple 4: Support role-based accountability through both institutional and technical meansPrinciple 3: Enable transparent decision process for trustPrinciple 5: Extend to ecosystem-level governancePrinciple 6: Manage legal compliance and ethical responsibilityBlockchain stakeholdersProject teamNode operatorUser Application providerRegulator Permissioned private blockchainPermissioned public blockchainPermissionless public blockchain• Governing structure: A single source of authority.• Decentralisation level: Low.• Governing structure: A consortium of multiple authorities.• Decentralisation level: Medium.• Governing structure: No clear authority.• Decentralisation level: High.Ethical  principles and guidelinesLegal regulationsGenerationBroadcastValidationConfirmationStorage Blockchain development lifecycleOperationImplementationPlanningAnalysis DesignTestingTerminationApplication development lifecycleOperationImplementationPlanningAnalysis DesignTestingTerminationEstablishmentGrowth Separation TerminationTransaction (data) lifecycleBlockchain community lifecycleBenevolent dictatorshipOnboarding & exit rulesFormal channelsAccountable access controlSuitability analysisIndustry specificationsImprovement proposalsConflict resolutionForking Transaction filterMainnet simulationFair validator selectionValid chain determinationConsensus mechanismIncentive mechanismReverse by hard forkRemoval Node managementTable 2: Distribution of 3 governance dimensions over blockchain stakeholders for Principles 2-4.

Stakeholders Decision rights

Accountability

Incentives

A PREPRINT - JUNE 3, 2022

Platform development:

Institutional means:

Project
team

Node
operator

Blockchain infrastructure set-

ting;

Consensus mechanism;
Incentive mechanism;

Project management:

Conﬂict resolution rules;
Formal communication chan-

nel;

Onboarding & exit rules;
Risk management.

Replica storage;
Block validation;
Improvement proposal voting;
Forking (instance installation).

User

Transaction submission;
Improvement proposal voting.

Real-world identity veriﬁcation;
Traceable code contributors;
Standardised documentation;

Technical means:

Address-based on-chain identity;
Ledger-enabled operation logs.

Technical means:

Address-based on-chain identity;
Ledger-enabled operation logs;

Institutional means:

Real-world identity veriﬁcation.

Technical means:

Address-based on-chain identity;
Ledger-enabled operation logs;

Institutional means:

Real-world identity veriﬁcation.

Application
provider

Blockchain adoption;
Improvement proposal voting.
Onboarding & exit rules.

Institutional means:

Real-world identity veriﬁcation;
Commercial agreement.

Regulator

Risk assessment & measurement:

Regulatory policy;
Audit trail.

Institutional means:
Legal regulation;
Real-world identity veriﬁcation;

Technical means:

Address-based on-chain identity;
Ledger-enabled operation logs.

Increase of market val-
ues;
Block rewards;
Transaction fees;
Service fees.

Block rewards;
Transaction fees.

Achievement of per-
sonal goals:

Personal investment;
On-chain trading;
Data storage.

Increase of market val-
ues;
Service fees.

Taxes and fees.

We conclude the incentives of different stakeholders in Table 2. In general, monetary incentives are straightforward
to reward stakeholders in governance-related issues. The project team and application providers can beneﬁt from the
increase of market values (e.g., increase of cryptocurrency price), and service fees. Node operators receive block rewards
and transaction fees according to predeﬁned incentive mechanisms for their contributions to blockchain operation,
while the project team may also obtain a certain proportion as compensation. Incentives of blockchain users mainly
come from their intentions to use blockchain and applications, including personal investment, on-chain trading, and
data storage. Finally, regulators collect taxes and charge for regulation services (e.g., audit).

4.3 Principle 3: Enable transparent decision process for trust

The decentralisation nature of blockchain drives the need for collective decisions on governance issues. Decision-
makings rely on the authorities, responsibilities, and capabilities of relevant stakeholders. Notice that a stakeholder’s role
may change throughout the lifecycle of a blockchain, which implies the transition of decision rights. We summarised
the decision rights of blockchain stakeholders in Table 2.

The project team of a blockchain mainly comprises developers and the foundation, for technical and monetary support
respectively. Most governance-related decisions for a blockchain platform are made by developers. Speciﬁcally,
developers’ decisions determine a series of on-chain and off-chain meta-rules for both blockchain platforms and
communities. On-chain decisions include the setting of blockchain infrastructure (e.g., block size and interval), and
design of consensus and incentive mechanisms, which can regulate the behaviours of other stakeholders when using
blockchain. Off-chain decisions refer to the implementation of code, establishment of conﬂict resolution rules, formal
communication channel, and onboarding and exit rules for the whole community. In addition, blockchain governance
should consider risks such as software bugs in coding, cyber attacks in operation, breach of commercial contracts,

7

A PREPRINT - JUNE 3, 2022

etc. Risk management in blockchain is achieved by platform update and evolution, which the involves approval of
improvement proposals, and implementation of new features, also known as forking.

Node operators hold either local full nodes to maintain all historical ledger contents, or light nodes with compressed
information like block header. Meanwhile, an operator can become block validators, or special node operators who
are granted rights to make improvement proposals for more contributions. As nodes are the fundamental elements to
construct a blockchain, operators are the key roles to ﬁnalise forking by choosing and installing blockchain instances of
a speciﬁc version.

Users interact with blockchain services via submitting transactions to achieve personal goals. When encountering an
abnormal function/service, a user can report to the project team for improvements, while other users can then join the
voting of proposed solutions.

Application providers have the right to choose which blockchain platform to be adopted in their existing workﬂow
regarding business targets. They can contact the project team to exchange domain knowledge and requirements for
blockchain adaptation, which may be raised in the form of an improvement proposal. Further, an application may have
its own setting for onboarding and exit rules, which should be decided by providers.

Regulators mainly refer to governments and third-party auditors, who are responsible for ensuring the compliance of
laws and ethics. The assessment and mitigation of corresponding risks rely on the enactment of regulatory policies and
audit trails in blockchain ecosystem.

Ensuring the transparency of decision-making processes is critical in blockchain governance for stakeholders to oversee
whether decisions are reasonable, accordingly, to gain trust from the whole community. When decisions are made
on-chain, blockchain itself can record individuals’ choices and the eventual outcome. This can usually be found in
permissionless blockchains, where decision rights are allocated to different stakeholders for fairness and democracy in a
highly decentralised environment. Off-chain decision-makings should be conducted in formal channels which are open
to relevant stakeholders. Note that the clear source of authority may integrate multiple roles and corresponding decision
rights into certain individuals in a permissioned context where signiﬁcant decisions are usually made by blockchain
deployers.

4.4 Principle 4: Establish role-based accountability through both institutional and technical means

Accountability in blockchain governance refers to the identiﬁability and answerability of stakeholders for their decisions.
Accountability should be enforced in an explicit way to manifest the allocation of stakeholders’ responsibilities and
capabilities. Failure on this governance dimension may result in the abuse of power and eventually, the collapse of the
entire blockchain system due to the risk of centralisation.

Accountability for blockchain governance can be established via both institutional and technical manners. Institutional
accountability is applicable to conventional governance structures in a blockchain, which requires standardised
documentation to report the off-chain accountability process. Technical implementation of accountability is embedded
in the distributed ledger, providing evidence for on-chain accountability by recording both data and operations. In
comparison with off-chain accountability, the on-chain process is still less mature and relies on how developers design
the blockchain platform to reduce risks and uncertainties.

Accountability is also dependent on the decentralisation level of a blockchain. In permissioned blockchains, it is
compulsory to conduct identity veriﬁcation for entities to join the blockchain. Hence, it does not cost much effort to
recognise accountable individuals for certain events or operations. By contrast, participants identify themselves via
pseudonymous accounts in permissionless blockchains, which may increase the uncertainties of ﬁnding responsible
entities and hence, hinder the accountability process.

As shown in Table 2, the accountability process of the project team, application provider, and regulator relies more
on institutional means, while technical means are more important for node operator and user as they are usually
identiﬁed via on-chain addresses. In general, institutional means of accountability enables an effective and efﬁcient
decision-making process where the source of authority is clear. Relevant stakeholders should be considerate when
making governance decisions, otherwise, they could be criticised and punished immediately for their neglect of duty,
which may further affect real-world business or individual reputation. For different stakeholders, institutional means
may vary. For instance, the accountability of the project team relates to institutional means regarding the visibility and
accessibility of source code development to monitor contributors. While for application providers, institutional means
are dependent on their organisational code of conduct. However, technical means of accountability do not ensure such a
rigorous decision-making process as the cost of violation may be low. A malicious node operator may attempt to forge
and broadcast invalid blocks to the network. This can be traced by on-chain ledger logs to impose a ﬁtting penalty such

8

A PREPRINT - JUNE 3, 2022

as blacklisting the blockchain account. Nevertheless, the accountable entity can make more attacks over and over again
via other blockchain accounts.

4.5 Principle 5: Support ecosystem-level governance

The governance of blockchain does not locate in merely the platform itself, but needs to support a broader environment
of the overall ecosystem. Platform is the base of blockchain ecosystem, which includes underlying on-chain data, the
superstructure of blockchain-based application systems, and the whole community comprising of different stakeholders.
We illustrate the main phases in the lifecycle of each layer in Fig. 2.

Platform layer. Platform is both the base and target of governance structure for blockchain ecosystem. All governance-
related design and tactics will eventually take effect in this layer. We adopt the software development process [31] to
describe different phases of this layer.

During the initial planning and analysis stages of a blockchain platform, business context is taken into consideration to
determine the blockchain type. Later in the design phase, the blockchain architecture with all on-chain self-governance
features is constructed (e.g., consensus and incentive mechanisms), along with the distribution of stakeholders’ decision
rights, accountability, and incentives. When developing the platform, management of source code should be decided
(e.g., open or closed source), while the testing environment needs to be separated from the mainnet to avoid inﬂuencing
the actual business process. When a blockchain platform is ofﬁcially in use, all on-chain issues need to adhere to
established mechanisms of previous phases. Note that the management of nodes is speciﬁed in Principles 2-4 from the
perspective of node operators.

If a blockchain platform needs updates or adjustments within a risk management process, the governance structure
in permissioned blockchains can make quick responses such as forking or protocol replacement. In the case of
permissionless blockchains, an improvement proposal is created, which starts a new epoch of development process
from the planning phase. Such upgrades and evolutions require a series of formalised development procedures. An
improvement proposal should be analysed by eligible stakeholders, with proper conﬂict resolution measures, usually
voting, for its acceptance or rejection. The accepted ones are then codiﬁed and integrated into source code, and released
as new versions via forking. This iteration of blockchain upgrades embodies an adaptive governance process to manage
and mitigate risks in blockchain operation. Finally, blockchain platforms may be terminated for certain reasons. At
this point, blockchain governance focuses on coordination among stakeholders about the transfer or redistribution of
on-chain assets and resources, which requires explicit descriptions and explanations of decisions to guide the whole
process.

Additionally, blockchain governance structures should deﬁne inter-system interoperation policies between different
platforms regarding the decentralisation level. This will reﬂect in the data ﬂow, integration of business process, and even
adjustment of decision rights process. For instance, if two permissionless blockchain platforms have interoperations, the
extent of visible and shared distributed ledger contents, transition of transaction format, and compatibility of on-chain
programmability (i.e. smart contracts) should all be scrutinised.

Data layer. In blockchain, data governance is carried out along with the transaction lifecycle. When designing a
blockchain platform, on-chain data governance is covered in the design phase, for instance, a standardised format to
ensure transaction quality, access policies for security and privacy, and sharding technique for scalability. During the
operation of a blockchain platform, transactions are generated and broadcast when users send data to blockchain. Insofar,
a ﬁlter is utilised to automatically discard transactions that do not meet the uniﬁed requirements (e.g., transaction format,
data contents). Transactions are then kept in nodes’ local memory pool waiting for validation. After being validated and
conﬁrmed, data is then ofﬁcially stored in blockchain. Hereby, conﬁrmation can resolve conﬂicts that there may be
several blocks generated at the same time, which requires subsequent blocks to conﬁrm the workload of validation.
The longest chain is viewed as the valid one. Note that pending transactions may be outdated and then automatically
removed from the pool.

The emphasis on data governance during blockchain operation is placed on accountable access control of transactions.
Capabilities of writing/reading data to/from blockchain, as well as validating transactions, are assigned to speciﬁc
stakeholders considering the deployed blockchain type. For instance, in permissioned blockchains, validators are often
appointed by authorities, while novel consensus mechanisms are designed and implemented to impartially elect the
validator each round in permissionless blockchains. Changes of data states are logged by blockchain transactions, which
enables an on-chain accountability process regarding all decentralisation levels. However, reading transparent data
usually leaves no trace to blockchain history as no transaction is sent, which may hinder the identiﬁcation of individuals.
All on-chain operations should respect the rights of data subjects that illegal data need to be removed from blockchain
by conducting a hard fork and reversing historical transactions. Finally, when a blockchain is terminated, all on-chain
data will be destroyed under predeﬁned guidance.

9

A PREPRINT - JUNE 3, 2022

Application layer. Blockchain governance also covers the utilisation of blockchain as a component in software
application systems. A blockchain-based application may have a close connection to the blockchain platform itself and
consequently, its development process almost synchronises with the blockchain development process. This situation is
usually found in blockchain-based decentralised ﬁnance (DeFi). Another situation is that when a blockchain platform is
in operation, further investment is made to build up DApps over the platform. Application providers need to conduct
suitability analysis regarding domain knowledge, and check whether adopting blockchain is compliant with industry
standards and regulations during initial procedures. Afterwards, implementation and testing rely on the APIs and
testnet provided by the blockchain project team. When operating the application, changes to industry regulations and
speciﬁcations may generate new requirements. which in turn leads to upgrades of the underlying blockchain platform.
Finally, an application may fail, and then needs to remove its data from blockchain and transfer resources based on the
instructions of the project team or previous contractual agreements.

Community layer. The start of blockchain platform development indicates the establishment of corresponding off-chain
community. In the early stages, the project team is considered the benevolent dictator as there are few other stakeholders.
The project team can persuade them about certain decisions with its expertise. When a blockchain platform is ofﬁcially
in use, the community becomes larger with the participation of differential stakeholders, who will join the consequent
decision-making processes. Along with the maturity of a blockchain platform, the off-chain community is gradually
specialised and then divided into different groups regarding their roles and decision rights [32].

In particular, the project team and application providers may exist in the form of a company respectively. Accordingly,
the internal governance of these organisations can refer to existing speciﬁcations. Another signiﬁcant facet is the training
of blockchain practitioners, which informs the capability development and growth in the future workforce. Ensuring
they have adequate expertise, for the design and implementation of blockchain platforms and applications to avoid
ﬂaws, can gain more trust from other stakeholders. Further, blockchain governance highlights off-chain collaboration
among different stakeholders. In permissioned blockchains, there is a systematic process to communicate in the
constitutional hierarchy. By contrast, permissionless blockchains maintain explicit off-chain governance within the
community, which implies the need for formal communication channels (e.g., maillist, online forum) to transparentise
signiﬁcant decision-makings (e.g., improvement proposal). Finally, termination of community is along with the collapse
of blockchain platforms, where proper coordination of stakeholders is needed to rearrange off-chain resources and
assets.

4.6 Principle 6: Manage legal compliance and ethical responsibility

The ﬁnal principle ensures that all governance-related decisions and processes conform to existing legal regulations and
ethical responsibilities. Law is usually considered to set the minimum standards of human behaviours. Ensuring legal
compliance depends on where blockchain platforms and applications are launched and deployed, and how regulators
(e.g. governmental institutions) enact policies to safeguard the blockchain development process and shape the whole
ecosystem against risks and uncertainties. Examples include the regulation and standards in Australia in terms of digital
identity, data provenance, and taxation [33]. The European Commission proposed new law on crypto-assets and plan
blockchain regulatory sandbox [34]. In addition to blockchain-speciﬁc laws, other general regulations should also be
considered, for instance, the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) speciﬁes the “Right to Be Forgotten” [35] to
protect personally identiﬁable information when managing on-chain data. Another issue is the review of data contents
before a transaction is ofﬁcially included in a block, to ensure data quality and avoid malicious information on-chain,
such as child pornography. If such information is already stored on blockchain, a hard fork is required to reverse the
transaction history.

Ethical responsibilities denote the maximum standards of human behaviours. Promote and encourage ethical principles
and guidelines in blockchain governance can help uphold and protect human values, and the whole ecosystem will
be more responsible and trustworthy. For instance, blockchain technology is usually criticised for energy-intensive
platforms and applications, especially the ones applying the Proof of Work (PoW) consensus mechanism. Consequently,
how to reduce energy consumption and beneﬁt the environment is regarded as a signiﬁcant governance topic. Other than
environmental well-being, ethical responsibilities also involve consideration of human values from the perspective of
software engineering, such as privacy, transparency, integrity, etc [36]. Embedding ethical responsibilities in blockchain
governance is hard to guarantee, and requires the awareness of practitioners over such values and overall community
culture.

5 Qualitative Analysis

In this section, we present a qualitative analysis of the proposed framework via case studies on extant blockchain
platforms, and comparison with existing blockchain governance frameworks.

10

A PREPRINT - JUNE 3, 2022

Figure 3: Case study results. The framework is feasible as all principles are considered in real-world context, and
applicable to different blockchain platforms.

5.1 Case Study

The purpose of case studies is to understand whether and how blockchain governance is implemented in a real-world
context, while also conﬁrming that our proposed framework is feasible and applicable. Speciﬁcally, feasibility refers
to whether the principles in our framework solve blockchain governance problems, and applicability implies that the
framework can be applied to different blockchain platforms to analyse their governance structures.

We selected ﬁve blockchain platforms for case studies: Bitcoin, Ethereum, Dash, Tezos, and Hyperledger Fabric. Bitcoin
and Ethereum are the two most famous blockchain platforms around the globe, Dash and Tezos are included as they
are representative of novel governance structures, whilst Hyperledger Fabric is selected as it provides a permissioned
blockchain platform for a wide range of industry applications. We collected and analysed their implementation of
governance from open ofﬁcial websites and documents (e.g., white paper, yellow paper). The rest of this section
illustrates the results of case studies, which are summarised in Fig. 3.

Analysis of Principle 1. For the ﬁrst principle, Bitcoin, Ethereum, Dash and Tezos are all permissionless public
blockchains, and have a close connection to the DeFi ﬁeld. In their white papers, the project team is the primary
governing role to make decisions, whilst other stakeholders are also involved in governance issues, especially node
operators. Hyperledger Fabric offers permissioned public blockchain solutions in enterprise contexts. Its project team
only provides technical support to the underlying blockchain technology, while organisations that deploy Hyperledger
Fabric instances are the authorities for governance-related decision-makings.

Analysis of Principle 2. In terms of providing incentives, the four permissionless platforms mainly discuss the
investment income of users, and rewards to both node operators for their contributions to participate in the consensus
mechanism, and the project team as funds for future development. However, there is a narrow discussion about

11

BitcoinEthereumDashTezosHyperledger FabricPermissionless publicPermissionless publicPermissionless publicPermissionless publicPermissioned publicProject teamContribution creditsContribution compensationsMining rewardsN/ADeployment and maintenancefeesNodeoperatorMining rewards, bannedaccountMining rewardsMining rewards, QuorumsystemMining rewards, bondsBusiness revenuesUserInvestment in Bitcoin tokenInvestment in Ether tokenInvestment in Dash tokenInvestment in Tezos tokenBusiness revenuesApplicationproviderN/AN/AN/AN/ABusiness revenuesRegulatorTaxesAudit feesTaxesN/AAudit feesProject teamBlockchain platform, off-chain communityBlockchain platform, off-chaincommunityBlockchain platform, off-chain communityBlockchain platform, off-chain communityBlockchain platform,consultation with applicationprovidersNodeoperatorBlockchain replica, blockvalidationBlockchain replica, blockvalidationBlockchain replica, blockvalidation, masternodeBlockchain replica, blockvalidationBlockchain replica, blockvalidationUserOn-chain service interactionOn-chain service interactionOn-chain service interactionOn-chain service interactionOn-chain service interactionApplicationproviderN/AN/AN/AN/ABlockchain adoption anddeploymentRegulatorRegulated financial systemAuditRegulated financial systemDApp regulationAuditInstitutionalmeansGithub commit history,institution structureGithub commit history,institution structureGithub commit history,institution structureGithub commit history,institution structureGithub commit history, sign-offstatement, institution structure,identity verificationTechnicalmeansOn-chain operation logsOn-chain operation logsOn-chain operation logs,Proof of ServiceOn-chain operation logsOn-chain operation logsData layerFormat check, multi-signature, CoinJoin, non-persistent memory, Merkletree, Bloom filterFormat check, encryption,Merkle tree, Proof of Access,sharding, transaction reversalFormat check, transaction setFormat check, zero-knowledge proofEndorsement policy, versioningcheck, private data collectionPlatform layerProof of Work, BitcoinImprovement Proposal, hardforkProof of Work, Proof of State,Ethereum ImprovementProposal, carbonvote, hardfork, social contractProof of Work, governancemessage, Dash ImprovementProposal, masternodenetworkProof of Stake, self-amendmentPluggable consensus protocol,endorsement policy, codesecurity scans, regularcontributors meetingApplicationlayerDevelopment tutorial, APIs,testnetDevelopment tutorial, APIs,testnet, regulatorymechanismsDevelopment tutorial, APIs,testnetDevelopment tutorial, APIs,testnet, DApp regulationDevelopment tutorial, APIs,testnet, multiple signatures,automated check, endorsementpolicyCommunitylayerFormal communicationchannel, benevolent dictatorFormal communicationchannel, benevolent dictatorFormal communicationchannelFormal communicationchannel, benevolent dictatorFormal communication channel,Hyperledger FoundationCharter, code of conductLegalcomplianceTax liability, restricted areasKnown scamsBanking Secrecy Act, Anti-Money Laundering, KnowYour Customer regulations,known scamsDApp regulationData-sharing regulations,industry-specific regulations,intellectual property,commercial agreements, localand international lawEthicalresponsibilityTransparency, data privacyand integrityTransparency, data privacyand integrity, environmentalwellbeingTransparency, data privacyand integrityTransparency, data privacyand integrityData privacy and integrity, trustPrinciple 5: Supportecosystem-levelgovernancePrinciple 6: Managelegal compliance andethical responsibilityGovernance principlePrinciple 3: Enabletransparent decisionprocess for trustPrinciple 1: Consider the level ofdecentralisationPrinciple 2: Providestakeholders aligningincentives to achieveconsensusPrinciple 4: Establishrole-basedaccountability throughboth institutional andtechnical meansA PREPRINT - JUNE 3, 2022

application providers’ incentives from the perspective of governance. The following gives a detailed distribution of
incentives in these blockchains.

In Bitcoin, software release notes of its ofﬁcial client, Bitcoin Core, record all contributors [37]. Transaction fees and
mining rewards (i.e. new bitcoin tokens) are given to the corresponding validator (aka. miner) [1]. Node operators may
be banned for a particular time period (by default 24 hours) if they send false information, as a waste of bandwidth and
computing resources [38]. In Ethereum, a certain proportion of the total amount sold, which is about 60 million ethers,
is distributed to compensate early contributors. Ethereum applies a similar incentive mechanism as Bitcoin: transaction
fees and new ether tokens are both rewarded to validators [39]. In Dash, mining rewards are divided into three pieces:
validators and masternodes get 45% respectively, while the remaining 10% is to fund improvement proposals [40].
Moreover, Dash implements a Quorum system in which a node will be deactivated after six violations [41]. In Tezos
blockchain, both block validators and endorsers (who conﬁrm a block via signature) are incentivised by mining rewards
along with a bond. Validators can receive the bond after a security cycle (i.e. one year). The bond will be forfeited if
violations in their blocks are found (e.g. double signing). Inactive Tezos addresses are not allowed to validate blocks or
vote for improvement proposals until they are reactivated [42]. In addition, Bitcoin and Dash both mention taxes for
regulators [43, 44], while Ethereum pays for audit services [45].

On the contrary, Hyperledger Fabric does not have a native cryptocurrency distribution, consequently, incentives in this
blockchain platform refer to conventional business revenues. The project team are paid by application providers when
IBM Cloud is utilised to deploy and maintain blockchain instances [46], and the team will pay for audit services [47].
Application providers, node operators and users of a Hyperledger Fabric instance belong to different organisations. These
organisations establish business connections where blockchain is adopted. Hence, incentives of these stakeholders are
based on institutional governance within a single organisation, or business agreements between multiple organisations.

Analysis of Principle 3. The analysis of decision rights is dominantly about the project team, node operators, users
and regulators. First, the project team is in charge of the design, development, and management of both the blockchain
platform and off-chain community. In particular, the Hyperledger fabric project team provides consultation of blockchain
services to their clients (i.e., application providers) [48]. Secondly, node operators hold blockchain replicas locally,
and block validators are responsible for the validation and conﬁrmation of blocks. Dash introduces the concept of
“masternodes”, who provide services to ensure the availability of the Dash blockchain [41]. They are able to vote
on governance and funding proposals. Thirdly, users submit transactions to use on-chains services. They can also
participate in governance decision-makings. For instance, Ethereum users have cast votes for forking [49]. Finally,
Bitcoin and Dash acknowledge that governments are making efforts to integrate blockchain platforms into formal
and regulated ﬁnancial systems [43, 44]. Ethereum and Hyperledger Fabric select third-party authorities to perform
audits [45, 47]. Tezos mentions regulators for DApps [50]. All the above descriptions of decision rights and decision-
making processes can be found on ofﬁcial websites and documents to gain the trust of existing and possible stakeholders.
However, limited information is provided about how application providers are involved in governance decisions, except
for Hyperledger Fabric. In Hyperledger Fabric, application providers are signiﬁcant for deciding whether to adopt
blockchain technology, and also maintaining an off-chain community. Especially, they need to consider the actual
business problems, overall ecosystem, business and governance model, and also legal issues before deployment [51].

Analysis of Principle 4. All selected blockchain platforms utilise both institutional and technical means for the
accountability process. Institutional means include commit history in Github to locate the exact contributor on a
speciﬁc update, and internal governance within the project team, as they all provide the respective institution structure
on ofﬁcial websites. Technical means mainly rely on blockchain addresses of participants, and operation logs in the
transaction information. Particularly, Dash develops a Proof of Service scoring system to recognise the contributions
of masternodes [52]. Nevertheless, in the four permissionless public blockchains, it is still hard to identify on-chain
participants for real-world accountability. Further investigation is required to analyse trade-offs between accountability
and privacy. While in Hyperledger Fabric, transacting entities are not anonymous, all involved organisations and their
employees are identiﬁed by a Certiﬁcate Authority associated with each organisation [53].

Analysis of Principle 5. The results of Principle 5 are analysed regarding the four different layers as follows.

Data layer: When submitting transactions, all blockchain platforms ﬁlter transactions that any included ﬁeld violating
the standard format or required software version will result in errors, and neither be accepted, broadcast, nor validated.
Bitcoin allows multi-signature feature that a transaction is sent with the approval of a set of users [54]. Further, it also
enables “CoinJoin” which aggregates the operations of several users into a single transaction [38]. Ethereum speciﬁes
oracle services of sending data to blockchain [55].

After generation, transactions are kept in a pending pool for validation. Bitcoin states that Bitcoin Core clients keep
pending transactions in non-persistent memory [38]. If a node is shut down, the memory pool will be lost. While
in Dash, masternodes are randomly selected to relay the inputs, outputs and signatures of transaction sets [41]. A

12

A PREPRINT - JUNE 3, 2022

transaction set collects multiple transactions of the same user, but the selected masternode does not know the exact
on-chain identity. In a Hyperledger Fabric instance, a transaction needs to be endorsed by appointed nodes before the
ordering service node packages transactions into blocks [53].

After validation, full node operators take the responsibility of storing the whole transaction history, while light nodes
provide auxiliary transaction veriﬁcation services by recording only block headers. Bitcoin implements Merkle tree and
Bloom ﬁlter to test the membership of elements [38], which can achieve data compression in light nodes. Ethereum
also splits desired data into blocks with encryption techniques, and then builds up a Merkle tree [39]. Arweave’s Proof
of Access is applied to test whether a node maintains both the most recent and randomly past block [55]. Tezos utilises
indexers to achieve a quick fetch of blockchain data [56]. In addition, the current upgrade of Ethereum will create
new chains as shards for data storage and improve transaction throughput [57]. Tezos is investigating zero-knowledge
proof to ensure data privacy [58]. Hyperledger Fabric allows users to send private data, where original contents are
transferred during the endorsement process, and the respective hash values are stored in blocks [53]. When data is
stored in blocks, the accessibility is set via on-chain smart contracts. Nevertheless, the removal of on-chain data is not
explicitly covered, except that Ethereum mentioned a hard fork was conducted to solve the DAO attack, which reversed
transactions within a speciﬁc time period [59].

Platform layer: The critical difference of governance in planning, analysis and design phases is embodied in the
choice of consensus mechanisms. Currently, Bitcoin, Ethereum and Dash all implement Proof of Work, while Tezos
deploys Proof of Stake (PoS). However, Ethereum is undergoing an upgrade from PoW to PoS. Tezos validators need to
hold a minimum of 8000 XTZ tokens [60] while Ethereum’s future PoS requires 32 ETH tokens [57]. Although the
validator selection in Dash relies on PoW, becoming a masternode has a PoS-style demand for holding at least 1000
Dash tokens [52]. Hyperledger Fabric supports pluggable consensus protocols which can be customised according to
application providers’ requirements [53]. Raft is recommended by the Hyperledger Fabric project team where a “leader
and follower” scheme is implemented. Note that block validators (aka. ordering service nodes) in Fabric instances are
assigned by authorities instead of competed as in permissionless blockchains. In terms of platform implementation,
Github is commonly leveraged to manage source code in these platforms, which can provide commit history to assist
the off-chain accountability process.

Upgrading blockchain platforms require a complete process of submitting improvement proposal, analysis and conﬂict
resolution via voting, and implementation of code. Ethereum adopts “Carbonvote”, which means stakeholders’ votes
are calculated according to their owned ether tokens [49]. In Dash, speciﬁc on-chain governance messages contain the
proposals and corresponding votes. The acceptance of a proposal needs the approval of at least 10% of the masternode
network [61]. Improvements in Tezos are grouped into ﬁve periods: proposal, exploration vote, cooldown, promotion
vote, and adoption, each phase lasts for about 14 days [62]. When releasing updated code, accepted proposals are
implemented via a hard fork in Bitcoin and Ethereum as they are less ﬂexible, while the other two permissionless
platforms have smoother transitions between different versions. Dash integrates updated code into the current platform
but does not immediately active new features, until more than 80% of participants update their clients [61]. Tezos’s on-
chain protocol has two parameters for version control, which can conveniently enable accepted proposals [42]. Upgrades
in Hyperledger Fabric need to contemplate both each deployed instance and the overall platform. If an application
provider intends to change the settings of a Fabric instance, it needs to generate a new conﬁguration ﬁle, which requires
signatures from other organisations in the same instance [53]. For upgrading the overall Hyperledger Fabric platform,
regular issues such as bug ﬁxes and documentation improvements are accomplished via the normal GitHub pull request
workﬂow, while major upgrades require consensus from the broader community [63]. As Hyperledger Fabric does not
implement an inherent token distribution or universal blockchain instance, such decisions are ﬁnalised via off-chain
approaches. For instance, contributors meetings are held to plan and review release progress, and discuss future
directions [53].

Regarding the termination of blockchain, Ethereum proposes the concept of “social contract”, in which entities with a
certain quantity of ethers can develop a candidate version of Ethereum [39]. The Hyperledger Foundation speciﬁes
a project’s lifecycle, which includes “deprecated” and “end of life” [64]. Project maintainers should cast vote(s) on
the deprecation proposal, and the Hyperledger Technical Steering Committee determines whether to stop supporting a
project.

Application layer: The intrinsic DeFi background fertilises cryptocurrency-related applications with different client
software and exchanges in permissionless public blockchains. In addition, diverse DApps are built up based on all
selected platforms. They all provide tutorials and APIs for DApp development to practitioners. Testnet can be deployed
to run new functionalities, avoiding negative inﬂuences on real-world business processes. In particular, Ethereum notes
that it does not attempt to limit its use in particular ﬁelds, while regulatory mechanisms should be designed to prevent
harm [39]. Hyperledger Fabric enables a smart-contract level endorsement policy, which speciﬁes nodes from certain
organisations need to validate transactions related to particular smart contracts [53].

13

A PREPRINT - JUNE 3, 2022

Community layer: There are no speciﬁc onboarding or exit rules for permissionless blockchains, anyone can join or
leave at any moment. The separation of community is based on stakeholders’ different expertise and spotlights on
the blockchain platform or applications. Every platform provides formal communication channels, such as online
blogs, discussion forums (e.g., Stack Overﬂow) and social media, and also ofﬂine workshops and meetings. Regarding
Hyperledger Fabric instances, each organisation has its own structure for governance and management of employees.
In the Hyperledger project team, there are clear instructions on how to participate and contribute to the project [53]
and code of conduct [65]. In addition, we also note that Bitcoin, Ethereum, and Tezos all have their own benevolent
dictator(s) who have dominant decision rights on governance issues. In Bitcoin, Satoshi Nakamoto was regarded as the
benevolent dictator of the Bitcoin ecosystem before his/her retirement [66], while the co-founder of Ethereum, Vitalik
Buterin, is still active in governance-related issues in the Ethereum ecosystem1. In Tezos, the foundation has a veto
power for the ﬁrst 12 months as a security measure [42].

Analysis of Principle 6. Legal compliance and ethical responsibilities are heavily reliant upon the culture where a
blockchain platform is deployed. Bitcoin mentions tax liability [43] for individual incomes, and also lists that Bitcoin
is now prohibited or restricted in certain areas [67]. Ethereum discusses common scams to prevent serious risks [68].
Dash provides detailed clues about the conformation of Banking Secrecy Act, Anti-Money Laundering, and Know
Your Customer regulations, and lists known scams, fake wallets and Ponzi or pyramid schemes on the platform [44].
Tezos speciﬁes that a DApp “CoinHouse” is under the highest legal standards in French law [50]. Hyperledger Fabric
suggests that application providers should contemplate legal issues, including data-sharing regulations, industry-speciﬁc
regulations, intellectual property, commercial agreements, and local and international law, before adopting blockchain
in their business models [51]. Speciﬁcally, Pal [69] and Smith [70] both discussed GDPR and Hyperledger Fabric.
In addition, the Linux Foundation behind Hyperledger Fabric speciﬁes that their Antitrust Policy complies with all
applicable state and federal antitrust and trade regulation laws [71].

Ethical responsibilities found in these blockchain platforms mainly refer to transparency, data privacy, and integrity.
Transparency and data integrity are achieved by the decentralisation level of permissionless public blockchains. On
the other hand, data privacy is preserved by access control policies over the data layer. Note that Ethereum now is
undergoing a vital upgrade which includes the replacement of Proof of Work with Proof of Stake, this change will
enormously reduce the energy consumption and improve the sustainability of Ethereum [57]. In addition, Hyperledger
Fabric highlights the need for trust as all involving stakeholders are identiﬁed.

Summary. The case studies show that our proposed framework is applicable in real-world blockchain governance. All
six high-level principles can be found in the ﬁve blockchain platforms. In addition, the case studies also reveal the
similarities and differences across selected platforms, as well as some ﬁndings to improve their governance as follows.

First, the major difference between these blockchains is how to distribute incentives and deployed consensus protocols.
PoW and PoS are commonly applied, as they can choose validators who are regarded as having more contributions
(either computation power or holding tokens), and hence should be granted more decision rights. The choice of
consensus mechanisms is also dependent on the decentralisation level. For instance, Proof of Authority is suitable
for the low decentralisation level while Proof of Elapsed Time can achieve a random selection of validators and build
a highly decentralised environment. In addition, as permissionless public blockchains provide universal blockchain
instances, their project teams are signiﬁcant when arranging consensus and incentives. Consequently, the deviation of
incentives reﬂects how the project team value the contribution of stakeholders in permissionless blockchains. In the
selected four cases, their incentive mechanisms all involve a game theory to attract block validators, and preserve the
fund for future development. From the perspective of DeFi, it is also leveraged to mint new tokens into the market.
Incentives in permissioned public blockchains may rely on conventional business models, as they are usually adopted
in various application scenarios where there is no inherent token distribution. In the case of Hyperledger Fabric, the
project team is more like a service provider. All stakeholders are closely connected by business agreements.

Secondly, regarding the three governance dimensions (i.e., incentive, decision rights, and accountability), there is a
lack of discussion on how application providers make governance-related decisions, and what incentives drive their
behaviours in the four permissionless public blockchains. A possible reason is that these platforms intend to promote
the development of decentralized autonomous applications and organisations where human interference is minimised to
achieve on-chain autonomy. On the contrary, the signiﬁcance of application providers is highlighted in permissioned
blockchains, as they are the ones to decide whether to deploy a blockchain instance. In addition, there are different
settings for node operators. For example, Dash speciﬁes “masternodes” as the on-chain committee dealing with
governance issues like voting on improvement proposals. This may facilitate the future design of more special roles with
certain rights to ﬁnalise governance decisions (e.g., transaction visibility). While in a permissioned public blockchain
instance, on-chain roles are usually matched to corresponding off-chain positions. Further, different from mandatory
identity veriﬁcation in permissioned public blockchains like Hyperledger Fabric, permissionless public blockchains

1Vitalik Buterin’s website: https://vitalik.ca/index.html

14

A PREPRINT - JUNE 3, 2022

have an inherent weakness for on-chain accountability that individuals are hard to identify, which implies the low cost
of violations. This requires investigation of digital identity, for instance, self-sovereign identity is a blockchain-based
application, which may in turn help on-chain identiﬁcation.

Thirdly, all lifecycle phases of each ecosystem layer are covered except for the termination phase in several selected
cases. This may indicate the project teams’ conﬁdence that they can survive in the competitive market to some
extent. We suggest a full development process, which considers the termination phase, can help enable a complete
governance-driven architecture design. For example, data handling and transaction management require proper on-chain
data removal mechanisms that respect data subjects’ rights and comply with related regulations like GDPR.

The third remark further leads to our ﬁnal ﬁnding that although blockchain-related legal compliance and ethical
responsibilities are still under investigation, these platforms do provide related discussions and analysis. Future studies
can be conducted to raise general awareness, and further integrate it with current blockchain governance methods. For
instance, ﬁlters can be applied to examine data contents instead of merely transaction format, to prevent malicious
information from being fed to blockchain.

Through the case studies, it is observed that the proposed framework can satisfy feasibility and applicability. For
feasibility, we conﬁrmed that the six principles in our framework are addressed and considered in a real-world context.
In terms of applicability, we demonstrated how the proposed framework is applied to different blockchain platforms
to scrutinise their governance structures. The results helped identify current gaps and limitations based on selected
platforms.

Hereby, we summarise several research directions to guide practitioners in the implementation of blockchain governance.
Future study is required to translate the high-level principles into actionable mechanisms and patterns, explore the
effects of architectural decisions on governance, and analyse corresponding trade-offs from the perspective of software
engineering. For instance, design patterns can be extracted from extant blockchain platforms by scrutinising reusable
governance solutions.

Table 3: Comparison results of existing frameworks for blockchain governance.

Katina
et
al. [23]

Allen
and
Berg [24]

John
and
Pam [25]

Pelt et
al. [11]

Beck
et
al. [8]

Howell
et
al. [26]

Werner
et
al. [27]

Hofman
et
al. [12]

Tan et
al. [28]

Our
framework

×

◦

×

◦

◦

◦

◦

◦

×

◦

•

◦

◦

×

◦

◦

•

×

×

◦

◦

×

◦

◦

◦

◦

◦

•

•

•

•

•

◦

◦

◦

•

•

•

•

•

◦

◦

◦

•

•

◦

•

◦

◦

◦

•

×

×

×

•

•

•

•

◦

◦

×

×

×

•

•

•

•

•

◦

◦

•

◦

•

•

◦

◦

•

◦

◦

•

◦

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

• Covered

◦ Partially Covered

× Not Covered

Governance
aspects

Decentralisation
level

Stakeholders

Incentives

Decision rights

Accountability

Ecosystem

Lifecycle

Legal regulations

Ethical responsibili-
ties

5.2 Comparison

We compared our proposed framework with existing governance frameworks for blockchain platforms. We used
the identiﬁed governance aspects as comparison factors to evaluate different concerns of compared frameworks.
“Sufﬁciency” is used to examine whether the aspects are considered in the frameworks. A result is determined as “not
covered” (×), “partially covered” (◦ ), or “covered” (•). The comparison results are illustrated in Table 3.

First, most compared frameworks involve consideration of decentralisation levels when either designing their frameworks
or conducting evaluations as our framework. Nevertheless, [24] limits its investigation to permissionless public
blockchains, while [23] and [25] do not explicitly mention speciﬁc blockchain types. Existing frameworks highlight
that the decentralisation levels are signiﬁcant for governance structures, we further discuss how this aspect affects the

15

A PREPRINT - JUNE 3, 2022

following governance aspects in our work. For instance, we explain how incentives, decision rights, and accountability
may be various in different blockchain types.

Secondly, existing frameworks are marked as “covered” for stakeholders in blockchain governance, if at least two
types of stakeholders are considered. Most existing frameworks place emphasis on the project team, node operator,
and user, while analysis of application provider and regulator is limited. Notably, [24] covers the same stakeholders as
our framework. [8, 11, 28] adopt decision rights, accountability and incentives from IT governance. In particular, [8]
and [11] deﬁne multiple research questions regarding the three governance dimensions for further theoretical work.
Compared to them, our framework illustrates a comprehensive mapping between ﬁve groups of stakeholders to the three
governance dimensions of incentives, decision rights, and accountability. This mapping can help the broader community
comprehend the authority, capability, and responsibility of different stakeholders for blockchain governance.

Further, most compared frameworks are marked as “partially covered” for both ecosystem and lifecycle aspects. For the
blockchain ecosystem, existing frameworks discuss the separation of on-chain and off-chain governance [11, 24], or
focus on either side. In this paper, our framework provides a more extensive blockchain ecosystem with four reﬁned
layers (i.e., data, platform, application, and community), and discusses how governance can be implemented in each
layer. Regarding when to implement blockchain governance, existing frameworks roughly divide the phases into
exogenous and endogenous governance [24, 26]. In the proposed framework, the governance process is elaborated in
terms of each identiﬁed ecosystem layer. In particular, we adopt the software development lifecycle to describe the
governance process of platform and application layers. Our framework speciﬁes multiple constructive governance
mechanisms regarding different lifecycle phases.

Finally, extant frameworks lack concrete instances of legal conformation. In our framework, Principle 6 is provided as a
high-level guidance with discussion and multiple examples of both legal compliance and broader ethical responsibility.

It is observed in the comparison that there are signiﬁcant gaps between compared frameworks and our proposed
framework. This highlights the need for our framework again.

6 Conclusion

In this paper, we proposed six blockchain governance principles, and built a comprehensive framework to support
better governance processes in blockchain and blockchain-based applications. The governance framework considers the
level of decentralisation in different blockchain types, allocation of incentives, decision rights and accountability of
stakeholders. Further, the proposed framework extends governance to the blockchain ecosystem, and highlights both
legal compliance and ethical responsibilities in blockchain governance. We elucidated how governance is implemented
for ﬁve blockchain platforms through case studies, identifying current gaps and limitations. Their open websites and
documents conﬁrm the feasibility and applicability of our proposed framework. Blockchain governance is an arduous
and ongoing topic, and there is a continuing need of providing considered guidelines for the design and implementation
of blockchain and applications. In the future, we plan to propose a design pattern catalogue, and explore architectural
decisions for blockchain governance.

References

[1] S. Nakamoto, “Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system,” https://bitcoinsv.io/bitcoin, 2008, accessed

30-January-2022.

[2] F. Tschorsch and B. Scheuermann, “Bitcoin and Beyond: A Technical Survey on Decentralized Digital Currencies,”

IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 18, no. 3, p. 464, 2016.

[3] A. Bratanova et al., “Blockchain 2030: A look at the future of blockchain in Australia,” Data61, CSIRO,
Brisbane, Australia, Tech. Rep., Apr. 2019. [Online]. Available: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/
332298704 Blockchain 2030 A Look at the Future of Blockchain in Australia

[4] N. Atzei, M. Bartoletti, and T. Cimoli, “A Survey of Attacks on Ethereum Smart Contracts (SoK),” in Principles
of Security and Trust, M. Maffei and M. Ryan, Eds. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2017, pp.
164–186.

[5] P. De Filippi and B. Loveluck, “The invisible politics of Bitcoin: governance crisis of a decentralized infrastructure,”

Internet Policy Review, vol. 5, no. 4, 2016.

[6] Y. Liu, Q. Lu, L. Zhu, H.-Y. Paik, and M. Staples, “A systematic literature review on blockchain governance,”

arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.05460, 2021.

16

A PREPRINT - JUNE 3, 2022

[7] Z. Bao, K. Wang, and W. Zhang, “An auditable and secure model for permissioned blockchain,” in Proceedings of
the 2019 International Electronics Communication Conference, ser. IECC ’19. New York, NY, USA: Association
for Computing Machinery, 2019, p. 139–145. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3343147.3343170
[8] R. Beck, C. M¨uller-Bloch, and J. L. King, “Governance in the blockchain economy: A framework and research

agenda,” Journal of the Association for Information Systems, vol. 19, no. 10, p. 1, 2018.

[9] H. Nabilou, “Bitcoin governance as a decentralized ﬁnancial market infrastructure,” Available at SSRN, 2020.

[Online]. Available: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3555042

[10] P. Paech, “The governance of blockchain ﬁnancial networks,” The Modern Law Review, vol. 80, no. 6, pp.

1073–1110, 2017.

[11] R. van Pelt, S. Jansen, D. Baars, and S. Overbeek, “Deﬁning blockchain governance: A framework for analysis

and comparison,” Information Systems Management, vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 21–41, 2021.

[12] D. Hofman, Q. DuPont, A. Walch, and I. Beschastnikh, “Blockchain governance: De facto (x) or designed?” in

Building Decentralized Trust. Springer, 2021, pp. 21–33.

[13] P. Weill and J. W. Ross, “IT governance on one page,” Available at SSRN 664612, 2004. [Online]. Available:

https://ssrn.com/abstract=664612

[14] S. Cobit, “A business framework for the governance and management of enterprise IT,” Rolling Meadows, 2012.
[15] C. Ballard, J. Baldwin, A. Baryudin, G. Brunell, C. Giardina, M. Haber, E. A. O’neill, S. Shah et al., IBM

information governance solutions.

IBM Redbooks, 2014.

[16] “Information technology – governance of IT – governance of data – part 1: Application of ISO/IEC 38500 to the
governance of data,” International Organization for Standardization, Standard ISO/IEC 38505-1:2017, 2017.
[Online]. Available: https://www.iso.org/standard/56639.html

[17] S. O’mahony and F. Ferraro, “The emergence of governance in an open source community,” Academy of

Management Journal, vol. 50, no. 5, pp. 1079–1106, 2007.

[18] P. B. De Laat, “Governance of open source software: state of the art,” Journal of Management & Governance,

vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 165–177, 2007.

[19] A. Tiwana, B. Konsynski, and A. Bush, “Platform evolution: coevolution of platform architecture, governance,
and environmental dynamics (research commentary),” Information Systems Research, vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 675–687,
2010.

[20] V. Inc., “Corporate governance guidelines,” https://investor.visa.com/corporate-governance/, 2020, accessed

10-July-2021.

[21] E. Ostrom, Understanding institutional diversity. Princeton university press, 2009.
[22] P. Olsson, L. H. Gunderson, S. R. Carpenter, P. Ryan, L. Lebel, C. Folke, and C. S. Holling, “Shooting the rapids:
navigating transitions to adaptive governance of social-ecological systems,” Ecology and society, vol. 11, no. 1,
2006.

[23] P. F. Katina, C. B. Keating, J. A. Sisti, and A. V. Gheorghe, “Blockchain governance,” International Journal of

Critical Infrastructures, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 121–135, 2019.

[24] D. W. Allen and C. Berg, “Blockchain governance: What we can learn from the economics of corporate

governance,” The Journal of the British Blockchain Association, 2020.

[25] John, Thomas and Pam, Mantri, “Complex adaptive blockchain governance,” MATEC Web Conf., vol. 223, p.

01010, 2018. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1051/matecconf/201822301010

[26] B. E. Howell, P. H. Potgieter, and B. M. Sadowski, “Governance of Blockchain and Distributed Ledger
Technology Projects,” International Telecommunications Society (ITS), 2nd Europe – Middle East – North
African Regional ITS Conference, Aswan 2019: Leveraging Technologies For Growth 201737, 2019. [Online].
Available: https://ideas.repec.org/p/zbw/itsm19/201737.html

[27] J. Werner, S. Frost, and R. Zarnekow, “Towards a taxonomy for governance mechanisms of blockchain-based
platforms,” Proceedings of the 28th European Conference on Information Systems (ECIS), An Online AIS
Conference, June 2020. [Online]. Available: https://aisel.aisnet.org/ecis2020 rp/26

[28] E. Tan, S. Mahula, and J. Crompvoets, “Blockchain governance in the public sector: A conceptual
framework for public management,” Government Information Quarterly, p. 101625, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0740624X21000617

[29] B. A. Kitchenham and S. Charters, “Guidelines for performing systematic literature reviews in software engineer-

ing,” Tech. Rep., 2007.

17

A PREPRINT - JUNE 3, 2022

[30] S. U. Lee, L. Zhu, and R. Jeffery, “A data governance framework for platform ecosystem process management,”
in Business Process Management Forum, M. Weske, M. Montali, I. Weber, and J. vom Brocke, Eds. Cham:
Springer International Publishing, 2018, pp. 211–227.

[31] “Systems and software engineering – Software life cycle processes,” International Organization for Standardization,
Standard ISO/IEC/IEEE 12207:2017, 2017. [Online]. Available: https://www.iso.org/standard/63712.html
[32] O. E. Williamson, Economic organization: ﬁrms, markets and policy control. New York University Press New

York, 1986.

[33] E. R. Australian Government Department of Industry, Science. National blockchain roadmap: Regulation and stan-
dards. https://www.industry.gov.au/data-and-publications/national-blockchain-roadmap/regulation-and-standards.
Accessed 30-January-2022.

[34] E. Commission, “Legal and regulatory framework for blockchain,” https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/policies/

regulatory-framework-blockchain, accessed 30-January-2022.

[35] P. Voigt and A. Von dem Bussche, “The EU general data protection regulation (GDPR),” A Practical Guide, 1st

Ed., Cham: Springer International Publishing, vol. 10, p. 3152676, 2017.

[36] W. Hussain, H. Perera, J. Whittle, A. Nurwidyantoro, R. Hoda, R. A. Shams, and G. Oliver, “Human values in
software engineering: Contrasting case studies of practice,” IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, pp. 1–1,
2020.

[37] BitcoinCore, “Bitcoincore - about,” https://bitcoincore.org/en/about/, accessed 30-January-2022.

[38] Bitcoin, “Developer guides,” https://developer.bitcoin.org/devguide/, accessed 30-January-2022.

[39] Ethereum, “Ethereum whitepaper,” https://ethereum.org/en/whitepaper/, accessed 30-January-2022.

[40] Dash Core, “Dash core developer documentation,” https://dashcore.readme.io/docs, accessed 30-January-2022.

[41] Dash, “Dash whitepaper,” https://github.com/dashpay/dash/wiki/Whitepaper, accessed 30-January-2022.

[42] Tezos, “Tezos whitepaper,” https://wiki.tezosagora.org/whitepaper, accessed 30-January-2022.

[43] Bitcoin, “Frequently asked questions,” https://bitcoin.org/en/faq, accessed 30-January-2022.

[44] Dash, “Dash legal,” https://docs.dash.org/en/0.12.3/legal.html/, accessed 30-January-2022.

[45] H.

Jameson,

“Progpow audit:

Goals & expectations,”

https://medium.com/ethereum-cat-herders/

progpow-audit-goals-expectations-75bb902a1f01, accessed 30-January-2022.

[46] IBM Cloud, “IBM blockchain platform: Pricing,” https://www.ibm.com/cloud/blockchain-platform/pricing,

accessed 30-January-2022.

[47] Hyperledger Fabric, “Hyperledger Fabric audits,” https://wiki.hyperledger.org/display/fabric/Audits, 2021, ac-

cessed 30-January-2022.

[48] IBM Cloud, “IBM blockchain services and consulting,” https://www.ibm.com/blockchain/services, accessed

30-January-2022.

[49] Ethereum, “Introduction to Ethereum governance,” https://ethereum.org/en/governance/, accessed 30-January-

2022.

[50] Tezos, “Tezos corporate baking,” https://wiki.tezosagora.org/learn/uses-of-tezos/corporate-baking, accessed

30-January-2022.

[51] A. Banda, M. Hamilton, E. Lowry, and J. Widdiﬁeld, “The founder’s handbook: An introduction to building a
blockchain solution,” https://www.ibm.com/downloads/cas/GZPPMWM5, 2020, accessed 30-January-2022.

[52] Dash, “Dash platform developer documentation,” https://dashplatform.readme.io/, accessed 30-January-2022.

[53] Hyperledger Fabric, “A blockchain platform for the enterprise,” https://hyperledger-fabric.readthedocs.io/en/latest/

index.html, 2020, accessed 30-January-2022.

[54] Bitcoin, “Bitcoin for businesses,” https://bitcoin.org/en/bitcoin-for-businesses, accessed 30-January-2022.

[55] Ethereum, “Ethereum development documentation,” https://ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/, accessed 30-

January-2022.

[56] Tezos, “Blockchain indexers,” https://wiki.tezosagora.org/build/blockchain-indexers, accessed 30-January-2022.

[57] Ethereum, “Upgrading Ethereum to radical new heights,” https://ethereum.org/en/upgrades/, accessed 30-January-

2022.

[58] Tezos, “Tezos privacy,” https://wiki.tezosagora.org/learn/futuredevelopments/privacy, accessed 30-January-2022.

18

A PREPRINT - JUNE 3, 2022

[59] Ethereum, “The history of Ethereum,” https://ethereum.org/en/history/, accessed 30-January-2022.
[60] Tezos, “Tezos baking,” https://wiki.tezosagora.org/learn/baking, accessed 30-January-2022.
[61] Dash, “Dash features,” https://docs.dash.org/en/stable/introduction/features.html, accessed 30-January-2022.
[62] Tezos, “Tezos governance,” https://wiki.tezosagora.org/learn/governance, accessed 30-January-2022.
[63] D. E. M. B. W. Kostas Christidis, Christopher Ferris, “Hyperledger Fabric RFCs process,” https://github.com/

hyperledger/fabric-rfcs/blob/main/README.md, 2020, accessed 30-January-2022.

[64] Hyperledger Foundation, “Project lifecycle,” https://tsc.hyperledger.org/project-lifecycle.html, accessed 30-

January-2022.

[65] The Linux Foundation, “Hyperledger foundation charter,” https://www.hyperledger.org/about/charter, 2021,

accessed 30-January-2022.

[66] Bitcoin WiKi, “Satoshi Nakamoto,” https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Satoshi Nakamoto, accessed 30-January-2022.
[67] Wikipedia, “Legality of cryptocurrency by country or territory,” https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Legality of

cryptocurrency by country or territory, accessed 30-January-2022.

[68] Ethereum, “Ethereum security and scam prevention,” https://ethereum.org/en/security/, 2022, accessed 30-January-

2022.

[69] G. Pal, “The GDPR blockchain blind-spot: Regulating data and everything else,” https://www.ibm.com/blogs/
blockchain/2018/06/the-gdpr-blockchain-blind-spot-regulating-data-and-everything-else/, 2018, accessed 30-
January-2022.

[70] S. S. Smith, “Blockchain, the GDPR and what accounting professionals need to know,” https://www.ibm.com/
blogs/blockchain/2018/05/blockchain-the-gdpr-and-what-accounting-professionals-need-to-know/, 2018, ac-
cessed 30-January-2022.

[71] The Linux Foundation, “Antitrust policy,” https://www.linuxfoundation.org/antitrust-policy/, 2007, accessed

30-January-2022.

19

