When Blockchain Meets Auction Models: A
Survey, Some Applications, and Challenges

Zeshun Shi, Cees de Laat, Member, IEEE, Paola Grosso, Member, IEEE, and Zhiming Zhao, Senior Member, IEEE

1

1
2
0
2

t
c
O
4
2

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
4
3
5
2
1
.
0
1
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—In recent years, blockchain has gained widespread
attention as an emerging technology for decentralization, trans-
parency, and immutability in advancing online activities over
public networks. As an essential market process, auctions have
been well studied and applied in many business ﬁelds due to
their efﬁciency and contributions to fair trade. Complementary
features between blockchain and auction models trigger a great
potential for research and innovation. On the one hand, the
decentralized nature of blockchain can provide a trustworthy,
secure, and cost-effective mechanism to manage the auction
process; on the other hand, auction models can be utilized to
design incentive and consensus protocols in blockchain archi-
tectures. These opportunities have attracted enormous research
and innovation activities in both academia and industry; however,
there is a lack of an in-depth review of existing solutions and
achievements. In this paper, we conduct a comprehensive state-of-
the-art survey of these two research topics. We review the existing
solutions for integrating blockchain and auction models, with
some application-oriented taxonomies generated. Additionally, we
highlight some open research challenges and future directions
towards integrated blockchain-auction models.

I. INTRODUCTION

Over the past decade, the world has witnessed the suc-
cess of blockchain as a novel technology to build decen-
tralized systems. In general, blockchain is a decentralized
ledger technology that incorporates cryptography, peer-to-peer
(P2P) networks, and consensus mechanisms. The ledger is
maintained by all nodes participating in the system and is
decentralized, tamper-proof, transparent, and secure [1]. In
2018, Satoshi Nakamoto ﬁrst introduced blockchain as the
foundation technology for a cryptocurrency named Bitcoin [2].
After that, with smart contracts bringing programmability to
the blockchain, it is now widely believed that blockchain can
be applied to build decentralized systems in various application
scenarios, e.g., transportation and logistics, agriculture and
food, energy and utilities, healthcare, and life sciences [3].
According to a report from MarketsandMarkets, the worldwide
blockchain market is predicted to expand to $39.7 billion and
cover speciﬁc applications across more than 15 industries [4].
An auction is a process of buying and selling goods or
services. This process involves offering items for bidding,
waiting for bids to be accepted, and then selling goods to
the highest bidder under the supervision of an auctioneer
[5]. Typically, auctions tend to be centrally organized and
ofﬂine. Due to their fairness properties, auctions are widely

The authors are with the Informatics Institute, University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, 1098 XH, the Netherlands. E-mails: {z.shi2, delaat, p.grosso,
z.zhao}@uva.nl

used in trading activities for artworks, cars, radio spectra,
online advertisements, etc. [6]. In the ﬁeld of economics,
auction theory has become one of the most successful and
active branches [7]. Hundreds of auction models have been
designed to serve different auction scenarios. A case in point
is the spectrum auction that
the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC) has been conducting since 1994 [8]. Since
then, spectrum auctions have contributed more than $200
billion of revenue to the U.S. government. The two designers
of the FCC auction were awarded the Nobel Prize in 2020 for
their improvements to auction theory and the invention of new
auction formats [9].

Potential research and innovation opportunities across both
blockchain and auction models have emerged recently [10].
On the one hand,
traditional centralized auctions usually
require a third-party auctioneer or auction house to manage
the entire auction process, which is expensive due to high
commission fees. They also suffer from a single point of
failure, as auctioneers can potentially be malicious in some
cases [11]. In this context, blockchain has emerged as a
decentralized platform to support trustworthy online auction
applications. In 2018, for the ﬁrst time in the world, multi-
million dollar artworks by Andy Warhol were tokenized and
auctioned successfully using the Ethereum blockchain [12],
[13]. It
is also reported that major auction houses (e.g.,
Sotheby’s and Christie’s) are actively working on applying
blockchain in secure and trusted auction use cases [14]. Thus,
we can foresee that this mechanism of bidding for ownership
of items with blockchain could become the future trend. On
the other hand, peers in the blockchain can use auctions to
handle dynamic relationships. For instance, auction theory can
be leveraged to model the transaction fee market of blockchain
platforms. The transaction fee mechanism of the Ethereum
blockchain has been a ﬁrst-price auction since its inception;
each transaction has an associated transaction fee (bid), which
is paid by its submitter to the miner for priority processing
[15]. Auctions are also found, as the literature indicates, in
other blockchain activities such as miner selection [16] and
block reward allocation [17].

The opportunities of applying blockchain in auctions or
enhancing blockchain using auctions have attracted many
research and innovation activities; however, there is a lack of
surveys to systemically review those different technical devel-
opments and achievements, and to identify the important open
challenges. In this paper, we attempt to answer the following
questions through a systematic literature survey: 1) What are
the characteristics of existing blockchain technologies and
auction models? 2) How can blockchain technologies and

 
 
 
 
 
 
auction models enhance each other? 3) What blockchain-based
auction applications have been published, and how can these
applications be classiﬁed? 4) What auction-based solutions
have been proposed for enhancing blockchains? 5) What
open challenges can we identify in the integration between
blockchain and auction models?

Topic & Number of Surveys

Auction-Related
Blockchain-Related
Both-Related

2

N = 12

Smart Contract [32]

N = 9

Smart City [37]

Healthcare [36]

Security &
Privacy [29], [30]

Security &
Privacy [27], [31]

Market Design [6]

Models &
Tools [34]

IoT [38]

IoT [39]

Energy
Trading [45]

Energy
Trading [46]

Edge
Computing [42]

Big Data [43]

Consensus
Mechanisms [33]

Cloud Computing
[40], [41]

N = 2

Energy
Trading [47]

N = 5

Crowdsensing [23]

Wireless
Systems [21]

English
Auction [20]

N = 3

Wireless
Systems [22]

Security &
Privacy [28]

Auction Theory
[18], [19]

Blockchain
Overview [24]

Blockchain
Applications [35]

Blockchain
Overview [25], [26]

Cryptocurrency
Mining [44]

Before 2017

2018

2019

2020

2021 (Until March)

Fig. 1. Summary of existing related survey studies, categorized according to
the year of publication and their focus.

fee mechanism design, miner selection, and block reward
distribution. However, although there are so many studies
on blockchain and auction models respectively, the issue of
combining the two has rarely been addressed in previous
survey works. The studies most relevant
to our research
are three survey papers working on blockchain-based energy
trading solutions, where auction models are partially discussed
[45], [46], [47]. The authors in these studies only focus on
one speciﬁc application ﬁeld and do not offer the comprehen-
siveness of this work. Besides, no research work has so far
summarized how to use auction models to optimize blockchain
technologies.

In summary, most of the existing surveys discussed the two
topics separately. There is no general survey on the current
landscape of integrated blockchain-auction models. Therefore,
the purpose of this survey is to summarize previous publica-
tions and to complement existing research on the integration of
blockchain and auction models. To the best of our knowledge,
this paper is the ﬁrst comprehensive survey to ﬁll these gaps.

C. Organization

Fig. 2 illustrates the road map and organization of this
paper. As shown in the ﬁgure, the remainder of this survey
is organized as follows. Firstly, some preliminary knowledge
of blockchain technologies and auction models, as well as the
opportunities and considerations for integration, are presented
in Section II. Then, Section III reviews blockchain-based
auction applications, including a survey on auction models and
blockchain technologies used in different application ﬁelds.
Section IV explores several aspects of using auction models
to enhance blockchain technologies. Section V highlights and
summarizes the current research challenges and solutions.
Finally, the survey is concluded in Section VI. The acronyms
used in this paper are listed in Table A in the appendix section
for easy reference.

A. Contributions

In this survey, we draw a comprehensive research landscape
of the integration between blockchain and auction models to
answer the above-mentioned research questions. Both aspects
of the integration, namely blockchain-based auction models
and auction-enhanced blockchain technologies, are carefully
reviewed. The main contributions of this paper can be sum-
marized as follows:

• Review existing blockchain technologies and auction
models, and provide a conceptual schema to analyze
research and innovation opportunities from their integra-
tion.

• Systematically review the blockchain-based auction
applications, and auction-based solutions to enhance
blockchain technologies.

• Provide a taxonomy to classify the existing applications
and solutions in the integration between blockchain tech-
nologies and auction models.

• Identify open research challenges from the reviewed
models, and provide guidance to design applications
that require integration between blockchain and auction
models.

B. Related Works

During the past years, auction-based theories and models
have attracted extensive attention from many researchers. Most
surveys on auction-related topics we can ﬁnd were published
before 2017 in the ﬁeld of economics. Those surveys mainly
concern the introduction and comparison of different auction
models [18], [19], [20], market design [6], as well as the appli-
cation of auctions in specialized areas such as wireless systems
[21], [22] and crowdsensing [23]. The investigation efforts of
blockchain, on the other hand, are relatively new. Despite the
fact that blockchain is a newly emerged technology, almost
every aspect of blockchain has been extensively studied in
the literature. These surveys cover topics including blockchain
overview [24], [25], [26], security & privacy [27], [28], [29],
[30], [31], smart contract [32], consensus mechanism [33],
models & tools [34], and various blockchain-based applica-
tions [35] such as healthcare [36], smart city [37], Internet
of Things (IoT) [38], [39], cloud/edge computing [40], [41],
[42], big data [43], and cryptocurrency [44]. The summary
of these survey topics over the publication years is shown in
Fig. 1. Overall, both the publication number and the research
diversity have increased signiﬁcantly in the last few years.

A Blockchain can provide a decentralized environment to
support auction activities, thereby improving the security and
trustworthiness of auctions. On the other hand, previous re-
search has suggested the application prospect of using auction
models to optimize blockchain workﬂows, e.g., transaction

3

using a P2P paradigm, where the blockchain is main-
tained by all peer nodes together, and no single agent
can control the whole system. When new transactions
are generated on a node, they are ﬁrst propagated to the
neighboring nodes for validation. If the data structure and
syntax are valid, they are saved for further processing;
otherwise, they are simply rejected.

• Consensus Layer. This layer is the foundation and core
of a blockchain system. It deﬁnes protocols and algo-
rithms for decentralized nodes to reach a consensus on
the update of the blockchain. The most common and
successful consensus algorithm is Proof of Work (PoW).
Other alternatives like Proof of Stake (PoS), Delegated
Proof of Stake (DPoS), Practical Byzantine Fault Tol-
erance (PBFT), Proof of Elapsed Time (PoET), Proof
of Authority (PoA), and Raft, have also been widely
discussed recently [33].

• Incentive Layer. This layer provides incentive mecha-
nisms for a blockchain to motivate participants to val-
idate the data and maintain the whole system. Incentive
mechanisms are typically based on block rewards and
transaction fees. For example, the issuance mechanism
of the Bitcoin blockchain guarantees that successful
miners are rewarded with 6.25 Bitcoins when a new
valid block is mined. At the same time, the transaction
fees associated with each transaction can be allocated
to the corresponding miners. This layer is essential in
permissionless blockchains. Whereas in a permissioned
blockchain, the incentive mechanism is often optional
since the participants are selected organizations [26].
• Contract Layer. This layer deﬁnes decentralized program-
ming paradigms in a blockchain, which was initially
promoted by the Ethereum smart contract technology.
A smart contract is a tamper-proof and self-executing
program running on the blockchain, which enables a
much broader range of application innovations in addi-
tion to cryptocurrencies. The concept of smart contracts
has also extended to other blockchain platforms, e.g.,
chaincodes [48] and transaction processors [49] are smart
contracts offered by Hyperledger Fabric and Sawtooth,
respectively.

• Application Layer. This layer deﬁnes application pro-
gramming interfaces (APIs) and programming models for
developing speciﬁc applications. Blockchain was once
well known for its cryptocurrency application (e.g., Bit-
coin). Now with the popularity of smart contract technol-
ogy, blockchain-based applications, namely decentralized
applications (DApps), are showing huge market potential
in many industrial sectors [4].

2) Blockchain Types:

there are three types
of blockchains: permissionless, permissioned, and hybrid
blockchain. This section provides a brief summary of them. A
more detailed comparison is shown in Table I.

In general,

• Permissionless Blockchain. In a permissionless or public
blockchain (e.g., Bitcoin or Ethereum), anyone can join
the network by submitting or validating transactions. To
address the lack of trust among anonymous players, a

Fig. 2. Road map and organization of this survey.

II. BACKGROUND KNOWLEDGE

In this section, we begin with a brief overview of different
blockchain technologies and auction models. We then proceed
to discuss the opportunities and considerations behind com-
bining them.

A. Blockchain Technologies

Introduced by Satoshi Nakamoto in 2018, blockchain was
initially used as the underlying technology for Bitcoin. It
records transactions among distributed participants as identical
copies through a decentralized ledger, which is represented as
a chain of blocks. Based on the consensus among distributed
participants, new blocks are generated and attached to the
chain using a cryptographic algorithm. In this process, a
blockchain builds trust among its distributed users by virtue
of the immutability and security of the ledger.

1) Blockchain Architecture: Blockchain researchers and
practitioners often model blockchain systems using a layered
architecture, and abstract typical blockchain technologies and
functional components as six bottom-up layers: data, network,
consensus, incentive, contract, and application layer [29]. The
three layers at the bottom are usually considered a blockchain’s
basic elements, while the upper three layers are the extended
elements.

• Data Layer. This layer deﬁnes the schema, data structure,
and storage of all the data information on the blockchain.
As the name suggests, a blockchain uses the “chained
blocks” data structure as its backbone. Each block con-
sists of several transactions, with useful information (e.g.,
version, hash, nonce, timestamp, and Merkle root) con-
tained in the block header. The blocks are chained to each
other via cryptographic algorithms, making the data layer
constitute a tamper-proof database for the blockchain.
• Network Layer. This layer models protocols for con-
necting blockchain nodes and validating data transferred
across them. Blockchain nodes are typically connected

I. IntroductionContributionsRelated WorksOrganizationII. BackgroundBlockchain TechnologiesAuction ModelsIntegration ConsiderationsV. Challenges andFuture DirectionsPrivacy ProtetionPerformance & ScalabilityCost-EffectivenessCryptocurrency PaymentAuction EnforcementRegulations & StandardsAuction Design PropertiesAuction FraudIV. Auction Solutionsto Enhance  BlockchainMining Task OffloadingTransaction Fee MechanismMiner SelectionReward DistributionToken Sale & ExchangeOthersIII. Blockchain-BasedAuction ApplicationsEnergy TradingWireless CommunicationService AllocationData ManagementStock ExchangeCrowdsourcingSupply ChainHuman ResourceOthersWhen Blockchain MeetsAuction Modelsconsensus mechanism is often used to determine who gets
the right to package transactions and produce new blocks
in a given round. PoW is a good illustration of such
a consensus algorithm and has been validated with the
popularity of blockchain. However, it has been criticized
for being inefﬁcient and consuming too much energy in
order to reach a consensus. It is widely believed that
in a PoW-based permissionless blockchain, the waste of
energy is inevitable in order to establish trust among
strangers without any prior knowledge of each other.
• Permissioned Blockchain. A permissioned blockchain is
operated as a closed ecosystem that can only be accessed
by users with permissions. A user can only view the
ledger or validate new transactions after being approved
by the authority of the blockchain. In this way, malicious
or crashed nodes can be identiﬁed through more energy-
efﬁcient consensus algorithms such as PBFT, PoET, and
Raft. The ability of assigning speciﬁc network permis-
sions to users and the enhanced performance give permis-
sioned blockchains a great potential for wider industrial
application. Hyperledger is one of the most successful
blockchain communities and has incubated several per-
missioned blockchain platforms such as Fabric and Saw-
tooth [50]. However, there are also some arguments that
the “partially decentralized” nature of the permissioned
blockchain may lead to compromises in trust [33].

• Hybrid Blockchain. It aims to combine the strengths of
both permissionless and permissioned blockchains and
to customize the degree of decentralization based on
speciﬁc application needs. A hybrid blockchain enables
highly regulated organizations to have greater ﬂexibility
and control over which data is kept private versus shared
on a public ledger [51]. A typical example is the Aergo
platform, which consists of a public chain network using
the DPoS consensus and several customized sidechains
dedicated to speciﬁc applications based on leader-based
PoA consensus mechanisms [52].

TABLE I
CHARACTERISTICS OF THE THREE TYPES OF BLOCKCHAIN

Permissionless
Blockchain

Permissioned
Blockchain

Hybrid
Blockchain

Participants

• Public
• Anonymous

• Private/Consortium
• Known identities

• Public + Private

Access
Mechanism

• Anyone
• Decentralized

• Selected users
• Partially decentralized • Customized

Consensus

• PoW, PoS
• Energy-intensive

• PBFT, Raft, and PoET
• Energy-efﬁcient

• Integrated

Performance • Low

• High

• Medium

Examples

• Bitcoin
• Ethereum

• Hyperledger Fabric

• Aergo

B. Auction Models

An auction is a sale activity in which potential buyers make
competitive bids for objects or services [18]. There are usually

4

several fundamental elements in an auction: 1) a seller who
owns and wants to sell the objects; 2) one or several bidders
who want to buy the objects via the auction; 3) the auction
objects traded between the seller and the buyer(s); and 4) an
auctioneer who works as an intermediary agent to host and
control the auction process.

Auction models can be classiﬁed from different dimensions,
e.g., the bidding process, the number of items, the roles of
buyers/sellers, and the bidding participants [22]. In the rest of
this section, we review auction models that are frequently used
in the blockchain-related literature. A comparison of those
auction models is also shown in Table II.

1) Open-Outcry Auction vs. Sealed-Bid Auction: From the
perspective of the bidding process, an auction model can be
either open-outcry or sealed-bid. In an open-outcry auction,
a bidder’s bidding activities are transparent and visible to all
bidders. Whereas in a sealed-bid auction, bidders submit their
bids to the auctioneer privately, and the bids are only known
by the auctioneer until the auction ends. Typical open-outcry
auctions and sealed-bid auctions are summarized as follows:
• English Auction (also called open-outcry ascending-price
auction). In an English auction, the price begins low and
rises as buyers submit their bids until only one bidder is
left and no higher bids are obtained within the speciﬁed
time span. The whole process of requesting bids is open
and transparent. It can be very competitive, with pressure
rising as bidders’ offers increase. Since the auctioneer
would try to get the best price for the seller, an English
auction is expected to beneﬁt the seller.

• Dutch Auction (also called open-outcry descending-price
auction or clock auction). In a Dutch auction, the auction-
eer starts by announcing a high asking bid and then keeps
lowering this bid until a buyer is willing to accept it.
This auction is often used to sell goods that must be sold
quickly (e.g., fresh produce). For example, such auctions
are very common in the Dutch ﬂower sales market.
• First-Price Sealed-Bid (FPSB) Auction (also called blind
auction). In an FPSB auction, all bidders submit sealed
bids to the auctioneer simultaneously, and the highest
bidder wins and pays his/her bid. Other bidders’ bids
will not be revealed during the auction until a winner
is determined. Therefore, bidders do not compete openly
with each other, but they can collect information about
their competitors’ bids before submitting their own.
• Vickrey Auction (also called second-price sealed-bid auc-
tion). It is similar to an FPSB auction but with a different
payment mechanism. After all bidders submit sealed bids
to the auctioneer, the highest bidder still wins but only
pays the second-highest bid. In Vickrey auctions, truthful
bidding is the dominant strategy [7]. It has been well
studied in theory but not very popular in practice.

2) Single-Item Auction vs. Multi-Item Auction: From the
perspective of the number of items, an auction model can be
single-item or multi-item. The above-mentioned four auction
models are the main types of auctions where a single item
is sold [53]. However, in some situations, selling multiple
items at the same time is a more efﬁcient way. Multi-item
auctions can be further subdivided into two cases: an auction

5

TABLE II
SUMMARY OF REPRESENTATIVE AUCTION TYPES

Auction Type

Alternative Name

Auction Mechanism

Properties/Suitable Scenarios

English auction

Open-outcry
ascending-price auction

• The price starts low and increases as buyers bid.
• The auction continues until no higher bids are received.

• Support a dynamic price discovery process and
maximize sellers’ proﬁts.

Dutch auction

Clock auction; Open-
descending-
outcry
price auction

FPSB auction

Blind auction

Vickrey auction

Second-price
bid auction

sealed-

Double auction Double-sided auction

• The auctioneer starts the auction with a high asking price.
• The price is gradually reduced until one bidder accepts it.

• Suitable for perishable auction items or auctions that
need to be completed quickly.

• All bidders simultaneously submit a sealed bid.
• The highest bidder wins and pays his or her bid.
• All bidders simultaneously submit a sealed bid.
• The highest bidder still wins but only pays the second-
highest bid.
• Multiple sellers and buyers submit their bids/offers.
• The auctioneer chooses a price that clears the market.

• Prior to making their own offers, bidders can collect
details about their competitors’ bids.

• Well studied in theory due to the truthful bidding
property, but uncommon in practice.

• Real word marketplaces with multiple sellers and
buyers, e.g., stock exchanges.

Multi-lot auction

• Several heterogeneous items are sold.
• Bidders can place bids on combinations of items.

• Suitable when bidders have non-additive valuations
on bundles of items, e.g, spectrum allocation.

Combinatorial
auction

Uniform price
auction

Clearing price auction

• Multiple homogeneous items are sold.
• Winners pay the same price regardless of their actual bid.

Pay-as-bid auc-
tion

Discriminatory
auction

price

• Multiple homogeneous items are sold.
• Winners pay their bids based on the items they won.

• Bidders tend to shade their bids when they demand
multiple units.
• A common way to allocate assets and commodities.
• Bidders face no uncertainty about the price they will
receive if they win.
• Very popular among governments and central banks.
• Overbidding is a common behavior.
• Suitable when multiple attributes (e.g., service time,
quality) need to be considered in an auction.

• Every bidder must pay regardless of whether they win.
• The auction is still awarded to the highest bidder.
• The bids may have multiple attributes.
• A scoring mechanism calculates the attributes’ value.

All-pay auction -

Multi-attribute
auction

-

Reverse auction

Buyer-determined auc-
tion; Procurement auc-
tion

GFP auction

GSP auction

VCG auction

-

-

-

• The buyer makes a request for the required goods.
• Sellers place bids for the goods they are willing to buy.

• Suitable for procurement by governments and com-
panies, as it causes sellers’ competition.

• n bidders compete for k slots/positions.
• The highest bidder gets the ﬁrst slot (with his bid), the
second-highest gets the second, and so on.
• n bidders compete for k slots/positions.
• The highest bidder gets the ﬁrst slot and pays the second
highest bid, and so on.
• Bidders submit bids that report their true value.
• Each bidder pays for the losses he or she causes to others.
• Items are assigned in a socially optimal way.

• The auction structure is naturally unstable.
• The ﬁrst mechanism introduced in sponsored search
auctions.
• An extension of Vickrey auction for multiple units.
• The most commonly used mechanism for sponsored
search auctions.
• An extension of Vickrey auction for multiple units.
• More complex to interpret and implement than the
GSP auction in sponsored search auctions.

is said to be homogeneous if all items offered in the auction
are identical; otherwise, it is considered heterogeneous.

• Combinatorial Auction (also called multi-lot auction).
This is a popular auction in which heterogeneous items
are sold at the same time. Bidders can place bids on
combinations (or “packages”) of items. It
is suitable
to auction scenarios where bidders have non-additive
valuations for bundled items.

• Multi-unit Auction. This is an auction in which several
homogeneous items are sold. Based on the different
payments for each unit, it can be further divided into
two types, i.e., pay-as-bid auction (or discriminatory price
auction) and uniform price auction (or clearing price
auction) [54]. In the former, bidders pay their bids for
each unit they won. Whereas in the latter, all winning
bidders pay the same price regardless of their actual bid.

3) Forward Auction vs. Reverse Auction: An auction model
can be either forward or reverse in terms of the roles of buy-
ers/sellers. A forward auction is also called a seller-determined
auction, in which one seller sells products to multiple potential
buyers (bidders). The auction models discussed so far are all
forward ones. In a reverse auction, however, the roles of buyers
and sellers are swapped: sellers need to bid and compete for
the opportunity to sell their products.

• Reverse Auction (also called buyer-determined auction or
procurement auction). In a reverse auction, one buyer
needs to trade with multiple potential sellers. The buyer
ﬁrst makes a request for the required goods or services.
Then sellers place bids for the goods or services they
are willing to deliver. A reverse auction is highly suit-
able for procurement activities proposed by governments,
companies, and organizations since it motivates sellers’
competition.

4) Single-Sided Auction vs. Double Auction: In terms of
the participants in the bidding process, an auction model can
be single-sided or double-sided. The single-sided approach
has been widely implemented in traditional auctions (e.g.,
forward and reverse auctions). However, in some cases, they
cannot accommodate additional sellers/bidders in a large-
scale situation. The double auction is an extension of the
conventional auction, which adopts the many-to-many strategy
to generate multiple winning bidders in each round [55].

• Double Auction (also called double-sided auction). In
this auction, multiple sellers and buyers submit
their
bids/offers, respectively. The market institution (auction-
eer) then chooses a price that clears the market. Many dif-
ferent market clearing mechanisms already exist, includ-
ing average mechanism, VCG (Vickrey-Clarke-Groves)

mechanism, trade reduction mechanism, and McAfee’s
mechanism [56]. In reality, a double auction is suitable
for marketplaces with multiple sellers and buyers, e.g.,
stock exchanges.

5) Others: Some other emerging auction models found in

the literature are listed as follows:

• All-Pay Auction. Every bidder must pay regardless of
whether he/she wins or not. The auction is awarded to
the highest bidder as in a conventional auction. It is
popular among governments and central banks. However,
overbidding is a common behavior in the auction process.
• Multi-Attribute Auction. The bids could have multiple at-
tributes (e.g., service time and quality) other than price. In
this case, a scoring mechanism is essential to calculate the
total bidding value. It is suitable when the auction needs
to consider multiple attributes (e.g., service allocation).
• Sponsored Search Auction (also called keyword auction).
It is specially designed for search advertising scenarios.
In this auction, n advertisers (bidders) compete for the
assignment of k advertisement slots/positions. Each bid-
der submits a bid, then the highest bidder gets the ﬁrst
slot (with his/her bid), the second-highest bidder gets
the second slot, and so forth. Based on the winner’s
different payment strategies, it can be further divided into
generalized ﬁrst-price (GFP) auction, generalized second-
price (GSP) auction, and VCG auction.

C. Opportunities and Considerations for Integration

The integration between blockchain technologies and auc-
tion models can promote innovations on both sides. On the
one hand, blockchain can be used to enable a decentralized
auction system and improve the trustworthiness of centralized
auctions. On the other hand, auction models can be leveraged
to motivate decentralized peer nodes as a kind of price
incentive mechanism to enhance blockchain technology. In this
section, we discuss the research and innovation opportunities
brought by the integration between blockchain and auction
models.

Blockchain technologies effectively eliminate intermedi-
aries, thereby reducing transaction costs and ensuring trust
among auction stakeholders [57]. In general, blockchain tech-
nologies can enhance auction models from the following
aspects:

6

trustworthiness and greatly reduces the auction cost.
By contrast, traditional centralized auctions can be very
expensive and subject to cheating auctioneers; auction
houses typically charge 8-20% of the hammer price as
a commission [59].

• Flexibility in the Auction Payment. Cryptocurrencies em-
bedded in the blockchain can improve the security and
ﬂexibility of auction payments. At the same time, a de-
centralized payment scheme obviates the need for ﬁnan-
cial intermediaries, making transactions more convenient
and less costly.

In addition, auction models can be inserted into any
blockchain component to optimize the overall workﬂow. They
have been used to improve blockchain technologies from
different aspects: e.g., modeling and optimizing the blockchain
transaction fee mechanisms [60], selecting miners [61], and
designing new consensus algorithms [62].

Given the six-layer architecture of a generic blockchain
(as introduced in Section II-A), detailed opportunities for
integrating blockchain with auction models can be discussed
at different blockchain layers, as illustrated in Fig. 3.

Fig. 3.

Integration of auction models in different blockchain layers.

• Immutability of the Auction Transaction. Every trans-
action executed on the blockchain is public, veriﬁable,
and immutable. This means that the blockchain can be
leveraged as an audit certiﬁcate device that prevents par-
ticipants from cheating during the auction. The winning
bidders can also use the blockchain as a transaction proof
[58].

• Automation of

the Auction Process. A smart contract
automates the auction process on the blockchain. Almost
all auction logic can be predeﬁned in smart contracts to
facilitate the exchange of goods or services as well as the
token payment.

1) Integration at the Application Layer: The application
layer is where the blockchain encapsulates various appli-
cation scenarios and use cases [35]. To communicate with
the blockchain network, applications use either a command-
line interface tool provided by the blockchain platform or a
speciﬁc programming software development kit. In this layer,
various auction application scenarios can be designed and
implemented as DApps. The front-end code of an auction
DApp can be written in any programming language and make
API calls to its back-end (usually blockchain nodes). Different
cryptocurrency DApps are also implemented at this layer to
support auction payments.

• Decentralization of the Auction Management. There is no
need for a speciﬁc third-party auctioneer, which ensures

2) Integration at the Contract Layer: Once deployed on the
blockchain, a smart contract cannot be altered. Therefore, an

Data LayerNetwork LayerConsensus LayerIncentive LayerContract LayerApplication LayerScript CodeSmart ContractCryptocurrencyEnergy TradingService AllocationData ManagementPoWPoSPBFTPoETTransmission & ValidationData BlockChain StructureTime StampKey SignatureIssuanceMechanismAllocationMechanismP2P NetworkAuction-Based NetworkTransmission ModelAuction-Based ConsensusAlgorithms OptimizationAuction-Based BlockchainIncentive Mechanism DesignAuction Smart ContractProgramming and BenchmarkingBlockchain-Based DAppDevelopment and OperationsAuction Specific Data StructureDesign7

this layer in the form of blockchain transactions. While most
researchers use current blockchain data structures to store
auction transactions, some others are designing customized
data structures for auction scenarios. For example, the authors
in [69] added additional ﬁelds (e.g., “Auctioned”, “Expired”,
“Price”, and “Consumption”) to the Bitcoin transaction data
structure to represent energy consumption and auction status.
Despite such technical advances, a comprehensive study is still
lacking in integrating auction models with the data layer.

In summary, although a blockchain is a multi-layered col-
laborative system, the research on blockchain-based auction
applications mainly focuses on the contract and application
layers. By contrast,
the research using auction models to
enhance blockchain technology mostly targets the incentive
and consensus layers. Moreover, the integration in data and
network layers is less studied and discussed in the literature.
In the following text, we present a detailed and state-of-the-art
review of the two integration efforts in Section III and Section
IV, respectively.

III. BLOCKCHAIN-BASED AUCTION APPLICATIONS
Existing surveys have indicated the huge potential of
blockchain-based auction models in application ﬁelds like
energy trading [47]. However, a systematic classiﬁcation to
categorize these applications is still
lacking [70]. In this
section, we propose an application-oriented taxonomy for
blockchain-based auction applications, which is shown in
Fig. 4. We identiﬁed and reviewed several key application
ﬁelds, namely energy trading, wireless communication, service
allocation, and others. Our classiﬁcation method is based on
a statistical analysis of existing literature and is therefore
suitable to analyze current development efforts and illustrate
future trends. Table III further summarizes the auction models
and blockchain technologies used in different studies.

auction smart contract must be carefully analyzed, developed,
and tested to ensure that the contract rules meet all require-
ments before they take effect in a real blockchain. Researchers
have designed various auction smart contracts for different
auction models (e.g., English auction, Dutch auction, and
sealed-bid auction). The operational cost of these contracts,
as well as the security and privacy of auction transactions,
are the current concerns that need to be addressed urgently.
Another consideration for contract
layer integration is the
development of new programming languages for auction smart
contracts [63]. In addition to general programming languages
(e.g., Solidity in Ethereum), domain-speciﬁc programming
languages have also been proposed to improve the usability
of auction smart contracts [64].

3) Integration at the Incentive Layer: There is great poten-
tial to use auction-based incentives in this layer to promote
the development of blockchain systems. Most current permis-
sionless blockchains (e.g., Bitcoin and Ethereum) leverage a
built-in GFP auction mechanism for the transaction fee market
design; users attach a transaction fee when they submit a
new transaction to the blockchain, and miners choose the
transactions with the highest fee for priority processing. Alter-
native auction models (e.g., GSP auction) hold the promise of
making the blockchain transaction fee market more efﬁcient
[65]. Another integration direction in this layer is the block
reward allocation in mining pools. In reality, auction models
are widely used for efﬁcient and fair block reward allocation
to motivate more miners to join the mining pool [17].

4) Integration at the Consensus Layer: Existing studies
have highlighted the need to integrate auction models into
blockchain consensus mechanisms. Auction models can be
added to the consensus layer in different manners. For ex-
ample, miners can use auctions to ofﬂoad the mining tasks
to cloud/edge/fog computing servers when traditional PoW
consensus requires too many computational resources [66].
Besides, auction models can be leveraged to model and opti-
mize existing consensus mechanisms. The selection of miner
nodes in PoS can be modeled as an auction where miners
bid for the new block, and the miner with the highest bid
(stake) wins the auction [67]. There are also new consensus
mechanisms that are designed using the auction mechanism
[62]. All these directions make the consensus layer a more
developed area in terms of integration.

5) Integration at the Network Layer: Researchers are work-
ing hard to optimize the blockchain network layer with various
techniques to improve security and efﬁciency [27]. However,
there are still many concerns about whether an auction model
is suitable in this layer. One promising topic would be the
design of data transfer mechanisms with incentives for P2P
networks using auction models [68]. However, to our knowl-
edge, few studies have speciﬁcally incorporated auctions into
this blockchain layer. We believe that future research in this
area should delve into such mechanisms.
It

the Data Layer:
is instinctive that
there is little space to optimize the blockchain data structure
using the auction model. In contrast, when blockchain is used
to support auction applications, all data related to auction
activities (including bidding and payment) will be stored in

6) Integration at

Fig. 4. Taxonomy of blockchain-based auction applications.

A. Energy Trading

Traditional centralized energy transaction models have
many shortcomings, including high operating costs, low trans-
parency, and latent risks of transaction data modiﬁcation [71].

Blockchain-Based Auction ApplicationsServiceAllocationWirelessCommunicationEnergyTradingSpectrumResourceNetworkResourceCloud/Fog/EdgeServiceVirtual NetworkServiceMobileServiceOthersCrowdsourcingSupply ChainManagementHuman ResourceManagementPowerGridSmartCommunityInternet ofVehiclesDataManagementStock ExchangeIntegrating blockchain with energy trading is a new paradigm
that has recently emerged. As an incentive and pricing mech-
anism, an auction plays a vital role in ensuring fairness and
improving transaction efﬁciency in energy exchange. However,
there are many challenges in integrating traditional energy
auctions into blockchain technology. Researchers have pro-
posed different blockchain-based auction models to address
those challenges in the energy market [72]. Thematically,
the relevant
literature can be roughly classiﬁed into three
categories: power grid, smart community, and Internet of
Vehicles (IoV).

1) Power Grid:

In traditional centralized power stations
(e.g., thermal power, natural gas, and nuclear stations), con-
sumers typically trade indirectly with energy suppliers through
retailers in the market. The situation has been improved by a
system named microgrid. It is a small-scale power genera-
tion and distribution system that comprises distributed power
sources, electric loads, distribution facilities, and monitoring
devices [73]. By promoting decentralized transactions between
distributed generations (DGs) and consumers in a microgrid
(instead of letting retailers act as intermediaries), the interests
of both parties are increased. With the development of mi-
crogrids, transactive energy paradigms have been proposed to
support the development of next-generation energy distribution
systems. In this paradigm, customers might also act as sup-
pliers rather than the one-way conﬁguration of suppliers and
consumers. Microgrid systems, in this way, allow customers
to store electricity resources, sell them on-demand, and buy
them from other customers [74].

In this regard, the fusion of blockchain and auction models
can provide a transparent and credible trading environment
for P2P microgrid energy transactions. The relevant literature
has demonstrated that double auctions are more suitable for
multi-seller and multi-buyer models in grid transactions. For
example, Wang et al. [71] suggested a model for direct
electricity trading between DGs and consumers in micro-
grids based on blockchain technology and continuous double
auctions. To allow dynamic adjustment of the auction bids,
their model adopts an adaptive aggressiveness bidding strategy.
Besides, DGs and consumers can exchange digital certiﬁcates
on the blockchain to settle the auction and guarantee auction
security. Yan et al. [75] used a similar pricing strategy, but
they paid more attention to the generation right trade market.
They focused on the problem of how to allocate available
generation rights to integrate clean energy and reduce thermal
power emissions. It should be noted that the energy payments
in both of the above-mentioned studies are based on the
Bitcoin cryptocurrency protocol. In addition, Thakur et al. [69]
proposed that the information about energy surplus or deﬁcit
can be encoded as blockchain transactions and stored in an
optimized Bitcoin data structure to support double auctions.
St¨ubs et al. [76] argued that there are multiple communications
and data transmissions between various layers of the power
grid. So a hierarchical double auction model is proposed for
full on-chain implementation of energy transactions. AlAsh-
ery et al. [77] proposed a double auction model with an
optimized VCG pricing mechanism for P2P energy trading
in power grids on the blockchain. Zhao et al. [78] proposed

8

a bandit learning-based double auction model that can pro-
vide participants with more auction revenues by learning the
transaction history.

Some traditional single-sided auction models are also pre-
sented for microgrid energy trading. Seven et al. [79] proposed
a novel P2P energy trading scheme that uses smart contracts
for virtual power plants (VPPs). In particular, the authors used
an English auction-based workﬂow to achieve P2P transactions
in a VPP. Hahn et al. [80] demonstrated how to implement
Vickrey auctions on smart contracts and use them for a trading
market, where multiple consumers bid for power resources
from photovoltaic arrays. The authors in [81] leveraged both
Dutch and Vickrey auction models for user negotiation and
power distribution. In addition, a wallet-based cryptocurrency
called GreenCoin is created to support energy payments.

Blockchain-based decentralized systems bring new privacy
challenges like the possible leakage of energy usage pat-
terns [82]. So permissioned blockchains with better scalability
and identity permission mechanisms are widely discussed in
power grids. In this context, Zhang et al. [83] proposed a
privacy-preserving scheme for direct power transactions in
microgrids, in which a continuous double auction is combined
with a permissioned blockchain to reduce costs and improve
transaction privacy and efﬁciency. Hassan et al. [84] adopted a
permissioned blockchain for the computation of complex on-
chain transactions. Additionally, they leveraged the differential
privacy technology to protect auction privacy.

2) Smart Community: The smart community is another
blockchain-based energy auction application ﬁeld that has
attracted much public attention [85], [86]. In general, a com-
munity microgrid is a self-sufﬁcient energy system designed to
meet local energy needs (e.g., electricity, heating, and cooling)
for communities, villages, towns, and cities. Some households
may have extra renewable energy in their community micro-
grid and can therefore meet the needs of their neighbors. The
community can ﬂexibly absorb the peak hours of individual
consumers; in this way, the energy demand of the community
can be stabilized, and energy resources can be better planned.
The success of a smart community heavily depends on the
function of its auction economic backbone [85]. In [86], the
authors proposed a model for auctioning energy and water
resources between smart communities and smart homes, thus
encouraging communities to optimize global consumption. In
particular, users can use a Vickrey auction model on the
blockchain network during the resource negotiation stage.
Guo et al. [87] considered the issue of energy trading in
combined cooling, heating, and power (CCHP) systems and
developed a non-cooperative Stackelberg game between power
grid agents and the system to model energy transactions.

Other studies focus on improving the scalability of the
blockchain to improve the performance of community en-
ergy auctions. Saxena et al. [88] presented a permissioned
blockchain implementation of a P2P energy trading system
for residential communities. In this system, a single house
owner can place his/her energy bid in the district within
discrete time intervals on the blockchain. A more scalable
local grid system for smart communities is enerDAG [89], in
which a blockchain with tangled data structures is leveraged

to overcome issues such as expensive transaction fees and
limited throughput. However,
there are still many debates
regarding this blockchain since it deviates from the traditional
blockchain’s “chained block” data structure.

Quartierstrom [90] is a blockchain-based project for com-
munity energy trading. It is designed to manage the exchange
and payment of electricity resources between consumers,
producers, and local grid suppliers without any intermedi-
aries. In Quartierstrom, a real-world prototype system has
been implemented and tested in the town of Wallenstadt in
Switzerland (a community with 37 families involved). The
pricing mechanism of the Quartierstrom market is a double
auction with discriminative pricing, while Tendermint serves
as the underlying blockchain [91].

3) Internet of Vehicles: Vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) describes
a trading model
in which plug-in electric vehicles (EVs)
communicate with each other to exchange electricity energy.
It can enhance the cooperation between vehicles, extend the
driving endurance, and avoid the grid overload problem [92],
[93]. However, conducting non-transparent energy transactions
in IoV without trust is risky. Most existing IoV energy trading
platforms and facilities are centralized, and they rely on trusted
third parties (TTPs) to manage power dispatch, transaction
payments, and security issues; nevertheless, these third parties
are costly and can be corrupted [94]. In a blockchain-enabled
decentralized IoV network, Xia et al. [92] presented a V2V
electricity trading strategy using Bayesian game-based bidding
and pricing. Sun et al. [94] further considered transaction
privacy and efﬁciency issues. They adopted a permissioned
blockchain in the designed V2V energy trading architecture.
Additionally, a novel DPoS consensus mechanism is utilized
to boost trade efﬁciency. In [95] and [96], the authors argued
that the high computational cost required in the classic per-
missionless blockchain is not suitable for IoV. Therefore, they
adopted a blockchain with a directed acyclic graph (DAG) data
structure for charging scheduling among EVs. Furthermore,
Choubey et al. [97] introduced a new cryptocurrency called
ETcoin to facilitate energy transactions among EVs on the
permissioned blockchain.

Another related topic is vehicle-to-grid (V2G), which de-
scribes a system in which plug-in EVs communicate with
the grid by returning electricity or limiting their charging
rate to sell demand response services. Hassija et al. [98]
proposed a scheme utilizing the IOTA blockchain for data
sharing and energy trading in V2G networks. The scheme
implements an auction-based game-theoretic approach for the
price competition between EVs and grid users. Similarly,
Liu et al. [99] developed a reverse auction-based dynamic pric-
ing model for V2G networks in order to improve social welfare
and transaction efﬁciency. In their model, unﬁlled charging
EVs are powered by the smart grid, while charging and
discharging transactions are executed on the smart contract.
Pustiˇsek et al. [100] presented a model that allows independent
selection/dispatch of the most convenient charging stations
for EVs in V2G networks via blockchain. The model
is
implemented using the Ethereum blockchain and an FPSB
auction model. To summarize, a general blockchain-based
energy trading model for IoV is illustrated in Fig. 5.

9

Fig. 5. An illustration of a blockchain-based energy trading model for IoV.
Charging/discharging EVs and power grids upload the demand and supply
requests as well as the bids/offers to the blockchain. After transactions are
conﬁrmed on the blockchain, the energy resources are traded between different
entities and paid in cryptocurrencies.

B. Wireless Communication

As wireless systems develop with new mobile communica-
tion technologies, they become increasingly complex in terms
of architecture and management. Auctions have been proposed
as practical mechanisms for assigning a wide range of wireless
resources (e.g., spectra, subchannels, time slots, and transmit
power levels). By designing and employing various auction
procedures, wireless resources can be efﬁciently allocated
between consumers and resource providers [101].

1) Spectrum Resource: With the rapid development of com-
munication technology, users’ demand for spectrum resources
continues to increase, making spectrum a scarce resource
in the trading market. However, the traditional government-
led static spectrum allocation approach has failed to fully
utilize the limited spectrum resources. According to the report
from FCC, the utilization of the licensed spectrum can only
be maintained between 15% to 85% with static spectrum
allocation solutions [102]. As a result, market-driven spectrum
auctions have emerged as promising solutions for spectrum
allocation [103]. A spectrum auction can be centralized or
decentralized, and Fig. 6 shows a comparison of the two
approaches.

In this context, Fan and Huo [104] suggested a blockchain-
based framework for license-free spectrum resource manage-
ment in cyber-physical-social systems (CPSS). In particular,
two ways of obtaining a spectrum access license (i.e., mining
and auction) are designed. A new virtual currency, called
Xcoin, is also introduced in this process to enhance spectrum
trading. Yu et al. [105] focused on the space communication
ﬁeld and presented a spectrum auction model for hetero-
geneous spacecraft networks based on blockchains. Recent
studies have further highlighted the security and privacy
challenges [106]. For example, Tu et al. [107] designed a
privacy-preserving double auction mechanism for blockchain-
enabled spectrum sharing using the differential privacy tech-
nology. Wang et al. [103] designed a secure spectrum auction
protocol that utilizes Intel Software Guard Extensions (SGX)
technology and the Paillier cryptosystem.

Blockchain NetworkAuction  Smart ContractDischarging  EVDischarging EVInternet of VehiclesPower GridData FlowEnergy FlowCharging StationCharging EVCharging  EVUpload Supply RequestsUpload  Demand RequestsUpload Supply RequestsEnergy  Coins10

which a double auction model and a permissioned blockchain
are combined. Besides, cooperative relaying can be an effec-
tive way to improve the capacity, reliability, and security of
wireless networks. It either helps establish communications
between the source and destination or improves the established
communications by adding diversity. In [113], relay operators
are designed to be responsible for the relay/jammer selection
and resource allocation. A double auction mechanism is used
to simulate the interaction between transmitters and relay
operators. Furthermore, User congestion in wireless networks
is a severe problem to be solved. A Vickrey auction-based
user ofﬂoading mechanism between macrocell base stations
and small cell access points has been proposed in [114] to
improve the capacity of heterogeneous wireless networks.

An unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV), also known as a drone,
is a newly emerging ﬂying antenna system with a critical
requirement for network resource allocation. Accordingly, a
drone-mounted base station is primarily responsible for the
communication between the UAV backhaul and access net-
works. In this ﬁeld, Hassija et al. [115] introduced the idea
of using dynamic auctions to allocate the bandwidth of drone-
mounted base stations to different users to improve availability
and reduce costs. Khan et al. [116] proposed a multi-UAV
network framework, which can: 1) outsource network coverage
in speciﬁc areas based on the required service requirements; 2)
enable each network entity to use the blockchain intelligently;
and 3) provide an auction mechanism to make autonomous de-
cisions. To model the interaction between UAV operators and
business agents, a reputation-based truthful auction method is
also presented.

C. Service Allocation

Recent developments in service computing allow the use
of blockchain to allocate heterogeneous services, where
blockchain can be used as decentralized auditing devices, and
cryptocurrencies can secure money payments. However, most
of the existing models do not provide incentives for matching
service customers and providers; they often rely on manual
and inefﬁcient solutions [117]. Therefore, different auction
models are proposed together with blockchain to provide
secure, credible, and economical service allocation platforms.
1) Cloud/Fog/Edge Service: With the rapid growth of the
cloud computing industry, more and more application opera-
tors are now using the cloud for service hosting, computing of-
ﬂoading, and data storage. Some large cloud service providers
(e.g., AWS, Azure, and Google Cloud) have already supported
spot instance pricing, allowing users to bid on unused capacity
in cloud data centers. In this way, some users can even save
up to 90% of the cost compared with the traditional on-
demand instance pricing [118]. However, since cloud service
providers usually sell services in a centralized and opaque
manner, the fairness of the auction is challenging to guarantee
in reality. A trustworthy transaction and payment mechanism
is urgently needed to motivate service providers/customers
and improve service utilization. AStERISK [117] is a frame-
work designed to ﬁll this gap; it automatically determines
the best price for cloud services and assigns customers to

(a) Centralized Auction Model

(b) Decentralized Auction Model

Fig. 6. A comparison of centralized and decentralized spectrum auction
models. A primary base station (PBS) obtains or transfers the spectrum
ownership through a centralized auction managed by an auctioneer. While in a
decentralized auction, spectrum users can conduct P2P spectrum transactions
on the blockchain without the need for a third-party auctioneer.

It should be noted that spectrum auctions are different from
traditional auctions due to the reusable nature of spectrum
resources. In most traditional auctions, the same items (e.g.,
artworks, antiques, and estates) can only be auctioned to
a speciﬁc buyer. Spectrum auctions, by contrast, can allow
the sharing of an auctioned channel as long as the buyers
do not interfere with each other. In this context, dynamic
spectrum management in cognitive radio (CR) networks can
address the lack and underutilization of spectrum resources.
CRs can be dynamically programmed and conﬁgured to use
the best wireless channel nearby to avoid users interference
and congestion. Based on the cognition and reconﬁguration of
CRs, the primary users can share their licensed spectrum with
secondary users to improve spectrum utilization [106]. The
authors in [108], [109] introduced the idea of using blockchain
as a decentralized database to verify spectrum sharing and
auctions in CR networks. For secondary spectrum auctions
in a CR network, an automatic pricing strategy based on
a blockchain token called “spectrum dollars” is introduced
in [110].

2) Network Resource: In addition to spectrum resources,
researchers have paid attention to other network resources
in wireless networks. SAFE [111] is a framework designed
for users to customize auction formats and allocate general
wireless network resources, e.g., spectrum channels, femtocell
access permissions, and resource blocks of device-to-device
connections. Afraz et al. [112] proposed a distributed resource
market mechanism for future telecommunications networks, in

AuctioneerSpectrum MarketSecondary Spectrum MarketAuctioneerPBSPBSPBSPBSSecondary UserBids & PaymentsBids &PaymentsAuction  Smart ContractBids & PaymentsSpectrum Seller/BuyerBlockchain NetworkBids & PaymentsPBSthe most appropriate providers by implementing sealed-bid
auctions on the blockchain. Similarly, Chen et al. [119]
introduced a blockchain-based auction and trading model for
cloud virtual machine allocation. Their model can achieve
fairness in auction transactions by implementing commitment-
based state mechanisms, smart contracts, and cryptocurrency
technologies. In [120], [121], the authors paid attention to
the cloud storage problem and proposed VCG auction-based
resource trading models for distributed cloud storage.

The paradigm of connecting things to the cloud to receive
a centralized service is not always the best option, which
leads to the context in which edge and fog computing are
widely discussed. Basically, they both intend to distribute the
computing capacity and assist the cloud server with additional
resources located near the end users [122]. In this respect,
DeCloud [123] is a secure and decentralized auction system
speciﬁcally built for open edge computing infrastructures. It
integrates a truthful double auction and a bidding language
to match highly heterogeneous edge resources with different
service requests. Debe et al. [124] demonstrated a blockchain-
based reverse auction solution for public fog service allocation.
Yu et al. [125] also leveraged the reverse auction model and
presented a blockchain-based edge crowdsourcing service sys-
tem. Speciﬁcally, a changeable auction algorithm is designed
so that each request from the user will ﬁnd a winner that can
provide the appropriate edge service.

2) Virtual Network Service: Network function virtualiza-
tion (NFV) has come into view for its ability to provide
multiple network functions at a low cost [126]. BRAIN [127]
is a blockchain-based reverse auction solution with a focus on
NFV scenarios. It is introduced to address the challenge of
discovering and selecting infrastructures that can efﬁciently
host NFV services based on speciﬁc user needs. Virtual
network embedding (VNE) is one of the most
important
problems in network virtualization and is responsible for
mapping virtual networks to underlying physical networks.
Many auction methods have been presented in the literature to
achieve efﬁcient resource allocation in VNE. Rizk et al. [128]
designed a decentralized VNE system that uses smart contracts
and a Vickrey auction model for trustworthy virtual network
partitioning and allocation.

3) Mobile Service: The number of mobile devices and
compute-intensive mobile applications has exploded in recent
decades. The focus of these mobile applications is to im-
prove the quality of service (QoS) for end users; however,
by improving the QoS, these applications generate a large
amount of mobile trafﬁc, thus posing a huge challenge to
mobile network providers. One of the most promising ways
to deal with this issue is mobile data ofﬂoading. For example,
Hassija et al. [129] created a mobile data ofﬂoading model in
which mobile devices and users can securely perform compu-
tation ofﬂoading services on the blockchain. FlopCoin [130]
is a virtual currency specially designed for compensating
mobile devices when they execute device-to-device ofﬂoading
services.

On the other hand, the widespread dissemination of pro-
grammable sensor-employed smartphones has facilitated mo-
bile crowdsensing applications such as environmental mon-

11

itoring, crowd journalism, and public safety. These applica-
tions require effective incentives to compensate and reward
mobile users for their resource contributions. Chatzopou-
los et al. [131] suggested the use of blockchain and smart
contracts to manage spatial crowdsensing interactions between
mobile service providers and customers. A truthful and cost-
optimal auction model is also designed on the blockchain to
reduce payments from crowdsensing providers to mobile users.

D. Others

1) Data Management: The uncertainty of data value makes
it difﬁcult to make accurate estimates of the appropriate price
for data. An auction is a powerful approach to protect the
interests of both data sellers and buyers while maintaining
the fundamental principles of the marketplace. To eliminate
systemic risks caused by collusion in large-scale data auctions,
the authors in [132] introduced a decentralized data auction
system that uses an anti-collusion auction algorithm executed
on the smart contract. The system ensures that buyers and
sellers can engage in data auctions without relying on TTPs.
An et al. [133] implemented a crowdsourcing data trading
system using blockchain and reverse auctions. They used
carefully designed smart contracts to replace third-party data
brokers, thus providing a trustworthy environment for data
sellers and consumers. Besides, a permissioned blockchain-
based model is used in [134] to enable secure and efﬁcient
IoV data transactions. An iterative double auction model is
also presented to optimize data pricing and improve data
transaction volume.

2) Stock Exchange: A stock exchange is a marketplace
where traders can buy and sell securities, e.g., stocks, bonds,
options. To address the single point of failure in centralized
stock exchange platforms, Al-Shaibani et al. [135] introduced
a permissioned blockchain-based decentralized stock exchange
platform. Similarly, Pop et al. [136] suggested addressing the
shortcomings of centralized stock trading to reduce transaction
costs caused by brokers and central institutions. An Ethereum-
based decentralized Bucharest stock exchange model is further
proposed and validated. Recently, dark pool trading, as an
anonymous and decentralized stock trading approach, has
become an increasingly important component of traditional
stock exchanges. The decentralized and secure transaction
properties of blockchain are well suited to provide support
for anonymous dark pool transactions. AuditChain [137] is
an auditing and record-keeping platform for ﬁnancial markets
using blockchain. In particular, a periodic double auction-
based dark pool use case is used to demonstrate the platform’s
feasibility for stock trading. When a private corporation wants
to raise capital by issuing new stocks, it can issue shares
to the public by conducting an initial public offering (IPO).
Purchasers usually acquire multiple shares from the seller at
the same price in an IPO, which is a typical example of a uni-
form price auction. In [138], the authors introduced a uniform
price auction model for IPOs on the permissioned blockchain.
The model further leverages secure multi-party computation
technology to protect the privacy of IPO transactions.

3) Crowdsourcing: Crowdsourcing is a speciﬁc business
model for acquiring resources in which an individual or
organization can leverage a large number of users to obtain
desired services. Traditional centralized crowdsourcing plat-
forms face many challenges, including motivating workers to
share their truthful costs and guaranteeing trusted interactions
among users and the platform. To cope with those chal-
lenges, ABCrowd [139] is a fully decentralized crowdsourcing
framework that implements a repeated single-minded VCG
auction mechanism on the blockchain. BitFund [140] is a
platform designed to connect developers and investors in the
global crowdfunding environment, where a novel ascending-
price progressive auction algorithm is implemented for cost-
effective task allocation.

4) Supply Chain Management: In a supply chain, decen-
tralized auctions can be widely used to coordinate transactions
between suppliers and consumers. BitCom [141] is a decen-
tralized supply chain model built on the blockchain to provide
a clean and efﬁcient trading environment. Martins et al. [142]
proposed a customer-driven supply chain marketplace on the
blockchain, where customers post their proposals and suppliers
strive to outbid each other in a reverse auction model. Sim-
ilarly, Koirala et al. [143] introduced a solution to improve
transparency and traceability in the carrier procurement pro-
cess. Their solution considers multiple attributes of carriers in
the supply chain during the reverse auction bidding process.
The traditional English auction model has also been found
in the literature. In [144], an online English auction system is
implemented to sell and buy food products using the Ethereum
blockchain.

5) Human Resource Management: Employment and la-
bor industries become more and more important since the
value of human resources is directly related to a company’s
proﬁtability. However, employee background check remains
a controversial ﬁeld in HR operations, particularly in the
cases of employment, education, and skills veriﬁcation [145].
E2C-Chain [145] [146] is a two-stage blockchain designed
to assist the improvement of human resource management.
In the ﬁrst stage, the employees’ background records can
be stored in the blockchain in an immutable manner. After
that, a VCG auction mechanism is leveraged to encourage
veriﬁers to join in the skill veriﬁcation of employees. Another
application ﬁeld is employee recognition program, where em-
ployers reward employees for their achievements, milestones,
and anniversaries [147]. In such a context, Ward et al. [148]
argued that employees could liquidate their unwanted gifts
to others through auction mechanisms. Blockchain and smart
contract technologies can be used in this process of matching
individuals for exchanging gifts.

We also identiﬁed individual applications in blockchain-
based auction models, e.g., federated learning (FL), IoT col-
laboration, and code ownership management. For instance,
a centralized aggregator is usually needed to maintain and
update the global state in a traditional FL model. BAFFLE
[149] is a decentralized framework for non-aggregator FL.
It uses smart contracts to coordinate FL tasks and a user
scoring and bidding mechanism to reach the FL goal. For
FL in edge computing, Fan et al. [150] proposed a resource

12

trading system using a hybrid blockchain. Their main idea is
to establish a transparent, decentralized, and high-performance
trading platform that can encourage more edge nodes to
join in the FL model training. Another interesting topic is
collaborative IoT. As IoT projects become more and more
complex, IoT managers, experts, and non-technical staff are
expected to collaborate in the IoT development cycle [151].
In [152], a novel blockchain-based reverse auction model is
proposed to prompt active cooperation among IoT participants.
Besides, the current centralized code ownership management
scheme is cumbersome and opaque. Therefore, a blockchain-
based approach for managing code ownership is proposed in
[153], where auctions are used for ubiquitous code allocation.

E. Key Observations

The key observations we obtained in this section are sum-

marized as follows:

• Blockchain and smart contract technologies hold great
potential to optimize traditional centralized auction mod-
els in many application ﬁelds, as they can provide a
decentralized, transparent and trustworthy trading envi-
ronment. Different researchers have used different auction
models and blockchain technologies to handle auctions
for speciﬁc application scenarios. These applications are
mainly found in energy trading, wireless communication,
and service allocation.

• The most popular application ﬁeld for blockchain-based
auctions is energy trading. Energy trading has been a
popular research topic in recent years, and as a result,
a large number of publications have appeared. Specif-
ically, decentralized auctions can facilitate P2P energy
transactions between energy producers and consumers in
microgrids, smart communities, and IoV networks.

• Blockchain-based auction models can promote the effec-
tive and trustworthy allocation of scarce wireless com-
munication resources. On the one hand, blockchain can
optimize the traditional government-led spectrum auction
and make the auction process more transparent and
trustworthy. On the other hand, other wireless network
resources, such as users, bandwidth, and access rights,
can be effectively allocated between resource customers
and providers through different auction models on the
blockchain.

• Another popular application is service allocation, where
service providers and customers can use blockchain
and smart contracts to set auction rules for service
transactions. A common scenario is that only service
providers who win the bidding can sell their services to
the customer (i.e., a reverse auction). Current research
on this topic is mainly focused on cloud/fog/edge ser-
vices. Virtual network services and mobile services are
also found as auction items in different studies. Other
promising applications identiﬁed in the literature include
data management, stock exchange, crowdsourcing, supply
chain management, human resource management, etc.

13

(a) Distribution of Blockchain Platforms

(b) Distribution of Auction Models

Fig. 7. The distribution of blockchain technologies and auction models in
existing studies regarding different application ﬁelds. The results are obtained
by quantitative statistics based on their number of appearances in the literature.
Details of the auction model and blockchain technology used in each paper
are listed in the Table III.

To get an overview of how blockchain and auction mod-
els are integrated, we summarized the auction models and
blockchain technologies used in different studies, as shown
in Table III. In general, although different blockchain tech-
nologies have their trade-offs, researchers tend to have speciﬁc
selection requirements and preferences when actually perform-
ing the model construction. We ﬁnd that the largest share of
studies (34.7%) adopt permissioned blockchain technologies.
It is widely believed that the access control mechanism in the
permissioned blockchain can protect business secrets better.
In addition, the high throughput of permissioned blockchains
can accommodate large-scale transactions, making them more
suitable for real industrial applications. Slightly fewer studies
(28.0%) use permissionless blockchains. In these studies,
researchers argue that the fully decentralized nature of permis-
sionless blockchains can make the auction platform more trust-
worthy, and the built-in cryptocurrency can directly support
transactions within the blockchain platform. We ﬁnd that only
three studies choose the hybrid blockchain. Although cross-
chain solutions have been proposed for several years, they have
rarely been studied in auction applications. Nevertheless, we
believe this could be a promising direction for future research.
Finally, in one-third of the studies, no speciﬁc blockchain
technology was determined. Those authors leave the choice
of implementing blockchain technologies to users.

Fig. 7(a) further illustrates the distribution of blockchain
platforms used in different auction application ﬁelds. Our
ﬁnding is that more than half of the studies use Ethereum
as the underlying blockchain infrastructure. Apart from en-
ergy trading, Ethereum is also the most popular blockchain
platform in all application ﬁelds. Some researchers argue
that microtransactions in P2P energy trading require high
system throughput, so it is more favorable to implement a
permissioned blockchain (e.g., Hyperledger Fabric) or DAG
blockchain (e.g., IOTA) platform. In addition, we notice that a
small number of authors do not choose established commercial
blockchains; instead, they use simulation tools (e.g., Python or
Matlab) to validate their models or frameworks. Other studies
only present the conceptual proof of their blockchain-based
auction models without on-chain implementations.

As shown in Fig. 7(b), the most commonly used auction
models are double auction (36.4%), reverse auction (11.7%),
Vickrey auction (11.7%), and VCG auction (7.8%). We notice
that double auctions are most frequently used in energy
trading and stock exchange. This is mainly because the energy
trading and stock exchange markets with multiple sellers
and multiple buyers are well suited to integrate with double
auctions. Among other application ﬁelds, most researchers
prefer traditional single-sided auctions (e.g., reverse, Vickrey,
and VCG auctions). Another interesting ﬁnding is that reverse
auctions are popular in service allocation and supply chain
management. This is mainly because the reverse auction
can bring substantial cost savings to buyers in those two
application ﬁelds. A reverse auction also helps streamline the
auction process; auction time is saved because buyers do not
need to send requests to different sellers one by one.

Energy TradingWireless CommunicationService AllocationCrowdsourcingSupply ChainSupply ChainHuman ResourceN/AN/ADataData Management ManagementStock ExchangeEthereum (13.2%)Ethereum (13.2%)Fabric (3.9%)Fabric (3.9%)IOTA (3.9%)Bitcoin (2.6%)Tendermint (1.3%)MultiChain (1.3%)Burrow (1.3%)Simulation (3.9%)Prototype (7.9%)Ethereum (10.5)%Ethereum (10.5)%Fabric (2.6%)Fabric (2.6%)IOTA (1.3%)Prototype (3.9%)Ethereum (6.6%)Ethereum (6.6%)Fabric (1.3%)Fabric (1.3%)Chainspace (1.3%)Simulation (1.3%)Prototype (2.6%)Ethereum (2.6%)Ethereum (2.6%)Ethereum (3.9%)Ethereum (3.9%)Prototype (1.3%)Ethereum (1.3%)Ethereum (1.3%)Simulation (1.3%)Ethereum (3.9%)Ethereum (3.9%)FISCO-BCOS (1.3%)Prototype (1.3%)Ethereum (6.6%)Ethereum (6.6%)Ethereum (2.6%)Ethereum (2.6%)Fabric (1.3%)Fabric (1.3%)AuditChain (1.3%)AuditChain (1.3%)Energy TradingDouble auction (23.4%)Double auction (23.4%)Vickrey auction (3.9%)Vickrey auction (3.9%)English auction (2.6%)Dutch auction (1.3%)FPSB auction (1.3%)VCG auction (1.3%)Reverse auction (1.3%)Parallel auction (1.3%)Parallel auction (1.3%)Ascending-priceAscending-price progressive auction (1.3%) progressive auction (1.3%)Multi-attribute auction (1.3%)N/S (2.6%)Wireless CommunicationDouble auction (5.2%)Double auction (5.2%)Vickrey auction (3.9%)Vickrey auction (3.9%)Multi-attribute auction (2.6%)Sealed-bid auction (2.6%)Waiting-line auction (1.3%)Single-sided auction (1.3%)N/S (1.3%)Service AllocationDouble auction (1.3%)Double auction (1.3%)Vickrey auction (2.6%)Vickrey auction (2.6%)Reverse auction (3.9%)VCG auction (1.3%)Multi-attribute auction (1.3%)Combinatorial auction (2.6%)CrowdsourcingVCG auction (1.3%)Ascending-priceAscending-price progressive auction (1.3%) progressive auction (1.3%)Supply ChainSupply ChainDouble auction (1.3%)Double auction (1.3%)English auction (1.3%)Reverse auction (2.6%)Human ResourceVCG auction (1.3%)N/S (1.3%)N/AN/AReverse auction (2.6%)Vickrey auction (1.3%)Vickrey auction (1.3%)Scoring and bidding mechanism (1.3%)DataData Management ManagementDouble auction (1.3%)Double auction (1.3%)FPSB auction (1.3%)VCG auction (2.6%)Reverse auction (1.3%)Stock ExchangeDouble auction (3.9%)Double auction (3.9%)Uniform price auction (1.3%)14

TABLE III
SUMMARY OF BLOCKCHAIN-BASED AUCTION APPLICATIONS

Application Field

Ref. Year Addressed Issue

Auction Model

Blockchain Type Blockchain Platform

[71]

2017 Microgrids energy trading

Continuous double auction

Permissionless

Bitcoin

[75]

2018 Generation right trading

Continuous double auction

Permissioned

MultiChain

[69]

2018 Microgrids energy trading

Double auction

Permissionless

Bitcoin

[76]

2020 Smart grids energy trading

Hierarchical double auction

Permissionless

Ethereum

[77]

2020 Smart grids energy trading

Double auction

Permissioned

Simulation

[78]

2019 Transactive energy trading

Double auction with bandit
learning

N/S

Ethereum

[79]

2020 Energy trading in virtual power plants

English auction

Permissionless

Ethereum

[80]

2017 Transactive energy trading

Vickrey auction

Power
Grid

[81]

2019 Smart power distribution

Dutch auction & Vickrey
auction

N/S

N/S

Ethereum

Ethereum

[82]

2017 Transactive energy trading

N/S

Permissionless

Prototype

[83]

2019 Microgrids energy trading

Continuous double auction

Permissioned

Simulation

[84]

2020 Microgrids energy trading

Modiﬁed VCG auction

Permissioned

Prototype

[72]

2017 Decentralized energy trading market

Short-term parallel auction

Permissioned

Hyperledger Burrow

[74]

2020 Microgrids energy trading

[154] 2019 Decentralized energy trading market

English auction & Continu-
ous double auction

N/S

Ethereum

Uniform-Price double auc-
tion

Permissioned

Ethereum

[85]

2019 Smart communities energy trading

Double auction

Hybrid

Prototype

[86]

2018 Smart communities energy trading

Vickrey auction

Permissioned

Ethereum

[87]

2020 Energy trading in CCHP systems

N/S

Permissionless

Prototype

[88]

2019 Residential communities energy trading

Periodic double auction

Permissioned

Hyperledger Fabric

[89]

2020 Local energy trading market

Double auction

Permissionless

IOTA

[90]
[91]

2019 Local energy trading market

Double auction

Permissioned

Tendermint

[92]

2020 V2V energy trading

[93]

2020 EV group energy trading

Double auction

Double auction

Permissioned

Hyperledger Fabric

N/S

Prototype

Energy
Trading

Smart
Commu-
nity

[94]

2020 V2V energy trading

Iterative double auction

Permissioned

Simulation

[95]

2020 Energy trading in IoV

Multi-attribute auction

Permissionless

IOTA

[96]

2020 EV charging scheduling

Constrained double auction

Permissionless

Prototype

[97]

2019 V2V energy trading

Double auction

Permissioned

Hyperledger Fabric

Internet
of
Vehicles

[98]

2020 V2G data sharing and energy trading

Ascending-price progressive
auction

Permissionless

IOTA

[99]

2019 V2G energy trading

Reverse sealed-bid auction

Permissioned

Ethereum

[100] 2016 V2G charging scheduling

FPSB auction

[103] 2020 Spectrum resource allocation

Single-sided auction

N/S

N/S

Ethereum

Ethereum

[104] 2020 Spectrum resource management in CPSS N/S

Permissioned

Prototype

[106] 2020 Multiple-operators spectrum sharing

Double auction

Permissioned

Ethereum

[107] 2020 Dynamic spectrum sharing

Double auction

Permissioned

Ethereum

Radio
Spectrum

[108]
[109]

2017
2018

Spectrum sharing in CR networks

Waiting-line auction

Permissionless

Prototype

Wireless
Commu-
nication

[110] 2020 Secondary spectrum trading market

Periodic sealed-bid auction

N/S

Prototype

[105] 2019

Spectrum allocation in spacecraft net-
works

Generalized Vickrey auction

Permissionless

Ethereum

Continued on next page

15

Continued from previous page

Application Field

Ref. Year Addressed Issue

Auction Model

Blockchain Type Blockchain Platform

[111] 2020 Wireless network resource allocation

General sealed-bid auction

Permissionless

Ethereum

[112] 2019

Trade market for telecommunication net-
works

Double auction

Permissioned

Hyperledger Fabric

[113] 2019 Ccooperative relaying resource allocation Double auction

Permissionless

Ethereum

Network
Resource

[114] 2020 User ofﬂoading in wireless networks

Vickrey auction

N/S

Ethereum

[115] 2020

Bandwidth allocation for UAV base sta-
tions

Multi-attribute auction

Permissioned

Ethereum

[116] 2020 UAV network resource allocation

Vickrey auction

Permissioned

Hyperledger Fabric

[155] 2020

Bandwidth allocation between EVs and
roadside units

Multi-attribute auction

Permissionless

IOTA

[117] 2019 Shared economy service allocation

Vickrey auction

Permissionless

Chainspace

[119] 2020 Cloud VM allocation

Combinatorial auction

[120] 2018 Cloud data storage resource trading

VCG auction

[121] 2018 Distributed data storage

Reverse VCG auction

[123] 2019 Edge/Cloud service trading

[124] 2020 Fog service trading

[125] 2019 Edge service crowdsensing

Double auction

Reverse auction

Reverse auction

N/S

N/S

N/S

N/S

Ethereum

Ethereum

Ethereum

Prototype

Permissionless

Ethereum

N/S

Prototype

[156] 2020 Service allocation in fog-enabled IoV

VCG auction

Permissioned

Hyperledger Fabric

[127] 2019 Virtual network services in NFV markets Reverse FPSB auction

Permissionless

Ethereum

[128] 2018 Brokerless virtual network embedding

Vickrey auction

Permissioned

Ethereum

[129] 2020 Mobile data ofﬂoading

Multi-attribute auction

Permissionless

Simulation

[131] 2018 Mobile service crowdsensing

Combinatorial auction

[132] 2020 Big data trading and auction

FPSB auction

[133] 2019 Crowdsensed data trading

Reverse auction

N/S

N/S

N/S

Ethereum

Ethereum

Ethereum

[134] 2019 Data trading in IoV

Iterative double auction

Permissioned

Ethereum

[135] 2020 Decentralized stock exchange

[136] 2018 Decentralized stock exchange

Double auction

Double auction

Permissioned

Ethereum

N/S

Ethereum

[137] 2020 Financial trade auditing

Periodic double auction

Permissioned

AuditChain

[138] 2019 Secure and efﬁcient IPOs

Sealed-bid
auction

uniform price

Permissioned

Hyperledger Fabric

[139] 2020 Decentralized spatial crowdsourcing

Optimized VCG auction

[140] 2020 Decentralized crowdfunding platform

Ascending-price progressive
auction

N/S

N/S

Ethereum

Ethereum

[141] 2020 Decentralized supply chain management Double auction

Hybrid

Prototype

[142] 2020 Customer bargaining and e-procurement Reverse auction

Permissionless

Ethereum

[143] 2019 Multi-attribute carrier procurement

Reverse auction

[144] 2021 Food supply chain management

English auction

[145]
[146]

2019 Education and employment veriﬁcation

VCG auction

[148] 2018 Employee recognition programs reward

N/S

[149] 2020 Decentralized federated learning

Scoring and bidding mecha-
nism

N/S

N/S

N/S

N/S

N/S

Ethereum

Ethereum

Simulation

Ethereum

Ethereum

[150] 2020 Federated learning resource trading

Reverse auction

Hybrid

Ethereum & FISCO-
BCOS

[152] 2020 IoT collaboration

Reverse auction

Permissioned

Prototype

[153] 2018 Code ownership management system

Vickrey auction

Permissionless

Ethereum

Service
Alloca-
tion

Cloud/
Fog/
Edge
Service

Network
Service

Mobile
Service

Data
Manage-
ment

Stock
Exchange

Crowd-
sourcing

Others

Supply
Chain

Human
Resource

N/A

16

IV. AUCTION-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR BLOCKCHAIN
ENHANCEMENT

Recent studies have shown that the auction model has great
potential for optimizing blockchain technology [157], [158],
[17]. However, a systematic review of existing enhancement
solutions in different scenarios is still missing. In this section,
we present a taxonomy of the current auction-based solutions
for blockchain enhancement, as shown in Fig. 8. Based on
the purpose of using auction models in the blockchain, ﬁve
application domains are identiﬁed: mining task ofﬂoading,
transaction fee design, miner selection & reward distribution,
cryptocurrency economy, and others. In addition, a summary
of the auction models and main contributions in different
studies is shown in Table IV.

Fig. 8. Taxonomy of auction-based solutions for blockchain enhancement.

A. Mining Task Ofﬂoading

The use of blockchain in IoT and mobile computing sce-
narios can increase security and trust assurance and prevent
malicious attackers from entering the network [39]. Solving
the PoW puzzle needs continuous computation. Unfortunately,
lightweight IoT and mobile devices have difﬁculty partic-
ipating in the PoW consensus process due to a lack of
computing capacity [159]. As a result, rational miners (i.e.,
consensus nodes) will naturally ofﬂoad PoW computational
tasks to cloud/edge/fog computing servers. An illustration of
the auction-based mining task ofﬂoading is shown in Fig.
9. Generally, this ofﬂoading model has the following two
assumptions: 1) the blockchain network is permissionless and
adopts the classical PoW consensus protocol; and 2) miners
cannot use their own devices, such as lightweight or mobile
devices, to complete all mining tasks [160]. In [161], the
authors used an auction model to study resource management
and pricing mechanisms for mobile blockchains. They demon-
strated that their VCG-based auction model could maximize
social welfare and satisfy several important auction properties.
Similarly, Xia et al. [157] proposed a VCG-based auction
mechanism for mobile blockchain resource allocation. Their
auction includes three stages: 1) matching potential winners;
2) matching cloudlets for access points; and 3) allocating the
resource. Taking into account the diverse resource demands,
bids, and usage patterns of mobile users, the authors in [162]
used an optimized Vickrey auction to acquire dynamic re-
source allocation strategies in mobile blockchain networks.

Our investigation also shows that many researchers focused
on allocating mining resources between multiple blockchain
users/miners and service providers through double auction
models. Based on the combinatorial double auction, a two-
level allocation mechanism is designed for cloud and edge

Fig. 9. There are three auction scenarios for ofﬂoading mining tasks: 1)
overloaded miners can ofﬂoad mining tasks to other unused miners; 2) miners
can ofﬂoad mining tasks to edge providers; and 3) mining tasks can be further
ofﬂoaded to cloud providers when edge resources are not enough.

computing resources in [163]. Speciﬁcally, mobile users com-
pete to allocate edge-level resources ﬁrst, and then cloud-level
resources can be used as supplements. This model satisﬁes
the requirements of multiple users and optimizes resource
utilization compared to single-level computing ofﬂoading.
Similarly, Xu et al. [66] and Li et al. [164] argued that
mobile edge computing servers with limited resources could
request resources from cloud computing servers. They con-
sidered two auction scenarios, namely single-seller multiple
buyers and multi-seller multi-buyer. Correspondingly, a hier-
archical auction model (including a single-sided combinatorial
auction and a double combinatorial auction) was presented.
Guo et al. [165] proposed that the non-mining devices and
idle resources on the edge cloud can be selected to create a so-
called collaborative mining network (CMN) to perform mining
tasks. Thus, a double auction can be used to manage resource
allocation between mining and sharing devices in a CMN.
In addition, the interactions between edge cloud operators and
CMNs are modeled with a Stackelberg game, and both uniform
and differentiated pricing strategies are analyzed.

The following studies also investigate the different demands
of miners, privacy considerations, and the algorithm for winner
determination problems. Jiao et al. [160] studied two types
of miners with different demands on computing resources: 1)
miners with constant demand; and 2) miners with multiple de-
mands. Correspondingly, two auction algorithms are proposed
and tested. In [159], the authors argued that the competition
between IoT devices and edge servers should be truthful
and privacy-preserving in terms of personal data. Therefore,

Auction-Based Solutions for Blockchain EnhancementMiner Selection& RewardTransaction FeeMechanismMining TaskOffloadingToken Sale& ExchangeOthersBlockchain NetworkMinerMinerMinerMinerCloud ServerEdge ServerEdge ServerEdge ServerEdge ServerCloud ServerAuction  Scenario 3Auction  Scenario 2Auction  Scenario 1Mining Task FlowHierarchical Cloud-Edge Service ProvidersBidsPaymentsthey designed a truthful multi-item double auction. The pro-
posed auction model is also extended with the differential
privacy technology to protect sensitive bidding information.
Liu et al. [166] argued that the solution of combinatorial dou-
ble auctions can be modeled as NP-hard winner determination
problems. Thus two different greedy algorithms are designed
and implemented to solve these problems.

In addition to the above research, mining ofﬂoading is also
discussed in blockchain-based vehicle-to-everything (V2X)
networks [167]. Besides, machine learning-based optimal auc-
tion models have been discussed. For example, the authors
in [168], [169] proposed a deep learning-based optimal auction
model for allocating edge resources in mobile blockchain
networks. Their model contains a multi-layer neural network,
and the training data is composed of bidder valuation proﬁles
of the miners.

B. Transaction Fee Mechanism Design

Most current permissionless blockchains utilize the same
transaction fee mechanism for transaction prioritization. Each
transaction is charged a fee from the user, and miners choose
the transactions with the highest fees to include in the block
(as illustrated in Fig. 10). Such a mechanism is critical in
cryptocurrencies since it subsidizes miners to keep building
the blockchain and ensures efﬁcient use of network resources.
As the cryptocurrency becomes more popular and the baseline
subsidy (block reward) to miners gradually decreases,
the
revenue from transaction fees will play a more prominent
role in ensuring network stability [65]. In this context, auction
models are widely used to model and optimize the blockchain
transaction fee mechanism. Huberman et al. [170] found that
the Bitcoin protocol, despite the absence of an auctioneer,
implicitly includes a priority auction. Besides, users’ bids
have the characteristic of a VCG mechanism, i.e., each user
offers a bid equal
to his/her externalities (the transaction
delays he/she caused to others). They simulated this auction
activity and demonstrated that the Bitcoin payment system
could serve as a prototype for protecting customers from
monopolies. Dimitri [158] modeled the blockchain transaction
fee as the Nash equilibrium result of a complete information
auction game. Successful miners function as auctioneers in
the game, selling block space to users who bid for shares
to conﬁrm their transactions. Their analysis shows that the
optimal block size limit for successful miners is determined
by the transaction conﬁrmation fee that users are willing to
pay. Daian et al. [171] focused on the decentralized exchange
(DEX) ﬁeld and observed that bots in DEXes participate in
so-called priority gas auctions, where bots compete to raise
their transaction fees in order to conﬁrm transactions faster.
Their analysis of the priority gas auction demonstrates that
protocol details (e.g., miner selection criteria and P2P network
composition) could directly affect smart contracts’ application-
layer security and fairness properties.

It is commonly believed that the transaction conﬁrmation
process in Bitcoin and Ethereum is equivalent to a GFP auc-
tion [15]. This auction is ﬁrst proposed in online advertising
auctions where advertisers bid for more prominent advertis-
ing positions. However, the market practice of Bitcoin has

17

Fig. 10. The basic process of a blockchain transaction conﬁrmation auction.
Users submit transactions and fees (bids) to the memory pool. Then, miners
select and validate the transactions with higher transaction fees for priority
processing.

demonstrated that the GFP mechanism may have some defects
[172]. For example, the GFP mechanism causes Bitcoin users
to pay unnecessary transaction fees. When the Bitcoin memory
pool is stuffed with a huge number of transactions, it can
lead to severe congestion where users have to wait for days
to conﬁrm transactions and pay additional transaction fees. In
addition, the empirical analysis also shows that the transaction
fees charged vary signiﬁcantly from block to block and from
day to day, leading to large ﬂuctuations in miners’ income.
All of these facts prove that the GFP mechanism is not a
perfect auction mechanism for the Bitcoin transaction fee mar-
ket. Therefore, researchers have proposed different alternative
auction models to optimize the current blockchain transaction
fee market. Although related studies have focused only on
Bitcoin and Ethereum, the ﬁndings can be generalized to any
permissionless blockchain that uses PoW mining mechanism
to validate new transactions.

In [65], the authors argued that it is the lack of a dominant
strategy equilibrium in the existing transaction fee market
that caused instability and low efﬁciency. Therefore, a GSP
auction-based transaction fee mechanism can be used to re-
place the GFP one. Implementing such a mechanism remains
challenging as miners can include transactions using any
criteria and manipulate the auction results after seeing the
proposed transaction fees. Nevertheless,
they demonstrated
that the suggested approach is immune to manipulation as
the user base grows. Similarly, two cases of GSP auctions
in Bitcoin, namely complete information under synchronous
submission and incomplete information under asynchronous

Pending TransactionSelected TransactionUserUserMemory PoolMemory PoolHigher Transaction FeeMemory PoolMemory PoolAuctionMinerMinerMinerBlockchainBlockBlockBlockBlockSubmit Transactions & FeesRanking Transactions18

submission, have been analyzed in [172], [173]. Their results
suggest that this new GSP mechanism can help users save
transaction fees compared to the currently used GFP approach.
Furthermore, Yan et al. [174] took time series into consider-
ation and studied the time-dependent dynamic game model
of the GSP transaction fee mechanism. Their analysis result
shows that there exists a perfect Bayesian game equilibrium
so that the whole system can remain stable.

A monopolistic auction is another possible alternative mech-
anism for blockchain transaction inclusion. In this mechanism,
given a series of bids, miners selectively include transactions
in the block. All selected transactions are subject to the same
charge, which is the lowest bid in the current block. The au-
thors in [60] observed that the monopolistic auction is immune
to malicious auctioneers in the Bitcoin network. Besides, such
an auction is easy to implement for transaction issuers, and
miners’ revenue does not decrease as the maximum block
size increases. Yao [175] further proved that the monopolistic
auction mechanism is almost truthful for any i.i.d. distribution
when the number of users becomes large, making it a good
candidate for the blockchain transaction fee market.

systems distribute rewards based on the blocks discovered
by miners [17]. Nadendla and Varshney [176] suggested that
blockchain mining can as characterized as an all-pay auction,
where the computational efforts of miners are interpreted as
bids. In this way, the reward distribution function is deﬁned as
the chance of solving the cryptographic puzzle in a single try
with unit computational power. Based on such assumptions,
they constructed a mining auction mechanism that generates
a logarithmic equilibrium among miners. The analysis shows
that no allocation function in equilibrium prevents miners from
bidding higher costs. As a result, it is crucial to penalize
miners who choose a larger computational cost to maintain
a trustworthy system. In real-life blockchains, miners can also
join a number of mining pools to share the rewards they earn
in time. In [17], the authors investigated the reward distribution
mechanism of mining pools. They compared several block re-
ward allocation strategies in a long-term scenario and showed
that no existing technique could guarantee continuous mining
for miners in a pool. To address this issue, they proposed an
auction-based approach that increases miners’ enthusiasm and
the mining pool’s stability.

C. Miner Selection & Reward Distribution

D. Token Sale & Exchange

In a PoW-based permissionless blockchain, anyone with
the necessary computing capacity and network connection
can become a miner. Miners compete with each other to
provide transaction processing services to the blockchain and
receive corresponding rewards [170]. For some blockchain
platforms with new consensus algorithms, however, miners
need to be selected and authorized to verify new blocks. PoS
is one of the popular solutions to replace energy-intensive
PoW. It speciﬁes that users can mine or validate new block
transactions based on the stakes they hold, and therefore
the network may suffer from centralization and unfairness
issues. Saad et al. [67] presented an enhanced version of PoS
called e-PoS. In particular, a blind block auction is integrated
into e-PoS to ofﬂoad mining opportunities to more users,
thus improving fairness and resisting centralization. Another
interesting consensus mechanism called ABC is proposed
in [62], in which a continuous double auction is leveraged
to determine and select miners to write new blocks. Through
extensive experiments, the authors concluded that ABC has
better performance than PBFT in blockchain networks with
a large number of nodes. Devi et al. [61] developed a novel
mechanism for miner selection in order to encourage miners
to participate in block validation and optimize the blockchain
performance. Especially, a multi-attribute two-stage auction
model is designed and implemented to select miners; only
nodes with high credibility and data quality can be selected
as miners for block veriﬁcation. Amin et al. [16] argued
that users can leverage a discretionary mining strategy in an
IOTA blockchain network. This means that a user with low
computational power can outsource his/her veriﬁcation tasks
to a mining pool. The nomination of a speciﬁc number of
miners can be conducted using an FPSB auction.

Other studies focus on the design of distribution mecha-
nisms for miners’ rewards. Typically, PoW-based blockchain

Auction models are playing important roles in token sale
and exchange programs. An initial coin offering (ICO) (also
known as a token sale) is the process of raising funds from
the public for the development of a new cryptocurrency
project. It is a particular application of IPO in the cryptocur-
rency industry. With the integration of blockchain and smart
contract technologies, it is possible to raise external funds
for cryptocurrencies without any intermediaries [177]. The
basic process of an ICO is shown in Fig. 11. When a new
cryptocurrency is created, pre-mined tokens are sold to the
public through an ICO in exchange for other cryptocurrencies
or ﬁat money [178]. The issuing agency can arbitrarily set
a ﬁxed price or determine the sale price through an auction
[179]. According to a survey, the most commonly used auc-
tions include the Dutch auction and its variants, such as the
Vickrey-Dutch auction and the reverse Dutch auction [180].
For example, an optimal ICO mechanism based on the multi-
unit Vickrey-Dutch auction is proposed in [181] to guarantee
truthful bidding. Some third-party organizations, e.g., CoinList
and Gnosis, are also actively working on providing auction
services for token sales [182]. However, a survey revealed
that only a small percentage of ICO projects use auction
mechanisms [183]. While researchers have noted that various
types of auctions can be used in theory, there are few real
examples of attempts in ICOs except for Dutch auctions so
far [184].

An atomic swap (also called atomic cross-chain trading) is
an automated, self-enforcing cryptocurrency exchange contract
that allows P2P transactions of cryptocurrencies without the
need for TTPs [185]. In this respect, Zhang [186] demonstrated
an exchange mechanism that uses uniform price auctions for
atomic swaps. He proved that a uniform price auction could
save data cost, but the optimal transaction collection of the
atomic swap auction is NP-hard. Liu et al. [187] presented

19

scalable naming system based on the Ethereum blockchain. It
maps human-readable names to machine-readable identiﬁers
like wallet addresses, content hashes, and metadata via a
Vickrey auction-based name registration approach deﬁned in
Ethereum Improvement Proposal (EIP)-162 [192].

F. Key Observations

The key observations we obtained in this section are sum-

marized as follows:

• Auctions have been proven to be promising solutions
for blockchain enhancement; the efﬁcient distribution and
fair trade features of auctions can facilitate different
blockchain workﬂows. There are four main application
areas and directions identiﬁed in the literature: mining
task ofﬂoading, transaction fee mechanism design, miner
selection & reward distribution, and token sale & ex-
change.

• The huge energy consumption caused by the PoW con-
sensus has always been a big challenge for blockchains.
Some mobile blockchain or IoT-based blockchain miners
are not capable of using their own resources to complete
the mining task. By using auction models, PoW mining
tasks can be assigned to different devices to reduce the
computational burden. In this case, edge and cloud servers
become ideal targets for mining task ofﬂoading.

• Using auctions to design and optimize the blockchain
transaction fee mechanism is another promising direc-
tion. Traditional permissionless blockchains (e.g., Bitcoin
and Ethereum) use a GFP auction model to build their
transaction fee market. GSP and monopoly auctions are
often recommended as alternative mechanisms with more
beneﬁts. However, the usability and reliability of those
new mechanisms need to be further tested in real-world
blockchains.

• Auctions can be used as incentive mechanisms to op-
timize some speciﬁc blockchain workﬂows, such as
the process of selecting miners and distributing min-
ing rewards. An efﬁcient auction model can improve
blockchain performance by selecting and nominating the
most suitable miners. By designing a reasonable incentive
through auctions, miners can get a fair share of the mining
rewards in a mining pool, thus ensuring their continuous
mining in the blockchain network.

• Another direction that

integrates auctions

into the
blockchain is the sale and exchange of tokens. On the one
hand, new tokens can be sold to the public by auctions
through ICOs. On the other hand, the quick exchange
among different tokens can be performed through atomic
swap technology using various auction models.

• The design of new blockchain incentive mechanisms
using auction models is a promising direction, which
could involve both permissionless and permissioned
blockchains. A good example is the network transmission
model that uses auction-based incentives to motivate users
to forward transactions.

Fig. 11. The basic process of an ICO. The developer of an ICO project
publishes cryptocurrency information and invites bids on the blockchain
and smart contracts to raise funds. Investors pay their ﬁat money or other
cryptocurrencies to get pre-mined tokens from the ICO project.

an efﬁcient protocol for cross-chain asset
transfers using
Vickrey auction and atomic transfer techniques. Furthermore,
Black et al. [188] proposed the notion of atomic loans,
which make use of atomic swap technology to enable market
participants to build cryptocurrency debt instruments. They
also introduced a competitive bidding process for the fair
distribution of collateral when defaults occur.

There are some commercial efforts dedicated to building
an auction-based atomic swap trading platform. For example,
Freimarkets [189] is a protocol that adds primitives required
for implementing non-currency ﬁnancial transactions on Bit-
coin. Speciﬁcally, three auction models (i.e., English auction,
Dutch auction, and double auction) are demonstrated on how
to conduct atomic cross-chain trade. By contrast, Gnosis [190]
is a trading platform based on the Ethereum Plasma frame-
work in which a uniform price multi-batch auction model
is implemented among different ERC-20 (Ethereum Request
for Comments 20) tokens. Each batch, in particular, allows
requests to purchase any ERC-20 tokens in exchange for
other ERC-20 tokens. All orders are gathered at predetermined
time intervals and then settled using a uniform clearing price
computed across all token pairs.

E. Others

Other studies mainly focus on blockchain incentive mecha-
nism design and domain name trading. For example, most ex-
isting studies assume that the network state of the blockchain
is perfect; however, this is not the real case. When min-
ers have limited network bandwidth, their utility, the block
broadcasting, and the throughput of the entire blockchain are
heavily affected [160]. In this context, Wang et al. [191]
argued that peers in a blockchain network should be paid for
forwarding a large number of transactions, just as miners put
computational resources into block mining and get rewards.
Therefore, a new incentive can be designed for blockchain
network participants with limited bandwidth. In their study,
an FPSB auction is used to build this relay payment scheme.
The Ethereum Name Service (ENS) is a distributed, open and

InvestorsICO ContractsReturn TokensICO  ProjectsBlockchain SystemFundingPost InvitationsSearch for ProjectsAuctionTABLE IV
SUMMARY OF AUCTION-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR BLOCKCHAIN ENFORCEMENT

20

Classiﬁcation Ref.

Year Addressed Issue

Auction Model

[161]

2017

Edge resource ofﬂoading

VCG auction

[157]

2018

Edge resource ofﬂoading

VCG auction

[162]

2019

Edge resource ofﬂoading

Optimized Vickrey auction

[163]

2021

[66]

2020

[164]

2019

Cloud/Edge resource of-
ﬂoading
Cloud/Edge resource of-
ﬂoading
Cloud/Edge resource of-
ﬂoading

Combinatorial double auc-
tion
Hierarchical combinatorial
auction
Hierarchical combinatorial
auction

[165]

2020

Edge resource ofﬂoading

Double auction

Mining Task
Ofﬂoading

[160]

2019

Cloud/Edge resource of-
ﬂoading

Constant-demand and multi-
demand auction algorithms

[159]

2021

Edge resource ofﬂoading

Multi-item double auction

[166]

2019

Edge resource ofﬂoading

Combinatorial double auc-
tion

[167]

2020

Mining task ofﬂoading in
V2X networks

First-price auction

[168]

2018

Edge resource ofﬂoading

[169]

2020

Fog resource ofﬂoading

Deep learning-based opti-
mal auction
Deep learning-based opti-
mal auction

[193]

2020

Edge resource ofﬂoading

Double auction

[194]

2020

Edge resource ofﬂoading

Double auction

[170]

2017

[158]

2019

[171]

2020

[15]

2020

[65]

2019

[172]
[173]

2020

[174]

2020

[60]

2019

[175]

2018

[67]

2021

[62]

2020

[61]

2020

[16]

2020

[176]

2020

[17]

2019

fee

fee

fee

fee

transaction

transaction

transaction

transaction

Bitcoin
mechanism
Bitcoin
mechanism
Ethereum transaction fee
mechanism
Ethereum transaction fee
mechanism
Fee market for cryptocur-
rencies
Bitcoin
mechanism
Bitcoin
mechanism
Bitcoin
mechanism
Bitcoin
mechanism
Miner selection in PoS
consensus
Miner selection in new
consensus
Miner
blockchain-based IoV
Miner
ming pool
Mining cost and allocation
function
Reward distribution for
pool mining

selection in the

transaction

transaction

selection

fee

fee

in

Priority auction with VCG
mechanism

Auction game

Priority gas auction

GFP auction

GSP auction

GSP auction

GSP auction

Monopolistic auction

Monopolistic auction

Blind block auction

Continuous double auction

Multi-attribute auction

FPSB auction

All-pay auction

Uniform price auction

[186]

2020 Cross-chain atomic swap

Uniform price auction

[187]

2020 Cross-chain asset transfer

Vickrey auction

[188]

2019 Cross-chain atomic swap

Bidding process

[189]

2013 Cross-chain atomic swap

[190]

2018 Cross-chain atomic swap

English, Dutch, and double
auction
Uniform price multi-batch
auction

Transaction
Fee
Mechanism
Design

Miner Selec-
tion &
Reward Dis-
tribution

Token Sale
& Exchange

Others

[191]

2020

New blockchain incentive
mechanism

FPSB auction

[192]

2019

Ethereum naming service

Vickrey auction

Main Contributions
An auction model that ofﬂoads mobile blockchain mining
tasks to edge providers and maximizes social welfare.
A three-stage auction model that optimizes edge resource
allocation for mobile blockchains.
A dynamic auction model for allocating edge resources
while maximizing the revenue of all mobile users.
An efﬁcient resource allocation model for computation
ofﬂoading in mobile blockchains.
A hierarchical combinatorial auction model that enhances
resource allocation for mobile blockchain.
A hierarchical combinatorial auction model in which both
edge and cloud computing resources are considered.
Non-mining devices and edge clouds can be selected to
construct CMNs to ofﬂoad mining tasks.
Miners with different demand situations are considered, and
two efﬁcient auction mechanisms are proposed.
A privacy-preserving auction model that ofﬂoads limited
edge servers to blockchain-based IoT devices.
A combinatorial double auction mechanism that ofﬂoads the
mining process from miners to edge servers.
An efﬁcient auction solution for ofﬂoading mining tasks in
cellular V2X networks.
A deep learning-based optimal auction for edge resource
allocation in mobile blockchains.
A deep learning-based optimal auction for fog resource
allocation in blockchain networks.
Multi-task cross-server resource allocation in mobile edge
computing is achieved through auction models.
A smart contract-based mobile blockchain computation of-
ﬂoading model using long-term double auctions.
The Bitcoin protocol, despite the absence of an auctioneer,
implicitly includes a priority auction.
The transaction mechanism is modeled as an auction game,
where miners sell their space and users bid for such space.
Bots in DEXes engage in priority gas auctions to competi-
tively bid up transaction fees to obtain priority orders.
The transaction fee mechanism of Ethereum has always
been a GFP auction, as indicated in EIP-1559.
An alternative transaction fee mechanism for cryptocurren-
cies inspired by the GSP auction.
A novel GSP auction mechanism that deals with the prob-
lems caused by the GFP mechanism.
A time-dependent dynamic game model for the Bitcoin
transaction fee market under the GSP mechanism.
Monopolistic auctions are immune to malicious auctioneers
and can solve issues in the GFP mechanism.
The monopolistic auction mechanism is nearly truthful for
any i.i.d. distribution as the number of users grows large.
An enhanced version of PoS called e-PoS is proposed to
resist centralization and improve fairness.
A new auction-based consensus mechanism called ABC is
proposed for blockchain.
An auction-based mechanism for miner selection to encour-
age miners to participate in block validation in IoV.
A discretionary mining mechanism for the IOTA blockchain
in which miners are nominated through auctions.
Mining is modeled as an all-pay auction to analyze the
mining allocation function of the blockchain.
An auction-based reward distribution method that improves
miners’ enthusiasm and the stability of the mining pool.
An atomic swap mechanism with a uniform price auction
can save costs, but the optimal result collection is NP-Hard.
An efﬁcient cross-chain asset transfer protocol using atomic
swap technology and the Vickrey auction model.
A competitive bidding process for the liquidation of collat-
eral when defaults occur for atomic loans.
The Freimarkets protocol adds primitives to Bitcoin in order
to implement non-currency ﬁnancial constructs.
A trading platform using Ethereum Plasma in which auc-
tions are implemented among different ERC-20 tokens.
A new relay payment scheme that uses an auction model to
solve the relay incentive problem in the blockchain.
ENS is an auction-based naming system built on top of
Ethereum, as deﬁned in EIP-162.

V. CHALLENGES AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS

Despite the great potential of integrating blockchain with
auction models, there are several research challenges that need
to be addressed. In this section, we highlight and summarize
eight open challenges identiﬁed in the literature, as shown
in Fig. 13. Speciﬁcally, the ﬁrst six challenges, i.e., privacy
protection, performance & scalability, cost-effectiveness, cryp-
tocurrency payment, auction enforcement, and regulations &
standards correspond to the topic of blockchain-based auction
applications (Section III); while the last two challenges, i.e.,
auction design properties and auction fraud, are both involved
in blockchain-based auctions (Section III) and auction-based
solutions for blockchain enhancement (Section IV).

A. Privacy Protection

All data stored on the blockchain must be public to all
blockchain nodes in order to ensure traceability, veriﬁability,
and immutability. This conﬂicts with the privacy requirements
of most auction applications, especially for those with im-
portant trade secrets. Normal users will be discouraged from
using the blockchain for auctions if privacy can not be fully
guaranteed.

As illustrated in Fig. 12, there are generally two types of
privacy concerns for blockchain-based auctions [195]. The
ﬁrst one is identity privacy, which considers participants’
privacy and prevents transactions from being associated with
speciﬁc auction users and their blockchain addresses. The
second one is transaction privacy, which covers the privacy of
auction information about bids, auction contracts, payments,
and other transaction details We ﬁnd that most researchers
target both types of privacy concerns in their models through
a combination of various techniques. Based on the relevant
literature, the existing privacy protection solutions and their
challenges are summarized in the following text. A more
detailed comparison of the techniques used in different studies
can be found in Table V.

Fig. 12. There are two privacy concerns identiﬁed for blockchain-based
auctions: identity privacy and transaction privacy. The former concerns the
privacy of auction participants, while the latter concerns the privacy of various
auction transactions (e.g., bids, payments, and contract details).

21

1) Cryptographic Primitives: Cryptographic techniques can
effectively protect privacy in blockchain-based auction mod-
els. The most common cryptographic primitives used in the
literature can be summarized as follows:

• Multi-Party Computation (MPC): Multiple parties se-
curely compute an objective function without TTPs, while
each party does not have access to any input information
from other parties except for the computation result.
• Zero-Knowledge Proof (ZKP): One person (the prover)
demonstrates to another person (the veriﬁer) that he/she
knows a value without providing any information other
than the fact that he/she knows the value.

• Commitment Scheme (CS): One person can commit to a
chosen value (or statement) while hiding it from others
and being able to reveal the promised value later.

• Asymmetric Encryption (AE): A key pair is required for
encryption and decryption. So it is also known as public
key encryption. Ciphertexts encrypted with a public key
can only be decrypted with the associated private key and
vice versa.

• Homomorphic Encryption (HE): An encryption method
that enables users to retrieve, compare and calculate
encrypted data without decrypting it in advance.

• Digital Signature (DS): Two operations are designed to
verify the authenticity of digital messages or documents:
signature and veriﬁcation. One can use the private key
to encrypt (generate a signature), and others can use the
public key to decrypt (verify the signature).

Since these cryptographic techniques differ in terms of
effects and application scenarios, some studies choose to
integrate multiple algorithms on the blockchain to build a
secure and privacy-preserving auction system. For example,
ZKP, MPC, AE, and CS and their variant algorithms have been
widely combined in recently proposed frameworks in [196],
[197], [198], [199]. Such an integrated model can reduce the
potential risk of using one single encryption algorithm, thus
presenting an overall good privacy-preserving effect.

On the other hand, while cryptographic primitives can
protect auction privacy, they suffer from high computational
complexity and high transaction costs when implemented on
the blockchain. It
is reported that a non-interactive ZKP
veriﬁcation roughly takes more than 3 million gas on the
Ethereum blockchain [200]. The huge transaction fees make it
impractical for auction users to use these algorithms and join
the auction. To effectively protect privacy, the performance of
the cryptographic algorithms used in the blockchain needs to
be signiﬁcantly improved [201]. Recent studies have focused
on designing lightweight cryptographic protocols that are
weaker than traditional ones (e.g., MPC/ZKP) [202], [198],
[203], [204]. These protocols can perform speciﬁc auction
tasks and achieve optimized on-chain performance.

Cryptographic protocols can also be implemented off-chain
as separate modules to reduce on-chain execution costs. How-
ever, this increases the risk of data corruption during the
transmission and communication phase. To solve this problem,
Benhamouda et al. [205] proposed an approach that integrates
secure MPC protocols into the Hyperledger Fabric blockchain

InvestorsICO ContractsReturn TokensICO ProjectsBlockchain SystemFundingPost InvitationsSearch for InvestmentsAuctionBlockchaintx1: Bidder1                 Seller  Bidder1Bidder2tx3: Bidder2                 Seller  tx3: Seller                  Bidder2 SellerIdentity PrivacyTransaction PrivacyAuction Participants€10€20Object/Service22

Fig. 13. Taxonomy of challenges and solutions for integrated blockchain-auction models.

architecture. This integration model combining blockchain and
cryptographic protocols can signiﬁcantly reduce the risk of
data transmission and, therefore, may become a future research
and development trend.

2) Mixing/Tumbler Service: Blockchain addresses do
not guarantee the anonymity of auction participants. The
pseudonymous addresses used for transactions can be publicly
veriﬁed, So it is possible for anyone to analyze an auction
user’s address and link transaction records to his/her real
identity [29]. In this context, tumbler or mixing, as a service
that prevents users’ addresses from being linked to their real
identities, has been leveraged to protect bidders’ privacy.
AStERISK [117] is a blockchain-based auction framework
that uses the mixing function of the Coconut contract [206]
to break the link between bidders and their bids and tokens,
thus protecting the bidders’ privacy. It should be noted that
centralized mixing services may pose a signiﬁcant risk to
users, as all operations are handled centrally. Attackers may
also utilize big data analytics and machine learning techniques
to compromise mixing services and auction privacy.

3) Differential Privacy: Although the blockchain addresses
of auction participants can be hidden using cryptography and
mixing services, hackers can infer the true identity of users
through side-channel information (i.e., side-channel attacks).
This is why differential privacy, as a new privacy-preserving
technology, has recently been investigated to protect bidder’s
privacy by adding noise to the auction transactions. DEAL
[84] is a decentralized auction model for microgrid energy
trading. It can protect
the privacy of auction participants
through the combination of Laplacian and exponential noise
on a permissioned blockchain. However, the introduction of
noise can reduce the data utility, which becomes more severe

for small data sets. Recent studies focused on how to add noise
to a data set to maintain conﬁdentiality while maximizing the
data utility [27].

4) Trusted Execution Environment (TEE): TEEs can be
used to create secure auction computation environments and
protect the sensitive data involved in blockchain-based auc-
tions. Intel SGX, as one of the most popular hardware-
based commercial TEE solutions, has been widely used in
building blockchain-based auction systems [207], [103], [208].
To effectively safeguard auction smart contracts with TEEs,
however, challenges such as rollback attacks, state continuity,
and TEE protocol
integration must be properly addressed
[209]. In [210] [211], the authors introduced a framework for
executing Hyperledger Fabric chaincodes in Intel SGX to deal
with rollback attacks. A sealed-bid auction use case is also
evaluated to demonstrate the framework’s feasibility.

5) Permissioned Blockchain: Permissioned blockchains
usually have an extra authentication mechanism for permission
management and, therefore, can provide privacy protection
against non-member users. For example, Hyperledger Fabric
implements the “channel” technology, which is essentially
a private ledger between speciﬁc network members; nodes
within the same “channel” can share data, but nodes outside
the channel cannot access it. In [212], a hybrid blockchain-
based auction architecture is proposed, in which a permis-
sioned blockchain is used to publish sensitive bids and a
permissionless blockchain is used to make the auction ac-
countable. It should be noted that this solution offers privacy
protection against non-member peers, but still suffers from
possible data leakage from malicious nodes within the same
network [205]. Therefore, it is often used in combination with
other encryption techniques.

Research Challenges &Future DirectionsChallengeSolutionCryptocurrencyPaymentChallengeSolutionCost-EffectivenessSolutionChallengePerformance &ScalabilityChallengeSolutionPrivacyProtectionChallengeSolutionAuctionEnforcementChallengeSolutionAuction DesignPropertiesChallengeSolutionAuction FraudSolutionChallengeRegulations &StandardsThe transparency nature of blockchainconflicts with the requirement forauction privacy.Performance bottlenecks limit the useof blockchain in large-scale high-frequency auctions.Auctions executed on permissionlessblockchains can trigger hugetransaction fees.The instability and volatility of thecryptocurrency lead to price risks inauction payments.The blockchain oracle problem makesit difficult to enforce the auctioncontract in a trustworthy manner.Auctions on the blockchain lackstandard solutions and may violateexisting regulations.Some design properties need to besatisfied to produce the desiredauction equilibrium result.Complex auction fraud activitiescannot be eliminated by blockchainand smart contracts.Use integrated privacy preservationtechnologies to protect auctionprivacy.Design efficient and scalableblockchains to support auctionapplications.Use state channels or blockchainalternatives that do not requiretransaction fees.Use stable cryptocurrencies, paymentgateways, or atomic swap technology. Develop auction oracle services orintroduce auction enforcementwitness mechanisms.Develop standardized auction smartcontracts and on-chain auctionprotocols.Use mechanism design theory toregulate auctions and achieve auctiongoals.Design advanced mechanisms, e.g.,reputation/feedback systems, toeliminate fraud.TABLE V
SUMMARY OF PRIVACY PROTECTION TECHNIQUES USED IN BLOCKCHAIN-BASED AUCTION MODELS

23

Ref.

[213]

[202]

[197]

[204]

[196]

[200]

[208]

[205]

[203]

[214]

[215]

[207]

[216]

[10]
[217]

[201]

[218]

[219]

[212]

[220]

[210]
[211]

[198]

[221]

[222]
[223]

[224]

[107]

[103]

[83]

[105]

[90]
[91]

[84]

[117]

[82]

[145]
[146]
[225]
[226]

Main Contributions

Hawk can help users write private smart contracts without having to implement
cryptography. Hawk compiler automatically builds cryptographic protocols for users.
Strain is a secure auction protocol based on blockchain. It has a slightly weaker
adversary model than traditional MPC and can achieve constant latency.
BOREALIS is an efﬁcient model for sealed-bid auctions on the blockchain. It performs
the secure comparison of integer bids among participants using ZKP.
A secure auction model with affordable computations using an insulated integer
comparison protocol, which is more efﬁcient than traditional MPC/ZKP solutions.
A smart contract protocol for veriﬁable sealed-bid auctions on the Ethereum blockchain.
Different cryptographic primitives are used during the auction process.
A smart contract protocol for succinctly veriﬁable sealed-bid auctions on the Ethereum
blockchain with various cryptographic primitives.
Trustee is an Ethereum-based Vickrey auction model that protects bids’ privacy at a
low cost. It consists of a smart contract, an Intel SGX enclave, and a relay scheme.
A framework that integrates secure MPC protocols into the blockchain architecture
rather than allowing separate nodes to run secure MPC protocols off-chain.
A blockchain-based fair and secure MPC model for double auctions. In particular, a
more efﬁcient protocol for secure two-party comparison is designed.
A smart contract-based electronic voting and bidding system that integrates crypto-
graphic techniques such as the Paillier cryptosystem and homomorphic encryption.
A protocol called Time-Capsule that solves the multi-party timed commitments problem
for blockchain-based auction applications.
ShadowEth is a solution for public blockchains that utilizes hardware enclaves to secure
smart contracts while maintaining their integrity and availability.
A blockchain-based anonymous English auction scheme, in which group signatures are
used to provide anonymity for bidders and TEE is used to store the secret keys.
An iterative double auction protocol using smart contract and state channel technologies
that minimizes blockchain transactions.
A public bidding system that integrates ECC and dynamic accumulators in a tree-
structured blockchain to protect privacy and achieve great efﬁciency.
An anonymous auction model that uses a permissioned blockchain and blind signatures.
Speciﬁcally, bids are encrypted using a timed-release AE method.
PASTRAMI makes bidders accountable on the Ethereum blockchain by utilizing
threshold blind signatures and commitment schemes to ensure strong privacy guarantees.
A hybrid blockchain-based auction architecture, in which a private blockchain is used to
publish sensitive bids and a public blockchain is used to make the auction accountable.
FAST is an efﬁcient protocol for sealed-bid auctions on the blockchain. In FAST, bidders
work together to compute the auction winner while keeping failed bids private.
A smart contract execution architecture for Hyperledger Fabric that can handle rollback
attacks in Intel SGX.
TPACAS is a secure blockchain-based auction protocol for combinatorial auctions. It
introduces a privacy-preserving comparison technique to compare two integers.
Zether is a low-cost privacy-preserving cryptocurrency that encrypts account balances
and enforces money transmission using cryptographic proofs.
Auctionity is a blockchain-based English auction protocol built on Ethereum, in which
ECDSA and non-fungible tokens are leveraged to enhance security and privacy.
A protocol for secure English auction on the blockchain, in which ECDSA, AE, and
permissioned blockchains are integrated.
A blockchain-based spectrum sharing platform that protects users’ anonymity by using
AE and DP technologies during the bidding process.
A blockchain-based secure spectrum trading platform that combines Intel SGX, the
Paillier cryptosystem, and the Pedersen commitment.
Pseudonyms and pseudonym certiﬁcates are issued using blind signatures to enhance
the privacy of user identities on the blockchain.
A secure auction framework built on permissioned blockchains and cryptographic
primitives that protects against collusion attacks in auctions.
Quartierstrom utilizes a coin mixing protocol and account-based on-chain smart con-
tracts to create a secure P2P energy marketplace.
A decentralized auction model for energy trading in microgrids, where DP and
permissioned blockchains are used to protect bid privacy.
AStERISK is a secure auction framework that uses the mixing function of the Coconut
contract to protect auction privacy.
PETra is a blockchain-based microgrid trading platform that uses mixing services to
protect energy transaction privacy.
E2C-Chain is a secure blockchain system that protects all users’ private information
with ZKP in the employment and skill certiﬁcation process.
An auction model for quantum blockchains aims to achieve bid privacy, posterior
privacy, bid binding, decentralization, and unconditional security.

Privacy Protection Techniques*

MPC ZKP CS

TEE AE DS HE Mix DP

PB

(cid:33) (cid:33)

(cid:33) (cid:33) (cid:33)

(cid:33) (cid:33)

(cid:33) (cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33) (cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33) (cid:33) (cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33) (cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33) (cid:33) (cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33) (cid:33)

(cid:33) (cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33) (cid:33)

(cid:33) (cid:33)

(cid:33) (cid:33)

(cid:33) (cid:33) (cid:33)

(cid:33) (cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33) (cid:33)

(cid:33) (cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33) (cid:33) (cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33) (cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33) (cid:33)

(cid:33) (cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33) (cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

* Abbreviations: Multi-Party Computation (MPC), Zero-Knowledge Proof (ZKP), Commitment Scheme (CS), Trusted Execution Environment (TEE), Asymmetric Encryption

(AE), Digital signature (DS), Homomorphic Encryption (HE), Tumbler/Mixing (MiX), Differential Privacy (DP), Permissioned Blockchain (PB).

B. Performance & Scalability

Performance is one of the major bottlenecks that prevent the
widespread application of blockchain in auction applications.
As one of the world’s largest e-auction platforms, eBay needs
to process more than 2 billion transactions per day [227].
However, current popular permissionless blockchain platforms
(e.g., Bitcoin and Ethereum) can not support high-frequency
auction transactions. Due to the requirement to establish trust
among anonymous entities, a compute-intensive and time-
intensive consensus mechanism (i.e., PoW) is often required.
For instance, the throughput of Bitcoin and Ethereum are
only 7 and 15 transactions per second (TPS), respectively
[37]. According to the investigation in Section III, most
existing blockchain-based auction models are implemented
using Ethereum. As a result, their performance bottleneck
would be around 15 TPS in a public chain network. We
argue that such a throughput value is sufﬁcient for small-
scale auctions (e.g., high-value auctions among a few par-
ticipants) and static auctions requiring only a few rounds
of bidding. However, dynamic auction models that include
iterative bidding and intensive computations may need other
high-performance blockchain alternatives.

Scalability is another big concern for blockchain-based
auctions, especially when the number of auction participants
increases dramatically. Nowadays, some large-scale e-auction
platforms need to handle an increasing number of users and
intensive auction transactions. For instance, eBid serves a
daily trafﬁc volume of around 60,000 visitors [228]. However,
when conducting an auction on the blockchain, the maximum
number of auction participants is based on the condition
of the underlying blockchain, which is actually limited by
the maximum size of each block [127]. Therefore, in order
to support auction applications with large-scale users, more
scalable blockchain solutions need to be carefully designed
and developed. The use of the permissioned blockchain is a
feasible and popular solution to this problem. Permissioned
blockchains can generally achieve better performance and
scalability due to the use of efﬁcient consensus algorithms
(such as PBFT or Raft) and customizable block parameters.
Hyperledger Fabric is expected to reach a throughput of more
than 3,000 TPS. FastFabric [229] is a project that aims to
extend Hyperledger Fabric with architectural improvements
that allow it to support even 20,000 TPS. However, it should
be noted that the improved performance of the permissioned
blockchain is at the expense of decentralization. The absence
of a stable and widely recognized cryptocurrency also limits
the widespread use of permissioned blockchains.

In addition,

there are some popular solutions that can

improve the performance of the blockchain.

• Sharding. The basic idea is to split the entire blockchain
network into smaller “shards”, each of which is composed
of only pieces of the blockchain data. It is reported that
the latest Ethereum 2.0 integrates a sharding solution to
achieve more than 10,000 TPS while maintaining decen-
tralization and security [230]. This solution is expected
to support large-scale auctions on Ethereum in the near
future.

24

• Off-chain Solutions. The basic idea is to transfer the
blockchain performance burden by ofﬂoading some trans-
actions to an off-chain network. This scheme is particu-
larly suitable for some privacy-preserving auction models
where complex cryptographic algorithms usually cannot
be executed on-chain [219], [10], [203].

• New Data Structures. Using a DAG to build a blockchain
is a new development
replaces the traditional
that
“chained blocks” data structure. IOTA is one of the
popular DAG blockchain platforms that can achieve high
throughput. This platform has been recently applied to
blockchain-based energy auction models [98], [89], [96]
to support microtransactions. Besides, a tree-structured
blockchain has been introduced in [201] to enhance
the scalability of the blockchain to support large-scale
auctions.

C. Cost-Effectiveness

The issue of the high cost is a big challenge for auctions
based on permissionless blockchains that require transaction
fees. In the current Ethereum blockchain network, any op-
eration that invokes a smart contract requires an execution
cost. This cost is usually measured by gas, which represents
the unit of computational effort required to perform speciﬁc
operations on Ethereum [231]. Under certain exchange rates,
the gas cost of submitting an auction transaction may be
higher than its value, which will discourage normal users from
using Ethereum for auctions. In this context, researchers have
designed and tested a number of auction smart contracts in the
related literature to verify the feasibility and affordability. In
[58], the gas consumption of the smart contracts for four basic
auctions (i.e., English, Dutch, FPSB, and Vickrey auction) is
tested. The result shows that implementing sealed-bid auctions
consumes a little bit more gas than open-outcry auctions.
Nevertheless, the deployment and implementation costs of the
four auctions are kept at a low level. Although smart contracts
for basic auctions are less costly, a complex auction smart
contract may include multiple operations that incur unexpected
large costs. The cost is highly dependent on the design pattern
of the auction smart contract and the code optimization. For
instance, in an auction scenario where the auction process
requires 300 iterations to complete, a total of 12,191,380 gases
are required, which could incur a huge transaction cost that
equals several thousand dollars [10]. A promising solution to
this issue is the use of state channel technology. By submitting
the majority of auction transactions off-chain and only two
transactions on-chain, state channels have the potential
to
reduce gas consumption by 99% [10].

D. Cryptocurrency Payment

Following the end of an auction, the exchange of goods
and money between buyers and sellers is expected to happen.
Cryptocurrency is often leveraged to complete the auction
payment due to its easy and secure transaction properties. Be-
sides, auction payments can be enforced automatically through
the Ethereum token Ether in a smart contract. With such a
design, payments can be processed within the blockchain,

and transactions containing the corresponding values can be
processed between different wallets [127]. On the other hand,
the price volatility of cryptocurrencies is a big challenge. Due
to the speculative nature of cryptocurrencies,
their market
values are constantly ﬂuctuating. This makes it difﬁcult for
auction sellers to accept cryptocurrencies as the payment
method without considering the price risk. Buyers who expect
the cryptocurrency value to increase will also be hesitant to use
their own tokens as auction payments [232]. This issue can be
partially addressed by introducing a cryptocurrency payment
gateway [233].

Market liquidity is another concern regarding using cryp-
tocurrencies for auction payments. There are already cryp-
tocurrencies that are designed to support application-speciﬁc
auctions, e.g., GreenCoin [81] for energy trading and Xcoin
[104] for spectrum trading. However, the trading market of
these emerging cryptocurrencies is quite small and therefore
lacks liquidity. This means that in some cases, cryptocur-
to ﬁat money.
rencies may not be considered equivalent
Another issue is that different blockchain platforms support
different cryptocurrencies. In this case, an atomic swap [188]
is an efﬁcient solution for auction payments when users hold
different cryptocurrencies.

E. Auction Enforcement

Blockchain and smart contracts cannot conﬁrm the veracity
of external data, which is known as the blockchain oracle
problem. This is a big challenge that prevents the widespread
adoption of smart contracts for auction applications on the
blockchain. It should be noted that many of the (non-digital)
auctioned items and services cannot be managed by the
blockchain directly. For instance, in an art auction, while the
ownership of artworks can be recorded by the blockchain, the
blockchain cannot directly enforce the transfer of off-chain
artworks. Basically, a blockchain oracle is a secure middleware
that facilitates communication between the blockchain and any
off-chain system [234]. Using oracles in an auction ﬁlls this
gap and ensures that the real-world data fed into the blockchain
(e.g., whether the auction item/service is delivered as agreed)
is accurate and the auction contract is triggered properly [235].
This is why some smart contract-based auction platforms
have a built-in oracle component [222]. Current blockchain
oracle services are often provided by third-party companies.
Some successful solutions include Chainlink, Provable, and
Witnet [236]. These oracle services usually require additional
commission fees, and a single oracle may suffer from a single
point of failure. In [235], a decentralized oracle network is
integrated into an auction system. The oracles act as external
timers to trigger the start/end of the auction in a trustworthy
way.

Another possible solution to the oracle problem is to in-
troduce a decentralized witness mechanism to monitor the
delivery of auctioned goods/services. In this case, game theory
can be used to design incentive mechanisms to motivate
normal blockchain users to join the network and work as
witnesses [237]. In addition, a self-enforcing contract witness
mechanism is proposed in [238]. The basic idea is that the

25

smart contract can be enforced through the mutual judgment
of auction participants. We believe that an efﬁcient and eco-
nomical oracle design solution will signiﬁcantly facilitate the
enforcement of blockchain-based auction applications.

F. Regulations & Standards

There is no authority in a decentralized blockchain network
to avoid possible transaction disputes. In an auction appli-
cation, decentralized users may generate transaction data in
different formats. It would be a huge challenge to ensure
that the information uploaded by auction users complies with
the relevant laws and regulations. For instance, a key part
of the EU General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) lies
in the citizen’s right to data erasure, i.e., the GDPR claims
that individuals have the right to delete the data associated
with them [239]. However, due to the immutable nature of the
blockchain, it is difﬁcult to remove on-chain sensitive infor-
mation once uploaded to the blockchain. Currently, different
countries and regions are actively developing new blockchain
industry regulations to promote blockchain applications. The
compliance with current laws and regulations needs to be
carefully considered when designing blockchain-based auction
applications.

Another pressing challenge is standardization. Currently,
different blockchain platforms have different architectures and
design patterns, and there are hundreds of auction models
to support different application scenarios. There is an urgent
need for a standardized solution to set, maintain and merge
standards across blockchain platforms to enable seamless
integration. As one of the largest blockchain communities,
Ethereum has developed several standards (e.g., ERC-20 for
token development) to help maintain project interoperability
across different implementations [240]. Standardized solutions
for auction applications have great potential to address chal-
lenges such as interoperability, user experience, social accep-
tance, scale, governance, cost consumption, digital identity,
privacy protection, and developer shortcomings [241]. We
believe that the development and operations of standardized
auction smart models will be an active research direction in
the near future.

G. Auction Design Properties

Mechanism design is a branch of economics and game
theory that takes an objective-oriented approach to design eco-
nomic mechanisms or incentives to achieve desired outcomes.
As a result, mechanism design is also commonly referred
to as reverse game theory [242]. Auction mechanism design
allows a designer to organize speciﬁc auction rules to produce
the desired equilibrium outcome (e.g., maximize the auction
social welfare). Generally, the main properties of designing an
auction model can be summarized as follows:

• Individual Rationality: An auction is individually rational
if no person loses from joining the auction. This is a basic
assumption in economic theory when modeling auctions
with game theory.

• Incentive Compatibility (also known as truthfulness or
strategy-proofness): An auction is incentive-compatible

26

Design Properties*
IR IC BB EE CE

TABLE VI
SUMMARY OF AUCTION DESIGN PROPERTIES IN INTEGRATED BLOCKCHAIN-AUCTION MODELS

Group Ref.

Auction Mechanism Design Objectives

[62] A new blockchain consensus-incentive mechanism using a continuous double auction model.
[92] A Bayesian game-based optimal auction scheme to distribute electricity resources in V2V networks.

[107] A blockchain-based double auction model for spectrum sharing that satisﬁes different economic properties.
[134] An iterative double auction mechanism for IoV data trading aimed at maximizing social welfare.
[10] A general iterative double auction model that converges to a Nash equilibrium and maximizes social welfare.
[159] A truthful and effective online multi-item double auction mechanism for mobile blockchains.
[77] A novel VCG pricing rule that compensates the balanced budget attribute for the VCG mechanism.
[163] A combinatorial double auction model for computation ofﬂoading in mobile blockchains.
[66] A hierarchical combinatorial auction model to achieve computing resource allocation for mobile blockchains.

Double
Auction

[157] A three-stage VCG auction model to achieve resource allocation for mobile blockchains.
[97] A truthful double auction model to incentivize EVs to participate in the V2V energy trading.
[166] An efﬁcient combinatorial double auction model for mining task assignment with two greedy algorithms.
[164] An efﬁcient and truthful hierarchical combinatorial auction model for mobile blockchain resource allocation.
[194] A long-term auction model for mobile blockchains that satisﬁes several economic properties.

[123] A truthful double auction model for edge clouds using McAfee’s mechanism with near best social welfare.
[193] Two auction models for resource allocation in blockchain-based mobile edge computing.
[94] A double auction model for V2V energy trading where EVs will bid truthfully based on their private value.
[112]
[243]

A double auction model satisﬁes the crucial economic properties of a market while achieving great efﬁciency.

[96]

Two auction algorithms, namely a truthful mechanism for charging and an efﬁcient mechanism for charging,
are designed for charging scheduling among EVs.

[161] An auction model in edge computing resource allocation for mobile blockchains that maximizes social welfare.
[120] A decentralized cloud storage resource trading model using the VCG auction mechanism.

A novel decentralized framework for educational background investigation using the VCG mechanism.

[146]
[145]
[219] An efﬁcient Vicrey-Dutch multi-item auction algorithm that satisﬁes several economic properties.
[84] A VCG auction model for energy trading that maximizes revenue and ensures the truthful bidding.
[139] A crowdsourcing platform that motivates workers to bid truthfully through an optimized VCG auction.
[121] A decentralized cloud storage transaction mechanism based on the reverse VCG auction.

[130] A computation ofﬂoading framework using a truthful auction strategy and a P2P reputation exchange scheme.
[150] An auction-based resource trading system that encourages more edge nodes to join in the FL model training.
[244] A truthful auction in IoV that motivates vehicles to undertake the tasks issued by trafﬁc administrations.
[133] A truthful crowdsensing data trading framework based on the reverse auction and blockchain.
[116] A reputation-based truthful auction method for handling interactions between UAV operators and business agents.
[114] A Vickrey auction model that ofﬂoads users from a macrocell base station to small cell access points.

[111] A secure and fair auction framework that can achieve high economic efﬁciency.
[117] An auction framework that automatically determines the best price for cloud services.
[131] A truthful and cost-optimal auction model that reduces payments from crowdsensing providers to mobile users.
[198] A truthful and secure combinatorial auction solution that focuses on single-minded bidders.
[11] A collusion resistance auction solution that maintains social welfare at an acceptable level.
[245] An auction model that selects cost-effective service providers and (nearly) maximizes service requesters’ utility.

[60] The new monopolistic auction-based Bitcoin fee market mechanism is proved approximately truthful.
[175] The monopolistic auction is nearly truthful for any i.i.d. distribution as the number of users grows large.
[15] EIP-1559 mechanism is truthful for myopic miners and users (except in periods of rapidly increasing demand).
[156] A truthful service allocation model for IoV that uses a VCG auction mechanism.
[168]
[169]

A deep learning-based optimal auction model for blockchain mining tasks ofﬂoading.

[160]

An auction-based market model for blockchain mining tasks ofﬂoading, in which two bidding scenarios
(the constant demand and the multiple demands) are considered. Accordingly, three different auctions that
satisfy different economic attributes are designed.

Single-
Sided
Auction

* Abbreviations: Individual Rationality (IR), Incentive Compatibility (IC), Budget Balance (BB), Economic Efﬁciency (EE), Computational Efﬁciency (CE).
* Notes: Filled (or half-ﬁlled) circles indicate that the economic properties are (partially) proven or addressed, while empty circles mean that economic properties are not satisﬁed.

Empty cells represent properties not mentioned in the paper.

27

an auction involves three parties: the bidder, the seller, and the
auctioneer. Each party can collude with anyone on the opposite
side or on its own side in a variety of manners [247]. The most
common auction fraud activities include collusive bidding and
shill bidding. In [248], 11 types of auction fraud are further
summarized, including failure to ship, failure to pay, misrep-
resentation, loss or damage claims, and three-party fraud, etc.
Blockchain and smart contracts offer a new perspective to
partially solve these problems. By providing an open, trans-
parent and trustworthy environment, blockchain eliminates the
information asymmetry that exists in traditional auctions. In
addition, many advanced security mechanisms, e.g., access
control, insurance/guarantee mechanisms, reputation/feedback
systems, and certiﬁcation authorities, can be integrated with
blockchain-based auction models to alleviate auction fraud
[224]. However, there is no one-size-ﬁts-all solution to this
problem. When faced with more sophisticated fraud variations,
blockchain and smart contacts could be powerless. We expect
more solutions will be proposed to address this challenge in
the future.

VI. CONCLUSION

In this paper, we review existing auction models and
blockchain technologies, and provide a conceptual schema
to analyze research and innovation opportunities from their
integration. Speciﬁcally, we provide an overview of main
application areas for blockchain-based auction models, e.g.,
energy trading, wireless communication, and service alloca-
tion. Moreover, existing auction-based solutions for blockchain
enhancement are classiﬁed into several categories through ex-
tensive investigations, e.g., mining task ofﬂoading, transaction
fee mechanism design, miner selection & reward distribution,
and token sale & exchange. There are many open research
challenges identiﬁed for integrated blockchain-auction mod-
els, e.g., privacy protection, performance & scalability, cost-
effectiveness, cryptocurrency payment, auction enforcement,
regulations & standards, auction design properties, and auction
fraud, should be further investigated in the near future.

In summary, recent research on the integration of blockchain
and auction models is quite extensive. Scientiﬁc communities
have recognized the great potential of integrating the two
to solve problems in various application scenarios. While
there are still many challenges, such an integration trend
will be beneﬁcial to both industry and academia. This paper
attempts to explore how blockchain technology and auction
models work and when they should be fused together to tackle
corresponding challenges. We believe that the main ﬁndings of
this survey will offer theoretical support and practical guidance
for researchers and auction practitioners.

(or truthful) if every participant can achieve the best
outcome for themselves just by acting according to their
true preferences.

• Balanced Budget: An auction is budget-balanced if all
money transfers are conducted only between buyers and
sellers; the auctioneer should not gain or lose money.
• Economic Efﬁciency: An auction is economically efﬁcient
if the total social welfare of the auction is maximized.
Social welfare can be deﬁned as the sum of individual
utilities of all auction participants [47].

if the auction result,

• Computational Efﬁciency: An auction is computationally
including the winning
efﬁcient
buyer/seller,
the price charged to the buyer, and the
payment to the seller, can be obtained in polynomial time
[96].

• Allocative Efﬁciency (also known as system efﬁciency):
An auction is allocatively efﬁcient if the overall value of
the items awarded to bidders is maximized.

• Cost-Optimal: An auction is cost-optimal if it minimizes
the cost incurred by sellers [131]. This property is usually
associated with user satisfaction, which implies revenue
maximization or cost minimization for one side of the
auction user (seller or buyer).

An auction mechanism may expect several design goals to
meet different market requirements. Some classical auction
models have intrinsic properties. For instance,
the FPSB
auction is by default a non-incentive-compatible auction, while
the Vickrey auction is an incentive-compatible one. The VCG
mechanism satisﬁes three basic properties, namely individual
rationality, economic efﬁciency, and incentive compatibility.
The ability to realize economic efﬁciency while ensuring
truthful biding makes it a unique mechanism that has attracted
much discussion [84], [139], [156]. Some studies focus on the
optimization of existing auction mechanisms. In this context,
a novel pricing rule to remedy balanced budget property
in the VCG auction is proposed in [77]. According to the
Myerson-Satterwhite theorem, four basic properties (i.e., in-
dividual rationality, incentive compatibility, balanced budget,
and economic efﬁciency) cannot be satisﬁed in a single auction
market mechanism [246]. Although there is not a “perfect”
auction, designing an auction mechanism to satisfy as many
objectives as possible is a hot research topic. Among the
above economic design properties, incentive compatibility is
always considered a top priority in auction design because
malicious bidders have instinctive incentives to manipulate the
market and harm honest bidders in a non-incentive-compatible
auction. An incentive-compatible auction can simplify the
decision-making of auction bidders since truth-telling is their
dominant strategy [111]. Therefore, most of the current studies
focus on designing an incentive-compatible auction while en-
suring other properties. A detailed summary of auction design
properties in existing blockchain-auction integrated models is
shown in Table VI.

H. Auction Fraud

Auction fraud is a complex research topic that has received
much attention in traditional auction theory studies. Typically,

APPENDIX
SUMMARY OF ACRONYMS

Asymmetric Encryption
Application Programming Interface
Balanced Budget
Combined Cooling, Heating, and Power
Computational Efﬁciency
Collaborative Mining Network
Cyber-Physical-Social Systems
Cognitive Radio
Commitment Scheme
Directed Acyclic Graph
Decentralized Application
Decentralized Exchange
Distributed Generation
Differential Privacy
Delegated Proof of Stake
Digital Signature
Elliptic Curve Cryptography
Elliptic Curve Digital Signature Algorithm
Economic Efﬁciency
Ethereum Improvement Proposal
Ethereum Name Service
Ethereum Request for Comments
Electric Vehicle
Federal Communications Commission
Federated Learning
First-Price Sealed-Bid
General Data Protection Regulation
Generalized First-Price
Generalized Second-Price
Homomorphic Encryption
Incentive Compatibility
Initial Coin Offering
Internet of Things
Internet of Vehicles
Initial Public Offering
Individual Rationality
Multi-Party Computation
Network Function Virtualization
Peer-to-Peer
Permissioned Blockchain
Practical Byzantine Fault Tolerance
Primary Base Station
Proof of Authority
Proof of Elapsed Time
Proof of Stake
Proof of Work
Quality of Service
Software Guard Extensions
Trusted Execution Environment
Transactions Per Second
Trusted Third Party
Unmanned Aerial Vehicle
Vehicle-to-Grid
Vehicle-to-Vehicle
Vehicle-to-Everything
Vickrey–Clarke–Groves
Virtual Network Embedding
Virtual Power Plant
Zero-Knowledge Proof

AE
API
BB
CCHP
CE
CMN
CPSS
CR
CS
DAG
DApp
DEX
DG
DP
DPoS
DS
ECC
ECDSA
EE
EIP
ENS
ERC
EV
FCC
FL
FPSB
GDPR
GFP
GSP
HE
IC
ICO
IoT
IoV
IPO
IR
MPC
NFV
P2P
PB
PBFT
PBS
PoA
PoET
PoS
PoW
QoS
SGX
TEE
TPS
TTP
UAV
V2G
V2V
V2X
VCG
VNE
VPP
ZKP

REFERENCES

[1] I. Bashir, Mastering Blockchain: Distributed Ledger Technology, De-
centralization, and Smart Contracts Explained. Packt Publishing Ltd,
2018.

[2] S. Nakamoto.

(2008) Bitcoin: A Peer-To-Peer Electronic Cash
[Online]. Available: https:

System. Accessed: Oct. 04, 2021.
//bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf

28

[3] L. Da Xu and W. Viriyasitavat, “Application of blockchain in collabo-
rative Internet-of-Things services,” IEEE Trans. Comput. Social Syst.,
vol. 6, no. 6, pp. 1295–1305, 2019.

[4] MarketsandMarkets Inc. (2020) Blockchain Market. Accessed: Aug.
26, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.marketsandmarkets.com/
Market-Reports/blockchain-technology-market-90100890.html

[5] V. Krishna, Auction Theory. Academic Press, 2009.
[6] P. Milgrom, “Auction market design: Recent innovations,” Annu. Rev.

Econ., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 383–405, 2019.

[7] P. Klemperer, “Auction theory: A guide to the literature,” J. Econ. Surv.,

vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 227–286, 1999.

[8] P. Milgrom, “Putting auction theory to work: The simultaneous ascend-
ing auction,” J. Polit. Econ., vol. 108, no. 2, pp. 245–272, 2000.
[9] Nobel Media AB. (2020) The Prize in Economic Sciences 2020.
Accessed: Aug. 26, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.nobelprize.
org/prizes/economic-sciences/2020/summary/

[10] T. D. T. Nguyen and M. T. Thai, “A blockchain-based iterative
double auction protocol using multiparty state channels,” 2020,
arXiv:2007.08595.

[11] S. Wu, Y. Chen, Q. Wang, M. Li, C. Wang, and X. Luo, “CReam: A
smart contract enabled collusion-resistant e-auction,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
Forensics Security, vol. 14, no. 7, pp. 1687–1701, 2019.

[12] G. Wood. (2021) Ethereum: A Secure Decentralised Generalised
Transaction Ledger. Accessed: Oct. 04, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://ethereum.github.io/yellowpaper/paper.pdf

[13] M. Emem.

(2018) Andy Warhol’s Multi-Million Dollar Painting
Tokenized and Sold on Blockchain. Accessed: Aug. 22, 2021. [Online].
Available: https://ﬁnance.yahoo.com/news/andy-warhol-multi-million-
dollar-162928721.html

[14] H. Neuendorf.

(2018) Christie’s Will Become the First Major
Auction House to Use Blockchain in a Sale. Accessed: Aug. 29,
2021.
[Online]. Available: https://news.artnet.com/market/christies-
artory-blockchain-pilot-1370788

[15] T. Roughgarden,

the
Ethereum blockchain: An economic analysis of EIP-1559,” 2020,
arXiv:2012.00854.

“Transaction fee mechanism design for

[16] H. M. S. Amin, Z. Suﬁyan, N. Raﬁ, S. A. Anjum, and M. G. R. Alam,
“Secured IOTA enabled crypto-platform with discretionary mining
capabilities and miner nomination based on ﬁrst-price sealed bid
auction theory,” in Proc. IEEE TENSYMP, Dhaka, Bangladesh, Jun.
2020, pp. 412–416.

[17] K. Liu and Y. Ohsawa, “Auction based rewards distribution method in
pool mining,” in Proc. IECC, Okinawa, Japan, Jul. 2019, pp. 103–110.
Princeton University

[18] P. Klemperer, Auctions: Theory and Practice.

Press, 2004.

[19] A.

Jain and R. Sikora.

Mechanism: Potentiality
Modeling. Accessed: Oct. 01, 2021.
//www.swdsi.org/swdsi06/Proceedings06/Papers/MIS15.pdf

(2006) A Classiﬁcation of Auction
for Multi-Agent System (MAS) based
[Online]. Available: http:

[20] A. Wahaballa, Z. Qin, H. Xiong, Z. Qin, and M. Ramadan, “A taxon-
omy of secure electronic English auction protocols,” Int. J. Comput.
Appl., vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 28–36, 2015.

[21] Y. Zhang, C. Lee, D. Niyato, and P. Wang, “Auction approaches for
resource allocation in wireless systems: A survey,” IEEE Commun.
Surveys Tuts., vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 1020–1041, 2012.

[22] U. Habiba and E. Hossain, “Auction mechanisms for virtualization
in 5G cellular networks: Basics, trends, and open challenges,” IEEE
Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 2264–2293, 2018.

[23] X. Zhang, Z. Yang, W. Sun, Y. Liu, S. Tang, K. Xing, and X. Mao,
“Incentives for mobile crowd sensing: A survey,” IEEE Commun.
Surveys Tuts., vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 54–67, 2015.

[24] Z. Zheng, S. Xie, H. Dai, X. Chen, and H. Wang, “Blockchain
challenges and opportunities: A survey,” Int. J. Web Grid Serv., vol. 14,
no. 4, pp. 352–375, 2018.

[25] B. Butijn, D. A. Tamburri, and W. v. d. Heuvel, “Blockchains: A
systematic multivocal literature review,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 53,
no. 3, pp. 1–37, 2020.

[26] J. Kolb, M. AbdelBaky, R. H. Katz, and D. E. Culler, “Core concepts,
challenges, and future directions in blockchain: A centralized tutorial,”
ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 1–39, 2020.

[27] M. U. Hassan, M. H. Rehmani, and J. Chen, “Differential privacy
in blockchain technology: A futuristic approach,” J. Parallel Distrib.
Comput., vol. 145, pp. 50–74, 2020.

[28] M. Conti, E. S. Kumar, C. Lal, and S. Ruj, “A survey on security and
privacy issues of Bitcoin,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 20, no. 4,
pp. 3416–3452, 2018.

[29] R. Zhang, R. Xue, and L. Liu, “Security and privacy on blockchain,”

[53] D. Easley, J. Kleinberg et al., Networks, Crowds, and Markets. Cam-

ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 52, no. 3, pp. 1–34, 2019.

bridge University Press, 2010.

29

[30] J. H. Lee et al., “Systematic approach to analyzing security and
vulnerabilities of blockchain systems,” Master’s thesis, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, 2019.

[31] L. Peng, W. Feng, Z. Yan, Y. Li, X. Zhou, and S. Shimizu, “Privacy
preservation in permissionless blockchain: A survey,” Digit. Commun.
Netw., 2020, Early Access.

[32] B. Hu, Z. Zhang, J. Liu, Y. Liu, J. Yin, R. Lu, and X. Lin, “A
comprehensive survey on smart contract construction and execution:
Paradigms, tools, and systems,” Patterns, vol. 2, no. 2, p. 100179, 2021.
[33] W. Wang, D. T. Hoang, P. Hu, Z. Xiong, D. Niyato, P. Wang, Y. Wen,
and D. I. Kim, “A survey on consensus mechanisms and mining strategy
management in blockchain networks,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 22 328–
22 370, 2019.

[34] H. Huang, W. Kong, S. Zhou, Z. Zheng, and S. Guo, “A survey of
state-of-the-art on blockchains: Theories, modelings, and tools,” ACM
Comput. Surv., vol. 54, no. 2, pp. 1–42, 2021.

[35] F. Casino, T. K. Dasaklis, and C. Patsakis, “A systematic literature
review of blockchain-based applications: Current status, classiﬁcation
and open issues,” Telemat. Inform., vol. 36, pp. 55–81, 2019.

[36] E. J. De Aguiar, B. S. Faic¸al, B. Krishnamachari, and J. Ueyama, “A
survey of blockchain-based strategies for healthcare,” ACM Comput.
Surv., vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 1–27, 2020.

[37] J. Xie, H. Tang, T. Huang, F. R. Yu, R. Xie, J. Liu, and Y. Liu, “A survey
of blockchain technology applied to smart cities: Research issues and
challenges,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 2794–
2830, 2019.

[38] M. A. Ferrag, M. Derdour, M. Mukherjee, A. Derhab, L. Maglaras,
and H. Janicke, “Blockchain technologies for the internet of things:
Research issues and challenges,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 6, no. 2,
pp. 2188–2204, 2018.

[39] L. Lao, Z. Li, S. Hou, B. Xiao, S. Guo, and Y. Yang, “A survey of
IoT applications in blockchain systems: Architecture, consensus, and
trafﬁc modeling,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 1–32, 2020.
[40] K. Gai, J. Guo, L. Zhu, and S. Yu, “Blockchain meets cloud computing:
A survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 2009–2030,
2020.

[41] P. Sharma, R. Jindal, and M. D. Borah, “Blockchain technology for
cloud storage: A systematic literature review,” ACM Comput. Surv.,
vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 1–32, 2020.

[42] R. Yang, F. R. Yu, P. Si, Z. Yang, and Y. Zhang, “Integrated blockchain
and edge computing systems: A survey, some research issues and
challenges,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 1508–
1532, 2019.

[43] N. Deepa, Q. Pham, D. C. Nguyen, S. Bhattacharya, B. Prabadevi,
T. R. Gadekallu, P. K. R. Maddikunta, F. Fang, and P. N. Pathirana,
“A survey on blockchain for big data: Approaches, opportunities, and
future directions,” 2020, arXiv:2009.00858.

[44] U. Hacioglu, D. Chlyeh, M. K. Yilmaz, E. Tatoglu, and D. Delen,
“Crafting performance-based cryptocurrency mining strategies using a
hybrid analytics approach,” Decis. Support Syst., vol. 142, p. 113473,
2021.

[45] N. Wang, X. Zhou, X. Lu, Z. Guan, L. Wu, X. Du, and M. Guizani,
“When energy trading meets blockchain in electrical power system:
The state of the art,” Appl. Energy, vol. 9, no. 8, p. 1561, 2019.
[46] S. Oprea and A. Bˆara, “Local market mechanisms survey for peer-to-
peer electricity trading on blockchain platform,” Sci. Bull. ”Mircea cel
B˘atrˆan” Nav. Acad., vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 186A–191, 2020.

[47] M. U. Hassan, M. H. Rehmani,

“Optimizing
blockchain based smart grid auctions: A green revolution,” 2021,
arXiv:2102.02583.

and J. Chen,

[48] Hyperledger Fabric. (2017) Chaincode Tutorials. Accessed: Aug. 26,
2021. [Online]. Available: https://hyperledger-fabric.readthedocs.io/en/
release-1.1/chaincode.html

[49] Hyperledger Sawtooth. (2017) Transaction Processor: Creating a
Transaction Handler. Accessed: Aug. 30, 2021.
[Online]. Avail-
able: https://sawtooth.hyperledger.org/docs/core/releases/1.1/ autogen/
sdk TP tutorial js.html

[50] The Linux Foundation. (2020) What Is Hyperledger? Accessed: Aug.

31, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.hyperledger.org/

[51] A. McGuire. (2018) Hybrid blockchain: The best of both chains.
Accessed: Oct. 16, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://irishtechnews.ie/
hybrid-blockchain-the-best-of-both-chains/

[52] AERGO. (2021) What is AERGO? Accessed: Oct. 15, 2021. [Online].

Available: https://www.aergo.io/aergo/

[54] M. Wittwer. (2018) Pay-As-Bid vs. First-Price Auctions: Similarities
and Differences in Strategic Behavior. Accessed: Oct. 04, 2021. [On-
line]. Available: http://web.stanford.edu/∼wittwer/ﬁles/Wittwer2018

[55] J. Lee, C. Chew, Y. Chen, and K. Wei, “Preserving liberty and fairness
in combinatorial double auction games based on blockchain,” IEEE
Syst. J., 2020, Early Access.

[56] M. Babaioff and N. Nisan, “Concurrent auctions across the supply

chain,” J. Artif. Intell. Res., vol. 21, p. 595–629, 2004.

[57] F. Hawlitschek, B. Notheisen, and T. Teubner, “The limits of trust-free
systems: A literature review on blockchain technology and trust in the
sharing economy,” Electron. Commer. Res. Appl., vol. 29, pp. 50–63,
2018.

[58] C. Braghin, S. Cimato, E. Damiani, and M. Baronchelli, “Designing
smart-contract based auctions,” in Proc. Int. Conf. SICBS, Guilin,
China, Dec. 2018, pp. 54–64.

[59] C. Nickson. (2020) Auction House Commissions. Accessed: Aug.
[Online]. Available: http://www.exploreauctions.co.uk/

26, 2021.
AuctionHouseCommissions.html

[60] R. Lavi, O. Sattath, and A. Zohar, “Redesigning Bitcoin’s fee market,”
in Proc. Int. Conf. WWW, San Francisco, USA, May 2019, pp. 2950–
2956.

[61] A. Devi, G. Rathee, and H. Saini, “Using optimization and auction
approach: Security provided to vehicle network through blockchain
technology,” in Proc. Int. Conf. PDGC, Solan, India, Nov. 2020, pp.
476–480.

[62] Z. Ai, Y. Liu, and X. Wang, “ABC: An auction-based blockchain
consensus-incentive mechanism,” in Proc. IEEE ICPADS, Hong Kong,
China, Dec. 2020, pp. 609–616.

[63] M. W¨ohrer and U. Zdun, “Domain speciﬁc language for smart contract
development,” in Proc. IEEE ICBC, Toronto, Canada, May 2020, pp.
1–9.

[64] I. Sergey, L. V. Nagaraj, J. Johannsen, A. Kumar, A. Trunov, and
K. C. G. Hao, “Safer smart contract programming with Scilla,” Proc.
ACM Program. Lang., vol. 3, no. OOPSLA, pp. 1–30, 2019.

[65] S. Basu, D. Easley, M. O’Hara, and E. Sirer, “Towards a functional

fee market for cryptocurrencies,” 2019, arXiv:1901.06830.

[66] Y. Xu, K. Zhu, and S. Li, “Hierarchical combinatorial auction in
computing resource allocation for mobile blockchain,” Wirel. Commun.
Mob. Comput., vol. 2020, pp. 1–14, 2020.

[67] M. Saad, Z. Qin, K. Ren, D. Nyang, and D. Mohaisen, “e-PoS: Making
proof-of-stake decentralized and fair,” 2021, arXiv:2101.00330.
[68] R. T. Ma, S. C. Lee, J. C. Lui, and D. K. Yau, “An incentive mechanism
for P2P networks,” in Proc. ICDCS, Tokyo, Japan, Mar. 2004, pp. 516–
523.

[69] S. Thakur, B. P. Hayes, and J. G. Breslin, “Distributed double auction
for peer to peer energy trade using blockchains,” in Proc. Int. Symp.
EFEA, Rome, Italy, Sep. 2018, pp. 1–8.

[70] F. Casino, T. K. Dasaklis, and C. Patsakis, “A systematic literature
review of blockchain-based applications: Current status, classiﬁcation
and open issues,” Telemat. Inform., vol. 36, pp. 55–81, 2019.

[71] J. Wang, Q. Wang, N. Zhou, and Y. Chi, “A novel electricity transaction
mode of microgrids based on blockchain and continuous double
auction,” Energies, vol. 10, no. 12, p. 1971, 2017.

[72] A. Esmat, M. de Vos, Y. Ghiassi-Farrokhfal, P. Palensky, and D. Epema,
“A novel decentralized platform for peer-to-peer energy trading market
with blockchain technology,” Appl. Energy, vol. 282, p. 116123, 2021.
[73] C. Marnay, S. Chatzivasileiadis, C. Abbey, R. Iravani, G. Joos, P. Lom-
bardi, P. Mancarella, and J. von Appen, “Microgrid evolution roadmap,”
in Proc. Int. Symp. EDST, Vienna, Austria, Sep. 2015, pp. 139–144.

[74] S. Myung and J.-H. Lee, “Ethereum smart contract-based automated
power trading algorithm in a microgrid environment,” J. Supercomput.,
vol. 76, no. 7, pp. 4904–4914, 2020.

[75] Y. Yan, B. Duan, X. Wu, and Y. Zhong, “A novel generation right trade
in blockchain-enabled continuous double auction system,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. APSCOM, Hong Kong, China, Nov. 2018, pp. 1–6.

[76] M. St¨ubs, W. Posdorfer, and S. Momeni, “Blockchain-based multi-tier
double auctions for smart energy distribution grids,” in Proc. IEEE ICC
Workshop, Dublin, Ireland, Jun. 2020, pp. 1–6.

[77] M. K. AlAshery, Z. Yi, D. Shi, X. Lu, C. Xu, Z. Wang, and W. Qiao, “A
blockchain-enabled multi-settlement quasi-ideal peer-to-peer trading
framework,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 885–896,
2020.

[78] Z. Zhao, K. Nakayama, and R. Sharma, “Decentralized transactive en-
ergy auctions with bandit learning,” in Proc. IEEE TESC, Minneapolis,
MN, USA, Jul. 2019, pp. 1–5.

[79] S. Seven, G. Yao, A. Soran, A. Onen, and S. M. Muyeen, “Peer-to-
peer energy trading in virtual power plant based on blockchain smart
contracts,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 175 713–175 726, 2020.

[102] P. Kolodzy.

(2002) Spectrum Policy Task Force. Accessed: Oct.
03, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://docs.fcc.gov/public/attachments/
DOC-228542A1.pdf

[80] A. Hahn, R. Singh, C. Liu, and S. Chen, “Smart contract-based campus
demonstration of decentralized transactive energy auctions,” in Proc.
IEEE ISGT, Washington, USA, Apr. 2017, pp. 1–5.

[103] J. Wang, N. Lu, Q. Cheng, L. Zhou, and W. Shi, “A secure spectrum
auction scheme without the trusted party based on the smart contract,”
Digit. Commun. Netw., 2020, in Press.

[81] S. Dekhane, K. Mhalgi, K. Vishwanath, S. Singh, and N. Giri,
“Greencoin: Empowering smart cities using blockchain 2.0,” in Proc.
ICNTE, Navi Mumbai, India, Jan. 2019, pp. 1–5.

[104] X. Fan and Y. Huo, “Blockchain based dynamic spectrum access
of non-real-time data in cyber-physical-social systems,” IEEE Access,
vol. 8, pp. 64 486–64 498, 2020.

30

[82] A. Laszka, A. Dubey, M. Walker, and D. Schmidt, “Providing privacy,
safety, and security in IOT-based transactive energy systems using
distributed ledgers,” in Proc. Int. Conf. IoT, Linz, Austria, Oct. 2017,
pp. 1–8.

[83] S. Zhang, M. Pu, B. Wang, and B. Dong, “A privacy protection
scheme of microgrid direct electricity transaction based on consortium
blockchain and continuous double auction,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp.
151 746–151 753, 2019.

[84] M. U. Hassan, M. H. Rehmani, and J. Chen, “DEAL: Differentially
private auction for blockchain-based microgrids energy trading,” IEEE
Trans. Serv. Comput., vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 263–275, 2020.

[85] V. Hassija, G. Bansal, V. Chamola, V. Saxena, and B. Sikdar, “Block-
Com: A blockchain based commerce model for smart communities
using auction mechanism,” in Proc. IEEE ICC Workshop, Shanghai,
China, May 2019, pp. 1–6.

[86] R. Alcarria, B. Bordel, T. Robles, D. Mart´ın, and M. Manso-Callejo,
“A blockchain-based authorization system for trustworthy resource
monitoring and trading in smart communities,” Sensors, vol. 18, no. 10,
p. 3561, 2018.

[87] J. Guo, X. Ding, and W. Wu, “Combined cooling, heating, and
power system in blockchain-enabled energy management,” 2020,
arXiv:2003.13416.

[88] S. Saxena, H. Farag, A. Brookson, H. Turesson, and H. Kim, “Design
and ﬁeld implementation of blockchain based renewable energy trading
in residential communities,” in Proc. Int. Conf. SGRE, Doha, Qatar,
Nov. 2019, pp. 1–6.

[89] C. Groß, M. Schwed, S. Mueller, and O. Bringmann, “enerDAG –
Towards a DLT-based local energy trading platform,” in Proc. IEEE
COINS, Barcelona, Spain, Aug. 2020, pp. 1–8.

[90] A. Brenzikofer and N. Melchior, “Privacy-preserving P2P energy

market on the blockchain,” 2019, arXiv:1905.07940.

[91] L. Ableitner, A. Meeuw, S. Schopfer, V. Tiefenbeck, F. Wortmann,
and A. W¨orner, “Quartierstrom – Implementation of a real world
prosumer centric local energy market
in Walenstadt, Switzerland,”
2019, arXiv:1905.07242.

[92] S. Xia, F. Lin, Z. Chen, C. Tang, Y. Ma, and X. Yu, “A Bayesian game
based vehicle-to-vehicle electricity trading scheme for blockchain-
enabled internet of vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 69, no. 7,
pp. 6856–6868, 2020.

[93] B. Wang, X. Liu, S. Zhang et al., “Electric power transaction of electric
vehicle based on smart contract and double auction,” Adv. Comp.
Signals Syst., vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 7–12, 2020.

[94] G. Sun, M. Dai, F. Zhang, H. Yu, X. Du, and M. Guizani, “Blockchain-
enhanced high-conﬁdence energy sharing in internet of electric vehi-
cles,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 7, no. 9, pp. 7868–7882, 2020.

[95] M. Ali, A. Anjum, A. Anjum, and M. A. Khan, “Efﬁcient and secure
energy trading in internet of electric vehicles using IOTA blockchain,”
in Proc. IEEE HONET, Charlotte, USA, Dec. 2020, pp. 87–91.
[96] J. Guo, X. Ding, and W. Wu, “A double auction for charging scheduling

among vehicles using DAG-blockchains,” 2020, arXiv:2010.01436.

[97] A. Choubey, S. Behera, Y. S. Patel, K. Mahidhar, and R. Misra,
“EnergyTradingRank algorithm for truthful auctions among EVs via
blockchain analytics of large scale transaction graphs,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. COMSNETS, Bangalore, India, Jan. 2019, pp. 1–6.

[98] V. Hassija, V. Chamola, S. Garg, D. N. G. Krishna, G. Kaddoum, and
D. N. K. Jayakody, “A blockchain-based framework for lightweight
data sharing and energy trading in V2G network,” IEEE Trans. Veh.
Technol., vol. 69, no. 6, pp. 5799–5812, 2020.

[99] H. Liu, Y. Zhang, S. Zheng, and Y. Li, “Electric vehicle power trading
mechanism based on blockchain and smart contract in V2G network,”
IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 160 546–160 558, 2019.

[100] M. Pustiˇsek, A. Kos, and U. Sedlar, “Blockchain based autonomous
selection of electric vehicle charging station,” in Proc. Int. Conf. IIKI,
Beijing, China, Oct. 2016, pp. 217–222.

[101] Y. Zhang, C. Lee, D. Niyato, and P. Wang, “Auction approaches for
resource allocation in wireless systems: A survey,” IEEE Commun.
Surveys Tuts., vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 1020–1041, 2013.

[105] L. Yu, J. Ji, Y. Guo, Q. Wang, T. Ji, and P. Li, “Smart communications
in heterogeneous spacecraft networks: A blockchain based secure
auction approach,” in Proc. IEEE CCAAW Workshop, Cleveland, USA,
Jun. 2019, pp. 1–4.

[106] S. Zheng, T. Han, Y. Jiang, and X. Ge, “Smart contract-based spec-
trum sharing transactions for multi-operators wireless communication
networks,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 88 547–88 557, 2020.

[107] Z. Tu, K. Zhu, C. Yi, and R. Wang, “Blockchain-based privacy-
preserving dynamic spectrum sharing,” in Proc. Int. Conf. WASA,
Qingdao, China, Sep. 2020, pp. 444–456.

[108] K. Kotobi and S. G. Bil´en, “Blockchain-enabled spectrum access in
cognitive radio networks,” in Proc. WTS, Chicago, USA, Apr. 2017,
pp. 1–6.

[109] K. Kotobi and S. G. Bilen, “Secure blockchains for dynamic spectrum
access: A decentralized database in moving cognitive radio networks
enhances security and user access,” IEEE Veh. Technol. Mag., vol. 13,
no. 1, pp. 32–39, 2018.

[110] M. A. Khan, M. M. Jamali, T. Maksymyuk, and J. Gazda, “A
blockchain token-based trading model for secondary spectrum markets
in future generation mobile networks,” Wirel. Commun. Mob. Comput.,
vol. 2020, pp. 1–12, 2020.

[111] Y. Chen, X. Tian, Q. Wang, J. Jiang, M. Li, and Q. Zhang, “SAFE: A
general secure and fair auction framework for wireless markets with
privacy preservation,” IEEE Trans. Depend. Sec. Comput., 2020, Early
Access.

[112] N. Afraz and M. Rufﬁni, “A distributed bilateral resource market
mechanism for future telecommunications networks,” in Proc. IEEE
GLOBECOM Workshop, Hawaii, USA, Dec. 2019, pp. 1–6.

[113] A. S. Khan, Y. Rahulamathavan, B. Basutli, G. Zheng, B. Assadhan,
and S. Lambotharan, “Blockchain-based distributive auction for relay-
assisted secure communications,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 95 555–
95 568, 2019.

[114] T. Chen, A. S. Khan, G. Zheng, and S. Lambotharan, “Blockchain
secured auction-based user ofﬂoading in heterogeneous wireless net-
works,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett., vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1141–1145,
2020.

[115] V. Hassija, V. Saxena, and V. Chamola, “A blockchain-based framework
for drone-mounted base stations in tactile internet environment,” in
Proc. IEEE INFOCOM Workshop, Beijing, China, Jul. 2020, pp. 261–
266.

[116] A. S. Khan, G. Chen, Y. Rahulamathavan, G. Zheng, B. Assadhan, and
S. Lambotharan, “Trusted UAV network coverage using blockchain,
machine learning, and auction mechanisms,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp.
118 219–118 234, 2020.

[117] A. Sonnino, M. Kr´ol, A. G. Tasiopoulos, and I. Psaras, “AStERISK:
Auction-based shared economy resolution system for blockchain,”
2019, arXiv:1901.07824.

[118] Amazon Web Services Inc. (2021) Amazon EC2 Spot Instances.
Accessed: Aug. 22, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://aws.amazon.
com/ec2/spot/

[119] Z. Chen, W. Ding, Y. Xu, M. Tian, and H. Zhong, “Fair auction and
trade framework for cloud VM allocation based on blockchain,” 2020,
arXiv:2001.00771.

[120] Y. Gu, D. Hou, and X. Wu, “A cloud storage resource transaction
mechanism based on smart contract,” in Proc. ICCNS, Qingdao, China,
Nov. 2018, pp. 134–138.

[121] Y. Gu, D. Hou, X. Wu, J. Tao, and Y. Zhang, “Decentralized transac-
tion mechanism based on smart contract in distributed data storage,”
Information, vol. 9, no. 11, p. 286, 2018.

[122] Zigurat.

(2019) Cloud, Edge,

and Fog Computing–Practical
for Each. Accessed: Aug.
[Online].
https://www.e-zigurat.com/innovation-school/blog/cloud-

Application
Available:
edge-fog-computing-practical-applications/

2021.

26,

[123] A. Zavodovski, S. Bayhan, N. Mohan, P. Zhou, W. Wong, and J. Kan-
gasharju, “DeCloud: Truthful decentralized double auction for edge
clouds,” in Proc. IEEE ICDCS, Dallas, USA, Jul. 2019, pp. 2157–
2167.

[124] M. Debe, K. Salah, M. H. U. Rehman, and D. Svetinovic, “Blockchain-
based decentralized reverse bidding in fog computing,” IEEE Access,
vol. 8, pp. 81 686–81 697, 2020.

[125] B. Yu, Y. Chen, S. Fu, W. Yu, and X. Guo, “Building trustful
crowdsensing service on the edge,” in Proc. Int. Conf. WASA, Hawaii,
USA, Jun. 2019, pp. 445–457.

[126] P. Han, L. Guo, and Y. Liu, “Virtual network embedding in SDN/NFV
based ﬁber-wireless access network,” in Proc. ICSN, Jeju Island,
Republic of Korea, May 2016, pp. 1–5.

[127] M. F. Franco, E. J. Scheid, L. Z. Granville, and B. Stiller, “BRAIN:
Blockchain-based reverse auction for infrastructure supply in virtual
network functions-as-a-service,” in Proc. IFIP Networking, Warsaw,
Poland, May 2019, pp. 1–9.

[128] A. Rizk, J. Bisbal, S. Bergstr¨aßer, and R. Steinmetz, “Brokerless inter-
domain virtual network embedding: A blockchain-based approach,” it
- Inform. Technol., vol. 60, no. 5-6, pp. 293–306, 2018.

[129] V. Hassija, V. Saxena, and V. Chamola, “A mobile data ofﬂoading
framework based on a combination of blockchain and virtual voting,”
Softw.-Pract. Exp., 2020, Early Access.

[130] D. Chatzopoulos, M. Ahmadi, S. Kosta, and P. Hui, “FlopCoin:
A cryptocurrency for computation ofﬂoading,” IEEE Trans. Mobile
Comput., vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 1062–1075, 2018.

[131] D. Chatzopoulos, S. Gujar, B. Faltings, and P. Hui, “Privacy preserv-
ing and cost optimal mobile crowdsensing using smart contracts on
blockchain,” in Proc. IEEE MASS, Chengdu, China, Oct. 2018, pp.
442–450.

[132] W. Xiong and L. Xiong, “Anti-collusion data auction mechanism based

on smart contract,” Inf. Sci., vol. 555, pp. 386–409, 2021.

[133] B. An, M. Xiao, A. Liu, G. Gao, and H. Zhao, “Truthful crowdsensed
data trading based on reverse auction and blockchain,” in Database
Systems for Advanced Applications. Springer, 2019, pp. 292–309.

[134] C. Chen, J. Wu, H. Lin, W. Chen, and Z. Zheng, “A secure and efﬁcient
blockchain-based data trading approach for internet of vehicles,” IEEE
Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 68, no. 9, pp. 9110–9121, 2019.

[135] H. Al-Shaibani, N. Lasla, and M. Abdallah, “Consortium blockchain-
based decentralized stock exchange platform,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp.
123 711–123 725, 2020.

[136] C. Pop, C. Pop, A. Marcel, A. Vesa, T. Petrican, T. Cioara, I. Anghel,
and I. Salomie, “Decentralizing the stock exchange using blockchain
an Ethereum-based implementation of the Bucharest stock exchange,”
in Proc. IEEE ICCP, Cluj-Napoca, Romania, Sep. 2018, pp. 459–466.
[137] G. R. Vishnia and G. W. Peters, “AuditChain: A trading audit platform

over blockchain,” Front. Block., vol. 3, p. 9, 2020.

[138] T. Halevi, F. Benhamouda, A. D. Caro, S. Halevi, C. Jutla, Y. Manevich,
and Q. Zhang, “Initial Public Offering (IPO) on permissioned
blockchain using secure multiparty computation,” in Proc.
IEEE
Blockchain, Atlanta, USA, Jul. 2019, pp. 91–98.

[139] M. Kadadha, R. Mizouni, S. Singh, H. Otrok, and A. Ouali, “ABCrowd:
An auction mechanism on blockchain for spatial crowdsourcing,” IEEE
Access, vol. 8, pp. 12 745–12 757, 2020.

[140] V. Hassija, V. Chamola, and S. Zeadally, “Bitfund: A blockchain-based
crowd funding platform for future smart and connected nation,” Sust.
Cities Soc., vol. 60, p. 102145, 2020.

[141] S. Gupta, H. Sharma, V. Hassija, and V. Saxena, “BitCom: A commerce
model on blockchain,” in Proc. IEEE ICSC, San Diego, USA, Mar.
2020, pp. 64–70.

[142] J. Martins, M. Parente, M. Amorim-Lopes, L. Amaral, G. Figueira,
P. Rocha, and P. Amorim, “Fostering customer bargaining and e-
procurement through a decentralised marketplace on the blockchain,”
IEEE Trans. Eng. Manag., pp. 1–15, 2020, Early Access.

[143] R. C. Koirala, K. Dahal, S. Matalonga, and R. Rijal, “A supply chain
model with blockchain-enabled reverse auction bidding process for
transparency and efﬁciency,” in Proc. Int. Conf. SKIMA, Island of
Ulkulhas, Maldives, Aug. 2019, pp. 1–6.

[144] A. Shwetha and C. Prabodh, “Auction system in food supply chain
management using blockchain,” in Proc. ICACECS, Hyderabad, India,
Aug. 2021, pp. 31–40.

[145] L. Liu, M. Han, Y. Zhou, R. M. Parizi, and M. Korayem, “Blockchain-
based certiﬁcation for education, employment, and skill with incen-
tive mechanism,” in Blockchain Cybersecurity, Trust and Privacy.
Springer, 2020, pp. 269–290.

[146] L. Liu, M. Han, Y. Zhou, and R. M. Parizi, “E2C-Chain: A two-stage
incentive education employment and skill certiﬁcation blockchain,” in
Proc. IEEE Blockchain, Atlanta, USA, Jul. 2019, pp. 140–147.

[147] Semos Cloud.

(2019) Employee Recognition Program Beneﬁts
and Ideas. Accessed: Aug. 21, 2021.
[Online]. Available: https:
//semoscloud.com/blog/employee-recognition-program-beneﬁts-ideas/

31

[148] B. Ward, A. Eloyan,

(2018) Establishing a
and A. Norta.
Blockchain-Enabled, Highly Liquid, Auction-Based Employee Rewards
Marketplace. Accessed: Oct. 04, 2021. [Online]. Available: https:
//icofriends.com/urtoken/URT-WPv07b.pdf

[149] P. Ramanan and K. Nakayama, “Bafﬂe: Blockchain based aggregator
free federated learning,” in Proc. IEEE Blockchain, Rhodes Island,
Greece, Nov. 2020, pp. 72–81.

[150] S. Fan, H. Zhang, Y. Zeng, and W. Cai, “Hybrid blockchain-based
resource trading system for federated learning in edge computing,”
IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 2252–2264, 2020.

the

(2020)
of

[151] Record Evolution GmbH.
Internet
in

IoT Collaboration: The New
25,
[Online]. Available: https://www.record-evolution.de/en/iot-

Power
2021.
collaboration-the-collaborative-turn-in-the-internet-of-things/
[152] G. Cheng, S. Deng, Z. Xiang, Y. Chen, and J. Yin, “An auction-based
incentive mechanism with blockchain for IoT collaboration,” in Proc.
IEEE ICWS, Beijing, China, Oct. 2020, pp. 17–26.

Things. Accessed: Aug.

[153] H. Seike, T. Hamada, T. Sumitomo,

and N. Koshizuka,
ownership management
“Blockchain-based
Smart-
IEEE
system without
World/SCALCOM/UIC/ATC/CBDCom/IOP/SCI, Guangzhou, China,
Oct. 2018, pp. 271–276.

ubiquitous
hierarchical

code
structure,”

in

[154] M. Foti and M. Vavalis, “Blockchain based uniform price double
auctions for energy markets,” Appl. Energy, vol. 254, p. 113604, 2019.
[155] V. Hassija, V. Chamola, V. Gupta, and G. S. S. Chalapathi, “A
framework for secure vehicular network using advanced blockchain,” in
Proc. Int. Conf. IWCMC, Limassol, Cyprus, Jun. 2020, pp. 1260–1265.
[156] Y. Lee, S. Jeong, A. Masood, L. Park, N. Dao, and S. Cho, “Trustful
resource management for service allocation in fog-enabled intelligent
transportation systems,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 147 313–147 322,
2020.

[157] C. Xia, H. Chen, X. Liu, J. Wu, and L. Chen, “ETRA: Efﬁcient
three-stage resource allocation auction for mobile blockchain in edge
computing,” in Proc. IEEE ICPADS, Sentosa, Singapore, Dec. 2018,
pp. 701–705.

[158] N. Dimitri, “Transaction fees, block size limit, and auctions in Bitcoin,”

Ledger, vol. 4, 2019.

[159] J. Guo and W. Wu, “Differential privacy-based online alloca-
tions towards integrating blockchain and edge computing,” 2021,
arXiv:2101.02834.

[160] Y. Jiao, P. Wang, D. Niyato, and K. Suankaewmanee, “Auction mecha-
nisms in cloud/fog computing resource allocation for public blockchain
networks,” IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst., vol. 30, no. 9, pp. 1975–
1989, 2019.

[161] Y. Jiao, P. Wang, D. Niyato, and Z. Xiong, “Social welfare maxi-
mization auction in edge computing resource allocation for mobile
blockchain,” 2017, arXiv:1710.10595.

[162] Z. Gao, B. Lin, K. Xiao, Q. Wang, Z. Mo, and Y. Yang, “A dy-
namic resource allocation algorithm based on auction model in mobile
blockchain network,” in Proc. Int. Conf. EITCE, Xiamen, China, Oct.
2019, pp. 1605–1610.

[163] L. Li, Y. Li, and R. Li, “Double auction-based two-level resource
allocation mechanism for computation ofﬂoading in mobile blockchain
application,” Mob. Inf. Syst., vol. 2021, pp. 1–15, 2021.

[164] S. Li, K. Zhu, Y. Xu, R. Wang, and Y. Zhao, “Resource allocation for
mobile blockchain: A hierarchical combinatorial auction approach,” in
Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, Hawaii, USA, Dec. 2019, pp. 1–6.
[165] S. Guo, Y. Dai, S. Guo, X. Qiu, and F. Qi, “Blockchain meets edge
computing: Stackelberg game and double auction based task ofﬂoading
for mobile blockchain,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 69, no. 5, pp.
5549–5561, 2020.

[166] X. Liu, J. Wu, L. Chen, and C. Xia, “Efﬁcient auction mechanism for
edge computing resource allocation in mobile blockchain,” in Proc.
IEEE HPCC/SmartCity/DSS, Zhangjiajie, China, Aug. 2019, pp. 871–
876.

[167] F. Jameel, M. A. Javed, S. Zeadally, and R. J¨antti, “Efﬁcient mining
cluster selection for blockchain-based cellular V2X communications,”
IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., pp. 1–9, 2020, Early Access.
[168] N. C. Luong, Z. Xiong, P. Wang, and D. Niyato, “Optimal auction for
edge computing resource management in mobile blockchain networks:
A deep learning approach,” in Proc. IEEE ICC, Kansas City, USA,
May 2018, pp. 1–6.

[169] N. C. Luong, Y. Jiao, P. Wang, D. Niyato, D. I. Kim, and Z. Han, “A
machine-learning-based auction for resource trading in fog computing,”
IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 58, no. 3, pp. 82–88, 2020.

[170] G. Huberman, J. D. Leshno, and C. C. Moallemi. (2017) Monopoly
the Bitcoin

Without a Monopolist: An Economic Analysis of

Payment System. Accessed: Oct. 04, 2021.
https://moallemi.com/ciamac/papers/bitcoin-2017.pdf

[Online]. Available:

2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.nber.org/system/ﬁles/working
papers/w27634/w27634.pdf

32

[171] P. Daian, S. Goldfeder, T. Kell, Y. Li, X. Zhao, I. Bentov, L. Brei-
denbach, and A. Juels, “Flash boys 2.0: Frontrunning in decentralized
exchanges, miner extractable value, and consensus instability,” in Proc.
IEEE Symp. SP, San Francisco, USA, May 2020, pp. 910–927.
[172] J. Li, Y. Yuan, and F. Wang, “A novel GSP auction mechanism for
ranking Bitcoin transactions in blockchain mining,” Decis. Support
Syst., vol. 124, p. 113094, 2019.

[173] J. Li, X. Ni, Y. Yuan, and F. Wang, “A novel GSP auction mechanism
for dynamic conﬁrmation games on Bitcoin transactions,” IEEE Trans.
Serv. Comput., 2020, Early Access.

[174] G. Yan, S. Wang, Z. Yang, and Y. Zhou, “Dynamic game model for
ranking Bitcoin transactions under GSP mechanism,” IEEE Access,
vol. 8, pp. 109 198–109 206, 2020.

[175] A. C. Yao, “An incentive analysis of some Bitcoin fee designs,” 2018,

arXiv:1811.02351.

[176] V. S. S. Nadendla and L. R. Varshney, “A difﬁculty in con-
trolling blockchain mining costs via cryptopuzzle difﬁculty,” 2020,
arXiv:2005.05521.

[177] P. P. Momtaz, K. Rennertseder, and H. Schr¨oder, “Token offerings: A
revolution in corporate ﬁnance?” 2019, Available at SSRN 3346964.

[178] S. Somin, G. Gordon, and Y. Altshuler, “Network analysis of ERC20
tokens trading on Ethereum blockchain,” in Proc. ICCS, Cambridge,
MA, USA, Jul. 2018, pp. 439–450.

[179] J. Kranz, E. Nagel, and Y. Yoo, “Blockchain token sale,” Bus. Inf. Syst.

Eng., vol. 61, no. 6, pp. 745–753, 2019.

[180] G. Fridgen, F. Regner, A. Schweizer, and N. Urbach.

(2018)
Don’t Slip on the Initial Coin Offering (ICO) – A Taxonomy
for a Blockchain-Enabled Form of Crowdfunding. Accessed: Aug.
26, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.ﬁm-rc.de/Paperbibliothek/
Veroeffentlicht/730/wi-730.pdf

[181] D. C. S´anchez, “An optimal ICO mechanism,” 2017, Available at SSRN

3040343.
[182] A. Topchishvili.

Models. Accessed: Aug. 23, 2021.
//blog.coinlist.co/the-evolution-of-token-distribution-models/

(2021) The Evolution of Token Distribution
[Online]. Available: https:

[183] S. T. Howell, M. Niessner, and D. Yermack, “Initial coin offerings:
Financing growth with cryptocurrency token sales,” Rev. Financ. Stud.,
vol. 33, no. 9, pp. 3925–3974, 2020.

[184] J. Teutsch, V. Buterin, and C. Brown, “Interactive coin offerings,” 2019,

arXiv:1908.04295.

[185] CFI Education Inc. (2021) What Are Atomic Swaps? Accessed: Aug.
26, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://corporateﬁnanceinstitute.com/
resources/knowledge/other/atomic-swaps/

[186] Z. Yan. (2020) Optimum Transaction Collection for Uniform-Price
Atomic Swap Auction Is NP-Hard. Accessed: Oct. 02, 2021. [Online].
Available: https://bit.ly/34b8nAc

[187] W. Liu, H. Wu, T. Meng, R. Wang, Y. Wang, and C. Xu, “Aucswap: A
vickrey auction modeled decentralized cross-blockchain asset transfer
protocol,” J. Syst. Architect., vol. 117, p. 102102, 2021.

[188] M. Black, T. Liu, and T. Cai, “Atomic loans: Cryptocurrency debt

instruments,” 2019, arXiv:1901.05117.

[189] M. Friedenbach and J. Tim´on.

(2013) Freimarkets: Extending
Bitcoin Protocol With User-Speciﬁed Bearer Instruments, Peer-To-
Peer Exchange, Off-Chain Accounting, Auctions, Derivatives and
Transitive Transactions. Accessed: Oct. 04, 2021. [Online]. Available:
http://freico.in/docs/freimarkets.pdf

[190] T. Walther. (2018) Multi-token Batch Auctions with Uniform Clearing
Prices on Plasma. Accessed: Oct. 04, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://github.com/gnosis/dex-research/releases

[191] X. Wang, Y. Chen, and Q. Zhang, “Incentivizing cooperative relay in
UTXO-based blockchain network,” Comput. Netw., vol. 185, p. 107631,
2021.

[192] N. Johnson. (2019) ENS Documentation. Accessed: Oct. 03, 2021.
[Online]. Available: https://buildmedia.readthedocs.org/media/pdf/ens/
latest/ens.pdf

[193] W. Sun, J. Liu, Y. Yue, and P. Wang, “Joint resource allocation and
incentive design for blockchain-based mobile edge computing,” IEEE
Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 19, no. 9, pp. 6050–6064, 2020.
[194] T. Liu, J. Wu, L. Chen, Y. Wu, and Y. Li, “Smart contract-based
long-term auction for mobile blockchain computation ofﬂoading,” IEEE
Access, vol. 8, pp. 36 029–36 042, 2020.

[195] S. Allen, S. ˇCapkun, I. Eyal, G. Fanti, B. A. Ford, J. Grimmelmann,
A. Juels, K. Kostiainen, S. Meiklejohn, A. Miller, E. Prasad, K. W¨ust,
and F. Zhang. (2020) Design Choices for Central Bank Digital
Currency: Policy and Technical Considerations. Accessed: Aug. 28,

[196] H. S. Galal and A. M. Youssef, “Veriﬁable sealed-bid auction on the
Ethereum blockchain,” in Proc. Int. Conf. FC, Nieuwpoort, Curac¸ao,
Feb. 2018, pp. 265–278.

[197] E. Blass and F. Kerschbaum, “BOREALIS: Building block for sealed
bid auctions on blockchains,” in Proc. ACM ASIACCS, Taipei, Taiwan,
Oct. 2020, pp. 558–571.

[198] S. Damle, B. Faltings, and S. Gujar, “A practical solution to Yao’s mil-
lionaires’ problem and its application in designing secure combinatorial
auction,” 2019, arXiv:1906.06567.

[199] D. C. S´anchez. (2017) Raziel: Private and Veriﬁable Smart Contracts
[Online]. Available:

on Blockchains. Accessed: Oct. 02, 2021.
https://eprint.iacr.org/2017/878.pdf

[200] H. S. Galal and A. M. Youssef, “Succinctly veriﬁable sealed-bid auction
smart contract,” in Data Privacy Management, Cryptocurrencies and
Blockchain Technology. Springer, 2018, pp. 3–19.

[201] A. Sarfaraz, R. K. Chakrabortty, and D. L. Essam, “A tree structure-
based improved blockchain framework for a secure online bidding
system,” Comput. Secur., vol. 102, p. 102147, 2021.

[202] E. Blass and F. Kerschbaum, “Strain: A secure auction for blockchains,”
in Proc. ESORICS, Barcelona, Spain, Sep. 2018, pp. 87–110.
[203] L. Liu, M. Du, and X. Ma, “Blockchain-based fair and secure electronic
double auction protocol,” IEEE Intell. Syst., vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 31–40,
2020.

[204] J. Ma, B. Qi, and K. Lv, “Fully private auctions for the highest bid,”

in Proc. ACM TURC, Chengdu, China, May 2019, pp. 1–6.

[205] F. Benhamouda, S. Halevi, and T. Halevi, “Supporting private data on
hyperledger fabric with secure multiparty computation,” IBM J. Res.
Dev., vol. 63, no. 2/3, pp. 3:1–3:8, 2019.

[206] A. Sonnino, M. Al-Bassam, S. Bano, S. Meiklejohn, and G. Danezis,
“Coconut: Threshold issuance selective disclosure credentials with
applications to distributed ledgers,” 2018, arXiv:1802.07344.

[207] R. Yuan, Y. Xia, H. Chen, B. Zang, and J. Xie, “ShadowEth: Private
smart contract on public blockchain,” J. Comput. Sci. Technol., vol. 33,
no. 3, pp. 542–556, 2018.

[208] H. S. Galal and A. M. Youssef, “Trustee: Full privacy preserving
vickrey auction on top of Ethereum,” in Proc. Int. Conf. FC, Frigate
Bay, St. Kitts and Nevis, Feb. 2019, pp. 190–207.

[209] R. Strackx, B. Jacobs, and F. Piessens, “ICE: A passive, high-speed,
state-continuity scheme,” in Proc. ACSAC, New Orleans, Louisiana,
USA, Dec. 2014, pp. 106–115.

[210] M. Brandenburger, C. Cachin, R. Kapitza, and A. Sorniotti,
“Blockchain and trusted computing: Problems, pitfalls, and a solution
for hyperledger fabric,” 2018, arXiv:1805.08541.

[211] M. Brandenburger, C. Cachin, R. Kapitza, and A. Sorniotti, “Trusted
computing meets blockchain: Rollback attacks and a solution for
hyperledger fabric,” in Proc. SRDS, Lyon, France, Oct. 2019, pp. 324–
32 409.

[212] H. Desai, M. Kantarcioglu, and L. Kagal, “A hybrid blockchain
architecture for privacy-enabled and accountable auctions,” in Proc.
IEEE Blockchain, Atlanta, USA, Jul. 2019, pp. 34–43.

[213] A. Kosba, A. Miller, E. Shi, Z. Wen, and C. Papamanthou, “Hawk:
The blockchain model of cryptography and privacy-preserving smart
contracts,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. SP, San Jose, USA, May 2016, pp.
839–858.

[214] R. Tso, Z. Liu, and J. Hsiao, “Distributed e-voting and e-bidding
systems based on smart contract,” Electronics, vol. 8, no. 4, p. 422,
2019.

[215] Y. Doweck and I. Eyal, “Multi-party timed commitments,” 2020,

arXiv:2005.04883.

[216] B. Enkhtaivan, T. Takenouchi, and K. Sako, “A fair anonymous auction
scheme utilizing trusted hardware and blockchain,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
PST, Fredericton,Canada, Aug. 2019, pp. 1–5.

[217] T. D. T. Nguyen and M. T. Thai, “Trustless framework for iterative
double auction based on blockchain,” in Proc. Int. Conf. SecureComm,
Orlando, FL, USA, Oct. 2019, pp. 3–22.

[218] J. Xiong and Q. Wang, “Anonymous auction protocol based
on time-released encryption atop consortium blockchain,” 2019,
arXiv:1903.03285.

[219] M. Kr´ol, A. Sonnino, A. Tasiopoulos, I. Psaras, and E. Rivi`ere,
“PASTRAMI: Privacy-preserving, auditable, scalable & trustworthy
auctions for multiple items,” 2020, arXiv:2004.06403.

[220] B. David, L. Gentile, and M. Pourpouneh. (2021) FAST: Fair Auctions
via Secret Transactions. Accessed: Oct. 04, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://eprint.iacr.org/2021/264.pdf

[221] B. B¨unz, S. Agrawal, M. Zamani, and D. Boneh, “Zether: Towards
privacy in a smart contract world,” in Proc. Int. Conf. FC, J. Bonneau
and N. Heninger, Eds., Kota Kinabalu, Malaysia, Feb. 2020, pp. 423–
443.

[222] P.

Lafourcade, M.

Nop`ere,
D.
Yellow Paper. Accessed: Oct.

(2018)
Auctionity
[On-
line]. Available: https://www.auctionity.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/
09/Auctionity-Yellow-Paper.pdf

Pizzuti.

2021.

and

04,

[223] P. Lafourcade, M. Nopere, J. Picot, D. Pizzuti, and E. Roudeix,
“Security analysis of Auctionity: A blockchain based e-auction,” in
Proc. Int. Symp. FPS, Toulouse, France, Nov. 2019.

[224] Y. Shu, “Blockchain for security of a cloud-based online auction

system,” Master’s thesis, Auckland University of Technology, 2017.

[225] X. Sun, P. Kulicki, and M. Sopek, “Lottery and auction on quantum

blockchain,” Entropy, vol. 22, no. 12, p. 1377, 2020.

[226] X. Sun, P. Kulicki, and M. Sopek, “Bit commitment for lottery and

auction on quantum blockchain,” 2020, arXiv:2004.10312.

[227] Y. Lin. (2020) 10 eBay Statistics You Need to Know. Accessed: Aug. 22,
2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.oberlo.com/blog/ebay-statistics
eBid for Selling? An
[Online]. Available:

in-Depth Look. Accessed: Aug. 21, 2021.
https://www.salehoo.com/blog/is-ebid-a-viable-alternative-to-ebay

(2021) How Good Is

[228] Z. Rutherford.

[230] EC-Council.

Is Ethereum 2.0 and Why Does

It
[Online]. Available: https:

[229] C. Gorenﬂo, S. Lee, L. Golab, and S. Keshav, “Fastfabric: Scaling
hyperledger fabric to 20 000 transactions per second,” Int. J. Netw.
Manag., vol. 30, no. 5, p. e2099, 2020.
(2021) What
Matter? Accessed: Aug. 21, 2021.
//blog.eccouncil.org/what-is-ethereum-2-and-why-does-it-matter/
[231] Ethereum Community. (2021) Gas and Fees. Accessed: Aug. 26,
2021. [Online]. Available: https://ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/gas/
to
Enable Cryptocurrency Payments. Accessed: Sep.
2021.
[Online]. Available: https://medium.com/aditusnetwork/8-challenges-
to-overcome-to-enable-cryptocurrency-payments-c7a49e379d61
[233] J. Maslow. (2021) What Is a Crypto Payment Gateway? Accessed:
Oct. 21, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.inﬂuencive.com/what-
is-a-crypto-payment-gateway/

[232] T. Chew.

8 Challenges

to Overcome

(2018)

The

02,

[234] Chainlink. (2020) What Is the Blockchain Oracle Problem? Accessed:
Aug. 24, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://blog.chain.link/what-is-
the-blockchain-oracle-problem/

[235] I. A. Omar, H. R. Hasan, R. Jayaraman, K. Salah, and M. Omar, “Im-
plementing decentralized auctions using blockchain smart contracts,”
Technol. Forecast. Soc. Chang., vol. 168, p. 120786, 2021.

[236] Ethereum Community.

(2021) Oracle Services. Accessed: Aug.
26, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/
oracles/

[237] H. Zhou, X. Ouyang, Z. Ren, J. Su, C. de Laat, and Z. Zhao, “A
blockchain based witness model for trustworthy cloud service level
agreement enforcement,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM, Paris, France, May
2019, pp. 1567–1575.

[238] H. Matsushima and S. Noda.

(2020) Mechanism Design with
Blockchain Enforcement. Accessed: Oct. 01, 2021. [Online]. Available:
http://www.cirje.e.u-tokyo.ac.jp/research/dp/2020/2020cf1145.pdf
[239] M. Berberich and M. Steiner, “Blockchain technology and the GDPR-
how to reconcile privacy and distributed ledgers,” Eur. Data Prot. L.
Rev., vol. 2, p. 422, 2016.

[240] Ethereum Community.

(2021) Ethereum Development Standards.
Accessed: Sep. 03, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://ethereum.org/en/
developers/docs/standards/

[241] Zeeve Inc. (2019) Smart Contract Standardization. Accessed: Aug. 28,
2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.zeeve.io/blog/smart-contract-
standardization/

[242] Z. Han, D. Niyato, W. Saad, T. Bas¸ar, and A. Hjørungnes, “Auction
theory and mechanism design,” in Game Theory in Wireless and Com-
munication Networks: Theory, Models, and Applications. Cambridge
University Press, 2011, p. 221–252.

[243] N. Afraz and M. Rufﬁni, “A sharing platform for multi-tenant PONs,”
J. Lightwave Technol., vol. 36, no. 23, pp. 5413–5423, 2018.
[244] J. Guo, X. Ding, and W. Wu, “Reliable trafﬁc monitoring mechanisms
based on blockchain in vehicular networks,” IEEE Trans. Rel., pp. 1–
11, 2021, Early Access.

[245] P. Wang, J. Meng, J. Chen, T. Liu, Y. Zhan, W. Tsai, and Z. Jin,
“Smart contract-based negotiation for adaptive QoS-aware service
composition,” IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst., vol. 30, no. 6, pp.
1403–1420, 2019.

[246] R. B. Myerson and M. A. Satterthwaite, “Efﬁcient mechanisms for
bilateral trading,” J. Econ. Theory, vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 265–281, 1983.

33

[247] J. Wang.
Blockchain
Available:
auction-theory-blockchain-edition-cf09b005b1cc

Theory:
[Online].
https://medium.com/crypto-economics/an-introduction-to-

Introduction
(2018)
Edition. Accessed: Aug.

Auction
2021.

to
26,

An

[248] C. E. H. Chua and J. Wareham, “Fighting internet auction fraud: An
assessment and proposal,” Comput. J., vol. 37, no. 10, pp. 31–37, 2004.

Zeshun Shi is currently pursuing his Ph.D. degree
in the MultiScale Networked Systems (MNS) group,
University of Amsterdam (UvA), Netherlands. He
received a Master’s degree with a focus on semantic
web and ontology modeling from Beijing Normal
University (BNU), China, in 2018. Since then, he has
been working on research topics using blockchain
technology and auction models for quality-critical
cloud applications to provide trustworthy services.
His current research interests include blockchain,
auction theory, cloud computing, DevOps, and opti-

mization solutions for infrastructure services.

Cees de Laat
is the chair of the System and
Network Engineering laboratory at the University
of Amsterdam. The SNE lab conducts research
on leading-edge computer systems of all scales,
ranging from global-scale systems and networks to
embedded devices. His own work focuses on Secure
Trusted Distributed Data Processing Systems. Prof.
de Laat served on the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory
Policy Board for ESnet, the scientiﬁc advisory board
of SURF, was (co-)founder of the Global Lambda
Integrated Facility (GLIF), GRIDforum.nl, and Cine-
Grid.org. He is a member of the Advisory Board Internet Society Netherlands.
See: http://delaat.net/.

the Institute for Informatics at

Paola Grosso Dr. Paola Grosso is an associate
professor at
the
University of Amsterdam. She leads the Multiscale
Networked Systems (MNS) group, which researches
the emerging architectures that can support the op-
erations of multiscale systems across the Future
Internet. She has an extensive record of contribution
to international projects and she is currently involved
with her group in numerous EU-funded projects,
among them GN4-3, FEd4FIRE+.

Zhiming Zhao received his Ph.D.
in computer
science in 2004 from the University of Amster-
dam (UvA). He is currently a senior researcher in
the MultiScale Networked Systems (MNS) group
at UvA. He coordinates research efforts on qual-
ity critical systems on programmable infrastructures
in the context of EU H2020 projects of ARTI-
CONF, SWITCH, etc. His research interests include
blockchain, SDN, workﬂow management systems,
multi-agent systems, and big data research infras-
tructures.

