IoT Equipped Intelligent Distributed 
Framework for Smart Healthcare Systems 

*Sita Rani1, Meetali Chauhan2, Aman Kataria3 and Alex Khang4 

1Department of Computer Science and Engineering, 
Gulzar Institute of Engineering and Technology, 
( Affiliated To  I.K.G. Punjab Technical University, Kapurthala) 
Gulzar Group of Institutions, Khanna ( Ludhiana) 
Punjab, INDIA- 141401. 
sitasaini80@gmail.com 

2Department of Computer Science and Engineering, 
Gulzar Institute of Engineering and Technology, 
(  Affiliated To  I.K.G. Punjab Technical University, Kapurthala) 
Gulzar Group of Institutions, Khanna ( Ludhiana) 
Punjab, INDIA- 141401. 
meetalichauhan08@gmail.com 

3Project Associate 
CSIR-CSIO, Chandigarh 
INDIA-160030 
ammankataria@gmail.com 

4Professor of Information Technology, 
GRITEx and VUST, 
VIETNAM . 
alex.khang@outlook.com 

 Abstract: The fundamental aim of the healthcare sector is to incorporate different technologies 
to observe and keep a track of the various clinical parameters of the patients in day to day life. 
Distant patient observation applications are becoming popular as economical healthcare services 
are facilitated by these apps. The process of data management gathered through these applications 
also require due attention. Although cloud  facilitated healthcare applications cater a variety of 
solutions to store patients record and deliver the required data as per need of all the stakeholders 
but are affected by security issues, more response time and affecting the continues availability of 
the  system.  To  overcome  these  challenges,  an  intelligent  IoT  based  distributed  framework  to 
deploy  remote  healthcare  services  is  proposed  in  this  chapter.  In the  proposed  model,  various 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
entities  of  the  system  are  interconnected  using  IoTs  and  Distributed  Database  Management 
Systems is used to cater secure and fast data availability to the patients and health care workers. 
The concept of Blockchain is used to ensure the security of the patient’s medical records. The 
proposed  model  will  comprise  of  intelligent  analysis  of  the  clinical  records  fetched  from 
Distributed Database Management Systems secured with Blockchain. Proposed model is tested 
with true clinical data and results are discussed in detail.  

Key Words: Blockchain; Distributed Database Management System (DDBMS); IoT; Response 
Time; Security; Smart Healthcare. 

1. INTRODUCTION 

Health is the most essential aspect of living. In current times, the modern 

society  is  suffering  from  a  number  of  problems  like  multiple  organs 

failure  &  various  chronical  diseases  due  to  stress  &  anxiety.  So,  the 

society requires appropriate facilities, resources, and services  from the 

hospitals such as medications, doctors & nurses on time [1, 2]. With sharp 

rise in chronic diseases & pandemic era of Covid-19, a sudden hike can 

be seen in usage of smart healthcare systems. In order to provide efficient 

healthcare  services  to  the  patients,  a  major  role  is  played  by  smart 

healthcare  system.  This  has  reduced  mandatory  physical  presence  of 

patients  at  hospitals  [3-5].  E-healthcare  system  have  provided  high 

quality care to the patients by providing online medical services at homes 

itself. Earlier, there was a communication gap between patients & doctors 

due to unavailability of doctors in case of emergency. But now, advanced 

communication  systems  and  Internet  of  Things  (IoT)  technology  has 

made this possible by providing effective communication paradigm. IoT 

is  an  appropriate  solution  to  administer  such  problems  occurring  in 

2 

 
 
healthcare systems. This paradigm is used to collect patients’ data which 

is  analyzed  by  doctors  to  provide  medication  &  medical  treatment 

remotely.  This  automation  in  smart  healthcare  monitoring  system  has 

reduced risk of patient’s life by providing on time medical help to them 

in  case  of  emergency.  There  are  various  monitoring  systems  such  as 

sensors to collect data, IoT gateway to distribute data, and cloud-based 

storage for storing patients’ data to get examined by doctors.  IoT acts as 

a  chain,  responsible  to  collect  all  the  information  communicated  from 

smart devices via internet. Patients can receive their health records using 

mobile healthcare apps [6]. 

1.1 Internet of Things (IoT) 

IoT  is  a  concept  which  reflects  connectivity  of  devices,  services,  and 

system in terms of machine- to -machine and man- to –machine [7, 8].  

This helps to achieve automation which can be seen in a wide range of 

areas, such as smart cities, healthcare, traffic management, logistics, and 

waste  management.  IoT  has  provided  incredible  outlook  to  modern 

healthcare system by facilitating human life with healthcare apps, fitness 

programs, 

remote  health  monitoring,  emergency  help,  etc. 

In 

collaboration with medical devices, such as sensors & imaging devices, 

the service providers can provide best guidance to the patients. Thus, IoT 

based  healthcare  services  are  expected  to  reduce  medical  costs  and 

increase for the patients. 

3 

 
Recently evolved IoT-based wireless technologies have helped to prevent 

&  diagnose  chronical  diseases  and  provide  real-time  monitoring. 

Database  records  and  servers  play  a  vital  role  to  maintain  medical 

records,  and  provide  facilities  to  the  patients  in  need  of  hour.  Table.1 

describes the IoT integrated advanced  technologies which are useful in 

domain of healthcare [9]. 

Table 1. IoT-integrated Technologies and Their Benefits in the Domain 
of Healthcare 

Technology 
Big data 

Cloud 
computing 

Smart sensors 

Software 

Artificial 
intelligence 

Description 
Data is stored which provides a quick review 
easily in healthcare systems when required 
Helps to maintain clinical records, bills, medical 
history of patients 
Useful to store on demand data & specifies the 
content via internet 
This helps to visualize the data resources which 
helps the doctors to work effectively 
This device provides accurate results & monitors 
all medical parameters 
This device controls various aspects such as blood 
pressure, oxygen levels, temperature & sugar 
levels 
It is used to get associated with patients’ data, 
medical tests & reports  
It reduces the communication gap between 
doctors & patients  
This concept evaluates, predict, analyze & helps 
in decision making 

4 

 
Actuators 

Virtual Reality 

This concept with help of algorithms predict & 
controls diseases 
This device helps to maintain accuracy in 
calculated parameters 
This device helps to control system & makes it act 
according to the requirements 
It provides digital information & improves 
patients safety 
It provides real-time information with integration 
of humans with electronic systems 

A generalized IoT- based automatic framework developed for healthcare 

systems is shown in Fig. 1. It describes the results predicted using IoT 

integrated technologies [10-12]. 

Fig.1 IoT- based Automatic Design Framework  

The major role played by IoT in the domain of healthcare is in the areas 

of  silent  symptoms  of  patients.  Early  diagnosis  might  prevent  severe 

5 

 
 
 
 
illness & saves patients from untimely death. So, early diagnosis might 

save patients life. In current times, the IoT based health applications focus 

on medical treatments of the diseases  and monitoring the health of the 

patients  via  analyzing  various  parameters  using  smart  devices.  The 

healthcare system is slowly switching to remote healthcare by providing 

E-health  services  at  homes.  Fig.2  shows  the  IoT-based  healthcare 

application  framework  to  facilitate  the  residents.  There  are  many 

applications  existing  for  patient  monitoring.  In  addition,  various 

networks such as Wireless Body Area Network (WBAN), Wireless Local 

Area  Network  (WLAN),  Radio-frequency  Identification  (RFID)  and 

Wireless  Personal  Area  Network  (WPAN)  assist 

in  automatic 

identification and data capturing [13]. 

6 

 
 
Fig.2 IoT-based Healthcare Application Framework  

1.2 Smart Healthcare 

Using  traditional  healthcare  facilities,  it  was  difficult  to  diagnose  and 

treat  patients  in  case  of  emergency,  which  was  used  to  cause  mental 

trauma, cardiovascular disorders, anxiety & depression to the patients and 

their family members. With launch of smart healthcare applications and 

services  a  wide  variety  of  online  facilities  got  available  to  people  at 

homes.  

7 

 
 
Fig.3 Smart Healthcare Services 

Fig.3  highlights  some  of  the  smart  healthcare  services  which  have 

provided ease to human beings with secure services, such as availability 

of online appointments with doctors, storing medical records of patients, 

and  consultancy  to  the  patients  in  case  of  emergency  [14].  The  whole 

healthcare system is connected via wireless technology and database is 

maintained using cloud computing.  

Table 2 shows various smart applications launched with the purpose to 

make them available all-time to the people. These applications facilitate 

the  people  with  various  health  services.  They  can  analyze  various 

parameters themselves on daily basis and opt workout & healthy eating 

8 

 
 
habits accordingly. Various remedies can be followed without consulting 

doctors just by adapting healthy lifestyle [9, 15]. 

Table 2. Healthcare Applications and Services 

Application 

Services 

Your 

Steps taken and calories burnt   
Record of menstrual cycle in women  
Running, cycling and walking activities 
Water drinking habits and alerts 

Health Assistant  Body temperature, fat, weight, BP, glucose level check 
Calorie Counter  Calories count from the food eaten 
Pedometer 
Period Tracker  
Google Fit 
Water 
Body 
Heart Rate  
Monitor 
Smart Watch 
On Track  
Diabetes 
Finger Print  
Thermometer 

Number of steps taken, BP, heart rate, calories burnt 
Blood glucose level 

Body temperature 

Heart beat 

1.3 DBMS 

IoT  based  distributed  technology  plays  a  vital  role  in  smart  healthcare 

system.  Distributed  healthcare  system  has  interconnected  various 

medical resources with sensors and actuators such as ECG, BP machine, 

EMG, and Glucometer. With sharp rise in usage of IoT, there has been a 

major  contribution  of  distributed  database  management  system 

(DDBMS)  to  provide  efficient  healthcare  services  to  patients.  The 

distributed healthcare system acknowledges various parameters such as 

9 

 
 
blood  pressure  (BP),  sugar  levels  of  diabetic  patients  etc.  via  health 

monitoring  devices.  Efficient  remedies  &  medical  prescription  can  be 

suggested by doctors in case of emergency to the patients. The purpose 

of DDBMS is to extend the healthcare services from various domains of 

hospitals to patients at homes. The DDBMS in collaboration with IoT-

based healthcare are dedicated to provide various services using a variety 

of healthcare applications with other important resources which include 

laptop, mobile phones, sensors, actuators, medical equipment, e-patients, 

patients records stored using cloud computing, medical staff of doctors 

&  nurses,  and  database  of  patient’s  records.  Fig.4  shows  collaborative 

healthcare system comprising IoT & DDBMS [16].  

Fig.4 Distributed Healthcare System 

10 

 
 
1.4 Artificial Intelligence (AI) 

Artificial Intelligence (AI) is a concept which has no boundaries in terms 

of smart development. It contains the ability of algorithms in machines to 

analyze the results without human intervention. The induction of AI with 

smart  devices  in  the  domain  of  healthcare  has  set  an  ideology  for 

healthcare systems to a new level [17]. With advancement in healthcare 

systems, health status of people has reached a new level. AI embedded 

machines comprising sensors help to monitor and diagnose symptoms of 

diseases at earlier stages. This whole system acts like a robotic nurse for 

patients  who takes care,  monitor, and record patient’s  health  condition 

with consistency. Using AI algorithms, various roles & responsibilities 

are carried out which requires intelligence in the areas of image analysis, 

speech recognition,  under water communication,  pattern recognition  & 

decision making [18-23]. This provides assistance to suggest best way to 

cure health. The collaboration of AI algorithms makes it easier to make 

accurate predictions in laboratories, such as blood group detection, and 

disease predictions [24]. So, AI is the preferable choice when it comes to 

decision making [25]. 

11 

 
Fig.5 Smart Healthcare using AI 

AI  algorithm  is  a  mixed  composition  of  various  technologies  which 

includes  natural  language  processing  (NLP),  machine  learning,  neural 

networks  &  robotic  systems.  AI  is  used  in  multiple  fields  of  smart 

healthcare,  such  as  cancer 

treatment  surgeries,  neurology,  and 

cardiology. Fig.5 provides an outlook of AI based healthcare system. AI 

based  healthcare  system  requires  a  balanced  approach  which  can  be 

achieved through support from all domains such as doctors, nurses, labs, 

radiologists, pharmacy, and emergency medical services. 

12 

 
 
 
1.5 Blockchain Technology 

Blockchain in healthcare is linking of patient medical records, doctors, 

hospitals, nurses, medical staff , and health communities for the welfare 

of patients [26]. 

Blockchain is a kind of framework used to provide secure data exchange 

and management process [27]. The basic idea of blockchain is to share 

data  via  peer-to-peer  network.  This  helps  to  communicate  data  to 

authenticated users. They can modify or delete data records accordingly. 

In healthcare sector, the presence of sensitive information which needs to 

be  secured  from  third  party  users  to  maintain  a  privacy  &  security  is 

critical.  Due  to  such  sensitive  content,  blockchain  concept  has  been 

incorporated in healthcare sector to handle security systems. In addition, 

the  blockchain  concept  has  been  used  widely  to  resolve  problems  of 

central administration in database securely [28] . 

Blockchain  has  eliminated  the  need  to  govern  or  manage  the 

authentication  based  on  trust  &  transparency.  Blockchain  has  further 

enhanced  in  terms  of  privacy  &  security  using  cryptographic  hash 

functions.  Some  of  the  blockchain  applications  in  healthcare  are 

compilation of visitor’s details, patients’ records, records of lab results, 

and  treatment  details  of  patients.  All  such  details  are  ensured  by 

blockchain  process  which 

includes  ambulatory  services  &  data 

assistance.  A  commonly  observed  problem  with  medical  data  is  the 

13 

 
duplication or mismatch of details during analysis of patient’s records. 

Such  issues  are  tackled  using  hash  function  in  the  blockchain  process 

which includes hashed ledger instead of using a primary key. In addition 

to this, a blockchain concept is based on certification, due to which claims 

can be automatically verified whenever required. Blockchain has reduced 

data  compilation  as  well  as  cost  [29].  It  has  also  reduced  wastage  & 

chances of fraud due to digitization of complicated datasets [30]. 

2. SECURITY ISSUES IN SMART HEALTHCARE SYSTEMS 

There  are  many  security  issues  in  the  deployment  of  smart  healthcare 

systems, discussed below: 

2.1 Communication Media 

Healthcare devices are connected to global as well as local networks via 

wide range of wireless links such as Bluetooth, GSM, WIFI, and Zigbee. 

But wireless network makes traditional security schemes less appropriate. 

Therefore,  it  is  very  difficult  to  manage  security  protocols  which  can 

handle both wired and wireless technologies equally [31]. 

2.2 Topology Issues  

IoT-integrated healthcare devices are connected over various types of the 

network  for  data  collection,  storage,  and  computation  [32].  But  the 

problem occurs when they exit from network due to certain failure. This 

cause dynamic network topology issues [33, 34]. 

14 

 
2.3 Scalability 

With increase in  IoT devices, there is requirement to  integrate them in 

global  information  network.  Therefore,  to  design  a  scalable  security 

scheme  without  considering  security  related  requirements  become  a 

tough task [6, 35]. 

2.4 Mobility & Energy Constraints 

IoT based devices are dynamic in nature. They work on batteries. But, as 

different networks have different configurations, more efficient security 

algorithms are required for mobility [36, 37]. 

2.5 Memory Constraints 

Most of the IoT based devices have limited memory, which is one of the 

major issues faced in storage of data and functioning of the devices [38].  

2.6 Multi-Protocol Network 

IoT devices communicate with other devices over the local network using 

network  protocols.  In  addition  to  this,  some  IoT  devices  communicate 

with  IoT  service  providers  via  IP  network.  But  security  experts  face 

problems  related  to  sound  security  solutions  for  multiple  protocol 

communication [39]. 

15 

 
 
2.7 Tamper Devices 

An attacker might try to tamper the devices in physical mode and may 

extract cryptographic secret content. He might modify, delete, or replace 

the content with malicious data [6, 40]. 

3. EXISTING HEALTHCARE SYSTEMS 

The task of data management plays a very important role to administer 

different types of the services in smart healthcare systems. The efficient 

storage  of  patient  health  data  facilitates  disease  diagnosis,  vaccine 

scheduling,  and  deployment  of  other  health  services.  In  the  current 

scenario  of  smart  healthcare  framework,  penitent  health  data  is 

maintained in the electronic form using cloud architecture. Over the time, 

different  authors  have  proposed  different  secure  techniques  and 

frameworks  to  store  patients’  data.  In  [41],  authors  presented  a  novel 

approach for sharing patient data in a secure way. Using this technique, 

patients’ data is organized and shared through a semi-trusted server. In 

this  technique,  every  attribute  of  each  patient  record  is  saved  and 

transmitted in encrypted form. The scalability of the medical data is the 

main  feature  of  this  method.  In  [42],  another  conflux  approach  using 

encryption  mechanism  and  digital  signature  is  proposed  for  secure 

transfer of medical records. In [43], authors discussed the disadvantages 

of  the  approach  presented  in  [42],  and  introduced  a  new  method  to 

16 

 
 
overcome  the  issues.  Authors  in  [44-46],  proposed  a  number  of 

authentication  mechanisms  and  data  transfer  protocols  to  secure  the 

storage and transfer of medicals records on different types of machines 

and mobile devices. Many authors proposed different privacy preserving 

techniques to secure electronic medical records in the distributed smart 

healthcare systems. Although, lot many efforts are put by the researchers 

to secure medical data of the patients in smart medical systems adopted 

by various hospitals, this can also make the faster access of the records 

inconvenient  in  emergency  situations.  Emergency  care  providers  and 

doctors may face hurdles to provide first aid and other medicals services.   

To  resolve  these  challenges,  medical  industry,  researchers,  and 

academicians  have  introduced  many  smart  gadgets/devices  to  monitor 

individuals’  health  and  store  health  parameters  [47,  48].    But  these 

devices are vulnerable to data thefts and failures [49].  

To address  various security issues in exiting  healthcare systems,  many 

blockchain  models  are  proposed  by  the  researchers.  More  secure 

solutions  are  proposed  by  storing  the  hash  tables  for  cloud  data  in  the 

blockchain nodes [50-53]. Another, more secure technique is presented 

by the authors in [54]. This model is proposed to access medical records 

by the doctors and patients. In [55], authors proposed a multi-workflow-

based  system  to  manage  various  processes,  like  clinical  trials  and 

complicated surgeries. To store patient’s medical data more securely, and 

manage personal information efficiently, a novel platform framework is 

17 

 
proposed  by  the  authors  [56].  Remote  monitoring  of  the  patients  and 

wearable  gadgets  are  highly  prone  to  data  stealing  [2].  To  identify 

malfunctioning devices in a network is also a tedious job. Many authors 

carried  out  their  work  focusing  these  challenges.  In  [57],  authors 

proposed  a  novel  model  to  address  the  privacy  challenges  in  remote 

monitoring  systems.  Few  other  systems  are  also  proposed  by  the 

researchers  for  secure  smart-contract  based  remote  patient  monitoring 

[28, 58, 59].  

Table 3. Comparative Analysis of the Exiting Work with 

Proposed Work 

Medical 
Records 

IoT-
Facilitated 
Remote 
Monitorin
g 

AI-
Based 
Smart 
Contrac
t 

Distribute
d  Record 
Storage 

Locate 
Malfunctioning 
IoT-Device 

 
✓ 
✓ 
 
 
 
 
✓ 

✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 

✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 

✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
✓ 

Ref.  
No. 

Year 

2020 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2020 
2020 
2020 

[55] 
[57] 
[58] 
 [28] 
[59] 
[60] 
[61] 
Proposed 
Work 

The  model  presented  in  this  paper  stores  patient  health  records  in  a 

blockchain based network. This secure system is proposed for IoT-based 

patient  health  monitoring.  Smart  contract  is  supported  by  Artificial 

18 

 
 
 
Intelligence to locate the malfunctioning nodes. We have used 5 different 

attributes to characterize the performance of the proposed model. Main 

features  of  the  various  existing  solutions  proposed  by  the  authors,  and 

their comparison to the proposed system is summarized in Table 3. 

4. PROPOSED MODEL 

The  proposed  framework  is  implemented  in  four  layers,  i.e.,  Hospital, 

remote  IoT-integrated  medical  nodes,  distributed  medical  records,  and 

AI-based smart contract, as shown in Fig. 6.  

Fig. 6 Proposed Model: Framework 

•  Hospital- Basically, this layer acts as an information warehouse. 

It keeps complete patients’ information using various attributes; 

19 

 
 
few important ones are patient id, patient name, disease history, 

and medicines prescribed.   

•  Distributed  Medical  Records-  This  layer  is  integrated  with 

hospital  layer.  Medical  records  stored  in  the  hospital  layer  are 

distributed across the different nodes to make them secure using 

blockchain network.  

•  AI-based Smart Contract-This layer is merged between hospital 

and  distributed  medical  records  layer,  IoT  nodes  and  hospital 

layer, and IoT nodes and distributed medical records layer. It aids 

the process of decision making, breach detection, and to check for 

malicious data. 

•  Remote IoT-integrated Medical Nodes- These nodes are used 

to sense the various health parameters of the patients and transfer 

the  sensed  data  securely  to  blockchain  protected  distributed 

databases.  

Working of the proposed model is depicted with the flowchart shown in 

Fig. 7. 

20 

 
 
Fig. 7 Proposed Model: Working  

21 

 
 
5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 

This section focusses on the results obtained with the proposed model.  

The  proposed  model  is  evaluated  using  time  taken  by  the  transaction, 

throughput, and latency.  To gather results, total 5 different nodes were 

deployed, i.e., 4 IoT devices to sense data, and one hospital node. The 

blockchain to secure distributed medical records on the hospital node was 

deployed  using  the  Ethereum  platform.  Our  work  is  deployed  on  the 

blockchain using AI supported smart contract. The results obtained for 

the deployed IoT devices, i.e., transaction processing time and average 

delay are shown in Table 4 and Table 5 respectively.  

Table 4. Transaction Processing Time for IoT-based Medical Devices  

Number of 
Transactions 
50 
100 
150 
200 

 Processing Time (Seconds) 
Device 1  Device 2  Device 3  Device 4 

20 
31 
55 
82 

22 
41 
62 
84 

18 
37 
58 
73 

23 
45 
67 
91 

22 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 5. Average Delay in Transaction Processing for IoT-based 
Medical Nodes 

Number of 
Transactions 
50 
100 
150 
200 

Average Delay (Seconds) 
Device 1  Device 2  Device 3  Device 4 

0.8 
2.1 
2.4 
3.6 

0.9 
2 
1.8 
3.2 

0.7 
1.9 
2.6 
3.3 

0.8 
1.7 
2.1 
3 

Fig. 8 Transaction Processing Time: Medical IoT Nodes 

23 

 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 9 Average Delay: Medical IoT Nodes 

As discussed above, two important parameters considered to evaluate the 

deployed model are transaction processing time and average delay.  As 

shown in Fig.8 and Fig.9, transaction processing time and average delay 

for all used IoT-based medical devices is almost similar. So, the proposed 

model is highly scalable in terms of number of smart medical devices as 

well  as  number  of  transactions  executed.  Our  proposed  model  ensures 

blockchain based secure storage and access of distributed medical records 

in a smart hospital framework.  

6. CONCLUSIONS  

Smart distributed healthcare systems are rapidly becoming popular.  They are 

fulfilling the medical needs of modern society in more transparent, secure and 

convenient way. Along with all these features, the proposed blockchain model 

also protects the healthcare system from a single point of failure using AI-based 

24 

 
 
smart contract technique deployed at the hospital layer. The medical records of 

the  patients  are  stored  in  distributed  databases.  The  proposed  framework  is 

tested in real time environment for two important parameters, i.e., transaction 

processing  time  and  average  delay.  The  proposed  system  can  further  be 

enhanced  by  incorporating  more  efficient  AI  algorithms  to  improve  the 

processing time in the blockchain network to minimize average delays.  

REFERENCES 

[1] 

[2] 

[3] 

[4] 

[5] 

[6] 

[7] 

S.  B.  Baker,  W. Xiang,  and  I.  J.  I.  A.  Atkinson,  "Internet  of things  for 
smart healthcare: Technologies, challenges, and opportunities," vol. 5, 
pp. 26521-26544, 2017. 
V. Sharma, K. Lee, S. Kwon, J. Kim, H. Park, K. Yim, et al., "A consensus 
framework  for  reliability  and  mitigation  of  zero-day  attacks  in  IoT," 
Security and Communication Networks, vol. 2017, 2017. 
A. A. Mohammed, M. Burhanuddin, M. S. Talib, M. E. Hameed, M. F. J. 
E.  J.  o.  M.  Ali,  and  C.  Medicine,  "A  Review  on  IoT-Based  Healthcare 
Monitoring Systems for Patient in Remote Environments," vol. 7, pp. 
2227-2235, 2020. 
V.  Puri,  A.  Kataria,  and  V.  Sharma,  "Artificial  intelligence‐powered 
decentralized  framework  for  Internet  of  Things  in  Healthcare  4.0," 
Transactions  on  Emerging  Telecommunications  Technologies,  p. 
e4245, 2021. 
S. Rani, A. Kataria, V. Sharma, S. Ghosh, V. Karar, K. Lee, et al., "Threats 
and  Corrective  Measures  for  IoT  Security  with  Observance  of 
Cybercrime:  A  Survey,"  Wireless  Communications  and  Mobile 
Computing, vol. 2021, 2021. 
G.  Saha,  R.  Singh,  and  S.  Saini,  "A  Survey  Paper  on  the  impact  of" 
Internet  of  Things" 
International 
conference on Electronics, Communication and Aerospace Technology 
(ICECA), 2019, pp. 331-334. 
V. Sharma, R. Kumar, and R. Kaur, "UAV-assisted content-based sensor 
search in IoTs," Electronics Letters, vol. 53, pp. 724-726, 2017. 

in  Healthcare," 

in  2019  3rd 

25 

 
[8] 

[9] 

A.  Kataria,  S.  Ghosh,  and  V.  Karar,  "Prediction  Analysis  of  Optical 
Tracker Parameters using Machine Learning Approaches for efficient 
Head Tracking," arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.06606, 2021. 
S. R. Islam, D. Kwak, M. H. Kabir, M. Hossain, and K.-S. J. I. a. Kwak, "The 
internet of things for health care: a comprehensive survey," vol. 3, pp. 
678-708, 2015. 

[11] 

[12] 

[10]  M. Javaid, I. H. J. J. o. O. B. Khan, and C. Research, "Internet of Things 
(IoT)  enabled  healthcare  helps  to  take  the  challenges  of  COVID-19 
Pandemic," vol. 11, pp. 209-214, 2021. 
S. Rani and O. J. I. J. o. C. A. Gupta, "Empirical Analysis and Performance 
Evaluation  of  various  GPU  implementations  of  Protein  BLAST,"  vol. 
151, 2016. 
O.  Gupta,  S.  Rani,  and  D.  C.  Pant,  "Impact  of  parallel  computing  on 
bioinformatics  algorithms,"  in  Proceedings  5th  IEEE  International 
Conference 
Communication 
Technologies, pp. 206-209. 
J. Bedón-Molina, M. J. Lopez, and I. S. J. A. i. M. E. Derpich, "A home-
based smart health model," vol. 12, p. 1687814020935282, 2020. 
I.  You,  K.  Yim,  V.  Sharma,  G.  Choudhary,  I.-R.  Chen,  and  J.-H.  Cho, 
"Misbehavior  detection  of  embedded  IoT  devices  in  medical  cyber 
physical systems," in Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE/ACM International 
Conference  on  Connected  Health:  Applications,  Systems  and 
Engineering Technologies, 2018, pp. 88-93. 
S. Rani and S. J. I. J. o. C. A. Kaur, "Cluster Analysis Method for Multiple 
Sequence Alignment," vol. 43, pp. 19-25, 2012. 

on  Advanced 

Computing 

[15] 

[14] 

[13] 

and 

[17] 

[16]  M.  N.  Birje,  S.  S.  J.  J.  o.  D.  Hanji,  Information,  and  Management, 
"Internet  of  things  based  distributed  healthcare  systems:  a  review," 
vol. 2, pp. 149-165, 2020. 
P. Chakriswaran, D. R. Vincent, K. Srinivasan, V. Sharma, C.-Y. Chang, 
and  D.  G.  Reina,  "Emotion  AI-driven  sentiment  analysis:  A  survey, 
future research directions, and open issues," Applied Sciences, vol. 9, 
p. 5462, 2019. 
V. Arora, R. S. Leekha, K. Lee, and A. J. M. I. S. Kataria, "Facilitating user 
authorization from imbalanced data logs of credit cards using artificial 
intelligence," vol. 2020, 2020. 

[18] 

26 

 
[22] 

[24] 

[23] 

[20] 

[21] 

[19]  M. Bilal, B. Kumari, and S. Rani, "An Artificial Intelligence supported E-
Commerce  Model  to  Improve  the  Export  of  Indian  Handloom  and 
Handicraft Products in the World," Available at SSRN 3842663, 2021. 
A.  Kataria,  S.  Ghosh,  and  V.  Karar,  "Development  of  Artificial 
Intelligence Based Technique for Minimization of Errors and Response 
time in Head Tracking for Head Worn Systems," EIED, 2020. 
O.  Gupta,  S.  J.  C.-I.  J.  o.  B.  Rani,  and  bioinformatics, "Bioinformatics 
applications and Tools: An Overview," vol. 3, pp. 107-110, 2010. 
S.  Sudevan,  B.  Barwani,  E.  Al  Maani,  S.  Rani,  and  A.  K.  Sivaraman, 
"Impact of Blended Learning during Covid-19 in Sultanate of Oman," J 
Annals  of  the  Romanian  Society  for  Cell  Biology,  pp.  14978-14987, 
2021. 
A.  Kataria,  S.  Ghosh,  V.  Karar,  T.  Gupta,  K.  Srinivasan,  and  Y.-C.  Hu, 
"Improved  diver  communication  system  by  combining  optical  and 
electromagnetic trackers," Sensors, vol. 20, p. 5084, 2020. 
V. Sharma, T. G. Tan, S. Singh, and P. K. Sharma, "Optimal and privacy-
aware resource management in AIoT using osmotic computing," IEEE 
Transactions on Industrial Informatics, 2021. 
B. Mohanta, P. Das, and S. Patnaik, "Healthcare 5.0: A paradigm shift 
in  digital  healthcare  system  using  artificial  intelligence,  IOT  and  5G 
communication," 
International  Conference  on  Applied 
in  2019 
Machine Learning (ICAML), 2019, pp. 191-196. 
S.  Wang,  J.  Wang,  X.  Wang,  T.  Qiu,  Y.  Yuan,  L.  Ouyang,  et  al., 
"Blockchain-powered  parallel  healthcare  systems  based  on  the  ACP 
approach," vol. 5, pp. 942-950, 2018. 
V.  Sharma,  I.  You,  and  G.  Kul,  "Socializing  drones  for  inter-service 
operability  in  ultra-dense  wireless  networks  using  blockchain,"  in 
Proceedings of the 2017 international workshop on managing insider 
security threats, 2017, pp. 81-84. 
A.  Abugabah,  N.  Nizam,  and  A.  A.  J.  I.  A.  Alzubi,  "Decentralized 
telemedicine framework for a smart healthcare ecosystem," vol. 8, pp. 
166575-166588, 2020. 
V.  Sharma,  I.  You,  D.  N.  K.  Jayakody, D.  G.  Reina,  and  K.-K. R.  Choo, 
"Neural-blockchain-based ultrareliable caching for edge-enabled UAV 
networks,"  IEEE  Transactions  on  Industrial  Informatics,  vol.  15,  pp. 
5723-5736, 2019. 

[29] 

[26] 

[27] 

[28] 

[25] 

27 

 
[30] 

[31] 

[32] 

[33] 

[34] 

[35] 

[36] 

[37] 

[38] 

[39] 

[40] 

S.  Chakraborty,  S.  Aich,  and  H.-C.  Kim,  "A  secure  healthcare  system 
design  framework  using  blockchain  technology," 
in  2019  21st 
International  Conference  on  Advanced  Communication  Technology 
(ICACT), 2019, pp. 260-264. 
V. Arya, S. Rani, and N. Choudhary, "Enhanced Bio-inspired Trust and 
Reputation  Model  for  Wireless  Sensor  Networks,"  in  Proceedings  of 
Second Doctoral Symposium on Computational Intelligence, 2022, pp. 
569-579. 
V. Sharma, R. Kumar, and N. Rathore, "Topological Broadcasting Using 
Parameter Sensitivity-Based Logical Proximity Graphs in Coordinated 
Ground-Flying Ad Hoc Networks," J. Wirel. Mob. Networks Ubiquitous 
Comput. Dependable Appl., vol. 6, pp. 54-72, 2015. 
D.  Patel,  K.  Srinivasan,  C.-Y.  Chang,  T.  Gupta,  and  A.  J.  E.  Kataria, 
"Network  anomaly  detection  inside  consumer  networks—a  hybrid 
approach," vol. 9, p. 923, 2020. 
V. Sharma, I. You, K. Andersson, F. Palmieri, M. H. Rehmani, and J. Lim, 
"Security,  privacy  and  trust  for  smart  mobile-Internet  of  Things  (M-
IoT): A survey," IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 167123-167163, 2020. 
O. Gupta and S. Rani, "Accelerating Molecular Sequence Analysis using 
Distributed  Computing  Environment," 
Journal  of 
Scientific & Engineering Research–IJSER, 2013. 
A.  Kataria,  S.  Ghosh,  and  V.  Karar,  "Data  Prediction  of  Optical  Head 
Tracking using Self Healing Neural Model for Head Mounted Display," 
2018. 
A. Kataria, S. Ghosh, and V. Karar, "Data Prediction of Electromagnetic 
Head  Tracking  using  Self  Healing  Neural  Model  for  Head-Mounted 
Display,"  Romanian  Journal  of  Science  and  Technology,  vol.  23,  pp. 
354-367, 2020. 
G.  Choudhary,  V.  Sharma,  T.  Gupta,  J.  Kim,  and  I.  You,  "Internet  of 
Drones (IoD): threats, vulnerability, and security perspectives,"  arXiv 
preprint arXiv:1808.00203, 2018. 
G. Choudhary, J. Kim, and V. Sharma, "Security of 5G-mobile backhaul 
networks: A survey," arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.11427, 2019. 
V. Sharma, I. You, and N. Guizani, "Security of 5G-V2X: Technologies, 
standardization, and research directions,"  IEEE Network, vol. 34, pp. 
306-314, 2020. 

International 

28 

 
[45] 

[42] 

[44] 

[43] 

[46] 

[41]  M.  Li,  S.  Yu,  Y.  Zheng,  K.  Ren,  W.  J.  I.  t.  o.  p.  Lou,  and  d.  systems, 
"Scalable  and  secure  sharing  of  personal  health  records  in  cloud 
computing  using  attribute-based  encryption,"  vol.  24,  pp.  131-143, 
2012. 
J. Liu, X. Huang, and J. K. J. F. G. C. S. Liu, "Secure sharing of personal 
health records in cloud computing: Ciphertext-policy attribute-based 
signcryption," vol. 52, pp. 67-76, 2015. 
K. N. Dattatraya and K. R. Rao, "Hybrid based cluster head selection for 
maximizing network lifetime and energy efficiency in WSN," Journal of 
King Saud University-Computer and Information Sciences, 2019. 
P. Mohit, R. Amin, A. Karati, G. Biswas, and M. K. J. J. o. m. s. Khan, "A 
standard mutual authentication protocol for cloud computing based 
health care system," vol. 41, p. 50, 2017. 
S.-Y. Chiou, Z. Ying, and J. J. J. o. m. s. Liu, "Improvement of a privacy 
authentication scheme based on cloud for medical environment," vol. 
40, p. 101, 2016. 
V. Kumar, S. Jangirala, and M. J. J. o. m. s. Ahmad, "An efficient mutual 
authentication framework for healthcare system in cloud computing," 
vol. 42, pp. 1-25, 2018. 
X. Wang, Q. Gui, B. Liu, Z. Jin, Y. J. I. j. o. b. Chen, and h. informatics, 
"Enabling  smart  personalized  healthcare:  a  hybrid  mobile-cloud 
approach for ECG telemonitoring," vol. 18, pp. 739-745, 2013. 
P. Asghari, A. M. Rahmani, and H. J. T. o. E. T. T. Haj Seyyed Javadi, "A 
medical  monitoring  scheme  and  health‐medical  service  composition 
model in cloud‐based IoT platform," vol. 30, p. e3637, 2019. 
G.  Choudhary  and  V.  Sharma,  "A  Survey  on  the  Security  and  the 
Evolution of Osmotic and Catalytic Computing for 5G Networks," in 5G 
enabled secure wireless networks, ed: Springer, 2019, pp. 69-102. 
X. Liang, S. Shetty, D. Tosh, D. Bowden, L. Njilla, C. J. E. E. T. o. P. H. 
Kamhoua,  et  al.,  "Towards  blockchain  empowered  trusted  and 
accountable  data  sharing  and  collaboration  in  mobile  healthcare 
applications," vol. 4, 2018. 
A. Al Omar, M. Z. A. Bhuiyan, A. Basu, S. Kiyomoto, and M. S. J. F. g. c. 
s.  Rahman,  "Privacy-friendly  platform  for  healthcare  data  in  cloud 
based on blockchain environment," vol. 95, pp. 511-521, 2019. 

[51] 

[47] 

[50] 

[49] 

[48] 

29 

 
[52] 

[53] 

[54] 

[55] 

[56] 

[57] 

[58] 

G. Kaur, R. Kaur, and S. J. I. J. S. T. M. Rani, "Cloud Computing-A new 
Trend in IT Era," pp. 1-6, 2015. 
S. Rani, A. Kataria, and M. Chauhan, "Fog Computing in Industry 4.0: 
Applications  and  Challenges—A  Research  Roadmap," 
in  Energy 
Conservation  Solutions  for  Fog-Edge  Computing  Paradigms,  ed: 
Springer, 2022, pp. 173-190. 
V.  Ramani,  T.  Kumar,  A.  Bracken,  M.  Liyanage,  and  M.  Ylianttila, 
"Secure and efficient data accessibility in blockchain based healthcare 
systems," 
IEEE  Global  Communications  Conference 
in  2018 
(GLOBECOM), 2018, pp. 206-212. 
A.  J.  E.  Khatoon,  "A  blockchain-based  smart  contract  system  for 
healthcare management," vol. 9, p. 94, 2020. 
A. Al Omar, M. S. Rahman, A. Basu, and S. Kiyomoto, "Medibchain: A 
blockchain based privacy preserving platform for healthcare data," in 
International  conference  on  security,  privacy  and  anonymity  in 
computation, communication and storage, 2017, pp. 534-543. 
K. N. Griggs, O. Ossipova, C. P. Kohlios, A. N. Baccarini, E. A. Howson, 
and  T.  J.  J.  o.  m.  s.  Hayajneh,  "Healthcare  blockchain  system  using 
smart  contracts  for  secure  automated  remote  patient  monitoring," 
vol. 42, pp. 1-7, 2018. 
H. S. Z. Kazmi, F. Nazeer, S. Mubarak, S. Hameed, A. Basharat, and N. 
Javaid,  "Trusted  remote  patient  monitoring  using  blockchain-based 
smart  contracts,"  in  International  Conference  on  Broadband  and 
Wireless Computing, Communication and Applications, 2019, pp. 765-
776. 

[60] 

[59]  M. S. Ali, M. Vecchio, G. D. Putra, S. S. Kanhere, and F. J. S. Antonelli, 
"A decentralized peer-to-peer remote health monitoring system," vol. 
20, p. 1656, 2020. 
S.  Tanwar,  K.  Parekh,  R.  J.  J.  o.  I.  S.  Evans,  and  Applications, 
"Blockchain-based electronic healthcare record system for healthcare 
4.0 applications," vol. 50, p. 102407, 2020. 
L. Chen, W.-K. Lee, C.-C. Chang, K.-K. R. Choo, and N. J. F. g. c. s. Zhang, 
"Blockchain based searchable encryption for electronic health record 
sharing," vol. 95, pp. 420-429, 2019. 

[61] 

30 

 
 
