1
2
0
2

t
c
O
1
1

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
1
2
3
5
0
.
0
1
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Quantum solutions to possible challenges of
Blockchain technology

Nivedita Dey, Mrityunjay Ghosh and Amlan Chakrabarti

Abstract Technological advancements of Blockchain and other Distributed Ledger
Techniques (DLTs) promise to provide signiﬁcant advantages to applications seeking
transparency, redundancy, and accountability. Actual adoption of these emerging
technologies requires incorporating cost-eﬀective, fast, QoS-enabled, secure, and
scalable design. With the recent advent of quantum computing, the security of cur-
rent blockchain cryptosystems can be compromised to a greater extent. Quantum
algorithms like Shor’s large integer factorization algorithm and Grover’s unstruc-
tured database search algorithm can provide exponential and quadratic speedup,
respectively, in contrast to their classical counterpart. This can put threats on both
public-key cryptosystems and hash functions, which necessarily demands to migrate
from classical cryptography to quantum-secure cryptography. Moreover, the compu-
tational latency of blockchain platforms causes slow transaction speed, so quantum
computing principles might provide signiﬁcant speedup and scalability in transaction
processing and accelerating the mining process. For such purpose, this article ﬁrst
studies current and future classical state-of-the-art blockchain scalability and secu-
rity primitives. The relevant quantum-safe blockchain cryptosystem initiatives which
have been taken by Bitcoin, Ethereum, Corda, etc. are stated and compared with re-
spect to key sizes, hash length, execution time, computational overhead, and energy
eﬃciency. Post Quantum Cryptographic algorithms like Code-based, Lattice-based,
Multivariate-based, and other schemes are not well suited for classical blockchain
technology due to several disadvantages in practical implementation. Decryption la-
tency, massive consumption of computational resources, and increased key size are
few challenges that can hinder blockchain performance. We aim to provide the diﬀer-
ent ways where quantum-aided solutions can overcome the challenges in blockchain

Nivedita Dey
QRDLab, University of Calcutta e-mail: mail.dnivedita@gmail.com

Mrityunjay Ghosh
HCL Technologies, University of Calcutta e-mail: g.mrityunjay@gmail.com

Amlan Chakrabarti
University of Calcutta e-mail: acakcs@caluniv.ac.in

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

Nivedita Dey, Mrityunjay Ghosh and Amlan Chakrabarti

technology and enhance scalability, security, and performance in the post-quantum
era. Though quantum information itself is in the Noisy Intermediate Scale Quantum
(NISQ) era and not yet developed to a high technology readiness level, this paper
also covers the current challenges and future research direction in the near-term,
practical realization of post-quantum blockchain.

1 Introduction

Quantum computing is no longer just a theoretical concept but a palpable for enter-
prises and have a great potential in delivering business values by solving complex
problems eﬃciently. Conventional security in IT systems is provided by several
asymmetric key and symmetric key cryptographic algorithms.[1] Asymmetric key
cryptographic algorithms like RSA (Rivest Shamir Adleman) encryption, ECDSA
(Elliptic Curve Digital Signature Algorithm), ECDH (Elliptic Curve Diﬀe Hellman)
algorithm, EdDSA (Edwards-curve Digital Signature Algorithm) use hard problems
in mathematics like discrete logarithm problem, large integer factorization prob-
lem as an underlying cryptographic security provider.[3][9][10] On the other hand,
symmetric key or shared key cryptographic algorithms like DES (Data Encryption
Standard), TDES (Triple DES), AES (Advanced Encryption Standard) use block ci-
pher techniques to generate a symmetric key for both encryption and decryption.[1]
Blockchain and other Distributed Ledger Techniques (DLTs) are novel compu-
tational data structures that evolve signiﬁcantly in the last years due to their abil-
ity to provide secure communications, data privacy, resilience, and transparency.
Blockchain technologies like Bitcoin, Ethereum, Monero, Ripplecoin, Zcash, etc.,
can exhibit redundancy, transparency, and accountability through the use of public-
key cryptography and hash functions.[6] Blockchain users leverage public key cryp-
tographic primitives to authenticate transactions.[5] On the other hand, hash func-
tions are introduced to generate digital signatures and create blocks that do not
necessarily trust each other.

The unprecedented growth of quantum computing can pose potential threats to
classical blockchain cryptographic primitives. Shor’s factorization algorithm can
break asymmetric encryption with twice as many logical qubits as the key size,
which necessarily means to achieve a 112-bit security level using a 2048-bit RSA
key, a 4096-qubit quantum computer is suﬃcient enough. Similarly, on the other
hand, breaking AES-128 encryption key will be eventually reduced to breaking a
64-bit symmetric encryption key. This is achieved by Grover’s unstructured database
search algorithm, which can reduce the brute force attack time to its square root. [2]
[14] Possible quantum threats in the near-term quantum era lead to the development
of some quantum-resistant cryptographic algorithms which quantum computers can
not break in the near future. Post-Quantum Cryptography (PQC) deals with devis-
ing quantum-resistant algorithms. Some of the most promising PQC areas include
hash-based cryptography, code-based cryptography, lattice-based cryptography, and

Quantum solutions to possible challenges of Blockchain technology

3

multivariate-quadratic-equations cryptography. [2] In this article, we analyze both
the scalability and security issues associated with classical blockchain.

We discuss ﬁrst diﬀerent scalability aspects of blockchain both from an existing
standpoint and future standpoint. Consequently, it is shown that how quantum advan-
tage can be exploited to solve scalability issues in blockchain techniques. In order to
analyze the same, we have identiﬁed some research use cases from blockchain-aided
ﬁntech applications like supercharged data analyses, speed of calculation, reduction
in the number of false-positive cases in fraud detection, and Monte-Carlo simulation
where quantum computation can be applied.

Additionally, to guide researchers on the development of quantum-resistant
blockchain applications, we ﬁrst provide a broad view on potential threats that
can be oﬀered by Shor’s and Grover’s algorithm on current cryptographic primitives
used by blockchain. Furthermore, the most relevant post-quantum cryptographic
initiatives for generic quantum-resistant cryptography and speciﬁc post-quantum
initiatives on the blockchain are analyzed. Then, we discuss the vulnerabilities of
ﬁve blockchain cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin, Ethereum, Litecoin, Monero, and
Zcash. We also study the feasibility of quantum attacks on these DLTs. Since there
are challenges associated with post-quantum blockchain, we end up our article by
discussing future research direction towards the development of reliable blockchain
security primitives.

2 Blockchain and Distributed Ledger Techniques

Blockchain or any DLT is a database that is consensually shared, replicated, and
synchronized. The term ‘distributed ledger’ is associated with replicating and storing
transaction data by each node or party on a Blockchain network. Coherence-related
issues or database conﬂicts are handled automatically with pre-deﬁned distributed
ledger rules. Properties of a distributed ledger include operation between peer-to-
peer networks, decentralization in keeping transaction data, allowance to consensus-
based transactions, and tamper resistance. This makes a DLT to be programmable,
secure, anonymous, unanimous, distributed, time-stamped, and immutable as shown
in ﬁgure 1. The core parts of a blockchain consist of a block, a chain, a network, and
a blockchain consensus mechanism.

Variable Text
String Entry Value
National Archives
National Archives
(an extra space)
Nati0nal Archives

Hash Value

6429799b9af2d91cbf915cb0290f3a50281193a977b3457d63e4541cc5788c5b
d926fe7e72d09b249701dbcde2dad0ccb9b4bb653e053e461a67bbb951dcae0b

5f2d570fc940d5f8de89310db43f789fdd99f51e89c021e1a50acb7a6fe2cf83

Table 1 Secure Hash Algorithm generating a 256-bit signature (SHA-256) generates diﬀerent hash
values for slight variations in the spelling of the words “National Archives”.

4

Nivedita Dey, Mrityunjay Ghosh and Amlan Chakrabarti

Fig. 1 The properties of distributed ledger technology [39]

Fig. 2 Blockchain technology in Bitcoin crypto-currency [38]

Quantum solutions to possible challenges of Blockchain technology

5

Mechanism
Proof of Work Miners solve complicated mathematical puzzles to receive a block as reward. Diﬃ-

Operational Principle

culty level for puzzles is determined by the mining speed.

Proof of Stake Uses randomized process for selecting the node who will get chance to add a block.
The user owning the biggest stake or owning coins for the longest time is more
probable to create a new block. It is more energy-eﬃcient approach than Proof of
Work.

Delegated Proof
of Stake

Uses stake-weighted voting system where users stake their coins to vote for a partic-
ular number of delegates. The delegate with highest number of votes is favoured to
create a new block. It is one of the fastest consensus mechanisms for blockchain.

Proof of
Capacity

Users use digital storage to store the solutions for cryptographic puzzles. User with
minimum storage capacity gets the chance to create a new block.

Proof of Elapsed
Time

Uses amount of time spent by the users to choose producer of the new block. Each
user is assigned with a random waiting time. The user with minimum waiting time
gets chance to create the next block.

Proof of
Authority

Personal identities of the validators of the network are kept at stake. Only validator
nodes are allowed to create new blocks. It is a modiﬁed version of Proof of Stake.

Proof of Activity It is a combination of Proof of Work (blocks with mining reward address and header
information) and Proof of Stake (use of header information to choose validators
randomly).

Proof of Identity Cryptographic evidence to ensure integrity and authenticity of created data by at-
taching an user’s private key to a given transaction. Only an identiﬁed user can create
a block in the network.

Table 2 Blockchain consensus mechanisms

Block contains a list of transactions, which have been recorded periodically. Trans-
actions represent any type of virtual activity taking place in a blockchain database.
Block–speciﬁc rules are associated with the block itself at the time of network cre-
ation. Each block can set its size or the maximum number of transactions allowed to
be stored within a block according to pre-deﬁned rules.
The chaining of blocks is necessary whenever a block reaches its maximum limit
in terms of the number of transactions. Then chaining or linking of blocks is done
through hashing to connect the preceding block with the next block. The hash value
of the preceding is inserted into the next block. Thus each block has an impact on the
next block through cryptographic hashing. This has been shown in ﬁgure 2. Hash is
an algorithm that takes a variable string of data as input and produces a ﬁxed-length
value as output. This hashing scheme is vital to generate small transaction data that
can be easily validated and distributed to other nodes. If a block of data remains

6

Nivedita Dey, Mrityunjay Ghosh and Amlan Chakrabarti

Fig. 3 Flow of a transaction in Blockchain technology [39]

unaltered, then repeating a hash function on that block will always generate the same
hash output. This can be further understood from table 1, where slight variations
in the spelling of the word “National Archives” have led to diﬀerent output values
when a Secure Hash Algorithm (SHA – 256) is applied. Merkle tree is an extension
of a simple hash algorithm where multiple hash values. The single hashed output,
known as Merkle root, can represent multiple hashes. [50]
A Blockchain network is made up of nodes or blocks, each containing a record of all
the transactions. Each node in a Blockchain network is equiprobable to be trusted,
and once a node solves a cryptographic puzzle (a mathematically hard problem ), it
is allowed to add the next block to the Blockchain along with a performance reward.
This technique is known as mining, and the node to solve the puzzle is known as
miners. [53]
The blockchain consensus mechanism is the set of rules that govern the process of
validating transactions to be entered into the Blockchain by the nodes, as shown in
ﬁgure 3. These rules are established at the time of Blockchain creation. In case of
a situation when both the parties want to initiate communication without knowing
or trusting each other, a consensus mechanism is embedded to agree upon entry of
transactions into the Blockchain. This can resolve Byzantine Generals Problem.[17]
Each Blockchain diﬀers in its terms of consensus mechanism based on the type of
active transactions it works with to facilitate authenticity and immutability of trans-
action records. Some well–known consensus mechanisms are Proof of Work (PoW),
Proof of Stake (PoS), and delegated Proof of Stake (dPoS). [2] Other consensus
mechanisms include Proof of Capacity, Proof of Elapsed Time, Proof of Authority,
Proof of Activity, and Proof of Identity. Table 2 represents the basic operational prin-
ciples of all these consensus mechanisms. The process of ﬁnding a single reliable

Quantum solutions to possible challenges of Blockchain technology

7

consensus mechanism is increasingly complex due to the nascency of the underlying
platform. But, integrating Blockchain technology with business applications requires
information about all these mechanisms.

3 Scalability Aspects of Classical Blockchain

The thrive for achieving scalability in a blockchain is limitless, as adoption of
blockchain is often bottlenecked due to the lack of a scalable solution. Bitcoin can
process 4.6 TPS (Transactions Per Second); another competitor, Visa, processes
1,700 TPS on an average from over 150 million TPD (Transactions Per Day).[5]
According to Deloitte Insights, “Blockchain-based systems are comparatively slow.
Blockchain’s sluggish transaction speed is a major concern for enterprises that de-
pend on high-performance legacy transaction processing systems”. Just to add a
number for the percentage of adoption of blockchain by organizations, it is close to
around 44% based on a study published by Tata Communications.

3.1 Blockchain Scalability from Existing Standpoint

Scalability issues in blockchain can account for uncontrolled transfer delays,
high fees on the Bitcoin network, and congestion-uncontrolled traﬃc for the
Ethereum blockchain network on which thousands of decentralized transactions
are operated.[71][87]

3.1.1 Blockchain Scalability Metric

Blockchain transaction speed is a function of average block size and average trans-
action size. Mathematically, the transaction speed of a blockchain network can be
visualized as, Number of Transactions per Block = Average Block Size in Bytes/
Average Transaction Size in Bytes

3.1.2 Market Incompetency of Bitcoin TPS

Block size of Bitcoin is hard-cored at 1 million bytes (1,048,576 bytes), and its
average transaction size is 380.04 bytes. This leads to around 2759.12 transactions
that can ﬁt in one of Bitcoin’s blocks and approximately providing a TPS of only
4.6. Prior attempts were made by Bitcoin community to increase the scalability by
changing parameters in the blockchain. For this purpose, the metrics chosen were
block size (in bytes, to be increased to increase TPS) and block generation time (in
seconds, to be adjusted by changing the complexity of the hashing puzzle to reduce

8

Nivedita Dey, Mrityunjay Ghosh and Amlan Chakrabarti

its value). To achieve speedup in TPS like Visa, Bitcoin would require to increase its
block size to 377.5 million bytes, which is 377.5x of default block size in Bitcoin.[5]
Keeping the block generation time of 10 minutes and average transaction size of
380 bytes(same as default) could ideally give a TPS of 1736. But, practically, this
speedup can not be achieved as propagation delay or relay time will be required
to broadcast a new block to every other node on the Bitcoin network. In a Bitcoin
network comprising of 10,198 nodes, approximately 14 seconds are required to
transmit 99% of the block size of 1 million bytes across peers. Alternatively, if block
generation time is less than 14 seconds, a new block will be generated before an old
block gets received by most of the existing blocks.

3.1.3 SegWit – Flow Control in Blocks of Blockchain

SegWit or Segregated Witness aims at providing a solution to scalability issues of
the Bitcoin network. It believes in segregating the witness part of each transaction
from the actual transaction. The actual transaction is the base transaction data that
covers how bitcoins are moving, where they are being moved to, and how they are
being accessed. But, the “witness” part comprises a bit of code with cryptographic
signature data to prove that the owner of bitcoin is interested in spending the bitcoin.
This prevents the denial-of-service actions and helps to achieve non-repudiation.
The soft fork of SegWit approach helps to improve block size without changes to
core code, but the real challenge of scalability is in blockchain value propositions.
The high propagation time of transactions can lead to signiﬁcant security issues like
double-spend attacks.
Double-Spend Attack in Blockchain: The computational power of a decentralized
proof-of-work system is the cumulative sum of the individual computational power
of the nodes. More considerable computational power increases the probability of
winning the mining reward for each newly created block, thus making an incentive
or biasedness among nodes in mining pools. If a collection can achieve 51% hashing
power, it can eﬀectively overturn network transactions and create a double-spend
attack. Bitcoin fork ‘Bitcoin Gold’ (BTG) was hit by such an attack in 2018 and
again in 2020 at the cost of around $72,000 worth of BTG.[88]

3.2 Future Classical Approaches to Solve scalability

The inapplicability of a classical approach to solving the scalability issues of
blockchain in cross-cryptocurrency platforms is a major concern. Another challenge
lies in understanding the assumptions to be made for achieving trade-oﬀ among
multiple scalability parameters.

Quantum solutions to possible challenges of Blockchain technology

9

3.2.1 Batch Processing of Multiple Transactions

Batch processing refers to reducing the size of transaction record by putting multiple
transactions into one. This allows for more transactions per block which causes
only one batch payment to be paid for all transactions. Here, instead of complete
information of all the transactions, the ﬁrst transaction information is stored entirely.
For the rest of the transactions, only a fraction of the data is stored. This approach
helps reduce the amount of transaction data (in bytes) to be stored and the payment
cost. But, often, there is a limitation in creating batches of diﬀerent transactions
from diﬀerent wallets. Moreover, this approach does not provide privacy as details
of other transactions in a batch are open.

3.2.2 Bitcoin Cash – Hard Bitcoin

Bitcoin Cash is a hard fork of Bitcoin used as an alternative to Bitcoin to add value
propositions in terms of transaction speed. The primary motivator of Bitcoin Cash is
to increase the default block size of 1 million bytes (as used in Bitcoin) to 8 million
bytes, which can speed up the whole transaction processing system and provide a
TPS 8x of the default. But, this is a temporary solution to meet the global benchmark
and compete in transacting space. Additionally, it might not be adaptable for other
blockchain networks.

3.2.3 Lightning Network for Reserved Bitcoin Transactions

The lightning network facilitates instant processing of reserved transactions and
promotes micro-transacting. The payment channel created on a lightning network
does not run transactions through a Bitcoin blockchain rather, it considers them as
reserved and charges no additional transaction fee. This approach enables users to
take their bitcoins oﬀ the blockchain and transact with another party privately. But,
the limitations of the lightning network are that it only works for Bitcoin-core-based
blockchains like Bitcoin Cash, Litecoin, Digibyte, Dogecoin, etc. [78]

3.2.4 BloXroute – Blockchain-Agnostic On-Chain Solution

Unlike oﬀ-chain transactions, which take the value outside of the blockchain, an
on-chain transaction is considered valid only if the blockchain is modiﬁed to re-
ﬂect the transaction on a public ledger. On the other hand, blockchain-agnosticism
refers to a single platform that allows operation from diﬀerent underlying blockchain
technologies. BloXroute is a startup focusing on BDN (Blockchain Distributed Net-
work) while inspired by the concept of CDN (Content Delivery Network). A CDN
is a geographically distributed network of proxy servers and their data centers. The
main objective of CDN is to deliver content to end-users at a very high speed with

10

Nivedita Dey, Mrityunjay Ghosh and Amlan Chakrabarti

the help of a technique called replication. Web content services provided by CDNs
are done by duplicating the content from other servers and directing it to users from
the nearest data center. Though BDN is in ideation phase, it can give us a future
direction to solve blockchain’s scalability issue.

3.2.5 EOS – Scalability through Delegated PoS (Proof-of-Stake)

EOS is a blockchain project which provides high-end theoretical scalability using
delegated PoS. The enormous amount of electricity used in Bitcoin is due to the
PoW (Proof-of-Work) algorithm used as a consensus mechanism to secure Bitcoin
blockchain. PoW algorithm works by having all the blockchain nodes to solve a
cryptographic puzzle. Miners solve this puzzle, and the ﬁrst one to ﬁnd the solution
gets the miner reward. According to Digiconomist, “Bitcoin miners alone use about
54 Twh of electricity, enough to power 5 million households in the US or even power
the entire country of New Zealand.”

PoW gives more rewards to people with better and more equipment. The higher
the hash rate is, the higher the chance to create a block and receive the mining award.
Often, mining pools are created by miners where miners combine their hashing power
and distribute the reward evenly across everyone in the pool. The above-mentioned
issues of PoW open up the requirement of a new consensus mechanism, known
as Proof-of-Stake (PoS). PoS uses an election process to randomly choose a node
to validate the next block. Choice of validators is not entirely random; instead, a
node has to deposit a certain amount of coins as stake into the network to become a
validator. There is a linear correlation between the size of the stake and the chances
of a validator to forge the next block. Unlike Bitcoin, EOS uses a democratically
selected pool of 21 validators to achieve consensus much faster. This does come at
the cost of decentralization, as to take control of EOS consensus mechanism, we
only need to gain control of more than 50% of the producers (11 nodes out of 21).
Delegated PoS is the key part of delivering the revolutionary speed (millions of TPS)
and eﬃciency that EOS promises to give.

4 Quantum-aid to Classical Blockchain

4.1 Quantum Oﬀers Unprecedented Growth in Computing

4.1.1 Qubit

A qubit or quantum bit is the smallest information in quantum computing. It is
the quantum version of the classical binary bit, which can be physically realized
as a coherent coexistence of both 0 and 1, unlike either of the states in classical
computation. Qubit measurement might destroy the coherence and irrevocably cause
disturbance in the superposition state. A quantum state of a qubit can be represented

Quantum solutions to possible challenges of Blockchain technology

11

by a linear superposition of two orthonormal basis states. A multi-qubit (𝑛-qubit)
system can be represented by a superposition state vector in 2𝑛 dimensional Hilbert
space.

4.1.2 Quantum superposition

Quantum superposition refers to the simultaneous existence of a quantum particle
as mathematical possibilities described by a wave function rather than one actual
object. Mathematically, it corresponds to a property of solutions to the Schrodinger’s
equation where any linear combination of solutions is another solution. In quantum
information processing, |0(cid:105) and |1(cid:105) are the Dirac notation for the pure quantum states,
which will always give the result 0 and 1 respectively when converted to classical
logic by a measurement. Then a quantum state 𝛼 |0(cid:105) + 𝛽 |1(cid:105) will be superposition of
linear states |0(cid:105) and |1(cid:105) with complex numbers 𝛼 and 𝛽 as coeﬃcient representing
how much |0(cid:105) and |1(cid:105) go into each conﬁguration.[15] This notion of coexistence in
multiple states holds true only under the absence of observation.

4.1.3 Quantum Entanglement

Even more surprising than superposition, Einstein’s theory of "Spooky action at a
distance" in EPR (Einstein - Podolsky - Rosen) paradox opens up a new dimension
of interpretation of quantum mechanics, known as entanglement. Quantum theory
predicts that two entangled entities might have correlated fates, as the measurement
on one entity leads instantaneously to a correlated result. Before the measurement,
the outcome of a quantum experiment is unknown, but the correlation between the
outcomes prior to obtaining the actual outcome is fully deterministic. Once one
outcome of the entangled pair is obtained, there remains no uncertainty about the
outcome of the other.

4.2 Quantum advantage in Blockchain scalability

Quantum mechanical principles mentioned above can provide substantial speed-
up over classical computing. [25] Since blockchain platform is rigorously used in
multiple ﬁntech applications, we have analyzed four use cases of ﬁntech applications
where quantum invasion can be made to provide computational advantage.

4.2.1 Supercharged data analyses

Unlocking blockchain’s potential to manage IOT devices will help understand the
huge volume of data generated and processed by multiple transactions. This analysis

12

Nivedita Dey, Mrityunjay Ghosh and Amlan Chakrabarti

primarily helps in decision-making systems where consistency, autonomicity and
processing delays can be adjusted. Predictive analytics in Blockchain technology
enables trackability of the provenance of items along the supply chain. Lack of
suﬃcient data leads to inaccurate predictions, and available classical systems with
classical bits are less eﬃcient in processing a massive volume of data. Exploiting
quantum mechanical principles like quantum parallelism can provide a signiﬁcant
speedup in supercharged data analyses. Better utilization of a quantum-enabled ana-
lytical model using Blockchain data of a particular organization enables identifying
potential return on investment (ROI) sources.

4.2.2 Greater calculation speed

Limited block size and diﬃculty of proof of work of bitcoin consensus protocol lead
to a bottleneck in transaction processing capacity. [64] Operations like duplicate
record keeping, third-party validations, etc., constitute limited transparency and
causes slow data veriﬁcation. Classical solutions to use a better machine or faster
communication links can provide enhanced throughput in transaction processing
speed, but to a limited extent (around 5x). Upon the availability of fault-tolerant
quantum computers, in the future, the quantum era will provide noiseless qubits for
enhanced processing speed, accuracy, and a faster mode of communication using
quantum networks. This mode of immediate execution of transactions will incur low
computational complexity and reduced resource overhead.

4.2.3 Reduced False-Positive in fraud detection

Classical fraud detection models mainly rely on interpreting past payment methods
for assigning risk scores and detecting fraud payment transactions. Despite the
advent of artiﬁcial intelligence and machine learning algorithms, classical intelligent
systems cannot adapt themselves in processing real-time dynamic data on per event-
by-event basis. This leads to unﬁltered false-positive cases, which can drastically
aﬀect resource overhead and speed of fraud investigation, resulting in a signiﬁcant
impact on proﬁtability and customer experience. One of the possible solutions to
drive down the false positives is the calculation speed and optimality in choosing
the data points. This can enhance the accuracy and adaptability of the fraud alert
investigations. Quantum machine learning has the potential to achieve signiﬁcant
speedup over classical machine learning models. If we feed more data points into
the training model, re-adjustment of fraud detection rules and models to match the
perceived level of risk will be enhanced.

Quantum solutions to possible challenges of Blockchain technology

13

4.2.4 Eﬃcient Monte-Carlo Simulation

The cryptocurrency market is still volatile as it is decentralized, open, and highly
accessible. Monte Carlo simulation and time series analysis are essential for fore-
casting future risk and return associated with cryptocurrencies for a selected time
period. The classical Monte Carlo algorithm is computationally less eﬃcient un-
der simulation performed over many variables bounded to diﬀerent constraints. The
process incurs huge time overhead, and approximating a solution will involve many
computations. If conditions and parameters put into the model are poor and unﬁl-
tered, the simulation outcome will be poor. Quantum algorithm can accelerate and
achieve quadratic speedup over classical Monte Carlo methods in a very general
setting by estimating the expected output value of an arbitrary randomized.

5 Shor’s Algorithm – Threats on Classical Public-key Blockchain

Algorithms

5.1 RSA (Rivest Shamir Adleman) Algorithm

In RSA, a user sends its public key to the server and requests some conﬁdential data.
The server encrypts the data using users’ public key and sends back the encrypted
data. After receiving the data, the user decrypts it using their private key. Blockchains
follow a similar algorithm to that of RSA for creating and encrypting the blockchain
wallets. [8] Whenever a cryptocurrency wallet is to be created, a public address-
private key pair is generated. The public address of the user is used to receive
cryptocurrencies and consult respective balances on the blockchain. [21] In contrast,
the user’s private key is used in correlation to the public key to access and spend the
user’s crypto. Mathematically, RSA uses a one-way trapdoor function where public
information is two large prime numbers whose product is used as the modulus for
encryption and decryption. The intractability lies in the mathematical hardness to
calculate back the factors of such a large integer. Until 1994, Peter Shor came up with
his novel quantum algorithm for large integer factorization using Quantum Fourier
Transform (QFT). A 2048-bit key RSA encryption can be broken by a quantum
computer 4096 logical qubits.[8]

5.2 ECC and ECDSA (Elliptic Curve Cryptography and Elliptic Curve

Digital Signature Algorithm)

Elliptic curve-based algorithms are used as standards for creating keys for wallet and
signing for transactions. With ECDSA, a random 256-bit private key is generated
to derive the public key.[9] [47] Classically, it is very diﬃcult to ﬁnd the random

14

Nivedita Dey, Mrityunjay Ghosh and Amlan Chakrabarti

value for a given generated public key. The private key generated randomly is used to
sign for transactions, and the public key is used to prove that a private key has been
used. But, Shor’s algorithm can reverse back the private key for any public address
and gain control over a person’s wallet. Though from a cryptographic primitive
“security-level” (in terms of bits or number of operations an attacker has to perform
to compromise the security of the underlying system) point of view, ECDSA provides
a better security level than RSA. A 224-bit sized public key ECDSA provides a 112-
bit security level. On the contrary, to achieve the same 112-bit security level, a
2048-bit sized public key is required in RSA. But, with respect to post-quantum
resistance, ECDSA is under more threat than conventional RSA.[8][10]

According to public research, “RSA 2048-bit keys require around 4096 qubits
(5.2 trillion tofolli quantum gates) to be defeated, whereas ECDSA 256-bit keys
require only 2330 qubits (126 billion tofolli quantum gates).” [9]

5.3 ECDH (Elliptic Curve Diﬀe Hellman) Algorithm

ECDH is a key agreement protocol to allow two parties to establish a shared secret
over an insecure channel. This concept is used in the context of blockchain by having
the bitcoin receiver publish some ECDH-information which is to be used by the
sender for calculating a shared secret.[11] This shared secret is the bitcoin address,
also referred to as a stealth address, reusable payment codes, reusable address, or
paynyms to which a sender sends his money. [11] The receiver calculates the corre-
sponding private key to gain access to the money. The underlying mathematics for
key exchange protocol relies on the Discrete Logarithm Problem (DLT). The objec-
tive is to determine a unique integer that can be the order of the generator element of
a ﬁnite cyclic group. For general elliptic curves, DLP seems to be extremely compu-
tationally hard as best known classical algorithms for DLP on elliptic curves are the
generic algorithms with running times exponential to the number of bits necessary to
describe the problem. Modiﬁed Shor’s algorithm for DLP can theoretically achieve
exponential speedup to break the ‘thought to be’ irreversible and intractable one-way
function.

5.4 DSA (Digital Signature Algorithm)

In order to guarantee non-repudiation (post-denial) of information in the blockchain
system, digital signatures are used to verify the integrity of a ﬁle or a message.
But, lack of diversity in industrial settings makes currently available cryptosystems
susceptible to quantum computer-aided attacks. The degree of security provided by
Classical Digital Signature (CDS) schemes rely on intractability and complexity of
large integer factorization and discrete logarithmic problem. This makes the system
to be no longer quantum-safe in the near-term era.[12]

Quantum solutions to possible challenges of Blockchain technology

15

6 Grover’s Algorithm – Threats on Classical Blockchain

Techniques

6.1 Faster Detection of Hash Collision

Blockchain relies on the computation of hash functions to provide security against
modiﬁcation of past blocks and thus guarantees the integrity of blocks. Underlying
distributed architecture demands massive computational eﬀort in recomputing a
chain of blocks, ﬁnding a hash collision with existing hash and modifying a single
block are of extreme challenge.[24] But Grover’s algorithm can speciﬁcally provide
a solution to the problem of ﬁnding the pre-image of a value of a function that was
initially diﬃcult to invert. [18][19]Given a hash value (signature) and a hash function
as input to the quantum computer, Grover’s algorithm can give us the original data on
which the hash was applied in quadratically smaller number of eﬀorts. This allows
more eﬃcient and accelerated generation of hash collisions rather than brute-force
search. [14] Hence, it oﬀers achievable speedup in detection of hash collisions which
can be used to replace blocks without disturbing the integrity of blockchain – which
can be a serious security threat to classical blockchain.

6.1.1 Recreation of entire blockchain

Grover’s can speed up the generation of nonces to an extent where the entire chain
of records can be recreated with consistently modiﬁed hashes. A classical attack
necessitates using linear-time brute-force search, which involves the whole hash
space until a match is found with the known hash value. [19] This potentially causes
vulnerabilities in the system as inserting a modiﬁed block will remain unspotted as
it will not compromise the sequential consistency of the blocks in the blockchain.

7 Post- Quantum Initiatives for quantum-resistant cryptography

Classical cryptographic primitives used in blockchain technologies are under threat
due to quantum computers. Pre-quantum and post-quantum security level of diﬀerent
classical cryptographic algorithms are shown in tables 3 and 4 In order to overcome
the aforementioned cryptographic challenges in classical blockchain, several post-
quantum cryptographic initiatives have already been taken. [4] The main aim behind
these initiatives and their relevance with respect to classical security systems are
speciﬁed as follows.

16

Classical
Algorithm

Current
security
level
(bits)

256

SHA-256
(Secure
Hash
Algorithm)
Keccak-256 256
Keccak-384 384
Keccak-512 512
256
Scrypt
160
RIPEMD
160
(RIPE
Message
Digest)
SHA-3 256 256

Post-
quantum
security
level
(bits)
128

Nivedita Dey, Mrityunjay Ghosh and Amlan Chakrabarti

DLTs under threat

Quantum
algorithm
causing
threat

Grover

Bitcoin, Ethereum, Dash, Monero, Litecoin, Zeash,
Ripple, NXT, Byteball [63]

128
192
256
128
80

Grover
Grover
Grover
Grover
Grover

Ethereum, Monero, Bytecoin
IOTA [23]
Ethereum
Litecoin, NXT
Bitcoin, Ethereum, Monero, Litecoin, Ripple, Bytecoin

128

Grover

-

Table 3 Hash-function based algorithms under quantum threat

Classical
Algorithm

Current
security
level
(bits)

ECDSA

RSA-1024
RSA-2048
RSA-3072
AES-128
AES-256

128

80
112
128
128
256

Quantum
algorithm
causing
threat

Post-
quantum
security
level
(bits)
Broken Shor

Broken Shor
Broken Shor
Broken Shor
64
128

Grover
Grover

DLTs under threat

Bitcoin, Ethereum, Dash, Litecoin, Zeash, Ripple,
Byteball
-
-
-
-
-

Table 4 Asymmetric and symmetric encryption algorithms under quantum threat

7.1 PQCrypto

This is one of the initiatives to allow users to switch from classical cryptography
to post-quantum cryptography so that they remain secure for the long term against
attacks from quantum computers. The primary aim of PQ Crypto is to design a
portfolio of post-quantum public-key cryptosystems with (i) improved speed, (ii)
enhanced security, (iii) adaptability to several performance challenges of IoT, Cloud,
and mobile devices, etc.[26]

Quantum solutions to possible challenges of Blockchain technology

17

7.2 SAFEcrypto

The word SAFEcrypto stands for Secure Architectures of Future Emerging Cryp-
tography. Its primary aim is to provide robust, physically secure solutions for future
IOT applications in the quantum era. [27] Underlying mathematical source to provide
computational hardness is based on lattice-based cryptographic schemes to improve
the security of digital signatures, authentication schemes, public key encryption,
attribute-based encryption (ABE) and identity-based encryption (IBE), etc. Since
post-quantum initiatives require low power consumption and real-time performance,
SAFEcrypto aims to achieve 10x speed up throughout for real-time application sce-
narios and 5x reduction in energy consumption for low power and embedded mobile
applications. The algorithmic optimization and improved design using lattice-based
cryptographic schemes can enhance the performance of both resource-constrained
and real-time internet applications.

7.3 CryptoMathCREST

This post-quantum initiative is a part of the CREST funding program, which is
run by the Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST). The main aim behind
this initiative is to study the mathematical problems and their variations underlying
the security modeling of a next-generation cryptosystem. The novel mathematical

Fig. 4 Key research areas of CryptomathCREST post quantum initiative [55]

techniques emerged as research outcome will serve as the basis of the construction

18

Nivedita Dey, Mrityunjay Ghosh and Amlan Chakrabarti

of new cryptographic protocols. The four key research areas of CREST Crypto Math
project comprising of 25 mathematicians and four postdocs involve investigation of
the security model in industry applications, evaluation of security and eﬃciency of
post-quantum cryptography, study on mathematical object and reduction map used
in cryptography, and exploration of theoretical background for quantum technology
and quantum information theory as shown in ﬁgure 4.

7.4 Post Quantum Standardization

Post quantum cryptography standardization is a program hosted by NIST to up-
date their standards where Post-quantum cryptography (PQC) or quantum resistant
algorithms (QRAs) can be incorporated. Symmetric key cryptographic primitives
like Advanced Encryption Standard (AES), Data Encryption Standard (DES) are
comparatively easy to modify in a way that helps them increase their security level
(in terms of bits) and become quantum resistant. [28] So, the primary focus of the
NIST PQC initiative is on public-key cryptographic primitives like digital signa-
ture and Key encapsulation mechanisms (KEMs), currently, NIST initiated a call
for proposals is in round three out of the expected four rounds. The call for pro-
posals and timeline of NIST Post Quantum Cryptography Standardization project
has been depicted in ﬁgure 5. [29][30][41] These post-quantum cryptographic ini-
tiatives can have a diverse range of security applications. [31][33][35] The more
precise post-quantum initiative designed for blockchain includes Bitcoin Post Quan-
tum, Ethereum 3.0, and quantum-resistant cryptosystem for Abelian platform and
PQC for Corda Blockchain to name a signiﬁcant one.[34] In the next section, we
will discuss all these four post-quantum initiatives, including their operational prin-
ciple, pros and cons, relevance with respect to current Blockchain technology, and
underlying challenges in implementation. [32][36]

The timeline for NIST standardization project is summarized below. [37][40]
• February 2016: Announcement of the start of the Post-Quantum Cryptography

Standardization Project

• August 2016: Release of NISTIR 8105, Report on Post-Quantum Cryptography
• August 2016: RFCs on Submission Requirements and Evaluation Criteria
• December 2016: Formal Call for Proposals
• November 2017: Deadline for submissions
• December 2017: Examination of documents and forms; Round 1 begins
• April 2018: First Post-Quantum Cryptography (PQC) Standardization Conference
• 2018/2019: Round 2 begins
• August 2019: Second PQC Standardization Conference (plan)
• 2020/2021: Round 3 begins or algorithms to be selected
• 2022/2024: Draft preparation to be completed

Quantum solutions to possible challenges of Blockchain technology

19

Fig. 5 NIST standardization project timeline

8 Post Quantum Initiatives on Blockchain

8.1 Bitcoin Post-Quantum

8.1.1 Bitcoin Security Primitive/ Operational Principle

The security of decentralized digital cryptocurrency, Bitcoin, relies upon the ECDSA
and Proof of work (PoW) algorithm to authorize the payer and prevent a payer from
double-spending. [7] Transfer of bitcoins between users happens through transac-
tions from one address to another, where address represents the hash of the re-
ceiver’s public key, which is revealed when distributing the transaction over the
bitcoin network.[10] The amount of bitcoin ownership depends on the private key
ownership corresponding to the given public key. The digital signature used to sign
the transaction shows the proof of ownership.

8.1.2 Quantum- threat to Bitcoin security

ECDSA strength is based on a discrete logarithm problem that is vulnerable to Shor’s
algorithm. [13] The corresponding private key can be calculated using a quantum
computer whenever a public key is disclosed in the network. A new transaction can
be forged with a valid digital signature. But, the process of searching the pre-image
of the hash is still computationally complex, even in a quantum computer. Quadratic
speedup of Grover’s algorithm will not put signiﬁcant speedup on hash functions of
appropriate length.

20

Nivedita Dey, Mrityunjay Ghosh and Amlan Chakrabarti

8.1.3 Quantum – safe hash-based cryptography

For PQC era, the extended Merkle Signature Scheme (XMSS) can be used as a
quantum-safe digital signature scheme because of its high security, acceptable sig-
nature length, and permissible key generation time. [48] To achieve a post-quantum
security level, at least 256-bit hashes (as used in P2WSH, Pay-to-Witness-Script-
Hash) must be to provide 128-bit collision resistance. XMSS digital signature scheme
combined with RFC 8391 can naturally resist side-channel attacks and guarantees
security against quantum attacks by providing 128-bit post-quantum security level
(256-bit hash). [22] (iv) Usability and relevance to current blockchain: In order to
ﬁnd an authentication path from a given XMSS tree, the required number of sig-
natures is an exponential factor of the height of the tree. An increase in the height
of the XMSS tree will imply more transactions to be signed (2h= 1024, 1048576
for h=10, 20 respectively). On a modern classical computer, this can consume time
ranging from less than a second (h=10) to about 10 minutes (h=20) despite being
quantum-safe. [51][52] Moreover, as per Bitcoin Post – Quantum (BPQ) consensus,
the most prominent approach is to generate both XMSS key and a quantum-safe
address. However, BPQ approach discovered so far is impractical for Blockchain
applications as XMSS is computationally slow. [16] [43]

8.2 Ethereum 3.0

8.2.1 Ethereum Security Primitive/ Operational Principle

Ethereum uses zero-knowledge (ZK) proof technologies, enabling one party to prove
his knowledge to another party without actually conveying the information itself.[69]
- [72] This privacy-enhancing technique allows Ethereum to be a scaling technology
as the amount of information transfer between users will be signiﬁcantly reduced,
and proofs can be veriﬁed at a much faster rate. [69] [70]

8.2.2 Quantum threat to Ethereum Security

Ethereum cryptocurrency relies on ZK-SNARK (Zero-Knowledge Succinct Non –
Interactive Argument of Knowledge) technique. [60] [62] Though this technique is
non – interactive, meaning code can be run or deployed autonomously, it requires a
trusted setup. Trusted setup architecture requires key creation to generate and verify
proofs for private transactions. The secrets which are used to generate these keys
can be used to forge transactions unless destroyed. The underlying cryptographic
primitive used for ZK-SNARK is another disadvantage of Ethereum technology as
it primarily relies on elliptic curve cryptography. This can put threats on Ethereum
security as ﬁnding the discrete logarithm of the random elliptic curve for a given

Quantum solutions to possible challenges of Blockchain technology

21

publicly known base point will not remain infeasible upon the availability of a
full-scale quantum computer.

8.2.3 Quantum – safe cryptographic primitive (ZK - STARKS)

ZK-STARK (Zero-Knowledge Scalable Transparent Argument of Knowledge) is
the post-quantum initiative of Ethereum 3.0, where post-quantum security can be
achieved using quantum-resistant hash functions.[18][44] Additionally, the require-
ment of trusted set–up architecture is no longer there in the utilization of ZK-STARK
in the network. This helps to remove the vulnerability of the trusted parties compro-
mising overall system privacy. The advantage of STARK can be realized on improved
scalability and enhanced privacy. [62] It can perform bulk computations and storage
oﬀ–chain allowing exponential scaleup of blockchain infrastructure without losing
computational integrity.

8.2.4 Usability and relevance to current blockchain

Although issues like the requirement of trusted setup architecture and quantum
attacks on elliptic curve algorithms, technology like ZK – SNARK has a faster
adoption rate over quantum-resistant ZK – STARKS. [22] Reasons behind the lower
acceptance rate of ZK – STARKS are lack of developer libraries, published code,
projects, and developers currently available to work on that technology. Moreover,
the development of quantum computers in terms of more availability of noise-free
qubits to perform those quantum attacks is also in its nascency and far costlier for
the end-user concerning the current scenario.

8.3 Abelian

8.3.1 Blockchain Privacy Primitive/ Operational Principle

Data privacy has always been one of the major challenges in near–term blockchain ap-
plications. Cryptographic tools can preserve privacy in the case of both permission-
based and permission-less applications. The applications like Fully Homomorphic
Encryption (FHE), Multiparty Computation (MPC), Functional Encryption (FE),
Searchable Encryption (SE) have several challenges and computational complexities
associated with them. [45] FHE seems to be the universal solution provider to any
blockchain privacy issue but is not implementable in the near future. MPC tech-
nique is highly complex and ineﬃcient in terms of computation and communication
though they can provide privacy and veriﬁability in distributed computing platforms.
FE and SE techniques lack theoretical research to devise compelling use cases and
more eﬃcient schemes for large datasets without compromising security.

22

Nivedita Dey, Mrityunjay Ghosh and Amlan Chakrabarti

8.3.2 Privacy Perspective of Major Cryptocurrencies

The existing cryptocurrencies can provide dual privacy due to their ability to keep
anonymity of originator and recipient of each transaction while simultaneously
hiding each transaction amount. But these techniques cannot oﬀer any solution that
can be quantum-safe and, at the same time, can provide privacy with accountability.
The privacy perspective of major cryptocurrencies has been shown in table 5.

Bitcoin

Dash

(a) Pseudonym from privacy concern.
(b) Wallet addresses and personal information of wallet holders are kept indepen-
dently.
(c) Basic privacy level.
(d) Transactions are traceable as all transactions are recorded on the public ledger.
(e) Threat: if a graph can be built to represent all wallet addresses as nodes and all
transactions as edges, the complete view of the bitcoin system can be obtained from
a single bitcoin full node through graph analytics.
(a) Improvement over Bitcoin using privacy-centric master nodes to weaker the trace-
ability.
(b) Uses ‘mixing technique’ to obscure the linkage between inputs and outputs of
individual transactions by combining them with inputs and outputs of other transac-
tions.

CryptoNote (a) Improvement over both Bitcoin and Dash.

Zerocoin
Monero

Zerocash

(b) Uses ring signature to hide the identity of the originator.
(c) Applies Diﬀe – Hellman key exchange protocol to hide recipient’s identity.
(a) Breaks Linkage between individual transactions to improve privacy.
(a) Combines techniques from both Dash and CryptoNote to hide each transaction
amount.
(b) Applies Zero – knowledge range proof to ensure that the originator cannot over-
spend any amount.
(c) One of the cryptocurrency techniques considered to be providing full privacy.
(a) Breaks linkage between transactions
(b) Can hide the identity of the user, thus providing anonymity.
(c) Applies Zero-Knowledge SNARKs to cover up each transaction amount.
(d) Another cryptocurrency technique to provide full privacy.

Table 5 Privacy Perspective of Major Cryptocurrencies

8.3.3 Quantum – safe Abelian Cryptocoin (ABE)

ABE is designed to build an eﬃcient and quantum-safe privacy coin, which uses
lattice-based cryptographic constructions to provide accountability. Users of ABE
are allowed to choose the privacy level for each of their transactions. Its basic pri-
vacy level is comparable to bitcoin, while the full privacy level is compared to
Monero or Zerocash. Along with these two privacy levels, ABE allows users to pick
a designated authority who can link the current transaction with the immediately

Quantum solutions to possible challenges of Blockchain technology

23

previous transaction and simultaneously crack the actual transaction amount. Cryp-
tographic primitives of ABE are based on the intractability of lattice-based hard
problems, namely Short Integer Solutions (SIS) and Learning with Errors (LWE).
These schemes used in ABE are supported by rigorous proofs of post-quantum se-
curity, thus providing a practical and scalable solution with an enhanced privacy
perspective.

8.4 Corda

Corda is probably the most cryptographically agile DLT technique that allows users
to choose between multiple signing key types. [46] These key-types include both the
techniques which are (a) not quantum-safe like RSA, ECDSA, EdDSA (Edwards-
curve Digital Signature Algorithm), and (b) quantum-safe like SPHINCS (post-
quantum stateless hash-based signature scheme).[3][8] SPHINCS-256 is a high-
security scheme that can sign hundreds of messages per second on a modern 4-core
3.5 GHz Intel CPU.[9][10] SPHINCS provides signatures of size 41 KB and both
public keys, private keys of size 1 KB each. Conventional hash-based signature
schemes are stateful, meaning they need to record information (state) after process-
ing every signature. [49] Generally, input to these hash-based signature schemes
is a secret key, and the message itself generates a signature and an updated secret
key as output. [19] In case there is any failure while updating or copying the key
from one device to another, the system’s overall security is susceptible to disintegra-
tion. Unlike these schemes, SPHINCS is a method to apply randomized tree-based
stateless signatures. This can provide long-term 2128 security, which is resistant to
any quantum attack in the near term future. Moreover, this signature scheme is also
practical as it can provide a good trade-oﬀ between speed and signature size.

9 Feasibility of Quantum Attack on Blockchain DLTs

The underlying dependencies of the cryptographic schemes and lack of quantum-
resistant algorithms make current Blockchain DLTs vulnerable to several attacks
made by quantum computers. Hence, it is necessary to understand the current level
of vulnerability that can be exploited upon availability of near-term quantum com-
puters and the required number of computational metrics (in terms of qubit count,
gate ﬁdelity, qubit noise, underlying physical machine description) to execute those
quantum attacks.[42][61] The following section will describe the mathematical and
operational feasibility of several quantum attacks on Blockchain technologies like
Bitcoin, Ethereum, Litecoin, Monero, and Zcash.

24

9.1 Bitcoin

Nivedita Dey, Mrityunjay Ghosh and Amlan Chakrabarti

Bitcoin incorporates Hashcash as its PoW, which was designed as a countermeasure
to Denial of Service (DoS) for email systems. This enables the potential sender
to send an email only after solving a computationally hard problem. In Hashcash,
the prospective miner must calculate an SHA-256 hash value for the header and a
random number. This random number is a signiﬁcant parameter to measure the com-
putational diﬃculty of the hard problem to be solved. The transaction mechanism
of Bitcoin incorporates an ECDSA signature scheme to prove authority, ownership,
transaction immutability, and guaranteed non-repudiation on token usage. The El-
liptic curve being employed is secp256-k1. [20] [75] [76] This signature is made up
of two values, S and R, where R denotes x coordinate of a point on the elliptic curve
and the corresponding another half of the signature (S) can be obtained as follows:
𝑆 = 𝐾 − 1(𝑆𝐻 𝐴256(𝑀) + 𝑑𝐴.𝑅)𝑚𝑜𝑑 𝑝 where,
K = temporary private key.
dA = signing private key.
p = prime order of the elliptic ﬁeld.
SHA256 (M) = Output of the message M when SHA-256 hash algorithm is applied.
[74]
With its quadratic speed up, Grover’s algorithm can perform PoW at a much faster
rate than classical miners. If an attacker can generate as much as PoW as the rest
of the network combined (>50%), it can allow an attacker to enforce a consensus
on any block of the network. Another source of vulnerability is the use of ECDSA
scheme for transactions. A classical computer can solve the hardness of the ECDSA
scheme in 𝑂 (2𝑛) complexity, which provides computational overhead. Shor’s al-
gorithm can perform the same computation exponentially faster than the classical
counterpart. [13] The hard mathematical problem underlying ECDSA is the dis-
crete logarithm problem, which Shor’s algorithm can solve on a quantum computer
in 𝑛3𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝑛)𝑙𝑜𝑔𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝑛) time, which is of 𝑂 (𝑛3) complexity. Moreover, an eﬀective
quantum attack can be made on Bitcoin when a public key and a signed transaction
have already been broadcasted to the network, and the objective is to ﬁnd the corre-
sponding private key. A quantum computer can speed up the process of signing a new
transaction with the private key. This will help an illegitimate user to impersonate as
the key owner and place that illegitimate transaction before the original transaction
on the blockchain. Thus, the original transaction can be stolen, and the newly created
Unspent Transaction Output (UTXO) can be directed into an account, thus leading
to the existence of a parallel blockchain. It has been experimentally shown that a
quantum computer with 4,85,550 qubits running at a clock speed of 10GHz can
solve the problem in 30min. [73]

Quantum solutions to possible challenges of Blockchain technology

25

9.2 Ethereum

Ethereum is primarily designed to introduce the use of smart contracts and distributed
applications where each transaction will add or deduct Ether to a user’s account. The
earlier consensus mechanism of Ethereum is Ethtlash, a PoW where only one round
of SHA-3 hashing is used. [16] The power of a miner is determined by the amount
of stake held by a miner in terms of Ether. Like Bitcoin, Ethereum uses a variant
of ECDSA where the primary public key associated with a user account is not
revealed to the network. Instead, the public key can be retrieved from another user’s
transaction signature using the public key recovery technique. EthHash is vulnerable
to be attacked by a quantum computer due to Grover’s algorithm. The diﬃculty value
for a successful attack on Ethereum can be described as follows:
𝐷 = (𝐻𝑟 ∗ 𝐵)/232, where
D = Diﬃculty of the PoW mechanism
𝐻𝑟 = Network hash rate
B = Block time of the Blockchain
In classical system, for B=16sec and 𝐻𝑟 = 18 ∗ 103 H/sec, the diﬃculty value
D=670552. On the other hand, the equivalent hash rate on a quantum computer
𝐷. [77] This enables a quantum computer to
with operating frequency is 0.04 ∗ 𝑆
perform a 51% attack with only a clock speed of 5THz. Ethereum is also vulnerable
to Shor’s algorithm due to its similarity with ECDSA. Unlike Bitcoin, Ethereum has
a signiﬁcantly shorter transaction processing time (TPS) which is advantageous. But,
Ethereum is signiﬁcantly more vulnerable to quantum attack due to its account-based
transaction system. In Ethereum, all outgoing transactions have to be signed using a
single public key/private key pair associated with the account. A quantum attacker
can request the public key and calculate the private key using Shor’s algorithm
exponentially faster. [13] This can make the entire account balance vulnerable after
a single transaction.

√

9.3 Litecoin

Litecoin is designed to process transactions much faster than Bitcoin. To increase
TPS, Litecoin uses a diﬀerent PoW scheme called Scrypt, which can consume sig-
niﬁcantly less hashing power than Bitcoin. [66][67] (Hashing rate of approximately
46*106 TH/sec for Bitcoin and 298TH/sec for Litecoin). [79] [80] Thus, Litecoin
focuses on a highly intensive use of RAM on mining nodes rather than the highly
intensive processing power. [65] But, since Litecoin is a source-code fork of Bit-
coin Blockchain, it is also potentially vulnerable to quantum attacks. The signature
scheme used in Litecoin is also secp-256k1 elliptic curve of ECDSA, which makes it
vulnerable to Shor’s algorithm. [20] Moreover, the PoW of Scrypt is also vulnerable
to be attacked by a quantum computer due to Grover’s algorithm. The diﬃculty value
for a successful attack on Litecoin can be described as follows:
𝐷 = (32 ∗ 1013 ∗ 150)/232 = 11175870

26

Nivedita Dey, Mrityunjay Ghosh and Amlan Chakrabarti

Litecoin’s current hash rate being 320 TH/sec allows a quantum computer to
attack the current hash rate while operating with a clock speed of 2.4 THz. [80]
Litecoin has a slight advantage in resisting quantum attacks due to shorter block
time and slightly faster throughput over Bitcoin. But a decreased hash rate due to
reduction of the block reward to complete given PoW may cause the system more
vulnerable and susceptible to quantum attack.

9.4 Monero

Monero is a Blockchain to provide user’s privacy by obfuscating both user’s identity
and the amount of transaction through Pedersen Commitments and Range Proofs.
CryptoNight V8 PoW scheme of Monero is memory – intensive process that makes
access to slow memory at random intervals. [82] Monero uses EdDSA as a signing
algorithm implemented using Twisted Edwards curve Ed25519. [86] Like ECDSA,
this signature scheme also relies on the mathematical hardness of discrete logarithm
problems for its security and thus can be thought of to be vulnerable to quantum
attacks by Shor’s algorithm. [13] Moreover, Monero is able to provide transaction
anonymity through the use of stealth addresses, ring signatures, and ring conﬁdential
transactions. [54]-[59] Bulletproof is the current zero-knowledge proof mechanism
used in Monero to ensure the balance of transactions. The use of this mechanism
helps Monero be eﬃcient in terms of less computational overhead and less space
required on the blockchain. [83] Recently, Monero has moved its PoW scheme
from CryptoNight V8 to RandomX. [84] RandomX is designed to execute random
programs in a special instruction set comprising of integer arithmetic, ﬂoating-point
arithmetic, and branch instructions. Monero is slightly more resilient to quantum
attacks as the attacker can not obtain information about the amount being transferred
in a target transaction. This privacy provides additional security to Monero by making
it less attractive security to Monero by making it less attractive for quantum attacks.
It should be noted further that RandomX is still thought to be safe from quantum
attacks as no known vulnerabilities have been obtained so far.

9.5 Zcash

Zcash is a privacy-based Blockchain that allows transactions between both public
and private accounts. Zcash transactions rely on ZK – SNARK works on trusted set
– up architecture to demonstrate the fairness of a transaction being sent. Equihash is
the PoW scheme used in Zcash, which is based on a generalized birthday problem.
[81] Like Monero, Zcash is also implemented using EdDSA as a signing algorithm
and employing elliptic curve Ed25519. [20] [68] [86] This signature scheme also
relies on the hardness of discrete logarithm problems and thus making it vulnerable
to quantum attack by Shor’s algorithm. Moreover, there is a quantum algorithm

Quantum solutions to possible challenges of Blockchain technology

27

developed by Grassi et al. that can solve the generalized birthday problem or the
K-xor problem in 𝑂 (2𝑛/(2+𝑙𝑜𝑔2𝑘) ) compared to the best known classical algorithm
known as Wagner’s algorithm, which can solve the same problem in 𝑂 (2𝑛/(1+𝑙𝑜𝑔2𝑘) ).
[85] This shows a quantum advantage in terms of reduced time and space complexity
and, consequently, can lead to a quantum 51% attack against the system. Quantum
attacks can be made to create an inﬁnite number of Zcash tokens if the attacker can
possess the global private key using Shor’s algorithm. If tokens can be created at
will and the token creation can be kept unknown to the rest of the network through
obfuscation, the overall security and the network performance can be drastically
aﬀected. Hence, it can be concluded that Zcash is more vulnerable than existing
blockchain technologies due to its low resilience to quantum computing attacks.

10 Realization of Post – Quantum Block and Future Research

Direction

Post-quantum blockchain techniques do not use quantum mechanical principles to
exploit computational speedup. Rather, they are advancements made on classical
computation so that current cryptographic primitives used in blockchain can be
made resistant to future quantum computing attacks. Researchers have been putting
a lot of eﬀort into discovering new post-quantum schemes that can be realized in
the near-term future and provide a practical, scalable solution for implementation.
This transition of blockchain from pre-quantum to post-quantum era needs to attain
certain objectives for their successful integration. Primary challenges involved while
devising any new research in this ﬁeld can be described as follows.

10.1 Key size and signature size

Post-quantum cryptosystems claim to oﬀer more security level over existing classical
standpoint. Enhancement of security level can be achieved by increasing the number
of bits used in cryptographic keys and signatures, which can drastically aﬀect the
overall performance of the Blockchain network. To achieve a 128 – bit quantum
security level, required key sizes are 2,688 – bit for a public key, 384 – bit for a
private key, and 120 KB for the signature. This would necessarily require the storage
of a massive amount of information and thus incorporating huge computational
overhead. Hence, research is required to devise new techniques to provide a trade-oﬀ
between achieved security level and Blockchain system performance.

28

Nivedita Dey, Mrityunjay Ghosh and Amlan Chakrabarti

10.2 Key Generation rate

Pre–quantum Blockchain schemes allow multiple messages to be signed with the
same key. But, if the security level has to be increased, it is necessary to limit the
number of messages which can be signed with the same key. Generating new keys
with a high speed relies on pseudo-random number generators (PRNGs), which
depend on the mathematical properties of a complex algorithm to generate the keys.
These keys do not provide enough entropy and are not inherently random, leading to
statistically correlated keys. An alternative approach relies on true hardware-based
random number generators (HRNGs), which can generate true random bits using
properties of classical physics. Though these hardware-based RNGs oﬀer suﬃcient
entropy, their key generation rate is not suﬃcient for an increase in demand. Recently,
researchers are working on quantum-based RNGs, which can exploit the properties
of quantum mechanical phenomena to generate true random bits. Thorough research
is required to focus on the trade-oﬀ between key generation mechanism and rate of
key generation for improved eﬃciency of the blockchain.

10.3 Blockchain compliance issues

Multiple post-quantum Blockchain initiatives have been taken, and the research is
still in progress. Hence, constant monitoring of the standard post-quantum schemes
that are being approved should be made by the researchers and developers to avoid
any compliance issues.

10.4 Incompatibility issue with existing hardware

Post-quantum cryptosystems are highly computationally intensive, as they incor-
porate large computation overhead to increase system security. But, this overhead
requires a huge computational resource with increased processing power. This makes
the post-quantum schemes less scalable and hence, less practical to be implemented.
Research is required to resolve this classical hardware incompatibility so that a
trade-oﬀ can be obtained between overall security and computational complexity.

10.5 Ciphertext overhead

Post-quantum cryptosystems are supposed to generate large Ciphertext so that their
deciphering can be made complex. But, this puts a lot of overhead on the overall
performance of the resource-constrained embedded systems. Quantum computing
can be one of the potential solutions to reduce the Ciphertext overhead. Quantum

Quantum solutions to possible challenges of Blockchain technology

29

parallelism through quantum superposition can be exploited to prepare a quantum
state space where classical data can be encoded in qubits rather than in bits as
shown in ﬁgure 6. However, this brings another challenge: segregating the quantum
computation part from the classical computational part. [61] If a quantum hybrid
system can be incorporated in the post-quantum blockchain, it can aid overall system
improvements in terms of security and computational speed.

Fig. 6 Proposed Block Diagram for Quantum-enabled Compression Technique

11 Conclusion

Despite the nascency of technological advancements in quantum computing, it has
attracted researchers and developers to keep their eye on potential advantages and
threats by quantum computers in blockchain and other DLTs. In this article, we

30

Nivedita Dey, Mrityunjay Ghosh and Amlan Chakrabarti

have discussed the existing and future scalability aspects of classical Blockchain
technologies. The potential beneﬁts to serve blockchain–aided ﬁntech applications
oﬀered by quantum computing have been analyzed so that use cases of Blockchain
performance in real-world applications can be enhanced further. We have analyzed
the impact of Grover’s algorithm and Shor’s algorithm in posing threats to classical
Blockchain security primitives. [14] For this purpose, the most relevant Blockchain
DLTs like Bitcoin, Ethereum, Litecoin, Monero, Zcash have been reviewed. Their
areas of vulnerabilities to be attacked by real quantum computers have been analyzed
in detail. In addition, post-quantum initiatives for quantum-resistant cryptography
and speciﬁc post-quantum initiatives on blockchain have been studied with respect
to their operational principle, possible quantum threat, quantum-safe cryptographic
primitive, and relevance of those schemes in the current Blockchain scenario. The
challenges and future research direction in realizing post-quantum blockchain and
exploiting quantum technology have been added in this article. Thus, the article can
provide useful guidance to the research areas of quantum computing and blockchain
technology and, moreover, in understanding a few possible quantum invasions in
post-quantum blockchain to devise new quantum-resistant Blockchain techniques.

References

1. J. Burke, J. McDonald, T. Austin, Architectural support for fast symmetric-key cryptography
Proceedings of the ninth international conference on Architectural support for programming
languages and operating systems, 178-189, 2000.

2. T. M. Fernández-Caramès and P. Fraga-Lamas, Towards Post-Quantum Blockchain A Review
on Blockchain Cryptography Resistant to Quantum Computing Attacks, in IEEE Access, vol.
8, pp. 21091-21116, 2020.

3. DJ. Bernstein, S. Josefsson, T. Lange, P. Schwabe, BY. Yang, EdDSA for more curves, Discrete

Mathematics; Coding Theory and Cryptology, 2015.

4. J J.Kearney, C A.Perez-Delgado, Vulnerability of blockchain technologies to quantum attacks,

Array Vol 10, July 2021

5. S. Nakamoto, Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System. Accessed: Nov. 2, 2019.

[Online]. Available: https://bitcoin.org/ bitcoin.pdf

6. M. Swan, Blockchain: Blueprint for a New Economy, 1st ed. Newton, MA, USA: O’Reilly

Media, 2015.

7. G. Zyskind and O. Nathan, “Decentralizing privacy: Using blockchain to protect personal
data,” in Proc. IEEE Secur. Privacy Workshops (SPW), San Jose, CA, USA, May 2015, pp.
180–184.

8. R. L. Rivest, A. Shamir, and L. Adleman, “A method for obtaining digital signatures and

public-key cryptosystems,” Commun. ACM, vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 96–99, Jan. 1983.

9. N. Koblitz, “Elliptic curve cryptosystems,” Mathematics Comput., vol. 48, no. 177, pp.

203–209, Jan. 1987.

10. V. S. Miller, “Use of elliptic curves in cryptography,” in Proc. Adv. Cryptol., in Lecture Notes

in Computer Science, vol. 218, Aug. 1985, pp. 417–426.

11. W. Diﬃe and M. Hellman, “New directions in cryptography,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol.

IT-22, no. 6, pp. 644–654, Nov. 1976.

12. Digital Signature Standard (DSS), Standard FIPS 186-2, NIST, Jan. 2000.
13. P. W. Shor, “Polynomial-time algorithms for prime factorization and discrete logarithms on a

quantum computer,” SIAM J. Comput., vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 1484–1509, Oct. 1997.

Quantum solutions to possible challenges of Blockchain technology

31

14. L. K. Grover, “A fast quantum mechanical algorithm for database search,” in Proc. 28th Annu.

ACM Symp. Theory Comput., Philadelphia, PA, USA, May 1996, pp. 212–219.

15. M. Ghosh, N. Dey, D. Mitra, A. Chakrabarti, A Novel Quantum Algorithm for Ant Colony

Optimization, arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.07413

16. W. Wang, D. T. Hoang, P. Hu, Z. Xiong, D. Niyato, P. Wang, Y. Wen, and D. I. Kim, “A survey
on consensus mechanisms and mining strategy management in blockchain networks,” IEEE
Access, vol. 7, pp. 22328–22370, 2019.

17. M. Castro and B. Liskov, “Practical Byzantine fault tolerance and proactive recovery,” ACM

Trans. Comput. Syst., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 398–461, Nov. 2002.

18. M. Raikwar, D. Gligoroski, and K. Kralevska, “SoK of used cryptography in blockchain,”

Cryptol. ePrint Arch., Tech. Rep. 2019/735, Sep. 2019.

19. L. Wang, X. Shen, J. Li, J. Shao, and Y. Yang, “Cryptographic primitives in blockchains,” J.

Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 127, pp. 43–58, Feb. 2019.

20. CNSS Advisory Memorandum Information Assurance 02-15: Use of Public Standards for the
Secure Sharing of Information among National Security Systems, NSS, Fort Meade, MD,
USA, Jul. 2015.

21. M. Mosca, “Cybersecurity in an era with quantum computers: Will we be ready?” IEEE Secur.

Privacy, vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 38–41, Sep. 2018.

22. S. Krendelev and P. Sazonova, “Parametric hash function resistant to attack by quantum
computer,” in Proc. Federated Conf. Comput. Sci. Inf. Syst., Poznan, Poland, Sep. 2018, pp.
387–390.

23. IOTA’s. Accessed: Nov. 2, 2019. [Online]. Available: https: //www.iota.org
24. G. Brassard, P. Høyer, and A. Tapp, “Quantum cryptanalysis of hash and claw-free functions,”
in Proc. Latin Amer. Symp. Theor. Informat., Valdivia, Chile, Mar. 2006, pp. 163–169.
25. M. Ghosh, A. Chakrabarti, NK. Jha, Automated quantum circuit synthesis and cost estimation
for the binary welded tree oracle, ACM Journal on Emerging Technologies in Computing
Systems (JETC) 13 (4), 1-14

26. PQCRYPTO Project. Accessed: Nov. 2, 2019. [Online]. Available: https: pqcrypto.eu.org
27. SAFECrypto Project. Accessed: Nov. 2, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://www.safecrypto.eu
28. CryptoMathCREST Project. Accessed: Nov. 2, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://cryptomath-

crest.jp/english

29. ETSI
Safe
Accessed:
https://portal.etsi.org/TBSiteMap/CYBER/CYBERQSCToR.aspx

Technical
Cryptography.

Cyber Working

Committee

2019.

Nov.

2,

Group

on
[Online].

Quantum-
Available:

30. Quantum-Safe Hybrid (QSH) Ciphersuite for Transport Layer Security (TLS) Version 1.3,

document Internet-Draft draft-whyte-qsh-tls, IETF, Oct. 2016.

31. XMSS: Extended Merkle Signature Scheme, document RFC 8391, IETF. Accessed: Nov. 2,

2019. [Online]. Available: https://datatracker. ietf.org/doc/rfc8391/

32. Leighton-Micali Hash-Based Signatures, document RFC 8554, IETF, Accessed: Nov. 2, 2019.

[Online]. Available: https://datatracker.ietf. org/doc/rfc8554/

33. ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 27 (Working Group on IT Security Techniques). Accessed: Nov. 2, 2019.

[Online]. Available: https://www.iso.org/ committee/45306.html

34. IEEE Standard Speciﬁcation for Public Key Cryptographic Techniques Based on Hard Prob-

lems
over Lattices, IEEE Standard 1363.1-2008, Mar. 2009.

35. ANSI. X9.98-2010 (R2017): Lattice-Based Polynomial Public Key Establishment Algorithm

for the

36. ETSI/IQC 2018 Quantum Safe Workshop. Accessed: Nov. 2, 2019. [Online]. Available:

https://www.etsi.org/news-events/events/1296-etsiiqc-quantum-safe-workshop-2018

37. NIST’s Workshop Cybersecurity a Post-Quantum World. Accessed: Nov. 2, 2019. [Online].

Available: https://www.nist.gov/news-events/ events/2015/04/workshop-cybersecurity-post-
quantum- world

38. B. Pursel, Introduction to Information Sciences and Technology.
39. Blockchain Explained, Euromoney.

32

Nivedita Dey, Mrityunjay Ghosh and Amlan Chakrabarti

40. NIST’s Announcement of the First Post-Quantum Cryptography Standardization Conference.
Accessed: Nov. 2, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://csrc.nist.gov/events/2018/ﬁrst-pqc-
standardization- conference

41. Announcement of the NIST’s Call for Proposals for Public-Key PostQuantum Cryptography

Algorithms. Accessed: Nov. 2, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://bit.ly/2hKONFb

42. M. Ghosh, N. Dey, D. Mitra, A. Chakrabarti, 2D Qubit Placement of Quantum Circuits using

LONGPATH, Advanced Computing and Systems for Security 10, 127-141

43. Bitcoin Post-Quantum. Accessed: Nov. 2, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://bitcoinpq.org
44. Ethereum’s Oﬃcial Roadmap. Accessed: Nov.

[Online]. Available:

2019.

2,

https://github.com/ethereum/wiki/wiki/Sharding-roadmap

45. Abelian. Accessed: Nov. 2, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://www. abelianfoundation.org
46. Corda’s Supported Security Suites. Accessed: Nov. 2, 2019.

[Online]. Available:

https://docs.corda.net/cipher-suites.html

47. Crypto Forum Research Group. Accessed: Nov. 2, 2019.

[Online]. Available:

https://irtf.org/cfrg

48. J. Buchmann, E. Dahmen, and A. Hülsing, “XMSS-a practical forward secure signature scheme
based on minimal security assumptions,” in Proc. PQCrypto, Taipei, Taiwan, Nov./Dec. 2011,
pp. 117–129.

49. D. J. Bernstein, D. Hopwood, A. Hülsing, T. Lange, R. Niederhagen, L. Papachristodoulou,
M. Schneider, P. Schwabe, and Z. Wilcox-O’Hearn, “Sphincs: Practical stateless hash-based
signatures,” in Proc. EUROCRYPT, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, Apr. 2015, pp. 368–397.

50. R. C. Merkle, “A certiﬁed digital signature,” in Proc. EUROCRYPT, 1989, pp. 218–238.
51. S. Krendelev and P. Sazonova, “Parametric hash function resistant to attack by quantum
computer,” in Proc. Federated Conf. Comput. Sci. Inf. Syst., Poznan, Poland, Sep. 2018, pp.
387–390.

52. W. Yin, Q. Wen, W. Li, H. Zhang, and Z. Jin, “An anti-quantum transaction authentication

approach in blockchain,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 5393–5401, 2018.

53. F. M. Ablayev, D. A. Bulychkov, D. A. Sapaev, and A. V. Vasiliev, “Quantum-assisted

blockchain,” Lobachevskii J. Math., vol. 39, no. 7, pp. 957–960, Sep. 2018.

54. R. L. Rivest, A. Shamir, and Y. Tauman, "How to leak a secret," in Advances in Cryptol-
ogy—ASIACRYPT (Lecture Notes in Computer Science), vol. 2248, C. Boyd, Ed. Berlin,
Germany: Springer-Verlag, 2001, pp. 1–14.

55. T. Takagi, Introduction to CREST Crypto-Math Project
56. Z. Liu, K. Nguyen, G. Yang, and H. Wang, “A lattice-based linkable ring signature support-
ing stealth addresses,” in Proc. ESORISCS, Luxembourg City, Luxembourg, Sep. 2019, pp.
726–746.

57. H. Zhang, F. Zhang, H. Tian, and M. H. Au, “Anonymous post-quantum cryptocash,” in Proc.

FC, Nieuwpoort, Curaçao, Feb. 2018, pp. 461–479.

58. W. A. A. Torres, R. Steinfeld, A. Sakzad, J. K. Liu, V. Kuchta, N. Bhattacharjee, M. H.
Au, and J. Cheng, “Post-Quantum one-time linkable ring signature and application to ring
conﬁdential transactions in blockchain (lattice RingCT v1.0),” in Proc. ACISP, Wollongong,
NSW, Australia, Jul. 2018, pp. 558–576.

59. CryptoNote’s. Accessed: Nov. 2, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://cryptonote.org
60. E. Ben-Sasson, A. Chiesa, E. Tromer, and M. Virza, “Succinct noninteractive zero knowledge
for a von Neumann architecture,” in Proc. USENIX Secur. Symp., San Diego, CA, USA, Aug.
2014, pp. 781–796

61. N. Dey, M. Ghosh, A. Chakrabarti, QDLC–The Quantum Development Life Cycle, arXiv

preprint arXiv:2010.08053

62. E. Ben-Sasson, I. Bentov, Y. Horesh, and M. Riabzev, “Scalable, transparent, and post-quantum
secure computational integrity,” IACR Cryptol. ePrint Arch., White Paper 1845, Mar. 2018.
[Online]. Available: https://eprint.iacr.org/2018/046.pdf

63. Byteball’s. Accessed: Nov. 2, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://obyte.org
64. I. Bentov, A. Gabizon, A. Mizrahi. Cryptocurrencies without proof of work. In: International

conference on ﬁnancial cryptography and data security. Springer; 2016. p. 142–57.

Quantum solutions to possible challenges of Blockchain technology

33

65. bitcoin.it. Diﬃculty. https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Diﬃculty
66. MK. Popuri, MH. Gunes. Empirical analysis of crypto currencies. In: Complex networks VII.

Springer; 2016. p. 281–92.

67. H. Wang, Y. Wang, Z. Cao, Z. Li, G. Xiong. An overview of blockchain security analysis. In:

“ China cyber security annual conference. Singapore: Springer; 2018. p. 55–72.

68. L. Alcock, L. Ren. A note on the security of equihash. In: Proceedings of the 2017 on cloud

computing security workshop; 2017. p. 51–5

69. A. Mense, M. Flatscher. Security vulnerabilities in ethereum smart contracts. Proceedings of
the 20th international conference on information integration and web-based applications &
services, 2018. p. 375–80.

70. M. Wohrer, U. Zdun. Smart contracts: security patterns in the ethereum ecosystem and solidity.
In: 2018 international workshop on blockchain oriented software engineering (IWBOSE).
IEEE; 2018. p. 2–8.

71. H. Chen, M. Pendleton, L. Njilla, S. Xu. A survey on ethereum systems security: vulnerabilities,

attacks, and defenses. ACM Comput Surv 2020;53(3):1–43.

72. F. Ma, M. Ren, Y. Fu, M. Wang, H. Li, H. Song, Y. Jiang. Security reinforcement for ethereum

virtual machine. Inf Process Manag 2021;58(4):102565

73. D. Aggarwal, G. Brennen, T. Lee, M. Santha, M. Tomamichel. Quantum attacks on bitcoin,

and how to protect against them. Ledge Oct 2018;3.

74. AM. Antonopoulos. Mastering Bitcoin: unlocking digital cryptocurrencies. O’Reilly Media,

Inc.; 2014.

75. AM. Antonopoulos, G. Wood. Mastering ethereum: building smart contracts and dapps.

O’Reilly Media; 2018.

76. G. Wood, et al. Ethereum: a secure decentralised generalised transaction ledger. Ethereum

project yellow paper 2014;151(2014):1–32.
77. BI. Charts. Ethereum hash rate historical

son/ethereum-hashrate.html.

chart. https://bitinfocharts.com/compari

78. J. Fernando.

“Bitcoin vs.

litecoin: what’s

the diﬀerence?. https://www.investope

dia.com/articles/investing/042015/bitcoin-vs-litecoin-whats-diﬀerence.asp.

79. blockchain.com. Hash rate (bitcoin). https://www.blockchain.com/charts/hash -rate?.
80. BI. Charts. Litecoin hashrate historical chart. https://bitinfocharts.com/compari son/litecoin-

hashrate.html.

81. A. Biryukov, D. Khovratovich. “Equihash: Asymmetric proof-of-work based on the general-

ized birthday problem. Ledge 2017;2:1–30.
82. N. Van Saberhagen. Cryptonote v 2.0. 2013.
83. B. Bünz, J. Bootle, D. Boneh, A. Poelstra, P. Wuille, G. Maxwell. Bulletproofs: short proofs
for conﬁdential transactions and more. In: 2018 IEEE symposium on security and privacy
(SP). IEEE; 2018. p. 315–34.

84. Monero Outreach. Monero’s

randomx. https://www.monerooutreach.org/stories

/Ran-

domX.html.

85. L. Grassi, M. Naya-Plasencia, A. Schrottenloher. Quantum algorithms for the k-xor problem.
In: International conference on the theory and application of cryptology and information
security. Springer; 2018. p. 527–59.

86. DJ. Bernstein, N. Duif, T. Lange, P. Schwabe, BY. Yang. High-speed high-security signatures.

Journal of Cryptographic Engineering Sep 2012;2:77–89.

87. L. Kenny, Towardsdatascience, The blockchain scalability problem the race for visa like

transaction speed, 2019.

88. J. Redman, Bitcoin News ,Bitcoin Gold Whale Allegedly Controls Half the BTG Supply, 2020

