Cybersecurity  of  Renewable  Energy  Data  and 
Applications Using Distributed Ledger Technology 

Umit Cali, Senior Member, IEEE, Murat Kuzlu, Senior Member, IEEE, Manisa Pipattanasomporn, Senior 
Member, IEEE, Onur Elma, Member, IEEE, and Ramesh Reddi 

1 

Abstract—  Renewable  energy  sources  (RES)  are  among  the 
most  popular  emerging  energy  resources  during  the  past  two 
decades.  Many  countries  have  introduced  various  energy  policy 
instruments,  such  as  renewable  energy  certificates  (RECs),  to 
support  the  growth  of  RES.  RECs  are  tradable  non-tangible 
assets, which have a monetary value. Tracking and certification of 
the  origin  of  an  energy  resource  regardless  of  its  type  (e.g.,  a 
conventional  power  plant  or  RES)  is  a  critical  operation.  In 
addition  to  the  certification  of  origin,  trading  transactions  are 
needed to be performed using a secure method. Energy industry 
participants  need  to  secure  the  data  and  applications  related  to 
RECs.  Distributed 
is  a  perfect 
framework that can support such REC functionalities. This paper 
addresses  the  cybersecurity  aspects  in  REC  trading  using 
Blockchain  and  a  distributed  ledger  technology,  considering 
detailed cybersecurity perspectives. 

ledger  technology  (DLT) 

Index  Terms—Renewable  Energy  Certificate,  Distributed 

Ledger  Technology,  NIST  Cybersecurity  Frameworks. 

I.  INTRODUCTION 

Decentralization, decarbonization, and digitalization are the 
three  most  popular  trends  in  the  energy  sector.  Renewable 
energy sources (RES), such as wind and solar generators, have 
been  among 
the  most  well-known  energy  generation 
technologies  during  the  past  two  decades.  RES  can  be 
connected to power grids at the transmission, distribution, and 
customer  levels.  Large-scale  RESs  are  typically  connected  at 
the transmission level, while small-scale and Behind-the-Meter 
(BTM)  RESs  are  connected  at  the  distribution/customer 
systems. Although the primary revenue source of RES is to sell 
clean electricity, other derivative products, which can provide 
additional  benefits  to  project  owners,  are  such  as  renewable 
energy  tax  credits  and  renewable  energy  certificate  (REC) 
trading.  Currently,  participation  in  renewable  energy  markets 
may  require  certificates-of-origin.  These  are,  such  as  GOs  in 
the  EU,  RECs  in  the  U.S.,  and  I-RECs  globally  [1].  A 
blockchain-based  REC  trading  platform  that  is  owned  and 
managed  by  a  consortium  of  market  participants  is  under 
development  by  Power  Ledger,  together  with  Midwest 
Renewable Energy Tracking System (M-RETS) and Clearway 
Energy Group in the U.S. [2]. 

U, Cali  is  with  Department  of  Electric  Power  Engineering,  Norwegian 
University  of  Science  and  Technology,  Trondheim,  Norway,  e-mail: 
umit.cali@ntnu.no. 

M.  Kuzlu  is  with  Department  of  Engineering  Technology,  Old  Dominion 

University, Norfolk, VA, USA, e-mail: mkuzlu@odu.edu. 

M.  Pipattanasomporn  with  Smart  Grid  Research  Unit,  Chulalongkorn 

University, Bangkok, Thailand, e-mail: manisa.pip@chula.ac.th. 

R.  Reddi  with  Cyber  Security  Consultant,  Raleigh,  NC,  USA,  e-mail: 

ramesh.m.reddi@gmail.com. 

for  each  megawatt-hour 

The  study  in  [3]  investigated  renewable  energy  policy 
mechanisms for transforming the electricity industry into a low 
carbon market, focusing on an auction-based mechanism and 
the  trade-off  between  direct  policy  and  integration  costs. 
According to this study, auctions are certainly better than REC 
in terms of costs. These certificates provide detailed proof of 
origin 
renewable 
generation. Blockchain-based applications are being developed 
to manage these systems, such as to document the provenance 
of  renewable  energy  generation,  issue  a  certificate  about  the 
green attributes of each unit of renewable generation, track the 
ownership  and  perform  compliance 
tasks.  Blockchain 
technology  has  been  deployed  in  many  applications  in  the 
electric power sector. These applications include peer-to-peer 
(P2P) electricity transactions, energy financing, sustainability 
attributions, and electric vehicle charging/billing [4]. NIST has 
reviewed the latest blockchain technologies recently [5], [6]. 

(MWh)  of 

to 

The Energy Web Foundation has organized an effort to create 
open-source platforms to deploy blockchain applications in the 
energy sector [7], [8]. Authors in [9] are involved in defining 
cybersecurity standards for blockchain applications for energy 
and utilities. Authors in [10] propose a conceptual architecture 
for an exchange of solar electricity in a neighborhood using the 
Hyperledger blockchain framework. In the other study [11], a 
blockchain-based  conceptual  framework  has  been  proposed, 
which enables a home to autonomously exchange electricity in 
a  neighborhood 
renewable  energy 
locally  balance 
production.  Authors  in  [12]  propose  a  blockchain-based  P2P 
trading scheme that couples energy and carbon markets. This 
can guarantee the security and privacy of the trading platform, 
as  well  as  solve  the  inappropriate  market  clearing  price  and 
carbon  reduction  imbalance.  A  P2P  blockchain-based  energy 
trading platform has been proposed for residential communities 
in  [13]  to  reduce  the  peak  demand  and  electricity  bills.  This 
paper  addresses  the  cybersecurity  aspects  involved  in  the 
blockchain-based framework for renewable energy certificates 
(RECs)  of  origin  and  distributed  energy  resources.  Key 
cybersecurity 
related 
are 
methodologies are described. A use case is also presented that 
handles  cybersecurity  functions  to  secure  REC  data  and 
applications  using  the  National  Institute  of  Standards  and 
Technology (NIST) Smart Grid Cybersecurity Controls.

discussed, 

functions 

and 

 
 
 
 
 
 
II.  ENERGY-RELATED  DLT  USE  CASES  AND  REC 
TRADING 

As  energy  systems  are  becoming  more  decentralized, 
distributed,  and  intelligent,  this  paves  the  way  for  the  next 
generation  of  digitalization  technologies,  such  as  DLT  [19]. 
According  to  [20]  and  [21],  the  most  popular  energy-related 
DLT use cases are the followings: 

•  Peer-to-peer (P2P) electricity trading 
•  EV charging and payment settlement 
•  Labeling and energy provenance 
•  Grid and flexibility management 
•  Wholesale and retail trading (early stages) 
•  REC trading 

P2P electricity trading is the most commonly known energy-
related DLT use case, where excess electricity generated in a 
local market is traded in a neighborhood, and in some cases, 
between neighborhoods. 

from 

large-scale 

Fig.  1  demonstrates  the  segmentation  of  various  energy-
related  DLT  use  cases  on  the  electrical  energy  value  chain, 
power 
starting 
generation/transmission/distribution 
retailers/ 
aggregators to prosumers/consumers. A prosumer is a new type 
of participant in a power market, acting as both a consumer and 
a producer of electrical energy. This is such a house with PV 
panels. In addition to RES, like solar PV, other decentralized 
components,  such  as  electric  vehicles  (EVs)  and  electrical 
energy storage (EES) units, can be integrated into the overall 
system. 

systems, 

energy 

Financial  (monetary),  data,  and  commodity  (electricity) 
transfers  are  three  kinds  of  transaction  types  that  can  be 
observed  in  various  energy-related  DLT  use  cases.  For 
instance,  P2P 
is  operational  under 
trading 
retailer/aggregator and prosumer/consumer domains (local and 
regional  power  markets).  These  are  the  segments  where  (1) 
data,  (2)  financial,  and  (3)  power  transactions  occur.  On  the 
other hand, the REC trading use case may only accommodate 
(1) data and (2) financial transactions. 
1.  Renewable  Energy  Certificates  (RECs)  are  tradable  green 
energy  certificates,  which  are  used  to  prove  the  origin  of 
renewable energy sources (RES), such as wind and solar. Once 
RES  originated  electrons  merge  into  a  public  utility  system 
where generation from other energy resources is also mixed, it 
is impossible to track each electron whether or not it is from 
RES. The best way to track and record these electrons is at the 
origination point. RECs can be sold or traded, acting as legal 
tracking, labeling, and accounting mechanism. Buying RECs is 
supporting  RES  and  clean  energy  resources,  which  reduces 
greenhouse gas emissions. Each REC gets a unique tracking ID 
by  a  certifying  authority  to  make  sure  that  it  is  not  double-
counted. REC can then be traded on an open market. If a REC 
is used by the owner, it is retired and cannot be used anymore. 
There are basically three ways to retire the REC: 
2.  RECs  are  used  by  an  end-user  (prosumer/consumer), 
marketer, generator, or utility based on statutory or regulatory 
requirements. 
3. The RECs associated with a public claim are purchased by 
an end-user. 

2 

4.  Any  component  attributes  of  a  REC  is  purchased  for  any 
purpose. 
When a REC is retired, it cannot be sold, donated, or transferred 
to any other party. The owner may only make claims associated 
with retired RECs. 

•  RECs  are  associated  with  Renewable  Energy  Portfolio 
Standards,  which  are  state  laws  that  require  utilities  to 
generate  a  specific  percentage  of  their  energy  mix  from 
RES. Each REC represents the environmental benefits of 
1 MWh, which is generated by RES. RECs contain data, 
such  as  project  name,  certificate  data,  certificate  type, 
certificate  tracking  ID,  and  renewable  energy  type  [14]. 
The  following  steps  are  currently  essential  to  perform 
conventional REC trading: 

•  RES  generates  electricity  and  sends  the  data  to  a  REC 

tracking system. 

•  Once  a  REC  is  validated,  the  origin  of  electricity  is 

recorded to the system. 

•  Brokers  collect  smaller  RECs  and  form  larger  REC 

blocks. 

•  RECs are forwarded to the buyers’ market. 
•  If  RECs  are  used  by  a  buyer,  the  record  regarding  the 

energy consumption is sent to the system. 
•  Once RECs are used, they need to be retired. 
•  Optionally  initial  buyers  may  prefer  to  swap  the  REC 
with other buyers to generate additional transactions. 
•  The  regulator  of  auditor  audits  annual  records  and 

provides certificates. 

A  DLT-based  REC  trading  platform  can  increase  the 
efficiency  of  the  overall  system  and  reduce  the  costs 
associated  with  unnecessary  third  parties.  Transaction  times 
can also be potentially reduced by using DLT. The following 
steps summarize the operational steps of the DLT-based REC 
trading platform: 

•  RES-originated electricity is labeled digitally on the spot 
where it is generated by using DLT. DLT-based RECs are 
created. 

•  The issued RECs were forwarded to the DLT-based REC 

trading platform. 

•  A REC tracking system records RECs. 
•  RECs are traded in a P2P manner. 
•  Once  a  new  owner  uses  the  REC,  it  is  retired,  and  the 
new  status  of  the  REC  is  recorded  in  the  REC  tracking 
system so that it is not double traded. 

•  If  the  owner  of  a  REC  prefers  to  swap  RECs  to  have 
arbitrage  gain,  it  can  be  forwarded  to  a  new  owner  by 
updating the smart contract. 

•  New  records  are  kept  on  the  REC  tracking  system 
simultaneously. In this case, REC is not retired, and it can 
be reused until it is used. 

•  Post-purchase  data  is  sent  to  the  Auditing/Regulatory 
authority,  where  the  entire  records  about  the  REC 
transactions are kept and annually audited. 
Fig. 2 illustrates a generic conventional renewable energy 
certificate  market,  while  Fig.  3  illustrates  a  generic 
blockchain-based renewable energy certificate. 

 
3 

Fig. 1.  Segmentation of energy-related DLT use cases. 

Fig. 2.  Generic conventional Renewable Energy Certificate market. 

Fig. 3.  Generic blockchain-based Renewable Energy Certificate. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
III.  BLOCKCHAIN  CAPABILITIES  TO  MAKE  A  REC 
SYSTEM CYBER SECURE 

Cybersecurity  advantages  of  the  deployment  of  DLT  in 
blockchains  have  been  the  focus  of  data  security  researchers 
recently [15], [16]. 

A.  Distributed Architecture 

An advantage of the distributed architecture of the blockchain-
based REC system is that it can defer or reduce the impact of a 
cyberattack.  A  REC  system  in  a  blockchain  network  can  be 
permission-based to fortify further. The distributed structure of a 
blockchain automatically provides operational resilience as it has 
no  single  point  of  failure.  With  risk  minimization  through 
multiple nodes, an attack would not compromise the ledger stored 
on intact nodes. In addition, the distributed network architecture 
makes permissioned blockchains more secure because attackers 
need to compromise all or most of the nodes. However, restoring 
the network will experience some latency effects after an attack. 

B.  Consensus Validation 

A consensus mechanism is one of the main security control 
functions  in  a  REC  system.  A  consensus  mechanism  in  a 
blockchain network requires a certain number of nodes to reach 
a  consensus  in  order  to  attach  a  new  block  of  data  in the 
shared  ledger.  A  consensus  mechanism  provides  integrity 
control of the past transactions and the new blocks of data. An 
attempt  to  hack  the  ledger  would  require  a  consensus 
mechanism  that  can  manipulate  the  consensus  validation 
process to tamper with the ledger. In a permissioned blockchain 
network,  these  attacks  may  be  prevented  easily  if  the 
blockchain network contains enough nodes with a significant 
degree of consensus. 

C.  Encryption 

A permissioned blockchain network employs multiple types 
of  encryptions  to  provide  multilayered  protection  against 
cybersecurity  threats.  Asymmetric  key  cryptography  or  a 
public/private key encryption are widely used to meet security 
requirements.  In  addition,  a  combined  cryptographic  hashing 
and digital signature can be used to encrypt the linked lists or 
blocks. 

D.  Transparency 

identical  copy  of 

Transparency  provides  another 

level  of  cybersecurity 
protection  in  a  blockchain  network,  where  each  participant 
has  an 
ledger.  Several  security 
the 
management processes, such as real-time auditing or real-time 
monitoring by other participants or by a third party with limited 
access,  can  be  conducted.  With  these  security  processes  and 
proper  implementation  of  risk  management  and  compliance 
controls,  identification  of  vulnerabilities  and  cybersecurity 
threats can be accomplished easily. 

4 

E.  Administrative Risk Controls 

RES systems are hosted on systems that need to comply with 
regulations from authorities, such as North American   Electric 
Reliability  Corporation  (NERC),  and  comply  with standards, 
e.g.,  National  Institute  of  Standards  and  Technology (NIST) 
Smart  grid  cybersecurity  controls  [17].  In  addition,  some  of 
these  systems  are  launched  on  a  cloud-based  platform that 
already  implements  robust  cybersecurity  controls  across 
different  layers  of  its  applications.  Some  of  the  NIST 
cybersecurity requirements in a RES environment are discussed 
below. Specifically, the cases where REC system transactions 
involved are highlighted. 

IV.  CYBERSECURITY  REQUIREMENTS  FOR  DER 
ENVIRONMENTS 

Based  on  NIST’s  and  Electric  Power  Research  Institute 
(EPRI)’s cybersecurity requirements for the DER environment, 
the REC process that occurs in that environment is identified 
through  [18].  Fig.  4  illustrates  the  hierarchical  DER  system 
architecture.  This  REC  process  occurs  at  different  levels. 
Cybersecurity  requirements  differ  among  these  levels.  Key 
levels to note are at the DER generation storage level (Level1) 
and the Distribution level (Level 4). 
The cybersecurity requirements for the DER environment can 
be described hierarchically, as follows: 

•  Level 1 Autonomous DER Generation and Storage 
•  Level 2 Facilities DER Energy Management 
•  Level 3 Utility and RES Operational Communications 
•  Level 4 Distribution Utility Operational Analysis 
•  Level 5 Transmission and Market Operations 

Level 1 Autonomous DER Generation and Storage is the initial 
level where electricity from RES is generated and fed back to 
the  utility  grid.  These  systems  may  include  solar  PV,  EV 
charging  apparatus,  battery  storage,  diesel  generator,  and 
controller.  RECs  need  to  be  recorded  and  tracked  from  this 
origin of certification. 
Level 2 Facilities DER Energy  Management  is  the  next level, 
where a Facility DER Management System (FDEMS) manages 
Level 1 DER systems. From the RECs  point  of view, they act 
as aggregators of RECs. The aggregated REC  information  is 
then passed to higher levels. 
Level 3 Utility and RES Operational Communications  are used 
to control DER systems. The systems at this level function  as 
REC tracking systems pictured above. 
Level 4 Distribution Utility Operational Analysis applications 
manage DER systems that get instructions from the distribution 
level. These systems interact with both transmission and DER 
levels.  REC  tracking  systems interface to this level. 
Level  5  Transmission  and  Market  Operations  is  the highest 
level,  and  key  players, 
large  utilities,  Regional 
like 
Transmission Organizations (RTOs), and Independent System 
Operators (ISOs), exchange information with REC generating 
and tracking systems at lower levels. This is done through the 
REC  trading  platform  that  does  brokerage  and  aggregation 
tasks of the REC management system. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 

[7]  Sam H et al., “Energy Web Chain: Accelerating the Energy Transition 
with an Open-Source Decentralized Blockchain Platform,” Energy Web 
Foundation Publication, Oct 2018. 

[8]  Peter  B  et  al.,  “Concept  Brief:  The  Decentralized  Autonomous  Area 
Agent (D3A) Market Model”, Energy Web Foundation Publication, 2018. 
[9]  Claudio  Lima,  ”Developing  Open  and  Interoperable  DLT/Blockchain 
Standards,”  IEEE  Blockchain  Standards  Working  Group,  Computer 
(IEEE Computer Society), Jan 2019. 

[10]  M.  Pipattanasomporn,  S.  Rahman  and  M.  Kuzlu,  ”Blockchain-based 
Solar  Electricity  Exchange:  Conceptual  Architecture  and  Laboratory 
Setup,”  2019  IEEE  Power  and  Energy  Society  Innovative  Smart  Grid 
Technologies Conference (ISGT), Washington, DC, USA, 2019, pp. 1-5. 
[11]  P.  Xie  et  al.,  ”Conceptual  Framework  of  Blockchain-based  Electricity 
Trading  for  Neighborhood  Renewable  Energy,”  2018  2nd  IEEE 
Conference  on  Energy  Internet  and  Energy  System  Integration  (EI2), 
Beijing, 2018, pp. 1-5. 

[12]  W. Hua and H. Sun, ”A Blockchain-Based Peer-to-Peer Trading Scheme 
Coupling  Energy  and  Carbon  Markets,”  2019  International  Conference 
on  Smart  Energy  Systems  and  Technologies  (SEST),  Porto,  Portugal, 
2019, pp. 1-6. 

[13]  S. Saxena, H. Farag, A. Brookson, H. Turesson, and H. Kim, ”Design and 
Field Implementation of Blockchain Based Renewable Energy Trading 
in  Residential  Communities,”  2019  2nd  International  Conference  on 
Smart  Grid  and  Renewable  Energy  (SGRE),  Doha,  Qatar,  2019,  pp. 
1-6. 

[14]  Federal Renewable Energy Certificate (FERC), ”Guide Office of Federal 

Sustainability Council on Environmental Quality,” June 2016. 

[15]  Iuon-Chang Lin and Tzu-Chun Liao, “A Survey of Blockchain Security 
Issues and Challenges,” International Journal of Network Security, Vol 
19, No 5, PP 653-659, Sep 2017. 

[16]  Enisa, ”Distributed Ledger Technology and Cybersecurity,” Dec 2016. 
[17]  SGIP Cyber Security Working Group,” Smart Grid Cyber Security: Vol 

1-3, NISTIR-7628, Aug 2010. 

[18]  A. Lee et al., “Cybersecurity for DER systems,” EPRI/NESCOR Report 

2013. 

[19]  Cali  U,  Fifield  A.,  ”Towards  the  decentralized  revolution  in  energy 
systems  using  blockchain  technology,”  International  Journal  of  Smart 
Grid and Clean Energy. 2019;8(3):245-56. 

[20]  Cali  U,  Lima  C.  Energy  Informatics  Using  the  Distributed  Ledger 
Technology and Advanced Data Analytics. In Cases on Green Energy and 
Sustainable Development 2020 (pp. 438-481). 

[21]  U. Cali, C. Lima, X. Li, and Y. Ogushi, ”DLT/Blockchain in Transactive 
Energy Use Cases Segmentation and Standardization Framework,” 2019 
IEEE  PES  Transactive  Energy  Systems  Conference 
(TESC), 
Minneapolis, MN, USA, 2019, pp. 1-5. 

Fig. 4.  The hierarchical DER system architecture 

V.  CONCLUSION 

This  study  investigated  the  cybersecurity  aspects  of  DLT- 
based REC data and applications by using the commonly used 
conventions. Tracking, certification of the origin of the energy 
resource,  accounting,  and  auditing  are  the  main  applications 
that  manage  the  REC  data.  The  cybersecurity  requirements 
to secure the REC data and applications were mapped  by using 
the  NIST  Smart  Grid  Cybersecurity  Controls.  NIST 
Cybersecurity Frameworks  are  further  used  in  suggesting a 
cybersecurity maturity model for securing  the  REC  data and 
applications.  According  to  the  finding  of  this  study,  DLT 
technology  is  compatible  with  the  existing  cybersecurity 
frameworks,  but  the  adjustment  of  the  overall  system  shall 
be  mapped  very  precisely  if  the  fully  functional  DLT-based 
REC trading platform is to be deployed on the existing power 
market and system. It is recommended to map the proposed use 
case  at  a  higher  resolution  by  considering  the  corresponding 
cybersecurity 
communication, 
power 
standardization frameworks before running operational tests. 

system, 

and 

REFERENCES 

[1]  ECOHZ,  “Guarantees  Of  Origin 

(GOS),” 

[Online].  Available: 

https://www.ecohz.com/renewable-energy-solutions/guarantees-of- 
origin/. 

[2]  American Public Power Association, “Blockchain REC trading platform 
  Available: 

set 
https://www.publicpower.org/periodical/article/blockchain-rec-trading- 
platform-set-launch-us. 

  U.S.,” 

[Online]. 

launch 

the 

to 

in 

[3]  I. MacGill, A. Bruce, and S. Young,  ”Renewable  energy  auctions versus 
Green Certificate Schemes — lower prices but greater integration costs?,” 
2019  IEEE  Power  and  Energy  Society  General  Meeting  (PESGM), 
Atlanta, GA, USA, 2019, pp. 1-5. 

[4]  David  L  et  al.,  “Applying  Blockchain  Technology  to  Electric  Power 
Systems,” Council on Foreign Relations Discussion paper, Jul 2018. 
[5]  Dylan Y et al., ”Blockchain Technology Overview,” NISTIR-8202, Oct 

2018. 

[6]  Elain  B  et  al.,  ”Guideline  for  Using  Cryptographic  Standards  in  the 
Federal Government: Cryptographic Mechanisms,” NIST SP 800-175B, 
Aug 2016. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
