1
2
0
2

t
c
O
6

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
4
9
5
2
0
.
0
1
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Empowering Citizens by a Blockchain-Based Robinson List∗

Albenzio Cirillo
Fondazione Ugo Bordoni
acirillo@fub.it

Francesco Mogavero
Fondazione Ugo Bordoni
fmogavero.ext@fub.it

Vito Dalena
Fondazione Ugo Bordoni
vdalena@fub.it

Antonio Mauro†
Fondazione Ugo Bordoni
amauro@fub.it

Diego Pennino
Roma Tre University - Eng. Dept.
pennino@ing.uniroma3.it

Maurizio Pizzonia
Roma Tre University - Eng. Dept.
pizzonia@ing.uniroma3.it

Andrea Vitaletti
Sapienza University of Rome
vitaletti@diag.uniroma1.it

Marco Zecchini†
Sapienza University of Rome
zecchini@diag.uniroma1.it

ABSTRACT
A Robinson list protects phone subscribers against commercial
spam calls. Its least basic functionality is to collect the denial of the
subscribers to be contacted by market operators. Nowadays, Robin-
son lists run as centralised services, which implies that citizens
should trust third parties for the management of their choices.

In this paper, we show a design that allows us to realise a Robin-
son list as a decentralised service. Our work leverages the experi-
ence developed by Fondazione Ugo Bordoni as the manager of the
Italian Robinson list. We present a general solution and a proof-
of-concept (PoC) adopting the Algorand technology. We evaluate
the performances of our PoC in terms of its scalability and of the
latency perceived by the involved actors. We also discuss aspects
related to identity management and privacy.

1 INTRODUCTION
User contact information is precious gold to marketing strategists.
For this reason, users are now exposed to an unprecedented num-
ber of unwanted calls on their phones (spam calls) for marketing
purposes, or even to attempts to defraud them by gaining their
confidence (scam calls). To better understand the dimension of
this problem, we focus on some of the figures reported in [2] that
collects statistics from several sources:

• In 2019, roughly 40 percent of all calls in the US were scams.

(Source: First Orion)

• Americans lost nearly $19.7 billion from phone scams in
2020 — more than double the amount lost in 2019. (Source:
Truecaller)

• 44% of Americans received spam calls related to COVID-19

in Q1 of 2020.(Source Truecaller)

• The number of spam calls jumped over 300 percent world-

wide between 2017 and 2018.

One way to tackle the problem of unwanted calls is to block
calls on our mobile phone [3]. Call blockers have also been rec-
ommended by governments in the recent pandemic emergency
regarding COVID19 [4], to prevent scams or other threats for cit-
izens. However, such apps will often not distinguish legitimate

∗A preliminary version of this work appeared at CryBlock ’20 [1].
†These authors provided a fundamental contribution in the implementation of the
PoC

survey research calls from telemarketing [5]. Moreover, call block-
ers are often eluded by spammers, as they usually have a large set
of caller IDs to reach the customer, so blocking a single ID is not
effective, most of the times.

We need a system capable to protect users and, at the same time,
to allow marketing operators to reach legitimately a vast audience
of informed and aware consumers. Robinson Lists are the standard
answer to this need. It is an opt-out list of people who do not wish
to receive marketing communications. Nowadays, Robinson lists
are centralised services existing in a number of countries, such as
UK, Canada, Australia, and Italy, just to mention a few.

The Italian Robinson list is called Registro Pubblico delle Oppo-
sizioni (RPO) [6] and it is managed, since 2011, by Fondazione Ugo
Bordoni (FUB). Today RPO manages 1.5 millions records, but, with
the next introduction, in the near future, of the management of
mobile phone numbers, it is expected to be required to handle at
least 100 millions records. In the work described by this paper, the
experience of FUB was fundamental for the identification of the
requirements of a typical Robinson list and of realistic workloads.
Motivations. Nowadays, Robinson lists are managed as cen-
tralised services. The purpose of this work is to design and evaluate
a decentralised Robinson list on top of blockchain technologies.
The main positive effect of this approach is to empower citizens
providing them with direct control of their options. Moreover, in-
stitutions that operate Robinson lists should aim to reduce their
involvement in management of user options as much as possible,
in order to lower their risks and costs. Indeed, cryptographic tech-
niques adopted by blockchains natively provide tools that easily
solve possible controversy between subscribers and operators. In
this perspective, in this work we focus on the most critical and
urgent function to decentralise, namely the ability of citizen to
autonomously opt-in/out.

Structure of the paper. In this paper, we present a solution for
a decentralised Robinson list. We first formally describe require-
ments on the basis of the experience on the Italian RPO (Section 3).
Then, we describe our solution of blockchain-based Robinson list
in abstract terms and identify the features that we require from the
underlying blockchain technology (Section 4). We recognise that
the Algorand technology complies with the identified requirements
and base on it our PoC realisation. We describe the architecture of

 
 
 
 
 
 
our PoC and some of the most interesting technical details (Sec-
tion 5). We exploit our PoC to perform an experimental evaluation
of our approach that shows results that are comparable with the
centralised solution currently deployed for the Italian RPO (Sec-
tion 6). We also discuss privacy and identity management aspects
(Section 7) and future work (Section 8).

2 STATE OF THE ART
Robinson lists are traditionally realised by a centralised authority
that is trusted by subjects and operators [7]. The scientific litera-
ture regarding systems supporting Robinson lists is very limited.
Indeed, the technical aspects of a centralised Robinson list are not
particularly challenging.

Blockchain applications for managing user consents have been
already considered for other application scenarios (e.g., medical,
banking, IoT stream data).

The Dwarna system described in [8] stores research partners’
consent for bio-banking process in a blockchain to create an im-
mutable audit trail of research partners’ consent changes. The work
described in [9] describes the design and implementation of a smart
contract for consent-driven data sharing. In this context, service
providers can share data about costumers among each other and
validate each other’s permissions to share it according to costumers’
consent. Both works are realised on Hyperledger [10], a permis-
sioned blockchain solution. The work described in [11] proposes, a
user-centric solution that allows data subjects to easily control con-
sents regarding access to their personal data in an IoT ecosystem
and exercise their rights in accordance with the GDPR regulation.
However, a data subject and a data controller cannot publish their
digital consents with the corresponding signatures directly on a
blockchain but a centralised platform takes care of this task. In our
solution, we aim to let each subscriber managing its own consent,
autonomously.

Essentially, Robinson lists allow a subject to associate an at-
tribute (the option) to an identifier (a telephone number). This
problem is strictly related to the one faced by identity manage-
ment systems (IdM). The main purpose of an IdM is to bind an
identifier of a subject (usually a public key) with attributes, claims,
entitlements, or properties of that subject. IdMs are standardized
by ISO [12] and there regulations about them (e.g., eIDAS [13]).
The idea of realising IdM on top of blockchains is a step toward
making IdMs independent from a specific organization. The Self-
Sovereign Identity (SSI) approach, surveyed here [14], envisions
solutions in which subjects should be able to create and control
their own identity, without relying on any centralised authority.
In this context, public/permissionless blockchains are fundamental
tools. W3C has ongoing efforts to standardize the building blocks of
SSI. Decentralised Identifiers (DIDs) [15] are controlled by subjects
and possibly securely stored in blockchains. DIDs are linked with
DID documents where attributes are listed. Certain attributes are
associated to Verifiable Claims/Credentials (VC) [16] which allow
the binding between the identifier and the attributes.

3 MODELLING A ROBINSON LIST: ACTORS,

USE CASES, AND REQUIREMENTS

In this section, we briefly outline the main actors and functions of
the current centralised RPO that we consider as a common accepted

practice for a Robinson list. Then, we define the main requirements
to support a decentralised Robinson list focusing on the decentrali-
sation of the most critic functions for citizens empowerment and
disintermediation.

We model a Robinson list as a collection of records ⟨tel, opt⟩,
where 𝑡𝑒𝑙 is the telephone number of the subscriber and 𝑜𝑝𝑡 can
assume the values 𝐼 𝑁 , if the subscriber opts-in to receive unsolicited
calls on 𝑡𝑒𝑙 from direct marketing operators, and 𝑂𝑈𝑇 , vice-versa.
The actors interacting with the Robinson list are the following:
Subscribers A subscriber is the owner of one or more tele-
phone numbers and consequently the owner of some records
in the Robinson list, where options associated with telephone
numbers are recorded.

Attestator The attestator is a single actor that is responsible
for the creation of the Robinson list, for binding subscribers
to their telephone numbers, and for pruning the phone num-
ber lists received from operators (as described below).
Operators An operator is interested in obtaining the options
associated with a list of telephone numbers. Actually, it pro-
vides a list of telephone numbers to the organization oper-
ating the Robinson list and receives as output a pruned list
where the numbers of the subscribers who opted-out have
been removed.

Therefore, four fundamental functions must be supported by system
realizing a functional Robinson list, which are listed in the first
column of Table 1.

In the current RPO, all these functions are centrally performed by
the attestator (i.e., FUB). For opt-in/out and pruning operations, the
attestator receives requests from subscribers and marketing opera-
tors, respectively, and acts as a trusted intermediary for accessing
the Robinson list.

3.1 Towards a Decentralised RPO
In formally listing the requirements, we primarily focused on fully
decentralising opting-in/out operations, giving full control to the
subscribers without relying on intermediaries. This guarantees the
principle of citizen empowerment that is a motivating argument of
our approach. Table 1 summarises our choices regarding decentral-
isation.

In the current proof-of-concept (described in Section 5), the
other functions are left centralised leaving the investigation of
their possible decentralisation as future work. This choice is also
motivated by the following considerations.

We do believe that it is practical and acceptable that the creation
of the assets in the Robinson list is centralised, provided that their
management (i.e. opt-in/opt-out choice) is fully decentralised. To
the best of our knowledge, centralised certification is the only
legal method that is currently accepted by Public Bodies to bind
subscribers to their phone numbers. We further discuss this problem
and possible approaches in Section 7.

About the decentralisation of the pruning function, we consider
it as an important part of our future research work (see Section 8).
The following is a formal list of the requirements of our decen-

tralised Robinson list.

(1) Each subscriber can own any number of records ⟨tel, opt⟩

(for distinct values of tel).

Empowering Citizens by a Blockchain-Based Robinson List

Function
Robinson List Creation
Binding of subscribers to phone numbers
Choice of opt-in/opt-out by subscribers
Pruning lists requested by operators

Centralisation Actor performing the operation

Centralised
Centralised
Decentralised
Centralised

Attestator
Attestator
Subscriber
Attestator

Table 1: Functions and decentralisation choices.

(2) The owner of a record should be able to switch the opt value.
(3) An operator should be able to query the list for the options

related to specific values of tel.

(4) There should be the possibility to equip the result of a query
(or of a pruning operation) with a succinct cryptographic
proof, to be shown to anyone, that the result of the query is
correct.

(5) No single actor (comprising the attestator) or small colluded
set of actors, should be able to independently change records
belonging to others without the consent of the owner.

It is worth noting that Requirements 1, 2 and 3 are also met
by centralised Robinson lists requiring trust in a central authority.
Vice versa, Requirements 4 and 5 are normally not met by current
centralised approaches.

Requirement 5 naturally lead the design toward a blockchain-
based approach. However, a simple solution may not met Require-
ment 4. Consider for example the trivial solution in which two
special addresses IN and OUT are present and the a subscriber
opted for IN or OUT by performing a transaction on the respective
address. A proof of the choice of a subscriber at a certain time
requires to analyse the history of the blockchain back in time, up to
the last choice performed by the subscriber. This is not a succinct
proof.

Essentially, the problem is that the options are not encoded
in the current state of the blockchain. In Section 4, we describe a
solution that does encode options in the blockchain state. This make
fulfilling of Requirement 4 much easier to implement, especially on
technologies that explicitly store the states of the accounts.

4 SOLUTION
Motivated by Requirements 2, 4 and 5, we realise Robinson List
on a blockchain technology. There are a large number of different
blockchains, showing different trade-offs between supported fea-
tures and scalability. In devising our solution, we aimed at requiring
a blockchain with a set of features that allow us to fulfill the require-
ments introduced in Section 3, and supporting high scalability, in
view of the future management of a large number of records (about
100Mln considering the italian RPO alone). In addition to standard
blockchain characteristics, we require the blockchain technology
to support the following features:

• The blockchain should support the creation and transfer of
custom tokens to represents IN and OUT options made by
subscribers.

• At each instant in time, the choice of a subscriber is either
IN or OUT. As will be clear in the following, we need to
atomicly swap a token IN with a token OUT. For this reason

the blockchain should support grouping of transactions so
that the whole group is either committed or not.

• The blockchain should support smart contracts to manage cit-
izen choices by an algorithmic governance. In this paper, we
are interested in proving that even stateless smart contracts
– the less demanding ones – are enough for our purposes.

Custom tokens are supported on many blockchains, either na-
tively [17] or by using proper smart contracts (see for example [18]).
In our solution, tokens are used to store the current opt-in or opt-out
of a subscriber without relying on smart contracts with persistent
state.

In section 5, we present our prototype based on the Algorand

technology, which provides all these features.

We now describe our solution. Subscribers are identified by one
or more public keys and each telephone number is associated to
a public key. How this association can be carried out is discussed
in Section 7. Private keys are secretly held by the corresponding
subscriber. The attestator is also associated with a key pair. The
binding between the public key 𝑝𝑘 and the telephone number 𝑡𝑒𝑙 is
stored on chain. We decided to encrypt those element so that only
the key’s owner and the attestator can view the values in clear text.
This decision was made to preserve citizen’s privacy, by masking
the binding of his/her private key to the phone number.

The binding information, namely the pair (𝑝𝑘, 𝑡𝑒𝑙), is hidden
into the payload of a transaction that the attestator sends to the
user. The masking technique consists in the following steps:

(1) the attestator generates 𝑟𝑘 , a random 128 bit AES symmetric

key and a random 128 bit initialisation vector 𝑖𝑣𝑘 ;

(2) The attestator uses 𝑟𝑘 and 𝑖𝑣𝑘 to encrypt the pair (𝑝𝑘, 𝑡𝑒𝑙) by
using AES-CBC (Cipher-Block-Chaining) scheme, obtaining
𝑒𝑏𝑘 ;

(3) 𝑟𝑘 ||𝑖𝑣𝑘 is encrypted with user’s public key and attestator’s
public key, producing the values 𝑟𝑘𝑢 and 𝑟𝑘𝑎, respectively
(these encryptions are performed using the PyNaCl library [19,
20] and the X25519 elliptic curve [21]);
(4) The triple ⟨𝑒𝑏𝑘, 𝑟𝑘𝑢, 𝑟𝑘𝑎⟩ is written on-chain.

Smart contracts are associated with an identifier that, for many
aspects, plays the same role of the public key. Hence, for homo-
geneity, we call it the public key of the smart contract and, when
we generically refer to public keys, we intend also to include smart
contracts identifiers.

In our solution, we define two custom class of tokens named IN
and OUT. We call IN tokens and OUT tokens the individual units
of IN and OUT, respectively. In the system, the global number of
IN tokens and of OUT tokens is always the same. To streamline
description, we refer to IN as the opposite of OUT and vice versa.

Each public key is associated with a wallet that holds tokens.
Public keys are used to identify source and destination wallets in
transactions involving tokens. In our solution, the tokens are kept
in smart contract wallets. For simplicity, we also say that the smart
contract contains or stores the tokens.

Each telephone number 𝑡 in the Robinson list is associated with a
corresponding smart contract 𝑈𝑡 . The system is built to enforce the
following option constraint: for each telephone numbers 𝑡, the wallet
𝑈𝑡 contains either only one IN token or only one OUT token. 𝑈𝑡 has
been designed to avoid the exchange of tokens between subscribers
that can lead to the violation of the option constraint. We can
express three possible states for each telephone number: opted in,
opted out, or no option expressed. The third state is represented
by the absence of 𝑡 and 𝑈𝑡 in the system. In our approach there
exists another smart contract 𝐶 that is in charge of realizing the
switch of the token stored in 𝑈𝑡 with its opposite, while fulfilling
the option constraint. It also stores all tokens that are not currently
stored by any 𝑈𝑡 contract and that may be needed in future switch
operations.

Intuitively, a switch operation is performed as follows. Consider
a telephone number 𝑡 with smart contract 𝑈𝑡 containing an 𝑂 token
(where 𝑂 is either IN or OUT). The switch operation consists of
the following two transfers: (1) transfer the 𝑂 token currently in
𝑈𝑡 to 𝐶 and (2) transfer an 𝑂 token (where 𝑂 is the opposite of 𝑂)
from 𝐶 to 𝑈𝑡 . The above transfers are asked by the subscriber of
𝑡 as a group to be atomically executed. Smart contracts perform
the following checks: 𝑈𝑡 checks that group is signed by the private
key of 𝑡 (i.e., it come from the owner of 𝑡), 𝐶 checks that the two
transfers are consistent with respect to the option constraint. Note
that, for security reason, all 𝑈𝑡 ’s should conform to a template of
smart contract in which the only changed part is related to the
public key of 𝑡 that the contract use to verify the source of the
accepted transactions. We call this the standard template.

We now formally describe the steps involved in the use cases

that initialise or change the content of our Robinson list.

Robinson list initialisation. To initialise our decentralised Robin-

son list the following operations are performed.

(1) The attestator generates its public/private key pair.
(2) The attestator creates IN and OUT tokens in a quantity which
is supposed to be much larger than the amount of telephone
numbers to be managed.

(3) The attestator deploys a smart contract 𝐶.
(4) The attestator transfers all IN tokens to 𝐶.

Addition of a new telephone number. To add a new telephone
number 𝑡 to the Robinson list, the following operations are per-
formed.

(1) The subscriber of 𝑡 creates a new public key 𝑘𝑡 and the
corresponding private key. It also creates, the corresponding
𝑈𝑡 according to the standard template.

(2) The subscriber asks the attestator to associate 𝑡 with public
key 𝑘𝑡 (see Section 7) and to add 𝑡 to the Robinson list.
(3) The attestator verifies the association of 𝑘𝑡 with 𝑡 (see Sec-
tion 7) and that 𝑈𝑡 conforms to the standard template. If
checks are successful, the attestator sends one OUT token to

𝑈𝑡 . This represents a default opt-out state for a newly listed
telephone number.

Option switching. To switch the option for a telephone num-
ber 𝑡 whose smart contract 𝑈𝑡 contains an 𝑂 token, the following
operations are performed.

(1) The subscriber of 𝑡 prepares two transaction 𝜏 and 𝜏 ′ as

follows:
• 𝜏 transfers one unit of 𝑂 from 𝑈𝑡 to 𝐶, and
• 𝜏 ′ transfers one unit of 𝑂 from 𝐶 to 𝑈𝑡 .

(2) The subscriber bundles 𝜏 and 𝜏 ′ into a group to be atomi-
cally executed, signs the whole group with the private key
associated with 𝑡 and broadcasts it.

(3) Within the execution of the consensus algorithm, both 𝐶

and 𝑈𝑡 are executed:
• 𝐶 checks that the two transfers are to and from the same
𝑈𝑡 and that transfers are for single opposite tokens (to
force the option constraint),

• 𝑈𝑡 checks that the request comes from 𝑡.
If checks are successful and regular balance constraints are
fulfilled, both transactions are committed.

5 PROOF OF CONCEPT
In this section we present the implementation of a proof-of-concept
(PoC) [22] of the decentralised Robinson List solution described in
Section 4. The main goal of the PoC is to show how the proposed
solution can be implemented on a blockchain technology and to
provide a first evaluation on the performance of this implementa-
tion.

5.1 Technical components
The PoC has been developed on Algorand [23] because it supports
all the necessary features to implemented our solution as discussed
in Section 4 and it is one of the solutions claiming to address the
blockchain trilemma [24, 25], thus providing state-of-the-art per-
formance in terms of latency and scalability.

Its inter-block time is very short: about 5 seconds.
To support the reader in a better understanding of our PoC, we
briefly describe how Algorand implements smart contracts, tokens
management and atomically committed transactions.

Algorand Standard Assets (ASA) are standard mechanisms for
creating, managing, transferring and destroying digital tokens (or
assets). In Algorand, an account should explicitly allow their use to
be able to receive them.

Algorand Smart Contracts (ASC) are small programs that serve
various functions on the blockchain and operate at layer-1. Smart
contracts are separated into two main categories, stateless and state-
ful. The language for coding ASC is named Transaction Execution
Approval Language (TEAL). Stateless ASC can validates and signs
transactions and it can be used as a Contract Account. A Contract
Account looks like any end-user account except that it validates
spending transactions according to its code logic.

Recently, Algorand released stateful ASC that provide local vari-
ables. These variables could be used to store the citizens choices
thus providing an alternative way of implementing our solution.
One contribution of our PoC is to prove that even simple stateless
ASC are enough for our goal.

Empowering Citizens by a Blockchain-Based Robinson List

Atomic Transfers are indivisible and irreducible batch operations
where a group of transactions are submitted as a unit and all trans-
actions in the batch either pass or fail. In our PoC, Atomic Transfers
handled by a suitable ASC are employed to swap an 𝐼 𝑁 asset for an
𝑂𝑈𝑇 one without the involvement of any intermediary and vice
versa.

5.2 Architecture
Now we formally describe the architecture of our PoC.

There is one attestator and several subscribers, each one with
only one telephone number associated with its public key. This
association is kept encrypted in the blockchain (see Section 4) and
cached in a database by the attestator. In the current implementa-
tion, the 𝑈𝑡 contract has not been implemented and the IN/OUT
token is kept directly in the subscriber account. We recall that the
main goal of the PoC is to evaluate feasibility and performance,
and the 𝑈𝑡 contract, whose main purpose is to achieve a higher
level of security, has a very minor impact on that and it will be
consequently implemented in future releases.

Figure 1 shows a simplified architecture of the system. The whole
interaction with the Algorand blockchain back-end is performed
by a web application developed with the Django framework.

The attestator set-ups the system generating all the 𝐼 𝑁 and 𝑂𝑈𝑇
assets. Then, it deploys the Contract Account 𝐶 and explicitly allow
𝐶 to receive both 𝐼 𝑁 and 𝑂𝑈𝑇 tokens. The set-up ends with an
asset transfer transaction of all 𝐼 𝑁 tokens from the attestator to 𝐶.
During the initialisation of the subscriber, the attestator binds
the public key of the subscriber to its mobile phone (see Sections 4
and 7). The subscriber explicitly enables reception of 𝐼 𝑁 and 𝑂𝑈𝑇
tokens in its wallet, then, if the binding is successful, the attestator
transfers one 𝑂𝑈𝑇 token to the subscriber wallet. For the sake of
simplicity, current PoC assumes that binding is always successful.
The initialisation is then completed transferring one 𝑂𝑈𝑇 token
from 𝐶 to the subscriber wallet. This is done at the first access of
the user into the web interface.

The subscriber can swap the 𝑂𝑈𝑇 token with an 𝐼 𝑁 one by exe-
cuting an Atomic Transfer with 𝐶. The TEAL code of 𝐶 is designed
to approve the atomic transfer only if it consists of two transactions:
(a) 𝑂𝑈𝑇 token from the subscriber’s wallet to 𝐶 and (b) 𝐼 𝑁 token
from 𝐶 to the subscriber’s wallet. A symmetric atomic transaction
lets the user swap the 𝐼 𝑁 token with the 𝑂𝑈𝑇 one.

6 EVALUATION
The proposed solution is functionally effective, as it proves that a
users can express their choice of being contacted on their personal
phone numbers on a distributed and decentralised ledger.

Nevertheless, in order to be actually employed, the solution
should be comparable to the current centralised one in terms of
costs and performance. In fact, while a blockchain solution provides
an evident improvement in terms of resilience to network failures
or data integrity and traceability, it might suffer of significant issues
in terms of scalability, bandwidth, latency and operational costs, in
particular in view of a possible public/permissionless deployment.
The purpose of this section is to quantitatively measure to what
extent our approach can actually successfully compete with the

Figure 1: Architecture of the proof-of-concept

current Italian centralised solution for the italian RPO service (see
Section 1). Our testing activity was carried on running our PoC on
a VM on a linux OS with 40GB of disk and 4GB of RAM.

The environment has been implemented on docker and runs in

three containers.

Web. The presentation layer.
DB. The identity database (owned by the attestator) that caches
the binding between the public keys (i.e., the blockchain
addresses) and the telephone number of the subscriber.
Algorand-Node. The Algorand node realising a private net-

work.

We evaluated the performance of our prototype in terms of time
consumption, investigating the different phases whose subscription
process is made of. In the decentralised scenario, the subscription
event is composed of 5 different phases:

• Create Wallet - subscriber’s wallet, that should contain the

OUT or IN token, is created;

• Init Wallet - the attestator transfers a minimal amount of
coins to the wallet, to enable the subscriber to perform trans-
actions on the blockchain;

• Binding - the attestator binds the public key of the sub-
scriber to its mobile phone writing it on the blockchain in
an encrypted form (as described in Section 4) and in clear
text in the local identity database;

• Opt-In ASA - the subscriber explicitly enables reception of

𝐼 𝑁 and 𝑂𝑈𝑇 tokens in its wallet;

• Transfer ASA - the attestator transfers the 𝑂𝑈𝑇 token to

the subscriber’s wallet.

RPO currently manages over 1.5 million of users’ fixed phone
numbers and, starting from 2021, should be able to support over
100 million of users’ phone numbers, as also mobile numbers will
be included.

Thanks to the data provided by FUB, responsible for managing
RPO’s infrastructure, we were able to analyse the history of users’

OUTOUTAttestatorSubscriberContract AccountCINOUTswapswapswapSubscriberSubscriberWeb AppWeb AppWeb AppWeb AppININAlgorand6.1 Pruning Test
Currently, the main service offered by the current centralised RPO
consists in filtering a list of telephone numbers provided by a mar-
keting operator, in order to return them the same list but without
the opted-out subscribers. This operation is also known as pruning.
We performed a pruning test operation on a list of 10’000 mobile
phone numbers. Indeed, 10’000 numbers is the mean amount of
phone numbers for which the telemarketing operators request the
pruning activity to RPO.
Our decentralised RPO can operate the filtering process in two
different modes:

• by looking on chain for the opt status associated with a

specific public key bound to a phone number;

• by enquiring a private database that acts as a cache for the
binding information on chain, similarly to what happens in
the current centralised implementation.

The former solution is preferable because it would prevent RPO
to maintain a private database with sensitive information, lowering
the risks in case of malicious attacks. Nevertheless, as the binding
between the public key and the phone number has been encrypted
on the chain, and considering that the phone number is the only
input to the filtering process, the first solution would also require to
exhaustively look into the whole blockchain, decrypting the binding
transactions, till finding the desired phone number and associated
public key, which is evidently more expensive than performing a
search over a private indexed database.

The difference in cost between the two methods has been evalu-
ated by comparing 3 different pruning tests, producing the following
results: As expected, the pruning operation performed without a

Iteration Blockchain only Cache DB
1’59"
1’54"
1’58"

14"
16"
16"

1
2
3

Table 3: Pruning Blockchain only and Cache DB

cache DB, which means using only on chain data, requires a higher
time effort. Considering 𝐵 as the total number of blocks and 𝑚
the number of mobile phones to be pruned, in the worst case the
cost of search is 𝑂 (𝐵 ∗ 𝑚), assuming 𝐵 >> 𝑚. This result suggests
for further investigations in order to foster the usage of on chain
data in real world processes and not only for notarization purposes,
while preserving security and privacy aspects.

6.2 Dimensioning archival nodes
We investigated the storage requirements for archival nodes in
a private Algorand blockchain, as the volume of traffic and the
dimension of the transactions can vary significantly with respect to
the main public network. In our test, we measured the amount of
disk space occupied on 5 different archival nodes when increasing
the number of subscribers to the decentralised robinson list. Results
are shown in figure 3. All nodes occupy the same amount of space
when increasing the number of subscribers to the service, except
for the Primary Node (circle dots) which acts as a relay node and
needs to store log activities.

Figure 2: A flash crowding day (2nd Feb 2011)

interaction since 2011 (when RPO was initially deployed), in order
to obtain aggregated data about subscription rate. A first concern
comes from the fact that a public service, like the one offered by RPO,
can suffer from peaks of legitimate service requests known as flash
crowding attack. This particular event can occur as a consequence of
mass announcements (e.g. through TV or journal advertisements),
that are usually followed by users concentrating their requests in a
very short time interval straight after the announcement, resulting
in something very similar to a DDoS attack.

We observed this situation in RPO’s history, finding few dates
when more than 20000 subscriptions occurred in a day, which is an
extremely high number with respect to the ordinary subscription
daily rate.

In order to provide a complete analysis of our proposed archi-
tecture, we used this particular events as a scalability benchmark.
The histogram of the subscriptions, namely the insert opera-
tion of a new phone user on a centralised database, during a flash
crowding day (in 2011) is represented in figure 2.

We observed a total of 25566 subscriptions in a day, grouped
into two intervals in the day. The gathering of subscriptions in two
intervals of the day (one at night time and the other around noon)
confirmed us that the insert on database operations were executed
in batch scripts.

Analysing our log in peak periods we calculate that the average

time for the insert operation is about 200𝑚𝑠.

We decided to use standalone accounts rather than wallets to
overtake the operational cost of creating a wallet. A standalone
account is an Algorand address and private key pair that is not
stored on disk. A user can invoke, on his/her premises, the algo-sdk
to generate a pair of public and private keys. The time cost for
generating an account is significantly reduced. With reference to
the benchmark, we evaluated the time consumption for registering
20’000 users: In this way we reached 3.6 subscriptions per second,

20’000 users subscription completed in
average time for a single subscription
dev std time for a single subscription

00:09:10.709
00:00:00.267
00:00:00.106

Table 2: Time consumption for registering 20’000 users

which is a comparable rate with the one observed during flash
crowding events.

Empowering Citizens by a Blockchain-Based Robinson List

Figure 3: Archive dimension of a node in relation to the num-
ber of subscribers

Giving this linear dependence among number of suscribers and
disk occupation, we can estimate the dimension for an archival node
that should be able to support a desired number of subscribers:
in our case, we estimated the need for 1650𝐺𝐵 for a node that
should contain 100 million of subscribers. On top of that estimate, a
blockchain designer should consider the estimate number of trans-
actions that could be performed, so to define a solid configuration
for the archival node.

Unfortunately, this considerations are not sufficient to dimension
an archival node on a private blockchain. Indeed, the blockchain
itself generates empty blocks whenever there are no transactions to
be committed. This is typical for all the blockchains and is needed to
ensure integrity and security. On a public blockchain it is unlikely
to observe empty blocks, however, in private blockchain dedicated
to specific regional services (which might be our case), idle times
might be common, especially at night.

6.3 Economic costs
In this section, we analyze the economic costs of our approach,
focusing on our PoC realization.

The following are the main costs a subject has to sustain in the

proposed decentralised solution:

• Each subscriber needs to possess a minimum amount of
Algos to participate to the network. In our PoC, the attestator
supports this cost transferring to each subscriber these Algos.
• A subscriber opts-in to trade both IN and OUT tokens, issu-

ing two transactions.

• The attestator transfers 1 OUT token to each subscriber.
• Every time a subscriber wants to change state, it publishes
an atomic transfer composed by two transactions to swap
the two different tokens. The first transaction is in charge
of the subscriber, the second one is paid by 𝐶. The balance
of 𝐶 is monitored by the attestator that refills it with Algos,
when necessary.

In Algorand, each transaction costs 0.001 Algos. Moreover, each
account must maintain a minimum balance to be considered active
(i.e. use an account in transactions) and an additional balance is
needed to trade ASAs (i.e. use an account in transactions involving
the ASA). The minimum balance required to activate an account
is 0.1 Algos [26] and the one to trade a token is 0.1 Algos [17] per
ASA. Since, in our scenario, each subscriber trades two ASAs, the
overall minimum balance is 0.3 Algos.

Considering the current 1.5M RPO subscribers, the attestator
pays 450000 Algos for the minimum balance of the subscribers, 1500

Algos to transfer it and 1500 Algos to distribute the OUT tokens.
Hence, the attestator pays 453000 Algos.

Each subscriber pays 0.002 Algos to publish the transaction
opting-in the IN and OUT tokens. Swapping the ASA costs 0.002
Algos in total. Hence, the subscriber pays 0.003 Algos.

The cost of the initialisation phase is relevant with respect to all
other costs. Supposing to use the public Algorand main network,
at the current quotation of the Algo cryptocurrency, the cost of
initialising the system for 1.5M subscribers is about 500k€. While
this may seems very high, it is substantially less than the current
annual costs paid by market operators to use RPO. In fact, on aver-
age, RPO filters about 400 million of numbers each year. As by May
2021, operators pay, for each filtered number, from 0.004€ to 0.025€,
depending on the subscribed bundle. Hence, market operators col-
lectively pays annually more than 1.6M€, which are supposed to
cover just operational costs, since RPO is a not-for-profit service.
One aspect to consider in this discussion is that our approach does
not fully substitute the current centralised realization, hence, some
of the costs of the current solution are supposed to exists also in
our approach, like identity verification costs. However, we think
that this simple analysis is enough to say that in case of realization
on the public blockchain costs are still comparable with the current
centralised approach.

7 PRIVACY AND IDENTITY MANAGEMENT
As already observed, the main contribution of this paper is the
decentralisation of the opt-in/opt-out choice. Subscribers choices
are personal data that have to comply with privacy regulation, like
for example the GDPR [27]. Decoupling the data from the personal
identity (pseudonymization) is a widely used approach for this kind
of compliance. In the previous sections, we deliberately avoided
to introduce any in-chain information that can help to associate
choices to related telephone numbers or subscribers. From this
point of view, the solution we have described so far is not affected
by privacy concerns. However, in practice, operators do need to
know both telephone numbers and choices. In this case, regulations
require that operators can have knowledge of that binding, but no
other subject should be able to get it.

Creating and storing bindings between telephone numbers and
public keys are essentially identity management problems [12]. The
simplest approach to them is to delegate both verification of this
binding and the management of the corresponding database to a
trusted third party. For example, the identity database could be
managed by the same attestator 𝐴 introduced in Section 4 (and
this is the choice in our PoC). When a subscriber 𝑆 asks 𝐴 to add
to the Robinson list a telephone number 𝑡, with public key 𝑘𝑡 , 𝐴
should check the binding and store it in its identity database. For
example, 𝐴 can ask the subscriber to sign a random challenge 𝑐
using the private key paired with 𝑘𝑡 , where 𝑐 is communicated to
𝑆 by making use of 𝑡 (e.g., by SMS or by voice call). In pruning
operations, operators should ask 𝐴 to obtain either 𝑘𝑡 or directly
the current choices for 𝑡.

Our solution, with this identity management approach, might
be deemed acceptable and regarded as a substantial improvement
with respect to current practices. The obvious next step is to ditch
any involvement of 𝐴 from regular operation of the Robinson list.

In the just described scenario, 𝐴 performs three tasks that we

[6] Registro pubblico delle opposizioni. http://www.registrodelleopposizioni.it/en,

Last accessed April 2020.

[7] Alastair Tempest. Robinson lists for efficient direct marketing. In International

Direct Marketing, pages 129–152. Springer, 2007.

[8] Nicholas Mamo, Gillian M Martin, Maria Desira, Bridget Ellul, and Jean-Paul Ebe-
jer. Dwarna: a blockchain solution for dynamic consent in biobanking. European
Journal of Human Genetics, pages 1–18, 2019.

[9] Kumar Bhaskaran, Peter Ilfrich, Dain Liffman, Christian Vecchiola, Praveen
Jayachandran, Apurva Kumar, Fabian Lim, Karthik Nandakumar, Zhengquan
Qin, Venkatraman Ramakrishna, et al. Double-blind consent-driven data sharing
on blockchain. In 2018 IEEE International Conference on Cloud Engineering (IC2E),
pages 385–391. IEEE, 2018.

[10] Elli Androulaki, Artem Barger, Vita Bortnikov, Christian Cachin, Konstantinos
Christidis, Angelo De Caro, David Enyeart, Christopher Ferris, Gennady Lavent-
man, Yacov Manevich, et al. Hyperledger fabric: a distributed operating system
for permissioned blockchains. In Proceedings of the Thirteenth EuroSys Conference,
pages 1–15, 2018.

[11] Konstantinos Rantos, George Drosatos, Konstantinos Demertzis, Christos Il-
ioudis, Alexandros Papanikolaou, and Antonios Kritsas. Advocate: a consent
management platform for personal data processing in the iot using blockchain
technology. In International Conference on Security for Information Technology
and Communications, pages 300–313. Springer, 2018.

[12] Iso/iec 24760:2019 it security and privacy — a framework for identity management.

Technical report, New York, 1994.

[13] European Union. eIDAS – Electronic Identification, Authentication and Trust

Services, EU Regulation 910/2014.

[14] Alexander Mühle, Andreas Grüner, Tatiana Gayvoronskaya, and Christoph
Meinel. A survey on essential components of a self-sovereign identity. Computer
Science Review, 30:80 – 86, 2018.

[15] D Reed and M Sporny. W3C Decentralized Identifiers (DIDs) v1.0, 2017.
[16] M Sporny, D Longley, and Chadwick D. W3C Verifiable Credentials Data Model

1.0: Expressing verifiable information on the web, 2018.

[17] Algorand Official Documentation, exploring features: Assets. https://developer.

algorand.org/docs/features/asa/, Last accessed May 2020.

[18] Friedhelm Victor and Bianca Katharina Lüders. Measuring ethereum-based
ERC20 token networks. In International Conference on Financial Cryptography
and Data Security, pages 113–129. Springer, 2019.

[19] Pynacl - public key encryption. https://pynacl.readthedocs.io/en/latest/public/,

Last accessed May 2020.

[20] Daniel J. Bernstein. Cryptography in nacl. Networking and Cryptography library,

3:385, 2009.

[21] Adam Langley, Mike Hamburg, and Sean Turner. Elliptic Curves for Security.

RFC 7748, January 2016.

[22] Decentralized robinson list. https://gitlab.com/amauro/fob_robinson_list/-/tree/

journal_version, Last accessed May 2021.

[23] Algorand: The first pure proof of stake blockchain platform. https://www.

algorand.com/, Last accessed May 2020.

[24] Ethereum wiki project. On sharding blockchains. https://eth.wiki/sharding/

Sharding-FAQs [Accessed 2021-05-05].

[25] Gianmaria Del Monte, Diego Pennino, and Maurizio Pizzonia. Scaling blockchains
without giving up decentralization and security: A solution to the blockchain
scalability trilemma. In Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Cryptocurrencies and
Blockchains for Distributed Systems, CryBlock ’20, page 71–76, New York, NY,
USA, 2020. Association for Computing Machinery.

[26] Algorand Official Documentation, exploring features: Accounts. https://developer.

algorand.org/docs/features/accounts/create/, Last accessed May 2021.

[27] Paul Voigt and Axel Von dem Bussche. The eu general data protection regulation
(gdpr). A Practical Guide, 1st Ed., Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2017.
[28] Diego Pennino, Maurizio Pizzonia, Andrea Vitaletti, and Marco Zecchini. Binding
In 2020 IEEE Symposium on

of endpoints to identifiers by on-chain proofs.
Computers and Communications (ISCC), pages 1–6, 2020.

would like to decentralise.

(1)
(2)
(3)

It checks bindings of telephone numbers to public keys.
It stores them into a private identity management database.
It replies to operators queries.

Task 2 is easy to decentralise, since the identity pairs ⟨𝑡, 𝑘𝑡 ⟩ can
easily be stored in clear text into the blockchain. However, this
would be a clear privacy violation, since blockchain is supposed to
be accessible to a multitude of subjects. If we accept to keep Task 3
centralised, then the identity pairs can be encrypted so that only 𝐴
and the owner of 𝑡 can decrypt them, as described in Section 4. A
scheme that allows operators to access identity pairs autonomously,
while respecting privacy regulation, is more challenging to devise.
This is especially true if we admit operators to be granted or denied
access, dynamically. By the way, this also introduces the problem
of who is authorized to grant or deny access to operators or if this
should be performed in a decentralised manner, as well. We intend
to develop these aspects in the future.

Regarding Task 1, the work in [28] describes two blockchain-
based approaches to perform this kind of checks in a decentralised
fashion. It relies on a randomly selected committee of participants
to the blockchain that is different for each check and it is hard to
predict in advance. Each member performs the check autonomously
and then write in the blockchain its “proof” about the binding. A
summary of the proofs can then be computed at the consensus level
and written on-chain as a regular identity pair. Again, while this
approach looks promising, privacy aspects are yet to be developed.

8 CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we show the technical feasibility of a decentralised
Robinson list and the adequacy of the performances of our ap-
proach. Our solution enables citizens to express their choice in
complete independence while costs, even in case of adoption of a
public blockchain, are comparable with costs of current centralised
RPO. The validity of our approach was also recognized in public
competitions1. Concerning future works, we plan to investigate
a completely decentralised solution (including both pruning and
binding) where we see two main challenges: conformity to privacy
regulation and automatic management of fees, where citizens may
possibly be rewarded for accepting marketing calls.

REFERENCES
[1] Albenzio Cirillo, Antonio Mauro, Diego Pennino, Maurizio Pizzonia, Andrea
Vitaletti, and Marco Zecchini. Decentralized robinson list. In Proceedings of
the 3rd Workshop on Cryptocurrencies and Blockchains for Distributed Systems,
CryBlock ’20, page 1–6, New York, NY, USA, 2020. Association for Computing
Machinery.

[2] 35+ phone spam statistics for 2017, 2018, 2019 n. https://www.comparitech.com/
blog/information-security/phone-spam-statistics/, Last accessed April 2020.
[3] Federal Communications Commissionstop unwanted robocalls and texts. https:
//www.fcc.gov/consumers/guides/stop-unwanted-robocalls-and-texts, Last ac-
cessed February 2020.

[4] ROK Ministry of Economy and Financeflattening the curve on covid-
19. http://www.undp.org/content/seoul_policy_center/en/home/presscenter/
articles/2019/flattening-the-curve-on-covid-19.html,Last accessed April 2020.

[5] American Association for Public Opinion Research. Spam flagging and call

blocking and its impact on survey research, February 2018.

1See Future of Blockchain 2 competition https://medium.com/future-of-blockchain-
competition/future-of-blockchain-2-summary-and-prizes-e87f3c6f392f

