E-voting System Using Homomorphic
Encryption and Blockchain Technology to
Encrypt Voter Data

Hyunyeon Kim, Kyung Eun Kim, Soohan Park, and Jongsoo Sohn

November 10, 2021

1
2
0
2

v
o
N
6

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
6
9
0
5
0
.
1
1
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

 
 
 
 
 
 
Contents

1 Introduction

2 Related Works

2.1 E-voting System Using Blockchain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.2 E-voting System Using Blockchain Technology and Homomor-

phic Encryption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.2.1 Homomorphic Encryption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.2.2 E-voting System Using Blockchain Technology and Ho-

momorphic Encryption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3 E-voting System Focused on Voter Data

3.1 Proposed system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.2 Voting Procedure in the Proposed system . . . . . . . . . . . .

4 Results and Discussion

5 Conclusions

Bibliography

1

2
2

2
2

3

3
4
6

7

11

13

1

Abstract

Homomorphic encryption and blockchain technology are regarded as two sig-
niﬁcant technologies for improving e-voting systems. In this paper, we sug-
gest a novel e-voting system using homomorphic encryption and blockchain
technology that is focused on encrypting voter data. By encrypting voter
information rather than cast votes, the system enables various statistical
analyses regarding the vote result while securing the credibility, privacy and
veriﬁability of overall e-voting system. We checked the eﬃciency of the over-
all system by comparing the speed of the proposed system with the speed
of other e-voting systems that use homomorphic encryption and blockchain
technology.

1 Introduction

The right to vote, one of the most enshrined rights protected by constitutions,
has been the fundamental basis of democracy. We must recall that one
of the most signiﬁcant changes the Civil War brought to America was the
voting right that male African Americans received [9][20][21]. This change is
regarded as a major turning point in U.S. History. Similarly, one of the major
outcomes of World War 1 was the victory of the women’s suﬀrage movement
[17]; women were ﬁnally granted the right to vote after 100 years of struggle
[18]. By winning the right to vote, women and blacks were recognized as
“citizens” of their countries. We can surmise that voting is indispensable for
a society to be fully democratic.

Because fair voting is the essence of democracy, the voting system has
been established and reﬁned along with the development of democracy. There
are some key procedures voting must include: identiﬁcation and authentica-
tion of voters, collecting and recording of votes, vote tallying, and declaration
of the results [14]. While performing these steps, voting deploys several pro-
tocols to ensure eligibility, integrity and auditability. Voter eligibility guar-
antees that voters who cast votes are eligible. Voting integrity is deﬁned
as the global standards voters must follow to cast votes. Auditability refers
to the ability of the voting system to conduct reviews after the poll closes.
Good auditability ensures accurate counting of votes.

E-voting systems are deﬁnitely a better choice than paper ballot systems
for ensuring fair voting. It can prevent the wasted time and resources that are
inevitable with paper voting systems [11]. However, we must also note that
e-voting systems display several weaknesses because they rely on internet
platforms. The security of the internet platform is crucial to the overall
security of an e-voting system. If the former is at risk, the latter is also fatally
ﬂawed.
In order to reduce this dependence, e-voting systems implement
several technologies to protect the creditability of votes and the privacy of
voters [8]. For example, e-voting systems using homomorphic encryption can
guarantee the veriﬁability of ballots and of results [14].

The common goal of paper ballots and e-voting systems is fair voting;
votes are counted accurately while the result of each cast vote remains un-
known. However, in this paper, we suggest a new e-voting system that en-
crypts information about the voters rather than the voting ballots. Unlike
current e-voting systems that focus on hiding the voting results, this e-voting
system focus on voter privacy using homomorphic encryption and blockchain
technology. After presenting the background literature in the next section
(2), we introduce this novel concept in detail in Section 3. We further analyze
the introduced system in Section 4 and present conclusions in Section 5.

1

2 Related Works

2.1 E-voting System Using Blockchain

Blockchain is a distributed and decentralized public ledger managed by a
peer-to-peer network. Once the data in one block undergoes change, the re-
vision process is recorded and shared by all the other blocks in the blockchain
system. In other words, it is impossible to amend the data secretly. This is a
clear advantage in an e-voting system because blockchain itself can monitor
whether the voting results are manipulated by external forces. Any forced
revision of data is detected immediately. The transparency of a blockchain
network leads to credibility of the total e-voting system. Moreover, the main
characteristic of blockchain system, especially public blockchain, is that its
network is decentralized. Decentralized networks avoid reliance on any cen-
tral authority; decisions for the total system are made by a majority of the
members in the network. Decentralization of blockchain networks can pre-
vent any possible corruption of total e-voting systems created by central
authorities.

Because the transparency and detectability of a decentralized blockchain
network become strengths in an e-voting system, there have been several
trials to implement blockchain technology in an e-voting system [2][6][7][10]
[12][19][22]. Two in particular, [2] and [22], introduced e-voting systems
using blockchain and a ring signature. E-voting systems based on blockchain
technology might have diﬃculty in preserving end-to-end privacy. Several
cryptographic techniques, such as homomorphic encryption, ring signature,
and blind signature, can ensure that a blockchain-based e-voting system is
able to preserve the privacy of voters [8]. In particular, [19] introduces a new
e-voting system that uses blockchain and a ring signature. The uniqueness
of this e-voting system is that it enables large-scale elections, unlike other
blockchain-based e-voting systems.

2.2 E-voting System Using Blockchain Technology and

Homomorphic Encryption

2.2.1 Homomorphic Encryption

Before going over e-voting systems that use both blockchain and homomor-
phic encryption, let us look at homomorphic encryption ﬁrst. Homomorphic
encryption is a cryptographic technique that enables computations of en-
crypted data [4]. To be precise, the result of computing encrypted data is
equal to the result of encrypting the computation of plain data [4]. In order to

2

compute encrypted data without using homomorphic encryption, encrypted
data must undergo decryption; this process creates a risk of exposing plain
data and weakens the overall security of the database. Thus, homomorphic
encryption guarantees data security by eliminating the need to send plain
data.

Let us note that homomorphic encryption clearly has weaknesses that
hinder practical implementation [5] [15]. Data that deploys homomorphic
encryption cannot help but require large capacity; in other words, database
systems using homomorphic encryption to reinforce security also requires
large data storage. Moreover, the speed of encrypting plain data and of
computing encrypted data are not fast enough to be practical. The accuracy
of homomorphic encryption for large-scale data is also in doubt because the
noise, that occurs with every computation, eventually becomes too large to
ignore.

2.2.2 E-voting System Using Blockchain Technology and Homo-

morphic Encryption

Despite these weaknesses, there have been many studies to enable practi-
cal implementation of homomorphic encryption [5][15]. Homomorphic en-
cryption is especially well-suited with e-voting system because votes can be
counted in their “encrypted” state. Because homomorphic encryption uses a
public key to encrypt data into hash numbers, encrypted data can be recorded
and stored in a blockchain network. Homomorphic encryption ensures pri-
vacy and security while the blockchain database guarantees data integrity
and transparency. Thus, homomorphic encryption and a blockchain network
complement each other to make a fair e-voting system [1][14].

3 E-voting System Focused on Voter Data

In this section, we propose a novel e-voting system that implements blockchain
technology and a homomorphic encryption scheme as the basis of a new
paradigm in voting systems. Normally, e-voting systems focus on preserving
the privacy of cast votes to ensure the credibility of the system. However,
the focus of the proposed system is encrypting voter data. By implement-
ing homomorphic encryption, we can perform statistical analysis on voter
information while protecting voter privacy. Note that this new approach can
complement the weakness of previous e-voting systems using homomorphic
encryption. When cast votes undergo homomorphic encryption, voters can-
not guarantee whether the cipher texts are equal to the votes they cast. How-

3

ever, because the new e-voting system encrypts only the voter data rather
than the votes cast, voters can check their cast votes in the form of plain
text. Moreover, because homomorphic encryption allows SQL query on the
encrypted data [3], the analysis can be much more complicated and detailed.
We believe that this e-voting system could be a new method by which to
interpret elections results from a variety of angles.

3.1 Proposed system

In order to fetch information from voters, we ﬁrst need to choose which
information we want to collect. The ﬁgure below shows several criteria by
which to perform statistical analysis on voters.

Figure 1: Choosing several features to perform statistical analysis.

In Figure 1, there are several attributes that could be statistical criteria.
Based on the aim and objective of the vote, we can choose speciﬁc factors that
might be useful for interpreting the voting result. For example, we choose
ﬁve traits: sex, residence, age, income and education in Figure 1. These
ﬁve features are irreplaceable characteristics for explaining South Koreans.
Each voter would give replies to questions regarding these factors. The grey

4

box in Figure 1 explains how the factors can be expressed in terms of an
integer. Let us note that each ﬁve integers are merged into a batch that
does not include “the voting result of the voter”. The batch from each voter
undergoes homomorphic encryption while the voting result remains plain
text. Encrypted batches and voting results are then recorded on assigned
blocks in the blockchain network.

Figure 2: Overall concept of the e-voting system

Figure 2 depicts the overall progress of an e-voting system focused on

5

voter information. Let us check the three sides that comprise the new e-
voting system using blockchain technology and homomorphic encryption:
administration server, blockchain system and voters. We can consider the
“administration server” as the election commission. This server creates votes,
counts votes, collects encrypted data, and reports the results to voters via
transferring data to the blockchain system. The “blockchain network” in
this e-voting system, contains several nodes: administration node and nodes
assigned to each candidate. This network records encrypted and plain data
and transfer data from voters to server and from sever to voters. A “voter”
in this e-voting system uses a mobile device for e-voting. These devices
encrypt voter data using homomorphic encryption and send the data to the
blockchain network. We must note that the votes cast are also passed on
to the blockchain network in the form of plain text. After the vote tally,
participating devices send requests to an administration server to receive the
voting result.

Now, let us highlight the important work ﬂows of this new e-voting sys-
tem. After collecting voter information following the process depicted in
Figure 1, the voter data and cast votes are recorded on assigned blocks in
the blockchain system. As the voter information undergoes homomorphic
encryption, it can be counted and computed along with the vote tally. Last,
we perform statistical analyses after reporting the voting results to voters.

3.2 Voting Procedure in the Proposed system

The proposed system consists of the following six modules which express the
overall voting procedure. In this section, we introduce each module to ex-
plain its function.

1) Module 1: verify_voter
In this ﬁrst module, we check whether the voter has the right to cast a
vote in the e-voting system. In other words, this module performs identiﬁ-
cation and authentication of voters. Each voter sets an ID and password to
login to the e-voting system whenever they want. Let us note that the voters
can later check their cast vote by re-accessing the system.

2) Module 2: collect_voter
After choosing factors that work as criteria for later analysis, the ad-
ministration server asks questions to voters regarding these attributes. This
module gathers information from voters, encrypts the collected data using ho-
momorphic encryption, then records the encrypted replies on the blockchain
database.

6

3) Module 3: cast_vote
In this module, voters cast their votes. These cast votes do not undergo
homomorphic encryption; votes are recorded in the blockchain network in
the form of plain text.

4) Module 4: check_vote
This module checks the vote result of each voter just in case the voter
accidentally picks a diﬀerent choice or the vote itself is wrongly recognized.
Each voter has set an ID and password in module {verify_vote}. Voters can
use their ID and password to login to the system to check their votes.

5) Module 5: tally_vote
Because cast votes are in plain text form, every vote can be recorded and
counted simultaneously. When all the votes are counted, the administration
server announces the result to the voters.

6) Module 6: analyze_voters
In this last module, we perform statistical analysis of the voter informa-
tion to gain various interpretations of the voting result. The factors chosen
above may work as criteria of the statistical analysis. We must note that all
these information about the voter remains encrypted. The data is decrypted
only when the analysis result comes out.

4 Results and Discussion

Let us now compare this newly proposed e-voting system with other e-voting
systems that use homomorphic encryption and blockchain technology.

The main and deﬁnite obstacle to homomorphic encryption to be used
commercially would be “speed”. Thus, we compared the systems based on
how fast the vote result comes out.

In Table 1, we can check speciﬁc settings of the e-voting systems. We use
SEAL as a homomorphic encryption library and Hyperledger Fabric 1.4 for
the blockchain system as common settings. We also set the total number of
voters to 1024. The speciﬁc reason for using SEAL is that SEAL is faster
than any other homomorphic encryption library because its computations
are decimal not binary [13].

7

Newly proposed e-voting system

Voter Information
400 Bytes(5 Factors)
+ 1 Byte(data size of each vote)

X

Other systems using HE
and blockchain technology
Votes

80 Bytes

O

Encrypted Data

Data Size

HE addition
in vote counting

• Homomorphic Encryption Library: SEAL
• Blockchain System: Hyperledger Fabric 1.4 [16]
• Number of voters: 1024

Table 1: Comparison of the new e-voting system with another e-voting system
that uses the HE and the blockchain technology

As shown in Table 1, the newly proposed e-voting system encrypts voter
information while other systems encrypt the votes cast. In other words, the
new system records voter information as cipher text and cast votes as plain
text while others records cast votes as cipher text. This diﬀerence leads to
diﬀerent data size of each block in blockchain systems. For other e-voting
systems, each block records only one cipher text, the encrypted data of the
cast vote. The data size of this single cipher text is 80 bytes.

As for the newly proposed e-voting system, each block contains ﬁve cipher
texts because there are ﬁve factors, and the total data size of ﬁve cipher texts
is 400 bytes. In addition, we must also count the data size of the cast votes.
The data size of each vote may vary depending on the data type. If the data
type is integer, the data size would be 4 bytes; if the data type is a single
capital alphabet, the data size would be 1 byte. In Table 1, the data size of
each vote is set to 1 byte. However, we must note that the data size of each
vote does not matter (see the graph in Figure 3).

8

Figure 3: Average time required for N voting rounds with data size 400+
bytes (top) and with data size 80 bytes (bottom).

9

Both of the y-axes of the two graphs in Figure 3 represent the number of
voters while the x-axes show the estimated time. The top graphic in Figure 3
shows the average time required for N voting rounds with data size over 400
bytes while the bottom graphic shows the average time required for N voting
rounds with data size of 80 bytes. For 1024 voters, both graphs show the
estimated time of 1.7 seconds. We can check that the average time estimated
for N voting rounds remains the same regardless of data size.

Another major diﬀerence would be the time required for counting votes.
This diﬀerence is based on the existence and non-existence of additional
evaluation of the encrypted data. As shown in Table 1, the newly proposed
e-voting system does not require additions of encrypted data while other
systems do. For the new e-voting system, computations of encrypted data
are required only for statistical analyses performed after the vote counting
process. Statistical analyses may take time as they require computations
of encrypted data; however, this does not matter because the analyses are
carried out after the vote counting.

Figure 4: Execution time for 32-bit addition in SEAL

In Figure 4, we can check that the estimated time for 1024 additions of
encrypted data is 5.463. On the other hand, counting votes in plain text does
not take any more time because the votes are recorded and counted simul-

10

taneously. Thus, the time diﬀerence of the vote counting process between
the new e-voting system and others is never signiﬁcant. We proved that the
e-voting system that focuses on encrypting voter data is at least as eﬃcient
as the other e-voting systems using homomorphic encryption and blockchain
technology.

5 Conclusions

E-voting systems have undergone signiﬁcant developments by implementing
homomorphic encryption and blockchain technology. Homomorphic encryp-
tion guarantees ballot veriﬁability and result veriﬁability of votes while the
blockchain technology promises integrity and transparency. However, these
e-voting systems using homomorphic encryption and blockchain technology
do show weakness. Because the cast votes are encrypted in the form of a
cipher text, voters cannot be certain that the cast votes are the same as the
encrypted forms.

In this paper, we suggest a novel e-voting system using homomorphic
encryption and blockchain technology that focuses on encrypting voter in-
formation rather than the cast votes. Cast votes remain in plain text while
only voter data is encrypted; thus, voters can always check their cast votes.
The main advantage of this new e-voting system is that it enables statisti-
cal analyses of the vote results while protecting voter privacy. In order to
perform statistical analysis in detail, the e-voting system may ask questions
to voters regarding several attributes, such as age, gender, and education.
Replies to these questions surely contain private information about voters;
however, voters can answer with no worries of exposing themselves because
every reply undergoes homomorphic encryption. The collected information
need not be decrypted even during the statistical analyses, highlighting the
strength of homomorphic encryption.

Because speed is the main factor for successful commercialization of ho-
momorphic encryption, we checked the eﬃciency of this new e-voting system
by comparing the speed of vote counting compared to the speed in other sys-
tems. The speed of recording data in the blockchain system does not diﬀer
by data size. Although the new e-voting system requires larger data size for
each block compared to other systems, there is no diﬀerence in the recording
speed. However, there exists a diﬀerence in speed during the vote counting
process. The new system counts votes in the form of plain text while other
In other words, other
systems counts votes that are in encrypted forms.
systems require additions of encrypted data while the new system does not.
Thus, the speed of vote counting in the new system is faster than the speed of

11

vote counting in the other e-voting systems using blockchain technology and
homomorphic encryption. Let us note that the new e-voting system, which
encrypts voter data, might require multiplication and addition of encrypted
data in statistical analyses. Because the statistical analyses are performed
after the votes are counted, the actual speed of getting the voting result does
not depend on the computation speeds for homomorphic encryption.

We believe that this e-voting system oﬀers a new paradigm for voting
systems. This system could enable further statistical analyses while com-
plementing the weakness of previous e-voting systems using homomorphic
encryption and blockchain technology. Moreover, this system displays eﬃ-
ciency at least as high as other systems do. Thus, we hope that this new
system brings meaningful change to e-voting and can be utilized in numerous
ﬁelds.

12

References

[1] Kannan Balasubramanian, M Jayanthi, et al. A homomorphic crypto
system for electronic election schemes. Circuits and Systems, 7(10):3193,
2016.

[2] Gaby G Dagher, Praneeth Babu Marella, Matea Milojkovic, and Jordan
Mohler. Broncovote: Secure voting system using ethereum’s blockchain.
2018.

[3] Youssef Gahi, Mouhcine Guennoun, and Khalil El-Khatib. A secure
database system using homomorphic encryption schemes. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1512.03498, 2015.

[4] Craig Gentry. A fully homomorphic encryption scheme. Stanford uni-

versity, 2009.

fully-
[5] Craig Gentry and Shai Halevi.
In Annual international conference
homomorphic encryption scheme.
on the theory and applications of cryptographic techniques, pages 129–
148. Springer, 2011.

Implementing gentry’s

[6] Rifa Hanifatunnisa and Budi Rahardjo. Blockchain based e-voting
recording system design.
In 2017 11th International Conference on
Telecommunication Systems Services and Applications (TSSA), pages
1–6. IEEE, 2017.

[7] Friðrik Þ Hjálmarsson, Gunnlaugur K Hreiðarsson, Mohammad Ham-
daqa, and Gísli Hjálmt`ysson. Blockchain-based e-voting system. In 2018
IEEE 11th International Conference on Cloud Computing (CLOUD),
pages 983–986. IEEE, 2018.

[8] Hugo Jonker, Sjouke Mauw, and Jun Pang. Privacy and veriﬁability in
voting systems: Methods, developments and trends. Computer Science
Review, 10:1–30, 2013.

[9] Alexander Keyssar. The right to vote: The contested history of democ-

racy in the United States. Basic Books, 2009.

[10] Kashif Mehboob Khan, Junaid Arshad, and Muhammad Mubashir
Khan. Secure digital voting system based on blockchain technology.
International Journal of Electronic Government Research (IJEGR),
14(1):53–62, 2018.

13

[11] Kwang-Woo Lee, Yun-Ho Lee, Dong-Ho Won, and Seung-Joo Kim. A
voter veriﬁable receipt in electronic voting with improved reliability.
Journal of the Korea Institute of Information Security & Cryptology,
16(4):119–126, 2006.

[12] Yi Liu and Qi Wang. An e-voting protocol based on blockchain. IACR

Cryptol. ePrint Arch., 2017:1043, 2017.

[13] Carlos Aguilar Melchor, Marc-Olivier Kilijian, Cédric Lefebvre, and
Thomas Ricosset. A comparison of the homomorphic encryption li-
braries helib, seal and fv-nﬂlib. In International Conference on Secu-
rity for Information Technology and Communications, pages 425–442.
Springer, 2018.

[14] Pranav More, Rohit Nawale, Reena Kharat, Mohit Nakhale, and Kaus-
tubh Patil. E2e veriﬁable blockchain voting system using homomorphic
encryption. Journal of Critical Reviews, 7(19):1120–1127, 2020.

[15] Michael Naehrig, Kristin Lauter, and Vinod Vaikuntanathan. Can ho-
momorphic encryption be practical?
In Proceedings of the 3rd ACM
workshop on Cloud computing security workshop, pages 113–124, 2011.

[16] Hyperledger Performance and Scale Working Group. Hyperledger

blockchain performance metrics. 2018.

[17] Francisco O Ramirez, Yasemin Soysal, and Suzanne Shanahan. The
changing logic of political citizenship: Cross-national acquisition of
women’s suﬀrage rights, 1890 to 1990. American sociological review,
pages 735–745, 1997.

[18] Constance Rover. Women’s Suﬀrage and Party Politics in Britain,

1866–1914. University of Toronto Press, 2019.

[19] Baocheng Wang, Jiawei Sun, Yunhua He, Dandan Pang, and Ningx-
iao Lu. Large-scale election based on blockchain. Procedia Computer
Science, 129:234–237, 2018.

[20] Xi Wang. Black suﬀrage and the redeﬁnition of american freedom, 1860-

1870. Cardozo L. Rev., 17:2153, 1995.

[21] Xi Wang. The trial of democracy: Black suﬀrage and northern Repub-

licans, 1860-1910. University of Georgia Press, 2012.

[22] Yifan Wu. An e-voting system based on blockchain and ring signature.

Master. University of Birmingham, 2017.

14

