1
2
0
2

v
o
N
2
2

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
8
5
1
1
1
.
1
1
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Blockchain for IoT: A Critical Analysis
Concerning Performance and Scalability (cid:63)

Ziaur Rahman, Xun Yi, Ibrahim Khalil, and Andrei Kelarev

RMIT University, Melbourne VIC 3000, Australia
{rahman.ziaur, xun.yi, ibrahim.khalil, andrei.kelarev}@rmit.edu.au

Abstract. The world has been experiencing a mind-blowing expansion
of blockchain technology since it was ﬁrst introduced as an emerging
means of cryptocurrency called bitcoin. Currently, it has been regarded
as a pervasive frame of reference across almost all research domains,
ranging from virtual cash to agriculture or even supply-chain to the In-
ternet of Things. The ability to have a self-administering register with
legitimate immutability makes blockchain appealing for the Internet of
Things (IoT). As billions of IoT devices are now online in distributed
fashion, the huge challenges and questions require to addressed in pur-
suit of urgently needed solutions. The present paper has been motivated
by the aim of facilitating such eﬀorts. The contribution of this work is to
ﬁgure out those trade-oﬀs the IoT ecosystem usually encounters because
of the wrong choice of blockchain technology. Unlike a survey or review,
the critical ﬁndings of this paper target sorting out speciﬁc security chal-
lenges of blockchain-IoT Infrastructure. The contribution includes how to
direct developers and researchers in this domain to pick out the unblem-
ished combinations of Blockchain enabled IoT applications. In addition,
the paper promises to bring a deep insight on Ethereum, Hyperledger
blockchain and IOTA technology to show their limitations and prospects
in terms of performance and scalability.

Keywords: Distributed Ledger· Public Consensus· Blockchain

1

Introduction

Blockchain and IoT have been able to show immense eﬀectiveness and poten-
tial for future improvements to productivity when being applied in collabora-
tion. Therefore, how they could be employed to install end-to-end secure and
sensor embedded automated solutions has become a frequently asked question.
The world has already been surprised to experience the beautiful adaptations of
diﬀerent IoT solutions, ranging from healthcare-warehousing to transportation-
logistics [1]. Existing centralized Edge and Fog based IoT infrastructure may
not be that scalable, secure and eﬃcient to mitigate broader enterprise chal-
lenges. Mostly, emerging IoT solutions concern network of sensor-enabled smart
appliances where it facilitates the services on the cloud of physical devices varies

(cid:63) Supported by RMIT RTS Program.

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

R. Ziaur et al.

from modern car to smart-home utensils. In essence, an immutable timestamp
ledger used for distributed data including either payment, contract, personal
sharing and storing or supply chain and health care expected to impact several
sectors due to its salient features such as immutability, distributed structure,
consensus-driven behavior and transparency [2].

1.1 Blockchain’s Potentials to be peer with IoT

There are several reasons why blockchain can be very promising to ensure eﬃ-
ciency, scalability and security of the IoT arrangement. Firstly, it has a proven
cryptographic signing capability to perform end-to-end cryptographic message
transfer. It is able to enable asset functionality to provide good governess [3][4].
Moreover, it can address custodial tracking of asset transmission in a global lo-
gistic phenomenon. Besides, next we give a list of several emerging issues and
their corresponding blockchain potentials as follows.

i Free global infrastructure that oﬀers

– Blockchain is leveraging and reliable

ii Data belonging in the Edge-Network the ﬁnal destination to the appliances
– Blockchain has the ability to be replicated rapidly and consistently to

every closest node for which it will certainly will be cost-eﬀective

iii Hack-proof cryptography eliminating attacks

– Already proven to be resilient to the popular attacks - for example: if
you are looking to protect a power grid or if you are looking to protect
high value asset it becomes natural to use blockchain
iv Record proof of life for industrial assets in an irreversible ledger

– people can even associate it to an asset to verify its validity which might
be increasing the revenue of the company as there is no counterfeiting.

v Track-chain of custody assets on Transportation or sale

– we not only can verify but also can track when those are sold to a dif-
ferent individuals allowing us to gain the types of metrics that we would
necessarily lose thus we can provide insight to companies.

– Full redundancy providing a hundred percent uptime and assuring mes-

sage delivery

The contribution of this work is to ﬁgure out those trade-oﬀs the IoT ecosys-
tem usually encounters because of the wrong choice of blockchain technology.
Unlike a survey or review, the critical ﬁndings of this paper target sorting out
speciﬁc performance and scalability challenges of blockchain-IoT Infrastructure.
The contribution includes how to direct developers and researchers in this do-
main to pick out the unblemished combinations of Blockchain enabled IoT appli-
cations. The claimed contributions are justiﬁed through the respective sections
of the paper. The Section 3 of this paper discusses Blockchain suitability to
eliminate the problems that emerges because of Blockchain and IoT integration
[5]. The later sections explains how existing solution namely Microsoft Azure
adopts diﬀerent Blockchain platforms such as Ethereum, Hyperledger, etc. The

Blockchain for IoT: A Critical Analysis

3

following section illustrates Blockchain potentials for speciﬁc IoT issues. The
challenges come to light while a sensor-enabled system ﬁnds its devices, man-
aging access control, etc through respective use-case anaysis. Furthermore, the
analysis justiﬁes the smart contract compliance for IoT system along with data
integrity and conﬁdentiality loop-holes.

Therefore, the article is organized as follows: the preceding section and the
introduction throughout its subsections talk about why blockchain is necessarily
applicable in the Internet of Things (IoT) [6]. Section 2 is a bit about blockchain
internal design and its tailored categories leading with part 3 where an OSI like
blockchain open system structure redrawn following some previous works. Sec-
tions 4 5 and 6 portray the comparative analysis with contemporary technologies
including Hyperledger, IOTA and Microsoft Azure IoT architecture. Then the
following section summaries with a brief table and graphs showing the chal-
lenges and proposed solutions at a glance as well as its applicability concerning
the throughput and latency. A set of use cases where blockchain is an inevitable
peer of IoT mentioned before the conclusion on top of advantages & application.

2 Blockchain Preliminaries

The blockchain is a means of removing the need of traditionally created trust
created through intermediaries in the distributed systems. A blockchain enables
trusts among untrusting entities within a common interest. Thus, it helps to
form a permanent and transparent record of exchange of processing, ignoring
the need for an intermediary. The terms blockchain and distributed ledger of-
ten used interchangeably, but they are not always the same thing. Blockchain is
about the exchange of value instant, decentralized, pseudonymous value transfer
which is now possible. It can ensure ledger building by preserving a set of trans-
actions shared to all participating users, where the new one is necessarily veriﬁed
and validated by others ([7], [8]). Adjoining brand-new transaction usually called
mining which demands solving the complex and substantial computational puz-
zle which in nature is a complicated answer but simplest to authenticate using a
chosen consensus mechanism in the network of untrusted and anonymous nodes.
That indeed has brought enormous transparency for a BC-enabled applications.
Signiﬁcant resource constraints required to facilitate the consensus algorithm
by which it restricts unauthorised blocks from joining the network. Besides,
communication among nodes are encrypted by changeable public keys (PK) to
prevent tracking itself, thus it has been able to draw attention in non-monetary
application [4], [9].

A sample chain of blocks can be delineated where each block depicts the hash
of the previous block, time stamp, transaction root and nonce created by the
miner [10].

It has already been able to show its potentials in particular in this ﬁeld by
super setting secure smart device authentication to ensure uncompromised com-
munication, decentralized data formulation or even automatic data purchasing
and others. Thus, we can conceivably estimate that an emerging phenomenon of

4

R. Ziaur et al.

Fig. 1: At a glance view of chain of diﬀerent blocks with nones, time stamp,
transaction data and hashes

IoT utensils would be equipped with the Internet to ease every aspect of human
life[11].

2.1 Blockchain Category

The following Figure 2 shows the comparative classiﬁcation of blockchain ledger
concerning the considered ledger accessibility.

Public Ledger based Blockchain. It is also often known as permission-
less blockchain as anyone can send, verify and read transactions on the network
even able to get and run the codes on their machine to take part in mining
process using consensus [9] algorithms. It has the maximum anonymity and
transparency even though any user unidentiﬁed are allowed to send, read and
validate the incognito transaction. Ethereum and Bitcoin are the typical ex-
amples of public blockchain. Private Ledger based Blockchain.It controls
the access privileges by restricting read and modiﬁcation right to a particu-
lar organization; thus, it does not require a consensus mechanism or mining to
ensure anonymity. In some instances, the read authority kept restricted to an
arbitrary level, but mostly the transaction editing is strictly permissioned. The
ledger-building process for coin supervised by Eris and Monax or the Multi-
chain could be said to have private-typed blockchain techniques [8]. It dserve
mentioning that Ethereum now has permissioned Blockchain, such as Quorum.
Protected Ledger based Blockchain. Protected Blockchain is also known as
Consortium/federated [12] or and in some cases it is called hybrid or publicly
permissioned blockchain which is maintained within the authority of a group
of owner or users [13]. Hyperledger by Linux Foundation and IBM [1], Services
of R3 with Corda or Energy Web Foundation are example of protected type
of Blockchain [14]. However, the required blockchain type shown through Fig-
ure 5 based after the ledger, consensus and the dependability of the type of

* Tx : TransactionBlock_N   Time StampTx Hash, Nonce  Transaction RootBlock_OneBlock_Two   Time StampTx Hash, Nonce  Transaction RootGenesis_Block   Time StampTx Hash, Nonce  Transaction Root Blockchain BlocksLedgerLedgerBlockchain for IoT: A Critical Analysis

5

Fig. 2: Blockchain Grouping according to the requirement analysis. It shows ei-
ther the need of the particular type of blockchain or the usual approach is able
to meet the demand

authority. Figure 2 shows that if the system has a centralized or single ledger
system, no category of the blockchain is needed there. However, if the authority
is restricted within a validated group, then protected one seems to suit more
than public or private ledger based blockchain system [15]. Beside, above types
of Blockchain, this manuscript explains performance comparison of IOTA. The
founders of IOTA have described its ledger as a public permission-less backbone
for the Internet of Things that enables interoperability between multiple devices
[12]. That means, it will enable transactions (tx) between connected devices, and
anyone on the network can access its ledger.

3 Blockchain Suitability for IoT

As explained earlier, Blockchain can solve all IoT issues. There are several prob-
lems where a centralized database can be a good solution instead of applying
blockchain. The following section illustartes Blockchain applicability for IoT and

Type of BLOCKCHAIN IoT Needs?:LEDGER  Database:CONSENSUS  PrivatePublicProtectedTraditional:OWNERS:AUTHORITYOPEN::VALIDATED GROUPS:SINGLE:CENTRALNo Blockchain neededNo Blockchain needed6

R. Ziaur et al.

Table 1: Comparison among Diﬀerent Popularly used Consensus Mechanisms

No

Attributes PoW
Category
Random
Throughput Little
Has
Token
P-Cost
Has
Big
Scalability
Trust
Trustless
Yes
Reward
Bitcoin
Example

PoS

BFT

PoA

Public Pub/Protected Private Protected

Yes
Big
Has
Has
Big
Trustless
No

No
Big
Not
Not
Little
Semi
No

No
Big
Native
Not
Medium
Trusted
No

Ethereum Hypeledger Kovan

the attributes that necessarily need to be discussed before applying it any IoT
use cases.

3.1 Comparison among Consensus Protocols

Table 1 shows the comparison among diﬀerent consensus mechanism. It illus-
trates that Proof of Work (PoW) or Proof of Stake (PoS) require signiﬁcant
computational resource, whereas Byzantine Fault Tolerance (BFT) and Proof
of Authority (PoA) have higher throughput in comparison to its peers. But in
either case of BFT and PoA scalability can be a challenge. Another thing is
that they have a token in dependability, which seems to be working ﬁne for IoT
nodes. In case of scalability and Overheads, blocks are broadcast to and veriﬁed
by all nodes with a quadratic increment of the traﬃc, and intractable process-
ing overheads that demand huge extensibility whereas IoT devices (e.g., LORA)
have limited Bandwidth connections [11]. For delay/latency: IoT devices have
stricter delay requirement (e.g., Smart Home Sensor unlikely to wait) whereas
BTC can take approximately 30 minutes to conﬁrm a transaction. Even it has
security overheads as it has to protect the double spending seems inapplicable for
IoT. For bitcoin, the throughput is 7/Transaction which would go beyond such
limit due to huge interaction among nodes in IoT. Therefore, after bitcoin many
have been opted for BFT based Hyperledger ([1], [9]) or non-consensus driven
approach such as IOTA [16]. The applicability of diﬀerent blockchain platforms
based on those consensus protocols and non-consensus approach discussed with
this [17].

3.2 Etherem, Hyperledger and IOTA

Ethereum emerged intending to compete with bitcoin is a ﬂexible blockchain
platform with required smart contracts and proof-of-work consensus mechanism
called Ethash. This associates with Directed Acyclic Graphs (DAG) [16] to gener-
ate the probabilistic hash. It ensures robust extensibility for the IoT applications,

Blockchain for IoT: A Critical Analysis

7

Fig. 3: The both part of the above ﬁgure shows the comparative Analysis among
Ethereum [18], Hyperledger [1] and IoTA [16] and before applying those as a
mean of IoT Performance and Scalability

including some eﬃciency trade-oﬀs. As Ethash works upon PoW, Ethereum re-
quires around 20s to append a new block after mining [4] [9]. Secondly, Hyper-
ledger is a permissioned and protected type of blockchain. It commonly applies
access control, along with chaincode-based smart contracts and consensus with
existing Practical Byzantine Fault Tolerance (PBFT) [19] [9]. It includes an-
chors of trust to base certiﬁcate-authorities as an increment to the asymmetric
cryptographic approach and digital signature properties with SHA3 or ECDSA.
Hence, its smart contracts implementation involves the chaincode that has a
self-execution ability such as asset or resource transferring among network-peers
in huge time. This latency is low among comparative distributed ledger im-
plementations. Fabric has been chosen as blockchain medium by IBM in their
Bluemix-Watson IoT architecture, which has been shown by the respective sec-
tion hereafter. IOTA which a unique distributed ledger in that it does not utilize
an explicit blockchain at all; instead, it implements a directed acyclic graph of
transactions – instead of blocks of multiple transactions that link together, each
transaction approves and links back to two other transactions. IOTA Tangles
has immense potentials to be eﬃciently adapted with IoT to ensure security
and privacy by ensuring maximum throughput. Fig. 3 shows the comparative
analysis among Ethereum, Hyperledger and IOTA in terms of performance and
scalability.

3.3 Azure IoT Workbench

Figure 4 illustrates the Azure IoT workbench that facilitates client-side applica-
tion for both mobile and web system depending on the smart-contract. It pur-
poses to verify, retrieve and test applications or entertain new use-cases there.
It brings a user-interface to interact with the end-user for appropriate tasks. Be-
sides, entitled individuals are given to permission accessing the administrative
console with diﬀerent functionalities such as uploading and deploying smart con-
tracts depending on certain roles. As depicted in the ﬁgure, the workbench has
a gateway-service API standing on the representational state transfer (REST)
API reproduces and delivers messages to event-broker while attempting to ap-
pend data to blockchain. Queries are submitted to oﬀ-chain-database when data

IOTAHYPERLEDGER Distinct FeaturesETHEREUMEthashNo [DAG]PBFT10-100 ms10 ms10k msNoYesYesLight computation,low Network useHigh computation intensive BC Type    Delay & SCConsensusLight computation,high network use8

R. Ziaur et al.

is requested. The database mostly the SQL contains a replication of all chained
meta-data and bulk data that issues relevant conﬁguring context for the smart
contracts supported. Thus, the users with developer role are allowed to get ac-
cessed the gateway servicing API to develop blockchain apps without depending
on the client/end-user solutions. In case of message breaking for incoming data,
users who desire to circulate messages thoroughly to the Azure workbench can
submit data directly to the service bus there. For illustration, this API solutions
for system integrated confederation or sensor based tools. Apart from this events
are held during the life-time of the application. It can be caused by the gateway
API or even inside ledger and its alerting trigger downstream-code based on the
event so far occurred. Microsoft Azure consortium usually able to locate two
diﬀerent kinds of event consumers. First one gets activated by the events lies on
the blockchain to manipulate the oﬀ chain SQL storage while the rest responds
capturing meta-data for the events brought by document upload and storage
related API. Figure 4 shows how Microsoft (MS) Azure IoT work bench adapts
diﬀerent Blockchain farmeworks. It also portrays that MS Azure architecture
can facilitate Hyperledger Fabric (HLF), CORDA R3, or IOTA. The IoT Hub is
connected to the IoT sensors and its bus is enjoined to the Transaction Builder.
MS Azure can be proof that how exisiting IoT workbench can be implemented
for the scalable and secure IoT service.

Fig. 4: Microsoft Azure Blockchain Architecture that has been integrated with
Ethreum for securing IoT appliances. The COrda, Hyperledger and IOTA could
be incorporated just like Ethreum as said by Azure

Client AppsWebAppsXamarinIoT DevicesGateway BusIoT HubServiceDataBSStorageDTLConsumerKey VaultNot Integrated YetEthreumCorda R3HYP FabricIOTATransaction Routers and LedgersTrns.BuilderDLT WatcherEvent GridApp InsightsMonitoringInsightsBlockchain for IoT: A Critical Analysis

9

Fig. 5: IBM Watson and Bluemix Integration for IoT-Blockchain Service. Watson
communicates the IoT devices, where Bluemix facilitates Blockchain network on
top of smart contarct repository from Github

3.4 IBM Blockchain Integrated IoT Architecture

The IBM Blockchain architecture for IoT solutions comprises three principal
tiers; each has customized roles in its own side. The Figure 5 depicts the high
level IoT architecture incorporating Hyperledger Fabric as Blockchain service,
Watson as IoT Platform and Bluemix as cloud environment [1] [20]. The IBM
IoT architecture can be divided into several components as shown by Figure 5.
It has been discussed with its three tiers, service execution process and along
with the challenges it encounters. It also shows the IBM Blumix IoT working
procedure. During execution, data collected from smart devices and intelligent
sensors are dispatched to Watson using ISO standard (Message Queuing Teleme-
try Transport (MQTT) protocol. Speciﬁc blockchain proxy works to send data
from Watson to the chain-code of the Hyperledger Fabric depending on the
settlement. Hence, the transactions get executed in the Cloud. The solution-
components associated in the execution process have been enlisted as below:

BLUEMIXApplication & Blockchain ServicesClient- 1Process IoT DataChain CodePeer1Peer2Chain CodeHYPERLEDGERREST APIHFC SDKValidateREST APIHFC SDKGithub SmartContract RepositoryIBM Watson IoT Platformconnect, manage, analyseRESTMQTTGITHUB10

R. Ziaur et al.

Smart Contarct as Chaincode Instead of using Bitcoin or Ethereum like
smart contract Hypeledger fabric adapts the chaincode written with Go. It
shapes the core distributed ledger solutions and necessarily epitomize the de-
sired business logic. Each transaction call out there is carefully preserved and
prevailed as expected blockchain transaction. As Fabric contract is the chain-
code, it requires implementation with the certain APIs so, the chaincode needs
to get registered with the services using those pre=deﬁned APIs. Hyperledger
Fabric Client (HFC) Software Development Kits (SDK) ease developers to cre-
ate Node.js applications able to maintain communication with the blockchain
network. Here, the applications are registered and submitted transactions us-
ing APIs. IBM Blockchain aligned IoT Architecture on Bluemix oﬀers several
advantages such as trust, autonomy, scalability, security in the distributed net-
work comprising multiple parties. Even though there are some challenges need
to overcome. One of the signiﬁcant issues is the power of computation, as IoT
devices are usually low powered devices and have less computation capacity.
Moreover, encrypting and transaction veriﬁcation may require huge electricity.
It can increase both energy consumption and expenses as well [4].

4 Blockchain-IoT Challenges and Solutions

Despite enormous engaging attributes of blockchain for IoT implementation,
there are several challenges; each of which deserves proper concerning solutions
before fruitful lodgement of Blockchain in the of IoT domain.

4.1 Storage, Throughput and Latency Challenges

Ethreum and Bitcoin have storage and Latency challenges as discussed ear-
lier. The storage size has been increasing day by day as shown by Figure 6. It
represents the incremental storage amount from 2015 to quarter August 2021.
Blockchain platform that requires higher storage has lesser suitability for real-
time system such as IoT. IoT system generates huge and voluminous data which
indulges the chances of failure because of storage overhead. Figure 6 shows that
in terms of storage the Ethereum seems more suitable than Bitcoin. Though
only storage overhead is not the only standard to decide whether a particular
Blockchain is suitable or not. But surely, it aﬀects both the performance and scal-
ability of the system. Whereas, the following Figure 7 shows a comparison among
Ethreum, Parity and Hyperledger with per second transaction amount labelled
beside the bars. The data were found from [9]. They worked with blockbench
collecting data from Yahoo Cloud Serving Benchmark (YCSB) a and Smallbank.
It concludes by showing Hypeledger has the maximum throughput. While the
second part shows Hyperledger works ﬁne under 16 Nodes. The challenge is here
how it can be improved when more nodes will be incorporated as depicted by
Fig. 7. Figure 7 shows the throughput Comparison among Ethreum, Ethereum
(ETH) Parity and Hyperledger (HLF) fabric based on the Data found on using
Blockbench. Though Parity is one of several implementations of Ethereum, it

Blockchain for IoT: A Critical Analysis

11

was considered as alternative Blockchain solution for IoT. Therefore, the Figure
illustrates both the Ethereum (ETH) and ETH Parity. Hyperledger is a multi-
project open source collaborative eﬀort hosted by The Linux Foundation, cre-
ated to advance cross-industry blockchain technologies [12]. In this comparison
we consider Hyperledger(HLF) Fabric only. The scalability challenges as ﬁgured
out needs proper attention, otherwise the large-scale IoT system not that type
of Blockchain after a certain volume of sensor integration.

Fig. 6: Comparison of Chain-data storage between Bitcoin (BTC) and Ethreum
(ETH) based on the online data provided by blockchain and statista and ether-
scan.io website

4.2 Prominent Challenges and Solutions

As IoT systems vary from smart coﬀee machines to complex automobiles, it is
diﬃcult to generalize all challenges in one table. The following Figure 9 describes
some inevitable challenges and their possible solutions, respectively [20]. We have
so far included seven possible challenges and respective blockchain solutions may
require considerations before applying it for IoT architecture [21].

2015201620172018201920202021050100150200250300350Blockchain Size (Gigabyte)YearETH SizeBTC Size12

R. Ziaur et al.

Fig. 7: Throughput (Performance Eﬃciency) comparison among Ethreum,
Ethereum (ETH) Parity and Hyperledger (HLF) fabric based on Data in [9]
using Blockbench framework.

5 Use case Analysis

According to a review [3], the research on blockchain and distributed ledger
in association with the several mobile operators conducted by GSMA [3], the
emerging application of distributed ledger for blockchain can be put into three
diﬀerent sets ordering as Areas with common IoT Controls, Areas where IoT
Appropriates and Areas with Particular IoT Solutions. The Figure 8 shows a
relative study comparing among application areas with respect to three priority
interests- maximum, medium and minimum. For Data Sharing as for illustration,
three operators recommends it as medium while ﬁve of all suggests as the max-
imum priority of interest, leaving the access control application with minimum
priority. As claimed by GSMA, data were collected with sincerely exploring all
operators, still it deserves further before assessing for technical and industrial
implementation. Considering conciseness and brevity, four use cases directly re-
lating to performance, security and sclability that have been discussed in the
following sections.

020040060080010001200EthereumETH ParityHLF FabricThroughput (transaction/s)Cloud Serving Benchmark (YCSB)Workload of Smallbak on BlockbenchBlockchain for IoT: A Critical Analysis

13

Fig. 8: Applicability of six considered Blockchain aligned IoT usecases according
to the review by 10 operators plotting with their priority and applicability. The
problems as illustrated through the usecases can be solved after incorporating
Blockchain technology.

5.1 Use Case : Finding IoT Devices

Retrieving and tracking identity information of the devices has been inﬂuenc-
ing factor with the growth of IoT enabling. The following cases will describe
examples of ﬁnding intelligent devices in the IoT Network.

Case 1 : Storing the original data and device status toward authentication.
For example- For example identifying the manufacturing company or party
if it has quality assurance accreditation including the life cycle status and
validating the serial numbers provided.

Case 2 : Issuer signature veriﬁcation according to the information stored in
the ledger to make sure software updates from trusted sources.

Case 3 : Preserving and ownership device information such as hardware con-
ﬁguration, version information, boot code installation purposing to ensure
privacy status check.

5.2 Use Case : IoT Access Control

A Monitoring and recording access control in inevitable in IoT network to pre-
serve access control details for both physical and virtual resources. Therefore,
the use-case for this can be as below-

Application AreasSupport ComplianceDevice IdentityData SharingMaximumPriority0Micropayments246108Supply ChainAccess ControlMediumMinimum14

R. Ziaur et al.

Case 1 : Virtual File sharing server uses the ledger to preserve identity of the
individuals and application by securely assigning printing, saving or editing
accessibility rights. For example – while a consumer made order for a good
online is away from home, there is a risk in deliveries. So, customers can get
beneﬁt of using distributed ledger, instead of giving access to their home by
using keys/address/codes prone to be misused.

Case 2 : Issuer signature veriﬁcation according to the information stored in
the ledger to make sure software updates from trusted sources.

5.3 Use Case : Supporting Smart Contract Compliance

There are a lot of circumstances associating multiple companies where it is
equally important to know whether the all of those are properly complied with.
Thus, compliance is eﬃciently activated using blockchain smart contract. For
example, let consider the following cases.

Case 1 : Certain Individual sharing personal data with their health provider
can control accessibility using distributed ledgers to make sure good data
governance if it is only being accessed by the authorized medical profession-
als. In multiparty system, patient blood pressure should be only shared by
pharmacy and general practitioner so that prescribed drugs can be easily
dispensed.

Case 2 : Suppose a person has to pay 2 Dollar extra for airport taxi pickup
if the ﬂight delays for 30 minutes. In a micro-insurance premium case like
this lower cost feature of service delivery in the smart contract can auto-
matically trigger it on arrival by determining whether that extra premium
has been paid in order. Blockchain can play a vital role to address the issues
mentioned in the use-cases.

Case 3 : Driving particulars including license information, previous record
of traﬃc rules violation, health and safety compliance either of a person
or car need to get veriﬁed before one can drive a connected hire car. Even
the car can upload journey information, servicing history, faults made by
itself. In a case where hundreds of thousand cars and drivers are aﬃliated
with, smart contract and blockchain can easily provide required information
within least hardship and delay.

5.4 Use Case: Data Integrity and Conﬁdentiality

It is often desired that the data sharing with keeping it conﬁdential enough
would be remarkably plausible in a distributed ledger framework [22]. One of the

Blockchain for IoT: A Critical Analysis

15

Fig. 9: Blockchain Implementation Challenges in the IoT and Probable Solutions
Identiﬁed

CHALLENGESKEY ATTRIBUTES SOLUTIONSTransactionThroughputThe transaction confirmation time ofdifferent public ledger ranges from100 to 2000 TPS (Transaction PerSecond) seems infeasible fortransferring real time IoT data whichmay lead to data loss.In compare to Bitcoin,Ethreum, Corda andQuorum Ripple eats uplesser time pertransaction as claimedEnergyComsumptionIoT appliances are mostly light weightand it should have required powercapacity to pursue cryptographicalgorithms.Could be adapted withplanned manufacturingconsidering potentialenergy usagemechanisms.ConfidentialPrivate KeyDTL often exercises asymmetricencryption approach where privatekeys should keep confidential and thepreservation should be resilient topotential adversaries due to openaccessibility of IoT ends.Ledgers in the distributedIoT infrastructure couldbe designed in a waytherefore the completeledger does not requirereplication eitherNetworkBandwidthIf the block sizes 1 Megabyte requiretypically 10 Minutes meaning the datarate could be near about 150Megabytes per day that demandssignificant bandwidth which seemsnot reasonable for small IoT WideArea Network such as Sigfox/LORA.Ledgers in the distributedIoT infrastructure couldbe designed in a waytherefore the completeledger does not requirereplication eitherTransactionCongestionIf the transaction receives exceed themaximum throughput limit of theledger transaction may occurredwhich may lead additionalincremental user expenses. Even thelimit offered by ripple or ethereum isstill not that enough to meet up realtime requirementThe zero fee transactionsapproach of non-Miningtangle based IOTA couldbe appliedMiningExpenses &Price VolatilityPublic blockchains inevitably engagewith the consensus mining andrewarding demands high priceddedicated hardware arrangementrelying on high power arise suitabilityissues for sensitive IoT devices.Low power consensusapproach, privateblockchain or non miningDTL could be consideredas alternativesData ChainStorage & ScalabilityBitcoin, Ethreum and IOTA havereached respectively 200, 125 and 25gigabytes by January 2019 ascomparison shown by the figurewhich clearly rise voluminous storagemanagement for 75 billion of potentialintelligent devices with anunavoidable scalability challengesIt could be mitigated byintroducing bigdatahandling strategiesincorporated withdistributed ledger16

R. Ziaur et al.

signiﬁcant features of blockchain is it can be applied to assert data integrity and
IoT aﬃliated data eﬀectively by maintaining the sequence of digital signatures
and data hashes. A use case for this can as following [23]. Selected challenges
are outlined in the Fig. 9.

Case 1 : IoT Devices are expected to transfer information to the servers
belongs to the manufacturing company. For example- intelligent thermostat
connected with cloud services determines when to switch on and oﬀ de-
pending of the current weather status can send data to the company about
component wear. Existing solution such as Public Key Infrastructure (PKI)
driven techniques can solve issues like this but Blockchain seems to more
eﬃcient deterring the need to reinvent processes with integrity and conﬁ-
dentiality.

Case 2 : Home or oﬃce alarm machines can be controlled by diﬀerent en-
tity as per their access privileges assigned. In case of it is compromised by
intruders it may require to remotely access by law enforcing agencies. Dis-
tributed Ledger could be a very useful to handle this case with integrated
with millions of devices [24][12].

Case 3 : Let us consider a personal ﬁtness tracker regularly recording health
care dart demands to share with the individual whom it belongs, researcher
and medical personnel. Besides, individual may be willing to get services
accordingly from manufacturer with micro premium business relationship.
The similar scenario could be though when smart homes have weather sta-
tion/air monitoring IoT appliances shared with several parties. In a case
where a machine-manufacturer-practitioner-researcher network seems exces-
sively large distributed ledger may be only smooth solution confronting chal-
lenges.

Case 4 : Even blockchain cand be put in the smart electricity grids to read
the total amount of energy produced by the micro-generator such as solar
farm or wind turbines and also can record the dissipation time period based
which net supplier payment would be issuing. Here distributed ledger can
provide immutable records auditable from either ends and smart contract
can make sure eﬃcient payment process according to the stipulated rate.

6 Conclusion

Applying Blockchain towards eﬃcient and scalable solution of smart and sen-
sor based appliances of Internet of things is an emerging research area that have
been rapidly evolving with an immense potentials and brand-new challenges [25].
There are huge skepticism with on how eﬃciently it could be incorporated with
usual IoT appliances by ensuring maximum throughput and anonymity. The

Blockchain for IoT: A Critical Analysis

17

eﬀort so far made throughout this article can help novice research and develop-
ers in this arena by introducing diﬀerent extant blockchain platforms and some
concerning challenges in general before adopting with IoT devices. Lastly, it has
brought some relevant use cases that could be considered while working on IoT
leading blockchain. The paper brings a critical analysis on how Blockchain plat-
form such as Bitcoin, Ethereum, and IOTA can be adopted for IoT applications.
It concludes that all of those have immense potentials to be used as a develop-
ment platform purposing to enable eﬀective and real time deployment of smart
devices on the distributed network. IOTA has been sought to be more eﬃcient
to solve transaction-latency and mining reward issue, which could be promising
in diﬀerent relevant use cases to save cost by bringing throughput and eﬃciency.
As private, public and protected blockchain have respective merits and trade-oﬀs
in diﬀerent cases, therefore further research could be made to specify the exact
gaps in between [26]. If the challenges and issues aroused could be minimized, it
could be a great mean and benefactor of the future technology driven world.

References

1. K. N. Griggs, O. Ossipova, C. P. Kohlios, A. N. Baccarini, E. A. Howson, and
T. Hayajneh, “Healthcare blockchain system using smart contracts for secure au-
tomated remote patient monitoring,” Journal of medical systems, vol. 42, no. 7,
p. 130, 2018.

2. S. Nakamoto, “Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system,” 2008.
3. O. G. S. M. Global System for Mobile Communications Association,
“Opportunities and use cases
in iot,
https://www.gsma.com/iot/opportunities-distributed-ledger-in-iot/, accessed on
january 2019 [survey made by gartner].”

for distributed ledger

technologies

4. M. A. Ferrag, M. Derdour, M. Mukherjee, A. Derhab, L. Maglaras, and H. Janicke,
“Blockchain technologies for the internet of things: Research issues and challenges,”
IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 2018.

5. I. Butun and P. ¨Osterberg, “A review of distributed access control for blockchain
systems towards securing the internet of things,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 5428–
5441, 2021.

6. X. Yang, X. Yang, X. Yi, I. Khalil, X. Zhou, D. He, X. Huang, and S. Nepal,
“Blockchain-based secure and lightweight authentication for internet of things,”
IEEE Internet of Things Journal, pp. 1–1, 2021.

7. T. Salman, M. Zolanvari, A. Erbad, R. Jain, and M. Samaka, “Security services
using blockchains: A state of the art survey,” IEEE Communications Surveys &
Tutorials, 2018.

8. T. M. Fern´andez-Caram´es and P. Fraga-Lamas, “A review on the use of blockchain

for the internet of things,” IEEE Access, 2018.

9. T. T. A. Dinh, R. Liu, M. Zhang, G. Chen, B. C. Ooi, and J. Wang, “Untangling
blockchain: A data processing view of blockchain systems,” IEEE Transactions on
Knowledge and Data Engineering, vol. 30, no. 7, pp. 1366–1385, 2018.

10. D. Minoli and B. Occhiogrosso, “Blockchain mechanisms for iot security,” Internet

of Things, vol. 1, pp. 1–13, 2018.

11. M. T. Hammi, B. Hammi, P. Bellot, and A. Serhrouchni, “Bubbles of trust: A de-
centralized blockchain-based authentication system for iot,” Computers & Security,
vol. 78, pp. 126–142, 2018.

18

R. Ziaur et al.

12. Z. Rahman, I. Khalil, X. Yi, and M. Atiquzzaman, “Blockchain-based security
framework for a critical industry 4.0 cyber-physical system,” IEEE Communica-
tions Magazine, vol. 59, no. 5, pp. 128–134, 2021.

13. C. Saraf and S. Sabadra, “Blockchain platforms: A compendium,” in Innovative Re-
search and Development (ICIRD), 2018 IEEE International Conference on, pp. 1–
6, IEEE, 2018.

14. J. Abdella and K. Shuaib, “Peer to peer distributed energy trading in smart grids:

A survey,” Energies, vol. 11, no. 6, p. 1560, 2018.

15. N. Kshetri, “Can blockchain strengthen the internet of things?,” IT professional,

vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 68–72, 2017.

16. S. Popov, O. Saa, and P. Finardi, “Equilibria in the tangle,” arXiv preprint

arXiv:1712.05385, 2017.

17. A. Dorri, S. S. Kanhere, and R. Jurdak, “Towards an optimized blockchain for
iot,” in 2017 IEEE/ACM Second International Conference on Internet-of-Things
Design and Implementation (IoTDI), pp. 173–178, IEEE, 2017.

18. V. Buterin et al., “A next-generation smart contract and decentralized application

platform,” Ethreum White Paper, 2014.

19. N. Z. Aitzhan and D. Svetinovic, “Security and privacy in decentralized energy
trading through multi-signatures, blockchain and anonymous messaging streams,”
IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing, vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 840–
852, 2018.

20. D. Eckhoﬀ and I. Wagner, “Privacy in the smart city—applications, technologies,
challenges, and solutions,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 20,
no. 1, pp. 489–516, 2017.

21. M. A. Ferrag, M. Derdour, M. Mukherjee, A. Derhab, L. Maglaras, and H. Janicke,
“Blockchain technologies for the internet of things: Research issues and challenges,”
IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 2188–2204, 2019.

22. A. Dorri, S. S. Kanhere, R. Jurdak, and P. Gauravaram, “Blockchain for iot se-
curity and privacy: The case study of a smart home,” in 2017 IEEE international
conference on pervasive computing and communications workshops (PerCom work-
shops), pp. 618–623, IEEE, 2017.

23. B. Yu, J. Wright, S. Nepal, L. Zhu, J. Liu, and R. Ranjan, “Iotchain: Establishing
trust in the internet of things ecosystem using blockchain,” IEEE Cloud Comput-
ing, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 12–23, 2018.

24. M. S. Hossain, S. Waheed, Z. Rahman, S. Shezan, and M. M. Hossain, “Blockchain
for the security of internet of things: a smart home use case using ethereum,”
International Journal of Recent Technology and Engineering, vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 4601–
4608, 2020.

25. A. Rahman, M. S. Hossain, Z. Rahman, and S. A. Shezan, “Performance enhance-
ment of the internet of things with the integrated blockchain technology using rsk
sidechain,” International Journal of Advanced Technology and Engineering Explo-
ration, vol. 6, no. 61, pp. 257–266, 2019.

26. R. Yang, R. Wakeﬁeld, S. Lyu, S. Jayasuriya, F. Han, X. Yi, X. Yang, G. Amaras-
inghe, and S. Chen, “Public and private blockchain in construction business process
and information integration,” Automation in Construction, vol. 118, p. 103276,
2020.

