Blockchain-based Recommender Systems: Applications, Challenges
and Future Opportunities

Yassine Himeura,¡, Aya Sayeda, Abdullah Alsalemia,b, Faycal Bensaalia, Abbes Amirac,b,
Iraklis Varlamisd, Magdalini Eirinakie, Christos Sardianosd and George Dimitrakopoulosd

aDepartment of Electrical Engineering Qatar University Doha Qatar
bInstitute of Artificial Intelligence De Montfort University Leicester United Kingdom
cDepartment of Computer Science University of Sharjah UAE
dDept. of Informatics and Telematics Harokopio University of Athens Greece
eSan Jose State University San Jose CA USA

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Recommender systems
blockchain
security and privacy preservation
decentralized and collaborative recom-
mender systems
big data and machine learning
scalability.

Recommender systems have been widely used in different application domains including energy-
preservation, e-commerce, healthcare, social media, etc. Such applications require the analysis and
mining of massive amounts of various types of user data, including demographics, preferences, social
interactions, etc. in order to develop accurate and precise recommender systems. Such datasets often
include sensitive information, yet most recommender systems are focusing on the models’ accuracy
and ignore issues related to security and the users’ privacy. Despite the efforts to overcome these
problems using different risk reduction techniques, none of them has been completely successful
in ensuring cryptographic security and protection of the users’ private information. To bridge this
gap, the blockchain technology is presented as a promising strategy to promote security and privacy
preservation in recommender systems, not only because of its security and privacy salient features,
but also due to its resilience, adaptability, fault tolerance and trust characteristics. This paper presents
a holistic review of blockchain-based recommender systems covering challenges, open issues and
solutions. Accordingly, a well-designed taxonomy is introduced to describe the security and privacy
challenges, overview existing frameworks and discuss their applications and benefits when using
blockchain before indicating opportunities for future research.

1. Introduction

Recommender systems (RSs), initially introduced to ad-
dress the problem of improving the customer experience and
retention in e-commerce sites Schafer et al. (1999) has since
become a ubiquitous and often anticipated functionality of
many online interactions, from movie and song recommen-
dations Deldjoo et al. (2020b) to applications related to
tourism Hong and Jung (2021), social networks Ghafari et al.
(2020), health Saha et al. (2020), energy and smart cities
Quijano-Sánchez et al. (2020), and many more.

The rise in popularity of Internet of things (IoT), Internet-
connected devices (e.g. mobile phones, tablets, laptops,
smart sensors, etc.), and sensors, has resulted in the gen-
eration of massive amounts of data Deebak and Al-Turjman
(2020); Katarya and Verma (2017). These huge quantities
of data, characterized by the “five V’s”, namely velocity,
variety, veracity, volume, and value is referred to as big
data Gupta and Katarya (2018). Having the ability to both
generate and process big data dramatically transformed
many aspects of everyday life, including social network
interactions, e-commerce, healthcare services, energy etc
Katarya and Verma (2018). Appropriate processing of big

yassine.himeur@qu.edu.qa (Y. Himeur); as1516645@qu.edu.qa (A.

Sayed); a.alsalemi@qu.edu.qa,abdullah.alsalemi@my365.dmu.ac.uk (A.
Alsalemi); f.bensaali@qu.edu.qa (F. Bensaali);
aamira@sharjah.ac.aea,abbes.amira@dmu.ac.uk (A. Amira);
varlamis@hua.gr (I. Varlamis); magdalini.eirinaki@sjsu.edu (M. Eirinaki);
sardianos@hua.gr (C. Sardianos); gdimitra@hua.gr (G. Dimitrakopoulos)

ORCID(s):

data can provide the users with significant knowledge about
their health, environment, and others Fu et al. (2018) and
allows them to adapt to changes on time. However, as perva-
sive and ubiquitous such applications are, the characteristics
of big data makes processing them a challenging problem.

While big data analytics have long been used to support
humans in processing such input and making decisions,
the need to introduce new, scalable RS algorithms that go
beyond the simple rating-based input and can incorporate
diverse types and huge amounts of data has become ev-
ident Zhang et al. (2019). In this context, the significant
advancement of machine learning has helped the RS com-
munity to move from traditional RSs, that use clustering,
nearest neighbors, matrix factorization, and collaborative
filtering Gupta and Katarya (2019); Katarya (2018), to a
new generation of RSs, which are powered by complex deep
learning systems Gupta and Katarya (2021a) and knowledge
graph Guo et al. (2020). This has brought rise to a broad
and diverse set of application domains for RSs, including e-
commerce Jerripothula et al. (2020), social media Anandhan
et al. (2018) and networks Eirinaki et al. (2018), e-learning
Wu et al. (2015), social behavior analysis Chen et al. (2019),
energy saving Himeur et al. (2021), healthcare Deng and
Huangfu (2019), IoT Wei et al. (2020), tourism Borràs et al.
(2014), fashion Nguyen et al. (2014), and food industry
Toledo et al. (2019), among others. Table 1 presents a
summary of various data sources that are used as input in
such RSs, in addition to the typical <user, item, rating>

Y. Himeur et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 1 of 25

Blockchain-based Recommender Systems

Table 1
Summary of the types of information used by Recommendation Systems.

Information

Item attributes

User attributes

User ratings for the items

Implicit user preferences

Recommendation feedback

User behavioural information

Contextual information

Social information

Domain knowledge

User purchase
or consumption history

Description
Descriptive information about the items (i.e. their features). Examples include
brand, color, model, category, place of origin, etc.
Descriptive information about the users (i.e. their features). Examples include age,
marital status, education, demographics etc.
Explicit user feedback, in the form of ratings. can be scalar or binary.
Information that is implicitly derived and relates to the user’s choices. Examples are
clicks, tags, and comments.
The user response to the recommendations. It is expressed as accept/reject values,
positive or negative labels, etc. Can be used to define (implicitly and explicitly)
the user preferences.
Implicit data recorded during the interaction of the user with the broader system.
Information on the context of recommendations. Examples are time, date, location,
user status etc.
Data related to the user’s social graph, including connections and interactions
with other users, friendship relations (or similar) to other users, community
membership, or both.
Background or prior information, empirical knowledge and rules that define the
relation between content items and the user stereotype. This type of knowledge
is usually static, but can also vary over time.

List of content items that have previously been purchased or consumed by the user.

triplets, demonstrating the diversity of information used in
RSs.

The value and sensitivity of such user-related data is
undeniable. While several researchers have looked into de-
veloping privacy-preserving RSs WAN (2018), the majority
of research that concerns developing new algorithms and
models disregards this very important aspect of privacy
and security, focusing on optimizing for accuracy and/or
scalability. In addition, RSs are vulnerable to external attacks
(e.g. injecting or manipulating data used for training the
models) by adversaries. When focusing on security and
privacy, ensuring that the data is safely stored has become
a much more challenging task in the age of cloud (and thus
decentralized) computing. Therefore, while there have been
efforts to employ various risk reduction techniques, none
of them has been completely successful, especially with
regards to cryptographic security and the protection of the
users’ private information. In the past few years, we have
observed the success of the blockchain technology as a de-
centralized way to ensure security and privacy preservation.
This technology can be leveraged to solve one of the biggest
challenges in RSs and thus this cross-domain area has started
to gain interest from researchers in both communities.

In that context, by integrating blockchain into RSs, it
becomes possible to (i) build trust-based and secure systems
using the benefits of blockchain-supported secure multi-
party computation, that adds smart contracts to the main
blockchain based RS protocol; (ii) secure the control of
users’ information because the blockchain enables a safe
data processing for the users in online portals. This is mainly

due to its secure distributed ledger used to store data transac-
tions; and (iii) provide the essential mechanisms for ensuring
data protection and data integrity by adopting some encryp-
tion technologies. All these features together, along with the
complicated structure and algorithms of blockchain, make
blockchain-based RSs harder to manipulate and tamper with
in comparison with conventional storage systems.

To that end, this paper presents, to the best of the authors’
knowledge, the first review of blockchain-based RSs. We
adopt a well-defined taxonomy to categorize the state-of-
the-art blockchain-based RSs We first discuss the security
and privacy challenges in RSs along with the characteristics,
working concept, and the blockchain’s potential impact on
RSs. Subsequently, the blockchain-based RS architecture is
explained followed by an overview of the main types of
blockchain-based RSs. Next, the applications of blockchain-
based RSs are described and various examples are portrayed.
We then conduct a critical analysis to identify the drawbacks
and limitations as well as open issues. Finally, we discuss
relevant future research directions that will attract significant
research and development in the near and far future. To
summarize, the contributions of this work are as follows:

• It develops a bridge between two research worlds
that can significantly benefit from each other, namely
“blockchain” and “recommender systems (RSs)”. It
creates a unique map for researchers on blockchain-
based RSs that comprises challenges, open issues, and
solutions and illustrates the main application domains.

• It provides a framework for the development of de-
centralized RSs that take advantage of the blockchain

Y. Himeur et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 2 of 25

Blockchain-based Recommender Systems

Figure 1: The main steps for introducing blockchain-based RS solutions and going beyond the current state of the art.

ledger to securely store data and separate them from
services.

the proposed framework for the blockchain and RSs research
community.

• It compares the performance of various existing frame-
works with respect to different parameters, including
time computation and accuracy of recommendations,
to inform the state-of-the-art.

• It examines horizontal issues of RSs, such as scala-
bility, explainability, distributed processing, and load
balancing, which raise new research challenges for
blockchain researchers and developers.

• It provides a set of future directions and orientations
for improving the performance of blockchain-based
RSs and addressing some of the current challenges.

This paper follows a specific workflow in order to cover
the novel field of blockchain-based RSs and pave the path for
researchers in the field, as depicted in Fig. 1. We begin with
the open challenges of the more mature technology, which is
RSs, and the needs that blockchain can cover. We continue
with the main features of blockchain technology and explain
how they can fit the requirements of RSs. We then proposes a
core architecture for blockchain-based RSs and details on the
main implementation types that are available. The next steps
comprise the overview of application domains for the new
solution and the open issues that have arised so far. Finally,
the future research opportunities are presented.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2
provides an overview of blockchain-based RSs, starting with
the main challenges of RSs and the main blockchain features
that can be of benefit to RSs, followed by a discussion on
the impact of blockchain’s use to future RSs, a presentation
of the main architecture of a blockchain-based RS, and the
various types of blockchain-based RSs and their applica-
tions. Section 3 includes a critical analysis that highlights the
drawbacks and limitations of the proposed technology and
discusses the main open issues, whereas Section 4 provides
the directions for future research on the topic. Finally, Sec-
tion 5 concludes the paper by highlighting the importance of

2. Overview of blockchain-based RSs

The use of blockchain technology in RSs is rather new,
with the first paper been published in 2016 Frey et al.
(2016a), and the majority of related work having been pub-
lished within the last two years. In order to provide a proper
coverage of the field and discover the challenges and oppor-
tunities for further research, it is important: i) to perform a
review of related works and discuss their contributions, and
ii) to organize these into a comprehensive taxonomy that will
highlight the main research sub-areas and the active research
topics in each one of them.

This will allow readers to get a better understanding
of the various application domains of blockchain-based
RSs, learn about the characteristics of the two domains
(blockchain and RSs) and become aware of the challenges
that arise from their merging. At the same time, it will
allow researchers to gain useful
insights on the future
research directions on this field and beyond, especially in
emerging technologies that are expected to affect research in
blockchain-based RSs in the near future. In order to better
organise the survey of related work in the area of blockchain-
based RSs, we follow the taxonomy illustrated in Fig. 2.

2.1. Security and privacy challenges in RSs (C)

As in all machine learning algorithms, the success of
RS models relies on the quality and quantity of data. The
more the system knows about the past history of a user, the
better the quality of the recommendations. Moreover, when
additional information such as the one included in Table 1
is incorporated, and the more accurate and detailed it is, the
more useful and personalized the recommendations made to
the user are. In this context, due to the sensitivity of users’
data, various security and privacy issues emerge from an
illegal access or vulnerable processing of such data Du et al.
(2018). The more specific the information about user profile,

Y. Himeur et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 3 of 25

Blockchain-based Recommender Systems

Figure 2: Taxonomy of blockchain based RSs.

preferences, habits and actions, the larger the potential of
leaking and threatening the user’s privacy. Unfortunately,
current RS algorithms and implementations usually neglect
the potential leaks of personally identifiable information that
risk of malicious attacks and the threats they can bring to
user privacy Deldjoo et al. (2021).

A closely related concept is that of trust. In the context of
RSs, trust has multiple meanings. First, it is related to trust-
worthy and secure services - i.e. the users trust that the RS
handles their sensitive identifiable data properly and protects
their privacy. Second, the users should trust the generated
recommendations for their precision and correctness Wang
et al. (2018), in order to increase the chance of recommenda-
tions to be accepted. Finally, there is a third definition of trust
in the context of trust-aware recommendations Eirinaki et al.
(2014). This refers to social RSs that leverage the circle of
trust of the user to enhance the quality of recommendations.
The focus of this work is on the security and privacy-related
meanings of trust so the third meaning will not be elaborated
further.

C1. Privacy: In RSs, preserving the privacy of users is
of utmost importance, because the RS generally gathers
and stores various sensitive data related to the identity,
usage of utilities, preferences, social information, etc. Zhan
et al. (2010). If a potential intruder gains access to the RS
engine, it would be possible to mine and steal sensitive
user data, such as preferences, habits, location, etc. This
problem becomes even more prevalent in applications such
as healthcare, where the data stored might include even more
sensitive information Kaur et al. (2018); Xu et al. (2019).

Authentication is considered a key factor in almost any
knowledge-based system, and is the first layer of security in
the digital world. It also has an important contribution in
creating a trustful relation between the users and the RS.
To access the services of a RS, a user should first connect
to the RS network and authenticate themselves to the RS
platform, which inspects the reliability of claimed identities
by matching different user-related information. However,
another layer of vulnerability is introduced as most RSs
and the respective data are deployed and stored on third-
party cloud frameworks. This may increase the risk of users’
privacy violation.

Y. Himeur et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 4 of 25

Blockchainbased Recommender systemsFuture directionsApplications (A)Types of blockchainbased RSs (T)D1. Scalability in Blockchain-based RSsD2. Explainabilityin RSsD3. Federated LearningO4. Cooperative Computing in blockchain-based RSsO5. Blockchain-based RSon edge/fog devicesO6. Reinforcement learningfor blockchain-based RSA1. EnergyA2. HealthcareA3. E-commerceA4. Internet of things (IoT)A5. Social networksA6. E-learningT1. Secure RSsT2. Privacy preservationbased RSsT3. Trust based RSsSecurity and privacychallenges in RSs (C)Characteristics and working concept (W)Blockchainpotential impact (P)C3. Secure communicationC2. TrustworthinessC1. PrivacyP3. Decentralized andcollaborative RSsP2. Secure multipartycomputationP1. Privacy preservationW3. Consensus algorithmsW2. Smart contractsW1. Striking features (F)F1. DecentralizationF2. ImmutabilityF1. DecentralizationF2. ImmutabilityBlockchain-based Recommender Systems

The subject of privacy protection and security in RS has
been studied from various aspects including the legal and
regulatory framework, and the technology-related data en-
cryption and distributed storage and processing techniques
Xu et al. (2018).

C2. Trustworthiness: The precision and correctness of the
recommendations can deteriorate due to several reasons, and
mainly due to the training process itself. Even in cases where
everything is done properly, the quality and trustworthiness
of the recommendations can be compromised, either due to
bias existing in the data, or due to malicious attacks. Despite
the many and clearly defined algorithms employed by the
recommendation engines, users are generally not provided
with enough data and convenient reasoning that will allow to
comprehend precisely why and how an item/action is being
recommended to them. This leads to “black-box” models,
which may hide inherent biases in the training dataset or the
overall design that might go undetected. Explainability of
recommendations is a prevalent challenge not only for RSs,
but for all ML models in general Li et al. (2020b); Zhang and
Chen (2020).

Finally, and most related to security and privacy, the
dataset and/or the model might be compromised by ma-
licious attacks aiming to achieve a particular outcome in
the recommendation process. RSs can suffer from different
kinds of malicious attacks launched by hackers who would
try to leak the identities of the authenticated users and
bias the recommendations, such as shilling attacks Cai and
Zhang (2019); Zhang and Wang (2020), adversarial attacks
Cao et al. (2020b); Deldjoo et al. (2020a), profile injection
attacks Williams et al. (2007); Zhang and Zhou (2014), and
poisoning attacks Fang et al. (2018); Hu et al. (2019).

Informally, the robustness of a RS measures its ability
to prevent attackers from manipulating its output. When
such attacks are targeted to rating-based RSs, they usually
include injection of fake information on a user profile (e.g.
fake ratings), generation of fake profiles that intentionally
rate specific items higher than others (which are randomly
assigned low ratings), or attacks to nuke specific items. To
that end, robustness, which refers to delivering stable, secure
and tailored recommendations, is becoming one of the most
challenging security issue for RSs Hurley (2011); Mobasher
et al. (2007).

A variety of strategies that can be employed to build RSs
in a more robust way have been proposed. CAPTCHA has
been successfully used in several online systems to identify
humans vs. robots and can be applied in the RS context as
well Ahn et al. (2003). Social trust Golbeck (2008) has also
been widely explored Resnick and Sami (2007, 2008) as
a way to identify adversary behaviors. A variety of robust
matrix factorization methods for designing attack-resistant
RSs have also been proposed Mehta and Hofmann (2008);
Mehta and Nejdl (2008). An overview of attack-resistant
RSs can be found in Aggarwal (2016) while a very recent
survey of attack-detection approaches for RSs has appeared
in Rezaimehr and Dadkhah (2021).

C3. Secure Communications: Although RSs need to im-
plement the minimum security requirements, communica-
tions between users and the RS engine should implement
all known security practices. RSs interact with users by
sending and collecting different kinds of data. Moreover,
data might be transmitted to remote cloud servers if the
RS requires important computation and storage resources
Alsubaei et al. (2019). Consequently, in RSs, the data com-
municated between a RS and users is usually assumed to be
correct and authenticated. However, in practical scenarios,
this assumption could be wrong since malicious users can
manipulate the information of authenticated users or bias
the recommendations for their own benefits O’Mahony et al.
(2005).

2.2. Blockchain-based RS: characteristics and

working concept (W)

RSs, initially appearing as content personalisation so-
lutions for the Web, quickly expanded to the real-life with
many applications ranging from health and wellness, to
tourism and energy efficiency. The last few years, IoT have
created a new landscape for applications (in smart cities and
homes, healthcare, agriculture etc), where recommendations
can be useful for many reasons. The ability of IoT to act as or
on behalf of human beings further expanded the applications
of IoT-based RSs and raised the need for human trust to the
generated (and directly actionable) recommendations.

The popularity of RSs and the profit that they can bring
to the sellers of the recommended products, has increased the
interest of sellers to bias recommendations and manipulate
the RSs for their benefit Adomavicius et al. (2019). Since
trust is one of the main requirements for the acceptance of
RSs technology, it is important to establish trust both to the
providers of information (e.g. users, sensors, etc.), to ensure
that they do not introduce bias Mohammadi et al. (2019),
and to the recommendation algorithms, for being robust to
adversarial attacks Du et al. (2018).

Blockchain offers a tamper-resistant ledger, where all
transactions are recorded in a decentralized network to guar-
antee anonymity, integrity, and data security. Its character-
istics may be used for RS development, where privacy and
trust are key values for the decision making process, and
can go beyond existing protocols for privacy-preserving data
collection Beg et al. (2021). For example, in healthcare,
users wish to share their sensitive information in exchange
of better medical recommendations, but still ask for privacy
and protection of their data from malicious adversaries (e.g.
confidentiality, protection from forgery or modifications)
Cao et al. (2019). Similarly, in social network RSs, users
may require privacy of their context or preferences (e.g.
they do not want to expose their exact location, or the exact
items they viewed or liked), whilst they still want recommen-
dations for similar items, actions or places Polatidis et al.
(2017).

W1. Striking features: Blockchain networks are governed
by the following properties:

Y. Himeur et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 5 of 25

Blockchain-based Recommender Systems

• Continuous availability: Unlike traditional servers,
blockchain practically never stops working, neither
due to failure, nor due to maintenance.

this regard, the stability of blockchain-based RSs aims
at enabling an external observer in determining, in
finite time, which blocks will eventually be approved.

• Reliability: The system completes its operations con-
sistently and successfully, while providing explana-
tions for possible transaction failures.

• Openness: The blockchain does not single out specific
users or computers. The operating rules are open
and transparent, since blockchain also relies on us-
ing trusted mathematical algorithms for regulating
the behaviors of transactions. Moreover, exchanging
information between nodes in the blockchain sys-
tems does not necessitate mutual trust. On the other
hand, this feature depends on the type of blockchain,
where three main scenarios are identified: (i) public
blockchain, where it is completely open; (ii) consor-
tium blockchain, where it is open to particular groups
or organizations that have been given permission to
access it; and (iii) private blockchain, which is only
open to an entity or a specific user with a completely
internal control.

• Security: At the level of each transaction, blockchain
ensures that the property stays and is transferred to the
right users. As for the operation of the entire system,
blockchain protects users from theft, unauthorized
access, double spending and fraudulent transactions.
In doing so, blockchain relies on the concepts of
cryptography, consensus, and decentralization, where
data is organized in blocks and every block includes
a transaction (or bundle of transactions). Every new
block is linked to all its previous blocks using a cryp-
tographic chain, where it is nearly impossible to hack
it. Moreover, all transactions within the blocks should
be approved and decided by a consensus mechanism,
which ensures that every transaction is correct and
true. Asymmetric encryption algorithms are mainly
applied in the blockchain, where they are responsible
on completing encryption/decryption bay using two
asymmetric ciphers, the “public key” and the “pri-
vate key”. Commonly used asymmetric encryption
algorithms in blockchain are Rivest-Shamir-Adleman
(RSA) and elliptic curve cryptography (ECC) Chandel
et al. (2019).

• Durability: Even in difficult conditions, the blockchain
can confirm, but also properly transfer ownership of its
data, while being resistant to a wide range of attacks.

• Final Stability: It can be seen from different perspec-
tives. Indeed, due to the way the blockchain works,
there are some cases where the answers given by the
system are not constant, but over time the whole sys-
tem eventually returns stable answers. Put differently,
stability also refers to the case in which there is a
positive rate of block arrivals and where blocks can
be approved for a fixed peer-to-peer network (P2P). In

• Integrity: The behavior of the system does not include
logical errors. The blockchain maintains the integrity
of the data and ensures the security of transactions, as
well as their history.

Blockchain technology offers many advantages com-
pared to traditional database management systems (DBMSs)
for storing data. The characteristics may vary between
private consortium and public blockchains Mohan (2019);
Zheng et al. (2017), but they can be beneficial for RSs.

F1. Decentralization: The blockchain technology is
characterized by a decentralized form of consensus between
counterparties, with low transaction and control costs as
opposed to traditional centralized systems. The blockchain
contains information, similar to a database, but in a secure
way that maintains data in a P2P network. In other words,
the blockchain is a combination of computers connected to
each other instead of a central server, which means that the
whole network is decentralized. The peers that participate in
the blockchain and keep record of the transactions are the
keepers, who operate with specific protocols and perform
mining tasks for allowing the chain to expand with new
nodes.

In decentralized blockchain networks, the users who
keep the transaction records vote on the historical events
that they think are correct and according to these votes
the users (agents) of the system decide the status of the
blockchain using a consensus algorithm. The decentralized
nature of public blockchains (e.g. Bitcoin, Ethereum) means
that network participants must be able to reach an agreement
on the common state of the blockchain. Unanimous consen-
sus between network nodes results in a single blockchain
containing verified data, such as network-confirmed transac-
tions. However, network nodes cannot always reach a unan-
imous consensus on the future state of the blockchain. This
leads to forks that are all valid. In the decentralized trading
system, the creation of blockchain promoted a different way
of recording and processing information that does not need
to be trusted between the different entities involved in them
while reducing costs, i.e. blockchain removes the need for
trust between entities as they are subject to the authority of
the technical system that they are convinced is permanent,
indelible, and unalterable.

The recording of decentralized journals must not be
possessed by deceptive acts of individuals participating in
the network. To avoid this and prevent the counterparties
from taking such actions, penalties are usually imposed on
the wider social network. Fines range from loss of revenue to
natural costs associated with the global network resources.
In centralized payment networks, unanimity is achieved with
confidence in the recording of transactions. This trust can
be achieved either because extra money is given to secure
genuine transactions or because penalties are imposed in the
event of fraud.

Y. Himeur et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 6 of 25

Blockchain-based Recommender Systems

Decentralisation applies well to the case of RSs when
privacy Duriakova et al. (2019) or scalability Sardianos et al.
(2017) are the main concerns. In contrast to data obfuscation,
anonymisation, differential privacy, and encryption, which
are usually applied to centralized systems, decentralized
storage and processing of information used by the RSs (e.g.
user ratings) eliminate the need of users to exchange the
actual information with other users or a centralised node.
Instead, they can share only the minimum information for the
recommendation algorithm to operate. For example, in the
case of matrix factorization (MF), the users share only the
loss gradients of local MF models Duriakova et al. (2019).
When it is not possible to guarantee unlimited processing
and memory resources for storing and processing user rat-
ings, distributed solutions can be employed to distribute the
load among lower capacity peers, each one having access to
a smaller network of users and the information they share
Sardianos et al. (2017).

F2. Immutability: Immutability of records is one of the
most useful characteristics of blockchain technology, since
it protects the input data of the recommendation algorithm
from unwanted changes Hofmann et al. (2017). Immutability
facilitates the auditing process and brings more trust and
integrity to the data stored in the blockchain.

In order to store a transaction in the blockchain network,
a timestamp is added to it embedded into a “block” of
information that also contains the hash of the previous block
in the chain, and a hashing process cryptographically secures
it. When a block is tampered, the blockchain breaks, and the
reason for this break is directly available. For example, in the
case of collaborative filtering algorithms the main input for
the RS are the ratings of users for items (known as the utility
matrix). An adversarial attack may target the utility matrix
in order to modify ratings and affect the recommendations.
Using a public blockchain the ratings will be stored on a
large number of nodes, thus making it nearly impossible
to tamper with them. In a similar manner, when content-
based or knowledge-based RSs are employed to tackle the
sparsity of ratings, there is still the option for an attacker to
tamper with the user or item profiles by adding or removing
content, and consequently bias the recommendations. The
use of blockchain for storing profile information can take
advantage of the immutability property and protect this
information from unauthorised modifications.

F3. Auditability: Auditability is an official examination
and verification of transaction records performed by third
party experts either internally or externally. The ability of
blockchain to act as a distributed ledger, where transactions
are stored and validated by the participants on a continuous
basis, has shifted the centralised audit paradigm towards a
new self-auditing format Broby and Paul (2017).

The main problem in digital auditing is how to achieve

the consent of all parties and verify the history of events/transactions.
Centralized trading networks capitalise on trust to a centrally
controlled transaction auditing mechanism. The blockchain
trading system promoted a different way of transaction

auditing that does not rely on trust between the involved
entities. This trust can be built by investing to secure
genuine transactions or by detecting and penalizing fraud.
In a distributed ledger like blockchain, auditing brings new
challenges Liu et al. (2019). The malleability of transactions
leaves space for transaction modifications which are hard
to trace Andrychowicz et al. (2015). Another challenge for
auditors are blockchain forks, where two or more groups
decide to recognise only their own blocks as valid (e.g.
because all other blocks differ in size, or follow different
rules). In that case, auditors must be aware of long or short-
term forks in order to properly verify the transactions. A
major challenge for auditors relies on the way transactions
can be performed, using only the necessary private keys,
from any point of the network. This makes it harder to notice
all transactions that take place and validate their origins.

F4. Fault tolerance: Fault tolerance is the ability of
a system to continue to operate even in the presence of
errors. In general, fault tolerance is related to the concept
of reliability, i.e. the continuous uninterrupted operation of
a system, without fail. A fault tolerant system should be
able to manage both hardware and software faults, power
outages, and other types of problems that are unpredictable
in order to continue to meet its specifications. Fault tolerance
can be based on redundancy of processes and resources,
failure masking, and recovery using self-inspection and self-
healing capabilities Egwutuoha et al. (2013). Reliability
is the ability of a system to avoid failures, which occur
more frequently or are more severe, and also avoid longer
downtime, which is not acceptable to its users. Otherwise
the system is considered unreliable, i.e. it does not persuade
its users to use it.

When a faulty service fails equally for all users and all
of them face the same consequences, then the failure has
homogeneity, e.g. an inactive server computer displays a
similar message in browsers. When the service fails only to a
few users, and yet there are some other users who continue to
have the right service, then we have heterogeneity in failure,
which is often referred to as the Byzantine failure and is
one of the most difficult problems to solve in modern fault
tolerance systems. The difficulty mainly lies in the detection
of the fault, since the service status is constantly changing.
One of the main features of blockchain technology is
its ability to form consensus of all participants upon a
decentralized and shared transaction log. This decentralisa-
tion of trust is achieved by combining cryptography with
smart incentives that allow participants to agree on the state
changes of the ledger. The distributed nature of blockchain
that allows nodes to temporarily fail, and the consensus that
is achieved to a common state of the ledger, even when nodes
temporarily fail, makes it an ideal platform for developing
Byzantine Fault Tolerant (BFT) solutions Lamport et al.
(1982).

In private or restricted blockchain environments, where
an individual enterprise or a credible authority is responsible
for the blockchain fault tolerance, the fully BFT may be
unnecessary. In situations like this, a crash fault-tolerant

Y. Himeur et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 7 of 25

Blockchain-based Recommender Systems

(CFT) consent protocol may be more than sufficient. In a
multilateral, collaborative and decentralized use case, novel
security methods that guarantee confidentiality, integrity,
and availability (CIA) are needed. BFT protocols that estab-
lish traceability and accountability of the various actors are
the required tools for achieving trust Stifter et al. (2019).

Trust is one of the factors that affects user acceptance of
RSs Pu et al. (2012) and can build on the competence and
usefulness of recommendations, as well as on the integrity
and consistency of the RS. Fault tolerance can be beneficial
in the latter direction, since it will guarantee the uninter-
rupted and benevolent operation of the recommendation
engine.
W2. Smart contracts: The advent of Ethereum blockchain
in 2015, introduced the concept of Smart Contracts. Smart
contracts are computer programs that codify the business
logic behind an agreement, which are activated and executed
when certain conditions are met automatically. They can be
securely deployed in blockchain, in order to guarantee to all
sides of the agreement that when all the pre-set conditions
are met, the contractual terms will be enforced automatically
and will always produce the same result for all parts of the
agreement. Smart contracts are automatically activated and
the transactions are recorded in the blockchain making the
information unchanged and unquestionable. This removes
the need for a third party entity to act as an arbitrator, and
avoids the influence or manipulation that this entity could
have applied to the execution of the contract. These proper-
ties add to the reliability and availability of smart contracts
and make them ideal tools for decentralized applications
(DApps).

Smart contracts are an important element in processing
information in the blockchain. If the blockchain represents
a secure process of distributed information storage, then
smart contracts complement this process by integrating it
into a standalone Turing machine. When the programming
language is Turing-Complete, which means that it allows
the calculation of complex operations and functions, smart
contracts can execute and process data on the blockchain
executed either automatically or after an external stimulus
that may come from an IoT device or from an external ERP
program. For example, for a truck that transports sensitive
products from point A to point B, the transport contract states
that the temperature should not rise above -10 degrees Cel-
sius. If for some reasons this temperature rises and becomes
-8 degrees Celsius then automatically a sensor informs the
blockchain and a smart contract “wakes up” and records this
movement. The final recipient is aware that the temperature
has risen above limits and can exercise penalties as stipulated
in the agreed contract. The fact that the smart contract code
runs on the blockchain makes it almost impossible to falsify
information. Also, the distributed structure of the program
and its simultaneous execution on all nodes of the network
prevents its execution by a malicious or a compromised node
that has been victim of a cyber-attack.

Smart contracts can be beneficial in the case of dis-
tributed machine learning frameworks, where participants

share data and local models that require resources for being
trained. Using smart contracts, participants can share their
models publicly on the blockchain, where they will be free
to use for inference. Primarily, this allows to create a value
chain of shared resources and secondly it leaves space for
profit, to the model providers, using rewarding schemes
Harris and Waggoner (2019). Smart contracts can be used to
check whether data or model updates (in the case of incre-
mental algorithms) have improved the model performance
that is periodically evaluated against a test dataset. Based on
the contribution, each partner is rewarded at the end of this
process. A distributed matrix factorisation scenario, where
various partners are sharing their local models can be an
ideal application of smart contracts in RSs Lisi et al. (2019).
W3. Consensus algorithms: Proof of Work (PoW) is the
oldest of consensus algorithms. It was first implemented in
Bitcoin, but the real idea has been around for quite some
time. In PoW, validators (referred to as miners) record the
data they want to add until they produce a specific solution.
The PoW protocol sets the conditions for what makes a block
valid. For example, only a block whose hash starts with 00
will be valid. Miners can modify a parameter in their data to
produce a different result for each guess, until they get the
correct hash. In large blockchains, the stake is quite high. To
compete with other miners, one needs a warehouse full of
hardware that would deliver high computing power to build
a valid blockchain. The reward, in mining, is the cost of these
machines and the electricity required to operate them. The
only way to recoup the initial investment is to do mining,
which is a great reward if a new block is successfully added
to the blockchain.

Proof of Stake (PoS) was proposed in the early days of
Bitcoin as an alternative of PoW. In a PoS system, no min-
ers, specialized material, or bulk application are required.
PoS does not rely to external resources (electric power or
harware), but on an internal mechanism - the encryption.
The rules differ in each protocol, but there is generally a
minimum amount of money that a user must possess to meet
the entry criteria. More specifically, validators’ money are
locked in wallets and validators bet on the next block of
transactions that will enter the blockchain. When a block is
selected by the protocol, stakers receive a percentage of the
transaction cost, depending on the amount they have bet (i.e.
locked). The more money they have locked in, the more they
earn. If they try to cheat by proposing invalid transactions,
they will lose a part (or all) of their share. So PoS relies on a
mechanism similar to PoW, where honesty is more profitable
than a dishonest behavior.

Many alternatives to the above have also been proposed
in the literature and have been adopted by other networks,
such as the Delayed PoW, Leased Proof of Stake Consensus,
Proof of Authority, Proof of Burn, Delegated Proof of Stake,
Hybrid PoW/PoS Consensus Sankar et al. (2017). The main
concept in all these consensus mechanisms is that stake-
holders create new blocks and are rewarded for this task,
whereas other nodes are verifying these blocks, which are
added to the blockchain. In order to secure the network and

Y. Himeur et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 8 of 25

Blockchain-based Recommender Systems

the information it holds, the cost of changing information is
increased since multiple nodes must be modified in order the
change to happen.

2.3. Blockchain’s potential impact on RSs (P)

The concept of trust is of utmost importance for RSs,
especially when collaborative filtering algorithms are em-
ployed. As explained in the introduction, it is of equal
importance for the RS to keep malicious users outside of
the network, and to guarantee that the information used by
the recommendation algorithm (e.g. ratings), the learned
models, and the produced recommendations are protected
from adversarial attacks. Blockchain and smart contracts
can be beneficial in this direction Yeh and Kashef (2020).
Security and trustworthiness are two features that blockchain
offers using the PoW and the immutability of the ledger
respectively.
P1. Privacy preservation: In RSs, recommendations are
generated based on users’ past data. To design accurate
and efficient RSs, large volumes of high quality data are
required. Consequently, companies and RS developers are
gathering massive quantities of user data, which are usually
very sensitive. However users’ privacy concerns are often
ignored. Companies and RS developers develop various risk
reduction strategies for addressing the privacy problems, in-
cluding cryptographic security, data anonymization and ob-
fuscation. Nonetheless, user data are still subject to various
security and privacy issues, such as transaction linkability,
recovery of encryption keys, etc. Blockchain offers novel
crypto-privacy methods to further strengthen data security
and privacy, thus allowing users to become anonymous and
protect their profiles from being exposed. Accordingly, to
preserve the user privacy and increase the security, block-
ckain uses different cryptographic strategies, among them:
(i) cryptographic hash functions, which help in creating a
unique output (as digest) to every data input (of any size)
Lu (2019); (ii) asymptotic cryptography approaches(olso
known as public key cryptography) which deploy two keys,
i.e. a public key and a private, key that are mathematically
related to each other He et al. (2017); (iii) cryptographic
addresses, which are alphanumeric sets of characters derived
from blockchain network users’ public keys based on cryp-
tographic hash functions Li et al. (2018). Decentralisation of
data is one of its advantages, which minimizes the risk of a
user profile to be completely retrieved even if one or a few
nodes are compromised. Keyless signature infrastructures
(KSIs) and SSL certificate devices that have been developed
for blockchain allow users to verify the integrity of their
data and signatures without revealing their keys. All these,
along with the resilience of the blockchain P2P architectures
are guarantees for a secure and seamless data processing
Niranjanamurthy et al. (2019).

Data tampering is among the most fascinating privacy
protection problems. Customers need to exchange their per-
sonal details with these online company sites for different
individual or business purposes Al Omar et al. (2019). Tak-
ing advantage of this exchange of knowledge about a person,

online business sites collect client details, including the most
confidential client information, to conduct a separate data
collection without the permission of the client. To some
degree there is a shortage of safe monitoring of client details
in such applications. Blockchain technology guarantees con-
fidentiality in the processing of data for clients on these web
platforms since it is a secure public ledger for storing data
transactions. With the use of smart contracts, blockchain-
based applications can guarantee the use of data for specific
purposes only (intent) and thus increase the trust of their
users McKinney et al. (2017).
P2. Secure multiparty computation: The penetration of
information and communication technology (ICTs) in our
everyday lives led to a data explosion Casino and Patsakis
(2019) and fed people with more choices that they can handle
or probably like. In order to filter information, we need more
personal data, which raises privacy issues for these schemes.
Although autonomous advisors can protect privacy, they do
not have the required efficiency to be broadly implemented.
Secure Multi-Party Computation (MPC) provides improved
anonymity and precision Zhou et al. (2021), so if it is
properly combined with blockchain, it can overcome privacy
and confidence challenges Bosri et al. (2021); Frey et al.
(2016a).
P3. Decentralized and collaborative RS: As a decentralized
infrastructure, blockchain is regarded as substitute to the
shared centralized data storage systems Wang et al. (2019a).
Authors in Harris and Waggoner (2019) developed a plat-
form for collaborative dataset creation and continuous ML
model update with the use of smart contracts. The model is
then made openly available on the blockchain for inference.
In order to ensure the consistency of the model with respect
to any test collection, both financial and non-financial (gam-
ified) compensation mechanisms can be promoted, for the
provision of good results. The Ethereum blockchain1, can
be the basis for a similar implementation.

Authors in Arif et al. (2020) present a data-sharing
framework scheme that employs a blockchain-based decen-
tralized network, where each node can be linked directly
to other nodes, in order to facilitate data exchange between
nodes. Each form of node has a unique structure and path for
the data communication. When the user node sends the des-
tination evaluation data to the server node, the server node
sends the data from the machine learning method to the user
node. The sensor transmits dynamic data to the user node
as a factor for finalizing the recommendation generation
phase. In the process of transmitting results, each node in the
blockchain network performs a number of functionalities,
involving chaining block, hashing, and broadcasting.

In Wang et al. (2019a), the authors introduce a decen-
tralized knowledge graph creation approach. They employ
crowdsourcing methods, supported by blockchain-powered
smart contracts in order to maintain openness, accountabil-
ity and auditability. The resulting decentralized knowledge
graph is the basis for a deep recommendation framework,

1

https://github.com/ethereum

Y. Himeur et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 9 of 25

Blockchain-based Recommender Systems

Figure 3: Flowchart of the deep RS based on the decentralized knowledge graph Wang et al. (2019a).

and several case studies are used to confirm the efficacy of
the system. The authors intend to provide a new, decentral-
ized method to building the knowledge graph and serve as
a guide and direction for potential study and realistic use of
the knowledge graph. Fig. 3 portrays the flowchart of the
deep RS based on the decentralized knowledge graph. The
overall model can be split into two main components, i.e.
the on-chain component and off-chain component. The for-
mer focuses at building a domain knowledge graph through
crowdsourcing and that is activated by blockchain-powered
smart contracts, while the latter employs the decentralized
knowledge graph for producing the recommendations.

The authors of Arora et al. (2020) bring into consider-
ation the facets of blockchain and deep learning elements
of the market as the future of artificial intelligence in the
business scenario. The report also includes the advantages
and risks of utilizing artificial intelligence in industry. The
study collects results from the usage and deployment of
blockchain and deep learning components.

In Wibowo et al. (2019), the authors propose a method
for automating the security of the Internet utilizing white-
list packet filtering. In order to decide the filtering laws,
smart contracts are used to provide protected communication
media. Meanwhile, the controller streamlines packet filtering
by implementing the defined forwarding rules in the network
switches. The authors also evaluate white-list packet filtering
using Mininet for network emulation and Ethereum Rinkeby
networks for smart contract implementation. The outcome

indicates that the suggested white-list scheme is capable of
filtering the packet without resulting in excessive latency.

2.4. Blockchain-based RS architecture

The main architecture of the blockchain can be decom-
posed into three layers, namely the Protocol, the Extension,
and the Application layer. The Protocol layer implements
the P2P protocol, the consensus algorithm, and data storage.
In particular, it consists of two components: i) the storage
layer that stores all the user-item transaction data in the
blockchain, and ii) the network layer that contains the peer
nodes that run the distributed algorithm and carry the en-
crypted signature. The encrypted transaction blocks can be
stored in private blockchain services such as Hyperledger
Fabric, or take advantage of cloud-based solutions such as
Microsoft’s blockchain-as-a-service or Amazon’s managed
blockchain Lu (2018).

On top of the Protocol layer is the Extension layer that
can implement the business logic and algorithms of the RS
using smart contracts. Ethereum or Hyperledger Fabric can
be used for this task and they should offer the required
functionality in the form of APIs. One or more RS algo-
rithms can be accessed, such as the memory-based, user-
based Resnick et al. (1994) and item-based collaborative
filtering (CF) algorithms Sarwar et al. (2001), the model-
based matrix factorization models such as the original SVD-
based one Koren et al. (2009) and its variations (e.g. SVD++
Koren (2010) and non-negative matrix factorization Gillis

Y. Himeur et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 10 of 25

votingvotingvotingSmart contracts-powered crowdsourcingBasic graphUpdated graphStatic attributesDynamic dataRecommendation resultsDecision recordsDecision MakerDeep recommender systemDecision referenceFinal decisionsKnowledge graph embeddingOn-ChainOff-ChainBlockchain-based Recommender Systems

(2020)), as well as models are much more flexible in terms
of adding additional sources of information on top of ratings,
such as social recommender algorithms Gulati and Eirinaki
(2019); Jamali and Ester (2010); Ma et al. (2008) or the
embeddings-based factorization machines Kula (2015).

The definition of the information that is used to model
users, recommendation items/actions and prior knowledge,
and the representation model employed for storing user
preferences, behaviour and feedback (e.g. a utility matrix,
a social graph, a knowledge graph, a rule database, a deep
neural network, etc.) are two main decisions that affect
the implementation of the RS. In addition, the decision on
whether, when, and how the model is updated sets require-
ments that affect the architectural choices. The last and more
important decision is on which recommendation algorithm
to use. The algorithm properties, e.g. if it is incremental,
online, distributed, synchronous, etc., as well as specific
characteristics with respect to what types of data input it
accepts, and other concerns, such as ratings sparsity etc., are
of big importance in making such a decision.

Apart from the functional requirements of an RS, which
mainly focus on the quality of the generated recommenda-
tions, there is a long list of non-functional requirements that
are important for the successful delivery of recommenda-
tions. They include adaptability, response time, scalability,
performance, security and privacy, among others. The ma-
jority of privacy solutions for RSs mainly rely on centralized
schemes, which raises privacy concerns. The decentraliza-
tion of user-related data can be beneficial for scalability
Sardianos et al. (2017) and user privacy Berkovsky et al.
(2007). However, it can affect the quality of recommenda-
tions, which is strongly related to data sparsity and repre-
sentativeness of users and items in each partition.

The protection of user privacy can be achieved by: i)
defining an access policy to data and models, ii) maintaining
the statistical properties of data whilst anonymising the
original data in a way to avoid their revelation, and iii) using
cryptography techniques to mask data without affecting the
quality of the algorithm results.

Blockchain is a decentralized ledger of all transactions
across a P2P network. By adopting the blockchain tech-
nology in RSs, users are able to approve recommendations
or transactions without the necessity of a central certify-
ing authority. Fig. 4 illustrates a general flowchart of a
blockchain-based RS. Typically, one of the main assets of
recommendation systems is the data contributed by users
or item providers in the form of profile, descriptions, feed-
back etc. Therefore, users can use blockchain for storing
sensitive information needed by RSs, e.g. preferences and
selected items, digital transactions, special needs, personal
identifying information, rating feedback, etc., which will
be encrypted and secured. The company/RS owner gathers
and stores other useful data for the RS in the blockchain
network for avoiding hackers’ attacks and any other dan-
gers. In matrix factorisation, which is the state-of-the-art
approach in collaborative filtering algorithms for RSs, the
utility matrix R of ratings provided by a set of users U for

a set of items T is the key knowledge employed by the
algorithm. The matrix R is factorised in order to obtain
user and item profiles and make recommendations based
on the approximations of missing ratings. With the use of
blockchain the user-provided ratings are encrypted before
being sent to the recommendation engine and the same holds
for the matrix derivatives, with the use of a crypto service
provider (CSP). As depicted in Algorithm 1, the process
begins with collecting (lines 1-5) and encrypting each rating
of a user for an item using the public key of the CSP. The
encrypted ratings are sent to the recommendation engine
which generates random masks for each rating, encrypts
them and sends them back to the CSP. In the matrix factori-
sation step (lines 6-12), the CSP decrypts the masked ratings
(i.e. rj + mj), computes their d-dimensional vector repre-
sentations, encrypts them and sends them back to the RS.
The RS unencrypts the d-dimensional vectors, and removes
the respective mask vectors to get the final approximations.
The rating approximation process is repeated until a stopping
criterion is met.

Blockchain technologies combine the advantages of their
distributed nature with the use of cryptography in order to
guarantee privacy and immutability of data. At the same
time, using smart contracts blockchain technologies can
guarantee the proper execution of the algorithms on the
right data, thus adding to the security of the whole process.
What is important in the case of any application that is
ported on the blockchain, and also in RSs, is to properly
define what type of information is stored in the blockchain,
how it is encoded, and how this information is fed to the
recommendation algorithm.

The amount of information exchanged between nodes,
the amount and format of information stored in each node
and the computation load of each node, affect the overall
performance and privacy as well as the scalability of the
solution. Moreover, choosing a blockchain platform is the
first step in developing the blockchain-based RS, and for
doing this is important to review the main characteristics of
platforms, such as the block size, the block count in the main
chain (chain height) and the speed of transaction processing.
Bitcoin offers a block size of 1 million transactions, whereas
it comes third in the transaction processing speed after
Ethereum and Bitcoin.

2.5. Types of Blockchain-based RSs (T)

T1. Secure RSs

Secure RSs are generally built using a blockchain proto-
col supporting smart contracts and resolve different infor-
mation management problems, e.g. integrity, security and
authenticity, using the concepts of cryptography and hash
functions Idrees et al. (2021). In this context, the authors in
Lisi et al. (2019) introduce a smart contract-based RS (see
Fig. 5) that relies on Distributed Ledger Technology Wood
et al. (2014) and Ethereum TestNet. The principal main
operations provided by the RS include registering new users
(Register), creating new items/actions (Create item/action),

Y. Himeur et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 11 of 25

Blockchain-based Recommender Systems

Algorithm 1 A blockchain-based implementation of collaborative filtering algorithms that use the ratings matrix
1: procedure COLLECTUSERRATING(, tj, rj)
User: encrypt rating rj ←→ Enc.rj/
2:
send ., tj, Enc.rj// to the RS
RS: mask rating Enc.rj/ ←→ ER.rj/ = Enc.rj + mj/
send the masked and encrypted rating ER.rj/ to the CSP

3:
4:
5:
6: procedure MATRIXFACTORISATION(ER.rj/)
CSP: decrypt ER.rj/ ←→ ., tj, rj + mj/
7:
set the d-dimensional vectors and compute their encryption EV.rj + m,j/
8:
send the encrypted EV.rj, m,j/ to the RS
9:
RS: decrypt EV.rj, m,j/ and remove masks
10:
update rating matrix approximation R
11:
verify stopping criteria
12:

▷ Ratings’ matrix M is approximated

▷ user  rates item tj

Figure 4: A general block-diagram of a blockchain-based RS.

rating existing items/actions (Rate item/action), and com-
puting the scores of existing items/actions (Compute score).
The RS allows decentralized ratings, ranking of several
items/actions, and it is designed over a platform running
smart contracts on a public blockchain, without any cen-
tralized authority. The capabilities of the framework have
been widened via the integration of an authorization process,
which gathers preferences exclusively from users eligible for
rating the items/actions. To demonstrate the feasibility of
the solution, a prototype of a decentralized recommendation
system was designed and deployed on the Ethereum TestNet,
and a series of experiments were included to determine its
performance.

In a similar manner, in Khatoon (2020), a smart contract-
based RS that enables managing medical data management
and streamlining complex medical procedures, is proposed.
In addition, a comprehensive study has been conducted to
investigate the use of blockchain in healthcare workflows
and the feasibility of smart contract-based frameworks in
different use scenarios when realistic clinical databases are
considered.

T2. Privacy-preserving RSs

Recommendations are generated by analyzing users’
data. Consequently, a massive amount of high quality data
are required to infer personalized and accurate recommen-
dations. However, significant quantities of personal users’
data are gathered, which are often highly sensitive and
ignoring users’ privacy concerns. Although in the past
the developers of RSs have employed various privacy-
preserving approaches to overcome these concerns, WAN
(2018); Casino et al. (2019b); Zhan et al. (2010), none of
them is able to guarantee cryptographic security. To bridge
the chasm, the characteristics of blockchain in terms of
supporting secure multiparty computation have been used
in Frey et al. (2016a). In that way, potential users can allow
RSs to generate personalized recommendations for them,
disclosing their personal data. This results in reducing frauds
and misuses, and a higher willingness for data sharing from
the end users’ point of view. Similarly, the authors in Bosri
et al. (2021) propose a privacy-preserving platform for a
recommendation system through the integration of artificial
intelligence and blockchain. The platform gives the user

Y. Himeur et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 12 of 25

1. Recommendation requestBlockchain: protect user data and give access Users2. Store collected data and contractsRecommender system 5. Start a computationCompany/recommender owner4. Parameters settingDatabase6. Computation results7. Notification and recommendation results3. Store other kinds of useful dataBlockchain-based Recommender Systems

Figure 5: A decentralized blockchain -based RS proposed in Lisi et al. (2019).

a secure environment in which data can be used with the
required permission.

Although decentralized RSs have good privacy protec-
tion capabilities, they still miss the required efficiency to
be broadly accepted. Therefore, the authors in Casino and
Patsakis (2019) have adopted blockchain as the core of a
decentralized RS, where they have equipped it with a wide
range of characteristics and in parallel, preserved users’ pri-
vacy. The employed decentralized locality sensitive hashing
classification, in addition to an ensemble of recommendation
engines with reference to the manner in which data has been
handled by users. Fig. 6 illustrates a typical flowchart of a
secure RS based on the combination of blockchain and deep
learning Arora et al. (2020).

T3. Trust-based RSs

Trust is an essential parameter to develop efficient RSs
with accurate decision making. By using blockchain in RSs,
it becomes possible to guarantee trust between users Mo-
hammadi et al. (2019); Yeh and Kashef (2020). In this
category of RSs, secure and trust-based frameworks are
developed by the adoption of blockchain-supported secure
multiparty computation and the addition of smart contracts
within the principal blockchain protocol. Therefore, this
helps in designing reliable RSs for collaboratively creating
trust-based databases and hosting steadily updated models
using smart contract systems. Moving forward, the accuracy
of these models can be assessed using incentive mechanisms
offering a completely trust-based RS with acceptable perfor-
mance Porkodi and Kesavaraja (2020).

2.6. Applications of Blockchain-based RSs (A1)

A1. Energy

RSs in the energy sector aim to conserve natural re-
sources, maximize users’ savings, and to build a relationship

of trust in which users share their data and the system
influences their behavior. This interaction allows the system
to collect more data of high quality regarding a user’s real
preferences, but also positively influences the users’ future
behavior toward more sustainable actions Alsalemi et al.
(2021); Dahihande et al. (2020); Sardianos et al. (2020b).
However, when designing energy efficiency based RSs, eval-
uating the recommendations’ engine accuracy is a contin-
uous process due to the instability of energy usage users’
preferences. To achieve this, it is important to motivate users
to contribute their activity data and adopt a data collection
methodology that will feed the RS. Platform analytics, rat-
ings, and user surveys are all good inputs for RSs but at the
same time, they act as the indicators of recommendations’
accuracy Sardianos et al. (2020a). An important goal is
to guide users so as to gather their energy consumption
feedback intensively through ratings and likes (explicit) but
more importantly through usage and activity data, which
is the asset for the .EM/3 RS platform 2, which has been
developed to encourage energy efficiency in buildings using
behavioral change based on RSs, micro-moment analysis,
and AI. Hence, this increases the data repository and the
quality of extracted knowledge.

On the other hand, smart grids are expected to offer a
range of advantages to both consumers and energy providers
through smart metering and data sharing. That being said,
smart meters creates a range of privacy problems if con-
sumption data is analyzed. When sharing data, apart from
privacy, it is important to ensure data reliability Rubio et al.
(2017). Therefore, the development of secure blockchain-
enabled smart meters is receiving an increasing interest
as the actual utility meters enable easy manipulations to
give incorrect readings and generate corrupt bills, which

2

http://em3.qu.edu.qa/

Y. Himeur et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 13 of 25

Blockchain-based Recommender Systems

Figure 6: The overall architecture of a secure RS based on blockchain and AI Lisi et al. (2019).

leads tremendous financial losses for utility companies. For
example, in Bokhari et al. (2019), Bokhari et al.utilize smart
meters in tandem with an Ethereum-based blockchain for
increasin the security of energy usage data. While in Hassan
et al. (2019), a blockchain based solution was designed for
auctioning the micro-grid resources. To maintain the privacy
and security of the auction, differential privacy strategies
to ensure the disability of adversaries to access or alter
individuals’ private information.

Moreover, the public and legislators have recently voiced
concerns about the security, privacy, and transparency of IoT
sensing devices. Blockchain and distributed ledger systems
have provided alternatives by transparently bridging two or
more untrustworthy parties. In this regard, a new architec-
ture, which incorporates a control system and automations in
an intelligent building energy RS, was developed in Rahman
et al. (2020).

A2. Healthcare

The vast amount of medical data generated every second
have given rise to both a huge opportunity in analysing
them in order to help healthcare experts to make patient-
oriented decisions, and also to concerns related to privacy
and security due to the high sensitivity of medical records.

Therefore, the necessity of using RSs for helping healthcare
experts make effective and precise health-related decisions
has emerged Tran et al. (2020); Yong et al. (2020). In this
context, the use of blockchain can help patients become true
owners of their medical data and history. To that end, an
increasing attention is put towards developing blockchain-
based RSs for the healthcare domain. For example, in Bhard-
waj and Datta (2020) the authors present an RS for pa-
tients with diabetes, which stores patient records in the
blockchain, making them the true owners of their medical
history. Blockchain allows P2P information exchange with-
out the need of a reliable third party to verify transactions.
The medical personnel gets access to the data, whereas pa-
tients can decide whether to share their data with more users
(e.g. family, or caregivers). The RS employs information
about a person’s condition (e.g. heart rate, weight, sugar
level, etc.) and lifestyle choices, and creates a knowledge
graph. The graph is used to recommend activities (e.g.
exercising, eating healthy) that promote healthier habits.

In Abbas et al. (2020), blockchain is used for securing
all the data (i.e. data about suppliers, manufacturers, dis-
tributors, etc. and system assets and transactions) related
to the drug supply chain management. Each transaction

Y. Himeur et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 14 of 25

Blockchain-based Recommender Systems

is validated by other users, appended to the blockchain,
and executed. Using smart-contracts, the proposed archi-
tecture implements business terms and conditions. In order
to avoid delays, the smart-contracts are deployed only to
those network nodes that are responsible for the validation
of transactions. The recommendation engine builds on top
of patient reviews and comments about medicines. Using the
positive/negative reviews and the patient medical condition,
the engine is able to recommend the most appropriate and
top-rated drugs for the specific patient conditions, using a
content-based recommendation approach.

A3. E-Commerce

In most e-commerce-based RSs, recommendations are
inferred from user data using collaborative filtering tech-
niques. As a result, organizations are storing vast amounts
of confidential consumer data. Given the sensitivity of such
data, the consumers’ privacy concerns should no longer be
ignored Ali et al. (2020). Dealing with customer profiles
while respecting people’s right to privacy remains a major
concern in e-commerce. Secure management of confidential
data is vital to encouraging consumers to share their con-
sumption data and enable businesses to make personalized
recommendations Liu and Li (2020); Schuetz and Venkatesh
(2020).

The work done in Frey et al. (2016a) presents a novel rec-
ommendation method leveraging the benefits of safe multi-
party computing supported by blockchain. By applying the
aforementioned method, any potential customer can allow
an organization to use a recommendation algorithm without
sharing their personal details.

Cognitive systems, IoT, and blockchain technologies are
three areas that have resulted in various software devel-
opment revolutions. It appears that combining these fields
could contribute to the emergence of an intriguing field.
Thus, a RS is developed to investigate the applicability of the
suggested framework for IoT based on cognitive frameworks
and block-chain technologies Wang et al. (2019a). Observed
results verify the superiority of the developed RS over other
options.

In Patel et al. (2020), KiRTi, a deep learning-based credit
RS which uses blockchain for facilitating smart lending
operations between prospective borrowers and prospective
lenders is proposed. This helps in eliminating the require-
ment of third-party credit rating agencies for credit score
generation. Authors in Lisi et al. (2019) suggest an alter-
native solution for developing a general-purpose RS that is
built on Distributed Ledger Technology (DLT) to provide
users with a more transparent ranking strategy. The proposed
system graduates decentralized ratings, the ranking of vari-
ous items, and is designed on top of a system that manages
smart contracts on a shared blockchain with the absence of
any centralized authority. The system’s capabilities are also
enhanced with the addition of an authorization module that
extracts inclinations only from users who are authorized to
rank the items. To demonstrate the feasibility of the solution,
a prototype of a decentralized recommendation system was

designed and deployed on the Ethereum TestNet, and a series
of experiments were included to determine its performance.
The research presented in Frey et al. (2016b) suggests a
novel approach for a future shopping system. A blockchain-
based storage network protects customers’ personal informa-
tion. The system, which is based on the bitcoin protocol,
can transact encrypted data in a tamper-proof manner and
run secure multiparty computations with the input data
only accessible by the data owner. As a result, a potential
customer can allow a company to use functions such as a
recommendation algorithm without revealing personal infor-
mation. An entirely new shopping experience emerges when
a low-energy transmitter (beacon) is used in conjunction.
Based on encrypted personal data, the beacon automatically
initiates a recommendation process.

A4. Internet of things (IoT)

Recent improvements in IoT have made it possible to
implement smart city solutions (e.g. smart parking, traffic
management, etc.) that employ RSs to provide suggestions to
the users. The non-confidential sharing of user information
with an untrusted/semi-trusted RS may infringe privacy, as
user behavior and mobility patterns could be deduced by
performing analysis of their prior actions. The authors in
Saleem et al. (2020) present two solutions that retain the
confidentiality of users patterns in parking RSs by employ-
ing k-anonymity (anonymisation) and differential privacy
(perturbation) strategies whilst observing previous parking
history. In particular, the k-anonymity method builds an
anonymised database from an initial database containing
users’ preferences, while differential encryption disturbs the
query response using the Laplace mechanism, rendering
users indistinguishable in both methods and thus retaining
privacy.

Blockchain, IoT, and cognitive technologies are some of
the biggest technological advances in this era, which can be
combined to provide smarter and more secure solutions. In
this regard, in Porkodi and Kesavaraja (2020), existing vari-
ations of the aforementioned technologies are investigated,
and a system for blockchain-based cognitive IoT is proposed
for building trust over a reliable and secure RS. Authors in
Putra et al. (2020) proposed the decentralization of intrusion
detection systems (IDS) for networks, which uses blockchain
to substitute the centralized processing with safe cooperation
and solves some of the centralized IDS challenges.

A5. Social networks

Recently, huge quantities of information, such as text
(tweets, comments, .etc), images, videos, and documents
are shared on social networks Katarya et al. (2016). Due
to the significant sharing of information through social net-
works, the information overload issue has been raised. Con-
sequently various social network platforms employ RSs for
overcoming this problem and suggesting valuable informa-
tion to specified users Anandhan et al. (2018).

Using recommendation engines, different mobile appli-
cations can be suggested to mobile users. The vast volume
of data and user information that is collected raises an issue

Y. Himeur et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 15 of 25

Blockchain-based Recommender Systems

of security and user privacy. In this context, a study of
recommendations and trends in e-commerce technology and
mobile applications is carried out in Umekwudo and Shim
(2020). It explains how the blockchain can be integrated into
the collective filtering recommendation systems so that users
can configure their data protection and confidentiality.

In Jiang and Zhang (2019), Jiang et al. utilize the
blockchain to develop an online social network (OSN)-
based RS framework integrating the benefits of conventional
centralized OSNs and distributed OSNs. Typically, by using
smart contracts, the blockchain is considered as a trusted
server for providing essential control services.

A6. E-learning
Nowadays, each aspect of the society is advancing and
individuals are always looking for improvements for staying
competitive in their careers. One of the significant tech-
nologies to achieve this goal is via adopting e-learning,
which is significantly transforming the way in which learn-
ing is offered for learners De Medio et al. (2020); Maatuk
et al. (2021). Navigating this wealth of information (which
courses to take, from which instructors, institutions etc)
has become a concern. In this context, RSs are used to
assist learners with on time, tailored and engaging advice
after an automatic identification of their preferences Tarus
et al. (2018). In addition to courses delivered completely
online, more and more in-person courses are accompanied
by an online component, usually delivered via a learning
management system (LMS). In this context, RSs can be
used to generate recommendations on which courses to
take next, how to improve one’s grade, etc. However, such
systems also store and process sensitive information (student
IDs, grades, etc.). Existing technologies deployed in the e-
learning platforms have raised some privacy and security
issues (e.g. the leakage of private information, cybersecu-
rity attacks, etc.), and hence resolving these problems has
become essential for the users. In this context, the blockchain
technology has the power to transform education and the
use of RSs in e-learning environments in several ways Lam
and Dongol (2020); Ullah et al. (2021). In Mikroyannidis
et al. (2018) authors investigate the uses of Smart blockchain
Badges (SMB) in data science education. They examine how
SMBs will help learners with the intention of advancing their
careers in data science by providing personalised tips based
on their learning accomplishments. The study is carried out
to improve data science accreditation by implementing a
secure framework based on blockchain technology.

Table 2 summarises the various blockchain-based RS
frameworks described previously and their characteristics,
including the year of publication, classification, adopted
methodology, targeted application and the main advantages
of each framework.

3. Critical analysis and open issues

3.1. Comparative study

Although the increasing attention put towards the devel-
opment of blockchain-based RSs, comparing the empirical
performance of existing frameworks to inform the state-of-
the-art is still very challenging and it is also difficult to
faithfully comprehend the potential pros and cons associated
with competing blockchain-based RS models. This is mainly
due to various issues and aspects that are impeding the
reproducibility of the empirical results and hence prevent a
fair comparison of the performance under the same context,
which they can be summarized as follows: (i) it is difficult
(even impossible) to assess the generality of blockchain-
based RS frameworks as most of them are evaluated on com-
pletely different environments, for performing different tasks
and using different kinds of datasets (with different number
of users, etc). Moreover, data is often preprocessed, resam-
pled and/or augmented based on the specific need of each
framework; (ii) there is no baseline available for comparison
and most of the existing frameworks are just presenting case
studies for illustrating the validity of their systems; (iii) there
is a significant lack of comparative studies assessing the
performance of blockchain-based RSs as this is a new topic
and further effort is needed to create appropriate toolkits for
comparison and benchmarking purposes. Accordingly, most
of the existing studies were just evaluating their algorithms
in comparison with their variants and/or versus trivial base-
line approaches; (iv) distinct benchmarking metrics were
employed in existing frameworks based on the targeted tasks
and applications, thus making it virtually impossible to fairly
determine the state-of-the-art.

In the reviewed works, datasets are used to evaluate and
benchmark the developed RSs. In some contributions, whilst
not published, raw data is collected and prepared by the
authors and are used to evaluate recommendation perfor-
mance. On the other hand, a number of proposed solutions
utilize existing databases, such as the MovieLens dataset
Casino and Patsakis (2019), the MNIST dataset Harris and
Waggoner (2019), microblogPCU dataset Jiang and Zhang
(2019), human resources job offer dataset Mikroyannidis
et al. (2018), and e-commerce shopping data Frey et al.
(2016a) among others. Such datasets are instrumental tools
to understand the applicability of the proposed systems in
real-life scenarios.

Despite the aforementioned issues, we attempt to con-
duct a comparative analysis of different blockchain-based
RS models using what we have at hand as results. Table
3 reports the characteristics and performance results of the
frameworks used in the comparison with regard to the pub-
lication year, implemented approach, computational time
and recommendation accuracy. First of all, it seems obvious
that all the approaches described in the table are proposed
recently as part of the recent movement of the RS com-
munity to integrate blockchain into RSs. Thus, regarding
the time computation, it can be clearly seen that it varies
significantly from a framework to another. This is due to
the type of the blockchain platform deployed, cryptographic

Y. Himeur et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 16 of 25

Blockchain-based Recommender Systems

Table 2
Summary of the relevant blockchain-based RSs discussed in this paper and their characteristics with referencing their classifications
and target applications .

Work
Frey et al. (2016a)

Year
2016

Class of RS
Secure RS

Mikroyannidis et al. (2018)

2018

Secure RS

Al Omar et al. (2019)

2019

Privacy-preserving RS

Lisi et al. (2019)

2019

Secure RS

Method
Blockchain-supported secure multiparty
computation.
Smart blockchain badges using smart
contracts.
Privacy-securing platform using distributed
ledger attribute of blockchain
Decentralized distributed Ledger
technology platform

Application
E-Commerce

E-learning

E-Commerce
(online shopping)
E-Commerce

Casino and Patsakis (2019)

2019

Privacy-preserving RS Blockchain+decentralized

locality sensitive

Wang et al. (2019a)

2019

Privacy-preserving RS Decentralized construction of

knowledge graphs for deep RSs
(blockchain-powered smart contracts)

E-Commerce (movies
recommendation)
E-Commerce
(enterprise information)

Harris and Waggoner (2019)

2019

Privacy-preserving RS Decentralized and collaborative

E-Commerce

Jiang and Zhang (2019)

2019

Secure RS

Rahman et al. (2020)

2020

Secure RS

Porkodi and Kesavaraja (2020)

2020 Trust-based RS

AI on a blockchain platform
Blockchain-based decentralized
online RSs
Combination of IoT, Software-Defined
Networking (SDN) and blockchain
Rs based IoT blockchain network with
cognitive framework

Bhardwaj and Datta (2020)

2020

Abbas et al. (2020)

Patel et al. (2020)

Yeh and Kashef (2020)

Arif et al. (2020)

2020

2020

2020

Secure RS

Privacy-preserving RS Blockchain based platform with ML
algorithms and optimization process.
Blockchain and ML-based medicine
supply chain management and RS.
Combination of deep learning and
blockchain-powered smart contracts.
Design secure databases using
blockchain-powered smart contracts.
Blockchain-based data-sharing system.

Secure RS

Secure RS

2020 Trust-based RS

Lisi et al. (2021)

2021

Privacy-preserving RS Decentralized rating framework based on

Blockchain based Ethereum platform.

Table 3
Performance comparison of existing blockchain-based RS frameworks.

work

Year

Approach

Social networks

Smart energy
management
Social networks

IoT networks

IoT networks

E-Commerce (financial
transactions)
Social networks

E-Commerce
(online tourism)
E-Commerce

Advantages
Address privacy concerns and guarantee
cryptographic secureness.
Address the issues of using blockchain for data
science education in industry.
Ensure client information protection utilizing
blockchain technology.
Provides users with transparent and decentralized
rating strategy.
Use blockchain as the backbone of a
decentralized RS to ensure users’ privacy.
Guarantee the transparency, integrity, and
auditability using blockchain-powered
smart contracts
Collaborative building of datasets and use of smart
contracts to host a continuously updated model.
Provide safe, and privacy-aware functionalities
of authentication and newsfeed notification.
Improve privacy accessibility, integrity, and
overall security.
Increase the trust of the users in the RS and
and guarantee a high-level of security.
Preserve the privacy of users and allow a secure
sharing of data with healthcare experts.
Provide trusted and secure recommendations .
and prevent recommending counterfeit medicines.
Facilitate a trust based recommender ecosystem.

Ensure High-level of security and and host steadily
updated models.
Secure data circulation between nodes in Rss and
handle data circulation from various nodes.
Provide decentralization, review immutability and
persistency.

Casino et al. Casino and Patsakis (2019)

2019 Blockchain-based privacy-preserving RS using

Lisi et al. Lisi et al. (2019)

Private-Rec Bosri et al. (2021)

a collaborative filtering architecture
2019 A smart contract based RS built on top of

distributed ledger platform

2019 AI-based privacy-preserving recommender
system ensuring user data privacy.

2000

1.57

Wang et al. Wang et al. (2019a)

2019 Decentralized knowledge graphs for deep RSs

-

Arif et al. Arif et al. (2020)

using blockchain-powered smart contracts
2020 Blockchain-based RS that enables decentralized

203.6

data sharing of tourism destinations

Abbas et al. Abbas et al. (2020)

2020 Blockchain and machine learning-Based RS for

53

KiRTi Patel et al. (2020)

2021

Smart Pharmaceutical Industry
integrate deep learning (LSTM) and blockchain
for facilitating a trust based RS

20.96

-

83.3

-

80.5

97.5

algorithms used, targeted application, nature of RS devel-
oped, and also number of users. In this regard, Private-
Rec [87] has achieved the lowest computation time since it
adopts a simple collaborative filtering based RS along with
a simple fully homomorphic encryption algorithm. In terms
of the recommendation accuracy, the performance of all the
frameworks exceeded 80% although there is a significant
difference between the best accuracy achieved by KiRTi
[123], which was 97.5% and the lowest accuracy reached by
Abbas et al. [119], which attained 80.5%.

The decentralized data collection (or knowledge con-
struction) process is highly reliable, since everything is
recorded on blockchain, which makes it transparent, au-
ditable, and tamper resistant. Moreover, different works have
demonstrated that blockchain-based RSs are able to reach
similar accuracy as the centralized schemes, but with much
better efficacy by adopting a fully decentralized architecture
of the blockchain Casino and Patsakis (2019). Moreover,
they enable the preservation of the users’ privacy, which
is a property that is not provided by traditional centralized

Y. Himeur et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 17 of 25

Time compelxity Accuracy
(ms)
-

(in %)
90.6

Blockchain-based Recommender Systems

RS engines. However, there are still several limitations and
challenges that should be addressed to improve the quality
of blockchain-based RSs Harris and Waggoner (2019).

3.2. Drawbacks and limitations

Apart from collaborative filtering recommendation al-
gorithms which have been the state-of-the-art RS algo-
rithms for decades, there exist additional approaches, such as
knowledge-based and deep learning ones, which have been
shown to improve performance and can tackle the cold-start
problem of RSs Volkovs et al. (2017); Wei et al. (2017).
Their main drawback is that they require that the training
data are centrally collected and processed, which limits their
applicability on distributed architectures. Apart from a few
works, such as Wang et al. (2019a) that take advantage
of blockchain and smart contracts in order to promote a
collaborative/crowdsourced creation of knowledge for RSs,
and DeepChain Weng et al. (2019) that provides a value-
driven incentive mechanism based on blockchain in order to
allow distributed model training by multiple users, there are
not many works that take full advantage of the blockchain
capabilities.

Understanding the suitability of blockchain for a task is
important for its proper application. RSs perfectly fit this
purpose since: i) knowledge is collaboratively contributed
by many users who need to trust each other, ii) user data
(e.g. ratings or profile information) has to be stored for a
long term, if not permanently, and iii) user data must remain
immutable even for the administrators of the RS in order to
ensure transparency and increase trust.

The latency and scalability issues faced by current
blockchain architectures do not yet allow them to scale up
to thousands of transactions-per-second rates Kuzlu et al.
(2019). This can be an important limitation for web-scale
RSs, such as those employed by social networks Eksombat-
chai et al. (2018); Sharma et al. (2016), which must be able
to handle hundreds of millions of users and billion of items
and preferences that come as streams, and are requested to
provide recommendations in milliseconds.

Moreover, decentralized RSs have been introduced for
solving the problems encountered in traditional RSs that
have a central authority (which operates as a trusted party
with complete control over the RS) via spreading the respon-
sibility and control to the users. However, this can lead to
serious concerns when it comes to disputes or misbehaviour.
Therefore, the identification of potential unfair exchanges
that could occur during the activity between two or different
users is of utmost importance in addition to developing
adequate solutions that can create fair process, such as the
use of atomic swaps inherited from blockchain Lisi et al.
(2020).

Another important issue when using blockchain in RSs
is related to its energy consumption and hence its environ-
mental implication along with its potential negative impact
on climate. Accordingly, the standard process adopted in
the blockchain technology for transactions’ verification us-
ing the proof-of-work process, is “greatly energy hungry”

De Vries (2018), because it needs a vast amount of process-
ing power, and thus electricity, for running related computer
calculations. In this context, the wide utilization of the
blockchain technology can counterbalance climate change
mitigation efforts since electricity is still mainly produced
using fossil fuels worldwide Sedlmeir et al. (2020).

3.3. Open issues

The open issues in the adoption of blockchain in RSs
are mainly related to the blockchain itself Casino et al.
(2019a). First, the sustainability of the blockchain protocol
is challenged by the increased energy consumption of the
PoW consensus algorithm, which brings the need for new
algorithms. Second, the adoption of blockchain is growing,
but there are still businesses that are hesitant, mainly due
to the lack of regulation. Third, the various adopters of
blockchain have created a wide diversity of implementations
that are not inter-operable.

The technological advances in IoT and smartphone de-
vices, have transformed RSs to an integral part of people’s
life within smart cities or smart home environments. The
collected data can range from less sensitive (e.g. implicit or
explicit interests and preferences) to very sensitive personal
information (e.g. location, vital signs, etc). When data is
collected and processed on the cloud, the risk of privacy
violation still exists despite anonymisation Sweeney (2000).
At the same time, public blockchains still have several lim-
itations concerning privacy and confidentiality 3. The use
of anonymisation or encryption-based mechanisms can be
resource demanding and impractical for IoT-based RSs.

Another open issue relates to the dynamic nature of
content used by RSs and the ability of an RS to focus
on fresh information, while forgetting information that is
very old Castells et al. (2015). Although the forgetfulness
property is very important in RSs Zou (2019), it is not
yet incorporated into the blockchain architecture, allowing
outdated transactions to be removed from the ledger. Once
this is solved, it will be beneficial for handling scalability
issues of blockchain based RSs.

4. Future Directions (D)
D1. Scalability in blockchain-based RSs

One main challenge of industrial RSs with billions of
users and items is scalability Zhao et al. (2019). Both the
training and inference parts of the learning process must be
effective and efficient respectively. The solutions can be to
improve the hardware infrastructure, parallelize or distribute
processing, and design more efficient algorithms.

Blockchain may improve the privacy of users and protect
from tampering models and data, but this comes at an
additional processing cost, which raises scalability issues
for the blockchain technology itself. PoW-based blockchains
have a limited transaction throughput of few transactions
per second, which can be improved when only a fixed set
of block validators is employed. Storing models instead of

3

https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Weaknesses

Y. Himeur et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 18 of 25

Blockchain-based Recommender Systems

transactions may lower the needs for transaction through-
put, and the use of directed acyclic graph (DAG)-based
blockchain may remove any upper bounds in the transaction
throughput when new transactions arrive fast, which makes
it ideal for IoT applications Cao et al. (2020a).

Sharding, block size increase, and the separation of
signatures from transactions are some of the on-chain tech-
niques that have been used for improving the scalabil-
ity of blockchain. Off-chain solutions include the Light-
ning network, where only the transaction channel opening
is recorded in the main chain and the raiden network,
which supports a variety of transaction types apart from
blockchain. Finally, child and inter-chain solutions take
advantage of additional chains for improving transaction
throughput speed Kim et al. (2018); Xie et al. (2019).

Since blockchain-based RSs rely on decentralized ar-
chitectures, they always have to balance the quality of rec-
ommendations with the communication costs. However, the
integration of RSs with blockchain can scale more efficiently
than traditional RSs, which suffer from the lack of scalability
of singular value decomposition (SVD) and other algo-
rithms. Using locality sensitive hashing (LSH) techniques,
for example, has been proven beneficial for keeping the item
representations (namely signatures) short and allowing fast
similarity computation that is inherent for neighborhood-
based collaborative filtering Casino and Patsakis (2019).

D2. Explainability in RSs

Despite the advances in AI and deep learning and the
improved performance in many tasks, humans still have
the need to interpret and justify the results of any data
driven model. Especially in the case of RSs, researchers have
focused on the justification of recommendations from very
early Symeonidis et al. (2008) and they linked them with the
credibility of the system, the user acceptance and trust.

Explainable RSs provide the end users not only with
recommendations about items or actions, but also with ex-
planations that clarify why these items or actions are rec-
ommended Zhang and Chen (2020). Recently, researchers
demonstrated experimentally that when the mechanism that
triggers recommendations is explained to the end users,
this increases the recommendations’ acceptance rates Sar-
dianos et al. (2021) and can support behavioral change Hors-
Fraile et al. (2019). These recent works employ knowledge
and rule-based recommendations, which make it easier to
understand and explain how the recommendation mecha-
nism works. In model-based algorithms, such as collabo-
rative filtering, the neighborhood-style explanation is easy
and meaningful for the user- and item-based variants (e.g.
“similar users to you also like...”, “this item is similar to
those that you already liked” etc.). However in the case of
latent factor models, such as matrix factorization, and deep
learning models the same formulation may not convey the
reasoning behind the recommendation. Authors in Abdollahi
and Nasraoui (2016) used the distribution of ratings within
the target user’s neighborhood in order to select items that
can be recommended with an explanation.

Blockchain can provide to explainable RSs features like
transparency of transactions or models employed for the
recommendation, immutability of chained blocks, and trace-
ability of non-repudiation. It can also offer smart contracts
that allow business logic to be executed automatically and
with the consensus of nodes. The future of explainable RSs
can be on top of blockchain, in the form of model ensembles,
which generate competing recommendations and allow rule-
based or knowledge-based models, encoded within the smart
contracts to prioritize recommendations and gain user trust,
through a holistic approach that guarantees privacy, security
and explainability in tandem Nassar et al. (2020).

D3. Federated Learning

Federated Learning is a research topic that is quickly
gaining the interest of the machine learning community,
in cases where collaborative training can take place, while
preserving the privacy of nodes that contribute their data
for the task. In the federated learning scenario multiple
parties jointly train a machine learning model, but instead
of exchanging their data as a whole, they exchange data
summaries or even gradients and models Li et al. (2019).

In the case of RSs, federated learning can help in devel-
oping distributed solutions that preserve data privacy and
security. As described in Yang et al. (2020) federation in
RSs can be horizontal (i.e. items are shared between parties),
vertical (i.e. parties share the same user set but different item
set or feature spaces) or transfer where neither items nor
users are shared among parties. The latter approach takes
advantage of the transfer learning approach Pan and Yang
(2009), where a model is trained on a party using the local
data of this party and then it is reused as the starting point
for the model that is trained by the other party.

Blockchain can be used to enhance the resilience of fed-
erated learning architectures and avoid tampering of models.
The BLADE-FL framework Li et al. (2020a) is a blockchain-
based federated learning model, where all clients train their
models locally, then encrypt and share them into a pool of
models. Only verified models are aggregated in the clients,
and the verified models are in a block which is published
only when a consensus is reached. New blocks are created
and added to the chain at the end of each communication
round. The client consensus mechanism makes BLADE-FL
tamper-resisted, and the model federation preserves privacy.
The solution can be easily adapted to support federated RSs
that exchange locally trained models.

D4. Cooperative Computing in blockchain-based RSs

The term “cooperative computing” was initially coined
for highly distributed computing schemes, which employ
machine cycles from thousands of computers for solving
tasks Borcea et al. (2002); Hegering et al. (1994). Since
mobile, edge, and fog computing have become popular,
this highly distributed computing paradigm has re-emerged
in order to provide more energy efficient solutions Sheng
et al. (2015). The blockchain technology requires tremen-
dous computational power, which still makes it impossible
for fog networks. However, cooperative computing seems

Y. Himeur et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 19 of 25

Blockchain-based Recommender Systems

to offer a promising solution that leverages the compu-
tational burden. Authors in Wu and Ansari (2020) have
introduced a blockchain for fog node clusters, which demon-
strates reduced power consumption and need fewer stor-
age space. They employed it to improve security in each
cluster through shared (among the cluster nodes) access
control lists (ACL). In the proposed implementation older
blocks are deleted to keep the chain length constant and
the nodes work cooperatively to validate blocks instead of
competing like miner nodes do in other blockchains. Similar
paradigms are provided in Mendis et al. (2020), which
illustrates a decentralized, secure, and privacy-preserving
computing paradigm for asynchronous cooperative comput-
ing amongst scattered and untrustworthy computing nodes
with limited resources, and in Fu et al. (2019) that presents
an energy-efficiency aware architecture of cooperative com-
puting (CC) to blockchain-based IoT.

The cluster-based blockchain presented in Wu and Ansari
(2020) can be used for scaling up blockchain-based RSs,
without inflating the need for resources. Nodes in a local
level (e.g. based on their spatial or social proximity) can
share preferences and ratings in the blockchain of their
cluster and selectively grant or revoke access to other nodes
using their common ACL, which is also stored in the cluster
blockchain. Nodes that frequently interact with each other
will always be in the same cluster, whereas a node that
stops interacting with the cluster, will soon loose access
to the cluster resources and data. Authors in Liang et al.
(2019) describe a similar approach, though without the
use of blockchain, for their trust-based recommendation
scheme for a vehicular cyber physical systems network. The
cooperative computing approach is employed for validating
the credibility of user provided data and recommendations.

D5. Blockchain-based RS on edge/fog devices: Open chal-
lenges

Despite the wide adoption of blockchain in finance and
its rapid expansion in many more application domains (e.g.,
in logistics and healthcare), it is still underutilised in mobile
and IoT services. The main reason for this is the limited com-
putational capacity of IoT and mobile devices, in conjunction
with the power resources that blockchain tasks may require.
Smart cities, smart homes Damianou et al. (2019) and
autonomous vehicles Fu et al. (2020) have already attracted
the interest of researchers on IoT and edge or fog computing.
Current research focuses on optimising the performance in
the core tasks of each domain, and still relies on centralized
or cloud based solutions for issues related to privacy, secu-
rity, robustness and resilience to noise and attacks. Federated
learning allows to train more resilient models and protect the
privacy and security on the edge.

A combination of off-chain storage of data in P2P dis-
tributed systems that allow edge devices to easily connect
and disconnect at any time, with a blockchain that stores the
hashes of data locations or the trained models, can be a viable
solution for edge-based federated learning Zhao et al. (2020).
Smart home and consumption monitoring applications can
be benefited from the privacy that edge computing for IoT

with blockchain can provide Xiong et al. (2018). In this
setup, IoT devices can sense, communicate, and exchange
information with each other and with the RS, which may
run on the cloud. Edge computing devices in radio access
networks can provide local computing power, and solve
encryption, hashing, and recommendation tasks Sun et al.
(2020).

Fog-based RSs Wang et al. (2019b) have to address
the information overload issue, which can be performed by
abstracting the useful information from the fog environment.
In addition, fog-architectures have limited computing and
storage capabilities and low service latency. New algorithms
need to be designed, that provide recommendations of high
quality and in the same time optimize the system perfor-
mance. The algorithms must balance between sharing and
processing (e.g. abstracting) data locally and uploading data
to the cloud for further processing.

D6. Reinforcement learning for blockchain-based RS

Usually, RSs can be considered as classifiers or predic-
tors in which recommendation task has a sequential nature.
In this context, a RS can be represented as a Markov de-
cision process (MDP), where reinforcement learning (RL)
algorithms can be deployed for solving it Arulkumaran et al.
(2017); Zhao et al. (2018). Typically, the combination of
RL and deep learning has led to the paradigm of deep
reinforcement learning (DRL), which can be used in the rec-
ommendation problem with massive state and action spaces.
To that end, an increasing attention is devoted recently to
RL-based and DRL-based RSs Huang et al. (2021); Lei
et al. (2020). The reader can refer to Gupta and Katarya
(2021b) for more details, where the authors have discussed
various DRL-based RSs, highlighted their pros and cons and
identified their major challenges.

On the other hand, an incentive mechanism plays an es-
sential role for the functionalities of permissionless blockchain-
based RSs by incentivizing users for running and secur-
ing underlying consensus protocols. Thus, the design of
an incentive-compatible mechanism is a great challenge.
However, although the advantages of using blockchain in
RSs in terms of security and privacy, a large number of
public blockchain based RSs still utilize incentive mecha-
nisms that have poorly understandable and largely untested
characteristics. To that end, DRL can be deployed for
analyzing attacks on incentive mechanisms of blockchain-
based RSs. In this regard, SquirRL is proposed in Hou
et al. (2019) to automate attack analysis on blockchain
incentive mechanisms with DRL. While in Jameel et al.
(2020), a RL technique is used for addressing some of a set
of challenging problems blockchain-enabled IoT networks,
e.g. the transaction throughput enhancement and block time
minimization and.

5. Conclusion

In this article, we present a comprehensive survey of
blockchain-based RSs. We employ a specific taxonomy to

Y. Himeur et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 20 of 25

Blockchain-based Recommender Systems

to offer a promising solution that leverages the compu-
tational burden. Authors in Wu and Ansari (2020) have
introduced a blockchain for fog node clusters, which demon-
strates reduced power consumption and need fewer stor-
age space. They employed it to improve security in each
cluster through shared (among the cluster nodes) access
control lists (ACL). In the proposed implementation older
blocks are deleted to keep the chain length constant and
the nodes work cooperatively to validate blocks instead of
competing like miner nodes do in other blockchains. Similar
paradigms are provided in Mendis et al. (2020), which
illustrates a decentralized, secure, and privacy-preserving
computing paradigm for asynchronous cooperative comput-
ing amongst scattered and untrustworthy computing nodes
with limited resources, and in Fu et al. (2019) that presents
an energy-efficiency aware architecture of cooperative com-
puting (CC) to blockchain-based IoT.

The cluster-based blockchain presented in Wu and Ansari
(2020) can be used for scaling up blockchain-based RSs,
without inflating the need for resources. Nodes in a local
level (e.g. based on their spatial or social proximity) can
share preferences and ratings in the blockchain of their
cluster and selectively grant or revoke access to other nodes
using their common ACL, which is also stored in the cluster
blockchain. Nodes that frequently interact with each other
will always be in the same cluster, whereas a node that
stops interacting with the cluster, will soon loose access
to the cluster resources and data. Authors in Liang et al.
(2019) describe a similar approach, though without the
use of blockchain, for their trust-based recommendation
scheme for a vehicular cyber physical systems network. The
cooperative computing approach is employed for validating
the credibility of user provided data and recommendations.

D5. Blockchain-based RS on edge/fog devices: Open chal-
lenges

Despite the wide adoption of blockchain in finance and
its rapid expansion in many more application domains (e.g.,
in logistics and healthcare), it is still underutilised in mobile
and IoT services. The main reason for this is the limited com-
putational capacity of IoT and mobile devices, in conjunction
with the power resources that blockchain tasks may require.
Smart cities, smart homes Damianou et al. (2019) and
autonomous vehicles Fu et al. (2020) have already attracted
the interest of researchers on IoT and edge or fog computing.
Current research focuses on optimising the performance in
the core tasks of each domain, and still relies on centralized
or cloud based solutions for issues related to privacy, secu-
rity, robustness and resilience to noise and attacks. Federated
learning allows to train more resilient models and protect the
privacy and security on the edge.

A combination of off-chain storage of data in P2P dis-
tributed systems that allow edge devices to easily connect
and disconnect at any time, with a blockchain that stores the
hashes of data locations or the trained models, can be a viable
solution for edge-based federated learning Zhao et al. (2020).
Smart home and consumption monitoring applications can
be benefited from the privacy that edge computing for IoT

with blockchain can provide Xiong et al. (2018). In this
setup, IoT devices can sense, communicate, and exchange
information with each other and with the RS, which may
run on the cloud. Edge computing devices in radio access
networks can provide local computing power, and solve
encryption, hashing, and recommendation tasks Sun et al.
(2020).

Fog-based RSs Wang et al. (2019b) have to address
the information overload issue, which can be performed by
abstracting the useful information from the fog environment.
In addition, fog-architectures have limited computing and
storage capabilities and low service latency. New algorithms
need to be designed, that provide recommendations of high
quality and in the same time optimize the system perfor-
mance. The algorithms must balance between sharing and
processing (e.g. abstracting) data locally and uploading data
to the cloud for further processing.

D6. Reinforcement learning for blockchain-based RS

Usually, RSs can be considered as classifiers or predic-
tors in which recommendation task has a sequential nature.
In this context, a RS can be represented as a Markov de-
cision process (MDP), where reinforcement learning (RL)
algorithms can be deployed for solving it Arulkumaran et al.
(2017); Zhao et al. (2018). Typically, the combination of
RL and deep learning has led to the paradigm of deep
reinforcement learning (DRL), which can be used in the rec-
ommendation problem with massive state and action spaces.
To that end, an increasing attention is devoted recently to
RL-based and DRL-based RSs Huang et al. (2021); Lei
et al. (2020). The reader can refer to Gupta and Katarya
(2021b) for more details, where the authors have discussed
various DRL-based RSs, highlighted their pros and cons and
identified their major challenges.

On the other hand, an incentive mechanism plays an es-
sential role for the functionalities of permissionless blockchain-
based RSs by incentivizing users for running and secur-
ing underlying consensus protocols. Thus, the design of
an incentive-compatible mechanism is a great challenge.
However, although the advantages of using blockchain in
RSs in terms of security and privacy, a large number of
public blockchain based RSs still utilize incentive mecha-
nisms that have poorly understandable and largely untested
characteristics. To that end, DRL can be deployed for
analyzing attacks on incentive mechanisms of blockchain-
based RSs. In this regard, SquirRL is proposed in Hou
et al. (2019) to automate attack analysis on blockchain
incentive mechanisms with DRL. While in Jameel et al.
(2020), a RL technique is used for addressing some of a set
of challenging problems blockchain-enabled IoT networks,
e.g. the transaction throughput enhancement and block time
minimization and.

5. Conclusion

In this article, we present a comprehensive survey of
blockchain-based RSs. We employ a specific taxonomy to

Y. Himeur et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 20 of 25

Blockchain-based Recommender Systems

describe existing blockchain-based RS frameworks with ref-
erence to different aspects including security and privacy
challenges, characteristics and working concept, blockchain
potential impact, and types of blockchain-based RSs and
applications. We discuss the limitations and open issues
before deriving a set of future directions that can help in
improving the quality of blockchain-based RSs. Considering
the striking features of blockchain, it is possible to imple-
ment efficient decentralized RSs with comparable accuracy
as centralized RSs, which will preserve data privacy and
guarantee security of sensitive information.

Therefore, we focused on outlining how to develop RSs
while dealing with users’ personal data right and privacy,
increasing the security against malicious attacks and increas-
ing the trust of the users in the recommendations engines.
Typically, blockchain has been presented as a promising
solution that can be embedded in RSs to to bring responses
to the open questions, especially those related to security
and privacy preservation. Therefore, blockchain can signif-
icantly help in improving the recommendation frameworks
by ensuring the security, integrity of data, confidentiality and
accessibility.

Finally, it is worth noting that developing decentralized
blockchain-based RSs can also raise some concerns, e.g. in
case of disputes or misbehaviour between users. Therefore,
the development of appropriate solutions that can create fair
processes should be investigated in the near future, e.g. using
atomic swaps inherited from blockchain.

Acknowledgements

This paper was made possible by National Priorities
Research Program (NPRP) grant No. 10-0130-170288 from
the Qatar National Research Fund (a member of Qatar
Foundation). The statements made herein are solely the
responsibility of the authors.

References
, 2018. Toward privacy-preserving personalized recommendation services.
Engineering 4, 21–28. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eng.2018.02.005.
cybersecurity.

Abbas, K., Afaq, M., Ahmed Khan, T., Song, W.C., 2020. A blockchain and
machine learning-based drug supply chain management and recommen-
dation system for smart pharmaceutical industry. Electronics 9, 852.
Abdollahi, B., Nasraoui, O., 2016. Explainable matrix factorization for col-
laborative filtering, in: Proceedings of the 25th International Conference
Companion on World Wide Web, pp. 5–6.

Adomavicius, G., Bockstedt, J., Curley, S.P., Zhang, J., Ransbotham, S.,
2019. The hidden side effects of recommendation systems. MIT Sloan
Management Review 60, 1.

Aggarwal, C.C., 2016. Attack-resistant recommender systems, in: Recom-

mender Systems. Springer, pp. 385–410.

Ahn, L.V., Blum, M., Hopper, N.J., Langford, J., 2003. Captcha: Using
hard ai problems for security, in: Proceedings of the 22nd International
Conference on Theory and Applications of Cryptographic Techniques,
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg. p. 294–311.

Al Omar, A., Bosri, R., Rahman, M.S., Begum, N., Bhuiyan, M.Z.A., 2019.
Towards privacy-preserving recommender system with blockchains, in:
International Conference on Dependability in Sensor, Cloud, and Big
Data Systems and Applications, Springer. pp. 106–118.

Ali, O., Ally, M., Dwivedi, Y., et al., 2020. The state of play of blockchain
technology in the financial services sector: A systematic literature re-
view. International Journal of Information Management 54, 102199.
Alsalemi, A., Himeur, Y., Bensaali, F., Amira, A., Sardianos, C., Chronis,
C., Varlamis, I., Dimitrakopoulos, G., 2021. A micro-moment system for
domestic energy efficiency analysis. IEEE Systems Journal 15, 1256–
1263. doi:10.1109/JSYST.2020.2997773.

Alsubaei, F., Abuhussein, A., Shiva, S., 2019. Ontology-based security
IEEE Access 7,

recommendation for the internet of medical things.
48948–48960.

Anandhan, A., Shuib, L., Ismail, M.A., Mujtaba, G., 2018. Social media
recommender systems: review and open research issues. IEEE Access
6, 15608–15628.

Andrychowicz, M., Dziembowski, S., Malinowski, D., Mazurek, Ł., 2015.
On the malleability of bitcoin transactions, in: International Conference
on Financial Cryptography and Data Security, Springer. pp. 1–18.
Arif, Y.M., Nurhayati, H., Kurniawan, F., Nugroho, S.M.S., Hariadi, M.,
2020. Blockchain-based data sharing for decentralized tourism des-
tinations recommendation system.
International Journal of Intelligent
Engineering & System 13, 472–486.

Arora, M., Chopra, A.B., Dixit, V.S., 2020. An approach to secure
collaborative recommender system using artificial intelligence, deep
learning, and blockchain, in: Intelligent communication, control and
devices. Springer, pp. 483–495.

Arulkumaran, K., Deisenroth, M.P., Brundage, M., Bharath, A.A., 2017.
Deep reinforcement learning: A brief survey. IEEE Signal Processing
Magazine 34, 26–38.

Beg, S., Anjum, A., Ahmad, M., Hussain, S., Ahmad, G., Khan, S.,
Choo, K.K.R., 2021. A privacy-preserving protocol for continuous
and dynamic data collection in iot enabled mobile app recommendation
system (mars).
Journal of Network and Computer Applications 174,
102874.

Berkovsky, S., Eytani, Y., Kuflik, T., Ricci, F., 2007. Enhancing privacy
and preserving accuracy of a distributed collaborative filtering, in:
Proceedings of the 2007 ACM conference on Recommender systems,
pp. 9–16.

Bhardwaj, R., Datta, D., 2020. Development of a recommender system
healthmudra using blockchain for prevention of diabetes. Recommender
System with Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence: Practical
Tools and Applications in Medical, Agricultural and Other Industries
, 313–327.

Bokhari, S.T., Aftab, T., Nadir, I., Bakhshi, T., 2019. Exploring blockchain-
secured data validation in smart meter readings, in: 2019 22nd In-
doi:10.1109/
ternational Multitopic Conference (INMIC), pp. 1–7.
INMIC48123.2019.9022772.

Borcea, C., Iyer, D., Kang, P., Saxena, A., Iftode, L., 2002. Cooperative
computing for distributed embedded systems, in: Proceedings 22nd
International Conference on Distributed Computing Systems, IEEE. pp.
227–236.

Borràs, J., Moreno, A., Valls, A., 2014. Intelligent tourism recommender
systems: A survey. Expert Systems with Applications 41, 7370–7389.

Bosri, R., Rahman, M.S., Bhuiyan, M.Z.A., Al Omar, A., 2021.

In-
tegrating blockchain with artificial intelligence for privacy-preserving
IEEE Transactions on Network Science and
recommender systems.
Engineering 8, 1009–1018. doi:10.1109/TNSE.2020.3031179.

Broby, D., Paul, G., 2017. The financial auditing of distributed ledgers,
blockchain and cryptocurrencies. Journal of Financial Transformation
46, 76–88.

Cai, H., Zhang, F., 2019. An unsupervised method for detecting shilling
attacks in recommender systems by mining item relationship and iden-
tifying target items. The Computer Journal 62, 579–597.

Cao, B., Zhang, Z., Feng, D., Zhang, S., Zhang, L., Peng, M., Li, Y.,
2020a. Performance analysis and comparison of pow, pos and dag based
blockchains. Digital Communications and Networks 6, 480–485.

Cao, S., Zhang, G., Liu, P., Zhang, X., Neri, F., 2019. Cloud-assisted secure
Information

ehealth systems for tamper-proofing ehr via blockchain.
Sciences 485, 427–440.

Y. Himeur et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 21 of 25

Blockchain-based Recommender Systems

Cao, Y., Chen, X., Yao, L., Wang, X., Zhang, W.E., 2020b. Adversarial at-
tacks and detection on reinforcement learning-based interactive recom-
mender systems, in: Proceedings of the 43rd International ACM SIGIR
Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval, pp.
1669–1672.

Casino, F., Dasaklis, T.K., Patsakis, C., 2019a. A systematic literature
review of blockchain-based applications: current status, classification
and open issues. Telematics and informatics 36, 55–81.

Casino, F., Patsakis, C., 2019. An efficient blockchain-based privacy-
IEEE Transactions on

preserving collaborative filtering architecture.
Engineering Management 67, 1501–1513.

Casino, F., Patsakis, C., Solanas, A., 2019b. Privacy-preserving collabo-
rative filtering: A new approach based on variable-group-size microag-
gregation. Electronic Commerce Research and Applications 38, 100895.
doi:10.1016/j.elerap.2019.100895.

Castells, P., Hurley, N.J., Vargas, S., 2015. Novelty and diversity in
recommender systems, in: Recommender systems handbook. Springer,
pp. 881–918.

Chandel, S., Cao, W., Sun, Z., Yang, J., Zhang, B., Ni, T.Y., 2019. A multi-
dimensional adversary analysis of rsa and ecc in blockchain encryption,
in: Future of Information and Communication Conference, Springer. pp.
988–1003.

Chen, Y., Zhou, M., Zheng, Z., Chen, D., 2019. Time-aware smart object
recommendation in social internet of things. IEEE Internet of Things
Journal 7, 2014–2027.

Dahihande, J., Jaiswal, A., Pagar, A.A., Thakare, A., Eirinaki, M., Varlamis,
I., 2020. Reducing energy waste in households through real-time
recommendations, in: Santos, R.L.T., Marinho, L.B., Daly, E.M., Chen,
L., Falk, K., Koenigstein, N., de Moura, E.S. (Eds.), RecSys 2020:
Fourteenth ACM Conference on Recommender Systems, Virtual Event,
Brazil, September 22-26, 2020, ACM. pp. 545–550.

Damianou, A., Angelopoulos, C.M., Katos, V., 2019. An architecture for
blockchain over edge-enabled iot for smart circular cities, in: 2019 15th
International Conference on Distributed Computing in Sensor Systems
(DCOSS), IEEE. pp. 465–472.

De Medio, C., Limongelli, C., Sciarrone, F., Temperini, M., 2020.
Moodlerec: A recommendation system for creating courses using the
moodle e-learning platform. Computers in Human Behavior 104,
106168.

De Vries, A., 2018. Bitcoin’s growing energy problem. Joule 2, 801–805.
Deebak, B., Al-Turjman, F., 2020. A novel community-based trust aware
recommender systems for big data cloud service networks. Sustainable
Cities and Society 61, 102274.

Deldjoo, Y., DI NOIA, T., MERRA, F.A., 2020a. A survey on adversar-
ial recommender systems: from attack/defense strategies to generative
adversarial networks. ACM Comput. Surv. .

Deldjoo, Y., Noia, T.D., Merra, F.A., 2021. A survey on adversarial recom-
mender systems: from attack/defense strategies to generative adversarial
networks. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) 54, 1–38.

Deldjoo, Y., Schedl, M., Cremonesi, P., Pasi, G., 2020b. Recommender
systems leveraging multimedia content. ACM Computing Surveys
(CSUR) 53, 1–38.

Deng, X., Huangfu, F., 2019. Collaborative variational deep learning for

healthcare recommendation. IEEE Access 7, 55679–55688.

Du, Y., Fang, M., Yi, J., Xu, C., Cheng, J., Tao, D., 2018. Enhancing
the robustness of neural collaborative filtering systems under malicious
attacks. IEEE Transactions on Multimedia 21, 555–565.

Duriakova, E., Tragos, E.Z., Smyth, B., Hurley, N., Peña, F.J., Symeonidis,
Pdmfrec: a decentralised matrix
P., Geraci, J., Lawlor, A., 2019.
factorisation with tunable user-centric privacy, in: Proceedings of the
13th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems, pp. 457–461.

Egwutuoha, I.P., Levy, D., Selic, B., Chen, S., 2013. A survey of fault
tolerance mechanisms and checkpoint/restart implementations for high
performance computing systems. The Journal of Supercomputing 65,
1302–1326.

Eirinaki, M., Gao, J., Varlamis, I., Tserpes, K., 2018. Recommender
systems for large-scale social networks: A review of challenges and
solutions. Future Generation Computer Systems 78, 413–418.

Eirinaki, M., Louta, M.D., Varlamis, I., 2014. A trust-aware system
for personalized user recommendations in social networks.
IEEE
Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems 44, 409–421.
doi:10.1109/TSMC.2013.2263128.

Eksombatchai, C., Jindal, P., Liu, J.Z., Liu, Y., Sharma, R., Sugnet, C.,
Ulrich, M., Leskovec, J., 2018. Pixie: A system for recommending 3+
billion items to 200+ million users in real-time, in: Proceedings of the
2018 world wide web conference, pp. 1775–1784.

Fang, M., Yang, G., Gong, N.Z., Liu, J., 2018.

Poisoning attacks to
graph-based recommender systems, in: Proceedings of the 34th Annual
Computer Security Applications Conference, pp. 381–392.

Frey, R., Wörner, D., Ilic, A., 2016a. Collaborative filtering on the
blockchain: a secure recommender system for e-commerce. AMCIS
2016 Proceedings , 36.

Frey, R.M., Vuckovac, D., Ilic, A., 2016b. A secure shopping experience
based on blockchain and beacon technology, in: Poster Proceedings of
the 10th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems (Poster-RecSys
2016), Boston, USA, September 17, 2016, CEUR-WS. p. 03.

Fu, M., Qu, H., Yi, Z., Lu, L., Liu, Y., 2018. A novel deep learning-
based collaborative filtering model for recommendation system. IEEE
transactions on cybernetics 49, 1084–1096.

Fu, S., Fan, Q., Tang, Y., Zhang, H., Jian, X., Zeng, X., 2019. Cooperative
IEEE

computing in integrated blockchain-based internet of things.
Internet of Things Journal 7, 1603–1612.

Fu, Y., Yu, F.R., Li, C., Luan, T.H., Zhang, Y., 2020. Vehicular blockchain-
based collective learning for connected and autonomous vehicles. IEEE
Wireless Communications 27, 197–203.

Ghafari, S.M., Beheshti, A., Joshi, A., Paris, C., Mahmood, A., Yakhchi,
S., Orgun, M.A., 2020. A survey on trust prediction in online social
networks. IEEE Access 8, 144292–144309.

Gillis, N., 2020. Nonnegative Matrix Factorization. SIAM.
Golbeck, J., 2008. Computing with social trust. Springer Science &

Business Media.

Gulati, A., Eirinaki, M., 2019. With a little help from my friends (and their
friends): Influence neighborhoods for social recommendations, in: The
World Wide Web Conference, Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA. p. 2778–2784.

Guo, Q., Zhuang, F., Qin, C., Zhu, H., Xie, X., Xiong, H., He, Q., 2020.
A survey on knowledge graph-based recommender systems.
IEEE
Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering , 1–1doi:10.1109/
TKDE.2020.3028705.

Gupta, G., Katarya, R., 2018. A study of recommender systems using
markov decision process, in: 2018 Second International Conference on
Intelligent Computing and Control Systems (ICICCS), IEEE. pp. 1279–
1283.

Gupta, G., Katarya, R., 2019. Recommendation analysis on item-based and
user-based collaborative filtering, in: 2019 International Conference on
Smart Systems and Inventive Technology (ICSSIT), IEEE. pp. 1–4.
Gupta, G., Katarya, R., 2021a. Enpso: An automl technique for generating
ensemble recommender system. Arabian Journal for Science and
Engineering , 1–19.

Gupta, G., Katarya, R., 2021b. A study of deep reinforcement learning
based recommender systems, in: 2021 2nd International Conference on
Secure Cyber Computing and Communications (ICSCCC), IEEE. pp.
218–220.

Harris, J.D., Waggoner, B., 2019. Decentralized and collaborative AI
on blockchain, in: 2019 IEEE International Conference on Blockchain
(Blockchain), IEEE. pp. 368–375.

Hassan, M.U., Rehmani, M.H., Chen, J., 2019. Deal: Differentially private
auction for blockchain-based microgrids energy trading. IEEE Transac-
tions on Services Computing 13, 263–275.

He, P., Yu, G., Zhang, Y., Bao, Y., 2017. Survey on blockchain technology

and its application prospects. Computer Science 44, 1–7.

Hegering, H.G., Neumair, B., Gutschmidt, M., 1994. Cooperative com-
puting and integrated system management: A critical comparison of
architectural approaches. Journal of Network and Systems Management
2, 283–316.

Y. Himeur et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 22 of 25

Blockchain-based Recommender Systems

Himeur, Y., Alsalemi, A., Al-Kababji, A., Bensaali, F., Amira, A., Sar-
dianos, C., Dimitrakopoulos, G., Varlamis, I., 2021. A survey of
recommender systems for energy efficiency in buildings: Principles,
challenges and prospects. Information Fusion .

Hofmann, F., Wurster, S., Ron, E., Böhmecke-Schwafert, M., 2017. The
immutability concept of blockchains and benefits of early standardiza-
tion, in: 2017 ITU Kaleidoscope: Challenges for a Data-Driven Society
(ITU K), IEEE. pp. 1–8.

Hong, M., Jung, J.J., 2021. Multi-criteria tensor model for tourism
recommender systems. Expert Systems with Applications 170, 114537.
Hors-Fraile, S., Malwade, S., Luna-Perejon, F., Amaya, C., Civit, A.,
Schneider, F., Bamidis, P., Syed-Abdul, S., Li, Y.C., De Vries, H.,
2019. Opening the black box: Explaining the process of basing a health
recommender system on the i-change behavioral change model. IEEE
Access 7, 176525–176540.

Hou, C., Zhou, M., Ji, Y., Daian, P., Tramer, F., Fanti, G., Juels, A., 2019.
Squirrl: Automating attack analysis on blockchain incentive mechanisms
with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.01798 .
Hu, R., Guo, Y., Pan, M., Gong, Y., 2019. Targeted poisoning attacks on
social recommender systems, in: 2019 IEEE Global Communications
Conference (GLOBECOM), IEEE. pp. 1–6.

Huang, L., Fu, M., Li, F., Qu, H., Liu, Y., Chen, W., 2021. A deep reinforce-
ment learning based long-term recommender system. Knowledge-Based
Systems 213, 106706.

Hurley, N.J., 2011. Robustness of recommender systems, in: Proceedings
of the fifth ACM conference on Recommender systems, pp. 9–10.
Idrees, S.M., Nowostawski, M., Jameel, R., Mourya, A.K., 2021. Security
aspects of blockchain technology intended for industrial applications.
Electronics 10, 951.

Jamali, M., Ester, M., 2010. A matrix factorization technique with trust
propagation for recommendation in social networks, in: Proceedings of
the Fourth ACM Conference on Recommender Systems, Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA. p. 135–142.

Jameel, F., Javaid, U., Khan, W.U., Aman, M.N., Pervaiz, H., Jäntti, R.,
2020. Reinforcement learning in blockchain-enabled iiot networks: a
survey of recent advances and open challenges. Sustainability 12, 5161.
Jerripothula, K.R., Rai, A., Garg, K., Rautela, Y.S., 2020. Feature-level rat-
ing system using customer reviews and review votes. IEEE Transactions
on Computational Social Systems 7, 1210–1219.

Jiang, L., Zhang, X., 2019. Bcosn: A blockchain-based decentralized online
social network. IEEE Transactions on Computational Social Systems 6,
1454–1466.

Katarya, R., 2018. Reliable recommender system using improved collab-
orative filtering technique, in: System Reliability Management. CRC
Press, pp. 113–119.

Katarya, R., Ranjan, M., Verma, O.P., 2016. Location based recommender
system using enhanced random walk model, in: 2016 Fourth Interna-
tional Conference on Parallel, Distributed and Grid Computing (PDGC),
IEEE. pp. 33–37.

Katarya, R., Verma, N., 2017. Automatically detection and recommen-
dation in collaborative groups, in: 2017 International Conference on
Intelligent Sustainable Systems (ICISS), IEEE. pp. 218–222.

Katarya, R., Verma, O.P., 2018. Recommender system with grey wolf
optimizer and fcm. Neural Computing and Applications 30, 1679–1687.
Kaur, H., Kumar, N., Batra, S., 2018. An efficient multi-party scheme for
privacy preserving collaborative filtering for healthcare recommender
system. Future Generation Computer Systems 86, 297–307.

Khatoon, A., 2020. A blockchain-based smart contract system for health-

care management. Electronics 9, 94.

Kim, S., Kwon, Y., Cho, S., 2018. A survey of scalability solutions
on blockchain, in: 2018 International Conference on Information and
Communication Technology Convergence (ICTC), IEEE. pp. 1204–
1207.

Koren, Y., 2010. Factor in the neighbors: Scalable and accurate collabora-

tive filtering. ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data 4.

Koren, Y., Bell, R., Volinsky, C., 2009. Matrix factorization techniques for
recommender systems. Computer 42, 30–37. doi:10.1109/MC.2009.263.

Kula, M., 2015. Metadata embeddings for user and item cold-start recom-
mendations, in: Bogers, T., Koolen, M. (Eds.), Proceedings of the 2nd
Workshop on New Trends on Content-Based Recommender Systems co-
located with 9th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems (RecSys
2015), Vienna, Austria, September 16-20, 2015., CEUR-WS.org. pp.
14–21.

Kuzlu, M., Pipattanasomporn, M., Gurses, L., Rahman, S., 2019. Perfor-
mance analysis of a hyperledger fabric blockchain framework: through-
put, latency and scalability, in: 2019 IEEE international conference on
blockchain (Blockchain), IEEE. pp. 536–540.

Lam, T.Y., Dongol, B., 2020. A blockchain-enabled e-learning platform.

Interactive Learning Environments , 1–23.

Lamport, L., Shostak, R., Pease, M., 1982. The byzantine generals problem.
ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems 4, 382–
401.

Lei, Y., Wang, Z., Li, W., Pei, H., Dai, Q., 2020. Social attentive deep q-
networks for recommender systems. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge
and Data Engineering , 1–1doi:10.1109/TKDE.2020.3012346.

Li, J., Shao, Y., Ding, M., Ma, C., Wei, K., Han, Z., Poor, H.V., 2020a.
Blockchain assisted decentralized federated learning (blade-fl) with lazy
clients. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.02044 .

Li, Q., Wen, Z., Wu, Z., Hu, S., Wang, N., He, B., 2019. A survey on
federated learning systems: vision, hype and reality for data privacy and
protection. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.09693 .

Li, X.H., Cao, C.C., Shi, Y., Bai, W., Gao, H., Qiu, L., Wang, C., Gao,
Y., Zhang, S., Xue, X., et al., 2020b. A survey of data-driven and
knowledge-aware explainable AI. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and
Data Engineering .

Li, Z., Barenji, A.V., Huang, G.Q., 2018. Toward a blockchain cloud
manufacturing system as a peer to peer distributed network platform.
Robotics and computer-integrated manufacturing 54, 133–144.

Liang, W., Long, J., Weng, T.H., Chen, X., Li, K.C., Zomaya, A.Y., 2019.
Tbrs: A trust based recommendation scheme for vehicular cps network.
Future Generation Computer Systems 92, 383–398.

Lisi, A., De Salve, A., Mori, P., Ricci, L., 2019. A smart contract based
recommender system, in: International Conference on the Economics of
Grids, Clouds, Systems, and Services, Springer. pp. 29–42.

Lisi, A., De Salve, A., Mori, P., Ricci, L., 2020. Practical application and
evaluation of atomic swaps for blockchain-based recommender systems,
in: 2020 the 3rd International Conference on Blockchain Technology and
Applications, pp. 67–74.

Lisi, A., De Salve, A., Mori, P., Ricci, L., Fabrizi, S., 2021. Rewarding
reviews with tokens: An ethereum-based approach. Future Generation
Computer Systems 120, 36–54.

Liu, M., Wu, K., Xu, J.J., 2019. How will blockchain technology impact au-
diting and accounting: Permissionless versus permissioned blockchain.
Current Issues in Auditing 13, A19–A29.

Liu, Z., Li, Z., 2020. A blockchain-based framework of cross-border e-
commerce supply chain. International Journal of Information Manage-
ment 52, 102059.

Lu, Y., 2019. The blockchain: State-of-the-art and research challenges.

Journal of Industrial Information Integration 15, 80–90.

Lu, Z., 2018. The architecture of blockchain system across the manufactur-

ing supply chain.

Ma, H., Yang, H., Lyu, M.R., King, I., 2008. Sorec: Social recommendation
using probabilistic matrix factorization, in: Proceedings of the 17th
ACM Conference on Information and Knowledge Management, Asso-
ciation for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA. p. 931–940.
Maatuk, A.M., Elberkawi, E.K., Aljawarneh, S., Rashaideh, H., Alharbi,
H., 2021. The covid-19 pandemic and e-learning: Challenges and
opportunities from the perspective of students and instructors. Journal
of Computing in Higher Education , 1–18.

McKinney, S.A., Landy, R., Wilka, R., 2017. Smart contracts, blockchain,
and the next frontier of transactional law. Wash. JL Tech. & Arts 13,
313.

Mehta, B., Hofmann, T., 2008. A survey of attack-resistant collaborative

filtering algorithms. IEEE Data Eng. Bull. 31, 14–22.

Y. Himeur et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 23 of 25

Blockchain-based Recommender Systems

Mehta, B., Nejdl, W., 2008. Attack resistant collaborative filtering, in:
Proceedings of the 31st annual international ACM SIGIR conference
on Research and development in information retrieval, pp. 75–82.

Mendis, G.J., Wu, Y., Wei, J., Sabounchi, M., Roche, R., 2020. A
blockchain-powered decentralized and secure computing paradigm.
IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computing .

Mikroyannidis, A., Domingue, J., Bachler, M., Quick, K., 2018. Smart
blockchain badges for data science education, in: 2018 IEEE Frontiers
in Education Conference (FIE), IEEE. pp. 1–5.

Mobasher, B., Burke, R., Bhaumik, R., Williams, C., 2007. Toward
trustworthy recommender systems: An analysis of attack models and al-
gorithm robustness. ACM Transactions on Internet Technology (TOIT)
7, 23–es.

Mohammadi, V., Rahmani, A.M., Darwesh, A.M., Sahafi, A., 2019. Trust-
based recommendation systems in internet of things: a systematic liter-
ature review. Human-centric Computing and Information Sciences 9,
1–61.

Mohan, C., 2019. State of public and private blockchains: Myths and reality,
in: Proceedings of the 2019 International Conference on Management of
Data, pp. 404–411.

Nassar, M., Salah, K., ur Rehman, M.H., Svetinovic, D., 2020. Blockchain
for explainable and trustworthy artificial intelligence. Wiley Interdisci-
plinary Reviews: Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery 10, e1340.
Nguyen, H.T., Almenningen, T., Havig, M., Schistad, H., Kofod-Petersen,
A., Langseth, H., Ramampiaro, H., 2014. Learning to rank for person-
alised fashion recommender systems via implicit feedback, in: Mining
Intelligence and Knowledge Exploration. Springer, pp. 51–61.

Niranjanamurthy, M., Nithya, B., Jagannatha, S., 2019. Analysis of
blockchain technology: pros, cons and swot. Cluster Computing 22,
14743–14757.

O’Mahony, M.P., Hurley, N.J., Silvestre, G.C., 2005. Recommender

systems: Attack types and strategies, in: AAAI, pp. 334–339.

Pan, S.J., Yang, Q., 2009. A survey on transfer learning. IEEE Transactions

on knowledge and data engineering 22, 1345–1359.

Patel, S.B., Bhattacharya, P., Tanwar, S., Kumar, N., 2020. Kirti: A
blockchain-based credit recommender system for financial institutions.
IEEE Transactions on Network Science and Engineering .

Polatidis, N., Georgiadis, C.K., Pimenidis, E., Stiakakis, E., 2017. Privacy-
preserving recommendations in context-aware mobile environments.
Information & Computer Security .

Porkodi, S., Kesavaraja, D., 2020. A trust-based recommender system built
on iot blockchain network with cognitive framework. Recommender
System with Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence: Practical
Tools and Applications in Medical, Agricultural and Other Industries
, 291–311.

Pu, P., Chen, L., Hu, R., 2012. Evaluating recommender systems from the
user’s perspective: survey of the state of the art. User Modeling and
User-Adapted Interaction 22, 317–355.

Putra, G.D., Dedeoglu, V., Kanhere, S.S., Jurdak, R., 2020. Towards
scalable and trustworthy decentralized collaborative intrusion detection
system for iot, in: 2020 IEEE/ACM Fifth International Conference on
Internet-of-Things Design and Implementation (IoTDI), IEEE. pp. 256–
257.

Quijano-Sánchez, L., Cantador, I., Cortés-Cediel, M.E., Gil, O., 2020.
Recommender systems for smart cities. Information systems 92, 101545.
Rahman, A., Nasir, M.K., Rahman, Z., Mosavi, A., Shahab, S., Minaei-
Bidgoli, B., 2020. Distblockbuilding: A distributed blockchain-based
sdn-iot network for smart building management.
IEEE Access 8,
140008–140018.

Resnick, P., Iacovou, N., Suchak, M., Bergstrom, P., Riedl, J., 1994.
Grouplens: An open architecture for collaborative filtering of netnews,
in: Proceedings of the 1994 ACM Conference on Computer Supported
Cooperative Work, Association for Computing Machinery, New York,
NY, USA. p. 175–186.

Resnick, P., Sami, R., 2007. The influence limiter: Provably manipulation-
resistant recommender systems, in: Proceedings of the 2007 ACM
Conference on Recommender Systems, Association for Computing Ma-
chinery, New York, NY, USA. p. 25–32. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/

1297231.1297236, doi:10.1145/1297231.1297236.

Resnick, P., Sami, R., 2008.

The information cost of manipulation-
resistance in recommender systems, in: Proceedings of the 2008 ACM
Conference on Recommender Systems, Association for Computing Ma-
chinery, New York, NY, USA. p. 147–154. URL: https://doi.org/10.
1145/1454008.1454033, doi:10.1145/1454008.1454033.

Rezaimehr, F., Dadkhah, C., 2021. A survey of attack detection approaches
in collaborative filtering recommender systems. Artificial Intelligence
Review 54, 2011–2066.

Rubio, J.E., Alcaraz, C., Lopez, J., 2017. Recommender system for
privacy-preserving solutions in smart metering. Pervasive and Mobile
Computing 41, 205–218.

Saha, J., Chowdhury, C., Biswas, S., 2020. Review of machine learning
and deep learning based recommender systems for health informatics,
in: Deep Learning Techniques for Biomedical and Health Informatics.
Springer, pp. 101–126.

Saleem, Y., Rehmani, M.H., Crespi, N., Minerva, R., 2020.

Parking
recommender system privacy preservation through anonymization and
differential privacy. Engineering Reports , e12297.

Sankar, L.S., Sindhu, M., Sethumadhavan, M., 2017. Survey of consensus
protocols on blockchain applications, in: 2017 4th International Confer-
ence on Advanced Computing and Communication Systems (ICACCS),
IEEE. pp. 1–5.

Sardianos, C., Chronis, C., Varlamis, I., Dimitrakopoulos, G., Himeur, Y.,
Alsalemi, A., Bensaali, F., Amira, A., 2020a. Real-time personalised
energy saving recommendations, in: 2020 International Conferences on
Internet of Things (iThings) and IEEE Green Computing and Commu-
nications (GreenCom) and IEEE Cyber, Physical and Social Computing
(CPSCom) and IEEE Smart Data (SmartData) and IEEE Congress on
Cybermatics (Cybermatics), IEEE. pp. 366–371.

Sardianos, C., Varlamis, I., Chronis, C., Dimitrakopoulos, G., Alsalemi,
A., Himeur, Y., Bensaali, F., Amira, A., 2021. The emergence of
explainability of intelligent systems: Delivering explainable and person-
alized recommendations for energy efficiency. International Journal of
Intelligent Systems 36, 656–680.

Sardianos, C., Varlamis, I., Dimitrakopoulos, G., Anagnostopoulos, D.,
Alsalemi, A., Bensaali, F., Himeur, Y., Amira, A., 2020b. Rehab-
Future Generation
c: Recommendations for energy habits change.
Computer Systems 112, 394–407.

Sardianos, C., Varlamis, I., Eirinaki, M., 2017.

Scaling collaborative
filtering to large–scale bipartite rating graphs using lenskit and spark,
in: 2017 IEEE Third International Conference on Big Data Computing
Service and Applications (BigDataService), IEEE. pp. 70–79.

Sarwar, B., Karypis, G., Konstan, J., Riedl, J., 2001.

Item-based col-
laborative filtering recommendation algorithms, in: Proceedings of the
10th International Conference on World Wide Web, Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA. p. 285–295.

Schafer, J.B., Konstan, J., Riedl, J., 1999. Recommender systems in e-
commerce, in: Proceedings of the 1st ACM conference on Electronic
commerce, pp. 158–166.

Schuetz, S., Venkatesh, V., 2020. Blockchain, adoption, and financial
International Journal of

inclusion in india: Research opportunities.
Information Management 52, 101936.

Sedlmeir, J., Buhl, H.U., Fridgen, G., Keller, R., 2020.

The energy
consumption of blockchain technology: beyond myth. Business &
Information Systems Engineering 62, 599–608.

Sharma, A., Jiang, J., Bommannavar, P., Larson, B., Lin, J., 2016. Graphjet:
Proceedings of the

Real-time content recommendations at twitter.
VLDB Endowment 9, 1281–1292.

Sheng, Z., Mahapatra, C., Leung, V.C., Chen, M., Sahu, P.K., 2015. Energy
efficient cooperative computing in mobile wireless sensor networks.
IEEE Transactions on Cloud Computing 6, 114–126.

Stifter, N., Judmayer, A., Weippl, E., 2019. Revisiting practical byzantine
fault tolerance through blockchain technologies, in: Security and Quality
in Cyber-Physical Systems Engineering. Springer, pp. 471–495.

Sun, C., Li, H., Li, X., Wen, J., Xiong, Q., Zhou, W., 2020. Convergence
of recommender systems and edge computing: A comprehensive survey.
IEEE Access 8, 47118–47132.

Y. Himeur et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 24 of 25

Blockchain-based Recommender Systems

Yang, L., Tan, B., Zheng, V.W., Chen, K., Yang, Q., 2020. Federated
recommendation systems, in: Federated Learning. Springer, pp. 225–
239.

Yeh, T.Y., Kashef, R., 2020. Trust-based collaborative filtering recommen-
dation systems on the blockchain. Advances in Internet of Things 10,
37–56.

Yong, B., Shen, J., Liu, X., Li, F., Chen, H., Zhou, Q., 2020. An intelli-
gent blockchain-based system for safe vaccine supply and supervision.
International Journal of Information Management 52, 102024.

Zhan, J., Hsieh, C.L., Wang, I.C., Hsu, T.S., Liau, C.J., Wang, D.W.,
2010. Privacy-preserving collaborative recommender systems.
IEEE
Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part C (Applications
and Reviews) 40, 472–476.

Zhang, F., Wang, S., 2020. Detecting group shilling attacks in online
IEEE

recommender systems based on bisecting k-means clustering.
Transactions on Computational Social Systems 7, 1189–1199.

Zhang, F., Zhou, Q., 2014. Hht–svm: An online method for detecting profile
injection attacks in collaborative recommender systems. Knowledge-
Based Systems 65, 96–105.

Zhang, H., Sun, Y., Zhao, M., Chow, T.W., Wu, Q.J., 2019. Bridging
user interest to item content for recommender systems: An optimization
model. IEEE transactions on cybernetics 50, 4268–4280.

Zhang, Y., Chen, X., 2020. Explainable recommendation: A survey and
new perspectives. Foundations and Trends in Information Retrieval 14,
1–101.

Zhao, X., Xia, L., Zhang, L., Ding, Z., Yin, D., Tang, J., 2018. Deep
reinforcement learning for page-wise recommendations, in: Proceedings
of the 12th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems, pp. 95–103.
Zhao, Y., Zhao, J., Jiang, L., Tan, R., Niyato, D., Li, Z., Lyu, L., Liu, Y.,
2020. Privacy-preserving blockchain-based federated learning for iot
devices. IEEE Internet of Things Journal .

Zhao, Z., Hong, L., Wei, L., Chen, J., Nath, A., Andrews, S., Kumthekar, A.,
Sathiamoorthy, M., Yi, X., Chi, E., 2019. Recommending what video
to watch next: a multitask ranking system, in: Proceedings of the 13th
ACM Conference on Recommender Systems, pp. 43–51.

Zheng, Z., Xie, S., Dai, H., Chen, X., Wang, H., 2017. An overview of
blockchain technology: Architecture, consensus, and future trends, in:
2017 IEEE international congress on big data (BigData congress), IEEE.
pp. 557–564.

Zhou, J., Feng, Y., Wang, Z., Guo, D., 2021. Using secure multi-party
computation to protect privacy on a permissioned blockchain. Sensors
21, 1540.

Zou, R., 2019. A deep, forgetful novelty-seeking movie recommender

model. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.01811 .

Sweeney, L., 2000. Simple demographics often identify people uniquely.

Health (San Francisco) 671, 1–34.

Symeonidis, P., Nanopoulos, A., Manolopoulos, Y., 2008.

Providing
justifications in recommender systems. IEEE Transactions on Systems,
Man, and Cybernetics-Part A: Systems and Humans 38, 1262–1272.
Tarus, J.K., Niu, Z., Kalui, D., 2018. A hybrid recommender system for
e-learning based on context awareness and sequential pattern mining.
Soft Computing 22, 2449–2461.

Toledo, R.Y., Alzahrani, A.A., Martínez, L., 2019. A food recommender
system considering nutritional information and user preferences. IEEE
Access 7, 96695–96711.

Tran, T.N.T., Felfernig, A., Trattner, C., Holzinger, A., 2020. Recommender
systems in the healthcare domain: state-of-the-art and research issues.
Journal of Intelligent Information Systems , 1–31.

Ullah, N., Mugahed Al-Rahmi, W., Alzahrani, A.I., Alfarraj, O., Alblehai,
F.M., 2021. Blockchain technology adoption in smart learning environ-
ments. Sustainability 13, 1801.

Umekwudo, J.O., Shim, J., 2020. Blockchain technology for mobile
applications recommendation systems. Journal of Society for e-Business
Studies 24.

Volkovs, M., Yu, G.W., Poutanen, T., 2017. Dropoutnet: Addressing cold

start in recommender systems., in: NIPS, pp. 4957–4966.

Wang, S., Huang, C., Li, J., Yuan, Y., Wang, F.Y., 2019a. Decentralized
construction of knowledge graphs for deep recommender systems based
on blockchain-powered smart contracts.
IEEE Access 7, 136951–
136961.

Wang, T., Zhang, G., Bhuiyan, M.Z.A., Liu, A., Jia, W., Xie, M., 2018. A
novel trust mechanism based on fog computing in sensor–cloud system.
Future Generation Computer Systems .

Wang, X., Gu, B., Ren, Y., Ye, W., Yu, S., Xiang, Y., Gao, L., 2019b. A fog-
based recommender system. IEEE Internet of Things Journal 7, 1048–
1060.

Wei, J., He, J., Chen, K., Zhou, Y., Tang, Z., 2017. Collaborative filtering
and deep learning based recommendation system for cold start items.
Expert Systems with Applications 69, 29–39.

Wei, P., Xia, S., Chen, R., Qian, J., Li, C., Jiang, X., 2020. A deep-
reinforcement-learning-based recommender system for occupant-driven
energy optimization in commercial buildings. IEEE Internet of Things
Journal 7, 6402–6413.

Weng, J., Weng, J., Zhang, J., Li, M., Zhang, Y., Luo, W., 2019. Deepchain:
Auditable and privacy-preserving deep learning with blockchain-based
incentive. IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing .
Wibowo, F.M., Sidiq, M.F., Akbar, I.A., Basuki, A.I., Rosiyadi, D., 2019.
Collaborative whitelist packet filtering driven by smart contract forum,
in: 2019 International Seminar on Research of Information Technology
and Intelligent Systems (ISRITI), IEEE. pp. 205–210.

Williams, C.A., Mobasher, B., Burke, R., 2007. Defending recommender
systems: detection of profile injection attacks. Service Oriented Com-
puting and Applications 1, 157–170.

Wood, G., et al., 2014. Ethereum: A secure decentralised generalised

transaction ledger. Ethereum project yellow paper 151, 1–32.

Wu, D., Ansari, N., 2020. A cooperative computing strategy for blockchain-
secured fog computing. IEEE Internet of Things Journal 7, 6603–6609.
Wu, D., Lu, J., Zhang, G., 2015. A fuzzy tree matching-based personalized
e-learning recommender system. IEEE transactions on fuzzy systems
23, 2412–2426.

Xie, J., Yu, F.R., Huang, T., Xie, R., Liu, J., Liu, Y., 2019. A survey on the

scalability of blockchain systems. IEEE Network 33, 166–173.

Xiong, Z., Zhang, Y., Niyato, D., Wang, P., Han, Z., 2018. When mobile
IEEE Communications Magazine

blockchain meets edge computing.
56, 33–39.

Xu, C., Wang, J., Zhu, L., Zhang, C., Sharif, K., 2019. Ppmr: a privacy-
preserving online medical service recommendation scheme in ehealth-
care system. IEEE Internet of Things Journal 6, 5665–5673.

Xu, K., Zhang, W., Yan, Z., 2018. A privacy-preserving mobile application
Journal of computa-

recommender system based on trust evaluation.
tional science 26, 87–107.

Y. Himeur et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 25 of 25

