1
2
0
2

t
c
O
1
3

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
6
1
4
0
0
.
1
1
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

How BlockChain Can Help Enhance The Security And Privacy in
Edge Computing?

Jinyue Song
jysong@ucdavis.edu
University of California, Davis

Tianbo Gu
tbgu@ucdavis.edu
University of California, Davis

Prasant Mohapatra
pmohapatra@ucdavis.edu
University of California, Davis

ABSTRACT
In order to solve security and privacy issues of centralized cloud
services, the edge computing network is introduced, where comput-
ing and storage resources are distributed to the edge of the network.
However, native edge computing is subject to the limited perfor-
mance of edge devices, which causes challenges in data authoriza-
tion, data encryption, user privacy, and other fields. Blockchain is
currently the hottest technology for distributed networks. It solves
the consistent issue of distributed data and is used in many areas,
such as cryptocurrency, smart grid, and the Internet of Things.

Our work discussed the security and privacy challenges of edge
computing networks. From the perspectives of data authorization,
encryption, and user privacy, we analyze the solutions brought by
blockchain technology to edge computing networks. In this work,
we deeply present the benefits from the integration of the edge
computing network and blockchain technology, which effectively
controls the data authorization and data encryption of the edge net-
work and enhances the architecture’s scalability under the premise
of ensuring security and privacy. Finally, we investigate challenges
on storage, workload, and latency for future research in this field.

KEYWORDS
Edge computing, Blockchain, Smart Contract, Security, Privacy,
IoT, Vehicular Network, Authentication, Mobile Edge Computing,
Protocol Security, Architectural Security and Privacy

1 INTRODUCTION
With the development and popularization of cloud services and
smart devices, edge computing[21] has penetrated all levels and
aspects of our lives, improving our lives and work efficiency. Com-
bined with blockchain technology, the security and privacy of edge
computing raise our attention to new research directions.

There are various smart devices in the living and industrial en-
vironments connecting to servers without manual intervention,
such as medical facilities, smart grid, smart home systems, vehi-
cles and road side unit networks etc. Cloud computing’s efficiency
cannot support the massive amounts of data[2] generated by these

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
SEC ’21, December 14–17, 2021, San Jose, CA, USA
© 2021 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-8390-5/21/12. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3453142.3493513

devices and cannot meet the rapid response requirements in cer-
tain scenarios. Therefore, edge computing with low latency and
heterogeneous is the trend of remote data services development.
With service providers’ deployment close to the end devices, the
request latency may be lower, and the throughput may be higher.
Also, using an edge computing network can avoid the potential
security and privacy risk in a centralized system. For example, the
data processing could happen in the local server instead of the
centralized one, lowering the security risk of data leaking.

However, edge computing is not a perfect design, and it has
disadvantages in security and privacy aspects. Due to its heteroge-
neous and distributed structure, it is challenging to manage vari-
ous devices and servers in the network. Also, these servers have
limited hardware resources which is hard to handle heavy com-
putational tasks. It is essential to integrate blockchain technology
into edge computing. Blockchain[8] is a distributed database design
supported by consensus protocols and within this environment,
smart contract is a distributed program deployed on each server.
Such a design can improve the security and privacy of the system
under the premise of ensuring the high efficiency and availability
of computing service.

Combined with blockchain technology, edge computing has a
good research vision, but there are still many challenges to be solved
in this field. Due to edge devices’ limited computing and storage
resources, ensuring the integrity and validity of blockchain data
is a considerable challenge. In addition, due to the heterogeneous
organizational form of edge computing, potential security issues
may arise, such as the authentication of the local network and the
encryption requirements of local user data. These challenges are
worthy of our in-depth discussion and research.

2 EDGE COMPUTING
Edge computing refers to computing services provided for end-
user devices at the edge of the network, which is the middle layer
between cloud services and local devices. It provides fast-response
services such as computing, storage, communication, and control
in a location close to the data source of the end-user devices.

2.1 Research Areas in Edge Computing
We combine multiple study cases with various fields to present the
benefits of edge networks.

2.1.1 Real-Time Online Data Processing. Compared with tra-
ditional centralized cloud services, edge computing has the ad-
vantages of fast response and low latency, especially for real-time
data processing, which requires very high bandwidth. Real-time
data processing services based on the traditional centralized cloud
are often saturated with uplink capacity. They cannot satisfy the

 
 
 
 
 
 
transmission of large chunks of data, such as high-definition video,
which affects the performance of the analysis service. Wang[26]
proposed a bandwidth-efficient real-time video analysis mechanism
for drones, which filters frames, adjusts learning models, and re-
duces bandwidth usage. Zhou[34] provided a locally virtualized
CPU/GPU cluster for high-quality graphics in a real-time online
game, which has 14 to 38% better performance in the evaluation.

2.1.2

Internet of Things. Combined with edge computing, IoT
frameworks can meet the needs of fast deployment and high-speed
response and solve the problems of limited storage space and insuf-
ficient computing power of IoT devices. Compared with centralized
cloud services, edge computing can efficiently process data gener-
ated by IoT devices promptly while avoiding the large amount of
data transmission required by cloud services.

Chen[5] proposed an industrial-level IoT manufacturing archi-
tecture based on edge computing. This architecture uses the time-
sensitive network (TSN) protocol to manage time-sensitive task
data at the network level. Also, sensing devices are close to the
factory infrastructure, and the computing and storage nodes in the
edge network are used to dynamically adjust the execution strategy
of the factory facilities according to the sensor status.

2.1.3 Vehicular Networks. When the vehicular network uses
cloud services to perform computing tasks between vehicles, there
will be problems with network latency and high transmission over-
head. Especially when vehicular network data has an explosive
growth, cloud services cannot achieve real-time data analysis and
feedback, which brings potential safety problems to vehicles in
motion. Edge computing provides an alternative solution to deploy
computing and storage services near the vehicles[32], reducing
latency and saving energy consumption.

2.1.4 Computing Node and Task Management. Scalability is one
of the advantages of edge computing networks. Traditional cloud
computing has a centralized management node responsible for the
data and task scheduling of all devices in the network. When the size
of the cloud network scales up, this centralized management node
will become the bottleneck of system performance. The cloudlets[1]
design of edge computing leaves local data for local processing,
which cuts down the cloud’s bandwidth usage by three to six orders
of magnitude while also providing low-latency and high-bandwidth
services. This design can introduce more edge nodes while the
marginal cost increase is minor, ensuring the system’s scalability.
Within one cloudlet, the performance of devices varies greatly,
and each cloudlet has different operating status and conditions.
A virtualized environment[3], such as a container, can be used
for these various cloudlets and manage in a unified manner. The
optimized algorithm[13] enables the edge network to expand its
structure while ensuring stable device management.

2.2 Security and Privacy in Edge Computing

2.2.1 Benefits: User privacy and data security are very worthy
of attention. Centralized cloud services have brought growing con-
cerns about this field. When raw data is sent to the cloud, it is out
of the control of users and organizations. For example, the security
camera contains the user’s facial information, the online shopping

record reflects the user’s financial status, and the factory’s electric-
ity consumption represents its production status. The centralized
server cannot guarantee the whole data security when it is attacked
by hackers or misused by third parties.

Edge computing provides an alternative to protecting data[31].
The data from the edge device can be encrypted first, where the
representative encryption algorithms include: AES[18], RSA[17],
and other encryption approaches[4]. For distributed edge networks,
identity authentication[15] is another method to protect data, regu-
lating access rights and avoiding illegal access to sensitive data.

2.2.2 Challenges: But relying only on the framework of edge
computing, many security and privacy challenges still need to be
studied and resolved in depth. First, many IoT devices and sensors
in the edge network may have low accuracy, so abnormal and
malicious data collected is a significant challenge. Then, because
of the heterogeneous design of the edge network, the computing
nodes and devices are very diversified, resulting in a coarse degree
of data access management, and malicious access may penetrate
the core of the edge device. Unverified computing nodes joining the
network may hack user data and disrupt the operation of the edge
network. In addition, due to the performance limitations of edge
nodes, these devices cannot resist network attacks, such as man-in-
the-middle attacks and denial of service attacks, which leads to the
paralysis of the edge network and loss of stability.

Attacks and issues that threaten privacy and security often occur
in three aspects of edge networks: aiming specific data nodes, aim-
ing data transmission, and model synchronization among nodes and
edge clouds. For these three aspects, we will analyze the solutions
with representative cases in section 4.

3 BLOCKCHAIN
Blockchain is a fiery research and application field. It is an en-
crypted distributed anonymous ledger system[8] recording transac-
tions between participants, which solves inconsistent information
consensus in a distributed network, such as the Byzantine Generals
problem. Based on the blockchain platform, smart contracts have
realized decentralization, automatic execution, and other functions,
enriching the research and application of the blockchain field—for
example, cryptocurrency combined with blockchain technology,
Bitcoin, and Ethereum.

3.1 What Security and Privacy Benefits

introduced by Blockchain?

Blockchain technology builds a credible interaction method be-
tween untrusted computing nodes, which fits in the distributed
structure of edge computing. It removes the dependence on cen-
tralized management nodes and supports data privacy and security
through encryption and consistency mechanisms such as Proof-of-
Work.

The framework of an edge network generally has three layers:
the bottom layer is composed of small sensors and devices, the
middle layer contains servers with limited data processing and
storage capabilities close to the data source, also known as cloudlets,
and the upper layer is composed of large data centers. Due to
the high computing cost of the blockchain consensus algorithms
and the limited performance of the small underlying devices, the

blockchain is generally deployed among multiple cloudlets in the
middle layer to form a consensus and ensure data security.

About the security and privacy issues mentioned in section 2.2,
we show how blockchain technology can resolve these threats in
edge computing networks. When a single edge device or computing
node is hacked to broadcast malicious data, these polluted data will
not be transmitted through the network since most nodes and de-
vices use the blockchain’s distributed ledger to verify and identify
the malicious data. Similarly, the read-write permissions can be
recorded on the blockchain blocks without a centralized manage-
ment to verify access permissions, so users and local nodes can
have the same knowledge of the global data access from each server.
The program operation deployed among nodes can be automati-
cally executed through the decentralized smart contracts, without
a central node to trigger.

3.2 Research Areas Benefiting from Blockchain

in Security and Privayc Perspective.

In this section, we summarize some areas where blockchain tech-
nology is utilized and combine study cases to analyze the improve-
ments that blockchain technology brings to edge computing.

3.2.1

Internet of Things. Due to the lack of trust between IoT
devices and computing nodes, building a trusted relationship within
this network is challenging. The distributed ledger of the blockchain
is a feasible solution. For example, the device’s identifier and mac
address will reveal its model number and location[9]. This sensitive
information can be encrypted and recorded in the immutable block;
it protects the device’s privacy, and at the same time, it allows other
peers to verify the device’s identity through the encrypted data
extracted from the block, which maintains a trusted communication
relationship in an untrusted network.

On the other hand, a decentralized and automatically executed
smart contract can process the IoT’s program operations without
support from a centralized control node[24]. Then, the output gen-
erated by the smart contract will be stored in the block. This design
ensures consistent program operations and outputs, avoiding sus-
picious execution and providing data security.

3.2.2 Vehicular Cloudlet. The biggest difference between ve-
hicles and other types of Internet of Things lies in vehicles’ high
mobility and Spatio-temporal sensitivity. It is very challenging to
maintain the data integrity and accuracy of moving vehicles. With
the help of the roadside unit, vehicles can quickly join the net-
work, perform encrypted communications, and synchronize valid
vehicle information[16] with the blockchain consensus mechanism.
This procedure ensures that vehicles can maintain data consistency,
avoid data loss, and ensure data integrity and validity.

3.2.3 Payment and Loan. Digital encryption currency is the
most significant application of blockchain technology. However,
the mining work and transactions of digital currencies are pro-
cessed on traditional networks and servers. The introduction of
edge computing frameworks increases the mobility and economical
property of the system.

The deployed smart contract can automatically execute comput-
ing resource transactions and currency lending[24]. Because of its
transparency in data and execution, developers can analyze the

Figure 1: General blockchain based edge computing framework.
contract’s operating status and financial costs. In addition to com-
bining game theory and Nash equilibrium theory[33], the system
can make optimal decisions with minimum costs.

3.2.4 Privacy-preserved Tracking. The tracking function can de-
scribe the user’s movement trajectory, allowing the system to learn
more data and accurately predict the overall users’ movement trend.
But directly uploading the user’s raw data to the system will ex-
pose privacy, so additional mechanisms are demanded to reduce
the data’s sensitivity while maintaining its accuracy.

The anonymity of users in the blockchain environment is the
key to protect user’s privacy and the decentralized and automatic
execution smart contract is the core to avoid malicious operations.
Using blockchain technology for traffic tracking[28] can protect the
location privacy of vehicles while collecting travelling history on a
decentralized transportation network. The recent coronavirus infec-
tion tracking is also a hot field. Unlike the centralized management
of the user’s infection status and travel path, the blockchain-based
decentralized system[23] can ensure users’ anonymity by random-
ization mechanism, and its smart contract guarantees the virus
transmission path data is accurate and secure saved in the block.

4 SECURITY AND PRIVACY ENHANCEMENT
IN EDGE COMPUTING VIA INTRODUCING
BLOCKCHAIN.

Figure 1 shows a general structure for the edge computing frame-
work based on blockchain technology, which may have three layers:
the user layer at the bottom comprises the edge devices as the data
source, and the edge layer in the middle is the edge node with
limited computing and storage capabilities. In most designs, they
undertake the work of blockchain miners and ensure the synchro-
nization of blocks and the execution of smart contracts, and the
cloud layer on the top is a large data center that provides cloud
services.

In general, a blockchain-based edge computing system has the
following working procedure. Firstly, the bottom edge devices pro-
vide activity data, including the interactions between peers and

between edge nodes. Then, the middle edge node verifies these data
and writes them into blocks based on the blockchain consensus
mechanism. After that, the large-scale data center on the top layer
does the necessary structural analysis and management. We will
analyze the feasibility and benefits of the blockchain-based edge
computing system from the security and privacy aspects.

4.1 Anonymity
In an untrusted distributed edge network environment, anonymity
is an essential approach to protecting the identities of devices and
users. The device can rely on smart contracts to verify its identity
while using the edge node server as an information transmission
intermediary without exposing its identity to the server. This gen-
eral design is vital for stable and secure communication between
the devices and regional cloudlets in the edge network.

In the edge network, the data of the underlying device is pro-
vided to the upper nodes. The underlying device’s identity informa-
tion should not be exposed to other insecure networks. There is a
framework[25] to centralize and register these underlying devices
in the first-level edge device, then it manages the communication
and computation among these underlying devices. However, such
a scheme makes the level one edge device the local registration col-
lector in the edge network. Once the collector leaks these identities,
the anonymity of the locally registered devices will not exist.

Blockchain can provide anonymity to the system and hide the
identity of devices in the edge network. Wang[27] proposed an
anonymous identity verification protocol based on the blockchain.
The edge unit is registered and verified with the registration au-
thority to ensure that the edge units’ identity information will not
be exposed in the untrusted network.

4.2 Authentication
In the edge network environment, the data generated by devices will
interact across regions, which inevitably needs to verify the identity
of the devices and manage their data read and write permissions.
These records are written on the blockchain, and the smart contract
executes the device’s identity verification to ensure the security of
the data in the edge network.

In the protocol designed by Wang[27], the registration and data
authorization of the edge unit depend on the execution of the smart
contract. Only the registration authority can associate the real
identity of the device with the public key, so the authorization and
communication between the devices are guaranteed secure.

The dynamic domain name resolution strategy proposed by
Guo[7] provides services for edge authorization in the system. The
edge terminal’s domain name-related information is stored in the
blockchain, and the communication between the terminals is sup-
ported by an asymmetric encryption algorithm based on elliptic
curve cryptography. Similarly, the lightweight blockchain-based
identity verification protocol proposed by Jangirala[10] allows de-
vices to authenticate each other and establish a session key, which
technically guarantees the anonymity of user identities.

4.3 Mobile Edge Computing
Mobile edge computing is a novel research field for security and
privacy. Edge computing nodes must balance the performance of

offloaded computing tasks and the security of local data processing.
Excessive data processing requests or other attacks should not cause
incomplete data transmission from the mobile edge node, thereby
losing data security and user privacy protection.

Xu[30] combines blockchain technology to provide a feasible
resource allocation scheme for computing offloading, which op-
timizes energy consumption, task offloading time and maintains
load balance while ensuring the data integrity and security of edge
computing offloading. Similarly, Song[23] provides a COVID-19 in-
fection tracing framework based on the smart contracts to monitor
the location’s infection status. In this design, the smart contract
group balances the workload between local and upper-level con-
tracts for user check-in requests, reducing network traffic.

4.4 Protocol Security
The blockchain-based protocol design involves more complex and
practical security issues. A protocol design cannot meet all scenar-
ios and requirements. For example, it is challenging to guarantee
the untraceability of identity in a protocol while it is lightweight.
Therefore, we will analyze the security solutions of the protocol in
combination with specific scenarios.

In the IoT supply chain scenario based on mobile edge computing,
Jangirala[10] proposed a lightweight radio frequency identification-
based authentication protocol with blockchain support to provide
enough bandwidth for real-time data of goods. This protocol is
simple to operate, has provable security, and balances communica-
tion and computing costs. NKN Lab[14] proposes a more general-
purpose self-evolving and self-motivating decentralized network,
not limited to specific application scenarios. The blockchain in this
network has novelly presented Proof of Relay instead of Proof of
Work. While reducing energy consumption and improving perfor-
mance, this network can also resist various attacks, such as Double
spending attck and Denial-of- Service attacks, so security is guar-
anteed in this network.

4.5 Security and Privacy in Architecture
In addition to the protocol perspective or implementation of specific
applications discussed above, we also need to show the security
and privacy contribution of blockchain in the edge structure from
the perspective of architectural design.

In Rathore’s decentralized network security architecture[19],
blockchain and mobile edge networks are its primary technical
support. Blockchain can detect decentralized attacks, avoiding the
collapse of the architecture due to the crash of one certain node.
In addition, the introduction of edge architecture removes storage
constraints, reduces computing costs and latency.

The interaction between the layers of the system is also related to
security and privacy. Ines proposed a modular and hierarchical de-
sign in a complex Internet of Things environment, which generates
good positive feedback in practical applications and ensures the se-
curity of data storage and computing. Ines’ global edge computing
architecture[22] consists of three layers: IoT layer, Edge layer, and
Business solution layer. The transmission data from the IoT layer
is processed by encrypted hardware and communication protocol
before it is connected to the Edge layer, an open layer containing
many different service providers. This Edge layer pre-processes the

raw data from IoT devices and transfers it to the Business solution
layer. The use of blockchain ensures the data integrity transmitted
through layers. At the business solution layer, the system verifies
IoT devices’ identity by smart contracts and extracts data from
the blockchain database to establish a secure computing channel.
Therefore, the three levels of security and privacy are guaranteed
under the support of hardware and software protocols.

4.6 Data Security
In this subsection, we present the advantages of blockchain-based
edge networks from the perspective of the definition of data security
and its case studies. The security of data is reflected in three aspects:
confidentiality, integrity, and availability. In our scenario, these
three aspects have more detailed definitions.

• Confidentiality: The data stored at the edge node must be
encrypted and protected, and only users with the key can
access the data.

• Integrity: In a distributed blockchain-based system, the con-
sensus mechanism of the edge node data needs to resist
attacks, such as 51% attacks and Sybil attacks. Data saved
on nodes needs to be updated to the latest version within an
acceptable time to ensure data consistency.

• Availability: Edge nodes should provide data access for edge
devices and top layer cloud services at any time. Even if
some nodes are shut down, the data can still be recovered
on new edge nodes and provide access services.

4.6.1 Confidentiality. In addition to standard data encryption,
we also need to consider the management of data read and write
permissions and user identity authentication because illegal reads
and writes are also a significant cause of data pollution.

Users need an efficient approach to imply identity authentica-
tion to access data in edge node. Ren[20] proposed an identity
authentication scheme for the trading system, where users’ identity
information is stored in the block for data consistency and not tam-
per. The trusted authentication method proposed by Shaoyong[7]
is based on the name resolution and authentication of edge com-
puting nodes, and a caching strategy is designed to improve the
performance of the system’s authentication mechanism.

4.6.2

Integrity. The traditional consensus mechanism is proof-
of-work or proof-of-stake, which occupies a lot of computing re-
sources. It is not practical and cost-effective to imply on edge devices
and nodes with limited hardware performance. Therefore, the repu-
tation of devices is an alternative method to determine if the device
data be written into the block. For example, the vehicular edge
network based on the blockchain[12] is supported by reputation
data sharing scheme to ensure high-quality data sharing between
roadside units and vehicles. This design provided a three-weight
subjective logic model to accurately manage vehicle reputation
and solve the security problems of untrusted participants in the
network and malicious data injection.

4.6.3 Availability. The heterogeneity of edge computing net-
works has profoundly affected the availability of data. It can unify
the communication at different levels of the edge network through
software support and hardware virtualization methods. Huan[35]
proposed the ALLSTAR ecosystem, which contains four subsystems

to accomplish this task. Heterogeneity-AS-code toolKIT (HASKIT)
and CRoss-Edge seamless infrAstructure orchestration Framework
(CREAF) focus on software perspective to establish a model to de-
scribe heterogeneous services and provide the relationship between
levels Interface. HardWare chAracterized Function vIRtualization
framework (WAFIR) focuses on the hardware perspective to unify
the virtual environment of hardware. Service Ederation defined
Trustworthy Inter-Chain platform (SETIC) is a blockchain-based
subsystem to record user transactions and uses smart contracts to
execute decentralized data management tasks automatically.

4.7 User Privacy
The definition of user privacy in this work is: in the edge computing
environment, data mining and cyber-attacks will not expose the
user’s identity and sensitive information[29]. Edge devices should
control what data is shared at edge nodes, how to verify the validity
of the data under the premise of encryption, and who else the data
is shared with. We discuss the user privacy protection from the
blockchain-based perspective of data encryption methods.

The native cryptography in the blockchain provides a digital
signature for users to prove and verify the encrypted data without
revealing the plain content, and Elliptic Curve Digital Signature
Algorithm (ECDSA)[11] is the typical one used on both Bitcoin and
Ethereum platform. These native encryption mechanisms can meet
the needs of general computing applications, but for applications
such as industrial IoT sensing and outdoor drone data synchroniza-
tion, lightweight and customized protocols are required to meet
new scenarios requirements such as reducing computing costs for
resource-limited IoT devices.

Except for those traditional encryption mechanisms to protect
sensitive and private data, users can encrypt sensitive data and iden-
tities in the blockchain transaction system, achieving data security
while providing privacy services. We consider removing identifiers
and trajectory data is also an encryption approach to protect user
privacy. Before publishing the source data, identifiers and sensitive
data that can infer users’ identities should be removed or added
with noise. Nowadays, social media are very popular, and users
activities are logged on those platforms and analyzed by third par-
ties. Even users’ true identities are hidden, and they can be tagged
with particular id numbers for analysis. Each user’s activity has a
unique pattern to be exposed to even though their true identities
are hidden. Another potential challenge comes with this encryption
approach. If source data is strongly anonymous, its usability will be
lower, and the information is lost. Blockchain provides a balanced
option on the encryption of sensitive data and its usability. Keke[6]
designed the smart grid’s operating architecture. He mapped the
grid’s network nodes to the blockchain and edge computing net-
work and used pseudo-names to mark users to avoid revealing their
real identities.

5 CHALLENGES AND FUTURE RESEARCH

DIRECTIONS.

Although blockchain technology provides solutions to the chal-
lenges of edge computing from many aspects, the combination of
the two fields still has potential issues and new research areas for
us to explore.

The first problem is about the storage consumption. It increases
a lot because of the blockchain consensus mechanism, which re-
quires a complete Blockchain’s distributed ledger data in edge nodes
within the network. It is potentially considered a huge storage waste
for duplication.

The second problem is about the unbalanced workload. A power-
ful computing node sustains the significant mining and computing
load of the blockchain, which may not be fair for the node because
the digital currency or incentive from private blockchain is not trad-
able for public. This challenge requires a fair and dynamic resource
management among edge nodes.

The last problem is about the transaction latency. The blockchain
requires block synchronization among edge nodes, where they have
a competition on writing transactions into the next block. The new
block generation time cost delays the system operation. Spatio-
temporal sensitive applications may suffer from this kind of latency,
for example, moving self-driving vehicles cannot wait seconds for
the synchronization of traffic status.

6 CONCLUSION
This survey focuses on the security and privacy aspects of blockchain-
based edge computing networks. It demonstrates the feasibility of
deployment in the Internet of Things, vehicular network, payment,
tracking, etc. In particular, we discussed the challenges and benefits
of these sub-areas of security and privacy. No universal system can
solve all security and privacy issues, and we can only use a more
suitable system framework for specific demands.

REFERENCES
[1] Ejaz Ahmed, Arif Ahmed, Ibrar Yaqoob, Junaid Shuja, Abdullah Gani, Muhammad
Imran, and Muhammad Shoaib. 2017. Bringing computation closer toward the
user network: Is edge computing the solution? IEEE Communications Magazine
55, 11 (2017), 138–144.

[2] Ahmed Alzahrani, Nasser Alalwan, and Mohamed Sarrab. 2014. Mobile cloud
computing: advantage, disadvantage and open challenge. In Proceedings of the
7th Euro American Conference on Telematics and Information Systems. 1–4.
[3] K Aruna and G Pradeep. 2020. Performance and scalability improvement using
IoT-based edge computing container technologies. SN Computer Science 1, 2
(2020), 1–7.

[4] Mohd Rizuan Baharon, Qi Shi, and David Llewellyn-Jones. 2015. A new light-
weight homomorphic encryption scheme for mobile cloud computing. In 2015
IEEE International Conference on Computer and Information Technology; Ubiquitous
Computing and Communications; Dependable, Autonomic and Secure Computing;
Pervasive Intelligence and Computing. IEEE, 618–625.

[5] Baotong Chen, Jiafu Wan, Antonio Celesti, Di Li, Haider Abbas, and Qin Zhang.
2018. Edge computing in IoT-based manufacturing. IEEE Communications Maga-
zine 56, 9 (2018), 103–109.

[6] Keke Gai, Yulu Wu, Liehuang Zhu, Lei Xu, and Yan Zhang. 2019. Permissioned
blockchain and edge computing empowered privacy-preserving smart grid net-
works. IEEE Internet of Things Journal 6, 5 (2019), 7992–8004.

[7] Shaoyong Guo, Xing Hu, Song Guo, Xuesong Qiu, and Feng Qi. 2019. Blockchain
meets edge computing: A distributed and trusted authentication system. IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Informatics 16, 3 (2019), 1972–1983.

[8] Sourav Sen Gupta. 2017. Blockchain. IBM Onlone (http://www. IBM. COM) (2017).
[9] Bechir Hamdaoui, Mohamed Alkalbani, Taieb Znati, and Ammar Rayes. 2019.
Unleashing the power of participatory IoT with blockchains for increased safety
and situation awareness of smart cities. IEEE Network 34, 2 (2019), 202–209.
[10] Srinivas Jangirala, Ashok Kumar Das, and Athanasios V Vasilakos. 2019. Design-
ing secure lightweight blockchain-enabled RFID-based authentication protocol
for supply chains in 5G mobile edge computing environment. IEEE Transactions
on Industrial Informatics 16, 11 (2019), 7081–7093.

[11] Don Johnson, Alfred Menezes, and Scott Vanstone. 2001. The elliptic curve digital
signature algorithm (ECDSA). International journal of information security 1, 1
(2001), 36–63.

[12] Jiawen Kang, Rong Yu, Xumin Huang, Maoqiang Wu, Sabita Maharjan, Shengli
Xie, and Yan Zhang. 2018. Blockchain for secure and efficient data sharing in

vehicular edge computing and networks. IEEE Internet of Things Journal 6, 3
(2018), 4660–4670.

[13] Alexandr Krylovskiy. 2015. Internet of things gateways meet linux containers:
Performance evaluation and discussion. In 2015 IEEE 2nd World Forum on Internet
of Things (WF-IoT). IEEE, 222–227.

[14] NKN Lab. NKN: a Scalable Self-Evolving and Self-Incentivized Decentralized

Network. (????). https://docs.nkn.org/docs/introduction-to-nkn

[15] Hong Liu, Huansheng Ning, Qingxu Xiong, and Laurence T Yang. 2014. Shared
authority based privacy-preserving authentication protocol in cloud computing.
IEEE Transactions on parallel and distributed systems 26, 1 (2014), 241–251.
[16] Hong Liu, Yan Zhang, and Tao Yang. 2018. Blockchain-enabled security in electric

vehicles cloud and edge computing. IEEE Network 32, 3 (2018), 78–83.

[17] Prerna Mahajan and Abhishek Sachdeva. 2013. A study of encryption algorithms
AES, DES and RSA for security. Global Journal of Computer Science and Technology
(2013).

[18] Dag Arne Osvik, Joppe W Bos, Deian Stefan, and David Canright. 2010. Fast
software AES encryption. In International Workshop on Fast Software Encryption.
Springer, 75–93.

[19] Shailendra Rathore, Byung Wook Kwon, and Jong Hyuk Park. 2019. BlockSe-
cIoTNet: Blockchain-based decentralized security architecture for IoT network.
Journal of Network and Computer Applications 143 (2019), 167–177.

[20] Yan Ren, Qiuxia Zhao, Haipeng Guan, and Zhiqiang Lin. 2020. A novel authenti-
cation scheme based on edge computing for blockchain-based distributed energy
trading system. EURASIP Journal on Wireless Communications and Networking
2020, 1 (2020), 1–15.

[21] Weisong Shi, Jie Cao, Quan Zhang, Youhuizi Li, and Lanyu Xu. 2016. Edge
computing: Vision and challenges. IEEE internet of things journal 3, 5 (2016),
637–646.

[22] Inés Sittón-Candanedo, Ricardo S Alonso, Juan M Corchado, Sara Rodríguez-
González, and Roberto Casado-Vara. 2019. A review of edge computing reference
architectures and a new global edge proposal. Future Generation Computer
Systems 99 (2019), 278–294.

[23] Jinyue Song, Tianbo Gu, Xiaotao Feng, Yunjie Ge, and Prasant Mohapatra. 2021.
Blockchain meets COVID-19: A framework for contact information sharing and
risk notification system. In 2021 IEEE 17th International Conference on Mobile Ad
Hoc and Sensor Systems (MASS). IEEE.

[24] Jinyue Song, Tianbo Gu, Yunjie Ge, and Prasant Mohapatra. 2020. Smart Contract-
based Computing Resources Trading in Edge Computing. In 2020 IEEE 31st Annual
International Symposium on Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications.
IEEE, 1–7.

[25] Muhammad Usman, Mian Ahmad Jan, Alireza Jolfaei, Min Xu, Xiangjian He,
and Jinjun Chen. 2019. A distributed and anonymous data collection framework
based on multilevel edge computing architecture. IEEE Transactions on Industrial
Informatics 16, 9 (2019), 6114–6123.

[26] Junjue Wang, Ziqiang Feng, Zhuo Chen, Shilpa George, Mihir Bala, Padmanabhan
Pillai, Shao-Wen Yang, and Mahadev Satyanarayanan. 2018. Bandwidth-efficient
live video analytics for drones via edge computing. In 2018 IEEE/ACM Symposium
on Edge Computing (SEC). IEEE, 159–173.

[27] Jing Wang, Libing Wu, Kim-Kwang Raymond Choo, and Debiao He. 2019.
Blockchain-based anonymous authentication with key management for smart
grid edge computing infrastructure. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics
16, 3 (2019), 1984–1992.

[28] Qianlong Wang, Tianxi Ji, Yifan Guo, Lixing Yu, Xuhui Chen, and Pan Li. 2020.
TrafficChain: A blockchain-based secure and privacy-preserving traffic map. IEEE
Access 8 (2020), 60598–60612.

[29] Lei Xu, Chunxiao Jiang, Jian Wang, Jian Yuan, and Yong Ren. 2014. Information

security in big data: privacy and data mining. Ieee Access 2 (2014), 1149–1176.

[30] Xiaolong Xu, Xuyun Zhang, Honghao Gao, Yuan Xue, Lianyong Qi, and Wanchun
Dou. 2019. BeCome: Blockchain-enabled computation offloading for IoT in mobile
edge computing. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics 16, 6 (2019), 4187–
4195.

[31] Jiale Zhang, Bing Chen, Yanchao Zhao, Xiang Cheng, and Feng Hu. 2018. Data
security and privacy-preserving in edge computing paradigm: Survey and open
issues. IEEE access 6 (2018), 18209–18237.

[32] Ke Zhang, Yuming Mao, Supeng Leng, Yejun He, and Yan Zhang. 2017. Mobile-
edge computing for vehicular networks: A promising network paradigm with
predictive off-loading. IEEE Vehicular Technology Magazine 12, 2 (2017), 36–44.
[33] Zhen Zhang, Zicong Hong, Wuhui Chen, Zibin Zheng, and Xu Chen. 2019. Joint
computation offloading and coin loaning for blockchain-empowered mobile-edge
computing. IEEE Internet of Things Journal 6, 6 (2019), 9934–9950.

[34] Zhou Zhao, Kai Hwang, and Jose Villeta. 2012. Game cloud design with virtual-
ized CPU/GPU servers and initial performance results. In Proceedings of the 3rd
workshop on Scientific Cloud Computing. 23–30.

[35] Huan Zhou, Zeshun Shi, Xue Ouyang, and Zhiming Zhao. 2021. Building a
blockchain-based decentralized ecosystem for cloud and edge computing: an
ALLSTAR approach and empirical study. Peer-to-Peer Networking and Applications
(2021), 1–17.

