THIS WORK IS SUBMITTED TO AN IEEE JOURNAL.

1

Blockchain Interoperability in UAV Networks:
State-of-the-art and Open Issues

Ruba Alkadi, Noura Alnuaimi, Abdulhadi Shoufan, Chan Yeun

1
2
0
2

v
o
N
8
1

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
9
2
5
9
0
.
1
1
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—The breakthrough of blockchain technology has
facilitated the emergence and deployment of a wide range of
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAV) networks-based applications.
Yet, the full utilization of these applications is still limited due
to the fact that each application is operating on an isolated
blockchain. Thus, it is inevitable to orchestrate these blockchain
fragments by introducing a cross-blockchain platform that gov-
erns the inter-communication and transfer of assets in the UAV
networks context. In this paper, we provide an up-to-date survey
of blockchain-based UAV networks applications. We also survey
the literature on the state-of-the-art cross blockchain frameworks
to highlight the latest advances in the ﬁeld. Based on the outcomes
of our survey, we introduce a spectrum of scenarios related to
UAV networks that may leverage the potentials of the currently
available cross-blockchain solutions. Finally, we identify open
issues and potential challenges associated with the application of
a cross-blockchain scheme for UAV networks that will hopefully
guide future research directions.

Index Terms—Blockchain , Unmanned Aerial Vehicles , inter-

operability , cybersecurity , survey

I. INTRODUCTION

Recently, unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) have emerged
as a game changing tech across many commercial industries.
This fact is emphasized by the exponential increase in the UAV
global market which is predicted to reach $22.55 billion by
the end of 2026 [46]. The full deployment of UAVs’ activities
is, however, associated with safety, security, and reliability
issues. These issues are fueling a surge of research activities
to provide an optimum way to manage the airspace trafﬁc
ﬂawlessly. Particularly, the Internet of Drones (IoD) concept
has been resonating recently [40]. It basically fosters the idea
of borrowing concepts from currently deployed networks (i.e.
cellular networks, Air Trafﬁc Management (ATM), and the
Internet). Nonetheless, adopting concepts from these networks
to the unmanned air trafﬁc is not straightforward due to the
heterogeneous nature of the latter. The UAVs’ ability to move
in three dimensions at high speeds makes the problem even
harder.

The blockchain technology, as a form of the Distributed
Ledger Technology (DLT), has proved effective in a multitude
of security applications. Fundamentally, it is an immutable
temper-proof distributed ledger that offers vital features such
as treacability, transparency, and auditability. Together with its
cryptographic algorithms, DLT serves as a secure repository
of data and events. The blockchain works by ﬁrst initiating
a transaction where a set of nodes can verify or reject this
transaction. The data in the blockchain is stored in blocks with

Center of Cyber-Physical Systems, Khalifa University, Abu Dhabi,
ruba.alkadi, noura.alnuaimi, abdulhadi.shoufan, chan.yeun

UAE (emails:
@ku.ac.ae)

speciﬁc sizes. Once a block reaches its maximum storage, it
is linked to the block before it which will create a chain,
hence the name blockchain. Due to its decentralized form, the
blockchain offers traceability of the transactions. Blockchains
can either be built permissioned or permissionless [52]. A
permissioned blockchain requires the authentication of the
nodes before processing any transactions. Nodes require au-
thorization to be able to read and write data. A permissionless
blockchain is, on the other hand, considered as a public
blockchain where no authorization is required to read and
write data. A blockchain can also be private or public, where
a private blockchain can belong to a single company and
all the nodes are controlled by that company while a public
blockchain allows the public to join the network.

The advantages of DLT were quickly recognized and thus
applied in many ﬁelds to tackle various emerging problems. In
this regard, it has been articulated that employing blockchain
technology in the UAV networks context will mitigate se-
curity and safety risks and improve reliability. Alladi et al.
[17] and Mehta et al. [63] have reviewed the literature on
the deployment of blockchain for serving several UAV-based
applications. This resulted in a large number of fragmented
blockchains. Recently, it has been realized that these isolated
chains need to communicate and inter-operate to exploit their
full potential. The notion of cross-blockchain was proposed
to address the portability and scalability of the blockchain
technology. Portability refers to the ability of transferring
assets and data between blockchains in a trustless way,
while scalability refers to the ability to ofﬂoad data to other
blockchains. Several approaches to achieve interoperability
between blockchains have fairly matured and successfully
deployed for cryptocurrency exchanges. Besides, a multitude
of applications have beneﬁted from its potentials including
healthcare data sharing [28], cyber-security [65], video games
[27], and many others. Although the unmanned air trafﬁc man-
agement industry could remarkably proﬁt from the advances in
cross-blockchain technology, none of the proposed blockchain-
based UAV networks highlighted this potential. To the best
of our knowledge, this work is the ﬁrst to explore potential
opportunities and use cases of cross-blockchain technology
in the IoD context. Particularly, we are motivated by the
enormous applications of the blockchain technology in the
UAV networks and we believe that addressing the problem of
interoperability of parallel blockchains is crucial to enabling
efﬁcient deployment of a decentralized immutable IoD envi-
ronment.

Mainly, our work aims at orchestrating current blockchain-
based UAV networks by exploiting state-of-the-art cross-
blockchain models. In brief, our contribution is distinguished

 
 
 
 
 
 
THIS WORK IS SUBMITTED TO AN IEEE JOURNAL.

2

by the following aspects:

• Provide an up-to-date review of recent blockchain-based

applications in an IoD environment.

• Introduce possible scenarios where cross-blockchain is

applicable in an IoD context.

• Propose a new cross-blockchain framework for UAV

networks.

We, ﬁrst, survey the literature on the current landscape of
cross blockchain interoperability (Section II) and the latest
blockchain-based UAV networks (section III). In light of our
review, we discuss possible use cases of the cross-blockchain
framework in Section III-B. In Section V, we discuss the
possible issues that might rise from the employment of the
cross-blockchain framework. Finally, we conclude the paper
by highlighting challenges and open issues in this research
direction.

II. CURRENT LANDSCAPE OF CROSS BLOCKCHAIN
INTEROPERABILITY

Fueled by the unprecedented success of blockchain tech-
nology in enabling a decentralized cryptocurrency market,
many industries have shown great interest (real and hype) in
this technology. In the UAV networks context, researchers, as
well as manufacturers, have called for a reimplementation of
current UAV networks-based functions to exploit the security
advantages of the blockchain and smart contracts. Nonetheless,
the omnipresence of these blockchain-based functions has led
to fragmentation, redundancies, and fraudulent activities. Par-
ticularly, the implementation of such functions usually takes
place on private and thus isolated blockchains. Therefore,
the interoperability of these isolated blockchains and their
associated functions is crucial for enabling a fully connected
Internet of blockchains that reduce the overall friction between
participating businesses and achieves portability, scalability,
and privacy. Moreover, cross-blockchain interoperability is
envisioned to reduce redundant transactions and the associated
cost. This is especially fundamental for UAV networks which
are known to be limited in terms of energy, processing power,
and memory [61]. A multitude of frameworks has been pro-
posed to achieve blockchain interoperability. Table I provides
a summary of the most common ones.

Originally proposed by Back et al. [23], sidechains are
secondary blockchains connected to other blockchains via a
two-way peg protocol [81]. This protocol requires locking the
transferred funds on the mainchain until they are created in
the sidechain. Then, these locked funds may be destroyed.
Both,
the sidechain and the mainchain may not have the
same features or consensus mechanism. However, creating and
maintaining sidechains is a complex task because sidechains
are designed to interconnect two chains only. Connecting N
blockchains requires creating N-1 sidechains, which limits the
scalability of this solution.

Notary schemes are usually centralized exchanges that trans-
fer assets between multiple blockchains. Sometimes, a group
of exchanges performs the asset transfer task which is referred
to as decentralized notary [78]. Although this approach is
the easiest and most convenient, it is prone to centralization-
related security risks as well as single-point of failures.

Hashed time-lock contracts are used for atomic swaps and
off-chain transactions between trustless parties. The tokens are
locked for a speciﬁc time on one blockchain. The receiver can
unlock the tokens using by revealing a secret which is shared
with him by the sender [34]. It, thus, requires sharing a secret
between the sender and receiver which may be associated with
security risks. Also, it requires the sender and receiver to be
online during the transfer time. This is somehow similar to
the one-time password (OTP). For this reason, it cannot be
considered as a robust interoperability solution in the long
run.

Blockchain of blockchains is a framework that connects
multiple blockchains in a way similar to sidechains called
bridges. Each blockchain is connected to other blockchains
in the network either directly or via hubs. The current im-
plementation requires interconnected blockchains to have the
same architecture. In addition, this interoperability framework
requires additional transaction fees which may prevent scala-
bility on the global level [25].

Trusted relay is a decentralized approach that allows val-
idators from source and target chains to validate, sign and
deliver transactions between two blockchains. Sometimes, a
TTP is employed to perform the tasks of the decentralized
veriﬁers. For instance, Cactus implements multiple TTPs to
issue transactions in several blockchains [45].

Ideologically, blockchain agnostic protocol is an abstraction
layer that allows one to build an application that is operable on
multiple blockchains in a seamless manner. Unlike other solu-
tions which depend on constructing bridges between different
blockchains, agnostic protocols must be able to function on
a higher level layer abstracting from chain-speciﬁc protocols.
Yet, this solution did not mature to achieve fully interoperable
blockchains and is still under development. Although several
approaches are proposed [70], a consensus on a fully agnostic
protocol is yet to be unveiled.

A stimulating analogy between the internet and the
blockchain has been discussed in [42]. The authors highlighted
the importance of understanding the aspects of the internet that
have made it scalable, resilient, sustainable, and commercially
viable. They emphasized blockchain interoperability as a cru-
cial requirement for managing and maintaining current and
future blockchains. It is argued that the interoperability of the
internet is what made it scalable to the global level. Compared
to the Internet, blockchains are viewed as Autonomous Sys-
tems (AS) that have predeﬁned physical perimeters and are
operated by an ISP.

III. STATE-OF-THE-ART ON BLOCKCHAIN-BASED UAV
NETWORKS

The realm of blockchain technology has sufﬁciently matured
to solve emerging issues related to UAV trafﬁc networks. In
this section, we brieﬂy review the state-of-the-art in UAV
networks that deploy different versions of blockchain to ex-
ploit multiple advantages such as immutability, transparency,
traceability, and auditability. Unlike other application-oriented
reviews [17], our review spins three axes based on the ulti-
mate motivation of each work, namely: safety, security, and

THIS WORK IS SUBMITTED TO AN IEEE JOURNAL.

3

TABLE I
BLOCKCHAIN INTEROPERABILITY APPROACHES

Interoperability approach

Description

Sidechains

Notary schemes

Hashed time-lock contracts

Blockchain of blockchains

Trusted relays

A blockchain connected to the
mainchain via CCC protocol.

Centralized or decentralized ex-
changes that make changes to the
blockchains on behalf of users. They
are faster and easier to use.

transfer mechanism without
Asset
a TTP. It
locks the fund on one
blockchain for a speciﬁc time. Fund
is unlocked again using a shared
secret between the sender and re-
ceiver.

Use case speciﬁc blockchains that
interact with each other

Relay transactions
blockchain
to
blockchain

from source
destination

Blockchain agnostic protocol

Translator between blockchains

Weaknesses
-Require TTP
-Complex to build
and not scalable
-Mainly for asset
transfers
-Most are centralized

Examples

Solana [91], polkadot [87],
[8], RSK [60], Horizon [6]

loom

Binance [1], coinbase [3], kraken
[9]

-Sender and receiver
need to be online.
-Only supports asset
transfer.
-A secret needs to be
created for each use

-Interoperability between
blockchains of the
same architectures
-other architectures
are not supported
-Private blockchains only

-Private and public
-Some lack enforcing
smart contracts and
non-fungible tokens
-Rely on TTP

Uniswap [13],
[10], onechain [11], fusion [37]

lightning network

-Ethereum 2.0 [5], Cardano [2],
Polkadot [87], cosmos [59]

Hyberledger cactus [14]

Quant [12], hyberledger Quilt [14],
interledger [7]

Fig. 1. Emerging issues in UAV networks that are addressed using blockchain

THIS WORK IS SUBMITTED TO AN IEEE JOURNAL.

4

reliability. We dedicate one subsection for each category to
highlight the recent major contributions (from 2018 to 2021).
Our review hierarchy is illustrated in Figure 1. Besides, the
focus of the reviewed papers is summarized in Table III.

A. Safety

Safety refers to maintaining a good physical condition
of a cyber-physical system while in operation. Not only
the physical condition of the participating drones shall be
preserved, but also the safety of the public residing under
the national airspace. This is one of the ultimate goals of
a UAV trafﬁc management system that are achieved using
different techniques such as by route de-conﬂiction, collision
Avoidance, and geofencing.

In principle, route de-conﬂiction refers to the mutual plan-
ning of ﬂight paths of UAVs in space and time to ensure
minimum or no conﬂicts. Scarlato et al. [77] proposed the
design of a permissioned blockchain for the collision avoid-
ance and recovery of UAVs. They envisioned a cooperative
environment where participating UAVs communicate obstacle
coordinates and collisions continuously. Moreover, Rahman et
al. [74] proposed a UAV network to ensure a collision-free
environment. Routes are planned in a way to avoid restricted
areas such as private properties. Also, the ﬂight altitude is
speciﬁed to reduce the collision risk by minimizing the number
of drones ﬂying at the same height. To ensure that the drone
is following the coordinates of the speciﬁed route, the authors
use a smart contract to log drone movement and location
information during the entire mission. If any of those attributes
violates the speciﬁed ﬂight route, a negative point is added
to the drone’s reputation. On the other hand, Kuzmin et
al. [58] proposed a route-sharing scheme where cooperative
drones deconﬂict their routes autonomously using the route
information on a blockchain. They emphasized the usefulness
of this approach especially when a manually operated drone
loses connection with its base station. Motivated by a similar
application, Allouch et al. [18] proposed, implemented, and
evaluated a permissioned blockchain to perform secure path
planning and data sharing among participating drones. To deal
with the limited computation power and storage resources of
the UAVs, they ofﬂoad the computations to a cloud server
while employing a decentralized off-chain storage system,
namely OrbitDB. Moreover, they exclude the participating
UAVs from the peer-to-peer network and only consider ground
control stations as peers that store a copy of the ledger.
To evaluate their architecture, they implemented the solution
on the Hyper-ledger Fabric platform. Finally, they estimated
the delay and resource consumption of one transaction. The
average latency of an invoke transaction on a network of 50
users was 454 ms. Despite being relatively high compared to
existing networks delays, this work has shown promise of the
application of blockchain-based UAV networks in the real-
time.

In contrast, dynamic geofencing refers to the virtual ge-
ographical fences usually imposed, maintained, and updated
by an airspace authority. Dasu et al. [33] presented a hybrid
method where parts of the airspace trafﬁc is controlled by a

central authority while others are decentralized with the help
of blockchain principles. They separate the two parts using
dynamic geofencing. In the decentralized zones, participating
drones reserve a volume of air to conduct their missions. The
reservation is logged in a transaction on a public ledger and
is approved if the requested volume is idle at the time of
the mission. To achive this, they employ the double-spending
avoidance concept originally deployed in cryptocurrencies.
The authors also suggest that, depending on the congestion
of the required airspace, authorities may charge users for
airspace allocation. This approach guarantees a fair share of
the airspace while reducing the congestion in peak-hours and
urban areas. It also improves the public safety by avoiding
collisions and dynamically prohibiting missions over people
crowds.

B. Cybersecurity

Cybersecurity serves as an overarching goal for the employ-
ment of blockchain technology in the UAV networks context.
Essentially, the immutability feature of this technology makes
it a perfect candidate for ensuring accountability of end-
users. Most of the papers that proposed a blockchain-based
solution for UAV trafﬁc are motivated by cybersecurity-related
requirements, including conﬁdentiality, integrity, availability,
non-repudiation, and authentication. We brieﬂy review how
each aspect is addressed in the literature. Although, most of
the proposed solutions simultaneously address the ﬁve security
aspects, we tend to group them based on the most dominant
one. For a more detailed review of earlier works, the reader
is referred to [63].

Conﬁdentiality refers to protecting information from being
accessed by unauthorized users. Like other networks, UAV
networks are prone to conﬁdentiality attacks such as data
snifﬁng, eavesdropping, and replay attacks. Wu et al. [89] have
recently outlined multiple scenarios at which blockchain can
be employed to preserve the privacy of UAV networks. They
suggested a cost-effective, tamper-proof blockchain-based ID
management system to authenticate and authorize drones as
per the Federal Aviation Authority (FAA) requirements. Be-
sides, they leveraged the potentials of the DLT to preserve
the privacy of the trajectory information of the drones. The
authors argued that asymmetric encryption and homomorphic
obfuscations schemes inherited in blockchain can be utilized to
improve the conﬁdentiality of the network. On the other hand,
Qian et al. [71] employed blockchain to protect the privacy
of cached content by sharing only necessary content with
selected vehicles. Similarly, Xiao et al. [90] proposed a drone-
swarm-aided distributed crowd monitoring system that features
efﬁcient identity authentication, secure communication, and
distributed data management. The goal of the work is to
ensure that
the monitoring data are kept conﬁdential and
secure. They outline a publich key infrastructure (PKI)-based
security protocol to authenticate participating UAVs, assign the
monitoring task to participating UAVs, and allow secure access
for the monitoring data by the management. They propose the
use of a private blockchain with smart contracts to log the
events and actions throughout the task. In terms of results,

THIS WORK IS SUBMITTED TO AN IEEE JOURNAL.

5

Authors

Field of contribution

Blockchain Application

Scarlato et al. [77]
Rahman et al. [74]
Kuzmin et al. [58]
Allouch et al. [18]
Dasu et al. [33]
Wu et al. [89]
Qian et al. [71]
Xiao et al. [90]
Ghribi et al. [41]
Lv et al. [62]
Islam et al. [47]
Singh et al. [82]
Kanade et al. [50]
Yazdinejad et al. [92]
Kapitonov et al. [51]
Barka et al. [24]
Almotary et al. [67]
Kumari et al. [57]
Cheema et al. [31]
Andola et al. [22]
Hassija et al [43]
Jiang et al [48]
Qiu et al [73]
Pathak et al [68]
Gai et al [39]
Wu et al. [88]
Hassija et al [44]
Feng et al. [36]
Sharma et al. [79]
Aloqaily et al. [19]
Singh et al. [83]

Safety
Safety
Safety
Safety
Safety
Cybersecurity
Cybersecurity
Cybersecurity
Cybersecurity
Cybersecurity
Cybersecurity
Cybersecurity
Cybersecurity
Cybersecurity
Cybersecurity
Cybersecurity
Cybersecurity
Cybersecurity
Cybersecurity
Cybersecurity
Reliability
Reliability
Reliability
Reliability
Reliability
Reliability
Reliability
Reliability
Reliability
Reliability
Reliability

Collision avoidance
Collision avoidance
Route deconﬂiction
Route deconﬂiction
geofencing
Conﬁdentiality: ID management system
Conﬁdentiality: privacy of cached content
Conﬁdentiality: privacy of cached content
Conﬁdentiality: privacy of cached content
Conﬁdentiality: privacy of cached content
Integrity
Integrity
Integrity
Availability
Availability
Non-repudiation
Non-repudiation
Authentication
Authentication
Authentication
Power reliability: recharging/ refueling
Power reliability
Power reliability
Power reliability
Power reliability
Power reliability
Network connectivity
Network connectivity
Network coverage
Network connectivity
Network connectivity

TABLE II
LATEST PROPOSALS ON BLOCKCHAIN-ENABLED UAV NETWORKS

their simulation revealed that the time overhead of the security
protocol increases as the size of the swarm increase, whereas
the key creation stage is responsible for the largest delay
among other operations.

In the same context, Ghribi et al. [41] targeted the conﬁ-
dentiality aspect of UAV networks by implementing a private
blockchain with encrypted transactions. The popular pub-
lic key cryptography with the Elliptic Curve Difﬁe-Hellman
(ECDH) model was used along with a one-time password
(OTP). A communication between the sender and the receiver
UAVs is done by a nominated endorsement UAV which
generates a 128-bit key by using the ECDH. After that, an
OTP key is generated by hashing the ECDH key. Finally, the
generated key is sent to the sender UAV and the rest of the
endorsement UAVs for approval. On the contrary, Lv et al.
[62] addressed the conﬁdentiality of blockchain aided UAV-
networks data sharing scheme by means of the number theory
research unit cryptosystem. They argue that
their scheme
requires low computing cost for encryption, decryption and
key generation compared to current data sharing models.

Data integrity is also important to ensure that transmitted
data is not altered or modiﬁed by an intruder. Islam et al. [47]
proposed an architecture to preserve the integrity of the data
transmitted between IoT devices and Mobile Edge Computing
(MEC) devices and servers. They used UAVs as trusted relays
to ensure the integrity of the data before being transmitted
to MEC servers. The data is securely kept in a blockchain
at MEC servers. The proposed mechanism which includes
an encryption scheme improves the overall integrity of the

transferred data and reduces the number of direct requests
to MEC servers. In contrast, Singh et al. [82] employed a
blockchain to improve the integrity of data transferred between
drones in an IoD environment. Their mechanism intelligently
selects the miner node using a deep Boltzmann machine.
Power plants surveillance is another application that requires
high data integrity. Kanade et al. [50] proposed a secure
surveillance system for power plants using UAV swarms.
They employ the DLT to preserve the integrity of the plant
data sensed by the UAVs. To reduce the computational cost,
transactions are only issued for high risk signals. Further, block
validation task is assigned to human workers to reduce the
computational cost.

Moreover, maintaining the availability of services for UAVs
in the airspace is a vital concern. By design, blockchain is a
decentralized technology which is immune to single-point-of-
failure [16]. All proposed blockchain-based UAV trafﬁc man-
agement (UTM) architectures are essentially decentralized and
require limited or no central authority. Yazdinejad et al. [92]
proposed a decentralized zone-based system for registering
and authenticating drones. In their architecture, they assign a
trusted ground-based drone-controller agent to manage the au-
thentication within a predeﬁned perimeter. They maintain the
availability of the authentication scheme by allowing neighbor
drone-controllers to substitute for a failing one. In the UTM
context, the authors of [51] deﬁned a blockchain architecture
for UTM in which they implemented a so called Robonomic
protocol to provide security between communicating nodes.
They argue that their architecture solves the latency issue

THIS WORK IS SUBMITTED TO AN IEEE JOURNAL.

6

that is found in decentralized systems, which is essentially
beneﬁcial for critical applications. The model is supported by
smart contracts that provide transparency and immutability.
Thus, the work is implemented by means of the decentralized
Ethereum and InterPlanetary File System.

Another crucial requirement for the cybersecurity of UAV
networks is non-repudiation. This term is deﬁned as the
inability to deny or refuse responsibilities of actions. This
can be achieved using public key infrastructure, where a UAV
signs messages using its private key before sending it via the
network. In [24], Barka et al. highlighted the importance of
non-repudiation as a requirement for UAV networks. They
argued that a UAV might deny sending images of restricted
areas. Thus, the authors proposed a trusted blockchain-based
UAV system to protect critical infrastructure. Similarly, the
authors of [67] deﬁned four blockchain concepts that can
enhance the drone security. These elements comprise: digital
ﬁngerprint, data structure, conensus mechanism, and access
control. They emphasize the role of the consensus mechanism
in preventing dishonesty by allowing nodes in the network to
agree on a transaction.

Finally, ensuring authenticity of users and messages is a key
requirement for UAV networks. In principle, authentication is
deﬁned as the ability to recognize the real identity of a user.
UAV networks may suffer from authentication attacks such
as masquerading attack. Kumari et al. [57] addressed such
threats in UAV networks by presenting a blockchain-based
softwarization of the UAV network management scheme. They
argue that
the UAV network should be provisioned with
cryptographic data to ensure authentication and conﬁdentiality.
Similarly, Cheema et al. [31] employed blockchain technology
to develop a registration and authentication scheme for drones
in a smart vehicular network context. They also addressed
the issue of optimal drone positioning to enhance the overall
spectral efﬁciency in the network. Under the same consid-
eration, Andola et al. [22] proposed a lightweight blockchain
model that provides authentication and anonymity. Their work
provides security preferences for a surveillance UAV. They de-
ﬁned an adversary model in which an attacker can modify the
transactions of a blockchain during the communication before
they are veriﬁed. This kind of attack is called a malleability
attack. They also deﬁned an issue during the handoff process
when a UAV moves from one Ground Control station (GCS)
to another, where latency might occur. They solve this issue
by implementing a novel blockchain architecture which they
called SpyChain. They have described a detailed authentication
scheme of their work following four approaches.

C. Reliability

Improving the reliability of UAV trafﬁc management is a
crucial prerequisite to attracting large-scale commercial appli-
cations such as package delivery, transportation, and network
coverage. This is achieved by optimizing power reliability and
network connectivity while minimizing the cost. A surge of
research activities have been identiﬁed in this direction.

Hassija et al [43] presented a blockchain-based architec-
ture to manage power-charging/refueling between UAVs and

charging stations. Their proposed model allows UAVs to buy
power using digital tokens. Wireless power trading in UAV
networks based on blockchain principles is also proposed in
[48]. The same idea was also proposed earlier in [73] where a
consortium blockchain was exploited to introduce a spectrum
trading platform for UAV-assisted cellular networks. In this
work, MEC devices were employed to reduce the computation
overhead of the veriﬁcation process. To select the block miner,
they implemented a reputation algorithm for the MEC devices.
Further, the business model is incentivised by a Stackelberg
game to maximize the proﬁt of the cellular network operators
and the UAV operators. They claim that the proposed frame-
work enables a secure, efﬁcient, and decentralized spectrum
trading between both trading parties. Another UAV-based
business model is proposed by Pathak et al. [68] where a
blockchain-based UAV virtualization is introduced to provide
UAV as a service. The envisioned platform aims at connecting
UAV owners, end users, and UAV-service providers via a
permissioned distributed network, enabling UAV owners to
rent their vehicles to end users which in turns allow for a more
efﬁcient utilization of resources. Their architecture is similar
to the previously proposed sensor virtualization [64]. The
concept of blockchain is employed to ensure efﬁcient resource
utilization, security, and market competition. Comparably, Gai
et al. [39] incentivised miners to validate authentication and
authorization certiﬁcates. The presented approach aims at
facilitating secure and reliable group communication between
UAVs. Particularly, blockchain was employed to record and
validate actions. On the other hand, an attribute-based vot-
ing mechanism is introduced by means of smart contracts.
Real-time experiments were carried out to verify and assess
the model performance. On the other hand, Wu et al. [88]
proposed a layered IoT architecture that supports ofﬂoading
computationally-intensive mining processes to edge servers.
This, in turn, reduces power consumption on UAVs and base
stations.

To improve the 5G network coverage, the authors of [44]
proposed another blockchain-based model for using drones
as dynamic base-stations. Their model
integrates a game-
theoretic smart contract that ensures fair and efﬁcient allo-
cation of bandwidth between users. Likewise, the authors of
[36] proposed a blockchain enabled 5G drones network to
address the identity authentication and secure data sharing of
drones. In their work, they implement three core services uti-
lizing blockcahin technology, namely: identity authentication,
operation management, and security auditing. Moreover, they
employ a multi-signature smart contract managed by a central
authority for registering and authenticating drones. To incen-
tivise miners, peers request a certain amount of coins to verify
that the requesting drone is already in the registered drones list.
Besides, secure data sharing is enabled by uploading encrypted
data to the cloud. Similarly, the uploading process is mainly
managed by a smart contract deployed on the blockchain. On
the contrary, Sharma et al. [79] presented a neural-blockchain-
based scheme for MEC caching. In their model, they used
drones as base stations to provide ultra-reliable ﬂattened 5G
network service. The proposed model was evaluated in terms
of ﬂyby time and area spectral efﬁciency. Similarly, Aloqaily

THIS WORK IS SUBMITTED TO AN IEEE JOURNAL.

7

et al. [19] envisioned a blockchain assisted 5G network which
improves the quality of service by deploying public and private
ledgers supported by fog and cloud data centers. They showed
that their framework improves packet delivery success rate
compared to traditional networks without blockchain. Addi-
tionally, Singh et al. [83] addressed the problem of reliability
in UAV-networks by introducing a light-weight permissioned
blockchain solution that in which each drone in the network
would access its own block rather than all the blocks in the
ledger. They argue that this architecture solves the issue of
large ledger that would be produced each time more data
and blocks are added. A shrinking mechanism has also been
implemented to provide a fast lightweight blockchain.

IV. CROSS-BLOCKCHAIN-ENABLED FRAMEWORK FOR
UAV NETWORKS

Despite the remarkable advances in blockchain-aided UAV
networks, the exploitation of cross-blockchain communica-
limited. The main purpose of the
tion framework is still
cross-blockchain technology is to connect the independent
blockchain networks. A variety of solutions have been intro-
duced to cope with the interoperability limitation. Qasse et
al. categorized cross blockchain solutions into four groups:
sidechains [69], trusted third party [87], blockchain routers
[35], [49], and smart contracts [26]. Alternatively, Belchoir
et al. [25] categorized the proposed approaches into three
categories, comprising: public connectors [75], [86], hybrid
connectors [15], [38], and blockchain of blockchains [59],
[84]. As discussed in the previous section, blockchain is
playing an important role in building UAV networks. Basically,
UAV networks have a variety of functionalities, yet each paper
discussed focuses on either a single or double functionalities.
Eventually, a sophisticated network must combine all of the
functionalities to build a secure and safe UAV environment.
One could take lessons from previously implemented cross-
blockchain models in other ﬁelds such as asset transfer [29],
[80] and health records [30]. Fueled by the enormous applica-
tions that may potentially beneﬁt from the cross-blockchain
concept, software development environment were also in-
troduced to enable easier deployment of cross-blockchain
models [72], as well as the associated smart contracts [66]. In
this section, we highlight opportunities and discuss multiple
proposals to employ interoperable blockchains in the IoD en-
vironment including: multiple UAV Service Suppliers (USS),
UAV charging stations, and UAV delivery application (supply
chain).

A. Multiple UAV Service Suppliers

The USS is an entity that provides services to subscribed
UAS operators to help them meet the operational requirements
speciﬁed by the national aviation authority. Operation plan-
ning, strategic and tactical de-conﬂiction, Remote ID (RID),
and airspace authorization are examples of the services pro-
vided by a USS. A UAV operator may subscribe to one or more
USSs to avail multiple services. Upon subscription to a USS,
the UAV is given a unique ID and automatically registered
on a public blockchain which is accessible by other USSs

and aviation authorities. In parallel, the USS deliver digital
assets/data to the UAV using another blockchain that is only
visible to the UAVs in a certain zone and this particular USS.
The USS needs to interface the two ledgers to synchronize
the process of serving new subscribers while keeping record
of their IDs in a public blockchain.

Another scenario could happen when a USS user migrates
to another USS. In this case, he might request the old USS to
migrate his data and reputation/awards to the new USS to make
use of them. Recall that keeping all assets (i.e. registration,
payment, reputation, IDs, location-based services, etc.) in one
ledger is inefﬁcient, especially when the chain becomes too
long. Moreover, some of these information shall not be shared
with some parties while other should be public. Thus, adopting
specialized ledgers and allowing communication between them
improves scalability and conﬁdentiality.

On the other hand, UAV networks could also make use
of the decentralized identiﬁers (DID) scheme to enable the
minimum disclosure of users’ information on a need-to-know
basis. Many DID frameworks are built on top of a blockchain
[4]. Indeed, DID preserves users’ privacy while promoting a
universally unique identity that can be used across multiple
the DID framework is being
blockchains [53]. Currently,
considered for universal standardization by the World Wide
Web Consortium (W3C) [20] which implies the importance
of
integrating it with the current blockchain-based UAV
networks. Chen et al [32] proposed a decentralized cross-
domain blockchain that interfaces multiple applications via
a DID system. Ideologically, UAV networks could make use
of such solutions after carefully tailoring them for the UAV
environment.

B. UAV charging stations

As discussed earlier, Hassija et al. [43] envisioned a UAV
charging-refueling scheme built on top of the blockchain. They
assumed that UAVs can buy power/fuel from ground stations
using tokens or cryptocurrencies. However, every fuel supplier
might restrict transactions on its blockchain using a particular
cryptocurrencies. What if the UAV does not hold coins of the
same cryptocurrency in its wallet? A straightforward solution
would be to implement cross-blockchain solutions to exchange
coins to the desired cryptocurrency.

C. Physical Assets Delivery

The need to incorporate cross-blockchain technology in
UAV networks becomes evident in the physical-assets delivery
scenario. That is, a delivery UAV needs to operate on at least
two blockchains: one related to the supply-chain, and another
related to the airspace trafﬁc network. In some cases, the
supply-chain ledger might request trafﬁc and location-related
information from the air trafﬁc ledger to track the shipment.
Possibly, this use case could be addressed using the CAPER
framework [21], where conﬁdentiality and interoperability are
jointly provided. In other cases, the two ledgers may need
to exchange coins to pay for USS services and refueling.
Figure 2 illustrates a potential scenario at which blockchain

THIS WORK IS SUBMITTED TO AN IEEE JOURNAL.

8

Fig. 2. Potential cross-blockchain scenario at which a delivery drone is operating on four ledgers simultaneously.

interoperability is required for a delivery drone. In this sce-
nario, four blockchains need to interoperate to accomplish a
simple delivery mission. In the ﬁrst blockchain, the drone
subscribes to a USS smart contract at which it gets ﬂight-
related services such as dynamic geofencing and route de-
conﬂiction. To subscribe to this USS, a speciﬁc cryptocurrency
wallet
is required, which lives in another ledger. Further,
the UAV needs to connect to a private supply chain related
ledger, where the supplier and costumer can track the shipment
location. Another possible use of blockchain is for fueling
or charging the drone using a re-charging station. Essentially,
the drone needs to exchange information securely between
these ledgers without compromising data integrity or security.
A cross-blockchain solution is indispensable in such cases.

V. OPEN ISSUES AND CHALLENGES

Both, blockchain interoperability and UAV networks are still
in the research and development phase. Thus, the integration of
both technologies is faced with many practical problems. We
devote this section to discuss challenges and possible research
opportunities that may guide the future work in this topic.

a) Selection of cross-blockchain technology: : Despite
the substantial efforts dedicated to develop efﬁcient and secure
cross-blockchain interfaces [25], the selection of the most
appropriate one for managing the different applications in the
UAV networks is a critical design challenge. All currently
available cross-blockchain platforms still suffer from either
security, reliability, or efﬁciency issues. Consequently, it is
inevitable to choose the optimum platform that minimizes the
risks while maintaining satisfactory performance.

b) Absence of a managing third party: Although the
decentralized nature of peer-to-peer (P2P) networks provides
enormous advantages and mitigates substantial security risks,
it is, yet, vulnerable to 51% attacks [76]. This is especially in-
timidating in the case of UAV networks, where UAVs can join
and leave freely [89]. Also, the wide availability of relatively
cheap UAVs may facilitate such attacks. To tackle this issue,
Dasu et al. [33] presented a hybrid trafﬁc management model
where parts of the airspace are managed by a centralized au-
thority, while others are left to blockchain-based decentralized
management. Further, the authors presented a novel approach
to prevent denial-of-airspace attack by charging airspace users
some fees based on the local demand. This will also limit
51% attacks as it makes it more expensive for malicious
users to join the UAV network with many drones at a time.
Another way to improve the security feature of the cross-
blockchain scheme was introduced by Kim et al. [54]–[56]
where the blockchain governance game was proposed to deal
with attackers who try to gain control over the blockchain by
adding more illegitimate nodes.

c) Cost effectiveness:: Proposing any cross-blockchain
solution in the UAV network management context shall be cost
effective. That is, most of the civilian UAV-based applications
are commercial and thus the successful deployment of any
solution in the drone market is signiﬁcantly dependent on the
associated costs.

d) Simulation tools:: We emphasize the importance of
developing effective simulation tools for blockchain-based
UAV applications, where the computational costs, memory
size, message overhead, and UAV dynamics are taken into
consideration. The availability of such tools will deﬁnitely

THIS WORK IS SUBMITTED TO AN IEEE JOURNAL.

9

drive the development of efﬁcient cross-blockchain solutions
tailored for the unique dynamic nature of the IoD environment.
Moreover, Mehta et al. [63] highlighted the impact of the
lack of proper programming practices on the efﬁciency of the
blockchain implementations.

e) Limited computational and storage resources:: This is
the major barrier in the application of blockchain in the UAV
networks. This fact is emphasized in [17], [63], [89]. Par-
ticularly, most current consensus mechanisms are, by design,
power-consuming. Also, keeping a copy of the blockchain on
the UAV board requires a large memory. In fact, increasing the
capacity and computational power of UAVs while minimizing
power consumption is one of the most active research topics.
Yet, a game-changing solution is far from being deployed.
Thus, it will be helpful to implement lightweight consensus
mechanism such as the one presented in [85]. Relying on edge
serves for computational-intensive tasks and storage is also
proposed [88]. Nonetheless, one should pay attention to the
associated communication overheads and trust issues.

f) Compatibility of Blockchain Ledgers:: By reviewing
the related literature, it had come to our notice that each
research uses a different type of blockchain. The work done by
[74] focused on the permissioned blockchain to ensure the au-
thorization of blockchain miners. Yet, security vulnerabilities
may arise if other blockchain ledgers in the cross-blockchain
platform employ the permissionless architecture. This might
lead to reducing the security level that was granted by the
permissioned blockchain. In other words, certain blockchains
might be implemented either as public or private, permissioned
or permissionless. If combined together, the security level
of the entire system will be determined by the least-secure
component. Another issue that requires further research is
whether or not combining different blockchain ledgers will
introduce new vulnerabilities to a system.

VI. CONCLUSION

The blockchain technology sees to offer promising features
in many applications. In this paper we discussed different
employments of the blockchain to advance the safety, cy-
bersecurity, and reliability of UAV networks. We identiﬁed
different properties that has been addressed and exploited in
recent literature and concluded that the deployment of this
technology is faced with many barriers such as scalability
and portability. A range of cross-blockchain interoperability
solutions has been proposed to improve scalability while
maintaining transparency, immutability, and decentralization.
Motivated by the advances in cross-blockchain solutions, we
outlined multiple scenarios at which current blockchain-based
UAV networks may potentially proﬁt from the deployment of
blockchain inter-operation protocols. This includes a scenario
in which the functionalities of four different blockchain ledgers
are combined to fulﬁll the purpose of a single UAV system op-
erating under the concept of cross-blockchain. We then, high-
lighted the challenges associated with implementing a network
of blockchains to concurrently enable multiple functionalities
of UAV networks. Some of these challenges include cost,
computational and storage resources, and the compatibility

of different blockchain ledgers. We ﬁnally suggested possible
research directions that will form the basis for future proposals
to integrate cross-blockchain solutions in the IoD environment.

REFERENCES

[1] Binance. https://www.binance.com/en. Accessed: 2021-07-11.
[2] Cardano. http://www.cardano.org/. Accessed: 2021-07-11.
[3] Coinbase. https://www.coinbase.com/. Accessed: 2021-07-11.
[4] Decentralized identiﬁers (dids) v1.0.
[5] Ethereum 2.0. https://ethereum.org/en/. Accessed: 2021-07-11.
[6] Horizon blockchain games. https://horizon.io/. Accessed: 2021-07-11.
[7] Interledger. https://interledger.org/news/attention-creatives-grant-for-the-

webs-call-for-proposals-is-now-open/.

[8] Intro to loom network: Loom sdk. https://loomx.io/developers/en/intro-

to-loom.html.

[9] Kraken exchange. https://www.kraken.com/. Accessed: 2021-07-11.
[10] Lightning network. https://lightning.network/. Accessed: 2021-07-11.
[11] Onechain. http : //www.onechain.one/indexen.html. Accessed:

2021-07-11.

[12] Quant. https://www.quant.network/. Accessed: 2021-07-11.
[13] Uniswap. https://uniswap.org/. Accessed: 2021-07-11.
[14] Hyperledger:

blockchain

source

open

technologies.

https://www.hyperledger.org/, Oct 2021.

[15] Ermyas Abebe, Dushyant Behl, Chander Govindarajan, Yining Hu,
Dileban Karunamoorthy, Petr Novotny, Vinayaka Pandit, Venkatraman
Ramakrishna, and Christian Vecchiola. Enabling enterprise blockchain
interoperability with trusted data transfer (industry track). In Proceed-
ings of the 20th International Middleware Conference Industrial Track,
pages 29–35, 2019.

[16] Rahul Agrawal, Pratik Verma, Rahul Sonanis, Umang Goel, Aloknath
De, Sai Anirudh Kondaveeti, and Suman Shekhar. Continuous security
In 2018 IEEE International Conference on
in iot using blockchain.
Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pages 6423–6427.
IEEE, 2018.

[17] Tejasvi Alladi, Vinay Chamola, Nishad Sahu, and Mohsen Guizani.
Applications of blockchain in unmanned aerial vehicles: A review.
Vehicular Communications, page 100249, 2020.

[18] Azza Allouch, Omar Cheikhrouhou, Anis Koubˆaa, Khalifa Toumi,
Mohamed Khalgui, and Tuan Nguyen Gia. Utm-chain: blockchain-based
secure unmanned trafﬁc management for internet of drones. Sensors,
21(9):3049, 2021.

[19] Moayad Aloqaily, Ouns Bouachir, Azzedine Boukerche, and Ismaeel Al
Ridhawi. Design guidelines for blockchain-assisted 5g-uav networks.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.15286, 2020.

[20] Bander Alzahrani. An information-centric networking based registry
IEEE Access,

for decentralized identiﬁers and veriﬁable credentials.
8:137198–137208, 2020.

[21] Mohammad Javad Amiri, Divyakant Agrawal, and Amr El Abbadi.
Caper: a cross-application permissioned blockchain. Proceedings of the
VLDB Endowment, 12(11):1385–1398, 2019.

[22] Nitish Andola, Vijay Kumar Yadav, S Venkatesan, Shekhar Verma, et al.
Spychain: A lightweight blockchain for authentication and anonymous
authorization in iod. Wireless Personal Communications, pages 1–20,
2021.

[23] Adam Back, Matt Corallo, Luke Dashjr, Mark Friedenbach, Gregory
Maxwell, Andrew Miller, Andrew Poelstra, Jorge Tim´on, and Pieter
Wuille. Enabling blockchain innovations with pegged sidechains. URL:
http://www. opensciencereview.
com/papers/123/enablingblockchain-
innovations-with-pegged-sidechains, 72, 2014.

[24] Ezedin Barka, Chaker Abdelaziz Kerrache, Hadjer Benkraouda, Khaled
Shuaib, Farhan Ahmad, and Fatih Kurugollu.
Towards a trusted
unmanned aerial system using blockchain for the protection of critical
infrastructure. Transactions on Emerging Telecommunications Technolo-
gies, page e3706, 2019.

[25] Rafael Belchior, Andr´e Vasconcelos, S´ergio Guerreiro, and Miguel
Correia. A survey on blockchain interoperability: Past, present, and
future trends. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.14282, 2020.

[26] Peter Bennink, Lennart van Gijtenbeek, Oskar van Deventer, and
Maarten Everts. An analysis of atomic swaps on and between ethereum
blockchains using smart contracts. Technical report, Tech. report, 2018.
[27] L´eo Besanc¸on, Catarina Ferreira Da Silva, and Parisa Ghodous. Towards
blockchain interoperability: Improving video games data exchange. In
2019 IEEE International Conference on Blockchain and Cryptocurrency
(ICBC), pages 81–85. IEEE, 2019.

THIS WORK IS SUBMITTED TO AN IEEE JOURNAL.

10

[28] S. Biswas, K. Sharif, F. Li, Z. Latif, S. S. Kanhere, and S. P. Mohanty.
Interoperability and synchronization management of blockchain-based
IEEE Transactions on Engineering
decentralized e-health systems.
Management, 67(4):1363–1376, 2020.

[29] Michael Borkowski, Christoph Ritzer, Daniel McDonald, and Stefan
Schulte. Caught in chains: claim-ﬁrst transactions for cross-blockchain
asset transfers. TU Wien: Technische Universit¨at Wien, Tech. Rep, 2018.
[30] Sheng Cao, Jing Wang, Xiaojiang Du, Xiaosong Zhang, and Xiaolin
Qin. Ceps: A cross-blockchain based electronic health records privacy-
preserving scheme. In ICC 2020-2020 IEEE International Conference
on Communications (ICC), pages 1–6. IEEE, 2020.

[31] M. A. Cheema, M. K. Shehzad, H. K. Qureshi, S. A. Hassan, and
H. Jung. A drone-aided blockchain-based smart vehicular network. IEEE
Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, pages 1–11, 2020.
[32] Ruibiao Chen, Fangxing Shu, Shuokang Huang, Lei Huang, Huafang
Liu, Jin Liu, and Kai Lei. Bidm: A blockchain-enabled cross-domain
identity management system. Journal of Communications and Informa-
tion Networks, 6(1):44–58, 2021.

[33] Tamraparni Dasu, Yaron Kanza, and Divesh Srivastava. Geofences in
In Proceedings of
the sky: herding drones with blockchains and 5g.
the 26th ACM SIGSPATIAL International Conference on Advances in
Geographic Information Systems, pages 73–76, 2018.

[34] Christian Decker and Roger Wattenhofer. A fast and scalable payment
network with bitcoin duplex micropayment channels. In Symposium on
Self-Stabilizing Systems, pages 3–18. Springer, 2015.

[35] Donghui Ding, Tiantian Duan, Linpeng Jia, Kang Li, Zhongcheng Li,
and Yi Sun. Interchain: A framework to support blockchain interoper-
ability. Second Asia-Paciﬁc Work. Netw, 2018.

[36] Chaosheng Feng, Keping Yu, Ali Kashif Bashir, Yasser D Al-Otaibi,
Yang Lu, Shengbo Chen, and Di Zhang. Efﬁcient and secure data sharing
IEEE Network,
for 5g ﬂying drones: a blockchain-enabled approach.
35(1):130–137, 2021.

[37] Fusion.

A connected

ecosystem for ﬁnancial

transactions.

https://fusion.org/en. Accessed: 2021-07-11.

[38] Enrique Fynn, Alysson Bessani, and Fernando Pedone. Smart contracts
on the move. In 2020 50th Annual IEEE/IFIP International Conference
on Dependable Systems and Networks (DSN), pages 233–244. IEEE,
2020.

[39] Keke Gai, Yulu Wu, Liehuang Zhu, Kim-Kwang Raymond Choo, and
Bin Xiao. Blockchain-enabled trustworthy group communications in
uav networks. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems,
2020.

[40] Mirmojtaba Gharibi, Raouf Boutaba, and Steven L Waslander. Internet

of drones. IEEE Access, 4:1148–1162, 2016.

[41] Elias Ghribi, Tala Talaei Khoei, Hamed Taheri Gorji, Prakash Ran-
ganathan, and Naima Kaabouch. A secure blockchain-based communica-
tion approach for uav networks. In 2020 IEEE International Conference
on Electro Information Technology (EIT), pages 411–415. IEEE, 2020.
[42] Thomas Hardjono, Alexander Lipton, and Alex Pentland. Toward an
interoperability architecture for blockchain autonomous systems. IEEE
Transactions on Engineering Management, 67(4):1298–1309, 2019.
[43] Vikas Hassija, Vinay Chamola, Dara Nanda Gopala Krishna, and
Mohsen Guizani. A distributed framework for energy trading between
uavs and charging stations for critical applications. IEEE Transactions
on Vehicular Technology, 69(5):5391–5402, 2020.

[44] Vikas Hassija, Vikas Saxena, and Vinay Chamola. A blockchain-
based framework for drone-mounted base stations in tactile internet
environment. In IEEE INFOCOM 2020-IEEE Conference on Computer
Communications Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS), pages 261–266.
IEEE, 2020.

[45] Timo Hegnauer. Design and development of a blockchain interoperabil-
ity api. PhD thesis, Master’s thesis, CSG@ IFI, University of Zurich,
Switzerland, to appear 2019 . . . , 2019.

[46] Furtune

Business

Insights.

Small

drones

market.

https://www.fortunebusinessinsights.com/press-release/small-drones-
market-9611, 21-02-2020.

[47] Anik Islam and Soo Young Shin. Buav: A blockchain based secure
uav-assisted data acquisition scheme in internet of things. Journal of
Communications and Networks, 21(5):491–502, 2019.

[48] Li Jiang, Bin Chen, Shengli Xie, Sabita Maharjan, and Yan Zhang.
Incentivizing resource cooperation for blockchain empowered wireless
IEEE Transactions on Vehicular
power transfer in uav networks.
Technology, 2020.

[49] Luo Kan, Yu Wei, Amjad Haﬁz Muhammad, Wang Siyuan, Gao
Linchao, and Hu Kai. A multiple blockchains architecture on inter-
blockchain communication. In 2018 IEEE International Conference on

Software Quality, Reliability and Security Companion (QRS-C), pages
139–145. IEEE, 2018.

[50] Vijay A Kanade. Securing drone-based ad hoc network using blockchain.
In 2021 International Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Smart
Systems (ICAIS), pages 1314–1318. IEEE, 2021.

[51] Aleksandr Kapitonov, Ivan Berman, Vadim Manaenko, Vyacheslav
Rzhevskiy, Vitaly Bulatov, and Artemii Zenkin. Robonomics as a
blockchain-based platform for unmanned trafﬁc management of mobile
vehicles. In 2019 Workshop on Research, Education and Development
of Unmanned Aerial Systems (RED UAS), pages 9–17. IEEE, 2019.
[52] Muhammad Yasar Khan, Megat F Zuhairi, Toqeer Ali, Turki Alghamdi,
and Jose Antonio Marmolejo-Saucedo. An extended access control
model for permissioned blockchain frameworks. Wireless Networks,
pages 1–12, 2019.

[53] Bong Gon Kim, Young-Seob Cho, Seok-Hyun Kim, Hyoungshick Kim,
and Simon S Woo. A security analysis of blockchain-based did services.
IEEE Access, 9:22894–22913, 2021.

[54] Song-Kyoo Kim.

The trailer of strategic alliance for blockchain

governance game. arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.11172, 2019.

[55] Song-Kyoo Kim, Chan Yeob Yeun, Ernesto Damiani, Yousef Al-
Hammadi, and Nai-Wei Lo. New blockchain adoptation for automotive
security by using systematic innovation. In 2019 IEEE Transportation
Electriﬁcation Conference and Expo, Asia-Paciﬁc (ITEC Asia-Paciﬁc),
pages 1–4. IEEE, 2019.

[56] Song-Kyoo Amang Kim. Enhanced iov security network by using

blockchain governance game. Mathematics, 9(2):109, 2021.

[57] Aparna Kumari, Rajesh Gupta, Sudeep Tanwar, and Neeraj Kumar. A
taxonomy of blockchain-enabled softwarization for secure uav network.
Computer Communications, 161:304–323, 2020.

[58] Alexander Kuzmin and Evgeny Znak. Blockchain-base structures for
a secure and operate network of semi-autonomous unmanned aerial
vehicles. In 2018 IEEE International Conference on Service Operations
and Logistics, and Informatics (SOLI), pages 32–37. IEEE, 2018.

[59] Jae Kwon and Ethan Buchman. Cosmos whitepaper, 2019.
[60] Sergio Demian Lerner. Rsk. 2015.
[61] A Lipton and T Hardjono. Blockchain intra-and interoperability. Inno-
vative Technology at the Interface of Finance and Operations. Springer,
2021.

[62] Zhihan Lv, Liang Qiao, M Shamim Hossain, and Bong Jun Choi.
Analysis of using blockchain to protect the privacy of drone big data.
IEEE Network, 35(1):44–49, 2021.

[63] Parimal Mehta, Rajesh Gupta, and Sudeep Tanwar. Blockchain envi-
sioned uav networks: Challenges, solutions, and comparisons. Computer
Communications, 151:518–538, 2020.

[64] Sudip Misra and Aishwariya Chakraborty. Qos-aware dispersed dynamic
IEEE Transactions on

mapping of virtual sensors in sensor-cloud.
Services Computing, 2019.

[65] Ricardo Neisse, Jos´e L Hern´andez-Ramos, Sara N Matheu-Garcia, Gian-
marco Baldini, Antonio Skarmeta, Vasilios Siris, Dmitrij Lagutin, and
Pekka Nikander. An interledger blockchain platform for cross-border
IEEE Internet Computing,
management of cybersecurity information.
24(3):19–29, 2020.

[66] Markus Nissl, Emanuel Sallinger, Stefan Schulte, and Michael
Borkowski. Towards cross-blockchain smart contracts. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2010.07352, 2020.

[67] Almotery Ossamah. Blockchain as a solution to drone cybersecurity.
In 2020 IEEE 6th World Forum on Internet of Things (WF-IoT), pages
1–9. IEEE, 2020.

[68] Nidhi Pathak, Anandarup Mukherjee, and Sudip Misra. Aerialblocks:
Blockchain-enabled uav virtualization for industrial iot. IEEE Internet
of Things Magazine, 4(1):72–77, 2021.

[69] Joseph Poon and Vitalik Buterin. Plasma: Scalable autonomous smart

contracts. White paper, pages 1–47, 2017.

[70] Aleksei Pupyshev, Dmitry Gubanov, Elshan Dzhafarov, Ilya Sapranidi,
Inal Kardanov, Vladimir Zhuravlev, Shamil Khalilov, Marc Jansen,
Sten Laureyssens, Igor Pavlov, et al. Gravity: a blockchain-agnostic
cross-chain communication and data oracles protocol. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2007.00966, 2020.

[71] Yongfeng Qian, Yingying Jiang, Long Hu, M Shamim Hossain, Mubarak
Alrashoud, and Muneer Al-Hammadi. Blockchain-based privacy-aware
IEEE Network,
content caching in cognitive internet of vehicles.
34(2):46–51, 2020.

[72] Han Qiu, Xiao Wu, Shuyi Zhang, Victor CM Leung, and Wei Cai.
Chainide: A cloud-based integrated development environment for cross-
blockchain smart contracts. In 2019 IEEE International Conference on
Cloud Computing Technology and Science (CloudCom), pages 317–319.
IEEE Computer Society, 2019.

THIS WORK IS SUBMITTED TO AN IEEE JOURNAL.

11

[73] Junfei Qiu, David Grace, Guoru Ding, Junnan Yao, and Qihui Wu.
Blockchain-based secure spectrum trading for unmanned-aerial-vehicle-
assisted cellular networks: An operator’s perspective. IEEE Internet of
Things Journal, 7(1):451–466, 2019.

[74] Mohammad Saidur Rahman, Ibrahim Khalil, and Mohammed Atiquz-
zaman. Blockchain-powered policy enforcement for ensuring ﬂight
compliance in drone-based service systems. IEEE Network, 35(1):116–
123, 2021.

[75] Janick Rueegger and Guilherme Sperb Machado. Rational exchange:
In 2020 IEEE International
Incentives in atomic cross chain swaps.
Conference on Blockchain and Cryptocurrency (ICBC), pages 1–3.
IEEE, 2020.
[76] Muhammad Saad,

Jeffrey Spaulding, Laurent Njilla, Charles A
Kamhoua, D Nyang, and Aziz Mohaisen. Overview of attack surfaces
in blockchain. Blockchain for distributed systems security, pages 51–66,
2019.

[77] Michele Scarlato, Cristian Perra, Mohamed Yaseen Jabarulla, Giljun
Jung, and Heung No Lee. A blockchain for the collision avoidance
and the recovery of crashed uavs. pages 463–467, 2019.

[78] Stefan Schulte, Marten Sigwart, Philipp Frauenthaler, and Michael
In International
Borkowski.
Towards blockchain interoperability.
conference on business process management, pages 3–10. Springer,
2019.

[79] Vishal Sharma, Ilsun You, Dushantha Nalin K Jayakody, Daniel Gutier-
rez Reina, and Kim-Kwang Raymond Choo. Neural-blockchain-based
ultrareliable caching for edge-enabled uav networks. IEEE Transactions
on Industrial Informatics, 15(10):5723–5736, 2019.

[80] Marten Sigwart, Philipp Frauenthaler, Christof Spanring, and Stefan
Schulte. Decentralized cross-blockchain asset transfers. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2004.10488, 2020.

[81] Amritraj Singh, Kelly Click, Reza M Parizi, Qi Zhang, Ali Dehghan-
tanha, and Kim-Kwang Raymond Choo. Sidechain technologies in
blockchain networks: An examination and state-of-the-art review. Jour-
nal of Network and Computer Applications, 149:102471, 2020.
[82] Maninderpal Singh, Gagangeet Singh Aujla, and Rasmeet Singh Bali. A
deep learning-based blockchain mechanism for secure internet of drones
environment. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems,
2020.

[83] Maninderpal Singh, Gagangeet Singh Aujla, and Rasmeet Singh Bali.
Odob: One drone one block-based lightweight blockchain architecture
for internet of drones. In IEEE INFOCOM 2020-IEEE Conference on
Computer Communications Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS), pages
249–254. IEEE, 2020.

[84] Matthew Spoke, NE Team, et al. Aion: Enabling the decentralized

internet. AION, White Paper, Jul, 2017.

[85] Z. Su, Y. Wang, Q. Xu, and N. Zhang. Lvbs: Lightweight vehicular
blockchain for secure data sharing in disaster rescue. IEEE Transactions
on Dependable and Secure Computing, pages 1–1, 2020.

[86] Hongkai Wang, Dong He, Xiaoyi Wang, Caichao Xu, Weiwei Qiu,
Yiyang Yao, and Qiang Wang. An electricity cross-chain platform based
on sidechain relay. In Journal of Physics: Conference Series, volume
1631, page 012189. IOP Publishing, 2020.

[87] Gavin Wood. Polkadot: Vision for a heterogeneous multi-chain frame-

work. White Paper, 21, 2016.

[88] Yulei Wu, Hong-Ning Dai, and Hao Wang. Convergence of blockchain
and edge computing for secure and scalable iiot critical infrastructures
in industry 4.0. IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 2020.

[89] Yulei Wu, Hong-Ning Dai, Hao Wang, and Kim-Kwang Raymond
Choo. Blockchain-based privacy preservation for 5g-enabled drone
communications. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.03164, 2020.

[90] Wenjing Xiao, Miao Li, Bander Alzahrani, Reem Alotaibi, Ahmed Bar-
nawi, and Qingsong Ai. A blockchain-based secure crowd monitoring
system using uav swarm. IEEE Network, 35(1):108–115, 2021.
[91] Anatoly Yakovenko. Solana: A new architecture for a high performance

blockchain v0. 8.13. Whitepaper, 2018.

[92] Abbas Yazdinejad, Reza M Parizi, Ali Dehghantanha, Hadis Karimipour,
Gautam Srivastava, and Mohammed Aledhari. Enabling drones in the
IEEE
internet of things with decentralized blockchain-based security.
Internet of Things Journal, 2020.

