Integrating On-chain and Off-chain Governance for 
Supply Chain Transparency and Integrity

Shoufeng Cao  
QUT Design Lab 
Queensland University of Technology 
Brisbane, Australia 
shoufeng.cao@qut.edu.au 

Thomas Miller 
QUT Design Lab 
Queensland University of Technology 
Brisbane, Australia 
tj.miller@hdr.qut.edu.au 

Marcus Foth 
QUT Design Lab 
Queensland University of Technology 
Brisbane, Australia 
m.foth@qut.edu.au 

Warwick Powell 
BeefLedger Ltd & Smart Trade 
Networks Ltd 
Brisbane, Australia 
wp@smarttradenetworks.com 

Xavier Boyen  
School of Computer Science 
Queensland University of Technology 
Brisbane, Australia 
xavier.boyen@qut.edu.au 

Charles Turner-Morris 
BeefLedger Ltd & Smart Trade 
Networks Ltd  
Brisbane, Australia 
cm@beefledger.io

Abstract—Integrating  on-chain  and  off-chain  data  storage  for 
decentralised  and  distributed 
information  systems,  such  as 
blockchain, presents specific challenges for providing transparency 
of data governance and ensuring data integrity through stakeholder 
engagement.  Current  research  on  blockchain-based  supply  chains 
focuses  on  using  on-chain  governance  rules  developed  for 
cryptocurrency  blockchains  to  store  some  critical  data  points 
without  designing  tailored  on-chain  governance  mechanisms  and 
disclosing off-chain decision-making processes on data governance. 
In  response  to this  research  gap,  this  paper  presents an  integrated 
that  coordinates  supply  chain 
data  governance 
stakeholders with inter-linked on-chain and off-chain governance to 
disclose on-chain and off-chain rules and decision-making processes 
for supply chain transparency and integrity. We present a Proof-of-
Concept  (PoC)  of  our  integrated  data  governance  approach  and 
suggest future research to strengthen scaling up and supply chain-
based use cases based on our learnings.  

framework 

Keywords—  Blockchain,  on-chain,  off-chain,  governance, 

supply chain, data transparency, data integrity 

I.  INTRODUCTION 

level  of  accountability, 

Blockchain  is  a  decentralised  and  distributed  ledger, 
which highlights the necessity of achieving consensus from 
various stakeholders on how to record and store transaction 
information  on  the  shared  ledger  [1],  [2].  This  requires  a 
proper  governance  mechanism  to  coordinate  stakeholders 
with data injection, storage, sharing and access. Blockchain-
based  systems  are  generally  governed  by  a  set  of  rules  to 
achieve  a  certain 
fairness, 
transparency, assurance, and stakeholder engagement. While 
there  is  a  lack  of  commonly  accepted  definition  associated 
with blockchain governance [3], De Filippi and Mcmullen [4] 
defined blockchain governance as either the governance of a 
blockchain  system  by  infrastructure or  the  governance  of  a 
blockchain  infrastructure  system.  They  describe blockchain 
governance  as  either  ‘on-chain’  or  ‘off-chain’  patterns  [4]. 
On-chain  governance enables  decision-making  processes  to 
be  finalised  within  the  blockchain  system,  which  they 
consider to be formal, fair, and transparent, whereas off-chain 
governance  finalises  decision-making  away  from 
the 
blockchain system and this is considered informal and hidden 
most of the time [3].  

the 
Blockchain-enabled  supply  chains  are  one  of 
promising  areas  of  blockchain  application  beyond  the 
financial sector [5]. While various proof-of-concept work and 
use  cases  have  been  reported  to  develop  blockchain-based 
supply  chains,  especially  for  supply  chain  traceability, 
current research focuses on using on-chain governance rules 

developed  for  cryptocurrency  blockchains  to  store  critical 
data  points  [6].  The  application  of  blockchain  to  a  multi-
stakeholder supply chain can generate a large amount of data 
and  accordingly  increase  the  cost  of  data  storage  [7].  This 
creates  demand  for  more  cost-effective  off-chain  data 
storage. However, a proper disclosure of off-chain decision-
making processes is often still lacking, which can jeopardise 
data  transparency,  compliance  and  integrity  expectations. 
This paper reports ongoing research, which seeks to address 
integrated  data 
this  research  gap  by  developing  an 
governance  framework  that  coordinates  stakeholders  with 
inter-linked  on-chain  and  off-chain  supply  chain  data.  It 
enables  users  to  disclose  on-chain  and  off-chain  rules  and 
decision-making  processes  to  the  wider  community  via  the 
Smart Trade  Network  (STN),  which is a  proof  of authority 
Ethereum Virtual Machine compatible blockchain network. 

Following  this  introduction  section,  we  review  related 
work  on  blockchain  governance, and  data  transparency  and 
integrity (II). This is followed by the description of our work-
in-progress of an integrated data governance framework (III) 
before  presenting  the  pilot  use  case  implementation  and 
evaluation results. We conclude with our learnings from our 
pilot use case and suggest future research areas. 

II.  RELATED LITERATURE 

A.  Blockchain Governance 

typically  employ  mechanisms 

Blockchain governance is a novel and complex issue as it 
deals with the coordination between human involvement and 
the  automation  of  decision-making  processes  [4],  [8].  The 
discussion of governance mechanisms in blockchain systems 
generally  distinguishes  between  on-chain  and  off-chain 
governance [3]. Whether implementing on-chain or off-chain 
models,  both 
to  make 
consensual decisions on data updates and validation. Various 
on-chain consensus mechanisms with a type of “proof,” e.g., 
“proof of work,” “proof of stake,” “proof-of-authority” and 
other proofs have been developed for blockchain systems [9], 
[10].  The  literature  has  emphasised  the  advantages  of  on-
chain governance. However, they were largely developed to 
safeguard against (e.g.) Byzantine Fault Tolerance and Sybil 
Attacks [11] and each consensus mechanism is more suitable 
in a specific circumstance and less suitable in others due their 
own sets of risks and drawbacks [12]. Obviously, current on-
chain governance mechanisms are not perfect for organising 
and  safeguarding  each  stage  of  the  supply  chain  against 
errors,  fraud,  and  hardware  failure  in  multi-stakeholder 
supply chains [9], [13]. Furthermore, as noted by De Filippi 

 
 
 
 
two  typical  examples 

and  Mcmullen  [8],  on-chain  governance  mechanisms  have 
formal and rigid coding structures that restrict their flexibility 
to  enable  the  system  to  react  to  unforeseen  circumstances 
quickly and smoothly. Differently, off-chain governance has 
relatively  informal  and  unstructured  formats  [8]  and  can 
complement  the  weakness  of  on-chain  governance.  Bitcoin 
that  use  a 
and  Ethereum  are 
combination  of  offline  coordination  and  online  code 
modifications to implement update changes. However, they 
are criticised for allowing miners and developers to play the 
role  in  coordinating  and  achieving  consensus  between 
stakeholders  in  off-chain  governance  [14].  Therefore,  an 
integrated  on-chain  and  off-chain  governance  mechanism 
needs to be developed with stakeholders in ways that not only 
maintain  the  transparency  and  efficiency  of  on-chain 
governance rules, but also have the capability to balance the 
different needs and interests of stakeholders. Our study aims 
to  develop  and  test  an  integrated  blockchain  governance 
model to coordinate on-chain and off-chain mechanisms for 
blockchain-based supply chains.  

B.  Transparency and Integrity 

therefore  prompts 

Transparency and integrity are two key concepts related 
to  trust  [15],  [16]  in  multi-tier  supply  chains  that  involve 
interdependent  actors  from  production  to  consumption. 
Supply  chain  transparency  refers  to  the  disclosure  of 
information  to  supply  chain  stakeholders  about  an  agent’s 
operations  and  how  products  are  distributed  to  consumers 
[17].  Differently,  supply  chain integrity  refers  to adherence 
to good practice of being honest in supply chain activities and 
showing  a  consistent  dedication  to  maintaining  integrity  in 
supply  chain  processes  and  flows  [18].  Though  they  are 
different concepts, supply chain transparency is regarded as a 
prerequisite  to  supply  chain  integrity.  This  is  supported  by 
Stohl et al. [19] who argued that the transparency of decision 
processes  and  behaviours  to  others  could  force  actors  and 
companies to behave with integrity because of accountability. 
A transparent supply chain requires information disclosure to 
supply  chain  stakeholders  and 
the 
collection and sharing of relevant information. At root, it is 
about reducing the extent of information asymmetry [2], [13]. 
Technology plays a role in addressing these issues. However, 
companies  are  worried  about  their  private  and  confidential 
information [17]. Blockchain technology has its transparent, 
immutable,  secure,  and  decentralised  attributes  and  has  the 
potential  to  address  these  issues.  Recent  research  has 
explored the role of blockchain technology on supply chain 
transparency. Sunny et al. [20] found that better supply chain 
transparency  can  be  achieved  through  blockchain-based 
traceability. Rao et al. [21] reported that blockchain plays an 
important role in improving supply chain transparency from 
two  serialised  data  projects.  Blockchain  can  also  improve 
the integrity of data with  immutable  ledgers  that  effectively 
prohibits the alteration  or deletion  of  recorded  information. 
integrity  and 
This  allows  data  users 
authenticity. However, blockchain does not safeguard against 
intentional efforts to upload false and corrupted data, nor does 
it guarantee against unintentional error [13], [20]. Therefore, 
there is a need for transparency in decision-making processes 
on data entry and validation to ensure supply chain integrity, 
which is the focus of this paper. 

to  verify  data 

III.  AN INTEGRATED GOVERNANCE FRAMEWORK 

This paper proposes an integrated approach that enables 
the interaction between on-chain and off-governance, which 
leads to an integrated data governance framework as shown 
in Figure 1. The framework not only provides a way to ensure 
the transparency and efficiency of off-chain governance rules 
but  also  supports  the  achievement  of flexibility  in on-chain 
and  off-chain  governance.  Both  on-chain  and  off-chain 
governance  are  achieved  through  multi-sig  smart  contracts 
deployed  on  the  STN  network  that  can  interact  with  the 
Ethereum  Mainnet  and  Polygon/Matic  network.  The 
Polygon/Matic  network  is  a  scaling  blockchain  framework 
for  developing  Ethereum-compatible  blockchain  networks 
[22]. The off-chain governance leverages the smart contract 
created  on  the  Polygon/Matic  network  to  ensure  the 
transparency  of  consensus-based  decision-making  in  off-
chain governance so as to improve supply chain transparency 
and integrity.  Although these  smart  contracts  could  also  be 
deployed on the STN network itself, we chose to deploy these 
off-chain governance support functions on the Matic network 
to  explore  its  bridging  functions  to  the  Ethereum  mainnet, 
enabling users to move tokens from one to the other, as well 
as the impact of variable transaction costs when the multisig 
governance  contracts  are  deployed  and  executed.  The  STN 
network, by way of contract, does not have ‘variable’ fees per 
se,  which  makes  it  more  suitable  for  stable  cost-based 
business case development for industry application. 

Fig. 1.  An integrated data governance architecture for blockchain-based 
supply chains 

A.  On-chain Governance Mechanism 

The on-chain governance approach deployed on the STN 
network uses the primary multisig protocol built on top of the 
Ethereum Virtual Machine compatible blockchain. Multisig 
wallets are implemented as a      smart contract to validate the 
data state updates and storage when data points are proposed 
on  the  network  for  validation  following  the  pre-defined 
multisig  protocol.  The  on-chain  consensus  protocol 
implemented by the multisig smart contract defines the rules, 
including the signatory group, the number of signatories and 
the process of validation, for writing data to the blockchain 
and  validating  data  in  the  context  of  a  multi-stakeholder 
supply  chain  [2].  The  on-chain  consensus  protocol  also 
defines the rights and obligations of each group member in 
creating  and  joining  a  signatory  group  to  propose  and 
accept/reject changes to the on-chain consensus protocol. The 
on-chain consensus protocol is being resolved using multisig 
“voting”  on  the  Polygon/Matic  network  with  a  dedicated 
multisig mechanism.      

 
B.  Off-chain Governance Mechanism 

The  off-chain  governance  is  also  deployed  on  the  STN 
network  but  using  secondary  multi-sig  protocols  on 
the Polygon/Matic network,  which  offers  a  higher  level  of 
transparency  of  off-chain  decision-making  processes 
compared  with  traditional  informal  and  unstructured  off-
chain  governance  [8].  Our  proposed  off-chain  governance 
approach is also embedded with the multisig smart contract 
function to ensure transparent consensus vis-a-vis transaction 
information.  The  multisig  smart  contract  built  on  the 
Polygon/Matic network not only identifies the users who are 
involved  in finalising  transaction  rules  and  policies  but can 
for  example  also  record  the  process  of  how  users  agree  on 
which  data  need  to  be  validated  and  stored  on  the  STN 
blockchain.  This  improves  the  transparency  of  off-chain 
off-chain 
decision-making 
governance approach interacts with on-chain governance that 
equips the on-chain governance with flexible capability to be 
responsive to unforeseen circumstances.  

processes. 

Further, 

the 

IV.  PROOF OF CONCEPT DESIGN AND 
IMPLEMENTATION 

This section reports the design architecture of the Proof-
of-Concept  (PoC)  and  its  implementation  in  an  Australian 
beef  supply  chain.  The  on-chain  governance  mechanism  is 
designed  with  the  multisig  smart  contract  user  interface  on 
the  STN  Blockchain that  enables  supply chain actors to  set 
on-chain 
transaction  rules.  The  off-chain  governance 
mechanism  is  built  with  the  multisig  smart  contract  user 
interface  on  the  Polygon/Matic network  that  allows  supply 
chain members to finalise off-chain rules. While on-chain and 
off-chain  PoCs  are  built  on  different  blockchain  networks, 
they  are 
linked  by  MetaMask  and  designed  with 
compatibility on the STN network. 

A.  PoC for On-chain Governance 

The proof of concept for on-chain governance was built 
to track data about cattle which were registered on farms and 
whose  subsequent  changes  of  state  were  measured  with 
transactions confirmed via a multisig smart contract protocol 
to ensure  data  integrity at  the  entry  point.  Fig.  2  shows  the 
developed user interface for implementing on-chain multisig 
protocol.  The  smart  contract  was  built  as  multisig  wallets, 
which allows users to propose and agree to data state updates. 
Users can use the interface to set contracts, add and remove 
signature  group  members  as  well  as  change  signing 
requirements. This user interface also allows users to check 
approved and pending transactions.  

Fig. 3 gives a view of the data and cattle assets that are 
registered and measured by supply chain members within the 
system, which can offer a better understanding of how data is 
captured and presented in this PoC use case after applying the 
multisig smart contract protocol.  

Fig. 3.  Data  and  cattle  asset  views  generated  from  on-chain  multisig 
protocol 

B.  PoC for Off-chain Governance 

The proof of concept for off-chain governance was built 
to  track  decision-making  processes  in  finalising  rules  and 
policies that are used to establish the protocols to govern on-
chain transactions and  off-chain  storage.  A  simplified  view 
of  the  designed  user  interface  for  implementing  off-chain 
multisig protocol is shown in Fig. 3. The smart contract was 
built  with  STNBI  Wallets  on  the  Polygon/Matic network, 
which allows supply chain members to propose and agree on 
transaction governance rules. Supply chain members can use 
the  interface  to  set  multisig  names,  add/remove  signers, 
change multisig requirements, transfer and mint tokens.  

Fig. 4.  User interface for off-chain multisig protocol 

The application of our proposed off-chain governance on 
the  Polygon  /Matic  network  is  demonstrated  with  an 
illustrative  use  case.  Fig.  5  shows  the  history  of  decision-
making processes in finalising governance rules and policies 
within  the  system.  Guided  by  the  multisig  smart  contract 
protocol, 
the  decision-making  process  of  off-chain 
governance rules and policies is recorded and disclosed with 
critical 
actions, 
including 
participants,  confirmation,  and  description  of  activities.  It 
offers  a  higher  level  of  transparency  of  off-chain  decision-
making processes in this PoC use case.  

information, 

destination, 

Fig. 2.  User interface for on-chain multisig protocol 

Fig. 5.  User interface for off-chain multisig protocol 

 
 
 
 
V.  CONCLUSION 

This  paper  presents  an  integrated  data  governance 
framework that leverages multisig smart contracts in both on-
chain  and  off-chain  governance  mechanisms  to  improve 
supply chain transparency and integrity from the data point 
of  view.  This  paper  furthers  the  conversation  about  the 
integration of on-chain and off-chain blockchain governance, 
especially  the  disclosure  of  off-chain  decision-making 
processes  on  data  governance,  to  strengthen  supply  chain 
transparency  and  integrity.  We  explore  the  applicability  of 
for 
our 
practical implementation  with  the  proof-of-concept  design 
and implementation.  

governance 

integrated 

approach 

data 

While  our  study  is  still  work-in-progress,  it  makes  both 
technical 
theoretical  contributions.  The 
technical  and 
contributions  include  the  development  of  multisig  smart 
contracts  and  the  development  of  a  compatible  network  to 
accommodate  two  different  blockchain  networks  for  an 
integrated on-chain and off-chain governance approach. This 
paper also advances blockchain governance for supply chain 
transparency  and  integrity  management  from  a  theoretical 
point of view.  

Our  current  design  and  proof-of-work  bridges  two 
different  blockchain  networks  for  on-chain  and  off-chain 
integration  using  MetaMask,  which  is one  of  the areas that 
need further investigation. Our further research will focus on 
cross-chain  interoperability  and  design  and  evaluate  cross-
that  can  enable  more  effective 
chain  architecture 
communications  between 
independent 
blockchain  networks  and  consider  the  potential  trade-off 
between 
practical 
implementation  with  supply  chain  stakeholders  will  be 
included in the next stage of the project. 

two  or  more 

security.  The 

efficiencies 

and 

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

The authors thank our study participants, project partners, 
and  additional  team  members  working  on  the  larger  Smart 
Trade Networks program of research, including Assoc. Prof. 
Felicity  Deane  and  Santiago  Del  Valle.  This  project  was 
supported  by  funding  from  the  Future  Food  Systems  CRC 
Ltd,  funded  under  the  Commonwealth  Government  CRC 
industry-led 
Program.  The  CRC  Program 
collaborations  between 
the 
community. 

supports 
industry,  researchers,  and 

REFERENCES 

[1]  H. Treiblmaier, “Toward More Rigorous Blockchain Research: 

Recommendations for Writing Blockchain Case Studies,” Frontiers in 
Blockchain, vol. 2. 2019. doi: 10.3389/fbloc.2019.00003. 

[2]  W. Powell et al., “From premise to practice of social consensus: How 

to agree on common knowledge in blockchain-enabled supply chains,” 
Computer Networks, vol. 200, p. 108536, Dec. 2021. 

[3]  A. Fischer and M.-C. Valiente, “Blockchain governance,” Internet 

Pol. Rev., vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 1–10, Apr. 2021. 

[4]  W. Reijers et al., “Now the code runs itself: On-chain and off-chain 
governance of blockchain technologies,” Topoi, pp. 1–11, 2018. 
[5]  S. Jabbar, H. Lloyd, M. Hammoudeh, B. Adebisi, and U. Raza, 

“Blockchain-enabled supply chain: analysis, challenges, and future 
directions,” Multimedia Systems, vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 787–806, Aug. 
2021. 

[6]  Y. P. Tsang, K. L. Choy, C. H. Wu, G. T. S. Ho, and H. Y. Lam, 

“Blockchain-Driven IoT for Food Traceability With an Integrated 
Consensus Mechanism,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 129000–129017, 
2019. 

[7]  S. K. Singh, M. Jenamani, D. Dasgupta, and S. Das, “A conceptual 
model for Indian public distribution system using consortium 
blockchain with on-chain and off-chain trusted data,” Information 
Technology for Development, vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 499–523, Jul. 2021. 
[8]  P. de Filippi and G. Mcmullen, “Governance of blockchain systems: 
Governance of and by Distributed Infrastructure,” Feb. 22, 2019. 
https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-02046787/document (accessed 
Aug. 20, 2020). 

[9]  A. Litke, D. Anagnostopoulos, and T. Varvarigou, “Blockchains for 
Supply Chain Management: Architectural Elements and Challenges 
Towards a Global Scale Deployment,” Logistics, vol. 3, no. 1, p. 5, 
Jan. 2019. 

[10] A. Zwitter and J. Hazenberg, “Decentralized Network Governance: 
Blockchain Technology and the Future of Regulation,” Frontiers in 
Blockchain, vol. 3, p. 12, 2020. 

[11] R. Mercer, “Privacy on the Blockchain: Unique Ring Signatures,” 

arXiv [cs.CR], Dec. 04, 2016. [Online]. Available: 
http://arxiv.org/abs/1612.01188 

[12] M. Andoni et al., “Blockchain technology in the energy sector: A 

systematic review of challenges and opportunities,” Renewable 
Sustainable Energy Rev., vol. 100, pp. 143–174, Feb. 2019. 

[13] W. Powell, M. Foth, S. Cao, and V. Natanelov, “Garbage In Garbage 

Out: The Precarious Link between IoT and Blockchain in Food Supply 
Chains,” Journal of Industrial Information Integration, p. 100261, 
Aug. 2021. 

[14] J. Frankenfield, “On-Chain Governance,” Oct. 25, 2021. 

https://www.investopedia.com/terms/o/onchain-governance.asp 
(accessed Aug. 20, 2020). 

[15] S. Cao, W. Powell, M. Foth, V. Natanelov, T. Miller, and U. Dulleck, 
“Strengthening consumer trust in beef supply chain traceability with a 
blockchain-based human-machine reconcile mechanism,” Comput. 
Electron. Agric., vol. 180, p. 105886, 2021. 

[16] W. Powell, S. Cao, M. Foth, S. He, C. Turner-Morris, and M. Li, 
“Revisiting trust in supply chains: How does blockchain redefine 
trust?,” B. Abdelaziz, I. Khalil, and B. Aouni, Eds. Basingstoke, 
United Kingdom: Springer, 2021. 

[17] M. S. Sodhi and C. S. Tang, “Research opportunities in supply chain 
transparency,” Prod. Oper. Manag., vol. 28, no. 12, pp. 2946–2959, 
Dec. 2019. 

[18] V. E. Castillo, D. A. Mollenkopf, J. E. Bell, and H. Bozdogan, 
“Supply chain integrity: A key to sustainable supply chain 
management,” J. Bus. Logist., vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 38–56, Mar. 2018. 

[19] C. Stohl, M. Stohl, and P. M. Leonardi, “Digital age | managing 

opacity: Information visibility and the paradox of transparency in the 
digital age,” Int. J. Commun. Syst., vol. 10, no. 0, p. 15, Jan. 2016. 
[20] J. Sunny, N. Undralla, and V. Madhusudanan Pillai, “Supply chain 

transparency through blockchain-based traceability: An overview with 
demonstration,” Comput. Ind. Eng., vol. 150, p. 106895, Dec. 2020. 

[21] S. Rao, A. Gulley, M. Russell, and J. Patton, “On the quest for supply 
chain transparency through Blockchain: Lessons learned from two 
serialized data projects,” J. Bus. Logist., vol. 42, no. 1, pp. 88–100, 
Mar. 2021. 

[22] D. Phillips, “What is Polygon (MATIC) and why it matters for 

Ethereum,” Decrypt, Mar. 11, 2021. https://decrypt.co/resources/what-
is-polygon-matic-and-why-it-matters-for-ethereum (accessed Oct. 22, 
2021). 

 
