1
2
0
2

v
o
N
8
2

]
I

N
.
s
c
[

1
v
8
1
0
4
1
.
1
1
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

How Can Applications of Blockchain and Artiﬁcial Intelligence Improve Performance
of Internet of Things? – A Survey

Priyanka Bothra

Department of Information Technology,

Techno International New Town, Kolkata, INDIA 700156

Raja Karmakar∗
Department of Electrical Engineering,

ETS, University of Quebec, Montreal, Canada

Sanjukta Bhattacharya

Department of Information Technology,
Techno International New Town, Kolkata, INDIA 700156

Sayantani De

Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Techno International New Town, Kolkata, INDIA 700156

Abstract

In the era of the Internet of Things (IoT), massive computing devices surrounding us operate and interact with each
other to provide several signiﬁcant services in industries, medical as well as in daily life activities at home, oﬃce, education
sectors, and so on. The participating devices in an IoT network usually have resource constraints and the devices are
prone to diﬀerent cyber attacks, leading to the loopholes in the security and authentication. As a revolutionized and
innovated technology, blockchain, that is applied in cryptocurrency, market prediction, etc., uses a distributed ledger that
records transactions securely and eﬃciently. To utilize the great potential of blockchain, both industries and academia
have paid a signiﬁcant attention to integrate it with the IoT, as reported by several existing literature. On the other
hand, Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) is able to embed intelligence in a system, and thus the AI can be integrated with
IoT devices in order to automatically cope with diﬀerent environments according to the demands. Furthermore, both
blockchain and AI can be integrated with the IoT to design an automated secure and robust IoT model, as mentioned
by numerous existing works. In this survey, we present a discussion on the IoT, blockchain, and AI, along with the
descriptions of several research works that apply blockchain and AI in the IoT. In this direction, we point out strengths
and limitations of the related existing researches. We also discuss diﬀerent open challenges to exploit the full capacities
of blockchain and AI in designing an IoT-based model. Therefore, the highlighted challenging issues can open the door
for the development of future IoT models which will be intelligent and secure based on the integration of blockchain and
AI with the IoT.

Keywords:

Internet of Things; Blockchain; Artiﬁcial Intelligence

1. Introduction

The revolution of incorporating billions of varieties of
devices and digital information in real world [1] has been
brought by the Internet of Things (IoT). The IoT is a
fast developing ﬁeld in the history of computation, with

∗Corresponding author
Email addresses: priyankabothra1502@gmail.com (Priyanka

Bothra), raja.karmakar.1@ens.etsmtl.ca (Raja Karmakar),
sbhattacharya.tict@gmail.com (Sanjukta Bhattacharya),
sayantani.de@tict.edu.in (Sayantani De)

an estimation of 50 billion devices to be handled by the
IoT at the end of the year of 2020 [2]. The ‘things’ means
physical devices, such as vehicles, televisions, watches, ma-
chines, etc., which are connected to the Internet. The IoT
brings diﬀerent devices under an umbrella, where diﬀerent
functionalities are provided by the devices with the help
of inter-device communications. The things are connected
to sensors to sense the physical environment and perform
a communication with other things [3]. The things (or
devices) sense data to carry out any predeﬁned action by
monitoring the environment. Users access the devices with

Preprint submitted to Elsevier

November 30, 2021

 
 
 
 
 
 
the help of the Internet and are notiﬁed by the execution
of functions in the IoT; and accordingly, the users can take
action for controlling the environment. Therefore, all the
devices are connected together by using the Internet and
collectively perform a function or more than one function
to facilitate the use of collection of devices in order to
fulﬁll an objective [4]. The IoT can boost the growth of
manufacturing and productivity in traditional companies
(like transport, retail, etc.) and industries, by enhancing
the eﬃciency of the architectures and processing mecha-
nisms. The expansion of the IoT is booming in economics,
technology, education, healthcare, and so on. This growth
of the IoT leads to the revolution in the industry that is
know as Industry 4.0 [5].

Blockchain is an emerging Distributed Ledger Technol-
ogy (DLT) following a decentralized architecture, that al-
lows secure, immutable, and anonymous transactions [6, 7,
8, 9, 10, 11]. As reported in [8], the research in blockchain
requires a signiﬁcant eﬀort to develop new technologies
and methodologies in order to integrate blockchain with
other frameworks. Authors in [9] review the studies on
the blockchain, and highlight possible trends and chal-
lenges in the blockchain. The review [10] provides a com-
prehensive overview of existing researches on blockchain
along with the IoT, Industry 4.0, and Business Analytics.
The methodology discussed in [11] provides a blockchain
platform in the direction of solving enterprise issues. Ac-
cording to National Institute of Standards and Technol-
ogy (NIST), the blockchain technology provides a digi-
tal immutable ledger system that is implemented in dis-
tributed architectures (i.e., without any central repository
in the model) and without involving a central author-
ity [12]. Blockchain makes an eﬀective use of distributed
systems for diﬀerent types of application domains, such
as from a cryptocurrency system to an industrial system
that requires decentralized, trusted, robust, and making
automated decisions in diﬀerent multi-stakeholder situa-
tions [7, 12]. Blockchains help in issues created by third
parties in ﬁnancial transactions in the IoT, where the pri-
mary concerns are additional security risks and a lack of
anonymity for users [13]. Networking is a fundamental
technique that has a censorious role in designing and im-
plementing blockchain, where blocks are chained with hash
functions in order to impose privacy, security, and authen-
tication in transactions.

Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) facilitates the development
of intelligent systems by engaging Machine Learning (ML)
techniques [2, 14, 15]. An automated system reduces the
intervention of human beings and takes decisions quickly
based on the present situation. Thus, an intelligent sys-
tem overcomes errors which can be introduced by human
beings. The proper exploration and exploitation of the
full capability of AI in designing future wireless technolo-
gies, such as 6th generation (6G), are an exceptionally hot
research topic throughout the world [2]. AI ensures in-
telligent resource management through automatic adapta-
tion capabilities and powerful learning [16]. The authors

in [14] provide an extensive survey of AI considering in-
dustrial achievements and fundamental algorithms of AI.
The overview of the scope of AI is presented in [15] us-
ing diﬀerent applications, drivers, and technologies. The
work [17] highlights diﬀerent factors related to innovation
characteristics of AI with external environment and or-
ganizational capabilities. The survey [18] discusses the
current solutions and research challenges in the direction
of the application of ML for resource management in IoT
and cellular networks. In AI, machine learning techniques
study the training dataset for future inferences by consid-
ering that the future data will have the same probability
distribution or the identical feature space as the training
dataset [19].
In ML, there are primarily three types of
learning mechanisms – unsupervised, supervised, and re-
inforcement learning. Each of these learning approaches
has a speciﬁc ﬁeld of application, and therefore the appro-
priate ML algorithm needs to be exploited based on the
demand of the problem, in order to build an intelligent
model for solving the problem.

The IoT economy demands a way for devices and sen-
sors to perform monetary transactions for providing ser-
vices without the involvement of third parties (e.g., Peer-
to-Peer (P2P) and Machine-to-Machine (M2M)) [20]. More-
over, with the introduction of the ﬁfth generation (5G),
the exchanges and transactions in the IoT will primarily
require an internet-based network, where any payment or
billing system will need to be considered. In this direction,
blockchain is an eﬀective mechanism since it provides a
distributed ledger technology for allowing immutable and
anonymous transactions, by maintaining security, privacy,
authentication, trustworthy, tamper-proof, etc [13, 21, 7].
In addition, to store a massive volume of data generated
by the devices in the IoT, the cloud computing technology
can be used. Furthermore, to reduce the eﬀective response
time, the computation can be conducted in the edge in an
IoT architecture [22]. The work presented in [23] focuses
on the development of an IoT-based intelligent framework
to perform online control of the rate of pressure and ﬂow
in ﬂuid transportation systems. The association of digital
twin with the IoT can lead to the integration of the real
world and digital world, which will play the key role in
Industry 4.0 [24]. Due to the involvement of blockchain
along with cloud or edge in the IoT, the design complexity
is increased, where a huge volume of data needs to be han-
dled eﬃciently by minimizing the losses and ensuring the
security related constraints [25, 26, 27]. Additionally, with
the integration of billions of devices, the IoT has an objec-
tive to implement a communication between those devices
with a minimal human intervention [2, 28]. Therefore, AI
is an eﬀective choice to make smart systems that can in-
telligently interact with each other in IoT paradigms by
imposing smart access controls, where a massive volume
of data will be handled with a minimum loss and maximum
security. Hence, the performance of an IoT-based model
can be enriched by exploiting both blockchain and AI, fo-
cusing on achieving smart mechanisms to deal with high

2

data volume, adaptive communications and secured access
controls [29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 27, 15]. However,
in order to enrich IoT systems in future, a thorough study
of the impacts of using blockchain and AI on the perfor-
mance of the IoT is required to identify the challenges in
this domain.

Objective and Contributions of this Survey: Since
an IoT constructs the backbone for bringing and com-
municating several devices under a common architectural
model, the overall performance of the IoT needs to be
investigated after integrating it with blockchain and AI.
There are several existing research works, such as [37, 38,
39, 40, 41, 42, 43], and so on, which apply blockchain in
the IoT. The works like [28, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48] etc., make
intelligent IoT models by using AI. Both blockchain and
AI are exploited by several existing literature like [29, 30,
31, 32, 33, 27] etc., in order to design secure, distributed,
and smart IoT models. By considering such existing re-
lated research works, we present this survey to understand
the performance improvements and issues associated with
the integration of blockchain and AI with IoT systems.
Speciﬁcally, the contributions of the survey are mentioned
as follows:

• We study existing related works that deal with the
applications of blockchain and AI in the IoT. In order
to highlight the performance improvement of the IoT
due to the applications of blockchain and AI in the
IoT, we present an extensive discussion on the con-
tributions of existing works by categorizing the inte-
gration of the IoT with blockchain and AI in three
directions:

1. Integration of IoT with blockchain

2. Integration of IoT with AI, and

3. Integration of IoT with blockchain and AI.

• We highlight strengths and weaknesses of existing
works which integrate the IoT with blockchain and
AI. In this context, the discussion of such integration
is presented concentrating on several important pa-
rameters such as decentralization, security, privacy,
authentication, eﬃciency, robustness, etc.

• We discuss diﬀerent research challenges and future
research scopes in designing eﬀective IoT frameworks
integrating with the blockchain technology and AI,
which can lead to eﬃcient IoT models with a signif-
icant improvement of the performances of applica-
tions provided by the IoT.

Uniqueness of this Survey: To the best of our
knowledge, this survey is the ﬁrst in the direction of study-
ing the individual impacts of blockchain and AI, and their
collective impacts on the performance of the IoT. In addi-
tion, this survey identiﬁes the research challenges and fu-
ture research directions, considering the integration of the
IoT with the blockchain technology and AI mechanisms.

3

Figure 1: General applications of IoT

Organization of this Survey: The rest of this sur-
vey is organized as follows. In § 2, we present descriptions
on the IoT, blockchain, and AI. § 3 discusses existing lit-
erature that apply blockchain in IoT frameworks. In § 4,
we highlight existing research works that integrate IoT and
AI. § 5 presents a detailed discussion of existing researches
that consider the integration of both blockchain and AI
with IoT architectures. In the applications of blockchain
and AI in the IoT, diﬀerent research challenges and future
research directions are discussed in § 6. Finally, we present
the conclusion of the survey in § 7.

2. IoT, Blockchain and AI: A Generic Description

In this section, we present descriptions of the IoT,
blockchain, and AI, along with their ﬁelds of applications.

2.1. Internet of Things

The IoT is the latest technology evolving to connect
heterogeneous devices for communication. The IoT is known
as a growing technology through which anything can be
communicated and connected to each other anywhere and
anytime. The IoT deﬁnes an environment where com-
puting and communication systems are embedded to each
other to achieve speciﬁed goals by interchanging and col-
lecting data. The IoT technology refers to a scenario where
sensors, computation ability, and network are integrated
with each other to consume, generate, and exchange data
with a minor or without human interference. The genera-
tion of advanced technological age is possible using the IoT
where things in real world are enabled using various appli-
cations. The IoT is also able to provide a network-based
environment where sharing of information, handling of re-
sources and storage, properly organization of data, etc.,
can be done quickly and eﬃciently [49]. This environment
can be distributed in any of IoT-based applications areas.

2.1.1. Diﬀerent Applications in IoT

The IoT provides a variety of applications in diﬀerent
segments of daily life. The bunch of applications is gen-
erally recognized as Cyber Physical System (CPS) which

includes smart city, smart transportation, smart educa-
tion, smart industry, smart healthcare, smart agriculture,
smart security, etc., as shown in Fig. 1. The major appli-
cations of the IoT are discussed as follows [3].

• Assisted Driving in one of the segment where advan-

tages of the IoT are clearly visible.

• In social networking segment, the location tracking
in real time honestly provides various activities of
users.

• Another application is mobile ticketing where Near
Field Communication (NFC) tag is coupled with mo-
bile phones. Various transport related information in
the NFC tag is retrieved automatically using mobile
phones and transferred to users for satisfying their
queries.

• In oﬃces and homes, diﬀerent sensors are deployed
for various purposes such as temperature control or
alarm systems, etc.

• To save the valuable products from any types of
losses and thefts, the precious products are tagged
using the IoT such that, it can be identiﬁed and re-
trieved immediately after any of its displacement.

• In the development of a smart city, each citizen can
be facilitated using a smart infrastructure to safely
enjoy a reliable, secure, and autonomous lifestyle.

• Software Deﬁned Internet of Things (SDIoT) is an-
other advanced feather of the IoT, which is used
to eﬃciently manage smart city infrastructure pro-
viding security, fault-tolerance, reliability, latency,
versatile innovation, interoperability within diﬀerent
devices, circulation of traﬃc data on various devices,
etc.

• Intelligent and automated management is used to
securely control road traﬃc. Diﬀerent sensors and
microcontrollers, such as Arduino microcontroller,
proximity sensor, etc., are used for the detection of
vehicles in a crowded area and also for the prediction
of the excess time [4]. The IoT introduces Vehicle Ad
hoc Network (VANET) which combines the wireless
technology and automobile infrastructure.

• The application of the IoT in Healthcare sector is
gaining popularity day by day. The continuous mon-
itoring of the patients who are suﬀering from criti-
cal and rare diseases is absolutely necessary for their
proper diagnosis. The IoT provides an optimum level
of facility which is truly beneﬁcial for both health-
care providers and patients. Emergency alerts or
services are implemented using edge computing or
fog computing, and Wireless Body Area Network
(WBAN) in real time environments.

2.1.2. Architecture of IoT

The architecture of the IoT focuses on some factors
such as reliability, Quality of Service (QoS), integrity, and
conﬁdentiality. This architecture is also deﬁned as a lay-
ered architecture known as perception, network, middle-
ware, application, and business layers. All the service
managements related to IoT applications are handled by
the business layer. Diﬀerent types of IoT oriented appli-
cations, such as smart city, are managed by the applica-
tion layer. The middleware layer is responsible to store all
the information which generally comes from lower layers.
The function of the network layer is to securely store all
the conﬁdential information which comes from various sen-
sors, and also propagate information to the upper layers.
The lowest level layer which is deﬁned as the perception
layer incorporates with diﬀerent sensor devices, such as
ZigBee, Radio-Frequency Identiﬁcation (RFID), etc., and
the lowest layer is also responsible to collect the required
information from the sensor devices.

2.1.3. Protocols in IoT

Protocols are also crucial factors in the IoT-based in-
frastructure for the interaction between IoT gateways. Some
protocols are commonly used, such as Constrained Appli-
cation Protocol (CoAP), which are used for constrained
nodes and networks, and they are deﬁned as web transfer
protocols. Another protocol, Message Queuing Telemetry
Transport (MQTT), which is known as client server mes-
saging protocol, is also used to provide ordered lossless
connections [50].

Another protocol, known as Advanced Message Queu-
ing Protocol (AMQP), is responsible for message routing,
message orientation, and message security mainly in the
application layer. Extensible Messaging and Presence Pro-
tocol (XMPP) is also an important protocol which is ac-
countable for various real time applications. Several secu-
rity measures are associated with the IoT architecture and
these security measures are achieved using several tech-
nologies, such as ZigBee, which provide the reliable com-
munication, a minimum cost low power, etc. It is a two-
way wireless personal area network (PAN) concept which is
applicable for short range applications. Bluetooth is used
for radio frequency communication for the short range.
WiFi allows the internet in the shape of radio frequency.
WiFi consists of several security modes which are respon-
sible for ﬁltering of protocols, assigning of IP addresses,
WiFi-based security, ﬁltering of MAC addresses, Shield
Service Set Identiﬁer (SSID), etc. Taxonomy of the IoT
security and privacy is illustrated in Fig. 2.

2.2. Blockchain

Blockchain elevates the developments of Industrial world.

It has designed and processed new business models which
were impossible to shape few years ago. Blockchain se-
cured many segments, like ﬁnance, healthcare, manufac-
turing, etc., through the eﬀect of current business mod-
In organizations, the business, individuals, software
els.

4

Figure 2: Taxonomy of IoT security and privacy

agents, and a group of users are supported by many meth-
ods of blockchain for sharing secure records and trans-
actions among them. Blockchain strengthens a group of
individuals to make a settlement on a deﬁnite activity and
this settled activity can also be registered, secured, shared,
traced, tracked, and measured through blockchain. This
agreed activity may be a payment deal, purchase activ-
ity, and medical lab-tests for a patient, voting activity,
and contract agreement or it may be the supply chain of
the process of planning, implementing, controlling, stor-
age, services, and consumption of goods. As a technology,
blockchain unites the beneﬁts of both equal-level networks
and the ordered steps of mathematical problems of the con-
ﬁdentiality of messages, integrity of messages, sender au-
thentication, and assurances to make sure the reliability of
the managed agreements. Agreed, approved, and recorded
activity cannot be changed by any particular participant
without connecting others. Blockchain can assure the state
of error free, arranged functions over time. Connecting
strongly two or more entities to register an agreement se-
curely of deﬁnite tasks without knowing each other is one
of the main characteristics of blockchain. This agreement
cannot be recreated or removed by anyone in that group.
But, they can only review the previous transactions eas-
ily without removing and modifying it. Activities can be
easily recorded and preserved securely through blockchain
by a group of people or organizations [51]. Moreover, the
process of maintenance of blockchain makes an unchanged
history of activities of a group’s members. The process,

known as ’mining’, is used to authenticate and to grow
dependency of the supervised agreements which are at-
tached in the chain. Many industrial applications take sup-
port the internet transactions of blockchain. Blockchain is
a developing technology which was previously created in
Bitcoin area. But nowadays blockchain is applicable in
multiple sectors by its secure and updated structure.

Blockchain technologies can be utilized in distinct sets
of applications which are shown in Fig. 3. Blockchain
technology can ﬁnd remedies in multiple sectors like vot-
ing, healthcare, supply chain, identity management, en-
ergy resources, governance, etc. Diﬀerent applications of
blockchain are as follows.

• Blockchain can be served in healthcares by its ability
to identify and measure of drugs and patients’ data.
In the pharmaceutical industry, inauthentication is
one of the vital problem. By the Health Research
Funding Organizations report, it was disclosed that
10% to 30% of the medicines have sold in the eco-
nomically advanced countries. World Health Orga-
nization (WHO) evaluated that 16% of drugs have
improper mixture of substances and 17% of drugs are
comprised inexact level of necessary ingredients. So,
these kind of medicines can be harmful to patients
and will not cure them from diseases, rather they
cause fatality. All these major issues can be directed
towards workable solutions by blockchain technol-
ogy because all the data and time of the agreements

5

companies. Furthermore, blockchain empowers the
insurance industry to globally increase the produc-
tivity.

• Blockchain technology can be an eﬀective system for
protecting the online identiﬁcation. This technol-
ogy can assure to save an individual’s identity infor-
mation from being theft and dishonest activities, by
generating a updated technical platform.

• The updated implementation of blockchain technol-
ogy can able to speed up and secure the procedure
of documentation in the trade ﬁnance in an assuring
manner.

In blockchain, the digital signature which is achieved
using cryptography of private key is an important part
to initiate a transaction. In blockchain networks, trans-
actions are used to transfer digital assets within peers.
These peers are responsible for choosing and validating
the transactions. After the proper veriﬁcation and valida-
tion procedure, one transaction is inserted in a block that
is created by the miner node. The miner node has the
ability to create a new block only when it can solve ﬁrst
a computational puzzle. After creating a new block in the
network, it must be veriﬁed by all other peers and after
that, it will be joined in existing chain. At this moment,
transactions are speciﬁed as conﬁrmed [53].

Two types of transactions are commonly used in blockchain:

(i) Bitcoin transaction and (ii) Ethereum transaction. Bit-
coin is a conﬁdential, authentic, and integrated digital cur-
rency, which is performed over an accessible, public, and
unidentiﬁed blockchain networks.
In case of Ethereum
transactions, it has suﬃcient ﬁelds to transfer ether (trans-
ferable amount) and messages which are beneﬁcial to prop-
erly trigger the contracts. Blockchain is the basic tech-
nology of a number of digital currency based on a cryp-
tographic system. Chain of blocks can save information
with digital indication in distributed and allocated net-
works. Dissolution, constancy, clarity, and the power of
examining ability of blockchain characteristics build the
transactions more protected and strongly unchangeable.
Blockchain technology can be applied in various segments,
such as healthcare, energy industry, stock market, vot-
ing, insurance, identity management, trade ﬁnance, so-
cial services, etc., to make feasible solutions in a secure
manner [54]. Although blockchain-based remedies become
popular for diﬀerent business sectors, there are many im-
plementations of blockchain, which need more analysis and
improvement. Moreover, functions of blockchain need to
remove the errors fast to develop more fruitful, eﬀective,
protected, and appealing form of blockchain technology in
the long run.

Figure 3: Generic applications of blockchain

are recorded to the developed register, which can
observe data and make information unchangeable.
Blockchain can grow a better system to maintain
the previous and present data of patients in a secure
manner.

• The implementation of blockchain technology is as-
sociated with the energy industry through the ma-
jor uses of microgrids. Blockchain can make easier
to record and verify the power selling and buying
deal in the small power supply grid containing a dis-
tributed generation of electricity. Moreover, energy
related applications of blockchain have the capabil-
ity to lower energy costs and to resume functional-
ity [52].

• Through demoralization and automatic technology,
blockchain could be most appropriate in the stock
exchange. Blockchain can lower costs by demolish-
ing source of intermediaries and accelerating transac-
tion agreements. Furthermore, blockchain technol-
ogy can oﬀer possible uses in clearing and settlement
of a transaction by easing repetitions of paper works
in the business. Blockchain technology overcomes
the need of third-party regulators in transactions.

• Blockchain can solve the distrustfulness in the seg-
ment of voting by providing a developed record to
assure the countability of voters.

• Blockchain technology can reduce administration costs
in the insurance sector by the arrangement, pur-
chase, submission, claims, and record of insurance
policies between clients, policy holders, and diﬀerent

2.3. Artiﬁcial Intelligence

In the modern world, artiﬁcial intelligence is one of
the prominent and rising technology, which can ease the

6

tasks of human beings to complete the tasks eﬃciently
and eﬀortlessly. A person can use his intellect and cre-
ative mind through the performances of artiﬁcial intelli-
gence which is the property of machines, computer pro-
grams, and systems. Artiﬁcial intelligence is often useful
to ﬁnd ways in problem solving and decision making in-
dependently. Learning, thinking, planning, and ability of
taking actions independently are the fruitful outcomes of
recent researches in AI. Some researches make conclusions
that AI is wittier than human beings. On the contrary,
some of the other researches criticize its functional ability
and intelligence level in comparison with human brains.
But large number of researches are involved to explore the
possibilities of multiple capacities of AI in future. In recent
times, AI is becoming one of the highest place of interests
among the community of researchers [55]. Many successful
researches in AI already revealed the various ways to apply
it in solving problems easily associated with software en-
gineering processes. By observing the rapid developments
of AI in yesteryears, we all are hopeful for the positive rev-
olutionary outcomes of researches to take digitalization on
the top of the success history.

Artiﬁcial intelligence is introduced in various ways by
many authors through multiple subjects and their scien-
‘Thinking abil-
tiﬁc implementations in diﬀerent times.
ity’ is the common element among all the ﬁelds of AI.
The term ‘intelligence’ is actually the combination of the
way of thinking, acquiring knowledge, and ability to im-
plement in order to solve a given problem, as per require-
ments. AI achieves the capabilities and limitations of hu-
man beings in many tasks that were tough to be unable
to accomplish in earlier times. Advancements in AI were
achieved due to the increase of valid information, better-
ment in hardware, and the progress in the designs and
operations of systems, which were planned precisely in or-
dered steps for the computational procedure. Nowadays,
developers and researchers are allowed to code and test
models fast by high quality open-source libraries which are
the fruitful outcomes of advancements of AI [56]. Although
some applications based on AI disappointed for their trust-
related problems, developments in speech recognition, ob-
ject detection, and many more have successfully led to
their enlargement and ﬁltration to the real-world applica-
tions, mostly in supervised learning by the rising perfor-
mance of AI. Although the progress in the development of
AI is increasing, there are lot of challenges that need to be
overcomed to control the improvement in the applications
of AI. Lot of questions and doubts have been arised repeat-
edly about the implementations and fruitful outcomes of
AI because of distrustful results and unreliability in multi-
ple segments like vision models, visual recognition, Natural
Language Processing (NLP), etc. To protect future soci-
ety, these hazards should be addressed fast [57]. Although
recent researches of deep learning have been performed no-
ticeably, there are lot of darknesses in the area of improve-
ments. There are various methods in AI, which are used by
their applications in software engineering associated with

7

Figure 4: Working principle of AI

software development processes, for solving problems. Al-
though lot of researches already drew the conclusions that
AI is notably diﬃcult course to experiment through teach-
ing, learning, and execution, the current improvements of
AI can make the incompetent functions of many software
products less severe.

Applications of AI are:

• GPS navigations

• Customer services, ﬁnance, sales, and marketing

• Military applications

• Medicinal applications

• Space applications

• Industrial applications

• Telecommunication applications

An example of working principle of AI is shown in Fig. 4.
Lot of researches revealed that AI can achieve remarkable
discoveries in future [58]. Continuous improvements of AI
will provide multiple options to make human life more eas-
ier. Although AI could not be 100% reliable for human
beings because of its executional errors in several times,
AI is continuing its development consistently to provide
accurate outcomes of its performances.

3. Integration of IoT with Blockchain

In this section, diﬀerent uses of blockchain in IoT are
presented in details. Tables 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 14, 15, 16, and 17
highlight the strengths and weaknesses of the related re-
search works which consider the integration of the IoT
with blockchain in diﬀerent perspectives such as decentral-
ization, safety, security, privacy, authentication, tamper-
proof, robustness, etc.

3.1. Decentralization

The IoT system along with blockchain is used in [59]
to reduce accidents and improve traﬃc conditions by us-
ing decentralized peer-to-peer communication instead of
cloud-based centralized system, so that data can be trans-
mitted eﬃciently. Conﬁdentiality, integrity, and availabil-
ity of data are ensured by using blockchain which also
makes external attacks negligible since users communicate
and self-execute automatically. However, there are some
vulnerabilities including power consumption and excessive
overload of the network throughput, which are not taken
into consideration in [59]. In [60], it is observed that decen-
tralized ledger technology is based on various cryptocur-
rencies such as bitcoin and Ethereum. Cryptocurrency
provides a reliable, stable, and robust way to store, trans-
mit, and validate data to ensure democracy, transparency,
and safety in various organizations. With the development
of the IoT 4.0, the impact of cryptocurrency would be enor-
mous, and it will be applied in various ﬁelds like banking,
healthcare, ﬁnancial, etc. Using blockchain as the under-
lying communication architecture, a security auditing sys-
tem is constructed in [61], which can predict and detect
any anomalies to guarantee conﬁdentiality of data, issue
alerts for security incidents, collect evidences for auditing
purposes, and probe event trajectory via data analysis in
order to track the involved devices. It uses decentralized
system to prevent tampering of data and help in encryp-
tion and decryption of data records. Using smart contract
scheme on a single blockchain node, the eﬀectiveness and
eﬃciency of the security records are examined.

Two Local Energy Market (LEM) mechanisms are pro-
posed in [62] with artiﬁcial prosumers and these mecha-
nisms are implemented on private blockchain in a decen-
It pro-
tralized manner based on economic evaluation.
motes increase in the production of renewable energy and
decrease in consumption to reduce usage spikes at peak-
hour. Through experiments, it is found that prosumers
energy behavior can aﬀect their economic beneﬁts; and if
users’ energy supply is increased and demand is decreased
during peak-hour, their economic beneﬁts increase, which
helps in boosting the local economy. The decentralized
WEB revolutionized the technologies such as blockchain
by introducing symbiotic webs as discussed in [38].
It
helps in linking web pages with AI, NLP etc., and makes it
transparent and eﬃcient. Due to several characteristics of
the IoT such as mobility, distributed deployment, and lim-
ited performance, centralized access control method does
not support access control in a large scale environment.
So, based on attributed-based access control (ABAC) and
Hyperledger Fabric Blockchain framework, an access con-
trol system is proposed in [39] making use of blockchain’s
decentralization, traceability as well as tamper-proof prop-
erty. The proposed system has a device authority model
which ensures the security of the device using three smart
contracts, and helps in maintaining high throughput along
with ensuring data consistency. In a network, to address

the mining process which has limited resources, a blockchain-
based solution is presented in [40], which veriﬁes a trans-
action. To overcome the problem of Proof of Work (PoW)
which arises due to limited resources as well as its expen-
siveness, a decentralized blockchain system is used, where
the nodes of the IoT devices are grouped together as a
cluster in the network, and multiple transactions occur-
ring at the same time are veriﬁed making it more eﬃcient.
First Fit Decreasing (FFD) method is modiﬁed so that
node which leaves the cluster can be replaced with proper
ﬁt and helps in overcoming the limitations of PoW.

A transaction settlement system, NormaChain, is pro-
posed in [63], for IoT-based e-commerce based on blockchain
in order to provide security against collusion and crypto-
analysis, and ensures privacy. NormaChain overcomes var-
ious problems such as huge computational overhead and
It increases system scalability and
non-supervisability.
transaction eﬃciency. A decentralized public key search-
able encryption scheme (Decentralized PEKS scheme) for
cryptosystems is designed, which helps in achieving crime
traceability and illegal transactions. A Decentralized IoT
Collectability Data Marketplace (DCDM) market model
is presented in [64], where various operational factors are
involved such as contextual, operationality, geographical
location, and data provider availability. It uses a combi-
nation of crowdsensing and blockchain. It employs crowd-
sensing to build a business model for trading the IoT and
collect data on-demand from customers, whereas blockchain
is used to ensure the privacy and transparency. Using
community-based decentralized architecture, security is main-
tained and there is a reward mechanism to boost the per-
formance.

A decentralized application (DApp), as presented in [65],

is used for sharing IoT data based on blockchain technol-
ogy using smart contracts without the involvement of a
third party. It is accessible to everyone. It applies Sensing-
as-a-Service (SaaS) which provides opportunity for mon-
etization of data by helping in selling sensor data easily.
By using cryptocurrency, DApp ensures security and ﬂex-
ibility to the users transacting on peer-to-peer level. How-
ever, the system faces various issues, such as scaling and
high delay in transaction conﬁrmation, which are to be ad-
dressed. BlendCAC is used in large scale IoT devices for
access control processes to provide ﬁne-grained, scalable,
and lightweight control mechanisms. In [66], IoT devices
control their own resources. Local private blockchain net-
work is used and smart contracts are implemented for reg-
istration, revocation of the access authorization, and prop-
agation. A capability delegation mechanism is proposed,
which helps in access permission, and a token management
strategy is also implemented. It is found that the system
helps in validation and access control authorization in a
decentralized and trustless IoT network.

With the increased number of IoT devices, there is
a need to create an IoT back-end, and to improve the
method of communication for IoT gateways, which can
be achieved using trustless and decentralized nature of

8

Table 1: Contributions of Existing Works Integrating IoT and
Blockchain, and Concentrating on Decentralization

Item Contributions
[59]

[60]

[61]

[62]

[38]

[39]

[40]

[63]

[64]

[65]

[66]

[67]

[68]

[69]

Reduces accidents and improves traﬃc condi-
tions by using decentralized peer-to-peer com-
munications.
Cryptocurrency provides a reliable, stable, and
robust way to store, transmit, and validate
data.
Predicts and detects any anomalies to guaran-
tee conﬁdentiality of data.
Uses a private blockchain and increases the
production of renewable energy.
The decentralized WEB revolutionizes the
technologies such as blockchain by introducing
symbiotic webs.
Ensures security of the device accessed, and
helps in maintaining high throughput along
with ensuring data consistency.
IoT devices are grouped together as a cluster,
and multiple transactions are veriﬁed at the
same time.
Blockchain-based e-commerce provides secu-
rity against collusion and cryptoanalysis, and
ensures privacy.
Employs blockchain-crowdsensing to build a
business model for trading IoT and collect data
on-demand from customers.
Shares IoT data based on blockchain technol-
ogy using smart contracts without the involve-
ment of third party.
Local private blockchain and smart contracts
are implemented for registration, revocation of
the access authorization and propagation.
Based on the computing and storage capabili-
ties, all IoT devices are integrated, which will
lead to data-centric models.
Potential business applications are explored in
order to form a smart world.
An architecture is presented by combining IoT
systems with blockchain for managing IoT data
for further utilization like retrieving and audit-
ing.

blockchain providing peer-to-peer network, as discussed
in [67]. Based on the computing and storage capabil-
ities, all the IoT devices can be integrated, which will
lead to data-centric models where data processing and ap-
plication development are conducted by smart contracts.
In order to create a smart environment, various beneﬁts,
drawbacks as well as trending research topics of using the
decentralized nature of blockchain along with IoT are ex-
plored in [68]. Potential business applications are explored
in order to form a smart world. Conventional IoT systems
suﬀered from various issues like lack of transparency, lim-

9

ited scalability, and single point of failure. In [69], a gen-
eral architecture is presented by combining IoT systems
with blockchain technologies to implement the decentral-
ized nature of blockchain for managing IoT data for further
utilization like retrieving and auditing. A case study of a
resource allocation learning-based method is also proposed
for intelligently managing data. Table 1 highlights exist-
ing works which consider the integration of the IoT and
blockchain concentrating on decentralization.

3.2. Safety and Transparency

The application of blockchain in the perspective of safety
and transparency is highlighted in [60]. Blockchain helps
in digitally transferring money safely to the intended recip-
ient by protecting against various external attacks, losses,
and errors. With the development of the IoT 4.0, its im-
pact would be enormous and it will be applied in various
ﬁelds like banking, healthcare, ﬁnancial, etc. The WEB
revolutionized the technologies such as blockchain by in-
troducing symbiotic webs making it transparent and ef-
ﬁcient. The Industry 4.0 encompasses smart contracts,
smart supply chain, smart products, and smart factory, as
discussed in [38]. Blockchain has various features, such as
immutability and transparency, which make it distinguish-
able. There are various blockchain-based IoT projects but
there is no method to compare their performances based
on energy consumption. Blockchain technologies provide
trust while transacting at the cost of energy instead of
manpower. A research to model the energy consumption
behavior is done in [70] by collecting real-world data. The
model reﬂects on various algorithms such as PoW, Proof of
Stake (PoS), Stellar Consensus Protocol (SCP), and Rip-
ple Protocol Consensus Algorithm (RPCA) based on linear
models.

To improve the enactment of the IoT and its applica-
tion in an uncontrolled, hostile environment, and to auto-
mate living conditions ensuring the privacy and security,
a blockchain model is proposed in [71]. It provides various
advantages to the IoT system, such as security, cost re-
duction, immutability, anonymity, robustness, creditabil-
ity, trust building, authentication, veriﬁcation, etc. How-
ever, in the proposed model, there are some challenges such
as consensus mechanism and computational cost for veri-
ﬁcation of transactions. A comprehensive analysis is pre-
sented in [72] in the direction of the disruptive innovation
occurring in the ﬁeld of smart contracts and blockchain.
A shared distributed ledger ensures secure and tamper-
proof transactions between various users in the network
without involving third parties. With the application of
Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) and its multi-forked struc-
ture, high scalability, eﬃcient provenance, and optimized
validation are observed. Together the IoT and blockchain
help in real-time monitoring of resources and ensure non-
repudiation, privacy, accountability, predictive analysis,
transparency, and stakeholder visibility.

Blockchain technologies implemented on the IoT sys-
tem in [73] increase the eﬃciency by improving the trans-

Table 2: Contributions of Existing Works Integrating IoT and
Blockchain, and Concentrating on Safety and Transparency

[70]

[71]

[38]

Item Contributions
[60] With the development of IoT 4.0, its impact
would be enormous and it will be applied in
various ﬁelds like banking, healthcare, ﬁnan-
cial, etc.
Industry 4.0 encompasses smart contracts,
smart supply chain, smart products, and smart
factory.
A research to model the energy consumption
behavior is done by collecting real-world data.
Improves the enactment of IoT and its appli-
cation in an uncontrolled, hostile environment
and automates living conditions ensuring pri-
vacy and security.
A comprehensive analysis is presented in the
direction of the disruptive innovation occurring
in the ﬁeld of smart contracts and blockchain.
Increases the eﬃciency by improving the trans-
parency of data.
Converging cloud computing, IoT, blockchain,
and data analytics, a prototype of transporta-
tion scheme is proposed.
Provides scalable, generic, and manageable ac-
cess control system by implementing proof-of-
concept.
Uses logistics planner and smart contracts to
secure trust, provide visibility, and help in
condition-monitoring of assets.

[72]

[73]

[75]

[74]

[70]

parency of data. It is found that cryptocurrency IOTA is
not the best solution with respect to quality improvements.
It ensures high scalability by storing a large amount of
data but due to the usage of central server, it is prune to
attacks. A study is done to recommend which platform
is to used based on the demand. Converging cloud com-
puting, IoT, blockchain, and data analytics, a prototype
of transportation scheme is proposed in [74], where both
private and public blockchains are used. Hyperledger fab-
ric saves the massive trip data and Ethereum framework is
implemented as an insurance and payment model. Based
on a driver’s behavior, insurance premium is accessed and
deducted from IoT data, which is collected from mobile
sensors. The proposed model helps in encouraging drivers
to drive safely. It is evaluated after experiments that re-
source utilization is correlated with request load. The sys-
tem is capable of handling high request load and helps in
achieving better throughput.

To ensure scalability to constrained IoT devices, blockchain

is used as it oﬀers various strengths, such as transparency,
auditability, decentralized consensus, security, etc., which
make it an ideal component of IoT solutions. The work [75]
provides a scalable, generic, and manageable access control
system. It also implements proof-of-concept (PoC) which

10

enables various devices to connect to the same network.
Due to the versatility of management hub nodes, high ﬂex-
ibility of the network is ensured but the network suﬀers
from overhead of waiting due to the time required to is-
sue control information by the blockchain network. Smart
logistics solution in [70] uses logistics planner and smart
contracts to secure trust, provide visibility, and help in
condition-monitoring of assets using distributed ML frame-
work in supply chain management areas. It demonstrates
liability, transparency, accountability, optimal planning,
and traceability, for handling assets by diﬀerent parties
involved in the logistics of supply chain management with
the help of various technologies such as IoT, blockchain,
ML, and Big Data. Table 2 highlights existing works which
consider the integration of the IoT and blockchain concen-
trating on safety and transparency.

3.3. Security

Blockchain based communication architecture, NGBN
framework, is designed in [76] based on Named Data Net-
working (NDN) by integrating the IoT and wireless com-
munication network. It provides a scalable, robust, and se-
cure network environment for other applications. Two ap-
plication scenarios illustrated under NGBN – cyberspace
scenario which focuses on the digital life and society, where
the blockchain oﬀers virtual coins so that the data can be
transmitted eﬃciently and economically, which are use-
ful for smart transportation-related application. Using
blockchain as the underlying communication architecture,
a security auditing system is constructed in [61], which
can predict and detect any anomalies to guarantee conﬁ-
dentiality of data. The proposed system issues alerts for
security incidents, collects evidences for auditing purposes,
and probes event trajectory via data analysis in order to
track the involved devices. It uses decentralized system to
prevent tampering of data and help in encryption and de-
cryption of data records. By using smart contract scheme
on a single blockchain node, the eﬀectiveness and eﬃciency
of the security records are examined. The IoT system pre-
sented in [37] is based on blockchain to secure data and
support eﬃcient outsourcing services. To ensure conﬁden-
tiality of data as well as to secure the keys against key-
leakage attack, a blockchain-based key aggregation encryp-
tion system, known as BAI-KASE, is proposed, so that
the encrypted data can be shared and searched securely.
After performance analysis, the results indicate that the
proposed model is eﬃcient in computational costs as well
as communication overheads.

A framework in mobile IoT is designed in [77], which
is based on Wireless Sensor Network (WSN) for secure
routing, to improve data reliability, network lifetime, and
network security against various malicious attacks. It uses
shortest routing chains to eﬃciently use energy with an
optimum decision. Two subcomponents are proposed to
generate and maintain non-overlapping clusters and to se-
cure end-to-end routing paths based on the blockchain

Item
Qilei et al. [59]

Nguyen et al. [60]

Shi-Cho et al. [61]

Moniruzzaman et
al. [62]

Khan et al. [38]

Han et al. [39]

Ronald et al. [40]

Xiao et al. [63]

Duc-Duy
[64]

et

al.

Weakness
Vulnerabilities include – (1)
power consumption, and (2)
excessive overload of network
throughput
No path is discussed to the
design of blockchain-based
IoT 4.0

Lack of analysis of the pro-
posed architecture on multi-
ple blockchain node

Global energy consumption
issues are not addressed

Table 3: Integration of IoT with Blockchain Concentrating on Decentralization
Strength
Reduction of accidents and improve traﬃc conditions by
using decentralized peer-to-peer communication instead
of cloud based centralized system so that data can be
transmitted eﬃciently
(1) Highlight of the decentralized ledger technology
that is behind various cryptocurrencies like bitcoin
and Ethereum, (2) Discussion on digitally transferring
money safely to the intended recipient by protecting
against various external attacks, losses or errors
(1) Using blockchain as the underlying communication
architecture, a security auditing system is constructed,
(2) Predicts and detects any anomalies to guarantee con-
ﬁdentiality of data, issue alerts for security incidents
(1) Two LEM mechanisms are proposed with artiﬁcial
prosumers, (2) Implemented on private blockchain in a
decentralized manner based on economic evaluation, (3)
Promotes increase in the production of renewable energy
and decrease in consumption to reduce usage spikes at
peak-hour
(1) Highlights decentralized WEB revolution with
blockchain by introducing symbiotic webs, (2) A path
to Industry 4.0 that encompasses smart contracts, smart
supply chain, smart products and smart factory

(1) Details of security issues
are not explored, (2) Imple-
mentation details and chal-
lenges are not highlighted,
(3) Storage management is-
sues are not discussed
(1) Storage constraint and
scalability issues are not in
details, (2) Power manage-
ment is not addressed

(1) Lack of discussion on
the improvement of consensus
mechanism in IoT platform,
(2) Storage management

Integrity and scalability is-
sues are not in details, (2)
Storage management

(1) Time complexity due to
the use of crowdsensing, (2)
Storage access mechanism is
not highlighted

(1) An access control system based on attributed-
based access control (ABAC) and Hyperledger Fabric
Blockchain framework by using of blockchain’s decen-
tralization, traceability and tamper-proof property, (2)
A device authority model which ensures security of the
device accessed, using smart contracts, (3) Helps in
maintaining high throughput ensuring data consistency
(1) Addresses the mining process which have limited re-
sources, (2) Blockchain based solution is shown verify a
transaction, (3) Uses a decentralized blockchain system
to overcome the problem of PoW which arises due to lim-
ited resources and its expensiveness, (4) FFD method is
modiﬁed so that the node which leaves the cluster can
be replaced with proper ﬁt and can help in overcoming
the limitations of PoW
(1) Security against collusion and cryptoanalysis and en-
sures privacy, (2) Overcomes huge computational over-
head and non-supervisability, (3) Increases system scal-
ability and transaction eﬃciency, (4) Helps in achieving
crime traceability and eliminating criminal and illegal
transactions
(1) DCDM market model is proposed, (2) Uses a com-
bination of crowdsensing and blockchain, (3) Security is
maintained, (4) A reward mechanism to boost the per-
formance

11

Table 4: Integration of IoT with Blockchain Concentrating on Decentralization (contd.)

Item
Georgios
[65]

et

al.

Ronghua
[66]

et

al.

Ozyilmaz
[67]

et al.

Choudhary et al.
[68]

Zhang et al. [69]

Strength
(1) Uses decentralized application for sharing IoT data
based on blockchain technology using smart contracts
without the involvement of third party, (2) Ensures se-
curity and ﬂexibility to the users transacting on peer-
to-peer level using cryptocurrencies
(1) Targets a large scale IoT devices for access con-
trol processes to information, devices and services, (2)
Provides ﬁne-grained, scalable and lightweight control
mechanism, (3) Local private blockchain network and
smart contracts for registration, revocation of the access
authorization and propagation, (3) A capability dele-
gation mechanism to help in accessing permission, (4)
Token management strategy
(1) Improves the method of communication for IoT
gateways by using trust less and decentralized nature
of blockchain providing peer-to-peer network, (2) Dis-
tributed storage service
(1) Various beneﬁts, drawbacks as well as trending
research topics of using the decentralized nature of
blockchain in IoT, (2) Potential business applications in
the future directions, (3) Security features of blockchain
in IoT
(1) A general architecture combining IoT systems with
blockchain technologies to implement decentralized ar-
chitecture, (2) A case study of a resource allocation
learning based method for intelligently managing data

Weakness
(1) Scaling issues, (2) High
delay in transaction conﬁrma-
tion

(1) Transaction throughput
Storage
management,
management
(3)
Time bound analysis

(2)
details,

(1) Scalability and reliabil-
ity issues,
(2) Transaction
management, (3) Transaction
throughput analysis
Storage management
(1)
issues,
Implementation
challenges of blockchain in
IoT

(2)

Analyzing the robustness of
the architecture in diﬀerent
network scenarios

12

Table 5: Integration of IoT with Blockchain Concentrating on Safety and Transparency

Item
Nguyen et al. [60]

Ryan et al. [70]

Muzammal et al.
[71]

Huma et al. [72]

Vaﬁadis et al. [73]

Zengxiang et al.
[74]

Oscar et al. [75]

Ryan et al. [70]

Strength
(1) Highlights reliability, stability and robustness to
store, transmit and validate data to help various orga-
nizations ensuring democracy, transparency and safety,
(2) Helps in digitally transferring money safely to the in-
tended recipient by protecting against various external
attacks and losses
A research to model the energy consumption behavior
by collecting real-world data which reﬂects on PoW, PoS
etc.
Integrating blockchain with IoT provides various advan-
tages to the IoT system such as security, cost reduction,
immutability, anonymity, robustness, creditability, trust
building, authentication, veriﬁcation etc.
Comprehensive analysis of the disruptive innovation oc-
curring in the ﬁeld of blockchain and IoT

(1) Blockchain technologies implemented on IoT system
increase the eﬃciency by improving the transparency
of data, (2) Ensures high scalability by storing large
amount of data but due to the usage of central server
it is prune to attacks, (3) A study to recommend which
platform to use based on the demand
(1) A prototype of transportation scheme by converging
cloud computing, IoT, blockchain and data analytics,
(2) Both private and public blockchain, (3) Resource
utilization is correlated with request load, (4) The sys-
tem is capable of handling high request load, (5) Helps
in achieving better throughput
(1) Provides scalable, generic, manageable access con-
trol system, (2) Implements PoC which enables various
devices to connect to the same network, (3) High ﬂexi-
bility of the network is ensured

Smart logistics solution for smart contracts to secure
trust, provide visibility and help in condition-monitoring
of assets, (2) Demonstrates liability, transparency, ac-
countability, optimal planning and traceability, for han-
dling diﬀerent parties involved in the logistics of supply
chain management

Weakness
(1) Implementation details of
integrating blockchain with
(2)
IoT are not explored,
Lack of responsiveness analy-
sis

(1) Scalability analysis, (2)
Transaction throughput man-
agement
(1) Lack of details of consen-
sus mechanism, (2) Computa-
tional cost for veriﬁcation of
transaction
Details of privacy, security,
authentication, storage man-
transaction
and
agement
throughput are not explored
(1) Storage constraint analy-
sis considering practical sce-
nario, (2) Response time and
transaction throughput man-
agement

(1) Lack of details of consen-
sus mechanism, (2) Storage
management

The network suﬀers
from
overhead of waiting due to
the time required to issue
information by the
control
blockchain network
(1) Details of transaction de-
lay and throughput are not
present, (2) Storage manage-
ment

13

Table 6: Integration of IoT with Blockchain Concentrating on Security

Item
Lei et al. [76]

Strength
(1) Provides a scalable, robust and secure network en-
vironment, (2) Useful for smart transportation-related
application

Cha et al. [61]

Niu et al. [37]

(1) Predicts and detects any anomalies to guarantee con-
ﬁdentiality of data, (2) Issues alerts for security inci-
dents, (3) collect evidences for auditing purposes
(1) Eﬃcient outsourcing services, (2) Eﬃcient in com-
putational costs as well as communication overheads

Haseeb et al. [77]

(1) Secure routing to improve data reliability against
various malicious attacks

Srivastava et al.
[78]

(1) Advance security and privacy to the remote patient
monitoring, (2) Data storing over cloud by using ad-
vanced cryptographic techniques, (3) Double encryption
scheme

Agrawal et al. [79] Prediction models LSTM is used to provide continuous

Faika et al. [80]

security with seamless user authentication
(1) Energy eﬃciency, (2) Provides key management, ac-
cess control and reduces latency

Hao et al. [42]

Protects the system from double-spending attacks

Huang et al. [81]

Mokhtar
[82]

et

al.

Nguyen et al. [64]

Sanju et al. [83]

Urmila et al. [84]

(1) Decreases power consumption, (2) Improves secu-
rity as well as transaction eﬃciency, (3) Data authority
management system is designed to protect the conﬁden-
tiality of data
(1) Provides a time-sensitive distributed system us-
ing smart contracts by considering performance, time
constraints and autonomy requirements, (2) Adapting
power-eﬃcient mechanism, (3) Potential to enable scal-
ability and security for IoT use cases, (4) Provides ﬂex-
ibility to the distributed system, (5) Latency minimiza-
tion
(1) Boosts performance reward mechanism, (2) Payment
can be made in an auditable and secure manner
Various blockchain platforms such as Ethereum and Hy-
perledger fabric are compared based on their consump-
tion of energy for real workloads
(1) Increases the security and robustness by utilizing
cryptographic algorithm, (2) Trustworthy and peer-to-
peer platform to manage data eﬃciently without the
involvement of third party, (3) Provides a common plat-
form so that diﬀerent IoT devices can communicate in
a distributed manner securely and protect against mali-
cious attack, (4) Ensures feasibility, fault tolerance and
scalability

14

Weakness
(1)
Implementation details
with respect to storage uti-
lization and responsiveness
analysis, (2) Computational
cost for veriﬁcation of trans-
action
The communication details
in the proposed decentralized
architecture
Storage management and re-
sponsiveness are not high-
lighted
(1) Implementation details of
the proposed routing mech-
anism, (2) Storage manage-
ment
(1) Scalability and integrity
analysis, (2) Latency analysis
in details

be

of
can

Scalability and storage man-
agement analysis
the proposed
Latency
further
scheme
reduced if
instead of us-
ing cloud-based blockchain
server, local blockchain server
is used
The implementation details
with storage analysis
sensor
Quality control of
data as well as storing large
amounts of data

(1) Lack of storage manage-
ment analysis, (2) Implemen-
tation constraints

Lack of scalability and in-
tegrity analysis
Reliability, scalability, stor-
age management etc. are not
analyzed
Analysis
responsiveness
considering diﬀerent types of
attacks

of

Item
Dinesh et al. [85]

Table 7: Integration of IoT with Blockchain Concentrating on Security (contd.)
Strength
Communication constraints faced by blockchain is re-
solved by 5G communication

Weakness
(1) Limited storage capacity
of IoT system, (2) Poor scal-
ability, (3) Time consumption
while mining, (4) Increase of
traﬃc overhead
Challenges in implementation
such as security and compu-
tational costs
Implementation details
(1)
are not highlighted, (2) Lack
of analysis of storage manage-
ment issues and responsive-
ness, (3) Overhead analysis
(1) Storage management is-
sues, (2) Overhead analysis is
not in details

(1) Lack of overhead and re-
sponsiveness analysis (2) Im-
plementation details consid-
ering storage constraints

The network suﬀers
from
overhead of waiting due to
the time required to issue
control
information by the
blockchain network
(1) Lack of
implementation
details and storage overhead
analysis

(1) Overhead is introduced
due to the encryption and
transmission of messages and
videos, (2) Lack of details of
response time and latency

Choo et al. [86]

Lee et al. [87]

(1) Helps in identity veriﬁcation while maintaining trust,
(2) Transmits messages securely without involving cen-
tralized third-party
(1) Secures the system from external attacks, (2) Pre-
serves privacy and uses smart contracts in various IoT
related applications

Rashid et al. [88]

Brotsis et al. [89]

Novo et al. [75]

Pourvahab et al.
[90]

Xie et al. [91]

(1) Optimization of the lifetime of the network by self-
clustering methodology, (2) Helps in authorization, au-
thentication and veriﬁcation, (3) Improves safety and
explores upper layer communications, (4) Due to multi-
layer approach the, network load, delay and computa-
tional load are reduced, (5) Communication eﬃciency is
increased along with integrity and security
(1) Private evidence database is utilized along with a
permissioned blockchain, (2) Provides security services
like non-repudiation, integrity and authentication, (3)
An intrusion detection tool is used, which helps in en-
hancing the security and determining the source of at-
tacks, (4) Preserves and records the history of handling
the evidence
(1) Oﬀers various strengths such as transparency, au-
ditability, decentralized consensus and security, (2) Pro-
vides scalable, generic and manageable access control
system, (3) Due to the versatility of management hub
nodes, high ﬂexibility of the network is ensured
(1) Lightweight forensic architecture to increase the se-
curity, integrity and assist CoC, (2) IoT devices are con-
nected via gateway nodes and based on ﬂow rules and
action for each packet, (3) Increase in performance with
minimal delay, overhead and processing time, (4) In-
crease in throughput, security and accuracy
(1) Accountability of the message is validated by using
the immutability feature of blockchain, (2) Trust man-
agement is established so that messages cannot be tam-
pered, (3) Ensures feasibility, accuracy and eﬃciency

15

architecture which leads to the decrease in communica-
tion costs and overheads under large network and increase
security. Fabric-IoT, an access control system based on
ABAC and Hyperledger Fabric Blockchain framework, is
proposed in [39], which has a device authority model en-
suring the security of the device accessed.
It helps in
maintaining high throughput ensuring data consistency.
A blockchain based IoT system is proposed in [78] to pro-
vide advance security and privacy to the remote patient
monitoring (RPM) system. The network provides reliable
data communication and stores the data over cloud se-
curely using advanced cryptographic techniques such as
add–rotate–xor (ARX) encryption. Using digital signa-
tures and ring signature, the privacy can be improved. To
increase security, double encryption scheme is used, which
protects our data from third party intruders.

A blockchain-based IoT system is proposed in [79] us-
ing the distributed and immutable nature of blockchain
which helps in building trust and making the system ro-
bust, secure, and immune to failure. Crypto-token which
is pre-generated using prediction models, like Long Short-
Term Memory (LSTM), is used to provide continuous se-
curity with seamless user authentication. A Global IoT
Device Discovery and Integration (GIDDI) solution in [92]
consists of a GIDDI Marketplace that provides function-
ality required for query, integration, payment, IoT device
registration, security, and a GIDDI blockchain which man-
ages metadata. The blockchain stores metadata related to
IoT devices, which provides scalability, authentication and
security. Wireless battery management systems (WBMSs)
of [80] provide secure communication with external devices
and data. It is used in cyber-physical environment to solve
wiring-harness issues faced by battery management sys-
tems (BMSs), and utilizes cloud computing and wireless
IoT networks eﬃciently. It incorporates smart contracts,
peer-to-peer transaction, demand side management, sup-
ply chain, and IoT’s privacy and security. Due to the
application of the private blockchain system, less energy is
required. It provides a key management and access con-
trol, thereby reducing latency signiﬁcantly compared to
other platforms. The latency of the experiment can be
further reduced if instead of using cloud-based blockchain
server, local blockchain server is used.

FastPay, a payment method for blockchain-based edge-
IoT platforms, is proposed in [42]. This method is both
secure and fast, and is based on smart contracts mech-
anism. On front-end IoT devices, digital payments are
made while in the back-end, blockchain’s distributed na-
ture ensures the validity of the system.
It protects the
system from double-spending attacks. A blockchain-based
B-IoT system is presented in [81], which utilizes credit-
based PoW mechanism. It decreases power consumption
while increasing the complexity of computing for mali-
cious nodes.
It improves security as well as transaction
eﬃciency. To protect the conﬁdentiality of data, a data
authority management system is designed in [87], which
regulates the access to data and protects it without aﬀect-

ing the performance of the IoT system. It faces various
challenges such as quality control of sensor data as well as
storing large amounts of data. Blockchain technology is
used to revolutionize IoT system for Machine-to-Machine
(M2M) communications [87]. One M2M is a global project
which achieves interoperability with respect to the commu-
nication system, which can be achieved using blockchain
system. Its decentralized and peer-to-peer nature help se-
cure the system from external attacks and it is based on
blind voting. The proposed system in [87] is applied in
the IoT service layer; and it helps in preserving privacy
and it uses smart contracts in various IoT related applica-
tions. NormaChain, as proposed in [63], provides security
against collusion and cryptoanalysis, and ensures privacy.
A proxy re-encryption scheme is proposed in [93] in
combination with the blockchain to tackle trust issues and
scalability of the system, and to ensure the conﬁdentiality
of data. The atomized system stores the encrypted IoT
data in a distributed cloud and helps in securely sharing
the data by using dynamic smart contracts without the
involvement of a third party. A multi-robot path planning
is deployed in [82]. The plan combines Internet of Robotic
Things (IoRT) with Hyperledger Fabric. IoRT acts as a
bridge between the IoT domain and robotics domain. Hy-
perledger Fabric is an enterprise-grade and permissioned
blockchain platform. Hyperledger Fabric provides an ex-
tensible and elastic architecture solution for control system
by adapting power-eﬃcient mechanism known as order-
ing service.
It shows potential to enable scalability and
security for IoT use cases. The results obtained reveals
that while making transactions, a minimum latency is ob-
served compared to other public blockchain platforms. To
improve the enactment of the IoT, and to ensure privacy
and security, the IoT is integrated with blockchain, as dis-
cussed in [71]. A Decentralized IoT Collectability Data
Marketplace (DCDM) market model as presented in [64],
where security is maintained, and to boost performance,
Interledger is referred to
a reward mechanism is used.
as the class of operations, that is stretched across two or
more distributed ledger technologies (DLTs), as discussed
in [94]. Group of researchers demonstrated a way in which
a resource-constrained IoT device interacts with an “IoT-
friendly” ledger by using interledger as a gateway service
that mediates the payment and access controls between
diﬀerent parties using private and public permission-less
ledgers such as blockchain and Ethereum. Using hashed
timelock agreements (HTLAs), it is seen that payment can
be made in an auditable and secure manner.

A decentralized application, DApp, is proposed in [65],
which ensures security and ﬂexibility to the users transact-
ing on peer-to-peer level using cryptocurrencies. An anal-
ysis done by a group of researchers is shown in [72], which
ensures the security between various users in the network
without involving third parties. An IoT system is pro-
posed in [95], which collects, publishes, sends, and stores
all the relevant data for smart sensors. It is free, instan-
taneous and trustworthy as reliable, and immutable infor-

16

mation can be securely stored and can be accessed anytime
by various stakeholders. Cloud-based IoT systems intro-
duce constrained interaction in [96] with actuators and
sensors as well as network latency. An IoT management
construct, which is software based, is presented, and it en-
ables multi-tenancy and load distribution on constrained
edge-devices. It evaluates that, by reducing the number of
virtual resources used by the host, the delay is increased,
and it shows the use of permission-based blockchain. It is
believed that the security and safety of the system can be
increased by using blockchain for storing data.

Various blockchain platforms such as Ethereum and
Hyperledger fabric are compared in [83] based on their con-
sumption of energy for real workloads and by analyzing the
performance trade-oﬀs so that it could be securely imple-
mented in IoT devices. It is found that Hyperledger fabric
consumes less energy compared to Ethereum. The mech-
anism, proposed in [97], is used for trading IoT sensors
to provide security against malicious attacks and preserve
privacy of the parties. A blockchain-based IoT system is
proposed in [84], which is applied in healthcare sectors and
helps in increasing the security and robustness by utilizing
cryptographic algorithm. It helps in providing trustwor-
thy and peer-to-peer platform to manage data eﬃciently
without involving a third party. Blockchain provides a
common platform so that diﬀerent IoT devices can com-
municate in a distributed manner securely and protects
against malicious attacks.

The 5G technology promises reliability, scalability, real-
time applications, ubiquitousness, and cost eﬃciency. It
helps in improving IoT devices and makes it more ef-
ﬁcient along with the help of blockchain. Communica-
tion constraints faced by the blockchain are resolved by
the 5G communication in [85], where the security and
privacy issues are resolved by using blockchain. It faces
some issues such as limited storage capacity of IoT sys-
tems, poor scalability, time consumption while mining,
It also increases the traﬃc overhead. Blockchain-
etc.
assisted privacy-preserving authentication system (BPAS)
is proposed in [86], which helps in transmitting messages
securely without involving a centralized third-party. Sim-
ilarly, data sourcing, crowdsourcing, edge computing, and
industrial IoT (IIoT) architectures are achieved in over-
coming some of the issues faced by the blockchain when it
is implemented on IoT devices.

A blockchain technology addresses the problems of IoT
security as discussed in [88]. A self-clustering methodol-
ogy is proposed, which helps in clustering the IoT net-
work into K number of unknown clusters by using Particle
Swarm Optimization (PSO) and Genetic Algorithms, that
help in optimizing the lifetime of the network. Hyper-
ledger Fabric that helps in authorization, authentication
and veriﬁcation. The local blockchain helps in providing
framework to improve safety and ability; and the global
blockchain is implemented to explore upper layer commu-
nications. Due to the multi-layer approach, the network
load, delay, and computational load are reduced. Due to

the peer-to-peer nature of the model, communication ef-
ﬁciency is increased along with the integrity and security.
A survey is conducted in [98], where the security aspects
of blockchain-based IoT system is observed. A blockchain-
based IoT solution is presented in [89], which helps in deal-
ing with preservation and collection of digital forensic evi-
dences. A private evidence database is utilized along with
a type of permissioned blockchain, which helps to provide
security services like non-repudiation, integrity, and au-
thentication. To identify malicious attacks, an intrusion
detection tool is used, which helps in enhancing the secu-
rity and determining the source of attacks. Cyber-Trust
Blockchain (CTB) is built on top of Hyperledger Fabric,
and it dematerializes the chain-of-custody (CoC) process
by preserving and recording the history of handling the
evidences.

To ensure scalability for constrained IoT devices, blockchain

is used in [75], as it oﬀers various strengths such as trans-
parency, auditability, decentralized consensus, and secu-
rity. The work provides a scalable, generic, and manage-
able access control system. It also implements PoC which
enables various devices to connect to the same network.
High ﬂexibility of the network is ensured but the network
suﬀers from overhead of waiting due to the time required
to issue the control information by the blockchain net-
work. On the Software-Deﬁned Networking (SDN)-based
IoT network, a lightweight forensic architecture is devel-
oped in [90] by using the peer-to-peer decentralized nature
of blockchain, in order to increase the security, integrity,
and assist Chain of Custody (CoC) for evidence collec-
tion eﬀectively. The blockchain-based controller uses Lin-
ear Homomorphic Signature (LHS) algorithm to validate
users. The results indicate an increase in performance with
a minimal delay, overhead, processing time, and response
time. There is also an increase in the throughput, secu-
rity, and accuracy. A blockchain-based security framework
is proposed in [91] for the vehicular IoT environment in
5G-VANETs enabling SDN architecture. Accountability
of the message is also validated by using the immutabil-
ity feature of blockchain. Using blockchains, trust man-
agement is established such that the messages cannot be
tampered. Though the model ensures feasibility, accuracy,
and eﬃciency, there is an overhead introduced due to the
encryption and transmission of messages and videos.

In [99], the uses of blockchain in ﬁnancial security, ﬁ-
nancial accounting, and cyber security are discussed. The
diﬀerent ways of impacts of blockchain in auditing are also
highlighted. Authors in [99] ﬁnd that blockchain needs to
be eﬀectively applied into diﬀerent directions of cyber se-
curity and accounting. The authors in [100] focus on the
development of a marketplace framework that can address
design challenges in IoT models, and accordingly propose
a three-tier framework. The mechanism proposed in [101]
provides a suitable smart contract scheme for guarantee-
ing the integrity of IoT devices, and immutable and dy-
namic management of malicious applications. In [102], a
blockchain ledger is established to make more blockchain

17

Table 8: Contributions of Existing Works Integrating IoT and
Blockchain, and Concentrating on Security

Table 9: Contributions of Existing Works Integrating IoT and
Blockchain, and Concentrating on Security (contd.)

Item Contributions
[76]

Item Contributions
[97]

Blockchain-based communication architecture
is based on Named Data Networking by inte-
grating IoT systems.
Security auditing system is constructed to pre-
dict and detect any anomalies to guarantee
conﬁdentiality of data.
Uses blockchain to secure data and support ef-
ﬁcient outsourcing services.
Secure routing improves data reliability, net-
work lifetime, and network security against
various malicious attacks.
Has a device authority model ensuring the se-
curity of the device accessed.
Provides advance security and privacy to re-
mote patient monitoring (RPM) systems.
Helps in building trust and making the system
robust, secure, and immune to failure.
Provides functionality required for query, inte-
gration, payment, IoT device registration, se-
curity, and managing metadata.
Incorporates
smart contracts, peer-to-peer
transaction, demand side management, supply
chain, and IoT’s privacy and security.
The approach is fast and is based on smart
contracts mechanisms. On front-end IoT de-
vices, digital payments are made while in the
back-end, blockchain’s distributed nature en-
sures the validity of the system.
Utilizes the credit-based PoW mechanism and
decreases the power consumption.
Regulates the access to data and protects it
without aﬀecting the performance of IoT sys-
tems
Stores the encrypted IoT data in a distributed
cloud and helps in securely sharing the data by
using dynamic smart contracts.
Combines Internet of Robotic Things with Hy-
perledger Fabric, and acts as a bridge between
IoT and robotics domains.
Security is maintained, and to boost perfor-
mance, a reward mechanism is used.
Using hashed timelock agreements, it is seen
that the payment can be made in an auditable
and secure manner.
Ensures security between various users in the
network without involving third parties.
Proposes software-based IoT management con-
struct to enable multi-tenancy and load distri-
bution on constrained edge-devices.

[61]

[37]

[77]

[39]

[78]

[79]

[92]

[80]

[42]

[81]

[87]

[93]

[82]

[64]

[94]

[72]

[96]

nodes from IoT devices. Here, the authors design a mech-
anism that selects multiple IoT devices to enable the real-

18

Focuses on trading IoT sensors to provide secu-
rity against malicious attack and preserve pri-
vacy of the parties.
Helps in increasing the security and robustness
in healthcare sectors by utilizing cryptographic
algorithms.
Communication constraints
faced by the
blockchain is resolved by 5G communications.
Helps in transmitting messages securely with-
out involving centralized third-party.
A self-clustering methodology is used in clus-
tering the IoT network into K number of un-
known clusters.
A private evidence database is utilized along
with a type of permissioned blockchain,
which helps provide security services like non-
repudiation, integrity, and authentication.
Provides a scalable, generic and manageable
access control system by implementing PoC.
Proposes SDN-based IoT network by us-
ing peer-to-peer decentralized nature
of
blockchain.
The vehicular IoT environment in 5G-VANETs
enabling SDN architecture using the im-
mutability feature of blockchain.
Diﬀerent ways of impacts of blockchain in au-
diting are highlighted.

[84]

[85]

[86]

[88]

[89]

[75]

[90]

[91]

[99]

[100] Focuses on the development of a marketplace
framework that can address design challenges
in IoT models.

[101] Provides a suitable smart contract scheme for

guaranteeing the integrity of IoT devices.

[102] Designs a mechanism to select multiple IoT de-
vices to enable the real-time policy decisions in
a distributed way.

[103] Proposes a proxy re-encryption mechanism for
secure sharing of data in cloud environments.
[104] Overcomes the security issues of provenance

[105]

data by leveraging blockchain.
Incentive-based mechanism to purchase more
power for computation from server devices.

[106] The security protocol is ensured by using ver-
iﬁed IoT devices in the communication with
IoT gateways.

time policy decisions in a distributed way.

In [103], a proxy re-encryption mechanism is proposed
for secure sharing of data in cloud environments, where
an edge node behaves like a proxy server to handle ex-
tensive computations. The work [104] designs a generic
cloud-based IoT framework to overcome the security is-
sues of provenance data by leveraging blockchain. The

work [107] discusses blockchain-related security enhance-
ment solutions by highlighting key points required to de-
velop diﬀerent blockchain systems. The authors in [108]
review the security and privacy related issues in IoT sys-
tems, and present some security solutions using blockchain
technology. For blockchain platforms, the incentive mech-
anism is investigated in [105] to purchase more power for
computation from server devices in order to take part in
the mining. For the access control, BorderChain [106] is
based on blockchain in IoT endpoints, where the security
protocol is ensured by using veriﬁed IoT devices in the
communication with IoT gateways. BorderChain also ap-
plies access tokens which are used by IoT services and users
for any query to IoT resources. Tables 8 and 9 highlight
existing works which consider the integration of the IoT
and blockchain concentrating on security.

3.4. Privacy

A remote patient monitoring (RPM) system is pre-
sented in [78]. Using digital signatures and Ring Signa-
tures, the privacy is achieved to protect data from third
party intruders. WBMSs proposed in [80] ensure secure
communication with external devices and data. The credit-
based PoW mechanism in [81] builds DAG structured blockchain
which overcomes various problems such as power intensive-
ness, privacy and low-throughput, and makes the system
more eﬃcient. A scalable and trustworthy mechanism is
proposed in [109] which enforces traﬃc management by
integrating blockchain, pseudo IoT applications and SDN
at the edge networks, for veriﬁcation and authentication
purposes. It reduces the risk of IoT deployment by inter-
acting various IoT devices, stakeholders, and networks to
manage the traﬃc eﬃciently and ensure security, reliabil-
ity, and information tracking by the use of peer-to-peer
nature of blockchain. Various IoT services and devices are
listed, which are circulated among the stakeholders to pre-
vent traﬃc and reduce attacks on edge networks. Various
lightweight IoT devices face the problem of storing the
blockchain due to low storage capacity. A storage com-
pression consensus (SCC) algorithm is designed in [110]
which overcomes the problem such that the devices com-
press the blockchain using this algorithm to increase stor-
age capacity. It is observed that, by using SCC, the storage
capacity is reduced by 63% compared to the existing algo-
rithm like Byzantine fault tolerance (BFT) which uses pri-
vate blockchain. However, the proposed scheme increases
the maintenance of the system by acquiring free storage
spaces.

M2M communications presented in [87] secure the sys-
tem from external attacks. It helps in preserving the pri-
vacy. Interledger discussed in [94] acts as a gateway service
that mediates the payment and access controls between
diﬀerent parties, where the payment can be made in an
auditable and secure manner. In [112], various challenges
as well as current prospects of blockchain are surveyed.
Communication constraints faced in [85] are resolved by

Table 10: Contributions of Existing Works Integrating IoT and
Blockchain, and Concentrating on Privacy

Item Contributions
[78]

Using digital signatures and Ring Signatures,
privacy is achieved to protect data from third
party intruder.
Ensures secure communications with external
devices.
Proposes credit-based PoW mechanism with
DAG structured blockchain.

[80]

[81]

[109] Enforces traﬃc management by integrating
blockchain, pseudo IoT applications and SDN
at the edge networks.

[110] Devices compress the blockchain to increase

storage capacity.

[87] M2M communications are presented to secure
the system and maintain the privacy from ex-
ternal attacks.

[94] Mediates the payment and access controls be-
tween diﬀerent parties, where the payment can
be made in an auditable and secure manner.
Uses the 5G communication with blockchain
ensuring privacy.

[85]

[111] Ensures the privacy for resource-constrained
IoT devices using Multi-Party Computation
and blockchain.

[111] Ensures the privacy for resource-constrained
IoT devices using Multi-Party Computation
and blockchain.

the 5G communication using blockchain ensuring the pri-
vacy. However, it faces some issues such as limited storage
capacity, poor scalability, time consumption, and it in-
creases overhead in traﬃc. BPAS proposed in [86] helps
in transmitting messages securely. Two protocols, BRICS-
BB and BRICS-SSP, are introduced in [111] for resource-
constrained IoT devices using Multi-Party Computation
(MPC) and blockchain. These protocols are applied in
variety of cases. For example, BRICS-BB is applied on
software updates and BRICS-SSP can be used for data
privacy management, supply chain, and identity manage-
ment. A survey of blockchain of things (BCoT) is con-
ducted in [113] which provides an overview of both the
blockchain technology and Internet of Things as well as the
challenges addressed by the blockchain technology in IoT
systems. Industrial applications of BCoT and issues faced
by using blockchain technology for ﬁfth generation in IoT
are also highlighted. Table 10 highlights existing works
which consider the integration of the IoT and blockchain
concentrating on maintaining the privacy.

3.5. Authentication

An IoT device residing on blockchain uses smart con-
tracts to provide authentication, integrity, and non-repudiation.
Due to the problem faced by IoT devices using centralized

19

platform, a decentralized peer-to-peer based blockchain
network is implemented in [114], which helps in preventing
data-tampering by intruders. The GIDDI solution pro-
posed in [92] is IoT-scaled and IoT-owned. In this solu-
tion, the blockchain stores metadata related to IoT de-
vices, which provides scalability, authentication, and se-
curity. An update framework is proposed in [115], which
prevents attacks and ensures authentication and repudi-
ation to the messages sent between the ﬁrmware update
service and IoT devices. A blockchain-based architecture
is proposed in [41] for edge IoT devices so that they can be
uniquely identiﬁed through registering physically unclon-
able functions (PUF) attributes at the time of manufac-
turing. The dual-use of blockchain enhances the usability
and reliability of the system, and counteracts the problems
of cloning and counterfeiting. A low-cost communication
protocol is also introduced to securely authenticate the lo-
cal devices.

A trust list is proposed in [109], which enforces traﬃc
management for veriﬁcation and authentication purposes.
A blockchain-based IoT system is proposed in [43], which
is used to validate blockchain data helping IoT devices
with random nodes to conﬁrm block headers without only
depending on the central server. But the large size of the
blockchain causes problem for IoT devices with low data
storage capacity, memory, and bandwidth. The proposed
system works on the top of blockchain protocols support-
ing IoT devices with low-power. It consists of a gateway
which transfers messages from blockchain to IoT devices.
It uses a probabilistic approach which is based on Bloom
ﬁlters. Due to the high cost of deployment, IoT-based
solutions are restricted but it can be overcomed by hori-
zontal integration of IoT devices and the use of blockchain
system. In this direction, a ticket-based veriﬁcation pro-
tocol is implemented in [116], which does not require the
participation of IoT devices in complex transactions, and
therefore it can be used in low-end IoT devices. It reduces
the networking and processing overhead of IoT devices in
the system.

A blockchain framework, “Sensor-Chain”, is designed
for IoT of mobile devices in [117]. The proposed frame-
work is lightweight and scalable so that the IoT’s limited
storage capabilities as well as computational power can be
addressed. The designed framework reduces resource con-
sumption and is capable in retaining information about
IoT systems of mobile devices. Authentication is concen-
trated in this work. BPAS is proposed in [86], which helps
in transmitting messages securely without involving a cen-
tralized third-party. The user authentication scheme pro-
posed in [118] enables the integration of blockchain and
fog nodes. The proposed scheme uses smart contracts to
authenticate users such that IoT devices can be accessed
without involving a third party in a decentralised network.
Fog nodes provide scalability by carrying out computation
related tasks to communicate with blockchain and authen-
ticate devices. The security analysis is also conducted,
which shows that the proposed solution achieves security

20

Table 11: Contributions of Existing Works Integrating IoT and
Blockchain, and Concentrating on Authentication

Item Contributions
[114] Proposes a decentralized peer-to-peer network
to prevent data-tampering by intruders.
The blockchain stores metadata related to IoT
devices, which provides scalability, authentica-
tion, and security.

[92]

[115] Ensures authentication and repudiation to the
messages sent between the ﬁrmware update
service and IoT devices.
Edge IoT devices can be uniquely identiﬁed
through registering PUF attributes at the time
of manufacturing.

[41]

[109] Enforces traﬃc management for veriﬁcation

[43]

and authentication purposes.
Validates blockchain data with random nodes
to conﬁrm block headers without only depend-
ing on the central server.

[116] A ticket-based veriﬁcation protocol is imple-
mented, which does not require the participa-
tion of IoT devices in complex transactions.

[86]

[117] The proposed framework is lightweight and
scalable, and suitable for devices having lim-
ited storage capabilities.
Helps in transmitting messages securely with-
out involving centralized third-party.
[118] Fog nodes provide scalability by carrying out
computation related tasks to communicate
with blockchain and authenticate devices.

[119] Practical Byzantine fault tolerance consen-
sus algorithm is implemented in an optimized
manner to construct a consortium blockchain.
[120] The proposed software system consists of
ADCP handler, software ﬁrewall, WebSocket
server, and blockchain database.

[121] Reduces the latency in block validation and en-

ergy consumption.

goals of integrity, conﬁdentiality, and availability. The pro-
posed mechanism provides authentication, data encryp-
tion, and security against malicious attacks.

A trusted and distributed system is proposed in [119],
which is based on edge computing and blockchain in order
to improve the authentication and eﬃciency. The Practi-
cal Byzantine fault tolerance (PBFT) consensus algorithm
is implemented in an optimized manner to construct a
consortium blockchain which is used for storing authen-
It achieves traceability of termi-
ticated data and logs.
nals and guarantees trusted authentication. Edge comput-
ing is applied to provide edge authentication and name
resolution using smart contracts. Asymmetric cryptog-
raphy is used to prevent the nodes from being attacked.
Caching strategy is proposed which outperforms edge com-
puting in terms of hit ratio and average delay. Using

blockchain technology, we can digitally identify the IoT de-
vices, and then authenticate these devices before it join an
IoT network. Authenticated Devices Conﬁguration Pro-
tocol (ADCP) helps in achieving the authentication pro-
cess as presented in [120]. The proposed software system
consists of ADCP handler, software ﬁrewall, WebSocket
server, and blockchain database. WebSocket server helps
in synchronizing blockchain database. ADCP responds to
the requests for connection from other authenticated de-
vices. The software ﬁrewall helps in encryption of data
automatically. A consensus algorithm is proposed in [121]
that reduces the latency in block validation and energy
consumption. The proposed mechanism is evaluated over
resource-constrained IoT devices. Table 11 highlights ex-
isting works which consider the integration of the IoT and
blockchain concentrating on maintaining the authentica-
tion.

3.6. Tamper-Proof and Eﬃciency

A security auditing system is constructed in [61] which
prevents tampering of data and helps in encryption and
decryption of data records. Fabric-IoT proposed in [39]
makes uses of blockchain’s decentralization, traceability as
well as tamper-proof property. The proposed system has
a device authority model which ensures the security of the
device. Due to the problem faced by IoT devices in using
centralized platform, a decentralized peer-to-peer based
blockchain network is implemented in [114], which helps
in preventing data-tampering by intruders. To update
ﬁrmware and software, instead of delta updates, a private
blockchain mechanism is proposed in [115], which enhances
the update performance and helps in integrity veriﬁcation,
by utilizing a tamper-proof server. The blockchain server
maintains a record of metadata, checksum, etc.

A shared distributed ledger ensures secure and tamper-
proof transactions between various users in the network
without involving third parties. With the application of
DAG and its multi-forked structure, the high scalability,
eﬃcient provenance, and optimized validation are observed
in [72]. It aﬀects Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) of the
logistics domain. Together the IoT and blockchain help
in real-time monitoring of resources, and ensure tamper-
proof and eﬃciency. To address the constrained nature of
the IoT, both blockchain and edge computing are used. It
decreases device requirements for memory, and increases
the performance. The purpose of information circularity
is fulﬁlled in a smart city as data can be extracted to re-
duce the waste production and resource consumption, and
increase the services, as discussed in [122].
In [91], by
the use of blockchain, a trust management is established
such that the messages cannot be tampered. Although the
model ensures feasibility, accuracy, and eﬃciency, there is
an overhead introduced due to the encryption and trans-
mission of messages and videos. A blockchain-based IoT
system, known as Beekeeper, is proposed in [123], that al-
lows servers to process data without learning from homo-
morphic computations on the encrypted data. The data

Table 12: Contributions of Existing Works Integrating IoT and
Blockchain, and Concentrating on Tamper-Proof and Eﬃciency

Item Contributions
[61]

Prevents tampering of data and helps in en-
cryption and decryption of data records.
Has a device authority model which ensures
the security of accessed devices.

[39]

[114] Helps in preventing data-tampering caused by

intruders.

[115] Enhances the update performance and helps
in integrity veriﬁcation by utilizing a tamper-
proof server.

[72] With the application of DAG and its multi-
forked structure, high scalability,
eﬃcient
provenance and optimized validation are ob-
served.
Information circularity is fulﬁlled and im-
proved in a smart city.
Using blockchain, a trust management is estab-
lished such that the messages cannot be tam-
pered.

[122]

[91]

[123] Allows servers to process data without learn-
ing from homomorphic computations on the
encrypted data.

can be collectively veriﬁed even by public. Since all the
data are recorded in the decentralized blockchain, compu-
tational resources and huge memory are not required, and
therefore the proposed mechanism ensures privacy, secu-
rity, and the resistance to tamper. Table 12 highlights ex-
isting works which consider the integration of the IoT and
blockchain concentrating on tamper-proof and eﬃciency.

3.7. Resource Management

The survey [124] presents the classiﬁcation of resource-
constrained IoT devices and associated wireless communi-
cation protocols. The authors in [125] discuss the cloud
computing integrated with the blockchain platform for of-
ﬂoading computations from IIoT networks. Moreover, the
resource management issues are studied between cloud ser-
vice providers and miners in blockchain. The work [126]
discusses the importance of the blockchain in 6G com-
munications and resource management for multiple ap-
plications in the IoT. A distributed matching mechanism
is proposed in [127] to maximize the utilization of the
resource-restricted fog computing architecture, that guar-
antees diﬀerent mining requirements of fog nodes. Table 13
highlights existing works which consider the integration of
the IoT and blockchain concentrating on resource manage-
ment.

3.8. Auditable, Trustworthy, and Robustness

Using HTLAs in [94], it is observed that payment can
be made in an auditable and secure manner. A decen-
tralised blockchain technology is used along with constrained

21

Table 13: Contributions of Existing Works Integrating IoT and
Blockchain, and Concentrating on Resource Management

Item Contributions
[124] Presents

of
the
constrained IoT devices
and
wireless communication protocols.

classiﬁcation

resource-
associated

[125] Discusses the cloud computing integrated with
the blockchain platform for oﬄoading compu-
tations from IIoT networks.

[126] Highlights the importance of the blockchain in
6G communications and resource management
in IoT.

[127] Maximizes the utilization of resource-restricted

fog computing architecture.

IoT devices as it oﬀers various strengths, such as trans-
parency, auditability, etc., which make blockchain an ideal
component of IoT solutions [75]. In this work, a scalable,
generic, and manageable access control system is proposed,
which also implements PoC. NGBN framework is designed
in [76], which provides a scalable, robust, and secure net-
work environment for other applications, and it ensures
trustworthy and robustness. It focuses on the digital life
and society, where the blockchain oﬀers virtual coins such
that the data can be transmitted eﬃciently and economi-
cally. A blockchain-based IoT system is proposed in [79],
which helps in building trust and makes the system robust,
secure, and immune to failure. In [41], by accessing the
global dataset, the registered device can be veriﬁed any-
where without actually locating the manufacturer. The
local dataset helps in authenticating local edge IoT de-
vices robustly.

A blockchain-based IoT system is proposed in [128],
which helps civil-military cooperation to store metadata
collected from IoT devices and sensors, using Hyperledger
Fabric. It ensures feasibility, trustworthiness, and reliabil-
ity of the collected data from IoT devices. A high-level
architecture is presented in [61], which helps in metadata
binding using blockchain. A decision matrix or an analysis
framework is formulated in [129], which helps in identify-
ing key points while integrating the IoT and blockchain. It
guarantees trustworthiness, data immutability, and trace-
ability and provides an audit trail to diﬀerent stakehold-
ers. A blockchain-based IoT system helps in providing
trustworthy and peer-to-peer platform to manage data ef-
ﬁciently without the involvement of a third party, as dis-
cussed in [84]. It provides a common platform such that
diﬀerent IoT devices can communicate in a distributed
manner securely and protect against malicious attacks. It
ensures feasibility, fault tolerance, scalability, and opera-
tion time.

A model is proposed in [130] to provide IoT devices
the trust while making the payment by using blockchain
and OAuth 2.0 authorization framework. It ensures the
conﬁdentiality and integrity of IoT data. Authorization

requests are granted using the smart contract which works
on permissioned blockchain. Hash-lock and time-lock mech-
anism are used to cryptographically link various trusted
IoT resources for authorization grants and blockchain pay-
ments. In [131], a systematic survey is conducted on the
integration of the IoT and blockchain, where the current
trends are studied on the usage of blockchain in IoT sys-
tems. Challenges faced by IoT and blockchain are also
highlighted and analyzed, directing to future works in the
integration of the IoT and blockchain.

4. Integration of IoT with AI

In this section, we present the integration of the IoT
and AI in details. We also discuss the limitations of the
existing research works dealing with the applications of AI
in the IoT. Table 19 and Table 20 highlight the strengths
and weaknesses of the related works which consider the
integration of the IoT with AI.

ML applied on inexpensive and low-power IoT devices
is used for noise classiﬁcation in [132], by using a super-
vised learning algorithm. Mel-frequency cepstral coeﬃ-
cients (MFCC) is used for audio feature extraction. To
estimate the parameters for classiﬁcation, Support Vec-
tor Machine (SVM) and K-Nearest Neighbours (KNNs)
are used. The results show a high accuracy in the range
85% − 100% with the high computational speed. It is ob-
served that SVM has the highest accuracy. Using ML
methods, IoT botnets can be detected; however, to min-
imize the number of features, the feature selection is ap-
plied in [133]. It helps to overcome computation resource
as well as scalability problem by increasing the accuracy
rate based on the decision tree and a shallow method us-
ing the multi-class classiﬁer. It can be readily interpreted
by analysts and can be used in detecting the intrusion in
the system. A frost prediction system is proposed in [28]
enabling IoT devices. Using past readings of tempera-
ture and humidity, frost readings are predicted using ML
algorithms. Data was augmented by Synthetic Minority
Oversampling Technique (SMOTE). Experiments show a
reduction in the prediction error and increase the perfor-
mance in both Logistic Regression models and Random
Forest by including the neighbour information.

In [134], a semantic model is proposed for real-time
processing and data stream processing based on Seman-
tic Stream and Fact Stream. It assumes that all the ob-
jects, people, etc., have sensors embedded in them, that
help to emit events whenever an action is performed. The
main advantage is that it considers time as a key rela-
tion between diﬀerent information. Using Complex Event
Processing (CEP), the processing of streams can be imple-
mented and it can be applied to any random Data Stream
Management System (DSMS). In [135], a review is con-
ducted to obtain the trend of IoT applications and ML
techniques in Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSs).
It is seen that still there is a lack of application of ML tech-
niques in smart parking applications and smart lighting

22

Table 14: Integration of IoT with Blockchain Concentrating on Privacy

Weakness
Implementation
constraints
related to storage manage-
ment are not highlighted

analysis

between

Increases
the maintenance
complexity of the system by
acquiring free storage spaces
(1) Protocol overhead, (2) No
details of responsiveness anal-
ysis with respect to diﬀerent
existing related mechanisms
(1) Implementation details,
of
(2) Lack
of
trade-oﬀ
privacy
implementation
preserving
respon-
and
constraints
siveness
the proposed
of
mechanism
(1) Limited storage capacity,
(2) Poor scalability, (3) Time
consumption, (4) Increase of
traﬃc overhead
Implementation related to
security and computational
costs
(1) Latency of
transaction
output is not highlighted, (2)
Implementation details in dif-
ferent applications
Lack of details in implemen-
tation direction

Item
Kataoka
[109]

et

al.

Kim et al. [110]

Strength
(1) Enforces traﬃc management with the help of SDN,
(2) Reduces the risk of IoT deployment, (3) Ensures
security, reliability and information tracking by the use
of peer-to-peer nature of blockchain, (4) Reduces attacks
on edge networks
Storage compression based consensus algorithm

Lee et al. [87]

(1) Secures the system from external attacks, (2) Pre-
serves privacy in various IoT related applications

Paavolainen et al.
[94]

(1) Enhance privacy by acting as a gateway service that
mediates the payment and access controls between dif-
ferent parties, (2) Payment can be made in an auditable
and secure manner

Dinesh et al. [85]

Communication constraints is resolved by 5G communi-
cation

Choo et al. [86]

Kim et al. [111]

Dai et al. [113]

(1) Identity veriﬁcation maintaining trust, (2) Transmits
messages securely without involving centralized third-
party
(1) Authenticity, privacy and integrity of data transac-
tions in a lightweight manner, (2) Fast and does not
introduce overhead

(1) Provides an overview of both blockchain technology
and IoT along with the challenges, (2) Industrial ap-
plications and issues faced by blockchain technology for
ﬁfth generation in IoT

23

Item
Dawod et al. [92]

Table 15: Integration of IoT with Blockchain Concentrating on Authentication
Strength
Stores metadata related to IoT devices which provides
scalability, authentication and security

Guin et al. [41]

Dhakal et al. [115] Ensures authentication and repudiation to the messages
sent between the ﬁrmware update service and IoT de-
vices
(1) The registered device can be veriﬁed anywhere with-
out actually locating the manufacturer, (2) The local
dataset helps in authenticating local edge IoT devices
robustly, (3) Enhances the usability and reliability of
the system, (4) Counteracts the problems of cloning and
counterfeiting, (5) Low-cost communication protocol to
securely authenticate the local devices
Reduces the risk of IoT deployment by interacting with
various IoT devices and stakeholders

Kataoka
[109]

al.

et

Le et al. [43]

(1) Works on top of blockchain protocols supporting IoT
devices with low-power, (2) Space and time-eﬃcient

Pouraghily et al.
[116]

(1) Does not require the participation of IoT devices in
complex transactions, (2) Reduces the networking and
processing overhead of IoT devices

Shahid et al. [117]

Almadhoun et al.
[118]

Guo et al. [119]

Lau et al. [120]

(1) Lightweight and scalable, (2) Limited storage capa-
bilities and computational power are addressed, (3) Re-
duces resource consumption, (4) Capable in retaining
information about IoT systems of mobile devices, (5)
Extends with an integration of smart contract to deal
with data loss when number of nodes in a cell becomes
relatively low
(1) Transmits messages securely without involving cen-
tralized third-party, (2) Fog nodes provide scalability
by carrying out computation related tasks for commu-
nication, (3) Achieves security goals of integrity, conﬁ-
dentiality and availability, (4) Provides authentication,
data encryption and security against malicious attacks
(1) Practical Byzantine fault tolerance consensus al-
gorithm is implemented in an optimized manner,
(2) Achieves traceability of terminals and guarantees
trusted authentication, (3) Edge computing is applied
to provide edge authentication, (4) Asymmetric cryp-
tography is used to prevent the nodes from being at-
tacked, (5) The proposed caching strategy outperforms
edge computing in terms of hit ratio and average delay
(1) WebSocket server helps in synchronizing blockchain
database, (2) Storing all transactions helps in future
computation of the proposed mechanism, (3) Software
ﬁrewall helps in encryption of data automatically

24

Weakness
Design complexity and per-
formance issues are not high-
lighted
Lack of details of communica-
tion between devices

(1) Protocol implementation
overhead, (2) Storage man-
agement issues

Trust list implementation de-
tails and related overhead are
not highlighted
regarding
(1) Constraints
data storage
capacity are
not in details, (2) Protocol
overhead and implementation
cost
Storage management is not
highlighted,
(2) Response
time and latency are not in
details
(1) Lack of details of
im-
plementation constraints, (2)
Latency analysis is not in de-
tails

(1) Lack of details of stor-
age management, (2) Over-
head complexity, (3) Delay
and responsiveness are not
highlighted

(1) Protocol overhead needs a
detailed analysis, (2) Details
in comparative analysis with
respect to response time and
latency are required

(1) Details of storage han-
dling are not highlighted,
(2) Implementation costs and
constraints are not analyzed

Table 16: Integration of IoT with Blockchain Concentrating on Tamper-Proof and Eﬃciency

Item
Liu et al. [39]

Choi et al. [114]

Strength
(1) Makes uses of blockchain’s decentralization, trace-
ability as well as tamper-proof property, (2) Ensures
security of the device accessed, using three smart con-
tracts, (3) Helps in maintaining high throughput ensur-
ing data consistency
Helps in preventing data-tampering by intruders

Dhakal et al. [115]

(1) Enhances the update performance, (2) Helps in in-
tegrity veriﬁcation and updates by utilizing a tamper-
proof server, (3) Blockchain server maintains a record
of metadata, checksum etc.

Pervez et al. [72]

Damianou et al.
[122]

Xie et al. [91]

Zhou et al. [123]

(1) Ensures secure and tamper-proof transactions be-
tween various users in the network without involv-
ing third parties, (2) High scalability, eﬃcient prove-
nance and optimized validation are observed, (3) Helps
in real-time monitoring of resources and ensures non-
repudiation, privacy, accountability, predictive analysis,
transparency and stakeholder visibility
(1) Decreases device requirements for memory and in-
creases the performance, (2) The purpose of informa-
tion circularity is fulﬁlled in a smart city as data can be
extracted to reduce the waste production and resource
consumption
(1) Trust management is established so that messages
cannot be tampered, (2) Ensures feasibility, accuracy
and eﬃciency
(1) Processes data without learning from using homo-
morphic computations on the encrypted data, (2) High
computational resources and huge memory are not re-
quired, (3) Ensures resistance to tamper, privacy and
feasibility

Weakness
(1) Detailed analysis of eﬃ-
ciency and overhead are not
highlighted, (2) Storage man-
agement constraints

A simple approach that needs
a thorough analysis of imple-
mentation details,
security,
responsiveness, storage man-
agement etc.
(1) Storage issues are highly
related but
these are not
in details with an appropri-
ate storage management ap-
proach, (2) Lack of
imple-
mentation overhead analysis
of the proposed mechanism
(1)
Implementation details
(2) Time
are not present,
complexity and storage con-
straints are not highlighted

(1) Response time analysis
is not highlighted, (2) Over-
storage manage-
heads of
ment and device communica-
tion are not in details
Overhead is introduced due
to the encryption and trans-
mission of messages and video
(1) Lack of
implementation
details with performance is-
complexity
sues
analysis

(2) Time

25

Table 17: Integration of IoT with Blockchain Concentrating on Auditable, Trustworthy and Robustness

Item
Novo et al. [75]

Strength
Scalable, generic and manageable access control system
along with the implementation of PoC

Lei et al. [76]

(1) Provides a scalable, robust and secure network en-
vironment, (2) Smart city scenario which is useful for
smart transportation-related application

Weakness
(1) Storage management is-
sues, (2) Analysis of ease of
application
(1) Implementation complex-
ity, (2) Response time anal-
ysis along with the security
perspective needs to be pre-
sented in details

Guin et al. [41]

(1) Registered devices can be veriﬁed anywhere without
actually locating the manufacturer, (2) Local dataset
helps in authenticating local edge IoT devices robustly

Agrawal et al. [79] Makes the system robust, secure and immune to failure Lack of details of the pro-
posed system along with im-
plementation cost
(1) Details of access control
management are not high-
(2) Lack of delay
lighted,
analysis with response time
management
(1) Architectural
details
and complexity analysis, (2)
Communication
overhead
and responsiveness need to
be highlighted
(1) Lack of details of imple-
mentation and its constraints,
(2) Details of latency analysis
are not focused

(1) Civil-military cooperation to store metadata col-
lected from IoT devices and sensors using Hyperledger
Fabric, (2) Ensures feasibility, trustworthiness and reli-
ability of the collected data from IoT devices

Bajpai et al. [129]

Wrona et al. [128]

(1) Identiﬁes key points while integrating IoT and
blockchain, (2) Three computing aspects: communica-
tion, storage and processing, (3) Overcomes single point
of failure faced by various IoT systems, (4) Guarantees
trustworthiness, data immutability and traceability, (5)
Provides an audit trail to diﬀerent stakeholders
(1) Protects against malicious attacks, (2) Ensures fea-
sibility, fault tolerance, scalability and operation time

Urmila et al. [84]

Siris et al. [130]

(1) Lack of details of commu-
nication overhead, (2) Lack of
details of the proposed dis-
tributed mechanism
(1) Lack of operation time
(2) No details of
analysis,
storage management
and
complexity
implementation
along with cost management

(1) Ensures the conﬁdentiality and integrity of IoT data,
(2) Hash-lock and time-lock mechanisms are used to
cryptographically link various trusted IoT resources ac-
cess, along with for authorisation grants and blockchain
payments

26

systems. In [136], the usage of Autoregressive Integrated
Moving Average (ARIMA) forecasting in the IIoT is ex-
plored based on the time series data to predict the quality
of defects and the possible failures. Hence, the mechanism
improves the manufacturing process. The quality is man-
aged and controlled by using ML, and the cost of main-
tenance is lowered. Diﬀerent supervised models are used
to evaluate the prediction accuracy and it is observed that
they give an average accuracy of 0.96.

A survey conducted in [137] reviews the characteris-
tics of challenges faced by the IoT data for Deep Learning
(DL) methods. The IoT big data as well as the IoT fast
and streaming data are highlighted as the two categories of
the IoT data generation and their analytic requirements.
Several open source frameworks are presented for develop-
ing a DL architecture. Various challenges and the direction
of future work are presented in [137] in the path of IoT ap-
plications using DL methods. A monitoring system is de-
veloped in [138], which helps in identifying grape diseases
in the early stages using Hidden Markov Model. Based on
the prediction done by using ML algorithms, alerts are sent
to farmers and experts via SMS which helps them to in-
crease the proﬁts, protect the vineyards from diseases and
reduce the manual eﬀorts made for detecting the same. By
following the irrigation schedule and correctly spraying the
fertilizers, the excessive use of pesticides is limited. Hence,
the proposed system increases the quality of the crop. A
survey is provided in [139] on the use of ML algorithms
in Mobile Edge Computing (MEC) systems to learn about
the problem, and ﬁnd quick and optimal solutions for the
same. It also lists the challenges while integrating them.
Using ML, complex IoT systems can be built, which re-
sult in high quality services and supporting large number
of resources. A survey is conducted in [140] on the usage
of ML algorithms in context of the IoT. Diﬀerent types of
ML methods are described in the ﬁeld of sensor networks,
health monitoring, IoT, pattern recognition, and anomaly
detections. Various applications of ML algorithms in the
ﬁeld of the IoT-based healthcare are reviewed in [141],
where uses of various healthcare-based IoT applications
are analyzed along with their possible improvements.

IoT devices are expected to support various resource-
constrained Machine-Type Communication (MTC) devices
by satisfying their QoS requirements and several other
challenges faced by them, such as massive Machine Type
Communications (mMTC) traﬃc characterization, small
data packet transmission, QoS provisioning, and Radio
Access Network (RAN) congestion. A review is included
in [142] to address aforementioned issues. It identiﬁes the
potential as well as some challenges involved in using ML
techniques to solve the issues. Due to the large amount of
data generated by IoT devices, large scale ML systems are
required to organize, analyze, and draw inferences from
the sensor IoT data. ML algorithms are data intensive
and poses computational challenges to many computing
devices including cloud. To bridge the eﬃciency gap, three
approaches are highlighted in [143], which are approxi-

mate computing, machine learning accelerators, and post-
Complementary Metal Oxide Semiconductor (CMOS) tech-
nologies. Various techniques are presented in [44] to imple-
ment Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) on Field Programmable
Gate Arrays (FPGAs) having high energy eﬃciency and
performance, which include the use of resource modelling,
DNN reduction and re-training, conﬁgurable DNN, and
resource allocation across DNN layers, in order to adapt
the restricted resources used by IoT devices. A resource
allocation strategy is presented, which drives theoretical
guidelines for the minimal overall latency. Several designs
are also showcased, such as Inception module for FaceNet
face recognition, Long-term Recurrent Convolution Net-
work (LRCN) for video captioning, and Long Short-Term
Memory (LSTM) for sound recognition.

In [144], a comprehensive survey is conducted provid-
ing a view on the applications of ML in context of the
IoT. It highlights the recent progress achieved by using
ML techniques for the IoT enabling users to develop in-
telligent IoT applications and obtain deep analytics.
It
also discusses about the applications of the IoT using ML
in diﬀerent ﬁelds. In [145], an open source architecture is
proposed to predict the irrigation requirements by sens-
ing the ground parameters such as soil temperature, soil
moisture, environmental conditions, and weather forecast
data retrieved from the Internet, by exploiting ML algo-
rithms. In [146], a RESTful architecture is implemented
on Internet connected appliances to report their usage pat-
terns by using ML algorithms and the proposed mecha-
nism processes these data in the cloud through Auto Re-
gressive Integrated Moving Average (ARIIMA) predictive
models. Energy consumption of these devices can be re-
duced in order to operate autonomously and eﬃciently. To
address the issue of piglet mortality, the work [147] pro-
poses PigTalk which is an AI-based IoT architecture for
detecting and reducing piglet crushing, with the help of
the real-time investigation of the collected voice data. Ta-
ble 18 highlights existing works which generally consider
the integration of the IoT and AI.

4.1. Security

A supervised learning algorithm, Random Forest, is
applied in [146] to correctly identify types of IoT devices
from the white list. To train the multi-class classiﬁer, the
data was manually labelled and collected from the traﬃc
data. The results show that 99% of the devices were cor-
rectly identiﬁed from white list. The proposed mechanism
also demonstrates good transportability and it is highly
resilient in respect to external attacks. In [148], a system-
atic review of the attack vectors, security requirements,
and the security solutions currently implemented for the
constrained IoT networks is presented. Here, ML and DL
are used in the IoT devices to increase the security and pri-
vacy of the system. There are various limitations of using
ML and DL, such as the model does not ﬁt in all prob-
lems, the convergence takes long time, a minute change in
the input creates havoc in the system, and the models are

27

Table 18: Contributions of Existing Works Integrating IoT and AI

Item Contributions
[132]

Inexpensive and low-power IoT devices are
used for noise classiﬁcation using ML.
[133] Overcomes computation resource as well as
scalability problem by increasing the accu-
racy rate based on decision tree and a shallow
method using multi-class classiﬁer.
Frost prediction system is proposed using past
readings of temperature and humidity.

[28]

[134] A semantic model

is proposed for real-time
processing of data stream, based on Semantic
Stream and Fact Stream.

[135] A review is conducted to obtain the trend of

[136]

IoT applications and ML techniques in ITS.
Improves the manufacturing process in IIoT by
the usage of ARIMA forecasting in order to
predict the quality of defects and the possible
failures.

[137] Reviews the characteristics of challenges faced
by IoT data for deep learning methods.
[138] Helps in identifying grape diseases in the early
stages by using Hidden Markov Model.
[139] Learns about the problem and ﬁnds quick and
optimal solutions for the use of ML algorithms
in Mobile Edge Computing.

[140] Diﬀerent types of ML methods are described in
the ﬁeld of sensor networks, health monitoring,
pattern recognition, and anomaly detection in
IoT.

[141] Various healthcare-based IoT applications are
analyzed along with their possible improve-
ments.

[142] Reviews

the

issues

related to

resource-
constrained MTC devices and mMTC traﬃc
characterization, by satisfying their QoS re-
quirements.

[143] Highlights approaches to bridge the eﬃciency
gap between IoT devices and ML algorithms.
Implements DNNs on FPGAs having high en-
ergy eﬃciency and performance which includes
the use of resource modelling.

[44]

[144] Highlights the recent progress achieved by us-
ing ML techniques for IoT enabling users to
develop intelligent IoT applications.

[145] An open source architecture is proposed to pre-
dict the irrigation requirements by sensing the
ground parameters such as soil temperature,
soil moisture, environmental conditions, etc.

[146] Reports usage patterns of Internet connected
appliances by using ML algorithms, and pro-
cesses these data in the cloud.

also vulnerable to security breaches. Due to the increase
in the poisoning attack as described in [149], the overall

28

performance of the system decreases and presents various
security challenges. Using the tamper-free framework and
contextual information, the poisonous data is detected and
ﬁltered to train the supervised learning model. Two vari-
ations for fully untrusted and partially trusted data sets
are compared based on the performance. It is found that,
by using the proposed method, the network performance
is increased and the security is ensured.

To improve the security of IoT devices, a machine learn-
ing algorithm is used in [150] within the IoT gateway. By
using artiﬁcial neural networks, we can detect anomalies
in the data intelligently. The results presented in [150]
correctly identify invalid data points in IoT systems. By
using ML, Denial of Service (DoS) detection is performed
in [151], where it is observed that DoS traﬃc attack can
be identiﬁed eﬃciently from customer IoT devices. To re-
strict the computational overhead, limited feature set is
used, which is necessary for the middlebox deployment
and real-time classiﬁcation. Five diﬀerent classiﬁers, i.e.,
KNN, Support vector machine with linear kernel (LSVM),
Decision tree using Gini impurity scores (DT), Random
Forest using Gini impurity scores (RF), and Neural Net-
work (NN) are tested on both normal and DoS attack traf-
ﬁc datasets. The results show an accuracy of higher than
0.99 on all the aforementioned algorithms. An anomaly
detection framework is proposed in [45] for detecting ma-
licious behaviours and cyber-attacks in IoT devices having
limited communication and computation resources. The
proposed mechanism can be implemented in any device
despite the size and is more suitable for devices running
speciﬁc type of applications. ML models and statistical
techniques can be used in detecting any type of attacks
on IoT devices, and the behavioural models of these IoT
devices can be learned easily. It is seen that the proposed
approach performs better in comparison to other tradi-
tional models.

Various attack models for IoT devices are investigated
in [46] along with IoT security solutions based on ML tech-
niques which are learning-based including access control,
secure oﬄoading, IoT authentication, and malware detec-
tion to protect data privacy. The use of the transfer learn-
ing at the beginning of the learning process reduces the
risk of choosing bad security defence policies. New ML
techniques having low communication and computational
overhead enhance the security of IoT systems. A backup
security solution should be incorporated and designed in
order to provide reliability and security to the system. A
three-tier architecture is proposed in [152], which helps in
storing and processing a large volume of wearable sensor
data. Tier-1 helps in extracting data from IoT devices.
Tier-2 stores a large volume of data in cloud. Tier-3 de-
velops a logistic regression-based model for heart diseases.
In order to ensure the ﬂexibility of data access and
data security in the IoT, the scheme proposed in [155] ad-
dresses the issues with the security and privacy in the edge
intelligence (EI) model for the IoT, where ML models are
trained in EI. The work [156] presents a survey of various

Table 19: Integration of IoT with AI Concentrating on Security

Item
Ventura
[146]

et

al.

Hussain
[148]

et

al.

Baracaldo et al.
[149]

Canedo
[150]

et

al.

Doshi et al. [151]

Li et al. [45]

Xiao et al. [46]

Strength
(1) Demonstrates good transportability and is highly
resilient with respect to external attacks, (2) 99% of the
devices were correctly identiﬁed from white list of IoT
devices
(1) A systematic review of the attack vectors, security
requirements and the security solutions currently imple-
mented for the constrained IoT networks, (2) Highlights
various limitations such as ﬁtting of models in all prob-
lems, convergence analysis, a minute change in the input
creates havoc in the system and vulnerable to security
breaches
(1) Discussion of the decrease of overall system perfor-
mance due to the increase in poisoning attack, (2) Using
tamper-free framework and contextual information, poi-
sonous data is detected and ﬁltered to train supervising
learning model, (3) Increases performance and decreases
runtime, (4) Ensures security
(1) Anomalies in the data are detected by using artiﬁ-
cial neural network, (2) Results correctly identify invalid
data points in IoT systems

(1) DoS traﬃc attacks from customer IoT devices are
identiﬁed eﬃciently, (2) Computational overhead is re-
stricted, (3) Limited feature set is used, which is nec-
essary for middlebox deployment and real-time classiﬁ-
cation, (4) Five diﬀerent classiﬁers are tested on both
normal and DoS attack traﬃc dataset
(1) Detects malicious behaviour and cyber-attacks in
IoT devices having limited communication and compu-
tation resources, (2) Can be implemented in any device
despite the size, (3) More suitable for devices running
speciﬁc type of applications

(1) Learning based access control, secure oﬄoading, IoT
authentication and malware detection to protect data
privacy, (2) Using transfer learning at the beginning of
learning process reduces the risk of choosing bad secu-
rity defence policies, (3) Low communication and com-
putational overhead

Kumar et al. [152] A three-tier architecture is proposed, which helps in
storing and processing large volume of wearable sensor
data

Weakness
Lack of convergence analysis
in practical scenarios

Shortcomings
of machine
learning are not in details
which are useful to determine
the challenges of applying
machine learning in IoT

(1) Lack of analysis of learn-
ing overhead to ensure secu-
rity, (2) Implementation de-
tails in practical perspective
are not highlighted

(1) Learning overhead is not
in details, (2) Training con-
straints and future
train-
ing perspective are not high-
lighted
convergence
(1) Learning
needs a detailed analysis, (2)
Limitations with respect to
security constraints are not
highlighted

(1) More detailed implemen-
tation analysis is required to
understand the dependency
on the size and types of ap-
plications, (2) Tuning of dif-
ferent learning parameters is
not highlighted
A backup security solution
should be incorporated and
designed in order to provide
reliability and security to the
system

(1) Communication details
and overhead between diﬀer-
ent tiers are not in details, (2)
Lack of response time analy-
sis and storage management

29

Table 20: Integration of IoT with AI Concentrating on Privacy

Item
Xiao et al. [46]

Strength
(1) Various attack models for IoT devices are investi-
gated along with IoT security solutions based on ML
techniques, (2) ML-based access control, secure oﬄoad-
ing and IoT authentication, (3) Using transfer learning
at the beginning of learning process reduces the risk of
choosing bad security defense policies

Jeong et al. [153]

Li et al. [47]

(1) Helps in protecting the privacy of users whenever a
resource-constrained IoT devices run ML applications,
(2) To improve the privacy, partial processing is done at
the client side so that it would be hard to retrieve the
original data again, (3) Shorter prediction time com-
pared to other local predictions
(1) Due to the multiple layers in deep learning, accurate
information can be extracted from the large amount of
raw sensor data generated from IoT devices, (2) Edge
computing helps in reducing the traﬃc of the network,
(3) Both deep learning and edge computing are utilized

Pandey
[154]

et

al.

Using a person’s heart beat rate, it is tried to predict
whether or not a person is in stress

Weakness
(1) A backup security solu-
tion should be incorporated
and designed in order to pro-
vide reliability and security,
(2) Overhead of learning pro-
cess, (3) Convergence details
to impose security are not in
details
(1) There is a chance of in-
crease in the time required
for computation aﬀecting the
performance of the system,
(2) Lack of learning overhead
analysis
(1) Since deep learning is
used, learning time improve-
ment mechanisms are
re-
quired,
(2) Storage utiliza-
tion and implementation de-
tails are not highlighted
(1) Details of improving the
learning mechanism of the
proposed model are not pre-
sented, (2) Lack of respon-
siveness analysis

classes of cyber-attacks in diﬀerent IoT systems. More-
over, this work presents reinforcement and deep learning
based solutions to combat diﬀerent types of security at-
tacks in several IoT models. The authors in [157] design a
two-way trustworthy communication model in AI-enabled
IoT frameworks. The model incorporates both rating and
trust information more thoroughly, which can alleviate the
sparse trust problem in the IoT. In [158], the security of
IoT devices is achieved by detecting spam with the help
of ML, where ﬁve ML-based schemes are evaluated using
diﬀerent metrics considering a large set of input features.
Each model calculates a spam score considering the in-
put features, and this score reﬂects the trustworthiness of
devices under various parameters. Table 21 highlights ex-
isting works which consider the integration of the IoT and
AI concentrating on the security.

4.2. Privacy

Various attack models for IoT devices are presented
in [46], which address the IoT authentication and malware
detection. The use of transfer learning at the beginning
of learning process reduces the risk of choosing bad secu-
rity defense policies. An approach is described in [153],
which helps in protecting the privacy of users whenever
a resource-constrained IoT device runs ML applications
based on NN using cloud computing. To improve the pri-
vacy, partial processing is done at the client side such that

it would be hard to retrieve the original data again. It is
observed that the proposed approach has a shorter predic-
tion time compared to other local predictions. However,
there is a chance in increasing the time required for the
computation, which aﬀects the performance of the system.
To maintain user privacy in the IoT platform, deep
learning as well as edge computing are used in [47]. Due
to the multiple layers in deep learning, the accurate infor-
mation can be extracted from the large amount of raw sen-
sor data generated from the IoT devices. Edge computing
helps in reducing the traﬃc of the network to cloud servers.
From the performance analysis, it is observed that the pro-
posed solution can rise the number of tasks in edge servers
along with achieving QoS requirements.
In [154], using
person’s heart beat rate, the authors have tried to predict
whether or not a person is in stress, by exploiting both
the IoT and ML. The IoT informs patients about their
stress conditions and ML algorithms are used to predict
the condition of the patient. Table 22 highlights existing
works which consider the integration of the IoT and AI
concentrating on the privacy.

4.3. Link Quality, Fault detection, and Data Rate

The work [159] proposes a methodology to dynami-
cally estimate the link quality in cloud communications,
considering locations of nodes. For this purpose, several
machine learning techniques are implemented, such as de-

30

Table 21: Contributions of Existing Works Integrating IoT and AI,
and Concentrating on Security
Item Contributions
[146]

Identiﬁes types of IoT devices from the white
list using multi-class classiﬁer.

[148] A systematic review of the attack vectors, se-
curity requirements, and security solutions for
the constrained IoT networks is presented.

[149] Using tamper-free framework and contextual
information, poisonous data is detected and ﬁl-
tered to train supervising learning model.

[150] By using artiﬁcial neural networks, anomalies
in the data are intelligently detected.
[151] Performs DoS attack detection by using ML.
[45]

Detects malicious behaviour and cyber-attacks
in IoT devices having limited communication
and computation resources.
Various attack models for IoT devices are in-
vestigated along with IoT security solutions
based on ML techniques.

[46]

[152] Helps in storing and processing a large volume

of wearable sensor data in IoT.

[155] Addresses the issues with the security and pri-

vacy in the edge intelligence model for IoT.

[156] Presents

reinforcement and deep learning
based solutions to combat diﬀerent types of se-
curity attacks in IoT models.

[157] Designs a two-way trustworthy communication
model in AI-enabled IoT frameworks.
[158] The security of IoT devices is achieved by de-
tecting spam with the help of ML, where ﬁve
ML-based schemes are evaluated using diﬀer-
ent metrics.

Table 22: Contributions of Existing Works Integrating IoT and AI,
and Concentrating on Privacy
Item Contributions
[46]

Addresses IoT authentication and malware de-
tection using transfer learning.

[153] Helps in protecting the privacy of users when-
ever a resource-constrained IoT device runs
ML applications using cloud computing.
Using deep learning, the number of tasks in
edge servers are risen along with achieving QoS
requirements.

[47]

[154] Predicts whether or not a person is in stress,

by exploiting both IoT and ML.

cision tree, linear regression, neural networks, random for-
est, etc. Authors in [160] show that fault detection in
data driven predictive analysis in remote locations can be
achieved using the support vector machine algorithm and
low bandwidth IoT. The scheme proposed in [161] utilizes
the self-organization based map neural network to group
IoT devices considering their data rates. For each of the

31

group, a slot is allocated for channel access.

4.4. Sentiment Analysis

A learning-based mechanism is proposed in [162] to
analyze sentiment of text in IoT frameworks, and for this
purpose, a self-attention prototype is used to predict sen-
timent features. The work [163] discusses sentiment anal-
ysis of big data considering its features, deﬁnition, and
decision value. Here, the challenges of the impact of the
IoT on sentiment analysis of big data are also highlighted.

5. Integration of IoT with Blockchain and AI

In this section, we discuss existing research works which
integrate the IoT with blockchain and AI technologies. In
this regard, the limitations of the related works are also
discussed. Tables 23 and 24 highlight the strengths and
weaknesses of the related works which consider the inte-
gration of the IoT with blockchain and AI.

Sharing of authentic information using AI-capable ma-
chines in the IoT is very crucial for the risk management
with personal accountability. A probabilistic proof system
is introduced in [164] using blockchain for cybersecurity
satisfying economic and legal demands of the real-world
business. The decentralized system helps in proving the
trustworthiness of partners by a secure search. Here, the
minimal external attacks or losses are expected due to the
nonparticipation of third parties. The symmetric distribu-
tion of authentic information as well as overcoming the vul-
nerabilities of the adverse selection in the IoT contribute
to an open marketplace on using security reports for trad-
ing rights [164]. The IoT is a transformational technology
that minimizes human intervention with the aid of mod-
ern technologies like AI and blockchain.
In spite of au-
thentication of devices, the security remains a major issue
which can be improved by using blockchain’s decentralized
and atomizing mechanisms, and transactions. Problems of
network traﬃc, identity authentication, etc., can be over-
comed by using smart contracts which also prevent tam-
pering of data. Blockchain-based IoT systems can be used
for supply chain management supporting access manage-
ment systems, authorized payment generation, etc. AI,
on the other hand, uses machine learning algorithms to
adapt accordingly. Few concerns are that the blockchain
system is not scalable and there is a lack of challenges for
developing IoT applications [165].

The MEC-based sharing system oﬀers spatio-temporal
services without the need of a central veriﬁcation using
smart contracts, as discussed in [33]. AI and cognitive
computing are successful in providing reasoning by follow-
ing the workﬂows and identifying or validating any changes
found. Data transactions are advanced via blockchain,
IoT, 5G device-to-device (D2D) communication capabil-
ity, MEC, and fog computing. Phenomena of interest can
be found by analyzing massive amount of data with the
support of diﬀerent types of data science advancements.

Blockchain can store immutable data securely in a decen-
tralized repository which can be shared using global iden-
tity, and has the potential to detect and eliminate fraudu-
lent activities [33]. A software artifact, known as “Smart
Things” [36], is supported with AI features and is inte-
grated with C Language Integrated Production System
(CLIPS) to perform data analysis using RESTful micro
services which make it self-inferencable and self-monitorable.
“Smart Things” manages the real-time communication with
other resources via Multichain, a permission-based blockchain
protocol, to reduce the communication cost. A decen-
tralized fog architecture is designed and implemented to
In [36], the results illus-
distribute management tasks.
trate that, to enable autonomous features, hybrid solutions
should be adopted in IoT networks.

In [166], a data marketplace is implemented on a blockchain-

based platform using Swarm as a distributed storage sys-
tem, where technologies such as the IoT, blockchain, and
AI can interact and collaborate to create a decentralized
platform, such that data can be stored and accessed easily
by multiple parties. Thus, the proposed mechanism in-
creases the service quality. It uses a voting mechanism to
eliminate unreliable data providers. Blockchain provides
various economic, technical, and user-facing beneﬁts but
it does not support safety-critical applications due to the
lack of some form of encryption. Data replication is to
be handled by the vendors. A paid-sharing architecture
of the knowledge market is proposed in [30] for making
the knowledge tradable using edge-AI enabled IoT devices,
where blockchain helps in ensuring security as well as ef-
ﬁciency in the market using a new consensus mechanism,
known as Proof-of-Trading (PoT), that consumes less re-
sources. A game-based knowledge strategy is proposed
as incentives for the market, where it is observed that an
optimal pricing strategy helps buyers with the high qual-
ity knowledge and encourages sellers to learn more data.
Using Machine Learning, a hierarchical market model is
introduced, as the extracted knowledge can be reproduced
by it with almost no costs [30].

Blockchain is used to facilitate illegal market activities.
To overcome it, a self-redactable blockchain (SRB) is pro-
posed in [29] for building a trust layer for the IoT, using
revocable chameleon hash (RCH) to create disincentives
to manage any data-driven business and support execu-
tion of chain redaction securely as well as eﬃciently. To
obtain redaction, additional metadata and costs are intro-
duced, which can be compensated by the merits of the fast
veriﬁcation and storage saving provided by the same [29].
Smart logistics solution is proposed in [167], where logis-
tics planner and smart contracts are used to secure trust,
provide visibility, and help in condition-monitoring of as-
sets using distributed ML in supply chain management.
It demonstrates liability, transparency, accountability, op-
timal planning, and traceability, for handling assets by
diﬀerent parties involved in the logistics of supply chain
management with the help of the IoT, blockchain, ML,
and Big Data.

The IoT and CPS maintain visibility and global track-
ability of supply chain by gathering information in real
time. Manufacturers of these smart devices apply their
own standards making interoperability more challenging
leading to an overcomplicated system. Various cybersecu-
rity risks are present due to the increase in interconnec-
tivity leading to security breaches in sectors like ﬁnance.
A framework is proposed in [168] using the IoT and CPS
objects to incorporate forensic-readiness for investigations
and post-incident; and a prototype is maintained to de-
tect anomaly with the help of Bluetooth proximity mon-
itoring. The proposed scheme ensures conﬁdentiality, in-
tegrity, availability, authenticity, and safety [168]. Using
the IoT and AI, a proposition is made in [169] to oper-
ate Halal food chain on blockchain with respect to its ar-
chitecture, application, and technological components to
safeguard data. Blockchain reduces chances of tampering
with data, facilitates audit, provides security and compli-
ance but its immutable nature makes compliance to new
data privacy challenging [169].

Based on blockchain, a privacy preserving SVM scheme,
known as SecureSVM, is proposed in [31] to encrypt the
IoT data. Using blockchain, a secure and reliable plat-
form is built for sharing data between data providers, and
data is stored in a distributed ledger without involving
a third-party. By employing a homomorphic cryptosys-
tem, a secure, eﬃcient, and accurate training algorithm
is constructed such that a secure comparison and poly-
nomial multiplication are achieved, which help in ensuring
the conﬁdentiality of data for data analysis [31]. For smart
homes, the privacy-preserving distributed mechanism pro-
posed in [175] enables users to manage energy usages par-
allelly in an optimized way. Moreover, a blockchain system
is designed for developing a smart contract for IoT devices
to support an energy management system.

In [35], a video surveillance system is proposed based
on Inter Planetary File System (IPFS) technology, permis-
sioned blockchain, convolution neural networks (CNNs),
and edge computing. The edge computing helps in acquir-
ing a large amount of information and processing redun-
dant data. IPFS is used for storing massive video data.
Blockchain guarantees the reliability, security as well as
the robustness of the system, whereas CNN is used for
real-time monitoring of data. The system ensures the se-
curity of the data and tolerance. IPFS and edge computing
combinely reduce the storage and transmission costs [35].
A federated learning (FL) system is presented in [170]
for IoT manufacturers, where the proposed system is based
on reputation crowdsourcing and provides better services
than the existing related functionalities. Various tech-
nologies, such as blockchain, distributed storage, mobile
edge computing, and federated learning, are used to con-
struct the system. An incentive mechanism is designed to
increase the participation of customers in crowdsourcing
tasks. ML helps in predicting the consumption behaviours
and customers’ requirements of the system with the help of
the federated technology, whereas blockchain helps in in-

32

Item
Wohlgemuth et al.
[164]

Jindal et al. [165]

Rahman
[33]

et

al.

Samaniego et al.
[36]

¨Ozyilmaz
[166]

et al.

Lin et al. [30]

Huang et al. [29]

Table 23: Integration of IoT with Blockchain and AI

Strength
(1) Symmetric distribution of authentic information as
well as overcoming the vulnerabilities of adverse selec-
tion in IoT, (2) Minimal external attacks or losses are
expected due to the nonparticipation of third parties
(1) Blockchain-based IoT systems support access man-
agement systems and identity automatic currency ex-
change systems, authorized payment generation etc., (2)
AI strengthens the proposed mechanism to adapt ac-
cordingly by using machine learning algorithms
(1) MEC-based sharing system oﬀers spatio-temporal
services without the need of central veriﬁcation using
smart contracts, (2) AI and cognitive computing are
useful in providing reasoning by following the workﬂows
and identifying or validating any changes found
(1) Software artifact is supported with AI features and is
integrated with CLIPS system to perform data analysis
automatically, (2) Permission-based blockchain protocol
to reduce the communication cost, (3) Decentralized fog
architecture to distribute management tasks, (4) Man-
ages real-time communication with other resources
(1) Voting mechanism to eliminate unreliable data
providers, (2) Provide various economic, technical and
user-facing beneﬁts, (3) Blockchain and AI interact and
collaborate to create a decentralized and trustless plat-
form

(1) Blockchain helps in ensuring security as well as ef-
ﬁciency in the market, (2) Architecture of knowledge
market is proposed for making knowledge tradable using
edge-AI, (3) Consumes less resources, (4) Optimal pric-
ing strategy helps buyers with high quality knowledge
and encourages sellers to learn more data, (5) Knowl-
edge can be reproduced with almost no costs
(1) Self-redactable blockchain is proposed for building
a trust layer for IoT, (2) Execution of chain redaction
securely as well as eﬃciently, (3) Fast veriﬁcation and
storage saving

Arumugam et al.
[167]

Ahmadi-Assalemi
et al. [168]

(1) Helps in condition-monitoring of assets using dis-
tributed ML framework in supply chain management,
(2) Demonstrates liability, transparency, accountability,
optimal planning and traceability, for handling assets by
diﬀerent parties

(1) Incorporates forensic-readiness for investigations
and post-incident, (2) A prototype is maintained to de-
tect anomaly with the help of Bluetooth proximity moni-
toring, (3) Ensures conﬁdentiality, integrity, availability,
authenticity as well as safety

33

of

presence

the
in
learning

Weakness
Responsiveness
blockchain architecture
the
overhead is not in details
(1) Blockchain system is not
scalable, (2) Lack of profes-
sionals for developing IoT ap-
plications

of

(1) Protocol overhead and
learning convergence are not
highlighted, (2) Lack of im-
plementation details

(1) Training constraints and
the scope of improvement of
the learning are not in details,
(2) Lack of details of the pro-
posed approach

(1) Does not support safety-
critical applications due to
the lack of some form of en-
cryption, (2) Data replication
is to be handled by the ven-
dors
(1) Design complexity can in-
crease the overhead of proto-
col implementation and exe-
cution, (2) Scope of improve-
ment of the trained model is
not highlighted

(1) Additional metadata and
costs are introduced, (2) Con-
vergence of learning in prac-
tical scenarios is not in de-
tails, (3) Lack of responsive-
ness analysis
(1) Storage management is
not presented, (2) Lack of
details of the execution ﬂow
of the proposed model, (3)
Adaptability details and con-
straints are not highlighted
(1) Handling cybersecurity
needs
(2)
to be detailed,
Lack of implementation de-
tails of the prototype along
with management of learning
overhead

Table 24: Integration of IoT with Blockchain and AI (contd.)

Item
Chandra
[169]

et

al.

Strength
(1) An increase in trust throughout the supply chain is
noted, (2) Blockchain reduces chances of tampering with
data, facilitate audit, provide security and compliance

Shen et al. [31]

(1) Using blockchain, a secure and reliable platform is
built for sharing data between data providers, (2) Stores
data in distributed ledger without involving a third-
party, (3) Secure and eﬃcient training algorithm, (4)
Ensures conﬁdentiality of data for data analysis

Wang et al. [35]

Zhao et al. [170]

Chen et al. [171]

Ramachandran et
al. [172]

Singla et al. [173]

Outchakoucht
al. [174]

et

(1) Helps in acquiring large amount of
information
and processing redundant and private sensor data, (2)
Blockchain guarantees reliability, security as well as the
robustness of the system, (3) CNN is used for real-time
monitoring of data, (4) Ensures the security of the data
and tolerance, (5) IPFS and edge computing reduces the
storage and transmission cost
(1) Based on reputation crowdsourcing and provides
better services, (2) An incentive mechanism is designed
to increase the participation of customers in crowdsourc-
ing tasks, (3) ML helps in predicting the consumption
behaviours and customers requirements of the system,
(4) Blockchain helps in increasing the security and pri-
vacy of the system
(1) Helps to ensure privacy as swell as data fusing, (2)
All the resources can be exchanged between clouds and
blockchain through trusted environment, and transac-
tions are recorded, (3) The use of smart contracts helps
in providing trustworthy and impartial environment
(1) Transparency and security features are achieved
while transferring data, (2) Helps cars to drive auto-
matically, (3) Installation cost is comparatively cheaper

(1) Smart home IoT system is used to generate cus-
tomizations based on the activity prediction of users, (2)
Distributed association rule mining is applied to gener-
ate the rules of the activities from the users’ device logs
(1) Ensures distributed aspect which in turn increases
the privacy of the model, (2) Machine Learning focuses
on the dynamic as well as optimized aspect of the model,
(3) Helps in security

Weakness
(1)
of
Immutable nature
blockchain makes compliance
to new data privacy chal-
lenging,
(2) Storage man-
agement and implementation
are not high-
constraints
lighted
(1) Lack of details of com-
munication overhead in data
sharing, (2) Implementation
constraints, (3) Convergence
analysis of the learning, (4)
Storage management issues
are not highlighted
(1) Detailed
of
latency and responsiveness
needs to be presented, (2)
implementation
Protocol
complexity is not in details

analysis

(1) Communication overhead
and delay in crowdsourc-
ing are not highlighted, (2)
Scopes of
in
training and convergence are
not in details

improvement

(1) Lack of details of commu-
nication overhead in exchang-
ing information, (2) Storage
management issues are not
highlighted
(1) Learning convergence is
(2) Scope
not
of minimization in response
time and latency
Details of the mechanism and
constraints
implementation
are not highlighted

in details,

(1) Lack of details of the
adaptability issues, (2) Re-
sponsiveness analysis is not in
details

34

Table 25: Contributions of Existing Works
Blockchain, and AI

Integrating IoT,

Table 26: Contributions of Existing Works Integrating IoT,
Blockchain, and AI (contd.)

Item Contributions
[164] A probabilistic proof system is introduced us-
ing blockchain for cybersecurity satisfying eco-
nomic and legal demands of real-world busi-
ness.
Data transactions are advanced via blockchain,
IoT, 5G D2D communication capability, MEC,
and fog computing.
Proposes a decentralized fog architecture that
manages real-time communications and re-
duces the communication cost.

[36]

[33]

[30]

[166] A data marketplace is implemented on a
blockchain-based platform, where data can be
stored and accessed easily by multiple parties.
A paid-sharing architecture of knowledge mar-
ket is proposed using edge-AI enabled IoT de-
vices, where Proof-of-Trading (PoT) consumes
less resources.
A self-redactable blockchain is proposed for
building a trust layer for IoT to manage any
data-driven business and support execution of
chain redaction securely as well as eﬃciently.
Smart logistics solution is proposed, where
smart contracts are used to secure trust,
provide visibility, and help in condition-
monitoring of assets using distributed ML.

[167]

[29]

[168] A framework is proposed using IoT and CPS
to incorporate forensic-readiness for investiga-
tions and post-incident, and a prototype is
maintained to detect anomaly with the help
of Bluetooth proximity monitoring.

[169] Using IoT and AI, a proposition is made to op-
erate Halal food chain on blockchain with re-
spect to its architecture, application, and tech-
nological components to safeguard data.
By employing a homomorphic cryptosystem,
a secure, eﬃcient, and accurate training algo-
rithm is constructed.

[31]

[175] A blockchain system is designed for developing
a smart contract for IoT devices to support an
energy management system.
A video surveillance system is proposed based
on Inter Planetary File System technology,
permissioned blockchain, convolution neural
networks, and edge computing.

[35]

[170] ML helps in predicting the consumption be-
haviours and customers’ requirements of the
system, and blockchain helps in increasing the
security and privacy of the system.

Item Contributions
[176] Develops a FL system to assist home device
manufacturers to prepare (train) a ML model
based on data provided by customers.
[177] Presents a framework of blockchain-based FL
systems for failure estimation in IIoT to ensure
veriﬁable integrity of data.

[171] Helps to ensure the privacy as swell as data

fusing.

[172] A system with an autonomous feature is pro-
posed using Raspberry Pi, machine learning,
and image processing.

[173] Generates customizations based on the activity

prediction of users for IoT devices.

[174] Ensures distributed, dynamic, and optimized
aspects of the model and increases the security
of the system.
Intelligently handles massive decentralized ap-
plications in IoT frameworks.

[178]

[179] An AI-based layered hierarchical model

is
proposed to deploy a distributed blockchain-
enabled SDN framework for IoT.

[180] Applies a self-recovery mechanism to impose
robustness against maliciousness and device
failures.

ML model based on data provided by customers. Here,
Manufacturers can estimate customers’ future consump-
tion and requirement behaviors. The work [177] presents
a framework of blockchain-based FL systems for failure
estimation in IIoT, which ensures veriﬁable integrity of
data. Moreover, to address the issue of data heterogeneity
in IIoT, a federated averaging-based FL algorithm is pro-
posed, that considers the distance between negative and
positive classes of each data set.

An IoT service platform is proposed in [171] based on
Joint Cloud Computing (JCC) to help ensuring the pri-
vacy as swell as data fusing. All the resources can be ex-
changed between clouds and blockchain through a trusted
environment, where all the transactions are recorded. All
trades are done using smart contracts which help in pro-
viding trustworthy and impartial environments. To an ex-
isting electric car, a system with an autonomous feature
is proposed in [172] using Raspberry Pi, machine learning,
and image processing. With the help of blockchain, trans-
parency and security features are achieved while transfer-
ring data. The system helps the car to drive automatically
and the installation cost of the proposed model is compar-
atively cheaper.

creasing the security and privacy of the system. To design
a smart home model, authors in [176] develop a FL system
to assist home device manufacturers to prepare (train) a

ML, and artiﬁcial intelligence, is conducted in order to ad-
dress various security issues such as layer-wise issues and
Conﬁdentiality, Integrity, Availability (CIA) faced in IoT

In [34], a survey of diﬀerent technologies, such as blockchain,

35

systems. Several research challenges of these technologies
are also highlighted in [34]. By using Machine leaning
models, a smart home IoT system is used in [173] to gen-
erate customizations based on the activity prediction of
In [173], blockchain is used such
users for IoT devices.
that the model can run in a decentralized and secure man-
ner. The distributed association rule mining is also ap-
plied in order to generate the rules of the activities from
the user’s device logs. A fully distributed and dynamic
security policy is proposed in [174] focusing on the ac-
cess control in the IoT. Blockchain ensures the distributed
aspect which in turn increases the privacy of the model.
Whereas, ML, particularly reinforcement learning, focuses
on the dynamic and optimized aspect of the model, which
helps in the security part of the system. In addition, the
architecture of the proposed framework is well exposed and
explained.

To intelligently handle massive decentralized applica-
tions in IoT frameworks, Edgence [178] is designed to use
edge and cloud computing to communicate with IoT de-
vices and end-users. In this case, an in-built blockchain is
used to realize self-supervision and self-governing of edge
clouds. In [179], an AI-based layered hierarchical model is
proposed to deploy a distributed blockchain-enabled SDN
framework for the IoT, that ensures secure network com-
munication and cluster-head selection via the identiﬁca-
tion of rouge switches. The work [181] addresses the pri-
vacy and security challenges of edge-computing-based IoT,
and accordingly highlights the characteristics of blockchain,
which are suited for IoT scenarios. The proposed frame-
work is based on deep reinforcement learning and speci-
ﬁes the procedure for transactions between an edge node
and IoT device. In [182], to propose an approach for an
eﬀective identiﬁcation of faults in the network, an IoT
model and edge-data veriﬁcation mechanism are designed
using blockchain and random forest algorithm. The au-
thors in [180] design a protocol that relies on peer-to-peer
communications to allow interactions among IoT devices
organized in a distributed way. The protocol applies a
self-recovery mechanism to impose robustness against ma-
liciousness and device failures. The protocol also uses a
reputation model to monitor the devices and the quality
of their service delivery, such that service delivery reputa-
tions can be leveraged for the selection of future devices.
Tables 25 and 26 highlight existing works which con-

sider the integration of the IoT with blockchain and AI.

6. Challenges and Future Reseacrh Scopes in the
Integration of IoT with Blockchain and AI

There are several issues in integrating blockchain and
AI with the IoT, and these issues need to be addressed in
order to fully exploit the utilities of blockchain and AI in
In this section, we present the chal-
the IoT paradigm.
lenges in applying blockchain and AI in the IoT to de-
sign secure, scalable, intelligent, and robust IoT systems.

These challenges will open new research scopes in design-
ing smart IoT models.

6.1. Challenges in Application of Blockchain in IoT

Diﬀerent challenges of applying blockchain in IoT are

discussed as given in the following.

6.1.1. Storage-Constraint in Blockchain Implementation

The storage issue becomes serious when blockchain is
integrated with the IoT [183, 96, 123]. With a high capac-
ity of storage, blockchain nodes cannot handle the chal-
lenge of increasing data amount. Furthermore, the IoT
platform can have heterogeneous devices having various
storage capacities, and thus the storage issues become more
complicated while blockchain is associated with the IoT [12].
Therefore, the integration of blockchain and IoT devices
In
with a low capacity will become a great challenge.
the IIoT, the application of blockchain requires a massive
storage space, which is a great challenge in a resource-
constrained IIoT architecture. The work [184] addresses
this issue by proposing a hierarchical blockchain storage
architecture where the major portion of the blockchain is
stocked in the cloud. Since an edge-based architecture can
provide a faster response time than a cloud-based struc-
ture, it will be beneﬁcial to use the storage of an edge archi-
tecture to implement blockchain in a resource-constrained
IIoT.

6.1.2. Integrity

Blockchain technology can address the challenges re-
lated to traceability and integrity, which are due to the
complex supply chain management of today’s world. How-
ever, blockchain does not provide a solution of the trust
problem that is associated with the data in the IoT [185];
and therefore, this problem leads to a research challenge of
eﬃciently handling the trust problem with an optimization
approach.

6.1.3. Privacy and Security

The IoT has unprecedented scalability and security
challenges due to the high magnitude of data exchanged
by devices in IoT platforms. By coupling blockchains with
IoT applications, some of these challenges are addressed
in [186]. However, the design of a secure and scalable
blockchain along with a resource optimization in the IoT
is still a great challenge. The current Datagram Trans-
port Layer Security (DTLS) and Transport Layer Security
(TLS) are complex or heavy, especially for the IoT archi-
tecture with a massive number of devices [183]; and thus,
there is a challenge to design proper security mechanisms
as a part of a lower network layer while merging the IoT
with blockchain.

The primary concerns over the IoT platform are stor-
age and secure data transaction. Blockchain can be an
eﬀective solution by utilizing its secure and decentralized
structure. There are challenges of the implementation of

36

blockchain over hardware-constrained devices [187]. Since
sensors are often used as IoT devices to detect the environ-
ment, a lot of sensitive data is collected in IoT platforms.
Moreover, IoT devices can be highly exploited by attack-
ers who maliciously use the IoT paradigm to launch vari-
ous severe attacks [12]. Therefore, it is required to design
eﬀective secure communication protocols, attack-defense
mechanisms, and secure authentication techniques when
integrating the IoT with blockchain.

6.1.4. Management of Devices

IoT architecture can have numerous sensors, and the
management of the devices which are connected to the sen-
sors remains a technical challenge forever. This challenge
increases further while blockchain technology is merged
with the IoT [187]. Therefore, an eﬃcient design archi-
tecture is required while merging blockchain and the IoT
in order to manage a huge number of sensors and devices
connected in the IoT. This design can signiﬁcantly help
the mobile communication and satellite monitoring.

6.1.5. Scalability

Fog computing which is an extension of IoT-oriented
solutions has the requirements for decentralization and
distribution. In this regard, the integration of blockchain
with IoT can provide a solution for decentralization and
distribution, as well as can help fog computing to overcome
the deﬁciencies in security and privacy [188]. Therefore, an
eﬃcient design architecture integrating fog computing and
blockchain is required to utilize the power of fog comput-
ing based IoT solutions. Scalability is one of the primary
challenges of merging blockchain with fog computing [188].

6.1.6. Consensus Mechanism

IoT applications have high maintenance costs and weak-
ness to support time-critical usages. These problems can
be solved by proposing an appropriate distributed consen-
sus mechanism [12]. The IoT platform has a huge number
of various types of devices, and the communication cost
becomes extremely high when every node in blockchain
needs to broadcast its data and status. Therefore, it is re-
quired to overcome these obstacles and develop an eﬃcient
consensus mechanism to increase the overall throughput in
the network while blockchain is combined with the IoT.

6.1.7. Transaction Fees and Time

One challenging issue in merging blockchain with the
IoT implementation is the fees associated with the transac-
tions in blockchain. These fees are created to reward min-
ers but unfortunately, many cryptocurrencies allow to im-
plement market-based fees, and therefore, the fees can be-
come expensive [13]. Another problematic issue for blockchain
is transaction time [13]. Bitcoin has a stable time span of
ten minutes to create new blocks. However, the transac-
tion time is highly dependent on the congestion levels in
the network [189]. Hence, there is a large scope of research

37

in the blockchain-based IoT payment system consisting of
many micro-transactions which need to be ﬁnished within
seconds.

6.1.8. Transaction Throughput

The heterogeneity of devices in the IoT platform im-
plies diﬀerent communication protocols, like Bluetooth,
Wi-Fi, etc., and due to this heterogeneity, the cost of
providing consensus in blockchain becomes expensive [12].
It is also non-trivial to impose a synchronization among
the huge number of devices in the IoT. Consequently, im-
proving the transaction throughput becomes challenging.
Therefore, it is required to design proper communication
protocols and good consensus techniques to improve the
transaction throughput while the IoT and blockchain are
combined together. The communication protocols should
provide eﬀective synchronization among various devices in
the IoT.

6.2. Challenges in Application of AI in IoT

To develop an eﬃcient intelligent IoT system, we need
to identify the research challenges in the direction of in-
tegrating AI and the IoT together. Therefore, diﬀerent
challenges in applying AI in the ﬁeld of the IoT are pre-
sented next.

6.2.1. Training of AI-based Model

The appropriate training of a ML model is required
to make the system intelligent such that the system can
take the proper decision dynamically based on the de-
mand [190]. In this regard, the appropriate dataset needs
to be applied and the dataset should be large enough to
facilitate the learning process, by providing a suﬃcient in-
formation about the environment. In an IoT framework,
diﬀerent types of devices are deployed and various ML al-
gorithms can be used to serve diﬀerent purposes. Thus,
it is a challenge to generate the appropriate and suﬃ-
cient volume of datasets to eﬃciently train diﬀerent ML
algorithms, such that the whole system can adapt to the
environment in order to provide several functionalities in
the IoT. The performance of an intelligent system highly
depends on the training procedure that is carried out to
train the corresponding ML model. Therefore, the chal-
lenge is to perform the training procedure eﬀectively and
eﬃciently. Moreover, in distributed networks, the training
of ML-based mechanisms is far challenging [32].

6.2.2. Determination of Convergence

A primary challenge in exploiting intelligence in a model
is the proper analysis of convergence of the learning of
ML-based models [191]. The question of convergence is
mainly raised in reinforcement learning where the system
gains knowledge dynamically as the number of runs of the
model increases [192]. In this case, the convergence time
inﬂuences the nature of adaptability of the ML module
in diﬀerent network scenarios [193]. As the convergence

time decreases, the ML module takes less time to gain
knowledge about the environment. Therefore, our target
is to minimize the convergence time of the learning of an
intelligent system. Moreover, the convergence with the ap-
propriate learning (knowledge) about the network is also
important. Since an IoT model consists of a large number
of varieties of devices, it is crucial to take care of the con-
vergence of ML algorithms which are applied in the IoT
framework [48, 193].

6.2.3. Availability of Data for Training

Data plays the primary role to train any ML-based
model [194]. To implement an AI-based IoT framework in
a real case scenario, it is required to collect the data from
client sides or through the actual positioning of sensors
in the IoT. In this case, the designers of ML algorithms
need to interact with domain experts to get the data. In
addition, the collected data should have enough large vol-
ume so that the proposed ML model can be well-trained
to solve the purposes of using this model in an IoT archi-
tecture. Therefore, the collection of the appropriate and
suﬃcient large volume of data to train a ML model is a
great challenge.

6.2.4. Storage Management

An AI-based system needs to store a huge volume of
information such that, based on it, the system can take de-
cision dynamically, and thus intelligence can be imposed
in the system. Such high volume of information is required
because it is diﬃcult for a ML-based system to take de-
cision on which information will be needed in future; and
thus, the system stores all the data and information, which
are obtained during the training of the model [195]. There-
fore, it is a challenge to eﬃciently handle the storage man-
agement while AI is used to make a system intelligent. In
this case, the IoT yields a huge scope of research since a
large number of varieties of devices are used in the IoT,
where the edge-based implementation further provides a
great challenge due to the engagement of end-users having
low storage capabilities.

6.2.5. Development of Smart Cities

The idea of development of smart cities using proper
biometric and AI recognition technologies can be devel-
oped further, along with an explainable AI for supporting
high level human decisions [196]. The biometric solutions
are used for police investigations, law enforcement and ac-
cess to diﬀerent facilities which will promote the safety in
a much eﬃcient way. Examples of such concepts have been
tested by various countries and it has been found that, a
proper exploitation of AI in developing smart cities will
be really beneﬁcial. For example, the city of Tigre in Ar-
gentina uses a command control centre with biometrics
and video analytics, which led to the drop of city’s car
theft by 80% [196]. The AI is expected to give a decision
for making a certain decision, and thus AI emerges the ex-
plainable AI ﬁeld in the application of the IoT. This type

38

of innovation can be achieved by focusing on the safety,
security, and eﬃciency, which can be achieved by properly
by using AI technologies in high levels of the IoT data
exchange [196].
In addition, AI can be exploited in de-
veloping smart cities with the help of an edge computing
architecture which can enhance the network performance
and ease the development of a distributed architecture at
client sides [197].

6.2.6. Cooking Innovations with AI

Using IoT devices and special deep learning applica-
tion, food calorie, category estimation, and training of
robots for kitchen tasks are still a very underrated topic
and should be explored further. By using IoT and AI
technologies, it is possible to create a smart kitchen which
can be monitored via mobile devices; and it will reduce the
amount of physical labour that is put into the kitchen [198].

6.2.7. IoT Device Security Based on Machine Learning

The IoT integrates devices in a network so that they
can be used for executing diﬀerent types of applications.
It is really important to protect such devices from hack-
ers such that the user privacy is maintained. Attacks
like phishing, DoS, eavesdropping, and jamming can be
prevented by using a variety of supervised and unsuper-
vised learning algorithms which fall under artiﬁcial intelli-
gence [46]. Moreover, we can use exposure indicators and
predictive analytics for threats detection in such IoT net-
works. An eﬃcient threat exposure and evaluation frame-
work needs to be designed in order to improve preventive
capabilities in the IoT, by combining AI-based tools for
the continuous evaluation of security functionalities [199].

6.2.8. Development of Integrated Circuit (IC) Technology

with AI

The ICs used for the IoT integrating AI need mas-
sive capabilities and smart integration. The ICs should
be capable of concurrent engineering and multi-level co-
optimization such that it can achieve the high performance,
good yield, and low cost [200].

6.2.9. Human Centric AI

The IoT uses huge data points and applies artiﬁcial in-
telligence to learn from individual user’s actions and then
use the knowledge gained from the learning to take appro-
priate decisions. Most of the AI models are purely based
on mathematics, and this makes the AI model a black box,
where users trust their personal experiences. This type of
AI-based system learns from the inputs provided by users,
In the
and continuously improves with each new input.
integration of artiﬁcial intelligence and IoT devices, the
goal is to understand human emotion, human language,
and behaviour; and thus, we can bridge the gap between
machines and humans [201].

6.2.10. AI-Enabled IoT for 5G Network Complexity

The convergence of AI-enabled IoT, the network com-
plexity analysis, and 5G allow for designing, prototyping,
and enabling new systems that can adapt to various net-
work scenarios. IoT systems in the 5G provide support for
the applications in transportation, public safety, health,
energy, and food productions. As the number of IoT de-
vices connected to the Internet is increasing, the scalability
and computability of these devices are becoming a chal-
lenge which needs approaches related to the network com-
plexity analysis and designing new computational mod-
els [202].

6.2.11. Wireless Networks

The IoT requires continuous connectivity, dynamic ser-
vice mobility, and extreme security when connected in a
wireless network [203]. Artiﬁcial intelligence can play an
important role in the underlying network infrastructure.
In this case, the main challenges are designing of – (i) AI-
based approaches for handling bandwidth, spectrum, and
latency constraints in wireless networks, (ii) AI-based se-
curity or caching requirement models with Big data, and
(iii) an eﬃcient architecture coping up with the network
complexity in wireless environments. The generic needs of
a wireless network speciﬁc design in the IoT can be imple-
mented using the help of AI.

6.2.12. Edge Computing on IoT Data Using AI

IoT devices are continuously used and a huge amount
of IoT data is generated. In order to extract insights from
such high volume of data, the processing of data must hap-
pen in the place where it was generated [204]. This type
of process is called edge computing and it is a challenge
as the AI algorithms need a lot of processing power which
may not be available in the edge devices like laptops, mo-
bile phones, etc. One particular way of architecture that
can be used is a centralized approach-based AI model. In
this way, it can be a possible option to reduce the over-
head of executing AI applications in edge nodes. However,
the next challenge will be to minimize the communication
overhead between the central node and other edge devices.

7. Conclusion

Blockchain is a distributed immutable ledger system
that can be used for implementing cryptocurrency with
security; and AI is used to make an intelligent system.
Therefore, these two mechanisms can strengthen function-
alities of an IoT system. This survey presents an exten-
sive study of the existing research works which have ap-
plied blockchain and AI in designing IoT-based applica-
tions. We ﬁrst discuss about the IoT, blockchain, and
AI, such that their potentialities can be understood while
studying the impacts of applying blockchain and AI in
IoT paradigms. We present a detailed discussion on the
impacts of blockchain and AI in IoT-based applications

which have been proposed in several existing works.
In
this direction, we also highlight the limitations of exist-
ing literature which have utilized blockchain and AI in
the IoT. This survey also identiﬁes the research challenges
to integrate blockchain and AI with the IoT. These chal-
lenges open a fertile area for the future research scopes
to exploit the capabilities of blockchain and AI in build-
ing IoT-based applications; and meaningful explorations of
such challenges can lead to the development of smart IoT
applications ensuring security, privacy, and trustworthy.

References

[1] K. Routh, T. Pal, A Survey on Technological, Business and
Societal Aspects of Internet of Things by Q3, 2017, in: Pro-
ceedings of the 2018 3rd International Conference On Internet
of Things: Smart Innovation and Usages (IoT-SIU), IEEE,
2018, pp. 1–4.

[2] M. A. Al-Garadi, A. Mohamed, A. Al-Ali, X. Du, I. Ali,
M. Guizani, A Survey of Machine and Deep Learning Methods
for Internet of Things (IoT) Security, IEEE Communications
Surveys & Tutorials 22 (3) (2020) 1646–1685.

[3] H. Hejazi, H. Rajab, T. Cinkler, L. Lengyel, Survey of Plat-
forms for Massive IoT, in: Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Future IoT Technologies (Future IoT),
IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–8.

[4] B. Dhanalaxmi, G. A. Naidu, A Survey on Design and Anal-
ysis of Robust IoT Architecture, in: Proceedings of the 2017
International Conference on Innovative Mechanisms for Indus-
try Applications (ICIMIA), IEEE, 2017, pp. 375–378.

[5] H. Xu, W. Yu, D. Griﬃth, N. Golmie, A Survey on Industrial
Internet of Things: A Cyber-Physical Systems Perspective,
IEEE Access 6 (2018) 78238–78259.

[6] F. R. Yu, J. Liu, Y. He, P. Si, Y. Zhang, Virtualization for
Distributed Ledger Technology (vDLT), IEEE Access 6 (2018)
25019–25028.

[7] M. Belotti, N. Boˇzi´c, G. Pujolle, S. Secci, A Vademecum on
Blockchain Technologies: When, Which, and How, IEEE Com-
munications Surveys & Tutorials 21 (4) (2019) 3796–3838.
[8] A. Gorkhali, L. Li, A. Shrestha, Blockchain: A Literature Re-
view, Journal of Management Analytics 7 (3) (2020) 321–343.
[9] Y. Lu, The Blockchain: State-of-the-Art and Research Chal-
lenges, Journal of Industrial Information Integration 15 (2019)
80–90.

[10] C. Zhang, Y. Chen, A Review of Research Relevant to the
Emerging Industry Trends: Industry 4.0, IoT, Blockchain, and
Business Analytics, Journal of Industrial Integration and Man-
agement 5 (01) (2020) 165–180.

[11] S. Nanayakkara, M. Rodrigo, S. Perera, G. Weerasuriya, A. A.
Hijazi, A Methodology for Selection of a Blockchain Platform
to Develop an Enterprise System, Journal of Industrial Infor-
mation Integration 23 (2021) 100215.

[12] M. Wu, K. Wang, X. Cai, S. Guo, M. Guo, C. Rong, A Com-
prehensive Survey of Blockchain: From Theory to IoT Appli-
cations and Beyond, IEEE Internet of Things Journal 6 (5)
(2019) 8114–8154.

[13] A. Ensor, S. Schefer-Wenzl, I. Miladinovic, Blockchains for IoT
Payments: A Survey, in: 2018 IEEE Globecom Workshops
(GC Wkshps), IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–6.

[14] Y. Lu, Artiﬁcial Intelligence: A Survey on Evolution, Mod-
els, Applications and Future Trends, Journal of Management
Analytics 6 (1) (2019) 1–29.

[15] C. Zhang, Y. Lu, Study on Artiﬁcial Intelligence: The State
of the Art and Future Prospects, Journal of Industrial Infor-
mation Integration (2021) 100224.

[16] M. Lin, Y. Zhao, Artiﬁcial Intelligence-Empowered Resource
Management for Future Wireless Communications: A Survey,
China Communications 17 (3) (2020) 58–77.

39

[17] H. Chen, L. Li, Y. Chen, Explore Success Factors that Impact
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Adoption on Telecom Industry in China,
Journal of Management Analytics 8 (1) (2021) 36–68.

[18] F. Hussain, S. A. Hassan, R. Hussain, E. Hossain, Machine
Learning for Resource Management in Cellular and IoT Net-
works: Potentials, Current Solutions, and Open Challenges,
IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials 22 (2) (2020)
1251–1275.

[19] L. Shao, F. Zhu, X. Li, Transfer Learning for Visual Catego-
rization: A Survey, IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks
and Learning Systems 26 (5) (2014) 1019–1034.

[20] M. H. Miraz, M. Ali, P. S. Excell, R. Picking, A Review on
Internet of Things (IoT), Internet of Everything (IoE) and
Internet of Nano Things (IoNT), in: Proceedings of the 2015
Internet Technologies and Applications (ITA), IEEE, 2015, pp.
219–224.

[21] C. Fan, S. Ghaemi, H. Khazaei, P. Musilek, Performance Eval-
uation of Blockchain Systems: A Systematic Survey, IEEE Ac-
cess 8 (2020) 126927–126950.

[22] W. Raﬁque, L. Qi, I. Yaqoob, M. Imran, R. ur Rasool,
W. Dou, Complementing IoT Services through Software De-
ﬁned Networking and Edge Computing: A Comprehensive Sur-
vey, IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials 22 (3) (2020)
1761–1804.

[23] E. Priyanka, C. Maheswari, S. Thangavel, M. P. Bala, Inte-
grating IoT with LQR-PID Controller for Online Surveillance
and Control of Flow and Pressure in Fluid Transportation Sys-
tem, Journal of Industrial Information Integration 17 (2020)
100127.

[24] Z. Jiang, Y. Guo, Z. Wang, Digital Twin to Improve the
Virtual-Real Integration of Industrial IoT, Journal of Indus-
trial Information Integration 22 (2021) 100196.

[25] K. Gai, J. Guo, L. Zhu, S. Yu, Blockchain Meets Cloud Com-
puting: A Survey, IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials
22 (3) (2020) 2009–2030.

[26] M. Saad, J. Spaulding, L. Njilla, C. Kamhoua, S. Shetty,
D. H. Nyang, D. Mohaisen, Exploring the Attack Surface of
Blockchain: A Comprehensive Survey, IEEE Communications
Surveys & Tutorials 22 (3) (2020) 1977–2008.

[27] C. Qiu, X. Wang, H. Yao, J. Du, F. R. Yu, S. Guo, Net-
working Integrated Cloud-Edge-End in IoT: A Blockchain-
Assisted Collective Q-Learning Approach, IEEE Internet of
Things Journal.

[28] A. L. Diedrichs, F. Bromberg, D. Dujovne, K. Brun-Laguna,
T. Watteyne, Prediction of Frost Events Using Machine Learn-
ing and IoT Sensing Devices, IEEE Internet of Things Journal
5 (6) (2018) 4589–4597.

[29] K. Huang, X. Zhang, Y. Mu, F. Rezaeibagha, X. Du,
N. Guizani, Achieving Intelligent Trust-Layer for Internet-of-
Things via Self-Redactable Blockchain, IEEE Transactions on
Industrial Informatics 16 (4) (2019) 2677–2686.

[30] X. Lin, J. Li, J. Wu, H. Liang, W. Yang, Making Knowledge
Tradable in Edge-AI Enabled IoT: A Consortium Blockchain-
Based Eﬃcient and Incentive Approach, IEEE Transactions on
Industrial Informatics 15 (12) (2019) 6367–6378.

[31] M. Shen, X. Tang, L. Zhu, X. Du, M. Guizani, Privacy-
Preserving Support Vector Machine Training Over Blockchain-
Based Encrypted IoT Data in Smart Cities, IEEE Internet of
Things Journal 6 (5) (2019) 7702–7712.

[32] H. Chai, S. Leng, Y. Chen, K. Zhang, A Hierarchical
Blockchain-Enabled Federated Learning Algorithm for Knowl-
edge Sharing in Internet of Vehicles, IEEE Transactions on
Intelligent Transportation Systems.

[33] M. A. Rahman, M. M. Rashid, M. S. Hossain, E. Hassanain,
M. F. Alhamid, M. Guizani, Blockchain and IoT-Based Cogni-
tive Edge Framework for Sharing Economy Services in a Smart
City, IEEE Access 7 (2019) 18611–18621.

[34] B. K. Mohanta, D. Jena, U. Satapathy, S. Patnaik, Survey on
IoT Security: Challenges and Solution using Machine Learn-
ing, Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Blockchain Technology, Internet
of Things (2020) 100227.

[35] R. Wang, W.-T. Tsai, J. He, C. Liu, Q. Li, E. Deng, A Video
Surveillance System Based on Permissioned Blockchains and
Edge Computing, in: Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Big Data and Smart Computing (Big-
Comp), IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–6.

[36] M. Samaniego, R. Deters, Internet of Smart Things-IoST: Us-
ing Blockchain and CLIPS to Make Things Autonomous, in:
Proceedings of the 2017 IEEE International Conference on
Cognitive Computing (ICCC), IEEE, 2017, pp. 9–16.

[37] J. Niu, X. Li, J. Gao, Y. Han, Blockchain-Based Anti-Key-
Leakage Key Aggregation Searchable Encryption for IoT,
IEEE Internet of Things Journal 7 (2) (2019) 1502–1518.
[38] A. G. Khan, A. H. Zahid, M. Hussain, M. Farooq, U. Riaz,
T. M. Alam, A Journey of WEB and Blockchain Towards the
Industry 4.0: An Overview, in: Proceedings of the 2019 Inter-
national Conference on Innovative Computing (ICIC), IEEE,
2019, pp. 1–7.

[39] H. Liu, D. Han, D. Li, Fabric-IoT: A Blockchain-Based Access

Control System in IoT, IEEE Access 8 (2020) 18207–18218.

[40] R. Doku, D. B. Rawat, M. Garuba, L. Njilla, LightChain: On
the Lightweight Blockchain for the Internet-of-Things, in: Pro-
ceedings of the 2019 IEEE International Conference on Smart
Computing (SMARTCOMP), IEEE, 2019, pp. 444–448.
[41] U. Guin, P. Cui, A. Skjellum, Ensuring Proof-of-Authenticity
of IoT Edge Devices Using Blockchain Technology, in: Pro-
ceedings of the 2018 IEEE International Conference on In-
ternet of Things (iThings) and IEEE Green Computing and
Communications (GreenCom) and IEEE Cyber, Physical and
Social Computing (CPSCom) and IEEE Smart Data (Smart-
Data), IEEE, 2018, pp. 1042–1049.

[42] Z. Hao, R. Ji, Q. Li, FastPay: A Secure Fast Payment Method
for Edge-IoT Platforms using Blockchain, in: Proceedings of
the 2018 IEEE/ACM Symposium on Edge Computing (SEC),
IEEE, 2018, pp. 410–415.

[43] T. Le, M. W. Mutka, A Lightweight Block Validation Method
for Resource-Constrained IoT Devices in Blockchain-Based
Applications, in: Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE 20th Interna-
tional Symposium on ”A World of Wireless, Mobile and Mul-
timedia Networks”(WoWMoM), IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–9.

[44] X. Zhang, A. Ramachandran, C. Zhuge, D. He, W. Zuo,
Z. Cheng, K. Rupnow, D. Chen, Machine Learning on FP-
GAs to Face the IoT Revolution, in: Proceedings of the 2017
IEEE/ACM International Conference on Computer-Aided De-
sign (ICCAD), IEEE, 2017, pp. 894–901.

[45] F. Li, A. Shinde, Y. Shi, J. Ye, X.-Y. Li, W. Song, System
Statistics Learning-Based IoT Security: Feasibility and Suit-
ability, IEEE Internet of Things Journal 6 (4) (2019) 6396–
6403.

[46] L. Xiao, X. Wan, X. Lu, Y. Zhang, D. Wu, IoT Security Tech-
niques Based on Machine Learning: How Do IoT Devices Use
AI to Enhance Security?, IEEE Signal Processing Magazine
35 (5) (2018) 41–49.

[47] H. Li, K. Ota, M. Dong, Learning IoT in Edge: Deep Learn-
ing for the Internet of Things with Edge Computing, IEEE
Network 32 (1) (2018) 96–101.

[48] F. Hussain, R. Hussain, A. Anpalagan, A. Benslimane, A
New Block-Based Reinforcement Learning Approach for Dis-
tributed Resource Allocation in Clustered IoT Networks, IEEE
Transactions on Vehicular Technology 69 (3) (2020) 2891–
2904.

[49] N. Neshenko, E. Bou-Harb, J. Crichigno, G. Kaddoum,
N. Ghani, Demystifying IoT Security: An Exhaustive Survey
on IoT Vulnerabilities and a First Empirical Look on Internet-
Scale IoT Exploitations, IEEE Communications Surveys & Tu-
torials 21 (3) (2019) 2702–2733.

[50] P. Datta, B. Sharma, A Survey on IoT Architectures, Proto-
cols, Security and Smart City Based Applications, in: Pro-
ceedings of the 2017 8th International Conference on Comput-
ing, Communication and Networking Technologies (ICCCNT),
IEEE, 2017, pp. 1–5.

[51] J. Al-Jaroodi, N. Mohamed, Blockchain in Industries: A Sur-

40

vey, IEEE Access 7 (2019) 36500–36515.

[52] F. Casino, T. K. Dasaklis, C. Patsakis, A Systematic Litera-
ture Review of Blockchain-based Applications: Current Status,
Classiﬁcation and Open Issues, Telematics and Informatics 36
(2019) 55–81.

[53] A. A. Monrat, O. Schel´en, K. Andersson, A Survey of
Blockchain From the Perspectives of Applications, Challenges,
and Opportunities, IEEE Access 7 (2019) 117134–117151.
[54] R. Yang, F. R. Yu, P. Si, Z. Yang, Y. Zhang, Integrated
Blockchain and Edge Computing Systems: A Survey, Some
Research Issues and Challenges, IEEE Communications Sur-
veys & Tutorials 21 (2) (2019) 1508–1532.

[55] A. He, K. K. Bae, T. R. Newman, J. Gaeddert, K. Kim,
R. Menon, L. Morales-Tirado, Y. Zhao, J. H. Reed, W. H.
Tranter, et al., A Survey of Artiﬁcial Intelligence for Cognitive
Radios, IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology 59 (4)
(2010) 1578–1592.

[56] M. Sheraz, M. Ahmed, X. Hou, Y. Li, D. Jin, Z. Han, Artiﬁcial
Intelligence for Wireless Caching: Schemes, Performance, and
Challenges, IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials.
[57] E. Kadric, P. Gurniak, A. DeHon, Accurate Parallel Floating-
Point Accumulation, IEEE Transactions on Computers 65 (11)
(2016) 3224–3238.

[58] X. Wang, Y. Han, V. C. Leung, D. Niyato, X. Yan, X. Chen,
Convergence of Edge Computing and Deep Learning: A Com-
prehensive Survey, IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials
22 (2) (2020) 869–904.

[59] Q. Ren, K. L. Man, M. Li, B. Gao, Using Blockchain to En-
hance and Optimize IoT-based Intelligent Traﬃc System, in:
Proceedings of the 2019 International Conference on Platform
Technology and Service (PlatCon), IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–4.
[60] Q. K. Nguyen, Q. V. Dang, Blockchain Technology for the
Advancement of the Future, in: Proceedings of the 2018 4th
international conference on green technology and sustainable
development (GTSD), IEEE, 2018, pp. 483–486.

[61] S.-C. Cha, K.-H. Yeh, An ISO/IEC 15408-2 Compliant Se-
curity Auditing System with Blockchain Technology, in: Pro-
ceedings of the 2018 IEEE Conference on Communications and
Network Security (CNS), IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–2.

[62] M. Moniruzzaman, A. Yassine, R. Benlamri, Blockchain-based
Mechanisms for Local Energy Trading in Smart Grids, in: Pro-
ceedings of the 2019 IEEE 16th International Conference on
Smart Cities: Improving Quality of Life Using ICT & IoT and
AI (HONET-ICT), IEEE, 2019, pp. 110–114.

[63] C. Liu, Y. Xiao, V. Javangula, Q. Hu, S. Wang, X. Cheng,
NormaChain: A Blockchain-Based Normalized Autonomous
Transaction Settlement System for IoT-Based E-Commerce,
IEEE Internet of Things Journal 6 (3) (2018) 4680–4693.
[64] D.-D. Nguyen, M. I. Ali, Enabling On-Demand Decentralized
IoT Collectability Marketplace using Blockchain and Crowd-
sensing,
in: Proceedings of the 2019 Global IoT Summit
(GIoTS), IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–6.

[65] G. Papadodimas, G. Palaiokrasas, A. Litke, T. Varvarigou,
Implementation of Smart Contracts for Blockchain Based IoT
Applications, in: Proceedings of the 2018 9th International
Conference on the Network of the Future (NOF), IEEE, 2018,
pp. 60–67.

[66] R. Xu, Y. Chen, E. Blasch, G. Chen, Blendcac: A Blockchain-
Enabled Decentralized Capability-Based Access Control for
IoTs, in: Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE International Con-
ference on Internet of Things (iThings) and IEEE Green Com-
puting and Communications (GreenCom) and IEEE Cyber,
Physical and Social Computing (CPSCom) and IEEE Smart
Data (SmartData), IEEE, 2018, pp. 1027–1034.

[67] K. R. Ozyilmaz, A. Yurdakul, Designing a Blockchain-Based
IoT With Ethereum, Swarm, and LoRa: The Software Solu-
tion to Create High Availability With Minimal Security Risks,
IEEE Consumer Electronics Magazine 8 (2) (2019) 28–34.
[68] T. Choudhary, C. Virmani, D. Juneja, Convergence of
Blockchain and IoT: An Edge Over Technologies, in: Toward
Social Internet of Things (SIoT): Enabling Technologies, Ar-

chitectures and Applications, Springer, 2020, pp. 299–316.
[69] Z. Xiong, Y. Zhang, N. C. Luong, D. Niyato, P. Wang,
N. Guizani, The Best of Both Worlds: A General Architec-
ture for Data Management in Blockchain-Enabled Internet-of-
Things, IEEE Network 34 (1) (2020) 166–173.

[70] R. Cole, L. Cheng, Modeling the Energy Consumption of
Blockchain Consensus Algorithms, in: Proceedings of the 2018
IEEE International Conference on Internet of Things (iThings)
and IEEE Green Computing and Communications (Green-
Com) and IEEE Cyber, Physical and Social Computing (CP-
SCom) and IEEE Smart Data (SmartData), IEEE, 2018, pp.
1691–1696.

[71] S. M. Muzammal, R. K. Murugesan, A Study on Leverag-
ing Blockchain Technology for IoT Security Enhancement,
in: Proceedings of the 2018 Fourth International Conference
on Advances in Computing, Communication & Automation
(ICACCA), IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–6.

[72] H. Pervez, I. U. Haq, Blockchain and IoT Based Disruption in
Logistics, in: Proceedings of the 2019 2nd International Con-
ference on Communication, Computing and Digital systems
(C-CODE), IEEE, 2019, pp. 276–281.

[73] N. V. Vaﬁadis, T. T. Taeﬁ, Diﬀerentiating Blockchain Tech-
nology to Optimize the Processes Quality in Industry 4.0, in:
Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE 5th World Forum on Internet of
Things (WF-IoT), IEEE, 2019, pp. 864–869.

[74] Z. Li, Z. Xiao, Q. Xu, E. Sotthiwat, R. S. M. Goh, X. Liang,
Blockchain and IoT Data Analytics for Fine-Grained Trans-
portation Insurance, in: Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE 24th
International Conference on Parallel and Distributed Systems
(ICPADS), IEEE, 2018, pp. 1022–1027.

[75] O. Novo, Blockchain Meets IoT: An Architecture for Scalable
Access Management in IoT, IEEE Internet of Things Journal
5 (2) (2018) 1184–1195.

[76] Z. Lei, C. Feng, Y. Liu, D. S. Lee, T. Tsang, J. Liang,
Z. Xiong, Y. Liu, G. Chen, Next Generation Blockchain Net-
work (NGBN), in: Proceedings of the 2019 20th IEEE In-
ternational Conference on Mobile Data Management (MDM),
IEEE, 2019, pp. 452–456.

[77] K. Haseeb, N. Islam, A. Almogren, I. U. Din, Intrusion Pre-
vention Framework for Secure Routing in WSN-based Mobile
Internet of Things, IEEE Access 7 (2019) 185496–185505.
[78] G. Srivastava, J. Crichigno, S. Dhar, A Light and Secure
Healthcare Blockchain for IoT Medical Devices, in: Proceed-
ings of the 2019 IEEE Canadian conference of electrical and
computer engineering (CCECE), IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–5.

[79] R. Agrawal, P. Verma, R. Sonanis, U. Goel, A. De, S. A.
Kondaveeti, S. Shekhar, Continuous Security in IoT Us-
in: Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE Interna-
ing Blockchain,
tional Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
(ICASSP), IEEE, 2018, pp. 6423–6427.

[80] T. Faika, T. Kim, J. Ochoa, M. Khan, S.-W. Park, C. S. Le-
ung, A Blockchain-Based Internet of Things (IoT) Network for
Security-Enhanced Wireless Battery Management Systems, in:
Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE Industry Applications Society
Annual Meeting, IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–6.

[81] J. Huang, L. Kong, G. Chen, L. Cheng, K. Wu, X. Liu, B-
IoT: Blockchain Driven Internet of Things with Credit-Based
Consensus Mechanism, in: Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE 39th
International Conference on Distributed Computing Systems
(ICDCS), IEEE, 2019, pp. 1348–1357.

[82] A. Mokhtar, N. Murphy, J. Bruton, Blockchain-based Multi-
Robot Path Planning, in: Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE 5th
World Forum on Internet of Things (WF-IoT), IEEE, 2019,
pp. 584–589.

[83] S. Sanju, S. Sankaran, K. Achuthan, Energy Comparison of
Blockchain Platforms for Internet of Things, in: Proceedings of
the 2018 IEEE International Symposium on Smart Electronic
Systems (iSES)(Formerly iNiS), IEEE, 2018, pp. 235–238.
[84] M. Urmila, B. Hariharan, R. Prabha, A Comparitive Study
of Blockchain Applications for Enhancing Internet of Things
Security, in: Proceedings of the 2019 10th International Con-

41

ference on Computing, Communication and Networking Tech-
nologies (ICCCNT), IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–7.

[85] B. Dinesh, B. Kavya, D. Sivakumar, M. R. Ahmed, Conform-
ing Test of Blockchain for 5G Enabled IoT, in: Proceedings of
the 2019 3rd International Conference on Trends in Electronics
and Informatics (ICOEI), IEEE, 2019, pp. 1153–1157.

[86] K.-K. R. Choo, Z. Yan, W. Meng, Blockchain in Industrial IoT
Applications: Security and Privacy Advances, Challenges and
Opportunities, IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics
16 (6) (2020) 4119–4121.

[87] C. Lee, L. Nkenyereye, N. Sung, J. Song, Towards a
Blockchain-enabled IoT Platform using oneM2M Standards,
in: Proceedings of the 2018 International Conference on Infor-
mation and Communication Technology Convergence (ICTC),
IEEE, 2018, pp. 97–102.

[88] M. Rashid, H. H. Pajooh, A Security Framework for IoT Au-
thentication and Authorization Based on Blockchain Technol-
ogy, in: Proceedings of the 2019 18th IEEE International Con-
ference On Trust, Security And Privacy In Computing And
Communications/13th IEEE International Conference On Big
Data Science And Engineering (TrustCom/BigDataSE), IEEE,
2019, pp. 264–271.

[89] S. Brotsis, N. Kolokotronis, K. Limniotis, S. Shiaeles,
D. Kavallieros, E. Bellini, C. Pavu´e, Blockchain Solutions for
Forensic Evidence Preservation in IoT Environments, in: Pro-
ceedings of the 2019 IEEE Conference on Network Softwariza-
tion (NetSoft), IEEE, 2019, pp. 110–114.

[90] M. Pourvahab, G. Ekbatanifard, An Eﬃcient Forensics Archi-
tecture in Software-Deﬁned Networking-IoT Using Blockchain
Technology, IEEE Access 7 (2019) 99573–99588.

[91] L. Xie, Y. Ding, H. Yang, X. Wang, Blockchain-Based se-
cure and trustworthy Internet of Things in SDN-enabled 5G-
VANETs, IEEE Access 7 (2019) 56656–56666.

[92] A. Dawod, D. Georgakopoulos, P. P. Jayaraman, A. Nir-
malathas, Advancements towards Global IoT Device Discovery
and Integration, in: Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE Interna-
tional Congress on Internet of Things (ICIOT), IEEE, 2019,
pp. 147–155.

[93] A. Manzoor, M. Liyanage, A. Braeke, S. S. Kanhere, M. Yliant-
tila, Blockchain based Proxy Re-Encryption Scheme for Secure
IoT Data Sharing, in: Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Blockchain and Cryptocurrency (ICBC),
IEEE, 2019, pp. 99–103.

[94] S. Paavolainen, P. Nikander, Interledger Demo: IoT Integra-
tion, in: Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE International Confer-
ence on Blockchain and Cryptocurrency (ICBC), IEEE, 2019,
pp. 7–8.

[95] V. Rom´an, J. Ordieres-Mer´e, [WiP] IoT Blockchain Technolo-
gies for Smart Sensors Based on Raspberry Pi, in: Proceedings
of the 2018 IEEE 11th Conference on Service-Oriented Com-
puting and Applications (SOCA), IEEE, 2018, pp. 216–220.

[96] M. Samaniego, R. Deters, Hosting Virtual IoT Resources on
Edge-Hosts with Blockchain, in: Proceedings of the 2016 IEEE
International Conference on Computer and Information Tech-
nology (CIT), IEEE, 2016, pp. 116–119.

[97] P. Tzianos, G. Pipelidis, N. Tsiamitros, Hermes: An Open
and Transparent Marketplace for IoT Sensor Data over Dis-
tributed Ledgers, in: Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Blockchain and Cryptocurrency (ICBC),
IEEE, 2019, pp. 167–170.

[98] F. Alkurdi, I. Elgendi, K. S. Munasinghe, D. Sharma, A. Ja-
malipour, Blockchain in IoT Security: A Survey, in: Proceed-
ings of the 2018 28th International Telecommunication Net-
works and Applications Conference (ITNAC), IEEE, 2018, pp.
1–4.

[99] S. Demirkan, I. Demirkan, A. McKee, Blockchain Technol-
ogy in the Future of Business Cyber Security and Accounting,
Journal of Management Analytics 7 (2) (2020) 189–208.
[100] P. Gupta, V. Dedeoglu, S. S. Kanhere, R. Jurdak, Towards a
Blockchain Powered IoT Data Marketplace, in: Proceedings
of the 2021 International Conference on COMmunication Sys-

tems & NETworkS (COMSNETS), IEEE, 2021, pp. 366–368.
[101] K. M. Giannoutakis, G. Spathoulas, C. K. Filelis-
Papadopoulos, A. Collen, M. Anagnostopoulos, K. Votis, N. A.
Nijdam, A Blockchain Solution for Enhancing Cybersecurity
Defence of IoT, in: Proceedings of the 2020 IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Blockchain (Blockchain), IEEE, 2020, pp.
490–495.

[102] S. Sun, R. Du, S. Chen, W. Li, Blockchain-Based IoT Access
Control System: Towards Security, Lightweight, and Cross-
Domain, IEEE Access 9 (2021) 36868–36878.

[103] K. O.-B. O. Agyekum, Q. Xia, E. B. Sifah, C. N. A. Cobblah,
H. Xia, J. Gao, A Proxy Re-Encryption Approach to Secure
Data Sharing in the Internet of Things Based on Blockchain,
IEEE Systems Journal.

[104] E. B. Sifah, Q. Xia, K. O.-B. O. Agyekum, H. Xia, A. Smahi,
J. Gao, A Blockchain Approach to Ensuring Provenance to
Outsourced Cloud Data in a Sharing Ecosystem, IEEE Sys-
tems Journal.

[105] X. Ding, J. Guo, D. Li, W. Wu, An Incentive Mechanism for
Building a Secure Blockchain-Based Internet of Things, IEEE
Transactions on Network Science and Engineering 8 (1) (2020)
477–487.

[106] Y. E. Oktian, S.-G. Lee, BorderChain: Blockchain-Based Ac-
cess Control Framework for the Internet of Things Endpoint,
IEEE Access 9 (2020) 3592–3615.

[107] S. Singh, A. S. Hosen, B. Yoon, Blockchain Security Attacks,
Challenges, and Solutions for the Future Distributed IoT Net-
work, IEEE Access 9 (2021) 13938–13959.

[108] B. K. Mohanta, D. Jena, S. Ramasubbareddy, M. Danesh-
mand, A. H. Gandomi, Addressing Security and Privacy Issues
of IoT using Blockchain Technology, IEEE Internet of Things
Journal 8 (2) (2020) 881–888.

[109] K. Kataoka, S. Gangwar, P. Podili, Trust List: Internet-Wide
and Distributed IoT Traﬃc Management using Blockchain and
SDN, in: Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE 4th World Forum on
Internet of Things (WF-IoT), IEEE, 2018, pp. 296–301.
[110] T. Kim, J. Noh, S. Cho, SCC: Storage Compression Consensus
for Blockchain in Lightweight IoT Network, in: Proceedings of
the 2019 IEEE International Conference on Consumer Elec-
tronics (ICCE), IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–4.

[111] T. H.-J. Kim, J. Lampkins, BRICS: Blockchain-based Resilient
Information Control System, in: Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE
International Conference on Big Data (Big Data), IEEE, 2018,
pp. 5363–5365.

[112] S. Roy, M. Ashaduzzaman, M. Hassan, A. R. Chowd-
hury, Blockchain for IoT Security and Management: Current
Prospects, Challenges and Future Directions, in: Proceedings
of the 2018 5th International Conference on Networking, Sys-
tems and Security (NSysS), IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–9.

[113] H.-N. Dai, Z. Zheng, Y. Zhang, Blockchain for Internet of
Things: A Survey, IEEE Internet of Things Journal 6 (5)
(2019) 8076–8094.

[114] S. S. Choi, J. W. Burm, W. Sung, J. W. Jang, Y. J. Reo, A
Blockchain-based Secure IoT Control Scheme, in: Proceedings
of the 2018 International Conference on Advances in Comput-
ing and Communication Engineering (ICACCE), IEEE, 2018,
pp. 74–78.

[115] S. Dhakal, F. Jaafar, P. Zavarsky, Private Blockchain Network
for IoT Device Firmware Integrity Veriﬁcation and Update, in:
Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE 19th International Symposium
on High Assurance Systems Engineering (HASE), IEEE, 2019,
pp. 164–170.

[116] A. Pouraghily, T. Wolf, A Lightweight Payment Veriﬁcation
Protocol for Blockchain Transactions on IoT Devices, in: Pro-
ceedings of the 2019 International Conference on Computing,
Networking and Communications (ICNC), IEEE, 2019, pp.
617–623.

[117] A. R. Shahid, N. Pissinou, C. Staier, R. Kwan, Sensor-Chain:
A Lightweight Scalable Blockchain Framework for Internet of
Things, in: Proceedings of the 2019 International Conference
on Internet of Things (iThings) and IEEE Green Computing

42

and Communications (GreenCom) and IEEE Cyber, Physi-
cal and Social Computing (CPSCom) and IEEE Smart Data
(SmartData), IEEE, 2019, pp. 1154–1161.

[118] R. Almadhoun, M. Kadadha, M. Alhemeiri, M. Alshehhi,
K. Salah, A User Authentication Scheme of IoT Devices using
Blockchain-Enabled Fog Nodes, in: Proceedings of the 2018
IEEE/ACS 15th International Conference on Computer Sys-
tems and Applications (AICCSA), IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–8.
[119] S. Guo, X. Hu, S. Guo, X. Qiu, F. Qi, Blockchain Meets Edge
Computing: A Distributed and Trusted Authentication Sys-
tem, IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics 16 (3) (2019)
1972–1983.

[120] C. H. Lau, K.-H. Y. Alan, F. Yan, Blockchain-Based Authenti-
cation in IoT Networks, in: Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE Con-
ference on Dependable and Secure Computing (DSC), IEEE,
2018, pp. 1–8.

[121] S. Maitra, V. P. Yanambaka, A. Abdelgawad, D. Puthal,
K. Yelamarthi, Proof-of-Authentication Consensus Algorithm:
Blockchain-based IoT Implementation, in: Proceedings of the
2020 IEEE 6th World Forum on Internet of Things (WF-IoT),
IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–2.

[122] A. Damianou, C. M. Angelopoulos, V. Katos, An Architec-
ture for Blockchain over Edge-Enabled IoT for Smart Circular
Cities, in: Proceedings of the 2019 15th International Confer-
ence on Distributed Computing in Sensor Systems (DCOSS),
IEEE, 2019, pp. 465–472.

[123] L. Zhou, L. Wang, Y. Sun, P. Lv, Beekeeper: A Blockchain-
Based IoT System With Secure Storage and Homomorphic
Computation, IEEE Access 6 (2018) 43472–43488.

[124] J. H. Khor, M. Sidorov, P. Y. Woon, Public Blockchains for
Resource-Constrained IoT Devices – A State of the Art Survey,
IEEE Internet of Things Journal.

[125] H. Yao, T. Mai, J. Wang, Z. Ji, C. Jiang, Y. Qian, Resource
Trading in Blockchain-Based Industrial Internet of Things,
IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics 15 (6) (2019)
3602–3609.

[126] H. Xu, P. V. Klaine, O. Onireti, B. Cao, M. Imran, L. Zhang,
Blockchain-Enabled Resource Management and Sharing for 6G
Communications, Digital Communications and Networks 6 (3)
(2020) 261–269.

[127] L. Yang, M. Li, H. Zhang, H. Ji, M. Xiao, X. Li, Distributed
Resource Management for Blockchain in Fog-Enabled IoT Net-
works, IEEE Internet of Things Journal 8 (4) (2020) 2330–
2341.

[128] K. Wrona, M. Jarosz, Use of Blockchains for Secure Binding of
Metadata in Military Applications of IoT, in: Proceedings of
the 2019 IEEE 5th World Forum on Internet of Things (WF-
IoT), IEEE, 2019, pp. 213–218.

[129] A. Bajpai, M. Duchon, D. Balta, Blockchain Decision Matrix
for IoT Systems, in: Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE 10th An-
nual Information Technology, Electronics and Mobile Commu-
nication Conference (IEMCON), IEEE, 2019, pp. 985–990.

[130] V. A. Siris, D. Dimopoulos, N. Fotiou, S. Voulgaris, G. C. Poly-
zos, IoT Resource Access utilizing Blockchains and Trusted
Execution Environments, in: Proceedings of the 2019 Global
IoT Summit (GIoTS), IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–6.

[131] A. Panarello, N. Tapas, G. Merlino, F. Longo, A. Puliaﬁto,
Blockchain and IoT Integration: A Systematic Survey, Sensors
18 (8) (2018) 2575.

[132] Y. Alsouda, S. Pllana, A. Kurti, A Machine Learning Driven
IoT Solution for Noise Classiﬁcation in Smart Cities, arXiv
preprint arXiv:1809.00238.

[133] H. Bah¸si, S. N˜omm, F. B. La Torre, Dimensionality Reduction
for Machine Learning Based IoT Botnet Detection, in: Pro-
ceedings of the 2018 15th International Conference on Control,
Automation, Robotics and Vision (ICARCV), IEEE, 2018, pp.
1857–1862.

[134] M. Endler, J.-P. Briot, F. S. e Silva, V. P. de Almeida,
E. H. Haeusler, Towards Stream-Based Reasoning and Ma-
chine Learning for IoT Applications, in: Proceedings of the
2017 Intelligent Systems Conference (IntelliSys), IEEE, 2017,

pp. 202–209.

[135] F. Zantalis, G. Koulouras, S. Karabetsos, D. Kandris, A Re-
view of Machine Learning and IoT in Smart Transportation,
Future Internet 11 (4) (2019) 94.

[136] A. Kanawaday, A. Sane, Machine Learning for Predictive
Maintenance of Industrial Machines Using IoT Sensor Data,
in: Proceedings of the 2017 8th IEEE International Confer-
ence on Software Engineering and Service Science (ICSESS),
IEEE, 2017, pp. 87–90.

[137] M. Mohammadi, A. Al-Fuqaha, S. Sorour, M. Guizani, Deep
Learning for IoT Big Data and Streaming Analytics: A Sur-
vey, IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials 20 (4) (2018)
2923–2960.

[138] S. S. Patil, S. A. Thorat, Early Detection of Grapes Diseases
Using Machine Learning and IoT, in: Proceedings of the 2016
second international conference on Cognitive Computing and
Information Processing (CCIP), IEEE, 2016, pp. 1–5.
[139] T. K. Rodrigues, K. Suto, H. Nishiyama, J. Liu, N. Kato, Ma-
chine Learning Meets Computation and Communication Con-
trol in Evolving Edge and Cloud: Challenges and Future Per-
spective, IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials 22 (1)
(2019) 38–67.

[140] U. S. Shanthamallu, A. Spanias, C. Tepedelenlioglu, M. Stan-
ley, A Brief Survey of Machine Learning Methods and Their
Sensor and IoT Applications, in: Proceedings of the 2017 8th
International Conference on Information, Intelligence, Systems
& Applications (IISA), IEEE, 2017, pp. 1–8.

[141] H. K. Bharadwaj, A. Agarwal, V. Chamola, N. R. Lakkaniga,
V. Hassija, M. Guizani, B. Sikdar, A Review on the Role of
Machine Learning in Enabling IoT Based Healthcare Applica-
tions, IEEE Access 9 (2021) 38859–38890.

[142] S. K. Sharma, X. Wang, Toward Massive Machine Type Com-
munications in Ultra-Dense Cellular IoT Networks: Current
Issues and Machine Learning-Assisted Solutions, IEEE Com-
munications Surveys & Tutorials 22 (1) (2019) 426–471.
[143] S. Venkataramani, K. Roy, A. Raghunathan, Eﬃcient Embed-
ded Learning for IoT Devices, in: Proceedings of the 2016 21st
Asia and South Paciﬁc Design Automation Conference (ASP-
DAC), IEEE, 2016, pp. 308–311.

[144] L. Cui, S. Yang, F. Chen, Z. Ming, N. Lu, J. Qin, A Survey
on Application of Machine Learning for Internet of Things,
International Journal of Machine Learning and Cybernetics
9 (8) (2018) 1399–1417.

[145] A. Goap, D. Sharma, A. Shukla, C. R. Krishna, An IoT Based
Smart Irrigation Management System Using Machine Learning
and Open Source Technologies, Computers and Electronics in
Agriculture 155 (2018) 41–49.

[146] D. Ventura, D. Casado-Mansilla, J. L´opez-de Armentia,
P. Garaizar, D. L´opez-de Ipina, V. Catania, ARIIMA: A Real
IoT Implementation of a Machine-Learning Architecture for
Reducing Energy Consumption, in: Proceedings of the Inter-
national Conference on Ubiquitous Computing and Ambient
Intelligence, Springer, 2014, pp. 444–451.

[147] W.-E. Chen, Y.-B. Lin, L.-X. Chen, PigTalk: An AI-Based IoT
Platform for Piglet Crushing Mitigation, IEEE Transactions
on Industrial Informatics 17 (6) (2020) 4345–4355.

[148] F. Hussain, R. Hussain, S. A. Hassan, E. Hossain, Machine
Learning in IoT Security: Current Solutions and Future Chal-
lenges, IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials.

[149] N. Baracaldo, B. Chen, H. Ludwig, A. Safavi, R. Zhang, De-
tecting Poisoning Attacks on Machine Learning in IoT En-
vironments, in: Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE International
Congress on Internet of Things (ICIOT), IEEE, 2018, pp. 57–
64.

[150] J. Canedo, A. Skjellum, Using Machine Learning to Secure IoT
Systems, in: Proceedings of the 2016 14th Annual Conference
on Privacy, Security and Trust (PST), IEEE, 2016, pp. 219–
222.

[151] R. Doshi, N. Apthorpe, N. Feamster, Machine Learning DDoS
Detection for Consumer Internet of Things Devices, in: Pro-
ceedings of the 2018 IEEE Security and Privacy Workshops

43

(SPW), IEEE, 2018, pp. 29–35.

[152] P. M. Kumar, U. D. Gandhi, A Novel Three-Tier Internet
of Things Architecture with Machine Learning Algorithm for
Early Detection of Heart Diseases, Computers & Electrical En-
gineering 65 (2018) 222–235.

[153] H.-J. Jeong, H.-J. Lee, S.-M. Moon, Work-in-Progress: Cloud-
Based Machine Learning for IoT Devices with Better Privacy,
in: Proceedings of the 2017 International Conference on Em-
bedded Software (EMSOFT), IEEE, 2017, pp. 1–2.

[154] P. S. Pandey, Machine Learning and IoT for Prediction and
Detection of Stress, in: Proceedings of the 2017 17th Interna-
tional Conference on Computational Science and Its Applica-
tions (ICCSA), IEEE, 2017, pp. 1–5.

[155] X. Zhou, K. Xu, N. Wang, J. Jiao, N. Dong, M. Han, H. Xu,
A Secure and Privacy-Preserving Machine Learning Model
Sharing Scheme for Edge-Enabled IoT, IEEE Access 9 (2021)
17256–17265.

[156] A. Uprety, D. B. Rawat, Reinforcement Learning for IoT Secu-
rity: A Comprehensive Survey, IEEE Internet of Things Jour-
nal.

[157] G. Xu, Y. Zhao, L. Jiao, M. Feng, Z. Ji, E. Panaousis,
S. Chen, X. Zheng, TT-SVD: An Eﬃcient Sparse Decision
Making Model with Two-Way Trust Recommendation in the
AI Enabled IoT Systems, IEEE Internet of Things Journal.

[158] A. Makkar, S. Garg, N. Kumar, M. S. Hossain, A. Ghoneim,
M. Alrashoud, An Eﬃcient Spam Detection Technique for IoT
Devices Using Machine Learning, IEEE Transactions on In-
dustrial Informatics 17 (2) (2020) 903–912.

[159] B. Dias, A. Gl´oria, P. Sebasti˜ao, Prediction of Link Quality
for IoT Cloud Communications Supported by Machine Learn-
ing, in: Proceedings of the 2021 IEEE World AI IoT Congress
(AIIoT), IEEE, 2021, pp. 0150–0154.

[160] W. B. Richardson, J. Meyer, S. Von Solms, Towards Machine
Learning and Low Data Rate IoT for Fault Detection in Data
Driven Predictive Maintenance, in: Proceedings of the 2021
IEEE World AI IoT Congress (AIIoT), IEEE, 2021, pp. 0202–
0208.

[161] M. Mahesh, B. S. Pavan, V. Harigovindan, Data Rate-Based
Grouping Using Machine Learning to Improve the Aggregate
Throughput of IEEE 802.11ah Multi-Rate IoT Networks, in:
Proceedings of the 2020 IEEE International Conference on Ad-
vanced Networks and Telecommunications Systems (ANTS),
IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–5.

[162] L. Yang, Y. Li, J. Wang, N. N. Xiong, FSLM: An Intelligent
Few-Shot Learning Model Based on Siamese Networks for IoT
Technology, IEEE Internet of Things Journal 8 (12) (2020)
9717–9729.

[163] A. Dwivedi, R. Pant, S. Pandey, K. Kumar, Internet of
Things’(IoT’s) Impact on Decision Oriented Applications of
Big Data Sentiment Analysis, in: Proceedings of the 2018 3rd
International Conference On Internet of Things: Smart Inno-
vation and Usages (IoT-SIU), IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–10.

[164] S. Wohlgemuth, K. Umezawa, Y. Mishina, K. Takaragi, Com-
petitive Compliance with Blockchain, in: Proceedings of the
2019 IEEE International Conference on Pervasive Computing
and Communications Workshops (PerCom Workshops), IEEE,
2019, pp. 967–972.

[165] F. Jindal, S. Mudgal, V. Choudhari, P. P. Churi, Emerging
Trends in Internet of Things, in: Proceedings of the 2018 Fifth
HCT Information Technology Trends (ITT), IEEE, 2018, pp.
50–60.

[166] K. R. ¨Ozyilmaz, M. Do˘gan, A. Yurdakul, IDMoB: IoT Data
Marketplace on Blockchain, in: Proceedings of the 2018 Crypto
Valley Conference on Blockchain Technology (CVCBT), IEEE,
2018, pp. 11–19.

[167] S. S. Arumugam, V. Umashankar, N. C. Narendra, R. Badri-
nath, A. P. Mujumdar, J. Holler, A. Hernandez, IOT Enabled
Smart Logistics Using Smart Contracts,
in: Proceedings of
the 2018 8th International Conference on Logistics, Informat-
ics and Service Sciences (LISS), IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–6.

[168] G. Ahmadi-Assalemi, H. M. Al-Khateeb, G. Epiphaniou,

J. Cosson, H. Jahankhani, P. Pillai, Federated Blockchain-
Based Tracking and Liability Attribution Framework for Em-
ployees and Cyber-Physical Objects in a Smart Workplace, in:
Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE 12th International Conference
on Global Security, Safety and Sustainability (ICGS3), IEEE,
2019, pp. 1–9.

[169] G. R. Chandra, I. A. Liaqat, B. Sharma, Blockchain Redeﬁn-
ing: The Halal Food Sector, in: Proceedings of the 2019 Amity
International Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AICAI),
IEEE, 2019, pp. 349–354.

[170] Y. Zhao, J. Zhao, L. Jiang, R. Tan, D. Niyato, Mobile Edge
Computing, Blockchain and Reputation-Based Crowdsourcing
IoT Federated Learning: A Secure, Decentralized and Privacy-
Preserving System, arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.10893.

[171] W. Chen, M. Ma, Y. Ye, Z. Zheng, Y. Zhou, IoT Service Based
on JointCloud Blockchain: The Case Study of Smart Travel-
ing, in: Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE Symposium on service-
oriented system engineering (SOSE), IEEE, 2018, pp. 216–221.
[172] S. S. Ramachandran, A. Veeraraghavan, U. Karni, K. Sivara-
man, Development of Flexible Autonomous Car System Using
Machine Learning and Blockchain, in: Proceedings of the In-
ternational Symposium of Information and Internet Technol-
ogy, Springer, 2018, pp. 63–72.

[173] K. Singla, J. Bose, S. Katariya, Machine Learning for Secure
Device Personalization Using Blockchain, in: Proceedings of
the2018 International Conference on Advances in Computing,
Communications and Informatics (ICACCI), IEEE, 2018, pp.
67–73.

[174] A. Outchakoucht, E. Hamza, J. P. Leroy, Dynamic Access Con-
trol Policy Based on Blockchain and Machine Learning for the
Internet of Things, Int. J. Adv. Comput. Sci. Appl 8 (7) (2017)
417–424.

[175] Q. Yang, H. Wang, Privacy-Preserving Transactive Energy
Management for IoT-aided Smart Homes via Blockchain, IEEE
Internet of Things Journal.

[176] Y. Zhao, J. Zhao, L. Jiang, R. Tan, D. Niyato, Z. Li, L. Lyu,
Y. Liu, Privacy-Preserving Blockchain-Based Federated Learn-
ing for IoT devices, IEEE Internet of Things Journal 8 (3)
(2020) 1817–1829.

[177] W. Zhang, Q. Lu, Q. Yu, Z. Li, Y. Liu, S. K. Lo, S. Chen,
X. Xu, L. Zhu, Blockchain-Based Federated Learning for De-
vice Failure Detection in Industrial IoT, IEEE Internet of
Things Journal 8 (7) (2020) 5926–5937.

[178] J. Xu, S. Wang, A. Zhou, F. Yang, Edgence: A Blockchain-
Enabled Edge-Computing Platform for Intelligent IoT-Based
dApps, China Communications 17 (4) (2020) 78–87.

[179] A. Rahman, M. J. Islam, A. Montieri, M. K. Nasir, M. M.
Reza, S. S. Band, A. Pescape, M. Hasan, M. Sookhak,
A. Mosavi, SmartBlock-SDN: An Optimized Blockchain-SDN
Framework for Resource Management in IoT, IEEE Access 9
(2021) 28361–28376.

[180] B. Hamdaoui, M. Alkalbani, A. Rayes, N. Zorba, IoTShare: A
Blockchain-Enabled IoT Resource Sharing On-Demand Pro-
tocol for Smart City Situation-Awareness Applications, IEEE
Internet of Things Journal 7 (10) (2020) 10548–10561.
[181] Y. He, Y. Wang, C. Qiu, Q. Lin, J. Li, Z. Ming, Blockchain-
Based Edge Computing Resource Allocation in IoT: A Deep
Reinforcement Learning Approach, IEEE Internet of Things
Journal 8 (4) (2020) 2226–2237.

[182] W. Zhang, J. Wang, G. Han, S. Huang, Y. Feng, L. Shu,
A Data Set Accuracy Weighted Random Forest Algorithm
for IoT Fault Detection Based on Edge Computing and
Blockchain, IEEE Internet of Things Journal 8 (4) (2020)
2354–2363.

[183] A. Reyna, C. Mart´ın, J. Chen, E. Soler, M. D´ıaz, On
Blockchain and Its Integration with IoT. Challenges and Op-
portunities, Future Generation Computer Systems 88 (2018)
173–190.

[184] G. Wang, Z. Shi, M. Nixon, S. Han, Chainsplitter: Towards
Blockchain-Based Industrial IoT Architecture for Supporting
Hierarchical Storage, in: Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE Inter-

44

[202] I. Alvarado, AI-enabled IoT, Network Complexity and 5G, in:
Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE Green Energy and Smart Sys-
tems Conference (IGESSC), IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–6.

[203] I. Ahmad, S. Shahabuddin, T. Kumar, E. Harjula, M. Meisel,
M. Juntti, T. Sauter, M. Ylianttila, Challenges of AI in Wire-
less Networks for IoT, arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.04705.
[204] S. B. Calo, M. Touna, D. C. Verma, A. Cullen, Edge Com-
puting Architecture for Applying AI to IoT, in: Proceedings
of the 2017 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big
Data), IEEE, 2017, pp. 3012–3016.

national Conference on Blockchain (Blockchain), IEEE, 2019,
pp. 166–175.

[185] S. Malik, V. Dedeoglu, S. S. Kanhere, R. Jurdak, TrustChain:
Trust Management in Blockchain and IoT Supported Supply
Chains, in: Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE International Con-
ference on Blockchain (Blockchain), IEEE, 2019, pp. 184–193.
[186] H. T. T. Truong, M. Almeida, G. Karame, C. Soriente, To-
wards Secure and Decentralized Sharing of IoT Data,
in:
Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE International Conference on
Blockchain (Blockchain), IEEE, 2019, pp. 176–183.

[187] S. Yakut, ¨O. S¸eker, E. Batur, G. Dalkılı¸c, Blockchain Platform
for Internet of Things, in: Proceedings of the 2019 Innovations
in Intelligent Systems and Applications Conference (ASYU),
IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–6.

[188] K. Lei, M. Du, J. Huang, T. Jin, Groupchain: Towards a
Scalable Public Blockchain in Fog Computing of IoT Services
Computing, IEEE Transactions on Services Computing 13 (2)
(2020) 252–262.

[189] R. Beck, J. Stenum Czepluch, N. Lollike, S. Malone,
Blockchain–The Gateway to Trust-Free Cryptographic rans-
actions, in: Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth European Con-
ference on Information Systems (ECIS,2016), 2016.

[190] H. Son, Y. Jang, Partial Convolutional LSTM for Spatiotem-
poral Prediction of Incomplete Data, IEEE Access 8 (2020)
164762–164774.

[191] W. Tao, Z. Pan, G. Wu, Q. Tao, Primal Averaging: A New
Gradient Evaluation Step to Attain the Optimal Individual
Convergence, IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics 50 (2) (2018)
835–845.

[192] Y. Guo, M. Xiang, Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning Based
Energy Eﬃciency Optimization in NB-IoT Networks, in: Pro-
ceedings of the 2019 IEEE Globecom Workshops, IEEE, 2019,
pp. 1–6.

[193] W. Tao, Z. Pan, G. Wu, Q. Tao, The Strength of Nesterov’s Ex-
trapolation in the Individual Convergence of Nonsmooth Opti-
mization, IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learn-
ing Systems 31 (7) (2019) 2557–2568.

[194] F. Ahamed, F. Farid, Applying Internet of Things and
Machine-Learning for Personalized Healthcare:
Issues and
Challenges, in: Proceedings of the 2018 International Confer-
ence on Machine Learning and Data Engineering (iCMLDE),
IEEE, 2018, pp. 19–21.

[195] S. Kinkiri, W. J. Melis, Reducing Data Storage Requirements
for Machine Learning Algorithms using Principle Component
Analysis, in: Proceedings of the 2016 International Conference
on Applied System Innovation (ICASI), IEEE, 2016, pp. 1–4.
[196] Y. Mochizuki, AI and IoT for Social Value Creation, in: Pro-
ceedings of the 2019 IEEE Asian Solid-State Circuits Confer-
ence (A-SSCC), IEEE, 2019, pp. 99–102.

[197] P. Bellavista, P. Chatzimisios, L. Foschini, M. Paradisioti,
D. Scotece, A Support Infrastructure for Machine Learning
at the Edge in Smart City Surveillance, in: Proceedings of the
2019 IEEE Symposium on Computers and Communications
(ISCC), IEEE, 2019, pp. 1189–1194.

[198] A. Francis, Y. P. Pingle, Automation in Baking using AI and
IoT, in: Proceedings of the 2020 7th International Conference
on Computing for Sustainable Global Development (INDIA-
Com), IEEE, 2020, pp. 52–57.

[199] M. Brignoli, S. Mazzaro, G. Fortunato, A. Cor`a, W. Matta,
S. Romano, B. Ruggiero, V. Coscia, Combining Exposure In-
dicators and Predictive Analytics for Threats Detection in Real
Industrial IoT Sensor Networks, in: Proceedings of the 2020
IEEE International Workshop on Metrology for Industry 4.0
& IoT, IEEE, 2020, pp. 423–428.

[200] M.-h. Chi, D. Xiao, R. Chang, Fast Development of IC Tech-
nologies in AI and IoT Era, in: Proceedings of the 2018 14th
IEEE International Conference on Solid-State and Integrated
Circuit Technology (ICSICT), IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–4.

[201] I. Garc´ıa-Magari˜no, R. Muttukrishnan, J. Lloret, Human-
Centric AI for Trustworthy IoT Systems with Explainable Mul-
tilayer Perceptrons, IEEE Access 7 (2019) 125562–125574.

45

