Distributed Applications in Gamification of the 
Learning Process 

Martin Zagar 
Web and Mobile Computing Department  
RIT Croatia 
Zagreb, Croatia 
martin.zagar@rit.edu  

Nikola Draskovic 
International Business Department  
RIT Croatia 
Zagreb, Croatia 
nikola.draskovic@croatia.rit.edu  

Matija Sipek 
Web and Mobile Computing Department  
RIT Croatia 
Zagreb, Croatia 
mxs1943@rit.edu  

Branko Mihaljevic 
Web and Mobile Computing Department  
RIT Croatia 
Zagreb, Croatia 
branko.mihaljevic@croatia.rit.edu  

Abstract— Driven by the fact that  many of us experienced 
softer  or  not-so-soft  lockdown,  the  intention  of  a  couple  of 
instructors at our university was to develop a collaborative tool 
that  could  help  in  online  delivery  and  gamification  on  two 
courses that are delivered in the  Business and IT  curriculums 
we are offering to our students. That tool could be described as 
a  decentralized  web  application  that  simulates  Internet 
marketing principles and helps in gamification of the learning 
process for our students. We planned our  web application  for 
Internet  marketing  simulation  as  the  gamification  of  the 
learning process, which is one of the basics for active learning 
for  Internet  Marketing  course  for  International  Business 
students,  to  gain  new  class  activities  by  online  simulation 
competing in the field of Internet marketing principles; and for 
IT  students  in  developing  the  Web  application  and  also  on 
adopting  Blockchain  technologies  for  the  distributed  reports 
which  need  to  have  a  consensus  of  all  teams  included  in  the 
simulation.  The  proposed  solution  includes  the  design  of 
business logic simulation and using four main digital marketing 
tools – social networking, content creating and sharing, search 
engine  marketing,  and  display  advertising  in  use  of  such 
application for hands-on online class exercises. 

Keywords— Distributed applications in learning, gamification 
of  the  learning  process,  online  delivery  of  classes,  Internet 
marketing. 

I. 

INTRODUCTION  

planning, 

Studying, 

developing 

distributed 
and 
applications,  differs  significantly  compared  to  traditional, 
centralized  software applications, namely managing  internal 
persistent memory and operations conducted with it. From an 
educational  point  of  view,  this  process  is  not  covered 
completely in a proper way.  IT students lack knowledge on 
how  to  build  these  specific  applications  due  to  a  lack  of 
business  background  and  related  experience.  On  the  other 
hand, Business students may have the knowledge of business 
logic  an  Internet  simulation  would  apply,  but  they  have  no 
technical knowledge needed for the application development. 

 For  the  IT  students,  the  switch  from  centralized 
application  deployment 
to  a  decentralized  approach 
introduces  new  options  regarding  different  principles  in 
software  development  where  access  management,  integrity, 
and  immutability  are  imperative.  Business  students  need  to 
understand Internet marketing principles comprehensively, so 
there is a need for shifting the educational process, for both IT 

their  higher 

and  Business  students.  Also,  according  to  the  common 
rationale,  a  motivating  learning  environment  will  result  in 
better-performing  students  and 
level  of 
satisfaction  with  both  delivered  courses  and  instructors  [1]. 
Therefore, it is essential for curriculum designers to develop 
programs  and  assignments  that  will  challenge  students,  but 
also provide them with valuable experiences, especially real-
life  experiences  [2].  According  to  [3],  simulated  real-world 
experience allows students to test their skills before leaving 
the educational environment. 

Based  on  the  current  students’  feedback  on  courses 
Internet  Marketing  (in  the  Business  curriculum),  and  Web 
App Development (in the IT curriculum), students would like 
to have more real-world and real-time examples and as much 
as possible real-world experience [4]. The main purpose of the 
Internet  marketing  simulation  is  to  provide  both  groups  of 
students  with  course-specific  knowledge  and  experience.  In 
other words, the aim of Internet simulation is for students to 
develop  a  better  understanding  of  theoretical  fundamentals 
and  course  topics  in  a  more  interesting  and  dynamic  way. 
Having  in  mind  the  collaborative  nature  of  this  project,  the 
proposed simulation is enabling active learning in two courses 
within two different curriculums. The simulation supports the 
idea of topic delivery in a blended way. The lectures could be 
delivered  face-to-face,  while  hands-on  activities  for  both 
student sections could be delivered through the online Internet 
marketing simulation. 

This learning by doing approach already exists in different 
Internet  marketing  simulations,  such  as  Stukent  Mimic  Pro 
Simulation [5], Markstrat [6], or Anylogic [7], which we used 
as a benchmark to initially set parameters of our application. 
The main problem with other existing solutions is that they are 
not  fully  adaptable  to  all  market  dependencies,  which  our 
application  is,  and  which  is  a  prerequisite  for  fully  online 
delivery of the courses 

II.  APPROACH AND METHODS 
The  initial  version  of  the  Internet  Marketing  simulation 
comprised  a  simple  business  environment  where  students 
were  supposed  to  manage  digital  marketing  efforts  for  a 
hypothetical smartphone brand with a limited range of three 
devices  with  different  technical  specifications  and  targeted 
market. The simulation features an administration panel that 
provides  the  instructor  with  an  option  to  modify  various 

 
 
 
simulation  parameters.  Once  the  simulation  is  being  set-up, 
the  first  round  is  a  test  round,  which  gives  students  an 
opportunity  to  get  familiar  with  the  interface.  Both  test  and 
regular  rounds  consist  of  planning  the  budgets  per  digital 
platform and decisions about other parameters (e.g., keywords 
strategy).  After  each  round,  activity  reports  (i.e.,  digital 
platform insights/analytics) are generated providing students 
with valuable feedback on their actions. Additionally, students 
have  an  option 
to  review  market  reports  (containing 
competition's numbers and consumer preferences), but these 
reports would require spending of a certain amount of virtual 
money. Based on inputs from various reports, students have to 
manage digital marketing activities, such as content creation 
and content share/promotion via social media channels. The 
simulation gives students an option to decide how much of the 
virtual money should be spent per turn.  

The simulation is designed as a three-step process: 

A.  Planning stage 

In 

and 

the  planning  stage,  budgets,  message  strategy, 
keywords, and targeting options are set. Each student or team 
has to make a decision on budget allocation and spending per 
turn.  The  total  simulation  budget  is  predefined  by  the 
instructor.  The  weekly  budget  has  to  be  split  between 
communication 
products/brands 
channels/activities. 
per 
threshold 
channel/activity  is  predefined  (i.e.,  spending  less  than  the 
threshold  value  will  have  no  impact).  Furthermore,  more 
focused  spending  (e.g.,  limited  to  one  product  and/or  fewer 
channels/activities) is more efficient, like in reality. This stage 
is  completely  developed  and  deployed 
in  JavaScript 
technologies  and  is  accessible  through  the  front-end  of  our 
application. 

different 
spending 

The 

B.  Execution of the plan 

refers 

This step is done on a daily or weekly turn, depending on 
the class delivery type. In the execution of the plan, students 
can make some low-scale changes to optimize the promotional 
effort. Each student or team has to select the keyword (or even 
the  channel)  per 
multiple  keywords,  depending  on 
channel/activity.  Keyword 
topic 
communication  is  focused  on  (more  details  about  the 
Keywords in section III B.). Keywords have a different impact 
on the efficiency of promotional activities depending on the 
product  features,  target  audience  preferences,  and  proposed 
budget.  Synergy  across  channels  can  be  achieved 
if 
communication  is  more  focused  (e.g.,  the  same  keyword  is 
used  across  all  communication  channels).  In  other  words, 
consistency is crucial. Students/teams are limited here with the 
drop-down menu.  

the  main 

to 

their 

In  order  to  optimize  the  overall  promotional  effort, 
target  audience(s). 
students  can  precisely  define 
Targeting primarily refers to the promotional activities and it 
is  platform-specific.  A  proper  combination  of  message 
strategy  and  targeting  is  essential  for  success.  Appropriate 
targeting is also correlated with content creation and its quality 
score  in  the  context  of  search  marketing.  In  other  words,  a 
higher  quality  score,  together  with  a  consistent  bidding 
strategy,  will  result  in  a  more  efficient  search  marketing 
campaign. This stage is completed on the basic level. At the 
moment,  the  basic  principles  of  correlations  have  been 
implemented.  However,  as  part  of  the  future  development, 
further  and  more  detailed  development  of  correlations 
between various planning variables is expected.  

C.  Reporting 
Once 

the  round/turn 

is  finished,  students  receive 
distributed formal reports (digital platform insights/analytics) 
and  some  less  formal  (salesforce  feedback).  For  the  market 
report  (containing  competition's  numbers  and  consumer 
preferences), students have to spend a certain amount of their 
overall marketing budget. This backend process  is  designed 
instead  of  one  centralized  database  by  using  distributed 
Blockchain technologies, where we have developed reporting 
on  the  Blockchain  technology.  Initially,  we  encountered 
difficulties in payment options when tried to implement this 
in standard Ethereum Virtual Machine [8], which is part of the 
Ethereum network (this is to get the distribution of the reports, 
but also to prove the integrity of the data and to get an overall 
consensus of all of the parties in the reporting), so we plan to 
translate  our  solution  to  another  Blockchain  technology  – 
HashNet  network  [9],  where  we  can  run  our  simulation 
reporting for free.  

Our  next  step  was  adding  the  additional  feature  for  the 
weekly budgeting  that  has  to be  split  between products  and 
different communication channels/activities to enable multi-
user  mode,  so  students  (or  teams  of  students)  are  able  to 
compete with each other. Execution of the weekly plan based 
on weekly budgeting enables students to make some low-scale 
changes in order to optimize the promotional effort.  

III.  SYSTEM DESCRIPTION AND OUTCOMES 
In this section, we will describe what are the goals of the 
simulation and how to interact with the simulation with three 
main  tabs.  The  current  simulation  is  providing  the  main 
features  of  Internet  marketing  principles,  which  could  be 
easily extended upon further feedback. 

A.  Goals of simulation 

From the perspectives of users, there are several goals in 

this simulation: 

•  The  main  goal  is  to  increase  sales  for  each  of  the 

three smartphone models; 

•  Additionally, 

students 

increase  brand 
loyalty/image because it will have a positive impact 
on  sales  in  the  next  simulation  turns  (long-term 
perspectives). 

should 

Furthermore, Business  students/teams are faced with the 

following set of goals of specific challenges: 

• 

to 

increase  sales,  students  have 

to 
In  order 
appropriately  allocate  marketing  budget  and  set-up 
all  the  correlated  variables  (e.g.,  keywords,  post 
promotions). 

•  After  each 

into 
turn,  students  have 
consideration  outcomes  from  previous  turns  and 
adjust variables accordingly in order to optimize the 
performance of the digital marketing activities. 

take 

to 

For IT students, goals are related to the technical aspects 
of the simulation. Therefore, IT students are dedicated to the 
collection  of  real-time  inputs  from  the  users  for  further 
application features development. 

Students/teams have  to  manage digital marketing efforts 
for three product models (i.e., low-end, mid-end, and high-end 
products/brands).  By  default, 
the  smartphone  product 
category has been set-up. However, the instructor could make 

customization  and  manually  change  the  product  category. 
Since  the  marketing  budget  is  limited,  it  is  not  possible  to 
optimize promotional effort for all three products at the same 
time. Therefore, students have to make decisions about certain 
trade-offs. Ideally, only one model should be promoted within 
a turn (day or week) or over a period of few turns (if promoted 
for two or three weeks in a row, 20% better results should be 
expected). However, spending too much budget and focus on 
just  one  product  can  potentially  have  a  negative  impact  on 
other models’ sales (if promoted four weeks in a row, there is 
no  additional  impact;  for  the  fifth  week,  there  is  a  25% 
penalty; for the sixth week 45% penalty and so on).  

Additionally, the available budget would not support the 
full  utilization  of  all  channels  within  one  turn.  Therefore, 
students/teams needed to carefully develop their strategies and 
prioritize. Players should not try to utilize all channels at the 
same moment because the budget cannot support that. 

B.  Simulation interface 

The first tab of the simulation is the planning stage. Each 
team will first have to decide how much money to spend in 
one  turn.  The  total  simulation  budget  is  predefined.  The 
weekly budget has to be split between products and different 
communication channels/activities, and an example is shown 
in Table I.  

The  spending  threshold  per  channel/activity  is  also 
predefined,  e.g.,  spending  less  than  the  threshold  value  will 
have  no  impact.  Furthermore,  more  focused  spending  (e.g., 
limited  to  one  product  and/or  fewer  channels/activities)  is 
more  efficient.  The  numbers  in  the  table  are  just  for 
illustrational purposes. Students are responsible for all inputs. 

TABLE I.  

BUDGET SPLIT PER CHANNEL/ACTIVITY IN 

COMMUNICATION PLATFORMS 

Communication 
platforms 

Budget split per 
channel/activity 
Phone 
2 

Phone 
1 

Phone 
3 

Budget per 
channel/activity 

EUR 

Web site content 

50% 

40% 

10% 

SEO 

60% 

30% 

10% 

Facebook 
content 
production 
Facebook page 
promotion 
Facebook 
content 
promotion 
Youtube content 
production 
Youtube content 
promotion 
Instagram 
content 
production 

TOTAL 

40% 

40% 

20% 

60% 

30% 

10% 

70% 

30% 

0% 

100% 

0% 

100% 

0% 

0% 

0% 

50% 

40% 

10% 

500 

200 

500 

100 

200 

500 

100 

300 

2400 

The  second  tab  of  simulation  is  the  message  strategy 
described by one or more  keywords.  Here,  students have  to 
select a keyword (or even multiple keywords, depending on 
the  channel)  per  channel/activity.  This  is  the  main  topic  of 
communication  focus.  Obviously,  synergy  across  channels 
can be achieved if communication is more focused (e.g., one 
keyword is used in all channels). In other words, consistency 
is crucial. Students are limited here with the drop-down menu.  

The current list of keywords for initial simulation consists 
of  some  simple  points  like  Product  features  in  general, 
Photography,  Memory,  Distinctive  design,  Practical  design, 
Technical  support  reminder,  Brand  image  related,  Product 
differentiation, and Sales promotion support. Keywords have 
a different impact on the efficiency of promotional activities 
depending  on 
target  audience 
preferences, and proposed budget. 

the  product 

features, 

The  last  tab  of  simulation  is  focused  on  targeting. 
Targeting primarily refers to the promotional activities and it 
is  platform-specific.  A  proper  combination  of  message 
strategy  and  targeting  is  essential  for  success.  For  content 
creation, targeting will improve its quality score. The content 
quality score can improve promotional efficiency. 

C.  Technologies 
  Our system comprises several interconnected technologies 
that together create a useable, precise, and responsive system 
with  agility  for  further  implementations.  One  of  the  main 
goals was to focus on privacy guarantees for both students and 
professors  such  as  decentralization  and  differential  privacy. 
The  system  holds  three  main  sectors  that  have  explicit 
responsibilities  and  are  interconnected  by  an  intermediary 
level that manipulates and shares data. 

  Also, the key enforcer for using these technologies is the 
fact of the limited scope of the academic environment we were 
working in. Thus, we created a  working prototype  that uses 
the underlying technologies which allow free transactions per 
se, in comparison to EVM (Ethereum Virtual Machine) cost 
of transactions [8]. Nevertheless, the system can be migrated 
to any EVM-based blockchain network by just changing the 
targeted  network  and  adjusting  some  communicational 
variables. 

Blockchain supporting technologies: 

•  Truffle Suite – blockchain development environment 

•  Ganache – a local in-memory blockchain 

•  Web3.js – a web plug-in for Ethereum nodes 

•  MetaMask  –  Ethereum  browser  extension/crypto 

wallet 

•  Solidity  –  a  programming  language  for  smart 

contracts. 

Truffle  Suite  [10]  is  a  development  environment  that 
provides  a  set  of  tools  that  allow  an  easier  development 
lifecycle for blockchain development. Also, it can be used as 
a testing framework and an asset pipeline for all blockchains 
targeting 
the  Ethereum  Virtual  Machine  (EVM).  The 
environment  offers  built-in  smart  contract  compilation, 
linking  and  deployment  to  multiple  networks,  interactive 
debugger,  many  libraries,  and  automated  testing  along  with 
scriptable  deployment  and  migrations  frameworks,  which 
allows  accessible  and  straightforward  implementation  with 
different distributed ledger systems. From dependencies in our 
deployment, we were using Truffle v5.0.2 (core: v5.0.2) and 
truffle-contract v3.0.6. 

  Ganache  is  part  of  the  Truffle  Suite  and  presents  a  
simulated  personal  blockchain  environment  replicating  the 
behavior of the initial, real-world distributed ledgers. It can be 
used throughout the whole of the development cycle, allowing 
deployment  and  testing  dApps  in  a  safe  but  still  analogous 

 
 
 
 
environment to the real concept. Ganache gives developers 10 
mock  accounts  obtaining  a  certain  amount  of  fake 
cryptocurrency,  and  with  them,  we  were  able  to  simulate  a 
cohort  of  individual  parties  acting  within  the  system.  Each 
blockchain interaction on Ganache is saved with its TX hash, 
as  well  as  the  type  of  transaction,  sender  address,  value 
(presented  in  given  currency),  gas  used,  gas  price  and  limit 
with the  block number  in  which  the  transaction  was mined. 
For  development  we  have  used  Ganache  v2.4.0  with  JSON 
Remote Procedure Call (RPC) server setup, the price of each 
unit  of  gas  is  set  up  at  20000000000  Wei,  the  gas  limit  is 
6721975 units and the hard fork is set to Petersburg. 

     Web3.js is a set of libraries that allow communication 
with Ethereum nodes, both local and remotely placed ones via 
different  network  protocols.  To  connect  Truffle  Suite  and 
Ganache  to  the  browser,  we  have  used  web3.js  v1.3.0  as  a 
JavaScript web provider. 

     MetaMask allows websites to request Ethereum accounts, 
thus allowing them to operate Ethereum dApps. It does that 
by adding a provider object that indicates an Ethereum user, 
resulting in an Application Programming Interface (API) that 
can read data from the blockchains. In our system, we have 
used  the  MetaMask  v4.0.2,  which  was  a  part  of  the  user 
interface (UI) as well as a transaction communicator between 
the user and the simulation. Accordingly, when a distributed 
application  wants  to  perform  write  a  transaction  on  the 
blockchain,  the  user  gets  a  secure  interface  to  inspect  the 
transaction  before  deciding 
it 
respectively.  Consequently,  our  simulation  asks  the  user  on 
key  system  checkpoints 
through  blockchain 
transactions.  The  setup  of  the  system  requires  three  central 
items  which  are  detecting  the  Ethereum  provider  and 
Ethereum  network  on  whom  the  user  account  is  connected, 
and finally gets the user’s Ethereum account.  

to  approve  or  decline 

to  push 

Solidity is an object-oriented high-level language for the 
development  of  smart  contracts.  The  language  utilizes  a 
simple  single-slot  database  in  which  you  can  query  and 
modify  the  code  by  calling  the  functions  that  manage  the 
database. Our system uses solidity v0.5.0 with which we are 
deploying contracts to the Ganache in-memory representation 
of the Ethereum blockchain. 

  Lastly,  from  the  technologies  which  are  not  directly 
connected to the blockchain reporting process, but are still a 
key  part  in  the  simulation,  we  have  used  HTML5,  CSS, 
Bootstrap, JavaScript, and C# for the API. 

(R) 

Build 

Engine 

  The  API  business  logic  calculation  subsystem  uses  C# 
with  Microsoft 
version 
16.2.32702+c4012a063  for  the  .NET  Core  version,  and  the 
project  SDK  Microsoft.NET.Sdk.Web  with  netcoreapp2.2 
target  framework.  The  API  processes  the  largest  amount  of 
data  and  is  the  main  sales  force  calculations  mechanism. 
Through the simulation, JavaScript calls are made to the API 
via specialized controllers, which can handle user interaction 
with or without blockchain to make initial calculations, as well 
as finalize the weekly turn report. 

D.  System Communication Flow 

At  the  start  of  the  simulation,  the  admin  enters  pre-
determined data, and this data is the is starting benchmark of 
globally  defined  values,  which  define  the  successfulness  of 
each user’s overall situation. These elements include the social 
media  network’s  Number  of  likes,  Post  engagement,  Page 

views, Average post reach, etc., and they are equally set for all 
users. This is the first interaction with the blockchain reporting 
mechanism,  as  transparency  and  immutability  between  all 
users of this data are imperative.  

Secondly, 

the  user  starts  defining  Communication 
platform activities defined in Table I, and this data is gathered 
on  the  client  side,  and  transformed  into  JavaScript  Object 
Notation  (JSON)  data-interchange  format.  Then,  the  data  is 
being pushed directly to the API at the beginning of a weekly 
turn, and cannot be changed anymore for that week, again on 
the  next  weekly  turn,  the  student  enters  new  choices.  API 
immediately  creates  objects  and  calculates  dependencies, 
which  will  be  used  to  produce  rudimentary  figures  which 
impact the core strategy results (platform insight analytics and 
salesforce feedback) and through the turn.  

At the end of the weekly turn, the remaining user choice data 
regarding  Brand  content,  Mobile  content,  Google  ads, 
Facebook,  Instagram,  and  YouTube  ads  keywords  is  being 
sent to API in order to complete analytics for the given turn. 
In parallel, the API takes global, blockchain-held information, 
that  influences  the  current  week’s  results.  Afterward,  the 
finalized weekly calculations from the API are combined with 
the blockchain saved global data in order to produce weekly 
progress reports, as well as present the total results at the end 
of the simulation. 

E.  System Testing results 

Fig.  1  presents  the  total  amount  spend  per  user  per 
simulation cycle. It is important to emphasize that Ethereum 
transaction  fees  variate  constantly,  and  as  Ethereum  is  the 
second-highest valued cryptocurrency, these fee costs are not 
insignificant for the user. The testing was conducted for the 
period from November 12, 2020, to November 17, 2020. 

Total spending per user

0.06694

0.06692

0.0669

0.06688

0.06686

t
n
e
p
S

t
n
u
o
m
A

l
a
t
o
T

1

2

3

5

6

4
7
User Accounts

8

9

10

Fig. 1. Preliminary user spending per simulation cycle results 

 The first four user accounts were tested within a space of 
a couple of hours, so the result prices fluctuate slightly. Fig. 1 
presents data from  Blockchair, a tool  that provides different 
data regarding Ethereum variables [8]. The  slight fall in  the 
transaction costs of the user accounts 5 and 6 can be seen in 
Fig. 2. As of 14th, the average daily price was 0.00259 ETH 
and on the 15th 0.00241 ETH, as compared to previous and 
after days when it circulated around 0.0032 ETH. Finally, the 
last four user accounts were tested successively, with the time 
between transactions being around 30 seconds.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
Our  application  provides  a  high  level  of  customization 
through the admin tools accessible by the instructors, but also 
through  the  user  panel  and  different  options  based  on  the 
distributed Blockchain reports. Also, our application can run 
in multi-user mode, so students (or teams of students) are able 
to compete with each other. This enables the gamification of 
the  learning  process,  which  is  one  of  the  basics  for  active 
learning, one of the pillars of our transition to digital delivery 
of  teaching  and  learning  activities.  International  Business 
students get a better understanding of the Internet marketing 
principles not only by using this application, but also by partly 
designing the business logic (other parts are on the instructor 
on  this  course),  so  they  will  construct  the  knowledge  and 
understanding.  IT  students  build  the  real-world  application 
(and not usually some in-class application no one uses after 
they complete the course), will be able to interact with the real 
users (in this case online with their counterpart International 
Business  students)  about  the  user  experience  of  their 
application  (usually  they  are  able  just  to  get  instructor’s 
feedback, which is more theoretical). Both boost the way how 
they construct their knowledge and understanding. With this 
overall simulation approach their later probability of failure in 
their  businesses  will  be  lower.  This  option  is  also  tightly 
related 
technologies  for  real-world 
applications  and  online  course  deliveries  and  we  used  this 
the  capabilities  and 
to  boost 
COVID-19  outbreak 
competencies of our international students that are now online. 

to  changes 

in  IT 

ACKNOWLEDGMENT  

This work is supported by the RIT PLIG grant. 

REFERENCES 
[1]  M.  Žagar,  S.  J.  Zilora,  and  B.  Mihaljević,  “International  student 
cooperation in Capstone research project,” Proceedings of 2019 IEEE 
Global Engineering Education Conference (EDUCON), pp. 5-7, 2019. 
doi: 10.1109/EDUCON.2019.8725158 

[2]  M.  Žagar,  and  N.  Drašković,  “Work-in-Progress:  Internet  Marketing 
Simulation  for  Project-Based  Learning,”  Proceedings  of  2020  IEEE 
Global  Engineering  Education  Conference  (EDUCON),  pp.  8-11, 
2020. doi: 10.1109/EDUCON45650.2020.9125319 

[3]  L.  Barack,  “Real-world  experiences  are  crucial  for  students,” 
Education Drive, Industry Dive, 12 Sept., 2018.  [Online]. Available: 
https://www.educationdive.com/news/real-world-experiences-are-
crucial-for-students/531960/ 

[4]  M.  Žagar,  S.  J.  Zilora,  and  B.  Mihaljević,  “Assessment  of  Student 
Learning  in  Capstone  Project,  ”  EDULEARN19  Proceedings,  pp. 
1207-1211, 2019. doi: 10.21125/edulearn.2019.0371 

[5]  Stukent  Mimic  Pro  Simulation,  2020. 

  [Online].  Available: 

https://www.stukent.com/mimic-pro-simulation/ 

[6]  StratX Simulations, Markstrat Simulation, 2020.  [Online]. Available: 
https://web.stratxsimulations.com/simulation/strategic-marketing-
simulation/ 

[7]  Anylogic, Anylogic Simulation software, 2020.  [Online]. Available: 

https://www.anylogic.com/ 

[8]  A. Maiboroda, “Ethereum Virtual Machine (EVM),” 2020.  [Online]. 
Available: https://ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/evm/, 2020. 
J. Maričević, “Hashnet - a transaction superhighway,” Tolar.io, 2020.  
[Online]. Available: https://tolar.io/hashnet 

[9] 

[10]  Truffle, Truffle Suite for Smart Contracts, 2020. [Online]. Available:  

https://www.trufflesuite.com/ 

Fig. 2. Ethereum Average transaction fee variation 

Fig. 3 presents the average time per user’s transaction. As 
it  can  be  seen,  time  varies  between  3  and  6  seconds  per 
transaction,  which  is  within  some  average  time  needed  for 
transactions  in  Ethereum  [8].  From  the  perspective  of 
simulation  reporting,  it  shows  that  reports  are  quickly 
distributed  among  the  students/teams,  and  in  this  way,  they 
have a distributed reporting system that can be proved by each 
team (which is important from the integrity perspective). Time 
to the finality of a transaction by using the Ethereum network 
could be the problem for cryptocurrency application but for 
proving the integrity of report transactions in our simulation is 
not imperative. In this way, students can run the simulation in 
multi-user  mode  to  compete  with  each  other  and  yet  to  get 
consistent reporting, which integrity is proved and shared by 
the complete network. 

Fig. 3. Average time per all user’s transactions 

IV.  CONCLUSIONS AND SUMMARY 

principles, 

Our system comprises several interconnected technologies 
that together create a useable, precise, and responsive system 
with  agility  for  further  operations.  We  covered  Internet 
marketing 
application 
development based on Blockchain reporting. One of the main 
goals was to focus on privacy guarantees for both students and 
professors, such as decentralization and differential privacy. 
The  system  holds  three  main  sectors  which  have  explicit 
responsibilities  and  are  interconnected  by  an  intermediary 
level that manipulates and shares data. 

distributed  Web 

 
 
 
 
 
