NFTGAN: Non-Fungible Token Art Generation Using Generative Adversarial 

Networks 

SAKIB SHAHRIAR  

College of Technological Innovation, Zayed University, United Arab Emirates 

KADHIM HAYAWI* 

College of Technological Innovation, Zayed University, United Arab Emirates 

Digital arts have gained an unprecedented level of popularity with the emergence of non-fungible tokens (NFTs). NFTs are 

cryptographic assets that are stored on blockchain networks and represent a digital certificate of ownership that cannot be 

forged. NFTs can be incorporated into a smart contract which allows the owner to benefit from a future sale percentage. While 

digital art producers can benefit immensely with NFTs, their production is time consuming. Therefore, this paper explores the 

possibility of using generative adversarial networks (GANs) for automatic generation of digital arts. GANs are deep learning 

architectures  that  are  widely  and  effectively  used  for  synthesis  of  audio,  images,  and  video  contents.  However,  their 

application to NFT arts have been limited. In this paper, a GAN-based architecture is implemented and evaluated for novel 

NFT-style digital arts generation. Results from the qualitative case study indicate that the generated artworks are comparable 

to the real samples in terms of being interesting and inspiring and they were judged to be more innovative than real samples. 

CCS CONCEPTS • Computing methodologies • Machine learning • Machine learning approaches 

Additional  Keywords  and  Phrases:  NFT,  blockchain,  deep  learning,  adversarial  networks,  digital  art 
generation 

ACM Reference Format: 

First  Author’s  Name,  Initials,  and  Last  Name,  Second  Author’s  Name,  Initials,  and  Last  Name,  and  Third  Author’s  Name, 

Initials, and Last Name. 2018. The Title of the Paper: ACM Conference Proceedings Manuscript Submission Template: This 

is  the  subtitle  of  the  paper,  this  document  both  explains  and  embodies  the  submission  format  for  authors  using  Word.  In 

Woodstock ’18: ACM Symposium on Neural Gaze Detection, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 

10 pages. NOTE: This block will be automatically generated when manuscripts are processed after acceptance. 

1  INTRODUCTION 

Arts have always played a fundamental role in human lives across cultures and civilizations. It allows humans 
to express their thoughts, emotions, and memories. As the digital revolution continued with the introduction of 
smart phones and increase in internet accessibility, a demand for expressing arts in the digital world and social 
media was created. Although research in computer generated arts have been ongoing since the mid-twentieth 

* Corresponding Author email: Abdul.Hayawi@zu.ac.ae  
Address: College of Technological Innovation, Zayed University, Abu Dhabi Campus, MF2-0-018 
Contact Number: +9712 599 3545 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
century  [1],  it  is  after  the  digital  revolution  and  social  media  adoption  that  their  demand  from  a  consumer 
perspective  is  at  the  highest.  However,  a  major  challenge  for  digital  arts  was  the  issue  of  ownership  and 
copyright. Unlike physical arts, digital arts can be easily copied and distributed causing their value to significantly 
degrade. This obstacle is overcome with the introduction of non-fungible tokens (NFTs). NFTs are cryptographic 

tokens  that  were  initially  built  on  the  Ethereum  blockchain  but  more  recently  adapted  by  other  blockchains 
including Solana [2]. NFTs are different from fungible tokens like Bitcoins, where each token is similar in value 
to the other ones and can easily be swapped [3]. The non-fungible aspect of NFTs ensures that each token is 
unique and consequently provides the holder with ownership rights over a digital asset.  

Production and sales of digital arts skyrocketed with the introduction of NFTs. ‘Everydays – The First 5000 
Days’, an NFT art created by the artist Beeple sold for a record-breaking 69.3 million United State dollars during 
March of 2021 [4]. NFTs provide several major benefits to artists including the fact that artists no longer have 
to transfer ownership and content to agents and that artists can benefit by programming  NFTs to receive a 

predetermined  loyalty  fee  for  any  future  transactions  of  their  artworks  [5].  Moreover  with  the  emergence  of 
metaverse,  a  virtual  environment  blending  physical  and  digital  realities  [6],  NFT-based  digital  art  is  set  to 
become a core component in providing many metaverse experiences [7]. This has caught the attention of artists 
around the globe in producing digital arts. Younger artists are particularly interested and engaged in “crypto art” 
[8]. However, digital art production is a time consuming process and requires extensive knowledge of computer 
software  and  programming.  Therefore,  automatic  digital  art  creation  is  highly  desirable  and  one  technology 
enabling automatic art generation is generative adversarial networks (GANs). 

GANs are deep learning architectures that are typically made up of two neural network-based models known 
as generators and discriminators. The generator network is trained to synthesize new data points from random 
noise and the discriminator is trained to recognize between the original and generated data points. The two 
models are trained together in a zero-sum game and ideally the discriminator will be fooled by the generator 
about half of the time, at which point the real and generated examples are virtually indistinguishable. GANs 
have  produced  state-of-the-art  performance  in  various  applications  including  text  generation  [9]  and  text  to 
image  generation  [10].  Other  related  applications  include  the  use  of  GANs  in  handwriting  generation  with 
calligraphic  styles  [11]  and  photorealistic  images  of  video  game  generation  [12].    Although  software  and 
computing approaches were traditionally used for digital art generation, the ability of GANs to generate arts 
automatically without human supervision makes them ideal for digital art generation [13]. This is revolutionary 
because once the network has been trained, it can synthesize a large quantity of very diverse set of artworks. 
It is then possible for the artist to become the “judge” and hand-pick the most inspiring artwork and perhaps 
enhance it further. For a comprehensive review of GAN-based art generation including visual arts, audio arts, 

and literary texts, the readers are encouraged to refer to the following survey paper [13]. Although widely and 
effectively used for various art-related applications, GANs are yet to be experimented with the task of NFT art 
generation. Therefore, this paper presents a novel NFT art generation application using GANs. Following are 
the main contributions of this paper: 

• 
• 
• 

It presents a novel NFT art generation application trained using GANs. 
It provides a quantitative evaluation and a qualitative case study of NFT arts generated using GANs. 
It discusses the impacts, limitations, and future research work in GAN-based NFT art generation. 

2 

The  rest  of  the  paper  is  organized  as  follows.  Section  two  outlines  the  methodology  used  for  NFT  art 
generation and the evaluation approaches. The results are presented and discussed in Section three. Section 
four discusses the implications, limitations, and future work. Section five concludes this paper.   

2  METHODS 

In  this  section,  the  overall  methodology  including  the  dataset  used  and  preprocessing  steps,  the  network 

architecture, and evaluation metrics are discussed. 

2.1  Dataset and Preprocessing 

A  publicly  available  dataset  on  Kaggle  (https://www.kaggle.com/vepnar/nft-art-dataset)    was  utilized  for  the 

proposed application. The dataset contains NFT arts in gif, image, and video file formats. For the purpose of 
this work, only the image files were utilized. The image dataset contains 3021 NFT-style art images. The art 
images were not labeled to a specific category, and they represent a very diverse selection of NFT arts.  

All the images were resized to 512 by 512 size which is compatible with the GAN architecture. Although this 
led to the GAN training time being much longer, the expected art quality increased significantly. Moreover, any 
images that were non-RGB color format were removed. After this step, a total of 2283 images were left in the 
final dataset to be used for training. 

2.2  GAN Architecture and Experimental Setup 

There are various GAN architectures available for image generation including deep convolutional GANs, style 
transfer models, and conditional GANs [14]. Conditional GANs are suitable for generating data points based on 
a  label  or  condition.  Given  that  the  dataset  is  not  labeled,  the  objective  in  this  work  is  to  generate  the  arts 
unconditionally.  As  such,  the  GAN  architecture  would  be  trained  to  learn  the  overall  NFT  art  style  from  the 

dataset and consequently generate novel arts based on the existing style. A popular style transfer-based model 
known as StyleGAN [15] was employed for the proposed NFT arts generation application. In comparison to 
other  models,  StyleGAN  is  capable  of  generating  high  definition  face  images  using  two  mechanisms,  i.e., 
generating high-resolution images using progressive growing [16] and using adaptive instance normalization 

[17]  to  infuse  image  styles  in  each  layer.  The  main  difference  between  a  traditional  generator  and  the  one 
utilized  in  StyleGAN  is  the  addition  of  a  network  that  enables  mapping  from  the  latent  space  to  a  high 
dimensional space before adding fully connected layers to another network that synthesizes content with input 
noise. StyleGAN 2 [18] was introduced as an improvement to the original architecture, which often produced 

unnecessary artifacts or effects in generated images. The removal of the unwanted effects was obtained by 
restructuring the adaptive instance normalization mechanism to a weight demodulation network, which scales 
the convolutional weights to perform suitable style transfer.  

The StyleGAN2 [19] version, which is suitable for smaller datasets, was utilized for this work. The PyTorch 

[20] library implementation for StyleGAN2 was used. The model training was performed on Google Colab pro 
using  the  NVIDIA  Tesla  P100  GPU  with  16  GB  memory.  The  model  was  trained  for  about  59  hours  with 
checkpoints after every five iterations. The model pickle files were saved, and training was resumed after about 
10 hours due to time limit restrictions on the platform.  

3 

2.3  Evaluation 

After the training phase, the generated NFT artworks were evaluated on quantitative and qualitative metrics. 
For the quantitative evaluation, a popular metric known as Fréchet Inception Distance (FID) [21] was utilized, 

which is defined in Equation 1. 

𝐹𝐼𝐷 = ∥∥𝜇! − 𝜇"∥∥# + 𝑇! *𝛴! + 𝛴" − 2-𝛴!𝛴".

$/#

/ 

(1) 

where 𝜇! and 𝜇" represents the feature-wise mean of the real and the generated samples respectively, 𝑇! is 
the trace operation, and Σ!and Σ"represents the covariance matrix for the real and generated feature vector 
respectively. 

In addition to the FID score, kernel inception distance (KID) was also used for evaluation. KID was proposed 
by [22] as an extension to FID score using a polynomial kernel that eliminates the potential bias of FID scores 
in  certain  situations.  KID  is  computed  using  the  squared  maximum  mean  discrepancy  and  KID  scores  are 
asymptotically normal. For both FID and KID metrics, a lower score indicates better performance. 

Furthermore, to assess the generated NFT arts quality, a qualitative case study was conducted. A total of 
26 university students and graduates were invited to evaluate 6 of the generated samples and 6 of the samples 
from the dataset. Following the survey, the results were aggregated and analyzed. For each of the 12 images, 
the volunteers were asked to answer the following questions: 

•  Do you find the artwork interesting? (1 very uninteresting, 5 very interesting) 
•  Do you find the artwork inspiring? (1 very uninspiring, 5 very inspiring) 
•  Do you think the artwork is innovative? (1 extremely unoriginal, 5 very innovative) 
•  Rate the art quality overall.  (1 poor, 5 excellent) 
•  Do you think the art work is created by an artist or a computer? 

3  RESULTS 

Training progress was monitored using the saved model after every 5 iterations. Moreover, the FID score was 
also  examined  to  assess  the  training  progress.  Figure  1  depicts  the  training  progress  starting  from  the 
initialization step until the final iteration. The model starts off by producing random coloured noises, then moves 

on to creating consistent shapes, then progressively produces more diverse images, and then finally generates 
the desired artworks.  

4 

Figure 1 Training progress in generating artworks 

After approximately 59 hours of training, the improvement in FID score was negligible and consequently the 
training was stopped, and the best model was saved. Figure 2 illustrates some of the generated samples. The 

generated arts were diverse in terms of their style and color. A compilation of the generated arts in video format 
is also available online (https://youtu.be/THcYhDk9f-Y). Next, the evaluation results are presented. 

Figure 2 GAN-generated NFT arts 

3.1  Quantitative Results 

In this section, the results using the aforementioned FID and KID metrics are presented. Although the FID score 
was monitored during the training phase, the last model was used for final evaluation. Table 1 summarizes the 
scores from the best model. 

5 

 
 
Table 1: Results using evaluation metrics 

Metric 
Results 

FID 
43.64 

KID 
0.012 

The low scores for both FID and KID indicate that the model was able to produce high quality generations. 

Overall, the results obtained using StyleGAN in this work outperformed some of the related applications in the 
literature  that  reported  using  the  same  metrics  [11],  [12].  However,  it  must  be  noted  that  these  metrics  are 
generally used to compare performance across various GAN architectures solving a related generation task. In 
such cases, these metrics can help in deciding the best performing model.  

3.2  Quantitative Results 

The results of the qualitative case study from the 26 volunteers for the four different criteria are summarized in 
Table 2. The table indicates the results for both the real artworks from the dataset and the GAN generated 

artworks. Each evaluation criteria is scored between 1 to 5 (1 indicating poor quality and 5 indicating excellent 
quality). The average scores along with their standard deviation is presented in Table 2. 

Table 2: Results using qualitative case study 

Evaluation Criteria 
Interesting 
Inspiring 
Innovative 
Overall 

Real Samples 
3.68 ± 0.32 
3.35 ± 0.31 
3.35 ± 0.30 
3.35 ± 0.26 

Generated Samples 
3.46 ± 0.06 
3.10 ± 0.11 
3.47 ± 0.09 
3.24 ± 0.16 

The results of the case study indicate that the generated samples were close to the real samples for the four 
evaluation characteristics. The real samples were superior in terms of being more interesting, inspiring and, 
their overall quality. Interestingly, the volunteers deemed the GAN generated artworks to be more innovative. 
Moreover,  the  volunteers  were  also  asked  if  they  thought  the  artworks  were  produced  by  artists  or  were 
computer generated. For the GAN generated samples, the volunteers believed the generated samples to be 
created by real artists 40.6% of the time. This indicates that many of the generated samples were of very high 
quality which confused the evaluators from determining their origin. Furthermore, the standard deviations for 

the generated samples are low indicating that most of the evaluators scored similarly and there appears to be 
a consensus. Despite the limited samples size, the results from the case study indicate that GAN-based NFT 
artwork generation is promising. The results from the case study are displayed in Figure 3. 

6 

 
 
 
Figure 3: Case study results comparison between real and generated artworks 

4  DISCUSSION 

The results in the previous section demonstrate the immense potential of GAN-based solutions for NFT arts. 
Based on the results, further discussions are presented next. 

4.1  Implications 

The proposed application has several key implications. Firstly, with the growing interest in blockchain and NFT 
technologies,  this  work  will  facilitate  further  research  interest  in  GAN-based  solutions  in  NFT  related 

applications. This will lead to experimentation with different forms of digital arts generation and facilitate the 
introduction of newer datasets and algorithms. Moreover, the encouraging results obtained in this work highlight 
the outstanding potential of GANs in NFT art generation. This would consequently attract frequent collaborations 
between artists and machine learning engineers in producing high quality digital arts. Furthermore, the proposed 

work will significantly reduce the time and resources needed by professional artists to create digital arts. The 
artists  can  simply  use  the  GAN  generated  arts  that  match  their  style  and  enhance  them  based  on  their 
requirements instead of creating digital arts from scratch. NFTs are also indicated to have diversification benefits 
during unsettled times including the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic [23]. This is significant for artists as they do 

not lose substantial value of their works even during unstable market conditions.  

4.2  Limitations 

The proposed work has several limitations. Firstly, all the arts were generated using a single GAN architecture, 

which is a style transfer-based model. Although the results were encouraging, the full potential of GANs in NFT 
art generation is not realized with a single model. It is possible that other models may outperform the StyleGAN 
on this application. Moreover, the qualitative case study was conducted on a smaller scale with a limited sample 
size  consisting  of  only  26  volunteers.  Therefore,  the  results  obtained  cannot  be  used  to  draw  any  firm 

conclusions. Finally, specialists and expert artists were not invited for evaluating the generated arts. Therefore, 
the reliability and effectiveness of the case study is limited. 

7 

 
4.3  Future Work 

In  this  work,  the  NFT  art  generation  was  unconditional  because  the  artworks  were  not  labeled  based  on  a 
category.  To  improve  on  the  generation  quality,  it  would  be  reasonable  to  experiment  with  conditional  art 

generation focusing on a specific art content or style. For instance, a dataset of only animal arts could be used 
to train a GAN to generate arts of a specific animal such as cats or dogs conditionally. To realize this kind of 
application, there is a need for quality data collection which would initially require some collaboration with artists 
and  professionals.  Moreover,  unconditional  art  generation  would  also  compel  experimentation  with  different 

GAN architectures including conditional GANs and cycle GANs as opposed to the sole architecture used in the 
proposed work. Besides artworks in image format, NFT arts also include artworks in GIFs and video file formats. 
As such, researchers are encouraged to take on the challenge of generating arts in other file formats including 
GIFs and short videos. Finally, a comprehensive case study with a bigger sample size including professional 

artists should be carried out to evaluate the potential of GANs in generating NFT arts. 

5  CONCLUSION 

In this work, a novel NFT art generation application using GANs was presented. A style transfer-based model, 
StyleGAN2, was trained on a publicly available collection of NFT arts dataset. The generated arts were of high 
visual quality and scored well on two metrics, FID and KID. Moreover, volunteers were invited to assess the 
quality of the arts and they found the arts to be comparable to the real samples from the dataset. The generated 
artworks scored 3.24 overall out of 5 in comparison to the slightly higher overall score of 3.35 out of 5 for the 
real samples. The proposed work has the potential to attract further research on GAN related NFT applications. 
Moreover, future research directions were highlighted including conditional generation of NFT arts as well as 
NFT art generation in other file formats such as GIFs and videos. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

This work was supported by Zayed University RIF grant R20132. 

REFERENCES 
[1] 

[2] 

[3] 
[4] 

[5] 

[6] 

[7] 
[8] 

[9] 

[10] 

[11] 

H. Higgins and D. Kahn, Mainframe experimentalism: Early computing and the foundations of the digital arts. Univ of California Press, 
2012. 
J. Ponciano, “Solana Skyrockets To New High—Amassing Nearly $40 Billion In Market Value As Competition With Ethereum Heats 
Up,” Forbes. https://www.forbes.com/sites/jonathanponciano/2021/08/31/solana-skyrockets-to-new-high-above-130-amassing-nearly-
40-billion-in-market-value-as-competition-with-ethereum-heats-up/ (accessed Dec. 06, 2021). 
L. Kugler, “Non-Fungible Tokens and the Future of Art,” Commun ACM, vol. 64, no. 9, pp. 19–20, Aug. 2021, doi: 10.1145/3474355. 
A. Brown, “Beeple NFT Sells For $69.3 Million, Becoming Most-Expensive Ever,” Forbes. 
https://www.forbes.com/sites/abrambrown/2021/03/11/beeple-art-sells-for-693-million-becoming-most-expensive-nft-ever/ (accessed 
Dec. 06, 2021). 
Q. Wang, R. Li, Q. Wang, and S. Chen, “Non-fungible token (NFT): Overview, evaluation, opportunities and challenges,” ArXiv Prepr. 
ArXiv210507447, 2021. 
L.-H. Lee et al., “All one needs to know about metaverse: A complete survey on technological singularity, virtual ecosystem, and 
research agenda,” ArXiv Prepr. ArXiv211005352, 2021. 
L.-H. Lee et al., “When Creators Meet the Metaverse: A Survey on Computational Arts,” ArXiv Prepr. ArXiv211113486, 2021. 
M. Franceschet et al., “Crypto Art: A Decentralized View,” Leonardo, vol. 54, no. 4, pp. 402–405, Aug. 2021, doi: 
10.1162/leon_a_02003. 
G. H. de Rosa and J. P. Papa, “A survey on text generation using generative adversarial networks,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 119, p. 
108098, Nov. 2021, doi: 10.1016/j.patcog.2021.108098. 
S. Frolov, T. Hinz, F. Raue, J. Hees, and A. Dengel, “Adversarial text-to-image synthesis: A review,” Neural Netw., vol. 144, pp. 187–
209, Dec. 2021, doi: 10.1016/j.neunet.2021.07.019. 
L. Kang, P. Riba, Y. Wang, M. Rusiñol, A. Fornés, and M. Villegas, “GANwriting: Content-Conditioned Generation of Styled 
Handwritten Word Images,” in Computer Vision – ECCV 2020, Cham, 2020, pp. 273–289. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-58592-1_17. 

8 

[12] 

[13] 

[14] 

[15] 

[16] 
[17] 

[18] 

[19] 

[20] 

Z. Hao, A. Mallya, S. Belongie, and M.-Y. Liu, “GANcraft: Unsupervised 3D Neural Rendering of Minecraft Worlds,” ArXiv Prepr. 
ArXiv210407659, 2021. 
S. Shahriar, “GAN Computers Generate Arts? A Survey on Visual Arts, Music, and Literary Text Generation using Generative 
Adversarial Network,” Aug. 2021, Accessed: Nov. 08, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2108.03857v2 
A. Creswell, T. White, V. Dumoulin, K. Arulkumaran, B. Sengupta, and A. A. Bharath, “Generative Adversarial Networks: An 
Overview,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 53–65, 2018, doi: 10.1109/MSP.2017.2765202. 
T. Karras, S. Laine, and T. Aila, “A style-based generator architecture for generative adversarial networks,” in Proceedings of the 
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2019, pp. 4401–4410. 
T. Karras, T. Aila, S. Laine, and J. Lehtinen, “Progressive Growing of GANs for Improved Quality, Stability, and Variation,” 2018. 
X. Huang and S. Belongie, “Arbitrary style transfer in real-time with adaptive instance normalization,” in Proceedings of the IEEE 
International Conference on Computer Vision, 2017, pp. 1501–1510. 
T. Karras, S. Laine, M. Aittala, J. Hellsten, J. Lehtinen, and T. Aila, “Analyzing and improving the image quality of stylegan,” in 
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2020, pp. 8110–8119. 
T. Karras, M. Aittala, J. Hellsten, S. Laine, J. Lehtinen, and T. Aila, “Training Generative Adversarial Networks with Limited Data,” 
ArXiv200606676 Cs Stat, Oct. 2020, Accessed: Dec. 06, 2021. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2006.06676 
A. Paszke et al., “Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning library,” Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 32, pp. 
8026–8037, 2019. 

[21]  M. Heusel, H. Ramsauer, T. Unterthiner, B. Nessler, and S. Hochreiter, “Gans trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a 

local nash equilibrium,” Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 30, 2017. 

[22]  M. Bińkowski, D. J. Sutherland, M. Arbel, and A. Gretton, “Demystifying mmd gans,” ArXiv Prepr. ArXiv180101401, 2018. 
[23] 

D. Y. Aharon and E. Demir, “NFTs and asset class spillovers: Lessons from the period around the COVID-19 pandemic,” Finance 
Res. Lett., p. 102515, Oct. 2021, doi: 10.1016/j.frl.2021.102515. 

9 

 
 
