Blockchain Meets AI for Resilient and Intelligent
Internet of Vehicles

Pranav K. Singh, Sukumar Nandi, Sunit K. Nandi, Uttam Ghosh and Danda B. Rawat

1

Abstract

The Internet of Vehicles (IoV) is ﬂourishing and offers various applications relating to road safety, trafﬁc and fuel efﬁciency,
and infotainment. Dealing with security and privacy threats and managing the trust (detecting malicious and misbehaving peers) in
IoV remains the most signiﬁcant concern. Artiﬁcial Intelligence is one of the most revolutionizing technologies, and the predictive
power of its machine learning models can help detect intrusions and misbehaviors. Similarly, empowering the state-of-the-art IoV
security framework with blockchain can make it secure and resilient. This article discusses joint AI and blockchain for security,
privacy and trust-related risks in IoV. This paper also presents problems, challenges, requirements and solutions using ML and
blockchain to address aforementioned issues in IoV.

A. Overview

I. INTERNET OF VEHICLES (IOV) SYSTEMS OVERVIEW

In the new era of the Internet of Everything (IoE), the traditional VANETs enabled by vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) and vehicle-
to-infrastructure (V2I) communication have evolved to the Internet of Vehicles (IoV). IoV is the concept that connects smart
and intelligent vehicles to any other entities around them, such as vehicles, infrastructure, pedestrians, networks, grids, UAVs,
etc., through vehicle-to-everything (V2X) or cellular V2X (C-V2X) technologies [1]. The generic view of IoV is shown in
Fig. 1.

1
2
0
2

c
e
D
8
2

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
8
7
0
4
1
.
2
1
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Fig. 1: An Overview of Internet-of-Vehicles

B. Applications

IoV is expected to solve the major challenges of our transportation by improving road safety, minimizing road congestion,
reducing fuel consumption and CO2 emissions, solving parking issues, and minimizing expenses and space by enabling cab
sharing, etc. The remarkable advancements in on-board capabilities of vehicles (sensing, computation, storage, communication),
radio access technologies (RAT), network architectures, protocol stacks have enabled automated driving and platooning. These

The work is published in IEEE COMSOC MMTC Communications - Frontiers Vol. 16, No. 6, November 2021, Page 12-24

V2V: VLCV2UV2GV2PV2XV2IV2VV2VV2R5G/gNB4G/eNBDSRC/RSUCore NetworkEdgeEdgeSDN SwitchNFVV2NCAVV2SAT 
 
 
 
 
 
2

advancements brought IoV to the center of Industry 4.0. and led to promising areas of intelligent transportation, vehicle
manufacturing, payment services, predictive maintenance, usage-based insurance, intelligent parking, automation, infotainment,
software, energy, secure data sharing, data trading, vehicle life-cycle, etc. [2].

C. Key Enablers

To support a wide variety of IoV applications and services, some of the best-known RATs are DSRC / IEEE 802.11p, Wi-Fi,
4G, new 5G (NR) radio, 6G (envisioned) [3], white space TV, millimeter wave (mmWave) and visible light communications
(VLC). Three well-known regional protocol stacks developed over DSRC for vehicular communications are Connected Vehicle
(WAVE), the Cooperative-ITS (C-ITS), and the ARIB STD-T109 in the USA, Europe, and Japan, respectively [4]. However,
it is soon realized that a single RAT (DSRC) and traditional solutions at core may not support diverse QoS requirements of
emerging applications. For instance, these regional protocol stacks over DSRC may not be sufﬁcient to provide the end-to-end
latency and throughput requirements of Autonomous Vehicles (AVs). Thus, various technologies are being developed and tested
to handle the highly dynamic (variable density, high mobility, diversiﬁed QoS) and complex IoV. The ultimate goal is to provide
secure, seamless, ultrareliable low latency connectivity and support high throughput and high capacity.

Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) s a promising approach for making IoV intelligent. AI is implemented using machine learning
(supervised, unsupervised, reinforcement) models. AI integration into IoV can help improve resource allocation and manage-
ment, decision making, and detect misbehaviors, anomalies, and intrusions. Blockchain is the next revolutionizing technology
[5], which can be integrated as a decentralized security framework in the IoV. Leveraging Blockchain into IoV can improve
security, privacy, and trust. It can secure the cyber-physical system (CPS) of connected and autonomous vehicles (CAVs), boost
PKI capabilities, and enhance the scalability and availability of the IoV security framework. The inherent characteristics of
Blockchain can also be capitalized to enable a wide variety of services in IoV, such as secure data sharing and trading among
two or more entities.

In this section, we discuss major IoV challenges that AI and blockchain can solve.

II. AI AND BLOCKCHAIN FOR IOV

A. AI for IoV

Fig. 2a lists major IoV challenges such as mobility management, radio, and network resource management, and security [3],

where AI/ML can play a vital role.

Finding the vehicle’s future position in IoV is challenging because of its highly dynamic nature. Mobility prediction can play
a crucial role in various applications and services for IoV. AI and ML can help in an accurate mobility prediction, facilitating
better handover and radio resource management and avoiding degradation of the expected QoE and QoS.

The conventional techniques in the radio access network (RAN) may not satisfy the high throughput and ultralow-delay
requirement of IoV. Thus, AI/ML techniques are being explored to address the challenges associated with conventional radio
resource allocation, radio conﬁguration, multi-radio access, tracking, and beamforming.

The HetNet scenario results in new challenges at the core network of IoV in terms of network resource allocation,
conﬁguration, management, and trafﬁc control. The AI/ML techniques are being widely used in IoV for network radio resource
allocation, transmission power control, beamforming, load balancing, scheduling, trafﬁc ofﬂoading, admission control, dynamic
routing, etc.

The cyber-physical systems of smart and connected vehicles and V2X communication are susceptible to various hacks and
attacks. Major attacks are denial-of-service (DoS), Replay, Sybil, man-in-middle, bogus and fake information propagation,
wormhole, blackhole attacks, etc. The malicious behaviors of IoV users are another big challenge. Although various solutions
(PKI, group signature) have been proposed, the detection of malicious behavior, anomaly, and intrusions, and prevention from
the mentioned attacks remains the biggest challenge to be addressed. Various deep learning models are being explored to detect
misbehavior and attacks and help the trusted authority take preventive measures.

B. Blockchain for IoV

IoV ecosystem (in-vehicle (sensors), communication (V2X), control, applications, and services) faces several challenges in
terms of security, privacy, trust management, data, and resource sharing and trading. Fig. 2b lists IoV challenges related to
security, privacy, trust, and secure data sharing where blockchain can help.

1) Blockchain to solve the challenges of IoV: The list of IoV challenges that blockchain can solve are as follows:

a) Security, Privacy, and Trust: Integration of sensors and vehicle-to-everything connectivity expands attack vectors for
malicious entities. Extensive data sharing and open wireless broadcast attract adversaries to exploit privacy. IoV users with
malicious intents exploit existing security ﬂaws to gain over others. The blockchain integration into IoV with smart contracts
and an advanced cryptographic approach can address these challenges, improve security, preserve privacy, and build trust.

3

(a) AI/Machine Learning for Intelligent IoV

(b) Blockchain for Decentralized IoV

Fig. 2: AI and Blockchain for IoV

b) Availability and Fault Tolerance: In a state-of-the-art centralized IoV system, tackling the single point of failure and
ensuring data and service availability are among the most signiﬁcant challenges. The distributed and decentralized nature of
blockchain eliminates the reliance on central servers or clouds and allows replication of records among other peers. Thus,
blockchain adoption can make IoV fault-tolerant, and resilient [6].

c) Data Sharing: The CAVs generate massive data, which must be shared securely among peers and service providers for
safety, trafﬁc, and other services. However, the state-of-the-art data sharing mechanism lacks security, user privacy, reliability,
trust, and efﬁciency. Blockchain has proven its strength to build trust and reliability in similar topologies and is capable of
resolving other limitations of secure and private data sharing of IoV.

d) Data and Resource Trading: IoV provides excellent business opportunities for vehicle owners and service providers
by enabling the trade of data and resources. However, the existing system does not facilitate such a platform for data and
resource trade, which is fair, secure, transparent, and preserves the user’s privacy. Blockchain has the potentials to provide a
secure, trusted, fair, and decentralized platform for data and resource trading among various IoV entities.

e) Trafﬁc Monitoring and Control: The trafﬁc monitoring (trafﬁc condition, rule violation), automated trafﬁc control &
management rely on data generated by vehicles uploaded to RSUs and edges for storage. However, they are vulnerable to
attacks related to data availability, data integrity, and user privacy. The immutable nature of blockchain makes it difﬁcult for
the adversaries to alter those data. The distributed storage features can enhance accessibility and ensured security against DoS
attacks.

f) ITS and Payment Services: With a massive number of vehicles on the road, it is very challenging to implement ITS
and other payment services like E-tolls, intelligent parking, usages based insurance, over-the-air update, etc. Blockchain with
the smart contract can securely and efﬁciently implement these services.

C. Joint AI and Blockchain for IoV

In this article, we propose to leverage the salient and best features of both blockchain and AI for security, privacy and
trust-related risks to make IoV resilient and intelligent for better performance. We also present open problems, challenges and
requirements and potential solutions using ML and blockchain to address aforementioned issues in IoV.

III. THE NEED FOR SECURE AND RESILIENT VEHICULAR PKI

Over the years, IoV has witnessed security attacks and hacks (DefCon, GeekPwn) [4]. The attack surface is increasing
day by day because of feature integrations in the form of intelligence (sensors, ECUs, CAN), applications, services, and
HetNet connectivity (V2X). Researchers have also raised concerns over open V2V communication, which can be exploited by
adversaries to breach privacy by linking pseudonyms and tracking the movement [7]. This section highlights security privacy
and trust issues and key requirements to these ends.

A. Security and Privacy Risks

Security risks of IoV are on the following aspects In-vehicle (Connected and Intelligent devices and applications), V2X
communication, Service platforms (Edge, Fog, and Cloud), and Data. Fig 3 illustrates how the in-vehicle system of CAV itself
is vulnerable to various types of attacks.

V2X communications have several security risks associated with them. Mainly due to ﬂaws in the communication protocol
stacks, lack of proper security management and detection mechanisms, and vulnerabilities in RATs interface and mode of

Machine Learningfor Intelligent IoVML for MobilityPredictionML for RANML for CoreNetwork ML for SecurityTrajectory PredictionResidence Time PredictionEstimated Arrival Time PredictionHandover PredictionIntelligent Radio Resource AllocationIntelligent Radio ConﬁgurationIntelligent multi-radio accessIntelligent tracking and beamformingIntelligent Network Resource AllocationIntelligent Network ConﬁgurationIntelligent Network Management and Trafﬁc controlMisbehaviour Detection Malicious Node DetectionAnomaly DetectionBlockchain forDecentralized IoVSecurityPrivacyTrustSecure DataSharingSecuring CPS of CAVs Boosting PKI CapabilitiesStandalone Decentralized SecuritySecuring Communication at Vehicular and Infrastructure plane  Ensuring AnonymityEnsuring UnlinkabilityDecentralized Reputation Management Reward and PenalityCRL DistributionSecure Data sharing across various entitiesSecure Data trading to Service ProvidersImmutable Data Recording and Secure AccessibilityPseudonym Management4

Fig. 3: Security Risks at In-Vehicle System

communications. Some of the well-known attacks are DoS, DDoS, man-in-the-middle (MiM), Sybil, Greyhole, Blackhole, and
Wormhole.

The centralized service platforms on clouds face several security challenges due to the lack of strong access control policies,
certiﬁcate management, authentication mechanism, audit, intrusion detection mechanisms, etc. They are also vulnerable to DoS
and DDoS attacks.

The security of data generated and exchanged by various entities of IoV is paramount. For example, data related to location,
speed, heading, brake, acceleration, tire pressure, fuel consumption, vehicle proﬁle, driving behavior, etc. These data enable
safety applications, trafﬁc management, and other services. If these data are falsiﬁed or tampered with, it will be a severe threat
to drivers and occupants’ safety. Trafﬁc management, services, and associated business applications will also be affected.

As shown in Fig. 4, location tracking by dumping V2V safety messages (BSMs and CAMs) and performing syntactic
and semantic linkage attacks are among the main location privacy risks. Since these safety messages are delay-sensitive and
disseminated in V2V mode as plaintext (encryption not recommended due to delay), an adversary can easily eavesdrop and
extract useful sensitive Spatio-temporal information. The adversary can use powerful tracking algorithms to reveal the location
of the driver and occupants. Data shared with service providers and uploaded to cloud platforms via secure V2I also poses
a privacy risk. For example, vehicle data are shared with manufacturers, insurance ﬁrms, service centers, map providers, and
others for better services but can also be exploited to breach privacy.

Fig. 4: Privacy Risks in IoV

B. Misbehaviour and Malicious Activities

Vehicles, roadside sensors (trafﬁc detecting units), RSUs, network elements, and other IoV entities register with trusted
authorities and receive certiﬁcates (long-term and short-term) and cryptographic materials (key pairs). These materials and
certiﬁcates are used in communication to ensure conﬁdentiality (V2I/I2V, I2I), integrity, authenticity through the signing and

In-Vehicle      ECUs: Risks during deployment of forged node, Security Vulnerabilities inChips, Firmwares, Security UpdatesOBD Interface: Vulnerabilities in Bus protocol, and interfacing, Lack ofauthentication     CAN Bus: Vulnerabilities in protocol, and Lack of authentication, veriﬁcation,encryption and access control     TBOX: reverse analysis, data injection, man-in-the-middle      Sensors and OTA: Sensors (noise, acoustic, blinding attacks), OTA (lack ofveriﬁcation and signature)  OS and Apps: Vulnerabilities in OS and Malicious Third party Apps Data SharingPlatformVehicleManufacturerVehicleMaintenanceVehicle InsuranceCar SharingMap ProviderSmart ParkingSmart City/MobilitySecure DataSharing  Privacy IssuesPrivacy Issues5

veriﬁcation process. On the other hand, these certiﬁcations and materials do not safeguard the IoV from internal threats posed
by compromised, malevolent, or misbehaving entities. For example, a vehicle in the network can broadcast misleading and
false information about its kinematics, creating chaos and jeopardizing road safety. Similarly, a compromised or faulty trafﬁc
detection unit (TDU) can push wrong trafﬁc info (congestion at that road even when no trafﬁc) to the trafﬁc authority (TA).
When this incorrect info is propagated to commuters by TA, it may disrupt the entire trafﬁc in that zone. Such types of actions
are known as misbehavior in IoV. Malicious entities can transmit misleading information on purpose, while malfunctioning
or compromised entities can unintentionally convey wrong info. These attackers are considered insiders and active attackers
since they have the necessary certiﬁcates and cryptographic materials to communicate in an IoV. By getting access to their
vehicle’s CAN bus (since the protocol is vulnerable), these attackers can change the payload of outgoing safety and awareness
messages. It’s also conceivable for attackers to use a MiM and replay attack to change sensor data. [8].

Fig. 5: Misbehaviour (Position Falsiﬁcation Attack) in IoV.
Fig. 5 depicts an example of one such type of misbehavior known as position falsiﬁcation attack. The vehicle misbehaves
by changing the payload of the safety message to produce bogus positions and broadcasting them through V2V. As depicted
in Fig. 5, When the misbehaving node is close to the position of the intersection, it is overwhelming false location information
and creating confusion for other vehicles [9]. Such types of misbehavior can have disastrous consequences, which may pose a
risk to other nodes nearby. Because the message is generated by an insider (authorized peer), it gets veriﬁed and accepted for
processing by other receiving vehicles that are part of the same authentication system. As a result, a wide range of safety-related
applications that rely on actual position data may be adversely affected.

C. Security, Privacy and Trust Requirements

Avoiding those IoV security and privacy risks and misbehavior may lead to severe consequences. Thus, guaranteeing security
and privacy and dealing with misbehavior (trust management) are vital requirements of the IoV for its acceptability. Some of
those key requirements are summarized below.

1) Security Requirements: There is a need for strong security solutions and mechanisms at different levels of IoV.
In-vehicle Security: The in-vehicle system demands advanced hardware security solutions and modules to secure OBD2,
ECUs, T-BOX, event recorder, storage, onboard units, sensors (LiDAR, RADAR, GPS, Cameras, TMPS, Gyroscope), etc.
There is a need for secure design and development of software (OS and Apps) and ﬁrmware of the vehicles. Over-the-Air
update of software and ﬁrmware needs to be secure and immutable. The in-vehicle communication modules such as CAN,
FlexRay, LIN, Ethernet, Bluetooth, etc., need to be secured. The core security functions such as encryption, access control,
authentication, integrity check, signing, and veriﬁcation need to be utilized. Besides, we need to have a strong ﬁrewall and
anomaly detection mechanisms for the in-vehicle system.

V2X Security: Securing the HetNet V2X communications (DSRC, cellular, VLC, Wi-Fi, etc.) will be challenging. However,
all forms of V2X communication need to fulﬁll the following security requirements. (1) Advanced cryptographic approaches
must be used to fulﬁll security requirements such as availability, access control, authentication, conﬁdentiality, non-repudiation,
integrity, and data veriﬁcation at different planes of IoV. These should be used in such a way that data from an authenticated
entity can be transmitted to other entities(s) of the system securely without any alteration or tampering. (2) The consistency
and rationality of the communication data need to be protected. (3) The security of data stored at the cloud, fog, and edge and
their secure exchange (ofﬂoading, uploading) with infrastructure and vehicles must be guaranteed.

Service Platforms: Deployed security capabilities for cloud platforms need to be strengthened for IoV services. Essential
security requirements are as follows. (1) The data access control mechanisms need to be enhanced and highly secured. (2)
Need to ensure secure cross-cloud (OEMs, government agencies, service providers) or fog interactions. (3) There is a need
to establish trust among service providers to determine the level of data sharing and exchange. (4) Strong authentication

Attacker's RealPositionI am hereI am hereI am hereI am here6

mechanisms, security policies, and ﬁrewalls must be in place to secure user and vehicle data stored in the cloud from malicious
users and hackers.

2) Privacy Requirements:: A strong privacy protection mechanism is required to prevent attackers from exploiting private
data about the vehicle, the driver, and the occupants. In IoV, there are three distinct kinds of privacy protection mechanisms:
(1) Vehicle’s actual identity should not be revealed. (2) Vehicle’s location should not be tracked, and (3) All data exchanged
in IoV are protected against privacy. The following are the IoV’s most important privacy requirements: [10]:

Minimum disclosure: The information about the user that is absolutely necessary for IoV functionalities should be revealed,

and it should be kept minimal.

Anonymity: The usage of pseudonyms provides anonymity, which is one of the most common ways to preserve privacy.
For example, the messages delivered by a vehicle should be anonymous within a set of subjects, such as potential vehicles,
and should not reveal the vehicle’s real identity.

Unlinkability: The use of a pseudonym aids authentication while keeping the true identity hidden. However, if a pseudonym
is used in the same context for a long time, it will become linkable. Therefore, to achieve the unlinkability of pseudonyms, a
set of pseudonyms is used. To avoid linkability in the given context, these pseudonyms must be changed over time.

3) Trust Management:

In the IoV, trust management is a crucial concept for identifying and revoking malicious and
misbehaving nodes. The adoption of proper trust models helps in determining the trustworthiness of the message and its
sender. The following are the major requirements for trust management in IoV: Misbehavior Detection: One of the most
important aspects of trust management is detecting malicious and misbehaving nodes. Its goal is to keep an eye on the system
in order to spot any potentially misbehaving nodes and keep the IoV from straying from its normal course. The technique for
detecting misbehavior works in four stages [8]: Local detection of the misbehaving entity, reporting of the misbehavior to the
central authority or Misbehavior Authority (MA), assessment by the MA to establish whether the entity is truly misbehaving
or simply faulty, and lastly reaction by the registration authority (RA) to protect the system.

Accountability and Traceability: To establish accountability, the speciﬁed action should be unambiguously assigned to an
individual entity via a fair methodology or protocol. Traceability can help with this in the IoV. Only authorized and highly
trusted authorities should be able to trace a pseudonym and link it to the user’s true identity. Under some speciﬁc instances,
such authorities must attempt to trace or map a pseudonym to a real identity. Only MA, for example, should be permitted to
do tracing in order to identify the real misbehaving entity.

Revocation and CRL Distribution: When misbehavior is detected, trust management in the IoV should have a fair
revocation process that can act effectively. Some reputation-building processes with a reward and penalty system should
also be implemented. If the misbehavior is deliberate, the corresponding vehicle should be penalized, and its reputation score
should be deducted. Such misbehaving entities should be issued a warning. After crossing the speciﬁed threshold, an active
revocation (revocation of current certiﬁcates) or passive revocation (not able to request more certiﬁcates) should be invoked.
Scalability: Since IoV is very dynamic (varying density), it can experience high trafﬁc during peak hours. Thus, the system

deployed for trust management must be scalable to deal with a large number of nodes.

Decentralization: Centralized trust management systems for IoV face several challenges in terms of performance, scalability,
robustness, fault-tolerance, privacy, and security [11]. Thus, there is a need for fully decentralized trust management for highly
dynamic and distributed IoV.

D. Standardization Efforts

The security standard IEEE 1609.2 speciﬁes security, privacy protection, and trust management in the connected vehicle
protocol stack of the USA. The security standards ETSI TS 102 940 V 1.2.1 and ETSI TS 102 941 specify the security,
privacy, and trust in the Cooperative-ITS protocol stack of Europe. Various other efforts are underway by SAE (J3061), ITU
(FG and SG17), ISO/TC22, CEN, and 3GPP (C-V2X). The IEEE and ETSI standards recommend using pseudonyms for
privacy. However, determining when and how to change pseudonyms is still a work in progress. Misbehavior detection and
trust management are still in the initial phases of development under those standards.

The integration of AI and Blockchain in IoV can help to a great extent for its security privacy and trust management. In

this section, the AI and Blockchain driven solution for the same is discussed through a generic illustration (Fig. 6).

IV. AI AND BLOCKCHAIN BASED FRAMEWORK

A. ML for Intrusion and Misbehavior Detection

Machine Learning (ML) paradigm facilitates building models that can anticipate the expected behavior by learning from
experience. The data-driven approaches enable the machine to learn the relationship, which are hidden, and models for
misbehavior detection can leverage this to ﬁnd deviations. The deep learning models are found suitable in approximating
such relationships.

7

Over the years, various ML-based solutions have been proposed for intrusion, anomaly, and misbehavior detection in VANETs.
As shown in Fig. 6, the ML can help to detect intrusions in in-vehicle network and misbehavior in vehicular as well as
infrastructure plane of IoV.

For an in-vehicle network, the intrusion is detected by comparing the current action against the expected actions. The deep
learning models can extract the features from the behavior patterns of the nodes and look for the existing feature map to predict
the malicious activities of node(s). The training of deep learning models through probability-based feature vectors will also be
helpful in detecting intrusions.

For misbehavior detection, the power of ML can be utilized to cope up with insider attacks. First, data-centric mechanisms
(basic plausibility checks) can be used to check message consistency in the vehicular plane. For example, to check if two
consecutive safety messages coming from the same node have plausible separating distance or not. Based on the results, the
node-centric approach powered by deep learning models at the infrastructure plane can be invoked to detect the misbehaving
or faulty entity.

Fig. 6: AI and Blockchain for Security Privacy and Trust in IoV (a Generic View)

B. Blockchain for Security, Privacy and Trust

In IoV, a blockchain can be deployed at different planes such as in-vehicle, the RSU or edge plane, and at service plane
(standalone or hierarchical way). The planes that can support resources required for the transaction processing and procedure
for forming new blocks can be considered. The private blockchain is found to be more suitable for such contexts.

Security: To secure complex cyber-physical system against hacks and attacks (mentioned above) of in-vehicle, there can
be a separate private blockchain. The powerful nodes, such as gateways and switches, can be considered as blockchain nodes.
The consensus protocols can keep nodes synchronized with each other. All communications across ECUs can be considered as

In-VehiclePlaneVehicular PlaneInfrastructure PlaneServices PlaneVehicle ManufacturerVehicle MaintenanceVehicle InsuranceCar SharingMap ProviderSmart ParkingSmart City/MobilityInternetGatewayGatewayGatewayAI/MLAI PlatformBlockchainTransaction 1BlockFormation2BlockPropagation34ConsensusAchievedIML for In-vehcileintrusiondetection1Plausibility Check forData CentricMisbehaviorDetectionML for Node CentricMisbehaviorDetection2Input Events MisbeahviorReport3Global MisbeahviorDetectionIn-Vehicle BlockchainIPKI8

transactions. The smart contracts can be used, which can invoke ML for anomaly or intrusion detection, and if detected, those
transactions can be dropped (depending on the deﬁned danger level) and should not be considered in blocks. Similarly, to secure
vehicular plane, blockchain deployed at the edge can be helpful. Participating vehicles generate a series of transactions for
various events happening on the road, such as applying the harsh brake, detecting slippery roads, etc. Transactions generated by
vehicles on the road are sent to the associated RSU. The suspicious transaction can be dropped at the edge level (smart contract
can be used with local detection events). An RSU stores the transaction in its memory pool and simultaneously propagates the
transaction among the peer RSUs. The block formation task is entrusted to the RSUs (edge nodes). RSUs pick a random set
of transactions from their pool of received transactions and perform a mathematical operation on the selected transactions in
order to form a block. Once a block is formed, an RSU propagates the formed block to its network of RSUs. Each RSU in
the network verify the received block and accept it if it is a valid one.

Privacy and Trust Management: The Public Key Infrastructure (PKI)-based pseudonym authentication mechanism can be
used in the deployed blockchain at the cloud with a certain decentralization for better certiﬁcate and pseudonym management
and their efﬁcient distribution. The location privacy can be preserved with masquerading concepts over the existing pseudonym
change mechanism, which need to be backed up by proof-of-claim and casual dependency to ensure traceability (by trusted
authority) and non-repudiation [7]. To preserve the privacy in data sharing, smart contracts can be used to sign agreements
between the vehicle (owner) and service providers. The blockchain can be invoked to ensure that signed smart contacts do not
get tampered with. It also enforces proper access control to implement secure and authentic data accessibility and services.
The reputation management can also be implemented using smart contracts to penalize the misbehaving vehicles and revoke
the certiﬁcate or rewarding them (better trust value) based on the report received from the infrastructure plane. The power of
AI can be utilized to ensure accountability in the system.

This section of the article discusses challenges and research opportunities in AI and Blockchain enabled IoV.

V. OPEN CHALLENGES AND RESEARCH PERSPECTIVES

A. Performance: Latency, Throughput, Energy and Scalability

Blockchain and AI adoption to IoV may require handling massive data and transaction processing in a highly dynamic
environment. Thus maintaining performance to the allowable latency threshold, throughput, and energy are major concerns [12].
The acceptable latency for safety and non-safety applications is in the range of 100ms to 1 second. For delay-sensitive safety
applications, maintaining latency in milliseconds for the entire process of communication, transaction processing, consensus,
and block formation will be the biggest challenge. Similarly, maintaining throughput, minimizing energy consumption (mainly
electric vehicles), and dealing with a large number of nodes in peak hours of IoV are the biggest challenges of AI and
Blockchain integration.

B. Security, Privacy, Transparency

AI and Blockchain integration into IoV may result in a tradeoff between Security and Privacy and Privacy and Transparency.
Dealing with such a scenario will be very challenging. Security ﬂaws have also been reported to Blockchain technology
structure, peer-to-peer system, and application in the past. The poisoning attack in AI/ML algorithms may mislead the decision
making. Ensuring anonymity of users’ identity and providing unlinkability of transactions are two major concerns from a
privacy perspective. AI powers can be misused to link the pseudonym identity and transactions. Thus security, privacy, and
transparency need to be widely explored prior to AI and Blockchain integration.

C. Heterogeneity, Deployment Strategies and Standardization

IoV is heterogeneous at access networks, core network technologies, data formats, etc. Thus, dealing with HetNet and
different data formats and semantics are very challenging. AI and Blockchain deployment strategy used in one scenario of
IoV may not be suitable for other scenarios. For example, Proof-of-Work (PoW) may be ideal for delay-tolerant non-safety
applications where security is a major concern but not suitable for delay-sensitive safety applications. Similarly, if the complex
AI models (deep learning) used with PoW may lead to high computation, overhead, and delay. Thus, the selection of a proper
combination of AI and Blockchain is challenging. The interoperability and standardization of the AI and Blockchain deployment
strategy for IoV remain the most signiﬁcant concerns to be addressed.

There are enormous research opportunities to tackle the challenges mentioned above. How AI and Blockchain can complement
each other in IoV is not yet explored much. More efforts need to be put in to fulﬁll the QoS, security, privacy, and trust
requirement of IoV. Making the Blockchain solution for IoV quantum secure using advanced cryptography such as lattice-
based and multivariate mechanisms is one of the hot topics. How private blockchain can be used to secure the complex
in-vehicle CPS is another area of research. Designing and developing the adversarial machine learning models for IoV is
another open research area. The HetNet scenario of IoV itself opens enormous research opportunities to develop a common,
interoperable, and standard security framework.

9

VI. CONCLUSION

For public acceptance and successful implementation of IoV, security, privacy protection, and trust management are critical
aspects. The Blockchain and AI-based solutions can be integrated with the widely used security infrastructure, namely PKI
for IoV, such as Security certiﬁcate management System (SCMS) in the USA and ETSI TS 102 940 and 941 in Europe to
achieve the desired level of protection against security and privacy threats. The trust management process can also be enhanced
by ML-based misbehavior detection and inheriting the blockchain-based incentivization approach for revocation (reward and
penalty). The AI can help detect anomalies and intrusions at different planes of IoV when invoked through the smart contract
logic. Blockchain as a decentralized solution can prevent malicious activities and resolve fault-tolerance and scalability issues.
This article discussed the role of AI and Blockchain in IoV separately. Then highlighted the security, privacy, and trust issues in
the IoV. How AI and Blockchain can help in dealing with security, privacy and trust issues was discussed through a framework.
Furthermore, this article has discussed several open challenges and possible future research directions to tackle them.

REFERENCES

[1] H. Abou-Zeid, F. Pervez, A. Adinoyi, M. Aljlayl, and H. Yanikomeroglu, “Cellular v2x transmission for connected and autonomous vehicles

standardization, applications, and enabling technologies,” IEEE Consumer Electronics Magazine, vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 91–98, 2019.

[2] J. Contreras-Castillo, S. Zeadally, and J. A. Guerrero-Iba˜nez, “Internet of vehicles: architecture, protocols, and security,” IEEE internet of things Journal,

vol. 5, no. 5, pp. 3701–3709, 2017.

[3] F. Tang, Y. Kawamoto, N. Kato, and J. Liu, “Future intelligent and secure vehicular network toward 6g: Machine-learning approaches,” Proceedings of

the IEEE, vol. 108, no. 2, pp. 292–307, 2019.

[4] P. K. Singh, S. K. Nandi, and S. Nandi, “A tutorial survey on vehicular communication state of the art, and future research directions,” Vehicular

Communications, vol. 18, p. 100164, 2019.

[5] D. Puthal, N. Malik, S. P. Mohanty, E. Kougianos, and C. Yang, “The blockchain as a decentralized security framework [future directions],” IEEE

Consumer Electronics Magazine, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 18–21, 2018.

[6] G. Tripathi, M. A. Ahad, and M. Sathiyanarayanan, “The role of blockchain in internet of vehicles (iov): Issues, challenges and opportunities,” in 2019

International Conference on contemporary Computing and Informatics (IC3I).

IEEE, 2019, pp. 26–31.

[7] P. Singh, A. Agarwal, G. Nakum, D. Rawat, and S. Nandi, “Mpfslp: Masqueraded probabilistic ﬂooding for source-location privacy in vanets,” IEEE

Transactions on Vehicular Technology, pp. 1–1, 2020.

[8] J. Kamel, M. R. Ansari, J. Petit, A. Kaiser, I. B. Jemaa, and P. Urien, “Simulation framework for misbehavior detection in vehicular networks,” IEEE

Transactions on Vehicular Technology, 2020.

[9] C. A. Kerrache, C. T. Calafate, J.-C. Cano, N. Lagraa, and P. Manzoni, “Trust management for vehicular networks: An adversary-oriented overview,”

IEEE Access, vol. 4, pp. 9293–9307, 2016.

[10] A. Boualouache, S.-M. Senouci, and S. Moussaoui, “A survey on pseudonym changing strategies for vehicular ad-hoc networks,” IEEE Communications

Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 770–790, 2017.

[11] P. K. Singh, R. Singh, S. K. Nandi, K. Z. Ghafoor, D. B. Rawat, and S. Nandi, “Blockchain-based adaptive trust management in internet of vehicles

using smart contract,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, pp. 1–15, 2020.

[12] M. B. Mollah, J. Zhao, D. Niyato, Y. L. Guan, C. Yuen, S. Sun, K.-Y. Lam, and L. H. Koh, “Blockchain for the internet of vehicles towards intelligent

transportation systems: A survey,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 2020.

Pranav Kumar Singh is working as an Assistant Professor in the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Central Institute of Technology Kokrajhar,
India. Contact him at snghpranav@gmail.com

Sukumar Nandi is a Senior Professor with the Department of Computer Science & Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, India. Contact
him at sukumar@iitg.ac.in

Sunit Kumar Nandi is currently pursuing his Ph.D. in the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, India.
Contact him at sunitnandi834@gmail.com

Uttam Ghosh is working as an Assistant Professor of Practice in EECS, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee, USA. Contact him at ghosh.uttam@ieee.org

Danda B. Rawat is a Professor at the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Howard University, Washington, DC, USA. Contact him
at db.rawat@ieee.org

