Blockchain as an IoT intermediary 

Matija Šipek [1-2], Martin Žagar [2] and Branko Mihaljevic [2]  

1 CS Computer Systems, Zagreb 
2 RIT Croatia, Zagreb 

Abstract. Blockchain technology provides a private, secure, transparent decen-
tralized exchange of data. Also, blockchain is not limited to a particular area, but 
it has a wide range of applications and can be integrated into a variety of Internet 
interactive  systems.  For  example,  the  Internet  of  Things  (IoT),  supply  chain 
tracking, Electronic Health Records (EHR), digital forensics, identity manage-
ment, trustless payments, and other key business elements will all benefit from 
its implementation. Next layer solutions such as Ethereum 2.0, Polkadot, Car-
dano, and other Web 3.0 technologies provide developers versatility. Moreover, 
these platforms utilize smart contracts which are similar to standard, traditional-
ized  software  during  development  but  offer  key  utilities  to  end-users  such  as 
online wallets, secure data with transparent rules. 

Blockchain is receiving a lot of attention in educational technology (EduTech) 
as it aims to achieve a more transparent and multipurpose educational system. In 
addition to smart contract technology which defines how data should be regis-
tered, gathered and processed, blockchain can be used as an IoT intermediary for 
mobile usage. 

Therefore,  we  implemented  an  educational  learning  platform  powered  by 
blockchain technology to examine feasibility in industry and academic environ-
ment. In essence, this is a web application which is adapted to mobile platform 
and connected to blockchain for crucial data exchanges. In this paper we want to 
emphasize the potential of blockchain technology in multiple sectors as well as 
the need to really understand the underlying principles which are allowing dis-
ruptability of traditional centralized software solutions. 

Keywords: Blockchain; Smart Contracts; Data Security; Web 3.0; IoT 

1 

Introduction 

In this paper, we are presenting a decentralized system powered by blockchain tech-
nology also used as an IoT system. While there are research articles that use blockchain 
as an IoT intermediary [1] most of them do not go into enough detail regarding needed 
technical specification as there is no one-size-fits-all. Every blockchain network has the 
blockchain trilemma: decentralization, security, and scalability. These factors are inter-
connected,  meaning  if  you  try  to  improve  one  facet,  another  one  will  decrease  as  a 
trade-off.  

2 

Due to a lack of transaction speed some IoT blockchain systems [2] tend to eliminate 
particular  parts, for example removing  consensus mechanisms which just makes the 
need of a blockchain completely redundant and without the needed level of security.  

On the other hand, in order to achieve a similar level to legacy systems of transaction 
processing, blockchain networks must be capable of handling an enlarging number of 
users,  transactions  and  critical  data.  For  instance,  a  common  comparison  is  Bitcoin 
which can handle around 4.6 transactions per second while Visa handles around 1700. 
The problem is obvious, if blockchain networks were to compete with legacy systems 
they need to at least match the current numbers. 

1.1  Centralized system  

Most  of  today’s  internet  systems  and  applications are  centralized,  meaning  that a 
central authority is in control of data and functions an individual is using. An example 
would  be  an  email  service;  the  provider  knows  when  you  send  the  message  and  to 
whom, the data is allegedly privately stored, still, the email service has a copy of your 
data to which it is not impossible to access.  

It can be claimed [3] that a centralized system offers better security, as there is less 
surface of attack compared to decentralized systems; however, there is always a possi-
bility of a coup d'état whereas central entity goes rogue and maliciously uses data for 
its own benefit, also not an uncommon event. 

Traditional  database  systems  can  have  a  reasonable  amount  of  privacy  and  secu-
rity with additional measures like firewalls, but the centralized nature and lack of user 
control raise concerns about the true level of privacy. 
  Still, it can be said that centralized systems are more efficient since there is a clear 
command structure; it is simpler to plan since network and infrastructure requirements 
can be predetermined, and quick changes and decisions can be made. 

1.2  Decentralized systems 

The  widespread  adoption of blockchain  and distributed  ledger  technology  has re-
sulted in a workable solution that presents a consensus of synchronized digital assets 
that are not owned by a single entity and are instead stored on a public digital ledger. 

 The shift from a centralized to a decentralized approach to application deployment 
opens up new possibilities for several industrial disciplines where access management, 
integrity, immutability, and non-discriminatory governance of data is imperative. 

The key safety mechanism is  a consensus protocol and the most common type of 
this verification is Proof-of-Work (PoW), used by the majority of modern cryptocur-
rencies. The process is known as mining, and the construction of a new block is com-
pleted by solving a complex mathematical puzzle that yields a 256-bit number hash, 
which is a unique identifier of data within the block. 

Furthermore, the distribution of computational power and storage is an important 
security feature of a blockchain. As a result, because each node preserves a complete 
replicated transaction history,  so if an attacker tries to profit through a double-spend 

 
3 

attack,  a  51  %  attack,  or  any  other  malevolent  incentive,  he  will  need  an  enormous 
amount of resources in relation to the respected consensus algorithm. 

Even so, the high level of security PoW provides is diminished by the high resource 
consumption and slow transaction speed, making it unfeasible for large-scale adoption. 

1.3  Layer-1 

Layer 1 blockchain is a set of solutions that are incorporated in the blockchain's core 
protocol to improve the blockchain's functionality and scalability. Consensus protocol 
modifications and sharding are the two most popular Layer-1 scalability solutions. 

The new consensus protocol Proof-of-Stake (PoS) tries to remove costly mining op-
erations with the introduction of Staking. To be able to participate in the verification 
and  creation  of  blocks  on  a  blockchain,  you  must  stake  tokens.  In  a  Proof-of-Stake 
blockchain, an individual or group is picked at random to verify transactions. The al-
gorithm weighs the number of tokens they have staked on the network as collateral. 
Those chosen to confirm a block are routinely rewarded with the transaction fees asso-
ciated with that block. The stake serves as a deterrent to malicious behavior. 

Sharding is a way of splitting the database horizontally into smaller distinct datasets 
called “shards”. This way, not all nodes need to maintain a copy of the entire network, 
thus allowing parallel processing so sequential work can be done on numerous transac-
tions. 

1.4  Layer-2 

Layer-2 solutions refer to the collective pool of technologies designed to run on top 
of an underlying blockchain network in order to enhance its efficiency. The base layer 
blockchain becomes less congested and ultimately more scalable by abstracting the ma-
jority of data processing to auxiliary networks. A great example of this is Rollups, the 
heavy-computational  transaction  execution  is  performed  outside  the  main  chain,  but 
data is posted on Layer-1, meaning its secured by Layer-1 and also achieves much bet-
ter performance. There are several similar concepts in Layer-2 sphere: Nested Block-
chains, State Channels, and Sidechains, and not to go into too much detail, these are all 
trying to fix the limitations of layer-1 technologies [4]. 

2 

Internet learning platform 

Smart  contracts  are  a  key  component  of  programmable  distributed  ledgers  like 
Ethereum, Cardano, and Polkadot. Smart contracts are programs that run on the global 
blockchain;  the  code,  as  well  as  all of  the data  controlled within  the  transactions,  is 
public, resulting in a system that is trustworthy and cannot be cheated if properly de-
signed. In our system implementation, we took into consideration the lack of scalability 
and designed our system to handle transactions in a similar way to Layer-2 Rollups; 
namely, separation of concerns so that only light-weight end result data is put on-chain. 

4 

Main communication with the user is done on a simple website and all the heavy com-
putation is done on a separate .NET API platform as can be seen from Fig.1. 

Fig. 1. High-level system overview 

2.1  Ethereum network-based solution 

In our initial system design, we selected Ethereum Virtual Machine (EVM)-based 
system replica to emulate the real network. Our architecture connects three main sectors 
with clear duties that are linked by an intermediary level that manipulates and shares 
data. In order to replicate EVM, we had to employ multiple technologies:  Truffle suite, 
Ganache, Web3.js, MetaMask, Solidity and other technologies. 

Truffle suite is a development environment that includes smart contract compilation, 
linking, and deployment to different networks, as well as an interactive debugger, nu-
merous libraries, and automated testing, as well as scriptable deployment and migration 
frameworks. 

Ganache is a local in-memory blockchain environment that mimics the behavior of 
distributed ledgers in the reality. Solidity-related files, artifacts, and migrations are the 
three fundamental pieces of the execution model that split smart contract functionali-
ties. The system's starting point is composed of solidity contracts, solidity-related li-
braries, and dependencies. 

Web3.js is a suite of libraries that allow communication with Ethereum nodes, both 

local and remote, using various network protocols like HTTP, IPC, and WebSocket. 

MetaMask is a browser plugin that acts as a crypto wallet, allowing websites to re-
quest  Ethereum  accounts  and  therefore  run  Ethereum  decentralized  applications 
(dApps). 

Solidity is an object-oriented high-level language for smart contract development. A 
smart contract is a collection of code, functions, variables, and state that is recorded and 
exists on the blockchain at a specific address. 

 
 
  
5 

2.2  WIP Cardano network-based solution 

The current state of smart contract implementation in the Cardano network can be 
defined as development in progress [5]. The team behind Cardano is implementing the 
Plutus Platform for running smart contracts both on-chain and off-chain code, and the 
update is named the ‘Alonzo’ hard fork. Recently, an alpha test net, Alonzo Blue, has 
been launched to a testing community with exercises in order to assess solutions with 
incorporate next areas: Hard Fork, Addresses and Transactions, Managing Native To-
kens, Interaction with the Wallet etc.  

While  all  of  this  sounds great,  the key  factor  of  compiling and  submitting  Plutus 
scripts is not implemented yet,  meaning our tests on the  Cardano network will have 
been marked for future work. 

2.3  WIP Polkadot network-based solution 

Polkadot is a next-generation blockchain technology that can connect numerous spe-
cialized chains in a universal network, with a focus on building Web 3.0 infrastructure. 
When comparing Polkadot to other blockchains, several new concepts are introduced, 
most importantly Parachains and Parathreads and it changes the way smart contracts 
are interrelated with these [6]. The main Polkadot Relay Chain does not natively sup-
port smart contracts, however, the concept of Parachains will allow for more precise 
and fast execution of extensive logic than a smart contract platform could provide. For 
example, Custom fee and Monetary Policy structure, Decentralized Autonomous Or-
ganization (DAO) Governance, Shared Randomness etc. Arguably, with a more com-
plex runtime logic, an abstraction layer is added on top of it as developers will be able 
to declare a whole environment of their chain, also allowing smart contracts to be writ-
ten on top of them [7]. Both, Polkadot and Cardano present potential future benefits 
based on the concept of om- and off-chains codes in universal networks, implementa-
tion is still not possible due to the lack of network details. That’s why we proceeded 
with the implementation described in Section 2.1. 

3 

Results 

Our  educational  learning  platform  comprises  several  interconnected  technologies 
which together create a useable, precise, and responsive system with agility for further 
operations. One of the main goals was to focus on privacy guarantees for both students 
and professors such as decentralization and differential privacy.  

We have built our educational learning platform based on smart contracts to examine 
all potential benefits and flaws in the technology. In order to be able to use smart con-
tracts, we compiled and deployed them using contract creation transactions. In this pro-
cess, each contract is associated with an address derived from the creating transaction, 
more specifically from the invoking account and the nonce, which is a timestamp. After 
deployment,  contracts  are  ready  to  be  called  and  run  by  externally  owned  accounts 
(EOAs), in our case EOA’s calls will be users, that will call smart contracts after each 
simulation iteration circle finishes. Our system uses solidity v0.5.0 with which we are 

6 

deploying  contracts  to  the  Ethereum  blockchain.  The  key  communication  line  for 
blockchain reporting is the web3.js connected to a Solidity object.  

Our learning platform  simulates a simple business environment  of IoT on Block-
chain where students (representing nodes in IoT) are supposed to simulate digital mar-
keting efforts for a hypothetical smartphone brand with a limited range of three devices 
with different technical specifications and a targeted market. The simulation consists 
of several rounds in each of which students are planning the budgets per digital platform 
and decisions about other parameters (e.g., keywords strategy). After each round, ac-
tivity reports (i.e., digital platform insights/analytics) as a result of execution of smart 
contracts  are  generated,  providing  students  with  valuable  feedback  on  their  actions. 
During the start of the simulation, pre-determined data entered by the admin is loaded 
on the blockchain. This data is the starting benchmark of globally defined values which 
define successfulness of each user’s overall situation e.g.,  Number of likes, Post en-
gagement, Page views, etc. and they are equally set for all users.  

Since the platform is based on the concept of a smart contract, all the activity reports 
are immutable, showing data integrity and enabling everyone in the simulation is deal-
ing with the same datasets. The simulation consists of 16 iterations where  the initial 
iteration is for instructional setup and creating the environment. Reporting at the end of 
each round is based on smart contracting and for executing the contract, it is required 
to pay a gas fee. Our basic solution is built on the previously mentioned EVM-based 
environment with Truffle suite, Ganache, Web3.js, and MetaMask, and smart contracts 
developed in Solidity.  In order to compare our proposed solution on  Ethereum, with 
possible Cardano and Polkadot solutions, we adjusted the predicted amount of activities 
per iterations of each possible solution. 

As a major benefit of our solution, we have proved that our solution is applicable for 
use in any kind of smart contract. The time to the finality of executing the smart con-
tracts on our platform is presented in Fig. 2. It could be seen that the average time to 
finality  is  denoted  in  a  couple  of  seconds  which  is  acceptable  time  for  proving  and 
executing business contracts, comparing to the real world where such operations could 
take even a few days. 

]
s
[
e
m
T

i

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16

Iteration

Fig. 2. Time to finality per simulation iteration on our platform 

 
 
 
7 

As an additional outcome, as presented in Fig. 3 on average transaction costs, while 
our solution based on Ethereum is constantly showing costs around 0.7 gas (which is 
currently 15.80 Gwei), predicted gas price based on [8] and [6], for reporting based on 
Polkadot and Cardano technologies  will be some 3 times lower while enabling  even 
broader and cheaper usage of our platform. 

Average transaction cost

0.08

0.06

0.04

0.02

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16

Ethereum

Polkadot

Cardano

Fig. 3. Comparison of average transaction costs in gas 

4 

Conclusion 

According to revised Bloom’s taxonomy, the creation of this new and original edu-
cational learning platform, for the educational process and proving Blockchain technol-
ogies as IoT intermediaries (in our case, students represented nodes in IoT) is able to 
cover all six cognitive processes (which is in our case valid for both Business and IT 
students).  Business  students  get  an  insight  into  strategic  knowledge  and  conceptual 
knowledge by using the platform, and knowledge of Internet marketing specific tech-
niques and methods, knowledge about the terminology, together with knowledge about 
the criteria for determining when to use appropriate procedures when designing busi-
ness logic in the background of this application. IT students acquire knowledge of dis-
tributed  application development skills and  Blockchain and  smart contract technolo-
gies, knowledge about the classification when acquiring the initial input data from Busi-
ness students, and knowledge about the terminology in building the distributed appli-
cations from their instructor. 

We also proved that our approach based on EVM is applicable to different business 
domains that is based on the immutability and data integrity provided by the smart con-
tracts. We anticipate gas fees as the only downside, although the relevant numbers are 
counted in cents, which would not be a problem in real business application for replac-
ing and approving the business contracts with the smart contracts. 

Our result datasets show that this new approach of gamification in learning platforms 
is  inclusive  towards  different  perspectives  of  knowledge  sharing  and  knowledge 

 
 
 
8 

gaining, and in the near future when other frameworks like Cardano and Polkadot will 
be fully available, with additional options and lower gas prices and off-chain code man-
agement in universal networks, our proposal could be defined as a benchmark for edu-
cational learning platform for business and IT curricula, and also a showcase for prov-
ing the applicability of smart contracts in business applications. 

References 

1.  Pranto, T. H., Noman, A. A., Mahmud, A., Haque, A.B.: Blockchain and smart contract for 

IoT enabled smart agriculture. In: PeerJ Computer Science, pp. 1-29 (2021) 

2.  Christidis, K., Devetsikiotis, M.: Blockchains and Smart Contracts for the Internet of Things. 

In: IEEE Access, vol. 4, pp. 2292-2303. IEEE (2016) 

3.  Patsonakis C., Samari K., Roussopoulos M., Kiayias A.: Towards a Smart Contract-Based, 
Decentralized, Public-Key Infrastructure. In: Capkun S., Chow S. (eds) Cryptology and Net-
work Security. CANS 2017. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol 11261. pp. 299-321. 
Springer (2018) 

4.  Saraph, V., Herlihy, M.: An Empirical Study of Speculative Concurrency in Ethereum Smart 

Contracts. In: ArXiv, pp. 1-13. Cornell University (2019) 

5.  Aydinli,  K.:  Performance  Assessment  of  Cardano.  Independent  Study  –  Communication 

Systems Group. pp. 1-39 (2019) 

6.  Parity  Technologies:  A  brief  summary  of  everything  Substrate  and  Polkadot, 
ac-

https://www.parity.io/blog/a-brief-summary-of-everything-substrate-polkadot/, 
cessed 2021/01/07. 

last 

7.  Polkadot Builders Starter's Guide, https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/build-build-with-pol-

kadot/, last accessed 2021/01/07. 

8.  Burdges, J., Cevallos, A., Czaban, P., Habermeier, R., Hosseini, S., Lama, F., Alper, H.K., 
Luo, X., Shirazi, F., Stewart, A., & Wood, G.: Overview of Polkadot and its Design Con-
siderations. ArXiv, abs/2005.13456. (2020) 

 
