Blockchain and Beyond: Understanding Blockchains
through Prototypes and Public Engagement

DAVE MURRAY-RUST, Human-Centered Design, TU Delft, Netherlands and Institute for Design Infor-
matics, University of Edinburgh, Scotland
CHRIS ELSDEN, BETTINA NISSEN, ELLA TALLYN, LARISSA PSCHETZ, and CHRIS
SPEED, Institute for Design Informatics, University of Edinburgh, Scotland

This paper presents an annotated portfolio of projects that seek to understand and communicate the social and
societal implications of blockchains, DLTs and smart contracts. These complex technologies rely on human and
technical factors to deliver cryptocurrencies, shared computation and trustless protocols but have a secondary
benefit in providing a moment to re-think many aspects of society, and imagine alternative possibilities. The
projects use design and HCI methods to relate blockchains to a range of topics, including global supply chains,
delivery infrastructure, smart grids, volunteering and charitable giving, through engaging publics, exploring
ideas and speculating on possible futures. Based on an extensive annotated portfolio we draw out learning for
the design of blockchain systems, broadening participation and surfacing questions around imaginaries, social
implications and engagement with new technology. This paints a comprehensive picture of how HCI and
design can shape understandings of the future of complex technologies.

CCS Concepts: • Human-centered computing → Contextual design; Empirical studies in HCI ; • Security
and privacy → Human and societal aspects of security and privacy; • Applied computing → Digital cash.

Additional Key Words and Phrases: blockchains, public engagement, research through design, HCI, smart
contracts, distributed ledger technology, conditional giving, distributed energy

ACM Reference Format:
Dave Murray-Rust, Chris Elsden, Bettina Nissen, Ella Tallyn, Larissa Pschetz, and Chris Speed. 2021. Blockchain
and Beyond: Understanding Blockchains through Prototypes and Public Engagement. ACM Trans. Comput.-
Hum. Interact. 1, 1 (December 2021), 73 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn

1 INTRODUCTION
Blockchain systems are complex. As an example, the Ethereum network [151] includes a digital
ledger of transactions and other features that enable a cryptocurrency, a Turing complete program-
ming language that runs on top of this, with its own currency, all supported by a system of miners
who turn computational power into cryptocurrency, and a secondary network of organisations that
help move money into and out of the network. This is a mixture of human and technological actors,
with multiple, conflicting goals and reasons for participating. To make sense of the whole system
requires a combination of specialised cryptographic reasoning, distributed systems thinking and

Authors’ addresses: Dave Murray-Rust, d.s.murray-rust@tudelft.nl, Human-Centered Design, TU Delft, Delft, Netherlands,
Institute for Design Informatics, University of Edinburgh, 47 Potterrow, Edinburgh, Scotland, EH8 9BT; Chris Elsden;
Bettina Nissen; Ella Tallyn; Larissa Pschetz; Chris Speed, c.speed@ed.ac.uk, Institute for Design Informatics, University of
Edinburgh, Design Informatics, 47 Potterrow, Edinburgh, Scotland, EH8 9BT.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires
prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
© 2021 Association for Computing Machinery.
1073-0516/2021/12-ART $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn

ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: December 2021.

2

Murray-Rust, et. al.

game theory, along with a socioeconomic treatment of why and how people participate in the sys-
tem, and what the potential real-world applications are. This combined viewpoint is not accessible
to many people, hence multiple different understandings of the blockchain proliferate, covering
different aspects. However, these systems are the subject of great hopes for radical transformation.
The UK Government’s Walport Report states:

“In distributed ledger technology, we may be witnessing one of those potential explo-
sions of creative potential that catalyse exceptional levels of innovation. The technology
could prove to have the capacity to deliver a new kind of trust to a wide range of ser-
vices. As we have seen open data revolutionise the citizen’s relationship with the state,
so may the visibility in these technologies reform our financial markets, supply chains,
consumer and business-to-business services, and publicly-held registers.”[147]

The current focus of much research steers towards scientific or technical solutions and systems,
and the algorithmic or game theoretic functioning of consensus algorithms. Alongside this, in
order to develop a clear picture of how, when and why to employ this technology, it is necessary
to look at the broader context in which blockchains may be used and understood. In particular,
we are interested in how we can develop public understanding of the technologies, partly in their
functions, but also in their implications - what are the possibilities for a world in which these
decentralised, ‘trustless’ systems are common? This fits with the UK government’s Holmes report:

“[Distributed Ledger Technology] presents us with an opportunity not just to consider
how we might make what government currently does better, but to rethink what
government can and should be doing to promote democratic engagement and the
welfare of UK citizens and to stimulate and strengthen the UK economy” [68]

This sense of possibility is driven by the way that the technical potentials of blockchain systems
are understood: as ways to decentralise systems, empowering people and enhancing their agency;
to democratise transactions through disintermediation; to support artists by tracking sales and
re-use; to develop increasingly autonomous objects that can make their own transactions; and
ultimately to completely rewrite legal and social structures as formal code.

The set of speculations is broad, and many of the promises made are impossible, undesirable or
both. There is a need to engage publics with these propositions, to understand and develop the
new economic imaginaries [130] and socio-technical possibilities currently being thought through:

“As with most new technologies, the full extent of future uses and abuses is only
visible dimly. And in the case of every new technology the question is not whether the
technology is ‘in and of itself’ a good thing or a bad thing. The questions are: what
application of the technology? For what purpose? And applied in what way and with
what safeguards?” [Walport, 147]

In this paper, we are concerned with how we can use design, with its associated toolkits of
research and public engagement methods as a way to both articulate to the public some of the
meanings and possibilities of this new technology, and to co-create innovation and understanding
with the practitioners. We believe the interdisciplinary nature of design and HCI research offers a
lens to hold new technologies to account, engage participants, and expand imagination [40]. Just
as blockchain is allowing the rethinking of existing practices, we are interested in how design
helps researchers and publics alike to rethink their conceptualisations (c.f. Barry et. al’s logic of
ontology [4]) and create space for deeper ideation and engagement. To develop this, we engage
in experiential work, that brings people into the system in order to engage with knowledge. As
Barad puts it: “We do not obtain knowledge by standing outside the world; we know because “we” are
of the world. We are part of the world in its differential becoming.” [3]. Through the creation of new

ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: December 2021.

Blockchain and Beyond: Understanding Blockchains through Prototypes and Public Engagement

3

experiences through which stakeholders can meaningfully engage, design gives a tool to navigate
the space between technological hype and froth on one hand, and dystopian fears on the other.

The key contribution of this paper is bringing together and analysing a collection of work from
the Centre for Design Informatics in Edinburgh University, covering projects from 2014 to the
current day. This work is brought together as an annotated portfolio [13, 58], from which a range
of themes are drawn out and analysed. This approach is warranted here due to the complexity of
blockchain systems – carrying out design work in the space involves dealing with value exchange,
cryptographic security, decentralised and distributed systems, network infrastructures and more.
This portfolio includes work based on a range of different design methods from probes to design
fictions and group workshops, with different manifestations such as artefacts, prototypes and games,
spanning a range of levels of technical fidelity. Some are small prototypes, that pick up certain
aspects of the technology, and articulate them through provocative objects. Some are larger studies
about the relations between people and blockchains that are manifested as interactive experiences
and physical things, while others are public engagement workshops, that try to translate the
complex infrastructures into forms that encourage public participation.

Combining multiple projects allows for an analysis of the factors that make experiences work,
including i) traditional designerly concerns such as tangibility or transparency, the use of role-play
and seamfullnes; ii) specific concerns for working with blockchains around fidelity, abstraction
and contextualisation; and iii) broader concerns around value exchange and re-imagining society.
This allows us to paint a broad picture of the interconnected issues and concerns that arise around
complex socio-technical infrastructures in a way that is not possible with individual pieces of
work. We demonstrate the richness, complexity and diversity of knowledge that can be gained by
applying a range of approaches to a single technological locus.

In particular, this allows us to engage with four main questions that run through the work:

• How to go about the design of blockchain systems, in particular, connecting them to real-

world contexts of use and interactions with humans?

• How to involve a wider audience in meaningful critique, ideation and design of blockchain

technologies?

• What aspects of blockchain technology can be generalised to support the design of other

network infrastructures?

• How can design work around blockchains extend our envisioning of technological and social

futures?

The paper is structured as follows: First, we introduce a short survey of relevant work exploring
implications of blockchains through social studies and creative practice (Section 2). Next, we
introduce the setup of our annotated portfolio and the key design methods used across the projects
(Section 3). We then present the portfolio as four groups of related projects, covering i) understanding
blockchains (Section 4); ii) public engagement around blockchains (Section 5); iii) co-creation of
system rules (Section 6); and iv) the development of autonomous objects (Section 7). For each
group of projects, we detail their context and the questions they set out to explore, and then draw
out themes and understandings gained through the projects. This is then brought together into a
discussion (Section 8) along the four questions given above, looking towards rethinking value and
values, developing autonomous systems, understanding the imaginaries surrounding blockchain
and the move towards automated societies.

Due to the length and format of the paper, we suggest some reading journeys for exploring
different aspects of the work, as it is not necessary to read it as a complete text. We would suggest:

ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: December 2021.

4

Murray-Rust, et. al.

• For those new to Blockchain and HCI, the background and related work (Section 2) provides
an overview to the core technologies and methods, which should enable an exploration of
individual projects of interest.

• For HCI researchers looking to engage with blockchains and DLTs, the text that accompanies
each block of the portfolio (e.g. Sections 4.1-4.7) surfaces key HCI issues alongside the projects
where they emerged.

• For engineers and creators of blockchain systems, the discussion (Section 8) and in particular
the sections on learning about design around blockchain systems (Sections 8.1 and 8.2) give
an overview of key strategies and point back to the projects of interest.

2 BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
To set the scene for our annotated portfolio, we start by introducing some key terms, features and
debates regarding blockchain technologies and decentralisation which have set the scene for our
work since 2014. We then give a brief survey of the wide range of artistic and design-led practice
which have expanded the understanding and imaginaries of these technologies and infrastructures.
Finally, and crucially, we identify specific areas of prior work in HCI and design that this portfolio
builds upon and extends.

2.1 Introducing Blockchains and DLT
As a class of technologies, blockchains and DLTs have been extensively analysed and summarised
in a range of disciplines, both technically, and as ‘disruptive’ ‘general purpose’ technologies which
are envisaged to transform whole industries [29, 80]. As a very brief sample, Swan [133] provides
one of the earliest overviews of how the technology that emerged as a cryptocurrency in 2009
through the Bitcoin Blockchain [107], could become the basis for all manner of contracts, and
ultimately a source of distributed governance. Swanson [134] details key distinctions between
permissioned and permissionless ledgers. Tschorsch and Scheuermannn have conducted a technical
survey of decentralized digital currencies [142] while Garay et al. [57] provide a canonical analysis
of the Bitcoin protocol. As a less technical, but more comprehensive general overview, Rauchs et
al. [120] offer a conceptual framework of Distributed Ledger Technologies in an effort to refine
terminology and bring order to a vastly expanding field of applications with quite varying qualities.
Finally, there are also a plethora of domain-specific summaries, such as Dunphy et al.’s overview of
blockchain applications for identity management [35].

It is a challenge to give a concise and complete account of a blockchain system, and the gap
between ‘a blockchain is just a database that can only be appended to’ and a full technical knowledge
of the details is large. The Ethereum network [151] consists of: i) a distributed ledger that records
transactions immutably; ii) a consensus algorithm for determining which transactions should be
honoured; iii) a Turing complete programming language for creating programs to be executed in a
distributed manner; iv) a cryptocurrency that makes use of the distributed ledger, with a secondary
currency to manage execution of distributed programs; v) a collection of miners, who enable the
network by contributing processing power; and more. In order to orient the reader to some of
the key features of blockchain technologies, we provide an overview diagram and glossary of key
terms in Appendix 10, but the takeaway here is that the system is composed of many different
actors and technologies, operating at different levels with different logics.

Beyond these more technical definitions, we wish to briefly address some of the significant
debates and imaginaries that have fuelled research, hype and discussion of blockchain technologies.
It should also be noted that this work took place before the explosion and crash in the price of
Bitcoin in 2020/2021, the growing awareness of the ecological impact of proof-of-work mining, or

ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: December 2021.

Blockchain and Beyond: Understanding Blockchains through Prototypes and Public Engagement

5

rise of ‘NFTs’ with Beeple selling an artwork for $69M and Tim Berners-Lee selling an imaging of
the world wide web source code for $5.4M[82, 144].

Most evidently, the emergence of Bitcoin in the wake of the 2008 financial crisis has inspired
waves of envisioning alternative digital currencies and the future of the global financial system. Kow
and Lustig [88] recount competing visions within the Bitcoin community about how to ensure the
sustainability, prevalence and accessibility of the network. Through eight ‘MoneyLab’ conferences,
the Institute of Network Cultures has produced two compelling ‘readers’ [63, 93] charting the
vast possibilities of cryptocurrencies, from Bitcoin Maximalism (where Bitcoin ultimately replaces
fiat currency), to ‘common-coins’ for communities of shared values such as FairCoin 1, and more
corporate visions such as Facebook’s ‘Libra’ network 2.

Besides currency applications specifically, DLTs have spurred the conception of various ‘token
economies’, where actions and behaviours on a platform are regulated and incentivised by a token
or coin, with various embedded rules and possible values. In the first instance, token economies
offered a vehicle for initial investment in blockchain-based start-ups through controversial ‘Initial
Coin Offerings’ (ICOs). However, platforms such as Brave 3 demonstrate how token economies
might be configured to revolutionise internet publishing. Such visions are compelling, but also
speak to interactions that are deeply ‘financialised’ [143] and premised on individuals acting in
rational and economic self-interest.

A striking and confounding feature of blockchain technologies is how they simultaneously
appeal to deeply libertarian ideals [81] of independence from state governance, as well as more
socialist envisioning of equitably shared commons [25, 100, 113]. Similarly, there are deep ideo-
logical tensions between wholly independent and ‘permissionless’ networks developed outside of
institutions and state regulation (e.g. Bitcoin) and corporate-led initiatives where the technology is
used to agree or enforce industry standards (e.g. IBM Hyperledger, Consensys).

Distributed Autonomous Organsiations (DAOs) are an interesting example of this: autonomous
code that can carry out financial trades or other actions without the need for or possibility of
human intervention. One of the highest profile of these, simply named “The DAO” gathered up
$250M of Ethereum tokens, 14% of the entire supply, but was quickly exploited, and the money
stolen. This resulted in a ‘hard fork’, where a consensus emerged and participants in the Ethereum
network collectively decided to ‘roll back’ all transactions and erase this bit of history from the
supposedly immutable ledger [37].

The potential use of blockchain technologies to manage personal identity data [34, 35] demon-
strates some of these tensions. In opposition to nation states, or global technology companies,
some look to the distributed consensus mechanisms of blockchain technologies as a platform for
‘self-sovereign identity’ – where one’s identity is issued and controlled only by the individual
themselves, without relying on an external authority to prove this identity. These visions dovetail
with aspirations for a more open, peer-to-peer and distributed web [9, 125, 140]. Ideologically,
one’s identity can therefore never be taken away or discredited by an authority. However, other
decentralised identity schemes take a different path; they seek to make use of distributed ledgers
as a ‘tamper-resistant’ records, through which trusted authorities can share their affirmation or
‘attestation’ of different identity attributes. While both systems afford the individual a more portable
record of their identity, this second system is heavily predicated on the sharing and reinforcement

1https://fair-coin.org/
2https://libra.org/en-US/white-paper/
3https://brave.com/

ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: December 2021.

6

Murray-Rust, et. al.

of specific identity standards within existing regulatory frameworks. A particularly striking exam-
ple includes the World Food Program’s ‘Building Blocks’ program which encodes the identity of
refugees in camps through a retina scan in order to facilitate cash assistance [22].

Similar aspirations for ‘proof-as-a-service’ and the trusted exchange of credentials extend to
registries of goods and global supply chains. It is envisaged that through chains of tamper-resistant
attestation a provenance of goods could be achieved and bring greater transparency. However, while
blockchain protocols may ensure that data shared ‘on-chain’ is transparent and perpetual, these
systems ultimately depend on faithful representation of real-world ‘off-chain’ assets. Somewhat
paradoxically for a supposedly ‘trustless’ technology, a deep trust is required across institutions to
make such infrastructure work.

These are only brief examples of complex debates, however they serve here to illuminate para-
doxical and contested character of blockchain technologies and their applications. This ambiguity
is only heightened by the abundance of visionary ‘White Papers’ in contrast to the sparsity of
widely used applications. More than 10 years on from the emergence of Bitcoin, and despite vast
investments, the industry arguably remains embryonic. And while a great deal of critical work in
STS, political economy and infrastructure studies have analysed the prospects of these technologies
[30, 70, 76, 88, 90, 100, 113, 152], there is still much to understand about how they might be designed
and experienced by end-users and the implications of their widespread adoption in everyday life.

2.2 Expanding Public Imaginaries of Blockchains and DLT
Taken together – much of this prior work reflects the very broad and systemic thinking that
underpins the emergence of this technology and the grapples in various domains to contemplate
the applications of such a disruptive technology. However, where there is far less prior work is in
the ways people will actually interact with and experience these technologies. The sector is replete
with visions, white papers and illustrative product videos; working examples and meaningful
real-world interactions (especially beyond cryptocurrency trading) are considerably more sparse.
Artists have often gone further in this regard. In ‘Artists Re:Thinking the Blockchain’, the artists

collective Furtherfield write:

“There is a curious equivalence between art’s speculative abilities, to play with fact,
fiction, and abstraction, and the blockchain’s own chimeric character. Both art and the
blockchain grapple with the instability of authorship and authenticity.” [18]

Indeed, it is striking how much more ‘real’ and tangible some artistic projects have been, than
many aspiring blockchain start-ups. Furtherfield’s edited collection [18] demonstrates artists natural
desire to make and craft in order to understand new technologies. In doing so, many projects invite
attention to specific features of the technology, and offer entry points for a general public to grasp
their significance.

Several projects focus on the nature of ‘mining’, and specifically the extreme energy costs involved
in doing so: Lindley’s ‘CryptoHeater’ [92] attached a mining rig to a radiator to generate heat;
Oliver’s ‘Harvest’ 4 brought together wind turbines and miners to create Zcash from atmospheric
movement; and Bittercoin uses a calculator in order to be the worlds worst miner 5.

Projects have also drawn attention to the human roles in what are often perceived as purely
technical infrastructures: Dovey’s ‘Respiratory Mining’ 6 uses crypto-currencies to investigate
the role of the body in emerging financial systems and how the body can perform computational

4https://julianoliver.com/output/harvest
5https://escuderoandaluz.com/2016/03/03/bittercoin/
6https://maxdovey.hashbase.io/Respiratory_Mining/

ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: December 2021.

Blockchain and Beyond: Understanding Blockchains through Prototypes and Public Engagement

7

processes by using human respiration to mine crypto-currencies; Smith’s BlockMirror 7 combines
the viewer’s reflection with the act of mining currency to illustrate our value potential within this
system. It hints at a possible future where all aspects of our lives and our attention are commodified
and mined for currency.

Moving away from explicit critique of the technology itself, some of the most provocative
artist work in this space has explored possible economic reconfigurations. Furtherfield’s ‘Artists
Re:thinking the Blockchain’ collects multiple approaches including art and speculative design [18],
in particular the Plantoid - a blockchain based lifeform [50] and Terra0, a forest that is attempting
to buy and own itself [127]. This sense of autonomy and ownership is also seen in more plausible
systems, such as the Fairbike hire bikes that own themselves and commission more as needs
arise [97]. The DAOWO workshops have provided a specific venue for exploring the ways that
blockchains and critical artistic practice reflect and shape each other8.

While many of these projects are of artistic or speculative nature, remaining abstract, provocative
concepts, they all powerfully reflect and demonstrate the rich imaginaries that circulate through
blockchain technologies. These particular artistic instantiations, cut through purely theoretical or
technical imaginaries, and present compelling propositions. However, these provocative projects
only focus to a limited degree on engaging publics and exploring their actual interactions and
experience with blockchain technologies.

The work we present in this annotated portfolio is deeply inspired (and has sometimes been
undertaken in collaboration) with many of these artists. However, in our work we have prioritised
the practices of design and HCI research alongside public engagement. In this sense, our research
draws richly from artists’ approaches, but crucially seeks to investigate and test out many of the
underpinning theories and technologies in these works.

2.3 HCI and Designing Interactions with Blockchain Technologies
The HCI community has approached studies of blockchain technologies in a number of ways. One
strand of work on Bitcoin and alternative currencies taps into a rich history of studying money,
finance and peer-to-peer exchange [7, 15, 16, 19, 48, 49, 86, 87, 89, 114, e.g.].

Other work has looked more specifically at the Bitcoin community itself, with particular interests
in infrastructuring [88]. In particular, this work demonstrates the material and social factors
shaping the development, use and implications of what is often prefigured as a purely technical
intervention [76, 81, 86, 95]. In this respect, the HCI community, as ever, plays a role in articulating
the importance of the human in the loop.

HCI and particularly design-led researchers have also sought to understand the opportunities
and implications of blockchain technologies in specific domains, such as: education [123], charity
and philanthropy [44, 45, 102], identity management [23, 34, 35, 154], supply chains and transport
[51, 77, 78, 115, 136], shared commons and civic participation [25, 39, 96].

With a focus on particular applications and communities of use, this work has also tended to
adopt more participatory, creative and bottom-up approaches that endeavour to involve end-users
in understanding and informing the design of this new class of technologies, such as performative
works and design fictions [e.g. 83]. Such approaches are a stark counterpoint to the often far-
removed and top-down envisioning prevalent in most blockchain start-ups.

Through a survey and typology of blockchain application areas for HCI researchers, Elsden et al.
[40] also propose the roles that HCI researchers may be well placed to play in advancing the field.
They propose the HCI community should hold these technologies to account, engage participants

7http://www.dominicsmith.info/the-block-mirror/
8http://www.daowo.org/

ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: December 2021.

8

Murray-Rust, et. al.

around the technology, bring critical design knowledge and practice to bear on blockchain systems,
and expand the imaginaries around blockchains.

This is a wide brief - from technical understanding, to design and theoretical imaginaries, to
engaging with participants and end users on the ground. The diversity of such approaches was
embodied in a CHI 2018 workshop, on ‘HCI for Blockchains’, captured in four manifestos [42].

In presenting this annotated portfolio, we endeavour to demonstrate a range of projects that
do one or all of these things. The projects we discuss provide exemplars for the HCI community,
and by looking across a number of projects, we show several different approaches, as well as
accumulated learning that can guide HCI and design researchers in navigating research projects
on these complex technologies.. Our work also cuts across a number of the domains above - and
we see that although specific domains differ, similar questions and challenges emerge. By looking
at all of the work as a whole, we can articulate the design strategies that work well for engaging
participants, the particularities of designing around blockchains, and synthesise a picture of the
social impacts of distributed ledger technologies.

3 AN ANNOTATED PORTFOLIO OF BLOCKCHAIN IMAGINARIES
The projects that we discuss here have emerged from a series of collaborations with partners
and organisations from both industry and academia including experts in computer science and
cryptography as well as fields of HCI and business and organisational studies. The central strand is
understanding the relations between publics and blockchain technologies - starting from a core
understanding of how blockchain technologies work, but working towards a concern for social
worlds, how these technologies will manifest and be experienced in everyday life, engaging with
“the potential for surprise, imagination, and creativity, which is immanent in the openness of each
moment of experience” [153, p.184]. As such, a primary goal of our work is to engage various
publics and offer non-experts the opportunity to experience, ideate and think creatively in relation
to blockchain technologies.

The way of working here is broadly within the domain ofresearch through design (RtD) a design-
led approach, which generates knowledge by a design-led approach, where knowledge is generated
through all stages of a design process, from initial ideation, through to the deployment of functioning
prototypes, probes and research products [55, 60]. Our participatory approach to RtD particularly
emphasises engaging with a wide variety of stakeholders and publics, alongside the more traditional
RtD focus on materials and objects.

This approach is used within studies of human computer interaction (HCI) [155], especially when
looking at work ‘in the wild’ – aiming to study technology use in real-world contexts with likely
end-users [8, 122]. The type of research is often iterative in nature; active, participatory, playful and
performative [60] and its main aim is to allow publics to experience potential novel technologies and
their implications through experiential and embodied rather than purely academic or technical ways,
as Frayling put it: “How can I tell what I think till I see what I make and do?”[55]. As researchers
and practitioners who are focusing on engaging multiple audiences with concepts of blockchain
technology, design and creativity play an important role in creating engaging experiences for
our participants. And we as designers and HCI researchers agree that we should “take pride in
[design’s] aptitude for exploring and speculating, particularizing and diversifying, and – especially
– its ability to manifest the results in the form of new, conceptually rich artefacts” [60].

There is a key challenge in presenting this kind of work as much of the value is embodied in
specific objects and situations. Many design researchers and academics have grappled with the
disconnect of experiential depth and its translation into written ‘knowledge’[60, 131], e.g. exploring
other forms of media [69, 94, 146]. One approach emerging from these debates, the annotated
portfolios introduced by [13] and [58] aims to present practice as a multi-layered, cumulative

ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: December 2021.

Blockchain and Beyond: Understanding Blockchains through Prototypes and Public Engagement

9

Fig. 1. Timeline of projects in this portfolio, categorised by the type of activity - public engagement, provoca-
tions and workshops.

collection of research artefacts to draw out shared concepts in a “descriptive, yet generative and
inspirational fashion” [13] that go beyond individual project findings. This allows a combination of
empirical studies, observational approaches and critical design work to be brought together – a
necessary practice to cover the combination of formal concepts, behaviour understandings and
speculation necessary to engage with emerging infrastructures such as blockchains:

ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: December 2021.

20202019201820172016Block ExchangeWorkshopGeneral PublicDistributed StringsWorkshopBlockchain + GovernanceKASH CupsExperienceGeneral PublicSeismic SeesawInstallationGeneral PublicHappily Ever After (Bitcoin)InstallationGeneral PublicAfter MoneyInstallationGeneral PublicCariCropWorkshopAgriculture StakeholdersKarma KettlesInstallationGeneral PublicPizzaBlockWorkshopOrganizations + VolunteersGeoCoinWorkshopGeneral PublicIf This Then What? WorkshopOrgansationsProgrammable Donations InterviewOrgansationsGeoPactInstallation / WorkshopGeneral PublicBitBaristaInstallation /DeploymentGeneral PublicGigBlissInstallation / Dramatic DeliberationGeneral PublicUnderstandingBlockchainEnabling Public ExperiencesMaking the RulesThinking Through Autonomous Things20152014Public EngagementThings/ProvicationsWorkshops10

Murray-Rust, et. al.

“If a single design occupies a point in design space, a collection of designs by the same
or associated designers – a portfolio – establishes an area in that space. Comparing
different individual items can make clear a domain of design, its relevant dimensions,
and the designer’s opinion about the relevant places and configurations to adopt on
those dimensions.” [58]

In order to work with different communities, situations and research directions, a wide variety
of design-led approaches are deployed. The common thread is engaging people with these new
and complex technologies in accessible and experiential ways, looking beyond current technical
capabilities or issues (e.g. scaling, mining costs etc.) and critically reflecting on the broader socio-
material practices, societal impact and meaningful future use of blockchain technologies. As such,
we have been inspired by a range of methods, while at the same time responding to contexts,
partners, aims and audiences of each project. Our key methods can be roughly summarised as
follows:

• Ideation and creative thinking, where we stimulate divergent thinking in new areas by using
ideation cards to suggest possibilities [64], bodystorming [111] for situated ideation, and
unfinished software [108] to support participants developing their own ideas about novel
infrastructure.

• Material interventions that use a variety of objects and tasks in order to understand partici-
pants sociologies, including technology probes [72], design probes [145] and cultural probes
[59].

• Provocations that help to generate new ideas by finding ways to articulate new concepts
or defamiliarise existing ones, such as physicalising data [79] or other concepts, or using
provotypes – provocative prototypes – to elicit responses [11].

• Speculative works, whether design fictions or speculative designs, that paint pictures of

possible worlds in order to support new ways of thinking [2, 10, 33, 38].

To help make sense of the multiple facets of this work, we have structured the portfolio in four
sections, which draw out different concerns, with a narrative thread through them. The work
roughly follows a trajectory from simple through to complex, and from didactic to open-ended. We
have purposefully not followed a chronological order here (although this can be seen in Figure 1)
to draw out shared commonalities and valuable narratives for HCI.

The projects (Figure 1) have been thematically grouped into four areas, each of which builds on

the previous ones:

• Section 4 looks at workshops that develop public understanding of concepts behind blockchain
technology, from basic concepts (BlockExchange) through abstract notions (Attaching Strings)
to specific use cases (PizzaBlock and Caricrop).

• Section 5 looks at creating accessible public experiences that illustrate implications of
blockchain developments, through rethinking marriages (Happily Ever After (Bitcoin)), work
(After Money), donations (Seismic Seesaw) and socialising (KASH Cups).

• Section 6 explores how to engage people in creating the rules that systems work by, from
abstract concepts (IFTTW) through how charities work (Programmable Donations) and
creating geolocated currencies (GeoCoin)

• Section 7 develops the possibilities of autonomous objects, for location aware objects (GeoPact),
understanding supply chains (BitBarista) and negotiating with energy grids (GigBliss, Karma
Kettles).

To present the annotated portfolio, each project is described through a double page spread
combining text and images – these have been made visually distinct from the body text for clarity.
The analytic body text for each section sets up the context and intentions surrounding each group

ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: December 2021.

Blockchain and Beyond: Understanding Blockchains through Prototypes and Public Engagement

11

of projects, presents shared analysis over the projects, and motivates the next section. The first
stage of analysis was carried out on individual projects, as those involved drew out key learnings
and outcomes for that particular piece of work. These were then taken into discussion among the
authors of this paper, to work towards a coherent set of themes for each group of projects. Based
on these, as well as a holistic overview of the whole portfolio, the authors developed the final
discussion and key points. This means that the paper can be easily skimmed, by flicking through
the pictorial pages, or a particular group of projects can be explored in more depth.

4 UNDERSTANDING BLOCKCHAINS
Blockchains rely on complex cryptographic protocols, but also require systems-level thinking
across economics, mathematics and distributed technologies. To explore the full potential of
these technologies requires new ways of thinking, for example, considering radical new forms
of governance and organisation, set in opposition to traditional infrastructures and institutions
(e.g. the banking sector). This can lead to unearthing and reconsidering long held and forgotten
assumptions about how whole sectors of societies and economies function, such as unravelling the
tacit understanding of money and currency, revealing it as an abstract structure imposed on our
innate understanding of value and the need to exchange things.

However, working through ideas such as Merkle trees and hash functions is challenging to
many audiences, and is a barrier that limits who might be able to engage with the possibilities of
these technologies. We require ways to explain core blockchain concepts in a way that supports
non-experts in imagining future possibilities and implication without having to understand all
of the implementation details. Design methods can help both with ways to develop the technical
understanding and with the defamiliarisation [5] of existing practices, giving space to rethink them
with new metaphors.

In this section, we look at projects that abstract and distill key aspects or qualities of distributed
ledgers, whether simplified metaphors for how blockchains are built or materialising concepts such
as self-sovereign identity.

Several of these were driven by working with non-academic partners in a wide range of domains,
who were both excited, and sceptical of the hype surrounding blockchain technologies, and often
began from a very limited conception of its potential scope and applications. The four workshops
tackle different aspects of blockchain technologies in order to have relevance in different domains
with different stakeholders. They are structured to allow a detailed exploration of the questions
at hand, typically lasting 2-4 hours with a group of participants. As well as helping develop
understanding, these workshops are designed to open up discussion around alternatives to a
centralised status quo, supporting a grounded imagining of future possibilities.

BlockExchange (p. 13,14) starts with the fundamentals of making peer-to-peer transactions
on a public ledger [101]. It is intended to provoke new thinking of value exchange and lead
participants to consider what might happen if money is no longer the mainstay of value
exchange. The workshop has now been run many times for a broad range of audiences and
has been adapted to a variety of different contexts, including an online pack of workshop
materials and instructions, that can be picked up and used by others.

Attaching Strings to Distributed Systems (p. 15) invites the exploration of distributed net-
works through material entanglements. Decentralised Autonomous Organisations (DAOs) are
financial organisations composed entirely through code - typically smart contracts running
on a blockchain. As such, they offer interesting possibilities around transparency and fairness,
while raising challenges around relations, control and decision making [109, 110].

ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: December 2021.

PizzaBlock (p. 17) explores how a distributed ledger, maintained by a decentralized network
following a specific protocol, can support self-sovereign identities [119]. In most cases when
we make claims about our identity (e.g. our age, our address, a qualification) we rely upon
records generated and maintained by a third party, for example a government, bank or
technology company. Self sovereign identity systems aim to carry out the same job without
the need for a central authority. By using blockchain technology, this data can be made more
tamper-proof, and potentially allow the individual greater control and portability of their
data between multiple parties.

CariCrop (p. 19) was designed to critically understand how Distributed Ledger Technologies
(DLTs) could be designed to support socio-economic development in rural communities
particularly focusing on developing countries and the Caribbean region [115]. CariCrop
envisioned the use of Blockchain to ensure that transactions would continue to take place
within a trusted infrastructure while farmers waited for de facto payments to take place.
These four projects and workshop methods each tackle different aspects of blockchain technology
and aim to make such complex and technical features more accessible and understandable to a
range of stakeholders. The key aspects we have addressed here are concepts of peer to peer value
exchange, publicly accountable ledgers, distributed network systems and self-sovereign identity
management.

Blockchain and Beyond: Understanding Blockchains through Prototypes and Public Engagement

13

ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: December 2021.

In the Block Exchange workshop participants experiment with peer-to-peer trading using a Lego blockchain to record their trades in a gamelike activity. Participants start by trading ‘resource cards’ such as water, wheat and oil, recording their transactions by labelling Lego blocks with initialled stickers and fixing them on a Lego base plate representing the Blockchain ledger. Alongside the trading activity, a group of participants act as miners who compete to solve a mathematical puzzle. Once the puzzle is solved, the round of trading ends, and the Lego blocks are ‘sealed’ by fixing another Lego baseplate on top. This process represents the encryption of transactions and their permanent record in the Blockchain. The game is played over 3 rounds, moving from trading generic resources to speculating what other kinds of trades could be made.Defamiliarising the concept of money...... helps participants consider value exchange afreshPhysical objects to represent concepts help participants collaborate in building understandingBLOCK EXCHANGETangibilityAbstraction & FocusValue ExchangeLego stack representing the record of transactions on the Blockchain. Image credit: [Authors] ‘‘Block Exchange workshop in 2015 Collider. Image credit: Lindsay Perth’Using Lego and math problems to collaboratively simulate a blockchain and explore the possibilities of decentralised tradingBlock Exchange - DetailsAims and ContextIn the Block Exchange workshops, participants experiment with peer-to-peer trading using a Lego blockchain to record their trades in a game-like activity.This allows them to explore some of the basic principles of how Blockchain works, but more importantly to anticipate the social, technical and economic opportunities that Distributed Ledger Technologies, such as Blockchain, may offer. It is intended to provoke new thinking of value exchange and lead participants to consider what might happen if money is no longer the mainstay of value exchange.The workshop provides a light overview of the concepts as introduction to the technology and uses Lego bricks to represent intangible aspects of Blockchain mechanisms.ExperienceBlock Exchange is played over 3 rounds. Participants start by trading 'resource cards' such as water, wheat and oil, recording their transactions by labelleing Lego blocks with initialled stickers and fixing building them into a Blockchain. Alongside the trading, a group of participants act as miners who compete to solve a mathematical puzzle - once this is solved, the round of trading ends. In the second round, a scenario highlighting scarcity is introduced, leading to a change in the value of one or two of the resources. This introduces the concept of the market and how changing values affect desirability, moving away from the intrinsic value of material goods and gaining value becomes an end in itself. The third and final round has varied with different iterations of Block Exchange, but often ends with the resource cards being taken away and participants asked to trade anything they can think of, imaginary or real. This is intended to undermine the concept of the market that manifests in the second round and stimulate thinking on the nature of value in itself, leading participants to question what they really want and how they might find it through new models of peer-to-peer trade. Following this central activity with the Lego blocks, participants are asked to develop and produce novel products or services that use blockchain in new forms of value exchange. It culminates with a session on innovating and presenting new ideas and discussing potential opportunities.Lego stack representing the record of transactions on the BlockchainImage: Bettina Nissen14

Murray-Rust, et. al.

ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: December 2021.

Using Lego and math problems to collaboratively simulate a blockchain and explore the possibilities of decentralised tradingBlock Exchange - DetailsAims and ContextIn the Block Exchange workshops, participants experiment with peer-to-peer trading using a Lego blockchain to record their trades in a game-like activity.This allows them to explore some of the basic principles of how Blockchain works, but more importantly to anticipate the social, technical and economic opportunities that Distributed Ledger Technologies, such as Blockchain, may offer. It is intended to provoke new thinking of value exchange and lead participants to consider what might happen if money is no longer the mainstay of value exchange.The workshop provides a light overview of the concepts as introduction to the technology and uses Lego bricks to represent intangible aspects of Blockchain mechanisms.ExperienceBlock Exchange is played over 3 rounds. Participants start by trading 'resource cards' such as water, wheat and oil, recording their transactions by labelleing Lego blocks with initialled stickers and fixing building them into a Blockchain. Alongside the trading, a group of participants act as miners who compete to solve a mathematical puzzle - once this is solved, the round of trading ends. In the second round, a scenario highlighting scarcity is introduced, leading to a change in the value of one or two of the resources. This introduces the concept of the market and how changing values affect desirability, moving away from the intrinsic value of material goods and gaining value becomes an end in itself. The third and final round has varied with different iterations of Block Exchange, but often ends with the resource cards being taken away and participants asked to trade anything they can think of, imaginary or real. This is intended to undermine the concept of the market that manifests in the second round and stimulate thinking on the nature of value in itself, leading participants to question what they really want and how they might find it through new models of peer-to-peer trade. Following this central activity with the Lego blocks, participants are asked to develop and produce novel products or services that use blockchain in new forms of value exchange. It culminates with a session on innovating and presenting new ideas and discussing potential opportunities.Lego stack representing the record of transactions on the BlockchainImage: Bettina NissenAttaching Strings to Distributed Systems - DetailsAims and ContextDecentralised Autonomous Organisations (DAOs) are financial organisations composed entirely through code - typically smart contracts running on a blockchain. As such, they offer interesting possibilities around transparency and fairness, while raising challenges around control and decision making. This workshop activity explored the opportunities and challenges of distributed autonomous organisations (DAOs) through tangible materials. Participants collaboratively designed new DAOs by identifying key actors and their relationships. They used a range of materials to co-construct a tangible map of their new Distributed System, with strings and threads to represent the different connections. The central purpose of this process is not to create realistic maps of potential DAOs, but to structure and support critical debate within the group on issues of ownership, power, governance, agency, materiality and politics. ExperienceThe workshop begins with an initial discussion to understand current work relating to DAOs, in which potential application areas for DAOs are identified. Participants then form groups, select an application area, and work together to collaborative design a new DAO within that area. Participants are asked first to identify key actors in their DAO and choose materials and objects to represent them, and then to discuss the relationships between them and choose further materials to represent these connections, finally using these materials to construct a tangible map of the DAO. Throughout, the workshop focuses on three key topics to guide discussions:•Developing notions of what a DAOs is, through thinking about how to design them, in order to designing and defining DAOs;•Ownership, power and governance, in particular how existing structures may be challenged or reproduced;•Agency, materiality and politics - how are the different components of a DAO connected, and what power do they have?At the end of the design process, each group presents their concepts to the workshop as a whole, using their maps, and the workshop concludes with a discussion to draw together new thinking around implications and considerations for the design of DAOs.Attaching Strings to Distributed SystemsThis workshop activity explored the opportunities and challenges of distributed autonomous organisations (DAOs) through tangible materials. Participants collaboratively designed new DAOs by identifying key actors and their relationships. They used a range of materiasl to co-construct a tangible map of their new Distributed System, with strings and threads to represent the different connections. The central purpose of this process is not to create realistic maps of potential DAOs, but to structure and support critical debate within the group on issues of ownership, power, governance, agency, materiality and politics.TangibilityPeople and MachineVisibility & TransparencySupporting collaborative discussions and formulation of concepts through material mappings Unpicking the complex relations and the ecology of ‘things’ through material network metaphors Image credit: Yuxi LiuImage credit: Yuxi LiuUsing tangible materials to explore Decentralised Autonomous Organisations - physical networks to unpick complex abstract structuresImage: Yuxi LiuImage: Yuxi Liu16

Murray-Rust, et. al.

ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: December 2021.

Attaching Strings to Distributed Systems - DetailsAims and ContextDecentralised Autonomous Organisations (DAOs) are financial organisations composed entirely through code - typically smart contracts running on a blockchain. As such, they offer interesting possibilities around transparency and fairness, while raising challenges around control and decision making. This workshop activity explored the opportunities and challenges of distributed autonomous organisations (DAOs) through tangible materials. Participants collaboratively designed new DAOs by identifying key actors and their relationships. They used a range of materials to co-construct a tangible map of their new Distributed System, with strings and threads to represent the different connections. The central purpose of this process is not to create realistic maps of potential DAOs, but to structure and support critical debate within the group on issues of ownership, power, governance, agency, materiality and politics. ExperienceThe workshop begins with an initial discussion to understand current work relating to DAOs, in which potential application areas for DAOs are identified. Participants then form groups, select an application area, and work together to collaborative design a new DAO within that area. Participants are asked first to identify key actors in their DAO and choose materials and objects to represent them, and then to discuss the relationships between them and choose further materials to represent these connections, finally using these materials to construct a tangible map of the DAO. Throughout, the workshop focuses on three key topics to guide discussions:•Developing notions of what a DAOs is, through thinking about how to design them, in order to designing and defining DAOs;•Ownership, power and governance, in particular how existing structures may be challenged or reproduced;•Agency, materiality and politics - how are the different components of a DAO connected, and what power do they have?At the end of the design process, each group presents their concepts to the workshop as a whole, using their maps, and the workshop concludes with a discussion to draw together new thinking around implications and considerations for the design of DAOs.Using tangible materials to explore Decentralised Autonomous Organisations - physical networks to unpick complex abstract structuresImage: Yuxi LiuImage: Yuxi LiuPizzaBlock is a workshop and collaborative game to explore a specific set of blockchain applications related to decentralized and ‘self-sovereign’ identity management - a way to manage credentials and certifications without a central authority. Participants are given a social mission to ‘improve the local pizza scene by working as volunteers, training centres and social enterprises. Using a range of bespoke artefacts, they physically enact all of the steps required to record and verify important transactions with each other through a distributed ledger. By playing PizzaBlock we introduce between 10-20 participants to decentralised identity management systems and produce a number of physical artefacts which relate back to the core features of DLTs for identity management.Striking a balance between technical fidelity, and fun gameplayPIZZABLOCKRoleplay demonstrates the distributed labour required to run a DLTWallets, stickers, forms, stamps and washing lines become a way to explain key features of DLT.Roleplay & CollaborationFidelity of TechnologyTop: PizzaBlock paddles used to keep score during the game. Bottom: Wallets, forms, receipts and stickker sets from PizzaBlock . Image credit: Jonathan Rankin.‘Participants using the ‘public ledger’ in a Pizzablock game in a London bar. Image Credit: Andy Rethinking SocietyCreating great pizza as a way to understand self-soverign identity managementPizzaBlock - DetailsAims and ContextPizzaBlock is a workshop and collaborative game to explore a specific set of blockchain applications related to decentralized and ‘self-sovereign’ identity management.  In most cases when we make claims about our identity (e.g. our age, our address, a qualification) we rely upon records generated and maintained by a third party, for example a government, bank or technology company. Self sovereign identity systems aim to carry out the same job without the need for a central authority. Participants are given a social mission to ‘improve the local pizza scene by working as volunteers, training centres and social enterprises. Using a range of bespoke artefacts, they physically enact all of the steps required to record and verify important transactions with each other through a distributed ledger. By playing PizzaBlock we introduce between 10-20 participants to decentralised identity management systems and produce a number of physical artefacts which relate back to the core features of DLTs for identity management. ExperienceHere, Social Enterprises have a mission to improve Edinburgh’s lack of good pizza, but they must find Volunteers, who have the right skills for each task. Volunteers earn these skills from Training Centres. By playing PizzaBlock we introduce between 10-20 participants to decentralised identity management systems and produce a number of physical artefacts which relate back to the core features of applying DLTs to identity management. Examples of key features and physical artefacts include:1.Transactions between volunteers and organisations are recorded on a tamper-proof public ledger, represented by a washing line, so anyone can verify claims.2.When Volunteers learn a skill, or complete a task, they are awarded a set of uniquely numbered stickers, one which is published to the public ledger (washing line), to support claims they make about their identity.3.Volunteers maintain an individual ledger or ‘wallet’, which gives a CV that can be selectively shared showing skills learnt and tasks completed.4.Social Enterprises have a record of volunteer’s completed jobs and the skills each volunteer required for a specific task rather than a whole database. This minimises data retained about volunteers and promotes sharing.5.The game is ultimately governed by the players themselves as they take on more roles and are then able to ‘attest’, sign and prove the skills they have learned, and tasks that have been completed.18

Murray-Rust, et. al.

ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: December 2021.

Creating great pizza as a way to understand self-soverign identity managementPizzaBlock - DetailsAims and ContextPizzaBlock is a workshop and collaborative game to explore a specific set of blockchain applications related to decentralized and ‘self-sovereign’ identity management.  In most cases when we make claims about our identity (e.g. our age, our address, a qualification) we rely upon records generated and maintained by a third party, for example a government, bank or technology company. Self sovereign identity systems aim to carry out the same job without the need for a central authority. Participants are given a social mission to ‘improve the local pizza scene by working as volunteers, training centres and social enterprises. Using a range of bespoke artefacts, they physically enact all of the steps required to record and verify important transactions with each other through a distributed ledger. By playing PizzaBlock we introduce between 10-20 participants to decentralised identity management systems and produce a number of physical artefacts which relate back to the core features of DLTs for identity management. ExperienceHere, Social Enterprises have a mission to improve Edinburgh’s lack of good pizza, but they must find Volunteers, who have the right skills for each task. Volunteers earn these skills from Training Centres. By playing PizzaBlock we introduce between 10-20 participants to decentralised identity management systems and produce a number of physical artefacts which relate back to the core features of applying DLTs to identity management. Examples of key features and physical artefacts include:1.Transactions between volunteers and organisations are recorded on a tamper-proof public ledger, represented by a washing line, so anyone can verify claims.2.When Volunteers learn a skill, or complete a task, they are awarded a set of uniquely numbered stickers, one which is published to the public ledger (washing line), to support claims they make about their identity.3.Volunteers maintain an individual ledger or ‘wallet’, which gives a CV that can be selectively shared showing skills learnt and tasks completed.4.Social Enterprises have a record of volunteer’s completed jobs and the skills each volunteer required for a specific task rather than a whole database. This minimises data retained about volunteers and promotes sharing.5.The game is ultimately governed by the players themselves as they take on more roles and are then able to ‘attest’, sign and prove the skills they have learned, and tasks that have been completed.Speculative prototyping of decentralised currencies to engage stakeholders around values and equality20

Murray-Rust, et. al.

ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: December 2021.

Aims and ContextCariCrop is a platform that explores the possibility of using blockchain to mediate payments to farmers in the Caribbean. Delay of payments makes farmers highly vulnerable and unable to plan for future harvests. Among rural communities in the Caribbean and elsewhere, the trade of perishable goods can be surrounded by insecurity: the produce needs to reach the ﬁnal consumer before deteriorating, while payments are sometimes delayed until businesses have made some proﬁt, which poses challenges not only to farmers but also to businesses that trade with farmers, who start to operate through informal agreements of trust. CariCrop provides a bridge- currency that operates based on the agreement that a buyer will transfer money to farmers once they have made enough proﬁt to cover for the original purchase. While waiting for payment, farmers can use this currency at input and general stores, and these transactions are securely tracked on a Blockchain.ExperienceCariCrop envisioned the use of Blockchain to ensure that transactions would continue to take place within a trusted infrastructure while farmers waited for de facto payments to take place. The concept proposes a bridge- currency that operates based on agreements that a certain monetary transaction will occur in the near future. When a transaction is made:Payment is agreed by both parties, and the amount is released immediately in the bridge- currency. The farmer can  use this currency at input shops and general stores while payments are securely tracked on the Blockchain. When the buyer guarantees enough funds and is able to pay for the purchased produce, the de facto payment is released. A smart contract follows the digital chain of transactions and distributes the money to all individuals and establishments on record, guaranteeing the delivery of money to all new owners. Hence, the burden of holding the loan is distributed across many stakeholders, to whom the original buyer now owes diﬀerent amounts of money.CariCrop was developed into an app that was employed in several workshops with farmers and other stakeholders to discuss the impact of using such a technology.1.2.3.CariCrop - DetailsBlockchain and Beyond: Understanding Blockchains through Prototypes and Public Engagement

21

4.1 Common Themes
These workshops were conducted with a range of stakeholders, most often with individual or-
ganisations, who were keen to develop an understanding of blockchain technologies and their
potential within their organisation. The primary aims were to develop understanding and stimulate
and support ideation, to open out creative thinking with blockchain technology and its possible
applications for non-specialists. This often led to considering the deeper concepts that the emer-
gence of blockchain technology has provoked: around systems of governance and value exchange
that challenge the status quo; uprooting existing bastions of power and trust; and creating new
power dynamics through decentralising and democratising services currently monopolised by
small numbers of individual organisations.

In order to engage people with this complex mix of socio-technological concepts these workshops
have employed a number of strategies. Across the four workshops, we draw out some of the key
strategies, techniques and concerns here.

4.2 Roleplay and physical enactment
Role play is a key device to help participants understand systems by pretending to take part in them.
Simple interactions such as exchanging a resource card for Lego bricks, or recording a new pizza
making skill with a unique set of stickers and stamps provides a gateway to considering the possible
dynamics and outcomes of emerging practices around Blockchain systems. With PizzaBlock, a
starting point in a structured activity around making pizza helped participants understand how
trust can be derived through creating and maintaining a public ledger of transactions in the game.
The materials and the mapping process in Attaching Strings supported collaborative discussions
around distributed concepts as participants were able to externalise their ideas and share them with
other group members as they progressed through the mapping process. Making ideas physical, even
with simple materials, provided discussion points, and helped participants to formulate complex
concepts. With CariCrop, roleplaying around the app highlighted the habitual relationship among
stakeholders that could compromise the transformative power of the distributed ledger technologies.
Enacting the system helped not only to connect with the future possibilities, but also highlight the
frictions in getting there.

4.3 Tangibility
Tangibility and material properties are important to creating compelling experiences. Attaching
Strings focuses on relations between entities, and uses materials to represent different qualities
of relationship; Block Exchange uses the possibilities of familiar blocks to represent technical
operations; and Pizzablock uses collectible stamps and stickers to create a high fidelity replication
of a distributed ledger.

The use of simple physical metaphors was crucial – Lego could represent many of the operations
that make the blockchain work (mining, blocks, atomic transactions) while staying simple and
familiar. It was important to make sure that we had a small, coherent set of concepts to represent, to
avoid baffling participants, while also having enough richness to support further thinking. Working
from the physical objects, and starting with highly structured activities gave a space for participants
to engage: following the instructions, placing the blocks together, and they could then relate this to
terms they had previously encountered.

Some material qualities were important: with Attaching Strings, repositionable markers (e.g.
magnetic pins and post-its) allowed participants to reconfigure them as the map developed, while
yarn, edible shoelaces and wire mesh were useful to indicate different types of relationship such as
rigid, temporary, natural, transparent or grid-like; in Pizzablock, ink stamps represented immutable

ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: December 2021.

22

Murray-Rust, et. al.

signatures, with information hung on a washing line to make it visible to all players at once. This
is in contrast to the intensely fungible nature of Lego blocks, relating the material properties to the
aspects of the systems being explored.

4.4 Focus and Abstraction
Focusing the workshop on a single aspect of the technology in each case gave a solid grounding for
discussion, but still allowed wide ranging discussion of concepts and implications. BlockExchange
focused very specifically on the public and immutable nature of peer to peer transactions while
consciously abstracting other aspects of the technology. This allowed participant experiences and
discussions that are target on specific applications or implications of the technology rather than
attempting to explain the entirety of such complex systems. In Attaching Strings, the abstractions
provided in the workshops allowed participants – experts as well as novice – to ask many what-if
questions, and collaboratively unpack the concepts and meaning of DAOs. While CariCrop was
potentially less abstract than Attaching Strings, the focus on farmers trading information for
record-keeping and establishing trust helped participants to develop the implications that access to
this data must be carefully considered. In many of the works, metaphors played an important role.
In Attaching Strings, physicalising the idea of networks helped to unpick the complex relations and
the ecology of ‘things’ which DAOs might encompass. Through this process participants develop a
deeper understanding of DAO’s, their structures, uses, implications, and the flow of data and value
through these systems.

4.5 Technical Fidelity
A key axis through the workshops was the level of technical fidelity, balancing the complexity of
concepts with highlighting the key aspects of systems.

With BlockExchange, we set out to defamiliarise currency, revealing it as a socially-constructed
abstract system imposed on our innate understanding of value and the need to exchange things.
Inevitably, this involves a simplification of Blockchain technology, in favour of its operation as a
disintermediator. The workshop is not designed as a comprehensive or wholly accurate explanation,
but by encouraging free thinking and discussion, participants could speculate about what might
happen if we move beyond traditional currencies. However, more technically savvy participants
pointed out some of the shortfalls due to levels of abstraction. Pizzablock, in contrast, aimed to more
closely reflect details of how distributed ledgers worked, pushing at the level of fidelity possible
while keeping the game enjoyable to play. By doing this, we could then use each of the artefacts in
the game, (personal wallets, public ledgers, stickers) to explain and reflect upon specific aspects of
blockchain-based identity management. The intended audience and aim of the research or activity
are essential here in determining which approach to take and when to commit to high fidelity
translations of the technology or when to focus on simplicity of interaction.

4.6 Building Reflection
One of the motivations behind the workshops is to see how far participants can develop their
reflections on the technologies and implications, through their participation and discussion. With
PizzaBlock, for example, it became apparent to participants that new kinds of labour that would be
involved in decentralisation, as the whole network needs to work together to produce and maintain
a faithful record of events. Similarly, while fairness is accepted as the aspiration for the design of
some systems such as DAOs, it became clear to participants that fairness is contextual, and cannot
be integrated into systems without the active involvement of those affected. In general, making the
systems tangible and working through the activities helped participants frame crucial questions
such as: how do such immutable systems support human adaptation and creativity? Who has the

ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: December 2021.

Blockchain and Beyond: Understanding Blockchains through Prototypes and Public Engagement

23

power to resolve unforseen issues in the code? What rules need to be programmed and who gets to
make the decisions? And in a distributed system, where is legal responsibility held?

4.7 Summary and Directions
Whilst all four workshops focus on the production of new ideas resulting from both the challenge to
current thinking and possibilities presented by role-playing through new technological possibilities,
ultimately these workshops are more about opening up conversations in this new area, and can be
seen as a first step in considering concepts such as currency, value and governance afresh.

Overall, the workshops help clarify – but also move beyond – the challenge of defining things
in a fast moving area. This meant focusing not just on Blockchain, but considering the nature of
value and the mechanisms of its exchange, moving towards exploring the power relationships
within socio-technical systems and the governance and control of those systems. The workshops
create space to think through things in a highly collaborative, social situation, and this is often as
important as developing a technical understanding. Much of this work used features of blockchains
as a springboard to discuss wider concepts – a recurring theme throughout the portfolio.

Workshops provide spaces for detailed collaborative exploration of ideas. However, accessibility
is limited, they are time consuming to run, so there is a limit to how many people can be engaged. In
the next section, we look at moving from the workshop setting into more public spaces, with projects
based around provocative user experiences that can take place in shorter periods of time. This
allows publics to rapidly engage with the broader implications and potential effects of blockchain
technologies for their own and others’ lives.

5 ENABLING PUBLIC EXPERIENCES
There is a clear need to raise awareness and support grounded debate about the possibilities of
blockchains. A wide range of organisations, governments and companies are pursuing strategies
that include blockchains and decentralisation as part of their makeup [e.g. 65, 66, 103]. Methods that
can quickly reach a large number of people and raise an awareness about how such technologies
may impact society help to create a public that can engage more fully in decisions about their
futures. In particular, experiential methods have a long history of helping publics to engage with
on multiple levels of depth and complexity [85].

The projects in this section aim to provoke responses, encourage debate and challenge perceptions
through real-world, relatable experiences. In contrast to the more educational approaches above
(Section 4) that convey conceptual knowledge about new technologies, in this section we move these
interactive installations out of the academic and industrial context to engage new, non-specialist
public audiences from all walks of life, backgrounds and age groups. Public spaces and events,
such as festivals, exhibitions and conferences, offer a powerful platform to reach diverse audiences.
Complex technical systems such as blockchains are difficult to explain through language alone.
Hence, we designed playful and accessible experiences for several contexts, offering an interesting
and engaging entry point into the multi-layered technologies.

The pieces all start with relatable, even mundane, everyday life activities, such as getting married
or drinking coffee. These trigger interactions and incentives to provide a gateway for people
to imagine a potential future scenario or narrative in which blockchains could change current
exchange systems and societal norms. By crafting participatory experiences that introduce new
ideas in familiar contexts, publics were guided from an accessible performative interaction towards
a provocative or challenging narrative exploring the implications or applications of this technology.
We discuss four interactive installations, each exploring an area where blockchain technologies
may affect our future society, engaging non-expert public audiences with aspects of blockchain
technologies in playful, provocative and experiential ways.

ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: December 2021.

24

Murray-Rust, et. al.

• Happily Ever After (Bitcoin) critiques traditional social norms around marriage, contrast-
ing it with the possibilities of dynamic smart contracts. It was developed from an outcome
of the GeoCoin workshop (Page 42) called Handfastr9, that re-imagined marriage as a time-
limited agreement. It was based on a discussion around how smart contracts are different from
traditional legal contracts, in particular rapid deployments and programmatic conditions.
• After Money reveals current and potential future practices and perceptions of value ex-
change. Premiered at the Edinburgh Festival Fringe 2017, it is presented as an interactive
installation and associated mobile app that asks participants to trade various things for
sweeties – work, personal data or a variety of more or less fictional currencies.

• Seismic SeeSaw is an interactive poster that embodies escrow transactions, exploring the
possibility of ‘conditional charitable donations’10. The Seismic Seesaw was built as part of
the OxChain project [44], which sought to explore the use of blockchain technologies in the
charitable sector [28] and the possibilities of programmable money [45].

• KASH Cups11 work as an exposition of how design and technology can reconfigure the
representation and flow of value, investigating ideas of social currency and algorithmic rules.
The collection of NFC enabled coffee cups can be used in conferences or other settings to
investigate value exchanges around sociality, networking and coffee.

Although these projects seem to differ in their manifestations, from simple coffee cups to interactive
marriage installations, each experience aims to challenge a broader non-specialist public audience’s
perception and understanding of current value systems to playfully engage them in critically
thinking through the influences such new technologies could have on their own future lives.

9https://aftermoney.design/handfastr/
10https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WiDY0Uea0Qw
11https://www.designinformatics.org/research_output/kash-cups/

ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: December 2021.

The Happily Ever After (Bitcoin) project created a new kind of blockchain marriage. Particiants used smartphones to demonstrate close proximity and accept a marriage proposal, recorded on the blockchain. The wedding and subsequent divorce contracts were recorded for perpetuity in a ledger of encrypted marriages. This demonstrated how we could update traditional fixed legal contracts into mobile, digital arrangements.Happily Ever After (Bitcoin) was installed at the Furtherfield Gallery, London, and at a pavilion at the Edinburgh Arts Festival. HAPPILY EVER AFTER (BITCOIN)Visibility & TransparencyRethinking SocietyAbstraction and FocusPlayful engagement as easy access point into conversations about future of moneyDebating the meaning of a blockchain union and the future of temporary contracts with permanent recordsImage credit: Chris ScottImage credit: Chris ScottImage credit: [Authors]Have you ever wanted to join your partner in holy bitcoin matrimony? Or wanted to get married just for a vacation? This project uses blockchains to think about social structuresHappily Ever After (Bitcoin)  - DetailsAims and ContextThe Happily Ever After (Bitcoin) project create a new kind of blockchain marriage. This interactive installation allowed public visitors, blessed with a small amount of bitcoin, to merge their digital wallet with co-visitors or strangers for the short duration of their nuptials. It was based on a discussion around how smart contracts are different from traditional legal contracts, in particular rapid deployments and programmatic conditions. We aimed to highlight how we negotiate roles and values through looking at new forms of short-term partnerships and how we could update traditionally fixed legal contracts into mobile, contemporary, digital agreements for a range of applications and communities.It engages a very general public around questions such as: how can we negotiate new forms of contracts and transactions? What new forms of contract will we be able to design in the future? Who will benefit from such contracts and how will these affect the relationships and partnerships we build?ExperienceThe installation was based around an app, and the Ethereum blockchain. Any two people could come to the stand, and be quickly guided through making an accepting a marriage proposal. When a proposal was accepted, the romantic agreement was sealed in the blockchain, and the newly-weds gained access to a shared bitcoin wallet that could only be used for a limited time, and only when they were in the same location. Two printers in the centre of the installation would print a receipt or marriage certificate, one copy the newly-weds to take home, and another as continuously printed ledger of all marriages, displayed in a clear container for all to see.This demonstrated how we could update traditional fixed legal contracts into mobile, digital arrangements.Happily Ever After (Bitcoin) was installed at the Furtherfield Gallery, London, and at a pavilion in the Edinburgh Arts Festival.Marriage  wallet interfaceImage: Chris Scott26

Murray-Rust, et. al.

ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: December 2021.

Have you ever wanted to join your partner in holy bitcoin matrimony? Or wanted to get married just for a vacation? This project uses blockchains to think about social structuresHappily Ever After (Bitcoin)  - DetailsAims and ContextThe Happily Ever After (Bitcoin) project create a new kind of blockchain marriage. This interactive installation allowed public visitors, blessed with a small amount of bitcoin, to merge their digital wallet with co-visitors or strangers for the short duration of their nuptials. It was based on a discussion around how smart contracts are different from traditional legal contracts, in particular rapid deployments and programmatic conditions. We aimed to highlight how we negotiate roles and values through looking at new forms of short-term partnerships and how we could update traditionally fixed legal contracts into mobile, contemporary, digital agreements for a range of applications and communities.It engages a very general public around questions such as: how can we negotiate new forms of contracts and transactions? What new forms of contract will we be able to design in the future? Who will benefit from such contracts and how will these affect the relationships and partnerships we build?ExperienceThe installation was based around an app, and the Ethereum blockchain. Any two people could come to the stand, and be quickly guided through making an accepting a marriage proposal. When a proposal was accepted, the romantic agreement was sealed in the blockchain, and the newly-weds gained access to a shared bitcoin wallet that could only be used for a limited time, and only when they were in the same location. Two printers in the centre of the installation would print a receipt or marriage certificate, one copy the newly-weds to take home, and another as continuously printed ledger of all marriages, displayed in a clear container for all to see.This demonstrated how we could update traditional fixed legal contracts into mobile, digital arrangements.Happily Ever After (Bitcoin) was installed at the Furtherfield Gallery, London, and at a pavilion in the Edinburgh Arts Festival.Marriage  wallet interfaceImage: Chris ScottAfter MoneyThe AfterMoney installation and app at the Edinburgh Festival 2017 asked participants to choose what to trade for sweeties: They could use money, whether traditional, cryptocurrency or ficticious; They could sweep the floor for a set amount of time or do some exercise. Or, they could share personal data, such as a selfie, a facebook friend, their phone’s GPS data, their fingerprint or a tweet. This installation aimed to critically highlight and explore existing and future labour and value exchange practices.  Visibility & TransparencyRethinking SocietyAbstraction and FocusVisitor realisations of the value of data and what is considered to be ‘free’Playful access point for critical unpicking of daily value exchange habitsOpen-ended freedom for exploration of daily practiceImage credit: Yuxi LiuImage credit: Yuxi LiuImage credit: Chris ScottWould you swap your friends for a sweetie? AfterMoney lets you make trades - swapping sweeping for cryptocurrency, or personal data for imaginary tokens - to explore the future of transactionsAfter Money - DetailsAims and ContextThe AfterMoney installation asked participants to choose what to trade for sweeties - they could use money, whether traditional, cryptocurrency or fictitious; they could sweep the floor for a set amount of time, or dos some exercise; alternatively, they could share personal data such as selfies, Facebook friends, their fingerprints or GPS data.  AfterMoney highlights the tacit practices of how we trade, barter and share value across multiple forms of currency. The installation and mobile app reveals and crystallises some of the increasingly common non-monetary exchanges of value in a growing digital economy. This allows the public to question what constitutes currency today and in the future, and how this will be affected by increasingly precarious employment situations due to automation and a growing gig-economy. This app and installation aimed to challenge the perception that we currently only pay with one type of currency and bring awareness to the fact that we are constantly exchanging different types of value amongst ourselves and with digital businesses and services. ExperienceThe AfterMoney app appeared like a regular barcode scanning app to check and show the price of a given commercial product -- sweets, in this case -- which visitors could then purchase. The user was asked to select a payment method: money, time or data. When using money, choices included current fiat currencies, cryptocurrencies  or imaginary ‘in-game’ currency similar to those in online games. When paying with time, the user was asked to sweep the floor for a specific amount of time using a sensor-enabled broom, but other options also included helping a neighbour, giving someone a lift or exercising for 15 minutes. Data payments included taking a selfie -- without any indication of how it would be used -- or sharing daily step data, a facebook friend, their phone’s GPS data, their fingerprint or a tweet. Although none of the pictures were saved for ethical reasons, the app still gave the impression of storing real user data.Young members of the public exploring alternate currencies. Image: Chris ScottSwapping selfies for sweetiesImage: Yuxi Liu28

Murray-Rust, et. al.

ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: December 2021.

Would you swap your friends for a sweetie? AfterMoney lets you make trades - swapping sweeping for cryptocurrency, or personal data for imaginary tokens - to explore the future of transactionsAfter Money - DetailsAims and ContextThe AfterMoney installation asked participants to choose what to trade for sweeties - they could use money, whether traditional, cryptocurrency or fictitious; they could sweep the floor for a set amount of time, or dos some exercise; alternatively, they could share personal data such as selfies, Facebook friends, their fingerprints or GPS data.  AfterMoney highlights the tacit practices of how we trade, barter and share value across multiple forms of currency. The installation and mobile app reveals and crystallises some of the increasingly common non-monetary exchanges of value in a growing digital economy. This allows the public to question what constitutes currency today and in the future, and how this will be affected by increasingly precarious employment situations due to automation and a growing gig-economy. This app and installation aimed to challenge the perception that we currently only pay with one type of currency and bring awareness to the fact that we are constantly exchanging different types of value amongst ourselves and with digital businesses and services. ExperienceThe AfterMoney app appeared like a regular barcode scanning app to check and show the price of a given commercial product -- sweets, in this case -- which visitors could then purchase. The user was asked to select a payment method: money, time or data. When using money, choices included current fiat currencies, cryptocurrencies  or imaginary ‘in-game’ currency similar to those in online games. When paying with time, the user was asked to sweep the floor for a specific amount of time using a sensor-enabled broom, but other options also included helping a neighbour, giving someone a lift or exercising for 15 minutes. Data payments included taking a selfie -- without any indication of how it would be used -- or sharing daily step data, a facebook friend, their phone’s GPS data, their fingerprint or a tweet. Although none of the pictures were saved for ethical reasons, the app still gave the impression of storing real user data.Young members of the public exploring alternate currencies. Image: Chris ScottSwapping selfies for sweetiesImage: Yuxi LiuBlockchain and Beyond: Understanding Blockchains through Prototypes and Public Engagement

29

ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: December 2021.

The Seismic Seesaw is a simple interactive mechanical poster that invites users to conditionally donate £1 to an Emergency Response Fund. Once donated, the donation is visibly fixed in place; neither the donor nor the charity can reach it. If there is an earthquake of any magnitude in the next 5 minutes anywhere in the world, according to live US Geological survey data, the money is given to the Response fund. Otherwise, the money is returned to the donor who can take it back or use it to make a traditional donation.Communicating complex concepts in a walk-up interaction.SEISMIC  SEESAWTangibilityVisibility Demonstrating escrow literally as a mechanism.Simple design offers a template for new financial interactionsChallenging to explore longer-term use.Moments & SeamsThe Seismic Seesaw: an interactive mechanical poster behind perspex, .  Image Credit: Jonathan Rankin.A member of the public waiting for the Seismic Seesaw in a street exhibition during the Edinburgh Fringe Festival .  Image Credit: Jonathan Rankin.Give where it's most needed - Seismic Seesaw allows "programmable donations" that are only activated when earthquakes happenSeismic Seesaw  - DetailsAims and ContextSeismic Seesaw explores the possibility of making donations that are activated under certain conditions. In this case, giving to an Emergency Response Fund, with the donation only being taken if there is an earthquake in the given time. If there is no earthquake, the money is returned to the donor. Escrows, also known as trust funds, are a form of intermediary, where assets are held upon some conditions, before being transferred to another party.Through working with Oxfam, our project partners, we saw blockchain based escrows as a powerful tool to track the status of various donations, while also raising the prospect of attaching conditions to when and how a donation is given.This artefact provides a tangible, transparent embodiment of financial escrow.  While escrows are traditionally managed through legal contracts and financial institutions, smart contracts offer the means to rapidly create transparent and automatic forms of digital escrows,  radically remediating relationships between donors, charities and beneficiaries. ExperienceThe Seismic Seesaw is a simple interactive mechanical poster that invites users to conditionally donate £1 to an Emergency Response Fund. Once donated, the donation is visibly fixed in place; neither the donor nor the charity can reach it. If there is an earthquake of any magnitude in the next 5 minutes anywhere in the world, according to live US Geological survey data, the money is given to the Response fund. Otherwise, the money is returned to the donor who can take it back or use it to make a traditional donation30

Murray-Rust, et. al.

ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: December 2021.

Give where it's most needed - Seismic Seesaw allows "programmable donations" that are only activated when earthquakes happenSeismic Seesaw  - DetailsAims and ContextSeismic Seesaw explores the possibility of making donations that are activated under certain conditions. In this case, giving to an Emergency Response Fund, with the donation only being taken if there is an earthquake in the given time. If there is no earthquake, the money is returned to the donor. Escrows, also known as trust funds, are a form of intermediary, where assets are held upon some conditions, before being transferred to another party.Through working with Oxfam, our project partners, we saw blockchain based escrows as a powerful tool to track the status of various donations, while also raising the prospect of attaching conditions to when and how a donation is given.This artefact provides a tangible, transparent embodiment of financial escrow.  While escrows are traditionally managed through legal contracts and financial institutions, smart contracts offer the means to rapidly create transparent and automatic forms of digital escrows,  radically remediating relationships between donors, charities and beneficiaries. ExperienceThe Seismic Seesaw is a simple interactive mechanical poster that invites users to conditionally donate £1 to an Emergency Response Fund. Once donated, the donation is visibly fixed in place; neither the donor nor the charity can reach it. If there is an earthquake of any magnitude in the next 5 minutes anywhere in the world, according to live US Geological survey data, the money is given to the Response fund. Otherwise, the money is returned to the donor who can take it back or use it to make a traditional donationBlockchain and Beyond: Understanding Blockchains through Prototypes and Public Engagement

31

ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: December 2021.

KASH Cups have embedded NFC chips that connect to with ‘smart saucers’ that can sense the presence and identity of one or two cups. Connected to its owner, each cup has a digital wallet that is credited whenever a smart saucer detects its owner socialising with a new person. This credit can then be used by placing the cup on the barista’s smart saucer, which checks the cup’s balance and debits the cup in return for coffee. Originally deployed during Dutch Design Week 2016, the cups have been used to explore different kinds of value exchange at international conferences and events.Open objects allow free exploration of rulesUsing an alternate system of value supported new interactionHolding significant material value transcending its digital economic valueKASH CupsPeople & machinesImage credit: Jane MacDonaldContextualisationValue ExchangeImage credit: Jane MacDonaldPay for your coffee by meeting new people! Exploring transactions with NFC coffee cups, seeing how design and technology reconfigure value exchangesKASH Cups - DetailsAims and ContextKASH Cups asks what happens when objects have their own digital identity, and can participate in value exchanges.  Each cup has a digital wallet which is credited whenever a participant socialises with a new person, demonstrated by putting their cups next to each other on a smart saucer to earn credits for coffee. This intervention into the social conventions of a conference complicates the value constellation surrounding free coffee, by adding more values to the traditional service - because the software requires two cups to be placed on the saucer before adding credit, participants are forced to collaborate with another delegate in order to receive coffee. The system is is build on simple technology  - the saucers simply report presence and identity, and display colours to indicate outcomes. This means that it can can be programmed in various ways to open up the space for developing rules around exchange: for example, being able to steal credits when talking to people, or sharing personal information.As a whole, the project looks at how interaction design can engender different value interactions by intervening into familiar social practices.ExperienceKASH Cups have embedded NFC chips that connect to with ‘smart saucers’ that can sense the presence and identity of one or two cups. Connected to its owner, each cup has a digital wallet that is credited whenever a smart saucer detects its owner socialising with a new person. This credit can then be used by placing the cup on the barista’s smart saucer, which checks the cup’s balance and debits the cup in return for coffee. Originally deployed during Dutch Design Week 2016, the cups have been used to explore different kinds of value exchange at international conferences and events.KASH Cup charging user credit. Image: Jane MacDonaldParticipants selecting KASH Cups at a workshop. Image: Jane MacDonald32

Murray-Rust, et. al.

ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: December 2021.

Pay for your coffee by meeting new people! Exploring transactions with NFC coffee cups, seeing how design and technology reconfigure value exchangesKASH Cups - DetailsAims and ContextKASH Cups asks what happens when objects have their own digital identity, and can participate in value exchanges.  Each cup has a digital wallet which is credited whenever a participant socialises with a new person, demonstrated by putting their cups next to each other on a smart saucer to earn credits for coffee. This intervention into the social conventions of a conference complicates the value constellation surrounding free coffee, by adding more values to the traditional service - because the software requires two cups to be placed on the saucer before adding credit, participants are forced to collaborate with another delegate in order to receive coffee. The system is is build on simple technology  - the saucers simply report presence and identity, and display colours to indicate outcomes. This means that it can can be programmed in various ways to open up the space for developing rules around exchange: for example, being able to steal credits when talking to people, or sharing personal information.As a whole, the project looks at how interaction design can engender different value interactions by intervening into familiar social practices.ExperienceKASH Cups have embedded NFC chips that connect to with ‘smart saucers’ that can sense the presence and identity of one or two cups. Connected to its owner, each cup has a digital wallet that is credited whenever a smart saucer detects its owner socialising with a new person. This credit can then be used by placing the cup on the barista’s smart saucer, which checks the cup’s balance and debits the cup in return for coffee. Originally deployed during Dutch Design Week 2016, the cups have been used to explore different kinds of value exchange at international conferences and events.KASH Cup charging user credit. Image: Jane MacDonaldParticipants selecting KASH Cups at a workshop. Image: Jane MacDonaldBlockchain and Beyond: Understanding Blockchains through Prototypes and Public Engagement

33

5.1 Common Themes
The previous section focused on workshop environments where people dedicate time to under-
standing, learning and ideating with blockchain and distributed ledger technologies. In contrast, the
projects presented in this section are focused on rapid engagement with a general public through
interactions and provocations. There is move towards crystallising interactions around a single key
concept that can be communicated extremely directoy, but which is nonetheless a seed for more
wide ranging discussion and reflection.

As such, the projects had varying degrees of fidelity to actual blockchain technology, which
is a key axis for designing engaging activities (Section 4.5). In several cases, the presence of a
blockchain was not necessary for the interaction e.g. Happily Ever After (Bitcoin) used Ethereum
wallets until currency fluctuations made this untenable. However it was the experience itself that
was crucial, distilling complex concepts into rapid interactions with a simple pivotal transaction
that moves from current practices to novel forms of currency and contracts.

5.2 Reaching wider audiences
All of these projects seek to engage the public on varying levels, using design strategies to bring
them into technological discussions. The KASH Cup system establishes a material, encrypted,
algorithmic exchange and social interactions, through which participants find value manifest
in many forms. Familiar with the incentive of getting good coffee, and content with talking to
people, the system was both highly engaging and simple in its interaction. The Seismic See-Saw
communicates the complexities of programmable donations in a single-walk up interaction. This
presented temporal challenges – we required a condition to be set for the donation which was
reasonably frequent and predictable, and could occur within a few minutes. After Money showed
that playful interaction offered visitors the opportunity to understand convenience, privacy and
current data sharing behaviour in the context of economic practices. With Happily Ever After
(Bitcoin), as well as groups of friends and couples, a father joined his children aged 3 to 12 in Bitcoin
matrimony, while explaining the technological developments that will directly impact their future
interactions with money. In all cases, the use of objects that embody concepts helped a wide range
of people engage with complex technical issues.

5.3 Strategies for engaging publics around blockchain
Across this set of projects, several strategies proved powerful for public engagement and offer
designers tools to connect people with complex concepts:

• Playfulness and defamiliariastion allowed an easy access point into conversations for
non-tech audiences to discuss the future of money, banking, currency. In Happily Ever
After (Bitcoin) participants explored the conceptual space of marriage, rethinking traditional
institutions, and marrying the Means of Production or a Table being wed to a Chair. Other
participants married their friends or family members while debating the meaning of a
blockchain union and the future of banking and currency. The Seismic Seesaw took the
familiar experience of putting a coin into the charity box, and then defamiliarised this with
an interaction that makes that donation conditional on world events.

• Whether donating to charity or drinking coffee, seamfulness [21] created moments when
someone has to decide what currency to pay with, or learn a particular ruleset, exposing
the hidden architectures. It is this moment that creates space for thought and allows a move
from everyday practices and their structures into speculative realms.

• Controlling visibility and transparency foregrounded crucial parts of the interactions. The
value of the Seismic Seesaw is to be able to see the moving parts, and understand, experience

ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: December 2021.

34

Murray-Rust, et. al.

and trust the transaction taking place, even if the background mechanisms are elided for the
sake of simplicity. In KASH Cups, users could only see their credit when they checked their
status, which sets up different interactions compared to systems where value is individually
or publicly visible. Happily Ever After (Bitcoin) used a transparent box to collect the marriage
receipts, making it highly visible that the contract was being recorded, and it could be seen
but could not be tampered with.

• The previous section surfaced the theme of tangibility (4.3) as a way to engage with abstract
ideas. This re-occurs here, for instance Happily Ever After (Bitcoin) used tangible artefacts to
highlight the idea of temporary contracts that had a permanent record - a key principle of
smart contract systems. Beyond this, it became clear that the materiality of the components
affected the experience, and the physical embodiment of digital objects has an effect on
the way that they are used. As weighty, uniquely designed artefacts, the KASH Cups held
significant material value for some people, who took them away to use after the event despite
the fact they wouldn’t work as digital objects outside the interaction. The receipt-like nature
of the printouts from Happily Ever After (Bitcoin) connect to transaction records, while the
playful embodiment of ideas in Happily Ever After supported an exploration of themes that
were otherwise difficult to engage with.

5.4 Quantifying behaviours
In some of these installations, aspects of the interactions were recorded for both practical and con-
ceptual reasons which allowed another level of analysis and exploration of the publics’ behaviours.
The main aim of Happily Ever After (Bitcoin) was to record participants short-term contracts
which were printed and publicly shown as ‘proof of the marriage’. These recordings of names in
each union also offered additional insights into playful behaviour of participants not just joining
other humans in a union, but exploring marriages to animals or things. While playful, some more
conceptual marriages to things or abstract concepts such as ‘The Means of Production’ or ‘Time’
offered us an oversight of how the general public engaged with concepts of marriage and union
when it was removed from the traditional models. Similarly, for the KASH cups interactions to
function the backend database was collecting the numbers of cups which were used together. In
the conference setting where each conference attendee had their specific numbered cup, patterns
emerged such as people who were very busy meeting other conference attendees, or other who
were just using their cups as icebreakers. While this was in no real terms an analysis of people’s
intentions or actions, the quantitative nature of an individual cup’s ‘transactions’ could however
be seen as indicative measure of networking behaviour – or caffeine addiction.

Due to its nature, AfterMoney supported a more detailed quantitative analysis than other projects
as its specific intention was to record people’s transactions and their attitudes towards data, time
and money as different forms of currency. In this case the transactional data allowed us to analyse
and indicate that an equal split of participants preferred sweeping for their sweets or taking selfies.
Participants were less likely to pay with a fingerprint and least likely to give up a facebook friend or
their phone’s browser history. A questionnaire included in the experience highlighted that 81% of
participants considered the sweet to be either free (38%) or cheaper (43%) than in regular monetary
exchanges. While treating data collected from public engagement activities such as these with care
or additional robust analysis processes, the potential for not only engaging the general public in
socio-economic thinking but gaining more detailed quantitative insights into their practices and
behaviours is a powerful one. Most of the projects here were not intentionally aimed at quantifying
behaviour or even collecting particular data. However it is notable that by creating these public
experiences it allowed us to get some initial insights into how such installations could potentially

ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: December 2021.

Blockchain and Beyond: Understanding Blockchains through Prototypes and Public Engagement

35

offer additional quantitative basis for analysis of behaviour, use or perceptions in general or specific
future socio-economic contexts.

5.5 New forms of value
The development of blockchains centred around exchanging currency – purely financial value
transactions, despite their encoding in a system that brought together a collection of values around
autonomy, decentralisation and secrecy. However, the projects here used the exchange of financial
value as a gateway to asking what other kinds of value could be traded. AfterMoney and Kash cups
looked at shifting value practices and explored the kinds of value that could be exchanged, wether
data, labour or sociality. Seismic SeeSaw looked at alternative structures for monetary exchange,
giving rise to a new sense of what the value proposition around donating could be. In this case,
looking at the values that were exchanged and constructed rather than the technical operations of
the blockchains underlying the exchanges provided a clear entry point for publics.

Using alternative systems of value, supported new interactions. By nudging people to interact
with a stranger at the conference to gain credit, delegates enjoyed the opportunity that the cups
gave them to break the ice, and had a starting point for the conversation. Whilst the perceived
‘labour’ of the participants to earn credit for the coffee was the act of talking to a stranger at the
conference, in most cases this ‘friction’ had a significant social value in itself - that of meeting new
people. The playful uncovering of current non-monetary value exchanges (such as sharing data) in
an experiential manner, offered audiences a playful way to understanding non-traditional forms of
value. It helped non-specialist publics to act as engaged economic agents - making choices about
what values to exchange and how to balance them. Overall, by holding up a collection of different
value systems, people were able to make their own decisions and start to navigate what would
otherwise be an abstract space by making situated value judgements.

New forms of value gave rise to new forms of contracts, both social and legal: Happily Ever
After (Bitcoin) was a way to re-examine traditional marriage contracts as dynamic and precisely
specified; Seismic SeeSaw offered new contracts for giving that connected donations to evidence of
real world events – namely an earthquake. This possibility of using new technology as a platform
to rethink society is extremely powerful - it engages critically with the promises of the technology,
subverting the hype in service of creative thinking.

5.6 Summary and Directions
These projects used a range of design strategies, in particular seamfulness, playfulness, defamiliari-
astion and control of the visibility of information to create public engagement around blockchains.
This leads to a focus on what it is that blockchains enable, rather than how they do it.

This also illuminates some of the difficulties of working with blockchains, in particular questions
of inflexibility, time and how to mediate between the blockchain and the physical world. The
escrows in Seismic Seesaw are valuable as a transparent enforcement mechanism, but the ‘smart’
contract remains entirely dependent upon the actors and data to which it is connected, which
cannot be simply programmed out. While some envision vast DAOs, governed by a web of smart
contracts, in practice their pre-determined and inflexible nature requires contracts to be simple
and predictable. These projects raise questions about how to see smart contracts as part of a much
larger socio-technical ecosystem, from the source of the data used to validate a contract, to the
wider infrastructure that acts on behalf of the contract.

As well as exploring possibilities and limitations of blockchains, these projects opened up
research directions that give rise to other projects in this portfolio. The openness of KASH Cups
allowed an experimentation with alternative rulesets around the same physical objects. Similarly,
Seismic Seesaw raised the question of how the concept of ‘escrow’, once internalised, could be

ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: December 2021.

36

Murray-Rust, et. al.

applied to other situations. Together, as part of engaging with possible futures, this leads to the
question of who gets to write the rules which underpins the projects in Section 6. There was also
an engagement with the idea of autonomous objects, with marriages being formed with a family’s
dog or tree w6xcv7tf of the autonomous Terra0 forest[127]. This leads to an exploration of the
idea that non-human actors can own wallets and start joining (socio)economic unions for mutual
benefits, laying the groundwork for Section 7 to interrogate relations between humans and more
or less autonomous objects.

6 MAKING THE RULES
The previous section on creating experiences described what happens when people are confronted
by rules made by others. However, distributed ledgers are often touted as being able to open up the
process of making rules, so communities can decide how they want to operate, leading to questions
of what happens when people start to make the rules themselves. Where Bitcoin formalises a
system of IOUs, other systems such as Lazooz 12 use a tokenized ledger to support social ridesharing,
Mycelia 13 uses blockchains to manage music rights and so on. As with other aspects of distributed
cryptographic systems, this builds on a rich history of work around how to structure, support and
constrain interaction. Here, we start to see institutions emerge - collections of protocols that shape
interactions by specifying what actions can be taken and what the implications are [106, 126].

A common thread through this work is the idea that the rules are decentralised. We are interested
in approaches that investigate what happens when participants can create their own protocols and
contracts. Writing any kind of contract or interaction protocol is a challenge, from conceptualising
an idea of what should happen, through encoding this formally and then creating the community
or social structures that mean people actually engage. If ‘anyone’ can write smart contracts, how
can we ensure firstly that an inclusive group of people can participate in the writing, and secondly
that an even wider group can understand what a contract means, have a sense of the consequences,
and be able to make informed decisions about their participation.

This ties in with our attempts to foster a nuanced engagement with this technology, in a way
that is connected and integrated with actual life. Participation and creativity are powerful drivers
for deep engagement: when people start trying to design systems, it is a chance to think through in
detail how the networks would operate. In particular, prototyping a system raises questions about
how that system would interact with the rest of one’s life, so frictions and problems become more
apparent.

This section looks at three projects that take a participatory approach to the design of smart
contracts, guiding participants to conceptualise and prototype ideas with varying degrees of fidelity:
• The If This Then What? (IFTTW) cards are based on a common design methods of ideation
cards [64, 74] and are used to imagine and explore the possibilities of smart contracts. Inspired
by graphical programming systems such as If This Then That 14 and Scratch [99], they express
a simplified logic for smart contracts, using modular cards to build If...Then... or When...
Then... statements in the context of collaborative ideation workshops.

• Building on the concept of programmable and conditional donations that emerged during the
OxChain project15, Programmable Donations used engagements with a partner NGO [44]
and emerging blockchain applications in the wider humanitarian sector [28] to identify and
explore particular possibilities for programmable donations through interviews, workshops

12http://lazooz.com decentralised transport platform, now defunct.
13http://myceliaformusic.org/
14https://ifttt.com/
15https://oxchain.uk/

ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: December 2021.

Blockchain and Beyond: Understanding Blockchains through Prototypes and Public Engagement

37

and enactments. Outcomes from this led to a real-world trial with Oxfam Australia of a ‘Smart
Donations’ Ethereum App [141].

• GeoCoin [108] sets up an open bodystorming experience that leads into the ideation and
prototyping of geolocated currencies. Participants use a smartphone app to explore smart
contract architectures connected to their own city surroundings, and design their own new
forms of value exchanges. GeoCoin was used in a series of workshops [24, 108] leading to a
various concept designs, including Happily Ever After (Bitcoin) (Page 25).

All of these projects grapple with ways that the complex and often bewildering potentialities
of new technology and abstract ideas can be used as a public playground, allowing those with no
experience to rapidly understand the system and imagine new rules through participation.

ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: December 2021.

The If This Then What? cards scaffold development of smart contracts - distributed programs that run on blockchains. They wrap up key concepts around how to structure conditions and effects in a set of physical cards and a workshop structure. Participants with little or no background in programming or blockchains can ideate possible smart contracts and design blockchain applications and create visual prototypes of their ideas.Simple representations of logic are open to different levels of abstractionCreates a basis for discussing logic structures for interactionsIF THIS THEN WHAT?Moments & SeamsAbstraction & FocusPeople & MachinesFirst iteration of IFTTW cards. Image credit: [Authors]Second iteration of IFTTW cards. Image credit: [Authors]Design cards for smart contracts - developing ways for non-programmers to describe the logic of distributed systemsIf This Then What? - DetailsAims and ContextThe If This Then What? cards scaffold development of smart contracts - distributed programs that run on blockchains. They wrap up key concepts around how to structure conditions and effects in a set of physical cards and a workshop structure. Participants with little or no background in programming or blockchains can ideate possible smart contracts and design blockchain applications and create visual prototypes of their ideas.Smart contracts embody a lot of technical complexity - distributed, trustable computing with message passing, cryptographic functions and models of execution cost. However, many potential applications can be broken down into connections between certain conditions that may be met, and the actions that result. By creating a simplified, tangible version containing these conditions, actions and connectives, the IFTTW cards provide a framework for thinking and collaborating. They provided a structure for contract design, raising the level of detail enough that participants have a closer relationship to what would be needed in a real application. This meant that participants got a high level introduction to programming concepts, saw the challenges of grounding formal systems in the real world, and worked with the idea of ‘self executing’ code, that can run independently of the originator.ExperienceThe IFTTW ideation cards  are used within collaborative workshops to imagine and explore the possibilities of smart contracts. They provide a framework for thinking both by providing a structure for contract design and by raising the level of detail enough that designers have a closer relationship to what would be needed in a real application. Participants were asked to speculate on potential smart contracts, and then try to create their structures using the cardsThe cards went through a series of iterations from abstract pictorial forms to more specific descriptive cards, in response to what happened in the workshops. In addition to logical connectives, the first iteration of the cards included pictorial concepts grouped into high level categories: People, Things, Places, Nature, Resources and Currency, selected to cover key design concerns. Later iterations included more directed categories -- specific locations, modes of transport -- and more logical connectives such as ‘is’, ‘is not’, ‘check’, ‘record’, to enable participants to explore the potential mechanism more fully.Blockchain and Beyond: Understanding Blockchains through Prototypes and Public Engagement

39

ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: December 2021.

Design cards for smart contracts - developing ways for non-programmers to describe the logic of distributed systemsIf This Then What? - DetailsAims and ContextThe If This Then What? cards scaffold development of smart contracts - distributed programs that run on blockchains. They wrap up key concepts around how to structure conditions and effects in a set of physical cards and a workshop structure. Participants with little or no background in programming or blockchains can ideate possible smart contracts and design blockchain applications and create visual prototypes of their ideas.Smart contracts embody a lot of technical complexity - distributed, trustable computing with message passing, cryptographic functions and models of execution cost. However, many potential applications can be broken down into connections between certain conditions that may be met, and the actions that result. By creating a simplified, tangible version containing these conditions, actions and connectives, the IFTTW cards provide a framework for thinking and collaborating. They provided a structure for contract design, raising the level of detail enough that participants have a closer relationship to what would be needed in a real application. This meant that participants got a high level introduction to programming concepts, saw the challenges of grounding formal systems in the real world, and worked with the idea of ‘self executing’ code, that can run independently of the originator.ExperienceThe IFTTW ideation cards  are used within collaborative workshops to imagine and explore the possibilities of smart contracts. They provide a framework for thinking both by providing a structure for contract design and by raising the level of detail enough that designers have a closer relationship to what would be needed in a real application. Participants were asked to speculate on potential smart contracts, and then try to create their structures using the cardsThe cards went through a series of iterations from abstract pictorial forms to more specific descriptive cards, in response to what happened in the workshops. In addition to logical connectives, the first iteration of the cards included pictorial concepts grouped into high level categories: People, Things, Places, Nature, Resources and Currency, selected to cover key design concerns. Later iterations included more directed categories -- specific locations, modes of transport -- and more logical connectives such as ‘is’, ‘is not’, ‘check’, ‘record’, to enable participants to explore the potential mechanism more fully.Programmable Donations explores what it means to allow people to make and enforce very specific rules and conditions about how and when they give to charity. A series of cards and glossy leaflets invited participants to envisage their own contracts for various causes: an amount they would give, conditions they would set, and data they would trustto ‘validate’ those conditions. For example, participants imagined donating to water charities each time they went swimming, or donating to slow climate change if average temperatures in a location were rising. Through these simple speculative activities, participants could envisage wholly new relationships and values to be expressed in the way they would give to charity.... but conditions quickly become complicated.PROGRAMMABLEDONATIONSAbstraction & FocusRethinking SocietyImposing conditionality challenges the very nature of givingContracts enforce past promises, but also require flexibilityCards and leaflets support ideation...Close up of one participants programmable donation for a refugee project.  Image Credit: AuthorsTop: Original workshop materials. Bottom: Glossy leaflets inviting speculation about Programmable Donations as a service. Image Credit: [Authors].Using familiar objects to explore the possibilities of smart contracts for donating to charity in response to world events.Programmable Donations - DetailsAims and ContextProgrammable Donations explores what it means to allow people to make and enforce very specific rules and conditions about how and when they give to charity. In this project, we co-speculated with a range of charitable donors the kind of rules and data they would seek to underpin ‘programmable’ donations - ways to give charitably that are dependent on events in the world. We set out to investigate new interactions and relationships with charitable giving that could be facilitated through blockchains or Decentralised Ledger Technologies (DLTs). The specific functioning of each donation could be governed by a smart contract, meaning its operation would be pre-determined, automated, independent, and reliant upon specific data inputs. For example, a donor could set up a contract, where they would donate £1 to the Royal National Lifeboat Institution each time a lifeboat was launched on a rescue mission from a nearby lifeboat station.ExperienceThrough a series of cards and glossy leaflets resonant of traditional charity appeals and services, we co-speculated with a range of charitable donors the kind of rules and data they would seek to underpin programmable donations. The cards and leaflets invited participants to envisage their own contracts, and articulate for various causes: an amount they would give, conditions they would set, and data they would trust to ‘validate’ those conditions. For example, participants imagined donating to water charities each time they went swimming, or donating to slow climate change if average temperatures in a location were rising. Through these simple speculative activities, participants could envisage wholly new relationships and values to be expressed in the way they would give to charity.Blockchain and Beyond: Understanding Blockchains through Prototypes and Public Engagement

41

ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: December 2021.

Using familiar objects to explore the possibilities of smart contracts for donating to charity in response to world events.Programmable Donations - DetailsAims and ContextProgrammable Donations explores what it means to allow people to make and enforce very specific rules and conditions about how and when they give to charity. In this project, we co-speculated with a range of charitable donors the kind of rules and data they would seek to underpin ‘programmable’ donations - ways to give charitably that are dependent on events in the world. We set out to investigate new interactions and relationships with charitable giving that could be facilitated through blockchains or Decentralised Ledger Technologies (DLTs). The specific functioning of each donation could be governed by a smart contract, meaning its operation would be pre-determined, automated, independent, and reliant upon specific data inputs. For example, a donor could set up a contract, where they would donate £1 to the Royal National Lifeboat Institution each time a lifeboat was launched on a rescue mission from a nearby lifeboat station.ExperienceThrough a series of cards and glossy leaflets resonant of traditional charity appeals and services, we co-speculated with a range of charitable donors the kind of rules and data they would seek to underpin programmable donations. The cards and leaflets invited participants to envisage their own contracts, and articulate for various causes: an amount they would give, conditions they would set, and data they would trust to ‘validate’ those conditions. For example, participants imagined donating to water charities each time they went swimming, or donating to slow climate change if average temperatures in a location were rising. Through these simple speculative activities, participants could envisage wholly new relationships and values to be expressed in the way they would give to charity.GeoCoin - DetailsAims and ContextGeoCoin is a location-based platform for experiencing and ideating with smart contracts. In collaborative workshops with GeoCoin, participants engaged with location-based smart contracts, using the platform to explore digital ‘debit’ and ‘credit’ zones in the city. Smart contracts are attached to GPS locations, and participants interact with them using a smartphone app that shows the contracts on a map as they move through space. The app maintains a digital currency wallet for each person, so that participants can see changes to their balance in real-time. Debit and Credit zones can be easily administered through a web interface allowing workshop organisers and designers to quickly set up new experiences alongside participants.GeoCoin demonstrates how an experiential prototype can support understanding of the complexities behind new digital infrastructures and facilitate participant engagement in ideation and design processes. It is a location-based platform for embodied learning and speculative ideating with smart contracts in the city.ExperienceIn practice, this means that participants use an app on their phone to use a geolocated currency, that allows for structures like ‘debit’ zones that charge the participants while they are there, or ‘credit’ zones where the participant is paid for the presence. Participants were guided through:•an initial understanding aspects of cryptocurrencies, blockchains and smart contracts using the BlockExchange workshop •a pre-made experience using GeoCoin, where they explored a map configured with a collection of credit and debit zones, that were open to interpretation—tolls on bridges, promotions from supermarkets, privatisation of public space and so on•ideation around potential applications for geolocated smart contracts.•collaboration  to realise prototypes of their ideas.These collaborations created systems such as a participatory budgeting application that allowed anyone to geolocate a project that would then be funded based on how much time people spent in that space, and a short-term wedding app that formed the basis of the Happily Ever After (Bitcoin) project.GeoCoin is a location-based platform for experiencing and ideating with smart contractsIn collaborative workshops with GeoCoin, participants engaged with location-based smart contracts, using the platform to explore digital ‘debit’ and ‘credit’ zones in the city. Smart contracts are attached to GPS locations, and participants interact with them using a smartphone app that shows the contracts on a map as they move through space. The app maintains a digital currency wallet for each person, so that participants can see changes to their balance in real-time. Debit and Credit zones can be easily administered through a web interface allowing workshop organisers and designers to quickly set up new experiences alongside participants.GEOCOINContextualisationRethinking SocietyProviding an experiential smart contract infrastructure for ideationGetting across key concepts without much explanationLeaving open spaces for participants to speculate about what the rules really mean and the circumstances where they would be employedImage credit: [Authors]Image credit: [Authors]People & machinesProgrammable location based currency - design your own geospatial financial interactionsGeoCoin Interface in actionDeveloping possibilities around GeoCoin interface in a workshopBlockchain and Beyond: Understanding Blockchains through Prototypes and Public Engagement

43

ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: December 2021.

GeoCoin - DetailsAims and ContextGeoCoin is a location-based platform for experiencing and ideating with smart contracts. In collaborative workshops with GeoCoin, participants engaged with location-based smart contracts, using the platform to explore digital ‘debit’ and ‘credit’ zones in the city. Smart contracts are attached to GPS locations, and participants interact with them using a smartphone app that shows the contracts on a map as they move through space. The app maintains a digital currency wallet for each person, so that participants can see changes to their balance in real-time. Debit and Credit zones can be easily administered through a web interface allowing workshop organisers and designers to quickly set up new experiences alongside participants.GeoCoin demonstrates how an experiential prototype can support understanding of the complexities behind new digital infrastructures and facilitate participant engagement in ideation and design processes. It is a location-based platform for embodied learning and speculative ideating with smart contracts in the city.ExperienceIn practice, this means that participants use an app on their phone to use a geolocated currency, that allows for structures like ‘debit’ zones that charge the participants while they are there, or ‘credit’ zones where the participant is paid for the presence. Participants were guided through:•an initial understanding aspects of cryptocurrencies, blockchains and smart contracts using the BlockExchange workshop •a pre-made experience using GeoCoin, where they explored a map configured with a collection of credit and debit zones, that were open to interpretation—tolls on bridges, promotions from supermarkets, privatisation of public space and so on•ideation around potential applications for geolocated smart contracts.•collaboration  to realise prototypes of their ideas.These collaborations created systems such as a participatory budgeting application that allowed anyone to geolocate a project that would then be funded based on how much time people spent in that space, and a short-term wedding app that formed the basis of the Happily Ever After (Bitcoin) project.Programmable location based currency - design your own geospatial financial interactionsGeoCoin Interface in actionDeveloping possibilities around GeoCoin interface in a workshop44

Murray-Rust, et. al.

6.1 Common Themes
The work in this section is focusing on making new rules for decentralised systems. Beyond
previous workshops and public experiences, these projects support people to think through the real
implications of how lives might be governed by computational systems, and gets into questions
about who can make and change the rules. This computational governance is primarily explored
here through the lens of smart contracts. Like much blockchain infrastructure, they have subtle
and interesting properties, for example: they are immutable, which means they can be a foundation
for shared trust, but at the same time cannot adapt dynamically to changing circumstances; they
are strongly internally consistent, but have trouble connecting to the outside world; they expose
the difficulty of encoding even relatively simple sounding ideas, both technically and conceptually.
The projects here explore the notion of technical fidelity, looking for the right levels of abstraction
to explore concepts of interest.

6.2 Levels of Detail
In each of these projects, finding the right levels of constraints and detail was important; while
abstract images helped to open spaces for thinking, in the end it was more valuable to give concrete
use cases or application contexts to help ground the work in real concerns and plausible applications.
The initial IFTTW cards were somewhat ambiguous, in order to give participants a range of possible
interpretations and meanings to foster creativity [61]. However, this created a lack of focus, and
a distance from the technological possibilities. In response, a second iteration of the cards were
developed for a more specific application area – transport – with more directed categories and
topics: specific locations, modes of transport, transactions, behaviours and incentives. The workshop
structure was refined: rather than using the cards for conceptual ideation, they were used to refine
an idea through visual prototyping.

The use of application domains flowed through the other projects, as a way to engage with
abstract ideas. Programmable Donations was squarely focused on humanitarian aid. By situating
GeoCoin strongly in terms of the city, audiences ranging from arts organisations, artists, design-
ers to academics, industry and blockchain experts could collaborate, using the smart contract
infrastructure as a place to connect their ideas.

Across the projects, finding a core set of simple rules that mediated between technological
possibilities and participant understanding was a key enabler for creative thinking. The initial
GeoCoin experience only had three types of action - zones that continually credited or debited user
accounts, and ‘single use’ zones that would make a one-off payment to the first person to enter.
While this is simplistic on the surface i) it gets across key concepts without too much explanation
and ii) it leaves open the space for participants to speculate about what the rules really mean and
the circumstances where they would be employed.

6.3 Relating imaginaries to computational thinking
Each project manifested computational logics in a manner designed to be accessible. However,
there are various levels and types of understanding that participants bring to bear, resulting in
different relations to the underlying logics.

Even with the refined IFTTW cards, there was a spectrum between thinking of the cards as an
imperative program unfolding over time and seeing them more as a box and arrow diagram. While
using the cards helped the participants to both develop computational thinking and get a sense
of the complexities and difficulties involved in creating their potential systems, participants paid
varying levels of attention to the order and structure of the cards, the plausibility of the connections
to the real world and the operation of the system as a whole. Ideas for a conditional or data-driven

ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: December 2021.

Blockchain and Beyond: Understanding Blockchains through Prototypes and Public Engagement

45

donation were easy to envisage with Programmable Donations, but much harder to calibrate, as
participants navigated the complexities of formalising a contract to account for the uncertainties
of dat to day life. GeoCoin took a slightly different approach, in passing on the creation of an
underlying logic of location-based currencies to a practiced developer. This meant that participants
could interact with a realised system of abstract rules without a specific purposes. The playful
investigation of these computational rules then facilitated discussion and imagination about how
and when such rules could be meaningfully used – while also not hiding problematic spaces or
applications.

6.4 Infrastructural Experiences and Social Implications
These projects work with varying levels of experience. GeoCoin in particular borrowed elements of
design methods such as probes and experience prototyping, as it offers an open-ended experience
for participants. While experience prototypes [14] and probes [72] are often focused on gaining
understanding of participants’ perceptions, GeoCoin attempts to provide an informed experience
of smart contracts, inviting participants to intervene in or extend the system. The aim was to
mediate learning so that participants would feel empowered to apply smart contracts creatively.
Overall GeoCoin presents an experiential platform as open, ‘unfinished software’ [108], supporting
understanding and facilitating engagement in ideation and design with smart contracts and location-
based infrastructures for value exchange.

Using real infrastructure was surprisingly powerful, and the increased fidelity (Section 4.5)
showed up potential issues quickly. In several workshops, the participants with newer phones were
able to report their locations more rapidly and accurately, which meant they could claim locations
first. This helped participants to think about what happens when systems function imperfectly
and the inequalities that are likely to occur. While Programmable Donations did not build out
the infrastructure, the materiality of the presentation was key to developing a sense of how the
experience would play out in the world.

It is seemingly attractive to plan out how and when to give to a charity, but when can we really
comfortably make such firm commitments in advance and what are the implications of doing
so? Programmable Donations showed how imposing conditionality and rules challenged the very
nature of giving. Once conditional, donations began to resemble forms of insurance or tax, and
suggested new obligations that might be placed on a donor or charity. Sometimes these obligations
were an effort to attain accountability, for one’s own behaviour, or a charity’s actions, but on other
occasions, they occluded some of the original intentions of supporting a particular cause. Working
through the IFTTW cards to set conditions and possibilities let participants ask what-if questions
based on other possible logics, and develop a picture of how people might be affected by rules of
a given or new the systems. During GeoCoin workshops many participants experienced loss of
agency due to internet connectivity issues or other technological limitations in real time. This was
a powerful experience raising discussions around the correlation between access to technology
and access to resources, associated privilege and social implications of designed rules, who sets
and controls them.

6.5 Temporality and Trust
Working through these experiences helped participants to identify key issues around system
deployments. Temporality came to the fore, as participants in GeoCoin contrasted immediate
experience and feedback with the delay in blocks being verified on the chain, illuminating particular
technical infrastructural details. Programmable Donations quickly raised the questions of what kind
of limits should be placed on donations, and how far into the future could participants attempt to set
rules or conditions? Between this and developing self-executing code with IFTTW, we highlighted

ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: December 2021.

46

Murray-Rust, et. al.

the tradeoff that the very power of smart contracts is their ability to enforce firm commitments
over prolonged periods – a kind of ‘slow technology’ [67] - but as times or circumstances change, a
rigid one and people may need more flexibility.

Similarly, the importance of trust emerged through the projects, with leaky infrastructures in
GeoCoin asking how well we really know where people are located. The validity of Programmable
Donations entirely hinges on receiving a trusted data input to notify the escrow if the conditions
have been met. For many donors, it was challenging to specify who exactly should be trusted to
arbitrate rules and conditions and how.

6.6 Summary and Directions
Through the experience, appropriation, design, modification, and testing of participants’ own
concepts, they were able to learn and express new understandings about their environments, social
contexts, and economic and political concerns in relation to smart contracts. These exercises led to
the design of diverse distributed-ledger applications, for time-limited financial unions, participatory
budgeting, and humanitarian aid.

The work is not completely tied to smart contracts, but as with many other projects, provides
a springboard for thinking critically about power, control and governance. There was a range of
granularity in the responses of the participants, from very high level conceptual works independent
of the characteristics of the contracts, through to work that meticulously built up different parts of
an infrastructure with a solid grounding in technology.

There are tensions between trustworthiness and flexibility, between freedom of engagement
and the constraints of shared rules. Working through potential sets of rules has proven to be a
useful way to get across the difficulty of designing good systems, and the extent to which rules
encode values. A key notion here is uncomfort - when positive pictures of systems operation meet
the difficulties of translating the messiness of the real world into code, it challenges challenges
assumptions and expectations, and forces participants to reconsider these technologies in practice.
In Section 7, we present several projects that look at objects embodying these rules – physicalising
aspects of formal or imagined systems, and giving some power to act on their own as well as
highlighting the infrastructures governing them.

7 THINKING THROUGH AUTONOMOUS THINGS
Many of the pieces so far have been concerned with how humans experience or understand
blockchain technologies in different ways, whether their basic functions, their social possibilities
or the collaborative development of rules and activities for their use. A theme that has been arising
from several of these projects is the relationships between humans, the objects around them, and
the wider infrastructure in which these systems are embedded. In particular, distributed ledgers,
through their codified rules and machine friendly APIs offer the possibility for non-human things
to have greater agency in the world, in particular by having their own wallets and being able to
enact financial decisions. This means that a coffee machine can manage its own money[118, 136],
or a bicycle can hire itself out with no intermediaries.

In this section, we discuss four projects, with similar underlying themes: what happens when
objects can act for themselves, and how do we go about designing these systems? The development
of autonomous things is not in itself a new idea. From cybernetics through to driverless cars we
have seen increasing physical agency given to things, while work in autonomous agents has looked
at how software can make decisions and interact with others.

The following projects explore different aspects in this space:

ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: December 2021.

• GeoPact looks at creating location aware objects that participate in smart contracts; it
occupies a different level of technological readiness from some of the other systems. The
project was directly motivated by work on GeoCoin [108], and intended to address some of
the questions and possibilities raised in that project, by asking what might be needed for a
mature system.

• Bitbarista is a Bitcoin enabled coffee machine that explores cryptocurrency, autonomous
objects and supply chains; it has its own Bitcoin wallet, and negotiates with its users about
the supply chains of the coffee they consume. It is robust enough that it has been used in
two studies [118, 136] that explored interactions with the machine and perceptions of new
models of buying coffee in lab conditions and when deployed in a working office for a period
of several months.

• GigBliss [116] is a series of speculative hairdryers designed to discuss the impact of algo-
rithmic transactions in a context of distributed energy provision where devices can mediate
new forms of value and profit. The hairdryers can trade energy with a smart grid, and use
smart contracts (e.g. on an Ethereum blockchain) to define who has control over the energy
supply and who will profit from its trading.

• Extending the research initiated with the GigBliss hair dryers, the Karma Kettles [117]
mimic a scenario of energy storage, consumption and sharing in Distributed Energy systems.
Through improvisation with actors and roleplay, the Kettles explore how to design complex
infrastructures through deliberation and engagement.

Joined together, the design and development of these autonomous things intends to assess and
discuss how decentralised systems and autonomous behaviours can affect wider infrastructures – of
trade, transport and energy – to move beyond the human-centered focus of blockchain technologies
raising questions of control and agency for potential future value exchange between things (and
people).

48

Murray-Rust, et. al.

ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: December 2021.

GeoPact is an infrastructure for creating location-based smart contracts. It uses a LoRa long range IoT network to provide verifiable location data, which is then stored securely and anonymously in a blockchain. Geolocated smart contracts use location and proximity to control the operation of smart objects such as lock boxes that open up when the right people are in the right place at the right time.Initially focussed on promoting low-carbon travel, GeoPact has enabled publics and transport experts to engage with smart contract enabled delivery scenarios.Concretising smart contracts in tightly curated scenarios helps demystify conceptsGEOPACTRoleplay & CollaborationFidelity of TechnologyCreating high fidelity system supports scrutiny of real issues for applicationContextualisationGeoPact in exhibition at the Tate Exchange. Image credit: Dan WeillGeoPact lock-box. Image credit: Joe Revans and [AUTHORS]Exploring agreements between objects, people and space, using smart contracts and IoTGeoPact - DetailsAims and ContextGeoPact is an infrastructure for creating location-based smart contracts. It uses a LoRa long range IoT network to provide verifiable location data, which is then stored securely and anonymously in a blockchain. Geolocated smart contracts use location and proximity to control the operation of smart objects such as lock boxes that open up when the right people are in the right place at the right time. Initially focussed on promoting low-carbon travel, GeoPact has enabled publics and transport experts to engage with smart contract enabled delivery scenarios.The development of GeoPact arose from two threads. Firstly a combination of ethnographic and social science work to make sense of what is desired and needed from this kind of system - how do people relate to space, and what transactions would they like to enact? Secondly, an attempt to put as much as possible of the logic onto the blockchain, so that interactions are fully defined using smart contracts, allowing a grounded design exploration of the technology.. ExperienceThe system has been manifested as a series of demos around the UK in 2018 and 2019 that use smart ‘lock boxes’ as actors within smart contracts. Each box knows where it is, and whether other infrastructure is nearby, and can choose when it is open or closed. They can give participants instructions through a screen, and ask people to ‘verify’ that certain things have happened. Based on this, we created a set of scenarios in which we could create simple contracts for people to execute – for example, a supply chain, that required moving various parts from place to place in order to construct an electric car. However, we could attach different security considerations to each stage - does a human need to present to verify? Can the courier open the box they are carrying? Does the courier get to see what is inside the box? All of this activity was displayed on a large screen, indicating the current state of the contract and the next actions alongside a blockchain backed log of all of the events that had taken place. Based on this, the general public in open settings could participate in an experience lasting between one and five minutes, that conveyed the central aspects of smart contracts and blockchains, through tangible interactions.Blockchain and Beyond: Understanding Blockchains through Prototypes and Public Engagement

49

ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: December 2021.

Exploring agreements between objects, people and space, using smart contracts and IoTGeoPact - DetailsAims and ContextGeoPact is an infrastructure for creating location-based smart contracts. It uses a LoRa long range IoT network to provide verifiable location data, which is then stored securely and anonymously in a blockchain. Geolocated smart contracts use location and proximity to control the operation of smart objects such as lock boxes that open up when the right people are in the right place at the right time. Initially focussed on promoting low-carbon travel, GeoPact has enabled publics and transport experts to engage with smart contract enabled delivery scenarios.The development of GeoPact arose from two threads. Firstly a combination of ethnographic and social science work to make sense of what is desired and needed from this kind of system - how do people relate to space, and what transactions would they like to enact? Secondly, an attempt to put as much as possible of the logic onto the blockchain, so that interactions are fully defined using smart contracts, allowing a grounded design exploration of the technology.. ExperienceThe system has been manifested as a series of demos around the UK in 2018 and 2019 that use smart ‘lock boxes’ as actors within smart contracts. Each box knows where it is, and whether other infrastructure is nearby, and can choose when it is open or closed. They can give participants instructions through a screen, and ask people to ‘verify’ that certain things have happened. Based on this, we created a set of scenarios in which we could create simple contracts for people to execute – for example, a supply chain, that required moving various parts from place to place in order to construct an electric car. However, we could attach different security considerations to each stage - does a human need to present to verify? Can the courier open the box they are carrying? Does the courier get to see what is inside the box? All of this activity was displayed on a large screen, indicating the current state of the contract and the next actions alongside a blockchain backed log of all of the events that had taken place. Based on this, the general public in open settings could participate in an experience lasting between one and five minutes, that conveyed the central aspects of smart contracts and blockchains, through tangible interactions.50

Murray-Rust, et. al.

ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: December 2021.

Bitbarista - DetailsAims and ContextBitbarista is a Bitcoin enabled coffee machine that connects consumers to producers through the autonomous machine and embodies the idea of radical disintermediation within the supply chain. Giving the machine a wallet allows for a greater sense of its autonomy, which provides a moment for coffee drinkers to notice the way that coffee comes to them. The sourcing of coffee beans through the voting process encourages customers to consider the origins of their coffee at the time of purchase, offering greater transparency of the value flow through supply chains and the impact of consumer practices on broader societal issues. Involving customers in the ongoing maintenance of the machine in return for micropayments is intended to stimulate thinking around the effects of Bitbarista’s role in the flow of value at the consumer end of the supply chain, the potential impact of this on their individual experiences and activities, their immediate community, and that of wider society.ExperienceThe Bitbarista is used in studies of how people relate to financial technologies - it takes the place of an existing coffee machine, living with the users for a period of time.The Bitbarista has its own Bitcoin wallet, that enables it to trade directly with customers, via their wallets on smart phones. It is presented as an autonomous object that buys its own coffee, but allows customers to vote for potential future coffee supplies. It displays data relating to the production of coffee to customers, such as labour conditions, geopolitics, quality and price, and purportedly analyses this to present choices of potential sources. The customer is able to vote for the future supply by selecting from these choices, but is offered the coffee voted for by previous customers. The price of the coffee served depends on the choice of future supply. The Bitbarista also offers Bitcoin micro- payments, or free coffee, to customers in exchange for maintenance tasks, such as refilling the hopper with coffee beans, filling its water tank, and cleaning out used coffee grounds. Bitbarista has sensors that detects when these tasks are required, and is fitted with a small camera to scan QR codes from customers bitcoin wallets, in order to make these pay-outs.The Bitbarista is a Bitcoin enabled coffee machine that explores cryptocurrency, autonomous objects and supply chains. It has its own Bitcoin wallet, that enables it to trade directly with customers, via their wallets on smart phones. It is presented as an autonomous object that buys its own coffee, but allows customers to vote for which supplier they would prefer, based on factors such as labour conditions, geopolitics and price. The Bitbarista also offers Bitcoin micro-payments to customers in exchange for maintenance tasks, such as refilling the hopper with coffee beans, filling its water tank, and cleaning out used coffee grounds.considering effects of disruptive technologies on value flows The Bitbarista, a hacked Delonghi home coffee machine. Image credit: Mark Kobine‘The Bitbarista in use at a co-working studio in [a UK CITY]Image credit: [Authors]]micropayments for tasks can undermine altruistic behaviours clash between ethical thinking and serving immediate needs  BITBARISTAMoments & SeamsPeople & MachinesRethinking SocietyUsing autonomous objects to understand relations between everyday habits and global supply chains, with a Bitcoin powered coffee machine.The Bitbarista in use in a co-working studio in Edinburgh.Image: Ella TallynBlockchain and Beyond: Understanding Blockchains through Prototypes and Public Engagement

51

ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: December 2021.

Bitbarista - DetailsAims and ContextBitbarista is a Bitcoin enabled coffee machine that connects consumers to producers through the autonomous machine and embodies the idea of radical disintermediation within the supply chain. Giving the machine a wallet allows for a greater sense of its autonomy, which provides a moment for coffee drinkers to notice the way that coffee comes to them. The sourcing of coffee beans through the voting process encourages customers to consider the origins of their coffee at the time of purchase, offering greater transparency of the value flow through supply chains and the impact of consumer practices on broader societal issues. Involving customers in the ongoing maintenance of the machine in return for micropayments is intended to stimulate thinking around the effects of Bitbarista’s role in the flow of value at the consumer end of the supply chain, the potential impact of this on their individual experiences and activities, their immediate community, and that of wider society.ExperienceThe Bitbarista is used in studies of how people relate to financial technologies - it takes the place of an existing coffee machine, living with the users for a period of time.The Bitbarista has its own Bitcoin wallet, that enables it to trade directly with customers, via their wallets on smart phones. It is presented as an autonomous object that buys its own coffee, but allows customers to vote for potential future coffee supplies. It displays data relating to the production of coffee to customers, such as labour conditions, geopolitics, quality and price, and purportedly analyses this to present choices of potential sources. The customer is able to vote for the future supply by selecting from these choices, but is offered the coffee voted for by previous customers. The price of the coffee served depends on the choice of future supply. The Bitbarista also offers Bitcoin micro- payments, or free coffee, to customers in exchange for maintenance tasks, such as refilling the hopper with coffee beans, filling its water tank, and cleaning out used coffee grounds. Bitbarista has sensors that detects when these tasks are required, and is fitted with a small camera to scan QR codes from customers bitcoin wallets, in order to make these pay-outs.Using autonomous objects to understand relations between everyday habits and global supply chains, with a Bitcoin powered coffee machine.The Bitbarista in use in a co-working studio in Edinburgh.Image: Ella Tallyn52

Murray-Rust, et. al.

ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: December 2021.

The GigBliss hairdryers represent three scenarios that illustrate different levels of control in distributed energy systems: in the first, people own the device and have full control over it, even being able to use it to buy and sell energy according to market fluctuations. In the second scenario, the device belongs to the GigBliss corporation, which would lend or give it away to people, while using it in the background to trade energy, sometimes limiting access to users when the market is high. In the third scenario, a third party (e.g. council) has ownership over the devices distributed to an area, also agreeing on a standard fee for its users, who would potentially have even less control over the times in which it could be used. highlighting competing values and interests in distributed energy systems engaging the public with complex technology development and relevant policiesAllowing participants to define what would work for them in distributed systemsGIGBLISSGigBliss prototypes in exhibitionWorkshop participants: using video and prototypes to support discussion of values behind energy systemsActors improvising sketches based on the GigBliss prototypesMoments and SeamsRethinking SocietyRoleplay & CollaborationExploring energy futures with speculative hairdryers connected to smart grids. GigBliss uses roleplay with actors to paint rich pictures of technologyGigBliss - DetailsAims and ContextThe GigBliss hairdryers represent three scenarios that illustrate different levels of control in distributed energy systems. The hairdryers aimed to provide a tangible context to engage the general public and policy makers in discussions around algorithmic transactions that can mediate energy usage including issues of ownership, control, transparency, and predictive decision-making. The three models have decreasing levels of control to indicate that the design, not only of the device but the service and infrastructure behind it, could exacerbate existing power asymmetries between individual users, corporate bodies and governments. This raises questions regarding who defines algorithms that support autonomy, for whose benefit, what is the integrity of the data and what would be the social impact of different approaches. These systems also complicate relationships between stakeholders, disrupting traditional notions of value, control and ownership.ExperienceThe three concepts were developed into functioning prototypes, which worked based on simulated data stored in each device. In the workshops, professional actors were invited to perform critical sketches, also interacting with participants to mimic and discuss issues around control and autonomy in distributed energy systems . The the versions are:•GigBliss Plus combinines  energy storage with the ability to track energy prices, letting owners control transactions to buy energy when prices are low and sell when they are high•GigBliss Balance is based on a sustainable business model that allows consumers to host the hairdryer and return it to the GigBliss factory when the device is no longer needed. When inactive, it trades energy on the blockchain, but at peak times, the device might be busy trading energy and users might need to wait a few minutes to dry the hair. •GigBliss Auto allows third parties to subsidise costs of both devices and electricity supply for a particular group or set of hairdryers. The device would be made available for free via local councils, community services and charities. With no buttons on its panel and no user control, the hairdryer can only be used at very specific times, potentially defining people’s actions rather than vice versa.Blockchain and Beyond: Understanding Blockchains through Prototypes and Public Engagement

53

ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: December 2021.

Exploring energy futures with speculative hairdryers connected to smart grids. GigBliss uses roleplay with actors to paint rich pictures of technologyGigBliss - DetailsAims and ContextThe GigBliss hairdryers represent three scenarios that illustrate different levels of control in distributed energy systems. The hairdryers aimed to provide a tangible context to engage the general public and policy makers in discussions around algorithmic transactions that can mediate energy usage including issues of ownership, control, transparency, and predictive decision-making. The three models have decreasing levels of control to indicate that the design, not only of the device but the service and infrastructure behind it, could exacerbate existing power asymmetries between individual users, corporate bodies and governments. This raises questions regarding who defines algorithms that support autonomy, for whose benefit, what is the integrity of the data and what would be the social impact of different approaches. These systems also complicate relationships between stakeholders, disrupting traditional notions of value, control and ownership.ExperienceThe three concepts were developed into functioning prototypes, which worked based on simulated data stored in each device. In the workshops, professional actors were invited to perform critical sketches, also interacting with participants to mimic and discuss issues around control and autonomy in distributed energy systems . The the versions are:•GigBliss Plus combinines  energy storage with the ability to track energy prices, letting owners control transactions to buy energy when prices are low and sell when they are high•GigBliss Balance is based on a sustainable business model that allows consumers to host the hairdryer and return it to the GigBliss factory when the device is no longer needed. When inactive, it trades energy on the blockchain, but at peak times, the device might be busy trading energy and users might need to wait a few minutes to dry the hair. •GigBliss Auto allows third parties to subsidise costs of both devices and electricity supply for a particular group or set of hairdryers. The device would be made available for free via local councils, community services and charities. With no buttons on its panel and no user control, the hairdryer can only be used at very specific times, potentially defining people’s actions rather than vice versa.54

Murray-Rust, et. al.

ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: December 2021.

The Karma Kettles allow users to choose if they would like to take full control of energy transactions or delegate it to a predefined algorithm. If they decide to take control they can store the energy (pull), make it available to others (push), or use it to boil water. Associated with each action is a number of Karma points that corresponds to the impact of their actions on the health of the grid. They were designed to inspire discussion on levels of agency, and on how energy systems could be designed to promote more participatory approaches in distributed energy systems.Helping participants consider energy requirements of a wider community. Supporting new  forms of value, beyond financial rewardsAvoiding a top-down design of energy systemsKARMA KETTLESValue ExchangeTangibilityRethinking SocietyUser study: envisioning energy usage in a neighbourhoodKarma kettles exibited at TATE ExchangeExplore the future of energy transactions though a connected kettle. Will you pull energy or push it out for others to use? and will this improve your karma?Karma Kettles - DetailsAims and ContextThe Karma Kettles allow users to choose if they would like to take full control of energy transactions or delegate it to a predefined algorithm. If they decide to take control they can store the energy (pull), make it available to others (push), or use it to boil water. While distributed energy resources are often designed to operate without human intervention, the kettles allow people to experience a scenario where they have real-time information on energy availability (the state of the grid and their own energy resources) and can choose to have more control over energy transactions or delegating decisions and agency to algorithms that balance energy in the network. They were designed to inspire discussion on levels of agency, and on how energy systems could be designed to promote more participatory approaches in distributed energy systems. They have been used to explore energy usage in different settings, including energy awareness games in exhibitions and museums, and in people's homes through a field study.ExperienceThe kettles are presented  as an interactive installation or through workshops. Users can take control, and the kettles allow them to a) store energy (pull), therefore contributing to increasing the amount of energy currently available in the regional storage, b) push it back into the grid, therefore making it available for others to use, or c) simply use the stored energy to boil water. Connected to each action is a certain number of karma points that indicate when an action benefits or hinders the health of the energy system – a scenario of high availability in the grid and low regional storage would give a high, positive score for those who decide to store energy, or a low, negative score for those who decide to push energy back into the grid. People who decide to use the engergy get a medium score which could be either slightly positive or slightly negative depending on how much energy there is in the grid. The kettles included a BOT mode, which allowed people to shift agency to the system. The BOT mode intended to illustrate a scenario where the kettle pushes energy when the grid is critically low but still keeps some energy stored for usage in the device, therefore balancing the needs of the grid with the needs of the individual. Karma Kettles exhibited at Tate Exchange. Image: Dan Weill Blockchain and Beyond: Understanding Blockchains through Prototypes and Public Engagement

55

ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: December 2021.

Explore the future of energy transactions though a connected kettle. Will you pull energy or push it out for others to use? and will this improve your karma?Karma Kettles - DetailsAims and ContextThe Karma Kettles allow users to choose if they would like to take full control of energy transactions or delegate it to a predefined algorithm. If they decide to take control they can store the energy (pull), make it available to others (push), or use it to boil water. While distributed energy resources are often designed to operate without human intervention, the kettles allow people to experience a scenario where they have real-time information on energy availability (the state of the grid and their own energy resources) and can choose to have more control over energy transactions or delegating decisions and agency to algorithms that balance energy in the network. They were designed to inspire discussion on levels of agency, and on how energy systems could be designed to promote more participatory approaches in distributed energy systems. They have been used to explore energy usage in different settings, including energy awareness games in exhibitions and museums, and in people's homes through a field study.ExperienceThe kettles are presented  as an interactive installation or through workshops. Users can take control, and the kettles allow them to a) store energy (pull), therefore contributing to increasing the amount of energy currently available in the regional storage, b) push it back into the grid, therefore making it available for others to use, or c) simply use the stored energy to boil water. Connected to each action is a certain number of karma points that indicate when an action benefits or hinders the health of the energy system – a scenario of high availability in the grid and low regional storage would give a high, positive score for those who decide to store energy, or a low, negative score for those who decide to push energy back into the grid. People who decide to use the engergy get a medium score which could be either slightly positive or slightly negative depending on how much energy there is in the grid. The kettles included a BOT mode, which allowed people to shift agency to the system. The BOT mode intended to illustrate a scenario where the kettle pushes energy when the grid is critically low but still keeps some energy stored for usage in the device, therefore balancing the needs of the grid with the needs of the individual. Karma Kettles exhibited at Tate Exchange. Image: Dan Weill 56

Murray-Rust, et. al.

7.1 Common themes
The projects in this section focus more on the potential autonomous behaviours that objects can
be programmed to enact and the meaning of such automated decision making by devices for
everyday interactions, personal relationships and the way we see economic systems and businesses.
These artefacts speculate about potential interactions with blockchain-enabled devices, services
and infrastructures where the agency of artefacts and systems is often kept in the background of
people’s awareness.

As artefacts, they draw on the power of tangibility (Section 4.3) to support open investigation.
They explore the balance of control between human and systems, where giving things more agency
clashes with ideals of human freedom (Gigbliss), and when we humans become part of a distributed
system (GeoPact). They look at what happens when value judgements are either automated or
where seamfulness and resistance highlights them (Bitbarista).

Having touched on technical fidelity previously (more discussion in Section 4.5), several
projects here build on and built in high fidelity systems which allowed for a closer investigation
of how a system may interact with other infrastructures [138] or impact on peoples lives and
behaviours [137]. Where GeoPact used real networks and blockchains, and Bitbarista had a func-
tioning bitcoin wallet, GigBliss and Karma Kettles abstracted key qualities of the networks they
described in support of creating experiences. GeoPact was structured as if it would be a ‘real’
technology and the investment in such a high fidelity system led to a range of follow up studies,
allowing exploration of different aspects of the system and a range of reconfigurations.

7.2 Longer term engagements
Experiences of autonomous objects can take more time than is possible in a walk-up interaction –
the understandings of autonomy come through as interactions unfold. This came through looking
at relations to the Bitbarista – the initial study looked at buying a single coffee in lab conditions
[118], while the follow up [136] looked at deployments in three offices, for a month each time. This
highlighted the quotidian issues of maintenance once the technological excitement had subsided.
It also showed how the machine disrupted existing rituals, particularly for those who used to
gain social value from making coffee or looking after the equipment. The micro-payments offered
to participants for small tasks were generally not enough to make up for the disruption, and it
undermined a sense of altruism and community. The study of long term usage revealed a complex
picture in which customers struggled to align the long-term thinking required when voting for
future coffee supplies, with their immediate need for coffee. And although GeoPact wasn’t employed
in a longitudinal study, the potential of the ’real’ infrastructure allowed for more real world testing
and evaluation of smart contracts in the wild or outside the lab beyond the engagement of general
public audiences.

7.3 Experiencing Value Flows
Building on previous themes on how values are encoded and explored through artefactys and
systems, the autonomy of the objects in this section highlighted some of the ways that values flow
and evolve as the systems are in use. With Bitbarista, whilst participants for the most part initially
engaged with issues of ethics around their consumption, they tended to develop a strategy for
voting rather than consider the issues afresh each time they bought a coffee, regardless of changing
options. Interactions highlighted an implicit assumption that the Bitbarista’s autonomy would
make decisions in line with its ethos as an ‘ethical’ machine, providing benefits to themselves,
the coffee growers and society more broadly. The GigBliss hairdryers provided a way to highlight
competing values and interests in an experiential way, engaging the public with complex technology

ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: December 2021.

Blockchain and Beyond: Understanding Blockchains through Prototypes and Public Engagement

57

development and relevant policies through making everyday tradeoffs. Studies with professional
bike couriers using the GeoPact system [137] showed how interaction with the technological system
led to discussion of existing values, and how they were being negotiated and assessed in the face of
increasing automation. A study with the Karma Kettles suggested that enabling people to make
conscious decisions about when to pull, push, store and use energy can engage them in considering
energy requirements of a wider community in a bottom-up rather than top-down manner.

7.4 Contextualisation
Contextualisation was key to several of the projects. Strongly grounded scenarios helped partic-
ipants to engage the technological and the social at the same time, and being able to role-play
through relatable scenarios helped with the experience. Working with actors and improvisation
in GigBliss brought a high degree of reflexive contextualisation to bear, as they considered the
way that the objects would fit into their lives. GeoPact we explored a multiple scenarios in various
levels of detail: initially, the cryptographic architecture was presented in a simplified form, and
then contextualised through a stylised supply chain where participants took on different role; later,
high fidelity delivery infrastructure provided a real-world context for enactment with bike couriers.
The more detailed contextualisations gave a clearer picture of how people would relate to the
technology, navigating the space between previous work that attempted to communicate about
the technology into using design as a way to map out unexpected technical and socio-political
implications.

7.5 Humanising infrastructures
The GigBliss hairdryers were explored through methods of drama and deliberation. This provided a
way to engage people in negotiating meaning, value and control in autonomous energy transactions.
During workshops, participants discussed not only the implication of the different systems but
also what would work for them and how they would be willing to compromise to balance concerns
regarding lack of control and the convenience provided by autonomous systems. Part of this was
supported through the ways that concepts were related to people. For example, with Karma Kettles,
the creation of ‘karma points’ served as a reference to individual impact on the broader system. As
well as humanising abstract concepts, it points out the need for careful consideration of reward
mechanisms, considering gentle incentivisation without relying solely on financial motives, which
may eclipse thinking around other forms of value. In GeoPact, by starting from a human concept
of location, we could create ideas that are more generally accessible than a purely technological
solution would be. Rather than being purely shaped by the kinds of location operations we can
include in smart contracts, we could work towards the ways in which people experience location
in their lives.

In each case, mapping the infrastructures into human experience allowed an exchange of ideas
regarding what would work for them, and demonstrated the ways that deliberation can support
critical design to achieve its societal aim.

7.6 Summary and Directions
Here the artefacts or things give us a different way to engage with people - tangible interactions
can be immediate, and embedding things into daily life helps to understand the frictions, edges,
specifics and so on of designing these systems. This is reflected in the associated study methods as
well – the pieces support a longer term engagement, which helps to move beyond the ‘wow’ factor
of speculative objects and into a more nuanced understanding of the technological propositions.
When designing participatory work, having physical things can scaffold the kinds of engagement
we are interested in - curious and engaged, connected without being buried under the details.

ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: December 2021.

58

Murray-Rust, et. al.

These projects all offer perspectives on one of the more interesting possibilities of DLTs - that
anything can have a wallet, and hence the things we interact with can have a bit more agency
and do a bit more without human intervention. They have helped publics to question how these
agencies should be distributed and think through which decisions should be made by users and
which by algorithms or other agencies. It is important to develop this broader picture of the ways
people interact with autonomous things as giving the power to an object helps articulate the
system’s behaviours and choices, and make sense of the implications and wider effects.

8 DISCUSSION - COMMON THEMES
The core of this paper is a holistic presentation of a rich portfolio of related studio projects to
“capture the family resemblances that exist” [13, 150] between them. The projects spanning more
than half a decade, have various purposes, and touch on diverse aspects of blockchain technology.
In presenting these projects based around their primary aims, we have already drawn out a number
of key threads of our practice: approaches to supporting better understanding of blockchains,
producing engaging public experiences, making new rules, and thinking through autonomous
things.

In our discussion we take these analyses further, and indicate future directions for academic
research and design. Our discussion begins pragmatically, reflecting core learning we have developed
about how to design blockchain systems, before specifically discussing reflections on involving
people in the design of blockchains. We then look more broadly to consider how designing with
blockchains entails a more infrastructural turn for design in general. Finally, we offer some key
trends and outstanding societal questions for blockchain applications.

8.1 Learnings: how to design blockchain systems
If there is in fact a single common theme in our projects here, it would be the importance of situat-
ing and grounding blockchain technologies in real-world contexts of use. While fascinated
by the wide but abstract promises of decentralisation, autonomy and reprogramming economies,
our primary concern was always to explore what this hyped technology could meaningfully do –
whether to reconfigure collective coffee consumption, or program and automate new charitable
donations. The lack of many significant mainstream blockchain applications highlights the chal-
lenges in working with blockchains in real-world contexts. Though often beginning with more
abstract concepts such as ‘escrow’ or ‘location-based smart contracts’, to design with blockchains,
we sought ways to articulate the broad promises of the technologies, making them concrete and
digestible, preparing the ground for meaningful engagements.

In context, it becomes clear that blockchains are not simply formalising abstract permis-
sions, or even particular values or rights, but formalising relationships, between people
and/or things. This is most clear in a project like GeoPact, where the smart contracts governing
the behaviour of a lockbox required defining, questioning and anticipating all of the relationships in
a delivery service. The Seismic SeeSaws encode a very particular set of relations between charities,
donors, beneficiaries and data providers; KASH Cups and the BitBarista produce and enforce new
social relationships by constraining human actions around coffee production and drinking. Design-
ing with and for these relationships requires a broader system-design perspective that places focus
on the range of actors involved, and the relationships and trust between them. Attaching Strings
offers one collaborative approach to doing this from a birds-eye view. Importantly, a focus on
relationships beyond only values, demands attention to where power and control in such systems
lie, whether with human or machine.

ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: December 2021.

Blockchain and Beyond: Understanding Blockchains through Prototypes and Public Engagement

59

A recurrent challenge in designing with blockchains concerns dealing with the rigid
formality of computing systems[36]. Blockchains are explicitly transactional protocols, de-
signed to repeatedly and immutably follow particular rules. ‘Smart’ contracts are not in fact
responsive, dynamic or adaptive as other ‘smart’ systems appear to be; instead they will sit inactive,
until receiving specific inputs, and delivering very specific outputs. In this sense, blockchains
starkly expose an inherent tension between the emergent, and unpredictable messiness of everyday
life, and a pre-determined and idealised computer model. The various projects on ‘Making the
Rules’ confronted participants with these tensions, and raised questions about how to practically
manage the necessary inflexibility of blockchain technologies. It also raised questions about who
‘commissions’ such systems, and who is forced to use them. These systems could empower and
enforce some individual users’ very specific wishes or values, but viewed more broadly, they
configure quite restrictive terms for complex interactions. The GigBliss hairdryers are particularly
provocative, with one version completely dictating when people can dry their hair.

Such encodings aptly demonstrate how applied, design-led approaches are able to highlight
the limitations of blockchain applications and bring into question when, how and where
blockchain technologies might offer value. In addition to surfacing the inflexibility of smart contracts
and transactional protocols, we encountered difficulties in managing temporality; people and
contexts change, but contracts don’t. In essence, our various design projects have exposed
in different ways how difficult it is to connect blockchains to the world in which they
are situated. Firstly in terms of what a blockchain understands as truths about the world: has
an earthquake taken place? Where exactly is this lock box? Have the farmers made a profit yet?
Several of the workshop approaches (IFTTW, Programmable Donations) highlight gaps between
the intentions of the parties and what can actually be encoded [1, 104]. Secondly, blockchains can
be disconnected in the ways users and stakeholders are able to meaningfully interact with them.
A crucial design question remains around how explicitly and to what level of detail it is
necessary to expose the underlying functions of a blockchain to various groups of users.
Many of the promises of the technology hinge upon the potential for radical transparency and the
possibility to verify transactions taking place; but the workings of this infrastructure are inevitably
complex, and require trust in additional intermediaries. As research projects, we have tended to
over-expose particular aspects of the technology, in order to direct participants attention and elicit
their reflections.

In doing so however, we have identified the importance of a careful balance between seamless
operation and integration [148] and seamfulness [20, 21] that exposes the workings and individuality
of systems. Seams prompt questions and reflections from users. The moment in AfterMoney where
you are asked to decide what currency to pay in prompts a discussion and speculation about
currencies and their value. How does one weigh up a loss of data privacy versus spending a few
minutes sweeping a floor? The BitBarista asks you to decide between the cheap but decent coffee,
or the more expensive but more ethical beans, or when you have to rapidly rethink the value of
imaginary resources in BlockExchange.

Some seams are a necessary component of engaging with the mess inherent in complex systems
[6]. When GeoCoin does not immediately show transactions, or allows participants with newer
phones to collect more currency, it highlights a messiness in access; when messages take a long
time to reach a GeoPact box, visitors start to wonder what happens when the system goes wrong.
Seams based on prompting decisions, highlighting mechanisms and exposing mess are useful ways
to prompt reflection, and ultimately trust. However, they all require labour of some sort on behalf
of those interacting with the system. Over longer term, everyday interactions; such as when the
Bitbarista was situated in offices for extended periods of time [136], some users became frustrated
with the neediness of the machine and its protocols, and became disengaged. Carefully balancing

ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: December 2021.

60

Murray-Rust, et. al.

the seamfulness of blockchain technologies to properly expose their function, while remaining
accessible and easy to use is hence a key design challenge.

8.2 Learnings: Involving people in the design of blockchains
An evident element of this portfolio of projects is to involve people in the design of blockchains;
there are several reflections we can offer around how to do this. Firstly, it is clear that the in-
herent complexity of the technology can immediately be excluding. In many of these projects,
we’ve therefore often introduced what a blockchain does rather than what it is. The Block-
Exchange workshop begins as a trading game, gradually introducing features and characteristics of
blockchains. Programmable Donations focuses participants attention on the qualities of condition-
ality, rather than the specifics of a ‘financial escrow’. Happily Ever After (Bitcoin) starts from a
traditional legal contract, before introducing ‘smart contracts’ as short-term partnerships between
strangers. This project also reflects the value of setting a familiar, quotidian and mundane
context for blockchain technologies. This offers familiar hooks and routines that are easily
grasped by participants (having a coffee, taking a delivery, boiling a kettle, and drying your hair)
but it also speaks to the infrastructural ambitions of blockchain technologies. By situating these
technologies in such contexts, we’re able to work with participants to understand the extent to
which revolutionary ambitions of blockchains stand up to common needs and work. We’ve also
found that presenting examples of value exchange provide a human way to make sense of
blockchains. Transactions in After Money present opportunities to ‘swap’ one form of value – data,
cryptocurrency, labour – for another, sweeties. BlockExchange begins as a trading game, where
participants exchange various resources with the currency of lego blocks, before being prompted
to understand how they might exchange the things they value without traditional forms of money.
In our experience, we have found focusing on fundamental ways in which we exchange value,
opens the doors for many participants to think very broadly about the potential of blockchains and
distributed ledger technologies.

To develop an understanding of specific qualities or features of these technologies, we have
found roleplay and collaboration to be particularly effective approaches. Playing through
abstracted representations of technology lets participants build understandings of the concepts
collaboratively and incrementally. Simple interactions provide a gateway to considering the possi-
bilities of Blockchain systems whether exchanging a resource card for some Lego bricks, enacting
a marriage or recording a new pizza making skill with a unique set of stickers. By focusing first on
fulfilling a simple co-operative role, participants can feel their way into a networked experience.
Playing through a version of a system also provides an experiential approach, enabling par-
ticipants to imagine interactions as part of their own lives and consider possible real moments,
frictions and transitions. Collaboration enables participants to develop an understanding of the
dynamics and processes while discussing and talking with others who are also developing this
understanding. Projects like PizzaBlock also viscerally demonstrate the amount of labour and
computation required for a distributed network to function. Several projects place an emphasis on
the different roles and relationships within these emerging systems (Attaching Strings, GeoCoin,
GeoPact), exploring how the different roles may play out and change existing social enterprises,
leading to consideration of alternative forms of governance. Formal technical concepts quickly
become humanised for participants through encountering their social implications.

Often to support roleplay, the projects in this portfolio frequently also rely on designing care-
fully with regard to visibility and transparency. Some projects were rigorously transparent –
every person’s credentials in PizzaBlock can be seen hanging on the line, although their personal
identities are pseudonymised. Bitbarista reveals data from coffee production to consumers before
they buy a cup of coffee. The Seismic SeeSaw visually demonstrates the money being held in escrow,

ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: December 2021.

Blockchain and Beyond: Understanding Blockchains through Prototypes and Public Engagement

61

along with the mechanism that will release it – although not the data that causes the unlocking.
When people get married Happily Ever After (Bitcoin), there is a paper record for them to take
away, and a public record visible for others.

Sometimes information was hidden or obfuscated either purposefully or accidentally from
participants. Like many distributed ledgers, it is hard to look at the structure resulting from the
‘mining’ process in BlockExchange and understand what has gone into it. KASH Kups don’t have
active electronics in them, so they can’t display credit levels on the cups – users often only discover
that they are out of credit through the embarrassing moment of finding they can’t get coffee. In
each case - we sought to balance our aims to produce meaningful experiences, educate or engage
participants around a particular feature of the technology, while ensuring an appropriate level of
technical fidelity. For example GeoPact attempts to show the state of every object in the system,
the current and future status of a smart contract, and a blockchain log of each event that happens.
This level of fidelity produces a lot of information, but for the in-depth workshops with engaged
stakeholders, it was important to be able to capture these different views on the system, and match
up the informational perspective with the physical actions taking place in the world.

We often made concepts or features of the technology visible to participants through
making them tangible. Tangible materials have been widely employed within participatory
design practices to support participants in externalising their thinking [98] and distill complex
concepts into simple, manageable forms. In these projects, materials work to produce abstractions
that focus the participants – and researchers – on specific aspects of the technology and enable
them to explore these in experiential activities. Often the materials used in the interactions create a
common language, which has the benefit of leveling the playing field and enabling participants
from different disciplines and levels of technological competency to work together. Several projects
used objects that feel familiar as a way to introduce new concepts: the GigBliss hairdryers, the
broom used in AfterMoney and the Bitbarista start from everyday objects and then introduce seams
that disrupt the natural responses to handling those objects.

Tangible experiences are consistently powerful. Even members of the public who already had
read a lot around cryptocurrency found things in our experience that helped them understand
blockchain issues that they had previously ignored. As designers, producing highly-finished tangible
objects also forced us to resolve ambiguities in our own understanding of the technology, or to
bring focus to the concepts we wanted to play out with participants.

Whatever particular methods and approaches we took to engage publics with blockchain tech-
nologies, we frequently found ourselves choosing to focus on specific qualities of the tech-
nology while abstracting others. The Attaching Strings DAO workshops used very high level
abstractions of the idea of a Distributed Autonomous Organisation without worrying about the
details; the PizzaBlock workshops used technically grounded abstractions, but without delving into
cryptography. The Seismic Seesaw focused strongly on the concept of an automated escrow, and
was not required to run on a blockchain to discuss this with participants. With complex systems
such as blockchains, there are many aspects that need to be understood in order to have a compre-
hensive technical discussion; at the same time, it is possible to have a well rounded engagement
with implications, without unravelling the entire tapestry. This is often easier to do with an object,
rather than a question – the object articulates a particular position and presents a coherent portion
of the system which can be digested, and gives space for further debate.

8.3 Learnings: From designing blockchains to designing for algorithmic networked

infrastructures

While much of the weight of blockchain research has historically been concerned with their
functioning around cryptocurrencies, the work in this portfolio can also be extended to the more

ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: December 2021.

62

Murray-Rust, et. al.

general question of how do we do design in relation to networked digital infrastructures?.
These are complex situations, typically consisting of multiple technologies, concepts and ideologies
that come together to support a range of overlapping activities. As such, they provide a particular
challenge for design: much of the important functioning of such systems is encoded in algorithmic
and network protocols, which are often complex, technologically opaque and counter-intuitive.
There are often multiple concepts that need to be grasped before the system as a whole makes sense,
and multiple viewpoints that have to be considered - designers, users, commissioners and so on.
Views of a network are often partial and asymmetric and not nearly as stable as when considering
the design of a physical product or interface. The interactions in GeoPact, for example, highlighted
what happens when different networks rub up against each other – the formalised blockchain
contracts with the more worldly IoT logistics infrastructure and the more socio-physical road and
transport networks. Whether for low-level blockchain consensus or higher level smart contract
design, looking at the algorithmic mediation of society throws up challenging questions about
what algorithms are and how they relate to people. An algorithm can be seen as one of Barad’s
agential cuts[3], as being a device by which properties of interest can be constructed, yet at the
same time as being so buried in details of implementation,materiality, and wider systems, that it
can be hard to point to any part and say ‘this is the algorithm that caused this’ [32, 84].

Two threads of work come together here, as we look at algorithmic infrastructures for human
interaction, around the term institution[126]. Within participatory and co-design, insitutioning
has been highlighted as a move towards designing the institutions that create contexts for action
[53, 73, 139]. This shift of attention from the micro-level of interactions to the meso-level of the
sociopolitical context in which they happen is a part of several of the projects: Happily Ever After
(Bitcoin) grew out of ideation around the social implications of designing a new form of currency.
Here the introduction of blockchain functioned as a disruptor, that created a space for critiquing
social rules and norms, along with a handy tool for sketching new possibilities.

In parallel, there is a thread of work within computer science around electronic institutions
[31, 46, 47], as attempts to algorithmically formalise the rules and norms by which interactions take
place, in order to create a basis for societies of artificial intelligent agents. Just as with blockchain
systems, work continues on how to connect these kinds of formalisations of interaction within the
messiness of human life [106], and how to open up the design of formal systems to a wider audience
[105], in particular through the creation of ‘social machines’, in which network infrastructures
support open and creative human interaction [112, 128, 129]. Two the key challenges these projects
have addressed is how to form and communicate connections between formal systems and
the world, as well as how to support users to the point where they can meaningfully design
rules for formal systems. This difficulty of forming connections between formal systems and
the world, and of getting users to the point where they can meaningfully design rules is the heart
of many of the above projects, e.g. Programmable Donations and GeoPact. This can be seen in
the rule creation of Programmable Donations, the ideation in GeoCoin and contract building in
GeoPact and the explicit development of new kinds of institutions in Attaching Strings.

A challenge with network infrastructures is understanding how the micro-interactions relate
to macro-scale properties. This has been part of the design of blockchain systems from the start –
transforming individual needs around transactions through mining incentives into system-wide
properties of trust and consensus. The use of designerly strategies and provocative interven-
tions helps to mediate between micro and macro scales – the BitBarista uses microboundaries
in the human experience of coffee making to connect to global supply chains, GigBliss uses discus-
sion of living with speculative items as a connection to the wider world of smart energy grids, and
GeoPact uses moments of exchange of physical goods to articulate algorithmic ideas of responsibil-
ity. This echoes Rosenberger’s move to amalgamate a detailed, interactional viewpoint of individual

ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: December 2021.

Blockchain and Beyond: Understanding Blockchains through Prototypes and Public Engagement

63

experience with the connected, entwined view of the networks and constellations provided by
Actor Network Theory [124]. There is also a move towards understanding the multistability of
these emerging technologies, as their meanings and possibilities are constructed towards different
purposes. Carrying out ideation workshops around given concepts or infrastructures is a form of
Ihde’s variational analysis[75], where the various possibilities of a technology are explored as it is
brought to bear on different situations and contexts. Beyond this, designing interactions and
institutions used by different stakeholders explores the multi-intentionality of these net-
work technologies, as alternative desires, conceptualisations and behaviours come into tension,
alignment and entanglement [121, 149].

8.4 Learnings: Agency and values in distributed ledger technologies
Lessons learnt from our projects indicate two key considerations for the design of distributed ledger
technologies such as blockchains: the first is to consider agency beyond the human, and the second
to situate transactions within a larger system of values.

Our projects indicate ways in which we can include people in discussions around the design of
systems that have some level of autonomy. The idea that non-human things can have wallets,
and hence some form of enhanced transactional power, gives them an obvious sense of
autonomy which makes it easier to discuss implications of their participation in socio-technical
systems and beyond. What roles would we like them to play in these systems? How neutral would
these roles be? What are the implications of giving them more or less autonomy? Could we shift
roles and regain agency when we wish? This has been grounds for thinking through ideas such
as coffee machines that own and look after themselves (Bitbarista) or hairdryers and kettles that
can trade energy (GigBliss and Karma Kettles). Such systems make visible that agency could be
distributed among other actors or aspects of the environment, and the way it is distributed is
a design choice. GeoCoin explored the idea that currency could be located in space. GeoPact
develops this idea into systems of objects that can both direct humans and pay them for their
services. All of these point towards questions of what happens when we de-centre human
agency [26], and take a wider view of the implications of what we are designing . The objects
here have been purposely designed to embody a specific complexity (e.g. around coffee production,
energy, distribution of goods, etc) but they can also serve as starting points to question of what
happens when objects are fluid assemblages [62, 121], becoming portals to a much larger complexity
which constantly grows and changes with time. In these situations, the object itself may not
be as important as the services, systems and actors that it mediates. A second important point
of discussion regards the values behind these systems. Which values are they mediating? How
flexible is this mediation? Redesigning the way value and capital are represented opens up
space for different values to be shared and performed, exemplified by the radical imaginaries
of Bitcoin and cryptocurrencies [17, 71, 135]. While designers have often been concerned with
how values are embedded within certain technologies and systems [e.g. 12, 27, 56] our work
here highlights the intriguing opportunities to redesign systems of value exchange themselves.
Exploring how economy and values collide in social interactions can be uncomfortable terrain for
designers [43, 130], but these projects illustrate how fertile a design space there is in questioning
and redesigning representations of value and creative transactions [41].

Many of these systems change the relationship between people, labour and value, whether asking
people to carry out tasks (GeoPact, Bitbarista, AfterMoney) or demonstrating a worker’s value by
recording their history (PizzaBlock). Several of the systems replace human action with contracts
and scripts, and we highlight the critical questions of who programmed it? Who is controlling it?
What are their values and can they change over time? What are the implications of contributing to
the creation of these algorithmic cultures [132] for wider society? By making the possibilities of

ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: December 2021.

64

Murray-Rust, et. al.

decentralisation and disintermediation vividly apparent, the projects here create a space to surface
critical issues and potentially rethink assumptions behind these relationships. By exploring the
imaginaries behind these systems and their effects on society, these projects shift the building blocks
from which we make our possible worlds. By giving people the tools to engage with emerging
infrastructures, we hope that this combination of design and HCI supports the scaling up of action
in a changing world [54, 91] and a move from simply considering users to the consideration of
people and communities acting towards a shared system of values and citizenship [52].

9 CONCLUSIONS
This annotated portfolio has described a collection of projects that use design led approaches to
question and engage around blockchains and related systems. Dealing with these complex systems
– that combine cryptography and distributed computing with questions of trust, economics and
governance – requires multiple viewpoints, and we hope the value of bringing together these varied
perspectives and approaches is clear.

Algorithms play an increasing role in daily life - social, economic and political; there are pulls
towards both increasing autonomy and decentralisation, and towards centralisation and concentra-
tion of power. Blockchains, distributed ledgers and smart contracts are part of this transformation,
not only in terms of decentralised finance and economies, but also towards social and organisational
change. The projects showcased here are ways to think through the issues involved, for researchers,
engaged stakeholders and for a broad, interested public. They look at how blockchains are linked to
the physical world by building functionality into artefacts; they look at the interactional challenges
of using blockchains; they look at the social embeddings, and how distributed ledgers or smart
contracts affect existing human relationships and practices; they look at how we can navigate the
hype around emerging technology, and communicate a sense of possibilities and limitations.

This collection has worked through a range of projects that engage the public, develop under-
standing and explore future possibilities. It illustrates how design and HCI methods can be applied
to complex network infrastructures in service of speculation within and beyond the technology in
detailed workshops, rapid public experiences and through developing speculative objects and sys-
tems. By reading across the various projects, we have articulated approaches to design blockchain
systems, as relationships and values grounded in use, rather than abstract formal structures. We
have highlighted how connecting the new technology to the everyday and quotidian – through
roleplay and physical artefacts – offers a way to engage publics in otherwise impenetrable spaces.
The variety of projects, and in particular bringing together ideation with technical provocations has
articulated a connection to innovation, infrastructuring and institutioning based on the possibilities
of distributed ledger technology, and opened up a view of the algorithmic cultures they may create.
Taken together, we hope that this collection projects offers a provocative yet grounded exploration
of the possible spaces for blockchains in the coming years, for HCI and design researchers in
particular. Using experiential methods, defamiliarisation and role play alongside technical grounding
and research through design, we hope to open up new ways to think about the future, creating
new imaginaries around distributed ledger technologies.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This is a short text to acknowledge the contributions of specific colleagues, institutions, or agencies
that aided the efforts of the authors.

ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: December 2021.

Blockchain and Beyond: Understanding Blockchains through Prototypes and Public Engagement

65

REFERENCES

[1] Jason G Allen. 2018. Wrapped and stacked:‘smart contracts’ and the interaction of natural and formal language.

European Review of Contract Law 14, 4 (2018), 307–343.

[2] James Auger. 2013. Speculative design: crafting the speculation. Digital Creativity 24, 1 (2013), 11–35.
[3] Karen Barad. 2007. Meeting the universe halfway: Quantum physics and the entanglement of matter and meaning. duke

university Press.

[4] Andrew Barry, Georgina Born, and Gisa Weszkalnys. 2008. Logics of interdisciplinarity. Economy and society 37, 1

(2008), 20–49.

[5] Genevieve Bell, Mark Blythe, and Phoebe Sengers. 2005. Making by making strange: Defamiliarization and the design

of domestic technologies. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI) 12, 2 (2005), 149–173.

[6] Genevieve Bell and Paul Dourish. 2007. Yesterday’s tomorrows: notes on ubiquitous computing’s dominant vision.

Personal and ubiquitous computing 11, 2 (2007), 133–143.

[7] Victoria ME Bellotti, Sara Cambridge, Karen Hoy, Patrick C Shih, Lisa Renery Handalian, Kyungsik Han, and John M
Carroll. 2014. Towards community-centered support for peer-to-peer service exchange: rethinking the timebanking
metaphor. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 2975–2984.

[8] Steve Benford, Chris Greenhalgh, Andy Crabtree, Martin Flintham, Brendan Walker, Joe Marshall, Boriana Koleva,
Stefan Rennick Egglestone, Gabriella Giannachi, Matt Adams, Nick Tandavanitj, and Ju Row Farr. 2013. Performance-
https:
Led Research in the Wild. ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact. 20, 3, Article 14 (July 2013), 22 pages.
//doi.org/10.1145/2491500.2491502

[9] Timothy J Berners-Lee and Mark Fischetti. 1999. Weaving the Web: the original design and ultimate destiny of the

World Wide Web by its inventor. (1999).

[10] Julian Bleecker. 2009. Design fiction. A short essay on design, science, fact and fiction. Near Future Laboratory (2009).
[11] Laurens Boer and Jared Donovan. 2012. Provotypes for Participatory Innovation. In Proceedings of the Designing Inter-
active Systems Conference (Newcastle Upon Tyne, United Kingdom) (DIS ’12). Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, 388–397. https://doi.org/10.1145/2317956.2318014

[12] Alan Borning and Michael Muller. 2012. Next steps for value sensitive design. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference

on human factors in computing systems. 1125–1134.

[13] John Bowers. 2012. The logic of annotated portfolios: communicating the value of’research through design’. In

Proceedings of the Designing Interactive Systems Conference. ACM, 68–77.

[14] Marion Buchenau and Jane Fulton Suri. 2000. Experience Prototyping. In Proceedings of the 3rd Conference on Designing
Interactive Systems: Processes, Practices, Methods, and Techniques (New York City, New York, USA) (DIS ’00). Association
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 424–433. https://doi.org/10.1145/347642.347802

[15] John M Carroll and Victoria Bellotti. 2015. Creating value together: The emerging design space of peer-to-peer
currency and exchange. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social
Computing. 1500–1510.

[16] Sam Castle, Fahad Pervaiz, Galen Weld, Franziska Roesner, and Richard Anderson. 2016. Let’s Talk Money: Evaluating
the Security Challenges of Mobile Money in the Developing World. In Proceedings of the 7th Annual Symposium on
Computing for Development (Nairobi, Kenya) (ACM DEV ’16). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY,
USA, Article 4, 10 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3001913.3001919

[17] Cornelius Castoriadis and Cornelius Castoriadis. 1975. L’institution imaginaire de la société. Vol. 336. Seuil Paris.
[18] Ruth Catlow, Marc Garrett, Nathan Jones, and Sam Skinner. 2017. Artists Re: thinking the Blockchain. Vol. 1. Torque

editions.

[19] Simone Centellegher, Giovanna Miritello, Daniel Villatoro, Devyani Parameshwar, Bruno Lepri, and Nuria Oliver.
2018. Mobile Money: Understanding and Predicting Its Adoption and Use in a Developing Economy. Proc. ACM
Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol. 2, 4, Article 157 (Dec. 2018), 18 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3287035
[20] Matthew Chalmers and Areti Galani. 2004. Seamful interweaving: heterogeneity in the theory and design of
interactive systems. In Proceedings of the 5th conference on Designing interactive systems: processes, practices, methods,
and techniques. 243–252.

[21] Matthew Chalmers and Ian MacColl. 2003. Seamful and seamless design in ubiquitous computing. In Workshop at the

crossroads: The interaction of HCI and systems issues in UbiComp, Vol. 8.

[22] Margie Cheesman. 2020. Self-sovereignty for refugees? The contested horizons of digital identity. Geopolitics (2020),

1–26.

[23] Chun-Wei Chiang, Eber Betanzos, and Saiph Savage. 2018. Exploring blockchain for trustful collaborations between
immigrants and governments. In Extended Abstracts of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems. 1–6.

[24] Nazlı Cila and Gabriele Ferri. 2017. Centre for Design Informatics: Blockchain City. Amsterdam Creative Industries

Publishing.

ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: December 2021.

66

Murray-Rust, et. al.

[25] Nazli Cila, Gabriele Ferri, Martijn de Waal, Inte Gloerich, and Tara Karpinski. 2020. The Blockchain and the Commons:
Dilemmas in the Design of Local Platforms. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems. 1–14.

[26] Rachel Clarke, Sara Heitlinger, Ann Light, Laura Forlano, Marcus Foth, and Carl DiSalvo. 2019. More-than-Human
Participation: Design for Sustainable Smart City Futures. Interactions 26, 3 (April 2019), 60–63. https://doi.org/10.
1145/3319075

[27] Gilbert Cockton. 2006. Designing worth is worth designing. In Proceedings of the 4th Nordic conference on Human-

computer interaction: changing roles. 165–174.

[28] Giulio Coppi and Larissa Fast. 2019. Blockchain and distributed ledger technologies in the humanitarian sector. Technical

Report. HPG Commissioned Report.

[29] Sinclair Davidson, Primavera De Filippi, and Jason Potts. 2016. Economics of blockchain. Available at SSRN 2744751

(2016).

[30] Primavera De Filippi and Benjamin Loveluck. 2016. The invisible politics of bitcoin: governance crisis of a decentralized

infrastructure. Internet Policy Review 5, 4 (2016).

[31] Mark d’Inverno, Michael Luck, Pablo Noriega, Juan A. Rodriguez-Aguilar, and Carles Sierra. 2012. Communicating

Open Systems. Artificial Intelligence 186 (July 2012), 38–94. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.artint.2012.03.004

[32] Paul Dourish. 2016. Algorithms and Their Others: Algorithmic Culture in Context. Big Data & Society 3, 2 (Dec. 2016),

2053951716665128. https://doi.org/10.1177/2053951716665128

[33] Anthony Dunne and Fiona Raby. 2013. Speculative everything: design, fiction, and social dreaming. MIT press.
[34] Paul Dunphy, Luke Garratt, and Fabien Petitcolas. 2018. Decentralizing digital identity: Open challenges for distributed

ledgers. In 2018 IEEE European Symposium on Security and Privacy Workshops (EuroS&PW). IEEE, 75–78.

[35] Paul Dunphy and Fabien AP Petitcolas. 2018. A first look at identity management schemes on the blockchain. IEEE

Security & Privacy 16, 4 (2018), 20–29.

[36] Quinn Dupont. 2017. Blockchain Identities: Notational Technologies for Control and Management of Abstracted

Entities. Metaphilosophy 48, 5 (2017), 634–653. https://doi.org/10.1111/meta.12267

[37] Quinn DuPont. 2017. Experiments in algorithmic governance: A history and ethnography of “The DAO,” a failed

decentralized autonomous organization. Bitcoin and beyond (2017), 157–177.

[38] Chris Elsden, David Chatting, Abigail C Durrant, Andrew Garbett, Bettina Nissen, John Vines, and David S Kirk.
2017. On speculative enactments. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems.
5386–5399.

[39] Chris Elsden, Inte Gloerich, Anne Spaa, John Vines, and Martijn de Waal. 2019. Making the blockchain civic.

interactions 26, 2 (2019), 60–65.

[40] Chris Elsden, Arthi Manohar, Jo Briggs, Mike Harding, Chris Speed, and John Vines. 2018. Making Sense of Blockchain
Applications: A Typology for HCI. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(Montreal QC, Canada) (CHI ’18). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 458, 14 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3174032

[41] Chris Elsden, Evan Morgan, and Chris Speed. 2021. Creative Transactions: Special Digital Monies in ‘Break Kick-
starter’Crowdfunding Campaigns. In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems.
1–13.

[42] Chris Elsden, Chris Speed, Bettina Nissen, Dave Murray-Rust, and Ella Tallyn. 2019. Four manifestos from ‘HCI
for Blockchain’: A 2018 CHI workshop. Ubiquity: The Journal of Pervasive Media 6, 1 (1 Nov. 2019), 27. https:
//doi.org/10.1386/ubiq_00004_7

[43] Chris Elsden, Kate Symons, Raluca Bunduchi, Chris Speed, and John Vines. 2019. Sorting Out Valuation in the Charity
Shop: Designing for Data-Driven Innovation through Value Translation. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer
Interaction 3, CSCW (2019), 1–25.

[44] Chris Elsden, Kate Symons, Chris Speed, John Vines, and Anne Spaa. 2019. Searching for an OxChain: Co-designing

blockchain applications for charitable giving. Ubiquity: The Journal of Pervasive Media 6, 1 (2019), 5–16.

[45] Chris Elsden, Ludwig Trotter, Mike Harding, Nigel Davies, Chris Speed, and John Vines. 2019. Programmable
Donations: Exploring Escrow-based Conditional Giving. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems. 1–13.

[46] Marc Esteva, David de la Cruz, and Carles Sierra. 2002. ISLANDER: An Electronic Institutions Editor. In Proceedings of
the First International Joint Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems: Part 3 (AAMAS ’02). Association
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1045–1052. https://doi.org/10.1145/545056.545069

[47] Marc Esteva, Juan-Antonio Rodríguez-Aguilar, Carles Sierra, Pere Garcia, and Josep L. Arcos. 2001. On the Formal
Specification of Electronic Institutions. In Agent Mediated Electronic Commerce: The European AgentLink Perspective,
Frank Dignum and Carles Sierra (Eds.). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 126–147. https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-44682-6_8

ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: December 2021.

Blockchain and Beyond: Understanding Blockchains through Prototypes and Public Engagement

67

[48] Jennifer Ferreira and Mark Perry. 2014. Building an alternative social currency: Dematerialising and rematerialising

digital money across media. In Proceedings of HCI Korea. Hanbit Media, Inc., 122–131.

[49] Jennifer Ferreira, Mark Perry, and Sriram Subramanian. 2015. Spending time with money: From shared values to
social connectivity. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social
Computing. 1222–1234.

[50] Primavera De Filippi. 2017. Plantoid – The Birth of a Blockchain Based Lifeform. Torque Editions and Furtherfield.
[51] Marcus Foth. 2017. The Promise of Blockchain Technology for Interaction Design. In Proceedings of the 29th Australian
Conference on Computer-Human Interaction (Brisbane, Queensland, Australia) (OZCHI ’17). Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 513–517. https://doi.org/10.1145/3152771.3156168

[52] Marcus Foth, Martin Tomitsch, Christine Satchell, and M. Hank Haeusler. 2015. From Users to Citizens: Some
Thoughts on Designing for Polity and Civics. In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Australian Special Interest
Group for Computer Human Interaction. 623–633.

[53] Marcus Foth and Troy John Turner. 2019. The Premise of Institutioning for the Proliferation of Communities
and Technologies Research. In Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Communities & Technologies -
Transforming Communities (C&amp;T ’19). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 24–28.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3328320.3328398

[54] Christopher Frauenberger, Marcus Foth, and Geraldine Fitzpatrick. 2018. On Scale, Dialectics, and Affect: Pathways
for Proliferating Participatory Design. In Proceedings of the 15th Participatory Design Conference: Full Papers-Volume 1.
1–13.

[55] Christopher Frayling. 1993. Research in art and design. (1993).
[56] Batya Friedman, Peter H Kahn, and Alan Borning. 2008. Value sensitive design and information systems. The

handbook of information and computer ethics (2008), 69–101.

[57] Juan Garay, Aggelos Kiayias, and Nikos Leonardos. 2015. The bitcoin backbone protocol: Analysis and applications.

In Annual International Conference on the Theory and Applications of Cryptographic Techniques. Springer, 281–310.

[58] Bill Gaver and John Bowers. 2012. Annotated portfolios. interactions 19, 4 (2012), 40–49.
[59] Bill Gaver, Tony Dunne, and Elena Pacenti. 1999. Design: Cultural Probes.

Interactions 6, 1 (Jan. 1999), 21–29.

https://doi.org/10.1145/291224.291235

[60] William Gaver. 2012. What Should We Expect from Research through Design?. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Austin, Texas, USA) (CHI ’12). Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA, 937–946. https://doi.org/10.1145/2207676.2208538

[61] William W Gaver, Jacob Beaver, and Steve Benford. 2003. Ambiguity as a resource for design. In Proceedings of the

SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems. ACM, 233–240.

[62] Elisa Giaccardi and Johan Redström. 2020. Technology and More-Than-Human Design. Design Issues 36, 4 (Sept.

2020), 33–44. https://doi.org/10.1162/desi_a_00612

[63] Inte Gloerich, Geert Lovink, and Patricia de Vries. 2018. MoneyLab reader 2: overcoming the hype. INC Readers 11

(2018).

[64] Michael Golembewski and Mark Selby. 2010. Ideation decks: a card-based design ideation tool. In Proceedings of the

8th ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems. 89–92.

[65] Alexander Grech and Anthony F Camilleri. 2017. Blockchain in education. JRC Science for Policy Report.
[66] Ye Guo and Chen Liang. 2016. Blockchain application and outlook in the banking industry. Financial Innovation 2, 1

(2016), 24.

[67] Lars Hallnäs and Johan Redström. 2001. Slow technology–designing for reflection. Personal and ubiquitous computing

5, 3 (2001), 201–212.

[68] Christopher Holmes. 2018. Distributed ledger technologies for public good: leadership, collaboration and innovation.
[69] Kristina Höök. 2012. A Cry for More Tech at CHI! Interactions 19, 2 (March 2012), 10–11. https://doi.org/10.1145/

2090150.2090154

[70] Steve Huckle and Martin White. 2016. Socialism and the Blockchain. Future Internet 8, 4 (2016), 49.
[71] Syed Omer Husain, Alex Franklin, and Dirk Roep. 2020. The political imaginaries of blockchain projects: discerning

the expressions of an emerging ecosystem. Sustainability Science (2020), 1–16.

[72] Hilary Hutchinson, Wendy Mackay, Bo Westerlund, Benjamin B. Bederson, Allison Druin, Catherine Plaisant, Michel
Beaudouin-Lafon, Stéphane Conversy, Helen Evans, Heiko Hansen, Nicolas Roussel, and Björn Eiderbäck. 2003.
Technology Probes: Inspiring Design for and with Families. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems (Ft. Lauderdale, Florida, USA) (CHI ’03). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY,
USA, 17–24. https://doi.org/10.1145/642611.642616

[73] Liesbeth Huybrechts, Henric Benesch, and Jon Geib. 2017. Institutioning: Participatory Design, Co-Design and the

Public Realm. CoDesign 13, 3 (July 2017), 148–159. https://doi.org/10.1080/15710882.2017.1355006

[74] IDEO. 2003. IDEO Method Cards: 51 ways to inspire design. William Stout.

ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: December 2021.

68

Murray-Rust, et. al.

[75] Don Ihde. 2009. Postphenomenology and Technoscience: The Peking University Lectures. Suny Press.
[76] Karim Jabbar and Pernille Bjørn. 2017. Growing the Blockchain information infrastructure. In Proceedings of the 2017

CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 6487–6498.

[77] Karim Jabbar and Pernille Bjørn. 2018. Infrastructural grind: Introducing blockchain technology in the shipping

domain. In Proceedings of the 2018 ACM Conference on Supporting Groupwork. 297–308.

[78] Karim Jabbar and Pernille Bjørn. 2018. Permeability, Interoperability, and Velocity: Entangled Dimensions of
Infrastructural Grind at the Intersection of Blockchain and Shipping. ACM Transactions on Social Computing 1, 3
(2018), 1–22.

[79] Yvonne Jansen, Pierre Dragicevic, Petra Isenberg, Jason Alexander, Abhijit Karnik, Johan Kildal, Sriram Subramanian,
and Kasper Hornbæk. 2015. Opportunities and Challenges for Data Physicalization. In Proceedings of the 33rd
Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Seoul, Republic of Korea) (CHI ’15). Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 3227–3236. https://doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702180
[80] Ethan Kane. 2017. Is Blockchain a General Purpose Technology? Available at SSRN 2932585 (2017).
[81] Henrik Karlstrøm. 2014. Do libertarians dream of electric coins? The material embeddedness of Bitcoin. Distinktion:

Scandinavian Journal of Social Theory 15, 1 (2014), 23–36.

[82] Jacob Kastrenakes. 2021. Beeple Sold an NFT for $69 Million. https://www.theverge.com/2021/3/11/22325054/beeple-

christies-nft-sale-cost-everydays-69-million.

[83] Denisa Reshef Kera, Petr Šourek, Mateusz Kraiński, Yair Reshef, Juan Manuel Corchado Rodríguez, and Iva Magdalena
Knobloch. 2019. Lithopia: Prototyping Blockchain Futures. In Extended Abstracts of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (Glasgow, Scotland Uk) (CHI EA ’19). Association for Computing Machinery, New York,
NY, USA, 1–6. https://doi.org/10.1145/3290607.3312896

[84] Rob Kitchin. 2017. Thinking Critically about and Researching Algorithms. Information, Communication & Society 20,

1 (2017), 14–29.

[85] D.A. Kolb. 1984. Experiential learning: experience as the source of learning and development. Prentice Hall, Engle-
wood Cliffs, NJ. http://www.learningfromexperience.com/images/uploads/process-of-experiential-learning.pdf!
(dateofdownload:31.05.2006)

[86] Yong Ming Kow and Xianghua Ding. 2016. " Hey, I know what this is!" Cultural Affinities and Early Stage Appropriation
of the Emerging Bitcoin Technology. In Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Supporting Group Work.
213–221.

[87] Yong Ming Kow, Xinning Gui, and Waikuen Cheng. 2017. Special digital monies: The design of alipay and wechat
wallet for mobile payment practices in china. In IFIP Conference on Human-Computer Interaction. Springer, 136–155.
Imaginaries and crystallization processes in bitcoin infrastructuring.

[88] Yong Ming Kow and Caitlin Lustig. 2018.

Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW) 27, 2 (2018), 209–232.

[89] Deepti Kumar, David Martin, and Jacki O’Neill. 2011. The times they are a-changin’ mobile payments in india. In

Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems. 1413–1422.

[90] Karen EC Levy. 2017. Book-smart, not street-smart: blockchain-based smart contracts and the social workings of law.

Engaging Science, Technology, and Society 3 (2017), 1–15.

[91] Ann Light, Chris Frauenberger, Jennifer Preece, Paul Strohmeier, and Maria Angela Ferrario. 2017. Taking Action in a

Changing World. Interactions 25, 1 (2017), 34–45.

[92] Joseph Lindley. 2015. Crypto Heater: A Design Fiction. In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM SIGCHI Conference on Creativity

and Cognition. 355–356.

[93] Geert Lovink, Nathaniel Tkacz, and Patricia de Vries. 2015. MoneyLab reader: An intervention in digital economy.

INC reader (2015).

[94] Jonas Löwgren. 2011. The Need for Video in Scientific Communication.

Interactions 18, 1 (Jan. 2011), 22–25.

https://doi.org/10.1145/1897239.1897246

[95] Caitlin Lustig and Bonnie Nardi. 2015. Algorithmic authority: The case of Bitcoin. In 2015 48th Hawaii International

Conference on System Sciences. IEEE, 743–752.

[96] Peter Lyle, Mariacristina Sciannamblo, and Maurizio Teli. 2018. Fostering Commonfare. Infrastructuring Autonomous
Social Collaboration. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–12.

[97] The Incredible Machine. 2017. Fairbike. https://the-incredible-machine.com/fairbike.html.
[98] Lambros Malafouris. 2013. How things shape the mind. MIT Press.
[99] John Maloney, Mitchel Resnick, Natalie Rusk, Brian Silverman, and Evelyn Eastmond. 2010. The scratch programming

language and environment. ACM Transactions on Computing Education (TOCE) 10, 4 (2010), 1–15.

[100] Sarah Manski and Michel Bauwens. 2020. Reimagining New Socio-Technical Economics Through the Application of
Distributed Ledger Technologies. Frontiers in Blockchain 2 (2020), 29. https://doi.org/10.3389/fbloc.2019.00029
[101] Deborah Maxwell, Chris Speed, and Dug Campbell. 2015. “Effing” the Ineffable: Opening up Understandings of the
Blockchain. In Proceedings of the 2015 British HCI Conference (Lincoln, Lincolnshire, United Kingdom) (British HCI

ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: December 2021.

Blockchain and Beyond: Understanding Blockchains through Prototypes and Public Engagement

69

’15). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 208–209. https://doi.org/10.1145/2783446.2783593
[102] Apurv Mehra, Satya Lokam, A Jain, M Sivathanu, and S Singanamalla. 2018. Vishrambh: Trusted philanthropy
with end-to-end transparency. In HCI for Blockchain: A CHI 2018 workshop on Studying, Critiquing, Designing and
Envisioning Distributed Ledger Technologies (Montreal, QC, Canada).

[103] Matthias Mettler. 2016. Blockchain technology in healthcare: The revolution starts here. In 2016 IEEE 18th international

conference on e-health networking, applications and services (Healthcom). IEEE, 1–3.

[104] Eliza Mik. 2017. Smart contracts: terminology, technical limitations and real world complexity. Law, Innovation and

Technology 9, 2 (2017), 269–300.

[105] Dave Murray-Rust, Alan Davoust, Petros Papapanagiotou, Areti Manataki, Max van Kleek, Nigel Shadbolt, and
Dave Robertson. 2018. Towards Executable Representations of Social Machines. In Diagrammatic Representation and
Inference (Lecture Notes in Computer Science), Peter Chapman, Gem Stapleton, Amirouche Moktefi, Sarah Perez-Kriz,
and Francesco Bellucci (Eds.). SpringerLink, 765–769. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-91376-677

[106] Dave Murray-Rust, Petros Papapanagiotou, and Dave Robertson. 2015. Softening electronic institutions to support

natural interaction. Human Computation 2, 2 (2015).

[107] Satoshi Nakamoto. 2008. Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system.
[108] Bettina Nissen, Larissa Pschetz, Dave Murray-Rust, Hadi Mehrpouya, Shaune Oosthuizen, and Chris Speed. 2018.
GeoCoin: Supporting Ideation and Collaborative Design with Smart Contracts. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Montreal QC, Canada) (CHI ’18). ACM, New York, NY, USA, Article 163,
10 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3173737

[109] Bettina Nissen, Kate Symons, Ella Tallyn, Chris Speed, Deborah Maxwell, and John Vines. 2017. New value transactions:
Understanding and designing for distributed autonomous organisations. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference
Companion Publication on Designing Interactive Systems. ACM, 352–355.

[110] Bettina Nissen, Ella Tallyn, and Kate Symons. 2019. tangibly understanding intangible complexities: designing for

distributed autonomous organizations. Ubiquity: The Journal of Pervasive Media 6, 1 (2019), 47–63.

[111] Antti Oulasvirta, Esko Kurvinen, and Tomi Kankainen. 2003. Understanding contexts by being there: case studies in

bodystorming. Personal and ubiquitous computing 7, 2 (2003), 125–134.

[112] Petros Papapanagiotou, Alan Davoust, Dave Murray-Rust, Areti Manataki, Max van Kleek, Nigel Shadbolt, and Dave
Robertson. 2018. Social Machines for All. In 17th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent
Systems. 1208–1212.

[113] Alex Pazaitis, Primavera De Filippi, and Vasilis Kostakis. 2017. Blockchain and value systems in the sharing economy:

The illustrative case of Backfeed. Technological Forecasting and Social Change 125 (2017), 105–115.

[114] Mark Perry and Jennifer Ferreira. 2018. Moneywork: Practices of use and social interaction around digital and analog

money. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI) 24, 6 (2018), 1–32.

[115] Larissa Pschetz, Billy Dixon, Kruakae Pothong, Arlene Bailey, Allister Glean, Luis Lourenço Soares, and Jessica A
Enright. 2020. Designing Distributed Ledger Technologies for Social Change: The Case of CariCrop. In Proceedings of
the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–12.

[116] Larissa Pschetz, Kruakae Pothong, and Chris Speed. 2019. Autonomous Distributed Energy Systems: Problematising
the Invisible through Design, Drama and Deliberation. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems (Glasgow, Scotland Uk) (CHI ’19). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
Article 387, 14 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300617

[117] Larissa Pschetz, Luis Lourenco Soares, Billy Dixon, Esteban Serrano, Ella Tallyn, and Joe Revans. 2020. Push-Pull
Energy Futures: Using Design to Discuss Agency in Distributed Energy Systems. Proceedings of the ACM on Designing
Interactive Systems (2020).

[118] Larissa Pschetz, Ella Tallyn, Rory Gianni, and Chris Speed. 2017. Bitbarista: Exploring Perceptions of Data Transactions
in the Internet of Things. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 2964–2975.
[119] Jonathan Rankin, Chris Elsden, Ian Sibbald, Alan Stevenson, Chris Speed, and John Vines. 2020. Designing Artefacts
and Roleplay to Understand Decentralised Identity Management Systems. Proceedings of the ACM on Designing
Interactive Systems (2020). https://doi.org/10.1145/3357236.3395568

[120] Michel Rauchs, Andrew Glidden, Brian Gordon, Gina C Pieters, Martino Recanatini, Francois Rostand, Kathryn
Vagneur, and Bryan Zheng Zhang. 2018. Distributed ledger technology systems: a conceptual framework. Available
at SSRN 3230013 (2018).

[121] Johan Redström and Heather Wiltse. 2018. Changing Things : The Future of Objects in a Digital World. Bloomsbury

Academic.

[122] Yvonne Rogers. 2011. Interaction design gone wild: striving for wild theory. interactions 18, 4 (2011), 58–62.
[123] J. Rooksby and K. Dimitrov. 2019. Trustless education? A blockchain system for university grades. Ubiquity: The

Journal of Pervasive Media 6, 1 (2019), 83–88.

ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: December 2021.

70

Murray-Rust, et. al.

[124] Robert Rosenberger. 2014. Multistability and the Agency of Mundane Artifacts: From Speed Bumps to Subway

Benches. Human Studies 37, 3 (Sept. 2014), 369–392. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10746-014-9317-1

[125] Andrei Vlad Sambra, Essam Mansour, Sandro Hawke, Maged Zereba, Nicola Greco, Abdurrahman Ghanem, Dmitri
Zagidulin, Ashraf Aboulnaga, and Tim Berners-Lee. 2016. Solid: a platform for decentralized social applications based
on linked data. Technical Report. Technical report, MIT CSAIL & Qatar Computing Research Institute.

[126] John R Searle. 2005. What is an institution? Journal of institutional economics 1, 1 (2005), 1–22.
[127] Paul Seidler, Paul Kolling, and Max Hampshire. 2017. terra0 – Can an Augmented Forest Own and Utilize Itself? Torque

Editions and Furtherfield.

[128] Nigel Shadbolt, Kieron O’Hara, David De Roure, and Wendy Hall. 2019. The Theory and Practice of Social Machines.

Springer.

[129] Paul Smart, Elena Simperl, and Nigel Shadbolt. 2014. A Taxonomic Framework for Social Machines. In Social Collective
Intelligence: Combining the Powers of Humans and Machines to Build a Smarter Society, Daniele Miorandi, Vincenzo
Maltese, Michael Rovatsos, Anton Nijholt, and James Stewart (Eds.). Springer International Publishing, Cham, 51–85.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-08681-1_3

[130] Chris Speed, Bettina Nissen, Larissa Pschetz, Dave Murray-Rust, Hadi Mehrpouya, and Shaune Oosthuizen. 2019.

Designing New Socio-Economic Imaginaries. The Design Journal 22, sup1 (2019), 2257–2261.

[131] Erik Stolterman. 2008. The nature of design practice and implications for interaction design research. International

Journal of Design 2, 1 (2008).

[132] Ted Striphas. 2015. Algorithmic Culture. European Journal of Cultural Studies 18, 4-5 (Aug. 2015), 395–412. https:

//doi.org/10.1177/1367549415577392

[133] Melanie Swan. 2015. Blockchain: Blueprint for a new economy. "O’Reilly Media, Inc.".
[134] Tim Swanson. [n.d.]. Consensus-as-a-service: a brief report on the emergence of permissioned, distributed ledger
systems. https://allquantor.at/blockchainbib/pdf/swanson2015consensus.pdf. Report, available online ([n. d.]).
[135] Lana Swartz. 2018. What was Bitcoin, what will it be? The techno-economic imaginaries of a new money technology.

Cultural Studies 32, 4 (2018), 623–650.

[136] Ella Tallyn, Larissa Pschetz, Rory Gianni, Chris Speed, and Chris Elsden. 2018. Exploring Machine Autonomy and
Provenance Data in Coffee Consumption: A Field Study of Bitbarista. Proceedings of the ACM on Computer Supported
Collaborative Work (2018), 170.

[137] Ella Tallyn, Joe Revans, Evan Morgan, Keith Fisken, and Dave Murray-Rust. 2021. Enacting the Last Mile: Experiences
of Smart Contracts in Courier Deliveries. In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (Yokohama, Japan) (CHI ’21). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 639, 14 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445525

[138] Ella Tallyn, Joe Revans, Evan Morgan, and Dave Murray-Rust. 2020. GeoPact: Engaging publics in location-aware
smart contracts through technological assemblies. In Proceedings of the Designing Interactive Systems Conference.
ACM.

[139] Maurizio Teli, Peter Lyle, and Mariacristina Sciannamblo. 2018. Institutioning the Common: The Case of Commonfare.
In Proceedings of the 15th Participatory Design Conference: Full Papers - Volume 1 (PDC ’18). Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1145/3210586.3210590

[140] Carmela Troncoso, Marios Isaakidis, George Danezis, and Harry Halpin. 2017. Systematizing Decentralization and
Privacy: Lessons from 15 Years of Research and Deployments. arXiv e-prints, Article arXiv:1704.08065 (April 2017),
arXiv:1704.08065 pages. arXiv:1704.08065 [cs.CR]

[141] Ludwig Trotter, Mike Harding, Chris Elsden, Nigel Davies, and Chris Speed. 2020. A Mobile Platform for Event-Driven
Donations Using Smart Contracts. In Proceedings of the 21st International Workshop on Mobile Computing Systems
and Applications (Austin, TX, USA) (HotMobile ’20). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 108.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3376897.3379161

[142] F. Tschorsch and B. Scheuermann. 2016. Bitcoin and Beyond: A Technical Survey on Decentralized Digital Currencies.

IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials 18, 3 (2016), 2084–2123.

[143] Natascha Van der Zwan. 2014. Making sense of financialization. Socio-economic review 12, 1 (2014), 99–129.
[144] Angelica Villa and Angelica Villa. 2021. World Wide Web Code NFT Sells for $5.4 M. at Sotheby’s Auction.
[145] Jayne Wallace, John McCarthy, Peter C. Wright, and Patrick Olivier. 2013. Making Design Probes Work. In Proceedings
of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Paris, France) (CHI ’13). Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 3441–3450. https://doi.org/10.1145/2470654.2466473

[146] Jayne Wallace, Joyce SR Yee, and Abigail Durrant. 2014. Reflections on a synergistic format for disseminating research

through design. In CHI’14 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 781–792.

[147] Mark Walport. 2016. Distributed ledger technology: Beyond blockchain. UK Government Office for Science 1 (2016).
[148] Mark Weiser. 1999. The computer for the 21st century. ACM SIGMOBILE mobile computing and communications

review 3, 3 (1999), 3–11.

ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: December 2021.

Blockchain and Beyond: Understanding Blockchains through Prototypes and Public Engagement

71

[149] Heather Wiltse. 2020. Relating to Things : Design, Technology and the Artificial. Bloomsbury Academic.
[150] Ludwig Wittgenstein. 1953. Philosophical investigations. Macmillan Publishing Company.
[151] Gavin Wood et al. 2014. Ethereum: A secure decentralised generalised transaction ledger. Ethereum project yellow

paper 151, 2014 (2014), 1–32.

[152] Aaron Wright and Primavera De Filippi. 2015. Decentralized blockchain technology and the rise of lex cryptographia.

Available at SSRN 2580664 (2015).

[153] Peter Wright and John McCarthy. 2004. Technology as experience. MIT Press Cambridge, MA.
[154] Yifan Yang, Daniel Cooper, John Collomosse, Constantin C Drăgan, Mark Manulis, Jamie Steane, Arthi Manohar,
Jo Briggs, Helen Jones, and Wendy Moncur. 2019. TAPESTRY: A Blockchain based Service for Trusted Interaction
Online. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.06186 (2019).

[155] John Zimmerman, Jodi Forlizzi, and Shelley Evenson. 2007. Research through Design as a Method for Interaction
Design Research in HCI. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (San
Jose, California, USA) (CHI ’07). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 493–502. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/1240624.1240704

ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: December 2021.

72

Murray-Rust, et. al.

10 BLOCKCHAIN OVERVIEW
This appendix provides an extremely brief overview of blockchain technology to help a reader
make sense of the technical aspects of this paper.

Fig. 2. Simple overview of the Ethereum blockchain. Transactions represent transfers of cryptocurrency from
one wallet to another, identified by unique IDs. Transactions are combined to form Blocks, and each Block
has a cryptographic hash of the previous block in the chain - this forms the Blockchain, and provides proof
against tampering with historic data. Transactions may be created by individuals, who control their own
wallets, or for most users by organisations that manage multiple wallets on their behalf and allow exchange
with traditional currencies. Miners attempt to create the next block out of the pending transactions, typically
for some reward in cryptocurrency. This is governed by a distributed consensus algorithm that decides who
gets to make the next block - in current Ethereum, this is based on ‘proof of work’, where miners compete to
solve the arbitrary difficulty problem of finding a ‘magic number’ that means the output of the hash function
is in a certain range. In the bottom of the diagram, developers create Smart Contracts, and deploy them to
the blockchain, typically with payment in a secondary currency (“Gas” in the case of Ethereum). The Smart
Contracts respond to events on the chain or ones fed in by connected applications, and changes to their
state are recorded on each block. Distributed applications (DApps) allow users to interact with these smart
contracts.

ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: December 2021.

hashhashhashMiningEventsDeveloperMinersTransactions to processIndividual UserWallet ProviderWalletApplicationServerBlockBlockchainSmart ContractConsensusExchange$€£Transfer 1ETH from wallet #FC3D to wallet #D3C6DAppsIcons provided CC by the Noun ProjectBlockchain and Beyond: Understanding Blockchains through Prototypes and Public Engagement

73

Table 1. Glossary of terms used in the paper related to cryptocurrency, blockchain and distributed ledgers.

• Blockchain A data structure that provides a tamper-proof record of data in a decentralised manner,
by cryptographically linking new data to the existing record. As new blocks of data are added to the
front of the chain, it becomes increasingly difficult to alter any of the previous blocks.

• DLT Distributed Ledger Technologies. A ledger is a way to record transactions so that they cannot
later be altered - for example, an accounting book, where each transaction is recorded along with
the new account balance, so that a historic transaction could not be altered without changing every
subsequent transaction. Distributed ledgers do this in a decentralised manner, so that many people can
verify correct operation and add data to the ledger. Blockchains are a common implementation of this
concept.

• Smart Contract A way to write code whose execution can be independently verified, allowing it to

have financial actions. Typically, they are executed on a blockchain or other DLT.

• Bitcoin A cryptocurrency, based on the Bitcoin blockchain. Probably the best known cryptocurrency,
although it has technical limitations compared to subsequent projects: limited possibility for smart
contracts and a long time between each block.

• Ethereum A cryptocurrency, based on a blockchain. More modern than Bitcoin, it allows for smart
contracts, written in Solidity or other high level languages. It is popular with developers, as it is easy to
run a private, local blockchain with the same technology, and development is relatively rapid.

• Fiat Currency Most standard currencies at present. A currency used as money that is not directly
convertible into anything else (i.e. no direct equivalence to gold) that gains its value from exchange
and taxation.

• Altcoin An alternative currency, often used to refer to any cryptocurrency except bit coin, and particu-

larly for currencies with specific purposes or affordances.

• ICO Similar to floating a company on the stock exchange, in an Initial Coin Offering, some amount
of a cryptocurrency is made available, in exchange for either fiat currency or other, more established
currencies.

• Escrow A financial structure where money is held in trust until certain conditions are met - for example,
a payment may be held in escrow until goods are delivered. This is designed to ensure that the buyer
cannot avoid paying, and the seller cannot get paid without delivering.

• On-chain and Off-chain When transactions on a blockchain are slow or costly, ’off-chain’ solutions
can be used, where exchanges are made rapidly and cheaply in another network, and occasionally
written back to the main blockchain. For example, Bitcoin transactions take at least 10 minutes to be
visible, longer to be sure of, and cost a significant fraction of a dollar to carry out. The Lightning Network
is intended to run alongside the Bitcoin blockchain, rapidly and cheaply carrying out transactions, and
only committing them to the blockchain when necessary.

• Attestation An assurance that a claim is true, for example attesting that a person has a particular

credential or certification

• Mining The process of creating new blocks on a blockchain by a) collecting pending transactions b)
satisfying a cryptographic function that requires randomly guessing from a huge number of possibilities.
This is a known as ’proof of work’ - it means that each person’s chance of creating a new block is
dependent on the computational power and energy that they use. Creating a new block typically gives
the creator an amount of cryptocurrency, so there is a correlation between energy input and value.
• Self Sovereign Identity A form of identity that does not require a centralised authority, often backed

by a blockchain.

ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: December 2021.

