Blockchain Synchronous Trust Consensus Model 

Christopher Gorog MBA, PMP, CISSP, Terrance E. Boult IEEE Fellow 
University of Colorado Colorado Springs 

1  Abstract 
This  work 

introduces  a  novel  approach  for 

the 
governance of a blockchain containing social constructs and 
technical  viability  for  widescale  applications  for  the  next 
generation of distributed ledgers. Functional requirements for 
this new blockchain distributed ledger (BDL) were garnered 
from  an  analysis  of  the  needs  for  large  scale  applications. 
Applied research was employed as part of this endeavor to test 
the practicality and scalability of the solution outline. Novel 
features  in  this  application  draw  together  controls  and 
enforcement  for  cybersecurity,  digital  content  management, 
licensing, and configuration management. The Synchronous 
Trust  Consensus  Model™  applied  research  project  named 
the  BlockChain 
Project  Philos™  was  sponsored  by 
Development  Community  (BCDC)  with  support  from  the 
University  of  Colorado[1],  [2].  Research  has  followed  both 
theorized conceptual and theory-to-practice models to prove 
the  scientific  soundness  and  the  viability  of  incentive  for 
community  engagement.  Results  show  that  this  new  model 
proves 
indefinitely  expandable 
blockchain distributed ledger capability, while also providing 
a new participant incentive that is highly effective in engaging 
a community of practitioners. 

feasibility  of  an 

the 

2  Introduction  

In this publication, we introduce a new type of consensus 
model which has included at its core a systems-engineering 
approach to blockchain distributed ledger. This approach was 
first  theorized  as  a  solution  to  design-limiting  issues  found 
during scale testing for blockchain applications. The proposed 
solution  is  now  in  the  testing  phase  of  an  applied  research 
project in partnership with the State of Colorado, University 
of  Colorado  Colorado  Springs  (UCCS),  Colorado  State 
University 
the  Blockchain 
Development Community[1]. 

(CSU),  and  members  of 

This model introduces several novel key features which 
include  1)  indefinite  transaction  bandwidth  and  scaling 
capability, 2)  trust-based incentive model eliminating waste 
from mining 3) integrated cybersecurity capabilities, 4) data 
management for end of life, and 5) a robust open governance 
model. With the systems engineering approach, several other 
features are addressed and additional capabilities added which 
were not previously envisioned with BDL.  

It  was  imperative  for  this  effort  to  elicit  industry 
participation  and  acceptance  which  needed  to  include  a 
widely  engaging  contributor  incentivization  such  as  those 

1 

initially-successful 

cryptocurrency 
found 
with 
[4].  The  BlockChain  Development 
applications[3], 
Community,  comprised  of  students  from  more  than  eight 
universities,  and  other  corporate  partners,  was  created  to 
organize volunteers and form a public research organization 
charter  as was found to be most effective by  Sujan in 2018 
aimed at embracing of new standards for market adoption[5]. 
Findings of Sujan, indicate that “the relationship between the 
size of the venture and the market acceptance of an interface 
format  is  inverted  U-shaped.  This  suggests  that  more 
members in the venture per se cannot be counted upon to lead 
to  market  acceptance  of  the  format”[5].  Leveraging  these 
results, the BCDC charter initially engaged a limited number 
of contributing members but focused on building widescale 
awareness  to  potential  user  organizations.  Also  considering 
the  findings  of  Son  et  al.,  2019  is  structured  to  support 
entrepreneurship  in  members  and  create  a  “coopetitive 
environment”  as  defined  by  Johansson  et  al.,  2019  to  elicit 
cooperation  and  competitive  drive  for  its  members[6],  [7]. 
The BCDC charter was initially organized as a community-
sourced  project.  In  the  future,  the  project  is  intended  to  be 
released  as  open  source.  Maintaining  control  with  a 
manageable size group of contributors  was deemed the best 
approach for the initial effort[5]. The success of the  BCDC 
and partners have  furthermore proven the exceptional value 
and  enticement  of  the  organizational  structure  and  the 
project’s inherent incentive structure.  

3  Motivation  

State of Colorado legislators have been enthused to find 
solutions  to  show  accountability  of  State  Government  to 
constituents, and provide online privacy for Citizens[8]–[11]. 
The research for this publication was initiated to support such 
solutions  for  accountability  and  privacy  using  BDL.  Early 
results of research to align with this direction saw a similar 
division of research topics as did Ademi, E., which were well 
classified  as:  “1)  blockchain  reports,  2)  blockchain 
improvement, and 3) blockchain application”[12]. To move 
forward  to  the  next  phase  and  achieve  an  implementable 
solution, the decision was made to take a unique look at the 
strengths  of  BDL,  and  then  add  features  to  offset  the 
limitations and/or weaknesses identified as the topics of many 
research publications[12]–[18]. 

Overcoming the limitations on blockchains would need 
to  address  a  holistic  solution  which  includes  a  systems-
engineering  approach  and  ground  up  design  processes  to 
attempt  to  resolve  as  many  scalability-limiting  issues  as 

 
 
 
 
 
possible. Our review of these begins with the most scalability-
limiting issues, the integration of best practices for security, 
as well as social and community needs for trust and visibility 
for  participants.  Yli-Huumo  et  al.,  2016  report  identified 
several  limiting  issues  that  remain  true  as  this  document  is 
being  amassed[13].  The  inability  to  scale  large  programs 
using  blockchain  is  twofold:  the  nature  of  the  technical 
limitations, and due to the inability to control and govern an 
indefinitely 
currently-
implemented distributed ledgers.   

expandable 

program 

using 

4  Synchronous Trust Consensus 

Model™ 
We 

features 

introduce 

the  “Synchronous  Trust  Consensus 
Model™”  (STCM)  as  a  new  direction  for  blockchain 
distributed ledger governance based on the results of applied 
research,  combined  with  parallel 
for  best 
cybersecurity  practices.  The  base  concepts  underlying 
blockchain distributed ledger are cryptologic  operations put 
into  practice  using  unique  methods.  We  foresee  that  these 
technologies and industries will allow BDL to converge with 
other  common  cybersecurity  practices[19],  [20].    As  the 
initial  enthusiasm  and  glamour  related  to  cryptocurrency 
wanes  due  to  their  functional  limitations,  exploring  these 
connections are paramount for next-generation use cases[21]. 
Cryptography, being the underlying mathematical foundation 
for  blockchain,  and  the  primary  method  to  implement 
cybersecurity, makes it only natural that blockchain research 
should  be  a  primary  consideration 
to  discover  and 
operationalize  cybersecurity  solutions.  We  have  taken  the 
approach,, as with the transitive property in mathematics, to 
irrevocably 
consider  Cybersecurity  and  Blockchain  as 
connected[22].  In  this  applied  research  we  connected  these 
practices as if they are a single technology and will eventually 
become integrated industries[19].   

5  Background for This Work  

The  initial  blockchain  use  case  we  envisioned  was  the 
distribution and logistics management of cryptographic keys 
for Internet of Things (IOT) devices[23]. The urgent need for 
scaling to meet demands for the number of computerized IOT 
devices  worldwide  –  which  is  approaching  hundreds  of 
billions – required a new thought process for a blockchain that 
could  ultimately  scale  to  trillions  of  transactions.  Early  use 
to  study 
cases  provided  an  opportunity  and  support 
applications  that  required  scaling  to  the  scope  needed  for 
usage for a Colorado Statewide program[9], [24]. Findings of 
Ademi  E.  and  Yli-Huumo  et al.,  aligned  with  initial  results 
from  prototypes  developed  on  a  widely-adopted  production 
blockchain,  that  project  teams  characterized  as  technology-
limiting and completely inhibiting to  the use of those target 
platforms[12],  [13],  [18],  [25].    The  results  showed  that 
scaling  was  not  feasible  using  any  current  technology 
initial  findings  were  also 
solutions  evaluated.  These 
functional  needs, 
instrumental 

in  determining 

the 

requirements 

organizational 
for  scalability,  and  most 
importantly, garnering a foundation for additional research.  
The  initial  test  cases  also  identified  that  early  BDL 
implementation lacked an ability to govern a social program 
in  the  constructs  of  the  blockchain[26],  [27].  Evaluation  of 
statewide  programs  for  the  State  of  Colorado  required 
constructs  and  capabilities  related  to  social  paradigms  to 
support   governance on  a  large  scale[6],  [24],  [28].  Several 
examples  of  similar  exploration  can  be  found  in  many 
industries as governance across multiple industry participants 
is required. Examples can be found with the Pharmaceutical 
industry  MediLedger  Project[27],  [29].  Since  constructs 
required for governance are in a very early stage in platforms 
explored,  it  was  determined  for  Project  Philos™  that  new 
constructs for governance needed to be built from the ground 
up. Our research concluded that governance capability would 
need  to  be 
the  blockchain  consensus 
constructs.  Ultimately  the  new  solution  would  contain  a 
hybrid of successful traits found in various applications and 
additional  functionality  beneficial  to  the  primary  identified 
use cases[9], [10], [27].  

integrated  into 

Early research identified that the new direction would be 
most effective by associating a trust value related to actions 
performed, which is directly enforced within consensus itself. 
Additionally,  trust  relations  of  individual  participants  were 
identified as beneficial to enable the quality of transactions as 
a tool for governance of the overall blockchain. The inclusion 
of  entity-related  trust  provides  a  major  social  constructthat 
can  be  used  to  resolve  large globally  unsolved  problems  in 
cybersecurity[30]. The categorization of trust and constructs 
of human trust assessment identified by Gorog, Boult in 2019 
were incorporated into both the STCM and the novel Philos™ 
BDL design[23], [30]–[32].   

5.1 Overcoming BDL Limitations 

technology  were 

In  a  review  of  initial  early  blockchain  concepts,  it  is 
apparent that social reform was the primary consideration and 
less 
the  application  and  supporting 
emphasized[3],  [26],  [31],  [33].  The  concept's  success  with 
Bitcoin showed that the consumer-base appetite existed for a 
digital-age trustless exchange capability[31]. Blockchain use 
beyond  cryptocurrency  has  many  practical  and  widescale 
uses.    Over  71  distributed  ledger  program  candidates  have 
been  identified  within  the  state  of  Colorado[9],  [34]. 
However,  as  initial  research  proved,  existing  blockchain 
technologies  are  not  robust  enough  to  support  wide  scale 
adoption[35],  [36].  Limitations  categorized  in  work  from 
“Innovation  and  Software,  Lappeenranta  University  of 
Technology,  Lappeenranta,  Finland,”  offered  an  accurate 
starting point for  this work with the following categories of 
BDL limitation[13]: “1)  throughput,  2)  latency, 3) size and 
bandwidth,  4)  security,  5)  wasted  resources,  6)  usability, 
versioning, hard forks,  and multiple chains”. The proposed 
Synchronous  Trust  Consensus  Model™  (SCTM)  and  the 
implementation  of  the  SCTM  in  the  Philos™  Marketplace 
provide systems engineering solutions with workable features 
to  solve  all  of  these  limitations.  The  application  of 

2 

 
 
components  and  parts  of  SCTM  is  summarized  in  the 
remainder of this article.   

5.1.1 

Indefinite Transaction Scalability  

Our  research  identified  an  inability  to  scale  as  the 
principal  limitation  required  to  be  overcome  to  meet  the 
identified practical and social use cases[12], [18], [25], [36]–
[38]. Many notable efforts are underway to solve scalability 
issues.  Some have made successful strides, notably with the 
introduction  of  parallel 
chain 
operations[17],  [39].  By  limiting  the  number  of  ledgers 
required  to  store  duplicate  transactions  we  sanction,  over  a 
given  time  a  parallel  side-chaining  blockchain  can  handle 
more  throughput  then  a  serially  restricted  chain  due  to  the 
nature  of  reduction  of  complexity.  The  STCM  implements 
side chains by default to mirror successfully scalable models.  

chaining 

side 

and 

5.1.2  Growth of Distributed Ledgers Over Time  

The initial intent and theory of operation for blockchain 
was to be able to trace all actions back to the first transaction 
held in the genesis block. Though this would accomplish the 
proposed  social  intent,  it  is  apparent  that  this  would  not  be 
able to support an indefinite number of participants making 
an indefinite number of transactions for an infinite period of 
time[16],  [17].  The  size  of  resources  required  to  house  the 
possible  magnitude of  transactions  and  the  time  required  to 
verify each operation back to the genesis block reaches a point 
where  the  resources  and  time  are  not  economically  or 
practically feasible. The STCM implements a new feature to 
carry forward values and parameters with each new consensus 
block, removing the dependency on indefinite needs to store 
past transactions.  

5.1.3  Storage Requirements 

Data storage requirements for current distributed ledgers 
instances have already become problematic[16]. As sizes of 
overall  ledgers  grows,  the  growth  in  the  number  of 
transactions  outpaces  the  storage  needs  supplied  by  people 
who  choose  to  maintain  independently-operated  distributed 
ledgers[40]. This results in a dynamic imbalance between the 
needs  for  participation  and  the  incentives  offered  by  the 
technological 
to  verify 
the  originating  genesis  block  become 
transactions 
unfeasible, third-party verification services become necessary 
to  support  existing  implementations  of  blockchain[18].  The 
need for a verification service  essentially  negates  the initial 
social  motivation  of  independence  from  third-party  trust 
described by Nakamoto, 2008[3]. 

implementation[41].  As 

times 

to 

The  initial  BDL  models  neglected  to  consider  overall 
resource  requirements,  nor  how  they  will  scale  with 
operations  over  time.  The  STCM’s  novel  capabilities 
incorporates management and end-of-life planning for data to 
minimize adverse effects of scaling over time.  It also adds a 
method for applying end-of-life criteria for blockchain data, 
as the reliance on legacy data is separated from operational 
criteria. 

3 

5.1.4  Longevity and Reduced Energy Footprint 

Incentives  for  cryptocurrency  which  use  transactional 
proof models have adversely increased the worldwide energy 
footprint. Leading research has identified this as an epidemic 
issue,  as  Sutherland,  2019  quoted[42]  “Blockchain 
applications  must  transition  from  proof-of-work  toward 
energy-efficient  consensus  algorithms  to  be  sustainable”. 
Leading  research  has  proposed  that  the  trend  or  increased 
energy use by blockchains is in dire need to be reversed and 
that  international  treaties  should  be  drafted  to  restrict 
blockchain mining[42], [43].  

Another flaw with transactional proof-incentive models 
is they only support the initial phase of the overall transaction 
lifecycle[3],  [4].  However,  the  needs  for  sustainability  and 
longevity  of  the  blockchain  require  transaction  and  data 
content  availability  for  long  periods  of  time.  The  entire 
conceptional basis of such incentive models conflict with best 
organizational practices summarized in, “On the Wisdom of 
Rewarding  A  While  Hoping  for  B,”  as  the  expectation  to 
maintain  ledgers  for  an  indefinite  timeframe  conflicts  with 
incentives that only supports engagements during the initial 
transaction phase[44].  

The  STCM  institutes  a  novel  incentive  structure  which 
eliminates  mining  practices,  and  instead  is  based  on 
participation  over  time.  At  the  same  time,  the  model  is 
structured to align the reward with the needs to align longevity 
with  best  organizational  practices.  This  new  direction 
provides  the  groundwork  for  reversal  of  a  global  trend  of 
energy  waste.  It  is  anticipated  that  this  new  direction  can 
change the trend which is having a negative planetary wide 
impact[43], [45].  

5.1.5  Data and Transaction Management  

Most blockchain applications do not consider managing 
visibility of the data related to chain transactions at all. Our 
identified  that  the  need  for  public  blockchain  content  is 
limited to verification of the transactions, and also identified 
a need for private off-chain storage which could be verified 
by the chain transaction[4], [4], [46], [47]. The novel STCM 
approach  addresses  blockchain  visibility  and  user  privacy 
with dynamic user-controlled features.  

A STCM user control feature allowing for the separation 
of  transaction  and  off-chain  content  provides  a  social 
construct  to  enhance  usability.  This  feature  also  provides  a 
method  to  support  regulatory  compliance,  jurisdictional 
control,  and  data  management  features  for  individual  data 
owners to implement digital rights management[48].  

5.2 Parallel Distribution of Ledgers 

The  STCM  incorporates  parallel  capability  using  side 
chains as the base feature for the framework. The modularity 
introduced  with  the  STCM  to  support  scalability  has  been 
modeled  after  the  internet’s  global  expansive  framework 
created  by  the  router  and  domain  name  service  (DNS)[49], 
[50].  The  applied  research  Project  Philos™  in  partnership 
with BCDC has structured designs modeled after the internet 
and  DNS  service.  The  BCDC  Project  created 
two 
components:  the  “Peer  Ledger”  (PL)  and  the  “Consortium 

 
 
Server” (CS). Similar in features to the internet, the PL can be 
replicated indefinitely with each connection to the framework 
registered with a consortium service[49]. Once registered, a 
new PL enters the synchronous consensus and can continue 
to participate, while gaining incentive rewards incrementally 
over time. Each PL builds a reputation for performance and 
strengthens their standing as they build their trust ratings over 
time. 

This  overall  system-of-systems  creates  what  is  more 
accurately  characterized  as  a  blockchain  marketplace. 
this  marketplace 
Multiple  use  cases  can  coexist  on 
simultaneously  without  interfering  with  or  affecting  the 
performance of each other. Scaling both new  use cases and 
the  number  of  transactions  required  for  an  operational 
application  are  easily  done  by  the  addition  of  more  PL 
systems.    As  the  marketplace  expands,  the  addition  of 
consortium servers can also be scaled in a similar method by 
adding more systems. 

5.2.1  Side Chaining by Design 

In the STCM, each individual instance of a distributed PL 
creates its own blocks on an individualized side chain. These 
side chains created by each independent PLs come together in 
varying numbers with different requirements for consensus. 
This  approach  uses  a  similar  method  to  the  quorum  slicing 
successful  in  the  Stellar  model[39]. 
  The  systematic 
functionality  of  the  entire  blockchain  exhibits  a  semi-
autonomous  operation  capability,  modular  in  nature,  while 
containing a global control structure to implement consensus. 
This  division  of  the  overall  marketplace  into  side  chains 
creates 
to  rapidly  produce  content  block 
throughput. This component was implemented to address the 
limitations found on throughput of existing BDLs. The only 
restriction to content creation becomes the capabilities of the 
systems producing each side chain[13].   

the  ability 

5.2.2  Asynchronous and Synchronous in Tandem 
Human initiated operation exhibiting a random aspect to 
their  origination.  While  many  computer  era  operations  are 
predictably  timed  and  require  extremely  rapid  responses. 
Initial  applications  of  block  chain  only  considered  the 
asynchronous  operations  to  support  the  human  related 
transactions. Connecting cybersecurity best practices  within 
the STCM model led to the addition of features which support 
rapid transactions and predictably timed operations to sustain 
the  synchronous  operation  and  periodicity of  machines[30], 
[33], [51], [52]. To support connection of both human actions 
and machine periodicity, a novel feature is included as a base 
control  in  the  STCM  which  alternates  synchronous  and 
asynchronous  consensus  levels.  Asynchronous  individual 
user actions originated by humans make content blocks which 
are inserted at the asynchronous sequence in which they are 
initiated.  Synchronous  requirements 
that 
consensus be made on time before the side chain creation of 
independent intervals content blocks can once again resume.  
As successful in the Stellar model STCM is divided into 
three tiers much like the Leif, Mid and Top tier structure[39]. 
In the STCM these are Primary, Bridge and Global. Each tier 

then  restrict 

4 

is  independently  responsible  for  its  own  calculated  values 
based  on  content  created.    Primary  and  Global  consensus 
required operations are performed on a finite time interval.  

in 

include  contributions 

In order to combine the primary tier and the and the top 
global  tier  which  are  both  synchronous,  an  asynchronous 
middle  bridging  tier  was  incorporated  into  the  model.  This 
bridging  tier  serves  a  few  needs  including  the  ability  to 
connect  otherwise  disconnected  primary 
tier  sidechain 
operations for value exchange. Operations of the bridging tier 
also 
resolving  double-spend 
attempts.  Double-spend  addressed  by  the  Nakamoto  and 
further  researched  by  Rosenthal,  embody  attempts  by 
participants  to  game  the  system  by  trying  to  participate  in 
multiple transactions concurrently where they benefit at the 
expense  of  other  participants[3], 
[53].  The  STCM 
asynchronous  bridge  consensus  uses  larger  quorum  slices 
which  verify  the  lower  tier  to  provide  higher  certainty 
protection against double spend. Thought double spend is not 
fully  resolved  until  transactions  reach  top  tier  (global) 
consensus, bridging confirms calculation for each lower tier 
enabling  forensic  inclusion  of  each  side  chain  through 
verification by a larger percentage of ledgers[39].  

5.2.3  Periodic and Cyclic Consensus  

The primary grouping of PLs which produce a side chain 
is called a Primary Synchronization List (Sync List) or (PSL). 
This  minimal  grouping  of  PLs  is  a  set  of  distributed 
blockchain  PLs  which  stores redundant  copies  of  the  entire 
content  of  each  of  the  members’  side  chain  of  blocks.  The 
sync list enters into the primary consensus, creating a single 
consensus  block  containing  the  hash  of  the  last  block  from 
each side chain on a reoccurring increment called the Primary 
Synchronization  Interval.  This  feature  addresses  latency  by 
reducing the requirements of data storage on duplicate ledgers 
to  a  manageable  size.  It  also  adds  the  first  features  of  the 
STCM which provide for cybersecurity integration and trust 
building. The requirement for cyclic consensus incorporates 
the synchronous component into the STCM, departing from 
legacy BDL by the additional ability to relate enforcement of 
finite timing operations.   

5.3 Intersection with Cybersecurity  

With  the  ground-up  applied  research  approach,  cyber 
security  best  practice  was  incorporated  into  the  STCM  and 
Project  Philos™  to  enable  a  system-of-systems  governance 
structure.  The  concept  and  features  to  support  both  layered 
defense-in-depth,  and  zero-trust  were  combined  into  the 
communications  for  each  PL  system[54]–[57].    Project 
Philos™ included a zero-trust wrapper and capability which 
restricts  each  system  operationally  to  a  uniform  base 
structure. In cybersecurity terms this enables a configuration 
management  structure  built  into  the  functionality  of  each 
distributed ledger[58], [59]. The configuration of each PL is 
verified  and  placed  into  immutable  consensus  blocks.  In 
combination  with  the  synchronous  feature,  this  enables  the 
enforcement  of  system  health  for  each 
ledger  as  a 
marketplace-wide control[59].  

 
 
5.3.1  Security and Privacy 

With the integration of timing-enforced zero-trust, each 
PL system contains defense-in-depth with features similar to 
those  found  with  multi-factor  authentication[60].  The 
capabilities for zero-trust are enabled by blockchain-tracked 
provisioning of trust components in each PL[23], [54], [56], 
[61]. The net effect is that each system must be able to identify 
itself  on  initial  communications  with  others  in  order  to 
participate as a trusted PL node. This feature enables a largely 
missing  capability  in  the  digital  age  enabling  a  widespread 
ability to enforce compliance to a uniform set of standards.  

5.3.2  Compliance Controls 

The  STCM  novel  security  tools  provide  a  push-based 
adherence capability for compliance enforcement. The nature 
of periodicity found in the STCM require strict operation on 
a periodic basis to permit PLs to be included into consensus. 
This  control  capability  is  used  to  enforce  widespread 
compliance not only for the PL systems, but foreseeably also 
for many end use compliance applications.  

Since  the  Project  Philos™  primary  objective  was 
supporting governance visibility and meeting needs for State 
control,  our  research  identified  attempting  to  continuously 
identify rogue or ill-behaved nodes an extremely high risk. In 
order  to  mitigate  this  risk,  a  distributed  ledger  code 
verification  feature  was  incorporated.  This  feature  adds  an 
additional layer of protection over Byzantine Fault Tolerance, 
Federated  Byzantine  Agreement,  or  other  fault-tolerant 
consensus only[39], [62], [63].  

A  large  focus  of  the  Stellar  model  and  a  foreseen 
weakness  is  the  ambiguity  of  codebase  and  lack  of 
configuration  control.  This  requires  excessive  effort  to 
identify ill-behaved and well-behaved nodes[39]. The STCM 
version  verification  incentivizes  community  self-patrolling 
though  the  vested  interest  of  each  peer.  Partner  ledgers  are 
penalized jointly and thus have incentive to verify partnering 
ledger  configuration  and  compliance.  The  ability  to  control 
revisions over the entire BDL marketplace should also greatly 
reduce the capability for hard forks of the chain, addressing a 
major  security  risk  inherent  to  most  BDL  applications.  Our 
predictions are that several security and usability issues such 
as selfish mining, and majority attacks also may be mitigated 
or nearly eliminated with this control[14], [64].   

To  mitigate  any  risk  associated  with  the  STCM  source 
control, the entire process is designed to be openly visible and 
neutrally-governed.  A  consortium  governing  body  was 
formulated  to  maintain  visibility  to  the  revisioning  and 
compliance structure[6]. This incentivization anticipates the 
evolution  of  a  cooperative  environment  to  foster  expansion 
and adoption of the distributed ledger marketplace[28].   

6  Operation of the STCM 

The Synchronous Trust Consensus Model™ reduced to 
its most basic components consists of a Peer Ledger (PL) and 
Consortium  Server  (CS).  The  PL  is  a  single  autonomous 
system developed to operate with other PLs which operate on 
the  same  protocols  and  functionality  as  there  own.  Each 

distributed  PL  is  a  modular  unit  like  the  system  of  routers 
which  comprise  the  Internet[49],  [50].  A  new  PL  can  be 
entered into operation and registered with a local Consortium 
Server (CS) which then allows it to participate in unison with 
the system-of-systems created by the marketplace of all the 
registered PLs which maintain good standing. All the PL use 
the  support  of  CSs’  to  continuously  participate  in  the 
synchronous consensus.  

6.1 Three Tier Consensus  

Three  tiers  of  consensus,  Primary,  Bridge,  and  Global, 
have  different  features  and  functional  necessities  in  their 
support  for  achieving  the  STCM  indefinite  scalability.  The 
content  blocks,  which  correspond  to  Leif  Tiers  in  other 
blockchain  models,  deliver  the  feature  allowing  rapidly-
producible  side  chaining[39].  Throughput  for  production  of 
content blocks, as well as the number of unrelated uses cases, 
is  expandable  by  adding  more  lower-level  tiers  into  the 
marketplace  of  distributed  ledgers.  The  three-tier  design  is 
displayed in Figure “Three Levels of Consensus.”  

Figure: Three Levels of Consensus  

6.1.1  Primary Consensus 

The  lowest  tier  of  consensus  is  the  Primary  Consensus 
(P*),  which  supports  uniformity  of  a  subset  of  distributed 
ledgers. It is also the first level which contains a component 
to  enable  the  primary  participation  incentive  structure. 
Primary  Consensus  operations 
lowest 
synchronous structured level which becomes the basis of trust 
calculations related to the performance of each peer ledger's 
adherence  to  synchronous  requirements.  The  P*  requires  a 
one hundred percent successful consensus of each member of 
the Primary Synchronization List. 

implement 

the 

6.1.2  Bridge Consensus  

The middle tier consensus is the Bridge Consensus (B*) 
which supports the marketplace-wide impartial verification of 
subsets of P* operations. The B* is entered into by multiple 
groupings of synchronization lists and is done asynchronously 
when  required  to  perform  exchanges  of  value,  renewal  of 
transaction  licenses,  or  establishment  of  global  parameters. 
The  success  of  B*  depends  on  receiving  a  percentage  of 

5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
outstanding ledgers performing matching calculations which 
verify 
the  results  of  calculations  produced  by  each 
independent Synchronization List participating in the B*. The 
minimum percentage or ledgers required to create a B* is set 
by a governance organization's global configuration setting.  
Though  B*  are  done  on  an  as-required  basis,  global 
required configuration settings enforce a maximum timespan 
between  successful  B*.  When  the  maximum  timespan  is 
reached,  the  Synchronization  List  cannot  continue  creating 
side chains nor P* until they have performed a B* operation. 
The maximum timespan between B* is set by a governance 
organization's global configuration setting. This requirement 
also ensures the systematic participation in global consensus 
by the PSL, which may be offline or otherwise restricted from 
participating in a global consensus. Even with the occurrence 
of a PSL missing global consensus, all B* performed between 
Global  Consensus  instances  ensure  that  the  prior  PSL  side 
chain content blocks are included in the Global Consensus. 

6.1.3  Global Consensus 

The top tier consensus named the Global Consensus (G*) 
provides  a  reoccurring  requirement  for  a  majority  of  the 
outstanding  distributed  ledgers  to  reach  consensus.  This 
serves to eliminate any possibility of double spend across the 
entire  marketplace,  provides  the  global  compliance  control 
feature, and enables the global governance capability.  

Once  a  day  at  the  predetermined  time  set  by  the 
governance organization in a global configuration parameter, 
all active ledgers produce a final set of B* operations, which 
are  then  committed  globally  for  consensus.  All  active  root- 
level Consortium Servers, and a majority percentage of active 
PLs,  are  required  to  participate  in  the  election  process  and 
create each G*.  

In  the  occurrence  that  a  PSL  is  offline  or  otherwise 
unable to participate in G*, the last successful B* ensures that 
content blocks created prior to that B* are included in the G*.  
An exception to this is the requirement that PSL participants 
are only permitted to forgo G* a limited number of times. This 
permissible  number  of  missed  G*  is  set  by  a  governance 
organization's global configuration value setting. 

6.1.4  Global Consortium Services 

Along  with  the  Peer  Ledger,  the  second  component 
which makes up the expansible distributed ledger marketplace 
is  the  Consortium  Server.  A  Consortium  Server  is  a  single 
autonomous system also, like the Peer Ledgers, developed to 
operate together with other CSs identical to itself in order to 
provide a global service. The Consortium service provided by 
the  collection  of  CSs  supports 
the  coordination  and 
governance  of  all  the  PLs  participating  in  the  entire 
distributed ledger marketplace. Again, in comparison to the 
Internet, the CS can be associated with the  type of services 
found  in  the  Domain  Naming  System  and  Domain  Name 
Server (DNS) support[49], [50].  

It would be improbable for any design to encompass all 
considerations,  thus  allowance  for  future  feature  discovery 
was anticipated in the  strategy. To this end, global controls 
for parameters are provided by the Consortium service. Each 

parameter is available on a pull basis, with the responsibility 
of  each  participating  system  to  retrieve  them.  Consortium 
administrative controls allows for the augmentation of current 
parameters,  or 
future 
parameters.  

incorporation  of  unidentified 

Consortium administrative console workflow provides a 
structure  for  the  governing  body  to  propose  the  addition or 
augmentation  of  global  parameters  or  permissions.  The 
structure incorporates a public method of displaying proposed 
parameters, prior to promoting them to global use. Once the 
parameter is proposed and publicly vetted the final workflow 
stage places the parameter into immutable G*. This final stage 
places parameters into side chains reflected on all Consortium 
Servers,  where  they  are  available  to  each  PL  and  globally 
enforced through the compliance control structure.  

6.1.5  Management for Expandability 

Our research and the applied Project Philos™ identified 
the  beneficial  application  of  smart  contracts  as  an 
indispensable  feature  for  the  application  of  the  disturbed 
ledger  marketplace[4],  [26].  However,  a  modular  approach 
with  minimal  uniform  block  size  was  desirable  to  support 
rapid large-scale operations and facilitate the STCM incentive 
model.  A  novel  feature  was  incorporated  providing  the 
separation  of  smart  contracts  from  the  blockchain  content. 
Smart contract operations were incorporated into the STCM 
but use an innovative structure called Transactions Contracts 
(TC).  

Instead of placing the entirety of the TC on the chain, its 
prototype definition is maintained as a global parameter. The 
publicly  displayed  TC  prototype  definition  incorporates  the 
contract logic only devoid of any individualized transaction 
content.  The  TC  is  registered  as  a  part  of  the  consortium 
configuration process, which is displayed publicly for vetting. 
Each  TC  prototype  must  be  entered  into  immutable  G* 
similarly to global configuration parameters before they are 
validated for use. Once registered, they are then available to 
the owner to use, or could be licensed to a third party. A PL 
uses a single TC repeatedly to produce the resultant output, 
which  becomes  the  data  within  each  content  block  inserted 
into  its  side  chain.  This  process  provides  for  expandability 
while supporting minimal content block size.  

Features  of  the  TC  enables  self-defined  validation 
capability of content, as well as a bility for identification of 
private  and  public  components.  Execution  of  the  TC  1) 
performs any self-validation of content, 2) separates content 
based on privacy classification, and 3) parses the content into 
either  the  side  chain  content  block  or  offline  data  storage 
respectively. A properly defined TC will be publicly provable 
based  on  its  prototype  definition,  and  self-operating  to 
achieve  the  restricted  conditions  of  the  contract  provider. 
Signatures  of  the  TC  currently  in  use  are  placed  into  each 
content  block  created  by  the  TC,  providing  verification  of 
versions for each TC execution.  

Needs  for  the  Colorado  Department  of  Regulatory 
Agencies (DORA) revealed that a direct alignment of license 
fulfillment  as  part  of  the  immutable  consensus  would  be 
beneficial. To meet this a novel approach to TC fulfillment 

6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
was incorporated into Project Philos™. Similarly to the use of 
Gas within the Ethereum blockchain, licenses are expunged 
during  the  application  of  a  Transaction  Contract[4].  The 
project  implemented  a  single  license  unit  related  to  one 
instance of a content block created by the execution of a TC.  
Each  PL  contains  a  license  value,  which  represents  the 
number  of  executions  and  subsequent  blocks  they  are 
permitted  to  create  from  the  execution  of  its  registered TC. 
License units are pre-purchased from the TC owner and the 
units  are  expunged  when  used.  The  PL  license  value  is 
decremented  for  each  content  block  created.  This  structure 
provides  a  simple  modular  approach  to  purchasing,  selling, 
and expunging transactions.  

licensing  capability  with  wide 

A  biproduct  of  the  TC  decrementing  license  model 
provides for the pre-sale and modular management of licenses 
by  TC  owners.  This  new  social  construct  provides  for  an 
entirely  new 
scale 
applications[34], [65]. Whether the issuing agent is a DORA 
organization  related  to  a  government,  a  company  creating 
legal forms, or an individual marketing digital rights for sale 
of  unique  content,  any  presale  of  digital  content  per 
transaction instance is enforceable. The  vending of licenses 
by  the  owner  to  sub-issuers  is  also  feasible  by  presale  of 
license instances to third-party TC users.  

6.2 Calculation of Trust and Credit   

The  STCM 

is  not  designed  as  a 

tokenized 
cryptocurrency;  however,  it  contains  a  credit  structure  used 
within  and  as  part  of  the  consensus  model.  These  credits 
within  the  Philos™  marketplace  are  called  Phyli™.  The 
Phyli™  structure  is  designed  to  be  stable  and  not  float  in 
relation to market forces. To achieve stability, the Phyli™ is 
closely  tied  to  the  exercise  of  single  transactions.  The 
incentive structure provides a reward of a single Phyli™ for 
the storage of a single transaction. To share transactions with 
synchronized  partners  required 
transferring  of  an 
equivalent number of Phyli™ to each partnering ledger.  

the 

6.2.1  Phyli™ Usage 

As  part  of  a  consensus,  each  of  the  distributed  nodes 
implements  a  net-zero  calculation  for  exchange  of  Phyli™, 
based  on  the  number  of  blocks  each  has  made  during  the 
synchronization  period.  This  final  calculated  value 
is 
established by each node and is recorded into each immutable 
consensus  block.  The  primary  consensus  calculation  is 
depicted in Figure “Net Zero Calculations.” Each PL net-zero 
calculation  at  the  top  is  based  on  one  Phyli™  received  for 
each block it receives to store from a PSL partner, minus one 
Phyli™ paid to each PSL partner for each block created and 
sent to that partner for storage.   

Each  consensus  operation  incorporates  the  net-zero 
calculation results for each PL augments the total outstanding 
Phyli™,  and  the  new  balance  is  written  into  the  immutable 
consensus  block.  Depending  on 
tier, 
requirements establish that all or an acceptable quorum of PL 
nodes must agree on each other’s calculation before accepting 
that PL into consensus.  

the  consensus 

7 

Figure: Net Zero Calculations  

6.2.2  Trust Values  

is  displayed  with 

three 
interval 
One  primary  consensus 
participants in a Primary Synchronization List. Each of the three 
ledgers has produced sidechains with different numbers of blocks. 
The top Primary Consensus block shows the calculated net sum 
values for each of the three ledgers. These are the net value of 
from  primary 
Phyli™  either 
synchronization 
the  displayed  primary 
synchronization interval. 

transferred 
list  partners  over 

to  or  received 

Another  independent  value  for  trust  is  maintained  for 
each PL; the consensus operation also contains an algorithm 
to  update  this  value  each  time  a  consensus  operation  is 
performed.  The  Trust  value  provides  insight  into  the 
trustworthiness of the PL. This feature acts as a  continuous 
evaluation of each PLs performance over time. The trust value 
embodies a similar relationship which is equated to consumer 
confidence, but it relates to each operating PL. This value is 
encoded directly into consensus blocks and recalculated each 
time  consensus  is  done  within  the  STCM.  Each  PL  node 
correspondingly  verifies  the  other’s  premeditated  values  by 
calculating the balance in the same manner as it does its own. 
If any calculation of a Primary or Bridge is not excepted 
at a higher-level consensus, the content produced is not lost 
but must be restructured with accurate calculations after the 
erroneous tier successfully re-establishes synchronicity. The 
values of trust are established and recalculated based on the 
PLs ability to maintain synchronicity. Missing a consensus, 
for  any  reason,  produces  a  reduction  to  the  calculated  trust 
value,  which  is  re-adjusted  upon  the  next  successful 
consensus, and recorded in the immutable consensus block.  

 
 
  
 
 
6.3 Building Influence   

By  default,  the  STCM  design  is  “agnostic  to”  the 
inclusion of any single PL or CS but relies on the occurrence 
of a percentage of the active systems achieving the necessary 
sequence  to  meet  consensus  requirements.  Should  systems 
not  meet  sequencing,  timing,  or  compliance  requirements, 
they are instead removed from the  roster of active  systems, 
and  the  overall  consensus  continued  after  the  reduction  of 
participants. Individual participant ledgers’ values grow with 
successful  consensus  participation,  which  determines  their 
trust  by  performance  over  time.  This  produces  a  “Proof  of 
Trust” nature to the overall consensus model, where the top 
performers  are  rewarded  with  more  influence  through 
increased trust scores.    

In the STCM, there is no attempt to neutralize nodes that 
produce  incorrect  calculations  as  found  in  the  Stellar 
model[39].  Since enforcement of configuration is performed 
globally, if all PLs perform correctly, they should operate on 
the  same  revision of  the software  specification/API. Should 
calculations  not  match  between  peer  ledgers,  objectives 
within  the  STCM  shift  to  eliminating  alliances  with  non-
compliant  ledgers.    Quickly  resolving  non-compliance  and 
restructuring  to  interfaces  with  compliant  ledgers  is  a 
behavior  that  benefits  participants.  Thus  coopetition  is 
structured 
through  Proof  of  Trust,  where  uniformity 
compliance  encourages  competitors  to  work  toward  a 
common objective.  Trust  visibility  and  association  with  the 
STCM incentive model are designed to influence the behavior 
of participants over time by incentivizing expected activities. 
As  shown  in  multiple  research  studies,  e.g.,  [28],  [44], 
designing  for  the  proper  incentive  is  critical  for  long  term 
effectiveness of a system 

Maintaining synchronicity and active status in STCM is 
dependent  on  connectivity,  reliability  of  PSL  partners,  and 
utilizing  current  global  parameters.  Maintaining  revision 
integrity,  and  all  configurations  are  the  basis  of  the  reward 
systems. Active participation with best practices for security 
of  platforms  and  maintaining  expected  social  behavior, 
increase  trust  and  influence  and  avoids  any  individual 
penalization. The STCM marketplace, at its core, incentivizes 
uniformity. In theory, even in the occurrence of a system-wide 
flaw, which foreseeably could be caused by a defect within a 
configuration  enforced  revision,  it  is  more  likely  that 
penalization  would  be  uniform.  Supersession  of  allowable 
versions and the processes for pre-vetting are handled by the 
neutral consortium governance body.   

Primary use cases for the State of Colorado exhibited a 
high  value  for  the  accountability  of  participants  and  pre-
authorizing  and  vetting 
transaction  contributors.  This 
requirement drove the need for the licensing feature which has 
shown  comercial  viability  and  favorable  user  community 
support.    Responsible  participation  is  emboldened  by  this 
feature  as  licenses  of  responsible  entities  retain  greater 
quality,  and  thus  value  for  selling  and  use  by  other parties. 
Licenses contain a transferable value, which is also increased 
through  the  process  of  building  trust,  empowering  the 
participant with greater influence.  

7  Results of Applied Research 

The ongoing applied research Project Philos™ has 
displayed early success in several areas; the ability to engage 
public and private interest, the engagement of individuals 
with the proposed incentive model, and successfully meeting 
design objectives during early technology tests. The reduced 
size of each block enabled by use of the Transaction 
Contract and the Primary Synchronization List conception 
which reduces the number of ledgers required to store 
redundant content greatly impacted the STCM design.  

Before initiating the concept for Project Philos™ team 
first evaluated Ethereum, Hyperledger Fabric, and Sawtooth 
Lake for possible candidates plaforms to implement 
Colorado State wide programs. Ethereum use was rulled out 
in early evaluation stages upon determination that the overall 
transactions for a relatively small State of Colorado program 
would produce 110,000 transactions per day from 
approximately 2,700 different end points. It was also 
assessed that larger scale programs candidates would require 
thousands of times more transactions. Sawtooth was 
elimated due to technology specific limitations, minimal 
documentation, and limited availability of support.  

As Philos™ was designed to improved performance 
whild reducing the public chain footprint over equivalent 
distributed ledger applications. Considerations for this test 
examined the comparison to public content generated on 
chain between the evaluated platforms. Thought off chain 
data and/or private content would factor into growth, such 
content would be similar in operation and scale for all 
distribted ledger platforms thus was not considered for this 
evalution.  

The initial test platform was impelemented using 
Hyperledger Fabric in partnership with Colorado State 
University Pueblo. Hyperledger Fabric test application using 
a simple chain code was observed to grow the overall 
footprint in memory by   four (4) Megabyte per each chain 
block. Though not tested at scale Ethereum was also 
assessed for projected growth and overall footprint, by 
equating the average smart contract size over the last two 
years of 22KB[66].  

 Testing was set up to compare an equivalent operation 
implemented on the BCDC Philos™ platform implementing 
STCM. The test simulated thirty (30) million transactions 
which mimicked an exponential increasing generation scale 
over three (3) years’ time. Hyperledger Fabric was found to 
be able to keep up with the number of transactions over time 
but for all test casese the storage capacity used exceeded the 
capabilities of hardware implementing the test. It was 
assessed that this data set if it were implemented on 
hardware with enough storage resources would  produce an 
overall growth of the chain to more than one hundred and 
fourteen (114) Terabytes in the first year of operation of the 
Statewide program.   

The Philos™ implementation of STCM ran similar 
simulated scaling tests with the same thirty (30) million 
transactions. Test conditions were set to model the Primary 
Synchronization List containing three (3) peer ledgers where 

8 

 
 
the test version of the chain block size was less than 400 
bytes.  

 The resultant data set produced by Philos™ generated 

less than twelve (12) Gigabytes, accumulated only on the 
three distributed ledgers in the primary synchronization list. 
The resultant data generation for all other ledgers from the 
overhead of Bridge and Global consensus operations was 
less than two (2) Megabytes of content that was replicated 
on each distributed ledger.  

In comparison to Ethereum size growth has been  

scaling over time as the Smart Contract gain more 
complexity[66]. Philos™  constant size of block gained by 
removing of the Transaction Contract from the public chain 
sets a linear growth as the chain scales. This together with 
reduced number of insances containing the entire chain, 
Philos™ show substantial scalabilitiy and perfance 
improvements providing alternatives for several identified 
Ethereum defincencies[38].  

Thought the Philos™ prototype was in early stages 
during this test and the standard block size has increased in 
later versions it is projected to remain around 500 bytes in 
production released versions, incorporating no more than 10- 
20% change from current results. The test showed that 
performance and scalability under the STCM provided 
exceptional improvements over compared legacy blockchain 
applications. With the metrics garnered from these early 
tests the STCM exhibits an overall capability increase which 
would be manageable and able to be contanined within 
random access memory on an enterprise systems. The same 
scaling on Hyperledger Fabric would exceed the size of most 
disc drives for enterprise systems.  

Growth as new PSLs are added to the STCM has the net 

effect of adding more parallel sidechains of independent 
groups of ledgers. Each of the PSL would perform in 
relatively the same manor with content creation only limited 
to the performance of the systems composing each PSL.  
Overhead of the operations of Bridge will grow in a 
linear fashion with the growth of the numbers of PSLs in the 
overall marketplace. The growth is limited as operations 
producing linear growth include expansion from only each 
PSL group and not individual ledgers. Additionally, Bridge 
operations are done asynchronously such that the creation of 
content blocks by a PSL does not need to discontinue during 
Bridge operations. Once the bridge is complete the Primary 
Consensus operations would continue by re-defining the 
forensic hash linking of any content blocks created which 
are queued during the Bridge operation.  

Global consensus operations are limited in growth as 

they only scale due to the growth in the magnitude of 
Bridges. SCTM limits this impact by continually calculating 
the Bridge content as they occur throughout the span of time 
between Global Consensuses. As with the Bridge operations, 
the Global consensus occurs as a background process 
supported by all of the Philos™ systems working in concert. 
Any content blocks created during this background process 

are also queued and forensically link by reassigning forensic 
hash chains after the Global Consensus is complete.   

8  Challenges With STCM 

Any new direction in technology while solving existing 
issues  inherently  may  also  lead  to  new  challenges.  Several 
foreseeable tradeoffs that have been identified and/or address 
within the STCM presented initial challenges. Though there 
is no way to ensure that every aspect will be proven effective 
or  problematic  without  wider  adoption,  project  teams  are 
encouraged by the success received thus far.  The following 
are  some  issues  and  tradeoffs  that  have  been  identified  as 
challenges to the overall model, which may be mitigated as 
work continues.   

8.1 Hybrid Limited- Decentralization  

It is notable during early prototyping that in order to align 
the governance capability that several areas of the STCM may 
exhibit  moderately  centralized  structures  or  controls. 
Exceptional considerations were made in order to implement 
workarounds by either the operation of redundant structures 
or  by  mitigation  of  the  impact  through  openly  visible 
governance of the respective features. However, these design 
tradeoffs may be assessed by some people to portray limited 
decentralization  and  may  offer  concerns  for  proponents  of 
absolute  decentralization.  As  with  any  technology,  these 
features, which are essential to the needs of the primary use 
cases,  were  handled  by offering  consideration  to  mitigating 
risks in order to manage expectations of existing distributed 
ledger community users.  

8.2 Searching and Visibility   

the 

As  users  of 

technological  era  have  become 
accustomed  to  the  largely  unrestricted  access  of  data,  the 
ability to control data content on this novel platform departs 
somewhat  from  the  current  expectation  of  “normal”  data 
visibility  to  which  many  have  become  accustomed.  The 
ability  to  globally  search  content  and  even  the  visibility  of 
metadata  in  this  new  model  is  largely  in  the  hands  of 
individual data owners. Foreseeably this may take some time 
for  user  community  and  application  use  cases  to  fully 
embrace.  During  the  evolution  of  this  new  model,  it  is 
anticipated  that  minimal  visibility  may  result  in  many 
instances of orphaned content or a reduced awareness of data 
available for legitimate use. It is foreseeable that  future use 
cases  will  adapt  to  this  new  paradigm,  but  also  that 
undesirable results will persist from lack of visibility or search 
capability.   

9  Identified Strengths of STCM 

As Project Philos™ has unfolded, several unanticipated 
strengths  have  emerged.  Many  or  these  are  unexpected  or 
emergent  behavior  resulting  from  the  effects  of  linking  of 
cybersecurity  with  the  distributed  ledger.  This  list  is  only a 
portion of the major topic areas where use case discussions 
have identified entirely novel uses or application capabilities.   

9 

 
 
 
 
Elimination of proof of work energy waste 
Patch management and version enforcement   
Privacy of owner-creator content  
Secondary data sale market  
Self-Sovereign identity[67]  
Private sector-issued licensing 
Zero-trust expanded application 
Provide risk and trust relationships 
Provide trust and quality relationships 
Insurer and banking models 

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
•  Disconnected governing and jurisdictional control 
• 
•  Digital rights management  
• 
•  Quantifiable metrics replace qualitative processes 

Enforcement and audit by legitimate authorities 

Pre-paid models for security issuance 

10 Conclusion 

features 

including 

supporting 

We  have  proposed  a  novel  consensus  model  and  an 
indefinitely  expandable  approach  to  blockchain  distributed 
ledger.  We  started  with  the  pretense  of  taking  a  modular 
system-engineering approach and incorporating re-designs to 
correct  known  scalability  limitations  of  legacy  blockchain 
applications.  Considerations  were  incorporated  for  best 
practices and theories of successful blockchain applications, 
while 
state-of-the-art 
cybersecurity  practices.  Novel  incentive  models  for  robust 
community participation were conceived based on an analysis 
of  organizational  needs  and  desires  for  reduction  of 
worldwide  energy waste.  This new  model for blockchain is 
agnostic to the inclusion of any single ledger but incentivizes 
uniformity and continued participation over time. The novel 
use  of  Proof  of  Trust  in  a  consortium-governed  structure 
opens  countless  relational  use  cases.  Initial  results  of 
prototype  platforms  show  robust  community  engagement, 
and  capability  for  widely  scalable  transaction  growth.  
Metrics  garnered  from  early  prototype  tests  exhibits  an 
overall impact of greatly reducing the system resource needs 
to operate an independent distributed ledger. 

10 

 
 
11 References 
[1]  C. Gorog, G. Whitsett, and Lambert Kent, 
“Blockchain Development Community,” 
Blockchain Development Community, 2018. 
https://www.bc-dc.org/ (accessed Jan. 05, 
2020). 

[2]  C. Gorog, “DISTRIBUTED LEDGER NETWORK 

IMPLEMENTING A SYNCHRONOUS TRUST 
CONSENSUS MODEL,” 17/488,562, Sep. 28, 2021 
[3]  S. Nakamoto, “Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic 
Cash System.” Satoshi Nakamoto, Oct. 31, 2008. 
[Online]. Available: www.bitcoin.org 

[4]  V. Buterin, “A Next Generation Smart Contract & 
Decentralized Application Platform.” Ethereum, 
2017. [Online]. Available: etherium.org 
[5]  Dan. M. Sujan, “How Interface Formats Gain 

Market Acceptance: The Role of Developers and 
Format Characteristics in the Development of De 
Facto Standards,” Elsevier, vol. 88, no. 102054, 
pp. 1–11, Aug. 2018, doi: 10.1016. 

[6]  M. Johansson, M. Karreman, and A. Foukaki, 
“Research and Development Resources, 
Coopetitive Performance and Cooperation: The 
Case of Standardization in 3GPP, 2004–2013,” 
Elsevier, vol. 88, no. 102074, pp. 1–12, May 
2019, doi: 10.1016. 

[7]  H. Son, Y. Chung, and H. Hwang, “Do Technology 
Entrepreneurship and External Relationships 
Always Promote Technology Transfer? Evidence 
from Korean Public Research Organizations,” 
Elsevier, vol. 82–83, no. April-May 2019, pp. 1–
15, Feb. 2019, doi: 10.1016. 
J. Bridgers, C. Wist, J. Cooke, and S. Febberg, 
Concerning the protection of online privacy for 
Colorado citizens.  

[8] 

[9]  K. Lambert, A. Williams, Ginal, and Rankin, 

Concerning the Use of Cyber Coding Cryptology 
for State Records. 2018. Accessed: Mar. 18, 
2018. [Online]. Available: 
https://leg.colorado.gov/sites/default/files/docu
ments/2018A/bills/2018a_086_01.pdf 
[10]  C. Wist, J. Bridgers, K. Lambert, and L. Court, 

Concerning Strengthening Protections for 
Consumer Data Privacy. 2018. Accessed: Nov. 
07, 2019. [Online]. Available: 
https://leg.colorado.gov/sites/default/files/2018
a_1128_signed.pdf 

[11]  L. Woods and P. Lundeen, Concerning Protecting 
the Privacy of Child Victims when Releasing 

Criminal Justice Records. 2016. [Online]. 
Available: 
https://leg.colorado.gov/sites/default/files/2016
a_110_signed.pdf 

[12]  E. Ademi, “A Comprehensive Study on the 

Scalability Challenges of the Blockchain 
Technology.” Malmo Universitet, Jan. 11, 2018. 
Accessed: Nov. 01, 2019. [Online]. Available: 
https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/cfd0/d0050bc6
5102f2cb076fbac7e24d079a91d1.pdf 
[13]  J. Yii-Humo, D. Ko, S. Choi, S. Park, and K. 

Smolander, “Where Is Current Research on 
Blockchain Technology?—A Systematic Review,” 
PLoS One, vol. 11(10), no. e016347, Oct. 2016, 
[Online]. Available: 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0163477 
[14]  L.-C. Lin and T.-C. Liao, “A Survey of Blockchain 

Security Issues and Challenges,” Int. J. Netw. 
Secur., vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 653–659, Sep. 2017, 
doi: 10/6633. 

[15]  R. Beck, C. Becker, J. Lindman, and M. Rossi, 
“Opportunities and Risks of BlockChain 
Technology,” Dagstuhl Semin. 17132, p. 44, Mar. 
2017. 

[16]  K. Croman et al., “On Scaling Decentralized 

Blockchains,” Financ. Cryptogr. Data Secur. - Int. 
Workshop FC 2016 BITCOIN VOTING WAHC 
Revis. Sel. Pap., vol. 9604 LNCS, no. 0302–9743, 
pp. 106–125, Jan. 2016. 

[17]  Z. Ren, K. Cong, T. V. Aerts, B. A. P. de Jonge, A. 
F. Morais, and Z. Erkin, “A Scale-out Blockchain 
for Value Transfer with Spontaneous Shardin.” 
Delft Univeristy of Technology, May 17, 2018. 
[Online]. Available: 
https://arxiv.org/pdf/1801.02531.pdf 
[18]  S. Mattias, “Performance and Scalability of 
Blockchain Network sand SmartContracts.” 
UMEA University, 2017. Accessed: Jan. 03, 2020. 
[Online]. Available: https://umu.diva-
portal.org/smash/get/diva2:1111497/FULLTEXT0
1.pdf 

[19]  N. Sick, N. Preschitschek, J. Leker, and S. Broring, 

“A new framework to assess industry 
convergence in high technology environments,” 
Elsevier, vol. 84–85, no. June-July 2019, pp. 48–
58, Aug. 2018. 

[20]  P. Asuquo, C. Ogah, W. Hathal, and S. Bao, 
“Blockchain Meets Cybersecurity: Security, 
Privacy, Challenges, and Opportunity,” in 

11 

 
 
Advanced Applications of Blockchain Technology, 
2019, pp. 115–127. Accessed: Jan. 14, 2020. 
[Online]. Available: 
https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-
981-13-8775-3_5 

[21]  G. Foroglou and A.-L. Tsilidou, “Furrther 

applications of the blockchain,” 12th Stud. Conf. 
Manag. Sci. Technol., vol. May, May 2015, 
[Online]. Available: 
https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Georgios
_Foroglou/publication/276304843_Further_appl
ications_of_the_blockchain/links/5ba0a02a9285
1ca9ed11cccf/Further-applications-of-the-
blockchain.pdf 

[22]  “Cryptocurrencies: looking beyond the hype.”  
[23]  C. Gorog and A. Rossi, “Using BlockChain to 

Establish Distributed Trust for IOT,” Blockframe 
Inc., 2018. http://www.blockframetech.com/wp-
content/uploads/2018/05/Using-Block-Chain-to-
Establish-Distributed-Trust-for-IOT-.pdf 
(accessed Feb. 26, 2019). 

[24]  J. Singer and J. Bridges, Concerning the creation 
of the institute of cannabis research at Colorado 
state university - Pueblo. 2019. Accessed: Nov. 
07, 2019. [Online]. Available: 
https://leg.colorado.gov/sites/default/files/2019
a_1311_signed.pdf 

[25]  S. Goswami, “Scalability Analysis of Blockchains 
Through Blockchain Scalability Analysis of 
Blockchains Through Blockchain Simulation,” 
Univ. Nev. Las Vegas, no. 2976, May 2017, 
Accessed: Jan. 03, 2020. [Online]. Available: 
https://digitalscholarship.unlv.edu/cgi/viewcont
ent.cgi?article=3979&context=thesesdissertatio
ns 

[26]  W. Reijers, F. O’Brolchain, and P. Haynes, 

“Governance in Blockchain Technologies & Social 
Contract Theories,” Ledger, vol. I, no. 2016, pp. 
134–151, 2016, doi: 10.5915/LEDGER2016.62. 

[27]  MediLedger Project et al., “The MediLedger 

Project  2017 Progress Report,” Chronicled, Feb. 
2018. Accessed: Oct. 18, 2019. [Online]. 
Available: https://assets.website-
files.com/59f37d05831e85000160b9b4/5aaadbf
85eb6cd21e9f0a73b_MediLedger%202017%20P
rogress%20Report.pdf 

[28]  R. Axelrod, The evolution of cooperation. New 

York: Basic Books, 1981. 

[29]  R. Y. Garankina, E. R. Zakharochkina, I. F. 

Samoskchenkova, N. Y. Lebedeva, and A. V. 
Lebedev, “Blockchain Technology and its Use in 
the Area of Circulation of Pharmaceuticals,” J. 
Pharm. Sci. Res., vol. 10, no. 11, pp. 2715–2717, 
2018. 

[30]  C. Gorog and T. Boult, “Solving Global 

Cybersecurity Problems by Connecting Trust 
Using Blockchain,” Cybem2018 IEEE Confs 
Internet Things Green Comput. Commun. Cyber 
Phys. Soc. Comput. Smart Data Blockchain 
Comput. Inf. Technol. Congr. 
Cybermaticsatics2018, vol. 978-1-5386-7975–
3/18/, no. Cybermatics_2018.2018.00243, pp. 
1425–1432, Mar. 2018, doi: DOI 10.1109. 
[31]  R. Beck, J. Stenum Czepluch, N. Lollike, and S. 
Malone, “BlockChain - The Gateway to Trust-
Free CryptoGrpahic Tranasactions,” Assoc. Inf. 
Syst. AIS Electron. Libr. AISeL, vol. AIS Electronic 
Library (AISeL), no. Summer 5-15-2016, p. 14, 
May 2016. 

[32]  T. H. Hoor and Q. Z. Sheng, “Trust as a Service: A 
Framework for Trust Management in Cloud 
Environments,” Int. Conf. Web Inf. Syst. Eng., vol. 
Web Information System Engineering, no. WISE 
2011, pp. 314–321, 2011. 

[33]  Y. Benkler, “We Cannot Trust our Government, 
so we Must Trust the Technology,” Feb. 22, 
2016. 

[34]  S. Garimella, “Blockchain Update for the State of 

Colorado,” presented at the BlockChain 
Development Community, SecureSet Academy, 
Sep. 28, 2019. 

[35]  C. Borio, S. Claessens, B. Cohen, D. Domanski, 

and H. S. Shin, “BIS Quarterly Review September 
2017 International banking and financial market 
developments.” Bank for International 
Settlements, Sep. 2017. Accessed: Oct. 31, 2019. 
[Online]. Available: 
www.bis.org/publ/qtrpdf/r_qt1709.htm 
[36]  M. Vukolic, “The Quest for Scalable Blockchain 
Fabric: Proof-of-Work vs. BFT Replication.” IBM 
Research, 2015. Accessed: Nov. 01, 2019. 
[Online]. Available: 
https://allquantor.at/blockchainbib/pdf/vukolic2
015quest.pdf 

[37]  S. Menan and S. Sarkar, “Privacy and Big Data: 
Scalable Approaches to Sanitize Larger 

12 

 
 
Transactional Databases for Sharing,” MIS Q., 
vol. 40, no. 4, pp. 963–981, Dec. 2016. 

[38]  S. Rouhani and R. Deters, “Performance Analysis 
of Ethereum Transactions in Private Blockchain,” 
IEEE, vol. International Conference on Software 
Engineering and Service Science (ICSESS), no. 
8th, pp. 70–74, Nov. 2017, doi: 
10.1109/ICSESS.2017.8342866. 

[39]  D. Mazieres, “The Stellar Consensus Protocol: A 
Federated Model for Internet-level Consensus.” 
Stellar Development Foundation, Mar. 13, 2019. 
Accessed: Dec. 10, 2019. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.stellar.org/papers/stellar-
consensus-protocol.pdf 

Evidence from China’s Guangdong Province,” 
Elsevier, vol. 82–83, no. April-May 2019, pp. 58–
69, Feb. 2019, doi: 10.1016. 

[49]  P. V. Mockapetris and K. J. Dunlap, Development 

of the Domain Name System, vol. August 1988. 
Association for Computing Machinery, 1988. 
Accessed: Dec. 29, 2019. [Online]. Available: 
https://apps.dtic.mil/dtic/tr/fulltext/u2/a203901
.pdf 

[50]  J.-W. Lin, J.-M. Ho, L.-M. Tseng, and F. Lai, “IDN 
Server Proxy Architecture for Internationalized 
Domain Name Resolution and Experiences with 
Providing Web Services,” ACM Trans. Internet 
Technol., vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 1–19, Feb. 2019. 

[40]  World Bank Group, “Distributed Ledger 

[51]  M. Williams, “In Whom We Trust: Group 

Technology (DLT) and Blockchain.” World Bank 
Group, 2017. [Online]. Available: 
www.worldbank.org 

Membership as an Effective Context for Trust 
Development,” Acad. Manag. Acad. Maagement 
Rev., vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 377–396, Jul. 2001. 

[41]  K. E. Levy, “Book-Smart, Not Street-Smart: 

[52]  B. Christianson and W. Harbison, “Why Isn’t 

Blockchain-Based Smart Contracts and The Social 
Workings of Law,” Cornell Univ., vol. Engaging 
Science, Technology, and Society, no. 3, pp. 1–
15, 2017, doi: 10.17351/ests2017.107. 
[42]  B. Sutherland, “Blockchain’s First Consensus 

Implementation Is Unsustainable,” Elsevier, vol. 
3, no. 4, pp. 917–919, Apr. 2019, doi: 10.1016. 

Trust Tansititve?,” Internaltionl Workshop Secur. 
Protoc., vol. 1189, no. Security Protocols, pp. 
171–176, Jun. 2005. 

[53]  M. Rosenfeld, “Analysis of Hashrate-Based 

Double-Spending,” Cornell Univ. Comput. Sci., 
vol. Cryptography and Security, no. 9 Feb 2014, 
p. 13, Dec. 2012. 

[43]  J. Truby, “Decarbonizing Bitcoin: Law and Policy 

[54]  J. Flanigan, “Zero Trust Network Model,” 2018, 

Choices for Reducing the Energy Consumption of 
Blockchain Technologies and Digital Currencies,” 
Elsevier, vol. 44, pp. 399–410, Oct. 2018. 
[44]  R. D. Boettger and C. R. Greer, “On the Wisdom 
of Rewarding A While Hoping for B,” Organ. Sci., 
vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 569–582, Nov. 1994. 
[45]  A. de Vries and C. Stoll, “Bitcoin’s growing e-

waste problem,” Resour. Conserv. Recycl., vol. 
175, p. 105901, 2021, doi: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2021.10590
1. 

[46]  J. E. Cohen, “Privacy, Visibility, Transparency and 

Exposure,” Univ. Chic. Law Rev., vol. 75, no. 1, 
pp. 181–201, Winter 2008. 

[47]  G. Wolfond, “A Blockchain Ecosystem for Digital 
Identity: Improving Service Delivery in Canada’s 
Public and Private Sector,” Technol. Innov. 
Manag. Rev., vol. 7, no. 10, pp. 35–41, Oct. 
2017. 

[48]  G. Chen, G. Yang, F. He, and K. Chen, “Exploring 
the Effect of Political Borders on University-
Industry Collaborative Research Performance: 

[Online]. Available: 
www.cs.tufts.edu/comp/116/archive/fall2018/jfl
anigan.pdf 

[55]  J. Kindervag, “Build Security Into Your Network’s 
DNA: The Zero Trust Network Architecture.” 
Forrester, Nov. 05, 2010. [Online]. Available: 
www.virtualstarmedia.com/downloads/Forreste
r_zero_trust_DNA.pdf 

[56]  S. N. G. Gourisetti et al., “Standardization of the 

Distributed Ledger Technology Cybersecurity 
Stack for Power and Energy Applications,” Sci. 
Direct, vol. 28, no. 100553, Dec. 2021, doi: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.segan.2021.100553. 

[57]  C. Gorog, “CRYPTOGRAPHIC TRUST ENABLED 
DEVICES OF CYBERSECURITY SYSTEMS,” 
17/488,529, Sep. 28, 2021 

[58]  A. D. Meyer, A. S. Tsui, and C. R. Hinings, 

“Configurational Approaches to Organizational 
Analysis,” Acad. Manage. J., vol. 36, no. 6, pp. 
1175–1195, 1993. 

[59]  R. Conradi and B. Westfechtel, “Towards a 
Uniform Version Model for Software 

13 

 
 
Con_guration Management,” Lect. Notes 
Comput. Sci., vol. International Workshop on 
Software Configuration Management, no. 
Software Configuration Management, pp. 1–17, 
Jun. 2005. 

[60]  K. Abhishek, S. Roshan, and R. Ranjan, “A 
Comprehensive Study on Multifactor 
Authentication Schemes,” Adv. Comput. Inf. 
Technol., vol. AISC 177, pp. 561–568, 2013. 

[61]  C. Gorog, “CRYPTOGRAPHIC SECRET 

GENERATION AND PROVISIONING,” 17/488,589, 
Sep. 28, 2021 

[62]  M. Castro and B. Liskov, “Practical Byzantine 
Fault Tolerance,” USENIX Tech. Program, vol. 
Proceedings of the Third Symposium on 
Operating Systems Design and Implementation, 
pp. 173–186, Feb. 1999. 

[63]  L. Lamport, R. Shostak, and M. Pease, “The 
Byzantine Generals Problem,” ACM Trans. 
Program. Lang. Syst., vol. 4`, no. 3, pp. 382–401, 
Jul. 1982. 

[64]  I. Eyal and E. G. Sirer, “Majority is not Enough: 

Bitcoin Mining is Vulnerable.” Cornell University, 
Nov. 15, 2013. Accessed: Jan. 05, 2020. [Online]. 
Available: 
https://arxiv.org/pdf/1311.0243.pdf%7C 
[65]  G. Cabaleiro, “Sources of Appropriation Capacity 

in Licensing Agreements,” Elsevier, vol. 86–87, 
no. 2019, pp. 48–61, Aug. 2018, doi: 10.1016. 
[66]  Etherscan.io, “Etherscan,” Ethereum Average 

Block Size Chart, Feb. 13, 2020. 
https://etherscan.io/chart/blocksize (accessed 
Feb. 13, 2020). 

[67]  A. Tobin, D. Reed, and P. Windley J., “The 

Inevitable Rise of Self-Sovereign Identity.” The 
Sovrin Foundation, 2017. [Online]. Available: 
https://sovrin.org/wp-
content/uploads/2017/06/The-Inevitable-Rise-
of-Self-Sovereign-Identity.pdf 

14 

 
 
  
