Designing a Framework for Digital KYC Processes Built on
Blockchain-Based Self-Sovereign Identity

Vincent Schlatt a,b,†,∗, Johannes Sedlmeir a,b,†, Simon Feulner b,c, Nils Urbach b,c

a FIM Research Center, University of Bayreuth, Bayreuth, Germany
b Project Group Business & Information Systems Engineering of the Fraunhofer FIT, Bayreuth, Germany
c Frankfurt University of Applied Sciences, Frankfurt, Germany

† Both ﬁrst authors contributed equally to the article
∗ Corresponding author: vincent.schlatt@ﬁm-rc.de

This is the accepted version of https://doi.org/10.1016/j.im.2021.103553,
published in the Special Issue “Blockchain Innovations: Business Opportunities
and Management Challenges” in Information & Management.

Abstract

Know your customer (KYC) processes place a great burden on banks, because they are costly,

ineﬃcient, and inconvenient for customers. While blockchain technology is often mentioned as a

potential solution, it is not clear how to use the technology’s advantages without violating data

protection regulations and customer privacy. We demonstrate how blockchain-based self-sovereign

identity (SSI) can solve the challenges of KYC. We follow a rigorous design science research

approach to create a framework that utilizes SSI in the KYC process, deriving nascent design

principles that theorize on blockchain’s role for SSI.

Keywords: Banking, digital certiﬁcate, digital wallet, decentralized identity, distributed ledger

technology, veriﬁable credential

1
2
0
2

v
o
N
1
1

]

Y
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
7
3
2
1
0
.
2
1
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Preprint submitted to Information & Management

December 3, 2021

 
 
 
 
 
 
Highlights

• SSI can make KYC processes completely digital, eﬃcient, compliant, and convenient.

• No personal data need to be stored on a blockchain.

• SSI inhibits data silos, lock-in eﬀects, and aggregation of market power.

• Blockchain’s role for SSI should be more restricted than is often proposed.

CREDENTIAL ISSUERQUALIFIEDELECTRONICCERTIFICATECLOUD AGENTINSTITUTIONAL- AGENT / WALLETDID DOCUMENTREAD/ WRITECUSTOMERVERIFIABLE CREDENTIALVERIFIABLE PRESENTATIONDISTRIBUTED LEDGERBANKKYCINTERFACESTORAGENAMESCREENINGRISKENGINEREADREADCLOUD AGENTUSER AGENT/ WALLETCLOUD AGENT/ WALLET1. Introduction

Financial regulation has three primary goals: ﬁnancial inclusion, ﬁnancial stability, and market

integrity [Zetzsche et al., 2018]. To achieve the goal of market integrity, regulators have introduced

several regulatory requirements into the ﬁnancial sector, such as the Financial Action Task Force

on Money Laundering (FATF) recommendations, which seek to prevent money laundering and the

ﬁnancing of international terrorism, as well as Basel III, in reaction to the global ﬁnancial crisis in

2008 [Arner et al., 2016]. To remain compliant with this regulatory regime, ﬁnancial institutions

must perform in-depth due diligence to identify their customers and to understand the purpose

of their activities, a process formally known as know your customer (KYC) [Arasa and Ottichilo,

2015], in which customers typically need to be physically present at the bank’s branch or on a

video call to provide personally identifying information, such as a passport or an ID card.

This process is problematic for banks, because it is cost-intensive, time-consuming, and inconve-

nient for customers [Zetzsche et al., 2018]. Thus, there have been several attempts at improvement,

mostly involving the digitization of particular process steps. For instance, some banks use their

customers’ analog proof of identity, such as passports, and create internally used digital customer

identities to improve the process ﬂow. However, this approach again suﬀers from ineﬃciencies,

since it is error-prone, time-consuming [Jessel et al., 2018], and highly repetitive [Zetzsche et al.,

2018]. The lack of shared standards and banks’ reservations about sharing customer information

with competitors also limit the reusability of a customer’s KYC data at diﬀerent banks [Arner

et al., 2019].

A central utility that collects and provides identity-related data for an electronic KYC (eKYC)

process, as in India or Australia, is often mentioned as a solution to the aforementioned prob-

lems [Zetzsche et al., 2018; Arner et al., 2019; Perlman and Gurung, 2019], since it can reduce

costs and signiﬁcantly shorten KYC onboarding processes [Rajput and Gopinath, 2017]. However,

recent reports of leaks and misuses of personal data have lowered the conﬁdence of both banks and

customers in solutions that involve creating central data silos [Swinhoe, 2020]. Moreover, there are

jurisdictions in which such a centralized service run by the government is not feasible [Rieger et al.,

2019]. Generally, the fear that such a distinct service provider will aggregate signiﬁcant market

or political power impedes the establishment of a widely accepted centralized service provider [Za-

volokina et al., 2020].

1

Thus, both researchers and practitioners have identiﬁed blockchain technology as a poten-

tial solution to the latter problems. Blockchains can provide neutral platforms for digital cross-

organizational workﬂows [Guggenberger et al., 2020], mitigating the threat of market power ag-

gregation. At the same time, blockchain technology enables digital trust through synchronized

redundancy and therefore transparency, tamper-resistance, and enforcement of processes through

smart contracts [Rossi et al., 2019]. However, it is well known that blockchain technology’s built-in

transparency and append-only structure aggravates privacy-related problems [Rieger et al., 2019].

Particularly, the European General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) grants individuals the

right to be forgotten, which means that they can demand that their private data be deleted at any

time as soon as the purpose for their storage has expired. As data stored on a blockchain prac-

tically cannot be erased, implementations such as Moyano and Ross’s [2017] where eKYC-related

information is stored transparently on-chain, are not a viable solution.

As an alternative, one could think of depositing the KYC information in a standardized way at

the one and only entity involved in each of its KYC processes – the customer. These considerations

lead to the concept of self-sovereign identity (SSI), which seeks to establish holistic digital identity

management on the paradigm that a user controls all their data and attestations, similar to today’s

analog identity management via a system of plastic cards in physical wallets. Yet, SSI is still

strongly linked with blockchain technology because it requires a neutral platform that provides

governance, standards, and essential public information to check the validity of attestations. This

goal of an interoperable digital identity management system without a distinct central authority

in control makes SSI very attractive for digitizing the KYC process.

A recent pilot in the UK that investigated the opportunities of SSI-based KYC found that an

SSI-based “portable identity signiﬁcantly improves both consumer experience and protection, while

accelerating customer onboarding and reducing KYC and compliance-related costs for ﬁnancial

institutions” [Ledger Insights, 2020]. While research on the problem and approaches to SSI-based

eKYC onboarding have recently emerged [Soltani et al., 2018], they have not covered topics such as

user orientation, coverage of the entire KYC process, or platform independence. Further, Soltani

et al. [2018] focused on implementing the principles of SSI without acknowledging that SSI is a tool

to achieve an improved KYC process from the perspective of banks. Looking at SSI generally, in

the related literature, blockchain’s role in this context remains largely unclear. Thus, both research

and practice need a generic and validated framework that guides the design of SSI solutions for

2

entire eKYC processes and an overview of the resulting implications to assess the potential beneﬁts

and to learn how to leverage them. Further, we still lack generic design principles (DPs) to

guide the development of SSI solutions based on blockchain technology that can also be used

in other sectors [Liu et al., 2020]. We seek to design a framework for an eKYC process built on

blockchain-based SSI and to derive initial generic DPs. We develop and evaluate our framework in a

rigorous design science research (DSR) approach, incorporating both existing theoretical knowledge

and practitioners’ perspectives through semi-structured expert interviews. Thus, we extend the

literature on eKYC by providing a comprehensive architecture and process framework, discussing

the roles of blockchain and SSI for eKYC, and producing generalizable knowledge on the design,

opportunities, and challenges of blockchain-based SSI systems. The DPs we develop from our

DSR suggest that blockchain’s role in SSI should be more restrictive than is typically proposed in

the literature in order to make systems scalable and compliant with regulations. We also guide

practitioners on how to design the respective systems.

The remainder of this study is structured as follows: In Section 2, we present background

knowledge on KYC processes, blockchain technology, and SSI that is necessary to understand the

work that follows. In Section 3, we present our DSR method. In Section 4, we derive objectives for

the eKYC framework and evaluate them through expert interviews. We present the framework,

including the SSI-based eKYC architecture and process, in Section 5. Section 6 continues with the

evaluation of the framework along the derived objectives. In Section 7, we discuss the ﬁndings,

develop nascent DPs for blockchain-based SSI, and provide managerial and theoretical implications.

In Section 8, we summarize our results, identify limitations, and provide an outline for further

research.

2. Background

2.1. The KYC process and centralized attempts at eKYC

After the original FATF Forty Recommendations were drawn up in 1990, they were revised in

1996 to account for the latest money laundering techniques. These recommendations for anti-money

laundering (AML) have been adopted by more than 130 countries and are therefore considered to

be the international standards [Ruce, 2011]. A key element of these recommendations is the

KYC process. Financial institutions are urged not to open anonymous accounts or accounts with

3

obviously ﬁctitious names. In this context, due diligence is recommended to verify the identity

of customers through independent, credible documents. The purpose of the business relationship

must also be veriﬁed. Further, the KYC process should include ongoing monitoring of transactions

to identify suspicious customer behavior [FATF, 2004].

KYC processes may diﬀer, owing to countries’ diﬀerent regulatory requirements and the banks’

speciﬁc requirements. However, some repeating core activities of the KYC process can be identiﬁed

(see Figure 1). The process begins with the collection of data about potential customers to identify

them. Government-issued documents such as ID cards, driver’s licenses, or passports are preferred.

Documents from other companies in the ﬁnancial sector, as well as other documents relevant for

the identiﬁcation of persons, such as telephone or gas invoices, can also be used [Mugarura, 2014].

After a customer is identiﬁed and the identity data claims are veriﬁed, the bank checks whether

the person represents a risk for the ﬁnancial institution. This includes matching against a list of

known terrorists, criminals, and politically exposed persons [Arasa and Ottichilo, 2015]. Further

initial and ongoing measures follow to allow the bank to do permanent risk monitoring.

The process of initial veriﬁcation and ongoing monitoring of activities must be repeated for each

customer, and every customer must undergo this process again when opening an account with a

new bank. Thus, the KYC process is very time-intensive and inconvenient for both customers and

banks, resulting in poor customer experiences and fewer account openings. For instance, 89 % of

surveyed customers did not have a good experience with the KYC process [Thomson Reuters, 2016],

and criticized the onboarding process because it was time-intensive and involved posting several

documents. To avoid losing their customers and revenue opportunities, ﬁnancial institutions must

make essential improvements. Also, the overall market eﬃciency could beneﬁt from enhanced

competition owing to lower switching costs. Further, the high eﬀort required for this process and

the lack of automation of some manual steps result in high costs for the ﬁnancial institutions. A

survey of 800 ﬁnancial institutions found that the annual cost for KYC per bank is approximately

USD $60 million [Thomson Reuters, 2016].

Figure 1: The KYC process.

4

CustomerIdentificationDataVerificationNameScreeningRisk AssessmentEnhanced DueDiligenceOngoingMonitoringRecords KeepingThe primary focus and motivator of regulatory eﬀorts toward KYC is the avoidance of money

laundering through ﬁnancial institutions. Failure to comply with regulatory requirements may

further increase KYC process cost through considerable ﬁnes [Moyano and Ross, 2017]. A major

goal in KYC eﬀorts for ﬁnancial institutions is often, therefore, the avoidance of ﬁnes or loss

of reputation, at preferably low ownership costs. However, some institutions also see KYC as

an opportunity, since it enables them to better understand customers, identify their needs and

behaviors, create customized products, and improve customer relationships, ultimately leading to

higher company proﬁts [Ruce, 2011].

The key to simultaneously reducing compliance costs, preventing regulatory penalties, and

harnessing new potential lies in the digitization and automation of processes and the resulting op-

portunities for data processing and analysis [Lootsma, 2017]. One often used approach to improve

the KYC process is the digitization of analog ID documents, which typically involves some facial

veriﬁcation step by a combination of human and machine learning examination. One step further

are approaches that seek to abandon analog documents altogether, which is why the term eKYC is

often used here [Christie, 2018]. A sector-wide eKYC utility could avoid the repeated execution of

the KYC process at diﬀerent banks. These systems typically use biometrics such as ﬁngerprints,

iris scans, or facial recognition. The data are then stored on a smart ID card and online in a

central database, together with personally identiﬁable information such as the customer’s name,

age, and place of residence. During the KYC process, the customer’s biometric data are captured

and matched against the data in the central online database.

An example of such a sector-wide eKYC utility is India’s Aadhaar system.

Indian citizens

must provide various demographic and biometric data [Zetzsche et al., 2018], which are stored

in a central database. The system has led to much faster onboarding times and to fewer losses

from fraud and corruption [The Economist, 2016]. However, several data breaches have raised

questions regarding the privacy and security of the system [Zetzsche et al., 2018]. Further, if

operated by a public authority or heavily regulated, identity systems such as India’s could be

used by governments for mass surveillance without citizens’ knowledge. On the other hand, on an

international level or if operated by a private company, threats of monopolies and market power

may keep banks from participating in such a system [Zavolokina et al., 2020]. Thus, while it is

a key step toward increasing process eﬃciency, the design of identity systems is critical for their

success and acceptance, because this involves the management of highly sensitive data and misuse

5

should be prevented. Centralized databases to store users’ personal data are attractive targets for

attackers who can steal large amounts of sensitive information. Consequently, they are challenging

to secure [Sedlmeir et al., 2021b]. Similar concerns regarding the creation of centralized service

providers for non-competitive data arise in various further contexts beyond KYC. For the KYC

procedure, digital identity systems must therefore be considered from the perspectives not only of

eﬃciency and user experience but also privacy and security [Perlman and Gurung, 2019].

2.2. Blockchain technology and decentralized approaches to eKYC

Owing to the limitations and downsides of centralized platforms, banks have started looking for

alternatives, one being distributed ledger technology (DLT). Key components of DLT are a peer-

to-peer network where all data are replicated across multiple peers, and an associated consensus

protocol operated by speciﬁc nodes to ensure the validity of state modiﬁcations (transactions) and

to synchronize all replicas [Glaser, 2017; Kolb et al., 2020]. Authentication on DLT is conducted

through public key cryptography, which allows one to participate in consensus or to interact with

the network and authorize transactions. Distributed ledgers are resistant to crashes and even the

malicious behavior of a small subset of nodes, making them a highly available and decentralized

digital infrastructure. However, DLT also has considerable drawbacks concerning scalability and

privacy, owing to the redundant operation of all transactions [Kolb et al., 2020]. Blockchains1 are

a special case of DLT, and are probably the most widely used. The key characteristic of blockchain

architectures is that transactions are batched into blocks, and each block of data contains the

previous block’s hash value. The blocks therefore form an append-only structure (chain) with the

aim of establishing a tamper-resistant historical record [Butijn et al., 2020].

Thus, blockchains can serve as a physically decentralized yet logically centralized source of

truth for information, making them suitable for decentralized asset management [Rossi et al.,

2019]. Guaranteeing transparency and the enforcement of rules while ensuring the independence

from a distinct node can be major advantages of blockchain solutions for cross-organizational

workﬂow management [Fridgen et al., 2018]. Businesses and public authorities have realized

DLT’s potential for the digitization of their cross-organizational processes,

leading to a large

number of projects [Casino et al., 2019]. Considering the aforementioned generic properties of

1We use the terms blockchain and DLT interchangeably in this work

6

DLT, a blockchain-based neutral platform on which banks could collaborate on eKYC seemed very

appealing, since this approach can eliminate the threat of monopolies. However, it aggravates

privacy-related problems, since tamper resistance and redundancy imply not only that stored on-

chain data are visible to all nodes but also that it is practically impossible to delete on-chain

data [Rieger et al., 2019; Kolb et al., 2020]. It therefore does not make sense to store personal

data on the ledger [Dunphy and Petitcolas, 2018] and doing so contradicts regulation such as the

GDPR, which includes the right to be forgotten.

This fact signiﬁcantly complicates the conceptual integration of a DLT into the KYC process.

Moyano and Ross [2017], Biryukov et al. [2018], and Norvill et al. [2019], for instance, proposed

writing a proof about the successful completion of the KYC process in the form of a hash value on

a blockchain. In this concept, the de facto data are still stored in a centralized database operated

by banks or a service provider. Once a bank customer has completed the KYC process, it will

be suﬃcient for the customer to prove their identity using the hash value in the ledger. Although

the eﬃciency of the process can thus be increased, central parties with full control of and access

to the data are still necessary with these approaches, again causing the described security and

privacy challenges. Further, challenges regarding the binding of cryptographic keys to customers

as well as the management of permissions for exchanging customer data remain, while the beneﬁt of

using a blockchain is not yet clear, as a public key infrastructure and certiﬁcates based on digital

signatures can provide tamper-proof evidence of a completed KYC process. Ostern and Riedel

[2020] acknowledged the challenges of storing customer data on a blockchain in their development

of a blockchain-based system for KYC to satisfy the requirements of initial coin oﬀerings. Thereby,

only the statuses of completed KYC processes are stored on a blockchain. However, in their

design, the customers’ identity data remain with a centralized provider specialized in KYC, and

the protocol for exchanging data between the banks and the eKYC provider remains unspeciﬁed.

2.3. SSI and its proposed application to eKYC

Today, identiﬁcation and authentication are usually carried out against a service provider using

a username and password. The reason for the widespread use of this so-called centralized identity

model lies in its simple implementation and in the full control of the service providers, who can

minimize risks if no third party is involved for authentication. Users also beneﬁt from the fact

that they only have to pass on the information necessary for the context in question [Clauß and

7

K¨ohntopp, 2001]. However, the increasing use of internet services has made this system inconve-

nient for users, since they have to remember the login data for each additional service, and manual

input or repeated veriﬁcation processes of attributes are necessary [El Maliki and Seigneur, 2007].

This leads to poor user experiences and security issues, as users tend to reuse passwords across

many services. Moreover, service providers need to rely on the validity of the data provided by

the customer, which can result in bad data quality and costs for fraud that cannot be traced back

to a natural person. Service providers also usually store the data in large data silos – a popular

target for hackers [Rajput and Gopinath, 2017].

In an attempt to improve user experience, the so-called federated identity model was devel-

oped [Maler and Reed, 2008]. This concept allows for the use of digital identities for authentication

and proof of attributes across organizational and system boundaries. An identity provider, such as

Facebook or Google, manages users’ digital identities and makes them available to relying parties.

The fundamental prerequisite for this identity model is the establishment of a trust relationship

between the identity provider and the relying party. Federated identity management improves

user experience, since the users no longer have to remember a large number of user names and

passwords, and only need a single sign-on [Lim et al., 2018]. However, from the perspective of

privacy and security, such services are even more problematic than centralized systems [Maler and

Reed, 2008].

If privacy and security need to be improved, there must no longer be any central parties that

have access to users’ full digital identities and the associated data. Rather, control must be decen-

tralized. By using public key cryptography, users can create their own identiﬁers – also known as

decentralized identiﬁers (DIDs) – and prove control over them. Users can then append information

to these identiﬁers. For contexts in which some attested attributes require conﬁrmation, users can

collect credentials from trusted authorities, such as government agencies, companies, or univer-

sities [Sporny et al., 2019]. DIDs and the associated cryptographic keys, as well as credentials,

are stored by users in so-called digital wallets, for instance on smartphones, computers, or in the

cloud with a provider of their choice. Such a system is comparable to the physical credentials, e.g.,

plastic cards, we carry in our physical wallets [Avellaneda et al., 2019]. Since users fully control

their data, this approach has been called self-sovereign [Allen, 2016].

Such an approach requires open-source and open-standard technology [Wagner et al., 2018].

Various implementations of SSI are possible and have been realized, but currently many com-

8

monly used implementations build on the DID standard being developed by the World Wide Web

Consortium (W3C) [Reed et al., 2020]. A DID is always associated with a DID document that

contains information such as public key material used to delegate and prove ownership and control

of a DID [Reed et al., 2020], and to establish a secure (encrypted) communication channel with

this DID. Besides the purpose of standardization, DIDs create a reference point for bilateral in-

teractions that is portable across domains and does not require a centralized authority to register,

resolve, update, or revoke the identiﬁers [Soltani et al., 2018]. In this sense, DIDs are not strictly

necessary for SSI, but provide functionalities that go beyond the mere capabilities of decentralized

public key infrastructure (DPKI).

Figure 2: Layers of SSI-based identity management based on [Trust over IP Foundation, 2020].

Credentials that provide cryptographic evidence of who created them and who they were cre-

ated for are widely known as digital certiﬁcates. A new ﬂavor, called veriﬁable credentials (VCs),

is currently the subject of standardization eﬀorts by the W3C [Sporny et al., 2019]. Their validity

and whether they have expired or been revoked can be veriﬁed without having to communicate

with the issuer of the credentials, by checking the issuer’s digital signature and a public yet privacy-

preserving revocation registry. However, this approach requires an established trust relationship

between a veriﬁer and the credential issuer [M¨uhle et al., 2018]. The decentralized approach re-

9

        j          Reads  Issues credentialss credentials c ISSUER VERIFIER HOLDER Presents proofs Writes Reads AGENT + WALLET AGENT + WALLET  Global DIDs & Registries  Distributed Ledger LEDGER PROTOCOL AGENT-TO-AGENT PROTOCOL DATA EXCHANGE Context Specific Identity System Identity Metasystem  Peer DIDs Verifiable Data Registry garding the reliable and trustworthy provision of public information that is necessary to verify VC

data is enabled by the use of DLT. DLT acts as a single point of truth and thus as a generally ac-

ceptable and immutable location for the storage and management of information about standards,

issuers of VCs (e.g., their public signing keys), and revocation status. DLT therefore provides a

censorship-resistant storage facility for information that must be publicly available, without the

need for a central entity such as a certiﬁcate authority [M¨uhle et al., 2018]. SSI’s key roles and

building blocks are summarized in Figure 2.

Besides the security aspect, a widely acknowledged opportunity of SSI is enhanced privacy

features [Sedlmeir et al., 2021b]. One the one hand, by default, diﬀerent identiﬁers, so-called pair-

wise DIDs (pseudonyms), can be used in diﬀerent interactions. Global DIDs are required only for

public entities that want to aggregate reputation or trust, such as credential issuers. Further, some

implementations of VCs can prove the correctness of claims, such as the existence of the issuers’

signature on the VC, without the need to reveal the value of the signature itself or all attributes

that are attested on the credential. This signiﬁcantly mitigates the correlatability of conventional

digital certiﬁcates by means of their digital signature, and ultimately allows for enhanced pri-

vacy while still exchanging the information that is required to build the trust relationship that is

necessary for interactions and business [Davie et al., 2019; Hardman, 2020].

Since the concept places users in the center and leaves them in full control, some general

challenges arise with SSI. First, appropriate measures must be taken to ensure user friendliness.

Users must take care of storing the credentials and managing the keys themselves. So-called digital

agents or wallets are used for this, either directly on an edge agent (e.g., a smartphone or laptop)

or with cloud agents that can only be accessed by the user [Tom Lyons, 2019]. Cloud agents

are helpful, since edge agents cannot guarantee permanent online availability [Reed et al., 2018].

Further, problems such as recovery in the case of device loss or theft must be addressed. Second,

a governance framework is required to establish the possibility to gain trust in a large variety of

issuers. Third, user authenticity must be guaranteed; i.e., sharing and selling credentials must

be prevented [Camenisch and Lysyanskaya, 2001]. However, various concepts that allow one to

address these issues, such as initiatives to build governance frameworks [Davie et al., 2019] and

the combination of biometrics, cryptography, economic incentives, and device coupling to create a

strong bond between credentials and holders [Hardman et al., 2019; Hardman, 2020].

10

In sum, SSI allows for highly decentralized management of personal identiﬁers and for cre-

dentials that are reusable across diﬀerent contexts to be managed by the user from a single

app [Sedlmeir et al., 2021b]. In what follows, we investigate how this approach may help meet the

challenges of the eKYC process.

3. Method

We followed a DSR approach. DSR was originally created to enable IS practitioners to ﬁnd

solutions to previously unsolved problems through a continual build-and-evaluate process.

Its

outcomes are IT artifacts, such as constructs, models, methods, or instantiations [March and

Smith, 1995; Hevner et al., 2004]. While some scholars argue that the IT artifact itself already

contributes to research if it is novel and useful [Gregor and Hevner, 2013; Baskerville et al., 2018],

two challenges in discerning DSR’s research contribution remain: First, it is hard to determine

what exactly a theoretical contribution in DSR is [Gregor and Hevner, 2013]. Second, it is hard

to balance concrete, practical contributions to a rapidly changing technology environment and to

provide a suﬃcient level of generalization for theory [Baskerville et al., 2018]. To address these

challenges, we aim to contribute both an architectural design and a collection of processes as a

concrete IT artifact [Gregor and Hevner, 2013]. To elevate this IT artifact for further theoretical

discussion, we then derive DPs [Hevner et al., 2004; Gregor and Hevner, 2013]. Thus, we aim to

contribute nascent design theory in the form of operational principles [Gregor and Hevner, 2013].

For an IT artifact to oﬀer a substantial contribution to IS research, it must address a relevant

business need [Hevner et al., 2004], which can result from the persons, organizations, or tech-

nologies used in an environment. As argued in Section 2.1, the enhancement of the KYC process

represents such a business need. However, an IT artifact must also be applicable in the correspond-

ing environment [Hevner et al., 2004]. To ensure rigor in the design process, the construction of

the IT artifact needs to build on existing foundations from previous IS research [Vom Brocke et al.,

2020]. Also, existing methodologies should be used to evaluate the created artifact [Hevner et al.,

2004]. The KYC framework here is based on related work that aims to improve the KYC process

using digital technologies, the technical and theoretical foundations of KYC, DLT, and SSI, and

the requirements and expertise of practitioners in said areas.

We employ the frequently used and widely accepted [Schweizer et al., 2017; Reinecke and

Bernstein, 2013] DSR process model of Peﬀers et al. [2007] to facilitate the development of a

11

Figure 3: Our applied DSR process, following Peﬀers et al. [2007].

relevant IT artifact created by a rigorous method. Our process has six steps arranged in sequential

order (see Figure 3) and incorporates an iterative research procedure by design [Peﬀers et al.,

2007]. The process typically starts with the identiﬁcation of a research problem with practical

relevance.

Indeed, as illustrated in Section 2.1, our examination of the current KYC process

reveals challenges such as low process eﬃciency, security challenges, poor user experience, and

data protection concerns.

Next, we deﬁned solution objectives to address the stated challenges and to create a meaning-

ful artifact. In line with DSR, the insights gained from the build-and-evaluate process must be

generalizable and therefore applicable in more generic settings [Jones and Gregor, 2007]. Also, the

design artifacts should result in profound disruptions to traditional ways of doing business [Hevner

and Gregor, 2020]. Recent research into DSR encourages researchers to build their work on prior

DSR within the respective domain [Vom Brocke et al., 2020]. We derived solution objectives by

studying the related literature and regulatory requirements, both for the KYC process and for dig-

ital identiﬁcation and authentication, resulting in six main objectives for the KYC framework and

several requirements for each main objective. Based on these objectives and on theory, we design

and develop an SSI-based eKYC framework in the next research process step. Phase 5 comprises

evaluation, which is necessary to test whether an artifact achieves the purpose of its creation and

to prove this achievement using rigorous methods [Venable et al., 2012]. The evaluation phase also

helps one to better understand the problem at hand and thus to realize improved outcomes [Hevner

et al., 2004].

12

PROCESS ITERATIONIDENTIFY PROBLEMS●  Time expenditure●  Cost expenditure●  Strict Regulation●  Fear of market power●  Lack of security●  Privacy issues●  Poor user experienceDEFINEOBJECTIVES●  Efficiency●  Regulatory compliance●  Decentralization●  Trust●  Privacy●  User ExperienceDESIGN ANDDEVELOPMENT    SSI-Based KYC     Framework & Process●  Facilitate identity     management●  Facilitate data     verification●  Enable reuse of     KYC resultsEVALUATION    Criteria-based    evaluation of the     frameworkCOMMUNICATION   Disucssion and    publication of   the resultsDEMONSTRATION   Demonstration of the   framework in the   context of expert    interviews There is no unique path regarding evaluation, since the best approach depends on both the

underlying problem and the artifact [Peﬀers et al., 2007]. Our evaluation had several iterative

evaluation steps, starting ex ante with the formative evaluation of the design objectives through

interviews with experts [Venable et al., 2016; Sonnenberg and Vom Brocke, 2012]. We conducted

six additional ex post interviews to summatively evaluate our framework by demonstrating it to

the interviewees and incorporating their feedback. The evaluation of the framework was designed

to assess its functionality, accuracy, reliability, ﬁt with the organization, and utility [Hevner et al.,

2004]. We then applied a criteria-based evaluation concerning whether the derived solution objec-

tives were met, since evaluation criteria for an IT artifact must themselves be determined for the

particular environment [March and Smith, 1995]. To elevate the implicit knowledge contribution

in our IT artifact to more abstract and generalizable knowledge allowing for theoretical discus-

sion [Gregor and Hevner, 2013], we then developed nascent DPs for blockchain-based SSI, as this

technical approach is both novel and increasingly discussed, though no general DPs currently exist

in the literature. Finally, we shared the ﬁndings of our research with the relevant audience [Hevner

et al., 2004]. The applied DSR process was iterative and partly in parallel, since the evaluation

phase’s results have reshaped the created artifact [Beck et al., 2013].

Qualitative interviews, as used for our evaluation cycles, are a frequently used method in

IS research, since they are suitable for generating rich data [Myers and Newman, 2007]. We

conducted semi-structured interviews so that we could react ﬂexibly to the interviewees’ answers

and ask appropriate follow-up questions [Kallio et al., 2016]). We involved experts on KYC and

SSI to reﬂect opinions from the perspective of practical applicability in existing settings and bank

structures as well as opinions regarding technical maturity and feasibility. Also, we took care to

avoid an elite bias by representing the voices of executives of diﬀerent corporate levels [Myers and

Newman, 2007]. Further criteria for the selection of the experts included ample knowledge of their

disciplines and intensive experience in their daily work, as well as the ability to provide detailed

information on their ﬁeld of expertise [Morse, 1991]. A detailed overview over the interviewees

appears in Table 1.

We recorded 320 interview minutes (an average of 35.6 minutes per interview). The interviews

were recorded, transcribed, and later analyzed using MAXQDA software. For data analysis, we

used both open and axial coding [Salda˜na, 2015]. Starting from the initial concepts originally

derived in the open coding round, categories were formed. Categories are “higher-level concepts

13

1

1

1

2

2

2

2

2

2

Episode Expertise

Id Role

Background

Type

Project Manager KYC Strategic Analysis and Research, Banking Phone Call

KYC

KYC

SSI

A

B

C

Sales Director

Building Society, Banking

Identity Engineer

Innovation Consultant

SSI & KYC D

Executive Director

SSI Start-up Founder, Banking

SSI & KYC E

Project Manager

Banking

SSI

SSI

KYC

KYC

F

Senior Developer

Computer Science

G CEO

SSI Start-up Founder

H

I

Sales Executive

Banking

Sales Director

Banking

Table 1: Overview over the Interviewed Experts.

Video Call

Video Call

Video Call

Phone Call

Video Call

Video Call

Video call

Video call

under which analysts group lower-level concepts that then become its subcategories” [Corbin and

Strauss, 2008, p. 220]. During this ﬁrst coding round, we created 30 categories and 300 sub-

categories; in the second, we used axial coding to build subcategories. Thus, the data that were

split up during open coding were reassembled to summarize the categories on a more abstract

level [Salda˜na, 2015; Corbin and Strauss, 2008; Charmaz, 2006].

4. Design Objectives for the eKYC Framework

4.1. Structuring of design objectives

To comprehensively address the challenges of the KYC process (as identiﬁed in Section 2),

stage 2 in our DSR process involved the derivation of objectives to be met by a useful SSI-based

eKYC framework. We derived these objectives from the literature on the KYC process, KYC-

related regulatory requirements, and three formative interviews with experts. Thus, we aimed

to align with DSR by incorporating prior research [Vom Brocke et al., 2020] and incorporating

real-world business needs [Hevner et al., 2004]. We identiﬁed six main objectives and associated

requirements. In what follows, we explain and justify them.

Objective 1: Eﬃciency

The high cost and human resources involved in carrying out the current KYC process strongly

challenges ﬁnancial institutions. Financial institutions oﬀering fast and convenient veriﬁcation of

identity documents are more attractive from the customer’s perspective, can reduce costs, and can

help a company gain a competitive advantage [Jessel et al., 2018]. To allow for increased process

14

eﬃciency, we derived three requirements that had to be satisﬁed to overcome the existing challenges.

The end-to-end digital processing of relevant documents (R 1.1) is a prerequisite for automating

process steps and reducing friction [Arner et al., 2019]. Further, in the current KYC process, many

steps involving the validation of data, such as checking whether an ID document’s validity has

expired, are conducted manually [Zetzsche et al., 2018]. Thus, the de facto automation of manual

processes (R 1.2) is another key requirement. Further, Moyano and Ross’s [2017] interviews with

ﬁve senior banking executives revealed a need for interbank collaboration; this was conﬁrmed by

Experts A and B, who stated that banks would be ready to collaborate on resource-intensive KYC.

Currently, however, the main barrier to such cross-organizational processes is the lack of a suitable

non-proprietary IT infrastructure. Thus, a standardized exchange of eKYC documents (R 1.3) is

crucial to allow for the eﬃcient integration of eKYC checks that have been conducted at other

institutions.

Objective 2: Regulatory compliance

Compliance with regulations is a key objective of the KYC process [Ostern and Riedel, 2020];

derived from the overall goal of avoiding money laundering, it is one of the main reasons why the

KYC process exists at all. Our literature study revealed that the Money Laundering Act (MLA)

(R 2.1), GDPR (R 2.2), and electronic Identiﬁcation, Authentication, and Trust Services (eIDAS)

(R 2.3) are particularly relevant regulations for a digital KYC process [Arner et al., 2019]. While

these apply within the European Union (EU), there are similar regulatory requirements in other

jurisdictions worldwide. The European requirements are considered particularly strict, which is

why we decided to apply them here.

The MLA provides banks with speciﬁc requirements regarding the identiﬁcation of customers

and the storage of their records. The banks are also required to determine and document the

risk in relation to their customers. The GDPR applies to the processing of any data regarding

natural persons, but not to legal entities, and poses requirements such as privacy by design, porta-

bility, the right to erasure, transparency, purpose limitation, data minimization, accuracy, storage

limitation, information integrity, and conﬁdentiality. Further, digital KYC processes involve the

customer’s identiﬁcation and a check of the authenticity of the involved documents, and the 5th

EU AML Directive accepts electronic ID systems that comply with eIDAS as a legitimate means of

identiﬁcation for KYC procedures. eIDAS imposes requirements on these electronic means of iden-

15

tiﬁcation, such as compliance with certain security levels (level of assurance) and the cross-border

interoperability of systems.

Objective 3: Decentralization

As argued in Section 2.1, silos of customer data are an attractive target for attackers. Securing

valuable information is costly and not the core business of banks, and mistakes can have severe

consequences concerning reputation, ﬁnes, or both. Recent data breaches that revealed sensitive

customer data stored in central data silos have signiﬁcantly reduced conﬁdence in their respective

architectures [Rajput and Gopinath, 2017]. To avoid comparable data breaches, a viable solution

for an improved eKYC process must therefore avoid central storage of customer data (R 3.1).

Further, banks do not want to risk becoming dependent on a centralized eKYC service provider.

Thus, the system must be constructed to prevent lock-in eﬀects (R 3.2) that could result in the

aggregation of market power. Decentralization of both data storage and workﬂows is therefore one

key objective of the new eKYC architecture.

Objective 4: Trust

A key goal of banks is to make eKYC documents reusable in registrations of a customer at

diﬀerent banks. If banks do not comply with the regulations, there can be heavy ﬁnes, so it is

important to establish trust in the KYC process and the integrity of its documentation at other

banks. Thus, acceptance of KYC documents attested by other banks (R 4.1) is required. The

documents must be tamper-proof, so a further requirement is that validity checks (R 4.2) of these

documents are feasible. Another often disregarded requirement for a complete trust chain is that

sharing or selling KYC documents among customers must be prevented. This can be particularly

diﬃcult if the eKYC process happens remotely and lacks interaction with an employee of the bank.

The customer needs to be able to convince the bank that the KYC-related documents that they

present were not stolen, sold, or shared. We call this requirement authenticity checks (R 4.3),

meaning that the identity of the customer and their connection with the documents must have a

high level of assurance even if the customer is not present at a branch and no video call is held.

Objective 5: Privacy

Protecting customers’ privacy is a key feature of an eKYC process. Facing an increasing

number of data leaks, customers are aware of privacy issues, and delivering a privacy preserving

16

solution may increase the solution’s acceptance. An essential and fairly universal principle in this

context is compliance with the “need to know” principle (R 5.1): Only the customers themselves

and entities relevant to the KYC process must have access to customers’ personal data. This is

also a general recommendation for information systems from a security perspective [Hughes, 1988;

Moor, 1997]. Further, not only the parties involved in the KYC process but also the de facto data

that are exchanged should be restricted to what is necessary, because digital data are much more

comprehensive and easier to collect and abuse than their analog counterparts [Arner et al., 2019].

We call this requirement data minimization (R 5.2).

Objective 6: User experience

From the users’ perspective, although privacy is a nice feature that can be used for marketing

purposes, the most important objective is seamless user experience [Kokolakis, 2017]. The eKYC

process must be convenient, so that customers are not discouraged from registering at the new

bank. It is only when the eKYC process is fast and simple for the customer that it can provide

high security and acceptance [Dhamija and Dusseault, 2008]. Thus, we made low complexity (R 6.1)

a major requirement for user experience. Further, the variety of devices on which a customer can

perform the eKYC process must be respected. Mobile phones are often the customers’ preferred

option, but support for web apps is also necessary in many circumstances. Thus, the availability

of diﬀerent user interfaces (R 6.2) is important. The user experience should also include exception

handling, for instance, if a device that stores the customer data is lost or stolen.

In this case,

either there must be a built-in recovery mechanism, or the customer must be able to ask for rapid

support. This is very diﬃcult if no central third party is responsible for the whole process. Thus,

we also added such backup, recovery, and support (R 6.3) features to our requirements.

4.2. Evaluation of the design objectives

We discussed the current problems of the KYC procedure and our derived objectives with two

KYC experts and an SSI expert. The interviews sought to evaluate the identiﬁed design objectives

concerning relevance and completeness. The KYC experts worked in diﬀerent companies and held

diﬀerent positions, so that the objectives could be viewed from diﬀerent perspectives. Additional

information on the interviewees appears in Table 1.

Expert A conﬁrmed the relevance of the derived objectives and their associated requirements.

Owing to the increasing expenditure on personnel and technology, the process’s eﬃciency is indeed

17

a crucial goal for banks. He stressed the importance of end-to-end digital processing and advocated

interbank cooperation in the KYC process, but identiﬁed trust problems here, both between the

banks and concerning customer trust in the conﬁdentiality of their data. According to him, the

protection of customer privacy is also crucial. Further, he aﬃrmed the relevance of increasingly

strict regulations and the need to comply with them. For instance, customer data must be stored

by banks for at least ﬁve years. The expert also conﬁrmed the necessity of including further MLA

requirements.

Expert B also described process eﬃciency as the most crucial factor, to ensure cost and time

savings. The challenges apparently lie particularly in the high number of manual process steps.

This expert emphasized the importance of automation and digital processing of documents. He also

conﬁrmed the importance of protecting privacy. Sensitive handling of customer data is necessary,

and this must not be passed on to third parties, not even to cooperation partners. Like Expert A,

he noted the increasing importance of regulation and the need to comply with it.

Expert C emphasized the importance of a good user experience, since many users will not focus

on the systems’ functional details. During the implementation phase, special care should be taken

to ensure that the system is as intuitive as possible. Asked about the architectural perspective,

he mentioned backup and recovery capabilities through cloud storage as a building block for user

friendliness in case of data theft or loss. Expert C also conﬁrmed the importance of the GDPR

and eIDAS. According to him, there is still room for interpretation in the GDPR, for instance

regarding the role of encrypted or hashed personally identifying data. He advised proceeding from

the strictest possible interpretation of the GDPR. He stressed that, on a distributed ledger, data

cannot be deleted. A key challenge to the acceptance of KYC documents attested by other banks,

he spoke of the necessary establishment of a trust relationship between the banks. However, he

argued that connecting the eKYC architecture to the eIDAS infrastructure could be a solution to

this problem.

In sum, at least one expert emphasized each of the design objectives, and the experts generally

considered the associated requirements useful to evaluate an eKYC framework from a bank’s

perspective.

18

5. A Framework for eKYC Processes Built on Blockchain-Based SSI

5.1. The SSI-based eKYC architecture

Based on the related work presented in Section 2, we designed a decentralized architecture

that seeks to address the challenges of the KYC process. The study by [Moyano and Ross, 2017]

motivated a decentralized design of eKYC to allow for inter-bank collaboration. However, the

proposed system seems critical from a data protection perspective, considering the privacy-related

challenges of storing customer data, also in encrypted or hashed form, on a blockchain system. We

also noticed that the mechanism they presented does not enforce the alignment of incentives, since

the integrity check only requires a local read operation on one node. Thus, while we appreciate

the background they gave on the necessity of a reusable KYC and a non-centralized solution, we

found the design of the SSI-based framework proposed by [Soltani et al., 2018] more appropriate.

Nonetheless, we generalized this solution by considering both the initial onboarding to receive the

ﬁrst KYC document and how an existing SSI ecosystem and regulation such as eIDAS integrates

with and further strengthens eKYC. We also added an investigation of the framework’s practical

feasibility by rigorously evaluating our SSI-based framework concerning the technical, economic,

and legal requirements. From a technical perspective, we abstracted from their solution based on

Hyperledger Indy to a more generic perspective on SSI and extended their ﬁndings by rigorously

evaluating the design.

Following [Soltani et al., 2018] and the general approach of blockchain-based SSI, the proposed

eKYC architecture involves three primary parties: the customer (holder), a bank (veriﬁer), and

an issuer (the same bank, another bank, or any third party trusted by the verifying bank, such

as a government agency). Credentials from diﬀerent issuers can also be conjugated, because in a

so-called veriﬁable presentation (VP), attributes attested in diﬀerent VCs can be combined [Sporny

et al., 2019]. For simplicity, we assumed one issuer. The customer is the KYC subject and deﬁnes

the center of the architecture (see Figure 4). Customers manage their digital identity through

user agents by creating and storing DIDs and cryptographic keys in their digital wallets, collecting

credentials, creating backups, and managing permissions. It is possible to interact with agents on

various devices, such as smartphones or laptops. At all times, the customers have full control over

their data and particularly over KYC-related documents, represented by VCs. While traditional

certiﬁcate-based approaches (e.g., X.509 certiﬁcates) need to be shown fully to the veriﬁer in order

19

Figure 4: SSI-based KYC architecture (based on [European Commission, 2019; Moyano and Ross, 2017; Reed et al.,

2018; Soltani et al., 2018; Reed et al., 2020; Sporny et al., 2019]).

to check the signature’s validity, the VC standard [Sporny et al., 2019] and related implementations

such as Hyperledger Aries allow for creating proofs from the VCs, convincing the veriﬁer that

certain claims extracted from the VC are correct without the need to exchange the full VC. This

builds on cryptographic constructions such as anonymous credentials introduced by [Camenisch

and Lysyanskaya, 2001]. In our case, the VPs contain proofs of the validity of the attributes that

need to be revealed during the KYC process.

To facilitate the redundant storage of credentials and easier user access to the SSI documents,

as well as to enable secure communication with other entities, the framework employs cloud agents

and wallets. The permissions for carrying out identiﬁcation activities diﬀer between edge and

cloud instances. While edge agents and wallets are usually granted full access to an individual’s

data, the user should use cloud agents/wallets primarily for redundant storage and communication

with other entities. A blockchain serves as a neutral infrastructure for storing publicly veriﬁable

information. It is used to hold VC issuers’ public signing keys and other institutional information.

20

CREDENTIAL ISSUERQUALIFIEDELECTRONICCERTIFICATECLOUD AGENTINSTITUTIONAL- AGENT / WALLETDID DOCUMENTREAD/ WRITECUSTOMERVERIFIABLE CREDENTIALVERIFIABLE PRESENTATIONDISTRIBUTED LEDGERBANKKYCINTERFACESTORAGENAMESCREENINGRISKENGINEREADREADCLOUD AGENTUSER AGENT/ WALLETCLOUD AGENT/ WALLETFurther, schemas of KYC VCs are stored on-chain to allow for public veriﬁcation. Also, publicly

available revocation registries are stored on a blockchain to allow for public checks of privacy-

preserving revocation information. Which credentials are accepted in the KYC process may be

deﬁned by each bank, depending on its requirements and trust relationships. The combination of

eIDAS and DIDs could allow for qualiﬁed digital signatures that comply with eIDAS [European

Commission, 2019]. Credential issuers use institutional agents that are explicitly designed for

creating credentials. Besides issuing credentials, these agents perform identiﬁcation activities such

as checking credentials for integrity and direct communication with the customer that is relevant

during and after the KYC process. It also has an interface to name screening services, the bank’s

risk engine, and customer monitoring. The ﬁnancial institutions are obliged to store data about

customers, for which they use separate storage.

5.2. The SSI-based eKYC process

In accordance with the generic procedure of KYC processes, we split the proposed SSI-based

eKYC process into three parts: (1) customer identiﬁcation, data veriﬁcation, and identity au-

thentication; (2) name screening, risk assessment, and enhanced due diligence; and (3) ongoing

monitoring and records keeping. The ﬁrst part involves three scenarios, depending on the cus-

tomer’s status in the KYC process.

Customer identiﬁcation, data veriﬁcation, and identity authentication

The KYC process starts with customer onboarding, where three cases can be distinguished.

The ﬁrst case is completely new onboarding, where the customer has neither an SSI agent/wallet

nor VCs that conﬁrm a completed KYC process. The second case, fast onboarding, is possible

if the customer already has an SSI agent/wallet with corresponding VCs that attest to the prior

completion of a KYC process. Third, we discuss a simpliﬁed case we call new to KYC, where

customers already have an SSI agent or wallet and some VC from other contexts that contain

identity-related information trusted by the verifying bank (or that the bank is allowed to trust

from a legal perspective), but do not yet have VCs that demonstrate the completion of the KYC

process at some institution.

We present the ﬁrst case, completely new onboarding, in a UML sequence diagram (see Figure 5).

To enable SSI-based onboarding, as illustrated in [Soltani et al., 2018], banks must conduct a one-

time bootstrapping process in which they ﬁrst store a public DID and an associated DID document

21

in a distributed ledger. This DID document may contain service endpoints of the bank, e.g., for

obtaining customer services or conducting the eKYC. The bank will also publish a so-called

credential deﬁnition, which may be derived from an agreed-on schema/template that contains the

attributes that should be attested in a credential, and a revocation registry. All this information is

meant to be publicly readable and contains cryptographic information that allows banks (veriﬁers)

to check the validity of VPs that use an associated VC, and customers (holders) to conduct proofs of

non-revocation. Thus, these can be stored on the blockchain layer, and no GDPR-related problems

are to be expected.

After this initial setup, the bank is ready to perform customer onboarding processes. While

[Soltani et al., 2018] presented a (slightly less detailed) sequence diagram for customer onboarding,

it involves reading from and writing to the blockchain more often than technically necessary. Ac-

cording to our interview with a co-author of the W3C DID standard, it suﬃces and is preferable

from a privacy perspective to have a peer DID for the customer. We also discuss in detail the im-

plications of the design for the bank and the customer, for instance, related to binding, revocation,

and backups. Completely new onboarding starts with a bank customer who either visits the bank’s

website with their smartphone or laptop or physically arrives at a local bank branch to open a new

bank account. Since the customer has neither an SSI user wallet nor the necessary KYC creden-

tials, the bank recommends or oﬀers a user wallet and provides the customer with a corresponding

download link. Customers can download any digital wallet of their choice that supports the public

DID, peer DID, and VC standards. It stores credentials and keys and is secured by a password or

biometrics. The bank could further oﬀer an edge agent in encrypted form in the cloud as capability

for backup and recovery. The user wallet creates a new DID and some associated keys required for

encryption and stores them in the wallet. At the start, the user also creates a so-called link secret,

which will later be used to tie diﬀerent credentials together in a VC and thus provides a means

to prevent selective credential sharing. However, as long as all credentials contain the customer’s

name or another strongly binding attribute that needs to be revealed in the VP, it is easy to prove

that they belong together also without a link secret.

The customer can now use their newly generated DID to establish an end-to-end-encrypted

(secure) connection to the endpoint that the bank oﬀers for the eKYC. The bank could also provide

this information by submitting a QR code to the customer (e.g., via e-mail). The customer scans

this QR code with their wallet app and thus connects to the bank’s public service endpoint. The

22

Figure 5: UML Diagram: Completely New Onboarding

bank’s service behind this endpoint now also creates a new pairwise DID as well as a key pair that

the bank will use exclusively in this relationship, and sends a connection request to the customer’s

service endpoint, its cloud agent, which forwards the connection request to the customer’s wallet

app. This connection request contains the bank’s pairwise DID, the public key used by the bank,

and the service endpoint at which the customer can contact the bank, and could also involve a

proof that the pairwise DID has in fact been authorized by the bank (e.g., through a VP in which

the bank reveals its legal identiﬁer that has been certiﬁed by a reputable public institution). In

turn, the customer’s digital wallet checks the connection’s authenticity and creates a pairwise DID

and keys for the relationship with the bank. Next, it sends a connection response to the bank’s

23

CustomerCustomerEdgeDeviceCustomerEdgeAgent BankLedger Bank CloudAgentKYCInterfaceOpen Bank AccountVerify Documentsand Assess RiskCreate pairwise DID + KeysStore Backup Recovery DataCustomerCloudAgentRequest Identity DocumentsSend/Present Identity DocumentsSend Agent Download LinkCreate Link SecretSet up Cloud AgentWrite to (positive)Revocation RegistryResolve Bank's Public DID and Request DID DocumentStore CredentialRespond with Bank's Public DID Document(containing Bank's Service Endpoint) Create pairwise DID + KeysConnection ResponseSend Bank's Public DID through a QR CodeCreate and Sign CredentialSend Credential OfferAccessRequest new Bank AccountInstallRegister Issuer (DID & DID Document)Publish KYC Credential Definition Initialize Revocation RegistryConnection Request to Bank's Service EndpointSend Credential Request (including blinded Link Secret)Send CredentialRegister AgentForward Bank's Public DIDVisual Paradigm Online Diagrams Express EditionVisual Paradigm Online Diagrams Express Editioncloud agent/wallet, which forwards it to the bank’s KYC interface. Now an end-to-end-encrypted

connection exists between the bank and the customer, which can be used to securely exchange

messages, public keys, VCs, and VPs. Since the customer does not yet have VCs, the customer’s

identity must ﬁrst be veriﬁed. The customer sends the necessary analog identity data to the bank,

either by traditional means or – if feasible – in scanned form via e-mail or the just-established

connection. If the customer opens an account in a bank branch, the documents can also be veriﬁed

directly there.

After the data have been veriﬁed and the customer’s identity has been conﬁrmed, the bank can

send a credential oﬀer to the customer’s edge user agent via the established connection. This cre-

dential oﬀer contains a preview of the data that will be attested, the credential issuer information,

an expiration date for the VC, and information regarding credential revocation. The customer

then accepts the credential oﬀer and sends it to the bank, containing the link secret in blinded

form.2 However, the customer only has to create the link secret once and can later reuse it for

their other VCs. The bank includes the blinded link secret in the attributes attested in the VC

and sends the VC to the customer. The credential could support selective disclosure. That is, in

any VP, the customer can include only the attributes attested by the VC that are necessary for

the veriﬁer, and combine claims from diﬀerent VCs into a VP.

If the issuer wants to support revocation and has bootstrapped a revocation registry, the VC

also contains information on how to check its revocation status. The credential issuer can then

revoke credentials by updating a revocation registry in the distributed ledger. The bank, for

instance, can use this mechanism to invalidate a credential that turns out to be wrongly issued.

Notably, it is only through the additional information regarding revocation in the credential that

the customer can make sense of the information in the public revocation registry and create a

proof of non-revocation within a VP that contains attributes from this VC. Since the credential is

never revealed, but only proofs are derived from this, this likely makes public revocation registries

compliant with the GDPR.

2To be precise, the blinded link secret is a cryptographic commitment, i.e., the hash of the link secret and some

one-time random number. Thus, while the blinded form will diﬀer in each credential issuing process, the customer

(holder) can still prove that diﬀerent commitments originate from the same link secret, without revealing the link

secret itself, in a zero-knowledge proof (ZKP).

24

Going beyond [Soltani et al., 2018], we present in detail how the reuse of a KYC process works.

This fast onboarding process also begins with a bank customer visiting the bank’s website or a local

bank branch to open a new bank account. The customer states that they already have an SSI user

agent and VCs. In the case of opening an account online, the bank sends the customer its bank

public DID, for instance by means of a QR code that can be scanned by the customer’s wallet app.

The channel by which the customer receives this information must be trusted, as the customer

does not know the bank’s DID in advance. Using an identity infrastructure such as eIDAS, the

customer could check whether they are really communicating with the corresponding bank by

verifying an eIDAS certiﬁcation on the bank’s public key in the DID document. The customer’s

user agent can then identify the distributed ledger that stores the DID document associated with

the DID and can query this ledger for the DID document. The user agent uses the DID document

to identify the bank’s eKYC-related service endpoint. The customer’s user agent now creates a

pairwise DID for this relationship and the corresponding keys and sends a connection request to

the bank. The connection request also contains the customer’s pairwise DID and the public key

used. The bank then creates a pairwise DID and corresponding keys, and sends the customer a

connection response, including the pairwise DID and public key.

After establishing the secure connection, the bank sends a proof request for conducting fast

onboarding KYC. This request contains a random nonce to prevent replay attacks and speciﬁes

which data the customer must transmit to the bank, and restrictions on when to accept the VP.

This includes a speciﬁcation of issuers (credential deﬁnitions) and schemas that are accepted for

the VCs used, and whether there is a need for a proof of non-revocation, including a timestamp

of the revocation registry that the customer should refer to in creating this proof if a proof of

non-revocation is demanded. The customer’s edge agent automatically searches for VCs stored in

the customer’s digital wallet that match these requirements, updates their local revocation registry

through a query if it has not been cached before, and creates a VP that it sends to the bank. The

bank can now cryptographically verify the claims, which may also involve reading from revocation

registries and other information regarding credential deﬁnitions unless suﬃciently timely local data

from previous queries are cached.

The bank can now cryptographically verify the proof, which involves checks that the digital

signatures of issuers were on all attributes involved in the VP, that none of the attested attributes

came from a revoked VC, and that all the VCs involved were issued to a commitment of the same,

25

Figure 6: UML Diagram: Fast Onboarding

common link secret. After the proof has been veriﬁed, the bank account is opened. This whole

process can be highly automated and is completed in a few seconds. The secure channel established

between the bank and the customer based on pairwise DIDs can be used in the future to exchange

further documents and to communicate securely and reliably. Based on the exchanged keys, a

unique authentication of the involved entities is thereby possible. This is important when dealing

with digital identities, since the bank must ensure that it communicates with the same person over

time [Jessel et al., 2018].

The third case is new to KYC, where the customer already has an SSI user agent and maybe

even identity-related VCs, but does not yet have a VC that is accepted by the banks during the

26

CustomerCustomerEdgeDeviceCustomerEdgeAgentCustomerCloudAgentBankLedger Bank CloudAgentKYCInterfaceVerify Proofand AssessRisksForward Bank's Public DIDRespond with Bank's Public DID Document (containing Bank's Service Endpoint)Request Revocation Registry StateResolve Bank's Public DID and Request DID DocumentSend Revocation Registry StateCreate pairwise DID + KeysSend Revocation Registry StateCreate Proof (includingProof of Non-Revocation)Request new Bank AccountSend Bank's Public DID through a QR CodeAccessConnection Request to Bank's Service EndpointConnection Response and Proof RequestCreate pairwise DID + KeysSend Proof (Verifiable Presentation)Request Revocation Registry StateOpen Bank AccountVisual Paradigm Online Diagrams Express EditionVisual Paradigm Online Diagrams Express EditionKYC process. Thus, new to KYC is a combination of completely new onboarding (Figure 5) and

fast onboarding (Figure 6). While the construction of the pairwise DID relationship between the

bank and the customer corresponds to the fast onboarding process, the transmission of the analog

ID documents and the possibility of getting a KYC credential from the bank corresponds to the

process of completely new onboarding. However, the customer could ﬁrst check, through a proof

request, whether only a subset of ID documents is necessary because some digital identity proofs

are already in their wallet.

In addition to the option in which the customer opens an account

online, it is also possible to open an account directly in a bank branch by using a QR code to

receive the bank’s service endpoint and have the analog ID documents checked directly in the

bank.

Name screening, risk assessment, and enhanced due diligence

After the identity data has been exchanged and cryptographically veriﬁed, the name screening

service runs in the background of the bank’s IT system to check the data against publicly known

blacklists regarding terrorism, illegal money laundering activities, politically exposed persons, and

negative press. The result of the name screening service is then fed directly into the risk engine,

which uses this and other information to classify the customer into a risk class. The risk engine then

calculates a risk score and classiﬁes the customer into low, standard, or high risk. Depending on

this result, further checks may be necessary before the bank opens the account. Since, in contrast

to analog ID documents, VCs are much harder to forge, it suﬃces to request a minimum amount of

information at the start of the relationship. Depending on the risk assessment’s result, additional

checks may become necessary later. To mitigate risk, the bank can use the previously established

secure communication channel to request additional documents and information, such as an income

statement or the reason for opening the account. As illustrated, such additional documentation

could again be provided in analog form or by using VCs that are already in the customer’s wallet

– for instance, an income statement issued by an employer that the verifying bank trusts – and

deliver an associated VP. Once the customer’s veriﬁcation is successfully completed, the bank can

open the account.

Ongoing monitoring

Once the account has been opened, the risk engine checks the customer’s ongoing transactions

during the business relationship, compares these to the expected transaction volume, and checks

27

the transactions for suspicious transaction patterns. Further, the risk engine regularly checks

whether the expiration dates contained in the VPs have expired; these may even occasionally

trigger a new proof request to the customer through the secure connection to ensure that none

of the customer’s VCs that were used for KYC have been revoked. The customer then only has

to press a conﬁrm button to deliver a new VP. Thus, a manual check of the identity documents

is no longer necessary. If it turns out in a periodic refreshment that a customer’s VC has in the

meantime been revoked (which may just be because of a change of address or a successive re-

issuance of an ID card) or that the transaction behavior is abnormal, the risk engine reassesses the

risk and proposes measures to mitigate these risks if necessary. The bank can then also request

an updated version of the customer’s VCs or further documents. This could even be extended

to oﬀering the customer an option to automatically send updated versions of their VCs (e.g., if

the address on the customer’s government-issued identity VC changes) to the bank after the KYC

process, so that no more manual activities by the bank and the customer are necessary to keep the

data up to date.

Record keeping

The SSI concept theoretically allows a bank not to store personal data about its customers at

all. The data are solely stored in the customer’s digital wallet, and it is very easy to request data

when needed and convenient for the customer to provide this information. However, depending on

the speciﬁc regulations, the banks may be obliged to store their customers’ data for a longer period

in order to be able to unambiguously determine the person’s identity in the event of suspicious

or illegal conduct. Therefore, the bank also stores the data in a local database in the redeﬁned

KYC process. However, the bank may still manipulate some data. A beneﬁt of ZKP-oriented

VCs is that the VP could be made either repudiable or non-repudiable, ensuring tamper-proof

documentation where required and supporting customer privacy even in the case of hacks if no

auditability is required or sensitive information such as income is involved [Hardman, 2020].

6. Evaluation

We now report on a summative, criteria-based evaluation of our proposed framework with

interviews with experts (as described in Section 3), evaluating each of the objectives derived in

Section 4 and their associated requirements in detail [March and Smith, 1995].

28

Eﬃciency

According to Experts E and I, the SSI-based KYC process presented in the framework has the

potential to solve the ineﬃciencies in the existing KYC process. This can mainly be achieved be-

cause the framework involves fully digital cryptographic proofs in the form of VCs. By processing

the data entirely digitally (R 1.1), friction in the onboarding process can therefore be reduced for

both the customer and the bank (Experts D, H, and I). The need for face-to-face veriﬁcation, man-

ual data processing, and repeated KYC processes can be eliminated through the use of re-usable

VCs combined with revocation registries on the blockchain, thus saving costs for manual and re-

peated process steps (R 1.2). Expert H also emphasized that updates and periodic conﬁrmation

that customers need to provide to banks regarding their data can be signiﬁcantly reduced through

the bilateral and secure communication channel, through which the customer can easily give VPs

to the bank. In addition to the potential personnel cost savings, the possibility of authentication

with a high level of assurance and the associated reduction of risks can also avoid high penalties

for non-compliance with due diligence regulations and standards. However, if there is not yet an

existing ecosystem of oﬃcial identity-related documents, this is only true for the fast onboarding

process, where a prior eKYC process at another bank or oﬃcial document issuer has taken place.

Standards for KYC credentials can be created and stored on a public blockchain, such that they

can be referred to and accepted by a range of institutions (R 1.3). This standardization can be

particularly valuable when veriﬁcation of unknown foreign documents can be avoided (Expert I).

Nonetheless, questions regarding governance (e.g., who deﬁnes standards) remain open. An ad-

ditional governance framework is therefore necessary to create clear guidelines for deﬁning which

institutions are suitable as credential issuers.

Regulatory compliance

Regarding compliance with the MLA, the interviewees did not see particular diﬃculties in

the framework design (R 2.1). The GDPR grants the right to erasure of personal data if the

reason for their processing no longer exists. While the de facto interpretation of this regulation

remains unclear, it must be assumed that encrypted and hashed personal data also fall under this

regulation (Expert C). Further, public DIDs and public keys could be considered as personal data

under GDPR, and must therefore be deleted if customers request this (Expert E). Thus, KYC

designs that use distributed ledgers to store such data cannot be implemented by banks. In our

29

framework, natural persons only use pairwise DIDs and exchange information bilaterally without

writing it to a distributed ledger (Experts E, F, and G). Further GDPR requirements, such as

data minimization, are also naturally addressed through VCs’ selective disclosure capabilities. The

fundamental objectives of our eKYC process are therefore aligned with those of the GDPR (R 2.2).

However, a detailed legal assessment remains an avenue for future research.

To eﬀectively use the system, it must also comply with eIDAS regulation (Expert F). The

experts noted that they do not see a conﬂict between eIDAS and the SSI-based eKYC pro-

cess (R 2.3), and supported the idea of combining the SSI concept and the eIDAS infrastructure

(Experts D, E, F, G, and I). Expert G stressed that “these regulations are drivers that will help

to adopt SSI, because SSI is an ideal way to implement them.” The EU has started building the

eIDAS bridge, which seeks to make the legally qualiﬁed signatures from eIDAS accessible for the

VC standard; nonetheless, this implementation has not yet been completed.

Decentralization

Our framework for eKYC stores identity-related data in the customer’s digital wallet, i.e., on

a mobile phone or laptop. Besides the need for banks to store customer information for a certain

period – owing to regulatory compliance, rather than for technical reasons – central storage is

therefore unnecessary (R 3.1). User agents, whose role is discussed in R 6.3, could be considered for

centralized storage. However, these only store data encrypted under user-managed keys. Further,

owing to the heavy standardization associated with SSI, it is unlikely that user agents hosted by

third parties will encounter the same network eﬀects that have led to centralization for traditional

identity providers in federated systems. Thus, the framework counteracts data silos that are highly

attractive to hackers, since one can no longer capture many data sets at once (Experts E and F).

The proposed framework also induces no new central parties to the KYC process (R 3.2).

Through the use of blockchain, no single entity controls the infrastructure that is involved in

checking credential schemas or revocation registries. Expert F mentioned the banks’ position of

trust toward their customers, and therefore considered the banks to be very suitable providers of

cloud agents and wallets. Further, most of the experts support the idea of using banks as potential

service providers to backup facilities (Experts E, F, and G).

30

Trust

In our framework, VCs form the basis of KYC documents. The combination of VCs, as an

evolution of digital certiﬁcates with additional capabilities such as selective disclosure and privacy-

preserving revocation mechanisms based on a blockchain, yield a natural digital equivalent of

physical KYC documents that customers can fully control and take to other banks. VCs’ integrity

can be tested by checking the digital signatures’ validity, whereby the signing keys of issuing insti-

tutions (such as other banks) are publicly available on a blockchain. It is not possible to create fake

credentials, because these are not valid without a credential issuer’s signature. Further, ownership

of credentials can be cryptographically proven [Rannenberg et al., 2015], and binding multiple

credentials via a strongly correlating attribute such as the holder’s name or biometric properties,

or cryptographically through secure hardware, makes credential sharing or selling diﬃcult and

unattractive (R 4.3). From the perspective of both banks and regulators, fully digital veriﬁca-

tion provides a signiﬁcant advantage over analog documents, since data accuracy is improved and

manual errors during data processing can be ruled out (R 4.1) (Experts D, E, and I).

The use of the blockchain infrastructure for storing information on credential issuers (e.g., other

banks or government institutions) and revocation registries for VCs provides an infrastructure that

allows a bank to verify VCs issued by other banks. Nonetheless, governance mechanisms regarding

the legal acceptance of such VCs and other aspects of interbank collaboration required for (R 4.2)

still leave some questions open (Experts D, F, G, and I). Such a framework is necessary to clarify

which credentials the banks accept and whom they accept as a credential issuer.

Privacy

In our framework, users can store and manage their identity data independently, without having

to rely on a distinguished third party. Communication is designed to be only bilateral between

a credential owner and veriﬁer, and only requires occasional, potentially anonymized read queries

to a random node on a public blockchain to update schemas, issuers’ signing keys, and revocation

registries. This architecture prevents third parties from surreptitiously gaining insights into users’

comprehensive data, as is the case with federated identity providers (R 5.1). This is also desirable

from a scalability perspective (Expert G). As a result, users can have diﬀerent digital identities in

diﬀerent contexts and only need to disclose the data required for a speciﬁc situation (Experts E

and F) in accordance with the need to know principle.

31

In the SSI-based approach, customers have complete control over the data in their wallets, and

customers can decide for themselves whom they wish to share data with (Experts D, E, and F). In

this context, the experts also mentioned the possibility of selective disclosure through ZKP. The

fact that customers no longer have to show all their personal details, but only the relevant data,

helps to protect customer privacy through data minimization (R 5.2) (Experts E and F).

The experts also emphasized that a correlation of data is still possible in the absence of public

identiﬁers on the basis of the available rich data sets of banks and other organizations. However,

SSI’s goal is not anonymity, as is sometimes suggested, but rather the best possible extent of privacy

in each scenario. Since KYC procedures seek to build trust, a large amount of personal information

must be revealed.

In this context, it is important to note that researchers such as Lootsma

[2017] have emphasized the possibility of harnessing additional potential through KYC data by,

for instance, connecting them to transactional data. While Lootsma [2017] have even raised the

question of resulting conﬂicts with customer privacy, such eﬀorts may also lead to an inherent

conﬂict with SSI principles. Nonetheless, once personally identiﬁable information has been received

in plain text through a bank, it cannot be hindered in connecting it to other data, also in our

approach.

User experience

The SSI-based eKYC process has the potential to vastly improve the user experience of cus-

tomers. Much of the current friction, such as entering personal data in an online form, the need

to visit a bank, or the need to make a video call with a bank employee for identiﬁcation process,

has been eliminated. Instead, the onboarding process can be carried out on the user’s smartphone

with just a few steps, for instance by scanning QR codes and accepting invitation links and proof

requests through simple interfaces (R 6.1). Because the framework builds on generic and open

standards, for which many reference implementations for mobile phones and computer operating

systems are available, diﬀerent user interfaces are realizable (R 6.2). Further, customers have a

permanent overview of whom they shared data with (Expert E). A potential problem lies with the

customer’s full responsibility for data storage and administration (Experts D, E, and G) (R 6.3).

Customers must develop an awareness of this so that they realize their responsibility and take

appropriate backup and recovery measures to mitigate the consequences of device loss or theft

(Experts E and G).

32

7. Discussion

As indicated in Section 6, our framework can greatly improve KYC processes. In particular,

eﬃciency, trust, and privacy seem to beneﬁt from the blockchain-based SSI architecture. However,

many of the improvements do not speciﬁcally relate to the KYC case. The trust relationship

illustrated in Figure 2 between a holder of ID attributes, an issuer of documents conﬁrming these

attributes, and a veriﬁer is present in multiple domains. Thus, our architecture and its related

processes reveal insights into the general design of artifacts in the nascent ﬁeld of blockchain-

based SSI, which according to the interviews with the SSI experts may translate to many other

areas, where the fear of a centralized service provider has so far prevented a more eﬃcient cross-

organizational identity management. To elevate our IT artifact for further theoretical discussion, we

derived three DPs that abstract our ﬁndings and that seek to guide future research and practice in

blockchain-based SSI [Gregor and Hevner, 2013]. We analyzed codes from the interviews related to

our architecture’s technical building blocks (e.g., (distributed) ledger, blockchain, VC, or storage)

to identify commonly proposed design patterns and their justiﬁcation, and we arrived at three

generic principles.

Design principle 1: Utilize blockchain only for public data

Our research suggests that the absence of a centralized platform operator in the eKYC process

can enable cooperation between banks. The banks do not have to fear that other banks or even

a central eKYC utility will receive valuable customer data, which could put them in a disadvan-

tageous position or create new dependencies and lock-in eﬀects.

In this context, a distributed

ledger is well suited to transparently display public information. On the other hand, owing to

their inherent properties – such as transparency, redundancy, and tamper-resistance – blockchains

are not suitable for storing personal data [Zhang et al., 2019], even in encrypted form [Finck,

2018; COVID-19 Credential Initiative, 2020]. The academic literature often states that credential

hashes and peer DIDs also need to be stored on a distributed ledger [M¨uhle et al., 2018], and

initial frameworks for KYC based on SSI [Soltani et al., 2018] have used this approach. However,

from a technical perspective and according to the experts, this has no apparent advantages and

only carries performance challenges and regulatory risks: Trust in the interaction with a DID is

established through a VP, and VCs’ tamper resistance is established via the issuer’s digital sig-

natures, which need to be trusted anyway. This renders on-chain hashes unnecessary [Toth and

33

Anderson-Priddy, 2019]. Further, it must be assumed that legal persons’ DIDs fall under the

GDPR [Wagner et al., 2018], and for the aforementioned reasons, they should not be stored on

a distributed ledger. Thus, distributed ledgers should only be used in a manner comparable to a

public key infrastructure (PKI) for VC issuers (Experts E and F) and not for private persons’ DIDs

and VCs (Experts E, F, and G). By taking most communication oﬀ-chain, as Expert G mentioned,

the proposed architecture and SSI could help many blockchain use cases to comply with regulation

such as the GDPR or eIDAS and could resolve privacy issues (Experts C, D, E, F and G). Regarding

performance, the Hyperledger Indy blockchains on which many SSI systems rely can handle only a

limited number of write transactions [Sedlmeir et al., 2021a]; thus, one should design interactions

between stakeholders in a blockchain-based SSI environment bilaterally if possible, and one should

read from a blockchain rather than write to it so as to avoid scalability issues.

To abstract and generalize this observation, we propose that by using SSI in processes that re-

quire proofs about the possession of certain attributes, organizations should repeatedly request and

verify these attributes through bilateral communication channels, instead of storing the required

data centrally. As a side eﬀect, this can also help keep data up to date.

Design principle 2: Anticipate an ecosystem of various ledgers

Our initially designed framework was built on the assumption that ﬁnancial institutions share

a single distributed ledger to create and manage digital identities for eKYC. Employing a shared

ledger facilitates interoperability on a technical level and concerning governance. However, recent

developments in SSI practice [Kuperberg, 2019] and our interview ﬁndings indicate that it is

more likely that various distributed ledgers for SSI will exist (Experts F and G), similar to the

considerable number of today’s certiﬁcate authorities. Thus, it is important to account for this

circumstance and to design blockchain-based SSI solutions for various distributed ledgers to achieve

interoperability. This can be achieved through adherence to industry standards, which are currently

being developed by organizations such as the W3C [Sporny et al., 2019], as well as by using technical

components for interoperability and trust. Universal resolvers – i.e., identiﬁer resolvers working

for a multitude of identiﬁers such as DIDs on diﬀerent blockchains and maybe also centralized

databases (e.g., provided by certiﬁcate authorities) – may play an important role in this regard and

may also increase trust (Experts D, E, F, and G). While interoperability is technically achievable

34

without major challenges, the existence of various distributed ledgers may induce governance-level

challenges that must also be designed through cross-ledger governance (Expert G).

Design principle 3: Enable decentralization at the edge

During the creation of the SSI-based KYC framework, we encountered some challenges regard-

ing SSI-based identity management’s user-friendliness. Although managing all identity-relevant

data through a single app can boost the straightforward and user-friendly management of identity

documents and increase authenticity through hardware-binding or credential-linking, self-managing

leads to multiple challenges. For instance, users need support if their devices are lost or stolen.

The status quo of central systems must be broken down somewhat here [Wagner et al., 2018], and

users must develop an awareness of their responsibility for their data and must learn to store them

accordingly (Experts E and F). On the other hand, one must also ﬁnd the right balance between

decentralized and central solutions [Dunphy and Petitcolas, 2018]. An example can be the use of

cloud storage and cloud agents, which can add value concerning recovery, availability, and secu-

rity if the agent specializes in this service. On the other hand, these cloud solutions contradict

SSI’s basic idea of avoiding as many third parties as possible, particularly honey-pots of data, for

privacy and security reasons. However, as long as the data are encrypted and the cloud providers

cannot access the data, Expert C sees cloud storage a both a viable and an essential element for

enabling good user experience. To think decentralization to an end and support the autonomy of

end users in blockchain-based SSI applications, SSI-based architectures must ensure that users can

store their VCs on an infrastructure of their choice.

Crossing the chasm: How to bring blockchain-based SSI into practice in KYC and beyond

While design artifacts, as the outcome of the DSR process, should have practical

im-

pact [Baskerville et al., 2018], bringing the artifacts into practice requires suitable approaches.

One key topic mentioned by multiple experts – but that does not relate to technical terms and is

therefore not a DP that we can derive based on our codes related to technical building blocks –

is the adoption of the SSI-based eKYC. These experts regarded the general adoption of SSI tech-

nology in the public and private sectors as a major driving force of the practical implementation

of our eKYC solution. Expert D called this a chicken and egg problem: Since the technology is

still very new, there are few credential providers, so the utility for a user is very low; on the other

35

hand, as long as there are only a few users, there is also no major incentive for organizations to

act as credential issuers. The more credentials users have, the better such a system can be used

(Expert D). Network eﬀects can help bridge the gap between early adopters and the widespread

use of the technology [Moore and McKenna, 1999]. In particular, banks can contribute to this by

oﬀering the technology in the isolated KYC use case, issuing VCs to contribute to its spread in

the mass market. The more that banks accept these credentials, the more attractive the system

becomes to customers. In turn, higher usage by customers leads to more incentive for other orga-

nizations to accept VCs. As mentioned, the cooperation of the banks and the creation of shared

standards are crucial if this adoption is to become possible.

Because users have full control over their data, SSI must address the GDPR’s general require-

ments, such as privacy by design, portability, the right to erasure, transparency, purpose limitation,

data minimization, accuracy, storage limitation, and information integrity. Users can get a perma-

nent overview of whom they shared what data with (Expert E), and these records can help to better

implement the right to erasure. In turn, this may lead to a better adoption of the technology. In

fact, the GDPR’s strict requirements, which were often criticized for impeding blockchain-related

innovation in Europe, may ultimately have turned out to boost innovation, so blockchain’s beneﬁts

for interoperability can be used for the purposes highlighted in DP 1 while avoiding its well-known

privacy- and scalability-related challenges.

The interplay between SSI and regulation uncovers many other interesting dimensions. For

instance, our interviewees suggested that eIDAS regulation can facilitate SSI while SSI can help

make the eIDAS infrastructure, which so far has been used only moderately, more practicable and

valuated [Tom Lyons, 2019]. On the other hand, we saw that SSI technically allows for even more

privacy than what is required by regulation. However, the MLA requires that banks store customer

data for ﬁve years, creating tension between data protection regulation and the objectives of user

control and the prevention of data silos. Thus, SSI may even lead to new discussions on where to

set the sweet spot between market integrity and privacy.

8. Conclusion

In this article, we sought to build a framework to improve on the current shortcomings in the

KYC process through an end-to-end digital process that leverages blockchain-based SSI. Research

on SSI is still in its infancy, and little has been published on the design of applications for SSI.

36

Soltani et al. [2018] were the ﬁrst to explore this topic in the context of KYC, covering the

onboarding process and technically evaluating their solution. Building on this valuable work, we

extended the scope and emphasized banks’ requirements. We used a DSR approach based on Peﬀers

et al. [2007], designing and evaluating a framework for KYC processes built on blockchain-based

SSI, including a generic architecture and process design. Since we face a low solution maturity in

the innovative ﬁeld of blockchain and SSI, and high application domain maturity in the domain

of KYC, we provided an improvement in the context of DSR [Gregor and Hevner, 2013]. Our

evaluation suggests that our design can signiﬁcantly contribute to a more eﬃcient KYC process

that also addresses the other requirements of stakeholders. Thus, we are conﬁdent that we have

accomplished our research objective.

Besides the conceptualized and evaluated architecture and set of processes [Gregor and Hevner,

2013] for the KYC case, we made three primary contributions to the academic body of knowledge.

First, our examination revealed the challenges of using DLT for the exchange of personal data

generally and particularly for digital identity management systems. We also showed how these

problems can be solved by using SSI on top of the blockchain layer, thereby leveraging the ad-

vantages typically associated with blockchain technology while avoiding its well-known issues with

scalability and privacy. Second, we revealed the implications of designing SSI-based solutions built

on blockchain in the context of KYC by deriving three DPs, which allowed us to elevate our IT ar-

tifact for more abstract and generalizable theoretical discussion [Gregor and Hevner, 2013]. Third,

we oﬀered suggestions for relevant future research on blockchain and SSI, enabling researchers to

base their work on our results and thus generate additional knowledge [Vom Brocke et al., 2020].

DSR should also inform practice to advance a speciﬁc domain through IT [Gregor and Hevner,

2013]. Our conception and evaluation of the SSI-based KYC framework will provide practitioners

with valuable insights regarding design choices, DLT’s role, the intricacies of regulation, and related

challenges and opportunities for banks and customers. Our results indicate that SSI-based eKYC

processes can reduce cost and time expenditures and contribute to better user experiences and

increased security during the KYC process. We demonstrated how the use of SSI can positively

impact the diﬀerent onboarding processes and their interplays with an existing SSI ecosystem.

However, we illustrated that there are further conceptual challenges to be solved before SSI is used

in real systems and settings, especially regarding the necessary governance frameworks and a more

detailed regulatory analysis. While our research suggests synergies between SSI and regulation,

37

challenges remain, especially to establish a general SSI-based ecosystem and to make SSI as user-

friendly as possible without sacriﬁcing privacy and security.

Like most research, our study has limitations. Our framework has not yet been used in practice

and therefore lacks an evaluation in a real-world setting. However, by applying a rigorous research

design and obtaining practitioner feedback, we sought to address this shortcoming. Further, al-

though we described the necessary and central elements of an additionally required governance

framework, its concrete implementation remains open.

In particular, details regarding the co-

operation of banks in the KYC process, the creation of shared standards, and the responsible

parties for operating the blockchain in the case of using a permissioned network must be clariﬁed.

This opens various promising avenues for future research. In particular, the KYC process is often

relevant not only in the banking environment but also in other domains such as insurance, and

further objectives may be necessary to address this aspect. Further, although our interviews with

experts conﬁrmed Moyano and Ross’s [2017] ﬁndings that there is suﬃcient trust between banks

that collaboration on eKYC is possible despite competition on a suitable IT infrastructure, this

only represents the perspective of practitioners and researchers in central and northern European

countries. Nonetheless, there is also a promising development that may make SSI-based KYC

and our ﬁndings considerably more far-reaching and applicable in contexts in which this trust is

missing: In emerging SSI ecosystems in North America and Europe, governments are starting to

explore the impacts of issuing certiﬁcates such as driver’s licenses and ID cards in the form of VCs

that can be leveraged by the public and private sector. Besides increasing the eﬃciency of digital

identiﬁcation and authentication, a digital ID is expected to contribute to substantial reductions

in ﬁnancial crime [Financial Times, 2021]. In this context, an experimental clause was recently

adopted in Germany’s parliament that explicitly allows banks to perform KYC based on an ID

card in the form of a VC [Association of German Banks, 2021; Deutscher Bundestag, 2021].

We are conﬁdent that we have derived guidelines and DPs that generalize to these promising

developments and to other sectors, and that also provide guidance on how to make blockchain-

based SSI compatible with the needs of businesses and regulatory restrictions. More eﬃcient,

reusable processes, speciﬁcally relating to identity management, are needed in both business and

the public sector, but the risks associated with central providers have so far prevented general

services from providing these capabilities. Blockchain-based SSI can address the need for a general

service for data that is non-competitive, since the same data are needed and used by all, and yet

38

comply with customer data privacy expectations and regulations. On the other hand, our DP

of minimal involvement of the blockchain, speciﬁcally not storing natural persons’ DIDs or even

VCs on a blockchain, translates to applications of SSI generally, and we are eager to see more use

cases being built on this technology stack. Given current eﬀorts by the Veriﬁable Organizations

Network in Canada, the ambitious goal of having 10 diﬀerent pilots that leverage blockchain-based

SSI by the end of 2021 in Germany, and several SSI smartphone wallets that are already available,

we are conﬁdent that this time, the promises of blockchain-technology to revolutionize digital ID

management can be fulﬁlled, although blockchain’s role will be much more restricted than what

early research suggested.

References

C. Allen. The path to self-sovereign identity, 2016. http://www.lifewithalacrity.com/previ

ous/2016/04/the-path-to-self-soverereign-identity.html, last access: 2020-07-24.

R. Arasa and L. Ottichilo. Determinants of know your customer (KYC) compliance among com-

mercial banks in Kenya. Journal of Economics and Behavioral Studies, 2:162–175, 2015.

D. W. Arner, J. N. Barberis, and R. P. Buckley. The emergence of RegTech 2.0: From know your

customer to know your data, 2016. https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/Delivery.cfm/SSRN ID3

044280 code722134.pdf?abstractid=3044280&mirid=1, last access: 2020-07-24.

D. W. Arner, D. A. Zetzsche, R. P. Buckley, and J. N. Barberis. The identity challenge in ﬁnance:

From analogue identity to digitized identiﬁcation to digital KYC utilities. European Business

Organization Law Review, 20(1):55–80, 2019.

Association of German Banks. Digital identities – steps on the path to an ID ecosystem, 2021.

https://en.bankenverband.de/newsroom/comments/digital-identities-steps-path-id

-ecosystem/#2.

O. Avellaneda, A. Bachmann, A. Barbir, J. Brenan, P. Dingle, K. H. Duﬀy, E. Maler, D. Reed,

and M. Sporny. Decentralized identity: Where did it come from and where is it going? IEEE

Communications Standards Magazine, 3(4):10–13, 2019.

39

R. Baskerville, A. Baiyere, S. Gregor, A. Hevner, and M. Rossi. Design science research contribu-

tions: Finding a balance between artifact and theory. Journal of the Association for Information

Systems, 19(5):3, 2018.

R. Beck, S. Weber, and R. W. Gregory. Theory-generating design science research. Information

Systems Frontiers, 15(4):637–651, 2013.

A. Biryukov, D. Khovratovich, and S. Tikhomirov. Privacy-preserving KYC on Ethereum. In 1st

Blockchain Workshop. ERCIM, 2018.

B.-J. Butijn, D. A. Tamburri, and W.-J. v. d. Heuvel. Blockchains: A systematic multivocal

literature review. ACM Computing Surveys, 53(3):1–37, 2020.

J. Camenisch and A. Lysyanskaya. An eﬃcient system for non-transferable anonymous credentials

with optional anonymity revocation. In International Conference on the Theory and Applications

of Cryptographic Techniques, pages 93–118. Springer, 2001.

F. Casino, T. K. Dasaklis, and C. Patsakis. A systematic literature review of blockchain-based

applications: Current status, classiﬁcation and open issues. Telematics and Informatics, 36:

55–81, 2019.

K. Charmaz. Constructing grounded theory: A practical guide through qualitative analysis. Sage,

2006.

R. Christie. Setting a standard path forward for KYC. Journal of Financial Transformation, 47:

155–164, 2018.

S. Clauß and M. K¨ohntopp. Identity management and its support of multilateral security. Computer

Networks, 37(2):205–219, 2001.

J. Corbin and A. Strauss. Basics of qualitative research: Techniques and procedures for developing

grounded theory. Sage, 2008.

COVID-19 Credential Initiative. Decentralised Identity Architecture and Regulatory Compliance,

2020. https://docs.google.com/document/d/164S-nNnMHlPZex5lKenuGRhavvt8qeKIdTPHFA

D5b c/edit, last access: December 3, 2021.

40

M. Davie, D. Gisolﬁ, D. Hardman, J. Jordan, D. O’Donnell, and D. Reed. The trust over IP stack.

IEEE Communications Standards Magazine, 3(4):46–51, 2019.

Deutscher Bundestag. Drucksache 19/30443, 2021. https://dserver.bundestag.de/btd/19/30

4/1930443.pdf.

R. Dhamija and L. Dusseault. The seven ﬂaws of identity management: Usability and security

challenges. IEEE Security & Privacy, 6(2):24–29, 2008.

P. Dunphy and F. A. Petitcolas. A ﬁrst look at identity management schemes on the blockchain.

IEEE Security & Privacy, 16(4):20–29, 2018.

T. El Maliki and J.-M. Seigneur. A survey of user-centric identity management technologies. In

The International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems, and Technologies,

pages 12–17, 2007.

European Commission. eIDAS supported self-sovereign identity, 2019. https://ec.europa.

eu/futurium/en/system/files/ged/eidas supported ssi may 2019 0.pdf, last access:

2020-07-24.

FATF. FATF 40 Recommendations, 2004. https://www.fatf-gafi.org/media/fatf/documen

ts/FATF%20Standards%20-%2040%20Recommendations%20rc.pdf, last access: 2020-07-24.

Financial Times. 81 % of ﬁnancial services ﬁrms agree digital ID would improve ﬁnancial crime

prevention, 2021. https://thefintechtimes.com/81-of-financial-services-firms-agr

ee-digital-id-would-improve-financial-crime-prevention/.

M. Finck. Blockchains and data protection in the European Union. European Data Protection Law

Review, 4:17–35, 2018.

G. Fridgen, S. Radszuwill, N. Urbach, and L. Utz. Cross-organizational workﬂow management using

blockchain technology – towards applicability, auditability, and automation. In Proceedings of

the 51st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, pages 3507–3516. AIS, 2018.

F. Glaser. Pervasive decentralisation of digital infrastructures: A framework for blockchain enabled

system and use case analysis. In Proceedings of the 50th Hawaii International Conference on

System Sciences, pages 1543–1552. AIS, 2017.

41

S. Gregor and A. R. Hevner. Positioning and presenting design science research for maximum

impact. MIS Quarterly, 37(2):337–355, 2013.

T. Guggenberger, A. Schweizer, and N. Urbach. Improving interorganizational information shar-

ing for vendor managed inventory: Toward a decentralized information hub using blockchain

technology. IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management, 2020.

D. Hardman. No paradox here: ZKPs deliver savvy trust, 2020. https://www.evernym.com/bl

og/no-paradox-here-zkps-deliver-savvy-trust/, last access: 2020-07-24.

D. Hardman, L. Harchandani, A. Othman, and J. Callahan. Using biometrics to ﬁght credential

fraud. IEEE Communications Standards Magazine, 3(4):39–45, 2019.

A. Hevner and S. Gregor. Envisioning entrepreneurship and digital innovation through a design

science research lens: A matrix approach. Information & Management, page 103350, 2020.

A. Hevner, S. T. March, J. Park, S. Ram, et al. Design science research in information systems.

MIS Quarterly, 28(1):75–105, 2004.

P. L. Hughes. The ‘need to know’ principle of computer security. Computer Law & Security Review,

3(5):29–30, 1988.

B. Jessel, K. Lowmaster, N. Hughes, et al. Digital identity: The foundation for trusted transactions

in ﬁnancial services. Journal of Financial Transformation, 47:143–150, 2018.

D. Jones and S. Gregor. The anatomy of a design theory. Journal of the Association for Information

Systems, 8(5):312–335, 2007.

H. Kallio, A.-M. Pietil¨a, M. Johnson, and M. Kangasniemi. Systematic methodological review:

Developing a framework for a qualitative semi-structured interview guide. Journal of Advanced

Nursing, 72(12):2954–2965, 2016.

S. Kokolakis. Privacy attitudes and privacy behaviour: A review of current research on the privacy

paradox phenomenon. Computers & Security, 64:122–134, 2017.

J. Kolb, M. AbdelBaky, R. H. Katz, and D. E. Culler. Core concepts, challenges, and future

directions in blockchain: A centralized tutorial. ACM Computing Surveys, 53(1):1–39, 2020.

42

M. Kuperberg. Blockchain-based identity management: A survey from the enterprise and ecosys-

tem perspective. IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management, 67(4):1008–1027, 2019.

Ledger Insights. Self-sovereign identity successfully trialed for KYC in UK regulatory sandbox,

2020. https://www.ledgerinsights.com/self-sovereign-identity-successfully-tria

led-for-kyc-in-uk-regulatory-sandbox/, last access: 2020-07-24.

S. Y. Lim, P. T. Fotsing, A. Almasri, O. Musa, M. L. M. Kiah, T. F. Ang, and R. Ismail. Blockchain

technology the identity management and authentication service disruptor: A survey. Interna-

tional Journal on Advanced Science, Engineering and Information Technology, 8(4-2):1735–1745,

2018.

Y. Liu, Q. Lu, H.-Y. Paik, X. Xu, S. Chen, and L. Zhu. Design pattern as a service for blockchain-

based self-sovereign identity. IEEE Software, 37(5):30–36, 2020.

Y. Lootsma. Blockchain as the newest regtech application – The opportunity to reduce the burden

of KYC for ﬁnancial institutions. Banking & Financial Services Policy Report, 36(8):16–21,

2017.

E. Maler and D. Reed. The Venn of identity: Options and issues in federated identity management.

IEEE Security & Privacy, 6(2):16–23, 2008.

S. T. March and G. F. Smith. Design and natural science research on information technology.

Decision Support Systems, 15(4):251–266, 1995.

J. H. Moor. Towards a theory of privacy in the information age. ACM Sigcas Computers and

Society, 27(3):27–32, 1997.

G. A. Moore and R. McKenna. Crossing the chasm. Harper Business Essentials, 1999.

J. M. Morse. Strategies for sampling. Qualitative nursing research: A contemporary dialogue,

pages 127–145, 1991.

J. P. Moyano and O. Ross. KYC optimization using distributed ledger technology. Business &

Information Systems Engineering, 59(6):411–423, 2017.

N. Mugarura. Customer due diligence (CDD) mandate and the propensity of its application as a

global AML paradigm. Journal of Money Laundering Control, 17(1):75–96, 2014.

43

A. M¨uhle, A. Gr¨uner, T. Gayvoronskaya, and C. Meinel. A survey on essential components of a

self-sovereign identity. Computer Science Review, 30:80–86, 2018.

M. D. Myers and M. Newman. The qualitative interview in IS research: Examining the craft.

Information and organization, 17(1):2–26, 2007.

R. Norvill, M. Steichen, W. M. Shbair, and R. State. Blockchain for the simpliﬁcation and au-

tomation of KYC result sharing. In International Conference on Blockchain and Cryptocurrency,

pages 9–10. IEEE, 2019.

N. K. Ostern and J. Riedel. Know-your-customer (KYC) requirements for initial coin oﬀerings.

Business & Information Systems Engineering, 2020. ISSN 1867-0202. doi: 10.1007/s12599-020

-00677-6.

K. Peﬀers, T. Tuunanen, M. A. Rothenberger, and S. Chatterjee. A design science research

methodology for information systems research. Journal of Management Information Systems,

24(3):45–77, 2007.

L. Perlman and N. Gurung. Focus note: The use of eKYC for customer identity and veriﬁcation

and AML, 2019. https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/Delivery.cfm/SSRN ID3370665 code505

438.pdf?abstractid=3370665&mirid=1, last access: 2020-07-24.

A. Rajput and K. Gopinath. Towards a more secure Aadhaar. In International Conference on

Information Systems Security, pages 283–300. Springer, 2017.

K. Rannenberg, J. Camenisch, and A. Sabouri. Attribute-based credentials for trust. Identity in

the Information Society, Springer, 2015.

D. Reed, J. Law, D. Hardman, and M. Lodder. DKMS (decentralized key management system)

design and architecture v3, 2018. https://github.com/hyperledger/indy-sdk/blob/677a0

439487a1b7ce64c2e62671ed3e0079cc11f/doc/design/005-dkms/DKMS%20Design%20and%20

Architecture%20V3.md, last access: 2020-07-24.

D. Reed, M. Sporny, D. Longley, C. Allen, R. Grant, and M. Sabadello. Decentralized identiﬁers

(DIDs) v1.0, 2020. https://w3c.github.io/did-core, last access: 2020-07-24.

44

K. Reinecke and A. Bernstein. Knowing what a user likes: A design science approach to interfaces

that automatically adapt to culture. MIS Quarterly, pages 427–453, 2013.

A. Rieger, J. Lockl, N. Urbach, F. Guggenmos, and G. Fridgen. Building a blockchain application

that complies with the EU general data protection regulation. MIS Quarterly Executive, 18(4),

2019.

M. Rossi, C. Mueller-Bloch, J. B. Thatcher, and R. Beck. Blockchain research in information

systems: Current trends and an inclusive future research agenda. Journal of the Association for

Information Systems, 20(9):14, 2019.

P. J. Ruce. Anti-money laundering: The challenges of know your customer legislation for private

bankers and the hidden beneﬁts for relationship management (the bright side of knowing your

customer). The Banking Law Journal, 128(6):548–564, 2011.

J. Salda˜na. The coding manual for qualitative researchers. Sage, 2015.

A. Schweizer, V. Schlatt, N. Urbach, and G. Fridgen. Unchaining social businesses – Blockchain

as the basic technology of a crowdlending platform. In 37th International Conference on Infor-

mation Systems, 2017.

J. Sedlmeir, R. Smethurst, A. Rieger, and G. Fridgen. Digital identities and veriﬁable credentials.

Business & Information Systems Engineering, 2021.

J. Sedlmeir, P. Ross, A. Luckow, J. Lockl, D. Miehle, and G. Fridgen. The DLPS: A framework

for benchmarking blockchains. In Proceedings of the 54th Hawaii International Conference in

System Sciences, pages 6855–6864, Wailea, Maui, Hawaii, USA, 2021. IEEE.

R. Soltani, U. T. Nguyen, and A. An. A new approach to client onboarding using self-sovereign

identity and distributed ledger. In International Conference on Internet of Things and Green

Computing and Communications and Cyber, Physical and Social Computing and Smart Data,

pages 1129–1136. IEEE, 2018.

C. Sonnenberg and J. Vom Brocke. Evaluations in the science of the artiﬁcial – Reconsidering the

build-evaluate pattern in design science research. In International Conference on Design Science

Research in Information Systems, pages 381–397. Springer, 2012.

45

M. Sporny, D. Longley, and D. Chadwick. Veriﬁable credentials data model 1.0, 2019. https:

//www.w3.org/TR/vc-data-model/, last access: 2020-07-24.

D. Swinhoe. The 15 biggest data breaches of the 21st century, 2020. https://www.csoonline.co

m/article/2130877/the-biggest-data-breaches-of-the-21st-century.html, last access:

2020-07-24.

The Economist.

Indian business prepares to tap into Aadhaar, a state-owned ﬁngerprint-

identiﬁcation system, 2016. https://www.economist.com/business/2016/12/24/indian

-business-prepares-to-tap-into-aadhaar-a-state-owned-fingerprint-identificatio

n-system, last access: 2020-07-24.

Thomson Reuters. Know your customer surveys reveal escalating costs and complexity, 2016.

https://www.thomsonreuters.com/en/press-releases/2016/may/thomson-reuters-2016

-know-your-customer-surveys.html, last access: 2020-07-24.

K. T. Tom Lyons, Ludovic Courcelas. Blockchain and digital identity, 2019. https://www.eu

blockchainforum.eu/sites/default/files/report identity v0.9.4.pdf, last access:

2020-07-24.

K. C. Toth and A. Anderson-Priddy. Self-sovereign digital identity: A paradigm shift for identity.

IEEE Security & Privacy, 17(3):17–27, 2019.

Trust over IP Foundation. Introducing the Trust over IP Foundation, 2020. https://trustove

rip.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/98/2020/05/toip introduction 050520.pdf, last

access: December 3, 2021.

J. Venable, J. Pries-Heje, and R. Baskerville. A comprehensive framework for evaluation in de-

sign science research. In International Conference on Design Science Research in Information

Systems, pages 423–438. Springer, 2012.

J. Venable, J. Pries-Heje, and R. Baskerville. FEDS: A framework for evaluation in design science

research. European Journal of Information Systems, 25(1):77–89, 2016.

J. Vom Brocke, R. Winter, A. Hevner, and A. Maedche. Special Issue Editorial – Accumulation

and evolution of design knowledge in design science research: A journey through time and space.

Journal of the Association for Information Systems, 21(3):9, 2020.

46

K. Wagner, B. N´emethi, E. Renieris, P. Lang, E. Brunet, and E. Holst. Self-sovereign identity: A

position paper on blockchain enabled identity and the road ahead, 2018. https://jolocom.io

/wp-content/uploads/2018/10/Self-sovereign-Identity- -Blockchain-Bundesverband

-2018.pdf, last access: 2020-07-24.

L. Zavolokina, R. Ziolkowski, I. Bauer, and G. Schwabe. Management, governance and value

creation in a blockchain consortium. MIS Quarterly Executive, 19(1):1–17, 2020.

D. A. Zetzsche, R. P. Buckley, and D. W. Arner. Digital ID and AML/CDD/KYC utilities for

ﬁnancial inclusion, integrity and competition. Journal of Financial Transformation, pages 133–

142, 2018.

R. Zhang, R. Xue, and L. Liu. Security and privacy on blockchain. ACM Comput. Surv., 52(3),

2019.

47

