Anomaly Detection in Blockchain Networks: A
Comprehensive Survey

Muneeb Ul Hassan, Mubashir Husain Rehmani, and Jinjun Chen

1

2
2
0
2

l
u
J

7

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

3
v
9
8
0
6
0
.
2
1
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Over the past decade, blockchain technology has
attracted a huge attention from both industry and academia
because it can be integrated with a large number of everyday
applications of modern information and communication tech-
nologies (ICT). Peer-to-peer (P2P) architecture of blockchain
enhances these applications by providing strong security and
trust-oriented guarantees, such as immutability, veriﬁability, and
decentralization. Despite these incredible features that blockchain
technology brings to these ICT applications, recent research
has indicated that
the strong guarantees are not sufﬁcient
enough and blockchain networks may still be prone to various
security, privacy, and reliability issues. In order to overcome
these issues, it is important to identify the anomalous behaviour
within the actionable time frame. In this article, we provide
an in-depth survey regarding integration of anomaly detection
models in blockchain technology. For this, we ﬁrst discuss how
anomaly detection can aid in ensuring security of blockchain
based applications. Then, we demonstrate certain fundamental
evaluation metrics and key requirements that can play a critical
role while developing anomaly detection models for blockchain.
Afterwards, we present a thorough survey of various anomaly
detection models from the perspective of each layer of blockchain.
Finally, we conclude the article by highlighting certain important
challenges alongside discussing how they can serve as future
research directions for new researchers in the ﬁeld.

Index Terms—Blockchain, Anomaly Detection, Fraud Detec-

tion

I. INTRODUCTION

investigated

blockchain. Research works

The tremendous success of Bitcoin as a cryptocurrency
grabbed the attention of researchers who then started to
explore the underlying technology behind this cryptocurrency
that
named
blockchain integrated with information and communication
technologies (ICT) have a vast number of use cases in
daily life applications, such as supply chain, ﬁnances, IoT
operations, cloud services, etc. Since then, applications of
blockchain technology are being explored by researchers and
this number is continuously increasing [1].
From a technological point of view, blockchain is an
immutable append-only chain of blocks which works over
decentralized peer-to-peer (P2P) network [2]. Each block
in the decentralized ledger
two critical
components, one is transactions and the other is block header.
Transactions can be termed as a validated set of records
between peers, which can be of multiple types ranging

is composed of

from ﬁnancial transactions to real-time reported data. The
second critical component of the block is its header, which
is comprised of critical information, such as nonce, block
hash, previous block hash,
time stamp, Merkle root, etc.
Since each block is linked with each other with a secure
hash function, thus, this property of the blockchain makes
the complete network secure and immutable [3]. Similarly,
from a functioning perspective, blockchain can further be
classiﬁed into multiple layers named as data layer, network
layer, incentive layer, and smart contract layer. Each layer
in the blockchain taxonomy has its own functionalities and
responsibilities. A detailed discussion about functioning and
layer oriented architecture of blockchain has been provided
later in this article (Section II-B.).
Despite these beneﬁts, blockchain technology is not 100%
secure and it is still prone to certain attacks and issues [4],
[5]. Usually, the purpose of launching the attacks over the
blockchain network is the capital or popularity of the system.
For example, a successful attack on the Bitcoin/Ethereum
network can result in reduction of its market value price.
A very similar attack was carried out
in 2017 over the
Bitcoin network, when the network was ﬂooded with a huge
number of spam transactions in order to cause delay and
stall the transaction veriﬁcation process, which in turn will
increase the fee of mining process of Bitcoin. This delay
in the transaction process resulted in delayed payments of
approximately $700million USD [6]. Similarly, attackers
also carry out attacks on a decentralized application or
cryptocurrency to reduce its popularity. For instance, in 2017,
the exchange Bitﬁnex faced a distributed denial-of-service
(DDoS) attack in the network, which caused the suspension
of service temporarily [7]. Similar to these attacks, a large
number of Ponzi schemes over the blockchain network have
been developed in order to steal money from legitimate users,
which attract layman users by promising future incentives,
etc. Alongside these, a large number of malicious accounts
are being created regularly on cryptocurrencies in order to
carry out money laundering. Moreover, in certain anomalous
attacks, malicious forks are created and deployed to overcome
computational power and to carry out double spending in the
network [8]. Thus, in order to get most out of the blockchain
network, it is equally important to detect the occurrence of
these attacks and vulnerabilities in a timely manner.

M. Ul Hassan and J. Chen are with the Swinburne University of Tech-
nology, Hawthorn VIC 3122, Australia (e-mail: muneebmh1@gmail.com;
jinjun.chen@gmail.com).

M.H. Rehmani is with the Department of Computer Science, Munster

Technological University, Ireland (e-mail: mshrehmani@gmail.com).

To provide the successful detection and prediction of such
attacks over blockchain, the ﬁeld of anomaly detection for
blockchain comes into action. The major functionality is to
detect or even predict the future occurrence of any vulnera-

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

blockchain technology. To summarize, the major contributions
of our work are as follows:

• We work over providing generalist audience a brief
overview regarding the ﬁeld of anomaly detection in
blockchain

• We provide detailed discussion about classiﬁcation of
anomalous attacks, their detection models, and the exist-
ing works in blockchain technology alongside providing
some fundamental metrics and key requirements for their
robust and timely identiﬁcation.

• We highlight critical challenges in blockchain based
anomaly detection that needs to be solved alongside
providing a brief overview of future directions associated
with these challenges.

B. Comparison with Related Surveys

The concept of anomaly detection for conventional
networks has been in discussion in industry and academia for
a long time, and a plethora of work has been carried over it
so far. However, traditional anomaly detection models cannot
directly be integrated with blockchain technology because
blockchain has multiple aspects which makes it distinct
from traditional networks, such as consensus mechanism,
smart contract, decentralized P2P transactions, lack of central
authority, etc. Therefore, in the presence of all these features,
traditional anomaly detection models cannot be applied
directly to blockchain. Thus, there is a dire need to develop
anomaly detection models purely for blockchain based
networks and applications.
Our survey on anomaly detection in blockchain networks is
distinctive from all past surveys because we cover the aspect
of anomaly detection in detail from basics to integration
perspective at different layers of blockchain technology. A
table comprising of comparison of our proposed work with
other similar works has been given in Table. I. Comparatively,
in literature, a detailed survey discussing various security
threats and their machine-learning based countermeasures for
Bitcoin has been presented by Mohamed et al. in [9].Similarly,
another similar survey discussing the privacy and anonymity
of Bitcoin and similar cryptocurrencies has been presented by
authors in [10]. A short review discussing intrusion detection
systems (IDS) in blockchain technology has been presented
by Meng et al. in [11]. Similar to this, another survey work
which emphasizes the use of blockchain as a critical tool for
security services has been presented by Salman et al. in [12].
A work discussing privacy preservation strategies
in
blockchain based Internet of Things (IoT) systems has
been presented by authors in [13]. The next work [14] is a
master’s thesis rather than a survey work, which discussed
the implementation of seven anomaly detection models in
blockchain scenarios. Moving towards generic surveys of
blockchain, a very comprehensive survey which discusses
blockchain from theory to application perspective of IoT have
been presented by Wu et al. in [15]. Another similar survey
providing a thorough discussion about blockchain, and its
useful scenarios have been presented by authors in [16].
From security perspective, a short article discussing security

Fig. 1: An Illustrative Overview of Structure of Our Survey
Article.

bility in the network in order to take a timely action against
them. A large number of anomaly detection models are being
created and deployed by researchers for various blockchain
networks. From a generic point of view, these models can be
categorized on the basis of different layers of blockchain. E.g.,
certain models work over prediction of anomalous commands
in the smart contracts, so these models come under anomaly
detection for smart contracts. Similarly, some models work
over detection of malicious block deployment, so these models
can be categorized under the umbrella of anomaly detection
in the data layer. Overall, it is important to mention anomaly
detection is one of the important ﬁelds in order to secure the
future blockchain network, and a vast amount of work is being
carried out in this ﬁeld from various perspectives which we
will discuss in this survey. Moreover, an illustrative organiza-
tional structure for our survey article has been presented in
Fig. 1.

A. Contributions of This Article

Certain surveys have been published in the ﬁeld of
blockchain, however, to the best of our knowledge, none of
them provides an in-depth overview of anomaly detection in

TABLE I
COMPARISON OF EXISTING SURVEY WORKS IN THE SIMILAR FIELD OF BLOCKCHAIN AND ANOMALY DETECTION WITH

THEIR MAJOR CONTRIBUTION AND CERTAIN SCOPES.

Acronyms: Classiﬁcation of Blockchain Anomalies (CoBA), Anomaly in Contract Layer (AiCL), Anomaly in Data Layer (AiDL), Anomaly in Network
Layer (AiNL), Anomaly in Incentive Layer (AiIL), Existing Works in Blockchain Anomaly Detection (EWiBAD). Tick(✔) Shows that the mentioned topic
is covered, Cross(✗) shows that the provided domain is not covered, and Asterisk(✽) shows that the particular topic is partially covered.

3

Major Contribution of Surveys

CoBA AICL AIDL AiNL AiIL

EWiBAD

Scope

Ref
No.
[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]
[7]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

This
Work

Year

2018

2018

2018

2019

2019

2019

2019

2019

2019

2020

A comprehensive survey about security concerns and their coun-
termeasures in Bitcoin.
A thorough literature about privacy and anonymity of Bitcoin-like
systems.
A detailed study about integration of intrusion detection systems
with blockchain technology.
A detailed survey of blockchain-based works in various security
services.
A comprehensive discussion about privacy issued in IoT scenarios
operating on blockchain.
A thesis works evaluating various anomaly detection mechanisms
in blockchain.
A survey on integration strategies of blockchain technology with
IoT and beyond from application perspective.
A comprehensive survey about blockchain, its functioning, and
applicability in various scenarios.
A survey over security assurance and correction veriﬁcations of
smart contracts deployed on blockchain.
A thorough survey on security attacks and their countermeasures
for blockchain based IoT and IIoT systems.

2020 Worked over exploration of attack surfaces and attacks vectors in

2020

2020

2020

2020

2020

2020

2021

blockchain environment.
A detailed investigation of blockchain from perspective of security
reference architecture for blockchain.
A book chapter over anomaly detection approaches in blockchain
technology.
A detailed investigation of integration of privacy preservation via
differential privacy strategy in blockchain technology.
A survey over necessities of privacy services, security issues, and
applications of blockchain technology.
A comprehensive survey of consensus algorithms in blockchain
based systems.
A thorough technical overview of blockchain smart contracts.

A comprehensive survey on anomaly detection in blockchain tech-
nology from perspective of identiﬁcation, integration, requirement,
and methodologies for anomaly detection in blockchain.

✗

✗

✗

✗

✗

✽

✗

✗

✗

✗

✗

✗

✔

✗

✗

✗

✗

✗

✗

✗

✗

✗

✗

✗

✗

✗

✗

✗

✗

✽

✗

✗

✗

✗

✗

✗

✗

✗

✗

✽

✗

✗

✗

✗

✗

✗

✽

✗

✗

✗

✗

✽

✗

✽

✗

✗

✗

✗

✗

✗

✗

✗

✗

✗

✗

✗

✗

✗

✽

✽

✗

✗

✗

✽

✗

✗

✗

✗

✗

✗

✽

✗

✗

✗

✗

✽

✽

✗

✗

✗

✽

✗

✗

✗

✗

✗

✗

✽

✗

✗

✗

✗

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

✔

veriﬁcation have been presented by Liu et al. in [17]. Two
other articles on very similar topic of security and attacks
of blockchain have also been presented by authors in [7],
[18]. Similarly, a comprehensive work providing details
about
threats, vulnerabilities, and resilience models from
security perspective of blockchain have been presented by
authors in [19]. Alongside this, a very short work discussing
anomaly detection in blockchain via data mining methods
have been presented by authors in [20]. Apart from anomaly,
a work providing an in-depth evaluation and discussion
about integration of differential privacy mechanism in layers
of blockchain technology has been presented by authors
in [21]. Another work covering a brief overview of security
and privacy threats alongside future applications have been
published by authors in [22]. Distinct from these threats, a
detailed survey providing an overview of consensus models
in blockchain networks have been given in [23]. Continuing
this trend, a detailed survey covering advances in the ﬁeld
of blockchain based smart contracts have been published by
Kemmoe et al. in [24].

II. PRELIMINARIES OF ANOMALY DETECTION IN
BLOCKCHAIN

A. What is Blockchain?

1) Development Phases of Blockchain: Blockchain technol-
ogy has gone through a process of transformations with time.
For instance, the ﬁrst era of blockchain also named Blockchain
1.0 started in 2008 when Satoshi Nakamoto introduced the
notion of a decentralized consensus via proof of work, which
is resistant to double spending and can successfully validate
transactions without the help of any centralized authority.
In this era, a large number of cryptocurrencies such as
Bitcoin, Ethereum, Ripple, etc. got formed. The ﬁrst phase
of blockchain enhanced the notion of decentralization, but
it was just
transactions. Therefore, to
improve it further, in the second era of blockchain (known
as Blockchain 2.0), researchers worked over integration of
feature of programmability in the network, with the help
of smart contracts. This started with the development of
basic DApps by Ethereum 2.0, which provided users with an
environment to code. In this way, blockchain users were able to
develop and write intelligent smart contracts according to their

limited to ﬁnancial

4

Fig. 2: An Illustration of Blockchain Features, Blockchain Layers, and Certain Anomalous Attacks on Blockchain.

requirements. The third era of blockchain is currently ongoing
and rapid development in the applicability of blockchain can
be seen around us. For example, blockchain is being used with
a diverse number of everyday applications, such as property
management, banking, education, healthcare, energy systems,
vehicular networks, etc.

2) Functioning of Blockchain: As the name suggests,
blockchain is a chain of blocks, which are connected together
by strong cryptographic guarantees. Each block has two parts,
is the body of the
one is the header and the other part
block. Header contains all linking information, such as hash
of its body contents, hash of previous block, time-stamp, etc.
Moreover, the body of the block comprises all the transactions.
Since the hash content of a block is calculated and stored
inside the block, therefore, tampering with anything in the
block body will change the hash of the header, and as a
result this block will not be linked with the next block in
the chain. In this way, blockchain technology ensures that
the ledger remains tamper-proof. Alongside this, each of the
blockchain nodes has a copy of this digital ledger, thus, a
single node cannot play with the complete chain as well,
the
which ensures that
nodes of blockchain operate in decentralized manner and
have strong cryptographically secured communication between
them which obeys the rules of P2P networking. All these
functionalities combine to form a modern day technology,
which is named as blockchain. A graphical illustration of
features of blockchain alongside an illustration of layers and
anomalies of blockchain has been presented in Fig. 2.

the ledger is immutable [21]. All

B. Layered Architecture of Blockchain

Since blockchain is a fully functional P2P network having
the features of decentralized communication, incentives, and
consensus, thus, to understand the functionality of this a bit
further, researchers divided it into multiple layers. Various

works have been carried out to identify and discuss different
layers, for instance, Homoliak et al. in [19] and Wu et al.
in [15] classiﬁed blockchain into four layers named as net-
work layer, consensus layer, data/state layer, and application
layer. Similarly, Belotti et al. [16] divided the architecture of
blockchain into ﬁve layers and added another layer named
‘Execution layer’. Similar to this, Xie et al. in [25] added
another layer and proposed a 06 layered architecture of
blockchain comprising of data layer, network layer, consensus
layer, incentive layer, contract layer, and application.Since, the
focus of our work is to detect anomalies in the blockchain
network, thus, after going through the available literature, it
can be concluded that four layers of blockchain are more prone
to anomaly attacks. Therefore, in this article, we discuss the
detection of anomalies in blockchain from the perspective of
four layers named as data layer, network layer, incentive layer,
and contract layer.
Each layer of blockchain has its own functionalities and has
corresponding tasks associated with it. In this section, we
brieﬂy highlight the functionalities of four prominent layers
which we will be discussing later in this article from an
anomaly detection perspective. However, readers interested in
understanding the functioning of blockchain layers from the
perspective of their functioning, applicability, and deployment
can study the discussion provided in [15], [19], [26]–[29].

1) Data Layer: The ﬁrst layer in the blockchain archi-
tecture is data layer, which comprises of data blocks. The
blocks in the data layer are time-stamped and are linked
with one another via hashes to form a chain-like structure.
A typical block in a blockchain network comprises of two
parts named as header and body of block [25]. Block header
mainly comprises important metadata parameters, such as
block hash, previous block hash, time-stamp, nonce value,
Merkle root hash, etc. The contents in the block header can
also differ according to the need of application. The second

part of the block is the block body which mainly comprises
the transactions which are picked from the mining pool for
the purpose of storing on blockchain. The hashes of these
transactions are computed and are further combined to form
a single Merkle root hash, which is also the part of the block
header.

2) Network Layer: Network layer in blockchain is responsi-
ble for carrying out distributed communication and networking
for blockchain peers. Since, blockchain is a P2P network in
which all peers have the same rights, thus, the functionality
of this layer is to run such networking and communication
models which ensure the timely distribution, forwarding, and
veriﬁcation of blocks in the network [19]. For instance, if a
transaction is generated in the blockchain network, then the
network layer is responsible to broadcast this transaction to all
neighbouring peers. Similarly, veriﬁcation acknowledgement
of this transaction will also be returned via using functionali-
ties of the network layer. Afterwards, if the transaction turns
out to be a valid transaction, then it will again be sent to
broadcast to other peer nodes. Contrarily, an invalid transaction
is denied and is not sent for further broadcast in the network. A
detailed discussion about transaction signing and veriﬁcation
is out of scope of this article, interested readers are suggested
to study the discussion given in [16].

3) Incentive Layer: Incentive layer in blockchain revolves
around ﬁnancial incentives in the network, which serves as a
major factor of motivation for participants of the network [16].
In a decentralized network with no centralized authority,
maintaining motivation of participants is a major challenge,
and this challenge in blockchain is solved by developing
incentive models through the incentive layer. For instance, in
the Bitcoin network, a speciﬁc number of Bitcoins are given as
a reward upon completion of a round of mining. This reward
mechanism motivates Bitcoin users to actively participate in
the mining process. Similarly, in other blockchain networks,
similar rewards are issued upon completion of speciﬁc tasks,
which serves as a driving force for the network. Apart from
incentives, certain penalties and deposits do also come under
the scope of this layer.

4) Contract Layer: Contract layer (also known as smart
contract layer), is responsible to bring programmable func-
tionalities in the blockchain network. Modern blockchain net-
works, such as Hyperledger Fabric, Ethereum 2.0, etc., provide
the functionalities of dynamic programming in which the users
can write a logical program to execute it on the network. The
program is written in the form of a contract, which is known
as smart contract. This smart contract is a piece of executable
code, which runs over the blockchain network, and performs
the tasks assigned to it. There could be multiple types of smart
contracts depending upon the nature of execution, application,
and requirements. A detailed discussion about different types
of smart contracts is out of scope of this article, interested
readers are suggested to study an interesting article by [30].

C. What is Anomaly Detection?

In this section, we provide a brief discussion about anomaly

detection for a generic audience.

5

1) What is Anomaly?: Anomaly can be termed as a speciﬁc
pattern in the collected or transmitted data which does not
show a well-suited regular behaviour [31]. Anomalies can
be caused due to multiple reasons, ranging from human and
non-human errors to maliciously controlled activities. Anoma-
lies are also known as novelties, noise, outliers, malicious
activities, and exceptions in various perspectives. However,
it is important to note that anomalies can be both harmful
or harmless depending upon their nature and origin. For
instance, an anomalous transaction which can suddenly reduce
or increase the price of a selective share to the verge of market
crash is considered a harmful anomaly. Contrarily, a sudden
transaction of a high number of shares from a speciﬁc node,
which will not have any signiﬁcant impact over the market
will be classiﬁed as a harmless anomaly. No matter harmful
or harmless, it is important to detect the presence of anomalies
in a network within an actionable time in order to reduce the
risk of any future catastrophe.

2) What

is Anomaly Detection System?: Detection of
anomalous behaviours in the network is termed as anomaly
detection, which is carried out by designing and implementing
sophisticated anomaly detection models. Anomaly detection
models play a very signiﬁcant role in order to detect the
anomalies in an efﬁcient manner. In order to detect anomalies
within an actionable timeframe, a continuous monitoring of
network behaviour is required. In order to do so, an anomaly
detection system is usually designed, which continuously
monitors the changes in the network with the help of the most
appropriate detection model in accordance with the network
requirement. Usually, monitoring in these anomaly detection
systems is categorized into two subtypes named as passive
monitoring and active monitoring. There are multiple deﬁ-
nitions of active and passive monitoring, however, generally
speaking, in active monitoring, data is usually generated and
monitored on a speciﬁc part of the network in order to identify
the anomaly in the selected region. Contrarily, passive moni-
toring is referred to as monitoring of the performance of the
whole network in order to identify any anomalous behaviour.
Despite the difference in functioning, the end goal of both
types of monitoring systems is to identify the anomalous
properties of the network and categorize whether they are
harmful or harmless.

3) Selecting Optimal Anomaly Detection Model: The actual
question in anomaly detection research is ‘which is the best
anomaly detection model?’. As per the discussion in various
research works, it will not be wrong to say that there is no
single uniﬁed algorithm which will work best in all scenarios,
which means that the optimal model can vary according to the
type and requirement of the problem scenario. Similarly, each
of the models has its associated advantages and disadvantages.
For example, if one already has a labelled set of records, then
supervised machine learning models will outperform others.
Similarly, if we have data with a small number of labels,
then semi-supervised models are the best options. Contrarily,
if we have a completely novel input data with no labels,
then unsupervised learning models outperforms other models.
Alongside data, it is also important to identify the type of
anomaly we are looking for. For instance, if one is looking

6

Fig. 3: Classiﬁcation of Anomaly Detection Models in Blockchain Technology

for small variations of patterns in the collected data which
occur in a non-systematic way, then outlier detection models
perform better, such as local outlier factor, etc. Similarly, if
one is trying to identify an abrupt or systematic change in the
data in comparison with normal behaviour, then classiﬁcation
and clustering based models turn out to be the optimal choice.
However, if one wants to analyse slow and long-term modiﬁ-
cations and changes in the network, then certain statistical and
analytical models can be used to carry out analysis. Therefore,
choosing the optimal model is mostly dependent upon the
input data, tackled anomaly, and desired outcome. In the later
sections, we highlight the technical challenges and evaluation
metrics that play a signiﬁcant role in determining the optimal
anomaly detection for blockchain based application. A detailed
classiﬁcation of multiple anomaly detection models and their
functioning from the perspective of blockchain has been
provided in Section III-B.

D. Anomaly Problem in Blockchain Layers

To efﬁciently run operations of a blockchain network, it
is important to identify and take action against adversarial
behaviours within the actionable time frame. In order to
do so, anomaly detection models came into discussion,
which are responsible for effective detection of anomalous
behaviour of a speciﬁc node. Generically, we divide the
anomaly detection models into six sub-categories on the
basis of their functioning, which are named as generative
architectures, classiﬁcation based models, clustering based
models, nearest neighbour models, statistical & analytical
models, and reinforcement learning based models (see Fig. 3).
From the perspective of blockchain layers, it is important to
mention that the anomalies in blockchain technology are not
pretty generic because almost all layers of blockchain have
their speciﬁc anomalies, thus, their detection mechanism vary.
For example, an anomaly related to a Ponzi scheme falls

under the category of incentive layers, while spreading of
anomalous messages in the network falls under the category
of network layer. Therefore, it is important to classify these
anomalies according to the layer they fall under in order to
carry out their efﬁcient detection.

E. Technical Challenges while Integration of Anomaly Detec-
tion in Blockchain

Nevertheless, development of basic anomaly detection mod-
els is not much complicated if one has basic knowledge of ma-
chine learning. However, when it comes to anomaly detection
in blockchain networks, then certain challenges arise due to
the nature of blockchain. In this section, we discuss certain
prospective challenges that one can face while developing
anomaly detection models for blockchain based scenarios.

1) Network-wide Consensus on Anomaly: The ﬁrst chal-
lenge that one has to overcome while developing anomaly
detection models for blockchain networks is to carry out a
network-wide consensus on anomaly. Since, the blockchain
network has no centralized entity to determine rules, thus,
it becomes hard to categorize a speciﬁc event
to be an
anomaly or not. Therefore, alongside designing a mechanism
to detect outliers, one also has to make sure that this outlier
is considered as an anomaly throughout the network. In short,
complete network has to reach a consensus that a particular
event is an anomaly and appropriate actions should be taken
against it. This becomes even more challenging, when some
nodes in the network start behaving in a malicious manner.
Therefore, considering the aspect of network-wide consensus
alongside designing anomaly detection models is important in
blockchain because of decentralization.

2) Careful Selection of Outlier Features: Since blockchain
is a novel paradigm and plenty of attacks are pretty new
even for researchers, therefore, selecting the best features for

outliers is one of the major challenges. For instance, if one
wants to label the purpose of a smart contract in a blockchain
network, then it becomes hard due to very less available
references. To overcome this, researchers worked over de-
veloping automated methods for labelling new and unknown
smart contracts for detection of possible anomalies from these
labels [32]. However, the majority of smart contracts are pretty
identical and do not show signiﬁcant differences, therefore,
such methods are not well-established till now. Thus, it is
always challenging to identify these features and one has to
be extra careful in order to ensure that they do not categorize
a legitimate user or transaction as anomaly.

3) Smart Contract Programmability & Execution due to
Environmental Constraints: It is important to mention that
majority of smart contracts of blockchain are being developed
in bytecode rather than binary code, which makes it difﬁcult
to run traditional anomaly detection models on blockchain
network in real-time environment [33]. Similarly, detecting
anomalies at bytecode level becomes even more challenging
because not all information is available at the level of byte-
code, and certain information gets lost during the compilation
process [34]. Therefore, designing such models, which efﬁ-
ciently detect anomalies from smart contract bytecode is a big
challenge that every researcher working in blockchain anomaly
detection faces regularly.

4) Lack of Deﬁned Rules: With the advent of every new
application of blockchain, the rules change accordingly. E.g.,
a blockchain based smart grid will have a different set of rules
for anomaly as compared to a network of blockchain based
electric vehicles. Therefore, the rules deﬁned for anomaly de-
tection in a decentralized smart grid cannot be applied to other
blockchain networks. Similarly, the generic rules deﬁned for
generalized blockchain networks cannot be applied to speciﬁc
domain-oriented networks. Certain researchers worked over
carrying out manual inspection of models and truncations in
order to gather detailed information, however, it is a tiresome
and inefﬁcient process [33]. Therefore, it can be said that
designing a set of rules is one of the major challenges for
researchers working in the domain of anomaly detection in
blockchain networks.

III. FUNDAMENTALS GUIDELINES TO IDENTIFY
ANOMALOUS BEHAVIOUR IN BLOCKCHAIN

A. Types of Anomalous Attacks on Blockchain

1) Malicious Transaction Pattern Detection: One of the
most common anomalies in blockchain networks is uneven
transactions. Due to the pseudonym property of blockchain,
nodes usually feel safe to carry out large transactions, however,
among these transactions, some transactions are also uneven,
which are mostly carried out for some malicious purposes.
For example, some users try to carry out money launder-
ing while being anonymous in the blockchain network [35].
Therefore, it is important to identify such transactions before
recording them to the ledger in order to take appropriate action
against them. Fortunately, due to the decentralized nature of
blockchain, these transactions can be identiﬁed by observing
various transaction patterns.

7

2) Double Spending Detection: As the name suggests,
double spending is related to spending or utilization of an asset
more than once in a decentralized network. Since blockchain
is decentralized and there is no central authority to verify each
transaction, therefore, malicious nodes usually try to use this
nature of blockchain to carry out double-spending [36]. A
transaction on blockchain is ﬁnalized once it gets validated
by the peer nodes, however, during the process of validation,
some malicious nodes try to use the same amount of funds
to carry out multiple transactions. Due to strong consensus
guarantees of blockchain networks, it is not that easy to carry
out double spending, however, sometimes hackers succeed in
fooling the network. Therefore, for successful functioning of a
blockchain network, it is important to timely detect and even
predict the occurrence of double spending in the network.

3) Market Manipulation: Manipulation in blockchain is not
just limited to cryptocurrencies and it can be done in any sort
of asset which is associated with a ﬁnancial factor. Moreover,
a number of manipulation strategies have been identiﬁed by
researchers and experts, however, generally, the three most
famous ones are pump and dump, wash trading, and whale
wall spooﬁng. In pump and dump, an individual or a group
of individuals try to artiﬁcially increase the price/value of
an asset or a cryptocurrency by developing a fake sense of
attention towards it [37]. Another market manipulation strategy
is wash trading,
in which a group of individuals usually
try to buy and sell a speciﬁc cryptocurrency/asset rapidly
in order to create a sense of an interest in the market [38].
Sometimes, this strategy is also adopted by exchanges which
are operating at a small scale and are unregulated. The third
strategy named as whale wall spooﬁng is pretty similar to
wash trading, in which a big whale (usually an entity with
a huge asset) tries to create buying or selling orders in the
market for the corresponding asset/coin. This is usually done in
order to trick the relevant investors/users into panic buying and
selling. Considering the intensity of market manipulation, it is
important to determine the occurrence of such event within an
actionable time. Certain research works have been carried out
in this regard which developed machine learning and statistical
analysis based market manipulation models, however, there is
still a lot of room for improvement in this domain.

4) Money Mixing Detection: Generally, money mixing is
a legitimate process in blockchain networks, which revolves
around mixing different assets or tokens to overcome identiﬁ-
ability trail [39]. The mixing in blockchain is usually used to
enhance transaction anonymity from malicious attackers. How-
ever, some maleﬁcent nodes try to take unlawful advantages
out of it and try to hide their transaction patterns to carry out
immoral activities, such as money laundering, etc. Therefore,
it is important to identify malicious money mixing in order to
protect the blockchain network from unlawful activities.

5) Currency/Token Theft Detection From Network: Apart
from basic anomalies, things get intense when malicious users
try to steal tokens directly from users by hacking or similar
other ways. This is one of the most common attack types and
multiple incidents have been highlighted in the past where
hackers stole millions of dollars from investors at different
occasions. For example, it has been reported that in 2020 alone

8

Fig. 4: Classiﬁcation of Anomalous Attacks on Blockchain Technology

that blockchain hackers stole an approximate sum of $3.8
Billion in 122 different attacks over the network [40]. Contrary
to centralized payment systems (such as banks), blockchain
network has no centralized mediator to regulate transactions.
Therefore, the importance of theft detection in decentralized
blockchain scenarios increases exponentially to prevent any
large mishap.

6) Smart Contract Anomalies: Smart contracts play a crit-
ical role in functioning and development of modern day
blockchain because they add the feature of programmability
in blockchain networks. Through this programmability feature,
one can use blockchain for numerous advantages ranging from
tracking decentralized ownership of assets to veriﬁcation of
education degrees. However, the base of these smart contracts
is programming, and programming is not guaranteed to be
100% perfect all the time. There is always a possibility of
mistakes in the smart contract, and since smart contracts
are irreversible, thus, these mistakes can cause big damage.
Similarly, apart from unintentional mistakes, some adversaries
try to set up honeypots in smart contracts, the sole purpose
of which is to perform fraudulent activities such as coin theft,
etc [34]. Therefore, in both of these cases, it is important to
identify any anomaly in blockchain smart contracts before its
execution.

7) Malicious Network Requests: From an outsiders per-
spective, blockchain is a secure network, however, from an
insider point of view, blockchain network is still prone to
certain attacks, and malicious network requests are one of
them. In such requests, adversary nodes try to tamper with
the transactional values before pushing these values to peer
nodes. In this way, hackers try to divide the network into
multiple parts so that they would not be able to communicate
with each other. These types of malicious requests are also
known as routing attacks on the network, and they can further
be divided into partition and delay based attacks on the basis
of their nature. These malicious requests can cause a big harm
in the network; thus, their timely identiﬁcation and eradication
is compulsory.

8) Divergent Path & Forks: Blockchains as a ledger are
immutable according to their nature, which implies that the

information on the ledger cannot be changed once it gets
recorded. However, if an adversary tries to play maliciously
while trading or while developing a smart contract, then they
can exploit this feature of immutability for their unlawful
beneﬁts and can initiate formation of new forks in the network.
One of the prime examples of fork formation are the forks
originated out of the Bitcoin network, such as Bitcoin Cash,
etc [41], [42]. Attackers usually try to create divergent paths in
order to take control over 51% of the network, which basically
leads to disastrous consequences. Therefore, for successful
functioning of a blockchain network, the timely detection and
prevention of forks is very important.

it

9) Tampering Blockchain Logs: In certain blockchain based
applications, logs play an important role in determining op-
erational activity. For instance, in a manufacturing industry,
whenever a new step is performed,
is recorded into a
blockchain ledger by log system, which is then used to ensure
the quality of product. However, if some nodes try to act as
an adversary, then they can try to tamper with the logs in
order to misguide the scrutinizing body, which makes audit
difﬁcult or sometimes even impossible. Therefore, in order to
ensure successful functioning of such blockchain applications,
a regular and thorough analysis of logs is required to overcome
any mishap.

Furthermore, a detailed taxonomy of these anomalies can

be visualized in Fig. 4.

B. Categorization and Functioning of Anomaly Detection
Models for Blockchain Technology

From the viewpoint of

functioning, anomaly detection
models can be categorized into multiple types ranging from
machine learning based to statistical anomaly detection mod-
els. A graphical illustration showing the detailed taxonomy
of anomaly detection models has been provided in Fig. 3.
The ﬁrst type of anomaly detection models are generative
architecture based models, which can be deﬁned as the use
neural network based algorithmic architectural methods to
generate new synthetic data instances, which is further used to
train the anomaly detection models accordingly in a manner
the model
that when one puts the anomalous input data,

should be able to highlight the reconstructed anomalous data
on the basis of reconstruction error [43]. These models are
helpful in categorization of anomalies, outliers, and novelties
in the data, especially transactional data of blockchain. Certain
popular models in this category are generative adversarial
networks (GANs), deep Boltzmann machine (DBM), Gaussian
mixture model (GMM), and hidden Markov model (HMM),
etc. The second type of anomaly detection models are known
as classiﬁcation based anomaly detection models [44]. These
are usually typical machine learning based models with an aim
to classify the data into two subtypes (normal and anomalous)
on the basis of detection pattern. In blockchain, these models
can be used to identify the anomalous behavior of any peer.
A large number of machine learning based algorithms can be
categorized in this domain, although, some of the prominent
ones are neural networks (NN), deep neural networks (DNN),
convolutional neural networks (CNN), support vector machine
(SVM), etc.
The next category is clustering based anomaly detection mod-
els, which works over the phenomenon of making clusters of
the training data and then predicting the new outcome with rel-
evance to the developed cluster [45]. For instance, in DB Scan
(a famous clustering based anomaly detection model) develops
density based clusters of the data during the training phase,
and then during testing phase, it compares the new received
data in accordance with these already developed clusters in
order to classify the normal or anomalous behaviour. These
cluster based analyses have been proved to be very effective
in analyzing transaction frequency and degree in blockchain
transactions. Some of the renowned models in this category are
k-means clustering, deep belief network (DBA), DB Scan, etc.
Another category very similar to clustering based approach is
nearest neighbour models, which basically classify the training
data into neighbours on the basis of distance parameters [46].
These models work over the belief that the normal blockchain
activities will occur in the dense areas where multiple nodes
are neighbours of each other. However, anomalous activities
occur far from their nearest neighbouring nodes. Some famous
models in this category are k-nearest neighbours (KNN), local
outlier factor, local probability outlier, etc.
The next category is statistical and analytical analysis based
blockchain anomaly detection [47]. These are the simplest
and traditional anomaly detection models as compared to
all other categories as they do not require any complex
algorithmic processing to identify anomalies in the data or
network. Because of their simple structure they are usually
used in scenarios which have less computational capability.
Despite being simple, they are quite powerful in identifying
various baseline anomalies in the blockchain network. Some of
the prominent statistical and analytical models are parametric
models (such as Gaussian), and non-parametric models (such
as Histogram, Boxplot). These models are usually used to
highlight anomalous transactions, which are usually linked
with anomalous gas usage for Ethereum blockchain. Similarly,
these models have also proved their effectiveness in analysis of
bugs in online/ofﬂine smart contracts, such as honey-pots. The
last category is reinforcement learning based anomaly detec-
tion models, which basically works over the phenomenon of

9

rewarding the training model upon identiﬁcation of blockchain
anomalies in the correct manner [48]. Some of the renowned
reinforcement learning models that can be used to carry out
anomaly detection are Q-learning, deep q-learning, QR-DQN,
and model based value estimation.

C. Evaluation Metrics being used to Identify Anomalies

In an anomaly detection system, one needs to be very
precise about every factor they consider, e.g., one cannot
overlook certain anomalies as it can lead to serious mishap.
Similarly, on the other hand one cannot even classify a
normal behaviour as an anomaly, which can also lead to
strenuous trouble certain times. Therefore, while developing
such models, researchers are required to carefully consider
certain factors, such as accuracy, precision, etc. In this section,
we provide a brief overview of such factors alongside their
importance in anomaly detection.

1) Sensitivity & Speciﬁcity of Outcome: In anomaly de-
tection, the factors related to sensitivity and speciﬁcity play
a critical role in determining effectiveness of any model.
Nevertheless, in an anomaly detection model, the decision
could be right or wrong which means true or false but
quantifying the outcome to make the model more effective is
the key. In order to understand the sensitivity and speciﬁcity
of an anomaly detection model a bit further, researchers have
devised certain terms, which are discussed as follows:

a) True Positive (TP): The outcome TP means that the
anomaly model gave a positive outcome and identiﬁed a
speciﬁc behaviour as an anomaly, and in reality the result is
true and that behaviour was actually anomalous.

b) False Positive (FP): This term means that
the
anomaly model gave a positive outcome and identiﬁed the
node/behaviour as an anomaly, but
in reality it was not
anomaly.

c) True Negative (TN): The outcome TN identiﬁes that
the anomaly detection model gave a negative result for de-
tection of anomalous behaviour and in reality its true and the
behaviour was not anomalous.

d) False Negative (FN): The outcome FN means that the
anomaly model gave a negative detection of anomaly but in
reality the behaviour was anomalous.
In an ideal anomaly detection model, the rate of TP and TN
should be high, and the rate of FP and FN should be low.

2) Confusion Matrix & Accuracy: Confusion matrix (also
known as error matrix) is a visual table which is used by
researchers to analyse the efﬁciency and accuracy of any
model. In anomaly detection mechanisms, it is used to carry
out comparison between the predicted and actual class labels.
E.g., in a 2-by-2 confusion matrix, one side would represent
the actual/true values, and the other side would represent
predicted values. The matrix is then ﬁlled according to the
outcomes of the model in comparison with the actual values.
E.g., if the predicted value is Yes, and the actual outcome is
also Yes, then the value of TP in the table is incremented.
Similarly, if the value of prediction is ‘No’, and the actual
value is also No, then the value of TN is incremented. In
this way, all values of TP, TN, FP, and FN are ﬁlled, and

Datasets for Anomaly
Detection in Blockchain

Cryptocurrency
based Datasets

Real-Life
Datasets

Synthetic
Datasets

Bitcoin Dataset

[50]

Stock Trading

Data [54]

Ethereum Dataset

[51]

Blockchain

Wallet [55]

Bitcoin Cash

Database [52]

Zcash

Database [53]

Smart Contracts

Database [56]

Smart Ponzi

Schemes [57]

DApps

Database [58]

Fig. 5: Datasets for Anomaly Detection in Blockchain

are then used to compare accuracy of model via following
equation [49]:

Accuracy =

T P + T N
T P + F P + F N + T N

(1)

3) Recall, Precision, and F-Score: Recall, precision, and F-
score are the usual factors which are being used by researchers
to analyse outcome of an anomaly detection model. The ﬁrst
terminology among them is recall which can be deﬁned as
the number of correctly identiﬁed instances by a model. To
be more detailed, it is the number of true positives divided
by the total number of actual positive instances. Precision
can be termed as a counterpart of recall, as the precision is
the ratio between total number of correct returned results and
cumulative sum of positively identiﬁed results including false
positives. F-Score, also known as F-1 Score, which mixes
the property of precision and recall in a harmonic manner,
so that the model can be evaluated in the best manner. The
higher F-Score means the credibility of the model to give good
results is high. A detailed discussion about these parameters
is out of scope of this article, readers interested in studying
these parameters can study the interesting article by Bhuyan et
al. [49].

D. Key Requirements for Anomaly Detection Mechanisms
Design

Usually, behaviour of an anomalous participant varies no-
ticeably as compared to other legitimate participants, therefore,
they get identiﬁed by anomaly detection models. However, in
order to get efﬁcient results, certain key requirements need
to be considered while designing anomaly detection models
for blockchain networks. In this section, we discuss these
requirements to give readers an overall viewpoint.

10

1) Data Collection Requirement: One of the major re-
quirements for efﬁcient functioning of any anomaly detection
model is to have an adequate amount of data for analysis.
Even this step of data collection is challenging in the tra-
ditional anomaly detection environment, and in blockchain
based anomaly detection scenarios, it becomes even more
challenging due to various protecting mechanisms in the way
of blockchain data collection. For each type of blockchain,
the data collection methods do vary, e.g., in case of public
blockchain, the data is available to all participating nodes
and one can carry out anomaly detection easily. However, in
case of private or consortium setting, the data is not publicly
available, and certain approvals are required before carrying
out any processing over data. Furthermore, in all these types,
the participating nodes are usually identiﬁed by pseudonyms,
therefore, tracking the exact individual even after classifying
it as an anomaly is sometimes very complicated due to lack of
data about that individual. Alongside these issues, it is equally
important to protect the privacy of participating blockchain
users/individuals in order to ensure the trust in the network.
Therefore, in certain cases one also has to integrate certain
privacy preservation mechanism as well with blockchain tech-
nology in order to enhance privacy.Some of the key datasets,
which can be used to train models for future prediction of
anomalies of blockchain network have been highlighted in
Fig. 5.

2) Data Preprocessing Requirements: Raw data usually
therefore, preprocessing is a step
contains a lot of noise,
in anomaly detection, in which collected data is modiﬁed
and manipulated in order to reduce any noise and vulnera-
bilities from the data which can cause hurdle in detection
of anomalies [59]. Some of the key steps involved in data
preprocessing include cleaning of data, transformation of data,
selecting required features from data, reduction of data, and
discretization of data. These steps are there to ensure that only
the ﬁne-grained data is fed to anomaly detection models, so
that anomaly is detected as quick as possible. In the majority
of anomaly detection models, data preprocessing is considered
as an essential step before feeding any data to anomaly
detection models in order to enhance the detection accuracy
and efﬁciency. A large number of challenges are associated
with data preprocessing, however, some of the prominent ones
that blockchain also faces is inconsistency of data, missing
data, and random pseudonyms, etc.
Similar pathway is also adopted in blockchain based anomaly
detection models in which a data collected via blockchain is
nodes is preprocessed via pre-developed mechanisms, usually
via preprocessing smart contracts [60], [61]. Similarly, in cer-
tain bytecode based anomaly detection models of blockchain,
data is denoised using autoencoders [33]. Comparably in de-
tection of anomalies in HYIP on blockchain, the preprocessing
phase usually involves removal of the transaction change part
alongside calculation and identiﬁcation of patterns between
transactions [62]. From the perspective of malicious account
detection on Ethereum, the data is usually preprocessed in
two steps, ﬁrst via string comparison to identify duplicate
addressed and then via ﬁltering of EOA addressed and contract
addresses [63]. Apart from the traditional preprocessing, cer-

tain real-time big data preprocessing tools and methods have
also been developed till now for various applications, which
modiﬁes the steps involved in preprocessing in a way that it
enhances the overall time and efﬁciency of preprocessing [64].
However, such works have not yet been carried out in the
ﬁeld of blockchain technology and there is a need for such
integrations in future.

3) Computational Requirements: In order to detect anoma-
lous behaviour in an efﬁcient manner, the model needs to
predict the anomalies within a speciﬁc time-frame, and that
can only happen if the computational requirement to run an
anomaly model matches with the required task. Certain models
require high computational complexity, while on the other
hand some models only need minimal computational power.
Similar is the case with blockchain, as for certain types of
anomalies, which require processing of large amounts of data,
such as smart contract bugs detection or malicious transaction
identiﬁcation, one needs to learn from a large amount of
data, which require large computational power. Contrarily, for
some basic graph/cluster based analysis over data, the require-
ment of computational power is pretty less comparatively. In
blockchain anomaly detection, a large computational power is
usually consumed during the mining and consensus process.
Therefore, in order to avoid overloading of machines, the on-
chain anomaly detection models need to require computational
power alongside high accuracy for smooth functioning of
the network. Various generic models have been designed to
reduce computational cost of anomaly detection, however, in
blockchain, this ﬁeld is still progressing, and it has a lot of
room in it for research.

4) Accuracy Requirements: Anomaly detection accuracy is
another key element that cannot be ignored while developing
anomaly detection models. This element even strengthens in
case of blockchain anomaly because in blockchain decisions
are irreversible and will always be there on the ledger. E.g., if
anomaly detection predicts some speciﬁc node as an anomaly,
and authorities take some action just on the basis of that
anomaly detection outcome, then this action will remain on
blockchain forever. This is ﬁne in case of an anomalous node,
but in case of a false positive result, it will be a big challenge
for authorities as they have identiﬁed a rational user as an
anomaly, which can lead to disastrous outcomes. As in case if
a penalty smart contract is executed on an honest node, then
it will reduce the trust in the network drastically. Therefore,
it is very important for a blockchain anomaly detection model
to have high accuracy during prediction.

IV. ANOMALY DETECTION IN DATA LAYER OF
BLOCKCHAIN

In this section, we classify the works that have highlighted
these anomalies and worked over their efﬁcient prediction
from perspective of data layer (cf. Section II-B for details) (cf.
Fig. 6 and Table. II).

A. Bitcoin Fraud Detection

Discussing data, one cannot undermine the data avail-
able on the Bitcoin platform, which is the highest ranked

11

cryptocurrency till now according to its market value. The
price of Bitcoin has increased dramatically in the past few
years, according to a report by Investopedia, the net worth of
circulating Bitcoin is more than $600 billion in total as of May
2021 [77]. On one hand, Bitcoin provides a trusted and secure
medium of ﬁnancial transactions, but on the other hand due to
its pseudonymity it also provides a safe passage for exchange
or purchase of illegal assets, services, and goods. Therefore,
it is important to highlight and take appropriate action against
such activities in a timely manner.
A work by Battista et al. in [65] proposed a system named as
‘BitConeView’ for analysis of Bitcoin transactions in a visual
manner. The aim of the work is to carry out deanonymization
of transaction ﬂow by developing a visually analysable system.
BitCoveView allows analysing users to track the sources, ﬂow,
and patterns of Bitcoin transactions in a detailed manner. One
of the critical use cases of these types of systems is to detect
fraudulent and money laundering transactions, which authors
investigated deeply and claimed that their proposed model can
help in detecting money laundering patterns in an efﬁcient
manner. Since the proposed framework is only suitable for
Bitcoin, however, it will not be wrong to say that it can be
modiﬁed and can be made suitable to other crypto-currencies
following similar functioning styles. Another similar article
that focuses on deanonymization and identiﬁcation of anoma-
lous users in the bitcoin network has been carried out by
Shao et al. in [66]. The article proposed a novel mapping based
system which learns on the basis of address similarity from the
perspective of a compact Euclidean space. The work identiﬁes
k-similar addresses and then uses the proposed model
to
identify presence of an anomalous participant. Authors carried
out their experimentation on the Bitcoin database to identify
anomalous nodes in the network.
From the perspective of blockchain feature analysis, a unique
work has been presented by Nan and Tao in [67]. The authors
focused mainly on detecting mixing and demixing services for
Bitcoin cryptocurrency via transaction graph reconstruction.
By using the features of graph embedding, authors proposed
a mixing identiﬁcation model in which one can ﬁgure out
services on the basis of their speciﬁed features. One more
considerable work from the perspective of unseen patterns
detection from blockchain network trafﬁc has been presented
by Kim et al. in [68]. The work is slightly different from
traditional works, as it highlights the use of network trafﬁc
rather than stored ledger data. In the proposed model, authors
developed an engine which collects multi-dimensional data
streams in an organized and periodic manner. The collected
data is then fed to a semi-supervised learning model, which
detects novel patterns from the blockchain data. The work
further highlights that they introduced a proﬁling-based en-
gine for efﬁcient anomaly detection, which is implemented
over autoencoder. The presented model is further tested and
compared with other similar models, such as DNN, LR, GB,
OC-SVM, and RF, and it can be visualized that it outperformed
other models in terms of training time and detection. As model
works over semi-supervised learning paradigm, it will limit
identiﬁcation of certain novel anomalies in the network which
has not be identiﬁed before.

Anomaly detection in Data Layer
Sec. IV

12

Bitcoin Fraud
Detection

Framework
Design for
Anomaly

Behaviour
Pattern
Classiﬁcation

Ethereum
Fraud
Detection

Tx Relative
Similarity
Clustering

Tx &

Integrating

User
Deanony-

mization

Autoen-
codersfor

Anomaly

[65], [66]

[67], [68]

Tx Fre-

Blockchain

Anomaly

quency
Analysis

Health
Analy-

[69], [70]

sis [71]

Database
De-

sign [72]

Time-

Series
Analysis

for Peer

Anomaly
[73]

Sequence

Similarity
for Be-

haviour

Analy-
sis [74]

Identifying

Identifying

DAO
attack via

Autoen-

DAO
attack via

Contract

coders [75]

Bugs [63]

Tx Edge

Detection
via

Dominant

Set Anal-
ysis [76]

Fraud

Pre-
Prediction

via Time

Patterns
[62]

Graph
Analysis

Semi-
supervised
ML

Framework
Design

Clustering

Deep
Learning

Ensemble
Learning

Multiple
Machine
Learning

Fig. 6: Classiﬁcation of Blockchain Anomalies from Perspective of Data Layer

Another critical work to identify high yielding programs for
Bitcoin investments has been presented by Toyoda et al.
in [76]. Authors devised certain Bitcoin features and then
ranked the transactions on the basis of these features to identify
speciﬁc actions. To elaborate it further, authors distributed
the Bitcoin payback into different distribution classes and
identiﬁed whether the payback amount is from a high yielding
investment program or it belongs to some other category, such
as donation, exchange, mining pool, faucet, etc. In this way,
the researchers were able to successfully identify and classify
the malicious behaviors in order to protect Bitcoin users.
Similar to identiﬁcation of high yielding investment programs
via analysing Bitcoin transactions, another article targeting
analysis of transaction history for address classiﬁcation has
been carried out by Lin et al. in [70]. The article works
over proposing novel features to develop abnormality detection
classiﬁcation models for Bitcoin. Authors further used these
features to carry out training of supervise machine learning
models, which are then used to carry out prediction and eval-
uation of anomalous Bitcoin addresses. From the viewpoint
of Bitcoin fraud detection, the majority of works used graph
analysis or traditional machine learning models. Since Bitcoin
is a huge database and an abundant amount of data is available
for training and testing purposes, therefore, we believe that
advanced deep learning approaches should be used to enhance
the accuracy.

B. Generic Framework Design for Blockchain Anomaly

Since, blockchain is a well-applied ﬁeld and now it has
applications in almost every aspect of life ranging from
healthcare to smart grid. Therefore, apart from developing
models just for Bitcoin transactions, it is also important to

design models to check health and anomaly presence of
generic blockchain models as well. One such work from the
perspective of designing of a visualization tool for anomaly
detection in blockchain based IoT systems has been pre-
sented by Song et al. in [71]. The proposed framework has
two major aims, determination of health and detection of
anomalies in blockchain networks. From the viewpoint of
health classiﬁcation of blockchain, authors analysed height,
number of transactions, and generation interval of each block
in the network. Similarly, to identify malicious activity on
blockchain, authors used the data of speciﬁc number of events
alongside IoT data statistics, which helped visualize and
identify a prospective anomalous node. Authors used various
blockchain based factors, such as block number, transaction
interval, etc. to strengthen their anomaly data analysis. A more
generalized work towards development of anomaly detection
tools for generic blockchain networks has been presented by
authors in [72]. The authors ﬁrst discuss the generic model of
blockchain and then highlight and expose certain anomalies,
such as anomalous metadata, transaction fees, and address
tags. Afterwards, authors implemented and validated their
framework on Ethereum and Bitcoin data, which are two
major blockchain models nowadays. The work developed APIs
and used MongoDB and MySQL databases to evaluate their
claims. After careful analysis of proposed frameworks, it will
not be wrong to say that there is still a dire need to develop
real-time anomaly detection frameworks for timely detection
of anomalous patterns in the network.

C. Behaviour Pattern Classiﬁcation

A blockchain network usually comprises of a large number
of peer to peer nodes, which are linked with each other in a

Domain

Ref
No.

Contribution

Detected Anomaly

Anomaly Factors

Blockhain
Type

Platform
Language

Applications

Dataset

Compl-

TABLE II
ANOMALY DETECTION IN DATA LAYER.

13

[65]

[66]

[67]

[68]

[69]

[70]

[71]

[72]

[73]

[74]

[75]

[63]

[76]

[62]

Bitcoin
Fraud
Detection

Framework
Design

Behaviour
Pattern
Classiﬁca-
tion

Ethereum
Fraud
Detection

Tx
Relative
Similarity
Clustering

Developed a system
for visual analysis of
Bitcoin Flow
Address similarity
mapping via Euclidean
space
Feature based
identiﬁcation of Bitcoin
mixing-demixing

Proﬁling based
anomalous pattern
detection from multi-
dimensional data
Tx pattern analysis for
anomalous activity in
HYIP

High order Tx moment
based anomaly detection

Analysing Tx & block
interval to measure
healthiness & Anomaly
of IoT blockchain
A scalable data
analysis tool design
for Blockchain via
MySQL and MongoDB
Databases
Classiﬁed peers of
blockchain w.r.t their
behaviour via Deep
Learning
Clustering based
behaviour analysis
for blockchain nodes
Strengthening encoder-
decoder model against
DAO attacks
Malicious Tx behaviour
detection via supervised
learning
Identiﬁed common
behavioural nodes via
dominant set analysis

• Malicious Tx
• Pure & impure
circulated money
• Anomalous
Bitcoin Users

• Graph intermediate
point for mixing
services

• Anomalous Tx
Patterns

• Uneven payback
rate
• Uneven Tx
frequency
• Malicious Tx
records

• False IoT data
storage

• Budget • Purity
• Transfer
Analysis
• K-similar
addresses

• Tx graph
reconstruction
• Outlier &
clustering
• Network trafﬁc
statistics
• User and Tx
proﬁling
• Address
clustering
• Feature gain

• Tx moments
• Tx history
summary
• Block No & Tx
interval

Public

Python

• Cryptocurrency

Public

N/S

• Cryptocurrency

Public

N/S

• Cryptocurrency

Public

Python

• Cryptocurrency

Public

R

• Cryptocurrency

Public

Python

Public

N/S

• Cryptocurrency
• Crowdsensisng
• Stocks
• IoT

• Uneven Tx rate

• Tx fee
• Address tags

Public

Multiple

• Cryptocurrency

• Non-similar peers

• Batch size
• Class label
prediction

• Anomalous
behaviour sequences

• Sequence
similarity

• Decentralized
autonomous
organization
• Malicious
Ethereum nodes

• Uneven Tx
behaviour

• Block size
• Average gas
usage
• Tx gas analysis
• Tx timestamp

• Tx edges
• cluster edges
• similar dominant
set
• Tx logs
• Levenshtein
distance

Public

N/S

• Cryptocurrency

Public/
Private

N/S

Public

N/S

Public

Python

• Cryptocurrency
• Stocks
• IoT
• Cryptocurrency
• Non-trusted
organizations
• Cryptocurrency

Public

MATLAB

• Cryptocurrency
• Crowdsensing

N/S

Public

N/S

• Cryptocurrency

N/S

Identifying hidden
time patterns from
Blockchain Tx

• Anomalous Tx
• Anomalous
behaviour nodes

Bitcoin
Database

Bitcoin
Database

Bitcoin
Database

Bitcoin
Database

Bitcoin
Database

Stock
Trading
Data
Real-Time
IoT Data

Bitcoin,
Ethereum

Bitcoin
Database

Stock
Trading
Data
Real &
Synthetic
Eth Data
Ethereum
Data

exity
−

−

O(n2

)

O(n2

)

−

−

−

−

−

−

−

−

−

−

distributed decentralized manner. This number is even more
abundant in public blockchains, where anyone from any part
of the world can join with no or very minimal veriﬁcation.
Thus, ensuring legitimacy in this large group of nodes is
fairly challenging, as it is hard to classify if some nodes start
misbehaving. Thus, one needs to check and classify behaviour
of each participating node in order to get deeper insights and
prediction about anomalous blockchain nodes.
A pioneering work in the ﬁeld of peer behaviour classiﬁcation
has been carried out by Tang et al. in [73]. The authors ﬁrst
developed a strong motivation for why traditional anomaly
detection approaches such as decision tree & SVM are not
reliable and do not produce satisfactory outcomes. Afterwards,
the authors proposed their own time series analysis based
deep learning behaviour classiﬁcation approach and named
it as PeerClassiﬁer. The two key factors which authors took
into account while analysing behavior are batch size and

class labels for the collected data. From the experimental
analysis and evaluation, authors demonstrated that their pro-
posed approach shows signiﬁcant improvements in accuracy
as compared to other traditional learning approaches. An-
other similar work from the perspective of clustering for
anomalous behaviour classiﬁcation has been carried out by
Huang et al. in [74]. Authors ﬁrst worked over evaluating
the similarity list among blockchain peers and then carried
out peer identiﬁcation according to distance among them.
Authors further evaluated their work from the perspective of
precision and compared it with classical approaches to show
the improvements. An evaluation of both of the above works
shows that both clustering and deep learning models provide
signiﬁcant improvement in anomaly detection as compared to
traditional approaches. However, this ﬁeld of behaviour pattern
classiﬁcation is not much discussed in research, and it has a
lot of research potential for the future works.

D. Ethereum Fraud Detection

Ethereum is the second largest blockchain platform after
Bitcoin, but Ethereum is different from Bitcoin as in Ethereum,
users can carry out deployment of decentralized applications
alongside doing cryptocurrency transactions [78]. Further-
more,
in order to deploy these decentralized applications,
Ethereum provides its users the facility of decentralized smart
contracts, which can be termed as pieces of code executed in
a decentralized manner [79].
Due to these large numbers of features and beneﬁts, Ethereum
is a big attraction for anomalous peers, as they continuously try
to take unfair advantage of these features. The ﬁrst work dis-
cussing the detection of vulnerabilities in Ethereum blockchain
network by the use of ensemble deep learning has been carried
out by authors in [75]. Authors work over strengthening the
encoder-decoder model for any prospective attack. Authors
did so by applying phenomenon of learning and aggregation
iteratively at multiple instances, in order to carry out compu-
tation of any prospective outlier for every observed reading.
Although the work did not provide a comprehensive in-depth
theoretical analysis of the model, the evaluation results show
that the proposed model predicts DAO attack in an efﬁcient
manner. The second work from the perspective of detection of
malicious Ethereum accounts via supervised learning approach
has been carried out by Kumar et al. in [63]. The major
focus of the work is to understand behaviour of transactions
among Ethereum accounts by keeping an eye over gas us-
age and transaction time-stamps. Authors further classiﬁed
the Ethereum network into two subtypes named as smart
contract accounts and externally owned accounts. After this
classiﬁcation, authors studied anomalies in both of these types
using supervised machine learning approaches such as random
forest, decision free, K-NN, etc. From the evaluated outcomes,
it can be seen that the proposed strategy efﬁciently helps in
detection of anomalies in the given conditions. Nevertheless,
Ethereum has a huge database, but the anomaly models over it
can be enhanced further by enhancing the training and testing
accuracy.

E. Tx Relative Similarity Clustering

Apart from traditional anomalies, it is also important to
study a chain of events in blockchain transactions that has
led to a harmful catastrophe. One of the work, which fo-
cuses on carrying out in-depth transactional analysis by the
usage of dominant set analysis, has been performed by Awan
and Cortesi in [76]. In the work, authors emphasized that
learning the behaviour of transaction for each node is critical
in identifying and predicting any current and prospective
anomaly. Therefore, in order to carry out efﬁcient behaviour
learning, authors proposed a dominant set approach which
categorizes each transaction in the blockchain network ac-
cording to the most relevant set. In order to do so, authors
analysed transaction edges, and cluster edges formed as a
result of analysis. Another innovative work that emphasized
over discovering hidden time patterns via clustering in a de-
centralized blockchain network has been presented by authors
in [62]. The major focus of the article is to carry out future

14

predictions via analysing current timestamp patterns in the
transactions.Authors ﬁrst clustered all transactions on the basis
of allocated patterns, such as transaction logs and Levenshtein
distance, and afterwards worked over detection anomalous
behaviours by observing various parameters, such as distance,
etc. Till now, both the works focusing over relative similarity
of transactions use clustering, but it will not be wrong to
say that this ﬁeld can be explored with the help of other
machine/deep learning models.

F. Summary and Insights

in successful

The role of data layer

functioning of
blockchain cannot be undermined as it acts as a backbone of
blockchain from the perspective of handling and securing data
records for blockchain networks. However, on the other hand,
the anomalies in the data layer cannot be ignored as well,
because they can cause catastrophic consequences otherwise.
The anomalies over the data layer can be divided into ﬁve
subtypes, in which a major proportion is occupied by the
anomalies from the perspective of Bitcoin and Ethereum fraud
detection. The remaining anomalies in the data layer are
oriented towards ﬁnding patterns of anomalous behaviours and
transactions carried out by blockchain nodes, which have been
recorded over blockchain ledger. It is important to identify
such anomalies and their corresponding user accounts, so that
one can restrict such accounts from carrying out such acts in
the future transactions.

V. ANOMALY DETECTION IN NETWORK LAYER OF
BLOCKCHAIN

In this section, we provide an in-depth discussion about
the functionalities,
limitation, and comparative analysis of
anomaly detection models from perspective of the network
layer of blockchain (cf. Section II-B for details) (cf. Fig. 7
and Table. III).

A. Malicious Accounts on Network

In a decentralized blockchain network, one of the prime
focuses for anomalous peers on the network is to mask their
identity so that they become untraceable. Anomalous peers try
to hide their identities by taking unfair advantages of loopholes
in the network. This category of masking the identity while us-
ing beneﬁts of the network comes under adversarial activities
over the blockchain network layer, therefore, in this section,
we ﬁrst discuss the works which identify the identities of these
malicious accounts. One of the critical work in this regard has
been carried out by Phan and Lee in [80]. The work focused
on analysing behaviours of users on the Bitcoin network by
analysing network graphs via different unsupervised learning
mechanisms. In order to carry out unsupervised learning on
users and transactions graphs, authors used three renowned
mechanisms named as support vector machine (SVM), k-
Means clustering, and Mahalanobis distance. Since this work
uses unsupervised learning, the effectiveness and accuracy of
the proposed model is not pretty high. However, from the
evaluation outcome, authors were able to identify a few cases

Anomaly detection in Network Layer
Sec. V

Malicious
Accounts
on Network

Malicious
Forks in
Network

Anomalous
Network
Transactions

Network
Entropy
Detection

15

Malicious

User
Identiﬁca-

tion from

Node
Graph [80]

Makov

Logic for
Outliers

Identiﬁca-

tion [81]

In-Degree

Scam
Detec-

tion [82]

Gini

Impurity
based

Address

Rela-
tions [83]

Malicious

Divergent

Request
Identiﬁca-

tion

Paths to
Detect MI

Linkage

[84], [85]

[86]

Malicious

Majority

Time-

Tx
Patterns

via Gas

Usage
[87]

Attack
Resisting

for Stake

Hold-
ers [88]

Series
Analysis

for

Malicious
Tx [89]

Local

Outlier
Factor

for Tx

High

Speed
Detection

of Key

Edges [90]

Theft [91]

SVM

Graph
Analysis

AdVise
Frame-
work

Clustering

Kibara
Tool

General
Machine
Learning

Algorithmic
Game
Theory

Rolling
Window

Fig. 7: Classiﬁcation of Blockchain Anomalies from Perspective of Network Layer

of fraud and theft accordingly. Another detailed work which
focuses on detection of malicious behaviour on the network
of Bitcoin cryptocurrency has been presented in the form of a
thesis by Frank Jobse in [81]. The work ﬁrst discussed suspi-
cious patterns and fraud detection in the Bitcoin network, and
afterwards, it provides detailed discussion about dataset, data
analysis, and sampling techniques used in the evaluation. After
that the author presented a discussion about Markov logic
network’s usage in the anomaly detection methodology, and
ﬁnally the work evaluated the proposed model and compared
the work with baseline methods to show the effectiveness from
the viewpoint of precision.
One more work from the perspective of detection of artiﬁcial
and strange behaving nodes in the network via user graphs
in Bitcoin has been performed by Maesa et al. in [82]. The
article majorly emphasizes over the outliers in the category
of indegree distribution of frequency and remarkably high
diameters. Article further discussed the formation of various
chain transactions by providing in-depth discussion about
various transaction types, such as BPS, GPS, PS- transactions.
After that,
the article evaluated the economic meaning of
these transactions and related the anomalous output behavior
to these transaction types for successful
identiﬁcation of
malicious nodes. The ﬁnal work in this domain of malicious
account detection on the network layer of blockchain has been
carried out by Chang and Svetinovic in [83]. Authors worked
over analysing different transaction patterns with a goal to
cluster the addresses with similar ownership information. In
order to do so, authors developed a clustering approach and
clustered all transactions on the network into ﬁve different
patterns such as peeling transactions, relay transactions, etc.
Another novel that authors did is that they used Gini impurity

measure to evaluate the outcome of the proposed clustering
model. Authors further compared the distributions with normal
distribution and after applying the proposed model to carry
out comparative analysis for the work to show a comparative
analysis. Since identifying malicious accounts is a critical
challenge, thus, different types of detection models can be
seen in this category, such as SVM, clustering, graph analysis,
etc. However, this domain also needs further advancement
to integrate recently developed models to improve detection
accuracy. This can be done via multiple ways but we believe
that usage of modern deep learning and reinforcement learning
based models is one of them.

B. Malicious Forks in Network

The simplest deﬁnition of fork can be termed as disagree-
ment on choosing the best way forward for the blockchain
network, this disagreement usually occurs between multiple
miners, which control the computational power of blockchain
network [92]. As a fork results in splitting of blockchain into
two separate chains, therefore, there is a strong possibility that
a fork can be carried out for both advantageous and malicious
purposes [93].
A number of works have been carried out in efﬁcient identi-
ﬁcation and prediction of these forks, one such work in this
regard has been presented by Pontecorvi et al. in [84]. Authors
developed a postulate that malicious requests in the network
leads to the formation of malicious forks and it also paves
a path for prospective attacks in the network. Therefore, in
order to efﬁciently eradicate these catastrophic outcomes, it is
important to detect and overcome these malicious requests. In
order to do so, authors developed a malicious activity detection
tool and named it as AdvISE. The proposed tool collects

TABLE III
ANOMALY DETECTION IN NETWORK LAYER.

Contribution

Detected Anomaly

Anomaly Factors

Blockhain
Type

Platform
Language

Applications

Dataset

Compl-

16

Domain

Malicious
Accounts
on
Network

Malicious
Forks in
Network

Anomalous
Network
Transac-
tions

Malicious
Forks in
Network

Ref
No.

[80]

[81]

[82]

[83]

[84]

[85]

[86]

[87]

[88]

[89]

[90]

[91]

Evaluated three
unsupervised learning
models for Bitcoin
anomaly
Random Forest
algorithm based
prediction for ground
truth cases
Exploited structural
properties of graph to
ﬁnd unusual patterns

Analyzed Bitcoin Tx
patterns via clustering
of ownership records
Used meta-data of
blockchain systems to
tackle eclipse attacks
Developed a novel
Blockchain anomaly
detection system
Link-mining tool based
anomaly detection for
IoT
Using visualized
features to detect
anomalous gas spent
Stakeholder activity
monitoring via software
agents

Personalized detection
of anomaly via
automated Tx signing
Local outlier factor
based clustering for
anomaly detection

High-Speed anomaly
detection for blockchain
using In-GPU cache

• Malicious users
• Malicious Tx

• Fraudulent nodes

• Artiﬁcial Tx
patterns

• Fraudulent owner
clusters

• Malicious requests
• Malicious forks

• Malicious code
• Malicious requests

• Malicious forks

• Graph
overlapping
• Out-degree

• Precision &
Recall of Tx users
data

• Common &
Uncommon Output
Amount
• Tx Frequency
• Gini Impurity
Index

Public

N/S

• Cryptocurrency

Public

Python

• Cryptocurrency
• Markov Logic
Networks

Public

N/S

• Cryptocurrency

Bitcoin
Database

Bitcoin
Database

Bitcoin
Database

Public

Blockseer

• Cryptocurrency

Bitcoin

• Pattern requests

Public

N/S

• Cryptocurrency
• IoT

N/S

exity
−

−

−

−

−

• Bandwidth
overhead
• Request Patterns
• Mutual
Information

Public

N/S

• Cryptocurrency
• IoT

Bitcoin
Dataset

O(k)

Public

N/S

• Cryptocurrency
• IoT

N/S

• Malicious Tx

• Tx throughput
• Gas usage

Public/
Private

Node.js
Python

• Cryptocurrency
• DApps

Ethereum

• Malicious nodes
• Double spending

• Tx Payoff

Public

N/S

• Cryptocurrency

Bitcoin
Database

• Malicious Tx

• Tx time-frame
• Tx frequency

Public

Python

• Cryptocurrency

Ethereum

• Suspicious Tx
• Suspicious users

• Suspicious Tx

• Tx Edges

Public

N/S

• Cryptocurrency

Public

CUDA

• Cryptocurrency

• Abnormal
execution time
• Avg withdrawal
& deposit

Bitcoin
Dataset

Bitcoin
Dataset

−

−

−

−

−

−

and analyses data of requests in the blockchain networks and
highlights potential adversarial requests for timely action. The
extension and further implementation and investigation of this
idea has been carried out by authors in [85], in which authors
developed a thorough anomaly detection and fork leveraging
tool for blockchain named it a ‘BAD’. Authors developed a
complete framework to tackle anomalies at a massive level,
and also made the proposed system resilient from eclipse
attack. Afterwards, authors implemented a thorough test bed,
in which they implemented the complete network by using two
types of nodes named as full nodes and client nodes. From the
evaluation viewpoint, the authors ensured that the proposed
model detects anomalies and occurrences of eclipse attack
in the network from analysing transaction patterns. Another
interesting work focusing over the use of link-mining tools on
the basis of blockchain network anomaly detection has been
presented by Agure et al. in [86]. The aim of the work is
to collect blockchain meta-data in the form of network forks,
which are further used to ﬁgure out prospective anomalous
paths in the network. A critical parameter, which is used to aid
the experimentation is mutual information (MI), which is used

as a measure to ensure efﬁciency of the proposed model from
the perspective of detection and occurrence of anomalies and
forks. After analysing the current literature, it can be visualized
that detection of malicious forks has not been well-studied in
the literature and integration of modern machine models is still
lacking in this category. Therefore, in order to further excel in
this domain and to detect the formation of malicious forks in
a timely manner, one needs to study their behaviors with the
help of modern algorithms, such as CNN, DNN, DQN, etc.

C. Anomalous Tx on Network

In the previous section (Sec. IV), we discuss how anomalous
transactions can be identiﬁed from the stored data records
on the data layer. However, research works have indicated
that these transactions can be ﬁltered even before recording
them to the data layer of blockchain. In this section, we
discuss the network layer aspects and detection of these
anomalous transactions. The ﬁrst work in this regard has been
carried out by Bogner in [87]. The work introduces an online
solution based on machine learning for optimal visualization
of anomalous transactions on the network. The goal of the

experimentation is to design a user-friendly visualization tool
which will be easy enough to be used by non-technical human
operators to identify prospective anomalies in the network
transactions.
Another pioneering work which aims to detect malicious
transactions intended for the purpose of majority attack has
been carried out by Dey in [88]. Author ﬁrst developed
the motivation that in consortium blockchain, the chances of
majority-attack is far greater as compared to public networks
because any collusion among governing companies can result
in a majority attack. Afterwards, the author discussed that the
malicious transactions intended for the purpose of majority
attack can be detected and prevented timely if appropriate mea-
sures are taken. In order to detect and prevent such malicious
transactions, the author used game-theoretic supervised learn-
ing model, which can detect the legitimacy of a transaction
and stakeholder on the basis of the past transactions.
Another pioneering work using machine learning for auto-
mated transaction signing to ensure efﬁcient anomaly detection
on blockchain networks has been carried out by Podgorelec et
al. in [89]. Authors ﬁrst emphasized that digital signing of
transactions takes time, and that is the prime reason that
blockchain is not being integrated in time-critical applications.
Afterwards, authors work over proposing an automated and de-
centralized digital signing framework on the basis of machine
learning, which according to the claim not only will make the
blockchain efﬁcient but will also detect anomalous transactions
at the time of digital signature via time-series machine learning
analysis. While evaluating the framework, authors carried out
a comparison between the proposed framework and the orig-
inal process and demonstrated that their proposed framework
optimizes blockchain efﬁciency and anomaly detection. From
the works, it will not be wrong to say that this indeed in
a well-studied domain, as this is one of the few domains
where researchers used the notion of algorithmic game theory.
However, this is still the start and this domain can be extended
further where one will be able to identify anomalous transac-
tions over the network without the risk of compromising their
data. E.g., via using privacy preserving machine/deep learning
models for anomaly analysis.

D. Network Entropy Detection

In fact, this section V as a whole section discusses anoma-
lies and their detection in the network layer of blockchain. But
works discussed prior to this subsection provide information
about analysis of networks for some particular issue, such as
malicious forks, transactions, accounts, etc. However, in this
particular subsection, we discuss how we can make the whole
network secure from generic anomalies and what are the works
that have been carried out in this domain so far. One pioneering
work by Pham and Lee [90] provides a thorough analysis
about integration of anomaly detection in the network layer
of Bitcoin cryptocurrency. First of all, the authors developed
a methodology for data collection from the Bitcoin network,
in which they classiﬁed different types of data streams in
user and truncation graphs. Afterwards, authors developed a
k-means clustering model, which uses six features from user-
node and three features from transaction nodes and clusters

17

them accordingly. Afterwards, authors work over identiﬁcation
of anomalies, for which they worked from the perspective
of local power degree, outlier factor, and densiﬁcation laws.
Another novel work from the perspective of accelerating the
process of anomaly detection for blockchain networks has
been carried out by authors in [91]. Authors ﬁrst developed
motivation about their work by stating the issues which can
be caused due to a malicious transaction if it gets recorded
on a tamper proof ledger. Thus, in order to eradicate these
issues, authors mentioned that high-speed anomaly detection
at the network layer is required, so that one stops malicious
transactions from being recorded on the ledger. To facilitate
this, authors developed a model which uses a k-means algo-
rithm to detect anomalous transactions, however, to accelerate
the process, authors propose a model which carry out both
abnormality detection and feature extraction in GPU memory.
The proposed model is then evaluated and compared with
traditional models, which showed that the proposed model was
37.1 times quicker than the traditional CPU based processing
model. TO demonstrate it further, authors compared it with
a traditional GPU based model, which does not carry out
feature extraction in GPU, the results showed that the proposed
model is 16.1 times speedier than the traditional GPU based
model. The works have highlighted that only clustering based
models have been used to study the entropy in the network,
therefore, this domain can be enhanced with the help of
modern machine/deep learning models. Especially, with the
help of generative networks, one can reconﬁgure the entropy
and study its behavior.

E. Summary and Insights

Network layer on blockchain is responsible for carrying out
activities related to communication and information delivery
over the blockchain network. Since, this layer is establishing
communication between multiple nodes and is ensuring the
legitimacy of transactions and data being transferred, thus the
anomalies and frauds for this layer are pretty disastrous and
need strong consideration. The anomalies over the network
layer of blockchain can be divided into four subtypes on the
basis of their impact. The most prominent type is malicious
accounts over the networks, where anomalous users try to
pretend to be legitimate ones. The next type includes formation
of malicious forks over the network which is done via either
carrying out malicious requests over the network or via making
divergent paths. The next two types consist of carrying out
anomalous transactions over the network and via carrying out
anomalous behaviours over the network, such as key theft,
etc. Irrespective of the type of anomaly, it is important to
highlight that as these anomalies are usually being done via
communication link, thus, they can be traced and stopped
before causing catastrophe, if proper actions are taken.

VI. ANOMALY DETECTION IN INCENTIVE LAYER OF
BLOCKCHAIN

In this section, we provide a thorough literature review from
perspective of anomaly detection in incentive/currency layer
of blockchain (cf. Section II-B for details) (cf. Fig. 8 and
Table. IV).

18

Anomaly detection in Incentive/Currency Layer
Sec. VI

Bitcoin Fraud
Detection

Malicious
Blockchain
Account

Incentive
Attack
Classiﬁcation

Market
Volatility
Prediction

Atypical

Tx
Patterns

for Coin

Mix-
ing [94]

Illicit

Activity
via F-1

Score [95]

Outlier

Identiﬁca-
tion [96]

Malicious

Laun-
dering

Pat-

terns [97]

Attribute

Indicator
for Wal-

lets [98]

Malicious

Pattern
via Sub-

graphs [99]

Malicious

Feature
Engineer-

ing [100],

[101]

Attacks

Attribute
Analy-

sis [102]

Forecasting

Bitcoin
Market

Fluctua-

tion [103]

Graphical

Tx Vector
Analy-

sis [104]

Active
Learning

K-Means
Clustering

Random
Forest

Graph
Analysis

Decision
Tree ML

SVM

Fig. 8: Classiﬁcation of Blockchain Anomalies from the Perspective of Incentive Layer

A. Bitcoin Fraud Detection

An initial work in Bitcoin fraud identiﬁcation as a part
of course project has been carried out by Hirshman et al.
in [94]. The focus of the article is to deﬁne and ﬁgure
out atypical transaction patterns in Bitcoin currency. In the
work, authors ﬁrst performed relational checks on Bitcoin
data in order to ﬁgure out
the roots of coin mixing for
any anomalous transaction. In order to do so, authors used
the K-means clustering model and developed and identiﬁed
different clusters on the basis of degree variance and hub
count. Finally, authors examined certain real-time splits to
ﬁgure out the level of anomaly from various coin mixing
services alongside identifying certain intermediate addresses
involved in the malicious transaction.
A very interesting work from the perspective of anomaly
detection in the Bitcoin network in the existence of label
scarcity has been carried out by Lorenz et al. in [95]. The
focus of the article is to basically detect money laundering
patterns in cryptocurrencies by specially focusing over Bitcoin.
Authors ﬁrst highlighted that traditional unsupervised money
laundering detection models are not good enough for the
Bitcoin network, and therefore, authors designed supervised
learning models to detect illicit laundering patterns in the
network. In order to evaluate the proposed model, authors
worked over reporting unlawful F1-score in a unit time-step
performed during the test. The reported scores are then used to
identify anomalous users in order to take action against them.
Another similar work that focuses over the usage of global
and local outliers for the identiﬁcation of Bitcoin fraud has
been carried out by Monamo et al. in [96]. The authors ﬁrst
highlighted the issue that lack of class labels in the Bitcoin
network is one of the root causes due to which it is hard to
ﬁnd ﬁnancial anomalies in the network. Afterwards, authors
discussed fraud in the Bitcoin network from both a global

and local perspective. Then in order to identify the anomalies,
authors highlighted the use of both unsupervised and super-
vised models for the identiﬁcation of global and local outliers.
For unsupervised models, authors worked over k − means
and kd − trees clustering, in which they identiﬁed that the
clustering mode of ‘8’ gives the optimal result. Similarly,
for supervised learning models, authors used GLM logistic
regression, boosted logistic regression, and random forest.
Authors further emphasized the use of supervised learning
models on the basis of ﬁndings and the detection accuracy
of these models.
Till now, we discussed the use of outliers and similar other
patterns, but a very different work from the perspective of
using Hypergraph for malicious user identiﬁcation of Bitcoin
has been carried out by authors in [97]. The article focuses
on identiﬁcation of speciﬁc exchange patterns of Bitcoin with
respect to its spending and acquisition. To study it further,
authors work over building a classiﬁcation model which dis-
criminates various feature features and the major focus was
to identify the root of a malicious address, which means
veriﬁcation of an address that whether it is owned by a speciﬁc
exchange or not. The basic reason behind designing and
analysing 2-motif hypergraphs to ﬁgure out hidden patterns
via learning models. To evaluate it further, authors used ﬁve
learning models named as linear SVM, perceptron, random
forest, logistic regression, and AdaBoost. Authors compared
these models on the basis of their precision, recall, and F1
score. A ﬁnal work that evaluates and proposes the anomalous
aspects in Bitcoin wallets has been carried out by Zambre
and Shah in [98]. The developed project aims to identify
the malicious users and entities who are targeting vulnerable
wallets and accounts of Bitcoin users with an intention to com-
promise them for illicit purposes. The article gave examples
of certain robberies and thefts that have been carried out over
the Bitcoin network so far, and afterwards, authors used k-

TABLE IV
ANOMALY DETECTION IN INCENTIVE LAYER.

19

Domain

Ref
No.

Contribution

Detected Anomaly

Anomaly Factors

Blockhain
Type

Platform
Language

Applications

Dataset

Compl-

Public

N/S

• Cryptocurrency

Bitcoin

exity
−

Clustering hub based
coin mixing detection

• Atypical Tx
patterns

• Hub count
• Tx value
variance
• F-1 Score

• Illicit Tx

Public

Python

• Cryptocurrency

Bitcoin

[94]

[95]

[96]

[97]

[98]

[99]

[100]

[101]

[102]

[103]

[104]

Bitcoin
Fraud

Malicious
Blockchain
Accounts

Incentive
Attack
Classiﬁca-
tion

Market
Volatility
Prediction

Detected money
laundering via
supervised learning
Detecting global &
local frauds of Bitcoins
via supervised and
unsupervised learning
Identifying laundering
patterns from
Hypergraph with high
accuracy
Analyzed Bitcoin data
to detect occurred fraud

GPU based high speed
anomaly detection from
user-centric subgraphs
Random Forest
based malicious node
detection
Using XGBoost
classiﬁer to detect
malicious features
Used one-class SVM
and K-Means on
electronic Tx data

Predicting volatility &
return in Bitcoin market
via network theory

Identiﬁed mining based
market manipulation of
Bitcoin

• Malicious Tx
groups

• Account inputs
• Account outputs

Public

N/S

• Cryptocurrency

Bitcoin

• Malicious Tx
patterns

• Exchange
addresses

Public

Python

• Cryptocurrency

Bitcoin

• Compromised
wallets

• Abnormal Tx

• Tx frequency
• User occurrence
frequency
• Tx Edges

Public

N/S

• Cryptocurrency

Bitcoin

Public

CUDA

• Cryptocurrency

Ethereum

• Tx with
discernible purpose

• Illicit accounts

• Malicious Tx

• Price variance

• Fluctuating
exchange rate
• Abnormal Tx
patterns

• Wallet labelling

Public

Python

• Cryptocurrency

Bitcoin

• Avg Tx value
• Received & sent
values
• Tx number,
address, & volume

• Market In-Out
Tx
• Impulse response

• Account BTC
production

Public

Python

• Cryptocurrency

Ethereum

Public

Python

• Cryptocurrency

Bitcoin

Public

N/S

• Cryptocurrency

Bitcoin

Public

N/S

• Cryptocurrency

Bitcoin

−

−

−

−

−

−

−

−

−

−

means clustering for malicious user identiﬁcation. In order to
get efﬁcient results for this k-means clustering, authors ﬁrst
extracted 21 available features from available Bitcoin data
and afterwards evaluated and categorised users on the basis
of occurrence frequency. Authors mentioned that they were
able to detect the illicit behaviour with 76.5 percent accuracy.
Despite the abundant number of works in the domain of
Bitcoin anomaly detection in the incentive layer, it is important
to mention that this domain still lacks a lot, and there is a huge
need for more research in order to make the cryptocurrency
more secure and trustworthy for future users. For instance,
as the data records are sufﬁcient from training, thus apart
from clustering and graph analysis, researchers can work over
integration of reinforcement and generative architecture based
models, which can yield more accurate data.

B. Malicious Blockchain Accounts

Since blockchain is immutable, therefore, it is also equally
important to detect the malicious transactions before updating
them on the ledger, and for this, we need highly efﬁcient
models that scrutinize transactions at a high pace. One such
work has been carried out by Morishima in [99]. The work
basically revolves around the use of GPUs to speed up
anomaly detection processes in blockchain networks. In the

article, authors ﬁrst used the concept of ﬁxed size subgraphs,
which are centred towards blockchain users in order to develop
an anomaly detection model. However, use of these types of
subgraphs normally result in increase in the total time of
execution for any model. Therefore, in order to overcome
these execution time issues, authors work over proposing
GPU oriented structural graphs which speed up the execution
and detection process for a timely action. Authors further
evaluated their proposed model over 300 million transactions
and claimed that their proposed model provides 195 times
faster execution time as compared to traditional methods.
Similarly, from the perspective of detection accuracy, authors
claimed that their true positive rate is substantially larger as
compared to traditional anomaly detection models due to the
use of GPU and developed subgraphs.
Apart from attacks over users’ identities, attackers and adver-
saries also try to play with different transactional features in
order to compromise accounts so that they can steal critical
assets or cryptocurrencies. Therefore, playing with different
features to identify anomalies in blockchain is a critical
aspect which needs more consideration. Till now, two critical
works [100], [101], have been carried out in this domain
so far, one from the perspective of malicious features for
compromised wallets identiﬁcation and other from the point

of view of top rated feature engineering for timely user
anomaly identiﬁcation. The ﬁrst work in the domain has been
carried out by Baek et al.
[100]. The article mainly
in
focuses on investigating Binance platform, which is one of
the most commonly used cryptocurrency platforms nowadays.
Authors evaluated more than 38,000 wallets in order to iden-
tify transactions for malicious purposes. In order to enhance
the detection, authors worked over feature engineering, in
which they identiﬁed and used the most suitable features for
unsupervised learning models, such as random forest. The
work further advocates labelling of the ﬂagged cryptocurrency
wallets and transactions for future transactions. In this way, it
will become easier to detect any malicious activity from the
ﬂagged accounts in future and by this way one can take timely
action and can prevent some catastrophe in future.
The other work in the domain of explicitly feature engineering
for detection of malicious accounts have been carried out by
Farrugia et al. in [101]. The basic motivation of the work is
to ﬁgure out the top features which have the largest impact
on the outcome of anomaly detection models. Therefore,
after thorough examination and evaluation authors identiﬁed
‘Min received value’, ‘time difference’, and ‘total balance’ as
the three most inﬂuential features speciﬁcally for Ethereum
blockchain. Alongside doing this feature engineering, authors
also work over proposing an effective method to detect the
malicious accounts, for which authors used XGBoost, which
basically is a method of ensemble machine learning via
decision tree.

C. Incentive Attack Classiﬁcation

Incentive layer is prone to many attacks ranging from
double spending to DDoS attack, etc. However, the majority
of works discussed above focused majorly over either
identiﬁcation of a particular attack, or
identiﬁcation of
some sort of anomalous behaviour in the blockchain model.
However, considering the diverse range of attacks, it is equally
important for an anomaly detection model to pinpoint the
type of attack which is being carried out in the network. From
the perspective of the incentive layer, one such incredible
work has been carried out by Sayadi et al. in [102]. The
work focuses on using two separate machine learning models
to ﬁrst detect the anomalies and then the second to classify
it up further. In order to detect outliers in the transactions
of blockchain, authors used one class SVM also known
as OCSVM, which basically separates novelty outliers on
the basis of hyperplane distance among the transactions.
Afterwards,
the model basically labels them and feeds it
to the next classiﬁcation model, for which authors used
K-means clustering. This K-means clustering is basically a
further extension via which authors picked and classiﬁed the
anomalies into different types of attacks. From the selected
anomalies, authors were able to identify the presence of
double spending, DDoS, and 51% vulnerability from the
identiﬁed labels.

20

D. Market Volatility Prediction

While talking about

incentive or currency layer of
blockchain, the aspect of market control, manipulation, and
volatility cannot be ignored because it
is one of the key
aspect over which a huge amount of investment depends
upon [105]. Nevertheless, cryptocurrencies, especially Bitcoin
and Ethereum have a large amount of market capitalization
and this capitalization is continuously increasing. E.g., the
total market capital of Bitcoin in 2017 was $18 billion, which
increased to $599 billion in 2018 [106]. Considering these
aspects, it is important to have answers to know more about
these cryptocurrencies, especially about market volatility from
an anomalous manipulation viewpoint.
From a technological point of view, it is important to identify
and predict the occurrence of anomalous factors which can
cause huge market volatility. It is also important to predict the
occurrence of a major surge in the network because it can also
be due to some adversarial attacks on the network, which can
further lead to disastrous outcomes. One such to predict market
volatility and return from Bitcoin price movements and trans-
actions movement have been carried out by authors in [103].
The work highlights that predicting the Bitcoin market is
not fairly simple as plenty of complex aspects are associated
with this. In order to carry out efﬁcient prediction, authors
developed a relationship between the market’s volatility and
the complexity measures. For complexity measures, authors
used the concept of transactions connectivity with regard to
number of roles, alongside this, authors used the measures
from information theoretic perspective as well. Afterwards,
these measures were fed into a prediction model, which ﬁrst
characterises the joint behaviour via vector autoregression and
afterwards carry out selection and model estimation accord-
ingly.
Another interesting work which focuses over identiﬁcation
of market manipulation of Bitcoin due to adversarial and
anomalous identities has been carried out by Chen et al.
in [104]. To train and develop the market manipulation model,
authors picked a previous database of transaction leakage and
organized the transactions into three sub-graphs. Afterwards,
authors worked over identiﬁcation of inﬂuence of each account
on the ﬂuctuation of the market in order to identify the most
inﬂuenced accounts, and they carried out this experimentation
with the help of singular value decomposition. From SVD,
the authors were able to identify certain base accounts and
networks, which had a direct relation with the volatility of
the network. Similarly, authors were able to identify the types
of abnormal transactions which can be carried out between
malicious users, e.g., unidirectional, self-loop, bi-direction,
polygon, triangle, and star transactions. From the given work,
one can efﬁciently detect the presence of any anomalous factor
which can cause market manipulation in the near future.
Market volatility and market manipulation has been in dis-
cussion since the advent and popularity of Bitcoin, and a
number of graph analysis based works have been carried out
so far. However, the integration of other speciﬁc anomaly
detection models is missing in the literature. Similarly, while
discussing market manipulation and volatility in the context of

blockchain anomaly detection, it is important to mention that
in this section, we only consider works which discuss these
aspects from a technological viewpoint. Contrarily, there are
plenty of other works, which purely focus over economical
or ﬁnancial viewpoint, therefore, we did not include these
articles in our discussion because they were out of scope of
this article. Interested readers can study more about economic
growth, volatility, and manipulation of cryptocurrencies in the
interesting article written by Bariviera and Sola [107].

E. Summary and Insights

Incentive layer is the major driving force in blockchain
technology, which motivates participating nodes to take part
in mining and other relevant processes. Nevertheless, it is a
driving force because of the incentivization, but for anomalous
peers, it is also one of the most critical layers to target,
because they can get direct beneﬁt from this layer in terms
of incentives, tokens, etc. Majority of attacks and anomalies
over this layer consist of frauds among cryptocurrencies, such
as Bitcoin, Ethereum, etc. Apart from cryptocurrency frauds,
the second critical anomaly type is ﬁnancial ﬂuctuations in the
market, which can cause huge rise and drop among the shares
and trading values of assets and currencies over the blockchain
network. Another signiﬁcant direction towards working over
anomaly detection from the incentive layer perspective is to
identify malicious accounts of the network carrying out such
anomalous activities and ﬂag or ban such accounts in order to
prevent them for carrying out fraud or market instability.

VII. ANOMALY DETECTION IN CONTRACT LAYER OF
BLOCKCHAIN

In this section, we provide a detailed review of existing
works from the perspective of anomaly detection in contract
layer of blockchain (cf. Section II-B for details) (cf. Fig. 9
and Table. V).

A. Paxos Anomaly in Blockchain

As the name suggests, in this section we will be discussing
an anomaly related with dependent transfers, which is cat-
egorized under the name of the famous consensus protocol
‘Paxos’. In order to understand this anomaly a bit further,
it is important to understand two major concepts, one is the
concept of Paxos consensus and the other is termination of a
consensus model in a decentralized blockchain environment.
From the perspective of Paxos, it can formally be deﬁned as
a family of selected protocols which can be used to reach a
consensus in an unreliable processor network [117].
Moving towards discussion of similarities between Paxos
anomaly and blockchain anomaly, it is important to highlight a
critical and thorough work carried out by Natoli and Gramoli
in [108]. Authors provided a thorough analysis of how the
asynchronous nature of blockchain and message delays can
cause a major issue in termination of consensus, which can
then lead to the start of two simultaneous chains where both
the miners agrees simultaneously over their own ‘k’ set of
blocks. Authors further evaluated that this problem accelerates

21

and becomes more catastrophic in case of dependent transac-
tions especially in case of a private blockchain, which can
further lead to double spending attack and uncommitting of
transactions. Authors further developed a complete model to
study this effect in which they evaluated by automating the
anomaly reproduction in the decentralized network at different
difﬁculties involved in mining the block. Through the evalua-
tion, authors show the hazardous effects which can be caused
if proper actions are not taken. Finally, authors discussed a
prospective smart contract based solution in which authors
provided certain examples showing the speciﬁc conditions and
statements which can be added in a smart contract to overcome
the occurrence of this anomaly, e.g., detecting and freezing of
coins at the time of need. Authors further emphasized that
modern blockchain networks, such as Ethereum, etc should
develop more secure smart contracts so that the possibility of
such anomalies can be eradicated completely. It will not be
wrong to say that Paxos is one speciﬁc type of anomaly that
freezes the transactions on the basis of dependency, however,
with more in-depth analysis, one can work over identiﬁcation
of other similar anomalies in the blockchain network.

B. Faulty Signals & Tx Detection

Researchers are actively working in development of modern
blockchain systems, which are paving paths towards develop-
ment of ‘Blockchain 3.0’ [118]. However, this also comes up
with afﬁliated anomalous concerns, such as malicious attacks
and faulty signals and transactions. In order to overcome this
anomaly detection issue, authors in [109] worked over propos-
ing a deterministic smart contract based anomaly detection
in blockchain based IoT networks. Authors work over the
development of a collaborative learning approach in which
authors used the functionalities of probabilistic dictionary
learning to ﬁgure out
the existence of a particular faulty
signals anomaly in the blockchain based IoT network. To
carry out the work, the authors ﬁrst formulated the problem by
developing an anomaly score on the basis of clients, network
participants, and used dataset. Afterwards, authors developed
the algorithm for density estimation in the blockchain network
in a collaborative manner, which further led to the development
of protocol which is used to update the parameters data. From
the evaluated models, authors claimed that the proposed model
identiﬁed anomalies in a more accurate manner as compared
to the previous works.
Another similar work from the perspective of anomaly detec-
tion over supply chain network operating over Hyperledger
Sawtooth has been carried out by Oh et al. in [110]. The
work focuses on identiﬁcation of anomalies via graph analysis,
which is done with the help of a smart contract. The smart
contract is designed in such a manner that it identiﬁes whether
the order of a transaction is correct, and it has all the necessary
linkage with its predecessors. If the transaction obeys all the
conditions, then it is recorded over the ledger, elsewise, it
is ﬂagged as an anomalous transaction. Authors successfully
implemented this anomaly detection notion over Hyperledger
Sawtooth in the form of an additional layer, which can be
integrated with blockchain platforms to ensure the capability

22

Anomaly detection in Smart Contract (SC) Layer
Sec. VII

Paxos
Anomaly
on Chain

Detecting

and
Freezing

Coins via

Novel
SC [108]

Faulty
Signals
& Tx
Detection

Application

Oriented
Anomaly

Detec-

tion [109],
[110]

Anomaly
in
Contracts
Bytecode

Enhancing

Bytecode
Identiﬁca-

tion [33],

[111]

Analytical
Analysis

Graph
Analysis

CNN

Detecting
Ponzi
Contracts

Malicious
Threats
in
Contracts

Tagging
& Log
based
Pre-
vention

Continuous

Ponzi
Contract

Detection

[112]

Multiple
Machine
Learning

Identiﬁed

Ongoing
Ponzi

Schemes

on Net-
work [4]

Threats

in EVM
Con-

tracts [34],

[113],
[114]

Efﬁcient

Security
Threat

Identiﬁca-

tion [115]

SVM

Statistical
Analysis

Sequence
Learning

Updating

SC w.r.t
Log Pat-

tern [61]

Aging
Resistant
ML

Overhead

Reduction
in Detec-

tion [116]

Path
Indexing

Fig. 9: Classiﬁcation of Blockchain Anomalies from Perspective of Contract Layer

of anomaly detection. From the presented work, it can be seen
that detecting faulty signals is important and it can also be seen
in future applications of blockchain. However, the detection
phenomena are not much advanced, therefore, it is equally
important to detect the occurrence of these faulty signals in
order to take appropriate actions.

C. Anomaly in Contracts Bytecode

With the development of Ethereum smart contracts, a
plethora of opportunities and future directions which require
the integration of decentralized services for their efﬁcient
functionalities can be visualized. Since, smart contracts is a
deterministic piece of code which cannot be stopped once
it starts execution on the blockchain network, therefore, it is
equally important to ensure that the outcome of a particular
smart contract is in the favour of blockchain network, and it
will not cause any catastrophe, which is done with the help
of anomaly detection models. One such work towards identi-
ﬁcation of anomalies in bytecode of Ethereum smart contracts
has been carried out by Huang in [111]. Unlike other similar
works, Huang did not focus primarily on extraction of novel
features for efﬁcient identiﬁcation, instead, the major focus
of the article is to reduce the overall labour cost associated
with identiﬁcation of anomalies in the Ethereum bytecode.
In order to do so, authors ﬁrst work over translation solidity
bytecode into an RGB code, which is further used to develop
an encoded image of the ﬁxed-size. The RGB image is then
fed to CNN for training, which automatically extract features,
carry out learning, and then carry out detection of bugs of
the compiler at the time of execution of smart contract. In this
way, the proposed work is able to identify bugs in a more cost
effective and efﬁcient manner as compared to previous works.
Another critical work to enhance bug prediction accuracy for
smart contracts has been carried out by Kim et al. in [33].
Authors worked over analysing smart contract bytecode in

order to categorize and attribute them in the form of tags
for swift identiﬁcation. In order to do so, the authors used a
learning model comprising ﬁve different stages ranging from
pre-training stage to inference stage. In order to evaluate the
proposed methodology, authors used code examples EtherScan
and Google BigQuery datasets. From the outcome results, it
can be seen that the authors were able to successfully classify
smart contracts bytecode on the basis of attributes present
in them. Since bytecode is being used in a large number of
blockchain simulators, therefore, more research work needs
to be carried out over detection of anomalies in bytecode for
smooth running of the network.

D. Detecting Ponzi Contracts

Since the advent of blockchain and cryptocurrencies, ad-
versaries are continuously trying to take unusual and illegal
advantages of certain hidden functionality of it which common
people are not aware of. One such type of fraudulent model
is the development of the Ponzi scheme on the decentralized
blockchain network, which not only affects an individual,
but it also affects the economy on a deeper level [119]. An
interesting work towards development of data mining models
to develop Ponzi smart contracts on Ethereum blockchain
has been carried out by Jung et al. in [112]. Authors ﬁrst
highlighted the functioning and basic methods being used in
Ponzi smart contracts by speciﬁcally focusing over Ethereum,
and afterwards authors worked over building a dataset of
Ponzi contracts on the network. Then the authors used these
malicious Ponzi contracts to pick out speciﬁc features, for
which authors used the transactions and the compiled code on
the network for these malicious contracts. Then authors work
over the development of a classiﬁcation model, which efﬁ-
ciently predicts the presence or absence of malicious and Ponzi
factors in a smart contract. Authors carried out evaluation of
their proposed model for 250 days and the outcome results

23

Domain

Paxos
Anomaly
in
Blockchain

Faulty
Signal and
Tx
Detection

Anomaly
in
Contracts
Bytecode

Detecting
Ponzi
Contracts

Malicious
Threats in
SC

Tagging
& Log
based
Anomaly
Prevention

Ref
No.

[108]

[109]

[110]

[111]

[33]

[112]

[4]

[34]

[113]

[114]

[115]

[61]

[116]

TABLE V
ANOMALY DETECTION IN CONTRACT LAYER.

Contribution

Detected Anomaly

Anomaly Factors

Blockhain
Type

Platform
Language

Applications

Dataset

Compl-

Highlighted a complex
immutability related
anomaly & proposed
coin freezing.
Graphical lasso &
collaborative dictionary
learning based anomaly
detection in industrial
data.
Graph analysis based
anomalous Tx detection
from supply chain data.
Converted bytecode
to RGB for efﬁcient
anomaly extraction.

Identiﬁed Malicious
Smart Contracts by
Assigning Labels on
basis of bytecode
Developed model to
predict Ponzi smart
contracts from day zero.
Developed model to
predict scamming smart
contracts in Ethereum.
Developed a taxonomy
of honeypots of
Ethereum smart
contracts.
Identiﬁed 20 Defects
in Ethereum smart
contracts.

Linked Smart Contract
Defects to Prospective
Unwanted Behaviour.
Sequentially learning
smart contracts to ﬁnd
weaknesses.
Developed a self-
adaptive model to detect
log anomaly in smart
contracts.

Detected & prevented
abnormal control ﬂow
in Ethereum smart
contracts.

• Malicious risky Tx
• Uncommitting Tx

• Swap frequency
• Tx movement

Public

EVM

• Digital Assets
• Cryptocurrency

N/S

• Faulty data ﬁles

• Logarithmic loss
• Sample accuracy

Private
(Permis-
sioned)

Hyperledger
Fabric

• Digital Assets
• Industrial Data
Storage

Real-
world
Data

• Faulty unordered
transactions

• Tx life cycle
• Tx order

• Compiler bugs in
contracts

• Malicious smart
contracts

Private
(Permis-
sioned)
Public

Hyperledger
Sawtooth

• Digital Assets
• Supply Chain

Solidity

• Cryptocurrency

• Anomalous
bytecodes

• Malicious smart
contracts

Public

Solidity

• Cryptocurrency

• Fraudulent smart
contract

• Malicious Tx
• Malicious SC
body
• Balance disorder
• Inheritance
disorder

• Security,
Availability,
Performance,
Maintainability, and
Re-usability Defects
• Contract
dependencies

• New attack trends

• Malicious data
storage

• Precision
• Recall
• F-1 Score
• Ponzi detection
count

• Hidden traps in
SC

• Hidden defects
in SC

• Hidden attacks
in SC

• Precision
• Recall
• F-1 Score
• Time complexity

Public

EVM

• Cryptocurrency

Public

EVM

• Digital Asset
• Cryptocurrency

Public

Python

• Cryptocurrency

Public

N/A

• Cryptocurrency

Public

Solidity

• Cryptocurrency

Public

EVM

• Cryptocurrency

Public

N/S

• Cryptocurrency
• Digital assets

Real-
world
Data
Ethereum
Contracts

Ethereum
Contracts

Ethereum
Data

Real-
world
Data
Ethereum
SC data

Ethereum
SC data

Ethereum
SC data

Ethereum
Data

Real-
world
Data

• Control paths

• Gas consumption
• Overhead

Public

EVM

• Digital assets
• Cryptocurrency

Multiple
datasets

exity
−

−

−

−

−

−

−

−

−

−

−

−

−

identiﬁed that it predicts malicious contracts in an efﬁcient
manner. Another similar work focusing over, exploitation of
Ethereum blockchain to identify Ponzi contracts has been
carried out by Chen et al. in [4]. In order to diversify their
search, authors ﬁrst manually picked 200 Ponzi smart contracts
by analysing around 3,000 available Ethereum contracts. After
that, authors extracted two malicious features on the basis
of operation codes and history of transactions. Afterwards,
authors used data mining tools to develop the complete model
which classiﬁed each new smart contract as Ponzi or safe.
From the analysis, authors highlighted that more than 500
Ponzi schemes are currently being operated on the blockchain
network.
It is important to mention that the majority of the work towards
development of Ponzi smart contracts has been carried out
from Ethereum perspective because they are the ﬁrst ones to

introduce the feature of smart contracts in blockchain, there-
fore, they are the most vulnerable one. However, these Ponzi
schemes are not just limited to Ethereum, as they are spreading
to other cryptocurrencies and blockchains as well. Therefore,
there is a dire need to develop such advanced detection models
which accurately analyse, detect, and eradicate such Ponzi
smart contracts before occurrence of any catastrophe.

E. Malicious Threats in Smart Contracts

Every smart contract being executed in a blockchain net-
work has its own dependencies and can affect the blockchain
network in its own way. Similarly, once executed, it is im-
possible to stop the functioning of smart contracts. Therefore,
certain time adversaries take unfair advantage of this feature
and try to add certain malicious threats and honeypots in smart
contracts which can cause a serious harm to the network or

individual. Therefore, destruction and timely identiﬁcation of
such smart contracts is mandatory to keep the network safe
from adversaries. One such work towards identiﬁcation of
malicious honeypots on Ethereum smart contracts has been
carried out by authors in [34]. The authors developed a tool for
honeypot identiﬁcation and named the tool as ‘HoneyBadger’.
To elaborate their concept a bit further, authors proposed
a formal deﬁnition of honeypots in which they described a
honeypot in a speciﬁc type of smart contract which tricks users
to give their funds to attackers in the exchange of some leaked
arbitrary funds. In order to attract an audience, the attacker
ﬁrst deploys a smart contract which seems to be giving funds
to the executor. Then, the victim falls prey to the greed of
getting more funds, and thus he/she transfers the required sum
to the attacker. Finally, the attacker withdraws both the funds
and the original funds, and the victim is left with nothing in
hand. Through visual examples, authors explained the severity
of the situation and thus to overcome this, authors developed
a complete taxonomy of such honeypots which are currently
running over the Ethereum network. The authors also carried
out an extensive analysis of such honeypots in contacts on the
basis of their sub-components, such as various disorders and
overﬂows.
Another critical work working over identiﬁcation of critical
defects in the smart contracts of Ethereum has been carried
out by Chen et al. in [113]. Authors developed the motivation
of their work by discussing that certain smart contracts can
have defects, and some severe defects can deeply affect
the functioning of the whole network and can impact the
whole chain. Afterwards, authors identiﬁed defects in con-
tracts by analysing gas consumption, keywords ﬁltering, open
card sorting, and similar other features. In this way, authors
were able to successfully identify 20 critical defects which
can cause severe issues in the network. The authors further
classiﬁed these contracts to ﬁve subtypes named as security
defects, availability defects, performance defects, maintain-
ability defects, reusability defects. As an extension of this
work, the authors proposed a complete tool and named it as
DefectChecker [114]. The proposed tool can detect 08 critical
defects in the malicious contracts which could have caused
abnormal and unwanted behaviour. Afterwards, they worked
over using the tool for the identiﬁcation of level of impact.
From the outcomes and experimental results, it can be seen
that the proposed model can predict the given contracts with
88.8% F-Score. In this way, the authors were able to conclude
that out of 1,65,621 analysed smart contracts, 25,815 had at
least one identiﬁed as defective.
Till now, the works used analytical and statistical modelling
and analysis to identify prospective threats in the smart con-
tracts. However, a detailed model using sequence learning to
carry out similar work has been presented by Tann et al.
in [115]. In order to make the identiﬁcation effective, authors
worked over using long short term memory (LSTM machine
learning model. For which, authors ﬁrst classiﬁed the threats
of smart contracts and then sequentially modelled them on the
basis of opcode sequence. Then after labelling the data through
Maian, authors used supervised learning to predict the smart
contracts having critical threats. In this way, authors were able

24

to identify threats with 99.57% test accuracy.

F. Tagging & Log based Anomaly Prevention

The integration of smart contract technology with decen-
tralized blockchain network has initiated a new era of de-
centralized on-chain agreement. Due to this initiation a large
number of applications are now being developed which utilize
the tremendous advantages of smart contracts. But, this also
comes up with the associated risks and concerns which needs
to be eradicated in a timely manner. One such work using log
systems for smart contracts to identify prospective anomalies
has been carried out by Shao et al. in [61]. Authors proposed
an LSC architecture, via which authors formulated a complete
framework which can detect anomalies by users with the help
of efﬁcient smart contracts. The protocol works over learning
and analysing logs on the basis of aging-resistant machine
learning models. Afterwards, the learnt output results which
can also be used as models of anomaly detection are forwarded
to executable smart contracts in order to identify presence of
anomalies in the network. The developed smart contract also
keeps on updating on the basis of new available information
in order to ensure the novelty and security of smart contract
against vulnerabilities. Another interesting work towards usage
of tagging systems to defend smart contracts of Ethereum have
been carried out by Wang et al. in [116]. The major goal of
the work is to prevent execution of malicious smart contracts
alongside enhancing the overhead of detection. In this way,
authors can ensure that all nodes, even with a small execution
power will be able to run the contract without worrying
about
the overhead. From the empirical analysis, authors
showed that their proposed model can effectively safeguard
against 11 speciﬁc errors and attacks such as logic error,
superﬁcial randomness, abnormal control ﬂow, etc. Authors
further evaluated their proposed model to identify whether the
proposed model is practical or not, and from the experimental
results, it can be concluded that the proposed ContractGuard
model only causes an additional 28.27% runtime overhead and
36.14% deployment overhead. After analysing the works, it
can be mentioned that the applications utilizing tagging & log
based design are increasing, similarly, the anomalies over these
applications are also increasing. Therefore, there is a dire need
to develop machine/deep learning based models which can
detect the occurrence of these anomalies within an actionable
time frame.

G. Summary and Insights

Contract layer is relatively a more technical and consid-
erably a new layer in blockchain which got famous in the
second era of blockchain, named as blockchain 2.0 when
Ethereum platform provided its users the functionality of
developing DApps. A large number of contracts in a well-
established blockchain network are pre-developed and do not
contain any bugs, however, the malicious participants in the
network always try to ﬁnd out loopholes by any means and
smart contracts are their recent targets because it is hard for
a non-technical person to identify bugs and honeypots in the
smart contracts. The work from the perspective of detection of

anomalies in this speciﬁc layer is divided into multiple types
ranging from identiﬁcation of contracts restricting dependent
transactions to highlighting faulty signals being transmitted via
deployment of a smart contract. However, the most prominent
works in the anomaly detection over this layer have been
carried out from perspective of detection of Ponzi schemes
and detection of critical security threats in the contracts, such
as hacking, etc.

VIII. CHALLENGES & FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS

A. Data Layer

1) Privacy Preserving Anomaly Detection in Blockchain:

a) Key Challenge: From our analysis of blockchain
based anomaly detection models, we observed that none of
the work discussed integration of privacy preservation in their
works. Nevertheless, blockchain works over the phenomenon
of a decentralized ledger and every node has a copy, therefore,
it has got a lot of privacy issues that researchers are tack-
ling [21]. Similarly, from the perspective of anomaly detection
in blockchain, this issue doubles because one needs to analyse
even the deep details of each transaction on the data ledger
of blockchain in order to identify any anomalous behaviour.
However, it is highly unwilling that blockchain participants
share their complete data unless they have been provided with
a complete privacy guarantee.

b) Future Directions: Considering the nature of privacy
requirement in blockchain based anomaly detection, it will not
be wrong to say that there is a dire need to work over this issue.
In order to overcome such issues, researchers can work over
integration of modern privacy preservation strategies, such as
differential privacy [120], zero knowledge proofs [121], etc.
with anomaly detection models of blockchain. In this way,
researchers will be able to provide blockchain users with a
safe and secure platform via which they will be able to prevent
prospective anomalies without the risk of losing their private
data. It is important to highlight that each of the privacy
preservation models comes with a take away, e.g., while
employing differential privacy, one has to deal with a trade-
off between utility and privacy, same goes with other privacy
preserving models. Therefore, the prospective models which
show minimum effect over the utility and privacy leakage of
the system will be a key contribution in this domain of privacy
preserving anomaly detection in blockchain technology.

2) Integrating Federated

Learning with Blockchain

Anomaly Detection:

a) Key Challenge: In order to make efﬁcient anomaly
detection decisions, one has to train their machine learn-
ing model in a centralized manner. Similarly, in the recent
years, researchers worked over integration of various machine
learning based anomaly detection for blockchain technology
including CNN, SVM, etc. However, as per our observa-
tion, none of the work has integrated federated learning for
anomaly detection in blockchain. Nevertheless, blockchain is
a decentralized model and the basic phenomenon of federated
learning is also leading in a decentralized manner instead of a
centralized server. Therefore, these two technologies perfectly
ﬁt with each other from the perspective of framework. Sim-
ilarly, certain works have also identiﬁed the effectiveness of

25

federated learning in anomaly detection of IoT and similar
technologies [122], [123]. Now, the need is to develop such
federated learning based anomaly detection models which
comply with the nature of blockchain technology.

b) Future Directions: Integrating federated learning with
blockchain anomaly detection has two fold advantages. One
from the perspective of security and trust in the network, and
the other from the perspective of reduction of computational
overhead and data storage. Federated learning already has
decentralized nature, therefore, anomaly detection models do
not have to collect huge amount of data in centralized servers,
which will enhance and prevail a sense of trust in the network
and blockchain. Similarly, from the second viewpoint, it is
important to mention that detection overhead and data storing
in a centralized database are the two critical issues which the
majority of anomaly detection models are facing. However, if
an anomaly detection model starts working in a decentralized
manner, then these major issues can be reduced to a negligible
level, which can be done with the help of federated learning.

B. Network Layer

1) Development of Efﬁcient Consensus Models for Anomaly

Detection:

a) Key Challenge: Since the advent of blockchain, a
vast number of consensus mechanisms are being developed by
researchers and experts to enhance the aspect of trust among
peers and to overcome any prospective vulnerability in the
network [124]. As in the consensus model, all nodes reach
consensus over a uniﬁed transaction, similar to this, in case
of a detected anomaly, all nodes have to reach consensus
that the nominated vulnerability is an anomaly. This becomes
even more difﬁcult when a vulnerability is not universally
recognized or identiﬁed as an anomaly. E.g., for some nodes,
an anomaly can just be a random behaviour but for other
nodes, it could be a point of deep concern. Therefore, in
such cases, reaching a consensus on a uniﬁed opinion becomes
even more difﬁcult. This can be done by developing efﬁcient
blockchain oriented network communication models, which
will facilitate blockchain nodes to reach a uniﬁed consensus
over anomalies as well.

b) Future Directions: It has been proven that the con-
sensus carries an importance of backbone in blockchain tech-
nology, because blockchain nodes can reach and agree upon
a uniﬁed claim due to this feature. Similarly,
in case of
anomaly detection, this consensus needs to be ﬁnalized in a
deterministic way so that none of the adversaries take unusual
advantage of it. However, till now, as per our knowledge,
there is no speciﬁc communication and consensus model
which facilitates the early ﬁnality of consensus in case of
an anomaly. Therefore, there is a strong need to develop
such models, which have speciﬁc features regarding detection
of an anomaly. This can also be done by integrating some
speciﬁc functionalities of anomaly detection in current running
consensus models. E.g., a speciﬁc feature can be enabled if
an anomaly is reported by a trustworthy mining node, then a
speciﬁc network protocol can be used to disseminate quickly,
or in case of an anomaly detection via some detection model,

dissemination should be done via a speciﬁc protocol, etc.
Similarly, certain penalty functions can be formulated and can
be added in the existing consensus models, which reward or
penalize the reporting of true or false anomalies. Nevertheless,
this ﬁeld of consensus modiﬁcation in blockchain technology
is pretty huge and it has a large gap especially for anomaly
detection oriented consensus models which can be explored
by researchers.

C. Incentive Layer

1) Market Manipulation Detection:

a) Key Challenge: Market manipulation in blockchain
based applications can be deﬁned as a targeted attempt to
inﬂuence the market price of an asset/cryptocurrency in an
artiﬁcial manner [125]. This is usually carried out by a single
participant or a group of participants who aim to create
an artiﬁcial illusion about an asset or cryptocurrency in the
corresponding market
in order to ﬂuctuate the price. The
the proﬁt from
actual aim of these participants is to get
the end result of these ﬂuctuations. One of the most famous
market manipulation strategy is pump and dump, in which an
individual or a number of people from a speciﬁc class/group
try to pump the value of a penny stock (a stock whom value
is less than one dollar) by spreading a plethora of fake news
about it with an aim to get the proﬁt once it reaches its peak
value [126].

b) Future Direction: The concept of market manipu-
lation is not new, and it has been there since the start of
ﬁnancial markets. However, with the advent of decentralized
digital markets for assets and cryptocurrencies, this aspect has
taken a different turn and malicious bodies continuously try to
manipulate the market to get unfair advantage. Therefore, time
detection and notiﬁcation about any prospective or present
market manipulation is extremely important in order to save
the community from losing their valuable assets. Nowadays,
the modern machine learning based anomaly detection models
are being used to detect and predict the ﬂuctuations and
manipulations in the market. One such example is the use
of classiﬁcation based supervised machine learning models
in order to learn from the data and predict the occurrence
of any prospective manipulation [127]. However, it will not
be wrong to say that this ﬁeld still requires considerable
attention from research, academia, and industry,
in order
to develop more advanced detection models. For example,
unsupervised machine learning models can be developed for
such cryptocurrencies and assets, who do not have a substantial
amount of data to train models. Similarly, models need to be
developed in accordance with modern market manipulation
strategies, such as wash trading, whale wall spooﬁng, etc.

D. Contract Layer

1) Malicious Threats Identiﬁcation in Modern Smart Con-

tract Platforms:

a) Key Challenge: Ethereum introduced the usage and
functionality of smart contracts in blockchain technology.
However, now almost every new blockchain model has its
own smart contracts for its functioning. One of the largest

26

examples after Ethereum is Hyperledger platform, which has
its own diverse range of smart contracts especially focusing
on enterprise functioning [128]. Similarly, all other blockchain
platforms have their own personalized smart contract which
facilitates their functions. However, if we analyse the integra-
tion of anomaly detection in blockchain smart contracts, the
majority of the work just focuses on anomaly detection in
Ethereum smart contracts. No doubt, Ethereum was the ﬁrst
one to introduce smart contracts, therefore, there is a huge
amount of literature on it. But now there is a need to work
over identiﬁcation of anomalies in smart contracts from other
technologies as well.

b) Future Directions: From our analysis regarding inte-
gration of anomaly detection blockchain for malicious smart
contract identiﬁcation, the majority of work we found only
targets Ethereum based smart contracts. Considering the recent
development of blockchain based technologies, we believe
integration of anomaly detection with smart contracts of other
technologies can be a key towards development of secure
blockchains. For example, Hyperledger Fabric is one of the
most viable alternatives to Ethereum, however, a very minimal
literature highlighting anomalous effects in Hyperledger Fabric
can be found. Similarly, certain other blockchain platforms,
such as Stellar, Waves, Nem, etc. have tremendous smart
contract features, however, no work is available over identiﬁ-
cation of anomalous users and contracts for these technologies.
It is important to highlight that while developing anomaly
detection models for new blockchain models, one key thing
that needs to be kept in mind is their community standard.
E.g., some communities might be willing to share signiﬁcant
amounts of information towards the cause of anomaly detec-
tion. Contrarily, some communities might be stricter in sharing
the data for development and execution of anomaly detection
models. Therefore, while developing such models, the aspect
of community requirements and standards needs to be taken
into consideration.

E. Cross-Layers

1) Rapidly Evolving Attacks over Blockchain Network:

a) Key Challenge: Blockchain attackers are also getting
strong and are continuously trying to ﬁgure out novel attack
surfaces for the blockchain network. One of the most promi-
nent types of attack among these rapidly evolving attacks is
cross-layer attacks. As the name suggests, the aim of these
types of attacks is to target multiple layers or to utilize the
functionality of one layer to target the operations at another
layer. For example, in case of DNS resolution attack, an
attacker trying to poison the cache of domain name server
over the network layer, which results in malicious query results
for IP related queries [129]. In this way, the malicious node
tries to trick the network into recording fake transactions
or blocks over the data layer of the blockchain. Similarly,
in case of BGP attack on blockchain network, the server
works over diverting and re-routing the blockchain trafﬁc by
publishing fake announcements in the network. In modern
blockchain networks, this can be done by initiating a malicious
smart contract over the network, which contains such clauses.

Similarly, in case of smart contract denial of service (DoS)
attack, the network layer is targeted with the help of malicious
smart contracts, which results in slowing down the processing
time of transactions and blockchain in order to reduce the
transaction rate [130].

b) Future Directions: The recent developments
in
blockchain attacks, especially the cross-layer attacks opened
a wide-attackable surface for malicious users, where they can
take unfair advantage of utilization of one layer for attacking
another layer. Therefore, it is equally important to develop
advanced mechanisms in order to detect and tackle them
before harming the network. For example, one of the solutions
of DNS resolution attack is to carry out routing-awareness [7],
[131]. But in order to tackle it, it is equally important to detect
the occurrence of attack within actionable time, which can
be done by developing advanced anomaly detection models.
Similar is the case with other rapidly evolving attacks, where
timely detection and action is required. In case of cross-
layer attacks, unsupervised learning based anomaly detection
approaches can play a vital role, because these models are
capable of detecting anomalies without available training data.
Thus, research works can be carried out in advancement and
development of such anomaly detection models in order to
overcome the risk of rapidly evolving attacks over the network.
2) Anomalous Attacks During Interoperable and Distinct

Blockchain Networks:

a) Key Challenge: Each blockchain network has its own
unique features and functionalities, which do not overlap with
others. For example, one blockchain might only require the
selected validators to validate the block, contrarily, the other
would require strong PoW. Similarly, an important issue in
this context that these platforms face is their interoperability,
which basically refers to the phenomenon that allows two
independent blockchain networks to carry out exchange of data
and information without each other. Nevertheless, it is a pro-
gressive direction towards development of modern blockchain
infrastructure where different blockchains will be able to
exchange information with each other without any dependency,
but this comes with its own unique set of challenges. For
example, a speciﬁc blockchain network working over PoW
consensus model (which has its own associated anomalies) is
going to interact with another blockchain network working
over PoS consensus model (having its own attack surface for
anomalies). This interaction on one hand facilitates interop-
erability, but on the other hand it also increases the attack
surface for malicious attackers. Therefore, there is a need to
develop such anomaly detection models, which are suitable for
multiple blockchains alongside their interoperable domain.

b) Future Direction: As we improve the types of ar-
chitectures and their interoperability, the vulnerable attack
surface also increases. Therefore, it is equally important to
develop adequate defence mechanisms to overcome these
attacks. This process of overcoming attacks basically starts
with the development of efﬁcient attack/anomaly detection
models. Each blockchain has its own operations and may have
a well-suited anomaly detection model for itself, but there
is a strong possibility that one speciﬁc anomaly detection
model (which is suitable for that speciﬁc blockchain) might not

27

work with similar accuracy over other blockchain networks.
Therefore, in order to enhance the performance interoperability
among multiple blockchain networks, it is important to design
such ﬂexible and dynamic anomaly detection models, which
also work with dynamic blockchain environments.

IX. CONCLUSION

Since the beginning of blockchain technology, it has at-
tracted attention from both academia and industry. One of the
prime reasons behind this attention is the P2P architecture of
blockchain which makes it a secure, trustworthy, and truthful
platform which is immutable and can be veriﬁed at the time of
need. Even though blockchain has beneﬁts, it is also vulnerable
to a number of attacks by adversaries, such as security, privacy,
reliability, and performance attack, etc. Therefore, in order
to keep these functionalities in full running condition, it is
important to identify any anomalous behaviour in the network
within a limited time. In order to do so, anomaly detection
techniques come into effect, which identify any anomalous
behaviour in the network and report it for timely action.
In this article, we work over providing a thorough survey
of these anomaly detection models. Firstly, we provide a
thorough discussion of how anomaly detection can help in
enhancing the trust and security of the blockchain network and
its ongoing applications. Afterwards, we provide a detailed
classiﬁcation of blockchain anomalies alongside discussing
evaluation metrics and key requirements for the development
of anomaly detection models in the network. Afterwards,
we provide a detailed in-depth analysis of existing anomaly
detection works from the perspective of four most prominent
layers of blockchain technology. Finally, we provide a compre-
hensive discussion about certain challenges and future research
directions which needs attention from the researchers working
in the ﬁeld of anomaly detection in blockchain technology.

REFERENCES

[1] M. S. Ali, M. Vecchio, M. Pincheira, K. Dolui, F. Antonelli, and M. H.
Rehmani, “Applications of blockchains in the internet of things: A
comprehensive survey,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials,
vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 1676–1717, 2018.

[2] M. Saad, J. Spaulding, L. Njilla, C. Kamhoua, S. Shetty, D. Nyang,
and D. Mohaisen, “Exploring the attack surface of blockchain: A
comprehensive survey,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials,
vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 1977–2008, 2020.

[3] F. Dewanta and M. Mambo, “Bpt scheme: Establishing trusted vehicu-
lar fog computing service for rural area based on blockchain approach,”
IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 70, no. 2, pp. 1752–
1769, 2021.

[4] W. Chen, Z. Zheng, E. C.-H. Ngai, P. Zheng, and Y. Zhou, “Exploiting
blockchain data to detect smart ponzi schemes on ethereum,” IEEE
Access, vol. 7, pp. 37 575–37 586, 2019.

[5] M. U. Hassan, M. H. Rehmani, and J. Chen, “Deal: Differentially
private auction for blockchain-based microgrids energy trading,” IEEE
Transactions on Services Computing, vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 263–275, 2020.
[6] M. Saad, M. T. Thai, and A. Mohaisen, “Poster: deterring ddos attacks
on blockchain-based cryptocurrencies through mempool optimization,”
in Proceedings of the Asia conference on computer and communica-
tions security, 2018, pp. 809–811.

[7] M. Saad, J. Spaulding, L. Njilla, C. Kamhoua, S. Shetty, D. H. Nyang,
and D. Mohaisen, “Exploring the attack surface of blockchain: A
comprehensive survey,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials,
in Print, 2020.

[8] S. Zhang and J.-H. Lee, “Double-spending with a sybil attack in
the bitcoin decentralized network,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial
Informatics, vol. 15, no. 10, pp. 5715–5722, 2019.

[9] M. Rahouti, K. Xiong, and N. Ghani, “Bitcoin concepts, threats, and
machine-learning security solutions,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 67 189–
67 205, 2018.

[10] M. C. K. Khalilov and A. Levi, “A survey on anonymity and privacy
in bitcoin-like digital cash systems,” IEEE Communications Surveys &
Tutorials, vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 2543–2585, 2018.

[11] W. Meng, E. W. Tischhauser, Q. Wang, Y. Wang, and J. Han, “When
intrusion detection meets blockchain technology: A review,” IEEE
Access, vol. 6, pp. 10 179–10 188, 2018.

[12] T. Salman, M. Zolanvari, A. Erbad, R. Jain, and M. Samaka, “Security
services using blockchains: A state of the art survey,” IEEE Commu-
nications Surveys Tutorials, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 858–880, 2019.
[13] M. U. Hassan, M. H. Rehmani, and J. Chen, “Privacy preservation in
blockchain based iot systems: Integration issues, prospects, challenges,
and future research directions,” Future Generation Computer Systems,
vol. 97, pp. 512–529, 2019.

[14] S. Omer, “Anomaly Detection in Blockchain,” Master’s thesis, Tampere

University, 2019.

[15] M. Wu, K. Wang, X. Cai, S. Guo, M. Guo, and C. Rong, “A
comprehensive survey of blockchain: From theory to iot applications
and beyond,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 8114–
8154, 2019.

[16] M. Belotti, N. Boˇzi´c, G. Pujolle, and S. Secci, “A vademecum on
blockchain technologies: When, which, and how,” IEEE Communica-
tions Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 3796–3838, 2019.
[17] J. Liu and Z. Liu, “A survey on security veriﬁcation of blockchain
smart contracts,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 77 894–77 904, 2019.
[18] J. Sengupta, S. Ruj, and S. D. Bit, “A comprehensive survey on attacks,
security issues and blockchain solutions for iot and iiot,” Journal of
Network and Computer Applications, vol. 149, p. 102481, 2020.
[19] I. Homoliak, S. Venugopalan, D. Reijsbergen, Q. Hum, R. Schumi, and
P. Szalachowski, “The security reference architecture for blockchains:
Towards a standardized model for studying vulnerabilities, threats, and
defenses,” IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials, in Print, pp. 1–1,
2020.

[20] J. Li, C. Gu, F. Wei, and X. Chen, “A survey on blockchain anomaly
detection using data mining techniques,” in Blockchain and Trustworthy
Systems, Z. Zheng, H.-N. Dai, M. Tang, and X. Chen, Eds. Singapore:
Springer Singapore, 2020, pp. 491–504.

[21] M. U. Hassan, M. H. Rehmani, and J. Chen, “Differential privacy in
blockchain technology: A futuristic approach,” Journal of Parallel and
Distributed Computing, vol. 145, pp. 50–74, 2020.

[22] B. Bhushan, P. Sinha, K. M. Sagayam, and A. J, “Untangling
blockchain technology: A survey on state of the art, security threats,
privacy services, applications and future research directions,” Comput-
ers & Electrical Engineering, p. 106897, 2020. [Online]. Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0045790620307497

[23] Y. Xiao, N. Zhang, W. Lou, and Y. T. Hou, “A survey of distributed
consensus protocols for blockchain networks,” IEEE Communications
Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 1432–1465, 2020.

[24] V. Y. Kemmoe, W. Stone, J. Kim, D. Kim, and J. Son, “Recent advances
in smart contracts: A technical overview and state of the art,” IEEE
Access, vol. 8, pp. 117 782–117 801, 2020.

[25] J. Xie, H. Tang, T. Huang, F. R. Yu, R. Xie, J. Liu, and Y. Liu, “A survey
of blockchain technology applied to smart cities: Research issues and
challenges,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 21, no. 3,
pp. 2794–2830, 2019.

[26] R.-V. Tkachuk, D. Ilie, K. Tutschku, and R. Robert, “A survey
on blockchain-based telecommunication services marketplaces,” IEEE
Transactions on Network and Service Management, 2021.

[27] R. Yang, F. R. Yu, P. Si, Z. Yang, and Y. Zhang, “Integrated blockchain
and edge computing systems: A survey, some research issues and
challenges,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 21, no. 2,
pp. 1508–1532, 2019.

[28] R. Huo, S. Zeng, Z. Wang, J. Shang, W. Chen, T. Huang, S. Wang,
F. R. Yu, and Y. Liu, “A comprehensive survey on blockchain in
internet of things: Motivations, research progresses, and
industrial
in
future challenges,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials,
Print, 2022.

[29] Z. Bao, Q. Wang, W. Shi, L. Wang, H. Lei, and B. Chen, “When
blockchain meets sgx: An overview, challenges, and open issues,” IEEE
Access, vol. 8, pp. 170 404–170 420, 2020.

[30] S. Rouhani and R. Deters, “Security, performance, and applications of
smart contracts: A systematic survey,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 50 759–
50 779, 2019.

28

[31] S. Agrawal and J. Agrawal, “Survey on anomaly detection using data
mining techniques,” Procedia Computer Science, vol. 60, pp. 708–713,
2015.

[32] R. Norvill, B. B. F. Pontiveros, R. State, I. Awan, and A. Cullen,
“Automated labeling of unknown contracts in ethereum,” in 26th
International Conference on Computer Communication and Networks
(ICCCN).

IEEE, 2017, pp. 1–6.

[33] Y. Kim, D. Pak, and J. Lee, “Scanat: identiﬁcation of bytecode-only
smart contracts with multiple attribute tags,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp.
98 669–98 683, 2019.

[34] C. F. Torres, M. Steichen et al., “The art of the scam: Demystifying
honeypots in ethereum smart contracts,” in 28th {USENIX} Security
Symposium ({USENIX} Security 19), 2019, pp. 1591–1607.

[35] R. Barone and D. Masciandaro, “Cryptocurrency or usury? crime and
alternative money laundering techniques,” European Journal of Law
and Economics, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 233–254, 2019.

[36] G. Ramezan and C. Leung, “Analysis of proof-of-work-based
blockchains under an adaptive double-spend attack,” IEEE Transactions
on Industrial Informatics, vol. 16, no. 11, pp. 7035–7045, 2020.
[37] M. La Morgia, A. Mei, F. Sassi, and J. Stefa, “Pump and dumps in
the bitcoin era: Real time detection of cryptocurrency market manipula-
tions,” in 29th International Conference on Computer Communications
and Networks (ICCCN).

IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–9.

[38] F. Victor and A. M. Weintraud, “Detecting and quantifying wash
trading on decentralized cryptocurrency exchanges,” in Proceedings of
the Web Conference 2021, 2021, pp. 23–32.

[39] Y. Liu, X. Liu, C. Tang, J. Wang, and L. Zhang, “Unlinkable coin
mixing scheme for transaction privacy enhancement of bitcoin,” IEEE
Access, vol. 6, pp. 23 261–23 270, 2018.

[40] “Blockchain hackers stole $3.8 billion in 122 attacks in 2020
(link: https://aithority.com/technology/blockchain/blockchain-hackers-
stole-3-8-billion-in-122-attacks-in-2020) [online (last accessed: 19 april
2022)].”

[41] W. Bazan-Palomino, “How are bitcoin forks related to bitcoin?”

Finance Research Letters, vol. 40, p. 101723, 2021.

[42] D. D. F. Maesa, M. Franceschi, B. Guidi, and L. Ricci, “Bitker: a
p2p kernel client for bitcoin,” in International Conference on High
Performance Computing & Simulation (HPCS).
IEEE, 2018, pp. 130–
137.

[43] X. Xia, X. Pan, N. Li, X. He, L. Ma, X. Zhang, and N. Ding, “Gan-

based anomaly detection: A review,” Neurocomputing, 2022.

[44] L. Bergman and Y. Hoshen, “Classiﬁcation-based anomaly detection

for general data,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.02359, 2020.

[45] J. Li, H. Izakian, W. Pedrycz, and I. Jamal, “Clustering-based anomaly
detection in multivariate time series data,” Applied Soft Computing,
vol. 100, p. 106919, 2021.

[46] X. Wang, X. Wang, and M. Wilkes, “A k-nearest neighbour spectral
clustering-based outlier detection technique,” in New Developments in
Unsupervised Outlier Detection. Springer, 2021, pp. 147–172.
[47] M. Ahmed, A. N. Mahmood, and J. Hu, “A survey of network anomaly
detection techniques,” Journal of Network and Computer Applications,
vol. 60, pp. 19–31, 2016.

[48] G. Pang, A. van den Hengel, C. Shen, and L. Cao, “Toward deep
supervised anomaly detection: Reinforcement learning from partially
labeled anomaly data,” in Proceedings of the 27th ACM SIGKDD
Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, 2021, pp. 1298–
1308.

[49] M. H. Bhuyan, D. K. Bhattacharyya, and J. K. Kalita, “Network
anomaly detection: methods, systems and tools,” IEEE communications
surveys & tutorials, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 303–336, 2013.

[50] Multiple Bitcoin Datasets , https : //data.world/datasets/bitcoin

[Last Accessed: 16 October 2021].

Blockchain:

historical
[51] Ethereum
:
Ethereum
//www.kaggle.com/bigquery/ethereum − blockchain [Last
Accessed: 16 October 2021].

(BigQuery)

blockchain

Complete

live
,

https

data

[52] Bitcoin Cash Blockchain: Live Bitcoin Cash historical blockchain
data (BigQuery), https : //www.kaggle.com/bigquery/crypto −
bitcoin − cash [Last Accessed: 16 October 2021].

[53] Zcash Crypto Blockchain: Complete live Zcash historical Blockchain
data (BigQuery), https : //www.kaggle.com/bigquery/crypto −
zcash [Last Accessed: 16 October 2021].

[54] Stocks Data by ”Multi-class Bitcoin-enabled Service Identiﬁcation-
Based on Transaction History Summarization”, shorturl.at/drEIZ
[Last Accessed: 16 October 2021].

[55] Rare Pepes Wallet, https : //data.world/f ivethirtyeight/rare −

pepes [Last Accessed: 19 October 2021].

[56] Smart

Dataset,

Contract

Attribute

:
//www.kaggle.com/xblock/smart − contract − attribute −
dataset [Last Accessed: 19 October 2021].
Labels,

:
//www.kaggle.com/xblock/smart − ponzi − scheme − labels
[Last Accessed: 19 October 2021].

Scheme

https

https

Ponzi

[57] Smart

[58] DApps Quality Characteristics Dataset, shorturl.at/oF M R8 [Last

Accessed: 19 October 2021].

[59] D. J. Weller-Fahy, B. J. Borghetti, and A. A. Sodemann, “A survey
of distance and similarity measures used within network intrusion
anomaly detection,” IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials, vol. 17,
no. 1, pp. 70–91, 2015.

[60] A. Kamisalic, R. Kramberger, and I. Fister, “Synergy of blockchain
technology and data mining techniques for anomaly detection,” Applied
Sciences, vol. 11, no. 17, p. 7987, 2021.

[61] W. Shao, Z. Wang, X. Wang, K. Qiu, C. Jia, and C. Jiang, “Lsc:
Online auto-update smart contracts for fortifying blockchain-based log
systems,” Information Sciences, vol. 512, pp. 506–517, 2020.

[62] A. Epishkina and S. Zapechnikov, “Discovering and clustering hidden
time patterns in blockchain ledger,” in First International Early Re-
search Career Enhancement School on Biologically Inspired Cognitive
Architectures. Springer, 2017, pp. 245–250.

[63] N. Kumar, A. Singh, A. Handa, and S. K. Shukla, “Detecting malicious
accounts on the ethereum blockchain with supervised learning,” in In-
ternational Symposium on Cyber Security Cryptography and Machine
Learning. Springer, 2020, pp. 94–109.

[64] S. Garcia, S. Ramirez-Gallego, J. Luengo, J. M. Bentez, and F. Herrera,
“Big data preprocessing: methods and prospects,” Big Data Analytics,
vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 1–22, 2016.

[65] G. Di Battista, V. Di Donato, M. Patrignani, M. Pizzonia, V. Roselli,
and R. Tamassia, “Bitconeview: visualization of ﬂows in the bitcoin
transaction graph,” in IEEE Symposium on Visualization for Cyber
Security (VizSec), 2015, pp. 1–8.

[66] W. Shao, H. Li, M. Chen, C. Jia, C. Liu, and Z. Wang, “Identifying
bitcoin users using deep neural network,” in International Conference
on Algorithms and Architectures for Parallel Processing.
Springer,
2018, pp. 178–192.

[67] L. Nan and D. Tao, “Bitcoin mixing detection using deep autoencoder,”
in IEEE Third International Conference on Data Science in Cyberspace
(DSC), 2018, pp. 280–287.

[68] J. Kim, M. Nakashima, W. Fan, S. Wuthier, X. Zhou, I. Kim, and
S.-Y. Chang, “Anomaly detection based on trafﬁc monitoring for
secure blockchain networking,” in IEEE International Conference on
Blockchain and Cryptocurrency (ICBC), 2021, pp. 1–9.

[69] K. Toyoda, T. Ohtsuki, and P. T. Mathiopoulos, “Identiﬁcation of
high yielding investment programs in bitcoin via transactions pattern
analysis,” in GLOBECOM IEEE Global Communications Conference,
2017, pp. 1–6.

[70] Y.-J. Lin, P.-W. Wu, C.-H. Hsu, I.-P. Tu, and S.-w. Liao, “An eval-
uation of bitcoin address classiﬁcation based on transaction history
summarization,” in IEEE International Conference on Blockchain and
Cryptocurrency (ICBC), 2019, pp. 302–310.

[71] J. Song, J. Nang, and J. Jang, “Design of anomaly detection and
visualization tool for iot blockchain,” in International Conference on
Computational Science and Computational Intelligence (CSCI).
IEEE,
2018, pp. 1464–1465.

[72] M. Bartoletti, S. Lande, L. Pompianu, and A. Bracciali, “A general
framework for blockchain analytics,” in Proceedings of the 1st Work-
shop on Scalable and Resilient Infrastructures for Distributed Ledgers,
2017, pp. 1–6.

[73] H. Tang, Y. Jiao, B. Huang, C. Lin, S. Goyal, and B. Wang, “Learning
to classify blockchain peers according to their behavior sequences,”
IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 71 208–71 215, 2018.

[74] B. Huang, Z. Liu, J. Chen, A. Liu, Q. Liu, and Q. He, “Behavior pattern
clustering in blockchain networks,” Multimedia Tools and Applications,
vol. 76, no. 19, pp. 20 099–20 110, 2017.

[75] F. Scicchitano, A. Liguori, M. Guarascio, E. Ritacco, and G. Manco,
“Deep autoencoder ensembles for anomaly detection on blockchain,”
in International Symposium on Methodologies for Intelligent Systems.
Springer, 2020, pp. 448–456.

[76] M. K. Awan and A. Cortesi, “Blockchain transaction analysis using
dominant sets,” in IFIP International Conference on Computer Infor-
mation Systems and Industrial Management. Springer, 2017, pp. 229–
239.

[77] “How

Much

of

All

Money

Is

in

Bitcoin?”

29

[78] R. Yang, X. Chang, J. Miˇsi´c, and V. B. Miˇsi´c, “Assessing blockchain
selﬁsh mining in an imperfect network: Honest and selﬁsh miner
views,” Computers & Security, vol. 97, p. 101956, 2020.

[79] Y. A. Hsain, N. Laaz, and S. Mbarki, “Ethereum’s smart contracts
construction and development using model driven engineering tech-
nologies: a review,” Procedia Computer Science, vol. 184, pp. 785–790,
2021.

[80] T. Pham and S. Lee, “Anomaly detection in bitcoin network using
unsupervised learning methods,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.03941,
2016.

[81] F. Jobse, “Detecting suspicious behavior in the bitcoin network,” Ph.D.

dissertation, Tilburg University, 2017.

[82] D. D. F. Maesa, A. Marino, and L. Ricci, “Detecting artiﬁcial be-
haviours in the bitcoin users graph,” Online Social Networks and
Media, vol. 3, pp. 63–74, 2017.

[83] T.-H. Chang and D. Svetinovic, “Improving bitcoin ownership iden-
tiﬁcation using transaction patterns analysis,” IEEE Transactions on
Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems, 2018.

[84] M. Signorini, M. Pontecorvi, W. Kanoun, and R. Di Pietro, “Advise:
Anomaly detection tool for blockchain systems,” in IEEE World
Congress on Services (SERVICES), 2018, pp. 65–66.

[85] ——, “Bad: A blockchain anomaly detection solution,” IEEE Access,

vol. 8, pp. 173 481–173 490, 2020.

[86] Z. Il-Agure, B. Attallah, and Y.-K. Chang, “The semantics of anomalies
integrated blockchain network,” in Sixth HCT Information

in iot
Technology Trends (ITT).

IEEE, 2019, pp. 144–146.

[87] A. Bogner, “Seeing is understanding: anomaly detection in blockchains
with visualized features,” in Proceedings of the ACM International
Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing and Pro-
ceedings of the ACM International Symposium on Wearable Computers,
2017, pp. 5–8.

[88] S. Dey, “Securing majority-attack in blockchain using machine learning
and algorithmic game theory: A proof of work,” in 10th computer
science and electronic engineering (CEEC).
IEEE, 2018, pp. 7–10.
[89] B. Podgorelec, M. Turkanovic, and S. Karakativc, “A machine learning-
based method for automated blockchain transaction signing including
personalized anomaly detection,” Sensors, vol. 20, no. 1, p. 147, 2020.
[90] T. Pham and S. Lee, “Anomaly detection in the bitcoin system-a
network perspective,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.03942, 2016.
[91] S. Morishima and H. Matsutani, “Acceleration of anomaly detection
in blockchain using in-gpu cache,” in IEEE Intl Conf on Parallel
& Distributed Processing with Applications, Ubiquitous Computing
& Communications, Big Data & Cloud Computing, Social Com-
puting & Networking, Sustainable Computing & Communications
(ISPA/IUCC/BDCloud/SocialCom/SustainCom), 2018, pp. 244–251.

[92] C. Chen, X. Chen, J. Yu, W. Wu, and D. Wu, “Impact of temporary
fork on the evolution of mining pools in blockchain networks: An
evolutionary game analysis,” IEEE Transactions on Network Science
and Engineering, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 400–418, 2021.

[93] H. Kang, X. Chang, R. Yang, J. Miˇsi´c, and V. B. Miˇsi´c, “Under-
standing selﬁsh mining in imperfect bitcoin and ethereum networks
with extended forks,” IEEE Transactions on Network and Service
Management, pp. 1–1, 2021.

[94] J. Hirshman, Y. Huang, and S. Macke, “Unsupervised approaches to
detecting anomalous behavior in the bitcoin transaction network,” 3rd
ed. Technical report, Stanford University, 2013.

[95] J. Lorenz, M. I. Silva, D. Aparicio, J. T. Ascensao, and P. Bizarro,
“Machine learning methods to detect money laundering in the bit-
coin blockchain in the presence of label scarcity,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2005.14635, 2020.

[96] P. M. Monamo, V. Marivate, and B. Twala, “A multifaceted approach to
bitcoin fraud detection: Global and local outliers,” in 15th IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Machine Learning and Applications (ICMLA),
2016, pp. 188–194.

[97] S. Ranshous, C. A. Joslyn, S. Kreyling, K. Nowak, N. F. Samatova,
C. L. West, and S. Winters, “Exchange pattern mining in the bitcoin
transaction directed hypergraph,” in International Conference on Finan-
cial Cryptography and Data Security. Springer, 2017, pp. 248–263.
[98] D. Zambre and A. Shah, “Analysis of bitcoin network dataset for fraud,”

Stanford Report, vol. 27, 2013.

[99] S. Morishima, “Scalable anomaly detection method for blockchain
transactions using gpu,” in 20th IEEE International Conference on
Parallel and Distributed Computing, Applications and Technologies
(PDCAT), 2019, pp. 160–165.

Https://www.investopedia.com/tech/how-much-worlds-money-bitcoin
[Available Online: 06-08-2021].

[100] H. Baek, J. Oh, C. Y. Kim, and K. Lee, “A model for detecting
cryptocurrency transactions with discernible purpose,” in Eleventh In-

ternational Conference on Ubiquitous and Future Networks (ICUFN).
IEEE, 2019, pp. 713–717.

[101] S. Farrugia, J. Ellul, and G. Azzopardi, “Detection of illicit accounts
over the ethereum blockchain,” Expert Systems with Applications, vol.
150, p. 113318, 2020.

[102] S. Sayadi, S. B. Rejeb, and Z. Choukair, “Anomaly detection model
over blockchain electronic transactions,” in 15th IEEE International
Wireless Communications & Mobile Computing Conference (IWCMC),
2019, pp. 895–900.

[103] S. Y. Yang and J. Kim, “Bitcoin market return and volatility forecasting
using transaction network ﬂow properties,” in IEEE Symposium Series
on Computational Intelligence, 2015, pp. 1778–1785.

[104] W. Chen, J. Wu, Z. Zheng, C. Chen, and Y. Zhou, “Market manipulation
of bitcoin: evidence from mining the mt. gox transaction network,” in
IEEE INFOCOM -IEEE Conference on Computer Communications,
2019, pp. 964–972.

[105] M. Xie, H. Li, and Y. Zhao, “Blockchain ﬁnancial investment based
on deep learning network algorithm,” Journal of Computational and
Applied Mathematics, vol. 372, p. 112723, 2020.

[106] J. Liu and A. Serletis, “Volatility in the cryptocurrency market,” Open

Economies Review, vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 779–811, 2019.

[107] A. F. Bariviera and I. Merediz-Sol`a, “Where do we stand in cryptocur-
rencies economic research? a survey based on hybrid analysis,” Journal
of Economic Surveys, vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 377–407, 2021.

[108] C. Natoli and V. Gramoli, “The blockchain anomaly,” in IEEE 15th
International Symposium on Network Computing and Applications
(NCA), 2016, pp. 310–317.

[109] T. Ide, “Collaborative anomaly detection on blockchain from noisy sen-
sor data,” in IEEE International Conference on Data Mining Workshops
(ICDMW).

IEEE, 2018, pp. 120–127.

[110] B. Oh, T. J. Jun, W. Yoon, Y. Lee, S. Kim, and D. Kim, “Enhancing
trust of supply chain using blockchain platform with robust data model
and veriﬁcation mechanisms,” in IEEE International Conference on
Systems, Man and Cybernetics (SMC), 2019, pp. 3504–3511.
[111] T. H.-D. Huang, “Hunting the ethereum smart contract: Color-inspired
inspection of potential attacks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.01868,
2018.

[112] E. Jung, M. Le Tilly, A. Gehani, and Y. Ge, “Data mining-based
ethereum fraud detection,” in IEEE International Conference on
Blockchain (Blockchain), 2019, pp. 266–273.

[113] J. Chen, X. Xia, D. Lo, J. Grundy, X. Luo, and T. Chen, “Deﬁning
smart contract defects on ethereum,” IEEE Transactions on Software
Engineering, pp. 1–1, 2020.

[114] ——, “Defectchecker: Automated smart contract defect detection by
analyzing evm bytecode,” IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering,
in Print, pp. 1–1, 2021.

[115] W. J.-W. Tann, X. J. Han, S. S. Gupta, and Y.-S. Ong, “Towards safer
smart contracts: A sequence learning approach to detecting security
threats,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.06632, 2018.

[116] X. Wang, J. He, Z. Xie, G. Zhao, and S.-C. Cheung, “Contractguard:
Defend ethereum smart contracts with embedded intrusion detection,”
IEEE Transactions on Services Computing, vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 314–328,
2019.

[117] A. Ailijiang, A. Charapko, M. Demirbas, and T. Kosar, “Wpaxos: Wide
area network ﬂexible consensus,” IEEE Transactions on Parallel and
Distributed Systems, vol. 31, no. 1, pp. 211–223, 2020.

[118] A. Furfaro, L. Argento, D. Sacc´a, F. Angiulli, and F. Fassetti, “An
infrastructure for service accountability based on digital identity and
blockchain 3.0,” in IEEE INFOCOM Conference on Computer Com-
munications Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS), 2019, pp. 632–637.

[119] J. Xu and B. Livshits, “The anatomy of a cryptocurrency pump-and-
dump scheme,” in 28th {USENIX} Security Symposium ({USENIX}
Security 19), 2019, pp. 1609–1625.

[120] M. U. Hassan, M. H. Rehmani, and J. Chen, “Differential privacy tech-
niques for cyber physical systems: A survey,” IEEE Communications
Surveys Tutorials, vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 746–789, 2020.

[121] X. Sun, F. R. Yu, P. Zhang, Z. Sun, W. Xie, and X. Peng, “A survey on
zero-knowledge proof in blockchain,” IEEE Network, vol. 35, no. 4,
pp. 198–205, 2021.

[122] Y. Liu, N. Kumar, Z. Xiong, W. Y. B. Lim, J. Kang, and D. Niyato,
“Communication-efﬁcient federated learning for anomaly detection in
industrial internet of things,” in GLOBECOM - IEEE Global Commu-
nications Conference, 2020, pp. 1–6.

[123] L. Cui, Y. Qu, G. Xie, D. Zeng, R. Li, S. Shen, and S. Yu, “Security
and privacy-enhanced federated learning for anomaly detection in iot
infrastructures,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, in Print,
pp. 1–1, 2021.

30

[124] G. Xu, Y. Liu, and P. W. Khan, “Improvement of the dpos consensus
mechanism in blockchain based on vague sets,” IEEE Transactions on
Industrial Informatics, vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 4252–4259, 2020.

[125] L. Tredinnick, “Cryptocurrencies and the blockchain,” Business Infor-

mation Review, vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 39–44, 2019.

[126] H. Nghiem, G. Muric, F. Morstatter, and E. Ferrara, “Detecting cryp-
tocurrency pump-and-dump frauds using market and social signals,”
Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 182, p. 115284, 2021.
[127] J. Kamps and B. Kleinberg, “To the moon: deﬁning and detecting
cryptocurrency pump-and-dumps,” Crime Science, vol. 7, no. 1, pp.
1–18, 2018.

[128] D. Li, W. E. Wong, and J. Guo, “A survey on blockchain for enterprise
using hyperledger fabric and composer,” in 6th International Confer-
ence on Dependable Systems and Their Applications (DSA), 2020, pp.
71–80.

[129] Z. Yu, D. Xue, J. Fan, and C. Guo, “Dnstsm: Dns cache resources
trusted sharing model based on consortium blockchain,” IEEE Access,
vol. 8, pp. 13 640–13 650, 2020.

[130] G. Spathoulas, N. Giachoudis, G.-P. Damiris, and G. Theodoridis, “Col-
laborative blockchain-based detection of distributed denial of service
attacks based on internet of things botnets,” Future Internet, vol. 11,
no. 11, p. 226, 2019.

[131] M. Apostolaki, A. Zohar, and L. Vanbever, “Hijacking bitcoin: Routing
attacks on cryptocurrencies,” in 2017 IEEE symposium on security and
privacy (SP).

IEEE, 2017, pp. 375–392.

Muneeb Ul Hassan received his Ph.D. degree from
Swinburne University of Technology, Hawthorn VIC
3122, Australia. He received his Bachelor degree
in Electrical Engineering from COMSATS Institute
of Information Technology, Wah Cantt, Pakistan.
in Bachelor degree for
He received Gold Medal
being topper of Electrical Engineering Department.
His research interests include privacy preservation,
blockchain, smart grid, and anomaly detection.

(M’14-SM’15)

Mubashir Husain Rehmani
re-
ceived the M.S. degree from the University of Paris
XI, Paris, France, in 2008, and the Ph.D. degree
from the University Pierre and Marie Curie, Paris,
in 2011. He is currently working as Lecturer at
Munster Technological University (MTU), Ireland.
He has been selected for inclusion on the annual
Highly Cited Researchers™ 2020 and 2021 list from
Clarivate.

Dr. Jinjun Chen is a Professor from Swinburne Uni-
versity of Technology, Australia. He is Deputy Di-
rector of Swinburne Data Science Research Institute.
He holds a PhD in Information Technology from
Swinburne University of Technology, Australia. His
research results have been published in more than
160 papers in international journals and conferences,
including various IEEE/ACM Transactions.

