A Survey on the Applications of Blockchains

1

in Security of IoT Systems

Zulﬁqar Ali Khan and Akbar Siami Namin

Department of Computer Science

Texas Tech University

zulﬁ.khan@ttu.edu; akbar.namin@ttu.edu

Abstract

The Internet of Things (IoT) has already changed our daily lives by integrating smart devices

together towards delivering high quality services to its clients. These devices when integrated together

form a network through which massive amount of data can be produced, transferred, and shared. A

critical concern is the security and integrity of such a complex platform to ensure the sustainability

and reliability of these IoT-based systems. Blockchain is an emerging technology that has demonstrated

its unique features and capabilities for different problems and application domains including IoT-based

systems. This survey paper reviews the adaptation of Blockchain in the context of IoT to represent how

this technology is capable of addressing the integration and security problems of devices connected

to IoT systems. The innovation of this survey is that we present a survey based upon the integration

approaches and security issues of IoT data and discuss the role of Blockchain in connection with these

issues.

Internet of Things, Vulnerabilities, Blockchain, Classiﬁcation of IoT Integration

Index Terms

I. INTRODUCTION

The devices connected to the Internet of Things (IoT) are capable of generating big amount

of data captured by its sensors. Managing and handling this big data plays a vital role in quality

and assurance of IoTs. IoT is the building block of smart objects [1] where these objects are

communicating through a wireless network. Examples include Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation

(RFID)-based low battery-powered disposable computer chips having computational power.

1
2
0
2

c
e
D
7
1

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
6
9
2
9
0
.
2
1
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

The concept of big data management can be observed in various contexts such as ﬁnance,

medical care, and education, to name a few. For instance, in the application domain of ﬁnancial

or commercial application domains, it is essential to transfer ﬁnancial data and transactions in

a very secure way. This problem has created FinTech (Financial Technology) [2] where the

objective is to use the latest innovation to make monetary transfers and ﬁnancial services like

online shopping (OLS) secure and affordable.

Apart from FinTech’s invention, ﬁnancial sectors act as the backbone of the economy. Financial

institutions are aware of their critical roles and subsequently respond to the market sentiments

rapidly. For instance, the banking sector started as bricks and mortar locations but gradually

replaced several branches with Virtual Banking (i.e., e-Banking). However, when the ﬁnancial

gurus realized the importance of cash, they again focused on creating physical bank branches.

On the other hand, physical units face issues of insecurity, unnecessary charges, and long queues.

In most cases, the problems are so grave that they result in the capital ﬂight. The solution lies

in the adoption of IoT in the ﬁnance and online shopping domain. IoT provides tremendous

opportunities for the growth of some critical application domains such as the ﬁnancial sector

by enhancing all three phases of the ﬁnancial data ﬂow system, namely: data retrieval, data

analysis and management, and data reporting [3]. As a result, both traders and consumers have

access to more information about goods instantly, monitor different asset markets, and make

them available for better opportunities.

Due to its key role in addressing critical issues of IoT-based systems, this paper surveys the

applications of Blockchain in integration and security of IoTs. The paper ﬁrst reviews research

studies in integration of IoT data. We then present the remedial features that Blockchain offers

in mitigating IoT’s vulnerabilities. The key contributions of this paper are as follows:

– It introduces a classiﬁcation of integration approaches in IoT systems.

– It presents a survey of the applications of Blockchain technology to the problems related

to the integration and security in IoT systems.

– It highlights the research gap and future application domains of the Blockchain technology

in IoT contexts.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section II discusses the methodology taken in

conducting this survey. Section III presents our classiﬁcation of integration in IoT systems. In

Section IV, we provide a survey on the applications of Blockchain in IoTs. Section V concludes

the paper and highlights the future research directions.

3

II. METHODOLOGY

The purpose of this survey paper is not to conduct any meta-analysis but review the most

intriguing applications of Blockchain for addressing the problems unique to IoT systems. In

preparation of this survey paper, we followed the general guidelines recommended by the

Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Review and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) [4]. First, we

started our data collection using the search term “IoT Blockchain vulnerabilities”. Then, we

identiﬁed and collected only the relevant articles retrieved by the Google search engine that

were reported. We then archived and classiﬁed the collected articles and proceedings papers.

We repeated the procedure on the university’s portal and online library system searching for

digital libraries of reputable publishers such as IEEE, ACM, science direct, Springer, MDPI,

and Elsevier with the optional parameter indicating the year of publications.

III. INTEGRATION OF IOT DATA

IoT devices (e.g., sensors, IoT-enabled cameras) usually generate massive data. On the other

hand, these IoT devices often lack resources to process or store the large amount of data captured

and transmitted by sensors. This drawback of IoT devices justiﬁes the needs for integration of IoT

data. In other words, integration (for instance, with cloud computing and Blockchain) provides

the required memory and processing power for storing and organizing the IoT data for machine

learning and AI applications to make decisions. However, keeping data in cloud or Blockchain

requires transmission of data from an IoT network to cloud (or Blockchain network), which may

cause the stored data to incorporate noise or lose its privacy due to interception by the attacker.

The data encryption mechanism can handle the privacy issue.

Saxena et al. [5] express the concerns of data corruption related to the sensor data stored

in the Blockchain. This problem requires that the sensors retrieving the stored data from the

Blockchain (or Cloud) must verify the data that another sensor might have generated. Wang

et al. [6] introduce an approach for verifying the sensor data by implementing a collaborative

Certiﬁcate Validation protocol. The technique uses the cache space on all IoT devices to create

a large memory pool for storing validated certiﬁcates. IoT device, which retrieves the data from

the cloud, needs to verify the authenticity of data before usage. The device retrieves the cached

certiﬁcate corresponding to the retrieved data and asks the certiﬁcate generator (i.e., holder) to

verify it.

4

Based on our survey ﬁndings, several integration techniques are incorporating IoT data for

processing and/or storage such as 1) standalone (i.e., sensors have no interaction with other

systems), 2) integrated (i.e., sensors interact either with Cloud or Blockchain systems) 3) collab-

orative (i.e., sensors interact with one or more technologies like cloud, Blockchain, or Fog) and

4) Adhoc approaches (i.e., temporary availability of facilities like cloud computing for integration

of IoT data.)

A. Standalone Integration (No Integration)

This is a special case where each IoT device works independently. As a result, the data captured

by its sensor are not transmitted or shared with some other devices. Consider a scenario in which

IoT network does not connect to the cloud, Blockchain, or any other system for processing and

streamlining the data by itself.

Wang et al. [6] provide an example where the sensors use the cache space on all IoT devices

to create a large memory pool for the storage of validated certiﬁcations. When an IoT device

receives public key certiﬁcates from the cloud storage, it can update or revoke the certiﬁcate

in the shared data. For this purpose, the IoT device has to locate the device (i.e., holder) that

cached and veriﬁed the certiﬁcate.

B. Integrated Approaches

We divide these approaches into two types: Cloud-based integration and Blockchain-based

integration.

1) Cloud-based Integration: Zhao et al. [7] created a wireless monitoring system using a

commercial device that sends data to the cloud using a low-power, long-range LoRaWAN

gateway. The authors installed the unit on the existing dispenser on their campus and used

a holder to monitor dispenser interaction. Supplied data helps the cloud service to support the

unit staff with decision-making like reﬁlling the dispenser.

2) Blockchain-based Integration in IoT Systems: Blockchain is an emerging technology that

enables unlimited and decentralized data structure and processing. Due to its unique features,

Blockchain can be utilized as a platform for addressing the concerns about vulnerabilities in IoT

systems. We classify the IoT-Blockchain merger endeavors into Bitcoin, Ether, and HyperLedger

types. It is also possible to extend the classiﬁcation to include some other Blockchains technology.

5

a) Bitcoin-based Integration: This type of integration employs Bitcoin-based Blockchain

for storing IoT data. For example, Ren et al. [8] use a new digital signature called sequential

aggregate signature scheme with a designated veriﬁer (DVSSA) on the IoT data received from

the cloud. The system then stores the signed blocks into the Blockchain. The advantage of

using this technology is data integrity, non-repudiation, and reduced size of messages. Some

other research work such as Ren et al. [9] reward the miners with incentives, save power, and

replace Proof of Work (PoW) consensus algorithm with provable data possession. The consensus

algorithm ensures the agreement of a majority of miners to add a block to the Blockchain.

b) Ethereum-based Integration: This type of integration involves the use of Smart Contracts

(SCs). SCs require crypto asset-based accounts to store digital assets in the form of crypto-

currencies like Ethereum [10]. This may be considered as a drawback because of the apprehension

of attacks by hackers to steal Ether from the said accounts. One such attack is the DAO attack

which exploits the reentrancy vulnerability as discussed in [11].

Blockchain provides a distributed and decentralized eco-system to maintain the security and

privacy of stored transactions (e.g., IoT-based online shopping systems (IoT-OLS)). Guo et al.

[12] present an example of trading companies using smart meters and SCs to automate the

payment process. The smart meter veriﬁes the receipt of power and forwards the meter reading

to SC. Once the SC is executed, it deducts the amount from the SC account and stores the

payment into the power generating company’s account.

c) HyperLedger-based Integration: Traceability of items [13] is an essential aspect of IoT-

OLS activity. Recently, advancements in IoT-Blockchain integration allowed the IoT-OLS users

to know the origin and state of food items and their various stages, from growing to consuming

them [14]. Furthermore, the traceability aspect incorporates information assigned to the product

related to its identity, processing, and usefulness [15]. The by-product of this endeavor is the

buildup of consumers’ trust in IoT-OLS. Furthermore, the added security aspect has invited the

attention of several governments to create Blockchain Food Traceability Systems (BFTS) [15].

SC solutions can track the food chain from the ﬁelds to their transportation to the OLS stores

as ﬁnished products and ﬁnally to the households as grocery items. Thus, the homeowners can

easily trace back to the farmers growing the food items. For example, Garaus and Treiblmaier

[13] discuss the use of mobile phones to track the ﬂow of food items with the help of scannable

codes; whereas, Balamurugan et al. [16] present a system that uses IoT-HyperLedger Blockchain

driven traceability techniques to record the current state of the food items retrieved through

6

cryptographic IoT devices.

The traceability technique in [17] uses Blockchain QR codes but does not specify the role

of ChainCode (i.e., SC). The study tries to address the concerns of Chinese consumers towards

the use of dairy products in the context of 1) traceable safe foods and 2) the willingness to

use QR codes. On the other hand, the HyperLedger framework presented by Anithal [18] uses

ChainCode for traceability and to perform transactions like the registration of food items by the

farmer, moving the items from the farmer’s site to the processor’s site by the distributor, and so

on.

The HyperLedger fabric incorporates ChainCode that sends/receives notiﬁcations to/from

participants and monitors any violations. Thus ChainCode can help monitor IoT devices in

managing conﬁguration ﬁles stored on the Blockchain [19]. When the local conﬁguration ﬁle

changes due to an attack, IoT devices recover the conﬁguration ﬁles from the Blockchain. The

ChainCode receives a notiﬁcation about the successful download and records this information

on the Blockchain for the administrator.

3) Collaborative Integration: These approaches depend upon the collaboration of cloud com-

puting and/or Blockchain with other technologies including fog, Edge, AI, and machine learning.

As an example of cloud and fog computing-based collaboration, the fog and cloud computing

offer a collaborative environment through which Complex Event Processing (CEP) can be accom-

plished in real time for IoT applications [20]. The architecture offered by fog computing enables

holding CEP-based applications on low-cost resources. The architecture helps in generating

automatic alarms when a relevant situation or condition occurs in the underlying IoT system. In

addition, distributed ofﬂoading from cloud to fog architectures offers load balancing and thus

reduces latency.

C. Adhoc Integration

Uddin et al. [21] use ad-hoc approaches in agricultural lands presenting its application in far-

off places with no internet access. Large IoT-OLS stores set up in similar locations can beneﬁt

from these approaches. The major drawback in such situations is that an immediate cloud or

Blockchain integration may not be feasible. For instance, Uddin et al. [21] present a system that

uses unmanned aerial vehicles (i.e., UAVs similar to drones). The vehicle brings the cloud to the

proximity of agricultural lands thus implementing edge computing. UAV itself handles the ﬁeld

location problem without the aid of GPS. IoT devices communicate with UAV using short-range

7

protocols like Zigbee and Bluetooth. On the other hand, WiMax facilitates WAN communication

between the UAV and the remote cloud network. Thus, UAV solves the local requirements of

the sensors, whereas the remote cloud solves the global requests of the UAV.

IV. IOT VULNERABILITIES AND BLOCKCHAIN REMEDIAL

Vulnerability in IoTs [22] is a security glitch in an executable system that can weaken

a system’s sovereignty so much that an attacker misuses the owner’s or its organization’s

resources for pleasure or personal proﬁts. In IoT, the vulnerability problem is serious because

the technology empowers IoT devices to operate independently. The defense lies in the ofﬂine

execution of critical systems. For instance, car manufacturers now equip vehicles with computers

to handle collision avoidance. However, if the a hacker gains access to these vital computers,

the car’s operations can be at stake.

Adversaries can also affect IoT deployments through unintended physical interactions caused

by applications. These applications control the actuators and sensors. They may work ﬁne in

isolation, but in an integrated environment, they may land the devices in an unsafe state due to

unexpected interactions [23] (e.g., controlling the pressure cooker and vacuum cleaner).

Khan and Salah [24] concentrate on nineteen IoT vulnerabilities. Here, we focus on the

vulnerabilities discussed in [25], [26]. Incidentally, we found commonality between the discussed

vulnerabilities in [25] and [26]. This survey concentrates on the vulnerabilities in [26] but readers

can refer to [25] for additional details. The uniqueness of our work is that we provide Blockchain-

based remedial for each of the discussed vulnerabilities. Blockchain has several key features that

can better address some of the vulnerabilities in IoT. Khan and Namin [11] discuss some of the

vulnerabilities of Blockchain in the context of SCs.

A. Deﬁcient Physical Security Controls

Waheed et al. [27] discuss several physical threats related to IoT devices such as causing harm

to devices by direct, environmental, power, or intrusion like interferences. Apart from this, there

is no lifetime guarantee for the IoT devices’ components. The standard technique exploits weak

passwords [28] to inject data tampering once the attacker gets access to the device. Otherwise,

the attacker misuses the network trafﬁc due to untrusted protocols and then steal speciﬁc sensor

data. Furthermore, sensors are also vulnerable to ﬁrmware attacks occurring during the update

process because IoT devices do not invoke authentication or encryption procedures [29].

8

Blockchain Remedial: Blockchain offers remedial to the device’s physical security problems

by maintaining a decentralized network protected by cryptographic keys. Each individual device

can beneﬁt from Blockchain’s general features by creating a Blockchain within its memory [30].

Thus the device keeps track of data updates by maintaining a ledger containing a history of

previous transactions, preventing the risk of data tampering. Sensors exchanging their data for

making valuable decisions require authentication along with the combination of key distribution

techniques as discussed by Ding et al. [31]. SCs can also facilitate authenticated interaction, as

discussed in [28] and the advantage is the revocation capability when the authentication period

expires.

B. Insufﬁcient Energy Harvesting

Technical constraints render the IoT devices with small batteries insufﬁcient to run compu-

tationally intensive security routines. An attacker exploits the situation by pouring the device

with massive requests. Handling these requests deplete the device’s energy, ultimately making

the device inactive.

Blockchain Remedial: Existing research reports that Blockchain consumes very high energy,

even more than the requirements of a developed country like Ireland [32]. However, recent re-

search [33], [34] shows that clustering can help reducing energy consumption for IoT-Blockchain

integration. These research studies use a multi-layer structure that allows detecting compromised

blocks through a consensus algorithm. Pajooh et al. [34] use a genetic algorithm for clustering

incorporating attributes such as distance and energy. In these clustering, each cluster has a cluster

head (CH) for data transmission where members do not communicate with each other. Therefore,

for energy enhancement, the algorithm outputs fewer CH.

C. Inadequate Authentications

Authentication of IoT devices is crucial in IoT-OLS applications because embedded IoT

devices [35] usually do not require user’s credentials. In addition, due to resource limitations,

IoT devices are less enthusiastic about leveraging complex encryption techniques to protect the

data during transmission. Consequently, problems such as payment fraud are increasing. As a

result, worried traders are promoting the idea of more than one form of authentication.

9

Blockchain Remedial: Remedial techniques focus on device identiﬁcation and re-authentication.

Malan et al. [36] report an authentication vulnerability incident when a user changed the password

of his smart doorbell. Even though the new password was in place, the attacker was still able to

access the doorbell using their mobile app. The reason was that the password change function

did not ask for re-authentication of the device. In Blockchain each device has a public key for

encrypting messages.

Neshenko et al. [35] introduce the concept of developing a tempered proof universal identity of

the device by combining the public key with International Mobile Equipment Identity (IMEI) and

Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM) ﬁrmware hashes. Gong et al. [37] combine the device’s

identity and weight and sends this information to a SC deployed in a Blockchain network of

IoT gateways. All Blockchain copies validate the identity information. When a device connects

to the Blockchain network, SC authenticates the device by verifying its ID.

D. Improper Encryption

Neshenko et al. [35] point out to the issue that IoT devices usually do not encrypt their local

data, which can cause security problems. By local data we mean, conﬁguration information,

built-in settings, devices’ passwords, etc. If the attacker gets physical access to the device, the

attacker can alter the data mentioned above. But even if the user encrypts the local data using

a weak encryption algorithm, one cannot rule out the chances of tampering [38].

Blockchain Remidal: Blockchain can provide a solution to the weak encryption (or no en-

cryption) vulnerability of IoT devices by hashing the ﬁrmware and using the hash for the

device authentication. Devices can have a universal identity by utilizing Blockchain’s public

key. Therefore, a device can use the receiver’s identity for exchanging messages by encrypting

the message and its hash. As a result, the receiver can decrypt the received package and

validate the message by generating its hash and matching the new hash with the received

hash. Otherwise, the sender and receiver can use Blockchain for communication. The latest

endeavor performed by Loukil et al. [39] discuss a privacy-preserving approach by employing

homomorphic encryption and SCs for the consumers and an aggregator which encrypts the

requested information. The disadvantage is that the aggregation process coupled with encryption

complicates the comprehension of information.

10

E. Unnecessary Open Ports

The disadvantage of open ports is that they allow an attacker to access the device. Manufac-

tures, by default, do not inform the consumer about the dangers of open ports [40]. Open ports

can have varied behaviors in the context of IPv4 and IPv6 [41]. The open port vulnerability

helped launching the Mirai attack which is termed as the most dangerous IoT attack [42].

Mirai leveraged the telnet port and default credentials. Attackers might use a search engine like

Shodan to identify the vulnerabilities (i.e., misconﬁgurations) on Internet-connected devices [43].

Moreover, researchers warn about UPnP (Universal Plug and Play) because it provides remote

access to the intruder to steal critical credentials [44].

Wazzan et al. [42] summarize the working of Botnet in three steps like scanning and infecting

the vulnerable device until the device starts communication with the BotMaster (i.e., Attacker

robot). At this point, the BotMaster installs malware on the device and tries to get hold of open

ports; if not available, malware kills the associated process to lock its port. Finally, all the bots

waiting in the pool launch a massive DDoS (distributed denial of Service) attack, which blocks

the networking channels, making it impossible to connect.

Blockchain Remedial: Falco et al. [45] developed a tool NeuroMesh to counter Botnets using

a Botnet technology by incorporating Bitcoin protocol. The advantage of Bitcoin is that it is

a safe protocol. This property provides a safe platform for NueroMesh to order its bots (i.e.,

NeuroNodes) commands. NueroMesh would scan the system at the installation time and declare

all the running processes as safe (i.e., whitelisted). Now, if any process installs itself on the

system, NeuroNode would kill it. NueroMesh spreads out its bots in different ﬁle systems,

allowing the bots to escape being killed by the attacker installed on the system. At the same

time, it monitors all the open ports.

F. Insufﬁcient Access Controls

A system obtains information about resources to access using an access control list (ACL).

Thus, if the attacker gets permission to alter the ACL, then this vulnerability can allow the

adversary to get unrestricted access. However, if the data is publicly visible by default as in

Ethereum Blockchain, this is an access violation but ensures transparency. On the other hand,

the enormity of IoT devices makes the issue of access control more severe when there is an

option of privilege commands that can disable or damage IoT devices [46].

11

Blockchain Remedial: Algarni et al. [47] use the concept of Blockchain Managers, governed by

Mandatory Access Control policy header, to ensure secure authorization. The said policy allows

Blockchain Managers to remove and add IoT devices and control transactions. In addition,

Blockchain Managers contain agents like Miner, an internet-enabled device, accountable for

handling communication within the Blockchain manager, and an authorization agent who informs

the miner about the permissions of IoT devices. The authorization agent also communicates with

the authentication agent to retrieve the identity of the connected device (or user) for security

clearance and resource classiﬁcation using Mandatory Access Control.

G. Improper Patch Management

IoT devices may operate through vulnerable ﬁrmware due to the lack of proper testing or

update. This situation indicates that IoT devices need software patching. But at the same time, we

must accept that IoT devices lack hardware capabilities. Ray et al. in [48] state that this duplicate

problem puts IoT devices in an uncertain situation. Thus, authors in [48] suggest hardware

patching, which would allow reconﬁguring the hardware to deal with unexpected vulnerabilities

with the help of FPGA (Field Programmable Gateway Array). This will help in conﬁguring

electronic circuits using a hardware description language) technology. The surveyed literature

provides the following recommendations related to patching ﬁrmware of IoT devices:

– Patch installation is a complex procedure in the context of low-resource IoT devices. Thus

device manufacturers should focus on small patches instead of large patch installations [49].

– Client-server architecture is not a favorable mechanism for installing updates on billions of

IoT devices due to a single point of failure [50].

– Blockchain mechanisms for distributing ﬁrmware updates are appealing because of avoiding

the single point of failure and promotion of consensus [50].

– To increase people’s trust, IoT device manufacturers can open-source ﬁrmware and its

updates [51].

1) Blockchain Remedial: The latest work by Fukuda and Omote [52] discuss a method

for installation of ﬁrmware updates on IoT devices by focusing on vendors, distributors, and

SCs. First, the vendor entity registers the IoT devices and provides the updated resource on

the Blockchain. Then, to support decentralization, several distributor nodes on the Blockchain

download the modiﬁed ﬁrmware and record their repository’s IP address on the Blockchain.

Later on, the IoT device downloads the ﬁrmware and notiﬁes the distributor by its signature.

12

Finally, the distributor informs the SC by a transaction about the device’s update activity to

receive the reward. The advantage of the decentralized technique is that it provides incentives

to the distributors, and IoT devices do not have to decrypt the ﬁles.

V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

Blockchain is an emerging technology for implementing decentralized applications. The tech-

nology also is useful in some other application domains such as security of IoT. One of the

key features of Blockchain is the introduction of consensus protocols that make it possible to

address tampering and security issues along with tracing the sources of actions. This survey paper

reviews the applications of such a sophisticated technology in the context of IoT. We particularly

listed possible vulnerabilities in IoT systems and provided the mitigation and solutions that the

Blockchain technology can contribute to address these security problems. What makes this survey

valuable is the diverse set of applications of Blockchain in IoTs. Certainly, the vulnerabilities

and the mitigation offered by Blockchain are not limited to those discussed here and there is a

myriad number of other Blockchain’s applications in this context that can be explored in future

work.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

This research work is supported by National Science Foundation (NSF) under Grant No.

1821560.

REFERENCES

[1] S. Ammirato, F. Sofo, A. M. Felicetti, and C. Raso, “The potential of IoT in redesigning the bank branch protection system

an Italian case study,” Business Process Management Journal, vol. 25, 2019.

[2] U. Agrawal, I. Koshy, and P. Churi, “A role of blockchain in IoT and ﬁnancial applications,” in 2019 International

Conference on Vision Towards Emerging Trends in Communication and Networking (ViTECoN), 03 2019, pp. 1–7.

[3] S. Cuomo, V. D. Sommaa, and F. Sicaa, “Analysis of a data-ﬂow in a ﬁnancial IoT system,” in International Workshop

on Data Mining in IoT Systems (DaMIS 2017). Science Direct, 2017, pp. 508–512.

[4] PRISMA transparent reporting of systematic reviews and meta-analyses. [Online]. Available: http://www.prisma-statement.

org/

[5] S. Saxena, B. Bhushan, and M. A. Ahad, “Blockchain based solutions to secure IoT: Background, integration trends and

a way forward,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 181, p. 103050, 2021.

[6] M. Wang, C. Qian, X. Li, and S. Shi, “Collaborative validation of public-key certiﬁcates for IoT by distributed caching,”

in IEEE INFOCOM 2019 - IEEE Conference on Computer Communications, 2019, pp. 847–855.

[7] J. Zhao, B. Zhou, J. P. Butler, R. G. Bock, J. P. Portelli, and S. G. Bil´en, “IoT-based sanitizer station network: A facilities

management case study on monitoring hand sanitizer dispenser usage,” Smart Cities, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 979–994, 2021.

13

[8] Y. Ren, Y. Leng, F. Zhu, J. Wang, and H.-J. Kim, “Data storage mechanism based on blockchain with privacy protection

in wireless body area network,” Sensors, vol. 19, no. 10, 2019.

[9] Y. Ren, Y. Liu, S. Ji, A. K. Sangaiah, and J. Wang, “Incentive mechanism of data storage based on blockchain for wireless

sensor networks,” Mobile Information Systems, vol. 2018, 2018.

[10] P. Sandner, J. Gross, and R. Richter, “Convergence of blockchain, IoT, and AI,” Frontiers in Blockchain, vol. 3, p. 42,

2020.

[11] Z. A. Khan and A. Siami Namin, “Ethereum smart contracts: Vulnerabilities and their classiﬁcations,” in IEEE International

Conference on Big Data (Big Data), 2020, pp. 1–10.

[12] J. Guo, X. Ding, and W. Weili, “A blockchain-enabled ecosystem for distributed electricity trading in smart city,” IEEE

Internet of Things Journal, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 2040–2050, 2021.

[13] M. Garaus and H. Treiblmaier, “The inﬂuence of blockchain-based food traceability on retailer choice: The mediating role

of trust,” Food Control, vol. 129, p. 108082, 2021.

[14] A. Iftekhar and X. Cui, “Blockchain-based traceability system that ensures food safety measures to protect consumer safety

and covid-19 free supply chains,” Foods, vol. 10, no. 6, 2021.

[15] X. Lin, S. C. Chang, T. H. Chou, S. C. Chen, and A. Ruangkanjanases, “Consumers’ intention to adopt blockchain

food traceability technology towards organic food products,” International Journal of Environmental Research and Public

Health, vol. 18, no. 3, p. 912, Jan 2021.

[16] S. Balamurugan, A. Ayyasamy, and K. S. Joseph, “IoT-blockchain driven traceability techniques for improved safety

measures in food supply chain,” International Journal of Information Technology, 01 2021.

[17] X. Lin and R. Wu, “An empirical study on the dairy product consumers’intention to adopt the food traceability’s technology:

Push-pull-mooring model integrated by d&m iss model and tpb with itm,” Frontiers in Psychology, vol. 11, 2021.

[18] D. D. J. T. Anitha1, “Smart food supply chain using blockchain technology,” International Advanced Research Journal in

Science, Engineering and Technology, vol. 8, pp. 2702–2733, 2021.

[19] P. Helebrandt, M. Belluˇs, M. Ries, and I. Kotuliak, “Management and monitoring of IoT devices using blockchain,” MDPI

Sensors, vol. 19, no. 4, 2019.

[20] G. Mondrag´on-Ruiz, A. Tenorio-Trigoso, M. Castillo-Cara, and C. Carri´on, “An experimental study of fog and cloud

computing in cep-based real-time IoT applications,” Journal of Cloud Computing, 2021.

[21] A. Uddin, M. Ayaz, A. Mansour, e.-H. Aggoune, Z. Sharif, and I. Razzak, “Cloud-connected ﬂying edge computing for

smart agriculture,” Peer-to-Peer Networking and Applications, 06 2021.

[22] R. R. Williams, E. McMahon, S. Samtani, M. W. Patton, and H. Chen, “Identifying vulnerabilities of consumer internet

of things (IoT) devices: A scalable approach,” IEEE International Conference on Intelligence and Security Informatics,

pp. 179–181, 2017.
I. Butun, P. ¨Osterberg, and H. Song, “Security of the internet of things: Vulnerabilities, attacks, and countermeasures,”

[23]

IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials, vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 616–644, 2020.

[24] M. A. Khan and K. Salah, “IoT security: Review, blockchain solutions, and open challenges,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst.,

vol. 82, pp. 395–411, 2018.

[25] P. Ferrara, A. K. Mandal, A. Cortesi, and F. Spoto, “Static analysis for discovering IoT vulnerabilities,” International

Journal on Software Tools for Technology Transfer, vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 71–88, 2021.

[26] N. Neshenko, E. Bou-Harb, J. Crichigno, G. Kaddoum, and N. Ghani, “Demystifying IoT security: An exhaustive survey

on IoT vulnerabilities and a ﬁrst empirical look on internet-scale IoT exploitation,” IEEE Communications Surveys &

Tutorials, vol. 21, pp. 2702–2733, 2019.

14

[27] N. Waheed, X. He, M. Ikram, M. Usman, S. S. Hashmi, and M. Usman, “Security and privacy in IoT using machine

learning and blockchain: Threats and countermeasures,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 53, no. 6, 2020.

[28] D. M. M. Mena, “Blockchain-based security framework for the internet of things and home networks,” Ph.D. dissertation,

Dept. Comp. and Info. Tech., Purdue Univ., West Lafayette, Ind., USA, 2021.

[29] C. Gao, L. Luo, Y. Zhang, B. Pearson, and X. Fu, “Microcontroller based IoT system ﬁrmware security: Case studies,” in

IEEE International Conference on Industrial Internet, 2019, pp. 200–209.

[30] “Blockchain mechanisms for IoT security,” Internet of Things, vol. 1-2, pp. 1–13, 2018.

[31] Y. Ding, H. Xu, M. Zhao, H. Liang, and Y. Wang, “Group authentication and key distribution for sensors in wireless body

area network,” International Journal of Distributed Sensor Networks, vol. 17, 2021.

[32] M. A. Uddin, A. Stranieri, I. Gondal, and V. Balasubramanian, “A survey on the adoption of blockchain in IoT: Challenges

and solutions,” Blockchain: Research and Applications, 01 2021.

[33] S. Khan, S. Awan, S. Ahmed, F. Ullah, A. Nawaz, A. Khan, M. I. Uddin, A. Alharbi, W. Alosaimi, and H. Alyami,

“IoT with blockchain: A futuristic approach in agriculture and food supply chain,” Wireless Communications and Mobile

Computing, vol. 2021, p. 14, 2021.

[34] H. Honar Pajooh, M. Rashid, F. Alam, and S. Demidenko, “Multi-layer blockchain-based security architecture for internet

of things,” Sensors, vol. 21, no. 3, 2021.

[35] N. Neshenko, E. Bou-Harb, J. Crichigno, G. Kaddoum, and N. Ghani, “Demystifying IoT security: An exhaustive survey

on IoT vulnerabilities and a ﬁrst empirical look on internet-scale IoT exploitation,” IEEE Communications Surveys &

Tutorials, vol. 21, pp. 2702–2733, 2019.

[36] J. Malan, J. Eager, E. Lale-Demoz, G. C. Ranghieri, and M. Brady. (2020, DEC) Framing the nature and scale of cyber

security vulnerabilities within the current consumer internet of things (IoT) landscape.

[37] L. Gong, D. M. Alghazzawi, and L. Cheng, “BCoT sentry: A blockchain-based identity authentication framework for IoT

devices,” Information, vol. 12, no. 5, 2021.

[38] N. Neshenko, E. Bou-Harb, J. Crichigno, G. Kaddoum, and N. Ghani, “Demystifying IoT security: An exhaustive survey

on IoT vulnerabilities and a ﬁrst empirical look on internet-scale IoT exploitations,” IEEE Communications Surveys &

Tutorials, vol. 21, pp. 2702–2733, 2019.

[39] F. Loukil, C. Ghedira-Guegan, K. Boukadi, and A.-N. Benharkat, “Privacy-preserving IoT data aggregation based on

blockchain and homomorphic encryption,” Sensors, vol. 21, no. 7, 2021.

[40] A. Iskhakova, R. Meshcheryakov, A. Iskhakov, and S. Timchenko, “Analysis of the vulnerabilities of the embedded

information systems of IoT-devices through the honeypot network implementation,” in Proceedings of the IV International

research conference on Information technologies in Science, Management, Social sphere and Medicine, 2017/12, pp. 363–

367.

[41] D. Sisodia. On the state of internet of things security: Vulnerabilities, attacks, and recent countermeasures. [Online].

Available: https://www.cs.uoregon.edu/Reports/AREA-202001-Sisodia.pdf

[42] M. Wazzan, D. Algazzawi, O. Bamasaq, A. Albeshri, and L. Cheng, “Internet of things botnet detection approaches:

Analysis and recommendations for future research,” Applied Sciences, vol. 11, no. 12, 2021.

[43] B. Zhao, S. Ji, W.-H. Lee, C. Lin, H. Weng, J. Wu, P. Zhou, L. Fang, and R. Beyah, “A large-scale empirical study on

the vulnerability of deployed IoT devices,” IEEE Trans. on Dependable and Secure Computing, 2020.

[44] P. Ferrara, A. K. Mandal, A. Cortesi, and F. Spoto, “Static analysis for discovering IoT vulnerabilities,” International

Journal on Software Tools for Technology Transfer, pp. 71–88, 2021.

[45] G. Falco, C. Li, P. Fedorov, C. Caldera, R. Arora, and K. Jackson, “Neuromesh: IoT security enabled by a blockchain

powered botnet vaccine,” in Proceedings of the International Conference on Omni-Layer Intelligent Systems, 2019, p. 1–6.

15

[46] G. Nebbione and M. C. Calzarossa, “Security of IoT application layer protocols: Challenges and ﬁndings,” Future Internet,

vol. 12, no. 3, 2020.

[47] S. Algarni, F. Eassa, K. Almarhabi, A. Almalaise, E. Albassam, K. Alsubhi, and M. Yamin, “Blockchain-based secured

access control in an IoT system,” Applied Sciences, vol. 11, no. 4, 2021.

[48] S. Ray, A. Basak, and S. Bhunia. (2017, OCT) To secure the internet of things, we must build it out of “patchable”

hardware.

[49] L. Tawalbeh, F. Muheidat, M. Tawalbeh, and M. Quwaider, “IoT privacy and security: Challenges and solutions,” Applied

Sciences, vol. 10, no. 12, 2020.

[50] R. Kumar and R. Sharma, “Leveraging blockchain for ensuring trust in IoT: A survey,” Journal of King Saudi University

- Computer and Information Sciences, 2021.

[51]

I. Ullah, G. de Roode, N. Meratnia, and P. Havinga, “Threat modeling—how to visualize attacks on IoTA?” Sensors,

vol. 21, no. 5, 2021.

[52] T. Fukuda and K. Omote, “Efﬁcient blockchain-based IoT ﬁrmware update considering distribution incentives,” in 2021

IEEE Conference on Dependable and Secure Computing (DSC), 2021, pp. 1–8.

