Proof of Steak

Jon Crowcroft
University of Cambridge

Arthur Gervais
Imperial College London

Hamed Haddadi
Imperial College London

Tristan Henderson
University of St Andrews

1
2
0
2

c
e
D
3
1

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
8
9
4
6
0
.
2
1
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

ABSTRACT
We introduce Proof-of-Steak (PoS) as a fundamental net-zero block
generation technique, often accompanied by Non-Frangipane To-
kens. Genesis cut is gradually heated and minted (using the appro-
priate sauce), enabling the miners to redirect the extracted gold
and the dissipated heat into the furnace, hence enabling the first
fully-circular economy ever built using blockchain technology, util-
ising tamper-evident steak haché. In this paper we present the basic
ingredients for building Proof-of-Steak, assessing its global impact,
and opportunities to save the world and beyond!

CCS CONCEPTS
• Networks → Routing protocols; • Security and privacy →
Security protocols;

KEYWORDS
Steak, NFT, Blockchain

1 INTRODUCTION TO PROOF-OF-STEAK
To ensure the success of our new chain of high end steak restaurants,
it is paramount to ensure trust in our product. People need to
know that when they get an Angus Beef Sirloin, or a Fiorentino
Porterhouse, or a Kobe Wagu Tornados, you are getting the genuine
article, not some dodgy knockoff from England.1

To this end, we have implemented the world’s first Proof-of-Steak
technology, based on the famous bloodline going back decades to
early systems like the Internet’s Certificate Transparent Authority,
and Notarized smart contracts from the Nakatomi corporation.
Don’t be put off by gossip about our earlier technology, where we
used to gather and weigh the sweat from the masseurs that look
after the living cattle so well, and use this as a proxy for proof
of work. Of course, an underground market in fake "Kobe sweat"
quickly arose, mainly centred around gyms and boxing rings, where
there was ample supply of people desperate for a quick free energy
drink (ironically, given the main typical ingredient is Taurine). Now,
as with many other such setbacks in the successful commercial
world, we have moved on, embracing the new way to assure all
steps along the supply chain with the brand new Proof-of-Steak™.
When you see this brand (literally, on the animal, and on your
plate) you can be assured that at every stage, a second creature
or its derivative, have been securely sequestered in a third party
store, ahead of time, escrowed in case any party along the line
has been tempted to stray, or indeed third party rustlers (as they
are still known) have replaced the genuine article with counterfeit
products.

1https://www.forbes.com/sites/larryolmsted/2012/04/12/
foods-biggest-scam-the-great-kobe-beef-lie/

Figure 1: Minted golden steak (Source: The Sun)

We have tested these systems thoroughly, recently with a high
profile pen tester black-and-white team from the cattle ranchers’
institute, who were able to show that gold leaf used in one particular
product line was only 23-carat, although all the other ingredients
were worth their salt.

While Miner Extractable Value is threatening the steak’s incen-
tive stability, we propose a novel mechanism to atomically extract
and bind MEV to the cows’ emitted methane and resulting carbon
dioxide. Our cows are therefore, to the best of our knowledge, the
first cows to not feel guilty for producing steak.

 
 
 
 
 
 
process is the first of its kind, we hope that future work can in-
crease its efficiency by at least 1337×. We follow the community
consensus in discounting the Maillard reaction, due to its inherent
nucleophilicity.

We believe that this is the first successful application of cyber-
physical supply chain assurance to use proof-of-steak, but we do not
believe it will be the last. The timing could not be better, as we meet
all of the United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals, just when
global heating could rise to the point where the origin herds are no
longer viable. We are part of the future. Please join us for a fine meal.
We shall source excellent beverages and carbon offset all of our
cooking technology and practices with certificated reforestation
programs, to the point. Large-scale adoption can enable us to feed
the world, and let them know it’s Christmas time,3 one steak at a
time.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We wish to thank the various field experts who strongly supported
us and provided extensive feedback, but could not be named due
to the ongoing conflict of interests in the cryptocurrency or the
catering industry.

REFERENCES
[1] Hamed Haddadi, Tristan Henderson, and Jon Crowcroft. 2010. The ambient loo
- caught short when nature calls? ACM Computer Communication Review 40, 2
(April 2010), 78–78. This article is an editorial note submitted to CCR. It has not
been peer reviewed. The author takes full responsibility for this article’s technical
content. Comments can be posted through CCR Online.

[2] Hamed Haddadi, Richard Mortier, Steven Hand, Ian Brown, Eiko Yoneki, Derek
McAuley, and Jon Crowcroft. 2012. Privacy Analytics. SIGCOMM Comput. Com-
mun. Rev. 42, 2 (mar 2012), 94–98. https://doi.org/10.1145/2185376.2185390

1.1 An Alternative to Proof-of-Wok
There has been centuries of progress in an alternative block prepa-
ration technique, Proof-of-Wok (PoW), where a pre-heated wok is
used to mint the steak. However, uncertainties on the burn-rate of
wok, its half life, and the recent crackdowns in China on crypto
mining have all prevented a stable supply of woks for distributed
and decentralised restaurants. We leave the ideal sharding strategies
and energy comparisons of PoS and PoW as future work.

2 ANIMAL RIGHTS
Animal welfare and rights are also crucial for creating a trustworthy
and reliable Proof-of-Steak platform. We go beyond traditional
animal welfare requirements by affording our animals all of the
rights granted to “natural persons” under the GDPR. To comply with
GDPR Article 25 on data protection by design, we use differential
privacy and distributed analytics [2] to obfuscate the identity of
any given Kobe cow so as to prevent them from being singled out.
It goes without saying that all passwords in our system are salted.
In keeping with GDPR Article 6 on the lawfulness of processing,
we are careful to only process animals when it is in our legitimate
interest to turn them into tasty, overpriced, social-media-friendly
morsels.

To exceed regulatory requirements by 42 orders of magnitude for
protecting animal rights, we show that differential privacy coupled
with privacy preserving federated learning and optional trusted
hardware enclaves is the long awaited secret sauce.

3 RELATED WORK
Earlier work in the EU on an exchange rate mechanism for wine
and dairy herd products fell foul of a badly designed Proof-of-
Snake protocol, which used cutting-edge mobile-phone gaming
technology to attempt to bound the length of any ledger by linking
the head and tail of the chain, and quite literally, devour the body
to prevent it growing without bound. Insufficient attention was
paid to the dynamics of various parties’ periodic re-skinning of the
scheme, so that stability was never assured. Not well done. The
problems with deep fakes are outside the scope of this cuisine.2

4 FUTURE WORK
There is so much more to discuss: nothing at steak, weak subjectiv-
ity, slashing steak, steaking rewards, time to finality, and so on. We
will also leave the attacks on PoW such as apeing in and getting
rekt to future works (and cooler woks). We intend to integrate the
proof of steak with the new Cambridge Carbon Credit Certifica-
tion system, by measuring the herd methane emissions, so that
customers who wish to pepper their steak decisions with green
sauce will have that option, although we expect this to be rare. We
note with respect their use of mether, which replaces the nearest
rival’s ether with 50% lower carbon. An important block in the PoS
system is the full integration of the user output into the Ambient
Loo [1] towards a circular carbon-neutral economy, which we will
leave as an exercise for the green computing and the chemical engi-
neering communities. Moreover, while our methane-MEV binding

2https://www.manchestereveningnews.co.uk/whats-on/food-drink-news/
man-recreates-salt-baes-1500-21958035

3https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cIxj7Ew_99w

