A Network based Blockchain ecosystem for peer review publication 

Omid FATAHI VALILAI 

Department of Mathematics & Logistics, Jacobs University Bremen, Bremen, Germany. 

Campus Ring 1, 28759, Bremen, Germany  

E-mail address: O.FatahiValilai@jacobs-University.de 
https://sites.google.com/view/fatahivalilai-omid/  

Abstract  

Blockchain  as  an  emerging  technology  has  transformed  many  traditional  and 
conventional ecosystems and business models.  Publication review system is one of 
the interesting subjects for transformation. The conventional models of publication 
review  besides  the  urgent  criticisms  necessitates  a  transformation.  This  paper  has 
investigated  the  most  dominant  shortcomings  of  literature  review  of  publication 
review  systems.  Investigating  the  capabilities  of  Blockchain  technology  in  the 
literature and its transformative capabilities, a network based Blockchain ecosystem 
is proposed. The ecosystem is providing a decentralized, transparent, and effective 
collaboration  mechanisms  for  authors,  reviewers,  and  other  stakeholders 
in 
publication review processes. The main advantage of the ecosystem is committing the 
of all stakeholders and recognizing their contributions in a publication. Moreover, the 
ecosystem profits the stakeholders from the resulted reputation of the publication in 
future  citations  with  its  token  model.  The  architecture  of  the  proposed  ecosystem 
supports  the  management  of  publication  contents  and  sharing  it  for  stakeholders. 
Moreover,  it  enables  the  configuration  of  smart  contracts  for  governance  of 
processes among stakeholders. It uses a token transaction Blockchain model to fulfill 
the  token  transactions.  The  capabilities  and  details  of  layers  in  the  ecosystem  has 
been discussed addressing the new paradigm of publication review ecosystem. 

Keywords Blockchain, Publication review ecosystem, Proof of review (PoR)  

1.  Introduction    

Recently, the concept of Blockchain has gained the attention of academic researchers and professional 
business developers [1]. This is due to the transformative capabilities of Blockchain for globalized and 
decentralized collaboration [2, 3]. The application of blockchain has been elaborated in manufacturing 
and production industries [4–7], supply chain and logistics [8–12], medical fields [13], agriculture [14–
16] and banking systems [16–18]. The wide domain of applications of Blockchain can be interpreted 
mostly  considering  its  philosophy  of  decentralization  and  multi-organizational  interoperability 
capabilities [19–23]. These capabilities are a necessity for nowadays global and wide world interactions 
and  communications  in  different  industries  and  academic  environments  [24–26].  This  enables  the 
Blockchain  as  a  transformative  tool  for  redefinition  of  conventional  professional  and  academic 
processes.  

1 

 
 
 
 
 
A Network based Blockchain ecosystem for publication review; FATAHI VALILAI, Omid 

Dec, 2021 

One of the most dominant academic research processes can be defined as the academic publication 
[27–29].  Almost  all  researchers  have  dealt  with  this  process  in  different  forms  like  conference 
publications,  Journal  articles  and  Book  publication  [30].  This  process  is  very  important  as  it  should 
secure  the  novelty  of  the  research,  contingency  and  integrity  of  the  research,  academic  ethical 
necessities, copyright license concerns for distribution of publication and also proofing and editorial 
considerations [31–33]. Various platforms like journal publication or conference proceeding supporting 
solutions have been proposed to fulfill the main requirements of the review process [30, 33, 34]. The 
review process can be interpreted as an essential and integral part of consensus building which will lead 
to growth and development of scientific knowledge [35]. However, many criticisms have been raised 
for review process in recent years [36–38]. The majority of these criticisms can be interpreted due to 
the centralized mechanisms of review process at the publisher side and reviewers engagement in it 
[39–43].   

 This  paper  has  proposed  a  network  architecture  Blockchain  for  publication  review.  Conducting  a 
comprehensive  literature  review  for  publication  review  process,  the  main  requirements  for  a 
decentralized review process will be discussed. With the aim of fulfilling these requirements, a new 
ecosystem in the form of a network architecture Blockchain will be discussed. The proposed network 
architecture  Blockchain  will  be  elaborated  in  terms  of  the  architecture,  the  stakeholders  and  their 
engagement, the structure of the transactions, consensus mechanisms and policy of token distribution. 
The paper will discuss how the current publication business models can play a new role in proposed 
network architecture Blockchain ecosystem.    

2.  Literature review 

The literature review will focus on two major perspectives:  

 

 

The  current  literature  regarding  the  review  process  for  publication  and  the  related 
shortcomings and perspectives.  
The  current  literature  about  the  recent  achievements  for  using  Blockchain  as  an  emerging 
technology for transforming the conventional business models. 

2.1.  Publication and review process 

Journal peer review can be interpreted as an insuring mechanism for an environment of unrestrained 
criticism for science research which makes it to work efficiently [28, 32, 38]. Peer review process has 
been  recognized  as  a  way  to  insure  the  democratic  process  of  scientific  publication  [34,  36].  The 
institutionalization of review process has started after the second world war [35]. Peer review process 
was aimed mostly a quality assurance system [38]. The literature review in Table 1 has demonstrated 
that the review process is facing with major challenges which are mostly due to the decentralized and 
diverse  standards  for  publication  review.  One  of  the  most  challenging  issues  are  related  to  the  not 
transparent communication channel between the reviewers and authors and the reveal of the review 
report for readers. On the other side, the role of publication and journal firms is complicated and not 
effective mostly in terms of efficient interactions with the reviewers [36]. Although, the reviewers who 
are  academic/professional  entities  are  mostly  keen  to  participate  in  review  process,  still  the 
motivational and appraisal mechanisms are not effectively designed [39]. although the reviewers are 
contributing in a research by giving valuable comments for improvements of the research, their efforts 
are not recognized in the published paper [44]. Also, the review ecosystem should be able to scale itself 
due to increase of quantitative submissions also being capable of adapting itself for new quantitative 
scaling due to expansion of research topics [45]. 

2 

 
 
 
 
A Network based Blockchain ecosystem for publication review; FATAHI VALILAI, Omid 

Dec, 2021 

Table 1. The review publication process in literature 

Research 

Focus of study 

Criticisms for review process  

Improvement requirements 

Rennie  [35] 

Literature review of 
peer review 
evolution  

-  Unreliability 
-  Failing for validation of review 
-  Biased review  
-  Incompetent results 

Mavrogenis et al.  [38] 

The requirements of 
peer review process 

Teixeira da Silva [46] 

Challenges to open 
peer review 

Kelly et al. [36] 

highlighting the pros 
and cons of peer 
review types 

Stern and O’Shea [39] 

Proposal of future of 
scientific publishing 

Hope et al. [44] 

Proposing 
philosophy of 
scientific Peer 
review 

Reinhart  and 
Schendzielorz [45] 

Proposal of novel 
model for review 

-  Inconsistency of editors to 

address inappropriate reviews 
-  Review result with impossible 

requirements 

-  Discourages the authors 

-  Commercialization of science and 
information leading to biasing 
purely intellectual objectives 
with non-academic ones 

-  Wide variation in peer review 
quality between journals and 
publishers. 

-  Slowness of the publishing 

process  

-  Perceived bias by the editors 

and/or reviewers 

-  keeping peer reviews 

confidential 

-  Incentivizing high quality peer 

reviews 

-  Insuring review quality  
-  Transparency of the peer review 

process 

-  Biased review  
-  Deficit model of peer review 
-  The effects of review process on 
domains like grant evaluation  

Parsons and Baglini 
[47] 

Importance of 
neutral language in 
peer review 

-  Unprofessional peer reviews 
-  Peer reviewers with not language 

standards. 

-  A jury-based mechanism rather 

than a judge one 

-  Peer reviewers’ compliment in the 

process 

-  The reassurance of readers 

-  Peer review should interfere in a 

positive way 

-  Providing respectful comments 

-  Pre-publication peer review and 
post-publication peer review 
(PPPR) 

-  Providing a platform that 
accommodates for PPPR 

-  Suggesting the authors for fulfilling 

the shortcomings 

-  Accomplishing the review timely  

-  Emphasizing transparency 
-  Post publication appraisal  
-  Evaluation of the effectiveness of 

peer review  

-  Increase of the pool of well 

qualified reviewers 

-  Enabling the transparency of peer 

review process. 

-  Adaptability and scalability of 

review  

-  High quality decisions in peer 

review  

-  Increased awareness for 

nonneutral language in peer review 

-  Explicatory and concreteness 

assertions  

-  Different journals having 

-  Enabling a publication first and 

different distribution of articles 

then curating 

As  a  conclusion  from  the  literature  review  in  this  section,  the  paper  highlights  the  following 
shortcomings in current peer review publication models: 

 

 
 

The performance of peer review process is not proper especially in terms of pace of review 
and quality of received feedbacks 
The contribution of the reviewers in a publication is not appraised effectively.  
The communication of stakeholders especially the authors and reviewers are not effectively 
established despite of various publication platforms 

This paper has focused on shortcomings stated in the literature and is trying to provide the graph based 
Blockchain solution to overcome them. The idea is to enable a review ecosystem consist of mechanisms 
to: 

 

 

Increase  the  performance  of  peer  review  process  by  using  effective  and  useful  reviewers’ 
feedbacks which help the authors to enhance their publications. This requires benefiting the 
reviewers beside the authors from the created contribution in a publication. 
Facilitate the communication of main stakeholders of the ecosystem; authors and reviewers 
for transparent and also mutually beneficial collaboration. This requires both, the scalable and 
rich pool of reviewers who are willing to conduct a high-quality review and also benefiting from 
the created contributions besides the authors.  

3 

 
 
 
 
 
A Network based Blockchain ecosystem for publication review; FATAHI VALILAI, Omid 

Dec, 2021 

2.2.  Blockchain as an emerging technology 

At the first stage, this section will give a brief introduction of Blockchain Technology. Blockchain is a 
distributed ledger mechanisms which is shared with a decentralized mechanism among stakeholders 
[5, 48]. The main benefits of blockchain can be stated in terms of its scalability to handle the transaction 
growth in a network effectively [13, 24], security [26], solving the deficiency of monopoly mechanisms 
[22]. Although the dominant application of Blockchain is Cryptocurrencies, in recent years application 
of  blockchain  based  models  have  been  considered  in  various  business  and  industry  models  from 
Banking  [18],  agriculture  [15,  26],  manufacturing  and  production  [2,  4],  logistics  [21,  49]  and 
telecommunication  [20,  50].  Most  of  the  focus  points  for  using  the  Blockchain  are  concentrated  on 
definition of Transaction/Block, consensus mechanism, reward policy [2, 5].   

At the second stage, the focus is to find the capabilities of Blockchain oriented solutions in different 
business  sectors.  The  aim  is  to  highlights  the  achieved  merits  and  the  fulfilled  shortcomings  in 
traditional  and  conventional  business  processes  and  scenarios.  As  a  conclusion  for  the  reviewed 
literature in Table 2: 

 

 

 

The  capabilities  of  Blockchain  for  transparent  meanwhile  secured  data  and  information 
communication is emphasized.  
The decentralized capabilities of Blockchain which enable the non-exclusive governance while 
saleable and adaptable processes is highly valuable.  
The consensus and smart contract mechanisms in the Blockchain which guarantee the validity 
and  quality  of  generated  contents  inside  the  Blockchain  while  promotes  and  motivate  the 
stakeholders effectively to work inside the ecosystem is highly referred.  

Table 2. The recent development in terms of Blockchain application in literature 

Research 

Focus of study 

Blockchain characteristics 

Dominant advantages 

Radmanesh et al. [51] 
Aghamohammazade 
and Valilai [2]  
Ahmadi et al. [3] 

-  Cloud 

-  Service matchings builds the 

transactions and blocks 

Manufacturing and 
Production system 

-  Miners are service Matchers  
-  Reward function is based on the 

-  Cloud Supply 
network  

optimization effort 

-  Consensus mechanism to insure 
feasibility of service matching 

-  Service composition among 

providers and demanders are 
managed in decentralized mode 
-  The optimization as an NP-hard 

problem is more efficiently 
managed  

-  New framework for data sharing 
among firms in supply network is 
established  

-   Interoperability and integration 

from a global perspective 
-  Mapping the raw data to 

information and knowledge for 
network nodes 

-  Fulfilling the security and privacy 
by using advanced cryptographic 
algorithms  

-  Enabling the distributed storage 

of data  

-  Fault free with global consensus 

-  Enabling rapid decision-making 

mechanism 

mechanism 

-  Smart contract among the 

-  Traceability through whole chain of 

producers 

food production 

-  The store of traceability data 

-  Optimizing the performance of 

inside the Blockchain  

-  Validation of data through 
consensus mechanism 

production system 
-  Effective and fast data 

communication  

-  Cost reduction for financial 

infrastructure 

Lee et al. [6] 

-  Cyber-Physical 

Production Systems 
integration and 
synchronization  

Prashar et al. [26] 

-  Food safety through 

traceability of 
agriculture products 

Osmani et al. [17] 

-  Next generation of 

-  Cryptocurrency style of financial 

-  Cost reduction for transaction 

banking and finance  

transaction support 

fulfillment  

Mohamed and Al-
Jaroodi [52] 

-  Smart 

manufacturing for 
Industry 4.0 
applications 

-  Resource matching through 

transaction and clock definition 

-  Smart contract mechanism to 

handle the financial transaction  

Hwang et al. [53] 

-  Transparency for 

-  Cryptocurrency style of energy 

energy prosumers  

trading  

-  Privacy and transparency 
-  Scalability and interoperability 
-  Increasing trustable and secure 

data communication 

-  Enabling the data communication 

among different resources working 
with a XaaS approach  

-  Convenient and safe data collection  
-  More efficient Transaction model 
-  Connection of various energy 

sources and users  

4 

 
A Network based Blockchain ecosystem for publication review; FATAHI VALILAI, Omid 

Dec, 2021 

Research 

Focus of study 

Blockchain characteristics 

Dominant advantages 

Yuan and Wang [54] 

-  Intelligent 

transportation 
system 

Turkanović et al. [55] 

-  Higher education 
credit platform 

-  Enabling the security and trust in 

-  Transportation data in form of 

data communication 

transactions and blocks 

-  Using the capabilities of distributed 

-   Smart contract mechanism to 

computing 

handle the financial transaction 

-  Crowdsourcing enabled in a 
decentralized architecture  

-  Students evaluation records in 
form of transaction and blocks 
-  Proof of concept as consensus 

-  Trusted and privacy enabled credit 

storage and sharing  

-  Distributed verification mechanism 

mechanism 

Wang et al. [56] 

-  E-Healthcare 

system 

-  Patient biomedical data storage 
through transaction and blocks 

for credit evaluation  

-  Distributed remote physical 
conduction monitoring  

-  Trusted and privacy enabled credit 

storage and sharing  

-  Low power consumption 

The literature has illustrated the transformative capabilities of Blockchain technology as an emerging 
technology. Especially, the decentralization of processes together with consensus mechanisms can help 
ecosystems  to  benefit  the  expandability  and  scalability  of  governance  processes  without  being 
restricted in centralized exclusive authority. Moreover, the other technologies and paradigms evolving 
inside Blockchain technology like Web 3.o will be great opportunity to enable the interoperability and 
post processing of data inside the Blockchain more effectively to support the ecosystem interactions 
[57–59].  

3.  Network Blockchain for peer review publication  

3.1.  The problem definition and solution perspectives 

Considering the two perspectives investigated in the literature review, the paper proposes a solution 
to  use  the  Blockchain  capabilities  to  create  a  new  ecosystem  for  publication  review.  The  main 
concentration in this ecosystem will be the increase of review process performance in terms of quality 
and speed of review. Also, the contribution of all stakeholders inside this ecosystem on the resulted 
publication should be insured. This includes the author(s), reviewers and all the parties which are adding 
value to resulted contribution in the publication. The ecosystem should be saleable, adaptable and also 
it should enable the post processing of the contents in terms of providing the accessibility of contents 
effectively and benefiting the contributing stakeholders from the quality of the paper publication. Also, 
one of the most important features will be the effective content management in the terms of availability 
and post processing for being used by other researchers in their research studies.  

To fulfill the above problem statement, the main idea is to use the capabilities of Blockchain to shape 
the  publication  review  ecosystem.  In  this  ecosystem,  the  stakeholders  shall  interact  in  terms  of 
Blockchain  network  structure,  the  interaction  model  in  terms  of  how  the  publication  can  be 
broadcasted  and  reviewed  effectively  with  the  designed  consensus  mechanisms.  Also,  the  smart 
contract  will  enable  the  fair  and  effective  benefit  sharing  among  all  stakeholders  contributing  to  a 
publication. The decentralized nature of the Blockchain will insure the adaptability and scalability of the 
ecosystem meanwhile insure the wide access to the contents. Using the features of Web 3.0 in this 
ecosystem, a high potential for pos processing of the publication will be created which will address the 
initiation  and  development  of  conventional  and  transformative  business  models  connected  to  the 
ecosystem.  

It  worth  mentioning  that  the  closest  paradigm  to  the  proposed  solution  in  terms  of  ecosystem 
architecture can be regarded the Non-Fungible Tokens (NFTs). NFT has been offered as a paradigm for 
digital  asset  trading  [60–62].  Using  the  mechanisms  of  smart  contract  on  Blockchain  based 
cryptocurrency models, NFTs are used to transmit the ownership of digital images and media [63, 64]. 
However,  the  prosed  solution  in  this  paper,  will  be  fundamentally  distinctive  as  the  content  of  the 
publishing materials are going to be processed and reviewed for better contribution to literature. The 

5 

 
 
A Network based Blockchain ecosystem for publication review; FATAHI VALILAI, Omid 

Dec, 2021 

NFTs  are  relying  on  the  value  of  the  content  more  from  side  of  the  trader  side  [65],    however  in  a 
publication the quality of the published material itself will be assessed through a separate consensus 
mechanism which  would increase the contribution value by the contribution of the reviewers.   

3.2.  Network Blockchain solution for peer review publication: conceptual model 

The overall conceptual model of proposed network based Blockchain framework has been illustrated in 
Figure  1.  The  ecosystem  transactions  are  managed  through  these  three  layers  in  which  especial 
processes  are  designed  in  terms  of  publication  submission,  review  and  contribution  management 
through token transactions among stakeholders. The Framework is composed of three layers which are 
interacting with each other:  

 

The “Publication Graph” layer which is the highest layer in the framework. This layer contains 
all  the  publication  data  consisting  manuscript  contents,  review  reports  and  meta  data 
regarding the authors, reviewers and other stakeholders’ contribution. This layer shapes the 
network of publication and their dependencies in terms of the citations relating them together. 
These relations will trigger the smart contracts in the “Smart Contract Layer” and establish the 
transactions for transfer of the tokens through the smart contract stakeholders. Also, this layer 
is equipped with Blockchain API to establish the communication of third-party value-added 
service providers to the ecosystem. 

Figure 1. The Conceptual model of graph based Blockchain Peer review Framework 

 

The  “Smart  Contract  Layer”  which  is  responsible  for  establishment  of  contractual  relations 
among  different  stakeholders  in  the  publication  review  ecosystem.  These  relations  can  be 
categorized in terms of authorship agreement for specifying the share of  the contributions 
among  the  authors,  the  reviewed  contribution  in  terms  of  adding  value  and  guiding  the 
authors for better proposing their publication, the research grants announced and assigned to 

6 

 
 
A Network based Blockchain ecosystem for publication review; FATAHI VALILAI, Omid 

Dec, 2021 

the contribution of the authors, the special issue of a journal or a conference indexing contract 
including specific papers in terms of topics and contribution or any other value added which is 
created  via  third  parties  through  API  connections.    All  the  token  transactions  inside  the 
ecosystem are trigged via the smart contracts inside this layer. The stakeholders can contribute 
ad play role inside the ecosystem by establishing a smart contract instances from the provided 
templates inside this layer . 
The “Token Transaction Graph” which fulfills the token transaction in ledger. This graph is the 
connections of blocks consisting of the token transactions among the stakeholders. As stated 
earlier, the blocks are triggered by smart contracts and transmit the token from an address in 
the ecosystem to another address. 

 

Besides the three layers, the framework consists of user pool which manage the users interacting inside 
the ecosystem, “Blockchain User Role Management” section which manages the users’ behaviors and 
interactions inside the ecosystem in terms of their engagements in „Smart Contract Layer” and finally 
the  Blockchain  API  which  enables  the  third-party  interactions  with  the  ecosystem.  the  details  of 
functionalities inside each section is described in details in proceeding sections. 

3.2.1. User pool 

The user Pool will act as the user profile management section in the ecosystem. As illustrated in Figure 
2, the  stakeholders should establish their accounts in the ecosystem. The accounts will contain two 
major attribute categories. The first category is keeping the token and wallet private information like 
the  public  and  private  key  information  besides  user  preferences  for  their  wallets.  This  category  is 
connected to the “Token Transaction Graph” and is updated when the transactions are implemented 
inside the “Token Transaction Graph” like receiving of token and their withdrawal. The second category 
of  data  are  related  to  optional  research/academic  and  professional  attributes.  Stakeholders  like 
researchers can enrich the user pool with data and attributes regarding their research expertise, key 
words,  scholar  ids  like  google  Scholar,  ORCID  and  other  professional  social  media  attributes.  These 
attributes are important as they can influence the performance of mechanisms in the “Blockchain Role 
Management Section”.    

Figure 2. User Pool overall structure 

For  the  stakeholders  from  Professional  domain  like  journals,  conferences  or  any  other  third  service 
providers the second category of data and attributes would describe their business and marketing data 
and  capabilities  which  will  help  the  authors  to  find  and  interact  more  efficiently  to  improve  the 
publication qualities. Examples of these category stakeholders are journal editorial services, conference 
committee board, funding agencies and proofing service providers. The details of collaboration types 
are discussed in section “Blockchain User Role Management”.   

7 

 
 
A Network based Blockchain ecosystem for publication review; FATAHI VALILAI, Omid 

Dec, 2021 

3.2.2. Smart Contract Layer 

This layer facilitates the initiation and execution of smart contracts in the ecosystem. the users from 
the user pools via the “Blockchain User Role Management” collaborate with the other stakeholders in 
this layer. The transactions regarding the token transmissions among the users in “Token Transaction 
Graph” will be triggered from the smart contracts in this layer as shown in Figure 3. 

Figure 3. Smart Contract Layer illustration 

The process of signing the contract will be handled by “Blockchain User Role Management” section. The 
major types of contracts are: 

  Authorship contracts: If an author or a group of authors intend to submit a manuscript inside 
the ecosystem, they should sign a contract of authorship in this layer. The smart contract will 
initiate one node in “Publication Graph” based on the authorship smart contract signed with 
the authors. This type of contracts is executed in different occasions. They trigger the token 
withdraw from authors’ wallet when the manuscript is confirmed and signed by the required 
number of the reviewers. Also, when the published manuscript receives citations from other 
confirmed publications, the authorship portion of received token from those manuscripts will 
be distributed among the authors based on the authorship smart contract structure.  

 

  Review  contracts:  when  a  reviewer  accepts  the  review  assignment  of  a  manuscript,  the 
reviewer would be entitled to sign a smart contract. This contract will withdraw the tokens 
from  the  wallet  of  reviewers  if  they  sign  and  agree  to  review  the  manuscript.  When  the 
confirmed manuscript receives the citation, the review portion of received token from those 
manuscripts  will  be  distributed  among  the  reviewers  based  on  the  review  smart  contract 
structure.  When  a  manuscript  receives  enough  confirmations  by  the  reviewers  it  would  be 
treated as an accepted publication in ecostsem. 
Funding contracts: when a funding agency intends to announce a funding in a special topic or 
intends to assign a specific fund to specific authors, this type of contracts can be used. The 
token from the funding agency would be transferred to authors based on the specific terms in 
these smart contracts. The funding contracts can change the authorship contracts in terms of 
transfer of token (or a portion of tokens) from funding agencies instead of authors wallet. Also. 
In  case  of  receiving  token  after  the  confirmation  of  publication  in  ecosystem  and  receiving 
citations, special terms for receiving of token (or a portion of tokens) can be established which 
transfer the token to funding agency wallet.  
Journal indexing/Special issue/book publishing/Conference indexing contract: the ecosystem 
is enabling the varieties of users like book/journal publishing firms or conference organization 
committees to have the review and publishing of their manuscripts in the “Publication Graph”. 

 

8 

 
 
A Network based Blockchain ecosystem for publication review; FATAHI VALILAI, Omid 

Dec, 2021 

This type of contracts will establish special terms via the “Blockchain User Role Management” 
for the initiation and execution of authorship and review contracts. The ecosystem enables the 
payment of conference fees to be fulfilled via the citations the paper receives in future from 
citing publications. The review contract can also be tailored based on specific requirements of 
this type of contracts.  

The  smart  contract  can  be  extended  to  encompass  various  types  of  value-added  services  especially 
considering the communication via Blockchain API. For example, the Proof-reading service providers 
can have their smart contract enabled in this layer via “Blockchain User Role Management” section. 
This will enable them to conduct the proof-reading services and invest their tokens in a manuscript 
while agreeing with the authors to benefit from the received token in future citations. As observed, all 
the stakeholders which are contributing to a manuscript from authors. Reviewers, funding agencies, 
conference  organization  boards  and  proofreaders  should  invest  their  tokens  accordingly  in  related 
smart contracts. This means all stakeholders are investing in a manuscript and after the confirmation 
and receiving the citations from the other manuscripts they will receive tokens based on their smart 
contracts and the reputation of the publication to receive citations. This is one the efficient mechanisms 
inside the ecosystem which promotes the quality while recognizing the contribution of all stakeholders 
and engaging them in terms of investing their tokens and commit to the success of the publications.   

3.2.3. Publication Graph 

This  layer  contains  the  manuscript  contents  and  the  related  meta  data  regarding  the  contributions 
which are conducted for each manuscript. This layer forms a graph in terms of each manuscript acting 
as  a  node  and  the  citations  in  terms  of  the  vectors  (the  vector  starts  from  the  citating  manuscripts 
toward the cited reference publication). This graph will also be in relation with the “Smart Contract 
Layer”. To better understand the logic behind this layer, the paper first describes the structure of each 
manuscript which would be a node in “Publication Graph” layer.  The manuscripts will have four main 
components as illustrated in Figure 4. All the information regarding these components are stored in 
“Publication Graph” layer.  

 

 

The first component is authorship. This component is shaped by the help of authorship smart 
contract. When author/authors finalize their author ship smart contract, the related meta data 
regarding  their  attributes  besides  their  manuscript  data  is  updated  in  this  component.  As 
stated  earlier  through  the  agreed  terms  in  authorship  smart  contract  the  authors  will  put 
definite number of tokens in their manuscript which would be blocked in the manuscript. After 
a  manuscript  receives  the  confirmation  from  reviewer(s),  these  tokens  are  sent  to  all  the 
citations inside the manuscript based on the Blockchain policy. If authors refuse to continue, 
the reserved tokens in the manuscript will be processes by the authorship policy ranging from 
completely/partially  being  refunded  to  authors  or  being  used  inside  the  ecosystem  for 
performance refinement.   
The  second  component  is  the  confirmation  component.  This  component  contains  all  the 
conformation signed by the reviewers in the ecosystem. As stated earlier, the reviewers are 
assigned  by  the  “Blockchain  User  Role  Management”  section  in  ecosystem.  If  a  reviewer 
accepts the review of a manuscript, then the review smart contract is signed, and it would be 
recorded  in  this  component  inside  the  manuscript.  It  worth  mentioning  that  in  case  the 
reviewers find merits in a manuscript after signing the smart review contract and investing 
tokens, they will write their review report including their refinement suggestions which would 
be in this component besides their tokens. In case the reviewer signs and confirms an article 
(accept  the  article),  the  acceptance  report  is  recorded  besides  the  current  versions  of  the 
manuscript  contents  in  this  component.  This  will  allow  the  transparent  communication  of 
revision and the review process not only with authors but also with all the future audiences in 
ecosystem.  As  the  reviewers  are  contributing  in  terms  of  publication,  they  are  awarded  in 
future based on the citations (through the tokens assigned by citing manuscript) which the 

9 

 
A Network based Blockchain ecosystem for publication review; FATAHI VALILAI, Omid 

Dec, 2021 

publication receives. The number of required conformations for a manuscript depends on the 
policy of ecosystem and can be configured in “Publication Graph” layer. This can be interpreted 
as  a  consensus  mechanism  in  “Publication  Graph”  layer.  The  paper  calls  this  consensus 
mechanism Proof of Review (PoR) which confirms and accepts the manuscript nodes in the 
ecosystem based on the signatures and confirmations they receive from the reviewers. This 
demonstrates  the  decentralized  nature  of  the  ecosystem  in  which  the  reviewers  are 
collaborating  with  the  designed  PoR  consensus  mechanism  to  give  credit  and  validate  the 
manuscript in “publication graph” layer. 

Figure 4. The manuscript components  

 

 

The third component is the remarks component. This component contains all the other related 
smart contract data and attributes related to the manuscript which can be related to funding 
agencies,  proof  reading  services,  special  issue  journals,  book  publication  and  conference 
events. As stated earlier, all the remarks will store token in this section which will be released 
as the manuscript is signed and confirmed with required number of confirmations and will be 
share among all the cited manuscripts in “Publication Graph”.  
The last component will be the meta data for the manuscript node which are version, time 
stamp and Merkel Tree of citations’ hash. These data improve the performance of analyzing 
the “Publication Graph” information. Each manuscript will have a unique hash which is built 
by  the  definite  function  inside  the  smart  contracts  using  the  private  keys  of  authors  and 
reviewers and remarking agents.  

10 

 
 
A Network based Blockchain ecosystem for publication review; FATAHI VALILAI, Omid 

Dec, 2021 

The paper considers this article as the “Genesis Manuscript”. The “Genesis Manuscript” is the first block 
in “Publication Graph” layer which would not transfer any token to any other manuscript as it would be 
the first node initiated in “Publication Graph” layer. The first relations inside “Publication Graph” layer 
will be established in terms of new nodes (manuscripts) citing the “Genesis Manuscript” as illustrated 
in Figure 5. When a manuscript is initiated inside this layer, the manuscript node with authorship will 
be established and the manuscript hash will be built up from the authorship public and private keys 
signed  the  authorship  smart  contract.  As  the  paper  is  reviewed,  the  second  component  is  formed 
through  the  signatures  of  the  reviewers  via  their  smart  contracts  and  update  the  hash  through 
encapsulation the private keys of the reviewers. A reviewer may multiple times review and revise a 
manuscript which means the second component will be updated each time resulting in new hash. Until 
the manuscript receives the enough number of the confirmation by the reviewers the first component 
can be updated by the authorship smart contract and the third component by the remaking agents. 
When the enough number of the confirmations are received the manuscript, node is locked and all the 
related smart contracts are triggered and would be locked to prevent new modifications.  

Figure 5. The Publication Graph 

As mentioned earlier, the vectors inside the “Publication Graph” layer are connecting manuscript based 
on the citations created inside the ecosystem. The ecosystem will use the features of third-party service 
providers  through  the  “API  Blockchain”  section  to  facilitate  the  manuscript  preparation  in  terms  of 
generating  citations.  The  hash  of  the  manuscript  will  act  like  the  Digital  Object  Identifier  (DOI)  and 
enable the unique referencing and establishing the correct relations between the manuscripts. After a 
manuscript  receives  enough  confirmations,  the  citations  will  be  used  to  trigger  the  related  smart 
contracts inside the manuscript and transmit the tokens through the ecosystem.  

3.2.4. Blockchain User Role Management  

As described thought the former sections, all the stakeholders inside the ecosystem should establish 
their user profiles in user pool. This encompasses authors, reviewers, journal publishers, conference 
committee  boards  and  value-added  service  providers.  As  all  the  transactions  inside  the  ecosystem 
should  be  conducted  through  smart  contracts,  the  “Blockchain  User  Role  Management”  has  the 
responsibility to define, configure and establish the proper types of smart contracts for users besides 
providing required interfaces for effective interactions. This section can be modified through evaluation 
time of ecosystem to improve the efficiency of the processes and adjusting the behavior model of smart 
contracts. Also, any new business process should be embedded in this section to connect the users to 
proper types of smart contracts. The required fundamental types of mechanism in this section are: 

 

The authorship mechanism: this mechanism is enabled when author/authors intend to publish 
their manuscript in the ecosystem. It would facilitate the collaboration of the authors together 
to sign their authorship smart contract. If funding agencies should be engaged, this section will 
initiate their role in funding smart contracts and binds it to the manuscript which would be 

11 

 
 
A Network based Blockchain ecosystem for publication review; FATAHI VALILAI, Omid 

Dec, 2021 

 

then a node in “Publication Graph” layer. As there would usually different revisions which may 
encounter the change of the authorships and their contribution levels, again this section will 
handle  the  modifications  of  the  authorship  contracts.  As  an  example,  the  configuration 
regarding to limiting the token receipt by self-citations can be handled in this mechanism. 
The  reviewer  mechanism:  this  mechanism  assigns  the  manuscripts  listed  in  “Publication 
Graph” layer to the reviewers in the ecosystem. Just like all the other review mechanisms in 
traditional  publication  mode,  the  engagement  of  reviewers  to  accomplish  the  review  is 
required. However, this mechanism is fulfilling the former shortcomings. The ecosystem uses 
a decentralized mechanism which select random users (which have agreed in their user profile 
creation to contribute as a reviewer) to accept and sign the review smart contracts. To increase 
the  effectiveness  of  this  selection,  the  mechanism  will  use  the  historical  authorship  smart 
contracts of the users, their key words and indexes in their profile creation and their former 
review  contributions.  The  reviewers  can  deny  their  invitations  for  signing  the  review  smart 
contracts. If they sign the review smart contract, they should transfer the committed token to 
the manuscript. The paper calls this the proof of review (PoR) model which resembles a kind 
of Proof of stake model. This is as stated will insure both the contribution of the reviewers to 
increase the quality as the ecosystem is considering the review as a value-added role and will 
share  the  received  tokens  from  citations  in  future  for  the  reviewers.  The  reviewers  are 
assigning tokens to the manuscript committing to its success as the manuscript was found to 
be  worth  of  reviewing.  For  special  type  of  contracts  like  special  issues  and  conference 
organizations,  the  specific  methods  for  review  selection  and  token  reserving  would  be 
possible.  The  review  mechanism  will  continue  to  select  and  propose  the  review  smart 
contracts to the reviewers until the required confirmations are received or the authors refrain 
from publication progress.  

  Book/Special issue/Conference publication mechanisms: these mechanisms enable the special 
types of manuscript publishing in the ecosystem. the principles of authorship and review smart 
contracts  are  maintained  but  the  policies  for  token  transmissions  and  special  criteria  for 
reviewer  selection  maybe  applied.  This  enables  overriding  for  a  portion  of  conference 
registrations or open access reviews as the required processes are fulfilled in the ecosystem 
and the revenue business model can be fulfilled for stakeholders from the reputation of the 
resulted publication in future.  

3.2.5. Token Transaction Graph  

This  layer  will  accomplish  the  fulfillment  of  token  transactions  inside  the  ecosystem.  while  the 
“Publication Graph” is supporting the manuscript content and  meta data for authorship/review and 
value-added activities for the publications, all the required transactions for transferring token among 
the users inside the ecosystem will be accomplished in this layer. The ecosystem can use different types 
of  Blockchain  token  architecture  for  this  layer.  The  important  requirement  is  the  support  of  smart 
contract  mechanisms  in  “Smart  Contract  Layer”.  The  token  model  in  this  layer  is  suggested  to  be  a 
graph-based token model as illustrated in Figure 6, but also the conventional chain shaped models are 
also applicable.  

The proposed framework in this paper is enabling a plug-in architecture for handling “Token Transaction 
Graph”  layer.  It  means  the  “Smart  Contract  Layer”  can  be  deployed  on  different  Blockchain  token 
models  to  support  the  “Token  Transaction  Graph”.  As  the  paper  is  considering  a  special  token 
distribution, it would be better to offer a ground and self-created token model based on pre-mined 
tokens. As the user creates their user profile in the pool, they will be assigned the private/public keys. 
These keys are used to secure their wallets and tokens inside the ecosystem and also for signing the 
smart  contracts  and  creating  hashes  for  the  manuscript  published  in  ecosystem.  The  Ecosystem 
promotes  the  researchers  to  establish  their  user  profiles  inside  the  ecosystem  and  gives  gift  tokens 
based on the researchers’ academic profiles. Moreover, the tokens can be purchased from markets 

12 

 
A Network based Blockchain ecosystem for publication review; FATAHI VALILAI, Omid 

Dec, 2021 

through the crypto exchanges when the token is listed.  As the ecosystem evolves, the value of tokens 
will increase which will result in increase of the value of user wallets asset. The  ecosystem also will 
donate tokens to promote and support especial research trends in form of funding smart contracts. The 
rate of token cycling can be controlled through the “Blockchain User Role management” section and 
smart contracts. The general policy will be the configuration to enable the receipt of more tokens than 
spent tokens of authors and reviewers for high quality publications.   

Figure 6. The Token Transaction Graph 

3.2.6. Blockchain API 

The Blockchain API is designed to enable the ecosystem manuscript content communication with value-
added service providers. These service providers can have either user role inside the ecosystem and be 
engaged through the “Blockchain User Role Management” section in smart contracts or they can only 
provide services to increase the effectiveness of ecosystem processes. Especially with the application 
of Web 3.0, the contents of the  “Publication Graph” layer can be effectively processed and used to 
create valuable insights. The current designed APIs can facilitate the following value-added services in 
ecosystem: 

  Word  processing  and  reference  management  applications  which  will  use  mostly  the 
manuscript  content  data  in  the  “Production  Graph”  layer.  These  applications  facilitate  the 
effective search and retrieve of publication in the ecosystem and indexing them for ecosystem 
users.  Although  the  ecosystem  as  a  distributed  ledger  can  be  downloaded  and  updated  in 
every user’s computer, the search and query for finding the proper publications would be hard 
and both storage space demanding. The reference management applications help the users to 
have access to the publication data effectively in terms of finding relevant publications and 
moreover citing them in their manuscript. Nowadays, word processing plug-ins facilitate the 
citation and reference list creation for authors. The same capabilities will be provided for the 
users to embed the citations and generate the reference lists based on different reference 
styles and article templates.   

  Book and journal publishers/conference value added services which as described are users in 
the ecosystem. As the ecosystem is acting as a distributed ledger and provides the access to 
publication data and contents, these stakeholders can use it as their publication repositories 
and  develop  their  presentation  user  interfaces  for  special  designed  publication  directories. 
This can resemble a conference proceeding for historical archive of a conference events or 
special book/journal series. 

  Data and process analytics agents which will use the publication content data in the ecosystem 
to  generate  valuable  insights  and  knowledge.  The  generated  knowledge  can  be  used  to 
demonstrate the research trends, subject funding trends, biometric researcher characteristics 

13 

 
 
A Network based Blockchain ecosystem for publication review; FATAHI VALILAI, Omid 

Dec, 2021 

 

and  even  the  effective  collaboration  patterns  for  researchers.  In  fact,  many  data  analytics 
solutions can use the “Publication Graph” layer data as their source for knowledge extraction. 
Publication  refinement  services  which  will  be  the  value-added  service  of  journals’  editorial 
boards to the ecosystem users. This can provide the users based on their demand for special 
types of smart contracts in which the editorial boards will provide advisories for the authors 
to help them fulfill the reviewers’ comments and receive the confirmation more efficiently. It 
worth mentioning that would require the publication refinement services to invest their tokens 
in manuscript and will receive tokens in return in future publication citations in the ecosystem 
according to quality and reputation of the publication. The ecosystem is transforming the roles 
on editorial boards from judges to advisors which help the authors and reviewers based on 
their knowledge and expertise. 

The  Blockchain  API  can  be  extended  with  new  value-added  processes  and  functionalities  which 
promotes business model development in publication review domain.  

4.  Discussions and Conclusions 

In this paper, a new ecosystem for publication review has been proposed. Considering the shortcomings 
of current state of the art publication review models and capabilities of Blockchain technology, a new 
distributed and decentralized framework has been designed. The main capabilities can be summarized 
as: 

 

 

The performance of this ecosystem in comparison with the traditional review models would 
be incomparable. The ecosystem user pool provides the access to a very great repository of 
willing reviewers which are committed not for judging the manuscript but for collaborating 
and  advising  the  authors.  The  model  is  effective  as  it  is  not  promoting  a  criticism-based 
approach  for  review  but  a  collaborative  approach.  Meanwhile,  the  contribution  of  all 
stakeholders  ranging  from  authors  and  reviewers  are  fulfilled.  The  token  model  inside  the 
ecosystem  engages  the  stakeholders  in  investing  in  manuscripts  and  benefiting  from  the 
publication  quality  in  terms  of  receiving  citations  and  the  publication  reputation.  The 
ecosystem is completely scalable due to its decentralized architecture.   
The communication of authors and reviewers is increased and refined in terms of transparency 
and integrity. The centralized solution through different journals and their editorial boards has 
increased the complexity and criticisms of decisions for authors. Challenges of selecting the 
proper journals for authors and transferring their manuscripts from one journal to another 
one has been fulfilled in this platform. The ecosystem is decentralized, and the role of journals 
has  changed  and  transformed  greatly.  The  journals’  editorial  boards  would  help  the 
manuscript refinements and advising the authors rather than judging and making the probable 
criticized bias decisions. The access to publication content data is provided for all stakeholders 
and provide the revenue models would be transformed to value-added services which would 
really help the authors for effective and high-quality publication. 

The  paper  also  discusses  some  concerns  observed  in  publication  review  literature  which  can  be 
approached effectively by the capabilities of the proposed ecosystem: 

  Considering the recent arguments about the blind peer review or non-blind review processes, 
the ecosystem is designed mainly with concentration of on non-blind review process as it is 
believed  the  role  of  reviewers  has  been  transformed  to  facilitators  and  contributor 
collaborators  in  the  ecosystem.  However,  relying  on  capabilities  of  Blockchains  to  provide 
secure and anonymous transactions, the framework can enable the blind review system which 
will  not  reveal  the  authors’  and  reviewers’  identity  until  the  required  conformations  are 
obtained. 

14 

 
A Network based Blockchain ecosystem for publication review; FATAHI VALILAI, Omid 

Dec, 2021 

 

There are also some concerns about the non-ethical behaviors of authors and reviewers which 
the ecosystem has the capabilities to fulfill them with proper configuration of smart contracts. 
As  an  example,  the  self-citations  have  been  discussed  both  positively  and  negatively.  The 
ecosystem  can  use  the  smart  contract  mechanism  to  control  the  trend.  The  ecosystem  by 
default is not against the self-citations, however, if a journal is against this characteristic in 
research,  it  can  use  the  Blockchain  API  for  configuring  specific  smart  authorship  smart 
contracts which eliminate the token transmissions to authors in a publication cited with the 
publication of same authors.  

  Recently, there has been a trend for shifting to open access style of publication. The author 
considers this trend as a strategic move of publishing businesses to secure their revenue model 
to receive the publication fee from authors rather than the audiences demanding to access 
them. The proposed ecosystem is drastically transforming the paradigm here. The token model 
in  this  ecosystem  will  generate  wealth  for  all  stakeholders  and  distribute  it  among  them. 
Meanwhile  a  worldwide  and  global  free  access  to  publication  data  will  be  provided  for  all 
researchers through the “Publication Graph” in the ecosystem.  

The ecosystem can also be affected by the configuration of smart contracts. This is an important and 
interesting  topic  for  future  studies  and  developments.  Considering  the  speed  of  token  cycling  and 
stakeholders’  preferences  in  their  smart  contracts,  the  equilibrium  status  analysis  using  the  game 
theory methods and system dynamics is highly proposed. The author believes that ecosystem will find 
its balance and can be configured wisely by the consensus of stakeholders for smart contract definition.  

5.  Acknowledgement  

The idea has been supported in terms of documentation in its early stages of initiation with the help of 
Mr. Ehsan Aghamohammadzade (ORCID:0000-0003-4560-4265). The author appreciates the help. 

6.  References 

[1]  Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System | Bitcoin Paper. 
[2]  Aghamohammadzadeh, E.; Fatahi Valilai, O. A Novel Cloud Manufacturing Service Composition Platform 

Enabled by Blockchain Technology. Int. J. Prod. Res., 2020, 58 (17), 5280–5298. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2020.1715507. 

[3]  Ahmadi, E.; Khaturia, R.; Sahraei, P.; Niyayesh, M.; Valilai, O. F. Using Blockchain Technology to Extend the 

Vendor Managed Inventory for Sustainability. Int. J. Ind. Manuf. Eng., 2021, 15 (4), 5. 

[4]  Angrish, A.; Craver, B.; Hasan, M.; Starly, B. A Case Study for Blockchain in Manufacturing: “FabRec”: A 
Prototype for Peer-to-Peer Network of Manufacturing Nodes. Procedia Manuf., 2018, 26, 1180–1192. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.promfg.2018.07.154. 

[5]  Hasan, M.; Ogan, K.; Starly, B. Hybrid Blockchain Architecture for Cloud Manufacturing-as-a-Service (CMaaS) 
Platforms with Improved Data Storage and Transaction Efficiency. Procedia Manuf., 2021, 53, 594–605. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.promfg.2021.06.060. 

[6]  Lee, J.; Azamfar, M.; Singh, J. A Blockchain Enabled Cyber-Physical System Architecture for Industry 4.0 
Manufacturing Systems. Manuf. Lett., 2019, 20, 34–39. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mfglet.2019.05.003. 
[7]  Kasten, J. E. Engineering and Manufacturing on the Blockchain: A Systematic Review. IEEE Eng. Manag. Rev., 

2020, 48 (1), 31–47. https://doi.org/10.1109/EMR.2020.2964224. 

[8]  Bartsch, D.; Winkler, H. Blockchain Technology in Germany: An Excerpt of Real Use Cases in Logistics Industry. 

In Data Science and Innovation in Supply Chain Management: How Data Transforms the Value Chain. 
Proceedings of the Hamburg International Conference of Logistics (HICL), Vol. 29; Berlin: epubli GmbH, 2020; 
pp 699–735. https://doi.org/10.15480/882.3111. 

[9]  Rožman, N.; Vrabič, R.; Corn, M.; Požrl, T.; Diaci, J. Distributed Logistics Platform Based on Blockchain and IoT. 

Procedia CIRP, 2019, 81, 826–831. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2019.03.207. 

[10]  Irannezhad, E. Is Blockchain a Solution for Logistics and Freight Transportation Problems? Transp. Res. 

Procedia, 2020, 48, 290–306. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trpro.2020.08.023. 

[11]  Baharmand, H.; Comes, T. Leveraging Partnerships with Logistics Service Providers in Humanitarian Supply 

Chains by Blockchain-Based Smart Contracts. IFAC-Pap., 2019, 52 (13), 12–17. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ifacol.2019.11.084. 

[12]  Issaoui, Y.; Khiat, A.; Bahnasse, A.; Ouajji, H. Smart Logistics: Study of the Application of Blockchain 

Technology. Procedia Comput. Sci., 2019, 160, 266–271. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2019.09.467. 

15 

 
A Network based Blockchain ecosystem for publication review; FATAHI VALILAI, Omid 

Dec, 2021 

[13]  Abu-elezz, I.; Hassan, A.; Nazeemudeen, A.; Househ, M.; Abd-alrazaq, A. The Benefits and Threats of 

Blockchain Technology in Healthcare: A Scoping Review. Int. J. Med. Inf., 2020, 142, 104246. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2020.104246. 

[14]  Lin, J.; Shen, Z.; Zhang, A.; Chai, Y. Blockchain and IoT Based Food Traceability for Smart Agriculture. In 

Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Crowd Science and Engineering; ICCSE’18; Association for 
Computing Machinery: New York, NY, USA, 2018; pp 1–6. https://doi.org/10.1145/3265689.3265692. 

[15]  Awan, S. H.; Ahmed, S.; Nawaz, A.; Sulaiman, S.; Zaman, K.; Ali, M. Y.; Najam, Z.; Imran, S. BlockChain with IoT, 

an Emergent Routing Scheme for Smart Agriculture. Int. J. Adv. Comput. Sci. Appl., 2020, 11 (4). 
https://doi.org/10.14569/IJACSA.2020.0110457. 

[16]  Verma, M. Smart Contract Model for Trust Based Agriculture Using Blockchain Technology. 2021. 
[17]  Osmani, M.; El-Haddadeh, R.; Hindi, N.; Janssen, M.; Weerakkody, V. Blockchain for next Generation Services 
in Banking and Finance: Cost, Benefit, Risk and Opportunity Analysis. J. Enterp. Inf. Manag., 2020, 34 (3), 884–
899. https://doi.org/10.1108/JEIM-02-2020-0044. 

[18]  Buitenhek, M. Understanding and Applying Blockchain Technology in Banking: Evolution or Revolution? J. 

Digit. Bank., 2016, 1 (2), 111–119. 

[19]  Allessie, D.; Sobolewski, M.; Vaccari, L.; Pignatelli, F. Blockchain for Digital Government an Assessment of 

Pioneering Implementations in Public Services. In in JRC Science for Policy Report edt. Francesco Pignatelli; 
2019. 

[20]  Pilkington, M. Can Blockchain Improve Healthcare Management? Consumer Medical Electronics and the IoMT; 

SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 3025393; Social Science Research Network: Rochester, NY, 2017. 
https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3025393. 

[21]  Della Valle, F.; Oliver, M. A Guidance for Blockchain-Based Digital Transition in Supply Chains. Appl. Sci., 2021, 

11 (14), 6523. https://doi.org/10.3390/app11146523. 

[22]  Gill, S. S.; Tuli, S.; Xu, M.; Singh, I.; Singh, K. V.; Lindsay, D.; Tuli, S.; Smirnova, D.; Singh, M.; Jain, U.; et al. 

Transformative Effects of IoT, Blockchain and Artificial Intelligence on Cloud Computing: Evolution, Vision, 
Trends and Open Challenges. Internet Things, 2019, 8, 100118. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iot.2019.100118. 

[23]  Saberi, S.; Kouhizadeh, M.; Sarkis, J.; Shen, L. Blockchain Technology and Its Relationships to Sustainable 

Supply Chain Management. Int. J. Prod. Res., 2019, 57 (7), 2117–2135. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2018.1533261. 

[24]  Vergne, J. Decentralized vs. Distributed Organization: Blockchain, Machine Learning and the Future of the 

Digital Platform. Organ. Theory, 2020, 1 (4), 2631787720977052. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/2631787720977052. 

[25]  Self, K. How Blockchain Is Affecting Globalization; Malmö universitet/Kultur och samhälle, 2019. 
[26]  Prashar, D.; Jha, N.; Jha, S.; Lee, Y.; Joshi, G. P. Blockchain-Based Traceability and Visibility for Agricultural 
Products: A Decentralized Way of Ensuring Food Safety in India. Sustainability, 2020, 12 (8), 3497. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/su12083497. 

[27]  Spier, R. The History of the Peer-Review Process. Trends Biotechnol., 2002, 20 (8), 357–358. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/S0167-7799(02)01985-6. 

[28]  Tennant, J. P. The State of the Art in Peer Review. FEMS Microbiol. Lett., 2018, 365 (19), fny204. 

https://doi.org/10.1093/femsle/fny204. 

[29]  Benos, D. J.; Bashari, E.; Chaves, J. M.; Gaggar, A.; Kapoor, N.; LaFrance, M.; Mans, R.; Mayhew, D.; McGowan, 

S.; Polter, A.; et al. The Ups and Downs of Peer Review. Adv. Physiol. Educ., 2007, 31 (2), 145–152. 
https://doi.org/10.1152/advan.00104.2006. 

[30]  Lyman, R. L. A Three-Decade History of the Duration of Peer Review. J. Sch. Publ., 2013, 44 (3), 211–220. 

https://doi.org/10.3138/jsp.44.3.001. 

[31]  Lawrence, B.; Jones, C.; Matthews, B.; Pepler, S.; Callaghan, S. Citation and Peer Review of Data: Moving 

towards Formal Data Publication. Int. J. Digit. Curation, 2011, 6 (2), 4–37. 

[32]  Ali, P. A.; Watson, R. Peer Review and the Publication Process. Nurs. Open, 2016, 3 (4), 193–202. 

https://doi.org/10.1002/nop2.51. 

[33]  Burley, R. Peer Review in the 21st Century. Inf. Serv. Use, 2017, 37 (3), 259–261. https://doi.org/10.3233/ISU-

170850. 

[34]  Teixeira da Silva, J. A.; Tsigaris, P.; Al-Khatib, A. Open Access Mega-Journals: Quality, Economics and Post-

Publication Peer Review Infrastructure. Publ. Res. Q., 2019, 35 (3), 418–435. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12109-
019-09654-8. 

[35]  Rennie, D. Editorial Peer Review; Its Development and Rationale. In Peer Review in Health Science, ed. Fiona 

Godlee and Tom Jefferson; BMJ books: London, 1999. 

[36]  Kelly, J.; Sadeghieh, T.; Adeli, K. Peer Review in Scientific Publications: Benefits, Critiques, & A Survival Guide. 

EJIFCC, 2014, 25 (3), 227–243. 

[37]  Henderson, M. Problems with Peer Review. BMJ, 2010, 340, c1409. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.c1409. 
[38]  Mavrogenis, A. F.; Quaile, A.; Scarlat, M. M. The Good, the Bad and the Rude Peer-Review. Int. Orthop., 2020, 

44 (3), 413–415. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00264-020-04504-1. 

[39]  Stern, B. M.; O’Shea, E. K. A Proposal for the Future of Scientific Publishing in the Life Sciences. PLOS Biol., 

2019, 17 (2), e3000116. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3000116. 

[40]  Walker, R.; Rocha da Silva, P. Emerging Trends in Peer Review—a Survey. Front. Neurosci., 2015, 9, 169. 

https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2015.00169. 

16 

 
A Network based Blockchain ecosystem for publication review; FATAHI VALILAI, Omid 

Dec, 2021 

[41]  Kriegeskorte, N. Open Evaluation: A Vision for Entirely Transparent Post-Publication Peer Review and Rating 

for Science. Front. Comput. Neurosci., 2012, 6, 79. https://doi.org/10.3389/fncom.2012.00079. 

[42]  Csiszar, A. Peer Review: Troubled from the Start. Nature, 2016, 532 (7599), 306–308. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/532306a. 

[43]  Bowman, J. D. Predatory Publishing, Questionable Peer Review, and Fraudulent Conferences. Am. J. Pharm. 

Educ., 2014, 78 (10). https://doi.org/10.5688/ajpe7810176. 

[44]  Hope, A. A.; Munro, C. L. Criticism and Judgment: A Critical Look at Scientific Peer Review. Am. J. Crit. Care, 

2019, 28 (4), 242–245. https://doi.org/10.4037/ajcc2019152. 

[45]  Reinhart, M.; Schendzielorz, C. Trends in Peer Review. SocArXiv April 9, 2021. 

https://doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/nzsp5. 

[46]  Teixeira da Silva, J. A. Challenges to Open Peer Review. Online Inf. Rev., 2018, 43 (2), 197–200. 

https://doi.org/10.1108/OIR-04-2018-0139. 

[47]  Parsons, C. E.; Baglini, R. B. Peer Review: The Case for Neutral Language. Trends Cogn. Sci., 2021, 25 (8), 639–

641. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2021.05.003. 

[48]  Huckle, S.; Bhattacharya, R.; White, M.; Beloff, N. Internet of Things, Blockchain and Shared Economy 
Applications. Procedia Comput. Sci., 2016, 98, 461–466. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2016.09.074. 
[49]  Blossey, G.; Eisenhardt, J.; Hahn, G. Blockchain Technology in Supply Chain Management: An Application 

Perspective. Hawaii Int. Conf. Syst. Sci. 2019 HICSS-52, 2019. 

[50]  McGhin, T.; Choo, K.-K. R.; Liu, C. Z.; He, D. Blockchain in Healthcare Applications: Research Challenges and 
Opportunities. J. Netw. Comput. Appl., 2019, 135, 62–75. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jnca.2019.02.027. 
[51]  Radmanesh, S.-A.; Haji, A.; Valilai, O. F. Blockchain-Based Cloud Manufacturing Platforms: A Novel Idea for 

Service Composition in XaaS Paradigm. PeerJ Comput. Sci., 2021, 7, e743. https://doi.org/10.7717/peerj-
cs.743. 

[52]  Mohamed, N.; Al-Jaroodi, J. Applying Blockchain in Industry 4.0 Applications. In 2019 IEEE 9th Annual 

Computing and Communication Workshop and Conference (CCWC); 2019; pp 0852–0858. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/CCWC.2019.8666558. 

[53]  Hwang, J.; Choi, M.; Lee, T.; Jeon, S.; Kim, S.; Park, S.; Park, S. Energy Prosumer Business Model Using 

Blockchain System to Ensure Transparency and Safety. Energy Procedia, 2017, 141, 194–198. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egypro.2017.11.037. 

[54]  Yuan, Y.; Wang, F.-Y. Towards Blockchain-Based Intelligent Transportation Systems. In 2016 IEEE 19th 

International Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC); 2016; pp 2663–2668. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/ITSC.2016.7795984. 

[55]  Turkanović, M.; Hölbl, M.; Košič, K.; Heričko, M.; Kamišalić, A. EduCTX: A Blockchain-Based Higher Education 

Credit Platform. IEEE Access, 2018, 6, 5112–5127. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2789929. 

[56]  Wang, J.; Han, K.; Alexandridis, A.; Chen, Z.; Zilic, Z.; Pang, Y.; Jeon, G.; Piccialli, F. A Blockchain-Based 

EHealthcare System Interoperating with WBANs. Future Gener. Comput. Syst., 2020, 110, 675–685. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.future.2019.09.049. 

[57]  Terzi, S.; Votis, K.; Tzovaras, D.; Stamelos, I.; Cooper, K. Blockchain 3.0 Smart Contracts in E-Government 3.0 

Applications. ArXiv191006092 Cs, 2019. 

[58]  Khan, A. G.; Zahid, A. H.; Hussain, M.; Farooq, M.; Riaz, U.; Alam, T. M. A Journey of WEB and Blockchain 
towards the Industry 4.0: An Overview. In 2019 International Conference on Innovative Computing (ICIC); 
2019; pp 1–7. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICIC48496.2019.8966700. 

[59]  Alabdulwahhab, F. A. Web 3.0: The Decentralized Web Blockchain Networks and Protocol Innovation. In 2018 

1st International Conference on Computer Applications Information Security (ICCAIS); 2018; pp 1–4. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/CAIS.2018.8441990. 

[60]  Valeonti, F.; Bikakis, A.; Terras, M.; Speed, C.; Hudson-Smith, A.; Chalkias, K. Crypto Collectibles, Museum 

Funding and OpenGLAM: Challenges, Opportunities and the Potential of Non-Fungible Tokens (NFTs). Appl. 
Sci., 2021, 11 (21), 9931. https://doi.org/10.3390/app11219931. 

[61]  Cornelius, K. Betraying Blockchain: Accountability, Transparency and Document Standards for Non-Fungible 

Tokens (NFTs). Information, 2021, 12 (9), 358. https://doi.org/10.3390/info12090358. 

[62]  Wang, Q.; Li, R.; Wang, Q.; Chen, S. Non-Fungible Token (NFT): Overview, Evaluation, Opportunities and 

Challenges. ArXiv210507447 Cs, 2021. 

[63]  Arcenegui, J.; Arjona, R.; Román, R.; Baturone, I. Secure Combination of IoT and Blockchain by Physically 

Binding IoT Devices to Smart Non-Fungible Tokens Using PUFs. Sensors, 2021, 21 (9), 3119. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/s21093119. 

[64]  Ante, L. Non-Fungible Token (NFT) Markets on the Ethereum Blockchain: Temporal Development, 

Cointegration and Interrelations; SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 3904683; Social Science Research Network: 
Rochester, NY, 2021. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3904683. 

[65]  Nadini, M.; Alessandretti, L.; Di Giacinto, F.; Martino, M.; Aiello, L. M.; Baronchelli, A. Mapping the NFT 

Revolution: Market Trends, Trade Networks and Visual Features. Sci. Rep., 2021, 11 (1), 20902. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-00053-8. 

17 

 
 
 
