Blockchain-based Platform for Secure Sharing and
Validation of Vaccination Certiﬁcates

Mwrwan Abubakar, P´adraig McCarron, Zakwan Jaroucheh, Ahmed Al-Dubai William J Buchanan
Blockpass ID Lab
Edinburgh Napier University
Edinburgh, UK

1
2
0
2

c
e
D
1
2

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

2
v
4
2
1
0
1
.
2
1
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—The COVID-19 pandemic has recently emerged as
a worldwide health emergency that necessitates coordinated in-
ternational measures. To contain the virus’s spread, governments
and health organisations raced to develop vaccines that would
lower Covid-19 morbidity, relieve pressure on healthcare systems,
and allow economies to open. As a way forward after the COVID-
19 vaccination, the Vaccination certiﬁcate has been adopted to
help the authorities formulate policies by controlling cross-border
travelling. To resolve signiﬁcant privacy concerns and remove the
need for relying on third parties to maintain trust and control
the user’s data, in this paper, we leverage blockchain technologies
in developing a secure and veriﬁable vaccination certiﬁcate. Our
approach has the advantage of utilising a hybrid architecture
that implements different advanced technologies, such as smart
contracts, interPlanetary File System (IPFS), and Self-sovereign
Identity (SSI). We will rely on veriﬁable credentials paired with
smart contracts to implement on-chain access control decisions
and provide on-chain veriﬁcation and validation of the user and
issuer DIDs. The usability of this approach was further analysed,
particularly concerning performance and security. Our analysis
proved that our approach satisﬁes vaccination certiﬁcate security
requirements.

Keywords—COVID-19, Blockchain technology, smart contract,

SSI, IPFS.

I. INTRODUCTION

The shared epidemiological information system was origi-
nally established in the 1920s by the newly formed League of
Nations Health Organization in response to the 1918 pandemic
outbreak. It utilised a novel communication technology at the
time, wireless telegraphy, to share information about cases
between moving ships on the sea and land before the cases ar-
rived, thereby halting the disease’s spread [1]. Despite its long-
forgotten history, this system can teach us important lessons
about how international collaboration can use emerging tech-
nologies to tackle the recently discovered coronavirus-2019
(COVID-19). Due to its extreme contagiousness, COVID-19
has had an unprecedented worldwide impact. It has affected
human health as well as the global economy due to harsh coun-
termeasures such as lockdown implemented by governments
around the world. The ability of researchers to harness science
and new technology to develop treatments or exchange infor-
mation about diseases has never been stronger than it is now.
The capacity to quickly communicate information has been
critical in the ﬁght against COVID-19. As the globe mobilises

to combat the COVID-19 epidemic, Information Technology
(IT) has shown to be extremely beneﬁcial in stopping the
spread of the virus. To combat the COVID-19 epidemic, World
Health Organization (WHO) has received enormous pro-bono
assistance from technological businesses. On April 2, 2020,
technology professionals
40 of the world’s leading digital
convened in a virtual roundtable to further the WHO’s joint
response to COVID-19 [2]. Additionally, various open-source
IT platforms have emerged, facilitating data exchange and
enabling a better coordinated worldwide response to the in-
fection. For instance, contact tracing provided a systematic
approach to curb infectious disease transmission. Modes of
delivering healthcare services have also been reshaped by
technology to break the transmission cycle of COVID-19. For
instance, several countries have enhanced their use of robots
to disinfect areas, transport medical samples, automate testing
and promote public safety [3]. Drones have also been used
to carry crucial medical supplies to rural areas [4]. How-
ever, all sectors must act to ensure compliance with baseline
COVID-19 mitigations and further targeted, and proportionate
steps must be considered to further decrease risk. Vaccine
certiﬁcation is one example of such a measure. Vaccination
certiﬁcates aid in the prevention and control of COVID-19
spread by enabling the authorities and governments to develop
rules that permit cross-border travel for those who possess this
certiﬁcate. Unlike traditional paper vaccination certiﬁcates,
increase interoperability and
electronic documentation will
accountability by reducing data inconsistency across several
sources, such as medical centres or governments. Thus, it
would be more credible to follow pandemic progress across
many countries.

A. Problem statement

While the realisation of vaccination certiﬁcates represents
the spread of
the main objective to prevent and control
COVID-19 and helps locked down countries reopen their
economies, the vaccination certiﬁcate’s security is also as-
sociated with signiﬁcant challenges. It will undoubtedly be
a challenge to keep this information accurate and secure
and work across different systems that will consume this
data. According to [5], forged Covid-19 documentation is
now being openly sold on dark web in 29 countries with

 
 
 
 
 
 
prices ranging from US$85-US$200. In addition, we have seen
how cyber-attackers have targeted Ireland’s healthcare system
early this year in May, which resulted in the Department of
Health shutting down their IT system and causing substantial
cancellations to outpatient services [6]. In another instance,
an independent researcher discovered a signiﬁcant ﬂaw in the
Services Australia COVID-19 digital vaccine certiﬁcate that
allows an attacker to forge someone’s vaccination status [7].
So, therefore, the recent availability of vaccines for COVID-19
makes it urgently necessary to consider proper infrastructures
for vaccination certiﬁcates. Issues with current solutions are
that they are centralised and lack privacy.

1) Centralisation: The legacy authentication and access
control practices used to get access to critical COVID-19-
related data are mostly centralised, necessitating the establish-
ment of a centralised trust for proper operation. Authentica-
tion data is stored and managed by many service providers.
Furthermore, the centralisation of effective security solutions,
such as Public Key Infrastructure (PKI), would cause scal-
ability issues due to the thousands of nodes connected [8].
Furthermore, working on a centralised authority comes with its
own set of vulnerabilities, such as a single point of failure. As a
result, collaboration options among collaborating organisations
may be limited.

2) Lack Privacy:

Issues with centralised trust

is often
solved by utilising third-party data backup providers. By
relying on a third party to collect and analyse such data, the
risk of exposure is effectively increased. As a result, digital
vaccination certiﬁcates have cast doubt on the protection
of certain persons’ fundamental rights. As relying on third
parties to manage the trust could enable the acquisition of
personal information without the users’ agreement, resulting
in major data leakage risks. Additionally, individuals have
limited or no control over their sensitive personal information.

To help achieve self-sovereignty and increase the adoption
there is a need for
of the digital vaccination certiﬁcate,
more dependable solutions with privacy-preserving and user-
centric access control. On the other hand, blockchain and
decentralised approaches have tremendous opportunities in this
context. The decentralisation of trust is increasingly becoming
a dominant direction, creating potential opportunities to man-
age authentication and access control in a decentralised and
autonomous manner. Blockchain coupled with smart contract
technology [9] eliminates the reliance on central servers to
manage the trust. All the connected entities on the blockchain
network will have a copy of them, which provide an equal
right to control all contract operations. In addition, blockchain
provides immutability properties. This means that transactions
recorded in the blockchain cannot be modiﬁed or altered, guar-
anteeing high system trustworthiness and integrity. Besides,
access control using blockchain can achieve the transparency
property with the ability to effectively solve the issue of data
leakage, which can be caused by relying on a third party [9].
Motivated by such advantages of blockchain and distributed
ledger technology, in this paper, we aim to build a blockchain-

based platform for sharing vaccination data to enable a secure
and privacy-aware veriﬁcation process. For this, we utilised the
Ethereum blockchain system and smart contract technology
to build a secure and scalable decentralised architecture for
vaccination certiﬁcates creation and veriﬁcation. The remain-
der of this paper are structured as follows. After introducing
the topic in Section 1, we provide an overview of related
work in Section 2 and summarise our main contribution. In
section 3, we present a background on blockchain technology
and the Self-Sovereign Identity (SSI) principles. Subsequently,
we elaborate on our proposed solution in section 4 and
describe the system design in section 5. Then, we present
the implementation of our system in section 6. We further
provide the performance and security analysis of our approach
in section 7. Finally, we conclude the paper in Section 8.

II. RELATED WORK AND OUR CONTRIBUTION

Since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, the scientiﬁc
community has taken a keen interest in health data exchange
and monitoring. A signiﬁcant of current research focuses on
developing a secure and privacy-preserving method for sharing
and verifying vaccination certiﬁcates. The study presented in
[10] investigated the currently proposed blockchain solutions
for mitigating the COVID-19 challenges. The authors iden-
tiﬁed that the most prevalent applications of blockchains for
limiting COVID-19 implications are contact tracing and sup-
port for immunity and vaccination certiﬁcates. Additionally,
a European Parliament ofﬁcial study [11] names blockchains
as one of 10 technologies to tackle COVID-19 and cites
infection tracking and health data monitoring as two of the
most prominent cases. For the realisation of this COVID-19
vaccination data-sharing platform, blockchain technology has
been postulated in different related scenarios. For instance, the
authors of [12] proposed Veriﬁable Credentials (VC) for the
vaccination certiﬁcates that can be stored directly on the user
mobile phone. The data relating to vaccination can be stored
in different organisations and can only be reviewed through
a cryptographical mechanism. However, the presented work
was just a conceptional proposal without providing proof of
concept or evaluation. Another use of the VC was presented in
[13], where the authors developed a prototype mobile phone
app and the decentralised server architecture. The presented
work relies on the Veriﬁable Credentials concepts. Alter-
natively, several research efforts were proposed blockchain
and smart contracts for securing vaccination certiﬁcates. For
instance, the authors of [14] present the concept of digital
health passports, which rely on a private blockchain that use
the proof-of-authority consensus for registering and storing
test results. Similarly, the work presented in [15] proposes a
blockchain-based platform for the secure sharing of COVID-
19 or other disease vaccination certiﬁcates. The proposed
architecture relies on the deployment of Hyperledger Fabric on
an emulated network in EPIC. Another solution was proposed
in [16], which suggests the use of the InterPlanetary File
System (IPFS) to decentralise the storage of medical tests
and travel history. The presented approach is also utilising

the power of smart contracts provided by Ethereum. However,
most of the proposed approaches presented a general high-
level description of the architectures of the blockchain-based
systems. Instead, we aim to present a proof of concept to
demonstrate our approach. Compared to previous methodolo-
gies, our approach has the advantage of utilising a hybrid
architecture that implements different advanced technologies,
such as the smart contract, IPFS system, and SSI concepts.

A. Our Contribution

Our main contributions in the paper can be summarised as

follows:

• We propose a blockchain-based solution for the creation

and validation of vaccination certiﬁcates.

• We developed a Self-sovereign Identity (SSI) model for
secure sharing and verifying vaccination certiﬁcates.
• A smart contracts to implement on-chain access control

decisions.

• A proof-of-concept implementation of the proposed so-
lution along with performance and security Analysis to
verify the feasibility of our solution.

III. BACKGROUND ON BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY

Blockchain is a peer-to-peer network that keeps track of
transactions in a distributed, decentralised, and immutable
manner [17]. A node is any device that contributes to the
network. A transaction is a data unit on the Blockchain, and
a Block is a collection of transactions. The cryptographic
hash of a Block in the distributed ledger is used to link it
to a previously approved Block [17]. Because there is no
single point of failure, the decentralised element of blockchain
technology ensures the data and transactions stored on the
blockchain are secure. The blockchain’s transaction and data
record is transparent to all network participants, creating trust
in the data’s trustworthiness and availability. The consensus
mechanism is a system that enables the blockchain’s network
nodes to reach an agreement on the ledger’s present state.
Consensus is at the core of Blockchain technology since it en-
sures the network’s integrity and security. Different blockchain
systems employ different consensus mechanisms, and as a
result, their operation and execution are distinct from one
another [18]. Cryptography and hashing methods ensure the
integrity and immutability of transactions on the blockchain
network. Asymmetric cryptography is used in blockchain to
conﬁrm the validity and integrity of data. Cryptographic hash-
ing is also employed to connect each block to its predecessor.
Blockchains can be classiﬁed as public, private, or consortium
based on their membership. Any user can become a member
of public blockchains. There are no limitations on member-
ship, and they are just pseudo-anonymous. Public blockchains
include Bitcoin and Ethereum. While private blockchains are
owned and maintained by a business or organisation. On the
other hand, a group of organisations or a private community
owns and operates consortium blockchains. Due to the limited
number of participants, private and consortium blockchains
execute transactions more quickly than their public equivalents

[19]. Hyperledger and Corda are two examples of permis-
sioned blockchains.

A. Smart contract

This term was ﬁrst used by Nick Szabo in 1994 [20] to
refer to a theoretical concept of computer software that can be
used to digitally enforce and verify contract negotiation. In the
context of blockchain, this phrase refers to self-executed soft-
ware that is stored on a blockchain system and executes when
certain circumstances are met. Without the requirement for a
central authority, legal system, or external enforcement mech-
anism, smart contracts enable the execution of trustworthy
transactions and agreements between disparate, anonymous
parties. While blockchain technology has historically been
connected with Bitcoin, smart contracts in Bitcoin were limited
to exchanging values between users when certain requirements
are met. In Ethereum, however, the smart contract is treated as
an entity with a unique account and address. This account can
interface with other contracts, sending and receiving digital
currency, as well as storing data. To allow developers to
design their own smart contracts, Ethereum replaced Bitcoin’s
complex language with a Turing complete language called
solidity. They are often used to automate the implementation
of an agreement so that all participants are immediately certain
of the outcome, with no intermediary involvement or time
lost. They can also automate a workﬂow, activating the next
operation when certain circumstances are satisﬁed [9].

B. Decentralised identity

Identity management methods are used to determine user
identities. Third-party apps or protocols, such as single-point
services or identity providers, control and preserve the identity
of most modern systems’ users. However, the primary chal-
lenge with data security is trusting the people or organisations
entrusted to assure protection. In this situation, the speciﬁed
suppliers own the identity, not the legitimate proprietors. With
the advancement of blockchain technology, the use of self-
sovereign identities (SSI) [21] has expanded, leveraging the
beneﬁts of decentralisation. Users get authority and ownership
of their own identities through the usage of SSI, as well as
other beneﬁts such as decentralised control and privacy. To
actualize SSI, two critical standards must be implemented:
Veriﬁable Credentials (VCs) [22] and Decentralized Identiﬁers
(DIDs) [23]. VCs play a critical role in permitting authen-
ticated attribute disclosure and privacy-aware identiﬁcation,
whereas DIDs focus exclusively on cryptographic identiﬁca-
tion.

IV. THE PROPOSED SOLUTION

This section explains the proposed blockchain-based plat-
form for secure and user-centric vaccination certiﬁcates ver-
iﬁcation. Our approach utilises the Veriﬁable Credentials
(VC) for cryptographically using different keys to encrypt
and decrypt sensitive information with the goal of deﬁning
applications respecting the fundamental rights of citizens. To
resolve signiﬁcant privacy concerns and remove the need for

relying on third parties to maintain trust and control
the
user’s personal data used for authentication, we will rely
on the Ethereum blockchain, which allows us to use smart
contracts. We rely on the smart contract to implement on-chain
access control decisions and to provide on chain veriﬁcation
and validation of the user and issuers DIDs. The users can
interact with the smart contract by issuing transactions signed
by their private key. The hash of the used key is taken as
the user’s address and will be used to associate the user
with their vaccination certiﬁcate. However, storing vaccina-
tion certiﬁcates information in the blockchain would be very
expensive in terms of the storage needed and the time it takes
to write data to the blockchain. For this, we propose using
the InterPlanetary File System (IPFS) [24] to store vaccination
certiﬁcates and medical tests in a decentralised manner. During
the program’s preliminary phase, after the user gets vaccinated,
the vaccination provider centre will create a VC, which will be
encrypted and stored into the IPFS system. Only the hash of
VC location in the IPFS will be sent to the smart contract and
mapped to the user public address. After which, we implement
a decentralised identity model, which will be tasked with
managing the users’ identities. This will be accomplished by
utilising self-sovereign identity (SSI). With our approach, we
no longer need a central trusted authority. The application also
allows users to store their vaccination information straight
on their mobile devices, which can be accessed during the
veriﬁcation phase, which uses our decentralised web appli-
cation to request VC from the user. Due to the need for
two shots of vaccines is required to be effective. Therefore,
vaccination certiﬁcates could be only issued when both shots
are administered to the citizen. However, using our approach,
each vaccination shot could be associated with a VC so that
it can be used to prove that a citizen has already received
the ﬁrst shot. In addition, by recording test information, our
technique will further provide a solution for those who have
not been vaccinated but have lately tested negative. This
would accommodate vaccine passports for travel where both
vaccination and a negative test are required while also allowing
the use of the same system where either vaccination or a
negative test is allowed. Our blockchain-based approach will
allow interoperability and accountability properties so that
potential discrepancies among data from different sources,
such as medical centres or governments, could be avoided.
A simple lookup in the distributed ledger will help verify
the authenticity and integrity of the users’ information. In
addition, the use of self-sovereign identities and veriﬁable
credentials minimises the use of personal data putting the
needed data under the holder’s control, underpinned by good
security design practices based on the blockchain.

V. SYSTEM DESIGN

This section presents a detailed explanation of the design of
the proposed decentralised testing and vaccination certiﬁcation
systems. Our system design consists of three main entities: the
smart contract, the IPFS system, and the Self-Sovereign Iden-
tity (SSI) model to create and validate Veriﬁable Credentials

(VC). Figure 4 presents a high-level design of a blockchain-
based system to create a secure veriﬁable vaccination and
testing certiﬁcate.

A. Blockchain and smart contract

The proposed model exploits the advantages of blockchain
and smart contracts technologies in developing a secure ver-
iﬁable vaccination and testing certiﬁcate. We use Ethereum-
based blockchain on the proposed model to store information
in a distributed manner while maintaining consistency. Using
an Ethereum-based blockchain is because it provides an open-
source, public, distributed computing platform featuring smart
contract (scripting) functionality. The smart contract is used in
our approach to interfacing with data stored on the blockchain.
They also offer resilience by executing smart contract code
across all blockchain nodes. The web3 JS library, which uses
the RPC to interact with the smart contract, will be used
to access all the services written in the smart contract. The
smart contracts will be used in our system to help to store an
immutable record of users’ policies and authorisation infor-
mation, the registration of medical centres. The certiﬁcation
of these centres can be made by the health authority. The
smart contract will also implement policies such as on-chain
access control decisions. Our smart contract can be used in
two different scenarios: it can be used to issue immunisation
certiﬁcates, and it can also be used to manage testing results.

B. IPFS distributed ﬁle storage

The InterPlanetary File System (IPFS) is used for decen-
tralised off-chain document storing. It would be exceedingly
expensive to keep all of the documentation associated with
COVID-19 immunisation certiﬁcates and testing results on-
chain. As a result, it is critical to store this data in a decen-
tralised and secure manner. IPFS storage is distributed and is
open to the public. As a result, data saved on IPFS should be
encrypted, and only authorised entities should be able to view
unencrypted content. Therefore, we proposed encrypting the
certiﬁcate ﬁles in our system architecture before uploading
them to the IPFS servers. Only the authorised receiver can
access the cleartext because the smart contract governs access
to an encrypted certiﬁcate from the IPFS system.

C. Self-sovereign identity (SSI) model

1) Issuer: Creating this certiﬁcate necessitates the estab-
lishment of an effective identity management architecture to
associate citizen immunisation with their digital identity to
ensure that
the ﬁnal certiﬁcate is scalable, veriﬁable, and
preserving citizens’ privacy. This was accomplished in this
case by utilising uPort’s decentralised identity capabilities
[25], which enables issuing veriﬁable claims containing the
vaccination certiﬁcate. By establishing an identity rooted in the
Ethereum blockchain, uPort can leverage Ethereum’s veriﬁca-
tion and security features. We employed DIDs along with VCs,
in which the certiﬁcate’s issuer asserts vaccination information
included in the VC in a way that can be veriﬁed by other
veriﬁers that require proof of citizens’ vaccination. The system

Fig. 1. The proposed System

design is presented in ﬁgure 1. The citizen ﬁrst needs to go
to an authorised medical centre and present a valid identity
document to get vaccinated and get a vaccination certiﬁcate
issued. Because the vaccine is only effective after two doses.
As a result, vaccination certiﬁcates could only be issued to
citizens who had gotten both injections. In this case, our VC
can represent that the citizen has received the ﬁrst shot, so it
can be used in administering the second one or can represent
that the person is immune as they already received both shots.
To ensure the VC’s legitimacy, the medical centre or a prac-
titioner who performed the vaccine must sign it and include
the issuer DID. Additionally, the citizen needs to produce a
DID for embedding it in the VC using the uPort identiﬁcation
app. Additional information about the vaccine being given is
contained in the VC, such as information regarding the speciﬁc
doses of a particular vaccine. These bits of information may
be used to certify and validate various vaccines. The VC will
be encrypted and then sent to the IPFS, while only the IPFS
hash is kept in the smart contract and mapped to the citizen’s
decentralised identity, which representing the citizen public
key pair. However, encryption of the certiﬁcate is out of the
scope of this paper.

2) Veriﬁer: Citizens who have gotten a vaccination certiﬁ-
cate based on VC can use it to gain access to venues that
need vaccination veriﬁcation or can use it if travelling abroad.

The VC is veriﬁed by a veriﬁable presentation in which the
veriﬁer seeks the vaccination certiﬁcate from the citizen. The
VC request will be sent as a JWT encoded in a QR code,
which the citizen Uport identity mobile app must scan. The
veriﬁcation service examines the medical centre’s signature to
ensure an authorised authority generates the credential. This
can be achieved by querying the smart contract to match the
issuer DID with the ones that are whitelisted. Furthermore, it
validates the VC as well as the citizens’ DID to conﬁrm that it
is the person linked with the credential supplied. These checks
can be carried out by utilising the DIDs associated with the
issuer (i.e., medical centre) and subject (i.e., the citizen DID)
encoded in the VC. the veriﬁer requests authentication from
the user by presenting the challenge of uPort as QR code.
The QR code is comprised of a JWT [26] that is signed by
the identity of our web application.

3) Zero-Knowledge Proof (ZKP): Additionally, Covid-19
certiﬁcates would need to grant people a quick access into a
venue based on a simple yes or no response. Our approach
presented a zero-knowledge proof model in which the user
can perform a veriﬁable presentation by displaying a portion
of the credential’s properties. Our solution enables selective
publication of identity data while protecting users’ privacy
by utilising zero-knowledge proofs. This procedure may be
advantageous for gaining admission to certain locations that

demand merely conﬁrmation of a person’s vaccination status
but not personal information.

VI. IMPLEMENTATION

The use case developed in this paper involves a vaccina-
tion/testing centre who creates a VC that includes the citizen’s
vaccination certiﬁcate or a testing result. The citizens can
receive their certiﬁcate directly into their mobile app, which
can then be presented to a third party or a veriﬁer to prove
their vaccination status. The prototype is made up of ﬁve
main components, including the smart contract, issuer, veriﬁer,
IPFS for decentralised data storage, and the decentralised VC
recovery application.

1) Smart contract implementation: As a proof of concept,
we implemented Ethereum smart contracts. The Ethereum
network was chosen due to its capacity for smart contract
deployment and the assistance that comes with its popularity.
We chose Solidity [27] to create our smart contracts, a turing
complete language that enables the development of smart con-
tracts in Ethereum blockchain systems. Then, we utilised the
Ethereum-based integrated development environment (IDE)
Remix [28] to create, review, and deploy smart contracts
over the Ethereum network. Additionally, the IDE includes
a compiler for testing the functioning of smart contracts.
Examples of these functions are presented below.

Algorithm 1 Only Owner

1: modiﬁer onlyOwner() {.
2: require(msg.sender == owner);

Algorithm 2 Trusted Veriﬁers only
1: modiﬁer onlyWhitelisted() {
2: require(isWhitelisted(msg.sender));

Algorithm 3 Centres addition

1: function addaddressaddress public onlyOwner {
2: whitelist[ address] = true;
3: emit AddedToWhitelis( address);

Algorithm 4 Centres Veriﬁcation
1: function isWhitelisted(address

turns(bool) {

2: return whitelist[ address]; }

address) public view re-

In addition, we used the web3.js Ethereum JavaScript API
to interface with an Ethereum node running on Infura [29]
to facilitate communication between our application and the
Ethereum network. The Ethereum-based Uport identity mobile
application will be used as an Ethereum user’s wallet. We used
WebSockets as the transport to deliver a backup of vaccination
certiﬁcates from our web application to an IPFS node.

2) SSI implementation: Using uPort identity functionality,
we created the issuer and veriﬁer interfaces as well as a
decentralised identity architecture. Our web application is
made up of a variety of resources. HTML templates, JavaScript
ﬁles, CSS ﬁles, image ﬁles, and server-side implementation
code are all examples of this. Implementing the SSI concepts
in our proposed model has been associated with the use
of Decentralized Identiﬁers (DID) and Veriﬁable Credentials
(VC), which are being standardised by the World Wide Web
Consortium (W3C). A DID is an identiﬁer controlled by a DID
subject that denotes a DID method and a speciﬁc identiﬁcation
for that method. Furthermore, A DID is also resolved to a DID
document that deﬁnes the veriﬁcation process. To verify the
VC, the veriﬁer will ask for the citizen’s vaccination certiﬁcate
in a veriﬁable presentation. The VC request will be issued
as a JWT embedded in a QR code. The uPort mobile app
decodes the code and veriﬁes the JWT’s signature after it is
scanned. In addition, the app points to the requested attributes
and requests permission from the user to communicate the
corresponding veriﬁed claims to our application. The user will
be alerted of the request via their uPort app and given the
option to decline or approve it using a ﬁngerprint or mobile
pin code. In response, the uPort identity mobile app creates a
new JWT containing the veriﬁable claim and transfers it to the
callback address included in the authentication challenge. Our
decentralised web application will process the received JWT
and verify the citizen’s signature.

VII. EVALUATION

This section assesses the proposed vaccine certiﬁcate plat-
form and demonstrates its security and efﬁciency for applica-
tion in real-world contexts, including performance study, ﬁnan-
cial costs, and its security properties. To assess our system’s
performance, we created the issuer and veriﬁer web interfaces
according to our planned design. Our testing conﬁguration
is based on a MacBook Air 2018 equipped with a 256GB
SSD drive, 8GB RAM, and a 1.6 GHz dual-core Intel Core i5
processor.

A. Performance analysis

1) CPU utilisation: We measured storage and processor
utilisation using the activity monitor application on our sys-
tem. Our assessment discovered that even in the worst-case
scenario, CPU use remains below 40%. While the veriﬁcation
process, which involves requesting veriﬁable credentials (VC)
from the citizen Uport app, consumes less than 20% of the
CPU power. This is due to the fact that it executes these
operations off-chain. On the other hand, CPU utilisation for
querying the smart contract to verify citizens’ and issuers’
DIDs is costing less than 3% of available CPU power. This is
because these operations are designed as view functions, which
means they have no CPU overhead, delay, or cost because
they just read the state of the blockchain without modifying
it in any way. In general, we observed that our application
has a low computational burden. Additionally, our technique
consumes very little memory and storage space because the

immunisation certiﬁcate is not saved locally by our application
but is instead stored directly on the user’s smartphone and/or
on the IPFS.

2) End to end delay: We used the internal time function
of the MacBook to determine the total time required to issue
and verify VC as shown in Fig. 2. On the x-axis, the number
of concurrent users is shown. The y-axis depicts the execution
time of a single request. The time required to request and
verify VC from the user can be summarised as follows. The
time required to request and verify VC from the user can be
summarised as follows. The time required to construct the
JWT authentication challenge delivered in the form of a QR
code ranges from 1.5 seconds with one concurrent user to 7
seconds with 10 simultaneous users. While the time required
for the complete veriﬁcation process, including the creation
and authentication of the JWT challenge and processing the
response to receiving VC from the user, is approximately 5
seconds with a single concurrent user and the time required
for 10 simultaneous users is around 22 seconds. Overall,
the number of concurrent users increases the execution times
signiﬁcantly.

Fig. 2. End to end delay

While the veriﬁcation process has a lower execution time
overhead, registration has a much greater one. This is because
it needs to sign the transaction to be submitted to the smart
contract. In the end, though, this is a problem that should
be expected when using the open Ethereum network. This is
because it takes an average of 13 seconds to complete the
transactions. Overall, the number of concurrent users increases
the execution times signiﬁcantly.

3) Transaction’s cost: Additionally, each transaction and
interaction with the smart contract on the Ethereum blockchain
costs a speciﬁc amount of gas. As illustrated in Figure 3, the
cost of deploying smart contracts is the highest. Nonetheless,
this cost is variable, as it depends on various criteria, including
transaction speed and required storage. However, it is vital to
emphasise that our implementation is built on the Rinkeby
testing environment, which is free to use because Ethereum
offers this testing network with free Ethers.

B. Security analysis

Our solution complies with the three primary security
standards. This is known as the CIA’s security triad (Con-
ﬁdentiality, Integrity and Availability). Availability refers to

Fig. 3. Gas consumption

the availability of services upon request. Integrity ensures
that messages reach their intended recipients intact, while
conﬁdentiality ensures that the system is accessible only to
those with authorization. We then conducted an analysis of
our system’s security in light of these security standards.

1) Conﬁdentiality: The cryptographic technology used to
establish a blockchain ensures that transactions recorded in
the blockchain are exceedingly secure. Our solution will make
use of the blockchain’s asymmetric encryption technology to
ensure that only authorised users have access to the system.
2) Integrity: It is incredibly impossible for anyone to edit
or modify anything after it has been stored on the blockchain.
As a result, because user access control rolls and challenges
signed with the user’s private key are immutable, the system
does not allow them to be modiﬁed.

3) Availability: Our design ensures that data pertaining to
the veriﬁcation and authentication processes recorded on the
blockchain is readily available at all times. The transaction
data is replicated and updated on each node. It doesn’t matter
whether a node is removed from the network unintentionally,
maliciously, or otherwise rendered unavailable; the network as
a whole will continue to operate. As a result, our system will
provide an extremely high level of availability.

4) Auditing: In addition, any node in the blockchain has
the ability to approve any modiﬁcations made to any of the
blockchain’s linked blocks, regardless of where they occur.
The ability to trace blockchain transactions and build high-
quality security intelligence around those transactions allows
organisations to assure the traceability of blockchain transac-
tions while also enabling for the auditing and tracking of data
changes.

5) Security of our system: Our evaluation revealed that our
system would remain secure in the face of various threats.
For instance, a common hazard to any website is attackers
gaining access to a website where a user has an account. As a
result, attackers may be able to access the user’s password
and other accounts that share the same password. In our
solution we eliminated the need for a user password to gain
access to a user’s digital certiﬁcate in our system. Rather than
that, we rely on veriﬁable credentials that refer to the DID
assigned. Our strategy ensures an unwavering commitment

to secrecy and integrity. It is supported by the issuer’s DID
and cryptographic proof in order to ensure the security of
data transmission between users and our online application.
However, while a lost or forgotten password may be readily
changed in password-based systems, losing the private key
results in asset loss in blockchain-based SSI systems. To mit-
igate these concerns, uPort provides a delegation mechanism
into two unique contracts dubbed the controller contract and
the proxy contract. This enables uPort users to reclaim their
identities in the event of a private key loss. Furthermore, if the
system is subjected to a man in the middle (MITM) attack,
our proposed system will be immune because our model
makes use of the cryptographic signature to help prevent any
MITM attacks. Additionally, attackers may conduct a denial-
of-service attack (DoS) to make it difﬁcult for authorised users
to access the service by raising trafﬁc or performing fraudulent
transactions. However, because blockchain is decentralised,
our model becomes resistant to DoS and DDoS-related attacks.
Due to Ethereum’s enormous number of mining nodes, it is
extremely resistant to DDoS attacks.

VIII. CONCLUSIONS

This paper presented the design and implementation of
a blockchain-based solution for digital vaccination and test-
ing certiﬁcate. The proposed approach utilises the Ethereum
blockchain system and smart contract technologies to facil-
itate secure vaccination certiﬁcate creation and veriﬁcation.
Additionally, our system will feature a decentralised identity
architecture that will be responsible for managing users’
identities. This will be accomplished by using self-sovereign
identiﬁcation (SSI) reinforced by solid security design stan-
dards included on an Ethereum blockchain smart contract.
Finally, the security of our system and an attacks model have
been analysed to prove the feasibility of our system. It is
feasible that our approach satisﬁes the security requirements
for vaccination certiﬁcate and meet future demands. Our
solution showed enhancements in security and users’ privacy.
In addition, we provided an analysis of the performance and
the associated transactions costs. We observe that our approach
provides negligible memory and CPU usage. However, the
transactions cost and key management are the major draw-
backs that need to be considered. Finally, we hope that our
design provides advantages in the area of user authentication
and a source of motivation for further research into this ﬁeld.

REFERENCES

[1] H. Tworek, “The promise and peril of anti-pandemic technology,”
https://www.brookings.edu/techstream/the-promise-and-peril-of-anti-
pandemic-technology/, note = Accessed: 30 Oct 2021, December 10,
2020.
[2] “Digital

roundtable with

sector,”

private

virtual

health

the

https://www.who.int/director-general/speeches/detail/digital-health-
virtual-roundtable-with-the-private-sector, accessed: 30 Oct 2021.
[3] R. R. Murphy, J. Adams, and V. B. M. Gandudi, “Robots are playing
many roles in the coronavirus crisis—and offering lessons for future
disasters,” The Conversation, vol. 22, 2020.

[4] V. Chamola, V. Hassija, V. Gupta, and M. Guizani, “A comprehensive
review of the covid-19 pandemic and the role of iot, drones, ai,
blockchain, and 5g in managing its impact,” Ieee access, vol. 8, pp.
90 225–90 265, 2020.

[5] “Covid-19

‘vaccines’

touted

for

just

$250

on

darknet,”

https://blog.checkpoint.com/2020/12/11/covid-19-vaccines-touted-
for-just-250-on-darknet/, January 12th, 2021, accessed: 30 Oct 2021.
[6] “Cyberattack on hse systems prompts cancellation of key medical
https://www.irishtimes.com/news/health/cyberattack-

procedures,”
on-hse-systems-prompts-cancellation-of-key-medical-procedures-
1.4565631, May 15, 2021, accessed: 30 Oct 2021.

[7] B. Bracken, “Australian immunization app bug lets attackers fake vac-
cine status,” https://threatpost.com/spooﬁng-bug-cybersecurity-vaccine-
passports/169287/, September 8, 2021, accessed: 30 Oct 2021.

[8] A. Slagell, R. Bonilla, and W. Yurcik, “A survey of pki components and
scalability issues,” in 2006 IEEE International Performance Computing
and Communications Conference.

IEEE, 2006, pp. 10–pp.

[9] V. Buterin et al., “A next-generation smart contract and decentralized

application platform,” white paper, vol. 3, no. 37, 2014.

[10] L. Ricci, D. D. F. Maesa, A. Favenza, and E. Ferro, “Blockchains for
covid-19 contact tracing and vaccine support: A systematic review,”
IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 37 936–37 950, 2021.

[11] M. Kritikos. Ten technologies to ﬁght coronavirus. [Online]. Available:

https://www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/IDAN/2020/641543/EPRS IDA(2020)641543 EN.pdf

[12] K. K. Tsoi, J. J. Sung, H. W. Lee, K. K. Yiu, H. Fung, and S. Y. Wong,
“The way forward after covid-19 vaccination: vaccine passports with
blockchain to protect personal privacy,” BMJ Innovations, vol. 7, no. 2,
2021.

[13] M. Eisenstadt, M. Ramachandran, N. Chowdhury, A. Third, and
J. Domingue, “Covid-19 antibody test/vaccination certiﬁcation: there’s
an app for that,” IEEE Open Journal of Engineering in Medicine and
Biology, vol. 1, pp. 148–155, 2020.

[14] C. M. Angelopoulos, A. Damianou, and V. Katos, “Dhp framework: Dig-
ital health passports using blockchain–use case on international tourism
during the covid-19 pandemic,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.08922, 2020.
[15] J. L. Hern´andez-Ramos, G. Karopoulos, D. Geneiatakis, T. Martin,
G. Kambourakis, and I. N. Fovino, “Sharing pandemic vaccination
certiﬁcates through blockchain: Case study and performance evaluation,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.04575, 2021.

[16] H. R. Hasan, K. Salah, R. Jayaraman, J. Arshad, I. Yaqoob, M. Omar,
and S. Ellahham, “Blockchain-based solution for covid-19 digital med-
ical passports and immunity certiﬁcates,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp.
222 093–222 108, 2020.

[17] S. Nakamoto, “Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system,” Decen-

tralized Business Review, p. 21260, 2008.

[18] G.-T. Nguyen and K. Kim, “A survey about consensus algorithms used
in blockchain,” Journal of Information processing systems, vol. 14, no. 1,
pp. 101–128, 2018.

[19] R. Lai and D. L. K. Chuen, “Blockchain–from public to private,” in
Handbook of Blockchain, Digital Finance, and Inclusion, Volume 2.
Elsevier, 2018, pp. 145–177.
[20] N. Szabo, “Smart contracts,” 1994.
[21] A. Tobin and D. Reed, “The inevitable rise of self-sovereign identity,”

The Sovrin Foundation, vol. 29, no. 2016, 2016.

[22] W. W. W. Consortium et al., “Veriﬁable credentials data model 1.0: Ex-
pressing veriﬁable information on the web,” https://www. w3. org/TR/vc-
data-model/?# core-data-model, 2019.

[23] D. Reed, L. Chasen, and R. Network, “Requirements for dids (decen-
tralized identiﬁers),” in Rebooting the Web of Trust II: ID2020 Design
Workshop, 2016.

[24] J. Benet, “Ipfs-content addressed, versioned, p2p ﬁle system,” arXiv

preprint arXiv:1407.3561, 2014.

[25] “Self-sovereign identity and user-centric data platform on ethereum,”
https://medium.com/uport/tagged/ethereum, accessed: 30 Oct 2021.
[26] M. Jones and J. Bradley, “N. sakimura,” json web token (jwt),” RFC
7519, DOI 10.17487/RFC7519, May 2015,¡ https://www. rfc-editor.
org/info . . . , Tech. Rep., 2012.

[27] C. Dannen, Introducing Ethereum and solidity.

Springer, 2017, vol.

318.
[28] “Welcome

documentation!”
remix’s
ide.readthedocs.io/en/latest/, accessed: 30 Oct 2021.

to

https://remix-

[29] “The world’s most

powerful

blockchain

development

suite,”

https://infura.io/, accessed: 30 Oct 2021.

