1

1
2
0
2

c
e
D
6
2

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
0
3
4
3
1
.
2
1
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

IoT Analytics and Blockchain

Abbas Saleminezhadl, Manuel Remmele, Ravikumar Chaudhari, Rasha Kashef
Electrical, Computer, and Biomedical Engineering Department
Ryerson University
{ abbas.saleminezhad, rchaudhari, manuel.remmele, rkashef }@ryerson.ca

Abstract—The Internet of Things (IoT) is revolutioniz-
ing human life with the idea of interconnecting everyday
used devices (Things) and making them ‘smart’. By es-
tablishing a communication network between devices, the
IoT system aids in automating tasks and making them
efﬁcient and powerful. The sensors and the physical world,
connected over a network, involve a massive amount of
data. The data collection and sharing possess a critical
threat of being stolen and manipulated over the network.
These inadequate data security and privacy issues in IoT
systems raise concerns about maintaining authentication
of IoT data. Blockchain, a tempter-resistant ledger, has
emerged as a viable alternative to provide security features.
Blockchain technologies with decentralized structures can
help resolve IoT structure issues and protect against a
single point of failure. While providing robust security
features, Blockchain also bears various critical challenges
in the IoT environment to adapt. This paper presents a
survey on state-of-the-art Blockchain technologies focusing
on IoT applications. With Blockchain protocols and data
structures, the IoT applications are outlined, along with
possible advancements and modiﬁcations.

Index Terms—IoT, blockchain, security and privacy

I. INTRODUCTION
The number of IoT devices will be approximately
29 billion by 2022 [1]. Every device generates
and transfers data on the Internet. Considering the
massive number of devices, it is easy to understand
the crucial and continuous data production process.
Different aspects of our daily life, including our

cities, healthcare,
transportation, energy systems,
and homes, have been inﬂuenced actively by IoT
technology. Various types of devices by the power
of IoT can produce and transmit data across the
network, which consist of laptops, computers, and
phones but also sensors in the house, cars, trafﬁc
cameras, and common household appliances con-
nected to the Internet. The market capacity of IoT
that would be generated by 2020 is over 800 billion
dollars revenue which opens a huge business future
for different organizations [2]. On the other hand,
the design and management of IoT will be more
challenging because of its large scale and diversity.

Since the arrival of the blockchain (BC), certain
types of issues related to IoT have been solved
using this trustable, distributed ledger technology.
The distributed and decentralized nature of BC is
the reason for its popularity among the public [3].
Traditionally, centralized servers like cloud servers
oversee storing data of IoT systems for future us-
age. So, IoT users, for their privacy and securing
their private data, must develop centralized servers.
these cen-
Despite the indisputable beneﬁts that
tralized service providers present, they might face
speciﬁc security issues. For instance, hacking of
unencrypted data servers can cause the spreading
of sensitive information [4]. Considering all these
factors, IoT devices’ management and data storage

 
 
 
 
 
 
allowed industries to move towards decentralized
architectures. Blockchain permits two devices to
communicate and transfer resources, information,
and data in a decentralized peer-to-peer network.
As a gain of using Blockchain, it provides an infras-
tructure that minimizes the chance of any fraudulent
entry because of its unique method for adding a
piece of new information because the decision of
adding new data will go through the network when
many users instead of a single centralized unit
approve the decision then it will take place. There-
fore, the safety of blockchain-based IoT systems is
guaranteed when attackers or hackers want to take
control of a centralized server and get personal in-
formation. Taking advantage of blockchain, the cost
of additional security monitoring of IoT servers can
be diminished [5]. Blockchain technology storage
systems used for IoT devices are in a way that
data can be tracked easily in case of any contradic-
tion or problem. The encryption methods used in
blockchain ensure that if an intruder or adversary
wants to infer the information illegally within a
blockchain network, they will not be successful [6].
In this paper we provide a comprehensive
overview of the intersection of BC and IoT tech-
nologies. We demonstrate how BC can help to solve
these issues. In addition, we illustrate blockchain
applications in IoT within smart homes, smart cities,
Supply chains, and Applications in Energy do-
mains. This work also describes and summarizes
the methods and other tools used in blockchain
IoT. Moreover, we survey research trends and future
works. This paper is then organized as : Section 2
discusses the background on IoT architecture and
security analysis, and the Blockchain technology.
Section 3 presents the Blockchain in the context of
IoT. Section 4 discusses the blockchain tools, while
the various applications are discussed in section 5.
The paper is concluded with future directions in
section 6.

II. BACKGROUND

Blockchain can help mitigate the security and
scalability concerns of the IoT environment.[7] But
ﬁrst, we should understand the architecture of the
IoT system in order to understand its security is-
sues. Then, we will discuss the Blockchain and its
features(methods) that can help with these issues.
In the following section, we will discuss the IoT

2

architecture, security analysis and blockchain intro-
duction.

A. IoT architecture overview

The rapid growth in the popularity of IoT sys-
tems has caused many organizations to spend a
large amount of funding in research to ﬁnd an
IoT solution. Therefore, the industry focused on
producing the solutions often builds all components
of the stack, from hardware to cloud services. This
approach has resulted in the inconsistency of IoT
architecture [8]. From several ideas and literature
reviews, we can conclude an architecture that can
be seen as the fundamental architecture of an IoT
system. A layered IoT stack from paper [9] is
represented in ﬁg 1. The Physical or Perception
layer is composed of various devices and sensors,
gathering a continuous data stream. These devices
are often deployed as a star, clustered tree, or
mesh topology in the network. The devices or the
“Things” are connected to a centralized gateway
with various protocols such as Zigbee, Bluetooth
Low Energy, LwM2M and Wi-Fi. The third layer
is the Application layer, where the gateways are
connected to servers via LTE, Optical Fiber Cable,
5G etc. This layer provides analytical services to the
end-user to create a perception of the data collected
from the sensors. Especially in the third layer, chal-
lenges such as data privacy, processing, handling,
and storage are encountered. For example, health
sector governing bodies of many countries prevent
information sharing of patients to any other parties
without consent. The last layer is the Semantics
layer which can be deemed as a data analysis and
business intelligence layer [9].

The Physical or Perception layer is composed of
various devices and sensors, gathering a continuous
data stream. These devices are often deployed as a
star, clustered tree, or mesh topology in the network.
The devices or the “Things” are connected to a
centralized gateway with various protocols such as
Zigbee, Bluetooth Low Energy, LwM2M and Wi-Fi.
The third layer is the Application layer, where the
gateways are connected to servers via LTE, Optical
Fiber Cable, 5G etc. This layer provides analytical
services to the end-user to create a perception of
the data collected from the sensors. Especially in
the third layer, challenges such as data privacy, pro-
cessing, handling, and storage are encountered. For

3

the network and steal existing information. These
attacks can be harmful for hardware lifetime and
their functionalities

2) Network Layer Attacks: When we think of a
cyber-attack on an IoT device, network attacks come
ﬁrst in our minds. Based on the paper’s review of
[9], [10], and [11] some of the common attacks
are Sybil attack, Denial of Service and TCP/IP. In
the Sybil attack, a malicious node is presented to
claim a large number of nodes. These attacks are
especially dangerous in the voting system of the
sensor network where the Sybil node votes more
than just once and manipulates the results. TCP/IP
protocol attackers use IP source address manipu-
lation to spoof authentication and then control the
network in the Application layer.

3) OS or Firmware Attacks: To guarantee the
security and privacy of the IoT devices, we must
have Software, application, conﬁguration, and OS
integrity. Recently, the world faced an attack called
“Mirai”, which created a botnet by attacking thou-
sands of IoT devices. It exploited the software
weakness to hack through thousands of devices
and created a DDoS attack on DNS. It basically
created thousands of lookup requests to DNS, so
the DNS system collapsed and stopped responding.
This creates a single point failure which can shut the
whole system. Apart from this, software attacks can
be phishing, virus, malware, spyware, and malicious
scripts. Lack of security measures mechanisms such
as anti-virus across the IoT network leads to attacks
on software and applications.

4) Sensor data Attacks: Attackers usually tar-
get network protocols to get access to the data
of network devices. As mentioned in [12], IoT
networks use ad hoc protocols, i.e., information is
transmitted hop-by-hop until it reaches the destina-
tion. This type of protocol creates opportunities for
the attacker to forward the tampered data into the
system and manipulate the behavior of a system. For
example, if attackers target the trafﬁc data of a GPS,
then they can create trafﬁc congestion by using false
trafﬁc information. Authentication algorithms have
been created; however, they can be easily exploited
by normalized tampered data with original data.

C. Blockchain Technology

Satoshi Nakamoto introduced the concept of
blockchain. The blockchain is a distributed system

Fig. 1.

IoT Architecture

example, health sector governing bodies of many
countries prevent information sharing of patients to
any other parties without consent. The last layer is
the Semantics layer which can be deemed as a data
analysis and business intelligence layer.[9]

B. IoT Security analysis

According to [10], All IoT devices are vulner-
able to fragile security provisions such as weak
passwords, lack of encryption in the network and
poor device service management. This makes IoT
devices an easy target to attack and steal data. Also,
IoT devices in the network are often installed in
unattended areas with low surveillance. These are
some of a few fundamental issues with IoT system
security. Since devices are connected to the internet,
they are prone to security attacks on each layer of
the IoT system. In the following section, we have
tried to summarize these attacks based on papers
[9], [10] and [11].

1) Physical Layer Attacks: These types of at-
tacks are focused on the hardware part of the
system, and generally,
the attacker needs to be
close to the device to carry these attacks. Node
Tampering, Node Jamming in WSNs, Fake Node
Injection, Physical Damage and RF interference are
some of the physical layers of well known attacks.
Attacks on nodes are usually carried by replacing
the entire node with a fake node. Then attackers can
control the data ﬂow to inject malicious data into

running over a peer-to-peer network and does not
need a central unit for authority, so veriﬁcation
of 3rd party units is no longer needed. At ﬁrst,
blockchain was introduced for cryptocurrency sys-
tems for its unique way of recording transactions;
However, various ﬁelds can beneﬁt from the evolu-
tion of blockchain.

The blockchain is designed for times that par-
ticipants in the network do not trust each other
so it goes to record information with respect to it.
So, veriﬁcation and accountability will be provided
by this public and auditable ledger [13]. Every
blockchain consists of some blocks from the genesis
block to the current block. Because every block
contains a hash of the previous block it makes sense
to see it as a chain of blocks. The ﬁrst block in
a blockchain is the genesis block that is always
hard coded into the software. All transactions are
visible in the blockchain. When there is a new
transaction, this transaction is going to be written
down in the local ledger by a group of volunteer
recorders in that local ledger. After some time, a
selected ledger from these recorders will be ver-
iﬁed which block contains a set of transactions
and will be connected to the public one [14]. In
blockchain systems, miner’s duty is to record these
transactions and this process is called mining. They
designed Mining to be resource-intensive and hard
purposefully. Every individual block should have
proof of work (PoW) [15] this is the way to evaluate
the validity of a block in the blockchain. Once a
miner receives a block The PoW will be veriﬁed by
other miners. By this method, secure and tamper-
resistant consensus that is the goal of mining will
be satisﬁed. It takes time to spread a transaction
through all the nodes in the network, and this time
delay is used to make sure that all the nodes in
the network have veriﬁed all the transactions. The
consensus algorithm is an algorithm for selecting
a block to connect to the main public ledger. In
distributed systems, Consensus is a primary problem
to decide on
that requires more than one agent
a given value needed for computational purposes.
It can be assumed that some of these agents are
unreliable, therefore the consensus process needs to
be creditable.

These selected blocks form a public ledger that is
called the blockchain [16]. Blockchains can utilize
different consensus algorithms and proof of work
(PoW) is one of them [15]. PoW of every block

4

assures that there is a certain amount of difﬁculty
to generate a new block in the network. new blocks
are going to connect to the blockchain If there is
consensus to accept that new block, so all the miners
should start mining using that block considering
it as a reference. A digital signature protects this
whole procedure; in a way that each transaction
should be digitally signed into the network using
the private key of the sender. This will guarantee the
validity and integrity of transactions. Hash compu-
tations are there to assure the integrity of the whole
blockchain system. Coins are assigned as a reward
to miners who participate in successfully appending
a new block to the ledger [16].

III. BLOCKCHAIN IN THE CONTEXT OF IOT

Blockchain can provide a decentralized, safe, and
secured data sharing ledger in which data can easily
be traced, so it has the capability to efﬁciently
revolutionize the functioning of a large number of
IoT services and applications. It can improve diverse
IoT systems such as smart homes, smart cars, en-
ergy, smart city, healthcare systems, etc. considering
features of blockchain, it can be stated that IoT can
beneﬁt from blockchain concepts signiﬁcantly. Here
we mention the main progress applied by integrating
blockchain and IoT.

feature

The ﬁrst

is Decentralization. Main
centralized security issues
in IoT applications
are overcome by the decentralized nature of
blockchain,preventing security issues like a single
point of failure to guarantee the responsivity and
promptness of IoT services or prevent situations
where some companies control the storage and pro-
cessing of data of numerous people. Furthermore, it
can help IoT devices with reliable governance and
management, and it can track IoT devices for their
entire life cycle. Additionally,
in blockchain, all
nodes must have a copy of the data, and therefore,
data is immutable and reliable. Moreover, it can
offer privacy to the network in which transactions
can be approved in a reliable network, so nodes are
unknown, and it can be assumed that information
alongside their identities can be preserved [17]]. The
security and immutability that blockchain brings
to IoT are remarkable. By utilizing cryptographic
encryption, all transactional information of IoT ap-
plications will be protected [18]. Transactions stand
for the data transmission across various devices

in blockchain-based IoT systems, and data will
be secured due to transactional protocols. 160-bit
address space that blockchain offers as a hashed
public key to assign a huge number of addresses
that can be shown secure and unique to be allocated
in IoT devices. Moreover, a 160-bit address com-
pared to another addressing scheme like IPv6 that
offers 128-bit for addressing, is beneﬁcial and can
satisfy the huge IoT demand for future applications.
Additionally, all
the transactions taking place in
the network can be tracked down and cannot be
changed to assure data immutability and reliability.
Blockchain offers smart contracts, as in Ethereum.
Privileges and access controls across nodes in the
network can be deﬁned as hard code rules. They
can provide decentralized authentication logics that
are less complex and hardcoded into rules to autho-
rize IoT devices effectively. It also maintains data
security when conﬁguring conditions and criteria
under which certain nodes can access speciﬁc data.
The trust of participants can be guaranteed by the
immutable nature of blockchain-based IoT systems,
as they can track down and conﬁrm any transac-
tion without any risk of tampering [19]. The third
property of blockchain is Identity. In blockchain-
based IoT systems, for every connected device, in-
formation can be traced easily as unique identiﬁers.
Authorized and trustable identity control of con-
nected IoT devices can be provided by this identity
feature accompanied by their complex features and
relationships. Every stage in an IoT device life cycle
from the producer, supplier, and consumer can be
tracked [20].

IV. METHODES
To enable Blockchain for IoT applications ad-
ditional tools are required. Therefore, very valu-
able are the InterPlanetary File System (IPFS), an
emergent technology, and smart contracts that are
already widely used. Another approach for dis-
tributed databases is Bigchain DB. To implement the
blockchain itself, a lot of research papers are taking
advantage of Hyperledger due to its big variety and
modular appearance.

A. IPFS

For current IoT applications, the data is stored
in centralized servers. The reliability, privacy, and
interoperability of these data can be increased by

5

storing it decentralized. One IoT framework for de-
centralized data storage based on the InterPlanetary
File System (IPFS) as described in [21].

The IPFS is a System to share content like HTTP
or FTP. But there are a few main differences to the
common systems:

• Addressing content: In comparison to the In-
ternet as we know it, in the IPFS you are not
addressing the location of the content but the
content directly. So, to access a ﬁle the hash of
this ﬁle is used. Then a ping for this ﬁle is sent.
Because the hash is used to access the ﬁle it is
also secure against attacks on the consistency
of a ﬁle. These hashes are forming a Merkle
Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG).

• Decentralization: As the content and not the
localization of the ﬁle is relevant, the local-
ization can change without causing problems.
Whenever a ﬁle is downloaded from a new
node, it can be accessed from this node as
well. This leads to a lot of advantages, such
as security against attacks on the availability
or lower bandwidth.

• Size of an object: The maximum size of a ﬁle
is 256 kb. To be able to store bigger ﬁles they
are split into multiple objects and an additional
object needs to be created that links all objects.
• Usage as a ﬁle system: The data architecture
allows it to use IPFS as a ﬁle system. In this
case, an object includes the hashes of multiple
other objects to link them as a folder in a com-
mon system includes the location of the objects
that are stored inside it. This architecture leads
to immortality as it is not possible to delete a
hash out of an object without changing its hash.
To be able to change an object nevertheless,
versioning is supported by IPFS.

The PFS can be used to store IoT data decen-
tralized. It erases the need for a central node and
the disadvantages in security and stability coming
with a centralized system. As Blockchains have
issues with gigantic amounts of data appearing in
more IoT applications nowadays, IPFS enables the
blockchain to handle this problem. This leads to
a combination of widely used, well approved and
known blockchains and IPFS to store the data. In
[22] an architecture was built to provide IoT data
privacy via blockchains and IPFS. Access control
was controlled by smart contracts.

B. BigchainDB

V. APPLICATIONS

6

another

The BigchainDB is

decentralized
database through an extensible blockchain described
in [23]. While combining the distributed databases
with blockchain technology, we integrate the
advantages of both. As BigchainDB is a modern
distributed database, it has all the features as linear
scalability, availability,
tolerance and ﬁnal
consistency. Simultaneously, it features blockchain
such as decentralized control,
characteristics,
Issuing and trading assets directly
non-tamper,
and autonomy. Paper
shows an
[23] as well
improvement in time needed to query a transaction
in comparison with HadhoopDB and Hive.

fault

C. Smart contracts

Smart contracts are programs that get executed
when a particularly relevant event is happening that
was deﬁned in this contract. The primary use case
for this contract is to act like a normal contract to
transfer money within a smart ecosystem—the best-
known blockchain with smart contract functionality
Ethereum. But the ﬁnancial aspect of the IoT is not
the only scenario for using smart contracts. When
it comes to data, smart contracts can be helpful
to control the communication access between IoT
nodes.

D. Hyperledger Sawtooth

In 2015, Hyperledger was created as an open-
source blockchain platform by the Linux founda-
tion. Compared to other distributed ledger tech-
nologies (DLT) as Ethereum or R3 Corda, Hyper-
ledger is broadly based with its immense variety
in frameworks. Its modular appearance makes it
easy to implement different applications such as
smart contracts. Unlike other DLTs, Hyperledger
doesn’t have its currency; however, coins can be
implemented easily. In connection with IoT, two big
frameworks are worth mentioning are:

• Hyperledger Fabric: As mentioned in [24] Hy-
perledger Fabric is one of the promising DLTs
to implement easy usable big data storage in
blockchain.

• Hyperledger Sawtooth: In [25] Sawthoot was
used to build an IoT network that took advan-
tage of IPFS.

A. Smart home

A Smart Home is a concept that utilizes IoT that
can be used in every device that can generate and
transfer data to increase resident comfort and reduce
operation costs by efﬁciently managing resources.
On-location controllers capable of gathering and
processing data are provided for these smart homes,
controlled through a device to personalize the en-
vironmental adjustments. Smart Home devices are
increasing day by day. The ﬁnancial potential of
this data is vast because data generated from smart
homes can be used in various applications. For
instance, the healthcare industry may unravel severe
health issues by analyzing data collected from smart
home IoT-enabled devices to offer personalized
healthcare services. Smart-home devices and IoT
appliances are quickly becoming ordinary, but there
are issues about security. Blockchain technology can
provide a direct and obvious method, allowing you
to control everything securely from a simple on/off
switch or even more complex connected devices
capable of more access and controls for things
in the home [26]. Minors in the smart home are
responsible for handling all data transmission inside
and outside the home, always online and high-
resource devices. Communications are controlled
and audited by a private and safe blockchain pre-
served by a minor. A blockchain-based smart home
framework should guarantee its safety by analyzing
its security concerning the fundamental security
aspects of conﬁdentiality, integrity, and availability.
Conﬁdentiality guarantees that only authorized users
can access information. Integrity guarantees that the
sent data without any Interference is received at the
destination, and availability makes sure that every
service or data is accessible and attainable to the
user whenever is needed [27]. Many devices in
the home capable of connecting to a network are
low energy and lightweight; therefore, most of their
available energy must be devoted to computations
and executing core application functionality. The
power that remains for security and privacy is
limited and made affordable of these tasks quite
challenging. Energy consumption and processing
overhead of Traditional security methods tend to be
expensive for IoT. IoT in smart homes requires a
distributed, delicate, scalable security and privacy
system. The distributed, secure, and private nature

of blockchain technology has the potential to over-
come these challenges.

Integrating blockchain with smart home IoT is
not simple. It involves several crucial challenges
such as high resource demand for solving the POW,
long latency for transaction conﬁrmation, and low
scalability resulting from broadcasting transactions
and blocks to the whole network. In a study case,
Dorri [28] proposed a new framework of blockchain
by removing the concept of POW and the concept of
coins as rewards. For making his framework more
suitable for the speciﬁc requirement of IoT, His
framework is based on a hierarchical structure and a
distributed trust to maintain blockchain security and
privacy. The design consists of three main compo-
nents: smart home, overlay, and cloud storage. A
miner centrally manages all Smart devices located
inside the smart home. Smart homes consist of
elements like an overlay network, Service Providers,
laptops, smartphones, or personal
cloud storage,
computers. The overlay network is like a peer-to-
peer network that provides distributed features to
the framework. Cloud storage is responsible for
storing and sharing data of smart home devices.
A local and private blockchain offers secure access
control to the IoT devices and their data. Also, the
blockchain creates permanent time-ordered records
of transactions connected to other framework com-
ponents for giving speciﬁc services. Symmetric en-
cryption offers to achieve lightweight security for
smart home devices. It can be stated that common
security frameworks are not necessarily optimized
and suitable for IoT due to processing burden and
energy consumption. Here, using a smart home as a
case study is the idea to illustrate the challenge and
solution for blockchain application in IoT.

B. Smart cities

Within all the data that must be handled in Smart
cities comes a big need for security. Blockchain
can solve this in combination with other tools, as
the following proof-of-work papers show. In [24]
a car accident in a smart city is simulated. Smart
contracts and highway sensor data are stored on an
IPFS implemented in Ethereum. When the sensors
recognize an accident, several smart contracts stored
on IPFS are executed. This proof of work paper
concludes that there are several issues on IPFS in
combination with blockchain caused by the fact that

7

it is a new ﬁeld of study. These issues are, e.g.
lack of support by blockchain platforms or non-
existing standards. A similar scenario was simulated
in [25]. In contrast, Hyperledger Sawtooth was
used. Furthermore, the Blockchain and the IPFS
were implemented in separate networks. Thus, a
private IPFS could be used to increase privacy.
Because of the limited transaction validation rate of
Hyperledger Sawtooth, the blockchain was limited
in validation nodes and transaction rate.

C. Applications in Energy Domain

During our lifetime, we consume energy from
a variety of sources. Each part of our daily tasks
would not be possible without energy. As time
passes, these energy sources are becoming more and
more scarce around the globe.[29] There was no bet-
ter time than now to start ﬁnding more ways to save
these highly draining energy sources. Traditionally,
either government or private ﬁrms control the gener-
ation and distribution of electrical power. However,
change has been noted in past years with solar pan-
els and residential energy storage proliferation.[30]
The global market of Solar panels was nearly $52.5
billion in 2018 and is expected to grow further to
$223.3 billion by 2026. Similarly, residential storage
capacity will increase to 3.7 GW by 2025.[30] This
will change the trend of centralized distribution to
decentralized distribution of electrical power. This
new approach also comes with its issue, which is
extensively described in [31] and [32]. Blockchain
technologies have received enormous attention to
provide immutable, distributed transaction ledgers
and transform nearly every type of global business.
Consequently, researchers have also successfully
found ways to integrate blockchain in smart grid
applications. Among those, we will discuss a few
interesting applications of blockchain in electrical
power distribution and consumption.

1) Decentralized Energy resource management
using Ethereum blockchain:
In the decentralized
model of electrical power systems, synchronized
information exchange is critical. Power and load
level information should be declared to surrounding
nodes to gain balance between all grids.[31] An
information leak can be fatal, and it can cause the
system to shut down. External and internal actors
can initiate data leaks to exploit the system for
personal gain. A research team from the USA exper-

imented on ten college campus buildings. More de-
tails are available in [31]. They created a simulated
environment of solar panel grids of 10 buildings
and checked their performance based on season,
time of the day, and factors like clouds. They also
created a smart contract application on Ethereum
Virtual Machine via a DApp. This experiment aims
to create a synchronized and secure eco-system for
the microgrid around the ten buildings with the help
of Blockchain technology.

Micro-grid systems face similar authentication
and identity management issues as other IoT ap-
plications. The blockchain application used in this
experiment faced an identity issue with smart con-
tracts. Smart contracts provided identiﬁers, but over-
head work to create a new contract to claim in-
formation was too high. To Mitigate this issue,
they proposed a solution with a new architecture
in which they required a unique identiﬁer for the
device or user, a way to authenticate this identiﬁer,
a way to make a claim and a way to authenticate
this claim. The smart meter will communicate with
Ethereum smart contracts over an untrusted network
such as the Internet. The smart meter has been
equipped with authentication gateway software. On
the other hand, A node.js server will be set up
with an Ethereum smart contract to validate this
identity. To make this work, when a smart meter
attempts to connect to Ethereum smart contract, a
ﬁrst packet authentication token will be sent with
through an
identity information. This token will
untrusted network to node.js and be veriﬁed for
further actions. This approach is very simplistic
for such an application. The token created must
go through the internet to reach Ethereum smart
contract, which can be traced to get the identity.
Moreover, over ten buildings on a low scale, the
experiment was performed to identify the more
signiﬁcant issue as the system expanded. We should
take this approach to the next level with a small area
with multiple buildings to receive more information
and solutions. Power efﬁciency was also affected
after the implementation of Ethereum.

2) Blockchain for renewable energy credits and
carbon credits: The renewable industries have in-
centives based on clean energy and reduced car-
bon usage to provide access to clean energy for
end-users. Renewable energy credits (RECs) are
based on one megawatt-hour (MWh) clean energy
produced and one metric ton of CO2 avoided.

8

The RECs can be purchased by end-users or busi-
nesses to claim the credit worth of energy that
comes to them is from renewable sources. This
great incentive is in place; however, it has lacked
account and management procedures. The credits
were stored manually in an Excel spreadsheet. This
procedure not only was slow but also could fall
into danger of double counting. The credits are
often provided months later from the actual power
generation[33]. The authors mentioned blockchain
technology, especially the smart contract to auto-
mate and secure the entire procedure. This will
make the accounting and management procedure
secure and efﬁcient. Clean Energy Blockchain Net-
work (CEBN) and Silicon Valley Power formed
a partnership to include blockchain technology in
the Low Carbon Fuel Standards (LCFS) program.
With this program, Credits are given to clean fuel
providers, especially to Electric vehicle charging
station owners. Then these credits can be sold to
conventional fuel producers to compensate for their
carbon emissions. Blockchain technology can verify
clean energy produced with afﬁliation with Energy
Engineers- Certiﬁed Energy auditor. The veriﬁcation
process aids RECs in blockchain technology from
pre-qualiﬁed energy assets. This veriﬁcation process
saves time, cost, and resources.

3) Secure Electric Vehicles charging in Smart
Community: Renewable energy sources and Electric
Vehicles have been in great attention due to their
promise of reducing fossil fuel use and cutting
gas emissions to very low. Smart Community is
an essential part of the Internet of Energy, which
allows energy generation and distribution with a
smart grid architecture. However, it is hard to ensure
a secure schedule of charging behaviour of EVs
in the untrusted energy market. In [33], An algo-
rithm is proposed with the use of smart contracts
from blockchain technology to secure the charging
stations. First, they launched a novel permissioned
blockchain system in the smart community. The
number of pre-selected Electric Vehicles can access
and publicly share the transaction with blockchain
technology without interference from the trusted in-
termediary. After that, a consensus-based algorithm
(delegated Byzantine fault tolerance) is presented
to reach consensus in an effective means. Finally,
the controlling operator evaluates and designs the
best possible contracts to meet Electric Vehicles
energy requirements. They have presented a perfor-

mance evaluation where they showed performance
based on three different schemes. In a ﬂat rate
scheme, the price was ﬁxed regardless of the Elec-
tric vehicle type. With the increase of the Environ-
ment Coefﬁcient(ω), price did not change; thus, the
scheme worked poorly. For a two-way tariff scheme,
price and demands are linearly related. Therefore,
it shows slow growth in utilities. The third scheme,
which the authors proposed, showed a great increase
in the growth of utilities with the rise of ω. This was
achieved by designing optimal contracts.

VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

This paper provided an overview of the IoT
architecture, the security in IoT, and the state-of-
the-art Blockchain. We have introduced Blockchain
in the context of IoT added by some additional
methods used concerning Blockchain and IoT. Fi-
nally, applications were pointed out, such as smart
homes, smart cities, and applications in the energy
Domain. Security challenges in IoT systems should
be the priority to increase the acceptance of IoT
applications among consumers. Blockchain tech-
nologies such as proof-of-work, smart contracts and
private Blockchain are extensively used in the IoT
industries for various applications. Our observation
while conducting the survey is that Blockchain has
the capacity to alleviate the IoT issues of scalabil-
ity, network, security, and heterogeneous data. The
Blockchain technology design would also adapt to
properties of decentralized IoT networks, inherent
partitioning, and various topologies. We also ob-
served that implementation of Blockchain to IoT
applications itself is a challenge and requires the
core knowledge of the application. In a few applica-
tions, such as electrical microgrids and smart homes,
Blockchain technology was adding a signiﬁcant
delay to the extent that researchers had to adopt a
new way to reduce the delay. Therefore, Blockchain
technology requires future research on optimizing
faster transactions between two nodes or users and
nodes. It was also shown that security and privacy
blockchains are essential for the future of IoT.

REFERENCES

[1] E. Rescorla and N. Modadugu. Datagram transport

layer
security version 1.2. [Online]. Available: http://www.ietf.org/
rfc/rfc6347.txt

[2] M. Abomhara and G. M. Køien, “Security and privacy in the

internet of things: current status and open issues.”

9

[3] T. Salman, M. Zolanvari, A. Erbad, R. Jain, and M. Samaka,
“Security services using blockchains: A state of the art survey.”
[4] Y.-A. de Montjoye, E. Shmueli, S. Wang, and A. Pentland,
“openpds: Protecting the privacy of metadata through safean-
swers.”

[5] M. Pilkington, “Blockchain technology: principles and applica-

tions.”

[6] S. Nakamoto. Bitcoin: a peer-to-peer electronic cash system.

[Online]. Available: http://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf

[7] S.

Jain.

Can

blockchain

of
[Online].
https://www2.deloitte.com/ch/en/pages/innovation/

things
Available:
articles/blockchain-accelerate-iot-adoption.html

switzerland.

accelerate

adoption?

internet

deloitte

(iot)

[8] A.

[9]

[10]

Iot

and

things.

ieee.org.

standardization

Banafa.
-

ieee internet of

implementation
challenges
retrieved.
[Online]. Available: https://iot.ieee.org/newsletter/july-2016/
iot-standardization-and-implementation-challenges.html
I. Makhdoom, M. Abolhasan, J. Lipman, R. P. Liu, and
W. Ni. Anatomy of threats to the internet of things.
ieee
communications surveys and tutorials.
[Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1109/comst.2018.2874978
I. Andrea, C. Chrysostomou, and G. Hadjichristoﬁ. Internet
of things: Security vulnerabilities and challenges. 2015 ieee
symposium on computers and communication (iscc). [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/iscc.2015.7405513

[11] J. Steven Perry.

Iot malware - anatomy of an attack.
ibm developer. [Online]. Available: https://developer.ibm.com/
articles/iot-anatomy-iot-malware-attack/

[12] X. Zha, K. Zheng, and D. Zhang. Anti-pollution source
location privacy preserving scheme
sensor
networks. 2016 13th annual ieee international conference on
sensing, communication, and networking (secon). [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/sahcn.2016.7732970

in wireless

[13] R. Neisse, G. Steri, and I. Nai-Fovino, “A blockchain-based
approach for data accountability and provenance tracking.”
[14] Z. Zheng, S. Xie, H. N. Dai, and H. Wang, “Blockchain

[15]

challenges and opportunities: a survey work.”
I. Eyal, A. E. Gencer, E. G. Sirer, and R. Van Renesse, “Bitcoin-
ng: a scalable blockchain protocol.”

[16] M. Jakobsson and A. Juels. Proofs of work and bread
pudding protocols. [Online]. Available: https://link.springer.
com/content/pdf/10

[17] P. Veena, S. Panikkar, S. Nair, and P. Brody, “Empowering the

edge-practical insights on a decentralized internet of things.”

[18] G. Prisco. Slock. it to introduce smart locks linked to smart
ethereum contracts, decentralize the sharing economy, bitcoin
mag. [Online]. Available: https://bitcoinmagazine.com/articles/
sloc-it-tointroduce-smart-locs-lined-to-smart-ethereum-contractsdecentralizethe-sharing-economy-1446746719

[19] Modum. [Online]. Available: https://modum.io
[Online]. Available:
[20] Chain

things.

of

https://www.

blockchainofthings.com

[21] S. Muralidharan and H. Ko, “An interplanetary ﬁle system (ipfs)

based iotframework.”

[22] M. S. Ali, K. Dolui, and F. Antonelli, “Iot data privacy via

blockchains and ipfs.”

[23] Y. Wang, C.-H. Hsieh, and C. Li, “Research and analysis on
the distributed database of blockchain and nonblockchain.”
[24] A. Tiwari and U. Batra, “Ipfs enabled blockchain for smart

cities.”

[25] L. Gerrits, R. Kromes, and F. Verdier, “A true decentralized
implementation based on iot and blockchain: a vehicle accident
use case.”
[Online].
securely-controlling-hardware-devices-with-blockchain-642af4308529

https://medium.com/coreledger/

Available:

[26]

[27] A. Dorri, S. S. Kanhere, R. Jurdak, and P. Gauravaram,
“Blockchain for iot security and privacy: The case study of
a smart home.”

[28] N. Komninos, E. Philippou, and A. Pitsillides, “Survey in
smart grid and smart home security: Issues, challenges and
countermeasures.”

[29] U. Bodkhe, S. Tanwar, K. Parekh, P. Khanpara, S. Tyagi,
N. Kumar, and M. Alazab. Blockchain for industry 4.0: A
comprehensive review. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.
1109/access.2020.2988579

10

[30] M. E. Peck and D. Wagman. Blockchains will allow
proﬁt.
trading
rooftop
ieee spectrum. [Online]. Available: https://spectrum.ieee.org/
blockchains-will-allow-rooftop-solar-energy-trading-for-fun-and-proﬁt

energy

solar

and

fun

for

[31] C. DeCusatis and K. Lotay. Secure, decentralized energy
resource management using the ethereum blockchain. 2018
17th ieee international conference on trust, security and
privacy in computing and communications/ 12th ieee
international conference on big data science and engineering
(trustcom/bigdatase).
[Online]. Available: Published.https:
//doi.org/10.1109/trustcom/bigdatase.2018.00290

[32] C. Plaza,

J. Gil, F. de Chezelles, and K. A. Strang.
Distributed solar
self-consumption and blockchain solar
energy exchanges on the public grid within an energy
community. 2018 ieee international conference on environment
and electrical engineering and 2018 ieee industrial and
[Online]. Available:
commercial power
https://doi.org/10.1109/eeeic.2018.8494534

systems

europe.

[33] Y. Wang, Z. Su, Q. Xu, and N. Zhang. Contract based
energy blockchain for secure electric vehicles charging in
smart community. 2018 ieee 16th intl conf on dependable,
on
autonomic
pervasive intelligence and computing, 4th intl conf on
big data intelligence and computing and cyber science and
technology congress(dasc/picom/datacom/cyberscitech).
[On-
line]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/dasc/picom/datacom/
cyberscitec.2018.00062

computing,

secure

16th

conf

and

intl

