SoK: Blockchain Governance

Aggelos Kiayias
University of Edinburgh, IOHK
United Kingdom
aggelos.kiayias@ed.ac.uk

Philip Lazos
IOHK
United Kingdom
philip.lazos@iohk.io

2
2
0
2

y
a
M
7
1

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

3
v
8
8
1
7
0
.
1
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

ABSTRACT
Blockchain systems come with a promise of decentralization that,
more often than not, stumbles on a roadblock when key decisions
about modifying the software codebase need to be made. In a setting
where “code-is-law,” modifying the code can be a controversial pro-
cess, frustrating to system stakeholders, and, most crucially, highly
disruptive for the underlying systems. This is attested by the fact
that both of the two major cryptocurrencies, Bitcoin and Ethereum,
have undergone “hard forks” that resulted in the creation of alter-
native systems which divided engineering teams, computational
resources, and duplicated digital assets creating confusion for the
wider community and opportunities for fraudulent activities. The
above events, and numerous other similar ones, underscore the im-
portance of Blockchain governance, namely the set of processes that
blockchain platforms utilize in order to perform decision-making
and converge to a widely accepted direction for the system to evolve.
While a rich topic of study in other areas, including social choice
theory and electronic voting for public office elections, governance
of blockchain platforms is lacking a well established set of meth-
ods and practices that are adopted industry wide. Instead, different
systems adopt approaches of a variable level of sophistication and
degree of integration within the platform and its functionality. This
makes the topic of blockchain governance a fertile domain for a
thorough systematization that we undertake in this work.

Our methodology starts by distilling a comprehensive array of
properties for sound governance systems drawn from academic
sources as well as grey literature of election systems and blockchain
white papers. These are divided into seven categories, suffrage,
Pareto efficiency, confidentiality, verifiability, accountability, sus-
tainability and liveness that capture the whole spectrum of desider-
ata of governance systems. We interpret these properties in the con-
text of blockchain platforms and proceed to classify ten blockchain
systems whose governance processes are sufficiently well docu-
mented in system white papers, or it can be inferred by publicly
available information and software. While all the identified proper-
ties are satisfied, even partially, by at least one system, we observe
that there exists no system that satisfies most properties. Our work
lays out a common foundation for assessing governance processes
in blockchain systems and while it highlights shortcomings and
deficiencies in currently deployed systems, it can also be a cata-
lyst for improving these processes to the highest possible standard
with appropriate trade-offs, something direly needed for blockchain
platforms to operate effectively in the long term.

1 INTRODUCTION
Following the founding of Bitcoin [1] in 2009, cryptocurrencies and
other blockchain platforms have tremendously risen in popularity.
Unlike centralised organisations, which are governed by a select
few, blockchain platforms operate in a decentralised fashion by

1

the different actors in these platforms. The decentralised nature
of blockchains has been essential to their appeal; however, it has
also introduced new challenges. Blockchain platforms, like other
organisations, try to adapt and adjust to their stakeholders’ needs
and preferences. With different actors present whose preferences
might not always align, governance problems arise and the risk of
division between their community members increases.

Different governing mechanisms exist, depending on the plat-
form. Off-chain governance is the most centralised of such mech-
anisms with the core developers or the most trusted contributors
making most of the decisions. On-chain governance is achieved via
on-chain voting mechanisms, which can be more transparent and
inclusive than off-chain governance. In both of these mechanisms,
community division can take place when a backward-incompatible
update is adopted, where some stakeholders choose to stay on the
original chain and others choose to upgrade to the updated chain,
dividing the community into two. Alternatively, two or more com-
peting updates may be proposed dividing the community about
their potential merits. Eventually, consensus can fail and different
segments of the community adopt the update that they believe to
be the most beneficial.

In the most general sense, such deviations are known as hard
forks and numerous examples of them have been observed in pop-
ular cryptocurrencies. Two notable examples are the split of the
Ethereum chain to Etheurem and Ethereum Classic due to the the
DAO debacle [2] and the split of the Bitcoin system into Bitcoin
and Bitcoin Cash over the debate around block size and the SegWit
upgrade. Such divisions can fragment the community and its re-
sources, and as a result reduce the overall value of the platform as
well as its security. The latter consideration can be quite tangible
as the reduced number of resources supporting a fork can lead
to attacks. Such attacks are referred to as 51% attacks and have
occurred on a number of occasions, e.g., see the case of Ethereum
Classic [3] for a notable such instance.

The above issues highlight the importance of sound blockchain
governance, the ability of a blockchain platform community mem-
bers to express their will effectively regarding the future evolution
of the platform as well as the best possible utilization of its resources.
So this brings forth the question what characterizes proper gover-
nance in blockchain systems? This fundamental question motivates
the systematization effort we undertake in this paper.

Our methodology is first to derive a set of properties, that are
drawn from general governance principles and election theory
and then interpret them to the blockchain governance setting. We
use a variety of sources to ensure the comprehensiveness of our
property list that include the Council of Europe technical standards
for e-voting [4], the Federal Election Commission’s Voting Systems
Standards [5], but also blockchain specific ones such as [6–8]. Given
the set of properties, we then evaluate a wide array of blockchain

 
 
 
 
 
 
platforms against those properties revealing each platform’s unique
strengths and weaknesses.

We distill seven fundamental properties for blockchain gover-
nance. The properties capture different aspects of important require-
ments for governance. The first property deals with participation
eligibility; Decision making systems can produce legitimate out-
comes provided they are inclusive — a property that we capture
by different aspects of Suffrage suitably adapted to the blockchain
setting. Suffrage determines a set of “decision-makers” who are
a subset of the community of a blockchain project. The second
property has to do with the Confidentiality of the decision-makers’
inputs; it further specializes to Privacy, which asks for maintaining
the input private while Coercion Resistance asks for the input to be
free of any external influences. The third property —Verifiability—
asks for decision-makers to be able to verify their input has been
taken into account in the output and that such output is correctly
computed. These last two properties are in a sense “classical” se-
curity properties. Next we move to two properties that have to do
with the incentives of the decision-makers. Accountability asks for
decision-makers to be held accountable for the input they provide
to the system, while Sustainability asks whether appropriate incen-
tives are provided for the system to evolve constructively and to
the decision-makers for providing meaningful input. We then move
to a social choice consideration. Pareto efficiency asks that, given all
decision-makers’ preferences, the outcome of the governance pro-
cess cannot be strictly improved vis-à-vis these preferences. Finally,
the crucial ability of the system to produce outputs expediently is
captured by Liveness.

Armed with the above comprehensive list of governance prop-
erties we investigate a number of popular blockchain platforms
which provide some sort of governance functionality and we detail
the way they satisfy (or fail to satisfy) each of the given properties.
Our results dictate that while each of the properties is considered
in the context of at least one system, there exists no platform that
satisfies most of the properties.

1.1 Related Work
As of the time of writing, there is yet to be a formal or rigorous
coverage of good blockchain governance properties. However, the
topic of blockchain governance has received coverage in multiple
disciplines. Given their diversity, additional related work is also
presented in context within each subsection of Section 2, where
each governance property is defined. Pelt et al. [9] adapt the def-
inition of OSS (open-source software) governance to blockchain
governance; they then go on to derive six dimensions and three
layers of blockchain governance from the literature to build a frame-
work, which can be used as a starting point for discussion in new
blockchain projects. Similarily Beck et al. [10] derive three key
dimensions of blockchain governance to define an IT governance
definition. De Filippi and McMullen [11] investigate the social and
technical governance of Bitcoin, making a distinction between two
coordination mechanisms: governance by the infrastructure (via the
protocol) and governance of the infrastructure (by the community
of developers and other stakeholders). Corporate governance has
been drawn from in the literature to examine the governance of pub-
lic blockchains. The work done by Hsieh et al. [12] and Allen and

2

Berg [13] are such examples, where the authors of the latter work
derive a definition of blockchain governance and make a distinc-
tion between endogenous and exogenous governance. Given the
variety of actors and strategies in the decision-making processes in
blockchain platforms, Khan et al. [14] view blockchain governance
from the lens of IT governance and then analyse decision-making
processes in the form of voting on a new blockchain improvement
proposal, by using Nash equilibria to predict optimal governance
strategies. Certain forms of blockchain governance, like traditional
forms of governance, have the short-coming of participants not
able to change their vote between two consecutive elections or
votes. Venugopalan and Homoliak [15] address this shortcoming,
among others, by introducing an always-on-voting (AoV): a repeti-
tive blockchain-based voting framework that allows participants to
continuously vote and change elected candidates or policies with-
out having to wait for the next election. More specific analysis on
certain aspects of blockchain decision-making processes also exist
in the literature (e.g. Gersbach et al. [16] where the authors analyse
delegated voting and conclude caution should be exercised when
implementing such mechanisms).

2 BLOCKCHAIN GOVERNANCE PROPERTIES
One of the main contributions of our work is systematizing the
properties pertinent to blockchain governance systems. We would
like to stress that there is no single set that optimally captures every
aspect. There are trade-offs between satisfying some properties to
a high degree and others to a lesser degree. In addition, many cur-
rent implementations do not have rigorously defined governance
mechanisms for every use case and usually contain a mixture of
formal on-chain features as well as informal off-chain ones. This
is almost inevitable, as different blockchains are built for specific
purposes and not all decision-making processes can be sufficiently
captured by a smart contract or special purpose protocol logic. Oth-
ers might still be centralized or transitioning to full decentralization.
Irrespective of this, our property systematization focuses on first
principles and is meaningful across the board, independently of
the underlying set of mechanisms that are set in place to facilitate
decision-making in each blockchain platform.

We can categorize the properties into four broad classes picto-
rially shown in Figure 1. The first class contains properties about
the voting system that is used for decision-making. It will touch
the issues of who is eligible to participate and what is the process
that combines the inputs provided. The voting system enables us to
argue about the governance process in an ideal, philosophical sense;
questions such as who has the right to vote are relevant here. The
remaining three classes deal with the way an ideal voting system
can be implemented and touch three important domains: security
which deals with cryptographic and cyber-security aspects, incen-
tives which deals with game-theoretic and economics aspects, and
timeliness which deals with issues of time and expediency. Failures
in the properties of these classes can have important repercussions
for the legitimacy of the governance process. Even though the vot-
ing system might be acceptable in a ‘Platonic’ ideal sense, failures
in the remaining properties can suggest that certain community
members are disenfranchised because it is harder for them to par-
ticipate, or they cannot express their will freely or even that they

SoK: Blockchain Governance

have no ability to properly form an opinion due to lack of proper
incentivization. It is also worth adding that usability permeates
these three implementation related classes, but it will be outside of
scope of our systematization.

Voting System

Incentives

Suffrage

Pareto Efficiency

Accountability

Sustainability

Verifiability
Confidentiality

Liveness

Security

Timeliness

Figure 1: The partition map of governance properties.

An important aspect of our property systematization is that we
emphasize fundamental properties entirely decoupling them from
any specific techniques, algorithms or mechanisms that facilitate
them. To illustrate the point, a simple example is the distinction
between the property of having privacy (or secrecy) and the crypto-
graphic protocol techniques that may be used to achieve it. Another
example is quadratic voting, which is a technique where additional
votes can be ‘bought’ (using actual money, voting credit, etc.) but
the cost scales quadratically with the number of votes. Even though
it has received renewed interest in blockchain governance, particu-
larly for participatory budgeting applications,1 it should be clear
it is still just a mechanism, not a fundamental property per se; we
revisit it in some more detail when we discuss Suffrage below as it
is one of our basic properties that is most related.

Further to this point, whether a particular governance mecha-
nism is on-chain, off-chain, uses a foundation etc. is a mechanism,
not a property. These inner workings will not be part of our classi-
fication explicitly, unless they affect some fundamental property.
We want to stress that satisfying all properties to some higher
or lower degree, as feasible, would not make a blockchain gover-
nance system perfect. There are many blockchains applications and
each of them has different needs and use cases that would require
community involvement. Some properties might be incompatible
with each other. Our thesis though is that any design would have
to consider how each property is addressed and ensure that the
the choices made are deliberate. As such, during the evaluation of
different governance systems we will make sure that each property
is judged in context, taking the goals of each system into account.

1Such as Gitcoin quadratic funding, https://gitcoin.co/blog/gitcoin-grants-quadratic-
funding-for-the-world/

3

2.1 Suffrage
One of the first considerations of any governance system is deter-
mining who is granted suffrage, which is the right to participate
in decision making procedures. This can be distinguished in active
suffrage, the right to vote, and passive suffrage, which is the right to
stand for election and become an elected representative. Suffrage,
an already a complicated and nuanced property, is even more so
when applied to blockchain systems.

In national or regional elections, it is often the case that the
voting mechanism implements a ‘one person, one vote’ rule. Dif-
ferent jurisdictions use different criteria in guaranteeing the right
to vote to individuals, but the bottom line is that one person can
only submit one vote. Although research is currently underway on
proof-of-personhood systems [17], which verify that accounts cor-
respond to unique individuals, the ‘one person, one vote’ rule is not
applicable to most, if not any, current blockchain platforms. Instead,
we often see that a minimum amount of stake or hashing power
is required to guarantee a vote. We also see platforms where only
the founders or core developers are guaranteed a vote. In any case,
these are attempts to define and reconcile two groups of people:
the set of community-members 𝐶 and decision-makers 𝐷.

Definition 1. The community-members 𝐶 of a blockchain sys-
tem are people that have direct interaction with it. This may be by
providing resources in service of its security or consensus protocol,
owning tokens, develop software etc.

Definition 2. The decision-makers 𝐷 ⊆ 𝐶 of a blockchain system

are the people that participate in (any way) its governance.

Given these definitions, we establish the basic ways that com-
munity-members are granted voting rights in the blockchain space.
The voting rights should more accurately be called voting weights,
as it is very common to allocate a different number of votes across
all community-members.

Definition 3 (Type 1: Identity-Based Suffrage). A blockchain
governance system satisfies this property if it guarantees decision-
making rights to participants who are able to prove their identities
such that the votes correspond to unique individual humans.

Contrary to the usual notion of community-membership, iden-
tity alone is not (so far) a robust enough connection between users
and blockchains. Also, there is no restriction against switching to
different blockchains or having direct interactions with many of
them. The following notions of suffrage are based on a more ‘quan-
tifiable’ approach and typically assign voting power accordingly.

Definition 4 (Type 2: Token-Based Suffrage). A blockchain
governance system satisfies this property if it guarantees decision-
making rights to participants who have certain tokens in the platform
or a minimum amount of tokens in the platform.

Definition 5 (Type 3: Mining-Based Suffrage). A blockchain
governance system satisfies this property if it guarantees decision-
making rights to participants who have a certain amount of hashing
power in the platform (or other physical resource relevant to the
platform, e.g., disk storage).

In the PoS setting, voting weight is often measured by an opera-
tor’s stake (or wealth). This can result in the following undesirable

situations: (i) participants who may be more enthusiastic about
the platform have lower voting weight than those who are less
enthusiastic about the platform, and (ii) participants who may have
contributed more to the platform may have lower voting weight
than those who contributed less. Methods like quadratic voting
[18] can help dampen the effects of stake-based voting weight (see
below for an explanation), but it does not address the root of the
problem: voting weight is ultimately based on wealth owned or
even managed (e.g., centralized cryptocurrency exchanges may
control a significant amount of stake that does not belong to them).
Similar issues exist in the PoW setting, where hashing power may
not proportionately reflect stakeholder contributions to the plat-
form. Analysis in quantifying decentralisation [19] on blockchain
platforms, in terms of stake and hashing power, can provide insights
into resultant power concentrations.

Remark (Governance Tokens). Often, tokens used to determine
suffrage can have more than one use (e.g., native currency of a proof-
of-stake system). However, particularly for the governance of smart
contract based protocols, specific governance tokens can be used,
who have no other direct functionality or value (such as paying for
transaction fees or appearing as block rewards) other than enabling
participation. Especially when these tokens are transferable, special
care is needed to ensure that their supply, distribution and price accu-
rately represents the community members who are more invested in
the project. This was observed in the recent Beanstalk exploit, where an
attacker used a flash loan to obtain a majority of governance tokens,
passing his own malicious proposal and quickly implementing it. The
voting mechanism worked well: but clearly, the voting weights did not
accurately reflect the community. To avoid such attacks, other plat-
forms such as Compound employ more fail-safes, such as a mandatory
waiting period before enacting the election result.

Instead of assuming that community-members would have an
implied incentive to positively contribute to their respective block-
chain’s governance, sometimes a more direct approach is taken.
Participants are granted a decision-making right based on whether
they have positively contributed to the platform. What defines a
‘positive’ contribution is not always clear cut and its definition is
left to the platform’s community.

Definition 6 (Type 4: Meritocratic Suffrage). A blockchain
governance system satisfies this property if it only guarantees decision-
making rights to participants who have positively contributed to the
platform.

Definition 7 (Type 5: Universal Suffrage). A blockchain gov-
ernance system satisfies this property if it guarantees decision-making
rights to participants who have mining power or tokens in the platform
as well as participants with positive contributions to the platform.

We reiterate that it is not our objective to outline specific mecha-
nisms for translating community-membership to voting power. For
example, we are not suggesting that an actor’s voting weight should
be more influenced by previous contributions than by an actor’s
stake in the platform. Instead, we are suggesting that it is important
that all forms of investments and contributions of a community-
member (which can be very different across different blockchains)
should be considered when formulating voting weight.

In this context, a mechanism that has gained traction recently in
the blockchain context is quadratic voting. In this mechanism, 1 vote
would cost 1, but 2 votes would cost 4 and so on. Such a mechanism
could achieve a better balance between what Token-Based Suffrage
and Identity-Based Suffrage: having additional currency within the
system does entail enhanced voting rights, but some balancing
effect vis-à-vis the one-person one-vote rule seems appropriate. It
also provides a more flexible way of expressing voter preferences.
To see this, suppose that, in a governance system where votes can be
exchanged for tokens, two voters believe that one vote in favour of
some proposal is worth 5 and 10 respectively. By this, we mean that
the voters believe investing 1 coin for a vote, would yield a return
on investment of 4 and 9 respectively. In the final election, if the
first voter is richer they could purchase 100 votes, while the second
only buys 3. This would signal that the first voter is particularly
in favour of this proposal, but in fact they bought more votes just
because they had a higher budget to spare. With quadratic voting,
the first voter would acquire 2 votes: the next vote would cost 4,
which is not seen as a profitable investment.

2.2 Pareto Efficiency
Any blockchain governance system will necessarily depend on
a number of decision-making procedures: individual, competing
preferences have to be collected and combined into specific actions.
In this section we try to formalize how well the tools provided by
blockchain allow the decision-makers (recall Definition 2) to reach
their most favourable outcome. Ideally, the result would the same as
one chosen by an omniscient algorithm that has collected all their
private thoughts and magically chose the ‘perfect’ outcome. As we
will see, even the notion of a ‘perfect’ outcome is hard to define (and
under most definitions, does not always exist). We stress that this
might be terrible for the community-members of the blockchain;
in this section we only focus on how well the intentions of the
decision-makers can be turned into actions. Aligning the intentions
of the community-members and decision-makers is a question of
suffrage (as well as Accountability, which we define in Section 2.5).
The investigation of such decion-making processes is the focus of
Social Choice Theory [20], which is an entire field of study dedicated
to them. One of its crowning early achievements is the famous
Arrow’s Impossibility Theorem (Arrow [21]), on voting systems
where participants rank the possible candidates. Specifically, given
a set of alternatives 𝐴 = {𝑎1, 𝑎2, . . . , 𝑎𝑛 }, each voter 𝑖 submits an
ordered vector of the form 𝑎𝑖1 ≻ 𝑎𝑖2 ≻ . . . ≻ 𝑎𝑖𝑛 . Combining
the votes should lead to an outcome preference ordering 𝑎 𝑗1 ≻
𝑎 𝑗2 ≻ . . . ≻ 𝑎 𝑗𝑛 of the candidates that best represents the voters.
Unfortunately Arrow’s Theorem states that the following natural
properties cannot be satisfied at the same time:

• If every voter prefers candidate X over Y, then X is ranked
higher than Y in the final outcome. This property is often
called unanimity.

• The order of X and Y in the final outcome depends only on
the ordering of X and Y in each voters preference, irrespec-
tive of how all other candidates are ordered. This is called
independence of irrelevant alternatives.

• There is no voter who has dictatorial control over the final

outcome.

4

SoK: Blockchain Governance

Variations of this result have been adapted in many voting set-
tings, even in cases where the voting process does not have to
reveal an entire ordering of outcomes (but only to select the ‘best’
one) or when voters have cardinal preferences (i.e. they can assign
numerical preference values to each candidate). Note that almost
all popular voting schemes (such as approval voting, where each
voter selects a set of acceptable candidates) fall under these defini-
tions. Perhaps the most famous of those impossibility results is the
Gibbard-Satterthwaite Theorem (Gibbard [22], Satterthwaite [23]),
roughly stating that any voting scenario with more than two candi-
dates is either dictatorial, or subject to strategic voting (i.e., voters
swaying the outcome by misreporting their actual preferences.

To deal with these impossibilities, the voting procedures used in
practice are not required to be optimal in every scenario, but to sat-
isfy certain weaker properties depending on the setting. One such
mild property is Pareto efficiency (e.g., [24, 25]). These properties
are tested assuming every voter truthfully reports their preferences.

Definition 8. A blockchain governance system is Pareto efficient
if whenever a decision-making process is held, alternative X cannot
win if there exists another alternative Y that is preferred by at least
one participant and no participant prefers X over Y.

A Pareto efficient governance system would never lead to an
outcome that is clearly worse than another possible outcome. This
property should typically be satisfied (at least when interpreted
loosely, as some blockchain systems do not have an entirely rigorous
governance model), unless there is good reason not to. Evaluating
whether this property is satisfied can be tricky because a blockchain
governance system contains many interacting components, with
the final result seldom depending on a single vote. We make our
best effort to fairly evaluate how likely it is that a Pareto efficient
outcome is not selected and how much worse is the selected alter-
native.

Approval voting is of particular importance, as it is the most
common voting mechanism used by the blockchains we evaluate.
Given 𝑛 candidates, each voter can ‘approve’ as many as they want.
The winner is the candidate which was approved by most voters,
often combined with a threshold, such as also requiring approval
from at least 20% of them. Notice that even though the voters
might have ordinal or cardinal preferences, they can only submit a
binary signal for each candidate. Starting with a simple example,
suppose that 2 possible incompatible blockchain updates 𝑎 and 𝑏 are
up for election. Furthermore, suppose that every voter prefers 𝑎 ≻ 𝑏.
The outcome will be dictated by the threshold they chose when
converting their ordinal preferences to an approval vote. Typically
we would expect 𝑎 to win, but 𝑏 could win as well! Clearly, any
truthful voter who approved 𝑏 would also approve 𝑎, since 𝑎 ≻ 𝑏
for every voter. However, some voters might chose not to approve
either of them. In this case 𝑏 could win because of a tie. In fact, this
is the only way an outcome of approval voting might not be Pareto
efficient: if the winner is tied with the Pareto optimal candidate. This
happened because the voters where completely uniformed about
the preferences of each other and set their ‘approval threshold’
too high. The more information they have the less likely such an
outcome becomes. A group of perfectly rational and informed voters
would always produce a Pareto efficient outcome. In addition, it is
important to keep in mind that there are two more ‘secret’ (implicit)

5

options always available: to do nothing or to fork, which is to be
avoided. When combined with a minimum approval threshold and
some awareness on the part of the voters, the winner is most likely
either Pareto efficient, a suboptimal yet highly popular alternative
or a deadlock. Finally, strategic voting involves setting the threshold
very high, which decreases the total number of votes and could
lead to a deadlock, but is unlikely to result in a fork.

We briefly discuss an alternative voting system that uses the com-
plete ordinal preference profile called instant-runoff (IRV) voting.
It proceeds in turns:

• From every ballot, only the top preference is counted.
• If one candidate obtains a majority, they win.
• Otherwise, the least popular top preference is deleted from

all ballots and the process repeats.

IRV is also not Pareto efficient as a good candidate might be deleted
early, if they fail to win many first choice votes. It is however
remarkably resistant to strategic voting [26] while retaining some
properties that approval voting lacks, such as selecting the majority
winner if one exists. This makes IRV particularly appealing when
the community is asked to choose between alternatives in a non-
binding way. The result can be further ratified by a referendum.

In some cases, IRV (and any voting system using ordinal prefer-
ences) might force the voters to inadvertently submit misleading
information. For example, IRV assumes that the first and second
place candidate on every ballot are separated by an equal amount,
whereas some voters might be indifferent while others strongly in
favour of their first choice only. Approval voting sometimes gets
around this issue by asking for even less information. Ordinal pref-
erences can be easily elicited by an auction which is undesirable for
an election. A better alternative is to use an ordinal voting mecha-
nism such as majority judgment [27] or combine approval voting
with token locking: voters who feel strongly about some candidate
may lock their vote tokens for longer, indicating that this election
is particularly important to them.

2.3 Confidentiality
One of the initial goals of Bitcoin, as well as arguably the first design
consideration when implementing a voting system on which the
governance system will be based, is the approach to privacy. While
its definition is fairly intuitive, we make a distinction between
secrecy and pseudonymity.

Definition 9 (Type 1: Secrecy). A blockchain governance system
satisfies secrecy if whenever a decision-making process is held, an
adversary cannot guess the input of any participant better than an
adversarial algorithm whose only inputs are the overall tally and, if
the adversary is a participant, the adversary’s input.

This definition follows from the early work of Benaloh, cf. [28]
and has been formally modeled in numerous subsequent works,
e.g., see the model of Juels et al. [29]. This is the strongest of the two
notions and typically what would be required of an offline voting
system (e.g., traditional elections in most countries). Often, true
secrecy is difficult to accomplish in a decentralised setting or might
be undesirable. For example, many blockchain combine on-chain
governance with off-chain elements, such as discussions on forums.
These discussions may be part of the formal governance model and

could be combined with an off-chain poll, based on the on-chain
distribution of voting power. In these cases there could be a benefit
in using pseudonyms, keeping the real life identity safe but tying
their public discourse with their actual vote. This is particularly
relevant when the distribution of voting power distribution. Even
though not explicitly mentioned by name, the Bitcoin whitepaper
provides an explanation about why pseudonymity [1] might be a
good enough alternative.

Definition 10 (Type 2: Pseudonymity). A blockchain gover-
nance system satisfies pseudonymity if no participant is required to
reveal their real-life identity to participate in the decision-making
processes.

The reason for the development of this notion is that blockchain
systems are usually designed with the assumption that consensus
is achieved only with regards to the shared ledger; it is impossible
to keep track of any information outside of it. Therefore, the same
techniques used to keep track of the distribution of wealth (e.g.,
publicly announcing and linking transactions together), can be
used to provide voting rights to the people actually involved in the
blockchain without requiring much additional work. This is further
related to the notion of suffrage, which is defined in Section 2.1. For
example, in Proof-of-Stake based cryptocurrencies like Cardano,
voting rights for some applications are distributed based on the
amount of stake held by each user, as outlined in the paper by Zhang
et al. [30] describing the voting system used by the treasury system
of that platform. In practical terms, as long as the cryptographic
information required when first producing one’s online identity
cannot be traced back to any real-life information, pseudonymity
is satisfied. Privacy can be further strengthened, considering the
notion of coercion-resistance [29, 31].

Definition 11. A blockchain governance system satisfies coercion-
resistance if whenever a decision-making process is held, a participant
can deceive the adversary into thinking that they have behaved as
instructed, when the participant has in fact made an input according
to their own intentions.

In a strict sense, this definition is arguably stronger than the
guarantee provided by traditional elections: the voter should be able
to deceive the adversary even about his participation, not just his
vote. By definition, this exceeds the notion of privacy and requires
at least one anonymous channel of communication. Such a scheme is
described in [29], but tallying requires an amount of communication
which is quadratic in the number of votes. As such, this property
is typically too demanding to be fulfilled in a blockchain setting,
for most applications. However, it can be partially satisfied (e.g.,
if a ballot is encrypted in a way such that the voter can verify its
inclusion when it is cast, but it is impossible for him to reclaim it
later, if asked to prove that they voted in some way — the fact that
this only provides partial fulfillment of the property stems from the
fact that if the participant’s device leaks the random coins, then the
ciphertext can be demonstrated to encode the participant’s input).

2.4 Verifiability
To complement confidentiality, we now need a property that goes
in the opposite direction, namely verifiability. This is a crucial
property of every voting system, as it legitimises the election result.

6

The widely accepted “golden standard” of verifiability is expressed
below in the form of end-to-end verifiability.

Definition 12 (End-to-End Verifiability). A blockchain gov-
ernance system is verifiable if whenever a decision-making process
takes place, participants are to able to verify their inputs were properly
tallied and independent observers are able to verify that inputs from
eligible participants were properly tallied.

Furthermore, Gharadaghy and Volkamer [32] split the definition

of verifiability into two separate notions.

• Individual Verifiability: It is possible for the voter to au-
dit that his/her vote has been properly created (in general
encrypted), stored, and tallied.

• Universal Verifiability: Everyone can audit the fact that
only votes from eligible voters are stored in a ballot box, and
that all stored votes are properly tallied.

At a high level, a system satisfying both properties would be called
end-to-end verifiable – but we refer to [33] for more details on the
notion of verifiability as well as the subtleties that arise in defining
the concept formally.

Intuitively, satisfying privacy (and Definition 9 in particular) as
well as coercion-resistance definition 11 should make verifiability
more difficult to achieve. After all, these two limit the amount of in-
formation that a third-party could elicit by observing the blockchain.
Despite this, it is indeed possible to achieve both to a certain ad-
equate level. As exemplary schemes we can point to the work of
[29] mentioned earlier, but also schemes such as the early work of
Benaloh and Tuinstra [34], the Benaloh-challenge approach [35]
that has influenced a lot of practical e-voting systems, see e.g., [36],
or the hardware token based approach of [37]. This latter work also
provides a comprehensive modeling of the concept of incoercibility
that extends well beyond the setting of e-voting per se and can be
immediately applicable to the blockchain setting as well.

2.5 Accountability
The quest for accountability in governance is not a recent pursuit,
as it was clearly recognised by the ancient Egyptians and the an-
cient Greeks [38]. Since then, accountability as a concept has been
split into multiple types and dimensions. For example, Grant and
Keohane [39] outlines that accountability can take two general
forms: vertical (where a party is accountable to other parties that
are higher in a given hierarchy) and horizontal (where a party is
accountable to other parties that are not higher or lower in a given
hierarchy). Although collective accountability is often implicitly
implied in coin-based voting, individual accountability is not. That
is, if enough voters vote for a bad decision, the coin value of every
voter declines whether or not they supported the decision. Individ-
ual accountability can take various forms, the most prominent of
which is often referred to as ‘skin in the game’, where participants
have an individual investment that will be directly affected by their
individual actions.

Even though only the decision-makers take part in governance,
accountability should capture the possible harm incurred to the
community-members as well. This is an added layer of security
required to align the incentives of these two types of participants,
particularly in governance designs where the two groups could be

SoK: Blockchain Governance

disjoint (e.g., voting rights based on a governance token that has
no other function or direct relation to any on-chain activity).

Definition 13. A blockchain governance system satisfies the prop-
erty of accountability if whenever participants bring in a change, they
are held individually responsible for it in a clearly defined way by the
platform.

Examples outside the blockchain space include the work done in
Sacco et al. [40], where participants review publications and those
having more ‘skin in the game’ (evaluating publications in which
they will be marked as co-authors) have an increased individual
interest in ensuring that a study’s ambiguously reported methods
and analyses are clarified prior to submission. Examples in the
blockchain space include Polkadot’s governance system [41], where
voters who vote in favour of a proposal will have their stake locked
until the proposal is ‘enacted’ or deployed.

2.6 Sustainability
Changes in blockchain governance rely on two main actors: those
who develop and propose the changes, and those who decide on
whether or not to adopt these changes. Contributions from both ac-
tors help the platform to adapt and evolve and need to be rewarded.

Definition 14 (Sustainable Development). A blockchain gov-
ernance system sustains development if it incentivises, via monetary
rewards or otherwise, participants who develop successful improve-
ment proposals for the platform.

Definition 15 (Sustainable Participation). A blockchain gov-
ernance system sustains participation if it incentivises, via monetary
rewards or otherwise, participants who participate in the decision-
making process of the platform.

Remark. Sustainability is different from accountability in both
moral and practical terms. Contrary to the definition of Accountability,
Sustainability rewards development or participation with no regard to
its outcome (ideally, before the respective agents have to perform the
work or incur any costs). Accountability relates to possible penalties
applied afterwards, once the effects of a particular change are apparent.
For example, rewarding users just for voting would somewhat enable
sustainable participation, but would not qualify for accountability.
On the contrary, penalizing voters who approved a malicious proposal,
without ever rewarding anyone, would only meet the definition of
accountability.

The idea behind having participation and development incen-
tives in place is to help justify the cost of engagement, which can
lead to higher voter participation or more contributions to the
platform. These incentives can take various forms, from monetary
incentives to reputation- or merit-based incentives [42]. However,
Sustainable Participation could be a double edged sword if applied
carelessly (e.g., [43, 44]. A monetary reward that is too small might
convert a moral decision into a financial one, paradoxically de-
creasing participation. While in general increased participation
also leads to an increase in information acquisition from the voters,
it is certainly more beneficial to have a smaller set of participants
that have done their due diligence and vote as honestly as possible,
than a larger group of disinterested individuals who cast votes at
random just to collect rewards.

7

2.7 Liveness
In formal, on-chain governed platforms, the process for proposing
and adopting changes is often constrained by fixed-length time
periods. An example of this is Tezos’s Granada protocol [45], where
a proposal has to go through five governance cycles (each lasting
roughly two weeks) in order to be adopted. In such platforms, an
unforeseen event that requires urgent action will not be resolved
promptly through the platform’s governance process. Therefore,
a blockchain governance system must not only be able to process
regular changes, but also urgent ones.

Definition 16. A blockchain governance system satisfies live-
ness if it is capable of incorporating an input of urgency from the
stakeholders and then being capable of acting on it in the sense that
if an issue is deemed to be urgent according to some function, then
the decision making procedure is capable of terminating within a
reasonable amount of time, as a function of the urgency of the matter.

This definition includes having some protection against denial of
service attacks, that would prohibit governance mechanisms from
terminating in time. All systems evaluated in this work are safe, at
least from a high level standpoint, ignoring implementation details.
Events like the DAO hack [2] have shown the need for blockchain
governance systems to be able to accommodate inputs of urgency
and act on them within a suitable amount of time. An example of
blockchain governance system with liveness measures is Polkadot
[41], which allows for emergency referenda to be initiated by an
assigned technical committee. Others, such as MakerDAO, imple-
ment an emergency shutdown functionality: since it is running
on Ethereum, in an emergency the smart contact can suspend its
normal operation and return the invested assets to their owners.

3 EVALUATIONS
In this section, we evaluate a number of popular platforms with
respect to the properties outlined in Section 2. The platforms below
were chosen such that they present an overview of current ap-
proaches. An overall view of the evaluations can be found in Table
1. We start with Bitcoin and Ethereum, two of the oldest and most
influential blockchains. These two use proof-of-work for consensus
and rely mostly on their developers for governance, who maintain
a connection with the community but ultimately have control over
the direction of the platform. Continuing, we consider Tezos, Polka-
dot and Decred. The first two use proof-of-stake, while Decred takes
a hybrid approach. In particular, whereas Tezos and Decred favour
“direct” democracy, Polkadot uses a council as well, representing
two fundamentally different approaches to managing how voters
express their preferences and interact with the governance process.
Next, we study Project Catalyst and Dash, which incorporate a trea-
sury in their decision making, meaning that the result of the voting
process needs to respect a budget. Finally we consider Compound,
Uniswap and MakerDAO that use a governance token approach. In
the case of Compound and Uniswap this token is purely used for
voting, while for MakerDAO it also supports the normal operation
of the Maker protocol.

Gathering all the necessary information about every governance
system is not always easy: typically, the platform’s white paper

would contain a very high level overview. Moore details can some-
times be found on the websites of the respective blockchains, but
often the complete picture can only be acquired by interacting with
a wallet, voting app or forum. Keeping that in mind, we have made
our best efforts to cite the relevant sources.

Remark. In the main text we only include a high-level description
and evaluation of the governance protocols. A more in-depth study,
along with a point-to-point comparison with respect to each property
can be found in the appendix.

3.1 Bitcoin
Bitcoin [1] is the most prominent blockchain platform and it is a
proof-of-work, mostly off-chain governed blockchain. The Bitcoin
Improvement Proposal (BIP) process [46] is Bitcoin’s primary mech-
anism for ‘proposing new features, for collecting community input
on an issue, and for documenting design decisions’. An individual
or a group who wishes to submit a BIP is responsible for collecting
community feedback on both the initial idea and the BIP before
submitting it to the Bitcoin mailing list for review. Following dis-
cussions, the proposal is submitted to the BIP repository as a pull
request, where a BIP editor will appropriately label it. BIP editors
fulfil administrative and editorial responsibilities. There are reposi-
tory ‘maintainers’ who are responsible for merging pull requests,
as well as a ‘lead maintainer’ who is responsible for the release
cycle as well as overall merging, moderation and appointment of
maintainers [47]. Maintainers and editors are often contributors
who earnt the community’s trust over time. A peer review process
takes place, which is expressed by comments in the pull request.
Whether a pull request is merged into Bitcoin Core rests with the
project merge maintainers and ultimately the project lead. Main-
tainers will take into consideration if a patch is in line with the
general principles of the project; meets the minimum standards
for inclusion; and will judge the general consensus of contributors
[47].

There are stages through which a BIP can progress, including
‘Rejected’ and ‘Final’. In progressing to a status of ‘Final’, there are
two paths:

• Soft-fork BIP. A soft-fork upgrade often requires a 95% miner
super-majority. This is done via an on-chain signalling mech-
anism introduced in [48].

• Hard-fork BIP. A hard-fork upgrade requires adoption from
the entire ‘Bitcoin economy’, which has to be expressed by
the usage of the upgraded software.

Evaluation. It is important to note here that the Bitcoin decision-
making mechanism is informal, at least with respect to other plat-
forms. Clearly, the on-chain aspects of Bitcoin’s governance satisfy
pseudonymity, but not secrecy or coercion resistance as no ‘votes’
are even encrypted. The same is true for its off-chain component.
This has the advantage that the system is mostly verifiable, even
though having part of the deliberation take place in public forums
is harder to track and could be an impermanent storage solution.
Since the decision-making process is informal, without clearly de-
fined structure or voting rules, Pareto Efficiency (to any degree)
cannot be guaranteed. Sustainability and Accountability fail for the
same reason, as there are no defined rules for either. Liveness is

8

arguably partially satisfied, given the informality and flexibility of
the BIP system. Since miners are guaranteed to explicitly signal
their approval or disapproval of soft-fork upgrades [48], mining-
based suffrage is satisfied. Although those with previous positive
contributions and relevant expertise are able to provide substantial
inputs in the decision-making process, there is no explicit guarantee
of their decision-making rights due to the informality of the pro-
cess. Despite this, we conclude that meritocratic suffrage is likely
satisfied.

3.2 Ethereum
Ethereum [49] is one of the most significant second-generation
blockchain platforms. It is proof-of-work and governed off-chain,
using the Ethereum Improvement Proposal (EIP) process [50] as
a mechanism for proposing and integration changes. It is almost
identical to that of Bitcoin, without giving miners the option to
signal their preferences on-chain.

3.3 Tezos
Tezos [51] is a proof-of-stake, on-chain governed blockchain plat-
form, which defines its governance process as ‘self-ammending”.
Contrary to Bitcoin or Ethereum, participating in governance is
based on stake. Specifically, Bakers (also known as delegates) need
to have at least 8, 000 XTZ (called a roll) and the infrastructure to
run a Tezos node in order to gain both block producing and voting
priviledges. Community members who have fewer than 8, 000 XTZ
or are unwilling to spend the computational resources can delegate
their stake to bakers, who produce blocks and vote on their behalf.
The voting process is currently divided in five governance periods,
each period spanning roughly two weeks: Proposal, Testing-vote,
Testing, Promotion-vote and Adoption. During the proposal period,
approval voting is used to select the winning proposal, which must
also be accepted by at least 5% of the total vote. In testing-vote and
promotion-vote the possible options are ‘Yea’, ‘Nay’ or ‘Pass’. A
quorum between 0.2 and 0.7 of the total stake need to be reached,
and the proposal is implemented if an 80% supermajority of ‘Yea’
is reached.

Evaluation. As with Bitcoin, Tezos only satisfies Pseydonymity,
but is completely verifiable. Pareto Efficiency is more nuanced. If a
proposal receives less than 5% of the upvotes or is tied with another
proposal, no proposal will pass, even though operators could have
voted for some proposals. However, given the properties of approval
voting outlined in Section 2.2, this effect is mild. In addition, the
selected outcome is checked once again at the last step. Pareto
efficiency could be further hampered under the assumption that
the proposals appearing in a single voting period are too many
or too technical to evaluate in the allotted time, before the vote.
This could make voters inadvertently split their votes and abstain
on many proposals, either leading to a deadlock if no proposal
reaches 5% or favoring whales (i.e. users with many tokens). To
see this, consider that between 3 proposals 𝐴, 𝐵 and 𝐶 one whale
with 40% of the tokens favours 𝐴 while every other user equally
likes 𝐵 and 𝐶, but dislikes 𝐴. If the whale votes in favour of 𝐴
and the other voters evenly split their votes between 𝐵 and 𝐶, 𝐴
could win the election. A possible solution to this would be to
separate vote from stake delegation. Voters could transfer their

SoK: Blockchain Governance

Platform

Suffrage

Pareto Efficiency Confidentiality Verifiability Accountability

Sustainability Liveness

Resistance

Coercion
Secrecy

Develop m ent
Participation

Identity-based
Mining-based
Token-based
M eritocratic

N

N
N

Bitcoin
Ethereum
Catalyst
Dash
Tezos
Polkadot
Decred
Compound
Uniswap
Maker DAO

Table 1: Overview of the evaluations of each property against each of the chosen platforms.
Every platfom might satisfy each property to a different degree. This is shown by a filled circle for robustly meeting the definition down to
an empty circle if clear improvements are needed. The letter 𝑁 is used if a property does not apply.

voting rights to more knowledgeable individuals that they trust
which could consolidate their votes, while retaining their block
production capabilities. Accountability or Sustainability are not
satisfied. Given the lack of flexibility of the on-chain governance
model, the Tezos governance system is incapable of taking inputs of
urgency. Although a Gitlab issue or a pull request could be initiated
without going through the formal on-chain route, it is still not the
officially documented, and certainly not the ‘self-amending’, way
by which the system processes inputs.

3.4 Polkadot
Polkadot [41] is a proof-of-stake, mostly-on-chain governed block-
chain platform with a number interesting additions, including an
elected council and a technical council. Voters require at least 5
DOT to participate in governance and their voting power is based
on stake. At a glance, the voters elect councillors, directly vote
on referenda and submit proposals. The councilors then have the
power to veto dangerous proposals, elect the technical committee,
submit proposal of their own for approval by the voters and also
control the treasury. The technical council can submit emergency
referenda, that are implemented immediately if approved.

More specifically, the council consists of 13 members with 7 day
tenures. They are elected using an approval voting based method,
the weighted Phragmén election algorithm (e.g. [52]. An in-house
refinement of Phragmén called Phragmms [53] could be used in
the future. During a referendum election, an adaptive quorum is
used, requiring a different majority and turnout based on how the
referendum was created (e.g, by the community or a weak council
majority). A successful referendum enters a 28 day waiting period
before enactment, unless it is an emergency. Typically, the votes cast
are locked for these 28 days. However, the voters can increase their
voting power by voluntarily locking them for longer (or decrease
it by not locking at all). The treasury is controlled by the council,

9

which decides whether to allocate funds to proposals that ask for
them based on current supply.

Evaluation. As usual, only pseudonymity and verifiability are
satisfied. Council elections and referenda voting functions are
Pareto efficient. In addition, the voters have the ability to lock
their votes for an extended time, to signal the strength of their
preferences. Arguably, a veto might not be Pareto efficient if there
is 100% consensus in a referendum. However, this is an extremely
contrived case. Voting in favour of a proposal requires funds to be
locked in until the proposal is enacted. The documented rationale
behind this is to hold voters responsible for a proposal that they
vote for, satisfying accountability and further reinforcing Pareto
Efficiency. There are no explicit or direct rewards given for partici-
pation or contribution to satisfy sustainability. However, Polkadot
have deliberately chosen against monetary rewards for voters, for
justified reasons. Often the rewards for voters are too low for a sig-
nificant effect, as detailed in Section 2.6. However, council members
should probably receive some direct compensation. Even though
their tenure is short, they hold a lot of power and should have the
ability to devote themselves full time. The Polkadot governance
mechanism is capable of taking in inputs of urgency (i.e. emer-
gency referenda) and acting on it if deemed urgent by the council,
all whilst being able to terminate within an amount of time pro-
portional to the urgency. Token-based suffrage is satisfied since
only token holders are allowed to vote. The council adds teams to
the technical committee (which is able to propose emergency refer-
enda) based on their positive technical contributions and expertise.
However, those teams are chosen by council members only and a
positive contribution does not equate to a guarantee of an input in
a decision-making process.

3.5 Decred
Decred is a hybrid proof-of-work and proof-of-stake system that
is mostly on-chain governed [54]. Voters can participate in gover-
nance by locking enough DCR, which is the native token of Decred.
This provides them with tickets which supplement the consensus
protocol and can also be used for voting. High level issues that
require funds from the Decred Treasury are handled off-chain, in
Politeia. This deliberation results in an election which is crypto-
graphically coupled to a snapshot of the chain. A 20% quorum is
needed, with over 60% of the votes being in favour. The on-chain
component is the Decred Change Proposal (DCP) [55], through
which the consensus mechanism is updated. This requires a 10%
quorum and 75% majority of approval. Failing to meet the quorum,
the election will be repeated in the next cycle. If it is successful, a
‘lock-in’ period begins, after which all nodes should update their
software.

Evaluation The votes are not encrypted, therefore only pseudon-
ymity and verifiability are satisfied. Pareto efficiency is somewhat
satisfied: there are similar issues as Tezos, but the added role of
Politeia could improve the outcome. Sustainable development is
satisfied (somewhat informally) but there are no specific rewards
for participating in governance. Voters receive rewards, but these
have to do with their role in the hybrid consensus protocol. Ac-
countability could be improved, as the token locking required for
voting is shorter than the timelock for successful proposals.

3.6 Compound
Compound [56] is a protocol running on the Ethereum blockchain
that establishes money markets. Governance in Compound is fu-
elled by an ERC-20 compatible token called COMP [57]. These
governance tokens are distributed to the community through vari-
ous channels: some are allocated to users based on their invested
assets, others to Compound Labs Inc. shareholders and employees,
etc. Holding COMP allows users to vote, delegate to others and cre-
ate proposals, which are executable pieces of code. Once submitted,
these proposals enter a two day review period, following a three
day election. A proposal is successful if a majority is in favour and
a quorum is reached. After that, the proposal is locked for two days
before implementation, for security reasons. In addition, the Pause
Guardian (controlled by a community appointed multi-signature)
can suspend most functionalities of Compound at any time.
Evaluation Every step of the governance process is performed by
interacting with smart contracts on Ethereum, without any further
cryptographic techniques, satisfying pseudonymity and verifiability.
Once a proposal enters the voting phase, the voters only have two
options: yes or no, which is clearly Pareto Efficient. If there are
multiple incompatible options (e.g., values of a specific parameter),
these proposals would have to be dealt with sequentially: the actual
order could bias voters, which complicates their decisions and leaks
information. Therefore, Pareto Efficiency is somewhat satisfied (e.g.,
between two highly popular proposal, the slightly less popular one
might win if it is up for election first and then the users might
be less eager to implement another change). Once a proposal is
executed, its creator and voters are completely independent from
its future and there are no rewards associated with the process.
Therefore, neither availability or sustainability are satisfied. The

10

total time between creating a government proposal and voting
for it takes 7 days, 2 of which are hard-coded into the Timelock.
This window for immediate action is only open right after a vote,
but adding the Pause Guardian, liveness is satisfied. Since voting
eligibility depends only on having COMP tokens, which can be
exchanged and are initially distributed to addresses with assets on
Compound, token-based suffrage is satisfied. Some COMP tokens
are distributed or reserved for members of the Compound team.
Therefore, meritocratic suffrage is slightly satisfied.

3.7 Uniswap
We briefly sketch Uniswap [58] governance, which combines off
and on-chain components. The on-chain part of its governance
system is almost identical to Compound appendix A.4, using the
UNI token instead. However, UNI can also be used to empower
off-chain processes. The off-chain discourse takes place on the
Uniswap governance forum, where 2 types of posts have particular
significance. The first is the Temperature Check, whose goal is to
gauge interest in changing the status quo. After 3 days there is a
poll, where users have vote according to the amount of UNI they
hold on-chain. If a majority is reached and quorum are reached, a
Consensus Check is created on the same forum. During the 5 day
duration of the Consensus Check, a proposal needs to be fleshed
out. In the end, a second poll is brought before the users, this
time possibly containing many alternatives. As long as the highest
ranked alternative receives more than 50,000 UNI, an on-chain
Governance Proposal is created and handled like in Compound.

3.8 Maker DAO
Maker DAO [59] is a decentralized organization running on Eth-
ereum and based on the Maker Protocol. One of its novel features is
using a two-token system, with DAI, which is a stablecoin pegged
to the U.S. dollar, and MKR which the governance token. MKR
serves an additional purpose however: to support DAI’s peg. The
governance system employs both on and off-chain elements. The
off-chain component takes place at the Maker DAO forum, where
users can create Forum Signal Threads, which are followed by a
poll. Each forum user has a single vote, irrespective of MKR. These
are further ratified on-chain by Governance Polls, which employ
instant-runoff voting, weighted by the MKR of each voter. Finally,
changes to the protocol (which are pieces of executable code) are
enacted by Executive Votes. These follow a continuous approval vote
system, with the most approved Vote at any given time being the
actual implementation. For security reasons, these changes happen
after a 24 hour waiting period and there is also an emergency
shutdown functionality, triggered if the community locks enough
MKR.
Evaluation. As there is no vote encryption, only pseudonymity
and verifiability are satisfied. Pareto Efficiency is improved com-
pared to other designs by using instant-runoff voting to handle
competing proposals, thus giving voter a richer action space to
declare their preferences accurately (without requiring multiple
rounds or additional strategic behaviour). Suffrage is also improved,
as there is a clear connection between MKR tokens and the overall
functionality of Maker DAO, further coupling its value to some
actual generated utility.

SoK: Blockchain Governance

Remark. Project Catalyst and Dash also include a treasury, which
complicates the voting process. Funds are periodically collected by the
normal blockchain operation and allocated to fund its development
and undertake projects whose results may take months to material-
ize. In addition, at every funding round more than one proposal may
be selected, as long as their total cost does not exceed a budget. Voters
need additional flexibility to signal their preferences. Specifically, they
need to compare a proposals perceived value with it with its budget
and think about the opportunity cost of funding it. This is closely
related to the field of Participatory Budgeting (e.g., [60–62]). Decred
also includes a treasury. The salient difference (e.g., with Project Cat-
alyst) is that competing proposals are first debated off-chain, rather
than set to compete on-chain for some portion the budget available
in one round of funding. The final vote is on-chain, but only as a
referendum on proposals that already acquired off-chain support.

3.9 Project Catalyst
Project Catalyst [63] is the on-chain treasury governance system
used by the Cardano blockchain, which is proof-of-stake. Gover-
nance takes place in twelve week periods called funds and involves
a number of additional agents, on top of the usual voters, whose
voting power and eligibility is dependent on stake ownership. At
the beginning of the fund, community generated proposals (which
include a corresponding budget) are submitted. These are then
reviewed by Community Advisors (CA’s) and these reviews are
further checked for their quality by veteran Community Advisors
(vCA’s), both of which are rewarded for their efforts. Given these
evaluations, an approval voting based mechanism [30] is used. The
proposal whose ‘Yes’ votes minus the ‘No’ votes are more than 5%
of the total votes received is eligible for funding. These eligible pro-
posals are then sorted according to their approval. If the available
funds are not enough to cover some proposal, it is skipped and
a less popular (but cheaper one) could take its place. In addition,
there is the Catalyst Circle [64], an elected group of representatives
that oversees Catalyst and a delegated voting system is proposed
for future iterations.

Evaluation. Everyone participates in Project Catalyst using
their wallet address. Voters submit encrypted ballots (padded with
some randomness), using the public key issued by a committee,
which tallies the votes and decrypts the result. If the voter address
is linked to a real identity, the only information available is that
this particular person voted, keeping the contents secret. The ballot
itself cannot be decrypted by the voter and if the random padding
is not kept, it is impossible even for the voter to convince anyone
of the way they voted. The result of the vote can be independently
verified and long as the voter saved the random padding, they can
verify that their particular vote was counted. Therefore, there is a
(somewhat contrived) sequence of events after which a voter would
be unable to check that their ballot has been added.

In some cases, proposals with fewer votes will be prioritised for
their lower budgets. For example, if the total fund is 100 and the
three winning proposals have budget 1, 50 and 50 (in order of popu-
larity) the last proposal will not receive funding, even though every
voter might prefer funding the two 50 proposals. Additionally, each
voter could submit an uninformative ‘no’ vote to many proposals,

11

in order to maximize the winning chance of their favourite. A po-
tential mitigation would be to use techniques from Participatory
Budgeting [61] and Distortion [65], which use a small amount of
ordinal information (e.g., asking voters to compare between 2 pro-
posals or to list their most favourite one) to improve the quality of
the outcome. Overall, Pareto Efficiency is only somewhat satisfied.
There are no explicit, on or off-chain, penalties. Proposers need
to submit progress reports about their projects to keep receiving
funding and community advisors can be penalized for poor reviews
or absence. As these are either centralized or community-driven
without clearly described mechanisms, accountability is mostly not
satisfied. Although there is no explicit reward given to the proposer,
it is her responsibility to request the amount which cover the cost
of her work. All other parties are rewarded for participating in
the governance process and to an extent receive larger rewards
for additional effort. Each Project Catalyst Fund follows a 12 week
timeline. Liveness is not satisfied: even though the funds can be
released in accordance with each proposal’s progress, there is no
mechanism to take urgent action. Voting rights depend only on
having at least 500 ADA. There are no guaranteed voting rights
based on previous positive contributions, however, community
advisors can affect the outcome of the votes through their reviews.

3.10 Dash
Dash [66] uses proof-of-work for the underlying consensus mecha-
nism, but includes an additional layer of functionality enabled by
masternodes, including governance and treasury fund allocation.
These masternodes are users that have locked at least 1, 000 DASH
(called collateral, which is part of their stake) and also operate a
server. The treasury operates in similar fashion to Project Catalyst,
but requires a 10% difference between ‘Yes’ and ‘No’ votes for eli-
gible proposals. Proposals can be submitted by anyone, but require
spending 5 DASH to ensure that only serious enough issues are
raised. Only masternodes may vote and there are no designated
roles for reviewers or elected representatives. Additionally mastern-
ode do not collect rewards specifically for voting, but are rewarded
for the entirety of their duties.

Evaluation. The system only satisfies pseudonymity and veri-
fiability, as votes are public. Pareto Efficiency is similar to Project
Catalyst. Although masternodes have collateral, this is not directly
tied to governance and could be withdrawn immediately after en-
acting some controversial proposal. Sustainable development is
satisfied through the treasury, but sustainable participation could
be improved as the masternode rewards are not specific to voting,
but conensus as well. Additionally, there is an issue of Suffrage since
only token holders (having at least 1,000 DASH, or about 54, 000$)
who are also willing to run a server can participate, leaving other
token holders without representation.

4 CHALLENGES & RESEARCH DIRECTIONS
It should be clear from our exposition so far that the blockchain
governance space is still rife with challenges and open questions.
We summarize in this section a number of them to motivate future
research in the area.

I. Tradeoffs between Privacy vs. Verifiability and Suffrage. The
tension between verifiability and privacy stems from requirements

such as universal verifiability which mandates tracing each decision
back to the inputs of decision-makers as determined by suffrage.
The higher degree of privacy that is required, the more difficult it is
to ensure verifiability; as a simple example from classical elections,
if the electoral roll remains private, then it is difficult for an external
observer to verify whether the correct set of decision-makers has
participated. This also creates a tension with suffrage as types
of suffrage that maximize inclusion, for the sake of verifiability,
might have to expose a larger set of community-members that
otherwise would have remained private. Technically reconciling
these properties is highly non-trivial, especially if privacy aspects
such as coercion resilience are desired.

II. Proofs of Personhood, Identity-based suffrage and tradeoffs with
Privacy . While there is wide agreement that individual users should
have equal weight in decision-making (something advocated in the
context of election reform for centuries, cf. [67]), achieving this
type of suffrage is particularly challenging in the context of decen-
tralized systems. Even though some initial work is undertaken in
this direction e.g., [17], and there are also connections with other
concepts in cyber-security such as CAPTCHAs [68], nevertheless
the problem of achieving a satisfactory level of identity-based suf-
frage in the context of blockchain governance is still wide open.
This challenge should be also considered from the lens of privacy,
since in many cases of such proofs, community-members would
have to reveal personally identifiable information to other actors
something that comes inevitably with privacy implications.

III. Meritocratic suffrage and tradeoffs with privacy. The challenge
in the context of meritocratic suffrage is in two levels, first, in
quantifying what type of merit itself should warrant participation to
decision-making. The second level is recording reliably the relevant
actions of community-members in the system so that it can be
acted upon during the decision-making process. Finally, as in the
case of proofs of personhood, there can be privacy implications.
Some early works in this direction show that privacy and merit
may be reconciled, see e.g., the signatures of reputation primitive
[69] but still, significantly more work is required to fully tackle the
full spectrum of possible ways to express and act on merit.

IV. Exchanges, venture capital investors and token-based suffrage.
In the setting of token-based suffrage, an important consideration
is the fact that token-holders may choose custody solutions for
their tokens for a variety of reasons (reducing risks regarding loss
of keys, or the ability to access services or rewards provided by
custody operators). While among some cryptocurrency users this
is frowned upon (the tenet “not your keys, not your coins” is fre-
quently repeated in social media) there is a large number of users
that prefer to keep their digital assets in third party providers’ sys-
tems.2 This state of affairs, results in entities with inflated leverage
in a token-based system that in some cases can control a very signif-
icant portion of the token supply. A related issue is the presence of
venture capital firms that are early investors in some platforms and
receive a large amount of tokens at preferential prices in exchange
for funding initial development efforts. This similarly may result
in increased leverage which can be perceived as unfair by other
community-members.

2Indicatively, statistics from the web-site https://cryptoquant.com/, at the time of writ-
ing (May 2022), suggest that about 13.3% of the Bitcoin supply is held on exchanges.
The figure for Ethereum is higher at slightly above 20%.

12

V. Rational ignorance and inaction. Rational ignorance [70] is
when decision-makers refrain from acquiring the knowledge re-
quired of meaningful input when voting, or when delegating their
vote, due to the fact that the cost of acquiring that knowledge
exceeds any expected potential benefits. A similar argument can
be applied to developing improvement proposals, where inaction
can be more rational than action if the cost of development (or
even the act of preparing a proposal) exceeds any potential bene-
fits. These issues pertain to the property of sustainability which so
far lacks a comprehensive theoretical framework in the context of
blockchain governance. For some recent work that can be helpful
in this direction see [71, 72].

VI. Tradeoffs between accountability and utility. Recall that making
decision-makers accountable suggests some degree of “skin-in-the
game” on their side and the natural way to achieve this suggests
some form of restriction of the functionality that is offered to them
by the platform. As a result, the immediate utility that decision
makers can extract from the platform is reduced — recall the exam-
ple of “token lockup” for the duration of a certain decision making
process. The main challenge in this setting is to model and quan-
tify the relevant aspect of this utility reduction and mapping the
spectrum of possible options so that the the right balance between
accountability and utility can be determined on a case by case basis.
VII. Tradeoffs between Liveness vs. Pareto Efficiency and Suffrage.
As we discussed in the context of liveness, expedient decision-
making is highly desirable. Unfortunately high expediency can
come at odds with Pareto efficiency: if decision-makers have pref-
erences which are not recorded due to the system not giving them
enough opportunity to them for reacting, then it is easy to see
that this can violate Pareto efficiency (observe here that abstaining
can be also a preference - however there is a distinction between
having an actual preference and missing the deadline to provide it
to the system and preferring to abstain altogether). Liveness can
also exhibit a similar tradeoff with suffrage: the more exclusive the
suffrage mapping from community-members to decision-makers
is, the higher the expediency of the system may become - but this
of course comes at the expense of the system being less inclusive.
Striking the right balance between liveness and these properties is
another question on which future research should focus.

5 CONCLUSION
In this systematization work we focused on documenting a com-
prehensive list of properties of blockchain governance. We took a
first principles approach and derived seven fundamental properties
using which we analyzed a number of widely used blockchain plat-
forms. It is worth saying that there are also other platforms that
we have attempted to cover, but these were either too poorly docu-
mented or were yet to implement governance mechanisms, thus we
consider the list a comprehensive coverage of popular blockchain
systems at the time of writing.

The main outcome of the systematization effort, as illustrated in
Table 1, is that in many ways all current blockchain platforms either
have deficiencies in their governance processes or allow significant
room for improvement. It is worth also reiterating that achieving all
stated properties to the highest possible degree is impossible due to
their conflicting nature and as a result it is inevitable that platforms

SoK: Blockchain Governance

must decide on appropriate tradeoffs between the various properties
that are the most suitable for each particular setting. Arguably,
without effective governance processes, blockchain technology will
fail to reach its full potential. For one thing, software engineering
practice has shown that software updates, extensions and patches
are a necessity in the lifecycle of computer systems and as a result,
without proper governance, blockchain systems will fail to adapt to
unanticipated use cases and mitigate software bug vulnerabilities
that are inevitably discovered in any system.

6 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank Yussef Soudan for his extensive research
and participation in many meetings during the earlier stages of this
work. Additionally, we thank Roman Oliynykov for providing many
details and insights regarding the evaluation of Project Catalyst.

REFERENCES
[1] S. Nakamoto, “Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system,” 2008. [Online].

Available: https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf

[2] Divisions of Corporation Finance and Enforcemen. Statement by the Divisions of
Corporation Finance and Enforcement on the Report of Investigation on the DAO.
Investigation report. July 2017. URL: https://www.sec.gov/litigation/investreport/
34-81207.pdf.

[3] Almost $500,000 in Ethereum Classic coin stolen by forking its blockchain, Dan

Goodin, 1/8/2019, Arstechnica.

[4] Legal operational and technical standards for e-voting, Recommendation
Rec(2004)11 adopted by the Committee of Ministers of the Council of
Europe on 30 September 2004 and explanatory memorandum, Council of
Europe publishing, 2004, http://www.eods.eu/library/CoE_Recommentaion%
20on%20Legal,%20Operational%20and%20Technical%20Standards%20for%20E-
voting_2004_EN.pdf.

[5] Voting System Standards Volume I, Federal Election Commission, USA. April
2002. https://www.eac.gov/sites/default/files/eac_assets/1/28/Voting_System_
Standards_Volume_I.pdf.

[6] V. Buterin, Moving beyond coin voting governance, August, 2021. Accessed on:
October 1, 2021. Available: https://vitalik.ca/general/2021/08/16/voting3.html.
[7] Y. Liu, Q. Lu, L. Zhu, H.-Y. Paik, and M. Staples, “A systematic literature review

on blockchain governance,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.05460, 2021.

[8] Wharton Cryptogovernance Workshop. Accessed on: October 19, 2021. Available:

https://cryptogov.net.

[9] R. v. Pelt, S. Jansen, D. Baars, and S. Overbeek, “Defining blockchain governance:
a framework for analysis and comparison,” Information Systems Management,
vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 21–41, 2021.

[10] R. Beck, C. Müller-Bloch, and J. L. King, “Governance in the blockchain economy:
A framework and research agenda,” Journal of the Association for Information
Systems, vol. 19, no. 10, p. 1, 2018.

[11] P. De Filippi and G. McMullen, “Governance of blockchain systems: Governance

of and by distributed infrastructure,” 2018.

[12] Y.-Y. Hsieh, J.-P. J. Vergne, and S. Wang, “The internal and external governance
of blockchain-based organizations: Evidence from cryptocurrencies,” pp. 48–68,
2017.

[13] D. W. Allen and C. Berg, “Blockchain governance: What we can learn from
the economics of corporate governance,” Allen, DWE and Berg, C (Forthcom-
ing)‘Blockchain Governance: What can we Learn from the Economics of Corporate
Governance, 2020.

[14] N. Khan, T. Ahmad, A. Patel, and R. State, “Blockchain governance: An overview
and prediction of optimal strategies using nash equilibrium,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2003.09241, 2020.

[15] S. Venugopalan and I. Homoliak, “Always on voting: A framework for repetitive

voting on the blockchain,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.10571, 2021.

[16] H. Gersbach, A. Mamageishvili, and M. Schneider, “Vote delegation and misbe-

havior,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.08823, 2021.

[17] D. Siddarth, S. Ivliev, S. Siri, and P. Berman, “Who watches the watchmen? a
review of subjective approaches for sybil-resistance in proof of personhood
protocols,” Frontiers in Blockchain, vol. 3, p. 46, 2020.

[18] S. P. Lalley and E. G. Weyl, “Quadratic voting: How mechanism design can

radicalize democracy,” vol. 108, pp. 33–37, 2018.

[19] B. S. Srinivasan and L. Lee, Quantifying Decentralization, news.earn.com, July, 28,
2017. Accessed on: October 3, 2021. Available: https://news.earn.com/quantifying-
decentralization-e39db233c28e.

13

[20] F. Brandt, V. Conitzer, and U. Endriss, “Computational social choice,” Multiagent

systems, pp. 213–283, 2012.

[21] K. J. Arrow, “A difficulty in the concept of social welfare,” Journal of political

economy, vol. 58, no. 4, pp. 328–346, 1950.

[22] A. Gibbard, “Manipulation of voting schemes: a general result,” Econometrica:

journal of the Econometric Society, pp. 587–601, 1973.

[23] M. A. Satterthwaite, “Strategy-proofness and arrow’s conditions: Existence and
correspondence theorems for voting procedures and social welfare functions,”
Journal of economic theory, vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 187–217, 1975.

[24] R. L. Rivest and E. Shen, “An optimal single-winner preferential voting system
based on game theory,” in Proc. of 3rd International Workshop on Computational
Social Choice. Citeseer, 2010, pp. 399–410.

[25] B. Kluiving, A. de Vries, P. Vrijbergen, A. Boixel, and U. Endriss, “Analysing
irresolute multiwinner voting rules with approval ballots via sat solving,” in ECAI
2020.

IOS Press, 2020, pp. 131–138.

[26] J. J. Bartholdi and J. B. Orlin, “Single transferable vote resists strategic voting,”

Social Choice and Welfare, vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 341–354, 1991.

[27] M. Balinski and R. Laraki, “Majority judgment,” Cambridge/Mass, 2011.
[28] J. D. Cohen and M. J. Fischer, “A robust and verifiable cryptographically
secure election scheme (extended abstract),” in 26th Annual Symposium
on Foundations of Computer Science, Portland, Oregon, USA, 21-23 October
1985.
IEEE Computer Society, 1985, pp. 372–382. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1109/SFCS.1985.2

[29] A. Juels, D. Catalano, and M. Jakobsson, “Coercion-resistant electronic elections,”

in Towards Trustworthy Elections.

Springer, 2010, pp. 37–63.

[30] B. Zhang, R. Oliynykov, and H. Balogun, “A treasury system for cryptocurrencies:
Enabling better collaborative intelligence,” in The Network and Distributed System
Security Symposium 2019, 2019.

[31] E. Cuvelier, O. Pereira, and T. Peters, “Election verifiability or ballot privacy: Do
we need to choose?” in European Symposium on Research in Computer Security.
Springer, 2013, pp. 481–498.

[32] R. Gharadaghy and M. Volkamer, “Verifiability in electronic voting-explanations
for non security experts,” in 4th International Conference on Electronic Voting 2010.
Gesellschaft für Informatik eV, 2010.

[33] V. Cortier, D. Galindo, R. Küsters, J. Mueller, and T. Truderung, “Sok: Verifiability
notions for e-voting protocols,” in 2016 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy
(SP).

IEEE, 2016, pp. 779–798.

[34] J. C. Benaloh and D. Tuinstra, “Receipt-free secret-ballot elections (extended
abstract),” in Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth Annual ACM Symposium on
Theory of Computing, 23-25 May 1994, Montréal, Québec, Canada, F. T. Leighton
and M. T. Goodrich, Eds. ACM, 1994, pp. 544–553. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/195058.195407

[35] J. Benaloh, “Simple verifiable elections,” in 2006 USENIX/ACCURATE Electronic
Voting Technology Workshop, EVT’06, Vancouver, BC, Canada, August 1, 2006, D. S.
Wallach and R. L. Rivest, Eds. USENIX Association, 2006. [Online]. Available:
https://www.usenix.org/conference/evt-06/simple-verifiable-elections

[36] A. Kiayias, T. Zacharias, and B. Zhang, “Ceremonies for end-to-end verifiable
elections,” in Public-Key Cryptography - PKC 2017 - 20th IACR International
Conference on Practice and Theory in Public-Key Cryptography, Amsterdam,
The Netherlands, March 28-31, 2017, Proceedings, Part II, ser. Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, S. Fehr, Ed., vol. 10175. Springer, 2017, pp. 305–334. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-54388-7_11

[37] J. Alwen, R. Ostrovsky, H. Zhou, and V. Zikas, “Incoercible multi-party
computation and universally composable receipt-free voting,” in Advances in
Cryptology - CRYPTO 2015 - 35th Annual Cryptology Conference, Santa Barbara,
CA, USA, August 16-20, 2015, Proceedings, Part II, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer
Springer, 2015, pp.
Science, R. Gennaro and M. Robshaw, Eds., vol. 9216.
763–780. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-48000-7_37
[38] C. A. Dykstra, “The quest for responsibility,” American Political Science Review,

vol. 33, no. 1, p. 1–25, 1939.

[39] R. W. Grant and R. O. Keohane, “Accountability and abuses of power in world
politics,” American political science review, vol. 99, no. 1, pp. 29–43, 2005.
[40] D. F. Sacco, S. V. Bruton, M. Brown, and M. M. Medlin, “Skin in the game:
Personal accountability and journal peer review,” Journal of Empirical Research
on Human Research Ethics, vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 330–338, 2020, pMID: 32425095.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1177/1556264620922651

[41] D. Salman, Governance, Polkadot Wiki, September 17, 2021. Accessed on: October
1, 2021. Available: https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/learn-governance.
[42] Y. Zhang and M. van der Schaar, “Reputation-based incentive protocols in crowd-
sourcing applications,” in 2012 Proceedings IEEE INFOCOM, 2012, pp. 2140–2148.
[43] C. Panagopoulos, “Extrinsic rewards, intrinsic motivation and voting,” The Journal

of Politics, vol. 75, no. 1, pp. 266–280, 2013.

[44] V. A. Shineman, “If you mobilize them, they will become informed: experimental
evidence that information acquisition is endogenous to costs and incentives to
participate,” British Journal of Political Science, vol. 48, no. 1, pp. 189–211, 2018.
[45] Tezos Foundation, The Voting Process, Tezos Documentation, July 16, 2021.
Accessed on: October 2, 2021. Available: https://gitlab.com/tezos/tezos/-/blob/
master/docs/010/voting.rst.

[46] L. Dashjr, BIP Process, github.com, February, 4, 2016. Accessed on: October 14,
2021. Available: https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0002.mediawiki.
[47] J. Schnelli et al., Contributing to Bitcoin Core , github.com, September, 26, 2015.
Accessed on: October 14, 2021. Available: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/
master/CONTRIBUTING.md.

[48] P. Wuille, P. Todd, G Maxwell, and R. Russell, Version bits with timeout and
delay, github.com, October, 4, 2015. Accessed on: October 14, 2021. Available:
https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0009.mediawiki.

[49] V. Buterin, “A Next-Generation Smart Contract and Decentralized Applica-
tion Platform", github.com, 2013. Accessed on: November 15, 2021. Available:
https://ethereum.org/en/whitepaper/.

[50] M. Becze, H. Jameson, et al., “EIP-1: EIP Purpose and Guidelines," Ethereum
Improvement Proposals, no. 1, October 2015. Accessed on: November 15, 2021.
[Online serial]. Available: https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-1.

[51] “Tezos Docs", September 9, 2016. Accessed on: October 23, 2021. Available:

https://gitlab.com/tezos/tezos/-/tree/master/docs.

[52] M. Brill, R. Freeman, S. Janson, and M. Lackner, “Phragmén’s voting methods
and justified representation,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, vol. 31, no. 1, 2017.

[53] A. Cevallos and A. Stewart, “A verifiably secure and proportional committee
election rule,” in Proceedings of the 3rd ACM Conference on Advances in Financial
Technologies, 2021, pp. 29–42.

[54] “Decred Documentation", April 26, 2016. Accessed on: November 16, 2021. Avail-

able: https://github.com/decred/dcrdocs.

[55] “Decred Change Proposals", May 6, 2017. Accessed on: November 21, 2021. Avail-

able: https://github.com/decred/dcps.

[56] R. Leshner, G. Hayes, “Compound: The Money Market Protocol", com-
pound.finance, 2019. Accessed on: November 16, 2021. Available: https://
compound.finance/documents/Compound.Whitepaper.pdf.

[57] Coinbase Statistics on COMP, Accessed on: December 1, 2021. Available: https:

//coinmarketcap.com/currencies/compound/.

[58] H. Adams, N. Zinsmeister, M. Salem, R. Keefer, D. Robinson, “Uniswap v3
Core", 2021. Accessed on: November 16, 2021. Available: https://uniswap.org/
whitepaper-v3.pdf.

[59] The Maker Protocol: MakerDAO’s Multi-Collateral Dai (MCD) System. Accessed
on: November 16, 2021. Available: https://makerdao.com/en/whitepaper.
[60] H. Aziz and N. Shah, “Participatory budgeting: Models and approaches,” 2020.
[61] G. Benade, S. Nath, A. D. Procaccia, and N. Shah, “Preference elicitation for
participatory budgeting,” Management Science, vol. 67, no. 5, pp. 2813–2827, 2021.
[62] V. Buterin, Z. Hitzig, and E. G. Weyl, “A flexible design for funding public goods,”

Management Science, vol. 65, no. 11, pp. 5171–5187, 2019.

[63] Project Catalyst Community website. Accessed on: December 15, 2021. Available:

https://cardanocataly.st.

[64] Kriss Baird, Introducing the Catalyst Circle. Accessed on: December 12, 2021.
Available: https://iohk.io/en/blog/posts/2021/07/08/introducing-the-catalyst-
circle/.

[65] E. Anshelevich, A. Filos-Ratsikas, N. Shah, and A. A. Voudouris, “Distortion
in social choice problems: The first 15 years and beyond,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2103.00911, 2021.

[66] “Dash Docs", February 13, 2018. Accessed on: October 17, 2021. Available:

https://github.com/dashpay/docs.

[67] G. Howell, “One man, one vote,” Manchester Selected Pamphlets. JSTOR 60239578,

1880.

[68] L. von Ahn, M. Blum, N. J. Hopper, and J. Langford, “CAPTCHA: using
hard AI problems for security,” in Advances in Cryptology - EUROCRYPT
2003, International Conference on the Theory and Applications of Cryptographic
Techniques, Warsaw, Poland, May 4-8, 2003, Proceedings, ser. Lecture Notes
in Computer Science, E. Biham, Ed., vol. 2656.
Springer, 2003, pp. 294–311.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-39200-9_18

[69] J. Bethencourt, E. Shi, and D. Song, “Signatures of reputation,” in Financial
Cryptography and Data Security, 14th International Conference, FC 2010, Tenerife,
Canary Islands, Spain, January 25-28, 2010, Revised Selected Papers, ser. Lecture
Springer, 2010, pp. 400–407.
Notes in Computer Science, R. Sion, Ed., vol. 6052.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-14577-3_35

[70] B. R. Taylor, “The psychological foundations of rational ignorance: biased heuris-
tics and decision costs,” Constitutional Political Economy, vol. 31, no. 1, pp. 70–88,
2020.

[71] C. Prato and S. Wolton, “The voters’ curses: why we need goldilocks voters,”

American Journal of Political Science, vol. 60, no. 3, pp. 726–737, 2016.

[72] ——, “Rational ignorance, populism, and reform,” European Journal of Political

[73] P. Emerson, “The original borda count and partial voting,” Social Choice and

Economy, vol. 55, pp. 119–135, 2018.

Welfare, vol. 40, 02 2013.

[74] Maker Governance. Accessed on: October 18, 2021. Available: https://vote.

makerdao.com/.

14

A FURTHER DETAILS ABOUT EACH

GOVERNANCE SYSTEM

Following our high-level overview in Section 3, we use the appendix
to provide a more complete picture, including the finer details of
each platform and how these affect each property.

A.1 Bitcoin
Bitcoin [1] is the most prominent blockchain platform and it is a
proof-of-work, mostly off-chain governed blockchain. The Bitcoin
Improvement Proposal (BIP) process [46] is Bitcoin’s primary mech-
anism for ‘proposing new features, for collecting community input
on an issue, and for documenting design decisions’. An individual
or a group who wishes to submit a BIP is responsible for collecting
community feedback on both the initial idea and the BIP before
submitting it to the Bitcoin mailing list for review. Following dis-
cussions, the proposal is submitted to the BIP repository as a pull
request, where a BIP editor will appropriately label it. BIP editors
fulfill administrative and editorial responsibilities. There are repos-
itory ‘maintainers’ who are responsible for merging pull requests,
as well as a ‘lead maintainer’ who is responsible for the release
cycle as well as overall merging, moderation and appointment of
maintainers [47]. Maintainers and editors are often contributors
who earned the community’s trust over time. A peer review process
takes place, which is expressed by comments in the pull request.
Whether a pull request is merged into Bitcoin Core rests with the
project merge maintainers and ultimately the project lead. Main-
tainers will take into consideration if a patch is in line with the
general principles of the project; meets the minimum standards
for inclusion; and will judge the general consensus of contributors
[47].

There are stages through which a BIP can progress, including
‘Rejected’ and ‘Final’. In progressing to a status of ‘Final’, there are
two paths:

• Soft-fork BIP. A soft-fork upgrade often requires a 95% miner
super-majority. This is done via an on-chain signaling mech-
anism introduced in [48].

• Hard-fork BIP. A hard-fork upgrade requires adoption from
the entire ‘Bitcoin economy’, which has to be expressed by
the usage of the upgraded software.

We now have an overview of the upgrades decision-making process
in Bitcoin, which we will use to perform rough evaluations against
the properties developed in Section 2. It is important to note here
that the Bitcoin decision-making mechanism is informal, at least
with respect to other platforms. This results in rougher and less
satisfying evaluations.

• Suffrage: Since miners are guaranteed to explicitly signal
their approval or disapproval of soft-fork upgrades [48],
mining-based suffrage is satisfied. Although those with pre-
vious positive contributions and relevant expertise are able
to provide substantial inputs in the decision-making process,
there is no explicit guarantee of their decision-making rights
due to the informality of the process. However, since meri-
tocracy still does play a significant role in the process, we
will conclude that meritocratic suffrage is likely satisfied.

SoK: Blockchain Governance

• Pareto Efficiency. Since the decision-making process is
informal, there is no defined voting rule, which specifies
how the inputs result in a final outcome. Therefore Pareto
efficiency is not satisfied.

• Accountability. The platform does not define any way by
which it can hold participants responsible or accountable
for their individual actions. Therefore, accountability is not
satisfied.

• Confidentiality:

– Secrecy: Since the decision-making process among main-
tainers or reviewers is on public forums, an adversary
might accurately guess each participant’s input. There-
fore, secrecy is not satisfied.

– Pseudonymity: There are no defined requirements for
participants to reveal their identities. Some choose to par-
ticipate with their real identities and others do not. There-
fore, pseudonymity is satisfied.

– Coercion-resistance: Since the deliberation process among
maintainers and others takes place on public forums, an
adversary might accurately guess each participant’s input.
Thus, coercion-resistance is not satisfied.

• Verifiability. The signaling mechanism used as a voting pro-
cess for certain decisions is on-chain. However, even though
the deliberation process takes place in public forums, the
decision-making process remains informal, which makes it
difficult to identify how inputs are incorporated from which
parties and how they are tallied. However, such inputs can
be traced through the public forums and any changes that
are merged can be tracked on Github. Therefore, verifiability
is mostly satisfied.

• Sustainability: Sustainable Development. There are no ex-
plicitly defined incentives for contributors to develop BIPs.
Therefore, sustainable development is not satisfied.

• Sustainability: Sustainable Participation. There are no ex-
plicitly defined incentives for community members to partic-
ipate in discussions or reviews throughout the BIP process.
Therefore, sustainable participation is not satisfied.

• Liveness. Although no specific mention of inputs of urgency
are provided by the platform, given the informality and flex-
ibility of the BIP system, it is likely capable of taking inputs
of urgency and acting on them in an amount of time that
is a function of the urgency. Therefore, the platform likely
satisfies liveness.

A.2 Tezos
Tezos [51] is a more-recent proof-of-stake, on-chain governed block-
chain platform, which defines its governance process as “self-am-
ending”. In Tezos, to participate directly in the governance process,
a participant is required to have at least 8, 000 tokens. A unit of
8, 000 tokens is called a roll and it equates to a single vote. In this
case, the participant is called a delegate. Alternatively, to participate
indirectly in the governance process, a participant can delegate
whichever amount of tokens they have (which can be less than
8, 000) to an existing delegate.

The voting process is currently divided in five governance peri-
ods, each period spanning roughly two weeks or 20480 blocks (i.e. 5

15

cycles). Note that for proposals to be submitted in Tezos, they need
to be compiled without errors so that at the end of the governance
process the proposal can be adopted automatically. The following
is a breakdown of the five governance periods:

(1) Proposal period. Delegates can submit protocol amend-
ment proposals using the proposals operation as long as
the underlying codebase compiles with the change. Dele-
gates then upvote their preferred proposal or proposals. The
proposal with the most upvotes is selected. If there are no
proposals, no proposals with upvotes of at least 5% of the
possible votes, or a tie between proposals, a new proposal
period starts.

(2) Testing-vote period. Delegates can cast one vote to test or

not the winning proposal using the ballot operation.
(3) Testing period. A test chain is forked for the entire testing

period to ensure a correct migration of the context.

(4) Promotion-vote period. Delegates can cast one vote to
promote or not the tested proposal using the ballot operation.
(5) Adoption period. The adoption period serves as a buffer
time for users to update their infrastructure to the new pro-
tocol. At the end of this period, the proposal is activated as
the new protocol and a new proposal period starts. Here,
the Tezos node software is aware that at the end of this pe-
riod it needs to update to the new protocol, hence why the
governance process is described as “self-amending”.

In the proposal period, approval voting is used. In the testing-
vote and promotion-vote periods, the voting method is as follows:

• Each delegate can submit a single vote of a “Yea”, “Nay” or

“Pass”.

• If the participation reaches the current quorum and the pro-
posal has a super-majority in favour, it goes through to the
next stage.
– The quorum is the participation threshold, it has maximum
value of 0.7 and a minimum value of 0.2, and it changes
after every vote.

– A super-majority is when the number of “Yea” votes is
more than 80% of the number of “Yea” votes and “Nay”
votes summed together.

Similar to the previously evaluated platforms, we perform the
evaluations of the governance process in Tezos against the proper-
ties developed in Section 2.

• Suffrage: Only token-holders are able to vote, with or with-
out delegation. Therefore, token-based suffrage is satisfied.
• Pareto Efficiency. If a proposal receives less than 5% of
the upvotes or is tied with another proposal, no proposal
will pass, even though operators could have voted for some
proposals. However, given the properties of approval vot-
ing outlined in Section 2.2, this effect is mild. In addition,
the selected outcome is checked once again at the last step.
Therefore, Pareto efficiency is somewhat satisfied.

• Confidentiality:

– Secrecy: The delegation mechanism requires the public
key of each delegate to be recorded on the ballot, and all
ballots are public. Therefore, secrecy is not satisfied.

– Pseudonymity: Voters are not required to reveal their
real-life identities to participate in the governance process;
therefore pseudonymity is satisfied.

– Coercion-resistance. Since delegate votes (rolls) are tied
to their chosen pseudo-identities, coercion-resistance is
not satisfied.

• Verifiability. Since the votes and final tally are all public,

verifiability is, by definition, satisfied.

• Accountability. Whether an operator is directly voting or
delegating, the stake of each delegate is computed at the start
of each voting period. This means that delegates can sell their
stake before the adoption period ends and the proposal is
activated. There are no accountability measures defined in
Tezos. Therefore, accountability is not satisfied.

• Sustainability: Sustainable Development or Participation.
There are no explicit or direct incentives given for develop-
ing successful proposals or participating in the governance
process. Therefore, sustainability is not satisfied.

• Liveness. Given the lack of flexibility of the on-chain gov-
ernance model, the Tezos governance system is incapable of
taking inputs of urgency and responding to them in accor-
dance to the severity of the issue. Although a Gitlab issue or a
pull request could be initiated without going through the for-
mal on-chain route, it is still not the officially documented,
and certainly not the “self-amending”, way by which the
system processes inputs. Therefore, liveness is not satisfied.

A.3 Polkadot
Polkadot [41] is a proof-of-stake, mostly-on-chain governed block-
chain platform. To make any changes to the network, active token
holders and the council administrate a network upgrade decision.
Whether the proposal is proposed by the public (token holders) or
the council, it will go through a referendum to let all token-holders,
weighted by stake, make the decision.

The council is an elected body of on-chain accounts that are in-
tended to represent the passive stakeholders of Polkadot, currently
consisting of 13 members [41]. The council has two major tasks in
governance: (i) proposing referendums and (ii) vetoing dangerous
or malicious referendums. The council implements what is called a
prime member whose vote acts as the default for other members
that fail to vote before the timeout. The prime member is chosen
based on a Borda count [73]. With the existence of a prime mem-
ber, it forces councilors to be explicit in their votes or have their
vote counted for whatever is voted on by the prime. The council
also controls Polkadot’s treasury and allocates funds to successful
proposals.

Voting for councilors requires locking 5 DOT tokens (the native
token of the platform) and takes on an approval voting approach. A
token-holder can approve up to 16 different councilors and the vote
will be equalised among the chosen group, with each council term
lasting 7 days. The approval voting method used is the weighted
Phragmén election algorithm (e.g. [52], where the candidates with
most approvals are elected and, afterwards, a process is run that
redistributes the vote amongst the elected set. This reduces the
variance in the list of backing stake from the voters to the elected
candidates in order to ensure that the minimum amount of tokens

required to join the council is as high as possible. Running the
Phragmén algorithm cannot be completed within the time limits
of production of a single block. And waiting would jeopardise the
constant block production time of the network. Therefore, as much
computation as possible is moved to an off-chain worker, where val-
idators can work on the problem without impacting block produc-
tion time. An in-house refinement of Phragmén called Phragmms
[53] could be used in the future.

A significant part of Polkadot’s governance is the technical com-
mittee, which is composed of teams that have successfully imple-
mented or specified either a Polkadot runtime or Polkadot Host [41].
These teams are added or removed from the technical committee via
simple majority votes within the council. The technical committee
can, along with the council, propose emergency referendums, which
are fast-tracked for voting and implementation (e.g., for emergency
bug fixes)

Besides electing councilors, token-holders get to vote in refer-
endums. Each referendum has a specific proposal associated with
it. Proposals can implement backward-compatible or backward-
incompatible changes. Proposals can be submitted by token-holders,
the council or the technical committee:

• For token-holders to submit a proposal, a minimum amount
of tokens must be deposited. If another token-holder agrees
with the proposal, they can also deposit the same amount
of tokens in the proposal’s support. The proposal with the
highest amount of bonded support will be selected to be
a referendum in the next voting cycle. The referendum, in
this case, will have positive turnout bias. That is, the smaller
the amount of stake voting, the larger the super-majority
necessary for it to pass [41]. Specifically the proposal would
pass if

against
√

turnout

<

√

approve

electorate

.

• Proposals can only be submitted by the council through a
majority or unanimously. In the case of a unanimous council,
the referendum will have a negative turnout bias, that is, the
smaller the amount of stake voting, the smaller the amount
necessary for it to pass:
against

√

electorate

<

approve
√

turnout

.

In the case of a majority, the referendum will be a majority-
carries vote (51% of the votes is required to win).

• The technical committee can propose emergency referen-

dums subject to approval from the council.

If a proposal passes in a referendum, then Polkadot’s logic auto-
matically schedules it for enactment: autonomous enactment. This
is unlike other systems where miners or validators often have uni-
lateral power to prevent protocol changes by refusing to upgrade
software. Proposals submitted by the council or token-holders are
enacted 28 days after the referendum, whereas ones submitted by
the technical committee can be enacted immediately.

To vote, a token-holder generally must lock their tokens up for at
least the enactment delay period beyond the end of the referendum.
This is in order to ensure that some minimal economic buy-in exists
and to dissuade vote selling. It is possible to vote without locking at
all, but the vote is worth a small fraction of a normal vote. It is also

16

SoK: Blockchain Governance

possible to voluntarily lock for more than one enactment period, in
which case, the weight of the vote increases proportionally. This
mechanism exists to ensure that users with little stake but strong
opinions can express their conviction in referendums.

• Suffrage: Token-based suffrage is satisfied since only token
holders are allowed to vote. The council adds teams to the
technical committee (which is able to propose emergency
referenda) based on their positive technical contributions
and expertise. However, those teams are chosen by council
members only and a positive contribution does not equate
to a guarantee of an input in a decision-making process.
Therefore, meritocratic suffrage is only slightly satisfied.
• Pareto Efficiency. Council elections and referenda voting
functions are Pareto efficient. In addition, the voters have the
ability to lock their votes for an extended time, to signal the
strength of their preferences. Arguably, a veto might not be
Pareto efficient if there is 100% consensus in a referendum.
However, this is an extremely contrived case. For all intents
and purposes governance is Pareto efficient.

• Confidentiality:

– Secrecy: Votes on Polkadot, whether it’s in electing coun-
cilors, internal council votes, or voting in referenda, are
not documented to be private. Therefore, secrecy is not
satisfied.

– Pseudonymity: Participants are not required to reveal
their real-life identities to participate in the decision-making
process.Therefore pseudonymity is satisfied.

– Coercion-resistance: Since secrecy is not satisfied, coercion-

resistance is not satisfied by definition.

• Verifiability. Since the votes and final tally are all public,

verifiability is satisfied.

• Accountability. Voting in favour of a proposal requires
funds to be locked in until the proposal is enacted. The doc-
umented rationale behind this is to hold voters responsible
for a proposal that they vote for. Therefore, accountability is
satisfied.

• Sustainability: There are no explicit or direct rewards given
for participation, but successful proposals requiring funds
can access the treasury, after approval from the council. As
mentioned in the main text, Polkadot has explicitly chosen
against direct voting rewards. Sustainable development is
only somewhat satisfied, as the current mechanism is still a
bit informal.

• Liveness. The Polkadot governance mechanism is capable
of taking in inputs of urgency (i.e. emergency referenda) and
acting on it if deemed urgent by the council, all whilst being
able to terminate within an amount of time proportional to
the urgency. Therefore, liveness is satisfied.

A.4 Compound
Compound [56] is a protocol running on the Ethereum blockchain
that establishes money markets. These are collections of Ethereum
assets (e.g. Ether, ERC-20 stablecoins, coins like DAI or ERC-20
utility coins such as Augur) that users can supply and borrow.
These assets have algorithmically defined interest rates, dependent
on supply and demand, that users collect or pay when supplying

17

and borrowing respectively. Users can borrow depending on the
value of the underlying asset they have as collateral and repay at
any rate they want, paying the accrued interest. This provides the
ability to quickly switch between tokens in a trustless manner.

Governance in Compound is fuelled by an ERC-20 compatible
token called COMP [57]. The maximum number of COMP tokens
is capped at 10,000,000. About 4,200,000 of them are distributed to
the community at a rate of 2,312 per day. Of those, a fixed fraction
of these tokens is allocated to every market on Compound, half of
which goes to suppliers and the other half to borrowers and subse-
quently allocated proportionately within each group. Additionally,
2,400,000 tokens belong to the Compound Labs Inc. shareholders,
2,200,000 are allocated over 4 years to the Compound team (with an
additional 320,000 reserver for future members) and finally 775,000
are reserved for the community.

Holders of COMP can delegate voting power and create govern-
ment proposals. COMP tokens can be delegated to other addresses
at rate of 1 vote per token, or delegated to oneself for a direct vote.
A government proposal can then be created by any address holding
at least 25,000 COMP. On top of that, any address with 100 COMP
can create an autonomous proposal, which in turn can become a
government proposal once that address receives 25,000 COMP or
more in delegation. A government proposal is an executable piece
of code, which could update some parameter (e.g. the rate at which
COMP tokens are distributed), create a new money market or pro-
vide additional functionality to the Compound smart contracts. A
single address cannot issue multiple proposals in parallel.

The governance process is controlled by two smart contracts:
Governor Bravo and Timelock. Once a government proposal is cre-
ated, it is put into a two day review period, followed by an election
lasting 3 days. COMP holders can vote for or against the proposal,
which passes if the majority was in favour and it received more
than 400,000 votes in total. After that, it is put in Timelock for a
mandatory 2 day waiting period, before it is executed. This is a
safety measure: if an issue is found while in Timelock, the proposer
can cancel it (or the users can start reacting before its too late). At
any point prior to execution, the creator of the proposal (or any
address if the creator has fewer than 25,000 COMP) can cancel the
process. In addition the Pause Guardian (which is controlled by a
community appointed multi-signature) can suspend the functional-
ity of some Compound function (namely Mint, Borrow, Transfer,
and Liquidate) allowing users only very benign actions such as
closing their positions.

• Suffrage. Since voting eligibility depends only on having
COMP tokens, which can be exchanged and are initially
distributed to addresses with assets on Compound, token-
based suffrage is satisfied. Some COMP tokens are distributed
or reserved for members of the Compound team. Therefore,
meritocratic suffrage is slightly satisfied.

• Pareto Efficiency. Once a proposal enters the voting phase,
the voters only have two options: yes or no. This is clearly
Pareto efficient and aligned with their incentives. Things get
more tricky once there are multiple incompatible options
(e.g., values of a specific parameter). In this case the proposals
would have to be dealt with sequentially: the actual order
could bias voters, which complicates their decisions and

leaks information. Therefore, Pareto Efficiency is somewhat
satisfied (e.g., between two highly popular proposal, the
slightly less popular one might win if it is up for election
first and then the users might be less eager to implement
another change).
• Confidentiality:

– Secrecy and Coercion Resistance: Every step of the
governance process, such as proposing, voting or delegat-
ing is on-chain, by interacting with smart contracts on
Ethereum. This done through possibly pseudonymous ad-
dresses and is public and unencrypted. Therefore, neither
property satisfied.

– Pseudonymity: Users participate using their Ethereum

address, therefore pseudonymity is satisfied.

• Verifiability. Since the votes and final tally are all public,

verifiability is satisfied.

• Accountability. Once a proposal is executed, its creator and
voters are completely independent from its future. Therefore,
accountability is not satisfied.

• Sustainability: Sustainable Development. There is no mech-
anism to reward development efforts: the proposal should
already be complete and executable. Therefore, sustainable
development is not satisfied.

• Sustainability: Sustainable Participation. Although COMP
tokens have an value and can be traded, there are no addi-
tional reward for voting or creating a government proposal.
Therefore, sustainable participation is not satisfied.

• Liveness. The total time between creating a government
proposal and voting for it takes 7 days, 2 of which are hard-
coded into the Timelock. This is reasonable: in addition, if an
exploit is found while in Timelock, the proposer can cancel
it. Failing to do so, the users of Compound have some time to
either move their assets or fork. This window for immediate
action is typically only open right after a vote, however
the Pause Guardian ensures that an ‘emergency shutdown’
feature is always available. Therefore, liveness is satisfied.

A.5 Maker DAO
Maker DAO [59] is a decentralized organization running on Ethe-
reum and based on the Maker Protocol. It employs a two-token
system, using Dai and MKR, both of which are ERC-20 compati-
ble. The first, DAI, is a collateral-backed stablecoin which is soft-
pegged to the U.S. dollar and is collateralized by a mix of other
cryptocurrencies. The second, MKR, is a governance token is used
by stakeholders to maintain the system and manage Dai. However,
in addition to the previous governance token models, MKR, which
is not a stablecoin, is also used to control the price of Dai, by creat-
ing favourable exchange rates between the two coins, depending
on Dai supply and demand. In particular, 1,000,000 MKR were orig-
inally minted. The total supply is then kept as close to this number
as possible, by burning or minting new tokens in exchange for Dai.
The governance model employed [74] combines some of the
features of Compound (such as on-chain voting for some issues,
executable proposals and a mandatory waiting period) and some off-
chain features of Uniswap (such as forum discussions). Note that the
two components are not officially coupled. The off-chain component

18

takes place at the Maker DAO forum, which is public. In addition
to usual forum posts, users can (and are encouraged to) create a
Forum Signal Thread. The purpose is to get community feedback on
some issue, possible on-chain proposals or generally any potential
improvement to Maker DAO. At the end, the Forum Signal Thread
is followed by a poll, where users vote pseudonymously. Every user
has one vote, irrespective on the amount of MKR they may have.
The intended function is that the discussion and poll results will
inform the choices of an upcoming on-chain governance action.

There are two on-chain processes facilitated by smart contracts:
Governance Polls and Executive Votes. The aim of Governance Polls is
to ratify Forum Signal Threads, formally gauge consensus about im-
portant topics and select one of many alternative designs before an
Executive Vote. The Governance Poll could contain multiple options
and holders of MKR vote using instant-runoff. Governance Polls
usually stay open for 3 to 7 days. The results of Governance Polls
can then be turned into Executive Votes, although both processes
could be initiated by any Ethereum address at any point. However,
only Governance Facilitators can link specific Governance Polls
and Executive Votes in the official forum.

The Executive Vote is the only way to enact changes on the
smart contracts supporting of Maker DAO. Indeed, an Executive
Vote should contain instructions to amend their code with the
proposed set of changes. Executive Votes are selected via continuous
approval voting, typically without having a fixed voting window.
Specifically, holders of MKR can change their vote at any time and
the Executive Vote with the highest approval would win. However,
once an Executive Vote that was implemented loses to another
one, it is deactivated and the only way to revert to the previous
status is through a new vote. Once a new Executive Vote wins, the
Governance Security Module imposes a 24 hour waiting period,
during which the vote can be reversed.

Maker DAO also makes use of Emergency Shutdown. At any
point if a total of 50,000 MKR are deposited into the Emergency
Shutdown Module, an Emergency Shutdown is triggered. These
coins are immediately burned and the Maker Protocol is shut down.
Then, collateral supporting Dai (as well as the coins themselves)
are returned to their owners. For various reasons, Dai takes lower
priority than collateral and could be exchanged for less than 1$ per
Dai.

• Suffrage. Since voting eligibility is only guaranteed to MKR

token holders, token-based suffrage is satisfied.

• Pareto Efficiency. For Executive Votes, the voters only have
two options: to vote yes or no. Even though these do not
have to follow Governance Polls, the ranked-choice, instant
runoff voting mechanism used there gives the voters the
option to choose between multiple alternatives, avoiding
the possibility of a sequential vote (e.g., as could happen in
Compound). Therefore, Pareto Efficiency is mostly satisfied.

• Confidentiality:

– Secrecy: Every step of the governance process, such as
proposing, voting or delegating is on-chain, by interact-
ing with smart contracts on Ethereum. This done through
possibly pseudonymous addresses and is public and unen-
crypted. Therefore secrecy is not satisfied.

SoK: Blockchain Governance

– Pseudonymity: Users participate using their Ethereum

address. Therefore, pseudonymity is satisfied.

– Coercion-resistance: Since secrecy is not satisfied, coercion-

resistance is not satisfied by definition.

• Verifiability. Since the votes and final tally are all public,

verifiability is satisfied.

• Accountability. As with Compound, once a proposal is
executed, its creator and voters are completely independent
from its future. Therefore, accountability is not satisfied.
• Sustainability: Sustainable Development. There is no mech-
anism to reward development efforts: the proposal should
already be complete and executable. Therefore, sustainable
development is not satisfied.

• Sustainability: Sustainable Participation. MKR are crucial
for Maker DAO as they help maintain the peg with Dai. How-
ever, the extra energy spent on deciding what to vote on is
not explicitly compensated. Therefore, sustainable participa-
tion is not satisfied.

• Liveness. An Executive Vote can be implemented in 24
hours, once it receives enough votes. This gives both the abil-
ity to quickly prevent a bad proposal and relatively quickly
enact a better one. In addition, there is also an Emergency
Shutdown functionality. Therefore, liveness is satisfied.

A.6 Project Catalyst
Project Catalyst [63] is the on-chain governance system used by
the Cardano blockchain. The role of Project Catalyst is to provide
a mechanism through which users can collectively decide how
Cardano’s treasury funds should be allocated.

Governance in Project Catalyst occurs in 12 week intervals,
called Funds. There are 4 primary types of agents participating:
proposers, voters, Community Advisors (CA’s) and Veteran Com-
munity Advisors (vCA’s). Additionally, people can participate by
referring projects to be funded and designing challenges that need
to be addressed. Finally, the Catalyst Circle [64] is a small group of
representatives of all types of agents involved, tasked with mon-
itoring the current state and developing future plans for Project
Catalyst. The Circle is currently not elected, but an election mech-
anism is discussed for future iterations. At the beginning of each
fund a set of challenges is issued, either by users of Cardano or the
Project Catalyst team. Then, the proposers offer proposals, which
may, but are not required to, address a specific challenge. The pro-
posals should contain a detailed set of goals, along with a specific
plan to achieve them and a required budget. Then, the community
advisors write reviews for any proposal they chose to, focusing
on impact, implementability and auditability. These reviews are
then reviewed again by the veteran community advisors and are
assigned a grade that can be ‘Excellent’, ‘Good’ or ‘Filtered Out’,
the last reserved for particularly uninformative reviews. Having all
this information, the voters can vote ‘Yes’, ‘No’ or ‘Abstain’ for as
many proposals as they want. Each vote has weight proportional
to the users stake in ADA, which is the currency used by Cardano.
Project Catalyst implements fuzzy threshold voting [30]. Voters ex-
press a ‘Yes’, ‘No’ or ‘Abstain’ opinion for each proposal. A proposal
passes if the number of ‘Yes’ votes minus the number of ‘No’ votes
is at least 5% of the total votes it received. The winning proposals

19

are awarded their funds in the order of the margin by which they
are passing, until either the entire budget is allocated or no more
passing proposals exist. If a proposal has passed the voting thresh-
old but insufficient funds remain to pay the full amount requested,
it will not receive partial funding. Instead, any smaller proposals
which have also passed the threshold that will fit in the budget will
be funded, even if they have lower net approval than the larger
proposal.

All agents involved in Project Catalyst are rewarded in some
capacity. At every Fund each reward pool corresponds to a set
percentage of the total. As a concrete example we will examine
Fund7, which had total budget of $8,000,000 in ADA. This amount
was further broken down as follows:

• 80% → $6, 400, 000 for funding proposals
• 13% → $1, 040, 000 for voting rewards.
• 4% → $320, 000 for community advisors
• 1% → $80, 000 for veteran Community Advisors.
• 1% → $80, 000 for referral rewards.
• 1% → $80, 000 for challenge teams rewards.

Any user with more than 500 ADA can become a voter. This is
measured by a snapshot of the stake distribution taken before the
election, but the funds are not locked. Each voter receives voter
rewards proportional to their stake. Community advisors receive
rewards relative to the quality of the reviews, but also depending
on how many other reviews were written for the proposals they
reviewed. An ‘Excellent’ review provides 3 times the reward of a
‘Good’ review and each proposal has rewards for 2 ‘Excellent’ and 3
‘Good’ reviews. If these rewards are not enough to cover the reviews,
a lottery is used. Veteran community advisors are rewarded equally,
provided they reviewed a minimum number of reviews. Proposers
are not rewarded explicitly, but can manage the funds received by
their proposal and have to periodically submit progress reports
to the community. The performance of community advisors and
veteran community advisors is recorded, but there is no currently
defined on-chain mechanism for a voter to become either of those.
The promotion from voter (or proposer) to community advisor to
veteran is centralized.

• Suffrage. Since voting eligibility depends only on having
at least 500 ADA, token-based suffrage is satisfied. There
are no guaranteed voting rights based on previous positive
contributions. However, community advisors and veteran
community advisors can affect the outcome of the votes
through their reviews. Meritocratic suffrage is slightly satis-
fied.

• Pareto Efficiency. As noted in the main text evaluation,

Pareto Efficiency is only somewhat satisfied.

• Confidentiality:

– Secrecy: Everyone participates in Project Catalyst using
their wallet address. Proposers, community advisors and
veteran community advisors participate publicly. Voters
submit encrypted ballots (padded with some randomness),
using the public key issued by a committee. Then, these
votes are tallied and the result is decrypted by the com-
mittee, if a majority of its members agrees. Furthermore,
if the wallet address is linked to a real identity, the only
information available is that this particular person voted,

but the actual vote is still secret. Therefore the vote is
mostly secret.

– Pseudonymity: Voters participate with their wallet ad-

dress, therefore pseudonymity is satisfied.

– Coercion-resistance: The system is somewhat coercion
resistant. The ballot itself cannot be decrypted by the voter.
Additionally, if the random padding is not kept, it is im-
possible even for the voter to convince anyone of the way
they voted.

• Verifiability. The result of the vote can be independently
verified. In addition, as long as a voter saved the random
padding, they can verify that their particular vote was counted.
Without the padding this is impossible, as the votes cannot
be decrypted. As such, verifiability is only mostly satisfied.
• Accountability. There are no explicit, on or off-chain, penal-
ties. Proposers need to submit periodic progress reports
about their projects to keep receiving funding. Similarly,
community advisors and veteran community advisors can
be penalized for poor reviews or absence. As these are either
centralized or community-driven without clearly described
mechanisms, accountability is mostly not satisfied.

• Sustainability: Sustainable Development. Although there
is no explicit incentive or reward given to the proposing
group or individual, it is the responsibility of the proposer
to request the amount which represents the value of their
work. Therefore, sustainable development is satisfied.

• Sustainability: Sustainable Participation. Since all parties
are rewarded for participating in the governance process
and to an extent receive larger rewards for additional effort
(e.g. community advisors and review quality), sustainable
participation is satisfied.

• Liveness. Project Catalyst is primarily used for allocating
treasury funds and each Fund follows a 12 week timeline.
As such, liveness is not satisfied: even though the funds can
be released in accordance with each proposal’s progress,
there is no direct mechanism to take urgent action. However,
liveness is arguably not required for its purposes.

A.7 Dash
Like Bitcoin, Dash [66] uses a proof-of-work consensus mecha-
nism. However, Dash’s approach to governance takes a formal,
on-chain form. The Dash Governance System (DGS) uses a ‘budget
and masternode voting system’ to govern and fund the underly-
ing blockchain’s development and maintenance. Masternodes are
nodes that can place at least a 1, 000 DASH, the platform’s native
token, as a collateral to participate in the consensus protocol and
governance process. Each masternode has a single, public, approval
vote expressing which improvement proposals the masternode ap-
proves of. In each voting cycle (which is roughly a month long),
project proposals are submitted and then voted on. Even though
anyone can submit a proposal, doing so comes at a cost of 5 DASH
to ensure that only serious proposals are voted on.

The DGS implements a system very similar to Project Catalyst
with one difference: A proposal is eligible for funding if the number
of ‘Yes’ votes minus the number of ‘No’ votes is at least 10% of the
total masternode count. Additionally, if there are two proposals with

20

the same approval, then the one with a larger proposal transaction
hash is ranked higher. The treasury is funded through various
channels. When new blocks are mined, 45% of the block reward
is reserved for the miner, 10% for the budget and 45% for the
masternodes’ reward. We now perform evaluations of the DGS
against the properties developed in Section 2.

• Confidentiality:

– Secrecy: Since the masternodes vote publicly, the DGS

does not satisfy secrecy.

– Pseudonymity: Masternodes are not required to reveal
their real-life identities to participate in the governance
process; therefore pseudonymity is satisfied.

– Coercion-resistance: Since masternode votes are tied to
their chosen pseudo-identities, coercion-resistance is not
satisfied.

• Verifiability. Since the votes and final tally are all public,

verifiability is, by definition, satisfied.

• Pareto Efficiency. As with Project Catalyst, Pareto Effi-

ciency is only somewhat satisfied.

• Accountability. Although masternodes are required to lock
1, 000 DASH to vote, if a group of masternodes vote in a
malicious proposal, they will face no negative consequences
and will be able to unlock their funds before the malicious
proposal is enacted. Therefore, accountability is not satisfied.
• Sustainability: Sustainable Development. Although there
is no explicit incentive or reward given to the proposing
group or individual, it is the responsibility of the proposer
to request the amount which represents the value of their
work. Therefore, sustainable development is satisfied.

• Sustainability: Sustainable Participation. Masternodes are
rewarded with part of the block reward for their participa-
tion in the consensus and governance process. Therefore,
sustainable participation is satisfied.

• Liveness. Given the lack of flexibility of the on-chain gov-
ernance model, the DGS is incapable of taking inputs of
urgency and responding to them in accordance to the sever-
ity of the issue. Although a Github issue or a pull request
could be initiated without going through the formal on-chain
route, it is still not the officially defined way by which the
system processes inputs. Therefore, liveness is not satisfied.
• Suffrage. Since voting eligibility depends only on having at

least 1, 000 DASH, token-based suffrage is satisfied.

A.8 Decred
Decred is a hybrid proof-of-work and proof-of-stake system that is
mostly on-chain governed [54]. Such a hybrid implementation re-
sults in three main types of stakeholders: miners, voters and regular
users. All three participate pseudo-anonymously. To have decision-
making powers (in governance and block-validation), participants
need to have ‘tickets’, which are bought or acquired through time-
locking DCR (the native token of the platform). We will not go
through the details of a ticket lifecycle, but the process is thor-
oughly outlined in [54]. Each block contains 5 pseudo-randomly
sampled tickets (i.e. 5 votes).

Proposals can be handled either by an on-chain or off-chain pro-
cedure. Specifically, proposals regarding high level issues or that

proposal will pass. Therefore, the most likely ‘suboptimal’
outcome is not selecting any proposal, when one might have
had some support. Therefore, Pareto efficiency is somewhat
satisfied.

• Confidentiality:

– Secrecy: There are no explicit secrecy guarantees in the

voting process. Therefore, secrecy is not satisfied.

– Pseudonymity: Participants (miners, voters, and regular
users) are not required to reveal their real-life identities
to participate in the decision-making process. Therefore
pseudonymity is satisfied.

– Coercion-resistance: Since secrecy is not satisfied, coercion-

resistance is not satisfied by definition.

• Verifiability. Since the votes and final tally are all public,

verifiability is satisfied.

• Accountability. Although funds from the ticket cannot be
released until 256 blocks after voting, the changes to the
consensus rules are not applied until after 8,064 blocks. This
implies that if a voter or a group of voters voted in a malicious
proposal, they can withdraw their locked funds before the
proposal is enacted. Therefore, accountability is not satisfied.
• Sustainability: Sustainable Development. Although there
is no explicit incentive or reward given to the proposing
group or individual, it is the responsibility of the proposer
to request the amount which represents the value of their
work. Therefore, sustainable development is satisfied.

• Sustainability: Sustainable Participation. Although voters
can gain rewards from their tickets via validating blocks
as part of the consensus protocol [54], there are no explicit
additional incentives for voting (or participating in the gov-
ernance process). Therefore, sustainable participation is not
satisfied.

• Liveness. Given the lack of flexibility of the on-chain gov-
ernance model, it is incapable of taking inputs of urgency
and responding to them in accordance to the severity of the
issue. Therefore, liveness is not satisfied.

SoK: Blockchain Governance

require funds from the Decred Treasury are handled off-chain. They
first appear in Politeia, the system’s deliberation platform, to be
discussed throughout the community. Administrators of the plat-
form can flag spam proposals or comments. When a proposal owner
decides to put their proposal for a vote, the administrators can then
trigger the start of off-chain voting. A snapshot of the currently
bought tickets takes place 256 blocks before the start of voting.
Then, the ticket-voting interval of 2,016 blocks (approximately 1
week) formally begins, which means 10,080 pseudo-randomly sam-
pled tickets have the opportunity to vote. Voting on Politeia is not
recorded on chain, but it is still backed by cryptographic techniques
which prevent Sybil attacks and unfair censorship. When the ticket-
voting period ends, the proposal is formally approved or rejected.
There is a quorum requirement for a vote to be considered valid:
20% of the eligible tickets must vote ‘Yes’ or ‘No’. The threshold for
a proposal to be approved is 60% ‘Yes’ votes. When a proposal with
a budget and deliverables is approved, work can begin. The pro-
posal owner can submit claims against the budget as deliverables
are completed.

The on-chain governance is performed through Decred Change
Proposal (DCP) [55], focusing on updating the consensus mecha-
nism. With a DCP, the proposed node software must be developed
and released. The new code will lie dormant until the change has
been voted upon and accepted by the proof-of-stake voters. Each
voting interval lasts for 8,064 blocks, which makes the maximum
number of votes 40,320. A ticket can vote to accept the rule change,
to reject it or to abstain (the default choice). Every vote has a quo-
rum requirement of 10%. This means that at least 10% of all votes
cast must be non-abstain for the result to be considered valid. If all
non-abstaining votes fail to meet a 75% Yes or No majority thresh-
old, the agenda vote remains active for next voting period. If 75% of
all non-abstaining votes accept the proposal, the agenda is consid-
ered locked in and the consensus changes will activate 8,064 blocks
(4 weeks) after the vote passed. If 75% of all non-abstaining votes
reject the proposal, the agenda fails and the consensus changes
will never activate. If an agenda reaches its expiration before ever
reaching a 75% majority vote, the agenda expires and the consensus
changes will never activate. After a ticket has voted, missed, or
expired, the funds cannot be released for another 256 blocks.

If the quorum requirement is met, and more than 75% of the
votes are in favour of activating the new consensus rules, then
a ‘lock-in’ period begins of 8,064 blocks. During this period, all
participants in the Decred network must upgrade their software to
the latest version. All full nodes participating in the network will
automatically activate the new rules on the first block after this
period, so any nodes still running the old software will no longer be
able to participate. Throughout the process, it is possible to verify
the voting preference of a ticket.

With this brief overview in mind, we can now perform the eval-

uation of Decred’s governance system against our properties.

• Suffrage. Since voting eligibility only depends on buying
proof-of-stake tickets, token-based suffrage is satisfied.
• Pareto Efficiency. If a proposal vote occurs with a quorum
of less than 10%, the proposal will not pass, even when it
receives one or more approval votes. Furthermore, given
the role of Politeia, it is unlikely that a truly controversial

21

