2
2
0
2

n
a
J

7

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
8
5
3
2
0
.
1
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Date of publication xxxx 00, 0000, date of current version xxxx 00, 0000.

Digital Object Identiﬁer XXXXXX

Towards Trustworthy DeFi Oracles: Past,
Present and Future

YINJIE ZHAO, XIN KANG (Senior Member, IEEE), TIEYAN LI (Member, IEEE), CHENG-KANG
CHU (Member, IEEE), HAIGUANG WANG (Senior Member, IEEE)
Digital Identity and Trustworthiness Laboratory, Huawei Singapore, Singapore 138588

Corresponding author: Xin Kang (kang.xin@huawei.com)

ABSTRACT
With the rapid development of blockchain technology in recent years, all kinds of blockchain-based
applications have emerged. Among them, the decentralized ﬁnance (DeFi) is one of the most successful
applications, which is regarded as the future of ﬁnance. The great success of DeFi relies on the real-world
data which is not directly available on the blockchain. Besides, due to the deterministic nature of blockchain,
the blockchain cannot directly obtain indeterministic data from the outside world (off-chain). Thus, oracles
have appeared as a viable solution to feed off-chain data to blockchain applications. In this paper, we carry
out a comprehensive study on oracles, especially on DeFi oracles. We ﬁrst brieﬂy introduce the application
scenarios of DeFi oracles, and then we talk about the past of DeFi oracles by categorizing them into several
types based on their design features. After that, we introduce ﬁve popular DeFi oracles currently in use
(such as Chainlink and Band Protocol), with the focus on their system architecture, data validation process,
and their incentive mechanisms. We compare these present DeFi oracles from their data trustworthiness,
data source trustworthiness and their overall trust models. Finally, we propose a set of metrics for designing
trustworthiness DeFi oracles, and propose a potential trust architecture and a few promising techniques for
building trustworthiness oracles.

INDEX TERMS DeFi, Oracles, Blockchain, Trustworthiness

I. INTRODUCTION

A. BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION

Blockchain has appeared in the sight of researchers and the
public as a hot topic in the last decade, enabling immutable
and decentralized transactions recording.. Blockchain is
widely applied in the ﬁeld of decentralization and digi-
talization, such as decentralized digital identity, decentral-
ized ﬁnance (DeFi), decentralized organization. However,
the blockchain system is a closed system by design, which
cannot natively receive off-chain data from outside world.
This is acceptable for the ﬁrst generation blockchain, such
as bitcoin, due to its simple application scenarios. However,
for the second generation blockchain, such as Ethereum, the
aforementioned issue limits the application of smart contract,
which executes pre-determined algorithms once certain pre-
deﬁned conditions are fulﬁlled. This also limits the develop-
ment of DeFi which is mainly built on smart contracts.

Thus, oracles appeared as a promising technology to solv-
ing this issue, i.e., collecting off-chain information data and
providing speciﬁc data to on-chain smart contracts. Due to

their importance, oracles gradually became the key compo-
nents of DeFi as data providers and as an interface between
the blockchain and the off-chain world. Oracles are involved
in many circumstances in DeFi, including decentralized ex-
change, DeFi lending, synthetic assets (stable coins, etc.),
insurance, digital payment (cross-border payment, etc.), ful-
ﬁlling the demand of price data feeding.

In the past few years, DeFi token market capitalization
increases largely, reaching more than 150 billion USD by the
time of writing [1]. In this situation, oracles are given rising
importance due to its contribution to asset price reporting,
cryptocurrency pricing and so on. As a result, all kinds of
oracles have shown up in the DeFi market. However, the
trustworthiness of these oracles have not been discussed and
investigated in existing literatures. On the other hand, the
trustworthiness of oracles is very important since it directly
affects the trustworthiness of the DeFi projects, and it can
be regarded as the trust root of smart contracts. Thus, how
to guarantee the trustworthiness of oracles is of great impor-
tance to the blockchain and DeFi world.

VOLUME 4, 2021

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
B. RELATED WORKS
There are some existing works providing framework of
blockchain oracles. On one hand, oracle can be categorized
by data transmission process, such as data sources, data
transmission approaches and directions. By data sources,
oracles were categorized mainly into software and hardware
source ones in [2] and [3], as well as human source ones
in [4] and [5]. By data transmission direction, oracles were
categorized into inbound and outbound ones by works in-
cluding [2], [4], [5], [6]. Inbound oracles transmit data from
off-chain side to on-chain side, and vice versa for outbound
oracles. Further, by data transmission approach, oracles can
be categorized into pulling and pushing based ones as pointed
out by [6] and [7]. Pulling based oracles are executed at data
requester side while pushing oracles are executed on data
provider side. [8] categorized oracles into centralized and
consensus ones by their degree of centralization of data feeds.
[9] categorized the oracles into voting-based and reputation-
based ones and their respective detailed divisions of data
validation mechanisms. [10] categorized them into prediction
markets, centralized data feeds and oracle networks. [11]
divided data on-chaining into TLS-based, enclave-based and
voting-based types. [5] also proposed witness mechanism or
reputation algorithms, security and privacy. [9] also pointed
out the future research direction of oracles, such as lower
cost, higher speed, decentralization, and security. [10] sug-
gested that oracles should emphasis on data authenticity,
integrity, conﬁdentiality and availability. [12] suggested that
oracles should have more transparency, accountability and
operational robustness. However, for the DeFi industry, data
trustworthiness is the most important thing, and all those
works focused on the functionality of oracles while paying
little attention to the trustworthiness.

C. CONTRIBUTION AND NOVELTY
The aforementioned papers gave an overview of categoriza-
tion of oracles, which mainly focused on the approach of
data transmission and data validation themselves. However
nowadays, in an era of emphasized data trustworthiness, the
discussion and investigation on the trustworthiness of data
source and the trustworthiness of data itself is lacked. It is
necessary and important to have further up-to-date research
to study the data feeding and validation from the trustworthi-
ness perspective. To ﬁll this gap in the ﬁeld, in this paper we
contribute in the following ways:

1) We provide a comprehensive overview on the existing
oracles, and categorize these oracles by their data processing
and validation process methods and provide visions and
analysis of them from a trustworthiness point of view.

2) We provide a detailed analysis of existing popular DeFi
oracles, such as Chainlink and Band Protocol. We investigate
their design target, system architecture, data feeding scheme,
date aggregation scheme, incentive mechanisms, based on
which we analyze their trust models and trustworthiness.
We also make a detailed comparison on the similarity and
difference of their trust models and their trustworthiness.

FIGURE 1: DeFi lending

3) We summarize and propose a set of metrics for de-
signing trustworthy DeFi oracles. We propose a potential
trust architecture for DeFi oracles and provide our vision
and some viable technical solutions on how to enable the
trustworthiness of the data source and the trustworthiness of
the data itself.

In Section II, we demonstrate applications of oracles in
DeFi with actual DeFi projects. In Section III, we analyze
and give a categorization of DeFi oracles, giving analyzation
and comparison among them. In Section IV, we give a detail
analysis of current popular DeFi oracles and their working
mechanisms. We compare different categories of oracles. In
Section V, we give our point of view on the future develop-
ment of trustworthy DeFi oracles.

II. APPLICATION OF ORACLES IN DEFI
Oracles in DeFi function mainly serve as price data providers.
They are widely applied in decentralized exchange, DeFi
lending, synthetic assets (such as stable coins), insurance,
digital payment (such as cross-border payment), and etc..
In this section, we introduce the application of oracles to
DeFi, including in decentralized exchange, synthetic assets
and DeFi lending.

A. DEFI LENDING
In a DeFi lending platform, price data is fed from oracles
in complicated processes (Flowchart shown in Figure 1).
Similar to lending in traditional ﬁnance market, borrowers
need to collateralize some assets of certain value in case of
users not returning the borrowed assets. The collateral rate
and amount of deposit token issued are determined by the
price data provided as an important input parameter.

An example of DeFi lending is Compound. In Compound,
to borrow an asset, users need to collateralize certain DeFi
assets at certain rate against the borrowed assets. Users
operate on an asset with a function supportMarket, which
is validated and enabled by a smart contract Comptroller.
Comptroller validates users¡¯ operation via supportMarket
by checking collateral rate with price data fed from Com-
pound¡¯s own price oracle, and with valid collateral rate, a
lending process is enabled. Oracle, in this circumstance, is

2

VOLUME 4, 2021

On-chainassetsDeposit tokenDepositorDeFi Lending platformCollateral（paying interests, supervised on collateral rate by the market）BorrowerOn-chainassetsPrice feedingFIGURE 2: Compound Lending

FIGURE 3: Synthetix Flowchart

the core functionality of the lending platform [13], as shown
in Figure 2.

B. SYNTHETIC ASSETS
Synthetic assets are created by tracking the value of certain
original assets and mint them into new assets by collater-
alizing, similar to derivatives in traditional ﬁnance. Oracles
provide price data to calculate the value of DeFi assets and
decides the collateral amount on certain assets, so that users
can mint new assets by following proper amount of collateral.
The collateral rate and amount, as key component of the
system operation, is decided by the oracles.

An example is Synthetix, a synthetic asset platform. In
Synthetix, users have to collateralize SNX token (the na-
tive token of the platform) to Synthetix Exchange to obtain
synthetic assets, and a collateral rate of 750% is required,
namely the value of the collaterals should be 7.5 times that
of mint assets. Such proportional relationship is supervised
by obtaining the price data of assets from oracles [14]. For
example, if a user mint 10 units of synthetic asset A worth
100 USD (10 USD per unit of A), then 250 SNX worth
750 USD (3 USD per SNX) need to be collateralized. If
now SNX experiences a depreciation, with its price down
to 2 USD per SNX, then the value of collateral decreases
to 500 USD, lower than the required 750 USD. Oracles
feed the price data to the system, which calculates the value
change. In this case the user will be required to increase
the SNX collateralized or burn out certain amount of asset
A to rematch the collateral rate, otherwise not being able to
liquify the SNX collateralized. As shown in Figure 3, oracles
(mainly Chainlink for Synthetix) play an important part in
DeFi synthetic assets.

C. INSURANCE
Due to the high volatility of DeFi asset value, users holding
on DeFi assets face a high risk of incurring loss. Therefore,
insurance projects come to demand. Similar to insurance in
traditional ﬁnance world, users anticipate risk of high value
with relatively small cost.

An example is Nexus Mutual, a DeFi insurance project.

FIGURE 4: Nexus Mutual Insurance Claiming Flowchart

To be covered by the insurance, clients need to collateralize
certain amount of assets to reach the Minimum Capital
Requirement (MCR), the value and amount of which is
determined by price data provided by oracles. In addition,
there is a claim assessment process by voting to determine
whether to approve the claim of an insurance. If the claim
approved, the claim will be executed under the redemption
restriction, as shown in Figure 4.

III. PAST OF DEFI ORACLES
In this section, we compare the difference between central-
ized and decentralized oracles, and their respective advan-
tages over each other. We categorize decentralized oracles
into four categories, based on their data validation process
(i.e. source of data validity).

A. PIONEER: CENTRALIZED ORACLES
Centralized oracles are usually trusted third party data
providers backed by authorities or trustworthy parties (e.g.
government authorities, large company with benign reputa-
tion, etc.), and usually have single data source. In centralized
data providing, data are validated from both software and
hardware perspective. The data acquired from local storage of
data providers are secured by trusted execution environments
(TEEs), which isolate data from the operating system of
untrusted local device, and the data transmitted online are

VOLUME 4, 2021

3

Compound Price OracleBorrowerComptrollersupportMarketFunctionCollateralBorrowed AssetsCompound Money Market(Validate Function Call)Price FeedSNX TokenSyntheticAssetsSynthetixOraclePrice FeedCalculate Collateral RateCollateral RateMake Balanceat 750%OracleNexusMutualDetermine redemption restrictionClaim Assessmentby VotingClaim ApprovedClaim DeniedClaim RedemptedFIGURE 5: Flowchart of Provable oracle data processing

secured by data transmission protocols to ensure that the data
is not tampered or lost.

Provable is an example of centralized oracles, providing
users with an authenticity proof of the data along with the
data fed. As introduced by the Provable whitepaper, the
authenticity proof mainly includes 3 types: the TLSNotary
Proof, Android Proof and Ledger Proof. These proofs enable
users to audit untampered process of data transmission and
are supported by software and HTTP protocols and hardware
(namely TEEs) (Flowchart shown in Figure 5). Provable
claims that with authenticity proof users can receive data
from Provable without trust. Despite the fact above, users
still withstand the probability of Provable¡¯s protocols not
reliable or failing at data feeding, for example, encountering
system failure, or may be attacked. Such risks are accepted by
Provable users and backed by Provable company¡¯s credit
[15]. Provable now has partnership with IT research compa-
nies (Gartner etc.), banking companies (Intesa Sanpaolo, EY
etc.), blockchain venture companies (Coinsilium etc.) and so
on.

B. DEVELOPMENT: FROM CENTRALIZED TO
DECENTRALIZED ORACLES
With the development of DeFi oracles, decentralized oracles
began to show their advantage, with increasing application in
DeFi. Decentralized oracles obtain data from multiple data
sources with certain data validating mechanisms to remove or
reduce the impact of malicious data, for example, Chainlink
and Nest Protocol.

In comparison, centralized oracles usually have advantage
in data processing speed compared to decentralized ones
and are easier to construct and realize, while decentralized
oracles have better scalabilities and lower failure risks due
to the fact of having multiple data sources and decentral-
ized data processing mechanism. Therefore, centralized or-
acles are more applicable to circumstances with high time-
effectiveness requirement than decentralized ones, while de-
centralized oracles are more applicable to higher adversarial
risks situations. Furthermore, decentralized oracles ﬁt better
with the ideology and development trend of scalability and

FIGURE 6: Categorization of DeFi oracles

decentralization of DeFi. The comparison is summarized in
Table 1.

C. DECENTRALIZED ORACLES: DATA VALIDATION
MECHANISMS
Decentralized oracles have miscellaneous methods process-
ing and integrating data obtained from providers. In this
paper, we categorize the data processing methods into 4 main
categories: aggregation-based processing, staking-based pro-
cessing, game-theory-based processing, and reputation-based
processing (as shown in Figure 6). Meanwhile, it cannot be
ignored that oracles may have a combination of multiple
mechanisms mentioned above.

1) Aggregation-based processing
Aggregation-based data processing use predeﬁned logic and
mechanisms to obtain a deterministic result from multiple
data sources, regardless of individual data quality, cancelling
out the impact of malicious data and other adversarial actions
by aggregating them with other normal data.

Data aggregation may take miscellaneous methods, includ-
ing taking the medians, mean value or mode value of the data.
One of the commonly used method is taking the median to
aggregate the data and is done along with other validation
methods including adding an upper bound tolerance of price
variance so that the price cannot change in an abnormally
large rate (e.g., the Compound), adding time limitation of
data validation so that too newly added data or obsolete data
is not used for the price reporting (e.g., the AmpleForth) and
so on.

2) Staking-based processing
Staking-based data processing produce the trustworthiness
of data processing by requiring participants to stake certain
amount of assets to enable economic penalty of malicious
action to raise the cost of malicious behaviors. For example,
Band Protocol has a data validation mechanism of selecting
validators with most staking to run the data feeding task, and
users conducting adversarial actions will be slashed (meaning
his staking reduced by certain amount), and the more stake
a validator has, the more likely he will be selected for the
data feeding job, and less likely that he behaves dishonestly
against his staking. Band Protocol is an example, requiring
staking of validators. Another example is the Tellor [16],
where miners of a new block has certain stake requirement
and will be slashed if the data determined by the block

4

VOLUME 4, 2021

Data SourceUserProvable OracleDataDataAuthenticity ProofOraclesCentralizedDecentralizedAggregation-basedStaking-basedGame-Theory-basedReputation-based-e.g., Provable-e.g., Chainlink-e.g., Band Protocol-e.g., NEST Oracle-e.g., DOS Network, Witnet OracleTABLE 1: Comparison between Centralized and Decentralized Oracles

Criteria
Data Feeding Mechanism
Feasibility
Performance

Risks

Examples

Applicable conditions

Centralized Oracles
Single trusted third party
Relatively higher
Higher
throughput
Low scalability; single node failure
risk
Provable, etc.

time-efﬁciency and data

Higher time-efﬁciency requirement;
lower risk-tolerance

and

data

time-efﬁciency

Decentralized Oracles
Multiple decentralized data sources
Relatively lower
Lower
throughput
Strong scalability; resistant to single
node failure risk
Chainlink, Band Protocol, NEST
Protocol, etc.
Lower time-efﬁciency requirement;
higher risk-tolerance

he mined is successfully overthrown by later disputation
process.

Witnet oracle (reputation-based), and give a brief comparison
among them.

3) Game-theory-based processing
Game-theory-based data processing provides users and data
providers with economic incentives to act in non-adversarial
ways. In such systems, users have an overall higher math-
ematical expectation for beneﬁt
from conducting non-
adversarial actions than adversarial ones, or a lower expec-
tation for cost of non-adversarial ones than adversarial ones.
An example is the NEST Protocol, which constructs a price-
chain mechanism. In the system, any user is able to raise
a price of assets and claim it as a new block of the price
chain. To ensure the uploaded price is not malicious, the new
price raiser will provide collateral at the price he raised for
a period of time, and if the price is not reasonable for the
market within the period, another new-coming user is able to
conduct arbitrage at the price and liquify the collaterals and
raise a reasonable price while causing loss to the user raising
unreasonable price [17].

4) Reputation-based processing
Reputation-based data processing aims at ﬁltering data
providers with reputation system, punishing the adversarial
nodes and restricting their chance of participation as data
providers by reducing their reputation with speciﬁc mecha-
nism. DOS Network (Decentralized Oracle Service Network)
is an example of reputation-based data processing. The sys-
tem provides a service of calculating the QoS score (Quality
of Service) and reducing the score of low-quality nodes,
while removing certain nodes with overly abnormal scores
[18]. Witnet is another example, giving nodes reputation
scores, and increment or decrease the score according to the
performance of them [19].

IV. PRESENT OF DEFI ORACLES
In this section, we introduce and analyze ﬁve active ora-
cles mechanisms, including Chainlink oracle (aggregating-
based), Band Protocol oracle (staking-based), NEST Protocol
(game-theory-based), DOS Network (reputation-based) and

A. CHAINLINK ORACLES
Chainlink oracle is an aggregation-based oracle with
theDecentralized Oracle Network (DON) aggregating data
from different data providers and it is one the most popular
decentralized oracles in DeFi.

1) Design Criteria
According to the Whitepaper of Chainlink [20], the main
goals includes hybrid smart contracts (functioning as a
framework, integrating the computational power both on-
chain and off-chain, realizing the full potential of smart
contracts), abstracting away complexity (simplifying user
experience), scaling (meeting the demand of growing scales
of the system), conﬁdentiality (protecting the privacy of users
while maintaining the transparency of the system), etc., while
the core goal is the ﬁrst one, which is to provide a hybrid
smart contract framework with other goals in service of the
ﬁrst.

2) System Architecture
a: Decentralized Oracle Network (DON)
DON is the core framework of Chainlink as a decentralized
oracle. As the name of it indicates, DON is a network
of oracles, receiving data from an open network of data
providers, processing the data by aggregating to obtain a
relatively trustworthy result, and returning them to the users.
Furthermore, DON also functions as a key component of
transaction execution mechanism (TEF) as mentioned later.
DON mainly consists of executables, adaptors, and stor-
age. Executables are algorithms of DON that are in charge
of predetermined algorithms execution including aggregation
and has key components including logic and initiator. Logic
is deterministic algorithm that executes data aggregation,
similar to a smart contract (for example, a logic L can be set
to calculate the median of a given set of data received), while
initiator triggers L under certain determined circumstances.
Adaptors deﬁne methods and APIs transiting data between
outside data providers such as web servers and external

VOLUME 4, 2021

5

FIGURE 7: Flowchart of Chainlink oracle data processing

FIGURE 8: Flowchart of Band Protocol data processing

storage and DON. Storage of DON stores data in the network,
while DON can also have external cloud or decentralized
storage [20].

b: Transaction Execution Framework (TEF)
Chainlink not only aims at obtaining and providing trustwor-
thy data but is also proposing its own architecture for on-
chain transaction, hybrid smart contracts, by dividing a smart
contract into a Hybrid Contract consisting of a DON logic off
the main chain and an anchor contract on the main chain. The
DON logic receives the transactions of users and executes
them in the DON and is faster than main-chain transaction
execution since it can natively visit oracle data in the DON.
The transaction executed will be periodically updated to the
main chain. The anchor contract has higher trustworthiness
than the anchor contract since it is regarded as immutable on
the main chain. Therefore, the anchor point contract is used
for asset custodies, syncing veriﬁcation and as a guard rail of
the DON logic.

Furthermore, Chainlink proposed Fair Sequencing Ser-
vices (FSS) to cooperate with its TEF, which aims at achiev-
ing one of its goals, order-fairness for transactions. With
FSS, the sequence of transactions put on-chain will no longer
be determined by economically incentivized users (miners,
validators, etc.), but by pre-designed deterministic algorithms
so that Miner Extractable Value (MEV) can be reduced.

3) Data Validation Process
In DON, data is mainly validated and processed by executa-
bles, whose core component is logic, which can be designed
to integrate data obtained in desired ways. For example, with
data sent from multiple nodes (namely individual oracles) to
the DON, the logic of the executable can take the median
of the data obtained to cancelled out the overly high or low
data, which is likely to be malicious, and return the relatively
accurate ﬁnal result (the median) to users. The ﬂowchart of
Chainlink data processing is shown in Figure 7.

4) Incentivization Mechanism
If data is requested from a DON node, the data providing
nodes can charge certain gas fee in LINK token as their

reward. Therefore, for data requesters, the more nodes used
as data providers, the more expensive it is to aggregate
the data and the higher the reliability of the data received.
Furthermore, Chainlink oracle rates the performance of data
providers to as a quality evaluation (namely the nodes of
DON), which can be regarded as a reputation system with
evaluation criteria including Total Transactions, Total Link
Earned, Response Ratio, All Time Average Response (Blocks)
and so on [21]. The higher the reputation ranking of a node
is, the more likely users request data from it, which therefore
motivates data providing nodes to act honestly and efﬁciently.
However, the system merely provides users with quantiﬁed
index of performances of the nodes and does not further
ﬁltering or restriction on data providing nodes, but only
rely on the choice of user group. Therefore, although with
reputation ranking among data providers, Chainlink is not
regarded as a typical reputation-based data processing oracle
but still an aggregating-based data processing oracle.

5) Applications and Ecosystem
Currently, Chainlink is one of the largest decentralized or-
acles with application in DeFi projects including lending
(such as Aave and dYdX), synthetic assets (Synthetix), de-
centralized exchange (Pancakeswap), etc. as introduced in
its ofﬁcial website. The market capitalization of LINK token
reached more than 12 billion USD by the time of writing.

B. BAND PROTOCOL ORACLES [22]
Band protocol oracle is a staking-based decentralized oracle.
It has certain similarity with Chainlink oracle on data ag-
gregation procedure, but also difference mainly lying in the
incentivization mechanism (namely the staking-based data
processing).

1) Design Criteria
According to the whitepaper of Band protocol [22], the goals
of Band protocol includes speed and scalability (being able
to process large amount and high throughput data), cross-
chain compatibility (achieving blockchain-agnostic system
with zero-trust and high efﬁciency data veriﬁcation) and data

6

VOLUME 4, 2021

Oracle 1Oracle 2Oracle 3Oracle …(Data1, Data2, Data3, …)Data1Data3Data2Data…Data resultExecutablesAdaptersDecentralized Oracle NetworkStorageUserData resultUserAggregationValidator 1Validator 2Validator 3Validator …Validator Multi-signatureData Source 1Data Source 2Data Source …Data Provider 1Data Provider …DelegatorsBAND Tokenﬂexibility (building a permissionless and open system that
is compatible with future changes and new data aggregation
methods).

2) System Architecture
Users can participate in the network in 3 roles: data providers,
validators, and delegators. Data provider can be any user
that creates a data source (a data fetching script from pre-
determined source) on BandChain. Validators mainly con-
tribute by proposing and putting new blocks onto the chain
and responding to data requests from oracle clients by ob-
taining data from data sources. Delegators are who do not
commit to data on-chaining but stakes their tokens at the
validators to receive commissions from them. With this dele-
gation mechanism, BAND Protocol is a Delegation Proof-of-
Stake system (DPoS).

Band protocol allows users to interact with the ora-
cle through a Cosmos¡¯ Inter-Blockchain-Communication
(IBC) protocol,
therefore enabling other IBC-compatible
blockchains for the oracle.

3) Data Validation Process
In a data feeding process, after the clients request for data,
validators obtain data from data sources, and on-chain the
data to the system for aggregation. The data from data
sources is therefore aggregated by the system.

After a result of aggregation is obtained, validators verify
the result on new blocks. Like most Cosmos blockchains, a
new block is validated through multi-signature, and therefore
new price data produced. The ﬂowchart of Band Protocol is
shown in Figure 8.

4) Incentivization Mechanism
Band Protocol has its native token, BAND token with 7% -
20% inﬂation rate each year, enabling the users to participate
in governance and to obtain reward fee for processing trans-
actions.

In order to become validators, users need to stake their
BAND at the oracle, and the probability of being selected
as validators is proportional to the amount of BAND staked.
A validator gets rewards in BAND for performing tasks in-
cluding provisioning new blocks of the chain and processing
transactions. Validators may be slashed (meaning their stake
ﬁned by the system) due to adversarial actions including
participating too few block proposals and commits, double
signing or unresponsiveness for data requests. For delegators,
they are incentivized to stake BAND token to obtain rewards.
For data providers, they are able to participate as Premium
Data Provider to receive reward from creating data sources.

5) Applications and Ecosystem
According to the ofﬁcial website of Band Protocol, it has
been partnered to DeFi projects including Terra, Mirror Pro-
tocol, etc.. It also supports various DeFi exchanges, including
Binance, Uniswap, Coinbase, etc.. The native BAND token

FIGURE 9: Price chain and collateral of NEST Protocol

of the oracle has reached a market capitalization of 340
million USD by the time of writing.

C. NEST PROTOCOL [23]
NEST Protocol is a game-theory-based data processing ora-
cle, which aims at economically disincentivizing users from
malicious behavior. Compared to staking-based processing,
its incentivization process only exists during the process of
data providing and does not require pre-existing staking of
participants in the system or slashing after data providing,
and any user can join the process without prerequisites.

1) Design Criteria
NEST Protocol points out in its whitepaper [23] 5 key cri-
teria to judge oracle data quality, which are accuracy, price
sensitivity (following changing data on time), attack resistant
(high attacking cost), direct veriﬁcation (data veriﬁable by
any third party) and distributed quotation system (no require-
ment on user side and users are free to join and leave without
malicious impact to the system).

2) System Architecture & Data Validation Process
NEST Protocol is a game-theory-based data processing or-
acle, with a core mechanism of Quote Mining Process, a

VOLUME 4, 2021

7

Pn-2Pn-1PnPn+1Arbitrage and give new price & collateralArbitrage and give new price & collateralArbitrage and give new price & collateral12480123456789n-2n-1nn+1Adversarial Cost of Malicious PricePrice chain blockdecentralized incentive solution for price reporting.

The quote mining process of Oracle Quote mechanism
enables users to report new prices between 2 tokens and
correct unreasonable prices (as shown in Figure 9). The
process has following steps:

1. Any participant can pass a price among 2 assets to the
quotation contract, meanwhile collateralizing certain amount
of the 2 assets to the system at a proportion according to the
price just reported.

2. After step 1., the system will observe the price for T0
time, which is 25 blocks (around 5 minutes). During this
period, anyone is able to liquify a part or all the previous
collateralized assets at the price if the price is considered
to enable arbitrage compared to market price. This means
unreasonable price will be arbitraged by later upcoming
users. If during T0 period, all of the collaterals are liquiﬁed
by other users, and total collateral left is zero, the price will
be invalid; and vice versa if some transactions happen and
part or none of the assets collateralized are liquiﬁed, the price
is considered valid and the amount of collateral is remaining
value left not liquiﬁed during T0 period.

3. The users who arbitrage at the price during T0 have to
report a new price to the system, and leave the collateralized
assets, which is required to be beta times of the amount he
traded at the original price. Currently, beta is 2, which means
the adversarial cost doubles at each new price and increases
geometrically.

4. The new price is reported and new assets collateralized

form a chain, namely the price chain.

3) Incentivization Mechanism
For a miner (namely who propose new blocks in the price
chain), the cost of mining a price block on the chain is 1% of
the quoted ETH scale and the gas fee and as a reward NEST
token will be issued to miners who successfully on-chains a
price chain block. The total amount of NEST token release
has an upper bound of 10 billion, which will be 400 release
each block at the beginning and decrease to 80% of the last
period every 2.4 million blocks (around 1 year), and after the
block reward is reduced to 40 NEST per block the release
will no longer decrease.

4) Applications and Ecosystem
NEST Protocol currently has partnership with exchanges
including CoFix, crypto.com, iNFT, etc. according to its
ofﬁcial website. The market capitalization of its native token
NEST has reached 25 million USD by the time of writing.

FIGURE 10: DOS Network working ﬂowchart

1) Design Criteria
According the Whitepaper, DOS Network offers mainly 2
aspects of service, which are decentralized data feeding (by
providing connection among on-chain and off-chain data)
and decentralized veriﬁable computation (by providing com-
putation power to blockchains). Based on these services,
DOS Network enables chain-agnostic oracle and Dapp con-
struction.

2) System Architecture
The Decentralized Oracle Service (DOS) Network is a
reputation-based network based on layer-2 protocols, provid-
ing services including decentralized data feeding and decen-
tralized veriﬁable computation oracles.

Its design mainly consists of 2 parts, the on-chain part,
and the off-chain part of the oracle. The on-chain part of
the oracle includes a proxy system and on-chain governance
system (consisting of monitoring, registration, and payment
systems). The proxy system is an interface for the user to
interact with on-chain user contracts, and the governance
system mainly provide services including recording the Qual-
ity of Service (QoS) of DOS nodes (namely monitoring),
registering new joining DOS nodes and processing payment
rewarded to the DOS Network nodes runners.

The off-chain part of its design mainly guarantees the
validity of the data provided by the network nodes, which
is based on 2 techniques, the Veriﬁable Random Function
(VRF) and the threshold signature scheme, and together
they support a Byzantine Fault Tolerance (BFT) data feeding
system of DOS Network.

D. DOS NETWORK [18]
DOS Network is a reputation-based oracle, which decides
the opportunity of participation of a user with a reputation
score mechanism. Different from Nest Protocol mentioned
above, reputation-based oracle does not only give a short-
term penalty to malicious users (collateral liquiﬁed), but also
long-term penalty of losing change of participation in the
system.

3) Data Validation Process
DOS nodes need to deposit certain security reserve as col-
laterals in the system, and during data feeding, they are
randomly divided into groups by the VRF, and a group is
randomly selected to perform computation or to execute a
conﬁgured script such as responding to data requests. Within
the group, nodes can reach an in-group BFT consensus if
the number of non-adversarial nodes is above a threshold

8

VOLUME 4, 2021

Randomly select new group for new roundGather group signature for thedataData validData invalidPunish malicious node(if applicable)Data queriedUserdata provision. The system was designed to conduct tasks
of Retrieve-Attest-Deliver, to provide trustworthy data to
clients.

2) System Architecture
In Witnet Oracle, users are divided into 3 types: clients,
witnesses, and bridges. Clients are users who request certain
data provision, witnesses work as data reporters, and bridges
work as interconnection between the Witnet oracles and other
public smart contract platforms. Witnet¡¯s data processing
system is based on its Decentralized Oracle Network (DON).
In Witnet, prices are produced in the form of giving mining
blocks on the price chain. If at a block there exist dispute
among witnesses, the price chain will fork and proceed to the
dispute solving by choosing the fork with majority reputation
support as the valid result.

3) Data Validation Process & Incentivization Mechanism
Witnet incentivizes users with reputation scores and its native
token Wit. Miner publishing a new block can obtain block
reward in the form of Wit token, which is inﬂationary to
provide long-run incentive. Meanwhile, the likelihood of
successfully mining a new block is related to the reputation
score he gets. Namely the higher the reputation score he gets,
the more likely he is to get tasks, where such task returns
payoffs to the witnesses.

Each witness (public key) has a minimum score, and at
checkpoint 0 (the genesis block) of the ledger, the minimum
score is set to be 1. Considering that the public key is
of 256 bits, there exist 2256 initial score to be distributed
among the witness identities (public keys). In additional to
the basic 1 point, another x*2256 points are used for re-
distribution among the witnesses. Namely a witness starts
with a reputation score of x+1 [24]. If a witness loses all of
his re-distributable points, he still has the minimum 1 score
which is never reduced from him. In such system, the gain of
reputation score of a witness only comes from the reduction
of the scores of other witnesses.

If different data is given by different witnesses, they will
form forks on the price chain, and witnesses anchor their
reputation to different forks of the chain. Eventually, the
data fork receiving the support of majority witnesses will
become valid and survive as the ﬁnal result, while other forks
became invalid. For a witness who support an invalid fork,
his reputation score will be reduced. The reputation scores
reduced will transfer from dishonest witnesses to honest
witnesses, while remaining the total amount to be constant.
The ﬂowchart of Witnet oracle is shown in Figure 11.

In addition, for a witness that does not participate in the
data validation process (namely not anchoring his score to
any of the data outcomes), his score will still be reduced by a
demurrage process, and the more scores he has the faster his
score reduces due to irresponsiveness. Therefore, a witness is
incentivized to join the price reporting process.

Furthermore, Witnet system gives a so-called ¡°Double-
agent Incentive¡± to the witnesses, meaning in the system

FIGURE 11: Witnet oracle working ﬂowchart

(i.e. ”t-out-of-n”). The malicious nodes, if not responding or
providing invalid data, it will be excluded from future runs of
the protocol, and their security reserve will be slashed.

Each group has a quality score as a measure of their
Quality of Service (in the terms of criteria such as correct-
ness and responsiveness), and for non-responding groups,
their negative score will be incremented until their score is
abnormal to be banished from the protocol. Furthermore, for
a node of overly low QoS, it will excluded from the off-
chain protocol and payment process. The ﬂowchart of DOS
Network is shown in Figure 10.

Therefore, a reputation-based data validation process is

constructed with this QoS system.

4) Incentivization Mechanism
DOS Network has its native token, DOS Tokens, used to
incentivize participants of the system, including Dapp devel-
opers (for submitting development proposals), mining node
runners and premium data providers (those who monetize
data feeding in the system). Nodes on-chaining a new block
obtain rewards, while users can also obtain rewards from
staking itself. If the user conducts adversarial actions, the
penalty is being excluded from future participation, incen-
tivizing honest actions.

5) Applications and Ecosystem
DOS Network currently has strategic partners including
mining pools (Huobi Pool), lending platform (ForTube),
blockchain infrastructure (Meter), etc. according to its of-
ﬁcial website. The market capitalization of its native token
DOS has reached 40 million USD by the time of writing.

E. WITNET ORACLE [19]
Witnet Oracle is a reputation-based oracle. Compared to
DOS Network, its difference lies in the reputation score sys-
tem that the total reputation score of the system is constant,
and the increase of reputation score of some user can only be
sourced to the decrease of others.

1) Design Criteria
Witnet Oracle is a reputation-based oracle giving data re-
porters reputation points based on their performance of

VOLUME 4, 2021

9

Pn-2Pn-1PnPAPBForkNon-participating witnessesMajority witnessesMinority witnessesScore reduced (demurrage)Pn+1Score reduced (invalid fork)TABLE 2: Comparisons among Current DeFi Oracles

Chainlink

Trust model
Aggregation

Trustworthiness Source
Non-adversarial majority

Band Protocol

Staking
Aggregation

&

Non-adversarial majority &
high adversarial cost

Nest Protocol Game-theory

High adversarial cost

DOS Network Reputation

Witnet

Reputation

Non-adversarial majority &
high adversarial cost
Non-adversarial majority &
high adversarial cost

Data Provider Scalability
Adaptor & Hardware re-
quirement
Data Provider: data source
account and infrastructure
setup; Validator: staking
Any user can participate
with low barrier
Staking

Any user can join as a wit-
ness

Native Token
LINK

BAND

NEST

DOS

WIT

witnesses do not reveal which claim of data they support.
This means that even though bribers may provide economic
incentives to witnesses, the witnesses can still choose to
behave honestly to the DON and obtain both the reward from
the system and the bribers.

In this case, it is important to ﬁnd the optimized balance
between the dishonesty penalty and the demurrage. If the
former is too low, the quality of data providing cannot be
guaranteed due to low adversarial cost; if the latter is too low,
the witnesses may tend to not participate the price reporting
process to avoid the risk of supporting the wrong forks,
causing the operation of the system inefﬁcient. Therefore, a
balance is required so that the witnesses are incentivized to
report data to the client honestly in such mechanisms.

4) Applications and Ecosystem
According to its ofﬁcial website, Witnet¡¯s ecosystem
mainly includes other related infrastructure developed by
Witnet, including wallet (Sheikah wallet) and Witnet.network
block explorer. Currently, the native token of Witnet, WIT, is
not active in DeFi market.

F. COMPARISONS: SIMILARITIES AND DIFFERENCES
In previous sections of this paper, decentralized oracle de-
signs are categorized into 4 types, and essentially, their
source of trustworthiness can be categorized into two types:
(1) non-adversarial majority, and (2) beneﬁt of adversarial
acts smaller than beneﬁt of honest acts.

Aggregation-based type mainly rely on (1) and barely
relying on (2), since it merely aggregates the data received
in a node-agnostic and data-quality-agnostic way with pre-
determined algorithms. Staking-based type also mainly relies
on (1), but compared to aggregation-based type it rely more
on (2) since it provide economic incentive to voters by
staking, rewarding and slashing, and the higher staking is the
less likely the user is to vote for a malicious price. Game-
theory based type mainly rely on (2) rather than (1), and
since it barely rely on the proportion between adversarial and
honest users, it can work in environments with more mali-
cious users. Reputation-based type relies on both (1) and (2),

since reputation incentives the users with future participation
opportunities and it also decide the reputation of a user with
its performance compared to the majority users. For various
oracle designs, their suitable circumstances of applications
depend on the feature of their source of trustworthiness.
Therefore, judging the source of trustworthiness from criteria
mentioned in the session above, Chainlink mainly relies on
(1), NEST Protocol mainly relies on (2), and Band Protocol,
DOS Network and Witnet rely on both (1) and (2) as source
of trustworthiness.

With respect to the scalability of the data processing
nodes, current active oracles have different characteristics.
For Chainlink, users need to use adaptors of Chainlink
and fulﬁll hardware requirement to become a data feeding
node. For Band Protocol, to become a data provider, a Data
Provider¡¯s Account and a ¡°gateway server¡± is required to
be set up, and to become a validator, staking is required on the
system. For DOS Network, users are also required to stake to
become data validator, while for NEST and Witnet, any user
is able to join the data validation process as long as they are in
the network. The comparison above is summarized to Table
2.

Furthermore, it cannot be ignored that new data valida-
tion mechanism may show up in the future. For example,
Uniswap, as a decentralized exchange, has the potential of
being converted into an oracle with its current infrastructure,
according to Vitalik Buterin [25] since Uniswap has one
advantage of large market capitalization, which increases the
adversarial cost of attackers.

Although with current data validation mechanism, current
oracles are not solving the demand to oracle problem per-
fectly and is with some shortcomings. For example, inaccu-
racy of price data feeding causes huge loss for DeFi plat-
forms and users; data feeding may not be on time; data type
requested by users may not be reachable by the oracle or the
platform due to technical issue; DeFi attacks by manipulating
oracles are frequently heard, etc.. The problems DeFi oracles
are facing gives us insight on the potential development of
them in the future in the next section.

10

VOLUME 4, 2021

FIGURE 12: Design Metrics for DeFi Oracles

V. FUTURE OF DEFI ORACLES
With past and present DeFi oracles analyzed and compared,
in this section, we give out our view on the future of trust-
worthy DeFi oracles, including the metrics of DeFi oracles
and the trustworthiness mechanism for data feeding and data
providers.

A. METRICS FOR BUILDING TRUSTWORTHY DEFI
ORACLES
Current DeFi oracles have disadvantages in the application
to the industry, as [8] pointed out, oracle problems may
encounter malfunctions, biased data and lack of timeliness
of data feeding, which reﬂets some possible future direction
of improvement. In this paper, we propose some possible
improvement metrics or criteria of oracles, which include
accuracy, time-efﬁciency, scalability, and adversarial cost
(risks). (as concluded in Figure 12)

1) Accuracy
Accuracy means that the variance between data fed by the
oracle and actual data is held in an acceptable threshold. The
variance may be caused by the ﬂuctuation of price or the
difference among difference data sources and trading price
of different markets. In the highly ﬂuctuating DeFi market,
small proportion of price change may cause relatively large
ﬂuctuation of DeFi asset value.

Currently, DeFi oracles have limited accuracy. For exam-
ple, Chainlink updates the price when a deviation threshold
of the price is surpassed. Within the deviation threshold, the
price with certain inaccuracy may still cause loss of the users.
Therefore, oracles have to take the capability of providing
accurate enough data for the data requesters as one important
criterion.

2) Time-efﬁciency
Time-efﬁciency measures the timeliness of data fed to users
when receiving data request. With changing data source,
whether oracles can update the data on-time is an important
factor of whether the oracle provide qualiﬁed data feeding in
fast ﬂuctuating DeFi market.

In the future the importance of balance between accuracy
and time-efﬁciency in the future rises in oracles since the

demand of which is rising, while higher accuracy means
more time spent on data validation, and less data processed
in limited time period and in contrast time-efﬁciency may
requires less data validation time.

3) Scalability
Scalability means that oracles are able to integrate and adapt
to more data types and chains and with more ﬂexible func-
tionality. With more scalability, users may receive and trans-
mit data in more circumstances and occasions, expanding the
market and user group of DeFi.

Currently, we can see such trend on 3rd generation
blockchains such as Polkadot chain, which enables chain-
agnostic data transmission [26]. Outbound oracles (also
known as reverse oracles) report on-chain data to off-chain
algorithms, in contrast to traditional oracles. Parsiq [27] is
nowadays one of the example of application of outbound
oracles, providing services including on-chain wallet super-
vision and management. In addition, DeFi oracles are being
applied to more circumstances, with more types of DeFi
projects and ecosystems, and integration with traditional
centralized ﬁnance.

4) Security
For an oracle, degree of security is reﬂected by the cost of
adversarial users conducting malicious actions and attacks,
which is an important factor to improve the reliability of
oracles since it is directly related to the probability of attacks.
Adversarial costs can be divided into short-term and long-
term ones. Although now traditional oracles including Chain-
link and Band Protocol are dominating the market with short-
term costs (including cost of 51% attack and stake slashing),
we can see new designs coming up with more long-term
way to raise adversarial costs. For example, reputation-based
oracles are especially potential in this ﬁeld since it risks
the long-term future chance of participation of the malicious
users on the reputation system.

B. PROPOSED TRUST ARCHITECTURE FOR FUTURE
TRUSTWORTHY DEFI ORACLES
With potential improvement on the metrics of DeFi oracles
mentioned above, oracles will not only evaluate the trustwor-

VOLUME 4, 2021

11

Trustworthy DeFi OraclesAccuracyTime-efficiencyScalabilitySecurityBias from actual dataFollowing data variation timelyData typesChain-agnosticism Implementation Circumstances Direction of Data transmissionShort-term Adversarial CostLong-term Adversarial Cost thiness more efﬁciently, but also make trust evaluation more
universal and general among DeFi industry. It is possible for
a user possessing certain universal reputation proof among
difference blockchains and DeFi platforms, supported by a
general trust evaluation system. (ﬂowchart for demonstration
as shown in Figure 13)

2) On Trustworthiness of Data Providers
Beside the trustworthiness of data itself mentioned in last
section, the trust on data providers is also of importance.
Reputation-based oracle has certain advantage over other
oracles in this aspect. It is a more direct and essential solution
to the problem and will be further discussed in this session.

1) On the Trustworthiness of Data Feeding
With metrics mentioned above for DeFi oracles, data feeding
is challenged with higher standards. Currently, DeFi oracles
mainly relies on users¡¯ group behavior to decide the trust-
worthiness of data, which may not be the optimal approach
with respect to time-efﬁciency and operational cost since
extra economic incentive are required for user group to act
honestly rather than adversarial.

a: Automated Trust Modelling
Automated algorithm for trustworthiness is one of the possi-
ble future development directions, where trust modelling is
the key factor for trustworthiness evaluation. In [28], Lim et
al categorized trust models into 4 basic categories, including
basic models, such as weighted average, relational measure-
ment, graph methods, Bayesian methods and machine learn-
ing method, etc.. If applied to DeFi, such trust modelling is
implementable and automatable by algorithms (namely smart
contracts in DeFi), largely automating the trust evaluation on
the data, rather than evaluating the reputation of user through
the group behavior of majority users.

b: Machine Learning in Data Validation
Data validation is the process of determining the trustwor-
thiness of data and one of the promising approaches of
automated trust modelling is machine learning trained by
historical data and peer projects, etc.. Compared to the ap-
proach supported by user group behavior, machine learning
approach is able to process much larger amount of data than
user committees do. Furthermore, machine learning trust
model is relatively more scalable and migratable to other
systems as long as new data set or environment is provided,
while in contrast human users conventionally tend to process
certain data type or certain platform. With respect to user
cost, a machine-based trust model does not require economic
incentive to make honest decision and avoid adversarial ones,
which lowers the system operating cost and makes the system
less corruptible.

Furthermore, the data used for machine learning trust
model is highly accessible since DeFi users¡¯ (namely the
on-chain address) trading records are publicly traceable,
obtaining information such as amount of the transaction,
blockchain address of sender and receiver, platform of trans-
action, etc.. Such information can be useful as input data for
a classiﬁcation on whether the transaction was an attack or
whether the user is trustworthiness in certain circumstances,
which in contrast is not feasible to implement by human
effort on each data provider due to the effort required.

a: Reputation-based Oracles: Limitation and Advantage
Currently, reputation-based oracles have certain limitations.
As section E-1 of [3] pointed out, reputation-based data vali-
dation system may be less cost-effective. Such disadvantages
appear in human-based oracles described in [3], where users
experience opportunity cost of giving up beneﬁt obtained
from adversarial behavior and need extra incentive in order
to overcome the opportunity cost, which makes the system
run less cost-effectively.

Reputation-based oracles¡¯ advantages includes but are
not limited to: i) High barrier for adversarial user participat-
ing the system. Reputation system usually limits the chance
for low-reputation users to participate in the data feeding
process of the oracle system and requires much more effort
to gain more reputation than losing it, which is also known as
a property of trust, easier to lose than to gain. ii) Reducing
malicious data entering the system effectively. By ﬁltering
out data provided from low reputation users, malicious data
cannot enter the system. For oracles based on other data
validation mechanisms, adversarial users can still participate
in data processing but only with their impact restricted or dis-
incentivized, leaving higher potential threats to the system.
iii) Introducing reputation and trust into the system ﬁts future
trends of development. With more integration with traditional
ﬁnance and physical world, a more stable investment and
trading environment is demanded, especially with concepts
introduced from CeFi, including KYC (Know Your Cos-
tumer), AML (Anti-Money Laundering), CFT (Combatting
Financial Terrorism), etc.. Reputation and trust system is able
to ﬁll the gap between traditional centralized and on-chain
world.

b: Reduction of Human Effort in Reputation Evaluation
As mentioned in previous sections of trust on data feeding,
one direction of future development is conducting user rep-
utation evaluation with less human factors and automation.
Currently, the trust on data by reputation-based oracles is
based-on its provider¡¯s reputation, which is evaluated by
the general behavior of user group, for example, Witnet
choose the data fork with the majority witnesses¡¯ support
as the one with valid data and DOS gives negative QoS score
if the data provided deviates from majority.

Such process has limited effectiveness. On one hand, it
always requires some assumption on the general user group,
for example, that the proportion of adversarial users does not
exceed certain threshold (50% in the case of Witnet) so that
the system can always return valid answer. On the other hand,
the quality of data does not necessarily depend only on the
reputation of its provider. Therefore, it is reasonable to reduce

12

VOLUME 4, 2021

FIGURE 13: Blueprint for Future DeFi Oracles

the reliance on human behavior and introduce more factors
that can be observed by automated algorithms to determine
the trustworthiness of data, for example, the time distance
of the data being published from current time, the response
speed and rate of the user, etc..

Furthermore, reputation evaluation decides whether cer-
tain user is trustworthy or not, which is essentially a classiﬁ-
cation process, and the adoption of machine learning into rep-
utation system is worth attention. With determining factors of
reputation known, the algorithms to compute reputation from
those factors still requires careful consideration of oracle
developers. For example, when given data of trust factors
A, B and C relevant to evaluate the reputation of a user,
different weights (x, y and z) can be given to A, B and C
to form a calculation: xA + yB + zC. Due to the complexity
and fast-changing property of DeFi environment, optimizing
the weights of the calculation with human effort may raise
the operational cost and cause potential inaccuracy or time-
inefﬁciency to the reputation system. Machine learning can
largely save the effort and provide outcomes in a more
time-efﬁcient and accurate way as demonstrate in previous
sections.

3) General Trust Evaluation System
The trend can be predicted that, in the future trust evaluation
has the potential of generalization not limited to one speciﬁc
chain or DeFi project, due to the demand of transactions and
user migration among different chains and platforms. Such
evaluation system may be supported by specialized oracles
and smart contracts obtaining related data on the trustworthi-
ness of users and conducting trust evaluation through certain
algorithm and trust model.

Trustworthiness can be evaluated during the transmission

from data providers (including APIs, human, smart contracts,
etc.) to requesters (smart contracts, human users, etc.), by
conducting trust evaluation on both the data itself and the
provider of it.

4) Universal Reputation Proof
With a generalized trust evaluation system mentioned above,
it is likely that users or other data sources may possess certain
universal proof of their reputation to help data receivers val-
idate the data fed, especially for DeFi projects without trust
evaluation system of their own. Such universal proof is able
to prevent users from conduct malicious actions as a ¡°new
user¡± in a different DeFi platform without receiving penalty.
For example, it is possible to represent the reputation of a
user with an NFT (non-fungible token), which is unique as a
single proof among the users, enabling reputation evaluation
universally.

It is possible that such reputation proof is not limited
to DeFi world. For a DeFi project that is related to real
world assets, for example synthetic assets of households,
reputation proof may be linked to the real-world identity with
zero-knowledge publicized to the network. Such feature may
contribute to the connectivity between DeFi and traditional
centralized ﬁnance.

VI. CONCLUSION
In recent years, decentralized ﬁnance (DeFi) has appeared
as a rapid developing ﬁeld, where oracles provided viable
solutions and promising applications. In this paper, the ap-
plications of oracles in DeFi has been introduced, including
DeFi lending, synthetic assets and insurance. The past devel-
opment of DeFi oracles has been introduced by categorizing
them into the aggregation-based, staking-based, game-theory

VOLUME 4, 2021

13

General Trust Evaluation SystemData RequesterData ProviderOraclesDataDataTrust EvaluationResult of Trustworthiness EvaluatedUniversal Trust ProofUniversal Trust ProofDeFi Platform n…DeFi Platform n+1DeFi Platform n-1DeFi Platform n-2DeFi Platform n+2DeFi Platform n…Other DeFi platforms[18] DOS Network, “A decentralized oracle service boosting blockchain
power,”
data & veriﬁable
[Online]. Available: https://s3.amazonaws.com/whitepaper.dos/

usability with
2019.
DOS+Network+Technical+Whitepaper.pdf

computing

off-chain

[19] A. S. de Pedro, D. Levi, and L. I. Cuende, “Witnet: A decentralized
oracle network protocol,” 2017. [Online]. Available: https://neironix.io/
documents/whitepaper/5141/witnet-whitepaper.pdf

[20] L. Breidenbach, C. Cachin, B. Chan, A. Coventry, S. Ellis, A. Juels,
F. Koushanfara, A. Miller, B. Magauran, D. Moroz, S. Nazarov,
A. Topliceanu, F. Tramèr, and F. Zhang, “Chainlink 2.0: Next steps in the
evolution of decentralized oracle networks,” 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://research.chain.link/whitepaper-v2.pdf

[21] Chainlink Oracle Reputation, “Oracle reputation.” [Online]. Available:

https://reputation.link/

[22] Band Protocol, “Bandchain whitepaper.” [Online]. Available: https:

//docs.bandchain.org/whitepaper/

[23] Nest Protocol, “Overview of nest: Decentralized price oracle.” [Online].

Available: https://docs.nestprotocol.org/

[24] Witnet veriﬁed github page,

“Reputation initialization in wit-
net.” [Online]. Available: https://github.com/witnet/research/blob/master/
reputation/docs/initialization.md#reputation-initialization-in-witnet
[25] Y. Khatri, “Uniswap’s uni should become an oracle token, says vitalik
buterin,” 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.theblockcrypto.com/post/
104597/uniswap-uni-oracle-token-vitalik-buterin

[26] G. Wood, “Polkadot: Vision for a heterogeneous multi-chain framework
draft 1.” [Online]. Available: https://polkadot.network/PolkaDotPaper.pdf
[27] Parsiq, “Parsiq ofﬁcial website.” [Online]. Available: https://www.parsiq.

net/en/

[28] H. L. J. Ting, X. Kang, T. Li, H. Wang, and C.-K. Chu, “On the trust and
trust modeling for the future fully-connected digital world: A comprehen-
sive study,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 106 743 – 106 783, 2021.

based and reputation-based based on their data processing
features. Furthermore, ﬁve current active oracles have been
introduced with respect to their system architecture, data
validation process and incentive mechanisms, and a detailed
comparison has been conducted among them according to
the trustworthiness of the data and its sources as well as
their overall trust models. Lastly, metrics and possible future
techniques have been proposed, including the application of
automation and machine learning, and a potential overall
trust architecture has been given.

REFERENCES
[1] Coingecko, “Top 100 deﬁ coins by market capitalization,” Coingecko
Ofﬁcial Website. [Online]. Available: https://www.coingecko.com/en/deﬁ
[2] K. Mammadzada, “Blockchain oracles systematic literature review
Institute
Innovation & Technology Management
https://comserv.cs.ut.ee/

master
thesis
of Computer Science,
Curriculum,
[Online]. Available:
home/ﬁles/Mammadzada_MasterThesis_ITM.pdf?study=ATILoputoo&
reference=B913660BDAEE6C01D5D887A09A79331E898F990F

(20 ects),” UNIVERSITY OF TARTU,

2019.

[3] A. Egberts, “The oracle problem - an analysis of how blockchain
oracles undermine the advantages of decentralized ledger systems,”
EBS University for Wirtschaft und Recht, 2017. [Online]. Available:
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3382343

[4] A. Beniiche, “A study of blockchain oracles,” arXiv, Computer
Science, Cryptography and Security, 2020. [Online]. Available: https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2004.07140#

[5] H. Al-Breiki, M. H. U. Rehman, K. Salah, and D. Svetinovic,
“Trustworthy blockchain oracles: Review, comparison, and open research
challenges,” IEEEAccess, vol. 8, pp. 85 675 – 85 685, 2020. [Online].
Available: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9086815

[6] R. Mhlberger, S. Bachhofner, E. C. Ferrer, C. D. Ciccio, I. Weber,
M. WÃ¶hrer, and U. Zdun, “Foundational oracle patterns: Connecting
blockchain to the off-chain world,” arXiv, Computer Science, Software
Engineering, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2007.14946

[7] J. Heiss, J. Eberhardt, and S. Tai, “From oracles to trustworthy data
on-chaining systems,” 2019 IEEE International Conference on Blockchain
(Blockchain), Jul 2019. [Online]. Available: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/
document/8946220

[8] G. Caldarelli and J. Ellul, “The blockchain oracle problem in
decentralized ﬁnance - a multivocal approach,” MDPI Open Access
Journals, Applied Science, vol. 11, 2021. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.mdpi.com/2076-3417/11/16/7572/htm

[9] A. Pasdar, Z. Dong, and Y. C. Lee, “Blockchain oracle design patterns,”
arXiv, Computer Science, Cryptography and Security, 2021. [Online].
Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.09349v1

[10] I. Homoliak, S. Venugopalan, Q. Hum, D. Reijsbergen, R. Schumi, and
P. Szalachowski, “The security reference architecture for blockchains:
Towards a standardized model for studying vulnerabilities, threats, and
defenses,” arXiv, Computer Science, Cryptography and Security, 2019.
[Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1910.09775

[11] M. Kumar, N. Nikhil, and R. Singh, “Decentralising ﬁnance using
decentralised blockchain oracles,” 2020 International Conference for
Emerging Technology (INCET), 2020.
[Online]. Available: https:
//doi.org/10.1109/INCET49848.2020.9154123

[12] B. Liu, P. Szalachowski, and J. Zhou, “A ﬁrst look into deﬁ oracles,”
arXiv, Computer Science, Cryptography and Security, 2020. [Online].
Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.04377

[13] R. Leshner

and G. Hayes,

protocol,”
documents/Compound.Whitepaper.pdf

[Online]. Available:

2019.

“Compound: The money market
https://compound.ﬁnance/

[14] Synthetix, “Synthetix system documentation, litepaper,” 2020. [Online].

Available: https://docs.synthetix.io/litepaper

[15] Provable, “Documentation of provable, ofﬁcial website of provable.”

[Online]. Available: https://docs.provable.xyz/

[16] Tellor, “Whitepaper whitepaper, how tellor works.” [Online]. Available:

https://docs.tellor.io/tellor/whitepaper/tellor-oracle-overview/overview

[17] NEST Protocol,

oracle
network.” [Online]. Available: https://docs.tellor.io/tellor/whitepaper/
tellor-oracle-overview/overview

protocol: A distributed

“Nest

price

14

VOLUME 4, 2021

