Secure Spectrum and Resource Sharing for 5G Networks using a Blockchain-

based Decentralized Trusted Computing Platform. 

1Hisham A. Kholidy, Senior Member, IEEE, 2Mohammad A. Rahman, Senior Member, IEEE, 3Andrew 
Karam, 4Zahid Akhtar, Senior Member, IEEE 

1Department of Networks and Computer Security, College of Engineering, SUNY Polytechnic Institute, Utica, 
NY, USA. 
kholidh@sunypoly.edu 

2Florida International University, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, USA 
rahmanma@sunypoly.edu 

3RIGB, The Air Force Research Lab(AFRL) Rome, NY,USA 
andrew.karam@us.af.mil 

4Department of Networks and Computer Security, College of Engineering, SUNY Polytechnic Institute, Utica, 
NY, USA. 
akhtarz@sunypoly.edu 

Abstract 

The 5G network would fuel next-gen, bandwidth-heavy technologies such as automation, IoT, and AI on 

the  factory  floor.  It  will  improve  efficiency  by  powering  AR  overlays  in  workflows,  as  well  as  ensure 

safer practices and reduce the number of  defects through predictive analytics and real-time detection of 

damage.  The  Dynamic  Spectrum  Sharing  (DSS)  in  5G  networks  will  permit  5G  NR  and  4G  LTE  to 

coexist and will provide cost-effective and efficient solutions that enable a smooth transition from 4G to 

5G. However, this increases the attack surface in the 5G networks. To the best of our knowledge, none of 

the current works introduces a real-time secure spectrum-sharing mechanism for 5G networks to defend 

spectrum  resources  and  applications.  This  paper  aims  to  propose  a  Blockchain-based  Decentralized 

Trusted  Computing  Platform  (BTCP)  to  self-protect  large-scale  5G  spectrum  resources  against 

cyberattacks in a timely, dynamic, and accurate way. Furthermore, the platform provides a decentralized, 

trusted, and non-repudiating platform to enable secure spectrum sharing and data exchange between the 

5G spectrum resources 

1.  Introduction 

A 5G network would dramatically improve military communication and situational awareness. One 

of the 5G capabilities called Dynamic Spectrum Sharing (DSS), enables a radio channel to support both 

4G  LTE  and  5G  and  allows  the  5G  signal  to  share  the  underutilized  spectrum.  Considering  the  traffic 

characteristics of current cellular network communications and the spectrum shortage dilemma, the DSS 

 
 
 
 
 
is  a  cost-efficient  solution.  [1]  The  DSS  will  permit  5G  NR  and  4G  LTE  to  coexist,  allowing  network 

operators a smooth transition from LTE to 5G NR. With DSS, 5G can share the frequency bands used by 

4G,  allowing  operators  to  swiftly  expand  5G  coverage  while  eliminating  the  need  for  new  spectrum 

allocation for 5G. [1] Despite this, the implementation of spectrum sharing in 5G heterogeneous networks 

is fraught with challenges, such as security threats,  privacy leakage, and lack of incentive mechanisms. 

[2,  3]  Threats  against  spectrum  sharing  exploit  either  spectrum  sensing  or  geo-location  databases.  [4] 

According  to  [3,  4],  we  can  classify  these  threads  into  two  broad  categories:  threats  to  sensing-driven 

spectrum sharing and threats to database-driven spectrum. The first category includes threats that affect 

(1)  the  physical  layer.  E.g.,  the  Primary  User  Emulation  (PUE)  attack  [5],  (2)  the  MAC  layer.  E.g.,  A 

rogue  transmitter  may  corrupt  the  cognitive  control  channel  [6]  leading  to  a  DoS  attack,  beacon 

falsification (BF) attack [7], and small-back-off-window (SBW) attack [8]. (3) cross-layer where attacks 

can be conducted concurrently to exploit vulnerabilities in two or more layers. E,g, Lion attack [9] that 

targets  the  physical  and  transport  layers  of  a  Cognitive  Radio  Network  (CRN).  The  second  category 

includes  two  subclasses:  (1)  database  inference  attacks.  This  subcategory  includes  (a)  threats  to  the 

privacy  of  primary  users  which  is  an  especially  critical  concern  related  to  the  sharing  of  the  federal 

government (including military) spectrum with non-government systems. [10] (b) threats to the privacy of 

Secondary Users (SUs). E.g., Spectrum Utilization-based Location Inferring attack [11]. (2) Threats to the 

database access protocol such as security concerns related to using a geolocation database, impersonating 

a certified device, jamming a query or a database response...etc.  

Blockchain is a technology of collectively maintaining a reliable database through decentralization 

and de-trust. There are several applications for Blockchain technology in the security domain [12]. [13] 

proposed a new type of distributed cloud architecture based on blockchain that provides secure and on-

demand  access  to  the  most  competitive  computing  infrastructure  in  the  Internet  of  Things  (IoT).  [14] 

proposed  a  multi-layer  security  model  of  IoT  based  on  blockchain  at  all  levels  of  the  network  and 

provides  a  wide-area  networking  solution  of  the  Internet  of  Things.  [15]  proposed  a  blockchain-based 

smart home framework. Each smart home is equipped with an always-on, high-resource device called a 

“miner” that handles all communications inside and outside the home. [16] combined blockchain with a 

big  data  system  and  proposed  a  method  to  overcome  the  shortcomings  of  existing  identity  verification 

through  blockchain  technology.  [17]  proposed  a  blockchain-based  traffic  network  architecture  (Block-

VN) in smart cities.  

To the best of our knowledge,  none of the current works introduces a real-time secure spectrum-

sharing mechanism for 5G networks to defend spectrum resources and applications. This  paper aims to 

propose  a  Blockchain-based  Decentralized  Trusted  Computing  Platform  (BTCP)  to  self-protect  large-

scale 5G spectrum resources against cyberattacks in a timely, dynamic, and accurate way. Furthermore, 

 
 
the  platform  provides  a  decentralized,  trusted,  and  non-repudiating  platform  to  enable  secure  spectrum 

sharing and data exchange between the 5G spectrum resources. This platform can effectively bridge the 

gap between spectrum supply and demand in 5G networks and reduce the cost. The BTCP ensures that 

every spectrum transaction can be safely and reliably saved in the block and  does not need to pay for a 

third-party  platform.  In  addition,  it  can  ensure  that  free  spectrum  can  be  shared  in  real  time  and 

efficiently, thus saving the operator's cost and improving the overall spectrum utilization at the same time.  

1.  Literature Review 

[18]  Wajdi  et  al  studied  the  spectrum  sharing  security  from  the  cognitive  radio  MAC  layer 

perspective. Authors classified the threats against cognitive radio into two different categories. 

The  first  category  includes  threats  specific  to  CRN  users  namely  (1)  threats  against  spectrum 

sensing that bring the network performance down by reporting the false results of the Primary User (PU) 

detection.  (2)  threats  against  spectrum  management  such  as  the  forgery  or  tampering  attacks  that  are 

designed to transmit incorrect spectrum sensing information to the data collection center to deceive the 

secondary user. (3) threats against Spectrum Mobility that force SUs to vacate the channel by pretending 

to  be  the  PU.  (4)  threats  against  Spectrum  sharing  that  includes  the  abovementioned  two  broad  threats 

categories  in  Section  1  (i.e.,  threats  to  sensing-driven  spectrum  sharing  and  threats  to  database-driven 

spectrum). The second category relates to common security threats in both conventional wireless and CR 

networks. This category includes fake attacks, information tampering, service repudiation, replay attack, 

denial  of  service  and  information,  interference,  greedy  behavior  attack,  malicious  and  selfish  behavior 

attacks, and black and grey hole attacks.  

In [19], Fan et al. proposed a generalized temporal-spatial spectrum sharing scheme for ultra-dense 

networks  (UDNs)  by  using  a  game-theoretical  approach.  In  [20],  Kumar  et  al.  presented  a  cooperative 

spectrum  sharing  framework  and  designed  a  novel  dynamic  resource  allocation  strategy  based  on 

fractional  frequency  reuse.  A  new  network  architecture  was  proposed  for  the  coexistence  of  WiFi  and 

cellular systems [21] based on the almost blank subframe (ABS) protocol. 

Yu  et.  al.  [22]  proposed  a  spectrum  sharing  scheme  in  which  a  designated  spectrum  broker 

dynamically  allocates  spectrum  to  a  set  of  secondary  networks  with  different  access  priorities.  Game-

theoretic approaches for dynamic spectrum leasing in cognitive radio networks have been studied in [23, 

24].  In  [24],  the  PU  encourages  or  discourages  the  spectrum  allocation  to  SUs  depending  on  their 

maximum power constraints and Quality-of-Service (QoS). 

The  current  state  of  the  art  relies  on  a centralized  agency  to  verify  every spectrum  sharing 

transaction. This makes these mechanisms nonscalable because of the exponential growth of the spectrum 

allocation problem and their existing vulnerabilities to DoS attacks and a single point of failure problem. 

 
 
[25]  Moreover,  they  mainly  consider resource  management  and  neglect  the  critical  features  for 

spectrum sharing  such  as  security  and privacy issues.  Other  approaches  use  the  traditional  incentive 

methods  that  are  based  on  the  assumption  that  the  Human-to-Human  (H2H)  [26]  side  information  is 

already  known  to  the  Base  Station  (BS),  which  might  be  impractical  in  a  real-world  application. 

Therefore, the development of an incentive mechanism with non-symmetrical information is another real 

challenge.[26].  In  addition  to  that,  the  current  incentive  mechanisms  have  not  considered  the  mutual 

preferences  of  H2H  users  and  Machine-Machine  (M2M)  users.  The  H2H  users  may  not  have  the 

motivation  to  share  their  spectrum  resources  without  a  motivating  compensation  [26]  and  did  not 

introduce a real-time solution to address the authentication in decentralized CRNs.  

2.  The Proposed Blockchain-based Decentralized Trusted Computing Platform (BTCP). 

While  5G  Edge  enables  a  dynamic  edge  environment,  the  participants  are  not  fixed,  and  they  are 

heterogeneous in terms of their spectrum resources and 5G Edge nodes. Moreover, some edge nodes may 

advertise to offer  a certain spectrum, edge computing, and storage capacities but may provide different 

performance behavior during the participation. Hence, there is a need for accountability/reputation, along 

with incentives for quality participation. 

The BTCP addresses the security threats that are inherited from the spectrum sharing aforementioned 

above.  It  revamps  our  existing  autonomous  security  framework  [27-53]  with  trust  management,  and 

modeling and analysis techniques and leverages our 5G security testbed [27, 29] to provide a lightweight 

Blockchain-based  decentralized  trusted  framework  that  is  essential  to  (1)  provide  reliable  privacy  and 

security  guarantees  for  spectrum  sharing  (2)  Maintain  anonymity  from  other  participants  using  a  trust 

management mechanism.  

3.  Methods and Procedures 

The  BTCP  is  a  decentralized  trusted  computing  framework  that  manages  the  participating  edge 

devices using the non-interactive zero-knowledge proof (ZKP) technology. The zkp is a perfect candidate 

to be leveraged to ensure authentication, protecting participating 5G Edge node’ (corresponding users' or 

UE') privacy. The Blockchain-based platform will be utilized to track each 5G Edge node’s (advertised) 

resources (e.g., spectrum resources and 5G Edge resources such SDN, NFV, and mobile edge servers) and 

update  each  nodes'  reputation  (e.g.,  persistent  in  offering  resources).  The  BTCP  uses  the  blockchain 

platform  to  log  each  node’s  actions/responses  and  update  its  reputation  according  to  its  participation. 

Most  importantly,  this  decentralized  trusted non-repudiating  platform  help in communicating  computed 

results among the edge devices securely. This BTCP constitutes two primary components described in the 

following two sections. 

 
 
4.1: A Lightweight Blockchain Platform:  

The participant pool will be managed by a blockchain platform. While IoT devices open a new era for 

MEC services, particularly for a 5G Edge system, various trust issues are growing along with the benefits. 

The MEC using limited-resource (IoT) edge devices depends on the communication among the devices, 

as well as with the edge gateways and/or edge/cloud servers. The edge devices need to be authenticated to 

participate in the system, and they must trust each other. That is, the involved parties need to trust one 

another's  statuses,  e.g.,  identifiers,  locations,  and  capabilities  (e.g.,  available  computing  resources).  A 

trusted third-party-based mechanism can provide a solution, but there is still the concern of trust, along 

with the issues like privacy and single point of failure.  

Fig. 1: The blockchain architecture through which edge devices are connected 

There are existing works that have proposed solutions to some of these issues, such as authentication 

and privacy; however, the solutions have targeted mostly individual/specific problems that often cannot 

be  applied  for  different  settings,  such  as  IoT  device-based  edge  system  computing.  Therefore,  a  non-

 
 
 
centralized  and  third-party-less  framework  is  crucial  for  edge  systems  to  provide  secure,  privacy-

preserved  trustworthy  services.  We  propose  to  address  this  need  by  offering  secure  and  trusted  MEC 

services  by  utilizing  the  non-interactive  ZKP  technology  to  ensure  authentication  while  participating 

nodes’  privacy.  We  propose  a  blockchain  architecture  that  leverages  edge  servers.  We  will  call  this 

system Omnipurpose Edge Chain (OEC). The edge servers and IoT gateways will be used to work as peer 

nodes of the OEC (chaincode implemented). We name them blockchain (BC) nodes. An edge/IoT device 

will be connected to a BC node.  

Figure  1  shows  a  simplified  diagram  of  how  the  edge  devices  will  be  connected  to  a  Blockchain 

network.  In  this  figure,  OEC  is  the  blockchain  system,  which  has  got  several  nodes.  Edge  devices  get 

connected with any of the BC nodes, which are known as the corresponding node. The devices that are 

connected  to  the  same  corresponding  node  are  called  sibling  nodes.  Different  BC  nodes  might  have  a 

different  number  of  sibling  nodes.  The  total  number  of  nodes  required  might  vary  depending  on  the 

number of edge devices. 

When an IoT device or an Edge server wants to subscribe to the MEC services, it will create its user 

profile.  In  its  profile,  the  user  will  mention  all  necessary  information,  including  its  identity, 

device/resource  information,  and  the  payment  detail  (as  applicable).  Using  a  standard  authentication 

mechanism, an IoT device will be connected to the Blockchain peer. Figure 2 shows a tentative protocol 

for how an IoT can subscribe to a peer of the OEC network. In the OEC network, there will be a peer who 

will work as an OEC manager. The OEC manager will be responsible for generating cryptographic keys. 

The OEC manager is randomly selected from the existing peers for a particular period. 

Fig. 2: A protocol for the subscription to OEC 

 
 
 
In  a  permissionless  blockchain  setup,  all  transactions  are  broadcasted  to  each  participant.  The 

interactions  between  participating  nodes  are  also  visible  to  all  participants.  Hence,  there  exists  no 

transaction privacy and confidentiality. Here, ZKP-based techniques can ensure these properties by letting 

others  only  know  that  a  valid  transaction  has  taken  place,  without  sharing  any  information  about  the 

sender,  recipient,  and  asset  transferred.  zk-SNARKS  (zero-knowledge  –  Succinct  Non-Interactive 

Argument  of Knowledge) [54] is a  popular  ZKP  technique.  It  is  a  verifier and  prover-based  technique, 

following the idea of defining a quadratic equation based on public data and private data (only known to 

prover) and generating proof for the verifier to validate. The process does not require any interaction/data-

sharing between the prover and the verifier. 

We  consider  the  situation  where  the  participating  IoT/edge  devices  are  not  following  a  gateway-

based  architecture  and  thus  are  not  connected  to  the  powerful  gateway,  edge  servers,  and/or  clouds, 

having a limited connection to the Internet so that they can access the blockchain as required. In the case 

of  no  Internet,  these  authentication/reputation  models  will  allow  participation  in  the  pipeline,  leaving 

verification  and  blockchain  update  processes  to  be  performed  once  these  nodes  can  connect  to  the 

Internet.  It  is  worth  mentioning  that  ZCash  [55]  is  a  cryptocurrency  that  implements  zk-SNARKS  to 

ensure the confidentiality of personal and transaction data. In a Z-to-Z transaction appearing on the public 

blockchain, it can be seen that the transaction took place and the fees were paid. However, the transaction 

amount, user addresses, and memo are encrypted, and hence not publicly visible. Currently, to make ZKP 

process short and efficient ZKP in a blockchain, a common reference string (public values) is generated 

and  shared  between  the  prover  and  verifier  in  the  initial  phase.  Hence,  if  an  adversary  can  access  the 

secret randomness used for generating these parameters, he/she would be able to create false proofs for 

the verifier. To mitigate this problem, ZCash applies an elaborated multi-party ceremony to generate the 

public  parameters,  where  multiple  independent  parties  collaboratively  create  the  parameters.  This 

protocol  ensures  that  to  compromise  the  final  parameters,  all  participants  need  to  be  dishonest  or 

compromised. At a high level, zk-SNARKs works by converting what someone wants to prove into an 

equivalent form, demonstrating the knowledge of the solution. In this particular study, we aim to leverage 

the non-interactive ZKP designed for IoT [56]. 

4.2. An Incentive-based Reputation Management: 

We  propose  to  develop  incentive-based  reputation  management  on  the  blockchain  platform  to  be 

implemented in the previous subtask. This management involves designing a protocol that is suitable for 

the dynamic formation of the edge system with heterogeneous nodes, as well as updating the system with 

various changes. These changes can be in the set of participants and the computing need. The protocol 

 
 
provides a payment system that incentivizes individuals according to their performance and commitment. 

This protocol also tracks the participants’ behaviors and keeps the reputation updated accordingly. 

 The  reputation  management  protocol  considers  the  actions  concerning  forming  or  updating  the 

dynamic  MEC  system.  These  actions  primarily  include  “create,”  “join,”  “leave,”  and  “break”  the  edge 

system. Note that to work with such a dynamic system, it is important to model the system with proper 

identification and property specification. For example, if a node is already subscribed/participating in an 

edge  system,  a  condition  can  be  applied  to  only  allow  a  node  to  join  another  system  after  leaving  the 

current one. A node cannot join a system if its advertised computing power is too low or its reputation 

score is too low. A node may not be able to join is if the edge system already has enough participants with 

sufficient  computing  and  storage  capacities  to  serve  the  system  stakeholder’s  mission  since  an  edge 

system does not need to be too large than the need. Most importantly, the stakeholder/leader (the creator 

node) of the edge system incentivizes the participating nodes with proper payments (maybe preliminarily 

advertised). This incentive is important to make the nodes motivated to share their resources by joining 

the edge system. The join action includes various lower-level actions to identify if everything is good to 

go.  The  payments  for  the  joined/subscribed  nodes  according  to  their  participation/performance  in  the 

MEC  is  made  by  the  edge  system’s  leader/creator  node,  and  the  reputation  scores  are  updated 

accordingly.  All 

these  actions  are 

recorded 

in 

the  blockchain  platform, 

including 

the 

payment/transactions. Frequently or as the stakeholder has configured/advertised, the incentives will be 

calculated and distributed. Now, whenever a node wishes to exit the system, it invokes the “leave” action. 

A user can leave a system to which it is currently subscribed. Once this “leave” process starts, each node 

should  receive  payment  from  the  creator/leader  node  according  to  its  unpaid  service.  Moreover, 

reputation scores will be updated (for the unjudged performance), and the blockchain will be updated with 

these scores/transactions. This task may invoke a series of low-level actions to safely exit. 

 To design this incentivization system, we require exploring different payment strategies and benefit 

models to find an incentive scheme. Any scheme developed must involve the participating nodes being 

treated fairly. Designing such a model considering nodes that participate partially, while the resources are 

heterogeneous,  is  not  trivial.  The  overall  goal  of  any  member  of  the  edge  system  is  to  earn  (money) 

through their service. A simplified potential payment (Z) calculation for an edge device (I) can be done 

following Eq. 1: 

…………….…….(1) 

Here, f(.) is a function that evaluates the computing performance (e.g., a scaled value) for task (computing 

requirement) R based on the data (DI) processed and time (TI) required. This performance will calculate 

the  monetary  value  of  this  participation.  However,  MEC  with  multiple  nodes  works  based  on 

 
 
coordination between the nodes, according to some schedule and dependency. In the cases when the node 

does not perform as advertised, this coordinated computing task will be hampered, which requires to be 

penalized. The last term of the above equation is simply doing it by taking the ratio of shown performance 

over the expected/advertised performance. The latter is calculated by function g(.) based on the task, the 

advertised processing (PI), storage (SI), and communication (CI) capacities. 

 References 

[1]  

“Dynamic  Spectrum  Sharing  for  5G  NR  and  4G  LTE  Coexistence”,  RCR  Wireless  Reader  Forum. 

November  17,  2020.    https://www.rcrwireless.com/20201117/opinion/dynamic-spectrum-sharing-for-5g-

nr-and-4g-lte-coexistence 

[2]  

 "The  National  Strategy  to  Secure  5g  Implementation  Plan",  the  National  Telecommunications  and 

Information  Administration  (NTIA),  May  2020.  https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2020-06-

16/pdf/2020-12960.pdf  

[3]  

J.  Park,  J.  H.  Reed,  A.  A.  Beex,  T.  C.  Clancy,  V.  Kumar  and  B.  Bahrak,  "Security  and  Enforcement  in 

Spectrum  Sharing,"  in Proceedings  of  the  IEEE,  vol.  102,  no.  3,  pp.  270-281,  March  2014,  doi: 

10.1109/JPROC.2014.2301972. 

[4]   Z.  Zhou,  X.  Chen,  Y.  Zhang  and  S.  Mumtaz,  "Blockchain-Empowered  Secure  Spectrum  Sharing  for  5G 

Heterogeneous  Networks,"  in IEEE  Network,  vol.  34,  no.  1,  pp.  24-31,  January/February  2020,  doi: 

10.1109/MNET.001.1900188. 

[5]   R.  Chen,  J.-M.  Park,  and  J.  Reed,  “Defense  against  primary  user  emulation  attacks  in  cognitive  radio 

networks,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 25–37, Jan. 2008. 

[6]   L. Zhu and H. Zhou, “Two types of attacks against cognitive radio network MAC protocols,” in Int. Conf. 

Computer Science and Software Engineering, vol. 4, 2008, pp. 1110–1113. 

[7]   K. Bian and J.-M. Park, “Security vulnerabilities in IEEE 802.22,” in WICON, 2008, pp. 1–9. 

[8]   M.  Raya,  I.  Aad,  J.-P.  Hubaux,  and  A.  El  Fawal,  “DOMINO:  Detecting  MAC  layer  greedy  behavior  in 

IEEE 802.11 hotspots,” IEEE Trans. On Mobile Computing, vol. 5, no. 12, pp. 1691–1705, 2006. 

[9]  

J. Hernandez-Serrano, O. Le´on, and M. Soriano, “Modeling the lion attack in cognitive radio networks,” 

EURASIP J. Wirel. Commun. Netw.,pp. 1–10, Jan. 2011. 

[10]   D. Gurney, G. Buchwald, L. Ecklund, S. Kuffner, and J. Grosspietsch, “Geo-location database techniques 

for incumbent protection in the TV white space,” in IEEE DySPAN, 2008, pp. 1–9. 

[11]   Z. Gao, H. Zhu, Y. Liu, M. Li, and Z. Cao, “Location privacy in database-driven cognitive radio networks: 

Attacks and countermeasures,” in IEEE INFOCOM, 2013. 

[12]   Han, S., & Zhu, X. (2019). Blockchain Based Spectrum Sharing Algorithm. 2019 IEEE 19th International 

Conference on Communication Technology (ICCT). doi:10.1109/icct46805.2019.894729 

[13]   Pradip Kumar Sharma, Mu-Yen Chen,Jong Hyuk Park.  A Software Defined Fog Node  based Distributed 

Blockchain Cloud Architecture for IoT. J. IEEE Access,2017, PP(99):1-1.  

 
 
[14]   Cheng Li,  Liang-Jie Zhang. A Blockchain Based New Secure MultiLayer Network Model for Internet of 

Things. C. 2017 IEEE International Congress on Internet of Things (ICIOT), 2017:33-41. 

[15]   Ali  Dorri,  Salil  S.  Kanhere,  Raja  Jurdak,  Praveen  Gauravaram.  Blockchain  for  IoT  security  and  privacy: 

The  case  study  of  a  smart  home.  C.  2017  IEEE  International  Conference  on  Pervasive  Computing  and 

Communications Workshops (PerCom Workshops), 2017: 618 – 623.  

[16]   Nazri  Abdullah,  Anne  Hakansson,  Esmiralda  Moradian.  Blockchain  based  approach  to  enhance  big  data 

authentication  in  distributed  environment.  C.  2017  Ninth  International  Conference  on  Ubiquitous  and 

Future Networks (ICUFN), 2017: 887 - 892.  

[17]   Sharma  P. Block-VN:  A Distributed Blockchain Based Vehicular Network Architecture in Smart City. J. 

Journal of Information Processing Systems, 2017, 13(1):184-195. 

[18]    Wajdi Alhakami, Ali Mansour, Ghazanfar A. Safdar, “Spectrum Sharing Security and Attacks in CRNs: a 

Review”,(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications, Vol. 5, No. 1, 

2014 

[19]   C. Fan et al.,  “Learning-Based Spectrum Sharing and Spatial Reuse in  mm-Wave  Ultradense Networks,” 

IEEE Trans. Vehic.Tech., vol. 67, no. 6, May 2018, pp. 4954–68. 

[20]   A.  Kumar  et  al.,  “Dynamic  Resource  Allocation  for  Cooperative  Spectrum  Sharing  in  LTE  Networks,” 

IEEE Trans. Vehic. Tech., vol. 64, no. 11, Nov. 2015, pp. 5232–45. 

[21]   H.  Zhang  et  al.,  “Coexistence  of  Wi-Fi  and  Heterogeneous  Small  Cell  Networks  Sharing  Unlicensed 

Spectrum,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 53, no. 3, Mar. 2015, pp. 158–64. 

[22]   O.  Yu,  E.  Saric,  and  A.  Li,  “Dynamic  control  of  open  spectrum  management,”  in  IEEE  Wireless 

Communications and Networking Conference, March 2007, pp. 127–132.  

[23]   S.  Lin  and  X.  Fang,  “Two-level  game  based  spectrum  lease  framework  in  cognitive  radio  networks,”  in 

IEEE International Conference on Communication Systems, Nov 2008, pp. 104–108.  

[24]   S.  Jayaweera,  K.  Hakim,  and  C.  Mosquera,  “A  game-theoretic  framework  for  dynamic  spectrum  leasing 

(dsl) in cognitive radios,” in IEEE GLOBECOM Workshop, Nov 2009, pp. 1–6.  

[25]   Y. Zhang et al., "Contract-Based Incentive Mechanisms for Device-to-Device Communications in Cellular 

Networks", IEEE JSAC, vol. 33, no. 10, pp. 2144-55, Oct. 2015.  

[26]   Z.  Zhou,  X.  Chen,  Y.  Zhang  and  S.  Mumtaz,  "Blockchain-Empowered  Secure  Spectrum  Sharing  for  5G 

Heterogeneous  Networks,"  in IEEE  Network,  vol.  34,  no.  1,  pp.  24-31,  January/February  2020,  doi: 

10.1109/MNET.001.1900188. 

[27]   H.  A.  Kholidy,  A.  Karam,  J.  L.  Sidoran  and  M.  A.  Rahman,  "5G  Core  Security  in  Edge  Networks:  A 

Vulnerability Assessment Approach," 2021 IEEE Symposium on Computers and Communications (ISCC), 

2021, pp. 1-6, doi: 10.1109/ISCC53001.2021.9631531. 

[28]   N.  I.  Haque,  M.  Ashiqur  Rahman,  D.  Chen  and  Hisham    A.    Kholidy,  "BIoTA:  Control-Aware  Attack 

Analytics for Building Internet of Things," 2021 18th Annual IEEE International Conference on Sensing, 

Communication, and Networking (SECON), 2021, pp. 1-9, doi: 10.1109/SECON52354.2021.9491621. 

 
 
[29]   Kholidy, H.A. Multi-Layer Attack Graph Analysis in the 5G Edge Network Using a Dynamic Hexagonal 

Fuzzy Method. Sensors 2022, 22, 9. https://doi.org/10.3390/s22010009 

[30]   Hisham  A.  Kholidy,  "Detecting  impersonation  attacks  in  cloud  computing  environments  using  a  centric 

user profiling approach", Future Generation Computer Systems, Volume 117, 2021, Pages 299-320, ISSN 

0167-739X,https://doi.org/10.1016/j.future.2020.12.009. 

(http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167739X20330715) 

[31]   Kholidy,  Hisham  A.:  'Correlation-based  sequence  alignment  models  for  detecting  masquerades  in  cloud 

computing', IET Information Security, 2020, 14, (1), p. 39-50, DOI: 10.1049/iet-ifs.2019.0409. IET Digital 

Library, https://digital-library.theiet.org/content/journals/10.1049/iet-ifs.2019.0409  

[32]   H. A. Kholidy, "Towards A Scalable Symmetric Key Cryptographic Scheme: Performance Evaluation and 

Security Analysis," 2019 2nd International Conference on Computer Applications & Information Security 

(ICCAIS), Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 2019, pp. 1-6, doi: 10.1109/CAIS.2019.8769494. 

[33]   Kholidy, H.A., Fabrizio Baiardi, Salim Hariri: ‘DDSGA: A Data-Driven Semi-Global Alignment Approach 

for  Detecting  Masquerade  Attacks’.  The  IEEE  Transaction  on  Dependable  and  Secure  Computing, 

10.1109/TDSC.2014.2327966, pp:164–178, June 2015.  

[34]   Kholidy, H.A., Fabrizio Baiardi, "CIDD: A Cloud Intrusion Detection Dataset For Cloud Computing and 

Masquerade  Attacks  ",  in  the  9th  Int.  Conf.  on  Information  Technology:  New  Generations  ITNG  2012, 

April 16-18, Las Vegas, Nevada, USA. http://www.di.unipi.it/~hkholidy/projects/cidd/  

[35]   Kholidy,  H.A.,  Fabrizio  Baiardi,  "CIDS:  A  framework  for  Intrusion  Detection  in  Cloud  Systems",  in  the 

9th Int. Conf. on Information Technology: New Generations ITNG 2012, April 16-18, Las Vegas, Nevada, 

USA. http://www.di.unipi.it/~hkholidy/projects/cids/  

[36]   Kholidy, H.A., Baiardi,  F., Hariri,  S., et al.: ‘A  hierarchical cloud intrusion detection  system: design and 

evaluation’, Int. J. Cloud Comput., Serv. Archit. (IJCCSA), 2012, 2, pp. 1–24. 

[37]   Hisham A. Kholidy, Abdelkarim Erradi, Sherif Abdelwahed, Abdulrahman Azab, “A Finite State Hidden 

Markov  Model  for  Predicting  Multistage  Attacks  in  Cloud  Systems",  in  the  12th  IEEE  International 

Conference on Dependable, Autonomic and Secure Computing (DASC), Dalian, China, August 2014. 

[38]   Kholidy, H.A., Abdelkarim Erradi,  Sherif Abdelwahed, Fabrizio Baiardi, "A risk  mitigation approach for 

autonomous cloud intrusion response system", in Journal of Computing, Springer, DOI:  10.1007/s00607- 

016-0495-8, June 2016.  

[39]   Kholidy,  H.A.,  Abdelkarim  Erradi,  “A  Cost-Aware  Model  for  Risk  Mitigation  in  Cloud  Computing 

SystemsSuccessful  accepted  in  12th  ACS/IEEE  International  Conference  on  Computer  Systems  and 

Applications (AICCSA), Marrakech, Morocco, November, 2015.  

[40]   Kholidy,  H.A.,  Ali Tekeoglu, Stefano  Lannucci,  Shamik  Sengupta, Qian Chen, Sherif  Abdelwahed, John 

Hamilton, “Attacks Detection in SCADA Systems Using an Improved Non-Nested Generalized Exemplars 

Algorithm", the 12th IEEE International Conference on Computer Engineering and Systems (ICCES 2017), 

December 19-20, 2017.  

 
 
[41]   Qian  Chen,  Kholidy,  H.A.,  Sherif  Abdelwahed,  John  Hamilton,  "Towards  Realizing  a  Distributed  Event 

and  Intrusion  Detection  System",  the  International  Conference  on  Future  Network  Systems  and  Security 

(FNSS  2017),  Gainesville,  Florida,  USA,  31  August  2017.  Conference  publisher:  Springer.  “Industrial 

control 

system 

(ics) 

cyberattack 

datasets, 

http://www.ece.uah.edu/~thm0009/icsdatasets/ 

PowerSystem_Dataset_README.pdf  

[42]   Steele, B.; Kholidy, H.A. 5G Networks Security: Attack Detection Using the J48 and the Random Forest 

Tree  Classifiers.  DSPACE 

and 

SDR  Open  Access  Repository.  Available 

online: 

https://soar.suny.edu/handle/20.500.12648/1604 (accessed on December 2020). 

[43]   Ferrucci,  R.;  Kholidy,  H.A.  A  Wireless  Intrusion  Detection  for  the  Next  Generation  (5G)  Networks: 

DSPACE 

and 

SOAR  Open  Access 

Repository.  May, 

2020.  Available 

online: 

https://soar.suny.edu/handle/20.500.12648/1607 (accessed on May 2020). 

[44]   Borgesen, M.L.; Kholidy, H.A. Evaluating Variant Deep Learning and Machine Learning Approaches for 

the Detection of Cyberattacks on the Next Generation 5G Systems. The SUNY Digital Repository, SUNY 

Open  Access  Repository.  Available  online:  https://dspace.sunyconnect.suny.edu/handle/1951/71327 

(accessed on December 2020). 

[45]   Hisham  A. Kholidy,  Abdelkarim Erradi,  “A Cost-Aware Model for Risk Mitigation in Cloud Computing 

Systems”,  the  12th  ACS/IEEE  International  Conference  on  Computer  Systems  and  Applications 

(AICCSA), Marrakech, Morocco, November 2015.  

[46]   Hisham A. Kholidy, Abdelkarim Erradi, “VHDRA: A Vertical and Horizontal Dataset Reduction Approach 

for  Cyber-Physical  Power-Aware  Intrusion  Detection  Systems”,  SECURITY  AND  COMMUNICATION 

NETWORKS  Journal  (ISI  IF:  1.376),  March  7,  2019.  vol.  2019,  Article  ID  6816943,  15 

pages. https://doi.org/10.1155/2019/6816943.- 

[47]   Hisham  A.  Kholidy,  Ali Tekeoglu, Stefano  Lannucci,  Shamik Sengupta, Qian Chen, Sherif  Abdelwahed, 

John  Hamilton,  “Attacks  Detection  in  SCADA  Systems  Using  an  Improved  Non-Nested  Generalized 

Exemplars  Algorithm",  the  12th  IEEE  International  Conference  on  Computer  Engineering  and  Systems 

(ICCES 2017), December 19-20, 2017. 

[48]   Hisham  A.  Kholidy,  “A  Triangular  Fuzzy  based  Multicriteria  Decision  Making  Approach  for  Assessing 

Security Risks in 5G Networks”, December 2021, Preprint={2112.13072}, arXiv. 

[49]   Hisham A. Kholidy, “State Compression and Quantitative Assessment Model for Assessing Security Risks 

in the Oil and Gas Transmission Systems”, December 2021, Preprint={2112.14137}, arXiv. 

[50]   Baker, C., & Kholidy, H. A. (2020, December). Cyber Security Advantages of Optical Communications in 

SATCOM Networks: A Master’s Project Presented to the Department of Network and Computer Security 

In Partial Fulfillment of the  Requirements for the Master of Science Degree. Department of Network and 

Computer Security, College of Engineering, SUNY Polytechnic Institute. November  2020. 

[51]   SE Medina, HA Kholidy, “An Analysis of a Signature-based Approach for an Intrusion Detection System 

in a Wireless Body Area Network (WBAN) using Data Mining Techniques”, DSPACE and SOAR Open 

Access Repository 2020. 

 
 
[52]   ML Borgesen, HA Kholidy, “Evaluating Variant Deep Learning and Machine Learning Approaches for the 

Detection  of  Cyberattacks  on  the  Next  Generation  5G  Systems”,  The  SUNY  Digital  Repository,  SUNY 

Open Access Repository, November 2020. 

[53]   DB 

Basnet, 

HA 

Kholidy, 

“An 

Empirical 

Wi-Fi 

Intrusion 

Detection 

System”,http://hdl.handle.net/1951/71333 

[54]   Srivastava, D. (2018). Analysis of Zero Knowledge Protocol in the Domain of Gaussian Integers [Master's 

thesis,  University  of  Cincinnati].  OhioLINK  Electronic  Theses  and  Dissertations  Center. 

http://rave.ohiolink.edu/etdc/view?acc_num=ucin1535380077773601  

[55]   “Zcash: Privacy-protecting digital currency”, https://z.cash/  accessed December 29, 2021. 

[56]   Qi Duan, E.  Al-Shaer and H. Jafarian, "Efficient Random  Route Mutation considering  flow and  network 

constraints," 2013 IEEE Conference on Communications and Network Security (CNS), 2013, pp. 260-268, 

doi: 10.1109/CNS.2013.6682715. 

Hesham  Abdelazim  Ismail  Mohamed  (Hisham  A.  Kholidy)  received  his  Ph.D.  in 
Computer Science in a joint Ph.D. program between the University of Pisa in Italy and the 
University of Arizona in the USA. He works as an assistant professor at the Department of 
Networks and Computer Security (NCS), College of Engineering, State University of New 
York (SUNY) Polytechnic Institute. Before that, he worked as a postdoctoral associate at 
the  University  of  Nevada,  Reno,  and  Mississippi  State  University.  During  his  Ph.D.,  he 
worked  as  an  associate  researcher  at  the  NSF  Cloud  and  Autonomic  Computing  Center, 
Electrical and Computer Engineering Dept. at the University of Arizona. He holds several 
patents  in  Cybersecurity  published  by  the  United  States  Patent  and  Trademark  Office 
(USPTO), and he published more than 50 papers on high-quality journals and conferences. He was on the Technical 
Programs  and  Organization  Committees  for  various  IEEE  and  ACM  conferences.  He  received  several  research 
awards such as the SUNY Poly dean's excellence research award, AFRL VFRA award, and  SUNY Seed Research 
Award. He  participated  as  PI,  Co-PI,  and  senior  personnel  in  several  research  projects  and  his  research  interests 
include Cybersecurity and SCADA systems security, 5G systems security, Cloud Computing and high-performance 
systems, service composition, and big data analytics. 

Mohammad Ashiqur Rahman (Member, IEEE) is an Assistant Professor with the Department 
of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Florida International University (FIU), USA. He is 
leading the Analytics for Cyber Defense (ACyD) Lab with FIU. Before joining FIU, he was 
an  Assistant  Professor  with  Tennessee  Tech  University.  He  received  the  Ph.D.  degree  in 
computing  and  information  systems  from  the  University  of  North  Carolina  at  Charlotte  in 
2015.  He  has  already  authored  or  coauthored  75  peer-reviewed  journals  and  conference 
papers.  His  research  focus  primarily  includes  artificial  intelligence-based  novel  analytics 
design and development for network and information security, control-aware resiliency, and 
security  hardening.  He  was  on  the  Technical  Programs  and  Organization  Committees  for 

various IEEE and ACM conferences.  

Experienced Technical Advisor with a demonstrated history of working in the 
Intelligence  community  and  military  industry.  Skilled  in  U.S.  Department  of 
Defense,  Intelligence  community,  Cyber  Operations,  Signals  Intelligence, 
Communications  Intelligence,  Embedded  Systems,  Systems  Engineering, 
Vulnerability  Assessment,  and  Integration.  Strong  business  development 

 
 
 
professional and senior program manager with a Master of Science (M.S.) focused in Electrical and 
Electronics Engineering from Syracuse University College of Engineering and Computer Science. 

Zahid Akhtar (Senior Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree in electronic and 
computer  engineering  from  the  University  of  Cagliari,  Italy.  He  is  currently  an 
Assistant  Professor  with  the  Department  of  Network  and  Computer  Security, 
State University of New York (SUNY) Polytechnic Institute, USA. Prior to that, 
he  was  a  Research  Assistant  Professor  with  the  University  of  Memphis,  USA, 
and  a  Postdoctoral  Fellow  with  the  INRSEMT,  University  of  Quebec,  Canada, 
the University of Udine, Italy, Bahcesehir University, Turkey, and the University 
of  Cagliari.  His  research  interests  include  the  computer  vision  and  machine  learning  with 
applications  to  cybersecurity,  biometrics,  affect  recognition,  image  and  video  processing,  and 
audiovisual multimedia quality assessment. 

 
 
 
