Towards 6G Communications: Architecture,
Challenges, and Future Directions

Purbita Mitra∗, Rouprita Bhattacharjee∗, Twinkle Chatterjee∗, Soumalya De∗, Raja Karmakar∗,
Arindam Ghosh∗, Tinku Adhikari∗
∗Department of IT, Techno International New Town, Kolkata, INDIA 700156
Emails: purbita.mitrahabra@gmail.com,roupritabhattacharjee@gmail.com,ctwinkle2812@gmail.com,
soumalya384@gmail.com,rkarmakar.tict@gmail.com,happymailingtome@gmail.com,tinku.adhikari@gmail.com

2
2
0
2

n
a
J

6
1

]
I

N
.
s
c
[

1
v
9
7
0
6
0
.
1
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—The cellular network standard is gradually stepping
towards the 6th Generation (6G). In 6G, the pioneering and
exclusive features, such as creating connectivity even in space
and under water, are attracting Governments, organizations
and researchers to spend time, money, effort extensively in
this area. In the direction of intelligent network management
and distributed secured systems, Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) and
blockchain are going to form the backbone of 6G, respectively.
However, there is a need for the study of the 6g architecture
and technology, such that researchers can identify the scopes of
improvement in 6G. Therefore, in this survey, we discuss the
primary requirements of 6G along with its overall architecture
and technological aspects. We also highlight crucial challenges
and future research directions in 6G networks, which can lead to
the successful practical implementation of 6G, as per the objective
of its introduction in next generation cellular networks.

Index Terms—6G; architecture; technology; challenges; future

research directions

I. INTRODUCTION

Industry and academia are now working together in the
direction of the 6th Generation (6G) cellular networks [1]–
[3]. Unlike the previous generations, 6G is expected to utilize
a wide range of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) services from the
core network to terminal devices, leading to the concept of
“connected intelligence” [4], [5], along with the optimization
of 6G networks. In the near future, we need connections
underwater and in space. We need nanosecond response time
such that the network is fast enough to download 100 hours
of Netﬂix in a second. The network should be able to
support 10 times more devices which are 100 times more
reliable [3]. 6G networks are expected to use sub-millimeter
or terahertz waves, leading to an extremely high data rate [6],
[7]. Samsung recently suggested about the incorporation of
artiﬁcial intelligence by merging AI into 6G frameworks. It
means the devices connected in the network can automatically
talk to each other and smartly manage data between them.
These modern technologies will help in constructing a stable
communication source like 6G.

When the 5th Generation (5G) cellular network was built,
it had the idea to upgrade its capacity, so 6G could use the
existing towers and frameworks as opposed to starting from the
scratch. Another important consideration must be awareness
of the damage we are causing to the planet and since we
are trying to slow down the pollution level, 6G might be

allowed to use as much energy as 5G would be using. The
rising in data trafﬁc and ever increasing number of connected
devices are the main driving forces behind the evolution of the
next generation cellular network i.e., 6G [8], [9]. Therefore,
we need an informative survey on the basic architecture and
technologies of 6G network systems. The key features of
the 6G network system are expected to be – extreme low
latency, ultra high data rates, high energy efﬁciency, enhanced
security, and ubiquitous network coverage across the globe [3].
Another prominent objective of the 6G network system is
to satisfy the needs and requirements of Internet of Things
(IoT) applications and uplift the widespread application and
usage of the latest technological trends [10]. There has been
a signiﬁcant stress on the application of distributed ledger
technology, such as blockchain, in the 6G network system as
it is capable of providing privacy and security, which are the
necessities of the digital world in the era of the Internet [11],
[12].

Objective of

this survey: In this survey, we discuss
the overall proposed architecture and technologies for 6G
networks. We expect three tiers of network to the existing
terrestrial network – air tier network, space tier network, and
underwater tier network. In the new architectural design of the
6G network, we will ﬁnd extensive use of artiﬁcial intelligence
and machine learning in designing unmanned aerial vehicles
(UAVs), ﬂying base stations, satellites, and appreciably more
advanced forms of technologies. We also present the chal-
lenges in the design and deployment of 6g networks. Based
on the overview of architecture and technologies of 6G, we
also discuss future research scopes in 6G, which can help
practically implement the proposed 6G network, leading to
the intelligent network management with more security and
data rates compared to the existing cellular networks. Conse-
quently, 6G will help in merging the economically challenged
population with the technologically advanced world, that leads
to the opening of a wide range of beneﬁts and possibilities to
ease the way of living tomorrow.

Organization of this survey: This survey is organized
as follows. Section II discusses the overall architecture of
6G. Section III describes the technologies in 6G networks.
The research challenges of 6G are presented in Section IV,
and Section V highlights the future research scopes in 6G
networks. Finally, VI concludes the survey.

 
 
 
 
 
 
satellites are at an altitude of 35,786km which leads to signal
transmission delay as the nodes are at huge distances from
each other. This raises a need for non-geostationary satellite or-
bits (non-GSO) which is expected to provide high-bit rates and
low latency Internet connectivity throughout the globe [20].
Since the deployment of NGSO satellites will still take a lot of
time, LEO satellites can be opted as a possible solution. LEO
satellite network with radio frequency and laser co-routing
mechanism will provide lower latency communications, where
communication distances are above 3000km [5], [21].

2) Air Network Tier: The air network can be broadly
divided into two categories- Low Altitude Platform (LAP)
and High Altitude Platform (HAP). The LAP operates within
an altitude of a few kilometres and the HAP generally op-
erates in the stratosphere. The HAP has longer endurance
and wider coverage capabilities but the HAP overlaps with
LEO satellite networks [5], [22]. On the other hand, LAP
uses low frequency, Millimeter-wave (mmWave) bands, and
microwaves for providing ﬂexible and reliable connectivity by
dense employment of ﬂying base stations (BSs) and UAVs.
The UAVs can act as relay nodes for long distance communica-
tions, and thus promote the integration of space and terrestrial
networks. But the most interesting and helpful characteristic
of UAVs is that it can facilitate mobile communications in
areas where adequate infrastructures are absent [23]. The
UAVs have high speed mobility, and therefore, more advanced
mobile network protocols are required for UAVs. The adaptive
hybrid communication has potential and surpasses the existing
protocols [24]. A fully integrated 6G network can be expected
to have multilayer architectures including UAV based LAPs,
LEO satellites, GEO satellites, and heterogeneous terrestrial
networks [5], [13], [19].

3) Terrestrial Network: Terrestrial networks will be a
highly dense heterogeneous network requiring the deployment
of X-haul of high capacity as a large number of small BSs need
to be deployed to prevent the path loss. Terrestrial networks
will support microwave, mmWave, low frequency, and tetra
hertz band [13].

4) Under-Sea Network: The under-sea network targets on
providing Internet facility under the seas and oceans. But it
still remains a very controversial topic whether or not it would
be a part of 6G networks. This network system involves optical
and acoustic communication, and radio frequency. But the
difﬁculty lies due to the unpredictability of the underwater
environment, challenges that are to be faced, and the risk
factors as water exhibits different propagation properties which
are different from that of aerial or terrestrial terrains. There-
fore, a lot of issues are yet to be resolved for under water 6g
networks [5], [13].

Fig. 1: Primary requirements of 6G networks

II. 6G ARCHITECTURE

In this section, we present an overview of 6G architecture.

A. Vision of 6G Architecture

6G mobile networks target ubiquitous intelligence, comput-
ing power, and high-speed wireless connectivity throughout
air, space, and sea. The vision to achieve this objective is
integrating underwater communications and satellite commu-
nication networks to provide network coverage throughout the
globe [5], [13]. There is a need for a super speedy service
in 6G mobile networks with data speed close to about 1000
Mbps [11], [14]. Some of the requirements of 6G can be
listed as – holographic communication, ultra high broadband,
multi-sense transmission, ultra-high throughput, reliability, low
latency, etc. [5], [15]. Fig. 1 shows the primary requirements
of 6G networks [16].

Probable solutions can be using smaller cell sizes and higher
frequency bands. However, smaller sizes of cells will lead to
more power consumption and high operational costs, and high
frequency bands can suffer path loss. Therefore, we have to put
a limit to decrease the size of cells and increase the frequency
bands. Fully-decoupled radio access network (FD-RAN) archi-
tecture has been proposed, where the network functionalities
are fully decoupled and will be deployed by every independent
network entity. Implementation of multi-point coordination
and centralized resource management can obtain an elastic
resource cooperation in a fully decoupled RAN. The control
base station of FD-RAN co-ordinates with decoupled uplink
and decoupled downlink in a centralized way, which has a
similar architecture as cloud-RAN [14]. 6G will use a very
wide variety of computing, networking, communications, and
many sensing technologies to offer smart applications. The key
enablers are AI, edge-intelligence, blockchain, homomorphic
encryption, network slicing, and integrated network for space,
sea, and ground [17]–[19].

B. 4-Tier Ubiquitous Coverage of 6G Networks

There are 4-tiers in the ubiquitous coverage of 6G networks,

C. New Network Protocols

as follows.

1) Space Network Tier: The space network tier will support
wireless space Internet services using densely deployed low
earth orbit (LEO), medium earth orbit MEO), and geosta-
tionary earth orbit (GEO) satellites [17]. The geostationary

The current internet protocol architecture is not applicable
for 6G due its limitations in terms of latency and throughput.
Recently, some new protocols like Quick UDP Internet Con-
nections (QUIC) have been built that have eased these issues
to a certain extent. But, unfortunately these protocols make

Fig. 2: Different technological aspects of 6G

the Internet more complicated and cannot serve as a complete
remedy [25].

D. Large Dimensional Network Architecture

The multi-connectivity technique can help in connecting
multiple access network tiers to achieve enhanced cover-
this kind of connectivity arrangement
age [26]. However,
between aerial/space, and terrestrial network tier is non-ideal,
and therefore lead to a large latency which in turn will
affect the information transfer. Also, the high mobility of BSs
makes it difﬁcult to get the channel state information for the
connectivity management. The BSs also may generate errors
in channel estimation. Another problem that can arise is the
interference among the different tiers. The possible solution
to tackle the interference of tiers can be done by setting a
schedule system where information will be shared to upgrade
user scheduling. The authors in [13] discuss the need for high-
performance algorithms for the scheduling.

III. TECHNOLOGIES IN 6G

Spectrum communication technique for 6G mainly uses the
THz band which is basically a spectrum band (0.1 THz to
10 THz) having many unique characteristics for communi-
cations. These waves have a narrow beam that secures the
communication, and the data rate is close to 100 Gbps. The
spectrum communication is also suitable for broad applications
such as high-speed wireless and space communications [5]. A
wireless transceiver chipset (data rate of 80 Gbps) is designed,
which solves the problem of low antenna-gain [5]. In 6G, the
high frequency connection reduces many problems in many
areas like cross-talks, reﬂection, etc. [5]. Fig. 2 shows different
technological aspects of 6G networks.

The usage of a robust beamforming and scanning algorithm
needs a signiﬁcant research before use it properly in 6G.
In addition, other parameters need to be investigated, which
include low-complexity, low-power hardware circuits, channel
and noise modeling, energy efﬁcient modulation schemes,
low density channel coding, ultra massive multiple-input and
multiple-output (MIMO) systems, and powerful synchroniza-
tion schemes [5]. The visible light communication using

Fig. 3: Performance enhancements with respect to cellular
technology generations

optical wireless communication is one of the most preferable
technologies in the 6G architecture [27]. In 6G,
the use
of light-emitting diodes (LEDs) can help us in the high-
speed data communication. Fig. 3 illustrates the technological
enhancements of cellular networks, that lead to the era of 6G.

A. New Communication Paradigm

In molecular communication (MC), biochemical signals
(usually small particles) create a gaseous medium to make
the communication. It is usually compared with radio com-
munications. MC signals are mainly biocompatible as they
consumes very small energy particles. It mainly wants to
interface with mobile networks and the Internet, which are
more challengeable [5]. Quantum communication (QC) is one
of the most secure forms of communications. We encode
the information in the quantum state by using photons or
quantum particles. The QC has a huge potential in long-
distance communications [5]. Therefore, both MC and QC can
be effective in 6G [28].

B. Homomorphic Encryption

In homomorphic encryption, people perform cryptographic
operations on some speciﬁc algebraic operation to get a
truthful result. We want to combine machine learning (ML)
and homomorphic encryption to perform tasks on encrypted
data and get the result in plaintext [2]. If we apply deep
learning for wireless communications in 6G, it can give us
a better result [2]. We will use ML algorithm for learning
and prediction whenever we are protecting data security in a
speciﬁc biological atmosphere. We will also use homomorphic
encryption for maintaining the privacy of the data along with
computing time costs.

C. Free-Space Optical Communication

is tough to implement

Free-space optical communication (FSO) is a visible light
communication to transform data, and it has very high level
data rates, and thus it
in rural
areas [16]. FSO mainly provides the backhaul connectivity,
and is also used for fronthaul access in rural areas [16]. In
FSO, there are mainly two challenges – control of the Doppler
effect for satellites and varying delays of user equipments
(UEs) in the area of satellite [16].

it

D. Scope of Artiﬁcial Intelligence

H. Intra-Inter Chips Length Scale

Apart from low latency and high throughput, an important
point of difference between previous networks and the new
6G networks is intelligence. Therefore, there is a promising
scope of introducing AI in the architectural framework of 6G
autonomous networks. AI can learn, predict and then make
rational decisions based on training. Hence, AI provides a
contemporary solution for the technology enhancement and
superior network performance. The features, such as network
function virtualization (NFV), software-deﬁned networking
(SDN), and network slicing (NS), will continue to be parts
of 6G networks as cloudization, slicing, softwarization, virtu-
alization, etc.

The NFV decouples the software and hardware sections
to waive off the dependency of software on hardware and
NS creates parallel network functions to achieve network de-
ployment and management on demand. The function of SDN
is to decouple the control function to achieve programmable
conﬁguration and network management. A junction of SDN,
network slicing, NFV, and AI can bring about zero-touch and
dynamic network composition. Self aggregation of different
radio technologies can be achieved with the help of AI for
liquidized networks and satisfactory demands of constantly
changing applications and services. The authors in [13] have
clearly indicated the importance of AI in the architecture of
the new 6g network as it is capable of real-time monitoring. AI
will also escalate the network utility and improve the quality
of experience. In order to promote the inclusion of AI in the
6G network design, machine learning must be the centre of
attraction [13].

E. AI-Enabled Deployment and Energy Efﬁciency

To distribute the enhanced quality of service (QS) for
smartphone users, the 3D positioning of aerial BSs is used to
assist ground stations. The energy-efﬁciency behaviour of 6G
is an important study. In the direction of the 3D positioning
and energy-efﬁcient deployment, AI can be used to make a
learning-based model. Speciﬁcally, the researchers use actor-
critic reinforcement learning for BS users [29].

F. Big Data Analytics for 6G

6G can be plugged with the use of descriptive, diagnostic,
predictive, and prescriptive analytics in the big data. The use
of AI along with big data can lead to an intelligent 6G model
handling a huge volume of data processing [4].

G. Brazil 6G Project

In Brazil, the 6G project started in 3 phases, as given in the

following. [30].

• The art in 6G networks: Here we ﬁnd the architecture,

vision, and application of the 6G research.

• The scenario of Brazil

for 6G: This phase ﬁnds the
applications which are suitable for Brazilian environment.
• The trends of technology: This application ﬁnds the main

required technology for 6G.

The optic wireless communication mainly depends on inter-
intra-chip length scale, the ability of retransmission totally de-
pends on the structure of the ability of the received signal [31].
This retransmission technique can be widely used to improve
the performance of 6G.

I. Combination of Cloud/Edge/Terminal Computing

The cloud computing has some advantages like it offers
users for using the remote infrastructure. For this purpose, the
mobile application is released with the minimal management
efforts [32]. The edge computing is basically a service based
on the location to the edge of smartphone networks and
wants to avoid the network trafﬁc [32]. There is a centralized
server which gradually increases the communication between
user-friendly devices. But we can further recognize more
possibilities using the aforementioned computing mechanisms
[32].

J. Uses of Blockchain in 6G

For the spectrum sharing, orchestration, and decentralized
computation, the application of blockchain is an important
step. By the application of blockchain [33], [34] with AI,
the relation between users and operators can be controlled in
a smart manner. The design of the main centralized access
control system and the mechanism of radio clouding are
integrated with blockchain [33]. Big data computing can create
lots of hazards in the environment, but using the application
of blockchain, we can prevent the hazards [33].

IV. CHALLENGES IN 6G

Developers and researchers must think beyond 5G now as
the adaptation of mankind to 5G will lead to new demanding
challenges. Hence, to satisfy human needs, a novel network
with a fresh vision has to be introduced. There is an urgent
need for the development beyond 5G because there is a need of
an intelligent network management with very high data rates.
In order to be able to sufﬁce the human needs of the next
era and emerging challenges, a new network with new vision
has to be introduced [8]. One of the key objectives of the 6G
network is to reach every corner of the world, irrespective
of terrain, other environmental factors and social strata of
the people. The population of unconnected people is mostly
concentrated over rural regions with low per capita income
and low literacy rates. Next, we discuss different challenging
issues in 6G.

A. Internet Connectivity and Telecommunication Infrastruc-
ture

There is a sharp disparity in terms of Internet connectivity
in urban and rural areas because the rural areas lack the
availability of required infrastructure (e.g. water, electricity,
transportation, etc.) [16]. The difﬁcult terrains that can be
encountered in rural areas make the setting up of required
infrastructure more difﬁcult due to out-of-reach terrains in
rural areas and maintenance of various equipments. Therefore,

the basic challenges in 6G, that may be encountered for setting
up the telecommunication infrastructure, can be summed up
as:

1) Insufﬁcient business due to sparse population,
2) Increased capital expenditure (CAPEX) due to deploy-

ment of base stations.

3) Little or no electricity service leading to high operational
expenditure (OPEX) for setting up diesel generators in
base stations.

4) Lesser skilled personnel leading to difﬁculty in mainte-

nance [16].

B. Security and Varieties in Connected Devices

Moreover, there is a rapid increase in the number of varieties
of connected devices due to the inclusion of IoT, low latency,
and higher throughput. Therefore, a signiﬁcant improvement
in cellular networks is required in order to cope with IoT,
and meet the ever increasing speed and other features such as
network densiﬁcation, societal automation, public safety, reli-
ability, etc. [8], [10]. Recently, blockchain can be an efﬁcient
secure information exchange technology because of its features
like decentralized architecture and elimination of central third
parties, transparency with anonymity, less processing delay,
etc. Therefore, the appropriate application of blockchain in
6G networks can be a great challenge.

C. Intelligent Resource Management and Extreme Mobility

The intelligent resource management of networks can be
challenging considering the expected enormous connectivity
demands in the telecommunication ecosystems in future mo-
bile communications. In 6G, the operations, such as decentral-
ized computation, spectrum sharing, and orchestration, need
to be compatible with a huge infrastructure [35]. There will
be an extremely high rise in the number of devices that will
be operated in future and will be connected to the Internet,
which raises the need of extremely high speed network in-
frastructure to match the demands. This makes the design and
execution of 6G network architecture very difﬁcult because of
unprecedented trafﬁc demand. Also, with the rising number of
devices, there will be a rise in the various application usages
and real-time communications are expected to emerge as a
very urgent top-priority need in 6G, leading to life-critical
communications [36]. The aforementioned challenges can be
diminished only with close-to-zero delays and a high accuracy.
The base stations should be able to handle this exchange of
data on a large scale. In addition, the synchronization of ve-
hicular networks, electricity supplies, and many other services
are needed to serve the enormous rise in the connected devices
and application usages. All these make the conﬁguration of
world-wide 6g networks a challenging task.

D. Overall Challenges

Fig. 4 shows the challenges of 6G in various directions.
Overall, few important queries that arise as challenges are as
follows.

Fig. 4: Challenges of 6G in different directions

• Trustworthiness: Although there are many security fea-
tures in 5G networks, there are requirements of a better
security, reliability, high predictability, and high resilience
of delivered functionality, which will be highly demanded
from the user-end in 6G. Network should be able to revert
back any activity of jamming, tampering or intrusion.
• Omnipresent service coverage: 6G networks are ex-
pected to provide service on land, air, water, and space,
with strong and secured network connections. Along with
these features, 6G networks are expected to meet and
tackle the ever increasing demand of high speed services.
All these expectations need 6G networks to be robust and
versatile in providing network services.

• Performance and extreme applications: 6G is expected
to process the vast amount of information, and simulta-
neously serve the high speed network with the gradually
increasing number of connected devices. The low latency,
full sensory communication, reduced power consumption,
and extended range of network availability are some of
the key features of 6G networks. Moreover, 6G will
hopefully be used in the ﬁelds of agriculture, e-health, law
enforcement, governance, transportation, entertainment,
and many daily-life applications.

• Connected intelligent systems: Artiﬁcial

intelligence
and machine learning tools will become a signiﬁcant
part of connected integrated systems. Presently,
they
might be used to replace conventional solutions like brute
force algorithms or heuristic approaches. However, as the
days pass by the development, AI and machine learning
applications in zero-touch operations, real-time analysis,
multi-connectivity setup, mobility, etc. are going to take
up larger spaces in the connected integrated 6G network
systems.

• High quality of experience: A huge number of use cases
poses varying requirements in 6G, which include extreme
mobility, cost-effectiveness, high battery lifespan, and
ultra-low latencies. To incorporate all the expected fea-
tures of the intelligent management of the high speed mo-
bility, 6G architecture has to be ﬂexible to support huge
number of online learning-based processing instances,
variety of deployments, and consequently the quality of

experience (QoE) will be signiﬁcantly increased in 6G.
• Sustainability: 6G is expected to be a big contributing
factor to fulﬁl sustainable development goals and so-
cioeconomics transformations. A signiﬁcant reduction in
carbon emissions, energy-saving wireless terminals, and
helping to streamline other industries are some of the
targets of 6G networks [8].

V. FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS IN 6G

In this section, we present future research scopes in 6G.

A. Applications of Machine Learning Algorithms

Since machine learning is an important domain of 6G, we
must explore different machine learning algorithms to examine
the impacts of them on different performance factors of 6G.
Generalising the machine learning process will not provide
satisfactory results for frequently added data in an application.
We must keep preferable federated learning on the top priority
list in machine learning applications, however they also suffer
from fairness issues [18], [37]. The transfer learning can be an
efﬁcient-approach for making the 6G system adaptable with
the wireless environment [38].

B. Scalable and Reliable Blockchain-Enabled 6G

For secure storage in various smart services like immutable
ledgers and transactions in a distributed way, we generally use
blockchain in 6G [34]. Blockchain is also used in various smart
services in health care, smart supply chain management, etc.,
where the 6G technology will have extremely low latency and
low energy consumption along with maintaining the security
perspective. We also want
to enhance the scalability and
reliability of the 6G system. Blockchain can be an efﬁcient
tool to address all the aforementioned features along with
preserving privacy concerns [12], [18].

C. Meta-Learning-Enabled 6G

We want

to experiment with speciﬁc machine learning
techniques or algorithms for 6G applications. In this case, meta
learning provides us machine learning models which learn the
metadata of a machine learning-based experiment. We want to
merge general machine learning with meta-learning, that can
lead to a smarter technology for future 6G applications and
evolution of wireless mobile technology [18].

E. Terahertz Frequencies to Boost Data Rate

We want to enhance the data rate in 6G applications, and
the high data rate is one of the key requirements in 6G. For
this purpose, we will use the frequency band above 52.6 GHz
with ultra-high rates of 100 Gbps and more [7]. We will use
the THz band to improve spectrum efﬁciency and mitigate free
space loss, molecular absorption, etc. [7], [39]. We also need
to control the energy-efﬁciency ﬁeld to make it more suitable
since integrating large numbers of antennas can increase the
signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). By applying the multiple-input
and multiple-output (MIMO) conﬁguration, we can enable
the cost-efﬁcient delivery with the high data rate in a large
area of 6G networks [40]. We also should take care of the
electromagnetic ﬁeld and bio-aware beam streaming ﬁeld as
well [39].

F. AI-based Edge Computing

The increased number of data processing cannot be handled
by the mobile computing which is still used in 5G. Therefore,
the mobile edge computing is gaining a signiﬁcant momentum,
as it can distribute the network into a cloud computing archi-
tecture. We need to reduce the latency in 6G networks, where
we can access the radio networks easily [41]. We are planning
to use more AI in the ﬁnal devices or in the whole process of
6G technology. We also need to focus on ofﬂine computing
functions by using machine learning techniques [41], such
that the resource allocation and ofﬂoading in the cloud and
edge can be performed in an intelligent way [9]. We can use
a central controller which divides the applications/dataset in
the form of mini-batches and helps allocate in the multiple
processing devices [41] in the edge or cloud. In real-time
communications, the cloudiﬁcation (or edge clouding) is an
expected technical goal of 6G connections. The use of AI and
reusable data inﬂuence may help us reach the new expected
economy scale and many other new scopes. We need to build
an online learning-based connection between different compo-
nents of 6G frameworks [42]. In agriculture and industries, 6G
can intelligently handle the production generation, and impose
secured and very fast connections between different modules.

G. Use of Localization-based on an Intelligent System (LIS)

LIS-aided mmWave systems can be used as positioning in
6G design. Here, we want to ﬁnd the optimal location, by
which we can lace the reﬂection and metasurfaces. This task
is quite challenging, its a inverse problem of channel modeling.
On the other hand, an efﬁcient-deployment of materials in LIS
needs to be explored [43].

D. Cloud-based Architecture and Technology

VI. CONCLUSION

Basically, 6G is an edge-centric and data-ﬂow based tech-
nology. The chain of network functions and services is dynam-
ically based on the optimal balance between the consumed and
available resources in the cloud network. The system should
be based on the combination of different machine learning
approaches in the cloud environment. We will also focus on the
privacy and security of the dataset used in the technology [18].

In this survey, we discuss the architecture and technology
of 6G, where new features are introduced, focusing on the
enhancement of the speed compared to the previous cellular
standards. By using 6G, we are trying to reach everywhere
like underwater, space, etc., where normally we cannot even
imagine to reach. Based on machine learning and blockchain,
6G is expected to have an intelligent network management

with a distributed nature of handling privacy and security.
We also highlight the design challenges and future research
directions in 6G networks, which can help identify the scopes
of improvements in 6G systems, such that
the successful
deployment of 6G can be possible as per the objective of the
invention of 6G.

REFERENCES

[1] M. Z. Chowdhury, M. Shahjalal, S. Ahmed, and Y. M. Jang, “6G
wireless communication systems: Applications, requirements, technolo-
gies, challenges, and research directions,” IEEE Open Journal of the
Communications Society, vol. 1, pp. 957–975, 2020.

[2] Y. Sun, J. Liu, J. Wang, Y. Cao, and N. Kato, “When Machine Learning
Meets Privacy in 6G: A Survey,” IEEE Communications Surveys &
Tutorials, 2020.

[3] W. Jiang, B. Han, M. A. Habibi, and H. D. Schotten, “The road
towards 6G: A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Open Journal of
the
Communications Society, vol. 2, pp. 334–366, 2021.

[4] K. B. Letaief, W. Chen, Y. Shi, J. Zhang, and Y.-J. A. Zhang, “The
roadmap to 6G: AI empowered wireless networks,” IEEE Communica-
tions Magazine, vol. 57, no. 8, pp. 84–90, 2019.

[5] T. Huang, W. Yang, J. Wu, J. Ma, X. Zhang, and D. Zhang, “A Survey
on Green 6G Network: Architecture and Technologies,” IEEE Access,
vol. 7, pp. 175 758–175 768, 2019.

[6] W. Hong, Z. H. Jiang, C. Yu, D. Hou, H. Wang, C. Guo, Y. Hu, L. Kuai,
Y. Yu, Z. Jiang et al., “The Role of Millimeter-Wave Technologies in
5G/6G Wireless Communications,” IEEE Journal of Microwaves, vol. 1,
no. 1, pp. 101–122, 2021.

[7] L. Yan, C. Han, and J. Yuan, “Hybrid precoding for 6G terahertz commu-
nications: Performance evaluation and open problems,” in Proceedings
of the 2020 2nd 6G wireless summit (6G SUMMIT).
IEEE, 2020, pp.
1–5.

[8] G. Wikstr¨om, J. Peisa, P. Rugeland, N. Johansson, S. Parkvall,
M. Girnyk, G. Mildh, and I. L. Da Silva, “Challenges and technologies
for 6G,” in Proceedings of the 2020 2nd 6G wireless summit (6G
SUMMIT).

IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–5.

[9] S. U. Jamil, M. A. Khan, and S. ur Rehman, “Intelligent Task Off-
Loading and Resource Allocation for 6G Smart City Environment,” in
Proceedings of the 2020 IEEE 45th Conference on Local Computer
Networks (LCN).

IEEE, 2020, pp. 441–444.
[10] J. Huang, G. Li, J. Tian, and S. Li, “Accurate interpretation of the online
learning model for 6G-enabled Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet of
Things Journal, 2021.

[11] D. Kalbande, S. Haji, R. Haji et al., “6G-Next Gen mobile wireless
communication approach,” in Proceedings of the 2019 3rd International
Conference on Electronics, Communication and Aerospace Technology
(ICECA).

IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–6.

[12] T. Nguyen, N. Tran, L. Loven, J. Partala, M.-T. Kechadi, and S. Pirt-
tikangas, “Privacy-aware blockchain innovation for 6G: Challenges and
opportunities,” in Proceedings of the 2020 2nd 6G Wireless Summit (6G
SUMMIT).

IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–5.

[13] Z. Zhang, Y. Xiao, Z. Ma, M. Xiao, Z. Ding, X. Lei, G. K. Karagiannidis,
and P. Fan, “6G wireless networks: Vision, requirements, architecture,
and key technologies,” IEEE Vehicular Technology Magazine, vol. 14,
no. 3, pp. 28–41, 2019.

[14] Q. Yu, J. Ren, H. Zhou, and W. Zhang, “A Cybertwin based Network
Architecture for 6G,” in Proceedings of the 2020 2nd 6G Wireless
Summit (6G SUMMIT).
IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–5.

[15] S. Wang, T. Sun, H. Yang, X. Duan, and L. Lu, “6G network: Towards
a distributed and autonomous system,” in Proceedings of the 2020 2nd
6G wireless summit (6G SUMMIT).

IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–5.

[16] E. Yaacoub and M.-S. Alouini, “A key 6G challenge and opportu-
nity—connecting the base of the pyramid: A survey on rural connectiv-
ity,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 108, no. 4, pp. 533–582, 2020.
[17] S. Yan, X. Cao, Z. Liu, and X. Liu, “Interference Management in 6G
Space and Terrestrial Integrated Networks: Challenges and Approaches,”
Intelligent and Converged Networks, vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 271–280, 2020.
[18] L. U. Khan, I. Yaqoob, M. Imran, Z. Han, and C. S. Hong, “6G wireless
systems: A vision, architectural elements, and future directions,” IEEE
Access, vol. 8, pp. 147 029–147 044, 2020.

[19] S. Aggarwal, N. Kumar, and S. Tanwar, “Blockchain Envisioned UAV
Communication Using 6G Networks: Open issues, Use Cases, and
Future Directions,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 2020.

[20] X. Fang, T. Wei, W. Feng, H. Wei, Y. Chen, N. Ge, and C.-X. Wang, “5G
Embraces Satellites for 6G Ubiquitous IoT: Basic Models for Integrated
Satellite Terrestrial Networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.03182, 2020.
[21] D. Zhou, K. Li, C. Wang, W. Wu, and Y. Zhang, “Design and Imple-
mentation of Low-Latency Router for Space Network,” in Proceedings
of the 2019 IEEE 4th International Conference on Cloud Computing
and Big Data Analysis (ICCCBDA).

IEEE, 2019, pp. 454–459.

[22] Y. Zeng, R. Zhang, and T. J. Lim, “Wireless communications with
unmanned aerial vehicles: Opportunities and challenges,” IEEE Com-
munications Magazine, vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 36–42, 2016.

[23] L. Gupta, R. Jain, and G. Vaszkun, “Survey of important issues in UAV
communication networks,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials,
vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1123–1152, 2015.

[24] Z. Zheng, A. K. Sangaiah, and T. Wang, “Adaptive communication
protocols in ﬂying ad hoc network,” IEEE Communications Magazine,
vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 136–142, 2018.

[25] H. Zhang, W. Quan, H.-c. Chao, and C. Qiao, “Smart identiﬁer network:
A collaborative architecture for the future internet,” IEEE network,
vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 46–51, 2016.

[26] S. J. Nawaz, S. K. Sharma, B. Mansoor, M. N. Patwary, and N. M. Khan,
“Non-coherent and backscatter communications: Enabling ultra-massive
connectivity in 6G wireless networks,” IEEE Access, 2021.

[27] M. Katz and I. Ahmed, “Opportunities and challenges for visible light
communications in 6G,” in Proceedings of the 2020 2nd 6G wireless
summit (6G SUMMIT).
IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–5.

[28] S. J. Nawaz, S. K. Sharma, S. Wyne, M. N. Patwary, and M. Asaduz-
zaman, “Quantum machine learning for 6G communication networks:
State-of-the-art and vision for the future,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp.
46 317–46 350, 2019.

[29] M. Elsayed and M. Erol-Kantarci, “AI-enabled future wireless networks:
Challenges, opportunities, and open issues,” IEEE Vehicular Technology
Magazine, vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 70–77, 2019.

[30] J. M. C. Brito, L. L. Mendes, and J. G. S. Gontijo, “Brazil 6G project-
an approach to build a national-wise framework for 6G networks,” in
Proceedings of the 2020 2nd 6G Wireless Summit (6G SUMMIT). IEEE,
2020, pp. 1–5.

[31] A. Alves, M. Melo, J. Siqueira, F. Zanella, J. R. Mej´ıa-Salazar, and C. S.
Arismar, “Plasmonic Nanoantennas for 6G Intra/Inter-Chip Optical-
Wireless Communications,” in Proceedings of the 2020 2nd 6G Wireless
Summit (6G SUMMIT).
IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–4.

[32] J. Zhu, M. Zhao, S. Zhang, and W. Zhou, “Exploring the road to 6G:
ABC-foundation for intelligent mobile networks,” China Communica-
tions, vol. 17, no. 6, pp. 51–67, 2020.

[33] T. Hewa, G. G¨ur, A. Kalla, M. Ylianttila, A. Bracken, and M. Liyanage,
“The role of blockchain in 6G: challenges, opportunities and research
directions,” in Proceedings of the 2020 2nd 6G Wireless Summit (6G
SUMMIT).

IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–5.

[34] T. Maksymyuk, J. Gazda, M. Volosin, G. Bugar, D. Horvath, M. Kly-
mash, and M. Dohler, “Blockchain-Empowered Framework for Decen-
tralized Network Management in 6G,” IEEE Communications Magazine,
vol. 58, no. 9, pp. 86–92, 2020.

[35] K. Zhang, Y. Zhu, S. Maharjan, and Y. Zhang, “Edge intelligence and
blockchain empowered 5G beyond for the industrial Internet of Things,”
IEEE network, vol. 33, no. 5, pp. 12–19, 2019.

[36] G. Berardinelli, P. Mogensen, and R. O. Adeogun, “6G subnetworks
for life-critical communication,” in Proceedings of the 2020 2nd 6G
Wireless Summit (6G SUMMIT).

IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–5.

[37] Y. Liu, X. Yuan, Z. Xiong, J. Kang, X. Wang, and D. Niyato, “Federated
Learning for 6G Communications: Challenges, Methods, and Future
Directions,” China Communications, vol. 17, no. 9, pp. 105–118, 2020.
[38] M. Wang, Y. Lin, Q. Tian, and G. Si, “Transfer Learning Promotes 6G
Wireless Communications: Recent Advances and Future Challenges,”
IEEE Transactions on Reliability, 2021.

[39] V. Ziegler and S. Yrjola, “6G Indicators of Value and Performance,”
in Proceedings of the 2020 2nd 6G Wireless Summit (6G SUMMIT).
IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–5.

[40] S. Chen, J. Zhang, Y. Jin, and B. Ai, “Wireless powered IoE for
6G: Massive access meets scalable cell-free massive MIMO,” China
Communications, vol. 17, no. 12, pp. 92–109, 2020.

[41] I. Tomkos, D. Klonidis, E. Pikasis, and S. Theodoridis, “Toward the 6G

network era: Opportunities and challenges,” IT Professional, vol. 22,
no. 1, pp. 34–38, 2020.

[42] P. Ahokangas, S. Yrj¨ol¨a, M. Matinmikko-Blue, V. Sepp¨anen, and
T. Koivum¨aki, “Antecedents of Future 6G Mobile Ecosystems,” in
Proceedings of the 2020 2nd 6G Wireless Summit (6G SUMMIT).
IEEE,
2020, pp. 1–5.

[43] R. Alghamdi, R. Alhadrami, D. Alhothali, H. Almorad, A. Faisal,
S. Helal, R. Shalabi, R. Asfour, N. Hammad, A. Shams et al., “Intelligent
surfaces for 6G wireless networks: A survey of optimization and
performance analysis techniques,” IEEE Access, 2020.

