“It’s A Blessing and A Curse”: Unpacking Creators’ Practices
with Non-Fungible Tokens (NFTs) and Their Communities

TANUSREE SHARMA∗, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, USA
ZHIXUAN ZHOU∗, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, USA
YUN HUANG, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, USA
YANG WANG, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, USA

NFTs (Non-Fungible Tokens) are blockchain-based cryptographic tokens to represent ownership of unique
content such as images, videos, or 3D objects. Despite NFTs’ increasing popularity and skyrocketing trading
prices, little is known about people’s perceptions of and experiences with NFTs. In this work, we focus on NFT
creators and present results of an exploratory qualitative study in which we interviewed 15 NFT creators from
nine different countries. Our participants had nuanced feelings about NFTs and their communities. We found
that most of our participants were enthusiastic about the underlying technologies and how they empower
individuals to express their creativity and pursue new business models of content creation. Our participants
also gave kudos to the NFT communities that have supported them to learn, collaborate, and grow in their
NFT endeavors. However, these positivities were juxtaposed by their accounts of the many challenges that

*The first two authors contribute equally to this paper.
Authors’ addresses: Tanusree Sharma∗, tsharma6@illinois.edu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign,
USA; Zhixuan Zhou∗, zz78@illinois.edu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, USA; Yun Huang,
yunhuang@illinois.edu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, USA; Yang Wang, yvw@illinois.edu,
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, USA.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires
prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
© 2022 Association for Computing Machinery.
XXXX-XXXX/2022/2-ART $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn

2
2
0
2

n
a
J

5
1

]

Y
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
3
3
2
3
1
.
1
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Fig. 1. Sample popular NFTs, e.g., CryptoPunks, Bored Ape, Meebits, Cool Cat, ZED RUN, Hashmask, and
NBA Top Shots. Some of them are worth millions of dollars, e.g., CryptoPunks (volume: 6,596 ETH). As of the
time of writing, 1 ETH is worth around $3,300 USD.

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

Sharma and Zhou, et al.

they encountered and thorny issues that the NFT ecosystem is grappling with around ownership of digital
content, low-quality NFTs, scams, possible money laundering, and regulations. We discuss how the built-in
properties (e.g., decentralization) of blockchains and NFTs might have contributed to some of these issues. We
present design implications on how to improve the NFT ecosystem (e.g., making NFTs even more accessible to
newcomers and the broader population).

CCS Concepts: • Human-centered computing → Human computer interaction (HCI); Empirical studies
in HCI .

Additional Key Words and Phrases: Non-Fungible Token, Blockchain, Cryptocurrency, Online Community

ACM Reference Format:
Tanusree Sharma∗, Zhixuan Zhou∗, Yun Huang, and Yang Wang. 2022. “It’s A Blessing and A Curse”: Unpacking
Creators’ Practices with Non-Fungible Tokens (NFTs) and Their Communities. 1, 1 (February 2022), 25 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn

1 INTRODUCTION
“Grimes sold $6 million worth of digital art as NFTs.” [1] “What is an NFT? Are NFTs just a get-rich-
quick scheme?” [2] “Will NFTs transform the art world? Are they even art? ” [3]

Non-Fungible Tokens (NFTs) are unique digital tokens that represent ownership of a particular
piece of content such as digital art work, game objects, and collectibles. NFTs replicate the properties
of physical items, such as scarcity, uniqueness and proof of ownership on a public blockchain
(e.g., Ethereum) using cryptographic mechanisms and are usually traded in online marketplaces
with cryptocurrencies [55]. A blockchain generally refers to decentralized ledger systems that are
append-only, i.e., once data has been written onto the blockchain, they cannot be altered [62]. In
the case of NFTs, once the NFT is created on a blockchain, one’s ownership of the NFT underlying
asset (e.g., an image) is public and can be viewed and verified by anyone.

Technically, an NFT can be thought of as an one-to-one mapping between a user account (i.e., a
cryptocurrency wallet address) and the NFT’s underlying asset or content which can be represented
by a distinct Uniform Resource Identifier (URI). NFTs enable the establishment of the “provenance”
of digital objects, offering information such as the original creator and owner history of a particular
digital object, and the number of copies of this object (a measure of scarcity). Typically, NFTs have
their own special traits including provable scarcity, inter-operability and indivisibility, which make
them attractive to creators, collectors and investors.

NFTs have gain lots of momentum in recent years. Early NFT projects such as CryptoKitties and
CyberPunks are images released in 2017 and have sold for millions of dollars. NFTs in the gaming
industry (i.e., trade of in-game objects) have already reached a certain level of maturity [49], and
many other industries such as music, sports and fashion are also experimenting with this emerging
technology [40, 55]. For instance, Decentraland is an online/VR game (more recently known as
an example of metaverse) for creating and trading virtual land, on which users can run their own
business, e.g., running an NFT gallery (see Fig 2). NFTs of famous sports players are getting sold for
hundreds of thousands of dollars [14]. Companies such as Adidas created their own NFTs. Music
producers (e.g., Grimes) earned millions of dollars by selling NFTs of their recordings [16].

Another typical use case of NFTs is art. A telling example is that a digital artist known as
Beeple sold a NFT of a digital drawing for a jaw-dropping price of $69 million dollars [13]. While
counterfeits have been a long-standing problem in the traditional art industry, NFT with its ability
of validating ownership and authenticity was thought as a possible solution [14]. People can create
and sell NFTs on online marketplaces, such as OpenSea and Rarible. Many believe that NFTs are
poised to transform the art world, changing not only how art is bought and sold, but also, what
kind of art people value.

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.

Unpacking Creators’ Practices with Non-Fungible Tokens (NFTs) and Their Communities

3

Fig. 2. A virtual NFT gallery in Decentraland, owned by P5. Galleries are interactive media in the game,
designed for people to sell and buy NFTs. Each user has her own avatar/character in the virtual world.

Despite the growing popularity of NFTs, extant research on this emerging phenomenon is scant,
mostly focusing on the technical aspects of blockchain-based protocols [62] and market trade
networks [49]. NFT is an inherently socio-technical system and we know little about people’s
perceptions of and experiences with NFTs. To help fill this research gap, we conducted semi-
structured interviews with 15 NFT creators from nine different countries in 2021. Specifically, we
sought to answer the following research questions:

• RQ1: Why do NFT creators create NFTs?
• RQ2: How do NFT creators engage with NFTs and their communities?
• RQ3: What challenges do NFT creators encounter?

Our results paint a rather nuanced picture of the NFT ecosystem. Most of our participants were
enthusiastic about NFTs as a revolutionary technology that democratizes content creation and
commercialization. Some even called it the “New Renaissance.” Furthermore, they felt that the NFT
communities have played an integral role in their NFT experiences, supporting them to learn about,
create, promote, and sell NFTs. However, their passion was also juxtaposed with various challenges
they have encountered (e.g., learning and using new concepts and technologies) as well as their
accounts of the “dark side” (e.g., proliferation of low-quality NFTs, scams and even possible money
laundering) that the NFT ecosystem is grappling with.

Our work makes three main contributions: (1) our study provides novel insights into how NFT
creators perceive and engage with NFTs, including their participation in the NFT communities as
well as the challenges they have encountered (e.g., minting NFTs, assessing NFT quality); (2) our
study identifies a few key issues that the NFT ecosystem faces (e.g., content ownership in practice,
and regulations); and (3) we offer concrete design implications for improving the NFT ecosystems
(e.g., making NFTs more accessible to the broader population).

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.

4

Sharma and Zhou, et al.

2 RELATED WORK
In this section, we present literature on the history of NFTs, and the underlying blockchain ecosys-
tem. We then compare the interactions and dynamics in the NFT marketplace/community to those
in the traditional art market/community.

2.1 The Rise of NFTs, and the Blockchain Ecosystem
NFTs. NFTs are digital assets that represent the ownership of objects ranging from image and audio
files, email and Twitter accounts, to art, gaming and sports collectibles [19], which are encoded into
the blockchain with smart contracts, and traded with cryptocurrency such as USDT and ETH [33].
Through NFTs, a unit of data is stored on a blockchain that certifies a digital asset to be unique
and therefore not interchangeable as fungible tokens such as Bitcoin. Unlike other digital assets
on blockchain, NFTs have unique certification of ownership, and are catching more attention for
their uniqueness and provable scarcity recently. Notably, NFTs have enabled the verification of
“provenance” of underlying assets, by validating such information as who owns a certain items,
who previously owned or created that item, as well as how many copies exist for that item [33].

Originally, NFTs were based on the Ethereum blockchain, but increasingly more blockchains
have implemented their own versions of NFTs [64]. Ethereum provides a secure environment
for executing smart contracts, which are computer programs to carry out predefined functions.
Ethereum token standards guarantee that a certain asset will behave in a specific way, and specify
how people can interact with basic functions of the asset. Several Ethereum standards support the
creation and trading of NFTs. For instance, ERC-721 [32] proposed back in 2018 is exclusively used
to create NFTs. It provides such functionalities as transferring tokens from one account to another,
getting the current token balance of an account, getting the owner of a specific token, and getting
the total supply of a token available on the network [32]. ERC-1155 [54] proposed in the same year
can also be used to create NFTs. There are also blockchain customized for NFTs, e.g., Flow [4].

NFT creators and buyers are the two main stakeholders in the market. A creator would create an
NFT by signing a transaction, including the hash of the NFT data, and sending the transaction to
the underlying smart contract. When the smart contract receives the transaction with NFT data, the
minting process begins. The minted NFT is associated with a unique identifier in the blockchain,
which is an evidence of ownership for NFT creators/owners [39]. NFT marketplaces allow users
to “bid” for NFT collectibles where buyers need to place a bid to meet the reserve price set by the
creators, outbid other buyers, and finally settle the price to win[39]. When tradings of a certain
NFT are confirmed, the NFT metadata and ownership details are added to a new block to preserve
the ownership chain. Creators can also “burn” their NFTs to completely erase art pieces from the
blockchain. The entire process is built upon the underlying blockchain which stores information
electronically in the distributed ledger.
The Underlying Blockchain. Blockchain was proposed by Satoshi Nakamoto, where a proof
of work (PoW) mechanism was used to reach a consensus on transaction data among untrusted
participants in a peer-to-peer network [35, 51] to ensure the integrity of the entire blockchain. In
addition to transaction data, each block contains a timestamp, the hash value of the previous block
[28], by which fraud can be effectively prevented, since changes of a block would immediately
change the respective hash value.

Bitcoin [50], the first application of blockchain, is a cryptocurrency where owners have full
control over the currency, and are able to transact it at their own discretion and without geographical
constraints. It excludes involvement of any centralized authorities such as governments and banks,
and is free of regulation and censorship, thus protecting anonymity of users.

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.

Unpacking Creators’ Practices with Non-Fungible Tokens (NFTs) and Their Communities

5

The spectrum of blockchain applications ranges from financial services (e.g., decentralized
exchanges, settlement of financial assets, and payment systems), Internet of Things, to public and
social services [65, 66]. NFTs are among the examples where blockchain is applied to a setting
beyond cryptocurrency [29].

There is a small but emerging body of research in HCI concerning blockchain, largely the experi-
ences, motivations and values of Bitcoin users. For example, Gao et al. indicated the misconception
of crypto non-users of being incapable of using Bitcoin, since they did not fully understand how the
protocol functions and if it satisfies properties of usual payment systems they currently use [34].
Lustig studied online communities of Bitcoin to explore users’ values and trust in the algorithmic
protocol [46], showing that users preferred to integrate human judgment to mediate algorithmic
authority for fairness. Kow et al. described the cultural affinities of early crypto adopters as a
sociocultural journey [43]. This study indicated that meaningful community building and cultural
enterprise, in addition to providing technical support, are important for early stage users [43].
History of NFT Projects. The notion of NFTs had become popular before NFT standards were
established on Ethereum [58]. Back in 2017, memes started to be traded on Ethereum. In the same
year, John Watkinson and Matt Hall created unique characters, i.e., Cryptopunks, on the Ethereum
blockchain. Each character was different, and the number of characters was limited to 10,000. The
first project using the ERC-721 NFT standard was the famous CryptoKitties, which was on every
news station, from CoinDesk to CNN. People made enormous profits by trading the virtual cats.
The years of 2018 and 2019 saw a massive growth within the NFT ecosystem. There were 6.1
million trades of 4.7 million NFTs, primarily on Ethereum and WAX blockchains, between June
23, 2017 and April 27, 2021 [49]. Hundreds of NFT projects have emerged in the past few years.
NFT marketplaces were also thriving, led by OpenSea, Rarible, Foundation, etc. Web3 wallets such
as MetaMask further made it easier for people to participate in the NFT space. Public attention
towards NFTs exploded in 2021, when the market experienced many record-breaking sales. One
such example is the digital artist known as Beeple, who sold an NFT of his work for $69 million [13].
That sale positioned him “among the top three most valuable living artists,” according to the auction
house. Another popular NFT project in 2021 was Bored Ape Yacht Club, which offered ten thousand
unique iterations of the cartoon primates for sale, each at the price of about two hundred dollars.
The initial batch of NFTs were sold in more than two million dollars, and eventually increased to
fourteen thousand dollars for each item in trading value [18]. Yet another big sale was “meetbit”
NFT collection by Larva Labs. “Meebits” is a series of 20,000 distinctive 3D avatars designed to be
used in the metaverse, which was initially priced at 2.5 ETH per item [15].
Advantages and Challenges of Blockchain and NFTs. NFT projects (e.g., games and col-
lectibles), infrastructures (e.g., crypto wallets), and NFT marketplaces (e.g., Opensea and Rarible)
are built upon the underlying blockchain. The decentralization feature of the blockchain enables
crypto applications to be tamper-resistant [31]. However, some unwanted features also come with
decentralization, e.g., lack of scalability [27], high gas fees, and lack of regulation.

Gas fees on the Ethereum blockchain is especially high, given the high volume of on-chain traffic.
On Ethereum, users who pay higher fees will have their transactions confirmed faster. The high
gas fees is one of the barriers for NFT creators to mint and trade their work. Furthermore, lack of
regulation in the blockchain has enabled malicious users to involve in crimes, e.g., money laundering,
and trading illegal items [31]. Since blockchain hides the association between a transaction and the
person who conducts it, it is hard to trace the illegal transactions.

NFTs as a new technology built on blockchain inherit some of the limitations mentioned above.
Thus it is important to examine both NFT-specific and blockchain-induced drawbacks, toward
creating a better NFT landscape.

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.

6

Sharma and Zhou, et al.

2.2 NFT Marketplaces and Communities
Market Structures, Stakeholders, and Characteristics. The NFT marketplace has some in-
trinsic similarities with traditional art exhibitions and auctions. They mainly have two parties:
creators/owner/seller and buyers. In traditional art markets, objects offered for sale are unique
pieces, the value of which is determined by their characteristics (e.g., topic, medium, and reputation
of artists), subjective non-monetary utility [36], resale value, and demand (e.g., wealth concen-
tration, equity market evolution, changes in art-collecting audience) [45]. Stakeholders interact
through different social interactions, such as visual and material conduct of bidding and buying,
during trading [37]. In contrast, NFTs are collections of art, music, games, etc., the trading of which
is supported by the underlying distributed ledger, with consistent records of transactions. NFT
tokens are unique and can have different value depending on its rarity, quality, and reputation of
creators. NFT marketplaces allow users to bid for NFT collectibles. When an NFT is sold or resold,
its metadata and ownership details are added to a new block on the blockchain, thus the ownership
history is recorded and preserved.

The main difference between the two marketplaces is that the ownership chain is not well
structured in traditional art markets and may lead to fraudulent events. Whereas NFT tokens are
created and traded on top of blockchain, the ownership of which can not be easily tampered. From
literature, we find that information on provenance, such as details about an art object’s pedigree,
is important, as it may increase people’s confidence in the authenticity of the art object and help
identify forgery [60]. How to handle the issue of forgery in the traditional art space has always
been an open problem in previous literature. NFTs provide such a feature backed by the underlying
blockchain, bridging the gap of traceability which may improve its trustworthiness.
Societal Benefits of Creative Markets. Art exhibitions provide a platform for artists around the
world, and support their careers with creative development, exhibition and publication opportunities.
For the audience, exhibitions are an environment to learn about art in an interactive manner, and
socialize with other artists and visitors [61]. Research has shown evidence of positive relationship
between the engagement in art and physical/psychological well-being of people [52]. Arts also
provide a paradigm of interaction to enhance people’s experience, and support their engagement,
learning, and alignment with community [56]. There have been attempts for virtual art exhibitions
to allow local and remote visitors to co-exist in the environment, access the interactive content,
and communicate with each other [61].

There is a similar trend in the NFT marketplace, where artists create different types of collectibles
and arts, and exhibit/sell them virtually . However, there has been a lack of research on the emerging,
virtual NFT space. We aim to bridge this research gap by understanding the benefits of NFTs for
people who engage in the NFT marketplace, with an emphasis on creators.
Motivations and Dynamics of Community Engagement. People in a group, either in the
physical world or social media space, may share similar interest in art, politics, sports, etc. Research
shows that socializing, as a vital social activity, is not necessarily task-related; people also socialize
with other individuals for emotional reasons [30]. People with similar interests tend to support
certain events together, e.g., posting and cheering for certain sports teams, using slogans and
videos [23]. Different ways can facilitate social interaction, such as image sharing, and text-based
communication [67]. Even everyday objects, augmented with technologies, can contribute to
disseminating people’s lifestyle values [25]. The circulation of values may inform us about the
alternative roles of technologies in speaking for our norms in a community environment [26]. In a
previous study on online innovation communities [53], intrinsic motivations prove to be effective
for initial participation and long term engagement . It is shown that the majority of participants
are engaged to the online innovation community for fun, and activities that challenge them. In

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.

Unpacking Creators’ Practices with Non-Fungible Tokens (NFTs) and Their Communities

7

most cases, participants’ roles are contributors and collaborators. Extrinsic motivations such as
reward also attract people who are more interested in objective values [44].

In the NFT marketplace, there is a trend of forming active communities. There are many online
communities and forums for NFT users, such as Discord channels of popular NFT projects, and
NFT trading platforms (e.g., Rarible, Foundation, Opensea). Such gathering of individuals with
a common interest provides NFT creators with an opportunity to share their accomplishments
and values in public platforms. In this work, we seek to explore people’s motivations for joining
the NFT communities, which are innovation communities for artists. We also explore the commu-
nity dynamics and interactions, toward understanding NFT practices from both individual and
community perspectives.

3 METHODOLOGY
To answer our research questions, we conducted an exploratory qualitative study, in which we
interviewed 15 NFT creators from different countries. To help get familiar with the emerging
phenomena around NFTs, especially the community dynamics, we joined various NFT channels,
forums, and communities on social platforms such as Discord, Telegram, Slack, and Twitter. Such
observation has helped us build rapport with community members, and helped us recruit partici-
pants for interviews. Each interview was conducted online (e.g., via Zoom) in 2021 and took about
45 minutes. Each participant received a $10 Amazon e-gift card. This study is IRB approved.

3.1 Participant Recruitment
Our study focused on exploring NFT creators’ perceptions, practices, and challenges. NFT creators
are people who create various forms of NFTs, such as images, videos, music, game, and 3D models.
They sell the NFTs they created in NFT marketplaces (e.g., Rarible, OpenSea), and may also purchase
and collect others’ NFTs, for instance, as a way of giving back to the NFT community.

Participant recruitment was challenging in part because NFT creators are often very busy with
their NFT work. To help reach NFT creators, we recruited using different methods: (1) posting
recruitment information on Twitter and Discord channels, (2) snowball sampling, and (3) direct
message to NFT creators who promoted their NFTs on Twitter. Prospective participants were
invited to fill out a screening survey, which asked if they had experience with creating NFTs, and
if they were 18 years or older. These were our recruitment criteria. In the end, we had a total of
15 participants. Seven participants were recruited from Twitter and Discord postings, five were
from snowball sampling, and three were from direct messages. The participation in our study was
completely voluntary, and participants were allowed to quit at any time.

3.2 Participant Demographics
Our 15 participants had diverse backgrounds. They were from many NFT communities based
on their area of expertise and interest, such as art, music, video games, and memes. However,
all of them were in the broader NFT community on Reddit [5], Discord [6], and Twitter. Our
participants were from nine different countries: United States, China, Iran, Canada, Germany,
Belarus, Switzerland, Argentina, and United Arab Emirates. Our participants also had diverse
occupations, including students, business professionals, software programmers, a tattoo artist, and
a landscape photographer. Some of them were doing NFTs full-time. Their years of experience with
NFTs ranged from less than one year to two years, at the time of the interviews. Most participants
used at least one NFT marketplace (e.g., Rarible, Opensea, Foundation) to create and promote NFTs.
However, our sample was heavily skewed in gender identities. 13 of them self-identified as male
and only two as female. While this is not ideal, this skewed distribution might be reflective of the
underlying gender disparities in the cryptocurrency space in general and the NFT communities

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.

8

Sharma and Zhou, et al.

more specifically, which recent reports seem to suggest. For instance, a recent study conducted by
Art Tactic [7] reported that 77% of capital in NFT marketplace, earned by male artists [8]. A Pew
Research report also suggests that in the US, the likelihood for a man to use cryptocurrencies is
double of that of their female counterparts [9].

Table 1 summarizes the demographics and other backgrounds of our participants.

3.3 Interview Questions
The interviews were semi-structured. Our interview protocol had three major sections that cor-
respond to the three research questions. We started by asking about their perceptions of and
experiences with NFTs, such as how they first got to know NFTs, their initial experiences, and their
motivations for creating NFTs, and their perceived pros and cons of NFTs. For instance, “How did
you first learn about NFTs? What’s your first direct experience with NFTs? Can you tell me briefly what
kinds of NFTs you are creating? (For each NFT) What is it about? Can you remember the reasons for
creating it?” We also asked them about their experience in participating in the NFT communities.
For instance, “Can you share any of your experiences that demotivate you from NFT engagement, or
participating in the forums/online communities?” All interview questions are listed in Appendix A.
The original interview script was in English. Since some participants from China did not speak
English, a native Chinese speaking co-author translated the interview script into Chinese, and
conducted the interviews in Mandarin Chinese. Other interviews were conducted in English.

3.4 Analysis
The interviews were audio recorded from the Zoom meetings upon participants’ permission. We
transcribed the recordings, and analyzed the data using a thematic analysis [59]. Two researchers
first read through the interview transcripts many times, and then proceeded to open code a small
sample of transcripts independently. They met regularly to discuss and converged on a shared
codebook before they continued to code other transcripts. Some examples codes are “self-regulated
business model,” “purchase NFTs,” “disruption of art,” and “difficulty in minting NFTs.” They then
grouped relevant codes into emerging sub-themes and then further into main themes. Some example
themes include NFTs empowers creators, mutual support in NFT communities, and challenges in
learning new concepts and technologies related to NFTs. Since this work is exploratory, following the
guidelines [48], we did not calculate inter-coder reliability. We did not learn anything significantly
new from our last 2-3 interviewees, implying a sign of theoretical saturation. In this paper, we use
participant quotes to illustrate the major themes. All quotes are anonymized.

Table 1. Basic information of study participants. For NFT creation, three major marketplaces were used. r:
Rarible, os: Opensea, tz: Tezos. Price range is given in ETH (1ETH=$3200USD at the time of writing). Note
that gender is self-identified: M indicates male, and F indicates female, na indicates data that not available.

ID
P1
P2
P3
P4
P5
P6
P7
P8
P9
P10
P11
P12
P13
P14
P15

Country
UAE
Canada
USA
Germany
USA
Argentina

Gender
M
M
M
F
M
M
M
M
F
M
M
M
USA
M Switzerland
M
Iran
Belarus
M

Role
Creator
Creator
Creator
Creator
Creator
Creator
China Creator+Collector
Creator
USA
China
Creator
China Creator+Collector
Taiwan Creator+Collector
Creator
Creator
Creator
Creator

Year(s) of exp
<1
<1
<1
<1
<1
1
<1
1
<1
<1
2
1
<1
1

Main platform(s)
Rarible
Rarible
Twitter NFT group
Rarible
Rarible, Decentraland
Opensea, Rarible
Opensea
Rarible
Own platform
Own platform, Rarible
Opensea, Foundation
Opensea, Rarible, Tezos
Foundation, Opensea, NFTB
Foundation, Rarible, Opensea
<1 Rarible, Foundation, Opensea

Total created
28(r)
27(r)
108(r)
98(r)
29(r)
205(os)
na
160
na
na
na
66(tz)
75(os)
205(os)
12(os)

Price range(ETH)
0.1-0.15
0.003-0.05
0.1-3
0.05-0.1
0.3-4
0.005-5
na
0.013-5
na
na
na
0.01-5
0.35-1.5

Specific art/media
AI tools, Illustration
3D, VR with Tiltbrush
2D, 3D art
3D ducks, 2D Linework
3D game, holographic
3D abstract porn art and tattoo
na
Piet Mondrian Vector Mash-Ups
na
na
na
Experimental 4D/AV
Luminescence, Hyperreal Landscape
0.14-2 Geometric shapes of faces, sculptures
0.09-0.5 Natural things and digital apocalypse

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.

Unpacking Creators’ Practices with Non-Fungible Tokens (NFTs) and Their Communities

9

4 FINDINGS
In this section, we present our participants’ perceptions and practices of NFTs, specifically their
motivations for creating NFTs (RQ1), their engagement with NFTs and the communities (RQ2), and
the challenges they encountered regarding NFTs (RQ3).

4.1 A Diverse Range of Motivators for NFT Creation (RQ1)
Our participants expressed various motivations for creating NFTs, such as exploring interesting
properties of NFTs (i.e., uniqueness and proof of ownership); expressing personal feelings, emotions,
pleasure and a sense of accomplishment in presenting creative artworks; leveraging new models
for art business; and being a part of an innovative movement. Below we will elaborate on these
different motivations for NFT engagement.
Exploring Interesting Properties of NFTs. Many participants (e.g., P1, P7, P8, P10) were drawn
to NFTs because of their interesting properties such as uniqueness and proof of ownership.

Uniqueness. Each NFT is non-fungible and can have its unique traits, while fungible tokens (e.g.,
Bitcoin, Ether) are all the same. The uniqueness of NFTs makes them special and distinguishable
from each other. People often associate personal identities, meanings or emotions with their NFTs,
for instance, by using them as profile pictures (a.k.a., PFPs). P7 explained:

“Fungible tokens are more for speculation, and people trade them in the same way as
stocks. But non-fungible tokens, most of them are kind of art. [...] They have some special
traits, very different from each other. If you own one of them, you have some personal
emotion for it, and would use it as an Avatar.”

Proof of Ownership. Unlike traditional art, the authenticity, ownership, and provenance of
which are challenging to verify [60], NFTs are valued for their traceability, rarity and ownership
with the help of underlying blockchain technologies. NFTs allow people to check who (or more
precisely, which wallet address) owns the underlying NFT content (e.g., image, video), because that
information is public on-chain data. The underlying NFT content is usually saved in decentralized
storage (e.g., IPFS) with a unique address. A screenshot or copy of the underlying NFT content, say
an image, would yield a different piece of content (or NFT) with a different address. Each minted1
item is encoded and recorded in the underlying public blockchain [62]. P7 contrasted the pre-NFT
and post-NFT era regarding authenticity confirmation, demonstrating the level of transparency
that NFTs brought to the art market:

“Before NFT was a thing, I would post paintings on Instagram, and offer them for sale.
99.9% of people would just say, why should I buy it? I can just copy the image and download
it for myself. There’s no real way to prove that you created it or that you’ve bought it.
Now every time it is sold, I get the percentage”

The “percentage” mentioned by P7 means that every time the NFT is (re)sold, the original creator
could earn a portion of the sale price, which again demonstrates the traceability of NFTs.
Expressing Personal Emotions. Expressing personal feelings and emotions was one of the key
motivators for NFT creators (e.g., P1, P10, P11). Some participants mentioned creating NFTs, such
as NBA Top Shot video clips to support their favorite sports teams and players. For example, P10
offered emotional support to his favored sport team by creating NFT with the players’ finest playing
moments. In his case, NFT served to convey his attachment and support to the sports team.

P11 shared another touching example. He did not have any technical background, but created

NFTs for his son as a way to keep memories of him. He noted,

1“Minting" refers to the process of tokenizing an item, and uploading it to an NFT platform such as OpenSea.

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.

10

Sharma and Zhou, et al.

“I was thinking of creating NFT because my child will be born in December. I’m thinking
of making some connections between the baby and the blockchain, and even create a trend
on the market. I think I’m fine with Photoshop and simple art, as well as uploading it to
the Ethereum blockchain. I want to do this because I want to keep some memories for him,
like funny stories and his dreams.”

This case illustrates the emotional connection between real-world events and NFTs. Some partici-
pants also mentioned sending NFTs as postcards on special occasions to extend good wishes.
Expressing Creativity. Many participants created NFTs to express their creative ideas (e.g., P2,
P4, P5, P10, P13). These participants already had artistic background such as being landscape
photographers, film maker and tattoo artists.

Creating NFTs was seen by them as a way to express themselves, as they could create/mint NFTs

out of their own ideas, rather than following clients’ requirements. P4 was such an example:

“This was a way to step out of my comfort zone of normal art a little bit, start something
new, learn and create something new. In my previous [tattoo] business, I created tattoo
designs for my clients’ ideas. But NFT are just my own ideas, and that’s pretty cool to
make something new.”

She viewed NFTs as a rich space for exploring her own artistic ideas. Similarly, P5 combined his
multiple personal interests, such as writing, blogging, and video editing into NFT creation, which
was seen by him as a way to express his talents.
Leveraging New Models for Art Business. Many participants (e.g., P9, P11, P15) pointed out
that NFTs empowered artists by providing them with a low barrier to present their artwork. P11
also added how the inclusive, supportive NFT marketplace enabled unknown and under-served
artists to thrive. Unlike the traditional art market where artists often rely on event organizers,
sponsors and vendors to exhibit and sell their art [57], the decentralized blockchain ecosystem
creates the possibility to remove intermediaries in the NFT marketplace. P13 indicated the NFT
platform as an autonomous platform which empowered artists, who could exhibit, sell and promote
their work out of their own will, and regulate the art work with the underlying smart contracts.

P3, who owned an NFT company, highlighted the convenience of the new business model for
NFT creation due to the underlying blockchain. He thought NFT allowed freelancers to automate
their workflow, with all transactions recorded by the blockchain and being easily exportable, which
helped artists commercialize their art work more efficiently:

“It empowers individuals to create their own business model. Your business transactions
would always be recorded [...] benefit freelancers to automate their workflow. You don’t
have to worry about tracking receipts. They’re all stored on blockchain [...]in theory, if you
use it right, if you trust the platform you work with, you would have unlimited control.”

The COVID-19 pandemic has also forced many artists to explore alternative business models
because the lock-down policy shuts down their offline business. For instance, P13 was the inventor
of the famous hyper-real landscape photography, and used to earn money through workshops and
tutorials. The pandemic ceased his offline work, and he had to turn to the NFT market for a living:

“The events I used to attend for a living were almost not possible during the pandemic. So
I lost almost 80% of my income because of that. [...] I built a team with 2 guys. Now I try
to sell as much NFT as possible in my spare time to earn enough money to pay my bills.”

P13 also created and donated NFTs to non-profit organizations, e.g., one that helps stray dogs.

We also noticed some participants with limited entrepreneurial/business/art opportunities started
their careers in NFTs. For example, P4 was a female tattoo artist in Berlin who never got a chance

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.

Unpacking Creators’ Practices with Non-Fungible Tokens (NFTs) and Their Communities

11

to exhibit her artworks in physical exhibitions and who had to shut down business during the
pandemic. She said,

“I never sell arts in the gallery in real life. I entered this NFT space three months ago and
no one ever know me or see me [...] Now I have 3k followers in Twitter and my NFTs get
noticed.”

The NFT space has made art work more accessible to her. Through her hard work and the help and
promotion from the NFT community, her NFTs were gaining momentum.
Being A Part of “The New Renaissance”. Many participants (e.g., P1, P3, P11, P12, P13) con-
sidered blockchain and NFTs revolutionary and they wanted to be a part of the movement. They
called NFTs the new Renaissance for artists. P3 explained:

“Almost everyone that I’ve interacted with believes this [NFT] to be one of the most
important technologies and advancements in our lifetime. A lot of people are calling it the
new Renaissance for artists[...]. A lot of new inspiration and new art is coming out, and
people are very willing to collaborate in network, across countries, across the world.”

P3 also noted the collaborative nature of NFT communities, which we will dive deeper in the
next section on their actual engagements with NFTs and their communities. It is also important to
note that the empowerment of content creators by the NFT and underlying blockchain technologies
could be exploited and misused. As we will see in Section 4.3, our participants noted that the NFT
space is also fraught with low-quality NFTs, scams and even the possibility of money laundering.

4.2 Staged Engagement with NFTs and Their Communities (RQ2)
In this section, we present our participants’ actual practices with NFTs, including how they first
learned about NFTs, how they created NFTs, and how they participated in the NFT communities.
We highlight the staged engagement with NFTs, elaborating on different practices of novice and
experienced NFT creators.
First learning about NFTs. Our participants first learned about NFTs from different sources, such
as family members, friends, and news media. For instance, P4’s brother introduced NFTs to her as a
way of selling pictures during the pandemic lockdown when her shop was closed:

“Before I started with NFT, I didn’t do crypto. My brother is investing in it for a longer
time. During lockdown and pandemic we had to close our shops. [...] He told me about NFT
and a new way to share, and sell the pictures to earn money. That was my entry in NFTs.”

Once she initially learned about NFTs, she started exploring and creating her own NFTs.
Creating NFTs. To create NFTs, our participants reported mostly using NFT platforms or mar-
ketplaces (e.g., OpenSea, Rarible) rather than directly writing or using smart contracts. We also
observed that as our participants learned more about NFTs and gained more experience with NFT
marketplaces, their NFT creation practices tended to evolve. Therefore, we categorize their NFT
creation practices into two different stages: (1) an early stage (i.e., when they initially joined the
NFT marketplace), and (2) a more experienced stage (i.e., after they stayed in the marketplace for a
few months). Figure 3 summarizes the NFT creation workflows and resources used for these two
stages, respectively.

Early Stage. During the early stage of NFT creation, most of our participants encountered
difficulties due to lack of knowledge of underlying blockchain concepts, especially for those who
did not have an IT background. This is similar to the traditional software development realm where
new developers face challenges due to new terminologies and concepts [20]. For P12, it took him a
while to understand the new terminologies around NFTs and the associated crypto wallet. P6 felt
the crypto world was changing fast and there was a lot to learn about cryptocurrencies in general:

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.

12

Sharma and Zhou, et al.

Fig. 3. Two stages of how our participants created NFTs: an early stage (when they initially joined the NFT
marketplace), and an experienced stage (when they stayed in the marketplace for a few months). The top
row shows the steps taken to create NFTs, whereas the bottom rows (blue and orange boxes) show the
corresponding resources used for each step, for early stage and experienced stage, respectively. During the
early stage, our participants tended to seek information and create NFTs on their own. In contrast, during the
experienced stage, they tended to discover and participate in relevant online groups and communities, and
create NFTs more collaboratively.

“When I started working with this community of artists, I didn’t understand anything
about NFT and the crypto world. It’s moving really fast, so I’ve been studying a lot since
last year. To create and mint NFT, it is important to know general cryptocurrency.”

During the early stage, our participants often relied on themselves, for instance, by searching for
resources in Google and/or YouTube with keywords such as “create NFTs.” Some participants were
not aware that Ethereum gas fees were irreversible once the minting transaction was sent to the
blockchain/validators, and thus lost their money by uploading incorrect NFTs to the marketplace.
Experienced Stage. NFT creators who have stayed in the marketplace for a few months and
became more experienced consequently discovered different online NFT community groups on
platforms such as Discord, Twitter, and Telegram. Instead of relying on themselves as in the early
stage, they tended to participate in the NFT groups and seek help there, for instance, by directly
asking NFT platform developers or other community members when they encountered bugs during
the minting, creating, and promoting process. They may even send queries on art media and tools.
For instance, P3 had difficulty in setting up a wallet and depositing cryptocurrency into it to mint
his NFT. He asked the questions on Twitter, and was directly replied by a platform representative:

“It was actually kind of difficult to set up a wallet on that blockchain, and to deposit the
cryptocurrency. I asked around and tweeted about my challenge. And then one of their
representatives directly replied to me, and was able to help me.”

Our participants mentioned Discord and Telegram groups as their primary venues for asking
questions about and discussing NFTs. In general, they relied on NFT communities and online groups
as useful resources for help, rather than searching/learning NFT resources by themselves.

Creating Advanced NFTs. In the experienced stage, our participants also learned to use ad-
vanced tools to create NFTs in various modalities, such as videos and 3D art. For instance, P1
disliked purely digital art and instead created NFTs with traditional paintings using AI tools.

“I’ve always been a fan of fine art that was made in the 1600s, 1700s, 1800s. I’m not a
huge fan of the overly digital art that’s very popular now. It looks a little bit childish.”
While P1 chose not to share the details of the AI tool he used, which he thought was “private,” he
explained the final product, a GIF file combining 10 different stages of an evolutionary landscape:

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.

Unpacking Creators’ Practices with Non-Fungible Tokens (NFTs) and Their Communities

13

“This is an evolutionary landscape, so it’s not a still image. It’s actually a video that
contains 10 different stages of an evolution, evolving throughout time. Then I mint a GIF
that represents what the painting actually looks like as a whole. This is actually a piece of
art using AI tools.”

Unlike P1, many participants (e.g., P2, P3, P4, P5, P6, P12, P15) preferred purely digital NFTs. For
instance, P4 created 3D digital duckies with different colors, textures and costumes using Blender,
a 3D modeling tool. Some preferred NFTs with practical value, and may combine them with other
cutting edge technologies. For instance, P10’s team combined NFTs with VR:

“We created immersive VR scenarios such as an office, a cinema, or a pub. I can directly
participate in some pop bar activities in VR. They’re especially useful during the pandemic
when you stay home every day. It’s different from just sitting in front of your computer,
because it requires you to interact. Not just a visual nature, it is more based on the
experience of the entire environment ad interaction.”

In the blockchain-based virtual world (a.k.a., “metaverse”), virtual items are created, minted and
traded as NFTs. P10 believed such NFTs had more value than other popular NFTs such as the NBA
Top Shot NFTs which were “merely for collection purposes.”

P2 created 3D NFTs using Tilt Brush [17], a room-scale 3D-painting virtual-reality (VR) applica-

tion as well as Photoshop and other VR software.

“I’ve known NFT for five months, but started creation only recently, using Photoshop, Tilt
Brush and VR. This is a crazy place to manipulate sketches into digital format.”

While some participants made their NFTs from scratch, others used their earlier artworks. For

example, P13, a landscape photographer, created an NFT based on the pictures he took.
Promoting NFTs. After creating/minting NFTs, the creators need to promote the NFTs. Many
participants talked about promoting NFTs via the official social media channels (e.g., Discord,
Twitter) of the projects. For instance, P1 explained the typical use of Discord:

“If you’re the owner of a personal [NFT] project, you can talk to your community via
Discord, engage with them, and answer any questions of potential buyers.”

P2 also used these Discord channels to learn about people’s interests and preferences for NFTs.

He then used these insights gained to create his next NFTs.

“I’m in 15 Discord channels. There are members who are buyers. It’s great to connect with
people, knowing what type of work they like, so I can import those in my NFT.”

In addition to social media channels, NFT projects also organized events to engage with com-
munity members. For instance, P5, an owner of an NFT company, organized online events to
promote a new NFT game his company created. They engaged with their community members in
Decentraland, and live streamed the events on Twitch [10]. He explained:

“We’re throwing an event to open our gallery in Decentraland. [...] Now we stream on
Twitch almost every day, spending hours in the game, meeting people, and then helping
them learn how to play NFT games and create content. Creating relationships with the
community and then building things together is a lot of fun.”

Such social practices of NFTs P5 mentioned were considered very helpful by our participants in
general, which we will detail next.
Collaboration and Mutual Support among NFT Creators. Many participants highlighted the
collaborative and supportive nature of the NFT communities. For instance, P6 explained:

“We’re really collaborative and always trying to make valuable pieces of art, not trying to
make products just for sale. We’re always thinking about proposing something new.”

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.

14

Sharma and Zhou, et al.

Table 2. Challenges faced by NFT creators and their current strategies to address these challenges.

Challenges

Current strategies to address the challenges

Difficulty in under-
standing new and
complex concepts &
technologies

Lack of assessment
metrics for (new) NFT
creators & NFTs

Prevalence of phish-
ing NFTs and scams

• Seek help from community members, e.g., sharing tools/resources, solving bugs
• Seek help from NFT project/platform administrators upon request
• Search answers online by themselves (e.g., Google, YouTube)

• Look at prior reputation and how well-known the creator is
• Look at the number of their social media followers (mainly Twitter accounts)
• Estimate the amount of work/time devoted to creating the NFT
• Assess aesthetics of the NFT

• Manually inspect NFTs and compare them with existing NFTs
• Report scams to NFT project administrators
• Alert/Remind other community members (mostly via Discord channels and Twit-

ter)

• (Some NFT platforms) Use a KYC-like process and/or an “invite-only” mechanism

to restrict community membership

P12 identified himself as a “community-based person,” and enjoyed resource sharing and helping
each other in the NFT community. Some participants mentioned showing support to new creators by
buying their NFTs. P4 mentioned buying NFTs of a new artist just like other community members:

“There’s part of the community that will buy your first NFTs. They just want to get you
started. Some think that you might become something really big, so they buy your first
NFTs. And others are doing it like ‘hey, let’s just get you started. Let’s get you moving, get
you excited, give you a little push.”

This kind of community support is reciprocal. For instance, P1 regularly gave back to the community
by buying others’ NFTs whenever he reached a milestone in his own NFT project:

“I set up a goal in my mind: when I reach a milestone, I’ll give back to the community by
buying an NFT. And after I sold my first NFT, I bought one back.”

Another supportive behavior among creators was following-back on Twitter to increase the fan

base for each other. P4 elaborated on this community practice:

“I entered this space three months ago. I didn’t have a Twitter profile before that. If you’re
open to just being a part of the community and growing with others, then you get a lot of
followers and friends there to support you.”

However, the NFT communities are not always risk free. Next, we will present the major chal-

lenges faced by NFT creators, including the potential risks in the NFT communities.

4.3 Challenges Encountered by NFT Creators (RQ3)
Since NFTs are a relatively new phenomenon, our participants repeatedly described the challenges
they encountered, such as the difficulty of learning new and complex NFT concepts and technologies,
the lack of metrics to assess (new) NFT creators and NFTs, and the prevalence of phishing NFTs and
scams. Table 2 summarizes these challenges, as well as how they were addressed by our participants.

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.

Unpacking Creators’ Practices with Non-Fungible Tokens (NFTs) and Their Communities

15

Coping with New and Complex Concepts and Technologies. Despite support from the com-
munity, many participants (e.g., P1, P2, P3, P4, P5, P11, P12, P15) repeatedly emphasized the chal-
lenges of learning and understanding the sophisticated concepts and terminologies of blockchain
technologies especially during the early stage. For instance, P12 found connecting a NFT account
with an existing wallet quite intimidating, especially when he encountered bugs during that process.
He mentioned watching YouTube videos, which were far from instructional for lay people.

“In my opinion, NFT is still pretty tech heavy.[..] They’re almost speaking another language
and the system is complicated. They don’t have guidelines in Rarible or other places to
follow. So I’ve watched YouTube videos [...], not instructional at all [..]. It gets a little hazy
when I’m going to put some money in it.”

P4 added that NFT marketplaces should have well-prepared lists of resources and tutorials for new
creators to learn about concepts, tools, and strategies to improve/promote their NFTs.

While the built-in append-only / irreversible property of the blockchain technologies (e.g.,
Ethereum) prevents malicious parties from tampering the data stored on chain, this feature was
foreign to inexperienced NFT creators who might have been used to systems that support undos.

“You’re preparing for an NFT, and you mint it out. Then two hours later, you realize you’ve
made a typo, [...] the cover isn’t the exact cover you wanted. It’s set in a stone, so you can’t
edit it. Let’s say you accidentally burned an NFT, then there’s no way could it be restored.”

The lack of undos costed them gas fees if they made mistakes in creating their expected NFTs.
They not only struggled with grasping technical concepts but also explaining the new (desirable)
business models enabled by NFTs. For instance, P2 had a hard time explaining NFT-related business
ideas to older-generation business partners. He elaborated:

“You’re in university, and you must be in your early 20s. The idea of owning a digital
good in a video game is a natural thing for you. But for my generation, and especially the
generation above me, it’s like a foreign language. The number one thing that comes to my
mind is making it less intimidating.”

Besides understanding the technical and business concepts about NFTs, NFT creators still face

thorny challenges such as assessing the quality of NFTs and detecting NFT scams.
Lack of Assessment Metrics for (New) NFT Creators and NFTs. As we discussed in Section 4.1,
the underlying decentralized blockchain technologies significantly lower the barriers for artists or
others to create and sell their NFTs, who follow their own business models without the presence of
intermediaries. However, this democratization of NFTs is currently coupled with a lack of standard
or agreed-upon mechanisms to assess the quality of NFT creators and NFTs, which has in part
given rise to the proliferation of low-quality NFTs. For instance, P1 shared his observation:

“They are just extremely desperate for people to see their work, and most of their art
isn’t actually that great. It’s something that you’d make within 20 minutes on Photoshop.
Unfortunately, that’s because the gates are open and they are not accountable for anything.”
P1 used the estimated amount of work time needed as a quick proxy for quality while other
mentioned proxies were prior reputation, and the number of followers on social media. Similar to
P1, several other participants (e.g., P5, P8, P13, 15) felt low-quality NFTs demotivated NFT creators
who put much work into their NFTs. For example, P13 felt discouraged by the fact that lower-quality
NFTs sold better than his work. He also pointed out that there were no mechanisms in the NFT
marketplace to assess good creators and NFTs:

“I sold, since last month, nothing. That’s a little bit demotivated if I see other guys are
selling, even if their NFTs are very poor quality.”

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.

16

Sharma and Zhou, et al.

This lack of assessment metrics is particularly challenging for new creators because they
might have just started out and do not yet have a reputation. Another related factor is that the
pseudonymity of (new) creators pose additional challenges for trust. For instance, P8 mentioned
that many NFT creators use pseudonyms, and there is a trend to use avatars as NFT creators’
profiles. He personally felt uncomfortable communicating with pseudonymous peers who asked
him for help, or sharing his NFT experience without knowing who he was talking to:

“Some new people use pen names for safety. It might be okay because the NFT platform
allows it. But the phenomenon of avatar and not knowing who is behind it makes me trust
less. Once a guy asked for help to create a piece, but I was not comfortable. You don’t know
who is behind."

While the decentralized mantra of blockchains and NFTs empower people to pursue creative
content creation and commercialization, the lack of government regulations and platform rules
also contributes to the problem of low-quality NFTs. P1 eloquently put it:

“It’s a blessing and a curse that there’s not much regulation, because very bad art can be
posted there, especially the gasless platforms have very, very, very saturated with very low
quality and very low effort NFTs, and also there are legal concerns to people that might
think that NFTs are used to launder money. And I do personally think some NFTs are being
used to launder money like the ones going through ridiculous prices.”

By “regulations” P1 was referring to NFT platform or marketplace rules. P1 did go on to say having
more regulations would also create barriers that make NFTs less accessible to the broader population.
Our participants also reported not knowing any governmental regulations around NFTs (neither
did us). We also do not know whether money laundering is actually happening via NFTs, but these
challenges of pseudonymity, trust, and regulations are even heightened when the NFT communities
are sometimes fraught with phishing NFTs and scams that tried to trick people.
Difficulties of Detecting Phishing NFTs and Scams. While our participants noted the overall
positive and supportive culture of these NFT communities, several participants (P2, P3, P6, P7,
P8, P10, P11, P15) warned that malicious users often posted phishing NFTs and scams in the
Discord and/or Twitter of mainstream NFT projects. They also noted the challenge of detecting
such phishing NFTs and scams. One type of phishing NFTs mentioned by our participants was
that malicious creators copied the content of others’ existing NFTs to create their own NFTs, and
then set a lower price than the original ones. Since buyers are often not aware of this fact, they
tend to buy NFTs from these cunning creators due to cheaper prices. The copied content was
sometimes modified with very minor changes that make them almost visually indistinguishable
from the original NFTs. While this kind of phishing NFTs do not seem to trick people to provide
their sensitive information as traditional phishing attacks, we consider them phishing because they
pretend to be the original NFTs and mislead people to buy them instead. P7 explained:

“People can copy an image, add some new features with photoshop tools, and mint it on
Opensea. Then showing people that this is the original one, but actually it’s altered by
some random people. And unfortunately, there is no way the system can identify this.”
While the NFT communities often crowdsourced and alerted their members about recent and
potential NFT scams, this practice alone falls short. Some participants (e.g., P2, P11) mentioned
they knew people who had fallen for this kind of scams and had big financial losses. Part of the
challenge is that it is not always easy to quickly detect these phishing NFTs. While there are
technical mechanisms (e.g., visual hashing) that can quickly assess the similarity of two images,
we are not aware of any existing systems that have this feature in the domain of NFTs, as this
participant suggested. However, this type of phishing NFTs should not be confused with legitimate

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.

Unpacking Creators’ Practices with Non-Fungible Tokens (NFTs) and Their Communities

17

derivative NFTs based on existing ones. For instance, Mutant Apes NFTs are derivatives of the Bored
Apes NFTs. Derivative NFTs make it very clear that they are creative alteration and continuation of
the original NFTs rather than pretending to be the original ones.

Recently, some NFT platforms started to explore ways to mitigate scam NFTs. For instance,
according to P2, Rarible allowed new users to optionally verify their Twitter accounts in the
on-boarding process, which is similar to the KYC (Know Your Customer) process in traditional
centralized platforms. However, it was not mandatory. P11 mentioned that Foundation adopted
another mechanism, i.e., invite-only, to restrict random users. P11 felt more confident in minting
NFTs on Foundation compared to other platforms. He explained:

“If you want to join, you’ve got to have someone invite you.[...] When the platform just
started, there were only several known artists. Only those invited by them could join, and
could further invite 2 or 3 other artist, like a snowball. So I feel assured about the quality
of NFTs on Foundation.”

However, the invite-only mechanism may achieve its quality control at the cost of the inclusiveness
of NFTs, which was one of the promising premises of NFTs and the underlying decentralized
blockchain technologies. Some participants were disapproved of this mechanism. For example, P5
thought it as a steep barrier for new creators to enter the NFT space. He was also concerned that
the invitation process could be biased.

5 DISCUSSION
Through the lens of our participants (who were NFT creators), our results paint a rather nuanced
picture of the NFT ecosystem, which includes but not limited to: the underlying blockchain tech-
nologies with their built-in properties (e.g., decentralized, trustless); NFT platforms or marketplaces
(e.g., OpenSea, Rariable); NFT projects (e.g., CryptoPunks, Bored Apes) and their online groups
or communities (e.g., Discord, Twitter); NFT creators, sellers and collectors; as well as malicious
actors (e.g., scammers). This is mostly a NFT creator’s perspective of the NFT space.

Our participants have expressed a mixed bag of feelings, emotions and tensions about the NFT
ecosystem, ranging from the excitement about the underlying blockchain/NFT technologies, the
empowerment of new forms of content creation and commercialization, and the appreciation for
the community support and reciprocity, to the annoyance at the proliferation of low-quality NFTs,
the contempt for scams, and the ambivalence about regulations. Below, we will try to unpack these
inter-related ideas emerged from the interviews of our participants.

5.1 Is NFT The “New Renaissance”?
Most participants were passionate about NFTs and some of them called it the “New Renaissance.”
We will start with the positive sentiments and then follow up with the negative aspects.
NFTs Support Creativity. Unlike fungible tokens such as Bitcoins, non-fungible tokens (NFTs)
are unique, i.e., any two NFTs are different. This uniqueness allows content creators to fully explore
their creativity in the digital realm. As we saw in the results section, one of the main motivations
for NFT creation is indeed creators embedding their personal identities, feelings and emotions into
their NFTs. Our participants had different backgrounds, such as a blogger, a video editor, a tattoo
artist, and a landscape photographer. In their traditional offline work, their creativity was often
constrained by their client requirements. They saw NFTs as an exciting opportunity where they
could express their own artistic ideas.
NFTs Democratize Content Creation and Commercialization. Blockchains are the technical
bedrock of NFTs. One of the key properties of blockchain technologies is decentralization, which
often means storage, computation and even governance of the blockchain systems are decentralized,

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.

18

Sharma and Zhou, et al.

i.e., there is no centralized authority to make and enforce rules [41]. Critically, this decentralization
can remove intermediaries in the marketplace. In the traditional art industry, there are often
intermediaries (e.g., exhibit organizers, auction companies, artist agencies) that artists rely on [60].
In comparison, the blockchain-enabled NFT ecosystem can remove many of these intermediaries
and empower traditional artists and others to create and commercialize their digital content in
form of NFTs. Many participants raved about how NFTs allow them to try new business models
for their creative work in a more efficient and autonomous way. For instance, it is much easier
for them to promote and sell their work as well as do the business accounting (all the transaction
records are public and on-chain). Another recurring and encouraging theme is how NFTs empower
many under-resourced artists and creative professionals, such as those who were from developing
countries, who were less known, and who were in a poor financial standing during the COVID19
pandemic. Some of our participants (e.g., a tattoo artist and a photographer) were struggling to
make a living during the pandemic due to the physical lockdown. Their venture into the NFT space
has made a huge positive difference for them.

NFTs not only revitalize traditional artists, they also lower the barriers of digital art for some
participants who did not have an artistic background before. However, NFT still has a steep learning
curve and could be further improved to make it more accessible to a broader population. We will
revisit the accessibility improvements in Section 5.3.
NFT Communities Provide Mutual Support and Help Collaborations. Our participants also
attributed part of their positive experiences with NFTs to the supportive NFT communities (e.g.,
official Discord channels of NFT projects). During the early stage of their NFT expeditions, they
tended to take a self- and independent-learning approach where they learned the primary concepts
around NFTs, such as, minting, bidding, burning as well as blockchain concepts, such as gas fees
for minting NFTs from Google search and Youtube. In comparison, during the more experienced
stage, they tended to follow a social learning approach, in which they relied on different NFT
community groups in Discord, Twitter for advanced learning by Q/A and community events. In
this stage, they played with their skills and learned to use different tools, such as Adobe Photoshop,
Tiltbrush, VR software to create 3D arts, GIF, and sketch manipulation. Our participants mentioned
NFT official project groups in Discord and Twitter as their main venue to promote their work.
Research has shown that sustainability of organizations depend on how they are designed as social
learning systems which built upon individuals’ personal experience and sense of belonging through
engagement and alignment [63]. Many participants commented on how the NFT communities
have played an important role for their NFT promotion and collaborations. Many also mentioned
showing support to new creators by buying their first NFTs.

The collaboration of NFT creation can be more transparent than that of tradition art creation,
where the contribution of each individual artists to a collective art piece often remains vague. NFTs
address this issue by using the underlying blockchain and smart contracts to record each artist’s
contribution. Some of our participants talked about their experience in collaborative NFT creation.
POAP.art[11] was one example mentioned by one participant, where people could collectively
finish an NFT painting on the virtual canvas. Online meetings were also organized by NFT platform
founders and developers to discuss how to create a better NFT ecosystem for artists. Literature
has shown that the success of an innovation community can be measured in terms of the number
of completed collaborations [47]. Collaboration can also help foster a supportive and sustainable
marketplace. Thus the NFT communities could further support collective and collaborative creation
of NFTs as an opportunity to enhance the ties among NFT artists, and create a sustainable community.
Though several participants expressed their interest in collaboration in the near future, mainstream
NFT platforms such as Opensea and Rarible did not support such a function. Future research can
explore the adoption of collaboration mechanisms in NFT marketplaces.

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.

Unpacking Creators’ Practices with Non-Fungible Tokens (NFTs) and Their Communities

19

Our participants also repeatedly mentioned common community practices, such as alerting other
community members about suspicious activities, scams, for instance. Our participants described
some of the indicators they used to identify malicious actors: a) malicious actors hardly communicate
with peers personally, b) they tend to frequently spam links of NFTs in different groups without any
specific details of their content, and c) they randomly create contents which are inconsistent in the
types of art. Previous literature on community practices explained how a collective understanding,
accountability and mutual engagement, and shared communal resources (language, routines, style,
sensibility) could build a meaningful community [63]. The kind of community alerting practices
we observed in our study is a good sign for the sustainability of the community.

Next, we will dive deeper into the problematic aspects of NFT ecosystem, such as the prevalence

of low-quality NFTs, scams and even the possibility of money laundering.

5.2 Tensions, Dilemmas and Challenges
Is NFT True Ownership of Content? One dilemma that surfaced in our study was that – does
NFT actually mean ownership of content in practice? One might argue that Web 2.0 with centralized
platforms such as YouTube has already unleashed the power of user-generated content. However,
the content creators (e.g., YouTubers) do not truly own the content nor can they determine whether
or how the content they created will be displayed on these centralized platforms. In contrast, a
common narrative of Web 3.0 where NFTs is a prime example thereof is that content creators own
their content in the decentralized blockchain world. Does NFT actually equate to true ownership
of the content in practice? Let’s first recap the technical underpinnings of NFTs.

The underlying blockchain protocols (e.g., ERC-721) provide a technical mechanism to create a
data blob (basically an NFT) [21] that associates a unique (wallet) address with a unique piece of
digital content that is usually stored in a decentralized storage (e.g., IPFS) [22]. This one-to-one
mapping record is then stored permanently and publicly on a blockchain such as Ethereum (after
the NFT minting transaction is validated and confirmed) [62]. Once this record is stored on-chain,
it cannot be altered because blokchains are append-only. This technical mechanism of NFTs are
supposed to provide the authenticity of content and the proof of ownership. But, does this really
mean ownership for all practical purposes?

Our interview results suggest that the blockchain technical mechanism alone does not solve the
ownership question completely in practice. Many participants were very vocal about their loathing
for the wide spread of low-quality NFTs and even scams. The decentralization of blockchain and
NFT technologies lower the barriers of content creation but also opens the floodgate of NFTs. NFT
technologies can support rehashing or creating derivative NFTs based on existing ones (derivative
NFTs actually allow the owner of the original NFTs to make a cut from the proceeds of the trading
of derivative NFTs). However, NFT technologies also allow the creation of what we called “phishing
NFTs” where malicious actors essentially make a copy (e.g., a screenshot) of the underlying content
of a popular (and expensive) NFT, apply negligible changes to the copied content, and then create
a new NFT and offer to sell it at a lower price than the original NFT, albeit pretending to be the
original NFT and hoping to lure the unsophisticated buyers. This issue calls into question the
intellectual property rights of digital content in NFTs. This naturally leads to our next question.
Are Regulations Needed? Regulation is another dilemma emerged from our results. Here regula-
tions cover both government regulations and NFT platform rules. Our participants were mostly
ambivalent about them. On one hand, they felt that the whole premise of NFTs and blockchains
is decentralization, which is the antithesis of centralized regulations. They believed that having
regulations would increase the barriers of entry for NFTs. On the other hand, they feared that the
lack of regulations would harbor misuses of NFTs, which lead to low-quality NFTs, scams and even
possible money laundering. Countries around the world are expediting their legislation around

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.

20

Sharma and Zhou, et al.

cryptocurrencies [38]. For instance, countries such as China have already banned crypto mining
operations and cryptocurrency trading [12]. The US government is also actively looking to regulate
the crypto industry [38]. All of these legislative efforts will have a ripple effect on NFTs.

On the NFT platform / marketplace front, some of them have already started experimenting
different types of restrictions to prevent scams or low-quality NFTs. For example, Foundation
uses an “invite-only" policy: only invited artists can mint NFTs on the platform. Such efforts are
intrinsically double-edged swords. Despite their potential effectiveness in improving NFT quality,
they are essentially creating a private club, preventing talented yet under-resourced content creators
from creating their own NFTs on the platform. This type of policies are hurdles for creating an
open-access domain for everyone, which goes against the initial vision of blockchain. Future
research is needed to strike a good balance between decentralization and NFT quality control. The
rise of decentralized autonomous organizations (DAOs) could be a promising direction as they
often codify and enforce (via voting and smart contracts) emerging community norms.
Challenges Encountered by NFT Creators. Our participants described many challenges in
creating NFTs which includes learning about blockchain and NFT functions to operate throughout
the creation process. Early stage NFT creators found the blockchain concepts, such as, gas fees,
irreversibility of blockchain intimidating, especially when they encountered bugs during the process.
They also faced technical difficulties in setting up wallets and depositing cryptocurrencies in order
to mint NFTs. The lack of resources in many NFT marketplaces made it more challenging for
newcomers to learn about those concepts. They also wasted their cryptocurrencies (for gas fees) if
they made mistakes in minting the NFTs as they expected. Early stage creators were less familiar
with the purpose and irreversible nature of gas fees. Minting NFTs actually has made the gas fees
on Ethereum prohibitively expensive from time to time in 2021. The scalability of Ethereum is a
fundamental challenge and there are many Layer 2 solutions (e.g., opportunistic or zero-knowledge
rollups) and alternative Layer 1 blockchains (e.g., Solana, Avalanche, WAX) that can reduce the gas
fees of minting NFTs. There is also a lack of standard assessment metrics for the quality of NFTs.
To assess the NFT quality, our participants used some heuristics, such as prior reputation of the
creators, and the number of social media followers. These heuristics are particularly challenging
for new creators who do not (yet) have a strong fan base and reputation. Next, we will discuss
design implications based on our findings that could help address some of these challenges.

5.3 Design Implications
Making NFTs Even More Accessible. Our study results show that the NFT ecosystem has
empowered traditional artists and others to create digital content and mint them as NFTs. However,
many participants noted that NFT has a steep learning curve especially for those who did not
have an IT or digital art background. Our study indicates that newbie NFT creators are often
intimidated by the tech-heavy NFT concepts and terminologies. The process of minting NFTs
also introduces several challenges, including creating a crypto wallet, depositing cryptocurrencies
(e.g., ETH tokens) into the wallet, linking the crypto wallet to NFT marketplaces (e.g., OpenSea),
and finally minting NFTs. As we can see, the minting process includes several elements in the
blockchain ecosystem, i.e., cryptocurrencies, crypto wallets and NFT marketplaces. The usability of
these components are under-studied in the literature. Educational materials dedicated to blockchain
concepts and instructional guides can be integrated as built-in resources in NFT marketplaces to
make it easier for non-technical users to create NFTs. Chatbots or conversational agents about
NFTs can also be built to support new users. The conversational logic of these chatbots can be
designed based on commonly asked questions in NFT forums or communities.
Assessing NFT Quality. Measuring the quality of NFT creators and NFTs has remained as an open
problem. One idea is a creator dashboard or a public creator profile page. Creators are incentivized

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.

Unpacking Creators’ Practices with Non-Fungible Tokens (NFTs) and Their Communities

21

to fill out the details, e.g., prior experience in NFTs and other content creation, and social media
accounts. If anyone provides faked or inaccurate information, the community might catch it and
basically ruin their reputation and prospect in the community. Interested buyers or collectors can
then check the creator profile before purchasing the NFTs. Our participants suggested several
metrics for assessing the quality of NFTs and NFT creators, such as the number of followers on
social media and in NFT marketplaces, record of interpersonal communication in the marketplace,
history of prior spam incidents, and NFT ownership record, which could be integrated into the
profile. With such a public profile system, NFT creators can also look for potential collaborations.
Furthermore, machine learning models could be trained, taking the information mentioned above
as the input, to classify legitimate vs. scam NFTs. Providing the model predictions to users can help
them make more informed buying decisions, and reduce the chance of falling for scams.
Supporting Community Moderation. We have already seen that low-quality NFTs and scams are
prevalent problems in the NFT ecosystem. Some NFT marketplaces have started some restrictions.
For instance, Rarible gave its users the option to go through a Twitter verification process, and
those who do so may gain more visibility for their NFTs. In addition, our participants indicated
that NFT communities would alert its members about any sketchy NFTs. However, this usually
involves mostly manual checking of the NFTs in question, and is thus hard to scale and keep up
with the rate at which new NFTs are minted.

Scalability of moderation practices can be improved by AI technologies, which have been
shown to play an active role in moderating toxic behaviors in games and online forums. Kou and
Gui presented AI-led moderation in games, where community members collectively developed
explanations of AI-led decisions, most of which were automated punishments [42]. Crossmod is a
learning-based system [24], which provides moderation recommendations for Reddit moderators
by leveraging a large corpus of previous moderator decisions. P7, who developed a private NFT
project, also mentioned automatic filtering of irrelevant NFTs using off-the-shelf AI. We believe
that one way to use AIs here is to apply existing computer vision techniques (e.g., visual hashing)
to automatically compute visual similarity of two NFTs. This assumes that there is a database of
existing NFTs, which is not far-fetched because virtually all NFTs should be public and on-chain.
NFT marketplaces can already do this because they have all the data about the NFTs on their
platforms. When visual hashing detects highly similar NFTs, it can alert community members.

5.4 Limitations and Future Work
Our study explores an emerging phenomenon and has many limitations.

First, our sample size is relatively small (N=15). However, recruiting for this population is difficult
and our participants had very diverse backgrounds and NFT experiences. They created different
types of NFTs (e.g., image, video, 3D) and participated in different NFT projects. Our study focused
on the NFT creators’ perspective, which is inevitably limited because the NFT ecosystem has other
stakeholders (e.g., collectors) who might have different opinions. However, some of our participants
were also NFT collectors and sellers in addition to creators. While there could be self-selection
bias as in virtually any user research, the diversity of our sample and their views makes it less of a
concern. As with exploratory qualitative work in general, we cannot claim that our findings are
exhaustive or representative of the overall NFT creator population. However, our rich interview
data shed light on the actual practices of some NFT creators. Future work could conduct large-scale
surveys to obtain quantitative data (e.g., the percentage of NFT creators who encountered scams).
Second, while our participants were from nine different countries, we did not have more than
five participants from a single country. Therefore, we could not really examine NFT practices fom
a cultural/national perspective, which would be a promising direction for future work.

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.

22

Sharma and Zhou, et al.

Third, our findings on community practices were from our interviewees’ self-reported data.

Future work could complement this data with an observational or ethnographic study.

Last but not least, most of our participants (13/15) were male. This is a limitation of our study,
however, it also resembles the gender disparity in the NFT community in particular [8] and the
cryptocurrency space more broadly [9]. Future studies could purposefully oversample female NFT
creators. In addition, future research could further examine the demographic distribution of NFT
users, the reasons why certain groups are less represented in the NFT space, as well as create ways
to make the NFT space more accessible to a much broader population.

6 CONCLUSION
Non-Fungible Tokens (NFTs) are making waves in the worlds of cryptocurrencies and digital art.
The innovations behind NFTs and their jaw-dropping trading prices make them a popular topic in
recent news. To explore the NFT space, we conducted an exploratory study where we interviewed
15 NFT creators from nine countries. Our study gave voice to these NFT creators’ perspective
of “the good, the bad and the ugly” of NFTs. As new NFT projects are popping up everyday, the
issues and dilemmas our participants pointed out around low-quality NFTs, scams, ownership of
content in practice, and regulations will continue to evolve. This fascinating and fast-changing NFT
ecosystem is inherently socio-technical. We believe this is a timely and rich site for future research.

REFERENCES
[1] [n.d.]. https://www.theverge.com/2021/3/1/22308075/grimes-nft-6-million-sales-nifty-gateway-warnymph.
[2] [n.d.]. https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2021/nov/06/how-nfts-non-fungible-tokens-are-shaking-up-the-

art-world.

[3] [n.d.]. https://www.washingtonpost.com/arts-entertainment/2021/12/18/nft-art-faq/.
[4] [n.d.]. https://www.onflow.org/.
[5] [n.d.]. https://www.reddit.com/r/NFT/.
[6] [n.d.]. https://discord.com/invite/rnft.
[7] [n.d.]. https://arttactic.com/.
[8] [n.d.]. https://www.coindesk.com/business/2021/11/10/at-least-77-of-nft-art-sales-going-to-male-creators-study/.
[9] [n.d.]. https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2021/11/11/16-of-americans-say-they-have-ever-invested-in-traded-

or-used-cryptocurrency/.
[10] [n.d.]. https://www.twitch.tv/.
[11] [n.d.]. https://poap.art/.
[12] [n.d.]. https://www.reuters.com/world/china/china-central-bank-vows-crackdown-cryptocurrency-trading-2021-09-

24/.

[13] [n.d.]. Beeple sold an NFT for $69 million. https://www.theverge.com/2021/3/11/22325054/beeple-christies-nft-sale-

cost-everydays-69-million.

[14] [n.d.]. The ’insane’ money in trading collectible cards. https://www.bbc.com/news/business-56413186.
[15] [n.d.]. Meebits NFTs Selling for Six Figures as Larva Labs Banks $80M. https://cryptobriefing.com/meebits-nfts-

selling-six-figures-larva-labs-banks-80m/.

[16] [n.d.]. NFTs: Are they the future of the music industry? https://www.bbc.com/news/entertainment-arts-57164487.
[17] [n.d.]. A room-scale 3D-painting virtual-reality (VR) application. https://www.tiltbrush.com/.
[18] [n.d.]. Why Bored Ape Avatars Are Taking Over Twitter. https://www.newyorker.com/culture/infinite-scroll/why-

bored-ape-avatars-are-taking-over-twitter.

[19] Brett Abarbanel and Joseph Macey. 2019. VGO, NFT, OMG! Commentary on continued developments in skins wagering.

Gaming Law Review 23, 1 (2019), 23–25.

[20] Pär J Ågerfalk, Brian Fitzgerald, Helena Holmström Olsson, and Eoin Ó Conchúir. 2008. Benefits of global software

development: the known and unknown. In International Conference on Software Process. Springer, 1–9.

[21] Mustafa Bal and Caitlin Ner. 2019. NFTracer: a Non-Fungible token tracking proof-of-concept using Hyperledger

Fabric. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.04795 (2019).

[22] Juan Benet. 2014. Ipfs-content addressed, versioned, p2p file system. arXiv preprint arXiv:1407.3561 (2014).
[23] P. Booth. 2010. Digital fandom: New media studies. Peter Lang.

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.

Unpacking Creators’ Practices with Non-Fungible Tokens (NFTs) and Their Communities

23

[24] Eshwar Chandrasekharan, Chaitrali Gandhi, Matthew Wortley Mustelier, and Eric Gilbert. 2019. Crossmod: A Cross-
Community Learning-based System to Assist Reddit Moderators. In Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer
Interaction. Article No.: 174, pp 1–30.

[25] EunJeong Cheon, Shenshen Han, and Norman Makoto Su. 2021. Jarvis in Motion: A Research Artifact for Circulating

Lifestyle Values in Public. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 5, CSCW1 (2021), 1–27.

[26] EunJeong Cheon, Stephen Tsung-Han Sher, Šelma Sabanović, and Norman Makoto Su. 2019. I Beg to Differ: Soft
Conflicts in Collaborative Design Using Design Fictions. In Proceedings of the 2019 on Designing Interactive Systems
Conference. 201–214.

[27] Shumo Chu and Sophia Wang. 2018. The Curses of Blockchain Decentralization. arXiv (2018).
[28] David LEE Kuo Chuen and Robert H Deng. 2017. Handbook of blockchain, digital finance, and inclusion: cryptocurrency,

fintech, insurtech, regulation, Chinatech, mobile security, and distributed ledger. Academic Press.

[29] Mauro Conti, E Sandeep Kumar, Chhagan Lal, and Sushmita Ruj. 2018. A survey on security and privacy issues of

bitcoin. IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials 20, 4 (2018), 3416–3452.

[30] Robin Dunbar. 1996. Grooming, gossip, and the evolution of language. Harvard University Press.
[31] Simon Dyson, William J Buchanan, and Liam Bell. 2019. The Challenges of Investigating Cryptocurrencies and

Blockchain Related Crime. arXiv (2019).

[32] William Entriken, Dieter Shirley, Jacob Evans, and Nastassia Sachs. 2018. EIP-721: ERC-721 Non-Fungible Token

Standard. Ethereum Improvement Proposals (EIPS) (2018).

[33] Tonya M Evans. 2019. Cryptokitties, cryptography, and copyright. AIPLA QJ 47 (2019), 219.
[34] Xianyi Gao, Gradeigh D Clark, and Janne Lindqvist. 2016. Of two minds, multiple addresses, and one ledger: charac-
terizing opinions, knowledge, and perceptions of Bitcoin across users and non-users. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1656–1668.

[35] Juan Garay, Aggelos Kiayias, and Nikos Leonardos. 2017. The bitcoin backbone protocol with chains of variable

difficulty. In Annual International Cryptology Conference. Springer, 291–323.

[36] William N Goetzmann, Luc Renneboog, and Christophe Spaenjers. 2011. Art and money. American Economic Review

101, 3 (2011), 222–26.

[37] C. Heath and P. Luff. 2007. Ordering competition: the interactional accomplishment of the sale of art and antiques at

auction. The British journal of sociology, 58(1), 63-85 (2007).

[38] Joshua R Hendrickson, Thomas L Hogan, and William J Luther. 2016. The political economy of bitcoin. Economic

Inquiry 54, 2 (2016), 925–939.

[39] Sangwon Hong, Yoongdoo Noh, and Chanik Park. 2019. Design of Extensible Non-Fungible Token Model in Hyperledger
Fabric. In Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Scalable and Resilient Infrastructures for Distributed Ledgers. 1–2.
[40] Elizabeth Howcroft and Ritvik Carvalho. 2021. How a 10-second video sold for $6.6 million: It’s a ’non-fungible token’.

Reuters (2021).

[41] Eaman Jahani, Peter M Krafft, Yoshihiko Suhara, Esteban Moro, and Alex Sandy Pentland. 2018. Scamcoins, s*** posters,
and the search for the next bitcoinTM: Collective sensemaking in cryptocurrency discussions. Proceedings of the ACM
on Human-Computer Interaction 2, CSCW (2018), 1–28.

[42] Yubo Kou and Xinning Gui. 2020. Mediating Community-AI Interaction through Situated Explanation: The Case of

AI-Led Moderation. In Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction. Article No.: 102, pp 1–27.

[43] Yong Ming Kow and Xianghua Ding. 2016. " Hey, I know what this is!" Cultural Affinities and Early Stage Appropriation
of the Emerging Bitcoin Technology. In Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Supporting Group Work.
213–221.

[44] Karim R Lakhani and Robert G Wolf. 2003. Why hackers do what they do: Understanding motivation and effort in

free/open source software projects. Open Source Software Projects (September 2003) (2003).

[45] Stefano Lovo and Christophe Spaenjers. 2018. A model of trading in the art market. American Economic Review 108, 3

(2018), 744–74.

[46] Caitlin Lustig and Bonnie Nardi. 2015. Algorithmic authority: The case of Bitcoin. In 2015 48th Hawaii International

Conference on System Sciences. IEEE, 743–752.

[47] Kurt Luther, Kelly Caine, Kevin Ziegler, and Amy Bruckman. 2010. Why it works (when it works) success factors in
online creative collaboration. In Proceedings of the 16th ACM international conference on Supporting group work. 1–10.
[48] Nora McDonald, Sarita Schoenebeck, and Andrea Forte. 2019. Reliability and inter-rater reliability in qualitative
research: Norms and guidelines for CSCW and HCI practice. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction
3, CSCW (2019), 1–23.

[49] Matthieu Nadini, Laura Alessandretti, Flavio Di Giacinto, Mauro Martino, Luca Maria Aiello, and Andrea Baronchelli.
2021. Mapping the NFT revolution: market trends, trade networks and visual features. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.00647
(2021).

[50] Satoshi Nakamoto. 2008. Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system. Satoshi Nakamoto Institute (2008).

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.

24

Sharma and Zhou, et al.

[51] Satoshi Nakamoto. 2019. Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system. Manubot. Tech. Rep. (2019).
[52] EAMON O’SHEA and Áine NÍ Léime. 2012. The impact of the Bealtaine arts programme on the quality of life, wellbeing

and social interaction of older people in Ireland. Ageing & Society 32, 5 (2012), 851–872.

[53] Mercedes Paulini, Mary Lou Maher, and Paul Murty. 2014. Motivating participation in online innovation communities.

International Journal of Web-Based Communities 10(1) (2014).

[54] Witek Radomski, Andrew Cooke, Philippe Castonguay, James Therien, Eric Binet, and Ronan Sandford. 2018. EIP-1155:

ERC-1155 Multi Token Standard. Ethereum Improvement Proposals (EIPS) (2018).

[55] F. Regner, N. Urbach, and A. Schweizer. 2019. NFTs in Practice — Non-Fungible Tokens as Core Components of a

Blockchain-based Event Ticketing Application. In Fortieth International Conference on Information Systems.

[56] Francesca Rizzo and Franca Garzotto. 2007. " The Fire and The Mountain" tangible and social interaction in a museum
exhibition for children. In Proceedings of the 6th international conference on Interaction design and children. 105–108.
[57] Pernille Spence and Zoe Irvine. 2020. Bob & Sink: Group Exhibition, Aesthetica Art Prize, York Art Gallery. In Aesthetica

Art Prize 2020.

[58] Andrew Steinwold. 2019. The History of Non-Fungible Tokens (NFTs). Medium (2019).
[59] Vivian Ta, Caroline Griffith, Carolynn Boatfield, Xinyu Wang, Maria Civitello, Haley Bader, Esther DeCero, and Alexia
Loggarakis. 2020. User experiences of social support from companion chatbots in everyday contexts: Thematic analysis.
Journal of medical Internet research 22, 3 (2020).

[60] Rick Van der Ploeg. 2002. In art we trust. De Economist 150, 4 (2002), 333–362.
[61] Spyros Vosinakis and Ioannis Xenakis. 2011. A virtual world installation in an art exhibition: providing a shared

interaction space for local and remote visitors. Rethinking Technology in Museums 2011 (2011).

[62] Qin Wang, Rujia Li, Qi Wang, and Shiping Chen. 2021. Non-fungible token (NFT): Overview, evaluation, opportunities

and challenges. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.07447 (2021).

[63] Etienne Wenger. 2010. Communities of practice and social learning systems: the career of a concept. In Social learning

systems and communities of practice. Springer, 179–198.

[64] Gavin Wood et al. 2014. Ethereum: A secure decentralised generalised transaction ledger. Ethereum project yellow

paper 151, 2014 (2014), 1–32.

[65] Jesse Yli-Huumo, Deokyoon Ko, Sujin Choi, Sooyong Park, and Kari Smolander. 2016. Where is current research on

blockchain technology?—a systematic review. PloS one 11, 10 (2016), e0163477.

[66] Zibin Zheng, Shaoan Xie, Hong-Ning Dai, Xiangping Chen, and Huaimin Wang. 2018. Blockchain challenges and

opportunities: A survey. International Journal of Web and Grid Services 14, 4 (2018), 352–375.

[67] A. äkelä, V. Giller, M. Tscheligi, and R. Sefelin. 2000. Joking, storytelling, artsharing, expressing affection: A field trial
of how children and their social network communicate with digital images in leisure time. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
conference on Human factors in computing systems, pp. 548-555.

APPENDIX

A INTERVIEW QUESTIONS

A.1 Perceptions of and Experiences with NFTs

(1) Could you briefly introduce yourself (personal background, experience with cryptocurrency)?
(2) How do you identify yourself while interacting with NFT (creator/collector/trader)? What

does NFT mean to you?

(3) How did you first learn about NFT? What’s your 1st direct experience with NFT?
(4) How would you explain NFT to a lay person?
(5) Are you familiar with other cryptocurrency such as Bitcoin? What do you think is the

difference between Bitcoin and NFT?

(6) Can you tell me briefly what kinds of NFT you are holding? (For each NFT) What is it about?

Can you remember the reason for buying/creating it?

(7) Have you ever created NFT? Can you remember and explain why you created NFT for the

very first time? Can you tell me more about it?

(8) Have you ever bought NFT? Can you remember and explain why you bought NFT for the

very first time? Can you tell me about the most recent NFT you bought?

(9) What is your motivation behind engaging in the NFT marketplace?

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.

Unpacking Creators’ Practices with Non-Fungible Tokens (NFTs) and Their Communities

25

(10) Is there any personal stories associated with the NFT you buy/create? Would you share one

of your personal stories associated with NFT?

(11) Do you have any concerns or challenges in your experiences with NFT?

A.2 Community Perceptions and Practices

(1) From your experience in this marketplace, can you explain how other community members

are perceiving the value of NFT?

(2) Have you observed common topics, values and norms in online forums that you want to

share with us?

(3) What do you think are the benefits of NFT marketplace and community?

A.3 Challenges, Risks, and Regulations

(1) Can you share any of your experiences that demotivate you from NFT engagement, or

participating in the forums/online communities?

(2) What do you think about regulation practices around the NFT marketplace?
(3) Can you also talk about your preferences and suggestions for regulation that you think is

necessary in the NFT marketplace?

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.

