2
2
0
2

n
a
J

3
1

]

Y
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
4
5
7
4
0
.
1
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

EVERYTHING YOU WANTED TO KNOW ABOUT SMART
AGRICULTURE

A PREPRINT

Alakananda Mitra

Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering
University of North Texas, USA
alakanandamitra@my.unt.edu

Sukrutha L. T. Vangipuram
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering
University of North Texas, USA
lakshmisukruthatirumalavangipuram@my.unt.edu

Anand K. Bapatla
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering
University of North Texas, USA
anandkumarbapatla@my.unt.edu

Venkata K. V. V. Bathalapalli
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering
University of North Texas, USA
venkatakarthikvishnuvardbathalapalli@my.unt.edu

Saraju P. Mohanty
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering
University of North Texas, USA
saraju.mohanty@unt.edu

Elias Kougianos
Dept. of Electrical Engineering
University of North Texas, USA
elias.kougianos@unt.edu

Chittaranjan Ray
Dept. of Civil and Environmental Engineering
University of Nebraska-Lincoln, USA
cray@nebraska.edu

January 14, 2022

ABSTRACT

The world population is anticipated to increase by close to 2 billion by 2050 causing a rapid escalation
of food demand. A recent projection shows that the world is lagging behind accomplishing the
“Zero Hunger” goal, in spite of some advancements. Socio-economic and well being fallout will
affect the food security. Vulnerable groups of people will suffer malnutrition. To cater to the
needs of the increasing population, the agricultural industry needs to be modernized, become smart,
and automated. Traditional agriculture can be remade to efﬁcient, sustainable, eco-friendly smart
agriculture by adopting existing technologies. In this survey paper the authors present the applications,
technological trends, available datasets, networking options, and challenges in smart agriculture. How
Agro Cyber Physical Systems are built upon the Internet-of-Agro-Things is discussed through various
application ﬁelds. Agriculture 4.0 is also discussed as a whole. We focus on the technologies, such as
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML) which support the automation, along with the
Distributed Ledger Technology (DLT) which provides data integrity and security. After an in-depth
study of different architectures, we also present a smart agriculture framework which relies on the
location of data processing. We have divided open research problems of smart agriculture as future
research work in two groups - from a technological perspective and from a networking perspective.
AI, ML, the blockchain as a DLT, and Physical Unclonable Functions (PUF) based hardware security
fall under the technology group, whereas any network related attacks, fake data injection and similar
threats fall under the network research problem group.

 
 
 
 
 
 
Everything You wanted to Know about Smart Agriculture

A PREPRINT

Keywords Smart Agriculture, Internet-of-Things (IoT), Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS), Agirculture Cyber-Physical
Systems (A-CPS), Internet-of-Agro-Things (IoAT), Physical Unclonable Function (PUF), Distributed Ledger
Technology (DLT), Blockchain

1

Introduction

The world population is anticipated to reach 9.7 billion by 2050 and could reach 11 billion by the end of this century
[1]. Given these projections, it is anticipated that worldwide food consumption will increase at a rapid pace. The needed
increase in food production to serve the future population is a tremendous task. Escalating food supply production
is only possible through sustainable and smart agriculture. A goal has been set to end hunger all over the world by
2030. But currently, we are not in a trajectory to reach that goal [2, 3]. Today 800 million people are undernourished
worldwide. Increased population plays a signiﬁcant role in this issue. More people means more food. By 2050, 70%
more food production is needed to adequately feed the world’s population [4]. A number of other factors are aggravating
this situation:

• Urbanization is changing food habits. People are consuming more animal protein. In 1997-1999 annual animal

protein per capita consumption was 36.4Kg which will increase to 45.3Kg by 2030.

• Natural resources are being depleted. Farming lands are turning into lands unsuitable for agriculture. 25% of
the current farming land is highly unsuitable and 44% is moderately unsuitable. Water scarcity has turned
40% of the farming land into barren land.

• Deforestation for urban expansion and new farmland is rapidly depleting groundwater.

• Over farming is leading to short fallow periods, lack of crop rotation, and livestock overgrazing causing soil

erosion.

• Climate change is happening rapidly. It is affecting every aspect of food cultivation. Over the past 50 years,
greenhouse gas emissions have doubled which results in unpredictable precipitation and increased occurrence
of droughts or ﬂoods.

• Food wastage is another contributing factor. 33% to 50% of the food produced is wasted across the globe.

To alleviate these issues, the food and agricultural industries welcome “Agriculture 4.0”, a green, smart revolution with
science and technology at its core. Fig.1 shows an overview of smart agriculture.

If we travel back through the industrial revolution, we see that it actually started in the Neolithic and Copper Ages
when ancient people used wood and rock as instruments and later adopted metals for farming. But Industry 1.0 started
with the use of the steam engine. Mass production and use of electrical energy initiated Industry 2.0. Industry 3.0
comes with automation and use of information technology whereas Industry 4.0 connecting the machines and nodes in
cyber physical systems through AI, Big Data (BD), the Internet of Things (IoT), robotics, etc. [5]. A parallel agricultural
revolution also happened - starting with indigenous tools in Agriculture 1.0, use of tractors and fertilizers in Agriculture
2.0, decision and monitoring systems in Agriculture 3.0 and smart farming or smart agriculture in Agriculture 4.0 [5].
Agriculture 4.0 is deﬁned by the amalgamation of various technologies, e.g. the IoT, AI, the blockchain, the use of
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAV), nanotechnology, and robotics, as shown in Fig. 2.

The rest of this survey is organized into eight sections. Section 2 presents the importance of smart agriculture. Section 3
presents the smart agriculture architecture. Internet-of-Agro-Things (IoAT) based Agriculture Cyber Physical Systems
(A-CPS) is discussed in Section 4. Various applications of smart agriculture are described in Section 5. Challenges
the industry faced are depicted in Section 6. Section 7 describes different technologies adapted in smart agriculture,
whereas Section 8 discusses available datasets in the agricultural industry. Section 9 talks about the open research
problems for the future and ﬁnally Section 10 concludes the paper. A list of acronyms used in the paper is appended at
the end of the paper.

2 Smart Agriculture and Why Do We Need It?

Traditional agriculture with manual labor and low productivity is being transformed into sustainable, intelligent, efﬁcient,
and eco-friendly agriculture with the use of technologies such as those depicted in Fig. 2. Long established, old-world
agriculture is transmuting to “smart” agriculture. New terminologies are emerging - “smart farming,” “digital farming,”
“precision farming.” “Smart Farming” is another name for “Smart Agriculture.” In “Smart Farming” the focus is
accessing data and applying those data to optimize a complex system towards increasing the quality standards and yield
of the produce along with reducing human labor.

2

Everything You wanted to Know about Smart Agriculture

A PREPRINT

Figure 1: Smart Agriculture Overview.

Figure 2: Elements of Agriculture 4.0.

3

Livestock MonitoringAutonomous  TractorRemoteSensing Crop ManagementAgriculture Marketing Smart AgricultureSmart Irrigation SmartAgricultureAgriculture4.0Artificial IntelligenceMachine LearningBlockchainUnmanned Aerial VehicleBig DataNanotechnologyIoTRoboticsEverything You wanted to Know about Smart Agriculture

A PREPRINT

“Precision Farming or Agriculture” and “Digital Farming” are mostly the predecessors of “smart agriculture” [6]. When
the goal of farming is optimization, accuracy, and customized solutions for a particular ﬁeld or crop with the help of
different technologies, it falls under the label “Precision Farming or Agriculture.” “Digital Farming” is the combination
of these two. In this paper, we will discuss “smart agriculture" which addresses “Agriculture 4.0” and its future.

Fig. 3 shows the tremendous beneﬁts of smart agriculture compared to traditional agriculture. They are:

• Water conservation.
• Optimization of the use of fertilizers and pesticides. As a result, produce are more toxin free and nutrient rich.
• Increased crop production efﬁciency.
• Reduction of operational costs.
• Opening up of unconventional farming area in cities, deserts.
• Lower greenhouse gas emissions.
• Reduced soil erosion.
• Real time data availability to farmers.

Figure 3: Smart Agriculture Beneﬁts Over Traditional Agriculture.

3 Smart Agriculture Architecture

The IoT has been recently boosting the agricultural industry. Different technologies, protocols and standards are being
employed. Depending on the application, the number of associated layers varies in the implementation architecture.
Smart agriculture architectures with three layers [7, 8, 9], four layers [10, 11], ﬁve layers [12], six layers [13], and seven
layers [14] have been presented in the literature. Different names and perspectives have been used in those architectures.
We adapt a generic architecture, where layers are deﬁned depending on the location (proximity to the occurrence) of
their processing and how are they connected. This smart agriculture architecture is shown in Fig. 4.

We depict the architecture with three main layers. These layers are connected through two connectivity layers. We
divide them in two sub layers as both connectivity layers connect different layers with different technologies. As the
connectivity layer establishes a bridge among all the layers, it is the core layer of smart agriculture architecture through
which all the layers work in sync with each other.

4

Smart Agriculture BenefitsOptimization of Fertilizers, PesticidesWater ConservationGreen House Gas & Soil Erosion ReductionReal Time Data ProvisionOperational Cost ReductionCrop Production Efficiency IncreaseEverything You wanted to Know about Smart Agriculture

A PREPRINT

Figure 4: Architecture of Smart Agriculture.

• Layer-1: Agriculture Device Layer is the base layer of the smart agriculture architecture. It comprises of
various things like sensors, laid out through the agricultural land, animal paddocks, green houses, hydroponic
systems, tagged livestock, unmanned aerial vehicles, agricultural robots, automated fencing and tractors
[15, 16].
These devices or distributed source nodes sense the physical parameters, collect data round the clock in
real-time and send them to the gateway node at next layer through the connectivity layer, which is basically a
Wireless Sensor Network (WSN). Fig. 5 shows the data sensed by different sensors/cameras in various ﬁelds of
smart agriculture. For example, in a rice crop ﬁeld, underground soil sensors and on-UAV sensors and cameras
collect the data and send them to the edge for further processing.

• Layer-2: This is the Edge Computing Layer. This comprises of a number of edge nodes. The number of
nodes depends on the speciﬁc smart agricultural system. Data collected at layer-1 are processed, ﬁltered
and encrypted here. Previously, the prognostic and solution parts were done in the next layer because of the
resource limitations at the edge layer. But with recent advancement of hardware and AI at the edge initiatives,
trained machine learning models can perform the prognostics and suggest solutions at this layer. However,
if the job is resource expensive or not time sensitive, prognostic and inference can both be done in the next
layer. For example, if a cow is outside its supposed territory in a livestock farm or needs milking, the necessary
measures are performed at the edge computing layer and the farmer is notiﬁed.
Hardware boards are being used as the edge devices [17]. To mention a few common boards and applications,
the Arduino UNO, has been used in [18] for a greenhouse monitoring and controlling system, the Raspberry
Pi for a hydroponic system [19], the ESP8266 for connecting smart agricultural components for managing
ambient factors [20], the ESP32 for smart irrigation [21], the Intel Edison for vertical agricultural warehouses
[22], and the BeagleBone for monitoring of agrochemical processes [23].

• Layer-3: The Cloud Computing Layer is the third or topmost layer of the bottom up architecture of the smart
agriculture system. This virtual layer usually resides in data centers and can be accessed from anywhere in the
world through the Internet [11]. Massive data, collected by the sensors or cameras in agricultural farms need

5

EdgeComputing LayerCloud ComputingLayerAgriculture DeviceLayersigfoxLoRaZigBeeConnectivityLayer-2ConnectivityLayer-1Everything You wanted to Know about Smart Agriculture

A PREPRINT

Figure 5: Sensor Parameters in Various Sectors of Smart Agriculture.

to be processed, analyzed and saved. Until recently, most of the analysis and decision taking were done at
the cloud along with storing the huge data sets [7, 8, 24]. The high computing power of the cloud allows it to
perform various complex tasks in reasonable time. But there are certain limitations of cloud computing which
demand new computing paradigms to emerge. Latency, high band width Internet requirements, security and
privacy of data are some of the limiting factors which restrain the time sensitive monitoring and managing of
smart agriculture.

AI, recent developments in hardware boards and 5G network have orchestrated a new paradigm, the Edge AI. It
increases the security and privacy of data as it processes data near its point of origin. So data does not travel
to the cloud or is shared at the centralized cloud. Edge AI has reduced the latency and dependence on the
Internet.

• Connectivity Layers: They bridge the various layers. Connectivity layer-1 gets the physical parameter data
from layer-1 and passes them to layer-2. Processed data from layer-2 are passed to layer-3 by Connectivity
layer -2. Various transmission range communication networks are used in this layer depending on the area to
be connected as in Fig. 6. When data is transferred from the agriculture device layer to the edge computing
layer, near range ZigBee, Wi-Fi, Z-Wave, Bluetooth, Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation (RFID), and Near Field
Communication (NFC) are commonly used, whereas for longer ranges SigFox, LoRaWan, and Narrowband
IoT (NB-IoT) are used [17]. For example, for a smaller farm in a remote village where the network bandwidth is
limited low battery consuming Z-Wave is a good choice. But for larger farms, LoRaWan is suitable for its low
energy usage and long distance transmission capability. Bluetooth low power has been used for monitoring
soil and air along with water management systems in [25], and ZigBee for managing an irrigation system in
[26]. RFID is extensively used in the smart agricultural industry [27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32]. LoRa has been used
for water management in [33].

When the processed data are sent from the edge computing layer to the cloud layer, cellular technologies
like Ground Penetrating Radar Services (GPRS), Long-Term Evolution (LTE), 3G/4G, and 5G are used. The
recent 5G technology has low latency, high reliability, large coverage areas, high data rate and new frequency
bands [9]. This can greatly assist smart agriculture to advance. GPRS has been used for irrigation in [24]. New
initiatives have started using 5G [34, 35]. The successor of the 5G network is 6G cellular technology which is
under development. It will be much faster than the existing mobile networks. Flexible decentralized models
will propel various areas like edge computing, AI, and blockchain which will advance the growth of smart
agriculture.

6

Measured Parameters at Agricultural DevicesUndergroundSensorsOn UAVSensors/Cameras Crop Soil MoistureSoil pH Soil Chemical Composition(N2, S, Ammonia)Livestock ImageEnvironmental ParametersThermal ImageRGB ImageMulti Spectral ImageLiDAR ImageAir HumidityAir TemperatureSolar RadiationWind SpeedLocationBody vitalsReproductive CycleMilking TimeFeeding TimeWearableCollarGreenhouse(GH)GH HumidityGH TemperatureGH QualityWind SpeedSoil MoistureHydroponicsRoom HumidityRoom TemperatureWater LevelWater TemperatureSoil MoistureLight IntensitySoil pH Light IntensitySoil pH PrecipitationCO2Everything You wanted to Know about Smart Agriculture

A PREPRINT

Figure 6: Various Networks for Smart Agriculture.

4

Internet of Agro-Things (IoAT) based Agricultural Cyber-Physical Systems (A-CPS)

The IoT is the network of interrelated physical things, devices, objects with unique id for connecting and sharing data
with other devices and systems through the Internet. Implementation of the IoT in physical systems gives birth to
Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS). CPS are hybrid systems of physical entities and software or computing capabilities.
It is a modern way to deﬁne an industry. Smart cities and smart villages include one or more CPS like smart health,
smart agriculture, smart energy, smart transportation, smart citizens, renewable energy, etc. A-CPS is the core of smart
agriculture. It revolutionizes the agricultural industry. As the Internet of Medical Things (IoMT) forms Healthcare
Cyber-Physical Systems (H-CPS), the IoAT forms A-CPS [6].

The IoAT is a data driven system. Constant data collection, processing, and measures are taken to make the workﬂow
highly efﬁcient. Fig. 7(a) shows such an iterative system workﬂow which allows farmers to take actions readily if any
issue is observed. The cycle consists of ﬁve stages:

• Data Collection: First, various things (“T”) or sensors connected through the Internet (“I”) collect the data at

sensor level or end level.

• Data Processing: Second, if any data processing is needed to make the data compatible to the model, it is
done in this phase at the edge level. E.g. if the sensor data is not in range or the photos taken by an UAV are
needed to be changed to gray scale or any encryption of data is needed before sending to the cloud, they are
performed here.

• Prognostic: This is mostly done in the clouds for existing technologies. The data, processed at the edge,
are analyzed here from the predeﬁned rules or models (mostly ML, Fuzzy Logic (FL), and Ariﬁcial Neural
Networks (ANN) based). This is where data is stored for future use. The edge AI initiative is transforming the
scenario.

• Solution: Once the issue is detected in the cloud platform, the solution is suggested. This stage can be done in
the cloud or at the edge. E.g. if part of the farm land is dry, this stage suggests which valves of the irrigation
system need to release what value and how long to optimally water the dry patch.

• Measures Taken: This is the ﬁnal stage of the cycle where the implementation of the solution is performed.
This is performed by the IoT device. In the previously mentioned example, the opening of the valve of the
irrigation system is performed here.

The cycle continues to serve the whole farming process optimally. Fig. 7(a) shows that when ML based tasks are
performed in the cloud and edge settings, the decision or solution is sent to the IoT device for measures taken there. But,
TinyML as-a-service is bridging the ML and embedded worlds. Instead of “outsourced” the decision to the IoT device,
the ML based task is being performed at the limited resource IoT device only. In this new era, Fig. 7(a) is changing to
Fig. 7(b).

7

NetworksConnectivity Layer-2 Connectivity  Layer-1 Long RangeShort RangeZigBeeWi-FiZ-WaveBluetoothRFIDNFCSigFoxNB-IoTLoRaWanGPRS3G/4GLTE5G6G(Under Development)Everything You wanted to Know about Smart Agriculture

A PREPRINT

(a) Before TinyML Era

(b) After TinyML Era

Figure 7: IoT Based Smart Agriculture Cycle.

5 Smart Agriculture: Applications

In this section, application areas of smart agriculture are discussed. Fig. 8 shows some application areas of smart
agriculture, e.g., crop management, smart irrigation, livestock monitoring, and pest control and Fig. 10 shows some
more applications, e.g., smart greenhouse, UAV and autonomous tractor, and hydroponic system.

5.1 Crop Management

Crop Management is the process of analyzing the economical, ecological and sociological aspects which constitute an
important part in the crop selection, cultivation and marketing.

Crop growth, water resources availability, labor, insurance and environmental factors guide cropping patterns. Ecological
factors contribute to a change in cropping patterns. For instance, in areas with depleting water resources and groundwater
tables, traditional crops like paddy cultivation, which requires abundant water resources, cannot be sustained. The
market for an agricultural product, as well as different countries, export and import policies, also affect crop selection.
Once a crop has been selected then crop cultivation is the next important aspect.

Using the IoT, farmers are equipped with the latest technology and sensors placed in-ﬁeld monitor plant growth. For
instance, ultrasonic sensors are placed in the ﬁeld to monitor the presence of pests and insects affecting plant growth.
After identifying the presence of pests, high frequency sound waves are generated to remove the pest and the farmer is
also notiﬁed of the pests’ presence for further help [37].

The ﬂowchart illustrating the concept of Smart Farming is detailed in Fig. 9.

5.2 Soil Monitoring

Soil moisture plays an important role in the overall farming process. It is responsible for photosynthesis, respiration
, transpiration and transportation of minerals during the plant growth process [38]. Soil monitoring constitutes an
important role in farm decision making. Cropping patterns depend on various factors like water availability, soil
salinity, pests, moisture, pH and humidity. These factors help in assessing soil health. Sensors on the ﬁeld monitor
soil temperature and humidity and the analyzed data are sent to the cloud. Farmers will receive an alert on a range of
factors and cropping patterns are analyzed and decided based on salinity content and soil nutrient level, humidity, and
temperature. Soil moisture is a vital aspect in plant growth process as water is an important component in photosynthesis,
regulating temperature and acting as a carrier of food and essential nutrients for the plant growth. Humidity controls
the nutrient supply and regulates the rate of transpiration for optimum plant growth. The ideal humidity for vegetable

8

IoAT Data CollectionData ProcessingPrognosticSolutionMeasuresTakenAgriculture Device LevelCloud /Edge LevelEdge LevelAgriculture Device LevelCloud /Edge LevelAgriculture Device LevelIoAT Data CollectionData ProcessingPrognosticSolutionMeasures TakenAgriculture Device LevelEdge LevelEverything You wanted to Know about Smart Agriculture

A PREPRINT

Figure 8: Applications of Smart Agriculture - Crop Management, Pest Control, Smart Irrigation, Livestock Monitoring
[36].

Figure 9: Applications of Smart Agriculture.

9

Crop ManagementLivestockRemote SensingAgriculture Supply ChainWater MonitoringSoil MonitoringpHHumiditySalinityTemperatureCrop MonitoringPestDetectionPhotosynthesisWeedDetectionDisease PredictionField MonitoringFertigationUAVWeather MonitoringSmart FarmingLocation TrackingDisease PredictionEverything You wanted to Know about Smart Agriculture

A PREPRINT

plants cultivation is 50% to 60% [39]. Soil moisture sensors placed inside the root of plants analyze soil moisture level
values to facilitate optimum utilization of water resources [40, 41].

5.3 Smart Irrigation

Smart irrigation is the process of improving the quality and quantity of yield with optimal utilization of water using
the latest technologies. It conserves water by optimally watering the plants. There are two types of irrigation systems
- weather based and soil moisture sensor based. Weather based irrigation systems receive temperature and rainfall
data from a local mini weather station and a controller regulates the irrigation. In soil moisture sensor based irrigation
systems, sensors placed inside the turf of trees, accurately determine soil moisture content. In this type of irrigation,
accurate values of humidity and air temperature along with weather monitoring and cropping pattern are required to
irrigate the ﬁeld. Data is sent to the cloud and actuators like sprinklers are activated [42]. The soil moisture sensor
values guide the irrigation schedule per unit area of farm. The micro level analysis and scheduling of irrigation and
efﬁcient actuation ensures optimum crop growth and 100% efﬁciency in water utilization [43]. Farmers can operate the
irrigation system from a smartphone based mobile application. This irrigation system is based on data from temperature,
humidity, soil moisture and ultrasonic sensors placed in the ﬁeld [44]. The smartphone based mobile application for
automatic irrigation is connected to the cloud for analysis using a user friendly mobile application where farmers can
perform actuation by enabling the irrigation pumps to water the farm.

5.4 Livestock Monitoring

Livestock management constitutes an important part of smart agriculture. An IoT enabled livestock health monitoring
system enables farmers to monitor the health of cattle herds, track grazing animals, and optimize breeding practices.
Cattle health can be monitored automatically by measuring body vitals like heart rate, blood pressure or respiratory rate
using a wearable collar or RFID tag. This has a two fold advantage - saving man power and providing time sensitive
treatment to the animal which in turn stops spreading of diseases. For this purpose, Global Positioning System (GPS)
tracking is used [42]. It also can prevent accidents to the animal. RFID tags are also used in animal identiﬁcation and
tracking [45].

5.5 Remote Sensing

Remote sensing in agriculture can help farmers receive real time data on the crop using drones which record high quality
images to map the farm ﬁelds. They can also be used to check the crop yield using the information on crop health and
the condition of farmland. Remote sensing can be used to map soil conditions and enable farmers to decide which type
of soil is better for a particular crop. Weed and pests can be detected and proper pest control mechanisms can be adapted.
The most important application of remote sensing is weather forecasting and monitoring. It can be used to track rainfall,
drought conditions and in identifying water resources, thereby alerting farmers beforehand on availability of water
and on weather so that capital and crop planning can be done in advance [46]. Normalized Difference Vegetation
Index (NVDI) values, which are one of the most important parameters to quantify the crop cultivation process, are used
to notify yield prediction and plant growth [47]. Remote sensing instruments on the farm ﬁeld are used for monitoring
abiotic stress agents with the best possible spatial resolution [48].

5.6 Smart Greenhouse

In the wake of global climate change, and diminishing natural resources the agricultural industry welcomes technology
supported farming techniques. Smart greenhouse is one of them. It is an indoor controlled environment tailored for
plants. It is a self-isolated farm monitoring ecosystem integrated with IoT, and AI/ML technologies. It protects the farm
from wind, storms, and ﬂoods. It increases the efﬁciency of productivity without manual intervention.

Solar powered IoT sensors are placed inside the greenhouse for monitoring the vitals for vegetables, fruits and other
horticultural crops. Automatic drip irrigation can be employed using soil moisture sensors placed inside the root of the
tree. If a threshold value is reached, the in-ﬁeld actuator waters the farm accordingly. Use of LED lighting can better
cater to the plants’ needs. A controlled illumination with speciﬁc wavelength and intensity can revamp the plant growth
and all year-round yield.

Drip fertigation techniques can be used to sprinkle sufﬁcient amounts of minerals like potassium, phosphorus and
other minerals required for optimum growth and good health of plants. Smart greenhouse cultivation is increasing
as the technologies are at the farmer’s disposal and demand is growing for organic fruits and vegetables using smart
green techniques [49]. A decision support based IoT friendly smart greenhouse system has been presented in [50] for
increasing productivity of rose plants.

10

Everything You wanted to Know about Smart Agriculture

A PREPRINT

Figure 10: Applications of Smart Agriculture - Smart Greenhouse, Agriculture Robot, UAV and Autonomous Tractor,
Hydroponic System [36].

5.7 Unmanned Aerial Vehicle

In the current agricultural industry, the usage of UAV, a.k.a drones, has been steadily increasing. They are being used for
crop mapping, ﬁeld monitoring, remote sensing, fertigation, and weed detection. Drones can be a savior for taking
photos in large farming areas, mountainous regions or remote areas. The NVDI is calculated from the drone taken
images to asses the crop health. It determines water level, stress condition, plant nutrition, and pest infestation. It can
guide the entire crop cultivation process [51, 52, 53].

5.8 Autonomous Tractor

Cutting edge technologies are changing the agriculture industry. The Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT) has propelled
from crop management, soil monitoring, smart irrigation to pest control, livestock management or agro marketing. We
can expect in the near future farming with autonomous, intelligent, and smart instruments. An autonomous tractor is
an important part of these instruments. It is a programmable self-driving vehicle. It can perform tillage, and spraying
fertilizers. They are equipped with GPS, lasers and cameras and can function on their own without requiring farmers to
monitor them. Autonomous drones are used along with these smart tractors and are used in weed detection, pesticide
spraying, ﬁeld monitoring and surveillance for sustainable agriculture [54]. The autonomous tractors used for spraying
and mowing in orchards have perception systems to detect obstacles and remote aided guide for performing agricultural
tasks. The perception system uses cameras for geometry based obstacle detection and path identiﬁcation [55, 56].

5.9 Urban Farming

The increased urbanization rate poses an alarming situation in densely populated cities. A new approach to farming
has emerged to offer a sustainable farming solution in those areas. Hence the practice of urban or vertical farming
has gained prominence among urban populations. It takes up 3-D space for farming with controlled water, nutrients,

11

Everything You wanted to Know about Smart Agriculture

A PREPRINT

Figure 11: Smart Greenhouse.

minimal pesticides, and artiﬁcial lighting sources. The practical limitation of vertical farming system is generation of
artiﬁcial light sources for plant growth and the large costs involved [57].

• As the name suggests, hydroponics is a water based system where plants get all the nutrients from the nutrient
rich water solution [58]. In hydroponic systems, the nutrient supply needs to be continuous. These systems
can be operated through mobile apps. In [59] such a mobile app controls an Arduino controller for watering
the plants to manage the hydroponic system.

• Aeroponics is a similar system but instead of submerging the roots in the water, the roots are misted. Research
shows that aeroponics plants have more nutrients than hydroponics plants [60]. In the Internation Space
Station, this technology is used for growing plants.

• Another recent farming system is aquaponics which is essentially a hydroponic system but the nutrients

(phosphorous, nitrogen) are not mixed from the outside. Fish in the same tank generate those nutrients.

5.10 Agriculture Marketing

Proper marketing of the produce is an important aspect of the economic growth of a society. The presence of middle
men causes inﬂation and both consumers and farmers lose. Smart agriculture changes this scenario. Farmers can sell
the product directly to the consumers using various agro-marketing apps. Ethereum based blockchain has been used as
a platform for trade negotiations between farmers and end consumers [61]. A food supply chain has been implemented
with the help of blockchain [62] from updating the distributed ledger at the production phase to the ﬁnal distribution
phase.

6 Smart Agriculture: Challenges

Traditional Agriculture has been modernized and eased by Smart Agriculture processes. But there are still many
challenges needed to be addressed for the adoption of technologies to scale. These issues are associated with a variety
of aspects which are discussed in the current Section. Fig. 12 shows some of the major challenges of Smart Agriculture.

12

Automatic IrrigationFertigationPhotosynthesis Soil MonitoringSmart GreenhouseEverything You wanted to Know about Smart Agriculture

A PREPRINT

Figure 12: Major Challenges in Smart Agriculture.

6.1 Power Issues

Most smart agriculture activities utilize large machine automation which requires high amounts of power to operate. As
farms are generally vast in area and require many electronic components, it is not unusual to have very high power
requirements. This has been a bottleneck for wide adoption of such automation processes in large farms. Some of the
solutions propose the use of clean energy from renewable sources like solar, wind, and hydro and provide continuous
uninterrupted power to the machinery [63]. This has been an area of interest for many researchers and research is
ongoing to implement and improve such renewable energy sources for smart farming [64, 65]. Some of the issues with
these alternative power options are the storage and transmission of power, along with uneven energy requirements at
different location of the farm. An efﬁcient microgrid architecture is required to overcome such issues and research has
been done in this area to propose an efﬁcient smart microgrid working along with renewable power sources in [66, 67].

6.2 Power Consumption

For a seamless, reliable and sustainable operation of the smart agriculture farm, as IoAT devices are needed to be
operated by alternative power sources, the deployed models are required to be less power hungry. They should be
capable of working in a low resource setting.

6.3 Hardware Availability

Smart Agriculture requires different sensors and devices for sensing different environmental and system parameters.
After acquiring the data, the devices act upon those signals to give better predictable yield. Availability of speciﬁc
hardware is a bottleneck in this scenario.

13

ChallengesPower ConsumptionNetworking and CommunicationScalabilityBig DataHardware availability and SecurityData Security and PrivacyReliabilityArtificial IntelligenceEverything You wanted to Know about Smart Agriculture

A PREPRINT

6.4 Hardware Security

By 2020, the number of IoT connected devices are believed to be 50 billion [68]. These IoT devices are needed to be
robust and resilient against various attacks. But demand of simple hardware with low price compromises hardware
security. Hardware Trojan and Side Channel Attacks are the most common hardware security threats for IoT devices,
consequently limiting wide adoption of IoT network in critical applications. Hardware Trojans make use of malicious
hardware modiﬁcations by the adversary which can be used as a backdoor to control the system and to perform attacks.
These are very hard to detect and some methods include performing electronic microscope scanning on de-metalized
chips [69] and studying power and delays within the circuit and also inspecting the PUF which acts as signature of these
electronic devices [70]. Side Channel Attacks are another common hardware security threat which make use of side
channel signals to retrieve conﬁdential information like cryptography keys. Some of these side channel signals include
electromagnetic emanation, power proﬁling and timing analysis [71]. As IoT networks are more prone to these issues,
many solutions have been proposed in [72, 73, 74].

6.5 Networking and Communication

Machine-to-Machine (M2M) interaction is one of the most common aspects in smart agriculture. This makes use of
different network and communication protocols to share data and work collaboratively towards a common task. Most of
the applications make use of many different communication networks like ZigBee, Wi-Fi, LoRA, SigFox, and GPRS.
Establishing and maintaining such huge networks is expensive and not a viable option in large, open farms due to
physical damages and threats. Research directions have been explored and some solutions for efﬁcient communication
networks have been proposed [75, 76, 77]. Additionally, some research has integrated communication equipment with
other smart devices making it viable for uninterrupted communication such as Solar Insecticidal Lamps (SIL) and WSN
to create a novel agriculture thing, SIL-IoT [78]. The need for more secure and robust communication is very high in
smart agriculture applications and requires further research and new affordable technologies.

6.6 Connectivity Issues

In many rural areas across the globe reliable high bandwidth Internet connection is not available, which stalls the
existing cloud based computing and prevents the advancement of smart agriculture. Tall trees or hills can also stop the
line-of-sight GPS communication [79].

6.7 Data Security and Privacy

To maintain data privacy and security during data transmission, robust cryptography techniques and security measures
are needed. However, due to the minimalist design of IoAT sensor nodes and underlying protocols they are not resource
intensive. Practicing security measures in a resource limited device is difﬁcult in today’s existing technologies. Thus
data privacy and security has become a serious challenge in smart agriculture. As most of the processes in smart
agriculture are automated, an adversary can manipulate these processes to create chaos in the network. This may lead to
very serious consequences for yield and overall quality of farm production.

6.8 Scalability and Reliability

Agricultural farms vary in their size from smaller individual farms to larger commercial farms. They need different
quantities of ﬁeld sensors. These sensors generate a varied amount of data. Hence, any agriculture technology is needed
to be scalable. The devices are required to be reliable, so that the number of redundant devices to accommodate fault
tolerance can be lower. It will signiﬁcantly reduce the cost.

6.9 Big Data Challenge

Massive amounts of heterogeneous data is collected by the sensor nodes or cameras in smart agriculture. Traditional
ways of processing this enormous amount of data are insufﬁcient and BD analysis comes into play. Big data has the
capacity to explore massive datasets. It improves the efﬁciency of the end-to-end supply chain in smart agricultural
systems, mitigates food security issues [80], provides predictive analysis, real time decision, and introduces new
business models [81, 82]. Support Vector Machines (SVM) and ANN have been utilized to integrate big data platforms
for milk production chain security [83]. Fig. 13 shows the big data workﬂow in smart agriculture systems based on
[80, 82]. It starts with the data collection at various sensor nodes and ends with the various data analysis methods
including both traditional and big data analysis.

14

Everything You wanted to Know about Smart Agriculture

A PREPRINT

Figure 13: Big Data Work Flow in Context of Smart Agriculture.

6.10 Challenges of AI

Though AI is a logical step toward smart agriculture for sustainable, efﬁcient, and cost effective farming, there are some
constraint factors which pose big challenges to applying AI in the agricultural industry:

• There is a lack of connection between the agricultural industry and AI research ﬁeld. So, the problems faced
by farmers are not well known to AI researchers and similarly farmers are not well aware of the existing AI
technologies. More interdisciplinary collaboration is needed to solve this two-fold problem.

• As AI applications in agriculture are emerging, there are no well established policies and regulations. Thus,
many legal aspects of smart farming are unanswered. Until recently, most of the existing AI-IoT solutions were
cloud based and therefore cyber attacks, data security, and privacy concerns kept farmers away from embracing
AI techniques. To mitigate this issue, a new IoT setting “Edge AI” has emerged. Edge AI processes sensor data
at the local level, and it provides higher security and privacy in data along with lower latency and cost.

• Another challenge for AI in agriculture is lack of data. AI is a data-driven technology. The unavailability of

proper data is a barrier to applying various AI techniques.

• In remote rural areas where higher bandwidth mobile networks are not available but agriculture is the main
industry, Edge AI can be a game changer there. It expands the possibilities of smart agriculture. Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNN) have been used in [84] at the edge layer to compress the sensor image data and then
the compressed data has been sent to the fog layer using Low-Power Wide Area Network (LPWAN) technology.

6.11 Technical Malfunction

Technical malfunction, e.g., sensor damage can disrupt the technology. A huge amount of loss from wrong decision-
making of devices can introduce multi domain damage. For a paddy ﬁeld, if the sensors are damaged by hail, they will
not predict the water content of the soil correctly which in turn can damage crops, impact food supply chain, and cause
rice price imbalance.

6.12 Lack of Initial Capital Investment

In rural areas of developing countries where farmers work with a very meager proﬁt margin, initial investment for
advanced technologies is not always available. It can decelerate the mass scale use of smart technologies.

6.13 Unavailability of Uniform Standards

Different countries use different standards of units and technologies which demand customized solution. This increases
the price. A uniform standard across the world will solve the problem [79].

15

Data Generation•Enormous and Wide Variety of Data from Smart AgricultureData Acquisition•Collection•Transmission•PreprocessingData Storage•Direct Attached Storage (DAS) •Network Attached Storage (NAS)•Storage AreaNetwork (SAN)Traditional Analysis•Cluster•Factor •Correlation •Regression •Bucket Testing•Statistical•Data MiningBig DataAnalysis•Hashing•Index•Triel•Parallel ComputingData AnalysisEverything You wanted to Know about Smart Agriculture

A PREPRINT

7 Technologies for Smart Agriculture

2021 has been marked as the start of the Industry 5.0 era. It arrived at the right moment when various industry sectors
are welcoming digital, smart, green and sustainable ecosystems to cope with COVID-19 challenges. It redeﬁnes the
relationship between “man” and “machine” [85]. In agriculture, the Industry 5.0 era will accelerate the arrival of
Agriculture 5.0. Mainly AI/ML and DLT will orchestrate the advancement along with FL, UAV, agricultural robotics, and
alternative farming, as shown in Fig. 14. In this section the two main technologies are discussed.

Figure 14: Technologies in Smart Agriculture.

7.1 Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Machine Learning

Artiﬁcial intelligence is the intelligence displayed by machines that resembles human intelligence. Advancements in AI
and ML have shown a lot of promise in various domains such as e-commerce and marketing [86], human resources
[87], computer vision [88], multimedia forensics [89, 90], healthcare [91], social media [92, 93], gaming [94, 95],
automobiles, and agriculture. In agriculture, AI is used in increasing efﬁciency, crop yield and proﬁtability, monitoring
crop health, monitoring and forecasting climate, optimizing supply chain, managing irrigation systems, pesticide and
fertilizer management, weed control, smart sensing and mapping, livestock tracking and geofencing. Researchers are
applying Fuzzy logic, various AI/ML techniques including classiﬁcation, and logistic regression as well as Neuro-Fuzzy
logic to agricultural predictive analytics, decision making systems, agricultural robotics and mobile expert systems [96].
Fig. 15 shows the AI tools presented in various literature works on smart agriculture.

7.1.1 Crop Management

Crop management consists of crop production or yield prediction, estimation, and crop supply chain management.
Various ML tools have been used in different sectors of crop management. To count the number of coffee fruits on a
coffee plant branch [98] and identify the green immature citrus fruits [99], SVM have been used. SVM have also been
used for rice crop yield prediction [100]. The branches with full of cherries have been estimated with Gaussian Naive
Bayes [101]. ANN have been used to evaluate grassland biomass [102] and wheat yield prediction [103]. Corn and
soybean yield prediction has been done in [104] using ANN with better accuracy than regression models. ANN with back
propagation have also been used to predict yields from soil parameters [105]. ANN have also been used to predict corn
yield [106], rice yield in a mountainous region [107], cotton yield [108], wheat yield [109], maize crop yield [110],
tea yield [111], and general crop yield [112]. ANN have also been used in detecting nutrition disorder for crops [113]
and predicting the reaction of crops over soil salinity and water content [114]. From UAV imagery, tomatoes have been
detected using clustering [115]. Crop growth has been monitored in [116].

16

TechnologiesDistributedLedgerAI / MLFuzzy LogicUAVAgroRobotAlternativeFarmingClusteringSVMANNCNN DNNLSTM DTEnsemble LearningRegressionBlockchainHash GraphDirected Acyclic GraphHollow ChainTempoEverything You wanted to Know about Smart Agriculture

A PREPRINT

Figure 15: AI Tools for Smart Agriculture [97].

7.1.2 Soil Management

Soil property management such as soil moisture, temperature, and nutrient content is an important part of smart
agricultural systems. Its beneﬁts are two fold - increasing crop yield and preserving soil resources [117]. But the
process is time consuming and costly. So, various inexpensive and autonomous ML techniques are being proposed to
have a reliable soil management system [97]. Mostly, the data from sensors, satellite images or images taken by UAV
are used as the input of the ML models. ANN, SVM, and autoencoders have been used in predictive analysis. ANN and
Multi-Layer Perceptrons (MLP) have been used for suitability of soil evaluation [118]. Phosphorous in soil has been
predicted using various ML models [119]. Deep Neural Networks (DNN) have been utilized to extract geo-parcels from
high resolution images and MLP have been employed to predict the phosphorous content. Radial basis function neural
network have been applied to predict the water retention capacity of soil in Brazilian coastal areas [120]. Soil moisture
is also predicted with Boosted Regression Trees (BRT) from UAV-taken images [121] and with ANN in [122]. Health
and condition of soil moisture sensors have been predicted using SVM along with the stage of the degradation by using
Naive Bayes classiﬁcation [123]. Autoencoder and SVM have been used to predict the soil salinity from satellite images
[124].

7.1.3 Smart Irrigation

Water management is an integral part of smart agricultural systems. Rainfall patterns are changing worldwide due to
climate change. Evapotranspiration plays a vital role to assess water resources. Various AI methods have been utilized
in smart water management. Deep reinforcement learning has been used for smart water management in a crop ﬁeld
[125]. A multiple linear regression algorithm has been applied to calculate the water needed for greenhouse organic
crops and then water valves have been operated automatically with a LoRa Point-to-Point (P2P) network [126]. An
ANN system has been proposed in [127] to predict evapotranspiration by carrying out a study in Dehradun, India. ANN
and the Penman-Monteith equation have been utilized to predict daily evapotranspiration [128]. A smart irrigation
system has been proposed using Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) and Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) based models in
an Edge-Fog-Cloud setting [129]. Spatial water distribution has been predicted with ANN in [130] for a neuro-drip
irrigation system.

7.1.4 Pest/Disease Control

To have optimal yield from a crop ﬁeld, disease, pest, and weed control are necessary. An automated efﬁcient
system can save time and cost. From that perspective, AI techniques are being proposed in various publications. The
advancement started with a rule based system [131, 132, 133, 134, 135] in the last decade and evolved through FL
systems [136, 137, 138, 139]. Various ANN have been used for different diseases in different crops [140, 141, 142, 143]
or for pest detection, e.g., a channel–spatial attention module, integrated with a backbone CNN and a Region Proposal
Network (RPN) have been used to detect various pests in a crop ﬁeld [144] and apple leaf disease is detected in [145]
using the GoogleNet Inception network and Rainbow concatenation. An incremental back propagation network has

17

Smart IrrigationPest / DiseaseControlSoil ManagementLivestock ManagementWeed ControlAlternative FarmingCropManagementSVM    ANN    DNN    CNN    Regression    Bayesian Models    DT    Fuzzy Logic       Clustering   Instance Based Models   Ensemble Learning   LSTM  Everything You wanted to Know about Smart Agriculture

A PREPRINT

been used with Correlation-based Feature Selection (CFS) to detect pests in a tea plant. The CNN based object detection
model YOLOv3 has been utilized to localize the pest Tessaratoma Papillosa and by analyzing the environmental
information by LSTM, pest occurrence is predicted with 90% accuracy [146]. YOLOv3 and YOLOv3-Dense models
have also been employed to detect anthrax on apple surface in an apple orchard [147]. Single Seed Descent (SSD) has
been applied with 84% accuracy in detecting pests and with 86% accuracy in classifying pests [148]. Pest detection and
recognition have been performed through k-means clustering and correspondence ﬁlter [149]. CNN based models have
been used in [150] and in [151] in crop disease detection.

7.1.5 Weed Control

Weed affects yield negatively. So, weed control is another important area in smart agriculture. Weeds are sometimes
hard to distinguish from crops. The application of AI in weed control started in the early 2000s. ANN have been
employed with Hebbian synaptic modiﬁcation for distinguishing weeds from crops [152] and the accuracy achieved
was reasonable based on the available hardware at that time. YOLOv3 has been used for low cost precision weed
management in [153]. Counter Propagation (CP)-ANN with multi-spectral images [154] and a combination of auto
encoder and SVM along with hyper spectral images [155] have been utilized to detect weeds. SVM has been used in
[156] to detect weeds in grassland cropping.

7.1.6 Livestock Management

AI/ML techniques have been used in livestock management in two ways: animal welfare and livestock production [97].
Animal welfare, or the well-being of the animals has been addressed in [157] for cattle using bagging ensemble learning,
for calf using decision tree and C4.5 algorithm [158], and for pigs using Gaussian Mixture Models [159]. AI helps to
optimize the efﬁciency of livestock production. ANN with back propagation has been used in [160] to predict cattle
rumen fermentation patterns from milk fatty acids. Pigs’ faces have been detected with CNN with 97% accuracy in
[161]. SVM have been used for problem detection and warnings in egg production for commercial hen production [162],
to estimate cattle weight trajectories for evolution [163], and to predict skeleton weight of the beef cattle [164]. ANN
with Bayesian Regularization has been used to predict quality milk production and to reduce the heat stress levels of the
cows in a robotic cow farm [165]. A fully connected neural network has been used to predict cow diseases in [166].

7.1.7 Alternative Farming

Alternative farming consists of greenhouse farming, and hydroponics. ML and deep learning techniques are used in
those systems for better and precise control with less manpower. Greenhouse air temperature is forecast using fully
connected ANN and Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) [167]. ANN have been used for greenhouse tomato yield and
growth [168], greenhouse basil yield [169], greenhouse gas emission and energy consumption of wheat yield [170]
and that of watermelon [171]. An Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) with back propagation has been used to predict
the humidity and the temperature of a greenhouse, powered by solar energy [172] and RNN-LSTM in [173] for climate
(humidity, temperature and CO2) prediction. ANN and Bayesian Networks have been used in hydroponic systems to
predict the needed action [19].

Various AI technologies are proposed depending on the location of the computation. For edge AI settings, where the AI
model runs on the limited resource embedded system itself, research is ongoing to design deep neural network models
which have higher accuracy but fewer parameters to train [174]. MobileNet [175], SqueezeNet [176], EfﬁcientNet
[177] are such networks where depth wise convolution, down-sampling of data and uniform scaling down of the model
are performed respectively. Quantization [178, 179, 180, 181] and pruning [182, 183, 184, 185, 186, 187, 188] are used
to reduce the DNN size. Proper choice of hardware is equally important as the algorithms.

7.2 Blockchain and Distributed Ledger Technology

7.2.1 Blockchain as a Digital Technology

Blockchain is one of the recent technologies with promising applications in different ﬁelds which include peer-to-peer
ﬁnancial systems [189][190], Real-time Secure IoT systems [191], Smart Governance applications [192, 193], Digital
Asset Copyright technologies [194, 195], Smart Healthcare [196, 197], Smart Agriculture and many other industries.
The blockchain can be simplistically deﬁned as a peer-to-peer distributed ledger which processes incoming transaction
data and updates the shared ledger chronologically based on a set of rules known as Consensus mechanism that
are accepted by peers across the network. The main idea behind creating such peer-to-peer networks is to create a
reliable and veriﬁable communication and data storage between un-trusted entities which need to share data and work
collectively as a single system. The most commonly used decentralized application structure in the past few decades is

18

Everything You wanted to Know about Smart Agriculture

A PREPRINT

the client-server model where instead of housing data on a single central entity it is replicated and partitioned onto
multiple servers easily accessed by clients from multiple locations. Even though this model has successfully addressed
centralized system problems, it is still prone to security and privacy attacks which can be efﬁciently addressed using
distributed networks. Fig. 16 shows different network conﬁgurations.

Figure 16: Types Of Networks (a) Centralized network which has single point of information sharing represented by
blue sphere and multiple clients represented by orange spheres (b) Decentralized network which has multiple replicated
central nodes represented by blue spheres and multiple clients represented by orange spheres (c) Distributed network
where there is no central entity

Centralized systems have all the network data housed at a single location which is controlled and maintained by a
network owner. The main drawbacks of this system are Single Point-of-Failure (SPoF) and latency in data accessing
from long distances. These drawbacks can be avoided by introducing a decentralized system where the data is replicated
among multiple central servers which serve different locations effectively even when there is a failure at one of the
central nodes. Even though this solved most of the problems, data is still controlled by a third party owner who is
responsible for maintaining and storing the client information and interacting with them which may lead to several
security and privacy issues. Another disadvantage with such an architecture is lack of data ownership and control
on data from clients while interacting with such decentralized systems. Distributed networks can solve these issues
by removing the need for central authorities to monitor and verify the network trafﬁc. The IoT has sensor and edge
devices which form a distributed network. The data sharing and collective working of such devices can be improved by
blockchain technology. Main components of the blockchain include Shared Ledger, Node, Transaction and consensus
mechanism.

The blockchain shared ledger is a chronologically connected sequence of blocks of approved transactions. Each block
consists of transactions along with the metadata which can be used to verify the integrity and authenticity of the
transaction information within. Every node participating in the network will have its own copy of the ledger which will
be updated periodically and helps to act as a single point of truth for the network. The ledger is replicated across the
nodes in the network to avoid double spending of digital assets. Nodes are the participants of the network which are
capable of performing transactions and also participate in network operations. Based on the roles they perform nodes
can be peer nodes, full nodes and miners. Peer nodes are less computationally capable and are mainly responsible
for generating transactions which utilize the blockchain network to process and handle transactions. Full nodes are
nodes with large storage and are responsible for storing the entire trail of transactions. There is no incentive associated
with full nodes but these nodes maintain the complete ledger to verify the transactions coming in. Miner nodes are
responsible for performing the consensus mechanism where blocks generated are processed based on the pre-deﬁned set

19

a. Centralized Systemb. Decentralized SystemC. Distributed SystemEverything You wanted to Know about Smart Agriculture

A PREPRINT

of rules called consensus mechanism. These nodes are computationally capable and incentives are given for each block
generated by the node. Most popular consensus mechanisms used are Proof-of-Work (PoW) and Proof-of-Stake (PoS),
among which PoW makes use of computationally hard cryptography puzzles to select the miner whereas PoS makes use
of staking and age of staking into consideration while selecting a miner to generate new blocks. Fig. 17 shows the
transactions steps and digital asset veriﬁcation process in detail.

Figure 17: Blockchain Transaction Steps and Digital Asset Ownership Veriﬁcation.

7.2.2 Relevance of Blockchain Technology in Smart Agriculture

The agriculture sector has evolved by adapting various new technologies to modify farming practices for efﬁcient
and better yield of crops [5]. One such enabling technology is the IoT which provides solutions for automating many
anthropocentric tasks in farming. In the layered architecture used in the IoT environment in agriculture, layer-2 or the
edge computing layer consists of many Edge Data Centers (EDC)) which form distributed networks with a critical need
to communicate and share data between each other to work collectively [198], as in Fig. 18. In order to make these
Machine-to-Machine communications more secure, there is a need for central authorities to monitor the data and deploy
some cryptography techniques to maintain data integrity and privacy. This can be a challenging task with the number of
computing edge devices that are needed while monitoring and controlling a large farm. Furthermore, using such central
monitoring system can lead to centralization and other problems like single point of failure and latency issues. These
issues can adversely affect farms as automated systems will not behave as expected and result in the reduction in yield
or quality of crop.

7.2.3 Blockchain Applications in Agriculture

The blockchain has a large set of applications in smart agriculture and deals with different aspects of farm activities.
Some of the major applications and related solutions are discussed below.

7.2.3.1 Secure Real-time Data Sharing

Data security and privacy is one important aspect in smart agriculture which needs to be addressed for efﬁcient
functioning of autonomous processes. The blockchain makes use of cryptography techniques and processes transactions
in chronological order to maintain integrity of data and avoid adversary attacks such as Denial-of-Service (DoS) and

20

Sender A wants to send a digital asset to BA Transaction block is generated by the senderBlock is Broadcasted to entire networkTransaction is approved by participants of networkBlock added to Transparent and Immutable Chain of transaction blocksDigital Asset moved to Receiver BHash Linka. Transaction Processing Steps in BlockchainTransaction nSender A’s Public KeyHashPrevious Owner SignatureTransaction n+1Receiver B’s Public KeyHashSender A’s SignaturePrevious Block HashSender A’s Private KeyVerifySignb. Ownership VerificationEverything You wanted to Know about Smart Agriculture

A PREPRINT

Figure 18: Analogy Between Smart Agriculture IoT Network and Blockchain.

False Data Injection. Apart from data privacy, data ownership and monetization are also problems. Unlike in centralized
applications where the data is monetized by a central authority, blockchain based applications can help farmers control
the data access at granular levels and can help in monetizing the data on their own. A typical IoT architecture consists
of a cloud layer where data from the edge layer is stored and processed to perform automated tasks. One of the
main drawbacks with such networks is that the latency and access times vary based on network availability and
number of access requests going to the server at a given time. As real-time operation is critical in making decisions, the
blockchain can help in developing an efﬁcient real-time data sharing model. Some of the secure models using blockchain
for secure data sharing are proposed in [199, 200, 201, 202]. [199] established an identity managed authentication
mechanism which makes use of private blockchain and provides a secure information sharing mechanism eliminating
Distributed Denial-of-Service (DDoS) attacks. [200] has proposed a system which is a combination of Software-Deﬁned
Networking (SDN) technology along with blockchain to detect and prevent attacks in the IoT environment with only
minimal overhead. This can be an optimal solution in resource constrained environments like IoAT. [201] makes
use of homomorphic computation on encrypted data and follows a similar approach to Practical Byzantine Fault
Tolerance (PBFT) and is based on the threshold number of correct responses from the server relevant smart contracts will
be run. For the implementation, the Ethereum blockchain was used and the response times were computed to be 22 sec
as the block generation time of Ethereum is ﬁxed at 15 sec and can be further improved by adapting second generation
blockchains with shorter block times. [202] has proposed a novel key management architecture which can address
issues of centralized systems using blockchain while increasing scalability and reliability. [203] made use of distributed
ledgers instead of traditional blockchains which are resource intensive to increase the scalability and real-time data
availability in Smart Agriculture systems.

7.2.3.2 Community Farming and Local Markets

Community farming needs collective intelligence and transparent sharing of weather, crop disease or product demand
data to help crop choice and achieve better yield. Along with this, local markets will enable the farmers to monetize their
product more efﬁciently with greater proﬁts. The blockchain can help in organizing and managing such applications for
farmers to enable them to both produce and realize better proﬁtability. Some of the works towards this area have been
presented in [204] which made use of the Ethereum platform to remove the intermediaries to establish an ethical supply
chain and provide deserved proﬁts to farmers. Fig. 19 shows the logistics present in the Supply Chain Traceability.

21

Edge DeviceEdge DeviceEdge DeviceEdge DeviceBlockchain Core NetworkSensing LayerSensor DataFarm data blockBlockchain TransactionEverything You wanted to Know about Smart Agriculture

A PREPRINT

Figure 19: Supply Chain Traceability in Smart Agriculture.

7.2.3.3 Supply-Chain Traceability

Globalization is the trend which enabled product availability at even remote places. This has made global food supply
chains more complex by involving multiple entities working together throughout the process. One of the major problems
with such complex food supply chains is traceability and consumer conﬁdence. It is very common to see food-borne
disease outbreaks. In such scenarios, the most common approach is to dispose of the entire inventory as testing each
product for infestation is not possible. Instead, tracing the product back to the farm from where it was produced can
help in determining which products are affected and reduce food wastage. As an end user, a clear and transparent
supply chain can help building customer conﬁdence in the authenticity of food. The blockchain can help in this aspect
by building transparent supply chains where traceability and authenticity of the food can be easily veriﬁed. Many
research works have been proposed. [205, 206] makes use of HyperLedger Fabric blockchain to perform a case study
on the blockchain based supply chain and discusses limitations. A solution based on RFID technology integrated with
blockchain is proposed in [207]. [208] proposed a smart contract based ﬁnancial solution in supply chains to help in
solving the issue of SPoF in traditional Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) systems. [209] has proposed Ethereum
based decentralized applications for tracing the supply chain in organic foods to build trust and conﬁdence from the
consumer towards suppliers. [210] proposed an efﬁcient supply chain tracking system integrating blockchain with
Electronic Product Code Information Services (EPCIS) and making use of Ethereum smart Contracts.

7.2.3.4 Farm Insurance

Farms are more prone to weather changes and the damages due to weather conditions will lead to ﬁnancial instability
for farmers. Agriculture insurance is based on a farmer paying a ﬁxed amount of premiums before the cropping cycle
begins and receiving a payout based on the damage caused by the weather conditions. The problem arises when there is

22

ConsumersProducersStorage Packaging and ProcessingTransportationWebEverything You wanted to Know about Smart Agriculture

A PREPRINT

no index available to calculate the amount of damage, hence weather data is used and analyzed by the insurance provider
to evaluate an index which forms the baseline for farmers and makes it easy to process these farm insurances. The most
common setup is for the insurance provider to make use of weather station data recorded remotely and presented to
farmers. Blockchain can help in assessing and accepting premium payments from the farmer using automated smart
contracts. Together with that, weather index data can also be made available to farmers with greater reliability. [211]
proposes a blockchain based solution for avoiding fraud in insurance. [212] made use of the NEO platform to build a
system for drought based insurance. [213] proposed an Ethereum blockchain and hyperledger private blockchain based
solution for insurance services using smart contracts.

7.2.4 Limitations of Blockchain

Even though the blockchain has many potential applications in smart agriculture to enhance data security and integrity,
there are still challenges which need to be addressed before wide adoption of this technology into the agriculture
space. IoT technology used in smart agriculture is resource constrained both in terms of power and computations
whereas the consensus mechanism and cryptography components of the blockchain require large amounts of power and
computation. The blockchain as such cannot be an efﬁcient solution, hence research is being done to propose various
efﬁcient consensus mechanisms which can be implemented in resource constrained environments as in smart agriculture.
[214] has proposed a consensus mechanism based on cryptographic authentication and Media Access Control (MAC)
address veriﬁcation which has reduced the computational requirements of the consensus mechanism and has increased
the transaction times signiﬁcantly. Data is another signiﬁcant problem which needs to be addressed for wide adoption.
As the size of each block in the blockchain is predeﬁned and limited, large amounts of data like images are not viable to
be stored on-chain. Hence, many researchers are working on making the data stored off-chain while the transaction and
access information along with the data are stored on-chain for secure access and integrity. [215] proposed a system
which makes use of the Interplanetary File System (IPFS) along with Ethereum smart contracts to share COVID-19
related patient data which can help in enforcing social distancing practices. This can be adopted into smart agriculture
for storage of large chunks of data. Multi level access management is also a vital aspect which needs to be addressed.
[216] proposed a blockchain system which can operate at multiple levels with different access policies for an efﬁcient
and controlled data management process which can be adopted to smart agriculture environments.

8 Datasets for Smart Agriculture Research

Smart agriculture makes use of intelligent devices to collect data to analyze crop yields, livestock management, and
economics related to supply. The stored data can help further research into the availability of resources in farming for
next generations. Table 1 shows different datasets of multiple formats that we have studied and collected for the current
survey paper.

8.1 Crop Yield and Production

Sensors are used to collect data relating to acreage, crop condition, and yield. The amount of crop yield can be calculated
by dividing the amount of produce over the harvested area. Crop production can be measured in terms of tonnes per
hectare. The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) produces annual reports that include data for yield, acreage, and
production for crops, plants, livestock, and animals, along with a Census of Agriculture. Fig.20 shows the graphs for
some of the crops, livestock, and expenditures of agriculture in the United States for different years. Additionally, the
prices for farming, labor, production, and land values are collected monthly and annually [217].

8.2 Crop Condition and Soil Moisture

Knowledge of soil moisture is a critical factor for the yield and production of crops. In order to execute different
agricultural operations easily, data regarding the soil is essential for farmer decision making. Crop Condition and Soil
Moisture Analytics (Crop-CASMA) is a web-based geospatial application used to measure soil moisture and vegetation
conditions. The data collected is in the form of Geographic Information System mapping format (.gis) [218]. Fig. 21(a)
and 21(b) show crop condition and soil moisture analytics in the United States at two different dates.

8.3 Plant Diseases

When a plant gets infected with disease, its vital functions are modiﬁed and damaged, leading to harmful consumption
for individuals. Each plant species has its unique syndrome. Kaggle is a good source of various datasets regarding
different plant diseases. Fig. 22 shows some of the sample images from the Plant Disease dataset [219]. Collecting and

23

Everything You wanted to Know about Smart Agriculture

A PREPRINT

Dataset

Source

Dataset
Format

Link

Table 1: Datasets for Smart Agricuture.

Crop Yield & Production

USDA & NASS

.php

Crop Condition & Soil Moisture Crop-CASMA

.gis

Plant Diseases

Kaggle

Soil Health & Characterization

NCSS

.csv

.mdb

Pesticide use in Agriculture

USGS

.php, .txt

Water use in Agriculture

USGS

Tableau

Groundwater Nitrate Contamina-
tion

USGS

.jpeg

Disaster Analysis

USDA & NASS

.png, .pdf

https://www.nass.usda.gov/Charts_
and_Maps/

https://nassgeo.csiss.gmu.edu/
CropCASMA/

https://www.kaggle.com/saroz014/
plant-diseases

https://new.cloudvault.usda.gov/
index.php/s/7iknp275KdTKwCA

https://water.usgs.gov/nawqa/pnsp/
usage/maps/

https://labs.waterdata.usgs.gov/
visualizations/water-use-15

https://prd-wret.s3.
us-west-2.amazonaws.com/
assets/palladium/production/
s3fs-public/thumbnails/image/
wss-nitrogen-map-us-risk-areas.jpg

https://www.nass.usda.gov/Research_
and_Science/Disaster-Analysis/

storing these data can help study, train, and test to improve and impede the diseases in crops. Predicting plant diseases
can enhance crop yield and productivity. Fig. 8.3 shows some sample images from the Pomegranate Fruit Dataset [220].

Fig. 24 shows some sample images from the Chinese Cabbage Disease dataset [221].

8.4 Soil Health and Characterization

The soil characterization survey is used to give information regarding the properties and features of soil in a speciﬁc
area. The survey can contain detailed descriptions and soil boundaries that are beneﬁcial to the farmers, estate agents,
and engineers.

The National Cooperative Soil Survey (NCSS) provides database reports for soil classiﬁcation [222] along with the
pedon number for soil taxonomy. A pedon is a three-dimensional structure of soil that is sufﬁcient to explain the
soil’s inner composition and can be used for collecting samples for lab analysis. The soil properties at each ﬁeld, such
as available rock fragments, bulk density, moisture, water content, carbon, salt, pH, carbonates, phosphorous, clay,
sand, and silt mineralogy, can be obtained from the primary data characterization of the soil. The reports can be seen
on-screen or downloaded in text ﬁles by giving primary country, state, and county details [222].

8.5 Pesticide Use in Agriculture

The primary use of pesticides in agriculture is for controlling weeds, insect infestations, and fungus. However, excessive
use of pesticides can destroy other microorganisms necessary for soil health and degrade the quality of groundwater.
The U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) collects data for the amount of pesticide used in the U.S. on an annual basis in
the form of tables, graphs, and maps [223]. The map provides a more reﬁned picture of estimated pesticide use on
agricultural land in terms of pounds per square mile, and the graphs show the estimated usage in millions of pounds for
each crop every year.

24

Everything You wanted to Know about Smart Agriculture

A PREPRINT

(a) Small Red Bean Production.

(b) Dry Pea Production.

(c) All Cows and Calves Inventory.

(d) Farm Production Expenditures.

Figure 20: Graphs showing Crop yield and Production [217].

8.6 Water Use in Agriculture

Water is essential for agriculture. Both surface and groundwater are crucial and are utilized in farming [224]. Surface
water is formed from natural rivers and lakes; groundwater is found under the earth’s surface between rock, soil, and
sand cracks. The USGS collects total water usage every ﬁve years and updates the statistics in billions of gallons per day.
The data shows that water use is higher in agricultural areas, including irrigation, livestock, and aquaculture [225].

8.7 Groundwater Nitrate Contamination

Nitrate is the primary source for the growth of plants and crops. It is an oxidized form of nitrogen, which occurs naturally
in the earth, but it can dissipate due to extensive farming. To reﬁll the soil with essential nutrients, nitrogen fertilizers
are applied while farming. Nonetheless, these nitrates can be toxic primarily when they enter food, groundwater, and
surface water. Fig. 25 shows the map for contamination of groundwater all over the United States. Collecting data
nationwide, the USGS has developed a model for estimating groundwater nitrate contamination [226].

8.8 Disaster Analysis

Agriculture is facing threats from uncertain risks and changing landscapes and temperatures. It is necessary to forecast
disasters before they occur to know the intensity of these hazards so farmers can be prepared for the worst and plan
accordingly. The USDA and National Agricultural Statistics Service (NASS) have implemented a research study for
disaster analysis assessments in near real-time. To collect the datasets, geospatial techniques and sensors are used in
the procedure to estimate the disasters [227]. One of the example studies for monitoring ﬂooding with the help of
Sentinel-1, Synthetic Aperture Radar is given in [228].

25

Source: USDA & NASSSource: USDA & NASSSource: USDA & NASSSource: USDA & NASSEverything You wanted to Know about Smart Agriculture

A PREPRINT

(a) Dated November 07, 2021

(b) Dated November 30, 2021

Figure 21: Crop Condition and Soil Moisture in the United States [218].

26

Source: Crop-CASMAEverything You wanted to Know about Smart Agriculture

A PREPRINT

(a) Healthy Plant Leaves - Apple, Potato, and Peach (From Left to Right)

(b) Infected Plant Leaves - Scab Infected Apple, Late Blight Infected Potato, and Bacterial Spot Infected
Peach (From Left to Right)

Figure 22: Sample Images from Plant Disease Disease Dataset [219].

(a) Pomegranates of Different Grades of Quality 1 (From Left to Right - Grade 1, Grade 2, Grade 3)

(b) Pomegranates of Different Grades of Quality 4 (From Left to Right - Grade 1, Grade 2, Grade 3)

Figure 23: Pomegranate Fruit Dataset [220].

27

Everything You wanted to Know about Smart Agriculture

A PREPRINT

(a) Healthy Chinese Cabage Plant

(b) Infected with Back Moth

(c) Infected with Leaf Miner

(d) Infected with Mildew

Figure 24: Chinese Cabbage Disease Dataset [221].

Figure 25: Groundwater Contamination [226].

28

Source: United States Geological Survey(USGS)Everything You wanted to Know about Smart Agriculture

A PREPRINT

9 Smart Agriculture Open Research Problems

In this section we discuss the open research problems of Agriculture 4.0 and Agriculture 5.0. We can divide them into
two main sub groups depending on the research focus.

9.1 Technology Perspective

Smart agriculture faces various challenges as previously mentioned. These challenges need to be addressed by adapting
new and existing technologies. Until now most of the smart agriculture AI models were cloud based, cloud-edge
based, or cloud-fog-edge based. Hardware advancement has boosted the computing paradigm shift. The addition of
intelligence to IoT devices is the new trend [229]. Network availability, latency and bandwidth are not anymore barriers
in successful, seamless agriculture system operations. This opens up a new avenue for research. Edge AI in smart
agriculture is a broad area which will be a hot topic in the near future. Fig. 26 shows various open research problems in
a technology context. Research in the following ﬁelds holds much promise:

• Low powered and solar powered, low latency TinyML devices.
• Low computational decision methods suitable for low powered IoT devices.
• Sensor technologies operable in extreme temperatures.
• Data analytic methods for data compression.
• Quantization and pruning techniques for AI/ML models.
• Unsupervised and semi-supervised learning methods.
• Real time data analysis and decision.
• Public dataset creation with sensor data.
• UAV taken image dataset.
• Thermal and Infrared image dataset for crop ﬁeld.

Research areas are not only limited to these. Blockchain based data privacy and integrity and service based smart
agriculture applications are other areas to work with:

• Blockchain enhanced IoT applications focusing on immutable data storage mechanisms.
• Optimizing computational resource, design time, and energy efﬁciency.

Hardware security is another broad area of research for sustainable Smart Agriculture. The functionality and applications
of each IoT device in agriculture is unique. Research on PUF, which is a hardware ﬁngerprint [230, 231] is an important
area of research:

• PUF’s susceptibility to environmental effects like rainfall, pesticides, fertilizers, and chemicals.
• Reliability and tamper resistance of these hardware security modules.

9.2 Network Perspective

The network component is a very important aspect of smart agriculture which makes use of different Information and
Communication Technologies (ICT) to interconnect remote devices and make data transfer possible. Budding stage
unsecured network layer protocols for limited resource IoT devices have led to various security threats. A classiﬁcation
of research problems which need to be addressed is given in Fig. 27.:

• Providing alternative networking paths which can operate during natural disasters.
• Techniques to increase the real-time data operations even when the network is experiencing congestion due to

high volumes of transactions.

• Robust and resource efﬁcient techniques are still needed to manage data privacy and security challenges.
• Efﬁcient network topologies are needed to maximize usage of the available hardware and increase coverage

area to avoid blind spots.

• Cost-efﬁcient methods for easy maintenance of network equipment with minimal wear and tear can be

challenging.

29

Everything You wanted to Know about Smart Agriculture

A PREPRINT

Figure 26: Network and Communication Challenges on Smart Agriculture.

Figure 27: Network and Communication Challenges of Smart Agriculture.

30

Research ProblemsTechnologyPerspectivePUF BasedBlockchainAI / MLLow computational decision methodsExtreme Temperatures Operable SensorsPublic Dataset CreationReal Time Data Analysis and DecisionTinyMLDeviceUAV Taken Image Dataset CreationUse of Unsupervised and Semi-supervised Learning Methods Data Compression MethodsOptimizing Design timeOptimizing Computational ResourceImmutable Data Storage MechanismsPUF’s Impact to Environmental EffectsReliability and Tamper ResistanceOptimizing Energy EfficiencyThermal and Infrared Image Dataset for Crop Field Research Problems Network PerspectiveSocio-FinancialCyberPhysicalPhysical ThreatsNatural Disaster DisruptionData IntegrityDelayHardware AvailabilityCoverage AreaVandalismEquipmentWear & Tear Fake Data InjectionMan in the Middle AttacksDistributed Denial of Services (DDoS)Technical Skill Gap and Ease of UsageLack of Financial Resources and Affordable HardwareEverything You wanted to Know about Smart Agriculture

A PREPRINT

• Preventive techniques to address physical damages like vandalism by adversaries are much needed.

• Proper routing techniques in the network to avoid network threats like DDoS can be an area of interest to work.

• Efﬁcient encryption techniques and authentication mechanisms such as hardware assisted authentication are

very much needed to be included in network layer to avoid different security threats.

• Ease of use and troubleshooting mechanisms can be areas of interest for researchers as this technology is

developed for farmers.

• Network equipment is expensive, thus making networking hardware affordable can make the technology more

adopted into vast applications in Smart Agriculture.

10 Conclusions and Future Directions

In today’s world, we value more than ever “Let food be thy medicine” as quality food boosts our immunity. Research on
agriculture, food security, and food supply chain has become more relevant. This article provides a detailed survey on
the ongoing research trends in smart agriculture. It discusses recent technology trends to challenges and open research
problems in this ﬁeld. The authors believe this work will give an overall idea on technologies, challenges and research
problems in smart agriculture.

Technological advancement along with rapid growth of ICT have transformed traditional agriculture to a smart,
intelligent, automated agriculture. Smart agriculture reduces the carbon footprint by introducing sustainable, green
farming, reducing the use of pesticides and fertilizers, and optimizing the use of natural resources. Soon the agricultural
industry will welcome Agriculture 5.0 [232]. This will raise yields while keeping the system environmentally sustainable.
Developing countries will also follow the same trend as developed countries. Humanity will embrace the production
and distribution of food in an economically and ecologically efﬁcient way as never before [233].

List of Acronyms

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

Artiﬁcial Intelligence .
.
.
Big Data .

A-CPS Agricultural Cyber-Physical Systems
.
.
ANN Ariﬁcial Neural Networks .
.
.
.
AI
.
.
.
BD
.
BRT Boosted Regression Trees .
.
CNN Convolutional Neural Networks
.
CFS Correlation-based Feature Selection .
Crop-CASMA Crop Condition and Soil Moisture Analytics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.
CPS Cyber-Physical Systems .
.
DDoS Distributed Denial-of-Service .
.
DLT Distributed Ledger Technology .
.
DNN Deep Neural Networks
.
.
DoS Denial-of-Service .
EDC Edge Data Centers .
.
.
EPCIS Electronic Product Code Information Services
.
ERP Enterprise Resource Planning .
.
.
.
FL
GPRS Ground Penetrating Radar Services .
.
GPS Global Positioning System .
GRU Gated Recurrent Unit
.
.
H-CPS Healthcare Cyber-Physical Systems .
ICT
IIoT Industrial Internet of Things
IoAT Internet of Agro-Things .
.
.
IoMT Internet of Medical Things .
.
IoT

7
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.
1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
. 15
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
. 23
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
. 17
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
. 22
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
7
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.
.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
. 10
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. 17
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.
7
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. 29
Information and Communication Technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
7
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Internet of Things .

Fuzzy Logic .

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.

.
.
.

.
.
.

.
.
.

.
.

.
.

.
.

.
.

.
.

.
.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

31

Everything You wanted to Know about Smart Agriculture

A PREPRINT

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.

Point-to-Point

.
IPFS Interplanetary File System .
. 23
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
LPWAN Low-Power Wide Area Network .
. 15
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.
LSTM Long Short-Term Memory .
. 17
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.
.
LTE Long-Term Evolution .
.
.
6
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.
.
M2M Machine-to-Machine .
.
. 14
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.
.
MAC Media Access Control .
.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
.
.
ML Machine Learning .
.
.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
.
.
MLP Multi-Layer Perceptrons
.
6
.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.
. .
.
NB-IoT Narrowband IoT .
. 25
NASS National Agricultural Statistics Service . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. 24
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
NCSS National Cooperative Soil Survey .
6
NFC Near Field Communication .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.
. 10
NVDI Normalized Difference Vegetation Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
.
P2P
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
PBFT Practical Byzantine Fault Tolerance
.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
.
Proof-of-Stake .
PoS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
.
PoW Proof-of-Work .
.
1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.
PUF Physical Unclonable Functions .
6
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.
RFID Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation .
. 18
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.
.
.
RMSE Root Mean Square Error .
. 18
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.
.
RNN Recurrent Neural Network .
. 17
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.
RPN Region Proposal Network .
.
.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.
SDN Software-Deﬁned Networking .
. 21
.
.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
.
.
Solar Insecticidal Lamps
.
SIL
.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.
.
.
SPoF Single Point-of-Failure .
. 19
.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
.
.
.
SSD Single Seed Descent .
.
.
.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
.
.
SVM Support Vector Machines .
.
.
2
.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.
.
.
UAV Unmanned Aerial Vehicles .
. 23
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.
USDA U.S. Department of Agriculture
. 24
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.
.
USGS U.S. Geological Survey .
.
5
.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.
.
WSN Wireless Sensor Network .

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.

.
.

.
.

.
.

.
.

.
.

.
.

.
.

.
.

.
.

.
.

.

.

References

[1] UN Report. https://www.un.org/devFelopment/desa/en/news/population/world-population-prospects-2019.html.

[2] Un Report :Food. https://www.un.org/en/global-issues/food.
[3] UNICEF WFP FAO, IFAD and WHO. Transforming food systems for affordable healthy diets. 2020.

[4] World Government Summit. https://www.worldgovernmentsummit.org/api/publications/document?id=95df8ac4-

e97c-6578-b2f8-ff0000a7ddb6.

[5] Ye Liu, Xiaoyuan Ma, Lei Shu, Gerhard Petrus Hancke, and Adnan M. Abu-Mahfouz. From industry 4.0 to
agriculture 4.0: Current status, enabling technologies, and research challenges. IEEE Transactions on Industrial
Informatics, 17(6):4322–4334, jun 2021. doi:10.1109/tii.2020.3003910.

[6] Saraju P Mohanty. Internet-of-agro-things (ioat) makes smart agriculture. IEEE Consumer Electronics Magazine,

10(4):4–5, 2021.

[7] Ahmed Khattab, Ahmed Abdelgawad, and Kumar Yelmarthi. Design and implementation of a cloud-based iot
scheme for precision agriculture. In Proceedings of 28th International Conference on Microelectronics (ICM),
pages 201–204, 2016. doi:10.1109/ICM.2016.7847850.

[8] Abdullah Na and William Isaac. Developing a human-centric agricultural model in the iot environment. In
Proceedings of International Conference on Internet of Things and Applications (IOTA), pages 292–297, 2016.
doi:10.1109/IOTA.2016.7562740.

32

Everything You wanted to Know about Smart Agriculture

A PREPRINT

[9] Andrés Villa-Henriksen, Gareth TC Edwards, Liisa A Pesonen, Ole Green, and Claus Aage Grøn Sørensen.
Internet of things in arable farming: Implementation, applications, challenges and potential. Biosystems
Engineering, 191:60–84, 2020.

[10] Francisco Javier Ferrández-Pastor, Juan Manuel García-Chamizo, Mario Nieto-Hidalgo, Jerónimo Mora-Pascual,
and José Mora-Martínez. Developing ubiquitous sensor network platform using internet of things: Application
in precision agriculture. Sensors, 16(7):1141, 2016.

[11] Maanak Gupta, Mahmoud Abdelsalam, Sajad Khorsandroo, and Sudip Mittal. Security and privacy in smart farm-
ing: Challenges and opportunities. IEEE Access, 8:34564–34584, 2020. doi:10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2975142.

[12] Francisco Javier Ferrández-Pastor, Juan Manuel García-Chamizo, Mario Nieto-Hidalgo, and José Mora-Martínez.
Precision agriculture design method using a distributed computing architecture on internet of things context.
Sensors, 18(6):1731, 2018.

[13] Partha Pratim Ray. Internet of things for smart agriculture: Technologies, practices and future direction. Journal

of Ambient Intelligence and Smart Environments, 9(4):395–420, 2017.

[14] Ö Köksal and Bedir Tekinerdogan. Architecture design approach for iot-based farm management information

systems. Precision Agriculture, 20(5):926–958, 2019.

[15] Livestock Sensors. https://www.precisionag.com/in-ﬁeld-technologies/sensors/using-iot-to-increase-efﬁciency-

productivity-for-livestock/.

[16] Crop Field Sensors. https://extensionpublications.unl.edu/assets/html/g2296/build/g2296.htm.

[17] Othmane Friha, Mohamed Amine Ferrag, Lei Shu, Leandros Maglaras, and Xiaochan Wang. Internet of things
for the future of smart agriculture: A comprehensive survey of emerging technologies. IEEE/CAA Journal of
Automatica Sinica, 8(4):718–752, 2021. doi:10.1109/JAS.2021.1003925.

[18] DO Shirsath, Punam Kamble, Rohini Mane, Ashwini Kolap, and RS More.

Iot based smart greenhouse
automation using arduino. International Journal of Innovative Research in Computer Science & Technology, 5
(2):234–238, 2017.

[19] Manav Mehra, Sameer Saxena, Suresh Sankaranarayanan, Rijo Jackson Tom, and M Veeramanikandan. Iot
based hydroponics system using deep neural networks. Computers and electronics in agriculture, 155:473–486,
2018.

[20] Tran Anh Khoa, Mai Minh Man, Tan-Y Nguyen, VanDung Nguyen, and Nguyen Hoang Nam. Smart agriculture
using iot multi-sensors: A novel watering management system. Journal of Sensor and Actuator Networks, 8(3):
45, 2019.

[21] Shatadru Bipasha Biswas and M Tariq Iqbal. Solar water pumping system control using a low cost esp32
microcontroller. In Proceedings of IEEE Canadian conference on electrical & computer engineering (CCECE),
pages 1–5. IEEE, 2018.

[22] Sutanni Bhowmick, Bikram Biswas, Mandira Biswas, Anup Dey, Subhashis Roy, and Subir Kumar Sarkar.
Application of iot-enabled smart agriculture in vertical farming. In Advances in Communication, Devices and
Networking, pages 521–528. Springer, 2019.

[23] Terteil AA Ali, Viraj Choksi, and Madhukar B Potdar. Precision agriculture monitoring system using green
internet of things (g-iot). In Proceedings of 2nd International Conference on Trends in Electronics and Informatics
(ICOEI), pages 481–487. IEEE, 2018.

[24] JA López-Riquelme, N Pavón-Pulido, H Navarro-Hellín, F Soto-Valles, and R Torres-Sánchez. A software
architecture based on ﬁware cloud for precision agriculture. Agricultural water management, 183:123–135,
2017.

[25] Dixys L Hernández-Rojas, Tiago M Fernández-Caramés, Paula Fraga-Lamas, and Carlos J Escudero. Design
and practical evaluation of a family of lightweight protocols for heterogeneous sensing through ble beacons in
iot telemetry applications. Sensors, 18(1):57, 2018.

[26] Million Mafuta, Marco Zennaro, Antoine Bagula, Graham Ault, Harry Gombachika, and Timothy Chadza.
Successful deployment of a wireless sensor network for precision agriculture in malawi. International Journal of
Distributed Sensor Networks, 9(5):150703, 2013.

[27] Ravi Kishore Kodali, Vishal Jain, and Sumit Karagwal. Iot based smart greenhouse. In Proceedings of IEEE

region 10 humanitarian technology conference (R10-HTC), pages 1–6. IEEE, 2016.

[28] Takoi K Hamrita and Erich Chris Hoffacker. Development of a “smart” wireless soil monitoring sensor prototype

using rﬁd technology. Applied Engineering in Agriculture, 21(1):139–143, 2005.

33

Everything You wanted to Know about Smart Agriculture

A PREPRINT

[29] Sven Peets, CP Gasparin, DWK Blackburn, and RJ Godwin. Rﬁd tags for identifying and verifying agrochemicals

in food traceability systems. Precision Agriculture, 10(5):382–394, 2009.

[30] Luis Ruiz-Garcia and Loredana Lunadei. The role of rﬁd in agriculture: Applications, limitations and challenges.

Computers and Electronics in Agriculture, 79(1):42–50, 2011.

[31] AJ Sjolander, JA Thomasson, Ruixiu Sui, and Y Ge. Wireless tracking of cotton modules. part 2: Automatic
machine identiﬁcation and system testing. Computers and electronics in agriculture, 75(1):34–43, 2011.
[32] George Vellidis, Michael Tucker, Calvin Perry, Craig Kvien, and C Bednarz. A real-time wireless smart sensor

array for scheduling irrigation. Computers and electronics in agriculture, 61(1):44–50, 2008.

[33] Wenju Zhao, Shengwei Lin, Jiwen Han, Rongtao Xu, and Lu Hou. Design and implementation of smart irrigation
system based on lora. In Proceedings of IEEE Globecom Workshops (GC Wkshps), pages 1–6. IEEE, 2017.
[34] Giuseppe Faraci, Angelo Raciti, Santi Rizzo, and Giovanni Schembra. A 5g platform for unmanned aerial
monitoring in rural areas: Design and performance issues. In Proceedings of 4th IEEE Conference on Network
Softwarization and Workshops (NetSoft), pages 237–241. IEEE, 2018.

[35] Ahmed Alahmadi, Tami Alwajeeh, Vasuky Mohanan, and Rahmat Budiarto. Wireless sensor network with
always best connection for internet of farming. In Powering the internet of things with 5G networks, pages
176–201. IGI Global, 2018.

[36] image: Freepik.com.
[37] Giuliano Vitali, Matteo Francia, Matteo Golfarelli, and Maurizio Canavari. Crop Management with the IoT: An

Interdisciplinary Survey. Agronomy, 11(1):181, January 2021. doi:10.3390/agronomy11010181.

[38] K Balakrishna, SN Nethravathi, and K Harshitha. Real-time soil monitoring system for the application of

agriculture. International Journal of Engineering Science and Computing, 6(5):2016, 2016.

[39] Zhu Yao-lin, Zhang Gao-qiang, Zhu Lei, and Xu Jin. Design of wireless multi-point temperature transmission
In 2011 International Conference on Business Management and Electronic

system based on nRF24l01.
Information. IEEE, May 2011. doi:10.1109/icbmei.2011.5920375.

[40] Zheng Ma and Xing Pan. Agricultural environment information collection system based on wireless sensor

network. 2012 IEEE Global High Tech Congress on Electronics, pages 24–28, 2012.

[41] N Radha and R Swathika. A Polyhouse: Plant Monitoring and Diseases Detection using CNN. In Proceed-
ings of International Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Smart Systems (ICAIS), pages 966–971, 2021.
doi:10.1109/ICAIS50930.2021.9395847.

[42] Kanchana S. IoT in Agriculture : Smart Farming. International Journal of Scientiﬁc Research in Computer
Science, Engineering and Information Technology, pages 181–184, November 2018. doi:10.32628/cseit183856.
[43] Sudheer Kumar Nagothu. Weather based smart watering system using soil sensor and GSM. In Proceedings of
World Conference on Futuristic Trends in Research and Innovation for Social Welfare (Startup Conclave), pages
1–3, 2016. doi:10.1109/STARTUP.2016.7583991.

[44] Olugbenga Kayode Ogidan and Kennedy Richmond Aﬁa.

Smart irrigation system with an android-
In Proceedings of IEEE AFRICON. IEEE, September 2019.

based remote logging and control.
doi:10.1109/africon46755.2019.9133953.

[45] Yu Wang, Xi Yong, Zhaofeng Chen, Haiyuan Zheng, Jiayu Zhuang, and Jiajia Liu. The design of an intelligent
livestock production monitoring and management system. In Proceedings of IEEE 7th Data Driven Control and
Learning Systems Conference (DDCLS). IEEE, May 2018. doi:10.1109/ddcls.2018.8516021.

[46] Rajendra P. Sishodia, Ram L. Ray, and Sudhir K. Singh. Applications of remote sensing in precision agriculture:

A review. Remote Sensing, 12(19):3136, September 2020. doi:10.3390/rs12193136.

[47] Jasper Teboh, Brenda Tubana, Theo Udeigwe, Yves Emendack, and Josh Lofton. Applicability of ground-based
remote sensors for crop n management in sub saharan africa. Journal of Agricultural Science, 4:175–, January
2012. doi:10.5539/jas.v4n3p175.

[48] Thomas Jackson. Soil water modeling and remote sensing. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote

Sensing, GE-24(1):37–46, January 1986. doi:10.1109/tgrs.1986.289586.

[49] Ravi Kishore Kodali, Vishal Jain, and Sumit Karagwal.

In Proceedings of
IEEE Region 10 Humanitarian Technology Conference (R10-HTC), pages 1–6, 2016. doi:10.1109/R10-
HTC.2016.7906846.

IoT based smart greenhouse.

[50] Pradyumna K Tripathy, Ajaya K Tripathy, Aditi Agarwal, and Saraju P Mohanty. Mygreen: An iot-enabled

smart greenhouse for sustainable agriculture. IEEE Consumer Electronics Magazine, 2021.

34

Everything You wanted to Know about Smart Agriculture

A PREPRINT

[51] Panagiotis Radoglou-Grammatikis, Panagiotis Sarigiannidis, Thomas Lagkas, and Ioannis Moscholios. A
compilation of UAV applications for precision agriculture. Computer Networks, 172:107148, May 2020.
doi:10.1016/j.comnet.2020.107148.

[52] Othmane Friha, Mohamed Amine Ferrag, Lei Shu, Leandros Maglaras, and Xiaochan Wang. Internet of Things
for the Future of Smart Agriculture: A Comprehensive Survey of Emerging Technologies. IEEE/CAA Journal of
Automatica Sinica, 8(4):718–752, April 2021. doi:10.1109/jas.2021.1003925.

[53] Anandhavalli Muniasamy. Machine Learning for Smart Farming: AFocus on Desert Agriculture. In 2020
International Conference on Computing and Information Technology (ICCIT-1441). IEEE, September 2020.
doi:10.1109/iccit-144147971.2020.9213759.

[54] Ravi Gorli and Assistant Professor. Future of Smart Farming with Internet of Things. Journal of Information

technology and Its Applications, 2, April 2017.

[55] Stewart J Moorehead, Carl K Wellington, Brian J Gilmore, and Carlos Vallespi. Automating orchards: A
system of autonomous tractors for orchard maintenance. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference of
intelligent robots and systems, workshop on agricultural robotics, 2012.

[56] Ahmad Virk, Mehmood Ali Noor, Sajid Fiaz, Saddam Hussain, Haﬁz Hussain, Muzammal Rehman, Muhammad
Ahsan, and Wei Ma. Smart Farming: An Overview, pages 191–201. 02 2020. ISBN 978-3-030-37793-9.
doi:10.1007/978-3-030-37794-6_10.

[57] Isakovic Haris, Alexander Fasching, Lukas Punzenberger, and Radu Grosu. CPS/IoT ecosystem: Indoor vertical
farming system. In 2019 IEEE 23rd International Symposium on Consumer Technologies (ISCT). IEEE, June
2019. doi:10.1109/isce.2019.8900974.

[58] Msaﬁri Mbaga. The Prospects of Sustainable Desert Agriculture to Improve Food Security in Oman. Consilience:

The Journal of Sustainable Development, 13:44–59, January 2015.

[59] R. Vidhya and K. Valarmathi. Survey on automatic monitoring of hydroponics farms using IoT. In Proceedings
of 3rd International Conference on Communication and Electronics Systems (ICCES). IEEE, October 2018.
doi:10.1109/cesys.2018.8724103.

[60] Vertical Farming. https://mbc.studentlife.umich.edu/2021/04/23/urban-farming-the-introduction-of-vertical-

farming/.

[61] S. Revathy and S. Sathya Priya. Blockchain based Producer-Consumer Model for Farmers. In Proceedings of
4th International Conference on Computer, Communication and Signal Processing (ICCCSP). IEEE, September
2020. doi:10.1109/icccsp49186.2020.9315214.

[62] Miguel Pincheira Caro, Muhammad Salek Ali, Massimo Vecchio, and Raffaele Giaffreda. Blockchain-based trace-
ability in agri-food supply chain management: A practical implementation. In Proceedings of IoT Vertical and Top-
ical Summit on Agriculture - Tuscany (IOT Tuscany). IEEE, May 2018. doi:10.1109/iot-tuscany.2018.8373021.
[63] Junyong Liu, , Yanxin Chai, Yue Xiang, Xin Zhang, Si Gou, Youbo Liu, , , , and and. Clean energy consumption
of power systems towards smart agriculture: roadmap, bottlenecks and technologies. CSEE Journal of Power
and Energy Systems, 4(3):273–282, sep 2018. doi:10.17775/cseejpes.2017.01290.

[64] Saswat Kumar Ram, Sauvagya Ranjan Sahoo, Banee Bandana Das, Kamalakanta Mahapatra, and Saraju P. Mo-
hanty. Eternal-thing: A secure aging-aware solar-energy harvester thing for sustainable IoT. IEEE Transactions
on Sustainable Computing, 6(2):320–333, apr 2021. doi:10.1109/tsusc.2020.2987616.

[65] Kai Huang, Lei Shu, Kailiang Li, Fan Yang, Guangjie Han, Xiaochan Wang, and Simon Pearson. Photovoltaic
agricultural internet of things towards realizing the next generation of smart farming. IEEE Access, 8:76300–
76312, 2020. doi:10.1109/access.2020.2988663.

[66] Alpesh Desai, Indrajit Mukhopadhyay, and Abhijit Ray. Techno-economic-environment analysis of solar PV
In Proceedings IEEE 48th

smart microgrid for sustainable rural electriﬁcation in agriculture community.
Photovoltaic Specialists Conference (PVSC), 2021. doi:10.1109/pvsc43889.2021.9518454.

[67] Masoumeh EBRAHIMI, Amleset KELATI, Emma NKONOKI, Aron KONDORO, Diana RWEGASIRA,
Imed BEN DHAOU, Ville TAAJAMAA, and Hannu TENHUNEN. Creation of CERID: Challenge, edu-
cation, research, innovation, and deployment “in the context of smart MicroGrid”. In Proceedings IST-Africa
Week Conference (IST-Africa), 2019. doi:10.23919/istafrica.2019.8764845.
[68] Dave Evans. How the next evolution of the internet is changing everything. 2011.
[69] Franck Courbon, Philippe Loubet-Moundi, Jacques J.A. Fournier, and Assia Tria. A high efﬁciency hardware
trojan detection technique based on fast SEM imaging. In Proceedings Design, Automation & Test in Europe
Conference & Exhibition (DATE). IEEE Conference Publications, 2015. doi:10.7873/date.2015.1104.

35

Everything You wanted to Know about Smart Agriculture

A PREPRINT

[70] Sriram Sankaran, S. Shivshankar, and K. Nimmy. LHPUF: Lightweight hybrid PUF for enhanced security in
internet of things. In Proceedings IEEE International Symposium on Smart Electronic Systems (iSES) (Formerly
iNiS), 2018. doi:10.1109/ises.2018.00066.

[71] Ming Tang, Maixing Luo, Junfeng Zhou, Zhen Yang, Zhipeng Guo, Fei Yan, and Liang Liu. Side-channel attacks
in a real scenario. Tsinghua Science and Technology, 23(5):586–598, oct 2018. doi:10.26599/tst.2018.9010047.
[72] Hongil Ju, Yongsung Jeon, and Jeongnyeo Kim. A study on the hardware-based security solutions for smart
devices. In Proceedings International Conference on Computational Science and Computational Intelligence
(CSCI), 2015. doi:10.1109/csci.2015.105.

[73] Rajat Subhra Chakraborty and Swarup Bhunia. Security against hardware trojan through a novel application of
design obfuscation. In Proceedings International Conference on Computer-Aided Design - ICCAD. ACM Press,
2009. doi:10.1145/1687399.1687424.

[74] E. Kougianos V. P. Yanambaka B. K. Baniya V. K. V. V. Bathalapalli, S. P. Mohanty and B. Rout. A PUF-based
approach for sustainable cybersecurity in smart agriculture. In Proceedings of the OITS International Conference
on Information Technology (OCIT), 2021, Accepted, In Press.

[75] Abel Rodriguez de la Concepcion, Riccardo Stefanelli, and Daniele Trinchero. Adaptive wireless sensor networks
for high-deﬁnition monitoring in sustainable agriculture. In Proceedings IEEE Topical Conference on Wireless
Sensors and Sensor Networks (WiSNet), 2014. doi:10.1109/wisnet.2014.6825511.

[76] Ying Zhang. Design of the node system of wireless sensor network and its application in digital agriculture.
In Proceedings International Conference on Computer Distributed Control and Intelligent Environmental
Monitoring, 2011. doi:10.1109/cdciem.2011.371.

[77] G. Sahitya, N. Balaji, and C.D Naidu. Wireless sensor network for smart agriculture. In Proceedings 2nd
International Conference on Applied and Theoretical Computing and Communication Technology (iCATccT),
2016. doi:10.1109/icatcct.2016.7912049.

[78] Fan Yang, Lei Shu, Kai Huang, Kailiang Li, Guangjie Han, and Ye Liu. A partition-based node deployment
strategy in solar insecticidal lamps internet of things. IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 7(11):11223–11237, nov
2020. doi:10.1109/jiot.2020.2996514.

[79] Precision Agriculture Challenges.
[80] Min Chen, Shiwen Mao, and Yunhao Liu. Big data: A survey. Mobile networks and applications, 19(2):171–209,

2014.

[81] Krijn Poppe, Jacques Wolfert, CN Verdouw, and Alan Renwick. A european perspective on the economics of big

data. Farm Policy Journal, 12(1):11–19, 2015.

[82] Sjaak Wolfert, Lan Ge, Cor Verdouw, and Marc-Jeroen Bogaardt. Big data in smart farming–a review. Agricultural

systems, 153:69–80, 2017.

[83] C Kempenaar, C Lokhorst, EJB Bleumer, RF Veerkamp, Th Been, FK van Evert, MJ Boogaardt, L Ge, J Wolfert,
CN Verdouw, et al. Big data analysis for smart farming: results of to2 project in theme food security. Technical
report, Wageningen University & Research, 2016.

[84] T Nguyen Gia, Li Qingqing, J Pena Queralta, Zhuo Zou, Hannu Tenhunen, and Tomi Westerlund. Edge ai in
smart farming iot: Cnns at the edge and fog computing with lora. In Proceedings of IEEE AFRICON, pages 1–6.
IEEE, 2019.

[85] https://blog.isa.org/whats-the-difference-between-industry-40-industry-50.
[86] Vishal Dineshkumar Soni. Emerging roles of artiﬁcial intelligence in ecommerce. International Journal of trend

in scientiﬁc research and development, 4(5):223–225, 2020.

[87] Stefan Strohmeier and Franca Piazza. Artiﬁcial intelligence techniques in human resource management—a
conceptual exploration. In Intelligent techniques in engineering management, pages 149–172. Springer, 2015.
[88] Alakananda Mitra, Saraju P. Mohanty, Peter Corcoran, and Elias Kougianos. Detection of deep-morphed deepfake
images to make robust automatic facial recognition systems. In Proceedings of the 19th OITS International
Conference on Information Technology (OCIT), 2021.

[89] Alakananda Mitra, Saraju P. Mohanty, Peter Corcoran, and Elias Kougianos. Easydeep: An iot friendly robust
detection method for gan generated deepfake images in socialmedia. In Proceedings of the 4th FIP International
Internet of Things (IoT) Conference (IFIP-IoT), 2021.

[90] Alakananda Mitra, Saraju P. Mohanty, Peter Corcoran, and Elias Kougianos. iFace: A deepfake resilient digital
identiﬁcation framework for smart cities. In Proceedings of IEEE International Symposium on Smart Electronic
Systems (iSES) (Formerly iNiS), 2021, Accepted, In Press.

36

Everything You wanted to Know about Smart Agriculture

A PREPRINT

[91] Fei Jiang, Yong Jiang, Hui Zhi, Yi Dong, Hao Li, Sufeng Ma, Yilong Wang, Qiang Dong, Haipeng Shen, and
Yongjun Wang. Artiﬁcial intelligence in healthcare: past, present and future. Stroke and vascular neurology, 2
(4), 2017.

[92] Alakananda Mitra, Saraju P. Mohanty, Peter Corcoran, and Elias Kougianos. A novel machine learning based
method for deepfake video detection in social media. In Proceedings of IEEE International Symposium on Smart
Electronic Systems (iSES) (Formerly iNiS), pages 91–96, 2020. doi:10.1109/iSES50453.2020.00031.

[93] Alakananda Mitra, Saraju P. Mohanty, Peter Corcoran, and Elias Kougianos. A machine learning based approach
for deepfake detection in social media through key video frame extraction. SN Computer Science, 2(2):98, 2021.
doi:10.1007/s42979-021-00495-x.

[94] Marc Palaus, Elena M Marron, Raquel Viejo-Sobera, and Diego Redolar-Ripoll. Neural basis of video gaming:

A systematic review. Frontiers in human neuroscience, 11:248, 2017.

[95] Geoff Skinner and Toby Walmsley. Artiﬁcial intelligence and deep learning in video games a brief review. In
Proceedings of IEEE 4th International Conference on Computer and Communication Systems (ICCCS), pages
404–408, 2019. doi:10.1109/CCOMS.2019.8821783.

[96] Ye Liu, Xiaoyuan Ma, Lei Shu, Gerhard Petrus Hancke, and Adnan M. Abu-Mahfouz. From industry 4.0 to
agriculture 4.0: Current status, enabling technologies, and research challenges. IEEE Transactions on Industrial
Informatics, 17(6):4322–4334, 2021. doi:10.1109/TII.2020.3003910.

[97] Konstantinos G Liakos, Patrizia Busato, Dimitrios Moshou, Simon Pearson, and Dionysis Bochtis. Machine

learning in agriculture: A review. Sensors, 18(8):2674, 2018.

[98] PJ Ramos, Flavio Augusto Prieto, EC Montoya, and Carlos Eugenio Oliveros. Automatic fruit count on coffee

branches using computer vision. Computers and Electronics in Agriculture, 137:9–22, 2017.

[99] Subhajit Sengupta and Won Suk Lee. Identiﬁcation and determination of the number of immature green citrus

fruit in a canopy under different ambient light conditions. Biosystems Engineering, 117:51–61, 2014.

[100] Ying-xue Su, Huan Xu, and Li-jiao Yan. Support vector machine-based open crop model (sbocm): Case of rice

production in china. Saudi journal of biological sciences, 24(3):537–547, 2017.

[101] Suraj Amatya, Manoj Karkee, Aleana Gongal, Qin Zhang, and Matthew D Whiting. Detection of cherry tree
branches with full foliage in planar architecture for automated sweet-cherry harvesting. Biosystems engineering,
146:3–15, 2016.

[102] Iftikhar Ali, Fiona Cawkwell, Edward Dwyer, and Stuart Green. Modeling managed grassland biomass estimation
by using multitemporal remote sensing data—a machine learning approach. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in
Applied Earth Observations and Remote Sensing, 10(7):3254–3264, 2016.

[103] Xanthoula Eirini Pantazi, Dimitrios Moshou, Thomas Alexandridis, Rebecca L Whetton, and Abdul Mounem
Mouazen. Wheat yield prediction using machine learning and advanced sensing techniques. Computers and
electronics in agriculture, 121:57–65, 2016.

[104] Monisha Kaul, Robert L Hill, and Charles Walthall. Artiﬁcial neural networks for corn and soybean yield

prediction. Agricultural Systems, 85(1):1–18, 2005.

[105] Gang Liu, Xuehong Yang, and Minzan Li. An artiﬁcial neural network model for crop yield responding to soil
parameters. In Proceedings of International Symposium on Neural Networks, pages 1017–1021. Springer, 2005.
[106] Y Uno, SO Prasher, R Lacroix, PK Goel, Y Karimi, A Viau, and RM Patel. Artiﬁcial neural networks to predict
corn yield from compact airborne spectrographic imager data. Computers and electronics in agriculture, 47(2):
149–161, 2005.

[107] Biaojun Ji, Y Sun, S Yang, and J Wan. Artiﬁcial neural networks for rice yield prediction in mountainous regions.

The Journal of Agricultural Science, 145(3):249–261, 2007.

[108] Jun Zhang, Yiming Wang, Jinping Li, and Ping Yang. A neural network model for predicting cotton yields.

International federation for information processing-publications-iﬁp, 259:1321, 2008.

[109] Georg Ruß, Rudolf Kruse, Martin Schneider, and Peter Wagner. Data mining with neural networks for wheat
yield prediction. In Proceedings of Industrial Conference on Data Mining, pages 47–56. Springer, 2008.
[110] Rama Krishna Singh et al. Artiﬁcial neural network methodology for modelling and forecasting maize crop

yield. Agricultural Economics Research Review, 21(347-2016-16813):5–10, 2008.

[111] Farshad Soheili-Fard and Seyed Babak Salvatian. Forecasting of tea yield based on energy inputs using artiﬁcial
neural networks (a case study: Guilan province of iran). In Proceedings of Biological Forum, volume 7, page
1432. Research Trend, 2015.

37

Everything You wanted to Know about Smart Agriculture

A PREPRINT

[112] Snehal S Dahikar and Sandeep V Rode. Agricultural crop yield prediction using artiﬁcial neural network
approach. International journal of innovative research in electrical, electronics, instrumentation and control
engineering, 2(1):683–686, 2014.

[113] Haiyan Song and Yong He. Crop nutrition diagnosis expert system based on artiﬁcial neural networks. In Pro-
ceedings of Third International Conference on Information Technology and Applications (ICITA’05), volume 1,
pages 357–362. IEEE, 2005.

[114] Xiaoqin Dai, Zailin Huo, and Huimin Wang. Simulation for response of crop yield to soil moisture and salinity

with artiﬁcial neural network. Field Crops Research, 121(3):441–449, 2011.

[115] Jayavelu Senthilnath, Akanksha Dokania, Manasa Kandukuri, KN Ramesh, Gautham Anand, and SN Omkar.
Detection of tomatoes using spectral-spatial methods in remotely sensed rgb images captured by uav. Biosystems
engineering, 146:16–32, 2016.

[116] Siddhant Kumar, Gourav Chowdhary, Venkanna Udutalapally, Debanjan Das, and Saraju P Mohanty. Gcrop:
Internet-of-leaf-things (iolt) for monitoring of the growth of crops in smart agriculture. In Proceedings of IEEE
International Symposium on Smart Electronic Systems (iSES)(Formerly iNiS), pages 53–56. IEEE, 2019.

[117] Ngozi Clara Eli-Chukwu. Applications of artiﬁcial intelligence in agriculture: A review. Engineering, Technology

& Applied Science Research, 9(4):4377–4383, 2019.

[118] Durai Raj Vincent, Natarajan Deepa, Dhivya Elavarasan, Kathiravan Srinivasan, Sajjad Hussain Chauhdary,
and Celestine Iwendi. Sensors driven ai-based agriculture recommendation model for assessing land suitability.
Sensors, 19(17):3667, 2019.

[119] Wen Dong, Tianjun Wu, Yingwei Sun, and Jiancheng Luo. Digital mapping of soil available phosphorus
In Proceedings of 7th International Conference on

supported by ai technology for precision agriculture.
Agro-geoinformatics (Agro-geoinformatics), pages 1–5. IEEE, 2018.

[120] G.R. N. Carvalho, D.N. Brandão, D.B. Haddad, V.L. do Forte, and M.B. Ceddia. A rbf neural network applied to
predict soil ﬁeld capacity and permanent wilting point at brazilian coast. In Proceedings of International Joint
Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), pages 1–5, 2015. doi:10.1109/IJCNN.2015.7280628.

[121] Samuel N. Araya, Anna Fryjoff-Hung, Andreas Anderson, Joshua H. Viers, and Teamrat A. Ghezzehei. Machine
learning based soil moisture retrieval from unmanned aircraft system multispectral remote sensing. In Proceedings
of IEEE International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium (IGARSS 2020 ), pages 4598–4601, 2020.
doi:10.1109/IGARSS39084.2020.9324117.

[122] Chusnul Arif, Masaru Mizoguchi, Budi Indra Setiawan, et al. Estimation of soil moisture in paddy ﬁeld using

artiﬁcial neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1303.1868, 2013.

[123] Prachin Jain, Swagatam Bose Choudhury, Prakruti Bhatt, Sanat Sarangi, and Srinivasu Pappula. Max-
In Proceedings of
imising value of frugal soil moisture sensors for precision agriculture applications.
IEEE / ITU International Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence for Good (AI4G), pages 63–70, 2020.
doi:10.1109/AI4G50087.2020.9311008.

[124] Salim KLIBI, Kais TOUNSI, Zouhaier BEN REBAH, Basel SOLAIMAN, and Imed Riadh FARAH. Soil
salinity prediction using a machine learning approach through hyperspectral satellite image. In Proceedings of
5th International Conference on Advanced Technologies for Signal and Image Processing (ATSIP), pages 1–6,
2020. doi:10.1109/ATSIP49331.2020.9231870.

[125] Fanyu Bu and Xin Wang. A smart agriculture iot system based on deep reinforcement learning. Future Generation

Computer Systems, 99:500–507, 2019.

[126] Yu-Chuan Chang, Ting-Wei Huang, and Nen-Fu Huang. A machine learning based smart irrigation system
with lora p2p networks. In Proceedings of 20th Asia-Paciﬁc Network Operations and Management Symposium
(APNOMS), pages 1–4, 2019. doi:10.23919/APNOMS.2019.8893034.

[127] Manish K Nema, Deepak Khare, and Surendra K Chandniha. Application of artiﬁcial intelligence to estimate the
reference evapotranspiration in sub-humid doon valley. Applied Water Science, 7(7):3903–3910, 2017.

[128] Vassilis Z Antonopoulos and Athanasios V Antonopoulos. Daily reference evapotranspiration estimates by
artiﬁcial neural networks technique and empirical equations using limited input climate variables. Computers
and Electronics in Agriculture, 132:86–96, 2017.

[129] A. Dahane, R. Benameur, B. Kechar, and A. Benyamina. An iot based smart farming system using machine
learning. In Proceedings of International Symposium on Networks, Computers and Communications (ISNCC),
pages 1–6, 2020. doi:10.1109/ISNCC49221.2020.9297341.

38

Everything You wanted to Know about Smart Agriculture

A PREPRINT

[130] AC Hinnell, N Lazarovitch, A Furman, M Poulton, and AW Warrick. Neuro-drip: estimation of subsurface

wetting patterns for drip irrigation using neural networks. Irrigation science, 28(6):535–544, 2010.

[131] Shikhar Kr Sarma, Kh Robindro Singh, and Abhijeet Singh. An expert system for diagnosis of diseases in rice

plant. International Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 1(1):26–31, 2010.

[132] Kaliuday Balleda, D Satyanvesh, NVSSP Sampath, KTN Varma, and PK Baruah. Agpest: An efﬁcient rule-
based expert system to prevent pest diseases of rice & wheat crops. In Proceedings of IEEE 8th International
Conference on Intelligent Systems and Control (ISCO), pages 262–268. IEEE, 2014.

[133] GM Pasqual and J Mansﬁeld. Development of a prototype expert system for identiﬁcation and control of insect

pests. Computers and Electronics in Agriculture, 2(4):263–276, 1988.

[134] Gouravmoy Banerjee, Uditendu Sarkar, and Indrajit Ghosh. A radial basis function network based classiﬁer for
detection of selected tea pests. International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer Science and Software
Engineering, 7(5):665–669, 2017.

[135] BD Mahaman, H Christopher Passam, AB Sideridis, and CP Yialouris. Diares-ipm: a diagnostic advisory
rule-based expert system for integrated pest management in solanaceous crop systems. Agricultural Systems, 76
(3):1119–1135, 2003.

[136] Vidita Tilva, Jignesh Patel, and Chetan Bhatt. Weather based plant diseases forecasting using fuzzy logic. In
Proceedings of Nirma University International Conference on Engineering (NUiCONE), pages 1–5. IEEE, 2013.

[137] Fadzilah Siraj and Nureize Arbaiy. Integrated pest management system using fuzzy expert system. 2006.

[138] Magda S Peixoto, Laécio C Barros, Rodney C Bassanezi, and Odair A Fernandes. An approach via fuzzy systems

for dynamics and control of the soybean aphid. 2015.

[139] Hayo MG Van Der Werf and Christophe Zimmer. An indicator of pesticide environmental impact based on a

fuzzy expert system. Chemosphere, 36(10):2225–2249, 1998.

[140] LJ Francl and S Panigrahi. Artiﬁcial neural network models of wheat leaf wetness. Agricultural and Forest

Meteorology, 88(1-4):57–65, 1997.

[141] Bikash Chandra Karmokar, Mohammad Samawat Ullah, Md Kibria Siddiquee, and Kazi Md Rokibul Alam. Tea
leaf diseases recognition using neural network ensemble. International Journal of Computer Applications, 114
(17), 2015.

[142] Srdjan Sladojevic, Marko Arsenovic, Andras Anderla, Dubravko Culibrk, and Darko Stefanovic. Deep neural
networks based recognition of plant diseases by leaf image classiﬁcation. Computational intelligence and
neuroscience, 2016, 2016.

[143] Federico Hahn, Irineo Lopez, and Guadalupe Hernandez. Spectral detection and neural network discrimination

of rhizopus stolonifer spores on red tomatoes. Biosystems Engineering, 89(1):93–99, 2004.

[144] Liu Liu, Rujing Wang, Chengjun Xie, Po Yang, Fangyuan Wang, Sud Sudirman, and Wancai Liu. Pestnet: An
end-to-end deep learning approach for large-scale multi-class pest detection and classiﬁcation. IEEE Access, 7:
45301–45312, 2019. doi:10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2909522.

[145] Peng Jiang, Yuehan Chen, Bin Liu, Dongjian He, and Chunquan Liang. Real-time detection of apple leaf diseases
using deep learning approach based on improved convolutional neural networks. IEEE Access, 7:59069–59080,
2019.

[146] Ching-Ju Chen, Ya-Yu Huang, Yuan-Shuo Li, Chuan-Yu Chang, and Yueh-Min Huang. An aiot based smart agri-
cultural system for pests detection. IEEE Access, 8:180750–180761, 2020. doi:10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3024891.

[147] Kaiyi Wang, Shuifa Zhang, Zhibin Wang, Zhongqiang Liu, and Feng Yang. Mobile smart device-based vegetable

disease and insect pest recognition method. Intelligent Automation & Soft Computing, 19(3):263–273, 2013.

[148] Vincent Martin and Sabine Moisan. Early pest detection in greenhouses. In Proceedings of International

Conference on Pattern Recognition, 2008.

[149] Faithpraise Fina, Philip Birch, Rupert Young, J Obu, Bassey Faithpraise, and Chris Chatwin. Automatic plant
pest detection and recognition using k-means clustering algorithm and correspondence ﬁlters. International
Journal of Advanced Biotechnology and Research, 4(2):189–199, 2013.

[150] Venkanna Udutalapally, Saraju P Mohanty, Vishal Pallagani, and Vedant Khandelwal. scrop: A novel device
for sustainable automatic disease prediction, crop selection, and irrigation in internet-of-agro-things for smart
agriculture. IEEE Sensors Journal, 2020.

39

Everything You wanted to Know about Smart Agriculture

A PREPRINT

[151] Vishal Pallagani, Vedant Khandelwal, Bharath Chandra, Venkanna Udutalapally, Debanjan Das, and Saraju P
Mohanty. Dcrop: A deep-learning based framework for accurate prediction of diseases of crops in smart
agriculture. In Proceedings of IEEE International Symposium on Smart Electronic Systems (iSES)(Formerly
iNiS), pages 29–33. IEEE, 2019.

[152] MJ Aitkenhead, IA Dalgetty, CE Mullins, Allan James Stuart McDonald, and Norval James Colin Strachan.
Weed and crop discrimination using image analysis and artiﬁcial intelligence methods. Computers and electronics
in Agriculture, 39(3):157–171, 2003.

[153] Victor Partel, Sri Charan Kakarla, and Yiannis Ampatzidis. Development and evaluation of a low-cost and
smart technology for precision weed management utilizing artiﬁcial intelligence. Computers and electronics in
agriculture, 157:339–350, 2019.

[154] Xanthoula Eirini Pantazi, Alexandra A Tamouridou, TK Alexandridis, Anastasia L Lagopodi, Javid Kasheﬁ, and
Dimitrios Moshou. Evaluation of hierarchical self-organising maps for weed mapping using uas multispectral
imagery. Computers and Electronics in Agriculture, 139:224–230, 2017.

[155] Xanthoula-Eirini Pantazi, Dimitrios Moshou, and Cedric Bravo. Active learning system for weed species

recognition based on hyperspectral sensing. Biosystems Engineering, 146:193–202, 2016.

[156] Adam Binch and CW Fox. Controlled comparison of machine vision algorithms for rumex and urtica detection

in grassland. Computers and Electronics in Agriculture, 140:123–138, 2017.

[157] Ritaban Dutta, Daniel Smith, Richard Rawnsley, Greg Bishop-Hurley, James Hills, Greg Timms, and Dave Henry.
Dynamic cattle behavioural classiﬁcation using supervised ensemble classiﬁers. Computers and electronics in
agriculture, 111:18–28, 2015.

[158] Vinicius Pegorini, Leandro Zen Karam, Christiano Santos Rocha Pitta, Rafael Cardoso, Jean Carlos Cardozo
Da Silva, Hypolito José Kalinowski, Richardson Ribeiro, Fábio Luiz Bertotti, and Tangriani Simioni Assmann.
In vivo pattern classiﬁcation of ingestive behavior in ruminants using fbg sensors and machine learning. Sensors,
15(11):28456–28471, 2015.

[159] Stephen G Matthews, Amy L Miller, Thomas PlÖtz, and Ilias Kyriazakis. Automated tracking to measure

behavioural changes in pigs for health and welfare monitoring. Scientiﬁc reports, 7(1):1–12, 2017.

[160] M Craninx, Veerle Fievez, Bruno Vlaeminck, and Bernard De Baets. Artiﬁcial neural network models of the

rumen fermentation pattern in dairy cattle. Computers and electronics in agriculture, 60(2):226–238, 2008.

[161] Mark F Hansen, Melvyn L Smith, Lyndon N Smith, Michael G Salter, Emma M Baxter, Marianne Farish, and
Bruce Grieve. Towards on-farm pig face recognition using convolutional neural networks. Computers in Industry,
98:145–152, 2018.

[162] Iván Ramírez Morales, Daniel Rivero Cebrián, Enrique Fernández Blanco, and Alejandro Pazos Sierra. Early
warning in egg production curves from commercial hens: A svm approach. Computers and electronics in
agriculture, 121:169–179, 2016.

[163] Jaime Alonso, Alfonso Villa, and Antonio Bahamonde. Improved estimation of bovine weight trajectories using

support vector machine classiﬁcation. Computers and electronics in agriculture, 110:36–41, 2015.

[164] Jaime Alonso, Ángel Rodríguez Castañón, and Antonio Bahamonde. Support vector regression to predict carcass
weight in beef cattle in advance of the slaughter. Computers and electronics in agriculture, 91:116–120, 2013.

[165] Sigfredo Fuentes, Claudia Gonzalez Viejo, Brendan Cullen, Eden Tongson, Surinder S Chauhan, and Frank R
Dunshea. Artiﬁcial intelligence applied to a robotic dairy farm to model milk productivity and quality based on
cow data and daily environmental parameters. Sensors, 20(10):2975, 2020.

[166] N. K. Ray P. S. Chatterjee and S. P. Mohanty. LiveCare: An IoT based Healthcare Framework for Livestocks in

Smart Agriculture. IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics (TCE), 2021 Accepted, In Press.

[167] Gaia Codeluppi, Antonio Cilfone, Luca Davoli, and Gianluigi Ferrari. AI at the Edge: a Smart Gateway for
Greenhouse Air Temperature Forecasting. In Proceedings of IEEE International Workshop on Metrology for
Agriculture and Forestry (MetroAgriFor), pages 348–353, 2020. doi:10.1109/MetroAgriFor50201.2020.9277553.

[168] David L Ehret, Bernard D Hill, Tom Helmer, and Diane R Edwards. Neural network modeling of greenhouse
tomato yield, growth and water use from automated crop monitoring data. Computers and electronics in
agriculture, 79(1):82–89, 2011.

[169] Reza Pahlavan, Mahmoud Omid, and Asadollah Akram. Energy input–output analysis and application of artiﬁcial

neural networks for predicting greenhouse basil production. Energy, 37(1):171–176, 2012.

40

Everything You wanted to Know about Smart Agriculture

A PREPRINT

[170] Benyamin Khoshnevisan, Shahin Raﬁee, Mahmoud Omid, Marziye Youseﬁ, and Mehran Movahedi. Modeling
of energy consumption and ghg (greenhouse gas) emissions in wheat production in esfahan province of iran
using artiﬁcial neural networks. Energy, 52:333–338, 2013.

[171] Ashkan Nabavi-Pelesaraei, Reza Abdi, and Shahin Raﬁee. Neural network modeling of energy use and
greenhouse gas emissions of watermelon production systems. Journal of the Saudi Society of Agricultural
Sciences, 15(1):38–47, 2016.

[172] Wang Hongkang, Li Li, Wu Yong, Meng Fanjia, Wang Haihua, and NA Sigrimis. Recurrent neural network
model for prediction of microclimate in solar greenhouse. IFAC-PapersOnLine, 51(17):790–795, 2018.

[173] Dae-Hyun Jung, Hyoung Seok Kim, Changho Jhin, Hak-Jin Kim, and Soo Hyun Park. Time-serial analysis of
deep neural network models for prediction of climatic conditions inside a greenhouse. Computers and Electronics
in Agriculture, 173:105402, 2020.

[174] Massimo Merenda, Carlo Porcaro, and Demetrio Iero. Edge machine learning for ai-enabled iot devices: A

review. Sensors, 20(9):2533, 2020.

[175] Andrew G. Howard, Menglong Zhu, Bo Chen, Dmitry Kalenichenko, Weijun Wang, Tobias Weyand, Marco
Andreetto, and Hartwig Adam. Mobilenets: Efﬁcient convolutional neural networks for mobile vision applications.
CoRR, abs/1704.04861, 2017. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1704.04861.

[176] Forrest N Iandola, Song Han, Matthew W Moskewicz, Khalid Ashraf, William J Dally, and Kurt Keutzer.
Squeezenet: Alexnet-level accuracy with 50x fewer parameters and< 0.5 mb model size. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1602.07360, 2016.

[177] Mingxing Tan and Quoc Le. Efﬁcientnet: Rethinking model scaling for convolutional neural networks. In

Proceedings of International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 6105–6114. PMLR, 2019.

[178] Yiren Zhou, Seyed-Mohsen Moosavi-Dezfooli, Ngai-Man Cheung, and Pascal Frossard. Adaptive quantization

for deep neural network. In Proceedings of Thirty-Second AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 2018.

[179] Jiwei Yang, Xu Shen, Jun Xing, Xinmei Tian, Houqiang Li, Bing Deng, Jianqiang Huang, and Xian-sheng
Hua. Quantization networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 7308–7316, 2019.

[180] Yoojin Choi, Mostafa El-Khamy, and Jungwon Lee. Towards the limit of network quantization. arXiv preprint

arXiv:1612.01543, 2016.

[181] Qing Jin, Linjie Yang, and Zhenyu Liao. Adabits: Neural network quantization with adaptive bit-widths. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 2146–2156, 2020.

[182] Shuochao Yao, Yiran Zhao, Aston Zhang, Lu Su, and Tarek Abdelzaher. Deepiot: Compressing deep neural
network structures for sensing systems with a compressor-critic framework. In Proceedings of the 15th ACM
Conference on Embedded Network Sensor Systems, pages 1–14, 2017.

[183] Pavlo Molchanov, Stephen Tyree, Tero Karras, Timo Aila, and Jan Kautz. Pruning convolutional neural networks

for resource efﬁcient inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.06440, 2016.

[184] Sajid Anwar and Wonyong Sung. Compact deep convolutional neural networks with coarse pruning. arXiv

preprint arXiv:1610.09639, 2016.

[185] Tien-Ju Yang, Yu-Hsin Chen, and Vivienne Sze. Designing energy-efﬁcient convolutional neural networks using
energy-aware pruning. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
pages 5687–5695, 2017.

[186] Yiwen Guo, Anbang Yao, and Yurong Chen. Dynamic network surgery for efﬁcient dnns. arXiv preprint

arXiv:1608.04493, 2016.

[187] Geoffrey Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jeff Dean. Distilling the knowledge in a neural network. arXiv preprint

arXiv:1503.02531, 2015.

[188] S Han, H Mao, and WJ Dally. Compressing deep neural networks with pruning, trained quantization and huffman

coding. arxiv 2015. arXiv preprint arXiv:1510.00149.

[189] Satoshi Nakamoto. Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system. Cryptography Mailing list at

https://metzdowd.com, 03 2009.

[190] Vitalik Buterin. A next-generation smart contract and decentralized application platform. 2015.

[191] Madhusudan Singh, Abhiraj Singh, and Shiho Kim. Blockchain: A game changer for securing IoT data. In
Proceedings IEEE 4th World Forum on Internet of Things (WF-IoT), 2018. doi:10.1109/wf-iot.2018.8355182.

41

Everything You wanted to Know about Smart Agriculture

A PREPRINT

[192] Friorik P. Hjalmarsson, Gunnlaugur K. Hreioarsson, Mohammad Hamdaqa, and Gisli Hjalmtysson. Blockchain-
based e-voting system. In Proceedings IEEE 11th International Conference on Cloud Computing (CLOUD),
2018. doi:10.1109/cloud.2018.00151.

[193] Qing Geng and YingGe Du. From blockchain to digital twin community: A technical framework for smart
community governance. In Proceedings International Conference on Public Management and Intelligent Society
(PMIS), 2021. doi:10.1109/pmis52742.2021.00068.

[194] Yaping Zeng. Digital music resource copyright management mechanism based on blockchain. In Proceedings 3rd
International Conference on Smart BlockChain (SmartBlock), 2020. doi:10.1109/smartblock52591.2020.00036.
[195] Lijun Xiao, Weihong Huang, Yong Xie, Weidong Xiao, and Kuan-Ching Li. A blockchain-based traceable IP
copyright protection algorithm. IEEE Access, 8:49532–49542, 2020. doi:10.1109/access.2020.2969990.
[196] Laavanya Rachakonda, Anand K. Bapatla, Saraju P. Mohanty, and Elias Kougianos. SaYoPillow: Blockchain-
integrated privacy-assured IoMT framework for stress management considering sleeping habits. IEEE Transac-
tions on Consumer Electronics, 67(1):20–29, feb 2021. doi:10.1109/tce.2020.3043683.

[197] Asaph Azaria, Ariel Ekblaw, Thiago Vieira, and Andrew Lippman. MedRec: Using blockchain for medical data
access and permission management. In Proceedings 2nd International Conference on Open and Big Data (OBD).
IEEE, aug 2016. doi:10.1109/obd.2016.11.

[198] Deepak Puthal, Saraju P. Mohanty, Priyadarsi Nanda, Elias Kougianos, and Gautam Das. Proof-of-authentication
for scalable blockchain in resource-constrained distributed systems. In Proceedings IEEE International Confer-
ence on Consumer Electronics (ICCE), 2019. doi:10.1109/icce.2019.8662009.

[199] Hsin-Te Wu and Chun-Wei Tsai. An intelligent agriculture network security system based on private blockchains.

Journal of Communications and Networks, 21(5):503–508, oct 2019. doi:10.1109/jcn.2019.000043.

[200] Pradip Kumar Sharma, Saurabh Singh, Young-Sik Jeong, and Jong Hyuk Park. DistBlockNet: A distributed
blockchains-based secure SDN architecture for IoT networks. IEEE Communications Magazine, 55(9):78–85,
2017. doi:10.1109/mcom.2017.1700041.

[201] Lijing Zhou, Licheng Wang, Yiru Sun, and Pin Lv. BeeKeeper: A blockchain-based IoT system with secure
storage and homomorphic computation. IEEE Access, 6:43472–43488, 2018. doi:10.1109/access.2018.2847632.
[202] Mingxin Ma, Guozhen Shi, and Fenghua Li. Privacy-oriented blockchain-based distributed key manage-
ment architecture for hierarchical access control in the IoT scenario. IEEE Access, 7:34045–34059, 2019.
doi:10.1109/access.2019.2904042.

[203] AKBapatla et al. sfarm: A distributed ledger based remote crop monitoring system for smart farming. In
Proceedings of the 4th IFIP International Internet of Things (IoT) Conference (IFIP-IoT), 2021, 2021, Accepted,
In Press.

[204] Shovon Paul, Jubair Islam Joy, Shaila Sarker, Abdullah Al Haris Shakib, Sharif Ahmed, and Amit Kumar Das. An
unorthodox way of farming without intermediaries through blockchain. In Proceedings International Conference
on Sustainable Technologies for Industry 4.0 (STI). IEEE, December 2019. doi:10.1109/sti47673.2019.9068007.
[205] Hanqing Wu, Jiannong Cao, Yanni Yang, Cheung Leong Tung, Shan Jiang, Bin Tang, Yang Liu, Xiaoqing
Wang, and Yuming Deng. Data management in supply chain using blockchain: Challenges and a case study. In
Proceedings 28th International Conference on Computer Communication and Networks (ICCCN). IEEE, jul
2019. doi:10.1109/icccn.2019.8846964.

[206] Sidra Malik, Volkan Dedeoglu, Salil S. Kanhere, and Raja Jurdak. TrustChain: Trust management in blockchain
and IoT supported supply chains. In Proceedings IEEE International Conference on Blockchain (Blockchain).
IEEE, jul 2019. doi:10.1109/blockchain.2019.00032.

[207] Feng Tian. An agri-food supply chain traceability system for china based on RFID & blockchain technology. In
Proceedings 13th International Conference on Service Systems and Service Management (ICSSSM). IEEE, jun
2016. doi:10.1109/icsssm.2016.7538424.

[208] Dona Kaid and Maged M. Eljazzar. Applying blockchain to automate installments payment between supply
chain parties. In Proceeding 14th International Computer Engineering Conference (ICENCO). IEEE, dec 2018.
doi:10.1109/icenco.2018.8636131.

[209] B. M. A. L. Basnayake and C. Rajapakse. A blockchain-based decentralized system to ensure the transparency of
organic food supply chain. In Proceedings International Research Conference on Smart Computing and Systems
Engineering (SCSE). IEEE, mar 2019. doi:10.23919/scse.2019.8842690.

[210] Qijun Lin, Huaizhen Wang, Xiaofu Pei, and Junyu Wang. Food safety traceability system based on blockchain

and EPCIS. IEEE Access, 7:20698–20707, 2019. doi:10.1109/access.2019.2897792.

42

Everything You wanted to Know about Smart Agriculture

A PREPRINT

[211] Indranil Nath. Data exchange platform to ﬁght insurance fraud on blockchain. In Proceedings IEEE 16th
International Conference on Data Mining Workshops (ICDMW). IEEE, dec 2016. doi:10.1109/icdmw.2016.0121.
In Proceed-
ings IEEE Canadian Conference of Electrical and Computer Engineering (CCECE). IEEE, may 2019.
doi:10.1109/ccece.2019.8861573.

[212] T.Q. Nguyen, A.K. Das, and L.T. Tran. NEO smart contract for drought-based insurance.

[213] Veneta Aleksieva, Hristo Valchanov, and Anton Huliyan. Smart contracts based on private and public blockchains
for the purpose of insurance services. In Proceedings International Conference Automatics and Informatics
(ICAI). IEEE, oct 2020. doi:10.1109/icai50593.2020.9311371.

[214] Deepak Puthal and Saraju P. Mohanty. Proof of authentication: IoT-friendly blockchains. IEEE Potentials, 38(1):

26–29, jan 2019. doi:10.1109/mpot.2018.2850541.

[215] Sukrutha L. T. Vangipuram, Saraju P. Mohanty, and Elias Kougianos. CoviChain: A blockchain based framework
for nonrepudiable contact tracing in healthcare cyber-physical systems during pandemic outbreaks. SN Computer
Science, 2(5), jun 2021. doi:10.1007/s42979-021-00746-x.

[216] Sujit Biswas, Kashif Sharif, Fan Li, Anupam Kumar Bairagi, Zohaib Latif, and Saraju P. Mohanty. GlobeChain:
An interoperable blockchain for global sharing of healthcare data—a COVID-19 perspective. IEEE Consumer
Electronics Magazine, 10(5):64–69, sep 2021. doi:10.1109/mce.2021.3074688.

[217] United States Department of Agriculture and NASS. Census of Agriculture, 2021. URL https://www.nass.

usda.gov/Charts_and_Maps/. Last Accessed on 30 October 2021.

[218] USDA and NASS. Crop Condition and Soil moisture Analytics, 2021. URL https://nassgeo.csiss.gmu.

edu/CropCASMA/. Last Accessed on October 30, 2021.

[219] kaggle Dataset. Plant Disease, october 2018. URL https://www.kaggle.com/saroz014/plant-diseases.

Last Accessed on October 30, 2021.

[220] Pomegranate

Fruit

Dataset.

pomegranate-fruit-dataset.

URL

https://www.kaggle.com/kumararun37/

[221] Chinese Cabbage Disease Dataset. https://www.kaggle.com/ giane901/chinese-cabbage-disease-detection.
[222] National Cooperative Soil Survey. Soil Characterization Data, . URL https://ncsslabdatamart.sc.egov.

usda.gov/. Last Accessed on 30 October 2021.

[223] US Geological Survey. Estimated Annual Agricultural Pesticide Use, . URL https://water.usgs.gov/

nawqa/pnsp/usage/maps/. Last Accessed on 30 October 2021.

[224] U.S.Geological Survey. Total Water Use in the United States, 2015. URL https://www.usgs.gov/
special-topic/water-science-school/science/total-water-use-united-states. Last Accessed
on 30 October 2021.

[225] U.S.Geological Survey. Water use in the U.S, 2015. URL https://labs.waterdata.usgs.gov/

visualizations/water-use-15/. Last Accessed on 30 October 2021.

[226] U.S.Geological Survey.

Groundwater Quality,

.

URL https://www.usgs.gov/media/images/

areas-high-risk-nitrogen-contamination-groundwater. Last Accessed on 30 October 2021.
[227] U.S.Department of Agriculture. Disaster Analysis, 2021. URL https://www.nass.usda.gov/Research_

and_Science/Disaster-Analysis/. Last Accessed on 30 October 2021.

[228] Claire G. Boryan, Zhengwei Yang, Avery Sandborn, Patrick Willis, and Barry Haack. Operational Agricultural
In IGARSS 2018 - 2018 IEEE International

Flood Monitoring with Sentinel-1 Synthetic Aperture Radar.
Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium, pages 5831–5834, 2018. doi:10.1109/IGARSS.2018.8519458.

[229] Gabriel Signoretti, Marianne Silva, Pedro Andrade, Ivanovitch Silva, Emiliano Sisinni, and Paolo Ferrari. An
evolving tinyml compression algorithm for iot environments based on data eccentricity. Sensors, 21(12):4153,
2021.

[230] Shital Joshi, Saraju P. Mohanty, and Elias Kougianos. Everything you wanted to know about PUFs. IEEE

Potentials, 36(6):38–46, 2017. doi:10.1109/MPOT.2015.2490261.

[231] Carson Labrado, Himanshu Thapliyal, and Saraju P. Mohanty. Fortifying vehicular security through low
overhead physically unclonable functions. J. Emerg. Technol. Comput. Syst., 18(1), 2021. ISSN 1550-4832.
doi:10.1145/3442443.

[232] Verónica Saiz-Rubio and Francisco Rovira-Más. From smart farming towards agriculture 5.0: A review on crop

data management. Agronomy, 10(2):207, 2020.

[233] Evan DG Fraser and Malcolm Campbell. Agriculture 5.0: reconciling production with planetary health. One

Earth, 1(3):278–280, 2019.

43

Everything You wanted to Know about Smart Agriculture

A PREPRINT

Authors

Alakananda Mitra received a Bachelor of Science (Honors) in Physics from Presidency
College, University of Calcutta in 2001 and a Bachelor of Technology and Master of Tech-
nology in Radiophysics and Electronics from the Institute of Radiophysics and Electronics,
University of Calcutta in 2004 and 2006, respectively. She is currently a doctoral student in
the research group at Smart Electronics Systems Laboratory (SESL) in the Department of
Computer Science and Engineering at the University of North Texas, Denton, USA. Along
with her course work, she also works as a Teaching Assistant in the department. She has
worked as a Project Linked Personnel at Advanced Computing and Microelectronics Unit
in Indian Statistical Institute from 2006 to 2007. Her research interests include artiﬁcial
intelligence, machine learning, deep learning, edge AI, and application of AI/ML approaches
in multi-media forensics, smart agriculture, and smart healthcare.

Sukrutha L. T. Vangipuram received a Master of Technology in Computer Science, Jawa-
harlal Nehru Technological University, Hyderabad in 2012 and Bachelor of Engineering in
Information Technology, Osmania University, Hyderabad in 2007. Currently, she is enrolled
as a doctoral student in the research group at Smart Electronics Systems Laboratory (SESL)
at Computer Science and Engineering at the University of North Texas, Denton, USA. She
has worked as an Assistant Professor in the Computer Science Engineering Department,
Methodist College of Engineering and Technology, Hyderabad from 2012 -2015 and as
a Teaching Assistant in the Information Technology Department in Swamy Vivekananda
Institute of Technology Hyderabad, India, from 2007 -2009. Her research interests are Web
Programming Services, Services Oriented Architecture, Cloud Computing, Application of
Blockchain in Health Care, and Smart Agriculture.

Anand Kumar Bapatla received a Bachelor’s of Technology (B. Tech) in Electronics and
Communication from Gayatri Vidya Parishad College of Engineering, Visakhapatnam, India,
in 2014 and an MSCE degree in 2019 from the University of North Texas, Denton, USA. He
is currently a Ph.D. candidate in the research group at Smart Electronics Systems Laboratory
(SESL) at Computer Science and Engineering at the University of North Texas, Denton, TX.
His research interests include smart healthcare and Blockchain applications in Internet of
Things (IoT).

Venkata K. V. V. Bathalapalli received B.Tech. degree in Electronics and Communication
Engineering from Sri Venkateswara University, Tirupati, India, in 2020. He is currently
pursuing Ph.D. program in Computer Science and Engineering at Smart Electronics Systems
Laboratory, University of North Texas, Denton, TX, USA. His research interests are in the
areas of Hardware Assisted Security and Blockchain based IoT Device Security for Smart
Healthcare and Smart Agriculture.

44

Everything You wanted to Know about Smart Agriculture

A PREPRINT

Saraju P. Mohanty received the bachelor’s degree (Honors) in electrical engineering from
the Orissa University of Agriculture and Technology, Bhubaneswar, in 1995, the master’s
degree in Systems Science and Automation from the Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru,
in 1999, and the Ph.D. degree in Computer Science and Engineering from the University
of South Florida, Tampa, in 2003. He is a Professor with the University of North Texas.
His research is in “Smart Electronic Systems” which has been funded by National Science
Foundations (NSF), Semiconductor Research Corporation (SRC), U.S. Air Force, IUSSTF, and
Mission Innovation. He has authored 400 research articles, 4 books, and 7 granted and pending
patents. His Google Scholar h-index is 45 and i10-index is 180 with 8500 citations. He is
regarded as a visionary researcher on Smart Cities technology in which his research deals with
security and energy aware, and AI/ML-integrated smart components. He introduced the Secure
Digital Camera (SDC) in 2004 with built-in security features designed using Hardware-Assisted
Security (HAS) or Security by Design (SbD) principle. He is widely credited as the designer for the ﬁrst digital
watermarking chip in 2004 and ﬁrst the low-power digital watermarking chip in 2006. He is a recipient of 13 best
paper awards, Fulbright Specialist Award in 2020, IEEE Consumer Electronics Society Outstanding Service Award
in 2020, the IEEE-CS-TCVLSI Distinguished Leadership Award in 2018, and the PROSE Award for Best Textbook
in Physical Sciences and Mathematics category in 2016. He has delivered 15 keynotes and served on 13 panels at
various International Conferences. He has been serving on the editorial board of several peer-reviewed international
transactions/journals, including IEEE Transactions on Big Data (TBD), IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design
of Integrated Circuits and Systems (TCAD), IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics (TCE), and ACM Journal on
Emerging Technologies in Computing Systems (JETC). He has been the Editor-in-Chief (EiC) of the IEEE Consumer
Electronics Magazine (MCE) during 2016-2021. He served as the Chair of Technical Committee on Very Large
Scale Integration (TCVLSI), IEEE Computer Society (IEEE-CS) during 2014-2018 and on the Board of Governors
of the IEEE Consumer Technology Society during 2019-2021. He serves on the steering, organizing, and program
committees of several international conferences. He is the founding steering committee chair/vice-chair for the IEEE
International Symposium on Smart Electronic Systems (IEEE-iSES), the IEEE-CS Symposium on VLSI (ISVLSI), and
the OITS International Conference on Information Technology (OCIT). He has mentored 2 post-doctoral researchers,
and supervised 13 Ph.D. dissertations, 26 M.S. theses, and 11 undergraduate projects.

Elias Kougianos received a BSEE from the University of Patras, Greece in 1985 and an
MSEE in 1987, an MS in Physics in 1988 and a Ph.D. in EE in 1997, all from Louisiana
State University. From 1988 through 1998 he was with Texas Instruments, Inc., in Houston
and Dallas, TX. In 1998 he joined Avant! Corp. (now Synopsys) in Phoenix, AZ as a Senior
Applications engineer and in 2000 he joined Cadence Design Systems, Inc., in Dallas, TX as a
Senior Architect in Analog/Mixed-Signal Custom IC design. He has been at UNT since 2004.
He is a Professor in the Department of Electrical Engineering, at the University of North
Texas (UNT), Denton, TX. His research interests are in the area of Analog/Mixed-Signal/RF
IC design and simulation and in the development of VLSI architectures for multimedia
applications. He is an author of over 200 peer-reviewed journal and conference publications.

Chittaranjan Ray is a Professor of Civil and Environmental Engineering at the University of
Nebraska-Lincoln, and Director of the Nebraska Water Center at University of Nebraska. He
has extensive experience in many facets of managing both water quantity and water quality
issues, particularly in the areas of chemical and pathogen impacts on ground water quality;
ﬂow and transport processes in the vadose zone, technologies for low-cost water supply, and
the agriculture-water/energy nexus. He previously served as the interim director of the Water
Resources Research Center at University of Hawaii-Manoa. Ray also was Director of the
university’s Environmental Center and as Chief Environmental Engineer for the Applied
Research Laboratory, a U.S. Navy sponsored facility at University of Hawaii. He has held
positions in industry and at the Illinois State Water Survey.

45

