2
2
0
2

n
a
J

7
2

]
I

N
.
s
c
[

1
v
5
8
3
1
1
.
1
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

An Overview of Blockchain and 5G Networks

Hajar Moudoud∗,1,3, Soumaya Cherkaoui1, and Lyes Khoukhi2

1 Universit´e de Sherbrooke, Canada
hajar.moudoud, soumaya.cherkaoui@usherbrooke.ca
2 Normandie University, France
lyes.khoukhi@ensicaen.fr
3 University of Technology of Troyes, France

Abstract. The 5G wireless networks are potentially revolutionizing fu-
ture technologies. The 5G technologies are expected to foresee demands
of diverse vertical applications with diverse requirements including high
traﬃc volume, massive connectivity, high quality of service, and low la-
tency. To fulﬁll such requirements in 5G and beyond, new emerging tech-
nologies such as SDN, NFV, MEC, and CC are being deployed. However,
these technologies raise several issues regarding transparency, decentral-
ization, and reliability. Furthermore, 5G networks are expected to con-
nect many heterogeneous devices and machines which will raise several
security concerns regarding users’ conﬁdentiality, data privacy, and trust-
worthiness. To work seamlessly and securely in such scenarios, future 5G
networks need to deploy smarter and more eﬃcient security functions.
Motivated by the aforementioned issues, blockchain was proposed by re-
searchers to overcome 5G issues because of its capacities to ensure trans-
parency, data reliability, trustworthiness, immutability in a distributed
environment. Indeed, blockchain has gained momentum as a novel tech-
nology that gives rise to a plethora of new decentralized technologies.
In this chapter, we discuss the integration of the blockchain with 5G
networks and beyond. We then present how blockchain applications in
5G networks and beyond could facilitate enabling various services at the
edge and the core.

Keywords: Blockchain · 5G networks · SDN · NFV · smart contracts·
blockchain consensus · Blockchain oracles · Sharding · Network slicing ·
Cloud computing· D2D · MEC.

1

Introduction

Fifth-generation (5G) networks and beyond are expected to enable a wide
range of applications from the industrial internet of things, virtual reality,
autonomous driving to real-time gaming [1]. will enable them to bene-
ﬁt from massive machine-like communications, improve mobile broad-
band, and provide ultra-reliable, low-latency communications. The 5G
roadmap aims to provide users with up to 10 Gbps of data throughput,
1000x network capacity, 10 Tbps per square kilometer, and 1 millisecond
latency [2]. To meet these requirements, several underlying wireless tech-
nologies have been proposed, such as cloud computing (CC), multi-access

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

Hajar Moudoud, Soumaya Cherkaoui, and Lyes Khoukhi

edge computing (MEC), software-deﬁned network (SDN), and network
function virtualization (NFV). In addition to these new technologies, 5G
will incorporate new radio access techniques, including massive MIMO,
millimeter wave and D2D connectivity, which will also enable 5G cellular
networks.

The 5G networks will support new technologies to deliver new service de-
livery models. These technologies, however, will cause several challenges
regarding users’ security, data privacy, and integrity. Unlike centralized
cellular networks (i.e., 3G, 4G, etc.), 5G networks are expected to dis-
tribute and decentralize services that emphasize security challenges [3].
Speciﬁcally, the security management in 5G networks is complex because
it operates in a ﬂexible and dynamic environment where a massive num-
ber of devices are connected.

For secure, transparent, and immutable 5G networks, there is a need to
ensure security while exploiting new technologies such as Distributed
Ledger Technologies (DLT), Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI), and Machine
Learning (ML). Among the existing technologies, blockchain is the most
promising one that has the potential to revolutionize the way services
are oﬀered 5G networks [4] [5]. Blockchain technology is a distributed,
immutable, and secure ledger that ensures trust among unreliable en-
tities without relying on a centralized third party. Blockchain has the
capacity to be merged with the 5G to provide reliable resource shar-
ing, secure storage, smart authentication, and security management [6].
Consequently, blockchain with its inherent features will provide massive
communication in a distributed environment while ensuring high secu-
rity, data privacy, and reliability.

Currently, one of the challenging aspects of 5G networks is the need
to assure transparency, immutability, and decentralization for its large
number of users and services. Blockchain technology with its inherent
properties will enable secure and trustworthy data transactions in a P2P
manner for various services/users in the 5G network [7] [8]. Therefore,
blockchain integration with 5G networks will result in self-managing,
self-securing, and self-maintaining networks without the need for a cen-
tral authority. In fact, 5G is expected to provide a connection for a
large number of devices with resources and services (network slicing). In
this regard, distributed blockchain with its security features will enable
a new generation of massive communication by providing transparent
provisioning between devices.

Besides the beneﬁts of blockchain integration with 5G networks, 5G
will enable a wide range of blockchain-based applications such as au-
tonomy’s resource, automated management, and reliable content base
storage [9] [10]. For instance, blockchain can be leveraged by cellular ser-
vice providers (CSPs) to enable future services for mobile industries. In
order to automatically handle transactions in CSPs, blockchain features
such as smart contracts which are self-executing code will enable a secure
and automated sharing of infrastructures. Furthermore, the blockchain
and ML empowered intelligent 5G beyond network will enable a new
stack of technologies that will empower self-aggregating communication
and intelligent resource management beneﬁcial for 5G networks.

An Overview of Blockchain and 5G Networks

3

2 Background

In this section, ﬁrstly we give a brief background on the blockchain and
its features. Secondly, we give a brief description of blockchain features.

2.1 Blockchain

Blockchain is a transparent technology, that establishes trust among un-
reliable entities [11] [10]. This decentralized technology ensures secure
information transmission without the interference of a third authority.
Blockchain is a distributed ledger that keeps a continuously growing set
of data records called blocks. Each block contains a collection of transac-
tions committed by members of the blockchain. A blockchain transaction
is a piece of information meant to be stored in a safe database [12][13].
For instance, a transaction could contain technical metadata of a mobile
(i.e., size, type, or timestamp). The blockchain is an immutable ledger
that permits transaction veriﬁcation by members who could be dishon-
est. To add a new block to the blockchain, all members of the chain
should reach an agreement; this is referred to as a consensus. Once a
consensus is established among all members, the new block is validated
then added to the chain.
Blockchain technology has many characteristics, such as being decentral-
ized, immutable, and having no single point of failure (SPOF). Blockchain
can operate in a decentralized environment, each member of the chain has
an integral copy of the ledger, meaning, data is stored in a peer-to-peer
environment [14]. This redundancy of information guarantees data non-
repudiation, making it diﬃcult to cause major disruption. Blockchain
is designed to be immutable; once a block is added to the chain, any
changes inside the block will be extremely diﬃcult. The blockchain en-
ables several technologies like the hash function, the digital signature,
and the timestamp. If a malicious user wants to change a block, this will
cause the hash to change also, meaning he needs to reach a new agree-
ment for this block and other blocks following it. Due to the distributed
and shared nature of the blockchain, the ledger cannot be controlled by
a centralized entity, meaning, it has no SPOF.

Blockchain Taxonomy A blockchain is composed of a family of
blocks linked together by a hash. The hash function is used to map
data stored in a transaction and generates a unique ﬁngerprint [15]. The
hash does not only depend on the new transaction but on the previous
transactions also. A new transaction is broadcast to miners of the chain
and waits to be conﬁrmed. To verify a transaction, miners need a digital
signature to certify the authenticity and integrity of the transaction. The
blockchain uses the Elliptic Curve Digital Signature Algorithm to sign
a transaction. Once the blockchain miners approve a transaction, it is
written into a block. A block is added to the chain when the consensus
is established, and the block has reached a certain number of veriﬁed
transactions. Each block refers to the previous block and together form
the blockchain. Figure 1 presents how blocks are linked together.

4

Hajar Moudoud, Soumaya Cherkaoui, and Lyes Khoukhi

Fig. 1. Blockchain workﬂow.

Blockchain Platform Types Current blockchain networks can be
classiﬁed into three types: public, private, and consortium Blockchain
[16]. A public blockchain is permissionless where all members can join
the network. It is publicly open for members to read, write, or validate a
transaction without the approval of third parties. In a private blockchain,
only members can participate in the network, meaning, it is centralized.
The owner of the consortium blockchain, only a group of authorization
members can validate transactions [17]. These members can be chosen.
in advance.

Blockchain Consensus The consensus is a protocol that estab-
lishes the core of the blockchain and decides how the agreement should
be reached among miners to append a new block to the chain [18].
Blockchain consensus can be deﬁned as an algorithm that helps the dis-
tributed network to make decisions, while others describe the consensus
algorithm as the mechanism that brings about all nodes to take a deci-
sion about the same transaction either to add it to the chain or reject
it. According to others making a consensus among unreliable miners is
a transformation of the Byzantine generals. There are several types of
blockchain consensus. The most common consensus algorithms are Proof
of Work (PoW), Proof of Stake (PoS), Proof of Activity (PoA), and Prac-
tical Byzantine Fault Tolerance (PBFT).

Blockchain Smart contract Blockchain smart contracts are self-
executing programs non-modiﬁable implemented inside the chain which
is intended to automatically execute actions to the terms of a contract
[19]. Smart contracts are implemented permanently inside the blockchain

An Overview of Blockchain and 5G Networks

5

to execute a code once some conditions are veriﬁed. The most used plat-
form to run smart contracts is the Ethereum blockchain. These smart
contracts are coded using a coding language called Solidity. For exam-
ple, blockchain smart contracts can be implemented to help to manage
a system or to establish access control inside a network [20]. The smart
contracts can run dynamically in the network.

Blockchain Sharding The sharding consists of splitting a large col-
lection across several servers, enabling the distributed management for
the collection, thereby improving the scalability [21]. Blockchain sharding
refers to the artiﬁcial division of the workload of the transaction proces-
sion into a single shard, this way one single transaction can be validated
and stored by many members working in parallel. Yet, applying shard-
ing to the blockchain has several challenges, such as weak security, add
throughput, and increased risk for data loss.

Blockchain Oracle Blockchain cannot access external data of the
network. This is where the blockchain oracle intervenes. It is a service
provider (trusted third party) that veriﬁes the data authenticity and
attests to facts in an eﬀort to bring outside world data into the chain.

3

5G Networks and Beyond: An Overview

In this section, we present an overview of the 5G networks.

3.1 Software-Deﬁned Networking (SDN)

SDN enables external control of data away from network hardware to
software referred to as the controller. The controller manages packet ﬂow
to provide intelligent networks. With the controller, users will be able to
manage network equipment using software, and thus introducing new
services. An intelligent 5G network will enable new operations and oﬀer
new services on demand while ensuring eﬃciency. 5G SDN will be able
to control and orchestrate services in a seamless and eﬃcient manner.
SDN architecture will provide high ﬂexibility to 5G networks permitting
it to be perfect for the dynamic bandwidth nature of 5G.

3.2 Network Function Virtualization (NFV)

NFV refers to the replacement of hardware infrastructure by virtual-
ization software and for diﬀerent network functions (e.g., VPN, load
balancers, ﬁrewall, routers, switches). NFV decouples the network func-
tions from physical infrastructure and permits it to run virtually on a
cloud infrastructure. The key objective of NFV is to transform the way
networks are built and services are delivered. In 5G, NFV will enable
the distributed cloud, helping leverage scalability, dynamicity, and ﬂex-
ibility. The SDN and NFV are complementary to each other and both

6

Hajar Moudoud, Soumaya Cherkaoui, and Lyes Khoukhi

helping network abstraction and virtualization. The diﬀerence between
NFV and SDN is that NFV isolates network control functions from net-
work forwarding functions, whereas NFV isolates the network functions
from physical infrastructure to the cloud.

3.3 Network Slicing

Network slicing enables multiple networks to work virtually over one
physical network infrastructure. Each network slice is isolated from the
physical network to meet the requirements requested of an application.
Integrating NFV with network slicing will allow multiple applications/services
to be deployed for users. Consequently, applications or services running
over a network slice can display a high quality of experience (QoE) and
high-quality services (QoS) beneﬁcial for users.

3.4 Multi-Access Edge Computing (MEC)

MEC reduces network congestion and thus achieves a faster response. It
enables computing capabilities of the cloud to the network edge which
allows data to be processed near to the devices and thus users. Further-
more, by enabling the computing locally, MEC reduces signiﬁcantly the
energy need to process data and storage space. MEC enabled services,
applications, and operations to be closer to the users which enhances
the QoS for users; it enables network collaboration which improves the
quality of experience.

3.5 Device to Device (D2D)

In current cellular networks, base stations are responsible for establishing
communications between two devices. These communications are going
through base stations even if the two devices are in the same ranges.
Consequently, the spectral eﬃciency is low because of the delay added,
which is unsuitable for real-time applications. To solve this issue, the 5G
networks proposed using D2D communications to allow two devices close
to each other to communicate using a direct link. This concept creates
multi-hop relays among several devices which increase the data rate and
improve QoS. Furthermore, D2D connectivity will assist 5G networks to
be more malleable in terms of oﬄoading and energy-eﬃcient because it
eliminates unwanted traﬃc from the core network.

3.6 Cloud Computing (CC)

CC was proposed to achieve the ever-growing requirements of 5G net-
works, such as resource orchestrations, data storage, and mobile sensing.
CC enables resource oﬄoading by virtualizing physical infrastructure to
dynamically provide 5G services with their requests. Cloud computing
includes two tiers: 1) Infrastructure Providers which manages the physi-
cal infrastructures (InPs), and 2) Service Providers (SPs) which provides
services to network users.

An Overview of Blockchain and 5G Networks

7

Fig. 2. Blockchain integration with 5G opportunities tree.

4 Blockchain for 5G

In this section, we discuss the beneﬁts at various levels of blockchain
integration with 5G networks. Then, we present a taxonomy of the op-
portunities brought by blockchain applications on 5G.

4.1 Blockchain Integration with 5G Networks

5G and blockchain are two prominent technologies that could reshape the
future of technologies and the telecommunication sector. On one hand,
blockchain can provide a distributed environment to secure 5G services,
operations, and data. Blockchain techniques can assist 5G to enable fea-
tures such as decentralization, immutability, and transparency. On the
other hand, 5G networks are highly distributed and require enabling new
technologies such as NFV, SDN, D2D, MEC, and CC. These technologies
are complex to orchestrate and manage. Furthermore, 5G networks share
resources, services, and operations among several stakeholders that could
be dishonest. Consequently, blockchain will enable future 5G networks
with a high level of security, coordination, and manageability required
among 5G users. All these new features will present challenges that need
to be solved for the safe deployment of 5G networks.
The reason behind the integration of blockchain with 5G networks comes
for the most part from the prominent features of blockchain that could
solve the challenges in 5G networks in terms of security, privacy, manage-
ment, and transparency. Because 5G involves several stakeholders, it is
diﬃcult to leverage trust while preserving their security. With the use of
blockchain technology, 5G stakeholders are secured without the need of

8

Hajar Moudoud, Soumaya Cherkaoui, and Lyes Khoukhi

Fig. 3. Blockchain merging with 5G networks.

trusting each other. Blockchain consensus establishes trust among unre-
liable entities without the use of a trusted third party. Furthermore,
shared services and operations are secured using the blockchain im-
mutable ledger. Indeed, once data is stored inside the blockchain ledger
it cannot be altered or falsiﬁed, blockchain uses cryptographic signa-
ture and hash function to secure data. Moreover, blockchain smart con-
tracts can be used to automate the management of 5G resources and
services. The entire process is transparent, reliable, and decentralized.
Fig. 3 presents a conceptual diagram for the integration of blockchain
with 5G networks. Next, we present the opportunities brought by the
integration of blockchain with 5G.

4.2 Opportunities brought by blockchain integration
with 5G networks

Blockchain interesting features will provide a new set of solutions to im-
prove 5G networks in terms of security, transparency, immutability, pri-
vacy, and interoperability. Consequently, 5G networks should take advan-
tage of blockchain to improve their ﬂexibility, manageability, and security
of network services and operations. Next, we present the opportunities
that blockchain technology can conduct to 5G networks with regard to
security improvements and performance enhancements.

security improvements 5G networks face several security challenges,
from data privacy to authentication vulnerability such as frequent au-
thentication applied to ultra-dense networks [22]. These challenges ex-
pose 5G networks to attacks and increase their impact. Especially, when

An Overview of Blockchain and 5G Networks

9

services and operations are shared among several stakeholders when one
service is under attack, all the stakeholders taking part are exposed to at-
tacks. Fortunately, blockchain features will improve 5G networks in terms
of security, data privacy, and access control [23]. For example, blockchain
Byzantine Fault Tolerance (BFT) consensus can help 5G networks to
achieve trust in a distributed network even when some of the stake-
holders in the network respond with incorrect information. Furthermore,
blockchain can decentralize network management without the need for
a third-party authority. For instance, the use of blockchain-based cloud
computing can enable the decentralization of MEC 5G networks which
take out the control from the core network, provide decentralize man-
agement, eliminates SPF issues, and improves trust in the network. In
addition, blockchain can help to secure D2D communication by building
a centralized peer-to-peer blockchain network, which considers each de-
vice as a blockchain miner that holds a copy of the ledger, veriﬁes the
authenticity of a transaction, and monitor transactions for better system
reliability.

5G networks, with high connectivity and low latency, comes to support
distributed new services and operations, which need decentralized man-
agement, limited access control, secure data sharing, and authentication
services. Blockchain with smart contracts can establish a decentralized
access control both for stakeholders and services. Because blockchain
uses computing power to establish trust, data sharing, resource alloca-
tion, and spectrum sharing can be strongly secured against attacks such
as False Data Injection or Modiﬁcation Data Attacks. Indeed, several
researchers have proven the eﬃciency of blockchain technology to secure
5G networks in terms of better access control using blockchain contracts,
secure data sharing using hash functions, and cryptographic signatures.
Furthermore, blockchain can host several technologies like Artiﬁcial In-
telligence (AI) that could work on their own. Applied on 5G networks,
blockchain, and AI can be able to operate in an independent manner to
ensure better network orchestration and service management. All with-
out the need of a trusted third authority.

With the support of blockchain features, 5G networks can fully beneﬁt
from better access control to services, secure data storage, and improved
network management using blockchain smart while ensuring transparency
and privacy. Furthermore, the strong immutability of blockchain ledger
can provide a high degree of security for 5G users especially when sen-
sitive data are being shared at a high speed among several 5G stake-
holders. Furthermore, blockchain smart contracts can provide eﬃcient
access control mechanisms and authentication solutions that could help
improving authentication issues in 5G networks. Blockchain smart con-
tracts can implement automated access rules that will help authenticate
5G stakeholders without relying on external authority, can limit mali-
cious behaviors in the network, and can detect threats without leaking
stakeholders’ information. Besides, because blockchain uses hash func-
tions, data is signed making it diﬃcult to corrupt or falsiﬁed. Blockchain
is capable of proving high data protection when sharing among untrust-
worthy 5G stakeholders while ensuring transparency.

10

Hajar Moudoud, Soumaya Cherkaoui, and Lyes Khoukhi

performance enhancements Blockchain technology can improve
the performance of 5G systems. First, blockchain miners can verify data
access and credentials which helps 5G networks protecting data. Sec-
ond, blockchain smart contracts can manage automatically 5G services
with a low latency which may lead to reduce the management costs.
Finally, the use of a decentralized blockchain can provide a ﬂexible, ef-
ﬁcient, and secure data delivery system suitable with the 5G complex
environment. For instance, blockchain can leverage a peer-to-peer net-
work to secure communication among all 5G stakeholders and ensure
trust among participants using appropriate consensus algorithms. Over-
all, blockchain integration with 5G networks can reduce communication
costs, latency, and provide a secure platform for data exchange for all
stakeholders, all of which improves the overall system performance.
Interference management is a known factor that inﬂuences the perfor-
mance of wireless mobile networks. Because of the dense deployment in
5G networks and cellular interference, interference management will be
further complex and hard to overcome. Further, collaborative commu-
nications will play an important part in 5G networks, managing a huge
number of resources, services, and stakeholders while ensuring a high
quality of services will even be greater. In this context, blockchain can
solve some of these issues by decentralized interference administration.
For example, blockchain can implement a cooperative interference man-
agement algorithm in blockchain smart contracts to ensure mutual trust
and coordination protocols of interference.

5 A Scalable and Secure Blockchain Suitable
for 5G

We solely reviewed the integration of blockchain with 5G networks. In
this section, we present our vision of merging blockchain with 5G. We
provide an overview of the proposed architecture named Block5G.

5.1 A Scalable and Secure Blockchain Architecture
Suitable for 5G

Following our presentation of blockchain opportunities that blockchain
can bring to 5G networks, in this section, we present our vision of a
blockchain integration with 5G networks. 5G network needs a secure,
scalable, and non-computing intensive solution that meets the require-
ment of low-latency, high communication rate provided by the network.
In this context, we present a scalable and secure blockchain architecture
that uses the sharding concept, and blockchain oracles suitable with 5G
requirements named Block5G.

5.2 Architecture

As illustrated in Fig.4, we consider data exchange in a 5G network where
a large number of unreliable users are connected through a D2D commu-
nication. We propose a scalable, secure, and trustworthy blockchain ar-
chitecture composed of three layers, as follows:(1) the access layer which

An Overview of Blockchain and 5G Networks

11

Fig. 4. Scalable, trustworthy, and secure blockchain suitable with 5G.

includes 5G devices that send and receive data; (2) the edge layer which
is responsible for forwarding packets and verifying their validity using a
blockchain consensus and blockchain oracles; and (3) cloud layer which is
responsible for storing the data and scaling the blockchain while keeping
security guarantees.

Shared Blockchain The scalability has been a core problem in the
integration of blockchain within 5G. This is because the 5G includes
a large number of devices and users that communicate at a high rate
and thus generate big data. To enable horizontal scalability, blockchain
sharding was proposed, it consists of partitioning each transaction into
several shards and processing it independently. In this paper, we propose
building clusters with multiple nodes (i.e.miners) to process each shard
in parallel. Fig.5 shows the 3 main components of the Block5G sharding
concept, as follows: (1) the main chain; (2) the master clusters’; and (3)
slave devices. The master cluster contains n slave devices that could be
either honest or dishonest. Let Ti(x) represents the ith transaction in a
block. To enable the sharding, each transaction is divided into n disjoint
portions. All master clusters are responsible for verifying a portion of the
transaction ti,j(x), where i is the transaction number on a block and j is
the cluster number. All slave devices could verify a transaction portion,
outputs 0 or 1 indicates invalid and valid transaction, respectively. Let
n denote the total number of slave devices in a master cluster j that
can tolerate up to t (cid:54) n
3 dishonest devices. We deﬁne a transaction
veriﬁcation process as follows:

Ti(x) =

(cid:80)m

k=0 ti,j(x)
m

(1)

12

Hajar Moudoud, Soumaya Cherkaoui, and Lyes Khoukhi

Fig. 5. Scalable and Trustworthy Blockchain sharding in 5G context.

Where m is the total number of miners that have participated in the
veriﬁcation process.
The transaction veriﬁcation process has two possible outcomes: valid and
invalid, each of which carries its own reward structure. As compensation
for their eﬀorts, the clusters are awarded (R) whenever they verify a
transaction correctly. In the case of correct veriﬁcation, a cluster reward
is as follows.

R(Ti,j) =

R(ti,j(x))
R(Ti,T otal(x))

(2)

Where, R(ti,j(x)) and R(Ti,T otal(x)) represents, respectively, the reward
for a valid transaction portion and total reward for a valid transaction.
Note that the cluster trust value is only used to determine rewards and
penalties, and does not necessarily correspond to the cluster output.
Consequently, we enable secure sharding, prevent data loss and incentive
clusters to behave honestly.

Peer-To-Peer Oracle Network We propose using a Peer-To-Peer
(P2P) oracle network to verify the data queries and authenticate its
source. Blockchain cannot access external data of the network. This is
where the blockchain oracle interferes, it is a service provider (trusted
third party) that veriﬁes the data authenticity. However, trusting a single
third party may lead to providing corrupt or inaccurate data. To this end,
we propose using a P2P oracle network that ensures the truth value of
5G data. We assume each received data sent from a 5G device could be
either valid V or false F . There is m oracle in the P2P network, only n
oracle verify the data. For each oracle o ∈ [n,m] has a q probability that
data d is correct about a given proposition.

An Overview of Blockchain and 5G Networks

13

Oi(d) =

(cid:40)

q when data is valid
1 − q when data is false

(3)

The value of oi(d) is independent of oj(d) for all i (cid:54)= j. In other words,
each oracle’s trust values are independent of other oracles in the network
trust values. Furthermore, oracles need to place a deposit to participate
in a random-chosen veriﬁcation process. First, the oracle submits its
veriﬁcation probability q ∈ [0,1] about a data d. Then, this probability
is applied to a trust weight W ∈ [0,1] that is, informally, the parameter
within the network that veriﬁes the input data within the network’s
hidden layers. Formally:

Wi =

αi
βi

(4)

where αi is the sum of corrected veriﬁcation performed and βi is the
total number of veriﬁcations performed.

V (d) =

n
(cid:88)

i=0

oi(d) × Wi

(5)

Once a data veriﬁcation process V (d) has accumulated suﬃcient veriﬁ-
ability during a maximum of a period of time δ(t), it is decided. This
period of time is a ﬁxed value decided by network operators. The veri-
ﬁcation process has three possible outcomes:1) valid (V ), if V (d) value
to be strictly positive, 2) false (f ), if V (d) value to be strictly negative,
and 3) undeﬁned (U ) if V (d) value is equal to zero. In this last case, the
data veriﬁability process is only assigned to the oracle with the highest
trust weight.
Broadly speaking, oracles are rewarded when they participate in a veri-
ﬁcation process and their veriﬁcation probability matches it. Conversely,
those who gave incorrect veriﬁcation are penalized. In the case of unde-
termined outcomes, oracles receive no rewards or penalties. As argued in
the paper, the proposed data veriﬁcation process incentives the oracles
to behave honestly on the validity of data.

5.3 Design Components

The transaction veriﬁcation procedure of our Block5G of the following
(1) Initialization; and (2) Reward. This procedure starts with the ini-
tialization and then proceeds in periods to the rewarding phase. We now
explain each component in more detail.

Initialization The initial set of participants (i.e., nodes) are invited
to provide a deposit (stake) to validate or endorse a transaction. That
is, a node is given the chance to verify a transaction chosen uniformly
at random from the unveriﬁed transaction pool. The deposit is placed
before the veriﬁcation process. Because the nodes are grouped in clusters,
the outcome of the transaction veriﬁcation reward is a function of the
sum of the total transaction veriﬁcation reward weighted by the cluster
value in the cluster and the deposits.

14

Hajar Moudoud, Soumaya Cherkaoui, and Lyes Khoukhi

Fig. 6. A sequence diagram of utilizing oracles and shards with 5G services.

Reward Broadly speaking, nodes (i.e., miners) are rewarded for trans-
action veriﬁcation in which they took part. Conversely, those who pro-
vided false veriﬁcation are penalized. The steps of reward/penalize are
depicted in Fig.6. Let ri denote the reward amount that a node i used
to verify that a transaction partition is equal to 0 or 1. In the case of a
valid veriﬁcation, the reward is as follows:

ri =

R(Ti,j)
T otal

+ αi

(6)

where, R(Ti,j) is the master cluster reward, T otal refers to the total
number of the cluster devices participating in the veriﬁcation process,
and αi node deposit. A node’s reward is equal to his participating share
in the transaction veriﬁcation process. For instance, if a cluster has a
reward equal to 1000, and the number of participant nodes is equal to
100, the reward is distributed equally, and each node will receive 100 as
a stake. In the case of false veriﬁcation, the node is penalized, and the
reward is deducted from its deposit.

6 Challenges and Future Research Directions

Blockchain technology has the ability to improve 5G networks and to
solve several issues ranging from security challenges to system manage-
ment in a decentralized manner. Yet, various challenges need further
investigation before the deployment of blockchain in 5G networks. This
section highlights and discusses some of the open challenges that may
set back the merging of blockchain with 5G networks.

An Overview of Blockchain and 5G Networks

15

6.1 Scalability and Performance

The scalability of blockchain is measured by the rate at which transac-
tions are added to the chain, in other words, the number of transactions
per second (TPS). Currently, popular blockchain platforms, such as Bit-
coins and Ethereum, can reach up to 14 TPS, whereas some private
blockchain can reach up to 3000 TPS. Transaction speed is one of the
major concerns for adopting blockchain technology. High TPS is essential
for 5G networks to meet the requirements of low latency and high com-
munication rate. Straightforward integration of the current blockchain is
unsuitable for 5G networks. Furthermore, blockchain has high through-
puts because of the complexity of blockchain consensus. 5G networks
require coordination between a large number of entities, services, and
operations that cannot be achieved using blockchain. To solve these prob-
lems, further studies are required to improve the scalability of blockchain
solutions to meet the requirement of 5G in a dynamic and heterogeneous
manner and to involve a large number of transactions with low latency.

6.2 Standardization and Regulations

It is expected that various services and applications are going to be deliv-
ered by the 5G systems. However, standardizations are still challenging
because of the interoperability, ubiquitously, and dynamicity of 5G com-
munication systems and applications. On the other hand, blockchain just
started gaining the attention of network operators. Consequently, to get
a wide acceptance, network operators should work together to deﬁne
a standardization of blockchain integration with 5G networks. Further-
more, blockchain smart contracts are de-standardized and deregulated,
and unmodiﬁable, it is important to ensure the security of blockchain
technology before its integration with 5G networks. Any falsiﬁed manip-
ulation of blockchain smart contracts can severely damage the network
and lead to serious consequences. For a large adoption of blockchain in
the context of 5G networks, standardization, regulation, and governance
must be enacted.

6.3 Resource Constraints

The blockchain was designed for an internet scenario with powerful com-
puters; it is computationally expensive and has signiﬁcant overhead in
terms of both bandwidth and storage capacity. These particular charac-
teristics currently exclude the easy integration of the blockchain with 5G
networks. Indeed, to take part in the blockchain nodes (i.e., miners that
can verify a transaction) need to have a high-computing power to run a
blockchain consensus [17]. In some situations, 5G nodes may be already
taking part in an operation to provide a service and might not be able
to have enough resources to run also the blockchain, which may lead to
network degradation, bottleneck, and SPF issues. Due to resource limi-
tations, a lightweight framework that can dynamically optimize resource
usage among several nodes is required for the 5G networks. Consequently,

16

Hajar Moudoud, Soumaya Cherkaoui, and Lyes Khoukhi

resource provisioning for restrained nodes should be further investigated.
Besides, IoT devices are resource-constrained. Incorporating blockchain
technology with the IoT nodes is challenging. The high computing power
storage capacity and overheads have put under question the feasibility
of the integration of blockchain within the 5G [24].

6.4 Interoperability

Achieving seamless interoperability among blockchain and 5G networks
is still challenging. Indeed, several well-known blockchain platforms oﬀer
diﬀerent features. Nevertheless, it is unclear how blockchain technology
can be merged with 5G networks [25]. Furthermore, 5G networks and be-
yond involve various new technologies such as NFV, SDN, MEC, Massive
MIMO, and full duplex [26] [27] [28] [29]. Each of which works diﬀerently.
These are key challenges that need to be solved before the integration.
Among the questions that are worth investigating are: 1) how can we de-
ploy blockchain in 5G networks? Who will be responsible for ensuring the
interoperability among 5G services, operations, and users? Is blockchain
going to be deployed as an overlay network?

6.5 Security

Even if blockchain is considered as a secure technology that establishes
trust in 5G networks, it still suﬀers from various security issues, such as
51 % attacks that occur when an attacker takes positing of 51 % of all
network computing power. This type of attack led to falsiﬁcation, SPF,
and data corruption. If one attacker takes the position of 51 % comput-
ing power, then he can control all the blockchain and thus all services
and operations running in the blockchain. Furthermore, blockchain smart
contracts can cause security issues due to poorly written code. Safe de-
ployment of blockchain technology with a 5G network should take into
consideration the issue inherent to the blockchain. Furthermore, data pri-
vacy has become a major concern especially in the context of blockchain
and 5G. For example, data related to a credit card used to pay for a
service provided by the 5G network can be stored in the blockchain per-
manently and cannot be deleted. By design, private data should not be
stored in the chain but rather out of the chain and only have a pointer
of that information. In this context, several researchers have suggested
the use of on-the-chain and oﬀ-the-chain storage, on the chain stores
will only have pointers, metadata, and hashes of the actual data stored
oﬀ-the-chain in a secure database.

6.6 Infrastructure Costs

It is expected that 5G networks are going to increase energy consumption
because of the increased amount of equipment [30] [31]. With ongoing
eﬀorts for energy-eﬃcient communications and networking, green com-
munications are going to be harder to achieve. The blockchain solution
will be a hurdler for 5G networks because of its computationally intensive

An Overview of Blockchain and 5G Networks

17

consensus algorithms. For example, the bitcoin blockchain is estimated
to consume at a peak of more electricity than 159 countries. Further-
more, the use of blockchain platforms and cloud infrastructures that host
blockchain nodes comes at a cost. In some situations, every blockchain
transaction has fees. For example, in the Ethereum blockchain, a trans-
action can cost a gas unit which refers to the number of computation
eﬀorts required to verify a transaction. Transaction costs are relative
to the complexity of the consensus running. Consequently, designing
an energy-eﬃcient blockchain consensus algorithm is a big hurdle for
blockchain integration in the 5G networks.

7 Conclusion

Blockchain technology was originally intended for cryptocurrency con-
text, however, this technology has moved beyond its realm. Blockchain-
based solutions have beneﬁted from blockchain features to improve their
process. In this context, blockchain was proposed by several researchers
as a solution to 5G inherent challenges. Indeed, several studies have
shown the beneﬁt of using blockchain solutions to meet the require-
ments of 5G networks such as security, transparency, decentralization,
and immutability. Blockchain integration with 5G networks is expected
to improve new technologies with a secure design concept, limited access
control, and trust. Furthermore, blockchain smart contract, lightweight
consensus, sharding concept, and oracle blockchain will enable several
new 5G business models to beneﬁt from a high data rate, secure commu-
nication, and reliable services. In this chapter, we have reviewed some
blockchain integration opportunities that can empower 5G network ser-
vices and operations. Based on this overview we have proposed a scal-
able, secure, and lightweight blockchain architecture suitable with 5G
requirements. Furthermore, we summarized some open challenges and
provides some research directions that need further investigation for the
safe deployment of blockchain in 5G networks.

acknowledgement

The authors would like to thank the Natural Sciences and Engineering
Research Council of Canada, as well as FEDER and GrandEst Region
in France, for the ﬁnancial support of this research.

References

1. A. Alalewi, I. Dayoub, and S. Cherkaoui, “On 5G-V2X Use Cases
and Enabling Technologies: A Comprehensive Survey,” IEEE Access,
vol. 9, pp. 107 710–107 737, 2021, conference Name: IEEE Access.
2. A. Gupta and R. K. Jha, “A survey of 5g network: Architecture and
emerging technologies,” IEEE Access, vol. 3, pp. 1206–1232, 2015.

18

Hajar Moudoud, Soumaya Cherkaoui, and Lyes Khoukhi

3. Z. Mlika and S. Cherkaoui, “Massive Access in Beyond 5G IoT Net-
works with NOMA: NP-hardness, Competitiveness and Learning,”
arXiv:2002.07957 [cs, math], Feb. 2020, arXiv: 2002.07957.

4. X. Li, P. Jiang, T. Chen, X. Luo, and Q. Wen, “A survey on the secu-
rity of blockchain systems,” Future Generation Computer Systems,
vol. 107, pp. 841–853, 2020.

5. z. Mlika and S. Cherkaoui, “Competitive Algorithms and Reinforce-
ment Learning for NOMA in IoT Networks,” in ICC 2021 - IEEE
International Conference on Communications, Jun. 2021, pp. 1–6.
6. I.-C. Lin and T.-C. Liao, “A Survey of Blockchain Security Issues
and Challenges,” International Journal of Network Security, vol. 19,
no. 5, pp. 653–659, Sep. 2017.

7. A. Chaer, K. Salah, C. Lima, P. P. Ray, and T. Sheltami, “Blockchain
for 5g: Opportunities and challenges,” in 2019 IEEE Globecom Work-
shops (GC Wkshps), 2019, pp. 1–6.

8. Z. A. E. Houda, A. Haﬁd, and L. Khoukhi, “Blockchain meets ami:
Towards secure advanced metering infrastructures,” in ICC 2020
- 2020 IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC),
2020, pp. 1–6.

9. D. C. Nguyen, P. N. Pathirana, M. Ding, and A. Seneviratne,
“Blockchain for 5G and Beyond Networks: A State of the Art
Survey,” arXiv:1912.05062 [cs, eess, math], Dec. 2019, arXiv:
1912.05062.

10. Z. Abou El Houda, A. S. Haﬁd, and L. Khoukhi, “Cochain-sc: An
intra- and inter-domain ddos mitigation scheme based on blockchain
using sdn and smart contract,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 98 893–
98 907, 2019.

11. H. Moudoud, S. Cherkaoui, and L. Khoukhi, “An iot blockchain
architecture using oracles and smart contracts: the use-case of a food
supply chain,” in 2019 IEEE 30th Annual International Symposium
on Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications (PIMRC),
2019, pp. 1–6.

12. B. Liu, X. L. Yu, S. Chen, X. Xu, and L. Zhu, “Blockchain Based
Data Integrity Service Framework for IoT Data,” 2017 IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Web Services (ICWS), 2017.

13. Z. Abou El Houda, L. Khoukhi, and A. Senhaji Haﬁd, “Bringing
intelligence to software deﬁned networks: Mitigating ddos attacks,”
IEEE Transactions on Network and Service Management, vol. 17,
no. 4, pp. 2523–2535, 2020.

14. X. Li, P. Jiang, T. Chen, X. Luo, and Q. Wen, “A survey on the secu-
rity of blockchain systems,” Future Generation Computer Systems,
vol. 107, pp. 841–853, Jun. 2020.

15. X. Xu, I. Weber, M. Staples, L. Zhu, J. Bosch, L. Bass, C. Pautasso,
and P. Rimba, “A Taxonomy of Blockchain-Based Systems for Archi-
tecture Design,” in 2017 IEEE International Conference on Software
Architecture (ICSA), Apr. 2017, pp. 243–252.

16. N. M. Kumar and P. K. Mallick, “Blockchain technology for security
issues and challenges in IoT,” Procedia Computer Science, vol. 132,
pp. 1815–1823, Jan. 2018.

An Overview of Blockchain and 5G Networks

19

17. Z. Abou El Houda, A. S. Haﬁd, and L. Khoukhi, “Cochain-sc: An
intra- and inter-domain ddos mitigation scheme based on blockchain
using sdn and smart contract,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 98 893–
98 907, 2019.

18. L. S. Sankar, M. Sindhu, and M. Sethumadhavan, “Survey of consen-
sus protocols on blockchain applications,” in 2017 4th International
Conference on Advanced Computing and Communication Systems
(ICACCS). Coimbatore, India: IEEE, Jan. 2017, pp. 1–5.

19. Z. A. El Houda, L. Khoukhi, and A. Haﬁd, “Chainsecure - a scalable
and proactive solution for protecting blockchain applications using
sdn,” in 2018 IEEE Global Communications Conference (GLOBE-
COM), 2018, pp. 1–6.

20. Z. Mlika and S. Cherkaoui, “Massive IoT Access With NOMA in 5G
Networks and Beyond Using Online Competitiveness and Learning,”
IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 8, no. 17, pp. 13 624–13 639,
Sep. 2021.

21. H. Moudoud, S. Cherkaoui, and L. Khoukhi, “Towards a scalable
and trustworthy blockchain: Iot use case,” in ICC 2021 - 2021 IEEE
International Conference on Communications (ICC), 2021, pp. 1–6.
22. H. Moudoud, L. Khoukhi, and S. Cherkaoui, “Prediction and detec-
tion of fdia and ddos attacks in 5g enabled iot,” IEEE Network, pp.
1–8, 2020.

23. Z. Mlika and S. Cherkaoui, “Massive Access in Beyond 5G IoT Net-
works with NOMA: NP-hardness, Competitiveness and Learning,”
arXiv:2002.07957 [cs, math], Feb. 2020, arXiv: 2002.07957.

24. A. Rachedi, M. H. Rehmani, S. Cherkaoui, and J. J. P. C. Rodrigues,
“IEEE Access Special Section Editorial: The Plethora of Research
in Internet of Things (IoT),” IEEE Access, vol. 4, pp. 9575–9579,
2016.

25. A. Abouaomar, M. Elmachkour, A. Kobbane, H. Tembine, and
M. Ayaida, “Users-Fogs association within a cache context in 5G
networks:Coalition game model,” in 2018 IEEE Symposium on Com-
puters and Communications (ISCC), Jun. 2018, pp. 00 014–00 019,
iSSN: 1530-1346.

26. Z. A. E. Houda, A. Haﬁd, and L. Khoukhi, “Blockchain-based reverse
auction for v2v charging in smart grid environment,” in ICC 2021
- 2021 IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC),
2021, pp. 1–6.

27. A. Filali, Z. Mlika, S. Cherkaoui, and A. Kobbane, “Preemptive sdn
load balancing with machine learning for delay sensitive applica-
tions,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 69, no. 12,
pp. 15 947–15 963, 2020.

28. Z. A. El Houda, A. Haﬁd, and L. Khoukhi, “Co-iot: A collaborative
ddos mitigation scheme in iot environment based on blockchain using
sdn,” in 2019 IEEE Global Communications Conference (GLOBE-
COM), 2019, pp. 1–6.

29. E. D. Ngangue Ndih and S. Cherkaoui, “On Enhancing Technology
Coexistence in the IoT Era: ZigBee and 802.11 Case,” IEEE Access,
vol. 4, pp. 1835–1844, 2016.

20

Hajar Moudoud, Soumaya Cherkaoui, and Lyes Khoukhi

30. E. D. N. Ndih and S. Cherkaoui, “Chapter 17 - Simulation meth-
ods, techniques and tools of computer systems and networks,” in
Modeling and Simulation of Computer Networks and Systems, M. S.
Obaidat, P. Nicopolitidis, and F. Zarai, Eds. Boston: Morgan Kauf-
mann, Jan. 2015, pp. 485–504.

31. E. D. Ngangue Ndih, S. Cherkaoui, and I. Dayoub, “Analytic Mod-
eling of the Coexistence of IEEE 802.15.4 and IEEE 802.11 in Satu-
ration Conditions,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 19, no. 11,
pp. 1981–1984, Nov. 2015.

