2
2
0
2

b
e
F
9

]
I
S
.
s
c
[

2
v
6
7
0
7
0
.
1
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

Mitigating Misinformation Spread on Blockchain
Enabled Social Media Networks

Rui Luo, Vikram Krishnamurthy, Fellow, IEEE, and Erik Blasch, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—The paper develops a blockchain protocol for a social media network (BE-SMN) to mitigate the spread of misinformation.
BE-SMN is derived based on the information transmission-time distribution by modeling the misinformation transmission as
double-spend attacks on blockchain. The misinformation distribution is then incorporated into the SIR (Susceptible, Infectious, or
Recovered) model, which substitutes the single rate parameter in the traditional SIR model. Then, on a multi-community network, we
study the propagation of misinformation numerically and show that the proposed blockchain enabled social media network outperforms
the baseline network in ﬂattening the curve of the infected population.

Index Terms—Blockchain, double-spend attack, proof-of-work, misinformation propagation, SIR model, social media networks.

(cid:70)

1 INTRODUCTION

The spread of misinformation puts the information integrity
and trust relationships in social networks at risk. Recent ad-
vancements in blockchain technology have opened up new
possibilities for enabling decentralized trust in a peer-to-
peer network [1]. In this paper, we examine how blockchain
technology can be used to mitigate the spread of misinfor-
mation in decentralized social media networks (SMN).

Why Distributed Ledger in Social Networks: A decen-
tralized social network does not have a central proprietary
authority that stores and controls all the data available to
the users. Instead, data is stored at multiple nodes in the
network. An important aspect of decentralized social media
networks is that no single entity has control over what can
be published; hence there is greater freedom of expression.
Since there is no centralized control or moderator of content,
such networks are subject to misinformation (fake news)
and inappropriate content. This motivates the blockchain-
enabled SMN (BE-SMN) which utilizes a blockchain pro-
tocol that can mitigate the spread of misinformation in
decentralized social media networks.

To prevent fraudulent transactions, blockchain based
cryptocurrencies use an immutable, distributed ledger. A
BE-SMN, on the other hand, uses a distributed ledger to
store data. The ledger implies that every interaction is
irrevocably recorded in the blockchain and safeguarded by
end-to-end encryption, and the blockchain ﬁnds consensus

• R. Luo is with the Sibley School of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering,

Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, 14850.
E-mail: rl828@cornell.edu

• V. Krishnamurthy is with the School of Electrical and Computer Engi-

neering, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, 14850.
E-mail: vikramk@cornell.edu

• E. Blasch is with Air Force Ofﬁce of Scientiﬁc Research (AFOSR),

Arlington, VA, 22203.
E-mail: erik.blasch.1@us.af.mil

• This research was supported by the U. S. Army Research Ofﬁce under
grants W911NF-19-1-0365, U.S. Air Force Ofﬁce of Scientiﬁc Research
under grant FA9550-22-1-0016, and the National Science Foundation
under grant CCF-2112457.

among all members of a social media network in a decen-
tralized manner. With these desirable features, blockchain
technology has been emphasized as a possible counter-
measure to misinformation [2], [3], offers access control [4],
and there have been recent real-world implementations1.
Modeling Misinformation as Double-Spend Attacks in a
Blockchain Enabled Network: Misinformation occurs when
the truth or useful information is purposefully altered to
mislead other users. Similarly in blockchain, a double-spend
attack occurs when the same digital token is involved in
multiple transactions (e.g., reclaiming spent bitcoin value).
We will model information exchange in social media net-
works as transactions on blockchains, where misinformation
is represented as a double-spend attack.

Our proposed BE-SMN has two components. First, the
blockchain protocol mitigates the spread of misinformation
as follows. New social media postings require approval
by miners (who use their computing resources for fact-
checking) and further conﬁrmation by successive blocks. It
is assumed that conﬁrmation time is longer for posts that
are deemed to contain misinformation based on the idea
that positing a seemingly credible (but misleading) post
requires more effort to adapt the original post and masking
the fake information alignment [5]. Second, we model the
information diffusion in the social network as an epidemic
model where the blockchain conﬁrmation time affects the
information transmission rate. Epidemic models character-
ize the reproduction number, which is a good proxy for the
engagement rate and predictor for epidemic-like informa-
tion spreading [6], and compartments in epidemic models
specify different stages of being affected by misinformation
and how the populations evolve.

Main Results and Organization:
(1) The main idea of this paper is to construct a blockchain
protocol that examines social media postings and mitigates
misinformation by exploiting the blockchain transaction
conﬁrmation methodology. The social media postings are

1. Examples include Steemit, Sola, Civil, onG.social, and Sapien. See

Appendix C for details.

 
 
 
 
 
 
processed as blockchain transactions, with a higher pro-
portion of honest miners in the network ensuring that
misinformation takes longer to propagate.
(2) Section 2 details the BE-SMN model of the BE-SMN
protocol. First we model the misinformation propagation in
a SMN as double-spend attacks on blockchain. Section 2.2
devises an integral equation for the SIR (Susceptible, Infec-
tious, or Recovered) model that includes the misinformation
transmission time. The transmission-time distribution is de-
rived in Section 2.3 by creating two Poisson processes for
blocks mined by dishonest and honest miners. The discrete
difference equations for the SIR model are formulated in
Section 2.4, which considers the different time scales of
information propagation and block mining.
(3) Section 3 constructs the multi-community network and
proposes the stochastic simulation framework (Algorithm
2).
(4) Section 4 presents simulation results of the misinfor-
mation SIR dynamics on a three-community network and
illustrates the advantages of blockchain in combating mis-
information. The results demonstrate that BE-SNM commu-
nities are more resilient to misinformation propagation than
others. The parameters of the SIR model are estimated from
Twitter hashtag datasets [7] – Use pattern of some Twitter
hashtags is similar to the diffusion process of misinforma-
tion [8].

1.1 Related Work

Previous works for SMN disinformation can be consid-
ered under two categories within the paper (SIR modeling,
Blockchain), while many others exist (e.g,, see listing2).
(1) SIR epidemic model with heterogeneous parameters: The
classical SIR model assumes the same susceptibility for all
individuals and the same infectivity for epidemic (infor-
mation) spread in SMNs. Previous studies have analyzed
the effect of the susceptibility heterogeneity by either di-
viding individuals into different groups or constructing a
distribution of susceptibility. Baqaee [9] considers a ﬁve-
population SIR model where sub-populations correspond
to age groups and the interactions between age groups are
calibrated using survey data. Gou and Jin [10] generalized
the SIR model by considering both the heterogeneity of
degree, and heterogeneity of susceptibility and recovery
rate. They found that given the mean of the distribution of
susceptibility, increasing the variance may block the spread
of epidemics. Lachiany and Louzoun [11] studied the vari-
ability in infection rates which explains the discrepancy be-
tween the observation and the predicted number of infected
individuals using the typical SIR model. Smilkove et al. [12]
studied a SIR model with degree-correlated heterogeneous
susceptibility and found that positive correlation between
a node’s degree and susceptibility leads to a vulnerable
model to the spread of disease. Stanoev et al. [13] considered
concurrent spread of an arbitrary number of contagions in
a network. An individual can be affected through multiple
channels with its neighbors with different contact rates.
(2) Blockchain enabled network models: In SMNs, blockchain
technology has been used to improve data privacy and

2. https://www.rand.org/research/projects/truth-decay/

ﬁghting-disinformation/search.html

TABLE 1: Glossary of Symbols Used in This Article

2

Symbols

Description

G
V
E
A
S(t)
I(t)
R(t)
S(t)

I(t)
R(t)
B

Vm
βm
αm
TS→I
PTS→I (t)
˙PTS→I (t)
k

Tk

Nk
Nd(s)

Nh(s)

N (s)
g(j)
G(j)
P (Tk ≤ s)
µd
µh
l

ci
xi(t)
N (I)
i,m(t)

the undirected graph representing the SMN
the set of nodes
the set of edges
the adjacency matrix of G
the number of susceptible nodes at time t
the number of infected nodes at time t
the number of recovered nodes at time t
the set of susceptible node and
transmission time pairs at time t
the set of infected nodes at time t
the set of recovered nodes at time t
the probability matrix of the stochastic
block model (SBM)
the community m, which is a subset of V
the contact rate of nodes in community m
the recovery rate of nodes in community m
the transmission time
the CDF of TS→I
the PDF of TS→I
the number of leading blocks needed to
conﬁrm a previous block
the ﬁrst time that blocks mined by
dishonest miners outnumbers blocks mined
by honest miners by k blocks
the total amount of blocks at Tk
the number of blocks mined by dishonest
miners by time s
the number of blocks mined by honest
miners by time s
the total number of mined blocks by time s
the PMF of Nk
the CDF of Nk
the CDF of the transmission time
the computing power of dishonest miners
the computing power of honest miners
the ratio of the time unit in the network
and the time unit on the blockchain
the community label of node i
the state of node i at time t
the set of node i’s neighbors from
community m that are infected at time t

resilience to misinformation. Chen [14] studied how
blockchain can slow down the spread of rumor on SMNs.
They explored decentralized contracts and virtual informa-
tion credits for secure and trustful peer-to-peer information
exchange. Fu and Fang [15] employed blockchain to con-
struct a decentralized personal data management system
that ensures users own and control their data without
authentication from a third party. Tessone et.al. [16] pro-
posed a minimalistic stochastic model to understand the
dynamics of blockchain enabled consensus on a network.
Bara ´nski [17] studied mitigating the content poisoning at-
tacks on information-centric networks. The author proposed
a blockchain enabled Proof-of-Time authentication mecha-

nism which improves the network’s resilience. Saad et.al.
[18] proposed a high-level overview of a blockchain enabled
framework for misinformation prevention and highlight the
various design issues and consideration of such a blockchain
enabled framework for tackling misinformation. Qayyum
et.al. [2] considered a blockchain implementation of news
feed to distinguish facts from ﬁction.
Our work differs from existing works in that
• We explicitly model misinformation transmission as
double-spend attacks on blockchain. With new information
posting decided by a blockchain transaction approval pro-
cess, we analytically derive the distribution that misinfor-
mation propagates in the SMN.
• In our BE-SMN, users themselves take charge of their social
interactions without relying on service providers (e.g., cen-
tral authority or ofﬁcial publishers) – that is, users function
as blockchain miners for information exchange in the SMN,
resulting in a decentralized autonomous organization.
• In our numerical studies with parameters estimated from
real world Twitter datasets, we show that the BE-SMN
slows down the misinformation propagation and reduces
the number of infected users.

2 PROPAGATION OF MISINFORMATION ON THE
BLOCKCHAIN

In this section, we construct a SIR based model for misin-
formation propagation in a BE-SMN. We ﬁrst introduce the
blockchain protocol where messages in SMNs are checked
by miners. Then we use the SIR model to study the propa-
gation dynamics of misinformation. Speciﬁcally, we decom-
pose the transmission rate into a product of the contact
rate and the infectivity. We characterize the infectivity using
a transmission-time distribution and derive the integral
equation of the SIR model. Our key idea is to relate the
transmission-time distribution with the time it takes for
double-spend attacks to succeed on the blockchain.

2.1 Blockchain Protocol for Misinformation Propaga-
tion

This subsection describes the SMN’s blockchain system,
including how miners approve and encapsulate informa-
tion into blocks, as well as how blocks are conﬁrmed and
information is propagated.

Our proposed BE-SMN utilizes a distributed ledger to
ensure that users equally have full control of their social
interactions, i.e., what they post and what they see.

Speciﬁcally, every active user can become a miner, who
checks the authenticity of other users’ messages. Miners uti-
lize their computing power to search the knowledge base or
conduct data mining and text analysis to decide if a message
is truth or misinformation. The approved message will be
encrypted and added to the blockchain as a block and the
ﬁrst miner to approve it will be rewarded virtual credit in
the SMN. If a particular number of subsequent blocks are
attached after it, the block is conﬁrmed on the blockchain.
We categorize miners into two groups: honest miners who
approve true news, and dishonest miners who approve
misinformation. Concretely, the blockchain protocol has the
following rules:

3

Fig. 1: SIR dynamics in a BE-SMN. Social Network: The top
panel shows the decentralized SMN proposed in this paper.
Red nodes (u2, u4) and blue nodes (u1, u3, u5) represent
infected and susceptible users, respectively. Messages are
numbered in temporal order (m1, · · · , m6) and represented
as directed edges with red ones representing misinforma-
tion. Solid edges denote messages that are approved by
miners and encapsulated in the blockchain while dashed
ones denote messages that are disapproved and aborted.
Blockchain: The middle panel schematically illustrates a
double-spend attack in blockchain. The original information
(the ”i” icon) is turned into truthful message m1 (blue)
and misinformation m2 (red), which both get approved
(by u3 and u4 respectively as shown in the bottom half
of the blocks) and encapsulated into blocks. The chain
”m2 − m3 − m5” outnumbers the other chain ”m1” by 2,
which leads to m2 getting conﬁrmed and published in the
SMN, whereas m1 getting aborted.
SIR Model: The bottom panel shows the three com-
partments (S-susceptible, I-infected, R-recovered) in SIR
model. Because the misinformation m1 is published by the
blockchain, u1 becomes infected by u2 and enters I from S.

1) Each miner has equal probability to be the ﬁrst one to

approve the message.

2) A new block will attach to an existing block of the same
type, i.e., a new block created by a dishonest miner will
attach to a block containing misinformation. If there is
no existing blocks to attach to, a new block will become
a genesis block.

3) When two blocks are created simultaneously, there will

be a fork which results in two diverged chains.

4) When the cumulative successive blocks of one block
reach a predeﬁned number k, then the block is con-
ﬁrmed and the encapsulated message is published. The

shorter forked chain will be aborted.
Based on the blockchain protocol, misinformation is
propagated from an infected user to another user if a
dishonest miner approves the news followed by k other
approvals of (other) misinformation. A schematic of the
proposed BE-SMN is shown in Fig. 1. In Section 2.3 we
derive the misinformation transmission-time distribution.
Using this distribution we will show how the BE-SMN
slows down the misinformation propagation following a
blockchain transaction approval process. A numerical eval-
uation is provided in Section 4.

2.2 Transmission-time Distribution in SIR Model

In epidemic modeling, the transmission rate is the number
of people infected in a given amount of time. In a classical
SIR model, the transmission rate3 is deﬁned as the product
of contact rate and transmission probability. This measures
the number of contacts an individual makes per unit of time
and the probability that a contact results in a susceptible
individual becoming infected, respectively.

The classical Kermack-McKendrick epidemic model [19]
has dynamics determined by the following ordinary differ-
ential equation:

˙S(t) = −βS(t)I(t)

(1)

Here S(t), I(t) denote the number of susceptible users and
infected users respectively; N denotes the total population
size which is constant4; β > 0 denotes the contact rate. The
number of new infections βS(t)I(t) is given by mass action
incidence5, i.e., a user is assumed to make βN contacts in
unit time.

Eq. (1) assumes that a susceptible user get infected im-
mediately after contacting with an infected user. It is unable
to reﬂect true scenarios in which users become infected after
a period of time – The effect of an interaction may lead to in-
fection in the future. To account for this, we incorporate the
transmission time TS→I into the model, which refers to how
long it takes for a contact between a susceptible user and
an infected user to turn into an infection. This construction
is similar to the model with arbitrarily distributed disease
stages proposed in [21].

Let PTS→I (t) denote the cumulative distribution func-

tion (CDF) of the transmission time,

PTS→I (t) = P (TS→I ≤ t),

(2)

which is the probability that the transmission time lasts no
longer than t. The derivative with respect to time t, denoted
˙PS(t), is the probability density function (PDF) of the
as
transmission time, i.e., the probability that a susceptible
individual becomes infected at time t since the contact. The
CDF and PDF of the transmission time have the following
properties:

PTS→I (0) = 0, PTS→I (∞) = 1,
˙PTS→I (t) ≥ 0, t ≥ 0.

(3)

3. Also referred to as infection rate, transmission coefﬁcient, or β in

the literature.

4. We neglect the creation/deletion of user accounts during the
misinformation transmission [6] – the speed of misinformation spread
is much faster than the life cycle of social media.

4

Based on the transmission-time distribution PTS→I (t),
we obtain the following integral equation for the susceptible
population (where ˙S(t) denotes the time derivative)

˙S(t) = −

(cid:90) t

0

βS(τ )I(τ ) ˙PTS→I (t − τ )dτ

(4)

Here βS(τ )I(τ ) is the expected number of contacts be-
tween the susceptible and the infected population at time
˙PTS→I (t − τ ) denotes the probability density function of
τ ;
the transmission time at t − τ .

Note that in the classical SIR model, PTS→I (t) is a unit
step function at 0 and ˙PTS→I (t) is Dirac delta function δ(t).
Thus Eq. (4) becomes

(cid:90) t

˙S(t) = −

βS(τ )I(τ )δ(t − τ )dτ

0
= −βS(t)I(t)

(5)

which is the differential equation (1) of the classical SIR
model.

In the subsection below, we will incorporate the SIR
model with the transmission-time distribution (4) speciﬁed
by the blockchain double-spend attack.

2.3 Transmission-time Distribution with Blockchain

We now explain how the duration of a blockchain double-
spend attack can be used to compute the misinformation
transmission-time distribution.

A double-spend attack is deﬁned as fraudulent trans-
actions with users spending the same digital token more
than once [22]. To launch a double-spend attack in the BE-
SMN, a dishonest miner or mining pool reverses a previous
block (containing misinformation) and attempts to rapidly
approve all following blocks (containing misinformation) in
order to build a longer chain than that created by the collec-
tive honest miners, as shown in the middle panel of Fig. 1.
The blocks that come after the previous block serve as conﬁr-
mations6. Once a set amount of conﬁrmations are received,
the previous block’s misinformation will be conﬁrmed and
published in the SMN. The time it takes for double-spend
attacks to succeed is essentially the transmission-time distri-
bution discussed in Section 2.2.

In what follows, we derive the transmission-time distri-
bution using the ﬁrst-hitting-time of a blockchain approval
process [23]. Let {Nd(s), s ≥ 0} and {Nh(s), s ≥ 0} denote
the blocks mined by dishonest and honest miners, which are
independent Poisson processes with respective rates µd and
µh. The misinformation transmission-time is the ﬁrst time
that N1 is k greater than N2, which is deﬁned as Tk,

Tk = inf{s ≥ 0 : Nd(s) = Nh(s) + k}, k > 0.

(6)

Consider the mining process as multiple rounds of com-
petitions between dishonest miners and honest miners, and
in each round the winning(losing) team increase(decrease)
their score by 1. We represent dishonest miners’ score after
n rounds as a random walk Sn = (cid:80)n
i=1 Xi, where Xi, i ≥ 1
are independent and that P (Xi = 1) = p = µd
=

µd+µh

5. See Section 2.1 in [20].

6. See https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Conﬁrmation.

1 − P (Xi = −1). From Eq. (6), dishonest miners score k
for the ﬁrst time at Tk, i.e.,

Nk = min{n : Sn = k},

(7)

where Nk = ∞ if Sn < k for all n.

Lemma 1. [23]

P (Nk = k + 2i) =

k
k + 2i

Proof. See Appendix A.

(cid:32)

(cid:33)

k + 2i
k + i

pk+i(1 − p)i, i = 0, 1, · · ·

(8)

5

Algorithm 1 Inverse sampling of the transmission time
Input: The transmission-time distribution P (Tk ≤ s|Tk <
∞) with parameters k, µd, µh.
Output: A sampled transmission time s.
1: Sample U1 ∼ Unif(0, 1)
2: if U1 ≤ ( µd
µh
3:
4:

)k then
Sample U2 ∼ Unif(0, 1)
Compute the transmission time s = F −1
Tk

(U2), where

FTk (s) = P (Tk ≤ s|Tk < ∞)

5: else Set the transmission time s = ∞
6: end if

Deﬁne g(i) = P (Nk = k + 2i), G(i) = P (Nk ≤ k + 2i)
as the probability mass function (PMF) and the CDF of Nk
respectively. Lemma 1 shows that

g(i + 1)
g(i)

=

(k + 2i)(k + 2i + 1)
(k + i + 1)(i + 1)

p(1 − p), i ≥ 0

(9)

First, we connect the PMF and CDF in Eq. (10,11) to the

transmission-time distribution introduced in Section 2.2

PTS→I (t) = P (Tk ≤ t)
˙PTS→I (t) = P (Tk = t)

(13)

The integral equation (4) can be expressed as

which can be used to recursively compute g(i) and G(i).

When a block containing misinformation obtains k con-
ﬁrmations, it is conﬁrmed and the misinformation is dis-
seminated in the SMN. P (Tk = s) is the probability of this
event occurring at time s. We show the PMF and CDF of Tk
in the following Theorem 1 using law of total probability.

˙S(t) = −

= −

(cid:90) t

0
(cid:90) t

0

βS(τ )I(τ )P (Tk = t − τ )dτ

βS(τ )I(τ )

∞
(cid:88)

j=0

g([j/2])

e−µ(t−τ )[µ(t − τ )]j+k
(j + k)!

dτ

(14)

Theorem 1. The PMF of Tk, denoted as P (Tk = s), is the
sum of the probabilities of the joint events that (1) a total of
(j +k) blocks being mined; and (2) dishonest miners mining
the (j + k)-th block, resulting in their chain outnumbering
honest miners’ chain for the ﬁrst time by k blocks, where
j = 0, 1, · · · :

P (Tk = s) =

∞
(cid:88)

j=0

g([j/2])

e−µs(µs)j+k
(j + k)!

Similarly the CDF of Tk is:
∞
(cid:88)

P (Tk ≤ s) =

j=0

G([j/2])

e−µs(µs)j+k
(j + k)!

(10)

(11)

where µ = µd + µh and [x] denotes the largest integer less
or equal to x.
Proof. See Appendix B.

Assume that µd < µh, i.e., the computing power of the
dishonest miners is less than that of the honest miners.
Then the probability that the simple random walk with
p = µd
)k [23]. Conse-
quently,

ever goes up k is equal to ( µd
µh

µd+µh

P (Nk < ∞) = P (Tk < ∞) = (

µd
µh

)k

(12)

To simulate the transmission time from the CDF P (Tk ≤
s|Tk < ∞), we propose Algorithm 1 which uses inverse
transform method.

2.4 Discrete Difference Equations for SIR Model

In this subsection, we discretize the model in Eq. (4) and
include the transmission-time (Section 2.2) which results in
the discrete-time difference equations for SIR model.

where [x] denotes the largest integer less or equal to x and
g([j/2]) can be computed recursively using Eq. (9).

Now we consider Eq. (14) in the discrete time, i.e., t =
0, 1, · · · . Note that the time unit in discrete time t is the
time interval of information propagation among SMN users,
while the time unit in discrete time s (Eq. (10, 11)) is the time
interval of block mining on the blockchain. We assume that
the rate of block mining is faster than that of information
propagation. The aim is to provide the user with a feeling
of system reacting instantaneously and swiftly. Indeed, the
blockchain technology is capable to meet this requirement,
with Stellar and Solana achieving 2 − 4 seconds per block 7.
On the other hand, the information propagation on Twitter
or Facebook may take minutes.

Thus we deﬁne the ratio l = ∆t

∆s which represents the
different time scales of information propagation and block
mining. Eq. (13) can be rewritten as follows

PTS→I (t) = P (Tk ≤ ls)
˙PTS→I (t) = P (Tk = ls)

(15)

Then we time discretize the integral equation (14) result-

ing in the discrete time difference equation
(cid:34)

t
(cid:88)

l
(cid:88)

(cid:16)

S(t+1) = S(t)−

βS(i)I(i)

P

Tk = (t+1−i)l−j

(cid:35)

(cid:17)

i=0

j=0

(16)
Similarly, the discrete-time difference equations for the

infected and recovered population are
(cid:34)

(cid:16)

I(t+1)=I(t)+(cid:80)t

i=0

βS(i)I(i) (cid:80)l

j=0 P

Tk=(t+1−i)l−j

(cid:35)

(cid:17)

−αI(t)

(17)

7. https://alephzero.org/blog/what-is-the-fastest-blockchain-and%

2Dwhy-analysis-of-43-blockchains/

R(t + 1) = R(t) + αI(t)

(18)

Here α > 0 is the recovery rate denoting the probability
that infected individuals recover and remain permanently
immune to the infection.

3 SIR MODEL ON A MULTI-COMMUNITY NETWORK

In this section, we generalize the SIR dynamics to a
multi-community network. We model the network using a
stochastic block model (SBM), where users are partitioned
into three communities representing different contact rates
and recovery rates. We use stochastic simulation based on
Section 2 to analyze how the community structure and
rate heterogeneity affect misinformation propagation in the
network.

3.1 A Two-community SBM Network
Consider a SMN represented by an undirected graph G =
(V, E), where V is the node set representing the users and
E is the edge set representing the users’ friendship. The
adjacency matrix A = [aij]N ×N is a binary valued matrix
where

aij =

(cid:40)

1, nodes i and j are connected
0, otherwise

(19)

We partition V into two8 disjoint communities,
i.e.,
V = V1 ∪ V2 and V1 ∩ V2 = ∅, where V1 (V2) represents the
community with strong (weak) resilience to misinformation.
Just as population in different age groups have different
infection fatality rate to the epidemic [24], users in different
communities have different contact rates and recovery rates
to misinformation, i.e., contact rates β1 < β2 and recovery
rates α1 > α2, where βm and αm denote the rates for users
in community Vm, m ∈ {1, 2}.

Let ci denotes node i’s community label. ci = 1 if i ∈ V1
and ci = 2 if i ∈ V2. We also deﬁne the probability matrix B
as a symmetric 2 × 2 matrix which speciﬁes the probability
that two nodes connect based on their communities, i.e.,

aij = 1 with probability Bcicj

(20)

The above two-community SBM model captures the
community structure of SMNs and the variation of contact
rates and recovery rates for different communities. This idea
is similar to that in [12] that individuals are more likely to
connect with others that have similar susceptibility.

3.2 Stochastic Simulation of Misinformation Propaga-
tion

In this subsection, we use agent based modeling to construct
the SIR dynamics on a multi-community SMN. The model
that we propose fully exploits the graph structure compared
with the mean ﬁeld approximation in Eq. 1.

In the SIR model, a user can be in one of the three states
{susceptible, infected, recovered}. We use S(t), I(t), R(t) to
represent the set of nodes in each state at time t ∈ {0, 1, · · · }.
The time is discrete and the unit of time can be set in

8. The approach can be generalized to multi-community networks

straightforwardly.

6

accordance with the propagation speed of misinformation.
We set it to minute in the numerical simulation of Section
4. We also extend the two-community model to the multi-
community setting with M communities.

We deﬁne N (I)

i,m(t), m ∈ {1, · · · , M } as the set of node
i’s neighbors from community Vm that are infected at time
t, i.e.,

N (I)

i,m(t) = {j|Aij = 1 ∧ j ∈ I(t) ∧ cj = m},

(21)

First consider a SMN without the blockchain. The CDF
of the transmission time is a unit step function at 0, i.e.,
a susceptible user is infected as soon as she contacted an
infected user as shown in (5). Deﬁne xi(t) ∈ {S, I, R} as the
state of user i at time t. Then the transition matrix is:
1 − PS→I
0
0

P (xi(t+1)|xi(t)) =

1 − PI→R PI→R

 (22)

PS→I







1

0

0

where

M
(cid:89)

PS→I =

(1 − βm)|N (I)

i,m(t)|

m=1
PI→R = αci

(23)

In comparison, the stochastic simulation on the multi-
community network with blockchain is shown in Algorithm
2. For each infected neighbor j of a susceptible user i, j
contacted i with probability βcj , which is the contact rate
of j’s community. If they contacted, i will not become
infected immediately as in the typical SIR model; Instead,
a transmission time will be sampled from the distribution
speciﬁed in Section 2.3, indicating how long it takes for
i to be infected due to the contact with j. For each of i’s
contact with her infected neighbors, a transmission time is
sampled, and the minimum of them will be the time for i to
get infected.

In Section 4, we will use numerical simulation to com-
pare the results of misinformation transmission in SMNs
with and without the blockchain protocol.

4 NUMERICAL
OF
BLOCKCHAIN ENABLED SOCIAL NETWORK

ILLUSTRATION

THE

In this section, we simulate the SIR dynamics of misinfor-
mation transmission on a three-community SMN (Section
3.1) according to Algorithm 2. We compare the simulation
results with and without the blockchain in the network. The
results demonstrate that blockchain can ﬂatten the curve of
the population affected by misinformation in SMNs.

We also show that with the same proportion of honest
miners in the blockchain system, some communities are
more resilient to misinformation due to higher recovery rate
and lower contact rate. This indicates the Cannikin Law
[25] (wooden bucket theory) when applying the distributed
ledger to a multi-community network – The minimum
proportion of honest miners to avoid all the users getting
infected is determined by the community most fragile to
misinformation.

Parameter Estimation from Twitter Datasets: We use Twit-
ter datasets of trending hashtags [7] to obtain realistic SIR

7

(a) The subﬁgure shows the posterior distribution of the MCMC
samples for the contact rate β and recovery rate α. The mean,
the 5th and 95th percentiles of the samples are displayed in the
legend; A ﬁtted gaussian probability density curve is also shown.
The posterior means, also shown in Table 2, are used as the SIR
model parameters in the numerical simulation.

(b) The subﬁgure shows the ﬁtted result using SIR model and the
observation of the infected population. The dataset is for Twitter
hashtag ”#BBWLA”.

model parameters for simulating misinformation transmis-
sion. We justify this choice of dataset for the following rea-
sons: Twitter hashtags are used to describe virally popular
events and subjects. The spread of viral hashtags frequently
follows a similar pattern to that of diseases [26].

A total of 4574 time-stamped tweets were collected dur-
ing a 87-minute period using Twitter API by querying the
hashtag ”#BBWLA” in 2016 [7]. The hashtag is about an
American reality television series Basketball Wives. We chose
this hashtag because the popular reality show prompted a
lot of conversation on social media and the linked tweets
went viral, providing us with a good approximation of how
misinformation spreads. The tweets are grouped into one-
minute time windows resulting in a smoothed time series of
the infected population Iobs(t), t = 0, · · · , 87.

We use Bayesian Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
[7] to estimate the SIR parameters, β and α, as well as the
inital values for the infected (I(0)) and susceptible (S(0))
populations. We assign the parameters with uniform priors:

π(β) = U(0, 1), π(α) = U(0, 1),
π(I(0)) = U (1, max(Iobs(t))) ,
π(S(0)) = U (max (Iobs (t)) , 40000)

(24)

We also estimate the standard deviation of the observation
error σIobs (abbreviated as σI ), for which we choose the

Fig. 3: This ﬁgure shows the SIR dynamics in the SMN
with and without the blockchain protocol. The top subﬁg-
ure shows the infected population I(t) while the bottom
subﬁgure shows the effective infection rate λ(t). The BE-
SMN (red star) ﬂattens the curve of the infected population
and has a smaller effective infection rate compared with the
network without blockchain protocol (blue up triangle). The
main takeaway is that the blockchain enabled network has
stronger resilience to misinformation.

Jeffreys non-informative prior

π(σI ) ∝

1
σI

(25)

Let Ψ = {β, α, I(0), S(0), σI } be the set of inputs to the
model. The discrete-time difference equation of the infected
population is part of the model and are used to compute the
set of the model outputs, Φ = {I(t)}t=1,··· ,87

I(t) = I(t − 1) + βS(t − 1)I(t − 1) − αI(t − 1)

(26)

The likelihood of the model’s output is given by

L(Φ) =

87
(cid:89)

σI

t=1

1
√

2π

(cid:32)

exp

−

1
2

(cid:18) I(t) − Iobs(t)
σI

(cid:19)2 (cid:33)

(27)

8

TABLE 2: Posterior summary of SIR model parameters
estimated from the Twitter hashtag ”#BBWLA” dataset

Parameters

β
α
I(0)
S(0)
σI

5th
Percentile

0.0035
0.02141
4.12039
114.86173
14.72637

Mean

0.00359
0.02166
4.48387
115.67961
14.87384

95th
Percentile

0.00369
0.02190
4.83852
116.44687
15.00599

The posterior of Ψ is updated according to

p(Ψ) ∝ π(Ψ)L(Φ)

(28)

The estimation results for the ”#BBWLA” hashtag
dataset is shown in Table 2. The MCMC simulation is run
for 10000 iterations with a burn-in of 75%. Fig. 2a displays
the posterior sample distribution plots for the estimated β
and α. The infected population curves computed using the
estimated parameters is shown in Fig. 2b along with the
observation data.

Model Parameters: In the simulation, the number of users
in the three communities are 100, 60, 40 respectively, and the
3 × 3 probability matrix (20) is

B =





0.2
0.015
0.012

0.015 0.012
0.02
0.2

0.2
0.02





(29)

which corresponds to the situation where users have more
intra-community connections than inter-community ones.
The SIR model (1, 4) assumes that an individual makes βN
contacts in unit time in a population of size N [20], where
β is speciﬁed in Table. 2. Since a user cannot contact with
anyone in a SMN, we offset the contact rate by multiplying it
with the ratio N
, where d denotes the average node degree.
d
In the simulated network, N = 200, d = 16.56. The offsetted
contact rate from the Twitter dataset is thus 0.0425.

Based on the parameters ﬁtted from the Twitter hash-
tag dataset, the three communities have different contact
rates 0.02, 0.0425, 0.07 and recovery rates 0.1, 0.022, 0.005.
Because the network maintains one unique blockchain, the
three communities share the same transmission-time distri-
bution P (Tk ≤ s). We set k = 2,

= 0.3, l = 15.

µd
µd+µh

Performance Metrics: To measure how the network is
inﬂuenced by misinformation, we utilize the effective in-
fection rate [27]. The effective infection rate is deﬁned as
λ(t) = β(t)
α(t) , which is the ratio of the empirical contact
rate and empirical recovery rate. Recall that the contact rate
β and recovery rate α in (1, 18) are both time-invariant.
The empirical contact rate and empirical recovery rate, on
the other hand, are time-varying and reﬂect the real-time
dynamics of the misinformation transmission.

On a network, the population of newly infected nodes at

time t can be expressed as

Fig. 4: The ﬁgure shows the SIR dynamics in each com-
munity of the network with the blockchain protocol. The
curves represent the susceptible proportion s(t) (blue), the
infected proportion i(t) (red), and the recovered proportion
r(t) (green). The black dashed vertical line denotes t∗ when
the infected population reaches its peak, which is used to
compute R0 based on (33). Community 1 has the smallest
R0 while community 3 has the largest one. All users in
community 3 get infected in the end. The key takeaway from
this ﬁgure is as follows: Communities will react differently
to the dissemination of misinformation when the distributed
ledger is used to a multi-community network. To prevent
infecting all users in the community most vulnerable to
misinformation, a minimal proportion of honest miners

µh
µd+µh

can be chosen accordingly.

formation and can be computed as

β(t) = −

S(t + 1) − S(t)
S(t)I(t)

(31)

Similarly, the empirical recovery rate α(t) quantiﬁes how
likely that an infected user gets recovered from the misin-
formation

α(t) =

R(t + 1) − R(t)
I(t)

(32)

S(t + 1) − S(t) = −β(t)S(t)I(t)

(30)

Then the empirical contact rate β(t) measures the likelihood
of a contact, which quantiﬁes the ”infectivity” of the misin-

To compare the performance of different communities in
coping with the misinformation, we compute the reproduc-
tion number R0 of each community. R0 is the average num-
ber of secondary cases produced by one infected individual

7:
8:
9:

10:

11:
12:
13:
14:
15:
16:

17:
18:

19:
20:
21:
22:
23:

introduced into a population of susceptible individuals [28].
R0 greater than 1 emphasizes the fact that the epidemic
(misinformation) can not die out without external control.
R0 is computed as follows [29]:

R0 =

N
S(t∗)

,

(33)

where t∗ = argmaxt=0,1,··· I(t), i.e., the time when the
infected population reaches the peak.

Results:
• Blockchain Improves a Network’s Resilience: Figure 3 compares
the population dynamics and the effective infection rate in
the SMN with and without the blockchain protocol. In the
network with blockchain, I(t) curve of I(t) is ﬂattened,
with lower number of infected users and the infections dis-
tributed along a longer time. The effective infection rate is
also smaller. This suggests that the BE-SMN slows down the
misinformation transmission, and also lowers the number of
the infected population.
• Different Communities Behave Differently to Misinformation:
Figure 4 compares the performance of the three commu-
nities in the network with blockchain. Speciﬁcally, Fig. 4
displays the ratio of each population, with s(t) = S(t)
N
representing the ratio of susceptible individuals in the com-
munity; i(t) and r(t) are deﬁned similarly. The reproduction
number R0 is also computed for each community.
Due to the pre-deﬁned parameters, community 1 has the
strongest resilience to misinformation: R0 = 1.20 is the
smallest among the three communities; the peak value of
infected portion is less than 0.1, around 0.4 of the total
population is unaffected in the end, and the misinformation
exist for around 140 minutes, much shorter than that of com-
munity 3. On the other hand, community 3 has the weakest
resilience: the peak value of infected portion is around 0.8,
and all the population are affected in the end. The wooden
bucket theory posits that the minimum fraction of honest
miners under the blockchain protocol is decided by the
community 3, which is most vulnerable to misinformation.

5 CONCLUSIONS
We discussed a BE-SMN. Our proposed protocol examines
social media postings using a blockchain transaction conﬁr-
mation method. The social media postings are processed as
blockchain transactions, with a higher proportion of honest
miners in the network ensuring that misinformation takes
longer to propagate. We modeled misinformation as double-
spend attacks in the blockchain and derive its transmission-
time distribution. This distribution is incorporated into the
SIR model. Then we exploited stochastic simulation algo-
rithm of misinformation dynamics on a multi-community
network.

In numerical studies, we employed a Bayesian MCMC
algorithm to estimate the SIR model parameters from Twit-
ter hashtag datasets, which have a similar diffusion pattern
to misinformation. The posterior means of the contact rate
and recovery rate are used for simulating the misinfrmation
propagation on a multi-community SMN. The result demon-
strated that the proposed blockchain protocol reduces the
spread of misinformation and ﬂattens the infected popula-
tion curve.

9

Algorithm 2 Stochastic simulation of the SIR dynamics in
the multi-community network
Input: graph G = (V, E); adjacency matrix A; users’ com-
munity label ci ∈ {1, · · · , M }, i ∈ V ; contact rates βm and
recovery rates αm, m = 1, · · · , M ; time scale ratio l
Output: S(t), I(t), R(t); S(t), I(t), R(t).

1: Three nodes are selected uniformly at random from each
community to be the ﬁrst infected individuals I(0).
2: All the other nodes are initialized as susceptible with its
)|i ∈ V \
i = ∞9 denotes an inﬁnite transmission

state represented as a tuple, i.e., S(0) = {(i, t(S)
I(0)}, where t(S)
time.

i

(cid:46) S → I

) ∈ S(t − 1) do

3: for t = 1, 2, · · · do
for (i, t(S)
4:
i
if t(S)
i = ∞ then
for m = 1, · · · , M do
for j ∈ N (I)

5:
6:

i,m(t − 1)((21)) do

Sample U ∼ Unif(0, 1)
if U ≤ βm then
Sample t(S)∗
Update t(S)

i

according to Alg. 1
)10

, t(S)∗

i = min(t(S)

i

i

end if

end for

end for

else

if t(S)

i <= l then
S = S \ {(i, t(S)
I = I ∪ {i}
i = t(S)

i − l

i

)}

else t(S)
end if

end if

end for
Simulate newly recovered random variable R∗ from
(cid:46) I → R

the CDF (22)

I = I \ R∗
R = R ∪ R∗

24:
25:
26: end for

APPENDIX A
PROOF OF LEMMA 1

To prove Lemma 1, we use the Bertrand ballot theorem.

Lemma 2. (Bertrand’s ballot theorem [30]) In a random
permutation of n values +1 and m values -1, where n > m,
the probability that for every i = 1, · · · , n + m, the ﬁrst i
elements of the permutation always contain more values +1
than -1 is n−m
n+m .

Now we derive the distribution of Nk. Nk = k + 2i ⇒
Sk+2i = k and for j < k + 2i, Sj < k. Recall that Sk+2i =
(cid:80)k+2i
j=1 Xj where Xj = 1 with probability p. Then in the
ordered sequence Xk+2i, Xk+2i−1, · · · , X1, the cumulative

number of 1 is always greater than that of −1. Therefore,

P (Nk = k + 2i) = P (Sk+2i = k)P (Nk = k + 2i|Sk+2i = k)

(cid:32)

(cid:33)

k + 2i
k + i

pk+i(1 − p)i

k
k + 2i

=

of Scientiﬁc Research under grant FA9550-22-1-0016, and the
National Science Foundation under grant CCF-2112457. The
authors would like to thank Yucheng Peng and Buddhika
Nettasinghe for helpful discussions.

10

(34)

REFERENCES

where P (Nk = k + 2i|Sk+2i = k) = k
the Bertrand ballot lemma (Lemma 2 above).

k+2i is derived from

APPENDIX B
PROOF OF THEOREM 1
Let N (s) = Nd(s) + Nh(s) denote the sum of blocks
mined by both dishonest miners and honest miners. Because
Nd(s) and Nh(s) operate independently, {N (s), s ≥ 0} is a
Poisson process with rate µ = µd + µh. Recall from (6) that
Tk denotes the time of the Nk-th event of N (s). So

P (Tk = s) = P (Nk = N (t))

(35)

Conditioning on N (t) = k + j and using the fact that N (t)
and Nk are statistically independent yields
∞
(cid:88)

P (Tk = s) =

P (Nk = k + j)

(36)

e−µt(µt)k+j
(k + j)!

j=0

∞
(cid:88)

j=0

Similarly,

P (Tk ≤ s) =

which yields (11).

P (Nk ≤ k + j)

e−µt(µt)k+j
(k + j)!

(37)

APPENDIX C
LIST OF BLOCKCHAIN ENABLED SOCIAL MEDIA
NETWORKS
Real world examples of BE-SMNs include
is built on the Steem
(https://steemit.com/)
• Steemit
blockchain, a decentralized reward platform for publishers
to monetize content and grow community. Those who hold
more Steem tokens have more decision power on commu-
nity matters and reward distributions.
• Sola (https://sola.ai/) is a hybrid of media and social
network which uses AI algorithms to feed quality content
to the most interested users.
• Civil (https://civil.co/) is a community-owned network
of journalists who use blockchain to establish transparency
and trust. On Civil’s network, independent journalists create
newsrooms where they add and share their content.
• onG.social (https://ong.social/) is a blockchain based so-
cial dashboard which supports community building and
social interaction with cryptocurrency rewards. It runs on
two blockchains, Ethereum and Wavesplatform.
• Sapien (https://www.sapien.network/) is a social news
platform built on the Ethereum blockchain that gives users
control of data and content.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was supported by the U. S. Army Research
Ofﬁce under grants W911NF-19-1-0365, U.S. Air Force Ofﬁce

[1]

J. Huang, L. Tan, S. Mao, and K. Yu, “Blockchain network propa-
gation mechanism based on p4p architecture,” Security and Com-
munication Networks, vol. 2021, 2021.

[2] A. Qayyum, J. Qadir, M. U. Janjua, and F. Sher, “Using blockchain
to rein in the new post-truth world and check the spread of fake
news,” IT Professional, vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 16–24, 2019.
S. Paul, J. I. Joy, S. Sarker, S. Ahmed, A. K. Das et al., “Fake news
detection in social media using blockchain,” in 2019 7th Interna-
tional Conference on Smart Computing & Communications (ICSCC).
IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–5.

[3]

[4] U. U. Uchibeke, K. A. Schneider, S. H. Kassani, and R. Deters,
“Blockchain access control ecosystem for big data security,” in
2018 IEEE International Conference on Internet of Things (iThings) and
IEEE Green Computing and Communications (GreenCom) and IEEE
Cyber, Physical and Social Computing (CPSCom) and IEEE Smart Data
(SmartData).

IEEE, 2018, pp. 1373–1378.

[5] T. Khan, A. Michalas, and A. Akhunzada, “Fake news outbreak
2021: Can we stop the viral spread?” Journal of Network and
Computer Applications, p. 103112, 2021.

[6] M. Cinelli, W. Quattrociocchi, A. Galeazzi, C. M. Valensise,
E. Brugnoli, A. L. Schmidt, P. Zola, F. Zollo, and A. Scala, “The
covid-19 social media infodemic,” Scientiﬁc Reports, vol. 10, no. 1,
pp. 1–10, 2020.
J. Skaza and B. Blais, “Modeling the infectiousness of twitter
hashtags,” Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, vol.
465, pp. 289–296, 2017.

[7]

[8] R. Kouzy, J. Abi Jaoude, A. Kraitem, M. B. El Alam, B. Karam,
E. Adib, J. Zarka, C. Traboulsi, E. W. Akl, and K. Baddour,
“Coronavirus goes viral: quantifying the covid-19 misinformation
epidemic on twitter,” Cureus, vol. 12, no. 3, 2020.

[9] D. Baqaee, E. Farhi, M. J. Mina, and J. H. Stock, “Reopening
scenarios,” National Bureau of Economic Research, Tech. Rep.,
2020.

[10] W. Gou and Z. Jin, “How heterogeneous susceptibility and recov-
ery rates affect the spread of epidemics on networks,” Infectious
Disease Modelling, vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 353–367, 2017.

[11] M. Lachiany and Y. Louzoun, “Effects of distribution of infection
rate on epidemic models,” Physical Review E, vol. 94, no. 2, p.
022409, 2016.

[12] D. Smilkov, C. A. Hidalgo, and L. Kocarev, “Beyond network
structure: How heterogeneous susceptibility modulates the spread
of epidemics,” Scientiﬁc reports, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 1–7, 2014.

[13] A. Stanoev, D. Trpevski, and L. Kocarev, “Modeling the spread
of multiple concurrent contagions on networks,” PloS one, vol. 9,
no. 6, p. e95669, 2014.

[14] Y. Chen, Q. Li, and H. Wang, “Towards trusted social networks
with blockchain technology,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.02796, 2018.
[15] D. Fu and L. Fang, “Blockchain-based trusted computing in social
network,” in 2016 2nd IEEE International Conference on Computer
and Communications (ICCC).

IEEE, 2016, pp. 19–22.

[16] C. Tessone, P. Tasca, and F. Iannelli, “Stochastic modelling of

blockchain consensus,” Available at SSRN 3865040, 2021.

[17] S. Bara ´nski, “Application of blockchain and infection processes
in graphs to mitigate content poisoning attacks in information-
centric networks,” Ph.D. dissertation, 10 2020.

[18] M. Saad, A. Ahmad, and A. Mohaisen, “Fighting fake news
propagation with blockchains,” in 2019 IEEE Conference on Com-
munications and Network Security (CNS).

IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–4.

[19] W. O. Kermack and A. G. McKendrick, “Contributions to the
mathematical theory of epidemics. ii.—the problem of endemic-
ity,” Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A, containing
papers of a mathematical and physical character, vol. 138, no. 834, pp.
55–83, 1932.

[20] F. Brauer, C. Castillo-Chavez, and Z. Feng, Mathematical models in

epidemiology. Springer, 2016, vol. 32.

[21] Z. Feng, D. Xu, and H. Zhao, “Epidemiological models with
non-exponentially distributed disease stages and applications to
disease control,” Bulletin of mathematical biology, vol. 69, no. 5, pp.
1511–1536, 2007.

11

[22] C. Pinz ´on and C. Rocha, “Double-spend attack models with time
advantange for bitcoin,” Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer
Science, vol. 329, pp. 79–103, 2016.

[23] M. Brown, E. Pek ¨oz, and S. Ross, “Blockchain double-spend attack
duration,” Probability in the Engineering and Informational Sciences,
vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 858–866, 2021.

[24] D. Acemoglu, V. Chernozhukov, I. Werning, and M. D. Whinston,
“Optimal targeted lockdowns in a multigroup sir model,” Ameri-
can Economic Review: Insights, vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 487–502, 2021.
[25] D. Tilman, Resource Competition and Community Structure.(MPB-17),

Volume 17. Princeton university press, 2020.

[26] L. Weng, F. Menczer, and Y.-Y. Ahn, “Virality prediction and
community structure in social networks,” Scientiﬁc reports, vol. 3,
no. 1, pp. 1–6, 2013.

[27] P. Van Mieghem, “The viral conductance of a network,” Computer

Communications, vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 1494–1506, 2012.

[28] P. Van den Driessche, “Reproduction numbers of infectious disease
models,” Infectious Disease Modelling, vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 288–303,
2017.

[29] A. L. Bertozzi, E. Franco, G. Mohler, M. B. Short, and D. Sledge,
“The challenges of modeling and forecasting the spread of covid-
19,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, vol. 117, no. 29,
pp. 16 732–16 738, 2020.

[30] W. Feller, An introduction to probability theory and its applications, vol

2.

John Wiley & Sons, 2008.

