Cognitive Ledger Project: Towards Building Personal 
Digital Twins Through Cognitive Blockchain 

Amir Reza Asadi 
Humind Labs 
Tehran,Iran  
amirreza.asadi@ieee.org 
ORCID: 0000-0001-5440-8456 

Abstract—The  Cognitive  Ledger  Project  is  an  effort  to 
develop a modular system for turning users' personal data into 
structured information and machine learning models based on 
a  blockchain-based  infrastructure.    In  this  work-in-progress 
paper, we propose a cognitive architecture for cognitive digital 
twins.  The  suggested  design  embraces  a  cognitive  blockchain 
(Cognitive ledger) at its core. The architecture includes several 
modules  that  turn  users'  activities  in  the  digital  environment 
into reusable knowledge objects and artificial intelligence that 
one day can work together to form the cognitive digital twin of 
users.  

Keywords—  Cognitive  Computing,  Knowledge  Management, 

Artificial Intelligence, Blockchain, Tokenomics  

I.  INTRODUCTION  

Digital  Twin  is  a  trending  topic  in  manufacturing 
technology studies. It refers to the virtual representation of a 
physical object or system that simulates the behavior of the 
physical thing [1]. However, this paper does not deal with the 
manufacturing  industry.  In  this  project,  we  develop  a 
cognitive ledger for use by personal cognitive digital twins of 
individuals.  

The  ideal  cognitive  digital  twin  is  an autonomous  agent 
that represents the skills and knowledge of the person [2], and 
its digital nature facilitates the integration and collaboration 
with  cyberspace  and  software  systems.  Although  It  sounds 
very promising, there are many hurdles to the realization of 
cognitive digital twins. Our proposal seeks to utilize data that 
users created and consumed to simulate their cognitive skills 
such as decision making and long-term memory. 

As we know, in the past decade, information technology 
has integrated into our daily life more and more, and we see 
rapid growth of smartphone ownership globally. As the world 
is going to be more connected, smartphone users will create 
and  consume  more  information.  The  management  of  their 
personal  information  becomes  more  difficult  for  users  than 
ever.  For example, users may forget what terms they searched 
on  Google  and  their  preferred  results.  However,  Google 
preserves this information on its servers to use it in big data 
analytics.  

In other words, users' digital footprint and online activities 
can reveal the user's preferences, which is much valuable for 
internet  companies  to  risk  overstepping  users'  privacy  and 
regulatory rules. In this work in progress paper, we propose a 
system that would put back acquired intelligence to the hands 
of its actual owners(users). 

 A blockchain network as a distributed immutable ledger 
can  facilitate  the  secure  and  persistent  storage  of  user 

information while ensuring ownership of data and end users' 
privacy.  Medical  centers  currently  use  the  blockchain 
platforms like Medicalchain in order to store patient's health 
records securely  [3],[4].  Similarly,  for creating the  personal 
cognitive digital twin, we need to encode all of an individual's 
digital  activities  and  interactions  on  a  blockchain-based 
infrastructure. In Cognitive Ledger Project, we try to mimic 
the human mind by collecting as much as possible data and 
information  about  users  and  turning  them  into  usable 
information  by  machines.  After  few  years,  when  this  data 
covers most aspects of the individual's consciousness, similar 
to Ghost in the Shell world [5], the shell applications can use 
the cognitive blockchain to deliver the cognitive digital twin 
with different levels of agency and automation. 

 Furthermore,  blockchain  technology  has  driven  the 
paradigm  of  tokenization  of  assets,  and  several  companies 
around  the  world  are  working  on  blockchain  projects  for 
creating  tokens  that  represent  ownership  of  tangible  and 
intangible  assets  [6],[7].  To  put  it  another  way,  the 
immutability of records and the capability of issuing tokens 
facilitate the tokenization of knowledge and cognitive skills. 

In  the  following  sections,  we  introduce  a  cognitive 
architecture for representing individual intelligence.  Then, we 
describe  a  blockchain  ledger  system  that  supports  secure 
storage and representation of users' knowledge. After that, we 
discuss  steps  toward  the  implementation  of  the  proposed 
system. 

II.  PCDT 1.0 COGNITIVE ARCHITECTURE  

 Before developing a cognitive blockchain ledger, we need 
to choose a cognitive architecture for the personal digital twin.  
During  the  last  few  decades,  many  researchers  worldwide 
have worked hard to design architectures to represent human-
like cognitive abilities in digital environments. Adams et al. 
[8]  presented  important  competency  areas  associated  with 
human-like general intelligence (See Fig. 1) 

We needed to design a modular architecture that can be 
used for the creation of cognitive digital twins by third parties. 

The  participatory  design  methodology  was  used  for 
defining the design requirements. The recruited participators 
were briefed about the cognitive digital twins, and then they 
were  organized  into  two-person  teams.    Each  teammate 
checked the social media profiles of their teammate and tried 
to  play  the  role  of  the  teammate  cognitive  digital  twin  by 
writing its logs.  Then the other teammate gave feedback on 
the usefulness and the perceived experience from these logs.   
By  analysis  of 
following  design 
reports, 
requirements were gathered: 

these 

the 

 
 
 
 
•  The  architecture should  store personality  traits  and 
preferences,  which  can  lead  to  more  humanized 
interactions.  

• 

• 

It should convey the user's online interactions, such 
as consumed information.   

It should mimic the decision-making pattern of the 
user. 

•  ML  Trainer  Engine:  The  programs  that  train 
personalized  machine  learning  models.  In  our 
vision,  these  trained  models  work  together  to 
compose the cognitive digital twin of the user. 

Fig 1. Artificial general intelligence competencies [8] 

 By considering Fig.1, design  requirements, and altering 
CIT  architecture,  the  PCDT  1.0  architecture  (Personal 
Cognitive Digital Twin) was designed. 

CIT  architecture 

is  developed  by  Chandiok  and 
Chaturvedi [9]. They considered state of the art in cognitive 
architectures  and  created  a  wholly  general-purpose  and 
adaptable  architecture.    The  other  reason  for  using  CIT 
architecture elements is that this architecture is developed and 
implemented based on the latest practical artificial intelligence 
technologies. 

The  mental  layer  is  at  the  center  of  our  proposed 
architecture,  which  is  designed  to  be  implemented  on  the 
blockchain. The information from users is captured through 
the information capturing module and stored in the memory 
pool of this layer. The collected information is raw and must 
get  processed.  The  learning  layer  process  this  information 
through agents including: 

•  Knowledge  Codification  Agents:  These 
autonomous agents turn the raw information into 
knowledge objects and personality trait badges. 
This  process  makes  the  collected  information 
into a reusable form for usage by Digital Twin 
agent  and  dApps.  The  term  of  knowledge 
codification came from knowledge management 
literature  and  referred  to  transferring  tacit 
knowledge to explicit knowledge for later use by 
organizations [10]. 

•  Knowledge  Improver  Agents:    There  is  an 
improvement  phase 
in  most  knowledge 
management  cycles  that  take  place  after  initial 
learning  [11].  Meyer  and  Zack,  [12]  used  the 
term of the refinery for this KM activity.  These 
agents keep the knowledge codified knowledge 
give weight to codified knowledge and may burn 
the unnecessary knowledge from the ledger. 

Fig 2. PCDT 1.0 Cognitive Architecture 

 Finally, the shell layer allows users to benefit from their 
virtualized  knowledge  on  the  blockchain  or  start  new 
knowledge  synchronization  sessions.  In  other  words,  users 
can  connect  decentralized  applications  (dApps)  to  their 
cognitive  ledger.  These  applications  can  provide  different 
levels of AI, from no automation to fully autonomous digital 
twin agents.  

III.  COGNITIVE LEDGER ARCHITECTURE (MENTAL LAYER) 

The  users'  activities  and  interactions  in  the  digital 
environment, such as the terms they searched and webpages 
visited,  are  a  precious  source  for  digital  cognitive  eternity. 
And  the  mental  layer  or  Cognitive  Ledger  is  a  blockchain-
to  store  user  data  and 
based 
intelligence.  

infrastructure  designed 

Cognitive  Ledger 

is  a  crucial  foundation  for 

the 
development of cognitive digital twins. From our knowledge, 
a critical reason that we are far from the functional cognitive 
digital twins is there is no infrastructure for storing all of this 
sensitive information about users securely.  We hope that we 
create a basis for efforts to develop cognitive digital twins by 
implementing this infrastructure. 

We  propose  that  a  system  lifelogs  and  tracks  the  user. 
Then it turns the collected information into a queryable format 
for applications. Also, the cognitive ledger should show the 

 
 
 
 
knowledge  assets  to  its  owner  in  the  same  way  that  a 
cryptocurrency  wallet  displays assets.  In  addition,  it  should 
facilitate the management of the assets. 

A.  Memory Pool 

log  storage 

 The  cornerstone  of  the  cognitive  ledger  is  the  memory 
pool.  Several  efforts  have  been  conducted  for  secure  and 
tamperproof 
through  private  and  public 
blockchains [13], [14], [15], [16]. The idea of immutable log 
storage as a service [15] seems promising for the memory pool 
module. But there are concerns over the size of the blockchain 
ledger  because  the  blockchain  data  structure  of  blockchain 
requires that all nodes have a copy of the ledger. It means that 
each  node  needs  to  store  terabytes  of  data  after  few  years. 
However,  we  think  we  can  address  this  issue  through 
virtualization, so the on-chain storage approach is selected to 
store user activities. 

B.  Personality Trait Badges 

The  learning  agents  recognize  the  personality  traits  of 
users from the memory pool. The personality traits are stored 
in the form of non-fungible tokens (NFTs).  Furthermore, third 
party  shell  applications  can  issue  personality  trait  badges. 
These tokens display the personality attributes of users, such 
as their personality type according to the Myers-Briggs Type 
Indicator [17]. 

C.  Knowledge Objects 

In  this  model,  knowledge  objects  are  content  resources 
about the user and include vocabularies and knowledge bases 
based on what the user knows. And they are represented as 
NFT Tokens. It is apparent that these files are larger than the 
limitation  of  the  metadata  field  of  blockchain  records. 
Furthermore,  some  knowledge  bases  need  to  be  queryable.  
So,  storing  knowledge  objects  requires  a  decentralized 
filesystem and a blockchain-based database system. Only the 
hash of  the  file  can  be saved as  the  metadata  field  of  NFT 
tokens. 

D.  Personal ML Models 

Similar  to  knowledge  objects,  personal  ML  models  are 
represented as NFT, too. The NFT holds the hash of the model 
on off-chain storage services. 

 Personal Models can promote the commercial aspect of 
the  cognitive  ledger.  For  example,  the  aesthetic  taste  of  an 
artist can be simulated into an ML Model. This would be only 
one  of  the  possible  applications  of  mind  and  knowledge 
tokenization. 

IV.  LEARNING LAYERS & SHELLS 

The  idealistic  approach  for  implementing  the  learning 
layer would  be integrating  the  knowledge  mining  programs 
and agents on blockchain nodes. It means miners would earn 
tokens based on the knowledge they mine for the users. The 
other blockchain-friendly approach would be the development 
of  a  blockchain-based  decentralized  marketplace  of 
knowledge miners. It allows users to subscribe to knowledge 
mining  services  via  smart  contracts.  Nardini  et  al.  [18] 
proposed a framework for building a decentralized electronic 
marketplace for computing resources in 2020, so it is possible 
to implement this approach, but it requires in-depth evaluation 
and experiments. 

Thus, we decided to postpone developing the knowledge 
mining marketplace at this early stage and apply the on-device 
machine learning paradigm. In contrast to centralized cloud-
based systems, on-device machine learning would limit data 
privacy concerns, and new smart devices such as the new iPad 
Pro and the new ARM-based MacBook, which are capable of 
running on-device machine training frameworks, can reduce 
our concerns over the feasibility of using on-device ML. 

Fig 3. Cognitive Blockchain and Mental Layer 

Therefore,  the  learning  modules  will  be  integrated  into 
several  shell  modules.  Also,  the  third-party  developers  can 
create new shells to integrate novel learning methods or use 
the learned knowledge to provide intelligent human-computer 
interactions. 

The Cognitive Wallet would be the first shell that will be 
released, and it would be a wallet and gateway to the cognitive 
blockchain. It allows users to access their knowledge assets 
through  a  browser  extension,  which  can  then  be  used  to 
interact  with  the  third-party  shells.  It  is  inspired  by  the 
MetaMask wallet [19]. Furthermore, it includes some learning 
modules. First, it collects the links that the user visits. It also 
collects bookmarked URLs and the time users spent on these 
pages.  Then  with  the  help  of  Natural  Language  Processing 
pre-trained models, the web extension identifies the topics and 
persons mentioned on these pages. Moreover, the quiz panel 
recognizes the personality traits of the user.  

Fig 4:  Different levels of Cognitive Digital Twins in Cognitive Ledger 
Project 

Cognitive Ledger Project will work with individuals and 
organizations  worldwide  to  facilitate  the  utilizing  of  the 
cognitive  digital  twins  in  interactions  between  humans  and 

 
 
 
computers.  Utilizing  the  generated  knowledge  can  help  the 
user in several ways, such as: 

autonomous AutoML system at this moment [25], and some 
level of user collaboration is still required. 

• 

Intelligent  virtual  assistant:  A  virtual  assistant 
that  is  made upon the memories  and  cognitive 
abilities of the user can acquire new knowledge 
based on the personal traits and preferences of 
the  user.  This  virtual  assistant  will  be  able  to 
make decisions and act similarly to the user in 
multiple ways. 

•  Personal  information  management:  This  shell 
allows users to search and explore their minds. 
Furthermore, It can collect information based on 
the user's personality traits. 

•  Web browsing: A browser extension queries the 
ML  Model  to  add  a  preferred  information 
saliency layer on websites to highlight the more 
significant information to the user.  

V.  ON-GOING WORK AND NEXT STEPS 

At  this  stage,  we  are  evaluating  different  blockchain 
technologies  to  address  the  hurdles  mentioned  in  previous 
sections. The blockchain network should be capable of storing 
memory pool records and NFTs.   

tools 

tokens,  and 

there  are  many 

 The  primary  candidate  for  implementing  cognitive 
blockchain  is  running  a  public  blockchain  using  a  custom 
version  of  Ethereum.  Ethereum  is  widely  used  for  minting 
non-fungible 
for 
implementing NFTs in the Ethereum blockchain. We set up a 
private  Ethereum  blockchain  and  compiled  and  deployed 
several  smart contracts  for  testing  the  prototypes. The  most 
critical  issue  about  Ethereum  is  that  it  uses  a  consensus 
protocol called Proof-of-work (PoW). This protocol uses a lot 
of  energy  and  computing  resources,  and  newer  platforms 
turned to use new consensus protocols such as Proof-of-Stake 
(PoS),  which  is  designed  to  eliminate  energy  consumption 
[20]. Ethereum Foundation planned to update its program with 
a Proof-of-Stake algorithm in too, and this upgrade may make 
the  “Ethereum  miners  obsolete”  [21].  Once  Ethereum 
completes  this  upgrade,  and  we  have  enough  information 
about the impacts of this upgrade, we can select the platform 
of choice for implementing the blockchain. 

For filesystem implementation, IPFS [22] and Swarm [23] 
are the main candidate networks. Both systems use content-
based  addressing  and  allow  distributed  content  sharing  and 
storage [24]. IPFS   focuses on immutable data and is used as 
the storage layer for many blockchain projects. Swarm aims 
to become the storage layer of the internet too, but it is deeply 
integrated with Ethereum and depends on an Ethereum-based 
incentive  mechanism.  So,  once  the  blockchain  network  is 
finalized, it would be easier to select the proper protocol for 
the storage layer. 

Meanwhile, we gather information about the performance 
of  blockchain  networks  and  protocols.  Selecting  and 
developing relevant ontologies for storing the mental layer is 
also a part of future work. 

In  addition,  we  are  constantly  examining  the automated 
machine learning (AutoML) methods for use on the learning 
layer.      The  AutoML  is  an  inevitable  piece  of  creating  the 
digital cognitive twin puzzle. There are several open-source 
and commercial AutoML systems at this moment. Still, they 
provide  varying  levels  of  automation,  and  there  is  no  fully 

VI.  PRIVACY CONCERNS AND RELATED WORKS 

there 

Although 

is  no  company 

that  actually 
implemented the personal digital twins, it grasps the attention 
of  marketers  for  using  cognitive  digital  twins  in  marketing 
analytics[26].  It is important to emphasize that unlike projects 
like Datacoup [27], we do not aim to turn the project into a 
personal data brokerage system. Although we allow users to 
fully own and manage their valuable memory and knowledge, 
we aimed to design an architecture that prevents unauthorized 
access to the cognitive ledger.  Furthermore, the users' data is 
not connected to their contact info, and the knowledge mining 
process will be executed on their devices. 

 The critical scenario happens when the users allow closed 
source shell applications to use their cognitive ledgers, and the 
application  steals  this  information.  Reviewing  the  shell 
applications  is  one  possible  solution  for  addressing  this 
scenario. 

VII. CONCLUDING REMARKS 

This  paper presents a modular cognitive architecture for 
application in the development of cognitive digital twins. The 
cognitive  ledger  is  at  the  heart  of  this  architecture.  By 
lifelogging users and collecting their activities in the digital 
environment, it enables them to digitize their minds for usage 
in artificial intelligence systems. Moreover, it is evident that 
using  blockchain-based  decentralized 
infrastructure  can 
ensure  users  on  the  security  of  their  information.  In  other 
words, the cognitive ledger tries to model the user's mind into 
immutable records in order to be used by current and future 
machines. The design and development of the shells utilizing 
the cognitive blockchain can be the topic of future studies.  

Finally,  we should consider the limitations of this paper. 
As we noticed earlier, this paper is a work in progress, and the 
proposed architecture should get evaluated in more scenarios 
and  situations.  It  is  clear  that  there  is  a  long  way  toward 
implementing a  fully autonomous cognitive digital twin, but 
we shared this early-stage study to break the mental ceiling in 
this field.   

WEBSITE 

For more information you can check, CognitiveLedger.org 

REFERENCES 

[1]  C. Koulamas and A. Kalogeras, “Cyber-Physical Systems and Digital 
Twins in the Industrial Internet of Things [Cyber-Physical Systems],” 
Computer, 
doi: 
11, 
10.1109/MC.2018.2876181. 

95–98, 

2018, 

vol. 

pp. 

no. 

51, 

[2]  R. Saracco, “Opening a Pandora’s box: Personal Digital Twins,” IEEE 
Future 
2021. 
Directions, 
https://cmte.ieee.org/futuredirections/2021/05/29/opening-a-pandoras-
vase-personal-digital-twins/ (accessed Jun. 12, 2021). 

[3]  Medicalchain,  “Medicalchain  announces  a  partnership  with  The 
2018. 
Group,” 

Medicalchain, 

Groves 
https://medicalchain.com/en/partnership/ 

Medical 

[4]  Y. Sharma and B. Balamurugan, “Preserving the privacy of electronic 
health  records  using  blockchain,”  Procedia  Computer  Science,  vol. 
173, pp. 171–180, 2020. 

[5]  M.  Oshii  and  M.  Shirow,  Ghost  in  the  Shell,  vol.  1180.  Kodansha 

America LLC, 1998. 

[6]  A.  Asadi,  “The  Future  of  Ownership:  A  Disruptive  Scenario,” 
International Journal of Business and Management Invention (IJBMI, 
vol. 10, pp. 66–74, 2021. 

 
[7]  S.  Singhal,  “What  Can  be  Tokenized?  The  Tokenization  of 
Everything,” Hackernoon, 2019. https://hackernoon.com/what-can-be-
tokenized-the-tokenization-of-everything-mw1ay3bk7  (accessed  Jul. 
10, 2021). 

[8]  S.  Adams  et  al.,  “Mapping  the  landscape  of  human-level  artificial 
general intelligence,” AI magazine, vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 25–42, 2012. 
[9]  A. Chandiok and D. Chaturvedi, “CIT: integrated cognitive computing 
and  cognitive  agent  technologies  based  cognitive  architecture  for 
human-like  functionality  in  artificial  systems,”  Biologically  inspired 
cognitive architectures, vol. 26, pp. 55–79, 2018. 

[10]  S. P. Leuta and  M. Pretorius, “An analysis of the use of technology 
management  activities  for  technology  optimisation:  a  case  in  the 
banking  industry,”  South  African  Journal  of  Industrial  Engineering, 
vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 30–43, 2019. 

[11]  M. Evans, K. Dalkir, and C. Bidian, “A holistic view of the knowledge 
life  cycle:  the  knowledge  management  cycle  (KMC)  model,”  The 
Electronic  Journal  of  knowledge  management,  vol.  12,  no.  1,  p.  47, 
2015. 

[12]  M.  H.  Meyer  and  M.  H.  Zack,  “The  design  and  development  of 
information products,” MIT Sloan Management Review, vol. 37, no. 3, 
p. 43, 1996. 

[13]  S.  Ma,  Y.  Cao,  and  L.  Xiong,  “Efficient  logging  and  querying  for 
blockchain-based  cross-site  genomic  dataset  access  audit,”  BMC 
Medical Genomics, vol. 13, no. 7, pp. 1–13, 2020. 

[14]  M. S. Ozdayi, M. Kantarcioglu, and B. Malin, “Leveraging blockchain 
for  immutable  logging  and  querying  across  multiple  sites,”  BMC 
Medical Genomics, vol. 13, no. 7, pp. 1–7, 2020. 

[15]  W. Pourmajidi, L. Zhang, J. Steinbacher, T. Erwin, and A. Miranskyy, 
“Immutable  log  storage  as  a  service,”  in  2019  IEEE/ACM  41st 
International  Conference  on  Software  Engineering:  Companion 
Proceedings (ICSE-Companion), 2019, pp. 280–281. 

[16]  L. Shekhtman and E. Waisbard, “EngraveChain: A Blockchain-Based 
Tamper-Proof Distributed Log System,” Future Internet, vol. 13, no. 
6, p. 143, 2021. 

[17]  I.  B.  Myers,  “The  Myers-Briggs  Type  Indicator:  Manual  (1962).,” 

1962. 

[18]  M. Nardini, S. Helmer, N. El Ioini, and C. Pahl, “A Blockchain-based 
Decentralized Electronic Marketplace for Computing Resources,” SN 
Computer Science, vol. 1, no. 5, pp. 1–24, 2020. 

[19]  “MetaMask,”  Wikipedia.  2021.  Accessed:  Jul.  20,  2021.  [Online]. 

Available: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MetaMask 

[20]  S.  King  and  S.  Nadal,  “Ppcoin:  Peer-to-peer  crypto-currency  with 
proof-of-stake,” self-published paper, August, vol. 19, no. 1, 2012. 
[21]  J. Benson, “What Will Happen to Ethereum Miners After ETH 2.0?,” 
Jun.  26,  2021.  https://decrypt.co/74262/what-happens-ethereum-
miners-after-eth-2 (accessed Jul. 20, 2021). 

[22]  J. Benet, “Ipfs-content addressed, versioned, p2p file system,”  arXiv 

preprint arXiv:1407.3561, 2014. 

[23]  V.  Trón,  “The  Book  of  Swarm:  storage  and  communication 
infrastructure for self-sovereign digital society back-end stack for the 
decentralised web,” V1. 0 pre-Release, vol. 7, 2020. 

[24]  E.  Daniel  and  F.  Tschorsch,  “IPFS  and  Friends:  A  Qualitative 
Comparison of Next Generation Peer-to-Peer Data Networks,”  arXiv 
preprint arXiv:2102.12737, 2021. 

[25]  S. K. Karmaker (“Santu”), Md. M. Hassan, M. J. Smith, L. Xu, C. Zhai, 
and  K.  Veeramachaneni,  “AutoML  to  Date  and  Beyond:  Challenges 
and Opportunities,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 54, no. 8, Oct. 2021, doi: 
10.1145/3470918. 

[26]  S.  Del  Rowe,  “Personal  Digital  Twins  Look  Like  the  Answer  for 
2018. 

Marketers,” 
https://www.destinationcrm.com/Articles/CRM-
Insights/Insight/Personal-Digital-Twins-Look-Like-the-Answer-for-
Marketers-128314.aspx (accessed Jul. 25, 2021). 

Destiantion 

CRM, 

[27]  “Datacoup,”  Wikipedia. 

Jul.  20,  2021. 

[Online].  Available: 

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Datacoup 

 
 
