Towards a Secure and Reliable Federated Learning
using Blockchain

Hajar Moudoud ∗‡, Soumaya Cherkaoui ∗, Lyes Khoukhi †
∗ Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Universit´e de Sherbrooke, Canada
† GREYC CNRS, ENSICAEN, Normandie University, France
‡ University of Technology of Troyes, France
{hajar.moudoud, soumaya.cherkaoui}@usherbrooke.ca, lyes.khoukhi@ensicaen.fr

2
2
0
2

n
a
J

7
2

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
1
1
3
1
1
.
1
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Federated learning (FL) is a distributed machine
learning (ML) technique that enables collaborative training in
which devices perform learning using a local dataset while
preserving their privacy. This technique ensures privacy, com-
munication efﬁciency, and resource conservation. Despite these
advantages, FL still suffers from several challenges related to
reliability (i.e., unreliable participating devices in training),
tractability (i.e., a large number of
trained models), and
anonymity. To address these issues, we propose a secure and
trustworthy blockchain framework (SRB-FL) tailored to FL,
which uses blockchain features to enable collaborative model
training in a fully distributed and trustworthy manner. In par-
ticular, we design a secure FL based on the blockchain sharding
that ensures data reliability, scalability, and trustworthiness. In
addition, we introduce an incentive mechanism to improve the
reliability of FL devices using subjective multi-weight logic. The
results show that our proposed SRB-FL framework is efﬁcient
and scalable, making it a promising and suitable solution for
federated learning.

Keywords—Federated learning; Blockchain; Sharding; relia-

bility; Secure; Scalable.

I. INTRODUCTION

The adoption of machine learning (ML) is expected to
enable the ﬂourishing development of many applications, such
as autonomous driving, intelligent applications, or load bal-
ancing. Although machine learning has signiﬁcantly improved
the performance of many applications, most machine learning
models must be built in central servers, which may violate
privacy, especially for users with sensitive data [1, 2, 3]. This
is because to participate in learning a model, users/devices
trade their privacy by sending their sensitive data to the
central server [4]. To overcome this problem, Google proposed
Federated Learning (FL) to locally train models on edge
devices while keeping their data private [5, 6]. Federated
learning works as a collaborative learning process in which
edge devices run training models locally and then send model
updates, i.e.,
the weight and gradient parameters of the
training model, to the central server.

Although FL has improved privacy protection, it still suffers
from several problems. First, all devices involved in the FL
process are expected to contribute their resources uncondi-
tionally, which is not accepted by all workers [7, 8]. Without
reward, only a small fraction of the devices are willing to
participate in the training process. On the other hand, the
devices involved in the training are unreliable and may act

maliciously, intentionally, or unintentionally, which may affect
the overall model and lead to erroneous model updates [9].
For intentional behaviors, the device may send an incorrect
update that inﬂuences the overall model and leads to failure.
In addition, communication is a critical bottleneck in FL net-
works, which can lead to some unintended device behaviors.
Due to the high communication turns between devices and the
central server, devices may unintentionally update some poor
parameters that negatively inﬂuence federated learning tasks.
Therefore, it is important to develop a new FL architecture to
alleviate transmission loads and to improve the reliability of
model updates.

To overcome the aforementioned challenges, several re-
searchers proposed combining FL and blockchain technology.
Blockchain is a distributed solution that ensures trust between
unreliable entities without depending on a third party [10, 11].
With its features of anonymity, reliability, security, and no
single point of failure, blockchain has the potential to im-
prove FL. The authors of the paper [12] proposed a FL and
blockchain architecture, in which devices involved in learning
send their model updates to the blockchain for validation.
The work in [13] proposed using the blockchain with FL
to establish a secure reputation for devices participating in
learning. While this work presented the potential of using
blockchain with FL to improve device reputation and trustwor-
thiness, it introduced third-party devices, namely blockchain
miners, to mine blocks in a distributed manner. This will
leakage, as the model parameters will be
lead to model
shared with these miners. In addition, blockchain still suffers
from several shortcomings, including the scalability problem,
which can affect its integration with FL. For example, the
scalability problem of the blockchain may further increase
the communication delay for the FL.

To address these challenges, we present

in this paper
the SRB-FL framework. SRB-FL provides secure, reliable,
trustworthy, and transparent framework suitable for FL. This
framework implements: (1) blockchain sharding to enable par-
allel model training to improve the scalability of blockchain
FL; and (2) an incentive mechanism to improve the reliability
of FL devices. We consider synchronous FL case where
devices participating in the learning belong to the same
blockchain shard, that is to enable all devices to follow the
same time line.

 
 
 
 
 
 
The main contributions of our paper can be summarized as

follows:

• We design a blockchain framework, called SRB-FL,
which is a secure and reliable framework that is suitable
for FL. SRB-FL uses an incentive mechanism to improve
the reliability of FL devices and leverages blockchain
sharding to ensure a scalable training.

• We propose a reputation mechanism that uses subjective
logic (SL) to incite FL devices to provide reliable model
updates.

• We evaluate the performance of the SRB-FL framework
in terms of efﬁciency,
latency, reputation, and scala-
bility. The experimental results show that SRB-FL can
effectively guarantee reliability, security, and scalability,
making it a promising solution for securing FL.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
presents a review of some related work. Section III describes
the SRB-FL framework for FL and explains its main compo-
nents. Section IV deﬁnes the proposed incentive mechanism.
Section V presents the performance evaluation of SRB-FL.
Finally, Section VI concludes the paper.

This solution used a consortium blockchain approach to
improve the device reputation. In [27], the authors proposed a
hybrid blockchain architecture for a secure and reliable feder-
ated learning. This architecture proposed integrating learned
models into the blockchain to improve the reliability of data.
Although the combination of Blockchain with FL improved to
be very useful, however, to the best our knowledge, none of
the existing works have taken into considered the inherent
problems of blockchain, such as the scalability problem.
Indeed, blockchain suffers from issues related to the block
generation which impact the scalability of blockchain.

To address some of the shortcomings of these existing solu-
tions, we propose the SRB-FL framework. SRB-FL provides
a secure and reliable blockchain framework that allows FL
devices to train and send model updates in a secure, reliable,
and trustworthy manner. The SRB-FL framework proposes the
use of multiple shard chains, each of which is responsible for
training a FL model, and the main chain is responsible for
tracing all ﬁnal model updates. In addition, we propose to use
an incentive mechanism based on subjective logic to improve
the reliability of FL devices.

II. RELATED WORK

III. SYSTEM MODEL

Federated learning was introduced by Google to distribute
data learning, enabling FL devices to learn locally without
sharing their sensitive data. Keeping data locally yields many
beneﬁts, namely immediate access to ephemeral data, privacy
preservation and leveraging the computing resources of the
sparse participants [14, 15, 16, 17]. However, FL still suffers
from several shortcomings such as device’s reliability and
security [18]. To overcome some of these problems, research
has introduced blockchain-based FL [19, 20, 21]. In [22],
the authors proposed DeepChain, a secure and reliable FL
framework that improves the reliability of FL devices using
blockchain smart contracts. This framework implemented an
incentive mechanism to incite FL devices to behave honestly.
However, a comprehensive study with real-time data is needed
to scale up the DeepChain approach. In [23], the authors
proposed a trustworthy blockchain and FL solution to ensure
reliable shard training on the fog. Although useful,
their
solution has high a throughput.

In [24], the authors proposed a blockchain-based on-device
FL architecture, in which local and global updates of FL
devices are stored on the blockchain. They also studied the
scalability, robustness, and latency of integrating blockchain
with FL. In [25], the authors presented a FL and blockchain
model that improves the security. In this model, the FL devices
upload only the ﬁnal updates on the chain, whereas the
local updates are sent to a distributed hash table. Although
this model reduces block generation latency, it is subject to
security and integrity issues. Indeed, the authors proposed to
reduce the consensus difﬁculty of the blockchain in order to
reduce the latency, which can consequently lead to false data
injection attacks or 51% majority attacks.

In [26], the authors proposed a reliable FL device selection,
where only reliable devices participate in the model training.

The SRB-FL is a secure and reliable blockchain FL frame-
work that enables FL devices to train and send model updates
securely. In this section, we ﬁrst describe SRB-FL’s frame-
work. Then, we explain how the blockchain sharding and
incentive mechanism are carried out.

A. SRB-FL Framework

We consider the synchronous case, where FL devices can
train and send updates at the same time. For this purpose, we
propose to use blockchain sharding to allow several models
to use the blockchain synchronously. Each model is assigned
to a group of devices belonging to the same shard (or cluster)
to train and send local updates. Once these devices have
completed their training using their local data, they send their
ﬁnal model updates to the main chain. Consequently, several
models can train and use the blockchain efﬁciently.

Fig. 1 shows a blockchain and FL framework, including
both a model layer and a sharding layer. For the model layer,
we consider a network consisting of edge devices that are
connected by a wireless network (i.e., LTE, 4G, 5G, etc.).
These devices have sufﬁcient computational power to train
the models and communicate their updates. In the context of
FL, these devices have private data with which they will train
the model. Therefore, these devices can be considered as FL
workers/devices. Each FL device can train a shared model
using its local data and generate model updates. Then, all
FL devices send their model updates to their allocated shard.
This process is repeated until the desired model accuracy is
achieved.

In the sharding layer, FL devices act as blockchain miners
because they have sufﬁcient computing power. The sharding
layer consists of the main chain and the sub-chains. The
main chain stores ﬁnal model updates, while the sub-chains

Fig. 1: System model of reliable blockchain and FL using sharding.

store local model updates. The sub-chains act as a group
of clusters, each sub-chain contains a group of FL devices.
The details of device selection for each sub-chain are not the
focus of this paper. However, we can adopt some of the well-
known methods, such as: feature selection, random selection
or reputation-based selection.

B. Framework Components

We consider that our blockchain sharding layer can support
multiple learning models at the same time in a fully distributed
manner. In this case, a blockchain transaction Tj,i(t) can be
viewed as a model update at time t sent by a FL device.

We design a reliable and scalable blockchain suitable with
FL, we use blockchain smart contracts to implement an
incentive mechanism that improves the reliability of FL. The
incentive mechanism includes ﬁve steps as follows:

• Step 1 ( Initialization): Model publisher creates a smart
contract with the FL model and speciﬁc requirements
(e.g., data type, accuracy, training time, etc.). The model
is then affected to the shard with devices that satisﬁes
some of these requirements.

• Step 2 (Training): Beginning of local training, where each
FL devices j , k belonging to a shard j has a local dataset
Dk with a data size of |Dk|. The FL aims to ﬁnd the
optimal global model parameters w ∈ Rl that minimize
the global loss function f (w):

• Step 3 (Updates): After the training,

the FL devices
send updates to the corresponding sub-chain. It is worth
mentioning that only the ﬁnal updates that correspond
to the highest accuracy are added into the main chain.
To add a block into the chain, a FL device acts as
miners where they need to reach a consensus. Once the
consensus is reached among the shard, the ﬁnal model
updates are then stored permanently into the chain. In
our framework, we propose using on-chain and off-chain
storage, that is, metadata corresponding to the updates are
stored on the chain, and the raw data are stored off the
chain. This is because the blockchain has limited bloc
size. Finally, the updates are sent to the corresponding
model publisher.

• Step 4 (Reputation): To improve the reliability of de-
vices, we use an inter-shard reputation process based on
subjective logic, where devices that performed honestly
are rewarded and devices performing malicious are pe-
nalized, respectively.

IV. SECURE AND RELIABLE BLOCKCHAIN-FL USING
MULTIWEIGHT SUBJECTIVE LOGIC

In order

to improve the security and reliability of
blockchain-based FL, two mechanisms are proposed: (1) a
secure sharding process using subjective logic (SSSL) to
improve the reliability of FL devices, and (2) a lightweight
sharding consensus (LWSC) to improve the security of FL.

min
w∈Rl

f (w) =

1
D

N
(cid:88)

k=1

fk(w),

(1)

A. Key Notations and Assumptions

where D is the total data sample from N FL device (
D = (cid:80)N
k=1 |Dk|) and fk() is the local loss function
computed by a model device based on its local training
data.

Let Oj

i denotes the subjective opinion or trust of a device
to which the opinion applies (i.e.,
i and j is the target
model updates), where O = {b, d, u, a} and b, d, and u
respectively represent the belief, disbelief, and uncertainty of
i, b + d + u = 1 and b, d, and u ∈ [0, 1]. The parameter

a refers to the base rate, it is used to compute the opinion
probability expectation value E(O) = b + au. Each shard S
trains a FL model, where it holds the vector Oj
i,t (i.e., trust
in a FL device) during an epoch t with a uncertainty. In the
subjective logic, there can be different opinions (e.g., hyper
opinions, multinomial opinions, and binomial opinions).
In this article, we are interested in uncertain binomial opinion
(UBO) over binary events (i.e., valid or invalid update). This
is because, in the FL context, the uncertainty about an update
is u ≥ 0. Let Beta(X, α, β) corresponds to a beta probability
density function [28], where α = r +2a and β = s+2(1−a).
Let r denotes the number of observations of X, and s denotes
the number of observations of ¯X.

We assume that each shard can validate one or several
updates. Each shard is composed of multiple FL devices
that could be either dishonest or honest. These devices are
responsible for validating the updates by reaching a consensus.
A blockchain consensus is a fault-tolerant mechanism used to
reach an agreement between all the devices. Furthermore, we
assume that at the beginning, all the shards have equal rate
probability a and opinion Oj
i,t, respectively. In this article,
to obtain accurate reputation values of devices, every shard
combines its intra-trust opinion with inter-trust option to
generate the composite trust value for devices.

B. Secure Sharding Using Subjective Logic

Subjective Logic (SL) is one of the prominent probabilistic
logic that evaluates trustworthiness of different entities (i.e.,
miners/ Fl devices). The SL uses opinions about probability
values to determine a subjective belief through belief, dis-
belief, and uncertainty statements. During a time epoch te
different from t (t is a ﬁxed value by the model publisher
whereas te is a ﬁxed value by the shard devices), the repu-
tation of a FL devices i regarding an update t in a time slot
can be expressed as follows:

Ote

i→t = {bte

i→t, dte

i→t, ute

i→t}

Based on SL and UBO, we can obtain:



αte

i→t = αte
bte

i→t = βte
dte
ute
i→t =

αte
a = base rate of X

i
i +βte
i
i +2a−2
αte
i +βte
i
2
i +βte
i

(2)

(3)

Note that a dogmatic opinion of the reliability of a device with
u = 0 is equivalent to a deﬁned probability density function
(i.e., trustworthy or untrustworthy). The shard treats a FL
device as reliable after r observations of X and s observations
of ¯X with a base rate a. According to the Beta probability
density function, the value of a FL device’s opinion (trust)
i regarding the update X during an epoch te is deﬁned as
follows:

E(Ote

i→X ) = bte

i→X + aute

i→X

(4)

Shard veriﬁcation process can be expressed as follows:

Vj(t)=

n
(cid:88)

i=1

V (ti)E(Ote

i→ti

)

(5)

where, n is the number of active FL devices in a shard j. Every
veriﬁcation is weighted after being collected from a shard to
the main chain for accurate reputation update. The weight of a
veriﬁcation is set based on multiple factors. Consequently, the
traditional SL is evolved toward multi-weighted SL to consider
different factors.

To ensure a secure sharding, we expect to focus on devices
with higher reputation values to train a FL model while
avoiding being misled by malicious devices. Note that the
reputation of a FL device is affected by many factors among
them we ﬁnd interactivity and novelty. Here, we consider the
following factors to calculate the trustworthiness:

• Interactivity: Inside a shard, devices could either interact
in a honest or dishonest manner. The honest interactions
increase the trust of the device, which leads to increase
the reward, and vice versa. To encourage honest behavior
of FL devices, honest devices have a higher weight
in the reputation process. Similarly to work [13], the
interactivity value of a device i in a shard j during a
time epoch te, Ste
i , can be written as:

i = bte
Ste

i + dte

i = 1 − ute
i

(6)

• Novelty: The trustworthiness of a FL device changes with
time, the novelty is deﬁned to measure the freshness of
devices interaction inside a shard. Recent device interac-
tions with more novelty have a higher reward than past
interactions. To reﬂect the effect of time on reputation
opinion, we deﬁne the novelty function as follows:

i = ν(tni − te)−µ
nte

(7)

where ν and µ are two pre-deﬁned parameters to adapt
the effect of novelty, chosen similar to work in [13].

To sum up, by considering the interactivity and novelty, the
overall weight of the reputation opinion W te
i of a FL device
i is calculated by:

i = w1nte
f te

i + w2Ste
i

(8)

, dintra
i,j

, uintra
i,j

where w1 and w2 are pre-deﬁned weight factors that sat-
isfy w1 + w2 = 1. Consequently,
the reputation opinion
of a FL device i is aggregated with the weights factors
to acquire an intra-reputation opinion denoted wintra
=
(bintra
), for a device i inside shard j
i,j
during a time window te ≤ n. The inter-reputation opinion is
equal to the weighted reputation average of all the collected
reputation opinions. The inter-reputation opinions refer to
opinions that are formed after observing a targeted miner
behavior. Therefore, the intra-reputation opinions of a device
i in a time epoch te are denoted as:

, aintra
i,j

i,j

other devices opinions regarding the trustworthiness of miner
i.

V. EVALUATION

This section presents the evaluation of SRB-FL framework.
We use MNIST data and a widely used software environment
PyTorch to perform a digit classiﬁcation task to evaluate the
proposed framework. The simulations were conducted on a
laptop with 2.2 GHz Intel i7 processor and 16 GB of memory
[29, 30]. Simulation parameters are illustrated in Table 1.

We compare the performances of our SRB-FL and a basic
blockchain-FL framework similar to the work [13]. This
framework uses blockchain technology, speciﬁcally Proof-
of-Work (PoW) consensus and subjective logic to ensure
a reliability of FL devices. Fig. 3 shows the performance
evaluation of SRB-FL in terms of: a) Scalability; b) FL
Accuracy; c) Reputation; and d) Latency.

Fig. 3(a) examines the scalability of the two frameworks,
we evaluate the number of transactions (i.e., number of model
updates) in a function of time. Because SRB based FL uses
the sharding concept, we can observe that the number of
transactions in a function time does not increase drastically,
in the opposite of a basic blockchain-FL framework. This
because the basic framework uses Proof-of-Work (PoW) con-
sensus, which a high-computing consensus algorithm that
limits the number of transactions/time. We clearly observe
that the proposed SRB-FL framework is more scalable.

Fig. 3(b) evaluates the effects of the unreliable FL devices
on accuracy of federated learning. In this evaluation, we
increase the number of unreliable workers in a function of time
and observe their effect on the FL accuracy. We can observe
that
the increasing number of unreliable FL devices can
bring decreasing federated learning accuracy. For example,
a blockchain based FL framework with only reliable workers
achieves an accuracy of 96%, while the accuracy of the SRB-
FL framework achieves 94% and a basic blockchain based FL
framework achieves 84.6 % accuracy, which is 1.4% lower.

Fig. 3(c) evaluates the reputation value of malicious FL
devices that send erroneous updates. As illustrated, the use
of inter and inter reputation based on multiweight subjective
logic improves the reputation in comparison with only a
reputation mechanism that uses subjective logic. Indeed, the
reputation of SRB-FL is more accurate than the reputation
used in a basic blockchain-FL framework. The reputation
value of a malicious FL devices are calculated during a time
frame of 60 min and lowers to 0.14, which is lower than the
reputation calculated using subjective logic (0.26).

Fig 3(d) compares the latency of variant blockchains-
FL. As shown by the ﬁgure, the basic blockchain-FL uses
PoW consensus, which increased latency when increasing the
number of blocks. Meanwhile, the time needed to add a block
to the blockchain is a ﬁxed value 0.1s for the SRB-FL. The
results demonstrate the efﬁciency of SRB-FL, in terms of
scalability, accuracy, reputation, and latency in comparison
with a basic blockchain-FL framework.

Fig. 2: The operation of inter and intra reputation process.

TABLE I: SIMULATION SETUP PARAMETER

Parameters
Classiﬁer Training examples
Weight parameters
Epoch
IP
Shards
FL devices
PoW difﬁculty
Predeﬁned parameters

Value
1000
α=0.4;β=0.6
10
localhost
8
10
4
w1=w2=a=0.5; te=60min; u=1






bintra
i,j =
dintra
i,j =
uintra
i,j =

(cid:80)n

(cid:80)n

i dte

i bte

i=1 f te
i
(cid:80)n
i=1 f te
i
i=1 f te
i
(cid:80)n
i=1 f te
i
i=1 f te
(cid:80)n

i
i=1 f te
i

i ute

(cid:80)n

(9)

and E(Ote

i )intra =

(cid:80)n

i=1 f te
(cid:80)n

i E(Ote
i )
i=1 f te
i

C. Inter and Intra Reputation Process

The operation of the inner shard reputation aims to utilize
local knowledge on the behavior of a Fl device with the
other devices inside the shard. Generally, inner reputation is
based on collecting reputation for centralized analysis. Conse-
quently, we deﬁne intra-reputation and inter-reputation opin-
ions. The intra-reputation opinion of a device i is aggregated
with the weight factors. As for the inter-reputation opinion is
formed by other devices after observing the targeted device.
To explain the basic concepts, we present a toy example of
a reliable blockchain sharding for IoT systems in Fig. 2.
In this example, a device i has an intra-reputation opinion
about an update u. First, the neighbor devices interact with
the targeted device. Then, they form an individual opinion
about it. Subsequently, they forward these opinions to the
shard chain. According to the interactivity and novelty, the
inter-reputation opinions are weighted. Finally,
the global
reputation which is equal to the joint combination of the inter-
reputation and intra-reputation is updated to the main chain.
If the targeted device is a new FL device inside the shard, the
FL device sends a private key to the shard to be authenticated.
i )inter is calculated using
The inter-reputation opinion E(Ote

Fig. 3: Performance evaluation of SRB based FL in comparison with a basic blockchain framework in terms of: a) Scalability; b) FL Accuracy; c) Reputation;
and d) Latency.

VI. CONCLUSION

This paper proposed SRB-FL, a secure and reliable
blockchain framework suitable for federated learning. To
overcome the issues of unreliable and malicious FL devices
involved in the training of FL that may affect the overall
model accuracy and lead to falsiﬁed model updates, we
proposed a secure and reliable blockchain framework. We
employed blockchain sharding to improve blockchain efﬁ-
ciency and enable parallel model training. We then designed
a reputation mechanism that uses a multi-weight subjective
logic to improve the reliability FL devices. Furthermore, we
designed an intra-reputation and inter-reputation process to
simulate the reputation of FL devices that have trustworthy
and reliable updates to participate on the learning process.
The simulation results showed that SRB-FL framework can
greatly improve the reliability of FL devices while ensure
reliable federated learning making it a promising solution to
improve the reliability and security of federated learning.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

The authors would like to thank the Natural Sciences and
Engineering Research Council of Canada, as well as FEDER
and GrandEst Region in France, for the ﬁnancial support of
this research.

REFERENCES
[1] Z. Abou El Houda, A. S. Haﬁd, and L. Khoukhi, “Cochain-SC: An
Intra- and Inter-Domain Ddos Mitigation Scheme Based on Blockchain
Using SDN and Smart Contract,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 98 893–
98 907, 2019.

[2] E. D. Ngangue Ndih and S. Cherkaoui, “On Enhancing Technology
Coexistence in the IoT Era: ZigBee and 802.11 Case,” IEEE Access,
vol. 4, pp. 1835–1844, 2016.

[3] Z. Mlika and S. Cherkaoui, “Competitive Algorithms and Reinforcement
Learning for NOMA in IoT Networks,” in ICC 2021 - IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Communications, Jun. 2021, pp. 1–6.

[4] H. Moudoud, L. Khoukhi, and S. Cherkaoui, “Prediction and Detection
of FDIA and DDoS Attacks in 5G Enabled IoT,” IEEE Network, vol. 35,
no. 2, pp. 194–201, Mar. 2021.

[5] J. Koneˇcn´y, H. B. McMahan, D. Ramage, and P. Richt´arik, “Federated
Optimization: Distributed Machine Learning for On-Device Intelli-
gence,” arXiv:1610.02527 [cs], Oct. 2016.

[6] A. Ta¨ık, H. Moudoud, and S. Cherkaoui, “Data-Quality Based Schedul-
ing for Federated Edge Learning,” in 2021 IEEE 46th Conference on
Local Computer Networks (LCN), Oct. 2021, pp. 17–23.

[7] A. Ta¨ık and S. Cherkaoui, “Electrical Load Forecasting Using Edge
Computing and Federated Learning,” in ICC 2020 - 2020 IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Communications (ICC), Jun. 2020, pp. 1–6.
[8] A. Tak and S. Cherkaoui, “Federated Edge Learning: Design Issues and
Challenges,” IEEE Network, vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 252–258, Mar. 2021.
[9] H. Moudoud, S. Cherkaoui, and L. Khoukhi, “Towards a Scalable
and Trustworthy Blockchain: IoT Use Case,” in ICC 2021 - IEEE
International Conference on Communications, Jun. 2021, pp. 1–6.
[10] Z. A. El Houda, A. S. Haﬁd, and L. Khoukhi, “Blockchain-based
Reverse Auction for V2V charging in smart grid environment,” in ICC
2021 - IEEE International Conference on Communications, Jun. 2021.
[11] H. Moudoud, S. Cherkaoui, and L. Khoukhi, “An IoT Blockchain Ar-
chitecture Using Oracles and Smart Contracts: the Use-Case of a Food
Supply Chain,” in 2019 IEEE 30th Annual International Symposium
on Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications (PIMRC), Sep.
2019, pp. 1–6.

[12] H. Kim, J. Park, M. Bennis, and S.-L. Kim, On-Device Federated

Learning via Blockchain and its Latency Analysis, Aug. 2018.

[13] J. Kang, Z. Xiong, D. Niyato, S. Xie, and J. Zhang, “Incentive Mecha-
nism for Reliable Federated Learning: A Joint Optimization Approach
to Combining Reputation and Contract Theory,” IEEE Internet of Things
Journal, vol. 6, no. 6, pp. 10 700–10 714, Dec. 2019.

[14] A. Rachedi, M. H. Rehmani, S. Cherkaoui, and J. J. P. C. Rodrigues,
“IEEE Access Special Section Editorial: The Plethora of Research in
Internet of Things (IoT),” IEEE Access, vol. 4, pp. 9575–9579, 2016.
[15] Z. Mlika and S. Cherkaoui, “Massive IoT Access With NOMA in 5G
Networks and Beyond Using Online Competitiveness and Learning,”
IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 8, no. 17, pp. 13 624–13 639,
Sep. 2021.

[16] A. Taik, B. Nour, and S. Cherkaoui, “Empowering Prosumer Communi-
ties in Smart Grid with Wireless Communications and Federated Edge
Learning,” arXiv:2104.03169 [cs, eess], Apr. 2021.

[17] B. Nour, S. Cherkaoui, and Z. Mlika, “Federated Learning and Proactive
Computation Reuse at the Edge of Smart Homes,” IEEE Transactions
on Network Science and Engineering, pp. 1–1, 2021.

[18] Z. A. E. Houda, A. Haﬁd, and L. Khoukhi, “BrainChain - A Machine
learning Approach for protecting Blockchain applications using SDN,”
in ICC 2020 - 2020 IEEE International Conference on Communications
(ICC), Jun. 2020, pp. 1–6.

[19] M. H. ur Rehman, K. Salah, E. Damiani, and D. Svetinovic, “Towards
Blockchain-Based Reputation-Aware Federated Learning,” in IEEE
INFOCOM 2020 - IEEE Conference on Computer Communications
Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS), Jul. 2020, pp. 183–188.

[20] S. Rathore, Y. Pan, and J. H. Park, “BlockDeepNet: A Blockchain-Based
Secure Deep Learning for IoT Network,” Sustainability, vol. 11, no. 14,
p. 3974, Jan. 2019.

[21] M. Lakoju, A. Javed, O. Rana, P. Burnap, S. T. Atiba, and S. Cherkaoui,
““Chatty Devices” and edge-based activity classiﬁcation,” Discover
Internet of Things, vol. 1, no. 1, p. 5, Feb. 2021.

[22] J. Weng, J. Weng, J. Zhang, M. Li, Y. Zhang, and W. Luo,
“DeepChain: Auditable and Privacy-Preserving Deep Learning with
Blockchain-based Incentive,” Tech. Rep. 679, 2018. [Online]. Available:
http://eprint.iacr.org/2018/679

[23] S. Otoum, I. Al Ridhawi, and H. T. Mouftah, “Blockchain-Supported
Federated Learning for Trustworthy Vehicular Networks,” in GLOBE-
COM 2020 - 2020 IEEE Global Communications Conference, Dec.
2020, pp. 1–6.

[24] L. Feng, Y. Zhao, S. Guo, X. Qiu, W. Li, and P. Yu, “Blockchain-
based Asynchronous Federated Learning for Internet of Things,” IEEE
Transactions on Computers, pp. 1–1, 2021.

[25] Y. Qu, L. Gao, T. H. Luan, Y. Xiang, S. Yu, B. Li, and G. Zheng,
“Decentralized Privacy Using Blockchain-Enabled Federated Learning
in Fog Computing,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 7, no. 6, pp.
5171–5183, Jun. 2020.

[26] J. Kang, Z. Xiong, D. Niyato, Y. Zou, Y. Zhang, and M. Guizani,
“Reliable Federated Learning for Mobile Networks,” arXiv:1910.06837
[cs], Oct. 2019. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1910.06837

[27] Y. Lu, X. Huang, K. Zhang, S. Maharjan, and Y. Zhang, “Blockchain
Empowered Asynchronous Federated Learning for Secure Data Sharing
in Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology,
vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 4298–4311, Apr. 2020.

[28] X. Huang, R. Yu, J. Kang, and Y. Zhang, “Distributed Reputation
Management for Secure and Efﬁcient Vehicular Edge Computing and
Networks,” IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp. 25 408–25 420, 2017.

[29] E. D. N. Ndih and S. Cherkaoui, “Chapter 17 - Simulation methods,
techniques and tools of computer systems and networks,” in Modeling
and Simulation of Computer Networks and Systems, M. S. Obaidat,
P. Nicopolitidis, and F. Zarai, Eds. Boston: Morgan Kaufmann, Jan.
2015, pp. 485–504.

[30] E. D. Ngangue Ndih, S. Cherkaoui, and I. Dayoub, “Analytic Modeling
of the Coexistence of IEEE 802.15.4 and IEEE 802.11 in Saturation
Conditions,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 19, no. 11, pp. 1981–
1984, Nov. 2015.

