A Comprehensive Survey on the Applications of
Blockchain for Securing Vehicular Networks
Tejasvi Alladi∗, Senior Member, IEEE, Vinay Chamola∗, Senior Member, IEEE, Nishad Sahu, Vishnu Venkatesh,

Adit Goyal and Mohsen Guizani, Fellow IEEE

1

2
2
0
2

n
a
J

3
1

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
3
0
8
4
0
.
1
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Vehicular networks promise features such as trafﬁc
management, route scheduling, data exchange, entertainment,
and much more. With any large-scale technological integration
comes the challenge of providing security. Blockchain technology
has been a popular choice of many studies for making the
vehicular network more secure. Its characteristics meet some
of the essential security requirements such as decentralization,
transparency, tamper-proof nature, and public audit. This study
catalogues some of the notable efforts in this direction over
the last few years. We analyze around 75 blockchain-based
security schemes for vehicular networks from an application,
security, and blockchain perspective. The application perspective
focuses on various applications which use secure blockchain-
based vehicular networks such as transportation, parking, data
sharing/ trading, and resource sharing. The security perspective
focuses on security requirements and attacks. The blockchain
perspective focuses on blockchain platforms, blockchain types,
and consensus mechanisms used in blockchain implementation.
We also compile the popular simulation tools used for simulating
blockchain and for simulating vehicular networks. Additionally,
to give the readers a broader perspective of the research area, we
discuss the role of various state-of-the-art emerging technologies
in blockchain-based vehicular networks. Lastly, we summarize
the survey by listing out some common challenges and the future
research directions in this ﬁeld.

Index Terms—Internet of Things (IoT), Blockchain, Internet

of Vehicles (IoV), security, cryptography, authentication

I. INTRODUCTION

The number of vehicles moving on the roads reached 1
billion in 2010. Experts predict that this could reach 2 − 2.5
billion by 2050 and that a large part of it will form futuristic
vehicular network trafﬁc comprising connected vehicles. Mod-
ern vehicles are no longer mere thermo-mechanical machines
but are a combination of sophisticated hardware and software
[1]. They have GPS facilities, wireless communication devices,
entertainment systems, advanced sensing mechanisms, visual
aids, automatic alarm systems, and many more features, thus
involving a lot of data processing and connectivity. Since
travelling on roads is seldom a solitary endeavour, the next

∗ T. Alladi and V. Chamola have equal contribution
T. Alladi

is with the Department of Computer Science and Infor-
(e-mail:

mation Systems, BITS-Pilani, Pilani Campus, 333031,
tejasvi.alladi@pilani.bits-pilani.ac.in).

India.

N. Sahu, V. Venkatesh, and V. Chamola are with the Department of Elec-
trical and Electronics Engineering & APPCAIR, BITS-Pilani, Pilani Campus,
333031, India. (e-mail: {h20160215, f20171154, vinay.chamola}@pilani.bits-
pilani.ac.in).

Adit Goyal is with the Department of Computer Science and IT, Jaypee
Institute of Information Technology, Noida, India 201304 (email: adit-
goyal@hotmail.com)
Mohsen Guizani

is with the Department of Computer Science, Qatar

University, Qatar (e-mail: mguizani@ieee.org).

logical step in technological evolution is to enable individual
vehicles to communicate and coordinate with each other. A
connected vehicular network promises features such as trafﬁc
management, route scheduling, data exchange, entertainment,
and much more. Vehicular Ad-hoc Network (VANET) is a
way of achieving this. A VANET is a type of Mobile Ad-
hoc Network (MANET) designed for network nodes that are
constantly in motion supported by road-side infrastructure
called Road Side Units (RSUs) that theoretically can be used
to serve a large variety of features, anywhere from urgent
collision notiﬁcations to interlinking geographically separate
VANETs [2], [3]. Vehicles in a VANET can communicate with
each other via Vehicle-to-Vehicle (V2V) communication and
with RSUs via Vehicle-to-Infrastructure (V2I) communication.
Researchers believe that with the help of VANET technology
we can overcome a lot of issues including, but not limited to,
crash prevention and safety [4], driver assistance, and freeway
management. For example, in case of an accident, the vehicles
may broadcast the information to distant vehicles that may be
planning to use the same route. Road safety is also a growing
concern. The number of road trafﬁc deaths across the globe
was reported to be around 1.25 million by the Global Health
Observatory (GHO) data [5]. VANETs, believed to be an effec-
tive road safety solution also have the potential to contribute
to efﬁcient trafﬁc management in urban scenarios. Also, with
the adoption of IoT in VANETs, a new paradigm called the
Internet of Vehicles (IoV) is being discussed as a futuristic
vehicular network. However, there is also a downside to the
growing number of V2V and V2I communication links as part
of the VANET and the IoV paradigm, in terms of network
security [6], [7]. In this regard, several research articles have
been proposed addressing security issues in vehicular networks
[8].The number of vehicles moving on the roads reached 1
billion in 2010. Experts predict that this could reach 2 − 2.5
billion by 2050 and that a large part of it will form futuristic
vehicular network trafﬁc comprising connected vehicles. Mod-
ern vehicles are no longer mere thermo-mechanical machines
but are a combination of sophisticated hardware and software
[1]. They have GPS facilities, wireless communication devices,
entertainment systems, advanced sensing mechanisms, visual
aids, automatic alarm systems, and many more features, thus
involving a lot of data processing and connectivity. Since
travelling on roads is seldom a solitary endeavour, the next
logical step in technological evolution is to enable individual
vehicles to communicate and coordinate with each other. A
connected vehicular network promises features such as trafﬁc
management, route scheduling, data exchange, entertainment,

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

Fig. 1: Overview of this survey.

and much more. Vehicular Ad-hoc Network (VANET) is a
way of achieving this. A VANET is a type of Mobile Ad-
hoc Network (MANET) designed for network nodes that are
constantly in a motion supported by road-side infrastructure
called Road Side Units (RSUs) that theoretically can be used
to serve a large variety of features, anywhere from urgent
collision notiﬁcations to interlinking geographically separate
VANETs [2], [3]. Vehicles in a VANET can communicate with
each other via Vehicle-to-Vehicle (V2V) communication and
with RSUs via Vehicle-to-Infrastructure (V2I) communication.
Researchers believe that with the help of VANET technology,
we can overcome a lot of issues including, but not limited to,
crash prevention and safety [4], driver assistance, and freeway
management. For example, in case of an accident, the vehicles
may broadcast the information to distant vehicles that may
be planning to use the same route. Road safety is also a
growing concern. The number of road trafﬁc deaths across the
globe was reported to be around 1.25 million by the Global
Health Observatory (GHO) data [5]. VANETs believed to be
an effective road safety solution, also have the potential to
contribute to efﬁcient trafﬁc management in urban scenarios.
Also, with the adoption of IoT in VANETs, a new paradigm
called the Internet of Vehicles (IoV) is being discussed as a
futuristic vehicular network. However, there is also a downside
to the growing number of V2V and V2I communication links
as part of the VANET and the IoV paradigm, in terms of
network security [6], [7]. In this regard, several research
articles have been proposed addressing security issues in
vehicular networks [8].

A. Related Surveys

We ﬁrst discuss the existing surveys on blockchain in
vehicular networks and contrast them with the present survey.
Baldini et al. presented a short review of the applications of
distributed ledger technologies for the evolution of road trans-
portation [9]. Another work by authors in [10] surveyed the
applications of blockchain in the energy sector, with one ap-
plication area being electric vehicles. A broad survey by Xie et
al. [11] on applications of blockchain in smart cities discusses
several aspects of smart cities, with smart transportation being
one of the major areas of smart cities considered. Mollah et al.
[12] recently proposed a comprehensive survey for blockchain
applications in the IoV network. The authors in [13] presented
a review of blockchain-based privacy management techniques
in social IoV networks. Many of these surveys focus more
on the application areas and the frameworks and mention
the security features that are implicit with a blockchain-based
framework. However, a study that analyses security from a
more rigorous requirement-oriented viewpoint that discusses
how precisely blockchain meets those requirements would be
timely. Other perspectives, like applications and an overview
of how blockchain platforms have been used, are provided to
make this study self-contained for a reader. In summary, this
paper aims to help the readers get an overview of the security
challenges and requirements in vehicular networks and the
blockchain techniques developed to mitigate these challenges.
A list of major survey and review works done on blockchain
applications in vehicular networks in the last few years (as
discussed above) is given in Table I.

1B. Quantum  Computing  Attacks A. Blockchain  platforms III. Applicationsperspective A. Data trading/sharingB. TransportationC. Smart gridII. Backgroundknowledge I. IntroductionD. Resource sharingE. Crowdsensning/ CrowdsourcingA. Security  requirements B. Network specific  security attacksC. Authentication techniquesF. BIoV architectureC. Consensus  mechanisms B. Blockchain type A. Cloud and fog computingB. Edge computing C. CCN/NDN/ICND. SDNF. Cognitive RadioE. DAGG. AI (DNN, DRL, DDQL etc.) H. Others (UAVs,PUF, Link FIngerprints & 5G) A. Tools for simulating blockchainB. Tools for simulating vehicular networksA. Prototyping  and Simulation D. MotivationC. Blockchain   technologyB. Internet of  Vehicles (IoV)A. Vehicular Ad-hoc  Networks (VANETs)B. Organisation C. Attacks on  Blockchain D. ScalabilityVIII. Major Challenges,lessons learnt and futureresearch directions VI. SimulationtoolsVII. Role of othertechnologies IV. Securityperspective V. Blockchainperspective A. Related surveys and  our contributions Application ofblockchain insecuring vehicularnetworks IX. Conclusion3

TABLE I: Related surveys on blockchain applications in vehicular networks

Year Author
2019 Xie et al. [11]
2019 Butt et al., [13]
2020 Baldini et al. [9]
2020 Boa et al. [10]
2020 Mollah et al. [12]
This Survey
2021

Contributions
Surveys the application of blockchain in smart city scenarios
Presents a review of blockchain based solutions for managing privacy in social IoV
Reviews the use of distributed ledger in road transport evolution
Surveys the application of blockchain in the energy sector
Surveys usage of blockchain in IoV and Intelligent transportation systems (ITS)
Surveys the use of blockchain with a focus on security and privacy in VANETs

B. Motivation

Vehicles in the network share and access data with other
vehicles (V2V), humans (V2H), sensors (V2S), infrastructure
(V2I), or anything else (V2X) to provide a variety of ser-
vices such as trafﬁc management, energy exchange, accident
avoidance, and improved driving experience. There are two
aspects to blockchain technology that makes it particularly
useful for vehicular network applications. One is the structural
aspect of the blockchain - the technology itself is designed to
provide security services and data integrity in a way that does
not depend on the trustworthiness of a third party. The other
aspect is the functionality of smart contracts, which provide
a mechanism to carry out complex tasks and allow a large
number of nodes or vehicles to interact intelligently.

Data sharing is a key feature of the IoV - at all times, there
is a large amount of data that is being generated and distributed
across the network. Vehicles access that data to make decisions
or upload it to access cloud services. Along with the data
comes the associated problems of security. The issue of
security will be addressed in-depth in the coming sections of
this paper. Smart contracts have expanded the functionality
of blockchain beyond simple distributed ledger mechanisms.
They can facilitate energy sharing between electric vehicles
when blockchain is used for smart grid applications [14], [15],
optimizing demand and supply for data trading (or computing
resource sharing) for IoV applications [16]–[19], and task
scheduling [20]. They can also be used for security purposes,
when only a certain number of nodes need to be given the
authorization to transact [16], [21]. Authentication plays an
important role in a vehicular network, due to the underlying
dynamic topology with vehicles joining and leaving frequently.
Several research works [21]–[24] provide frameworks for
authentication in VANETs. Trafﬁc control mechanisms are
also an area where the IoV can use blockchains effectively.
Cheng et al. give a model for access control of data using
attribute-based blockchains, where only vehicles conforming
to certain attributes (road, the direction of travel, etc) can
access certain information [25]. Platooning is a model where
different vehicles form groups for navigation and travel in
those groups to ease trafﬁc congestion, and provide more
easily manageable coordination between vehicles [26].

In this survey, each research work was analyzed based on
the problem it addressed. From that analysis emerged some
broad research thrust areas that the research community is
currently working on. Based on this trend, future research
in this ﬁeld shall be closely related to one or more of these
thrust areas. Table III illustrates the major research areas with

some works containing the problem addressed in that research
direction and the proposed solution.

The main contributions of this work are as follows:
i. The study analyses recent

research in the area of
blockchain-based vehicular networks from the application
perspective, where the studies are classiﬁed based on the
application area considered.

ii. The study also analyses the research from a security per-
spective wherein studies are classiﬁed based on security
requirements met, security attacks protected against, au-
thentication techniques used, and security proofs showed.
iii. Recent advances are also examined from a blockchain
perspective, categorised by blockchain platforms and con-
sensus.

iv. The study discusses various simulation tools which have
been used in blockchain-based vehicular network studies.
v. We also provide some insight on the role of other
state-of-the-art technologies including, but not limited to,
cloud computing, fog computing, edge computing, Soft-
ware Deﬁned Networking (SDN), Named Data Network-
ing (NDN), Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 5G, etc. in securing
blockchain-based vehicular networks.

vi. Based on the survey we present some major challenges
and probable future research directions in this ﬁeld.

C. Organisation

The rest of the paper is organised as follows. In Section II,
we present the background knowledge on VANETs, IoV net-
works, and blockchain technology. We discuss the blockchain-
based security frameworks for vehicular networks from an ap-
plications perspective in Section III. Section IV discusses the
categorisation of the different blockchain-based works from
the security perspective. These works are further categorised
from the blockchain perspective in section V. A compilation
of different simulation tools used is presented in Section VI.
We discuss the role of other state-of-the-art technologies in
securing blockchain-based vehicular frameworks in Section
VII. Section VII-I describes existing challenges/open issues
in using blockchain to secure vehicular networks and presents
some future research directions. Finally, we conclude the paper
in Section IX. The organisational overview of this survey is
also shown in Fig. 1.

II. BACKGROUND KNOWLEDGE

This section gives a brief background on VANETs, Internet

of Vehicles, and blockchain technology.

TABLE II: Major abbreviations used in the survey.

Notation Meaning
3GPP
BFT
BIoV
CA
CCN
DAG
DSRC
GPR
IoEV
ITS
PBFT
PKI
PoW
SDN
SoC
TM
V2CH
V2I
V2V
V2X
VANET
VCC
VEC
VFS
WAVE
ZKP

3rd Generation Partnership Project
Byzantine Fault Tolerance
Blockchain-based Internet of Vehicles
Certiﬁcate Authority
Content Centric Networking
Directed Acrylic Graph
Dedicated Short-Range Communications
Gaussian Process Regression
Internet of Electric Vehicles
Intelligent Transportation Systems
Practical Byzantine Fault Tolerance
Public Key Infrastructure
Proof of Work
Software Deﬁned Networking
State of Charge ( of EVs)
Trace Managers
Vehicle to Cluster Head
Vehicle to Infrastructure
Vehicle to Vehicle
Vehicle to Everything
Vehicular Ad-hoc Networks
Vehicular Cloud Computing
Vehicular Edge Computing
Vehicular Fog Services
Wireless Access in Vehicular Environment
Zero Knowledge Proof

A. Vehicular Ad-Hoc Networks

The idea behind a vehicular network is to take wireless
technology that is used to network computers and adapt it to
vehicles. The technical term for vehicular networks is Vehic-
ular Ad-Hoc Networks (VANETs). Ad-hoc networks do not
have a deﬁned infrastructure, thus the network topology must
be decided by the nodes in the network through cooperative
mechanisms [27]. In other words, there is no central authority
and the nodes themselves behave as routers and are responsible
for propagating information in the network.

B. Internet of Vehicles

The Internet of Vehicles can be seen as an extension of
VANET, where the ability to network vehicles is used to
connect to the internet or to cloud services and create Intelli-
gent Transportation Systems (ITS) based on an IP-connected
infrastructure. VANETs provide data connectivity; and the IoV
includes the processing of that data on a very large scale,
to provide essential services. The ideal IoV network would
be a seamless integration of vehicles, the environment, and
humans on the roads which would increase transport safety
and efﬁciency on a city-wide or nationwide scale. Big data,
cloud computing, and artiﬁcial intelligence are technologies
that could be used in conjunction with VANETs to achieve
this goal. An abstract architecture of an IoV network was ﬁrst
proposed by Yang et al [28].

4

The IoV applications can be divided into two broad cat-
egories, namely, safety and commercial applications. Safety
applications are essential services such as collision avoidance,
speed limit information, and emergency braking information
among others. These applications require low transmission
latency in the network since they are often time-sensitive.
Commercial applications include providing weather and trafﬁc
information, streaming of media, instant messaging, or any
other service that enhances the driving experience. The im-
portant distinction is that safety applications are essential and
are hard real-time applications; they must not be disturbed by
commercial applications.

Some examples of IoV applications are given as follows:
Olaverri-Monreal et al. propose a video-streaming technology
that improves the visibility of the driver visibility and also
supports overtaking in challenging scenarios [29], Lin et al.
propose an on-board diagnostic system based on GPS and
3G [30], and MobEyes proposed by Lee et al. is a smart
system that exploits wireless-enabled vehicles to perform event
sensing, by having the mobile nodes constantly generate data
summaries by extracting features from their environment and
sharing with neighbour nodes [31].

C. Blockchain Technology

Blockchain is a new technology that

is rapidly gaining
traction in ﬁelds such as ﬁnance [32], UAVs [33]–[36], IoT
[37]–[40], smart cities [41], [42], smart grids [40], supply
chain management [43], VANETs [44], [45], and many others.
It was originally proposed by S. Nakamoto in his whitepa-
per [46] on Bitcoin. Blockchain is a type of data structure
holding records of digital transactions, formally known as
a distributed ledger. Identical copies of the database exist
across multiple different computing machines, called nodes in
blockchain terminology, connected in a peer-to-peer network.
Transactions being the fundamental units of blockchain, a
deﬁnite number of transactions are stored in a block, and
blocks are continuously appended in sequence to form a chain.
It emphasizes the importance of decentralization where the
majority of entities participating in the blockchain are assumed
to be genuine and take the decision collectively with the help
of the process known as a consensus mechanism.

Some of the core ideas on which blockchain is built are

outlined below:

1) Digital Signatures: Public key cryptography is one of
the core concepts of blockchain technology. Each agent
is assigned a private key and a public key. Anything
encrypted using the private key can only be decrypted
using the public key, and vice versa. The public key
serves as an address for each node, and each digital asset
is associated with its owner’s public key [47]. The piece
of data that needs to be transferred is signed using the
private key. This can be used to authenticate information;
if a piece of data is signed cryptographically using a
private key, then the only thing that can decrypt it is
the same user’s public key. Blockchains commonly use
elliptic curve digital signature algorithms [48].

2) Hashing: Hashing algorithms are arguably the backbone
of blockchain technology. The hash function is a type of

cryptographic algorithm which takes an input of variable
size and returns an output of ﬁxed length, called a hash.
SHA family (SHA-1 and SHA-2) are popular hashing al-
gorithms. There are two conditions a good hash algorithm
must obey:
a) It must be non-invertible; i.e., it should not be possible

to retrieve the input given the output.

b) The chances of two different inputs giving the same

output hash must be very small.

The reason this is useful for security is that a small input
change will completely change the hash value, and that
makes tampering evident.

3) Blocks: Blocks

are

the

elements

constituent

of
blockchains, and they typically consist of a block
body and block header. The block body contains
transactions and a transaction counter. The block header
contains different pieces of information, such as the
Merkle tree root, the timestamp, block version, and the
previous block’s header’s hash. These stored hash values
provide immutability to the transactions. If a transaction
in any block is changed, then it would change the block
header, and the hash value will be different from the
hash value stored in the successive block, and thus
tampering is evident.
Each block is validated through a consensus algorithm
and added using a process that is necessarily expensive or
difﬁcult to perform but easy to validate - the immutability
comes from the belief that malicious entities will not
be able to meet the conditions for this hard-to-perform-
but-easy-to-validate mining process, and therefore, cannot
simply change the hash values of the blocks to cover
up any tampering. The mining process needs to be
performed for all subsequent blocks if a certain block
is modiﬁed after creation and added to the chain, which
is practically impossible. The blockchain is public, so
participating nodes will be able to view but not modify
the contents. A string of blocks appended in sequence
form the blockchain.

Fig. 2: Blocks in a blockchain

4) Consensus Algorithm: Nodes in the peer-to-peer net-
work take the responsibility of verifying the transactions
and adding them to the blockchain. This process is known
as mining and is one of the most important elements
of the blockchain network because it is responsible for
its decentralized nature. The fundamental idea behind
consensus is that nodes must undergo a process that
is hard to perform yet easy to validate - discouraging

5

malicious entities from acquiring the necessary conditions
required to validate invalid transactions.

Putting it all together - suppose Alice desires to send a
digital asset to Bob. Then Alice would have to sign the asset
using her private key and broadcast a transaction request with
the item and Bob’s address. A miner, upon receiving the trans-
action, would bundle that transaction along with several other
transactions in the block body. The miner would also create the
block header and subsequently, broadcast the header to other
blockchain nodes. These blockchain nodes then perform a pre-
decided consensus algorithm. If the block is approved, then it
is added as the latest block and all the nodes update the ledger
to reﬂect the change. The fundamental role of the miner in all
this is to collect, verify, and package transactions into a block,
though the speciﬁcs of how they would do are dependent
on the type of blockchain and consensus mechanisms agreed
upon.

There are two major categories of blockchains - permis-

sioned and permissionless:

i. Permissionless blockchains are public and open access;
anyone is capable of joining the blockchain and take part
in the consensus mechanism. Interested users having an
internet connection can join become a part of the network,
and participants’ identities are hidden which is a security
concern.

ii. Permissioned blockchains place restrictions on the mem-
ber nodes in terms of read access or participation in the
consensus process, or both. This often helps in compu-
tation and network communication overhead, which is a
major cause for delay in permissionless networks.

Smart contracts are pieces of computer code that can run on
a blockchain to facilitate and enforce the terms of an agree-
ment. First proposed by Nick Szabo [49] in 1997, the concept
behind a smart contract is to execute the functions/ tasks of
an agreement automatically when the speciﬁed conditions of
a contract/ agreement are satisﬁed.

III. CATEGORISATION BASED ON APPLICATION
SCENARIOS

In this section, we categorise the different blockchain-based
security works surveyed from the application perspective, i.e.,
based on the application area considered.

A. Data Trading and Sharing

The concept of data trading/ sharing is to treat data as a
commodity, with vehicles being able to ‘purchase’ and ‘sell’
data from the network. From a very broad point of view, this
is the fundamental concept behind all other blockchain-based
IoV frameworks; whether it is computational information for
resource sharing or battery level information for smart grid
applications. Data must be shared for vehicles to coordinate
with each other. However, we address it as a separate thrust
area to delineate the research that focuses on optimizing data
trading/sharing frameworks from research works that take data
sharing for granted and focus on other aspects of the network.
We classify the data in vehicular networks into four broad
categories:

BlockMerkle Tree RootTimestampHash of previous block headerTransaction DataHashBlockMerkle Tree RootTimestampHash of previous block headerTransaction Data6

Fig. 3: Overview of the applications perspective section.

• Messages exchanged: Vehicles communicate with each
other by exchanging messages such as sensor data and
trafﬁc-related information.

• User personal data: User personal data refers to the
user identity, name, e-wallet details, images, and videos -
anything that can be used to identify a vehicle. It can also
include important parameters of Electric Vehicles (EVs)
such as State of Charge (SoC) of battery, battery capacity,
and travel schedules, all of which decide the EV type.
• User behavioural information: This includes informa-
tion about the trading preferences of the individuals when
participating in a trading network (data trading, resource
trading, and energy trading among others), individual’s
likes and dislikes - any information that can be used to
predict how a user will behave.

• User ratings: Various frameworks assign trust ratings to
the vehicles based on their previous history which can be
used by other nodes to evaluate the user’s trustworthiness.
These ratings need to be secured against false ratings
uploaded by malicious vehicles. Such data is shared when
a vehicle leaves one vehicular network and joins another
network.

• Ride sharing/Carpooling: Reducing the number of ve-
hicles on the road is a necessary step towards better
environmental conditions and road safety. Two aspects
of blockchain, namely, built-in cryptocurrency and smart
contracts make it suitable for this task.

• Platooning: The concept of cars forming a group and
navigating as a group has a couple of advantages. Firstly,
it reduces trafﬁc congestion since coordinating a few
groups is easier than coordinating several vehicles, and
secondly, it reduces the chances of accidents. Blockchain
is used in [26] as a transaction framework that achieves
this.

• Smart parking: Many parking lots are used inefﬁciently,
with a fairly simple parking model involving a ﬂat and
hourly rate. These rates are heavily dependent on local
demand. That demand could be spread over a larger area,
which reduces the number of underutilized parking areas.
Conceptually, it is just more efﬁcient resource allocation.
Many studies have focused on developing intelligent
parking mechanisms [85], [86], for example Zhang et al.
proposed a blockchain-based smart parking framework
that links customers to available parking lots [58].

B. Transportation

C. Smart Grid

This application area deals primarily with vehicle movement
and management. Coordinating vehicles in real-time allows
for more effective movement - one might think of how trafﬁc
is managed and coordinated even now with trafﬁc lights
and signs, and consider how that concept could be extended
digitally with extremely speciﬁc travel information of vehicles
[84]. It opens up possibilities for collaboration that are either
too centralized or too computation-heavy for anything other
than a distributed system. Some of these possibilities are
outlined below:

This application area deals with EVs [87]. The key feature
of smart grids that sets them apart from traditional grids is
the applicability of big data analytics. Consumers may also
sell energy to the grid, which means extra electricity need
not be generated needlessly if demand and supply can be
met with the existing resources. Smart grids need to be fault-
tolerant with the ability to quickly handle any possible faults.
Again, distributed systems come to their rescue. Scalability
is a major challenge in this sort of application; since the
infrastructure and power distribution complexity scale very

Blockchain applications in securing vehicularnetworks : An applications perspective Crowdsensing/CrowdsharingResource SharingBIoV ArchitectureSmart GridTransportationData trading and sharingUserbehavioralinformationUser PersonalDataMessagesexchanged in V2XUser ratingsPlatooningSmartParkingRideSharing/CarpoolingSecure EVChargingTABLE III: Research problems and proposed solutions of blockchain-based security works for some common application areas.

7

Application

Ref.

Target issue

[50], [51]

Securing communication

Reliability and efﬁciency
of data sharing

Solution proposed
and/or blockchain usage

• Novel cryptographic primitive: blockchain-based proxy re-encryption.
• Combines proxy re-encryption, searchable encrytion, and blockchain.
• Federated learning to fulﬁll data sharing requests correctly.
• Local DAG for storing shared update models, global permissioned

blockchain for managing data sharing requests.

Data trading/
sharing

[52]

[17]

[53]

[54]

[26]

[55]

[56]

Transportation

[16], [57]

Authentication

Smart grid

[25]

[60]

[61]

[62]

[63]

[64]

[65]

[14], [66]
[67], [68]

[69]

[70]

[15]

[71]

[74]

[75]

[76]

[77]

[78]

[79]

[80]

[81]

[82]

Crowdsourcing /
Crowdsensing

BIoV
architecture

Transaction delays and
cold start problems

• Vehicles buy and sell data. To allow new users to participate even
with empty accounts, this is formulated as a debt-credit system.

NDN data sharing

• Layered model, with NDN routers interfacing with blockchain.

Data sharing in VSNs

Trafﬁc management,
Autonomous driving

Ride sharing

Lane changing in
autonomous vehicles
Correcting errors in
GPS positioning

• Directed Acrylic Graph (DAG) based blockchain stores data within

relevant topic groups in VSNs.

• Vehicle platooning based on path matching.
• Platoon heads, chosen rotationally by reputation, pay attention to the

road while platoon members can relax.

• Rider makes a time-locked deposit and provides a set of obfuscated

locations; driver also makes a deposit until proof of pick-up.

• Lane changing modelled as a Deep Reinforcement Learning problem.
• Secure collective learning framework using blockchain.
• LIDAR aided vehicles train a DNN and share positioning error

information with other vehicles through blockchain.

[58]

Smart parking

• Parking owners rent out space using blockchain.

[59]

Carpooling

potential drivers.

• Fog computing to match user carpooling requests with

Road congestion,
inefﬁciency

Cross datacenter
authentication in
fog computing scenario
Conditional privacy -
preserving authentication
Performance bottlenecks
Vehicle authentication for
accident detection
Lightweight CA for
location based services

Batch Authentication +
Key Management

Coordinating
charging-discharging
schedules of vehicles
Charging services
with focus on privacy
Anonymously rewarding
vehicles for selling energy

• Blockchain stores records, with conditional privacy.
• Blockchain holds travel related information.
• Degree of availability of information on the blockchain is based on

attributes of a vehicle, like direction of travel.

• Custom privacy preserving authentication scheme for fog computing;

easy re-authentication across different locations.

• Consortium blockchain stores authentication records of vehicles.
• Blockchain used to store certiﬁcates as transactions.
• Messages contain transaction ID that authenticated sender vehicle.
• Edge computing proxy vehicles that authenticate vehicle groups.
• Custom certiﬁcate-based authentication scheme.
• Blockchain holds transactions for accident related information.
• Threshold proxy scheme is employed by CAs that play role of

distributed nodes inside a consortium type blockchain.

• Certiﬁcateless auth; TA and OBU establish session keys with

operations performed explicitly at the cloud side.

• Group key generation for efﬁcient and secure V2V communication.
• Aggregators formulate a schedule based on requests sent as

blockchain transactions by EVs.

• The schedule is formulated as an optimization problem.
• Blockchain with fog computing to reduce latency.
• Selective storage of only sensitive data in the blockchain.
• Exchange of energy happens for appropriate (secure) payment of

blockchain cryptocurrency.

Complete energy
trading framework

• Discharging EVs compensated by charging EVs with cryptocurrency.
• Incentive compatible Demand-Response paradigm is used.

Edge-based data processing
framework in VANETs

• Tasks allocated to containers on edge nodes, based on time and

resources needed. Formulated as multi-objective optimization problem.

Containerization

• Containers can be migrated to other edge nodes using blockchain.

Resource sharing

[19], [72]
[73]

Complete architecture
for resource sharing

Vehicular fog computing
with parked vehicles

IDaaS with Vehicular
cloud computing
Vehicle cooperation
for crowdsensing tasks

Real time map updates

Location privacy in
crowdsourcing tasks

Vehicular SDN

• Spectrum and computation resources paid for with cryptocurrency.

• Requester uses blockchain currency to pay vehicles for using

their computation resources.

• Problem formulated as two-stage Stackelberg game.
• Identity-as-a-Service model for vehicles and vehicular clouds.
• Personally identiﬁable information encrypted and stored in blockchain.
• Vehicle team selection and payment method based on blockchain.
• Credit score determined by number of successful completions.
• Blockchain based credit management system — a privacy

preserving incentive mechanism.

• Area grid recursively partitioned using quad tree function.
• Workers share location data over blockchain; recursive partitioning

allows selection of privacy levels. Task requesters access blockchain.

• Blockchain used to manage the network commands

for control plane securely.

Large energy consumption
in Blockchain enabled IoV

• Model that manages energy consumed for consensus by selectively

representing some nodes by their associated cluster head.

Performance and security /
trust services in VANETs

Mining cluster
selection

[83]

Key management

• Architecture for VANETs that combine SDN, blockchain, and

fog computing technologies.

• Blockchain provides secure communication.
• Ofﬂoading vehicles and mining clusters are matched based on

(1) transmission rate and (2) available cluster resources for mining
• Traditional architecture: Different CAs maintain identity information
for different regions; crossovers involve inter-CA communication.

• Proposed architecture: CAs replaced with a blockchain network.

—

—

—

Supporting techniques
and/or smart contract
(SC) usage
SC performs ciphertext
matching for data searches

Federated learning,
DAGs

Pricing strategy modelled as
a two-stage Stackelberg
game
Named Data
Networking (NDN)

Directed Acrylic Graphs

Platoon heads paid in
cryptocurrency by
members via SCs

SCs prevent fraud

Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL)

SCs ensure accuracy
of shared models
SCs realise fairness;
matching, advance payment

Bloom ﬁlters for
location anonymity

CP-ABE encryption used
instead of ordinary PKCs.

-

SCs are used to broadcast
certiﬁcates to the blockchain
Proxy authentication

Dynamic clustering

Threshold proxy signature

Group key

SCs set prices,
maximise utility

Fog Computing

SCs decide remuneration

SCs maximise social
welfare, in terms of
revenue generated.

SCs determine pricing by
matching demand and supply

SCs mediate requesters
and performers/providers

Encryption with CP-ABE

Reverse auction

optimization problem,
reverse auction mechanism

—

Q-learning to manage
system state

Distributed Clustering

8

Fig. 4: Thematic view of the various application scenarios in which blockchain is used for ensuring security.

disproportionately to the geographic area. Newer blockchain
architectures are being proposed to provide scalability [88].
Secure EV charging is the most common application for
smart grids. With the advent of electric vehicles, coordinating
charging schedules to balance out supply and demand over
time in a way that maintains security is the primary focus
of these kinds of research works. Blockchain also provides
a payment platform for rewarding vehicles that share their
energy to the grid, for example, if someone realizes they have
excess charge left over after making a trip.

D. Resource Sharing

Cloud computing is the key driving technology of this
research area. The paradigm is the same - exchange of compu-
tational resources for payment, except with the complexities
of vehicular networks and edge computing. Blockchain can
be used to construct a distributed open market type of system,
rather than rely on computation provided by a single third
party. It is assumed that vehicles, unlike typical embedded
systems, may be equipped with relatively higher processing
capabilities, which allows them to be computational resource
providers; they may also behave as consumers, purchasing
resources from the RSUs.

E. Crowdsensing/Crowdsharing

Similar to data sharing, crowdsensing applications focus
more on optimizing the system for aggregated data collection

rather than point-to-point data trading. Crowdsensing allows
service providers to gather data in real-time, and blockchain
allows people to contribute (maybe for payment) securely. This
is useful especially in the map and location-based services, for
example, notifying vehicles of a crash up ahead or road clo-
sure. Some form of crowdsourcing is already being practised
currently, but it lacks a strong incentive system which limits
its usefulness.

F. BIoV Architecture

Every application area analyzed so far has been some inte-
gration of blockchain and IoV technologies. But this research
area deserves to be mentioned separately since it is slightly
different in terms of research focus. Much research work has
gone into optimizing the core features of blockchain to make
it more adaptable to VANETs. For example, [24] proposed a
custom consensus algorithm for vehicular networks, and [80]
introduced an energy-efﬁcient clustering protocol speciﬁcally
for blockchain-enabled vehicular networks. This research di-
rection is conceptually distinct from the others in that the
primary problem being addressed is not that of providing
a service through blockchain use, but
that of overcoming
existing limitations in blockchain and/or VANETs by changing
some of their core features.

Summary: In this section, several blockchain-based IoV
frameworks were categorised for different application areas.
Scenarios like data trading and sharing, transportation, smart
grid, resource sharing, crowdsensing/crowdsourcing and BIoV

TrafficManagementRSUEnergy Trading/Energy SharingDriving SafetyCarpooling and Ride SharingSmart ParkingVarious application scenarios of blockchain-based secure vehicular networksSecure EVChargingEdge/Fog ServerRSUCluster HeadClustering/PlatooningData Trading/Data SharingRSUCrowdsensingResource SharingCRASHCRASHarchitecture are discussed in detail, explaining their utility, and
each of the frameworks is categorised into one of these groups.

IV. CATEGORISATION BASED ON SECURITY FEATURES

The security perspective section categorises different
blockchain-based security works based on the following cate-
gory types.

i. Security requirements met
ii. Protection against network-speciﬁc security attacks
iii. Authentication techniques
iv. Security proof
The purpose and scope of each category and the deﬁnition
of ﬁelds within them have been deﬁned in the subsequent
sections. This will give the readers a holistic view of the
research done in vehicular network security using blockchain-
based frameworks, and thus help in further research in this
area.

A. Security Requirements

A security requirement is a condition which a network
should meet
to mitigate attacks and vulnerabilities in the
network. There have been various studies that have deﬁned
different security requirements for vehicular networks [101]–
[103]. Blockchain technology implicitly provides some of
these security requirements due to its decentralized nature
and tamper-proof storage mechanism. Thus, any blockchain-
based security framework will meet the following security
requirements by default.

1) Decentralization: Blockchain eliminates the involvement
of any third party by enabling a P2P network where
some of the blockchain nodes verify the transactions. This
preserves the privacy of the vehicles by eliminating the
need for sharing their details with a third party [17]. This
property has several applications in vehicular networks
such as decentralized communication [89], data sharing
[90], and identity management [91] among others.

2) Tamper resistance: The data recorded in the blockchain
is difﬁcult to tamper with because it is organised in the
form of special structures such as hash chain [93], and
every block contains the hash of the previous block. This
ensures irreversibility and immutability as tampering with
the data in any block will change its hash value and
will disconnect it from the blockchain. Also, blockchain’s
distributed nature ensures that
the data has not been
tampered with at any intermediary stages because of
elimination of the third party, i.e., decentralization also
leads to tamper resistance [92].

3) Unforgeability: It refers to the ability of a network to
resist adversaries from forging data or a user’s digital
signature. The decentralized nature of the blockchain
combined with its digitally signed transactions guarantee
this and ensure that adversaries are not able to pose as
other users [90]. In [93], Li et al. use a blockchain-based
fair and anonymous ad dissemination scheme to ensure
unforgeability using a popular authentication algorithm
called Zero-Knowledge Proof.

9

4) Traceability (via cryptographic hash): Each block in
the blockchain contains the cryptographic hash of the
previous block, thus ensuring traceability [92], [93]. Each
node can trace and verify the correspondence of the data.
This will help in tracing any malicious activity or message
circulation thus avoiding confusion and accidents in the
vehicular network.

5) Public audit: Blockchain helps in implementing public
audits via its consensus mechanism. The block created
by the miners must satisfy the criteria of the consensus
mechanism used and should also be independently veri-
ﬁed by other nodes in the network. This feature has been
used in [94] for authentication purposes in the vehicle
to grid energy trading, and in [17] for publicly auditing
transnational data trading in the IoV environment.

Apart from the above security requirements, there are other
security requirements that a blockchain-based scheme must
satisfy to increase its robustness. In this study, the following
is the list of security requirements considered (excluding the
ones implicitly provided by blockchain):

1) Non-repudiation: It ensures senders cannot deny the
transmission of a message and also ensures easy iden-
tiﬁcation of the vehicle nodes in case of accidents. Mit-
igation of repudiation attacks comes under this security
requirement. It can be met by ensuring the following.
a) All transmitted messages are signed by a transmitting
node via its anonymous public key to ensure that
the node cannot claim to be some other node in the
network (which can result in a masquerade attack).
b) The node cannot claim that the message was replayed
since the message is timestamped. It is crucial for
investigation agencies for ﬁnding the chain of events
and message details in case of a mishap.

c) Vehicles cannot falsify their location information due
to the implementation of secure positioning solutions.
2) Privacy preservation: Frameworks meeting this security
requirement ensures that the private information of the
participating nodes is not disclosed to the public or
malicious parties. Also, the privacy of the drivers should
be guaranteed against unauthorized observers [104]. It has
mainly two important features:
a) Anonymity: Speciﬁc personal details of the nodes such
as name and vehicle type should not be disclosed. It
prevents malicious parties from tracking the activities
of a user by ensuring that for each incoming transac-
tion, all possible senders are equiprobable, i.e., untrace-
ablility [70] (not to be confused with traceability as a
security requirement). Anonymity is generally achieved
by using pseudonyms and cryptographic techniques. It
leads to mitigation of tracking attacks [23].

b) Unlinkability: It ensures that the attackers cannot link
received messages sent from the same sender; or in
other words, for any two outgoing transactions, it is
impossible to prove that they were sent to the same
person [70]. This is similar to forward security [62].

3) Traceability (via conditional privacy): By linking a
vehicle’s pseudonym to its true identity, a government

TABLE IV: Summary of various security requirements, a few frameworks meeting those requirements, their deﬁnitions, and
attacks they help to mitigate.

10

Alternate names /
Other similar
security requirements

References

Deﬁnition

Attacks covered

Security
requirements

Decentralization

Traceability
(Via transparency )

Without third
party reliance

[17], [89], [90],
[91]

Transparency

[92], [93]

BLOCKCHAIN
SPECIFIC

Tamper proof

Data integrity

[92], [93]

Unforgeability

-

[90], [93]

Consensus mehanism

Public audit

[17], [94]

Non-repudiation

-

Anonymity

Untraceability

Forward and
backward security

Privacy
preservation

Unlinkability

Known key security

[66], [92], [93],
[25], [60]

[23], [92], [95],
[66], [70]

[70], [94], [95],
[25], [69]

NETWORK
SPECIFIC

Traceability
(via conditional privacy)

Conditional
linkability

[23], [25], [93],
[60], [81]

Wallet security

Account security

Scalability

-

[90], [93], [96],
[72], [97]

[66], [91], [92],
[98], [99]

Low latency and
high throughput

Low computational
overhead

[100]

Nodes participate in a P2P
network eliminating the need
of a third party.
All the events in the network
can be sequentially traced.
The stored data inside the
network cannot be tampered
with.
Adversaries cannot forge data
or user’s digital signature.
Data stored in the network is
veriﬁed by the network nodes.
Ensures that senders cannot
deny that they have sent
messages or made transactions.
Ensures that personal details of
users are not compromised while
still allowing them to participate
fully.

Ensuring that attackers cannot
use the relation between two
messages sent by the same user
to violate that user’s privacy.

Privacy of future sessions is
guaranteed even in case the
session key is leaked for one
of the previous sessions.
In the event of an attack, the
identity of the offending vehicle
must be revealed to authorities.
The security of the e-wallet
used by the vehicles is
guaranteed by the network.
The network functionality and
performance are not affected
when the number of
participating vehicles become
very large.
There are minimal network
delays and the network is
capable of adding a high
number of transactions to
blockchain in a short time span.

SPoF (Single Point of Failure)

Repudiation attack

Data tampering/modiﬁcation attack
MITM
Block tampering attack

Forgery Attack

MITM

Repudiation attack,
Masquerade/impersonation attack,
Forgery attack

Tracking attack

Background analysis attack

Ephemeral Secret Leakage (ESL)

Double claim attack
Repudiation attack

-

-

All kinds of attacks
( as more latency gives more window
to adversaries for carrying out
attacks)

agency or trusted third party must be able to trace the
identity of the vehicle if it is found to be malicious. [93]
also refer to it as conditional linkability and meet this
security requirement to prevent a “double claim” attack.
4) Wallet security: Most vehicular frameworks have an
incentive mechanism and reward the vehicles with cryp-
tocurrency for behaving properly in the network. Vehicles
also pay cryptocurrency to each other in exchange for
services and data. Hence, very often each vehicle user
has an e-wallet associated with it. Meeting this security
requirement ensures that the wallet of the users is secured
against malicious attacks. In [93], each user employs a
client providing secure wallet services to manage the
cryptocurrency tokens and connect
to the blockchain
network. [17] guarantees the account security of vehicles
using an encrypted digital signature. Adversaries cannot
open the vehicle users’ wallets without the corresponding
keys and certiﬁcates.

5) Scalability: Scalability ensures that

the framework is
efﬁcient even when there are a large number of partic-

ipating vehicles in the network. For a blockchain-based
framework, the measure of scalability is the blockchain’s
ability to manage large volumes of transactions [105].
Low computational overhead and a dynamic consensus
algorithm that adapts to the trafﬁc volume is a way to
achieve this [98]. According to [96] decentralization also
leads to scalability. To evaluate whether a framework
is scalable or not, various simulation platforms can be
used and the results can be compared against benchmark
blockchain frameworks such as Hyperledger Caliper [68].
6) Low latency and high throughput: Low latency refers
to fewer network delays, and high throughput refers to
the ability of the blockchain to add a large number
of transactions to the chain in a limited time. These
are important requirements because a slower network
gives more time to the adversaries to execute attacks
[91]. This security requirement is subjective and not very
well deﬁned but is still worth discussing considering the
security of a network.

Table IV lists out various security requirements, frameworks

meeting those requirements, their corresponding deﬁnitions,
and the attacks they help to mitigate.

B. Network Speciﬁc Security Attacks

Vehicular networks are susceptible to many kinds of security
attacks because of operating in an open and dynamic environ-
ment. Hence most security schemes ensure that their proposed
frameworks provide resistance to well-known network security
attacks. In this section, we discuss the common network secu-
rity attacks which have been tackled in the existing blockchain-
based security schemes for vehicular networks. The list of
security attacks is as follows.

1) Replay attack: In this attack, the malicious entity imi-
tates a legitimate user and replays transmitted data in the
network that it had previously captured. This attack is
carried out to target the authenticity and conﬁdentiality
of the system and also to prevent tracking of vehicles in
case of a mishap or an accident [112].

2) Man-in-the-middle (MITM) attack: A malicious entity
intercepts and changes the messages exchanged between
legitimate nodes in the network [113].

3) Impersonation attack: A malicious entity impersonates
another entity in the network and sends messages on its
behalf [63]. It is also known as a masquerade attack.
4) Privileged insider attack: An adversary is a privileged
user inside the network and can access cryptographic
information of the deployed entities in the network, such
as certiﬁcates and private keys. [63].

5) Spooﬁng attack: A malicious entity circulates false data
in the network. It may broadcast spurious messages to
neighbours causing trafﬁc accidents and congestion [111].
It also includes false report generation about network
transmission channel availability and other resources [93].
It can also be in the form of GPS spooﬁng attacks, where
adversaries inject false position data in location-based
networks [57].

6) Malicious Third Party (MTP) or bad-mouthing at-
tack: Most blockchain-based vehicular network schemes
use trust management systems where they store the cred-
ibility ratings of each vehicle depending on the feedback
from other network vehicles about their past behaviour.
Malicious vehicles may generate false ratings and upload
them in the blockchain (or other storage places that main-
tain trust records) to decrease the credibility ratings of
genuine vehicles and increase the ratings of the malicious
vehicles. This is called MTP, or bad-mouthing attack [14],
[111], [114].

7) Ephemeral Secret-Key Leakage (ESL) or background
analysis attack: In an ESL or background analysis attack,
an adversary breaks the privacy of users by ﬁnding out
the session keys or true identities of users by analyzing
previously used leaked session keys or pseudonymous
identities of the users. Adversaries can easily ﬁnd out
the actual identity/behaviour or break into the commu-
nication session if the user continues to use the same
pseudonym or secret key every time. Also, in case of
secure communication taking place between entities via

11

common sessions, leakage of the session-speciﬁc secrets
(ephemeral secrets) may endanger the security of the net-
work and further communication sessions. Such attacks
can be classiﬁed as ESL [63] or background analysis
attacks [64]. They can be mitigated by meeting the
security requirement of privacy preservation, speciﬁcally
unlinkability or forward security. Security schemes can
use random secrets along with the session-speciﬁc secrets
to ensure that there is a different session key for every
session. A session key of one particular session being
revealed will not affect future sessions. This is also called
‘perfect forward and backward secrecy’ [63]. Vehicles
can be allowed to use a set of randomly generated
pseudonyms instead of a single pseudonym to prevent the
malicious vehicles from linking their true identity with
the pseudonym by background analysis.

8) Sybil attack: Sybil attack takes place when a malicious
entity tries to control a substantial part of the network
by introducing a large number of pseudo-identities or
pseudonyms at the same time [115]. It can use them
to illegally alter the reputation values of other nodes
(i.e., Sybil attack may lead to bad-mouthing attack).
Most vehicular networks offer a feature of forwarding
announcements anonymously, which makes them vulner-
able to Sybil attacks. Wang et al. [67] discuss how Sybil
attacks can take place in an energy trading scenario.
In [104],
the authors mitigate Sybil attacks by using
a threshold cryptographic technique based on Lagrange
Interpolation, which ensures that only a ﬁxed number of
different private keys are used to generate the signature.
9) Denial of Service (DoS) attack: In a DoS attack, an
adversary attempts to make a network resource or an
online service unavailable to legal users by ﬂooding the
network with illegitimate service requests [116]. Some
examples include the HTTP-DoS attack on Iranian sites,
which brought down important government sites [117]
and the DoS attack on American Health Care government
site [118]. Li et al. [66] discuss DoS attacks in the
context of electricity trading in vehicular networks where
the attacker needs to compromise a huge number of
blockchain nodes and control them to send transactions
to the target to prevent the target node from participating
in the electricity trading.

10) Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attack: The
DDoS attack is similar to a DoS attack, but a DoS
attack is executed through a single node whereas, the
DDoS attack is carried through multiple nodes in the net-
work. The DDoS attack is generally carried out through
‘botnets’. Firstly, several nodes are kept under control
by infecting them with malware. These compromised
nodes are used simultaneously to attack a speciﬁc target
machine. This network of compromised nodes that can
communicate with each other is called a botnet. Li et al.
[93] discuss DDoS attacks in an advertisement dissem-
ination scenario in vehicular networks. Feng et al. [99]
proposed a blockchain-assisted authentication mechanism
for mitigating DDoS attacks along with protecting against
other common attacks such as replay and impersonation

12

TABLE V: A summary of the network speciﬁc security attacks and the blockchain-based frameworks addressing these attacks.

Attack Type

Deﬁnition

Security Concerns

Frameworks
Addressing the Issue

Replay

Man-in-the-
middle

Impersonation

Privileged
Insider

Spooﬁng

Malicious
Third Party

Ephemeral
Secret Leakage

Sybil

Denial of
Service

Distributed
Denial of
Service

Repudiation

Eavesdropping

Collusion

Forgery

Imitate a legitimate user
and replay already
transmitted data
Adversary intercepts the
communication
between two nodes of
the network secretly
Impersonate a
legitimate node in the
network secretly
Malicious insider has
privilege account
credentials/ privilege
access in the network
Impersonate a user/
node of the network and
get unauthorized access
Adversary generates
false ratings to disturb
the trust records
Privacy is broken by
obtaining user’s
credentials illegitimately
Adversary tries to
control a signiﬁcant
part of network under
false identities
IoV network resources
are made unavailable
by ﬂooding the node
with false requests
IoV network resources
are made unavailable
across several nodes
by ﬂooding them with
false requests
An entity of the network
falsely denies
participation in an
activity
Secretly listening in on
the communication
between nodes
A member of the IoV
network colludes with
an adversary to get
them access
Forging the signature
of a member of the IoV
network

Authenticity, Conﬁdentiality

[23], [25], [61]–[63], [65], [66],
[95], [98], [99], [106]–[108]

Conﬁdentiality, Physical
security of the IoV network
resources

[18], [25], [61]–[64], [66], [91],
[95], [96], [107], [109]

Authenticity, Conﬁdentiality

[61], [63], [66], [67], [69], [93],
[95], [98], [99], [107]

Conﬁdentiality, Data loss,
Physical security of the
IoV network resources

Authenticity, Physical security
of the IoV network resources

Authenticity, Network
stability

Authenticity, Conﬁdentiality,
Data loss, Physical security
of the IoV network resources

Authenticity, Network Stability,
Physical security of the IoV
network resources

[63], [109]

[57], [81], [91], [98], [110], [111]

[14], [19], [63], [67], [107], [111]

[15], [60], [63], [64], [95], [98],
[106]

[25], [54], [67], [69]

Authenticity, Network Stability,
Resource depletion

[77], [89], [110]

Authenticity, Network Stability,
Resource depletion

[61], [66], [93], [99]

Authenticity

[18], [25], [60], [66], [83], [92],
[93]

Conﬁdentiality

[69], [83], [89], [98]

Authenticity, Conﬁdentiality,
Data loss, Physical security
of the IoV network resources

Authenticity, Physical security
of the IoV network resources

[23], [93]

[17], [64], [65], [106], [107]

attacks.

11) Repudiation attack: It refers to the denial of participa-
tion by an entity in all or part of communications in ve-
hicular networks. For example, a vehicle driver can deny
operating a credit card purchase, or adversaries can abuse
anonymous authentication techniques to run away with
liabilities [119]. This attack scenario can be mitigated by
meeting the security requirement of non-repudiation. Li
et al. [66] discuss mitigation of repudiation attacks with
the help of digital signatures in a consortium blockchain-
based electric vehicle charging and discharging scheme.
12) Eavesdropping attack: The dictionary meaning of eaves-
dropping means the act of secretly listening to other
people talking [120]. In a vehicular network scenario,
attackers can eavesdrop on the communication between
network entities such as vehicles, edge nodes, fog com-
puting nodes [69], and RSUs. In [89], the authors present
a formal security proof of how their framework encrypts
the system using RSA (with 2028-bit encryption algo-
rithm) to resist eavesdropping attacks. Formal security
proof such as Burrows–Abadi–Needham (BAN) logic can
also be used to determine whether a set of exchanged
messages is secured against eavesdropping or not.

13) Collusion attack: It

is a type of security attack in
which a network node makes a secret agreement with an
adversary. The adversary can use the compromised node
to carry out malicious activities to exploit the system,
information, executing
such as collecting conﬁdential
sophisticated attacks, injecting false data, etc. [121]. It
can also lead to various kinds of network security attacks
and hence can pose a serious threat to the vehicular net-
works. Some blockchain-based security schemes discuss
various types of collusion attacks that can take place in
a vehicular network, as given below.
a) Miner voting collusion: Collusion between malicious
RSUs and compromised stakeholders may lead to the
election of false miners who may modify or discard le-
gitimate transaction data during the mining algorithm.
b) Block veriﬁcation collusion: False results may also
be created by the collusion of miners in the block
veriﬁcation stage, which can be a stepping stone to
launching a double-spending attack [114].

c) Collusion authentication fraud: Multiple proxy vehi-
cles with selﬁsh intentions in the network may collab-
orate for executing authentication frauds by attempting
to reorganise the network secrets [62]. It can be miti-
gated by increasing the number of proxy vehicles and
by storing the authentication transaction records.
14) Forgery attack: It refers to an attack where the adversary
tries to recreate a digital signature of a message without
knowing the respective signer’s private key [122]. It
can be mitigated by meeting the security requirement
of non-repudiation. According to the authors of [106],
forgery attack is very common in a vehicular network
scenario. They use a digital signature where a secret
key is generated by a fully trusted authority called
Trusted Authority (TA) and stored in a physically isolated

13

Tamper-proof Device (TPD). In [17], the authors use an
encrypted signature to prevent adversaries from forging
the signature of a vehicle for gaining control of a majority
of network resources. Tan et al. [65], and Sutrala et al.
[107] formally prove that their frameworks are secure
against forgery attacks using the random oracle model
for veriﬁcation.

Table V lists various blockchain-based network-speciﬁc
attacks, security schemes proposed for vehicular networks and
the security attacks mitigated in each of these schemes.

C. Authentication Techniques

Authentication is an essential part of any security frame-
work and plays an important role in mitigating most security
attacks [8], [123]. We list some of the popular authentication
techniques used in blockchain-based vehicular security frame-
works below.

1) Mutual/Two-way authentication: In this type of authen-
tication, both the client (vehicle) and the access point
(RSU) authenticate each other. The client veriﬁes that it
is opening the session with a legitimate access point, and
the access point is sure that it is opening a session with
an authorized client. Authenticating access points helps
in mitigating MITM attacks, and authenticating clients
help in mitigating replay attacks [124]. Vangala et al. [63]
discuss how mutual authentication is established between
a cluster head and a vehicle within that cluster (V2CH)
and between cluster head and an RSU (CH2RSU) in
the authentication phase of their proposed framework. In
[95], the authors formally prove how their security model
achieves mutual authentication between the electric vehi-
cle and the charging pile.

2) Anonymous authentication: It is a type of authentication
scheme that preserves the privacy of the vehicles during
the authentication process. It is also referred to as privacy-
preserving authentication [125]. Privacy means that the
users have the full right to control their personal informa-
tion and reserve the right to choose which data is shared
with others. Anonymity refers to the quality of being
unidentiﬁable within a ﬁnite set of users. Anonymity is
achieved by the help of pseudonyms, which are bit strings
used as unique identiﬁers for authentication without any
personally identiﬁable information. Hence using them
helps in authenticating a speciﬁc entity without being
aware of its real identity, i.e., anonymous authentication.
Anonymous authentication schemes can be broadly clas-
siﬁed into ﬁve categories [125].

i. Schemes based on symmetric cryptography
ii. Schemes based on Public Key Infrastructure (PKI)
iii. Schemes based on identity-based signature
iv. Schemes based on certiﬁcate-less signature
v. Schemes based on group signature

Anonymous authentication is commonly employed in
vehicular networks for privacy preservation [60]. For ex-
ample, in [93], the authors use anonymous authentication
for a blockchain-based anonymous fair anonymous ad-
dissemination in vehicular networks. Yao et. al. [60]

proposed a blockchain-assisted lightweight anonymous
authentication scheme for distributed vehicular fog ser-
vices.

3) Certiﬁcate-based authentication: In certiﬁcate-based
authentication, the ﬁrst entity authenticates itself to the
second entity with the help of a digital certiﬁcate as-
sociated with the ﬁrst entity [126]. A digital certiﬁcate
contains a public key for the corresponding entity, and
the owner of the certiﬁcate can be conﬁrmed with the
help of a digital signature in the certiﬁcate. The digital
signature is veriﬁed by a certiﬁcate issuing unit, or more
speciﬁcally, a Certiﬁcate Authority (CA) or a TA in
the context of vehicular networks. In [63], the authors
use a blockchain-enabled certiﬁcate-based authentica-
tion scheme (BCAS-VADN) for empowering vehicles
to securely report the transactions related to accident
detection and notiﬁcation of their own or neighbouring
vehicles to the cluster head. Zhou et al. use certiﬁcate-
based authentication in a blockchain and edge computing
enabled vehicle-to-grid-energy trading [94]. It has also
been used by Kang et al. [90] in their localized peer-to-
peer electricity trading model for plug-in hybrid vehicles.
They employ a TA such as a government department for
implementing certiﬁcate-based authentication.

4) Batch veriﬁcation: In batch veriﬁcation, instead of a
single message/entity, a batch of messages/entities are
veriﬁed together. According to [92], batch veriﬁcation can
be explained as follows:
Assuming a random selection of an integer i between 1
and n (both included), where n is a positive integer, the
received veriﬁcation parameters can be Veri(AIDi, Si, Mi,
Ci). Here Ci is the randomisation parameter, Mi is the
message, Si is the ﬁnal signature information and AIDi
is the pseudonym generated by the vehicle. The plurality
of the authentication parameters generated during batch
veriﬁcation for the messages shared between the network
nodes is BatchVern((AID1, S1, M1, C1),...,(AIDn, Sn, Mn,
Cn). If each of the n signatures is legal then the batch
veriﬁcation is passed [127]. If any one or more of the n
signatures are invalid, the batch veriﬁcation fails. Batch
veriﬁcation can also be divided into three types:

i. Verify that a signer signs a different message
ii. Verify that different signers sign the same message
iii. Verify that different signers sign different messages
Batch veriﬁcation can help security schemes cope up
with the time delay when verifying multiple messages.
In [18], the authors use batch veriﬁcation in an energy
blockchain-based electricity trading framework for EVs.
Lin et al. [61] used a modiﬁed ECDSA encryption
scheme for implementing batch veriﬁcation. Also, in [65],
the authors formally explain how the batch veriﬁcation is
implemented in the authentication phase of the proposed
security framework for blockchain-based VANETs.
5) Zero Knowledge Proof (ZKP): The ZKP algorithm is
used when two entities are to be authenticated without
the exchange of secret information [71]. The concept was
ﬁrst given by Goldwasser et al. [128], and since then, it

14

has found many uses in identiﬁcation and authentication
protocols. A prover must demonstrate knowledge of a
secret to some veriﬁer through several interactive rounds.
Each round consists of a challenge from the veriﬁer and
a response from the prover. During the entire process,
the prover does not reveal any information whatsoever,
to either the veriﬁer or to any third party. In general, it
satisﬁes two basic security properties [93]: (1) Soundness
- It means that the veriﬁer will never accept an invalid
result, and (2) Zero-Knowledge - It means that no leak-
age of any information occurs during the proof. It has
been used in many blockchain-based vehicular network
frameworks. Singh et al. [71] used it in a blockchain-
based data processing framework in edge envisioned V2X
environment, and Li et al. [93] used it in a blockchain-
based fair and anonymous ad-dissemination vehicular
network.

6) Threshold authentication: It is a standard method to
prove the reliability of messages in a vehicular network.
In this technique, the receiver node only accepts a mes-
sage when it is conﬁrmed by a threshold number of
vehicles in the network [104]. Message aggregation in the
network is a good way to realize threshold authentication
and also to reduce network overhead. Li et al. use a
threshold ring signature scheme in [104] to design their
framework, “CreditCoin” which is a privacy-preserving
blockchain-based incentive announcement network for
communication of smart vehicles. It is also used by Lin
et al. [106] in their blockchain-based trust management
announcement scheme for VANETs.

Table VI lists the various security frameworks along with

the authentication techniques they use.
In this

Summary:

section, different blockchain-based
frameworks are categorised based on security requirements
like decentralization,
traceability, etc., protection provided
from several network-speciﬁc security attacks like DoS, spoof-
ing, Sybil, etc., and authentication techniques like mutual,
anonymous, etc.

V. CATEGORISATION BASED ON BLOCKCHAIN FEATURES

Understanding the different blockchain platforms and types
is essential for understanding how blockchains have been used
in vehicular network applications. For the sake of clarity,
in this section, we categorise the different blockchain-based
security works based on the following category types:

i. Blockchain platform
ii. Blockchain type
iii. Consensus algorithm

A. Blockchain Platform

Since Bitcoin was released as open-source software in 2009,
many other platforms have emerged as a result of wider appli-
cation scenarios of blockchain. These platforms are generally
an umbrella service, that comes with their toolkits and ecosys-
tems for developers to build their blockchain applications.
The more advanced the platform, the more varied options it

TABLE VI: Survey of authentication techniques used by blockchain-based security frameworks for vehicular networks.

15

Ref. Mutual/Two-way Anonymous Certiﬁcate based Batch verifcation ZKP Threshold
(cid:51)
[63]
-
[23]
-
[92]
-
[95]
-
[66]
-
[93]
(cid:51)
[94]
-
[69]
(cid:51)
[98]
-
[60]
-
[106]
-
[107]
(cid:51)
[67]
(cid:51)
[65]
-
[71]
(cid:51)
[83]
(cid:51)
[61]
-
[104]
(cid:51)
[59]
(cid:51)
[68]
(cid:51)
[76]
-
[129]
-
[58]
-
[130]
(cid:51)
[131]
-
[55]
-
[73]
-
[132]

(cid:51)
-
(cid:51)
(cid:51)
(cid:51)
-
-
(cid:51)
(cid:51)
-
-
(cid:51)
-
(cid:51)
-
-
-
-
-
(cid:51)
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-

-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
(cid:51)
-
-
-
(cid:51)
-
-
-
-
-
-
(cid:51)
-
-

-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
(cid:51)
-
-
-
-
-
-
(cid:51)
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-

-
-
(cid:51)
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
(cid:51)
-
(cid:51)
-
-
(cid:51)
-
-
-
-
(cid:51)
-
-
(cid:51)
-
-
-

(cid:51)
(cid:51)
(cid:51)
-
(cid:51)
(cid:51)
-
-
-
(cid:51)
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
(cid:51)
-
-
(cid:51)
(cid:51)
-
-
(cid:51)
(cid:51)

Fig. 5: Overview of the blockchain perspective section.

Blockchain applications in securing vehicularnetworks : A blockchain perspective Blockchain PlatformsConsensus AlgorithmOthers...PoAPBFTPoSPoWDPoSKafkaRipplePoREthereumPlatform-AgnosticMoneroHyperledger FabricBlockchainTypesPermissioned/Consortium Permissionlessoffers - for instance, the Hyperledger project offers several
different frameworks with different consensus mechanisms and
is designed for different applications. Ethereum is another
popular platform; while Hyperledger is not strictly associated
with any token, Ethereum (like Bitcoin) is associated with
its cryptocurrency (Ether/ETH) that has a standard conversion
rate with real currency. This is useful, for instance, where
blockchain is used as a stand-in for real-world market inter-
actions; in the example of an energy trading application, ETH
earned through mining or some other activity can be used
directly to purchase energy at charging stations. Apart from
cryptocurrency, the parameters by which blockchain platforms
generally differ are scalability, throughput, consensus mecha-
nism, crash fault tolerance, Byzantine fault tolerance, smart
contract support (and the language used to program them as
well) - there is a great amount of variation in many of the
technical speciﬁcations. The surveyed research works ﬁt into
the following categories:

1) Hyperledger Fabric (HLF): Hyperledger Fabric, main-
tained by the Hyperledger community, is an open-source
blockchain project. The project provides a few per-
missioned DLT platforms, designed for use in enter-
is the ﬁrst DLT platform to support
prises [133]. It
smart contracts authored in general-purpose programming
languages such as Java, Go, and Node.js. It
is also
permissioned, i.e., unlike with a public permissionless
network, the participants are known to each other. In
[81], the authors use HLF (v1.0.2) as their blockchain
platform, and in [22], an extended HLF architecture
that employs a modiﬁed blockchain structure, is used
to provide a privacy-preserving authentication scheme
against potential attacks such as vehicle impersonation
and broadcasting forged messages.

2) Ethereum: Ethereum is a blockchain platform that allows
its users to create smart contracts in Solidity, a Turing-
complete language. Smart contract owned accounts func-
tion similar to user accounts, except that they contain
executable bytecode, which governs the behaviour of
the smart contract account. When a user transacts with
the smart contract-owned account,
the stored code is
executed, and the Ethereum Virtual Machine records the
change. It has been used in many frameworks, for exam-
ple, in [129], the authors use an Ethereum blockchain in
their adaptive trafﬁc control mechanism, and in [96], an
Ethereum private chain is used for power-sharing between
EVs on a V2G network.

3) Monero: Monero is a cryptocurrency released in 2014
which primarily focuses on privacy and is an open-
source protocol based on CryptoNote. A concept called
obfuscated public ledger used in Monero ensures that
anyone can broadcast or send transactions, but no ob-
server from outside can ﬁnd the destination, source, and
amount [134], [135]. It
is used in Blockchain-Based
Anonymous Rewarding Scheme (BBARS) for V2G net-
works, proposed by Wang et al. in [70]. Vehicles can
sell stored energy back to the grid and make a proﬁt.
The BBARS system model involves a central aggregator

16

that authorizes and pays vehicles through an intermediate
local aggregator for supplying excess power to the grid,
but without either the payer or payee requiring each
others’ addresses or identities to complete the transaction.
Elliptic Curve Cryptography is used to ensure security for
all transactions.

4) Platform-agnostic: Many proposed research models only
utilize the essential features of blockchain, for instance,
the decentralized peer-to-peer sharing mechanism and
immutability. These, along with a few other properties,
are common to every blockchain - they are, in some
sense, properties without which software cannot be called
‘blockchain’ in the ﬁrst place. So it is entirely possible
to abstract away the details of the blockchain and design
a system that is ﬂexible enough to be used with any
blockchain platform. There have been models propos-
ing game theory-based security [136], malicious content
detection [109], trafﬁc signal management [25], energy
saving by distributed clustering [80], GPS accuracy en-
hancement [16], platooning [26], data sharing [114], and
authentication [21] that do not use any properties of
a blockchain that are tied to a particular platform or
framework, and are therefore equally applicable to all
blockchain-based vehicular networks.

B. Blockchain Type

There are primarily two types of blockchain networks -
permissioned and permissionless. Permissioned blockchains
reserve the right to validate and add blocks to a select few
nodes, while in permissionless blockchains, any node that joins
is also permitted (or expected) to validate and add blocks to
the blockchain. This is heavily application-dependent. For in-
stance, in the case of energy trading, one would want only the
charging stations that belong to a registered company to pro-
vide a platform for trading. Therefore, the ability to add trans-
actions must be restricted to nodes that are charging stations,
and not the vehicles themselves. A permissioned blockchain
would be appropriate for this. Permissioned blockchains also
have higher throughput, because a signiﬁcant portion of the
latency is due to the peer-to-peer interactions - if that
is
minimized, then the network can handle more transactions per
second. It must be noted that some aspect of decentralization
is sacriﬁced in a permissioned blockchain - there is a trade-
off that needs to be made between throughput and level
of decentralization. There are also some applications like
crowdsourcing and data sharing, that demand a permissionless
blockchain. Some representative research works out of the
surveyed set have been selected to illustrate these ideas in
more detail below.

1) Permissioned: Zheng et al. [23] proposed a blockchain
system for VANETs that provides conditional privacy -
here, a certifying authority is the only entity that may
validate blocks. This is an authentication system where
proof of legitimate identity is stored on the blockchain
- allowing any vehicle to add a block to it defeats
the purpose, and therefore this must be a permissioned
blockchain. BloCkEd is another proposed research work

that enables effective edge computing in vehicular net-
works - using the idea of migrating containers between
edge devices using blockchain, tasks from vehicles can
easily be ofﬂoaded to the edge computing devices and
results returned no matter what path the vehicle takes
[71]. This system necessarily requires only edge com-
puting devices to have the authority to validate blocks,
since vehicles need to be on the same network to interface
with the edge devices but cannot participate in migrating
the containers. Su et al. propose a framework for energy
sharing [14] in which only the charging piles are given the
authority to validate transactions. Apart from improving
throughput, this ensures that all transactions happen only
via the trusted smart grid operator.

2) Permissionless: This type of blockchain is not as pop-
ular, due to scalability issues. However, some crowd-
sensing applications [76]–[78] deploy a permissionless
blockchain because the transactions of the blockchain are
pieces of information that indicate something about the
condition of the road. The validating nodes must be the
peer nodes that also witness the same condition, not some
trusted authority in this case - like how a permissionless
blockchain defeats the purpose of authentication, in this
case, a permissioned blockchain defeats the purpose of
crowdsensing. Javaid et al. [98] propose a permissionless
blockchain for trust management - the problem of scala-
bility is managed by a dynamic proof-of-work consensus
where the difﬁculty threshold is constantly changed based
on the required security ﬁdelity, scale, and throughput.

C. Consensus Mechanisms

There are many different reasons for choosing one con-
sensus mechanism over the other. PoW is by far the most
common consensus algorithm, but it is inefﬁcient and wastes
energy - a more economical alternative is PoS. Neither of
these provides Byzantine Fault Tolerance, which is the quality
of being resistant to the famous Byzantine Generals Problem
vulnerability. What follows is an illustration of the different
types of research works classiﬁed based on the consensus
mechanism used.

1) Proof-of-Work (PoW): Zheng et al. propose a model for
pseudonymous message exchange among vehicles. The
consensus adopted in the blockchain composed of all
RSUs is PoW. This algorithm requires guessing a random
number by trial and error, which is time-consuming and
costly but is easy to verify. As long as the number of
malicious nodes does not exceed half of all the RSUs,
the transaction information cannot be modiﬁed, and the
longer the blockchain, the better will be its security [23].
Micro-Blockchain-Based Dynamic Intrusion Detection
(MBID) is a mechanism proposed by Liang et al. [148]
for intrusion detection. Micro-blockchains are nested into
a macro-blockchain, and together they provide strategies
for detecting intrusions into the vehicular network. The
main tasks of micro-blockchains are to store data and
intrusion samples as well as provide intrusion detection
strategies if they are available in the micro-blockchain.

TABLE VII: Categorisation based on consensus algorithms
used in vehicular network security papers.

17

Consensus
Proof of Work (PoW)

of

Activity

Byzantine
Tolerance

Practical
Fault
(PBFT)
Delegated Proof
Stake (DPoS)
Proof of Stake (PoS)
Proof
of
(PoA)
Proof of Reputation
(PoR)
KafKa
Ripple consensus
Attribute based con-
sensus
Proof of Online Dura-
tion
Delegated Byzantine
Fault
Tolerance
(DBFT)
Redundant Byzantine
Tolerance
Fault
(RBFT)
Zero Knowledge Proof
(ZKP)
Proof of Knowledge
(PoK)
Proof of Utility (PoU)
DPOSP (PBFT-DPoS
hybrid)
Proof of Elapsed Time
(PoET)
Proof of Event (PoE)
AlgoRand

Ref.
[15], [17], [18], [23], [54], [62],
[72], [74], [78], [83], [94], [98],
[106], [111], [130], [137], [138]
[21], [56], [60], [63], [72],
[75], [81], [91], [92], [97], [99],
[106], [139]

[16], [52], [56], [79], [114],

[140]
[59], [73], [111], [141], [142]
[61], [93], [96], [143]

[19], [62], [67]

[66], [68]
[21], [104]
[25]

[69]

[14]

[79]

[71]

[144]

[131]
[145]

[146]

[147]
[78]

Macro-blockchains store all the models and the collected
intrusion intelligence, and provide intrusion detection
strategies to vehicles when those strategies are not found
in the appropriate micro-blockchain. Network slicing is
used to deploy micro-blockchains in the same region.
PoW is used as the consensus algorithm for the macro-
blockchain.

2) Proof-of-Reputation (PoR): A blockchain architecture
that employs PoR is proposed for resource sharing in IoV
networks. The lightweight blockchain handles trust man-
agement and privacy preservation. A reputation value is
assigned to indicate the degree of trust of a vehicle using
which consensus is established. An RSU can publish a
block only if it has collected the highest reputation sum
for transactions [19]. Chai et al. [19] propose a blockchain

model for resource sharing that uses PoR to generate
blocks. Reputation is decided based on an accumulation
of historical records, with a saturating upper limit on
reputation to prevent any node from monopolizing the
blockchain. The node with the highest reputation creates
blocks of a ﬁxed number of transactions. Higher reputed
nodes are more likely to have the blocks they validate
accepted into the main blockchain, as well as pay a
smaller cost for purchasing computational resources.
3) Proof-of-Stake (PoS): Delegated proof of stake (DPoS)
is used for achieving network consensus in some works.
Each RSU in the network, based on its stake, selects
witnesses to participate in the blockchain system. The
top few witnesses (RSUs) with the highest vote count win
the veriﬁcation rights. The elected witnesses create new
blocks in sequence as assigned and get some rewards.
It accelerates the speed of block creation and transaction
veriﬁcation because of the reduction of veriﬁcation nodes
[16]. A coalition of a certain number of RSUs above
a threshold is required for vehicular authentication in a
consortium blockchain-based Vehicular Social Networks
(VSNs). If the stake is replaced by a rank of activity
(which indicates the RSU’s message relay participation
rate in the leader selection process), this modiﬁed PoS
is highly efﬁcient [64]. The authors in [114] propose an
enhanced DPoS consensus scheme with a two-stage secu-
rity solution for secure vehicle data sharing in blockchain-
based IoV. In the ﬁrst stage, miners are selected by voting
based on reputation using a subjective logic method.
In the second stage, standby miners are incentivized to
participate in block veriﬁcation.

4) Byzantine Fault Tolerance (BFT): Byzantine Fault
Tolerance is simply resistance to the Byzantine Generals
Problem, a situation where a certain number of peer nodes
may not be able to reach an agreement, and it is also
unclear to the honest nodes which ones are unable to
reach an agreement. Even if some of the nodes fail or
behave maliciously, the system must function regardless
of whether the other nodes know of those events or not.
In an energy market, malicious operators will heavily
threaten EVs ’ security and privacy. A contract-based
secure charging scheme for EVs with a permissioned
blockchain system is proposed to satisfy EVs’ individual
needs for energy sources while maximizing the operator’s
utility. Delegated Byzantine Fault Tolerance (DBFT) con-
sensus algorithm based on reputation efﬁciently achieves
consensus. DBFT provides f = (K −1)/3 fault tolerance
to a consensus system which comprises K consensus
nodes [14]. A scheme is proposed where vehicular public
key infrastructure (VPKI) is used with a permissioned
blockchain and a fragmented ledger to provide com-
prehensive forensic services for accident investigations.
A leader is selected randomly for every block created
from among the validator nodes (e.g., RSUs). The leader
proposes a block to the network, and the validators run
Byzantine protocols (e.g., PBFT) to reach a consensus
to mali-
on this block. These protocols are resilient
cious actions of the leader and the participants [149]. A

18

blockchain-based secure data sharing system is presented,
which consists of a parent chain and auxiliary chains. A
consensus mechanism, such as PBFT, is used to ensure
message consistency. Here, the announcement message is
signed by every vehicle that witnessed the event - using a
short-term secret key based on a multi-signature scheme.
At a particular threshold of signers, the announcement
message is deemed trustworthy [79].

5) Other mechanisms: A hybrid type of blockchain (Per-
miDAG) is developed that consists of a local Directed
Acyclic Graph (DAG) and permissioned blockchain. It is
made up of the local DAG and is also partition-tolerant,
which means the blockchain can run effectively even with
a partial network. Also by integrating different learning
parameters into the network can lead to the features of
learned models being further veriﬁed through a two-stage
veriﬁcation [52]. Attribute-based blockchains can be used
to improve trafﬁc management in the IoV. [25] proposed a
model that uses this concept. A node in the attribute-based
blockchain is distinguished by its anonymous identity
(pseudonym) and by a set of fuzzy identities (locations,
the direction of travel) - both of which are attributes.
Simple nodes may read and generate new messages while
consensus nodes cannot write/generate messages in a
blockchain directly. But it is the consensus nodes that
run the consensus algorithm to attain data consistency. To
improve the urban trafﬁc condition and reduce accidents,
a platoon-driving model is suggested by [26] for au-
tonomous vehicles. Vehicles travel in platoons, with more
experienced and credible vehicles serving as the platoon
heads. Credit is a collective conﬁdence measure accrued
over a while to resolve whether a vehicle is trustworthy
or not. In a platoon, the reputation value increases the
likelihood that the vehicle in question will become the
next platoon head. This ensures that the position of the
platoon head is not monopolized.

Fig. 6 presents a pie chart showing the usage of various

consensus mechanisms in the surveyed works.

Summary: This section discusses the categorisation of a
few works from the perspective of blockchain features they
provide. The ﬁrst categorisation was done based on blockchain
platforms like Ethereum, HLF, etc. Secondly, different ap-
proaches were grouped based on the type of blockchain, i.e.
permissioned and permissionless. Moreover, we categorise
blockchain-based frameworks used for IoV based on the
consensus mechanism employed by them.

VI. COMPILATION OF SIMULATION TOOLS USED IN
STATE-OF-THE-ART BIOV FRAMEWORKS

In this section, we present a compilation of popular simu-
lation tools used for simulating both blockchain and vehicular
networks.

A. Tools for Simulating Blockchain

MIRACL (Multiprecision Integer and Rational Arithmetic
Cryptographic Library) is a popular open-source C library
that is widely regarded as the gold standard for elliptic curve

19

estimation, and signal power consumption). Authors of [21]
use Veins to simulate the network aspect of their models. Other
publications using Veins can be found in [154]. Go is another
open-source programming language that is an efﬁcient choice
for networking, used in [23]. TraNS [155] is a popular open-
source platform that couples the SUMO simulator and NS2.
However, it has stopped being actively supported since 2008,
and iTETRIS [156] is the logical extension of TraNS, coupling
SUMO and NS3. Node.js and web3.js can also be used to
connect and interact with different nodes in the system. Mbed
TLS (previously PolarSSL) has been used by the authors of
[50] as a lightweight TLS implementation.

Summary: In this section, we discuss the simulation tools
for blockchain networks, like MIRACL, PBC, etc., and the
simulation tools used for the vehicular networks, like OM-
Net++, MiXiM, etc.

VII. ROLE OF IMPORTANT TECHNOLOGIES FREQUENTLY
USED IN BIOV FRAMEWORKS

In this section, we discuss how various state-of-the-art
technologies have been used in securing various vehicular
networks such as IoV and VANETs. A table summarizing the
role of these technologies in the surveyed works is presented
in Table VIII.

A. Cloud and Fog Computing

Blockchain based IoVs are systems that require enormous
amounts of computation and hardware resources, and tech-
nologies that manage the distribution of this load – like cloud
computing – will eventually play a central role.

Cloud computing is a notion that hardware and software
services can be purchased by those who need it from those who
have enough under-utilized infrastructure. Over the Internet,
a user may purchase the amount of processing or services
they require, and the task will be ofﬂoaded to a remote
computing unit, seemingly to a “cloud server”. This decou-
pling of hardware and software allows innovators to come up
with applications without having to worry about the required
hardware infrastructure. This technology is especially useful
for vehicles, where consumers have just as many resources
as they have the budget for. Fog computing is an extension
of cloud computing, where cloud services are brought closer
to the sensors and the embedded systems. In the context of
IoV, RSUs can serve as fog units or local gateways to the
cloud. Broadly, cloud computing technology can be used with
blockchain-based vehicular networks in two ways:

1) Vehicular clouds (also called Autonomous Vehicular
Clouds) [164], where the nodes are the service providers.
Vehicles with excess computational resources can take on
computational tasks of other vehicles.

2) VANETs that use cloud services, where the RSUs act
as gateways to the internet. By providing fog layers, this
technology can be made even more effective for vehicular
networks [165]–[167].

Fig. 6: Pie chart showing the usage of various consensus
mechanisms in the surveyed works.

cryptography (ECC). Blockchain uses several cryptographic
primitives, including hashes and asymmetric key encryption,
and can therefore be programmed with this library. The authors
in [70], [79] use this library for simulations. PBC (Pairing-
based Cryptography) is another library that simulated only
mathematical operations of pairing-based cryptosystems; that
is, public and private key system simulations without certifying
authorities or signatures. Many of these libraries work in
conjunction with the GNU Multiprecision Library (GMP) that
allows developers to perform operations on arbitrarily precise
numbers, which is useful for cryptography applications and
research. Ethereum based blockchain simulations can use So-
lidity, which is a Turing-complete (i.e. computationally univer-
sal) language that can be used to write smart contracts that can
carry out virtually any application. The authors in [80], [150],
[151] use MATLAB in their blockchain simulations. IBM’s
Hyperledger Fabric is an open-source blockchain infrastructure
that can be used to build blockchain applications in Java
and Go. The platform is used for simulating permissioned
platforms, with a conﬁgurable consensus. Hyperledger Fabric
has been used in [22] for simulation. Hyperledger Caliper is a
popular benchmarking tool, that measures throughput, latency,
and resource consumption for different blockchain solutions;
it can also be used with the Ethereum Platform. Besides these,
Python is also used extensively.

B. Tools for Simulating Vehicular Networks

The authors in [152] use SUMO and OMNeT++ libraries
to simulate the behaviour of vehicular networks in the IoV
for blockchain. SUMO is used to simulate trafﬁc, and OM-
NeT++ is used to simulate network behaviour. Veins [153]
is a simulation tool
that couples both these technologies,
along with the MiXiM framework that simulates physical
interference
layer properties (like radio wave propagation,

TABLE VIII: Role of other state-of-the-art technologies in blockchain based vehicular networks

20

Technology

Cloud Computing

Fog computing

Edge computing

Named Data
Networking (NDN)

Software Deﬁned
Networking (SDN)

Directed Acyclic
Graphs (DAG)

Cognitive Radio
Technology

AI - Deep Neural
networks (DNN)

AI - Deep
Reinforcement
Learning (DRL)

AI - Dueling Deep
Q-Learning
(DDQL) approach
AI - Federated
Learning

Differential Privacy

5G

UAVs

PUF
Wireless Link
Fingerprints

Role of other technology in the network
Cloud server was used as part of the blockchain center for creating, verifying and adding the blocks.
Used trusted cloud servers as part of their system architecture to enhance network operations
Some of the security managers are cloud based

Ref.
[63]
[21]
[83]
[104] Used a cloud application server to store and exchange some non-cryptographic information in the network
[59]
[75]

Used a cloud server to store the encrypted carpooling data
A distributed and large cloud system is used for storing the Personally Identiﬁable Information (PII) of the vehicles.
Proposed a pseudonym based privacy preserving scheme for maintaining location privacy speciﬁcally in fog
computing based IoV networks
Used fog computing to overcome drawbacks of a cloud-based centralized management and to provide local
computing capabilities with low latency
Proposed a route sharing service framework with privacy-preservation where fog nodes pre-process the data and provide
anonymous authentication.
Proposed a fog computing based V2V energy trading architecture in social hotspots.
Proposed a carpooling scheme using vehicular fog computing nodes in a blockchain network
that supports conditional privacy, destination matching of users, and auditability of data.
Fog computing avoids frequent handovers in the network.
Proposed a blockchain-based anonymous lightweight authentication mechanism for distributed
Vehicular Fog Services (VFS)
Proposed a fog computing based secure framework where RSUs for ofﬂoad tasks to nearby fog
vehicles on the basis of reputation scores which are stored in the blockchain
Used edge server for running DNN based prediction algorithms for evaluating the positioning error
Edge computing infrastructure offers extra computing and storage for vehicles in the network.
Developed a task ofﬂoading mechanism based on edge computing to increase the success probability of block creation.
Proposed a system model based on Dynamic Proxy Edge Computing mode in vehicular networks
where the vehicles with edge computing and communication capabilities are the proxy vehicles.
Incorporates Mobile Edge Computing (MEC) nodes for providing computing resources and to act as managers of local
P2P trading system.
Edge servers analyse transactions and contribute to partial block creation

[157]

[69]

[158]

[145]

[59]

[81]

[60]

[146]

[57]
[65]
[94]

[62]

[72]

[63]
[131] Vehicular edge computing network
[53]
[159] Amalgamation of blokchain and NDN helps in achieving integrity and accountability in the network.

NDN solves issues posed by IP-based networks

[18]

NDN facilitates content centric data sharing for IoV. Bottom layer nodes request for service via announcements
in the NDN paradigm
Framework is based on an area control plane, programmable by SDN mechanisms.
SDN guarantees that the control processes are adequately accomplished in the vehicular network
Used for efﬁcient data sharing in IoV and quality veriﬁcation based on reputation in IoV

[79]
[81]
[52]
[160] DAG data structure stores and validates transactions in the network
[161] Approach based on DAG improves the security and authenticity of the proposed energy management scheme
[54]
[162] Use Cognitive Radio technology to solve the problem of spectrum storage in vehicular systems.

DAG based blockchains have high throughput

[110]

Framework provides security to IoV during spectrum sensing and data transmission with the help of a
Cognitive Radio Network
Used DNN-based prediction algorithm for evaluating the positioning error
[57]
DNN algorithm used for accurate vehicle positioning
[16]
Used DRL for modelling the lane changing problem of autonomous vehicles.
[56]
Used an asynchronous federated learning scheme. DRL is used for selection of nodes.
[52]
[19]
Used a DRL based smart contract scheme for pricing based on supply-demand during the resource sharing process.
[131] DRL integrated into a permissioned blockchain for secure and intelligent content sharing in the vehicular network.

[79]

A novel DDQL with prioritized replay approach used to solve optimization problems in vehicular networks
(which is modelled as a Markov decision process).

Used DRL for modelling the lane changing problem of autonomous vehicles.

[56]
[144] A multilevel federated learning algorithm is used to satisfy the distributed pattern and privacy requirements of IoVs.
[163]

Integrated blockchain with differential privacy to alleviate privacy concerns in intelligent transportation systems.
Analyzes the SDN based blockchain network for effective operation of the VANET systems, especially in 5G and fog
computing paradigms.
UAV assisted aerial to ground framework providing secure and efﬁcient data transmission in areas affected by a
natural disaster.
PUFs provide a unique ﬁngerprint to identify each vehicle and build a trust management system.

[81]

[140]

[98]

[108] Used wireless ﬁnger prints for encryption.

B. Edge Computing

Edge computing is an extension of cloud computing that
brings cloud services closer to the edge, where the sensors
gather data. This is advantageous in terms of processing speed
and decentralization since data does not need to be transmitted
over long distances. With the large amounts of data being
generated in an IoV network, transmitting that quantity of data
over long distances, processing it, and returning the results
with low latency is also infeasible. Consensus algorithms that
are run on blockchains are also computationally heavy, and
solutions that leverage edge computing in their blockchain
architectures can ease the computational load of vehicles in
the IoV. Much of the processing work can be relegated to
the edge nodes or RSUs in the case of vehicular networks.
Mobile Edge Computing (MEC) architecture [168] has been
gaining some attention due to this. The robustness of the
blockchain network is also improved since RSUs can also be
miners. To ensure optimal quality-of-service (QoS), a suitable
trade-off between performance and privacy requirements must
be made. The authors of [157] propose a pseudonym-based
privacy-preserving scheme for maintaining location privacy
speciﬁcally in fog computing-based IoV networks. Route-
sharing is another important aspect of IoV networks - users
can upload their route information in real-time for a variety
of services, including platooning and trafﬁc forecasting. The
authors of [158] propose a privacy-preserving route sharing
service model where fog nodes pre-process the data and
provide anonymous authentication.

C. CCN/NDN/ICN

Content-Centric Networking (CCN), – also known as
Named Data Networking (NDN) or Information-Centric Net-
working (ICN) – is a data communication paradigm that places
more emphasis on the content rather than the connection
[169]. It replaces Internet Protocol’s end-to-end connection
model with a request-reply model [170]. Unlike TCP/IP, the
addresses of the nodes are not required for data exchange. This
approach leads to efﬁcient record broadcast as well as ledger
synchronization in blockchain networks. There is no concept
of a full node and a light node, which removes the security
vulnerability in which the light node is fully dependent on
the full node to retrieve and return data [171]. Simulations
have proven that this paradigm signiﬁcantly enhances network
performance [172]. Yu et al. [173] proposed an NDN routing
protocol called Bloom-ﬁlter routing, based on bloom ﬁlters
(which are probabilistic data structures that efﬁciently convey
one of two things about a queried element - either it may be
part of the set, or it is not). There is a lot of recent interest in
this technology since it is especially applicable for IoV. They
have been used in studies like [18], [53], [159] for achieving
high integrity and accountability in a vehicular network.

21

because of their complex nature in which the data and control
planes are coupled together. SDN is a programmable network
that reduces network complexity by decoupling the control and
data planes. It removes the control functionality from the nodes
and transforms them into a simple packet/data forwarding
node. This has many beneﬁts for a network as volatile as a
VANET. However, the decoupling of control and data planes
also expands the attack surface, and blockchain is a viable
solution to addressing that problem. Xue et al. [174] have
conducted an in-depth study of how blockchain may be used
to address existing problems with SDN networks. An external
entity called the SDN controller is responsible for controlling
the network affairs [81]. Few studies have used SDN along
with blockchain for making their frameworks more robust and
efﬁcient. For example, in [79], the authors propose a novel
blockchain-based distributed software-deﬁned VANET frame-
work (Block-SDV) based on a programmable area control
plane originated from SDN. Also, in [81], Gao et al. designed
a blockchain-based, SDN enabled IoV environment for fog
computing and 5G networks that used SDN to guarantee
that
the control processes are adequately accomplished in
the vehicular networks. Chamola et al. [175] propose a task
ofﬂoading framework for cloudlets using SDN to manage
resource sharing.

E. Directed Acyclic Graphs (DAGs)

A DAG is a graph that comprises variables (called nodes)
and arrows in between the nodes (called directed edges) [160].
They are arranged in such a way that it is impossible to begin
at a node, follow the directed edges in the direction of the
arrowhead and land up at the same node at which one started,
i.e., it is acyclic in nature [176]. It is discussed in [161]
that DAG-based blockchains such as Nano [177], Byteball
[178] and IOTA [179] are capable of processing transactions
in a parallel manner unlike the conventional sequential way
in chain based blockchains. This increases the throughput of
the blockchain as the chain-based blockchains can process
the blocks sequentially one at a time, whereas DAG-based
blockchains can process multiple blocks at the same time [54].
Many studies have proposed security frameworks that use both
blockchain and DAG. In [52], the authors develop a blockchain
architecture that consists of permissioned blockchain and local
DAG to enhance the security and reliability of their proposed
framework for secure data sharing in the IoV environment.
In [160], Hassija et al. used a DAG data structure to store
and validate transactions in their proposed framework for
V2V communication. Gong et al. [161] used a DAG-based
approach to improve the security and authenticity of their
proposed energy management scheme for smart hybrid micro-
grids. Yang et al. used a DAG-based blockchain to ensure high
throughput of their proposed framework for Vehicular Social
Networks (VSNs) [54].

D. Software Deﬁned Networking (SDN)

F. Cognitive Radio

SDN is a relatively recent technique that helps in efﬁcient
network management in communication networks. Traditional
data networks face many issues in extension and updates

A cognitive radio network (CRN) is an environment-aware
wireless communication system that operates with two primary
goals:

i. Ensuring very high reliable communication wherever and

whenever needed.

ii. Utilizing the available network spectrum efﬁciently.
It has been used by researchers to mainly implement
efﬁcient spectrum sharing and storage in their frameworks.
Blockchain is used to easily provide security and transparency
during the record sharing process within the network. Rathee et
al. use CRN in their proposed framework to provide security to
blockchain-enabled IoV networks during spectrum sensing and
information transmission [110]. In [162], Nadeem et al. use
cognitive radio technology to solve the problem of spectrum
storage in vehicular systems.

G. Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI)

AI

techniques have been used extensively in many
blockchain-based vehicular network schemes for achieving
various data and computation-intensive utilities. For example,
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have been used for evaluation
of positioning error in [57] and for accurate vehicle positioning
in [16]. Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) has been used
in many studies for tasks such as modelling lane changing
problem of autonomous vehicles [56], node selection [52],
matching supply and demand during resource sharing [19], and
for implementing intelligent and secure content sharing mech-
anisms [131]. Duelling Deep Q-Learning (DDQL) has been
used in [79] for solving optimization problems and federated
learning has been used in [56] for modelling lane changing
problems and in [144] for meeting privacy requirements of
the IoV network. In summary,
the primary use of AI in
blockchain-based systems is to (a) create more intelligent and
efﬁcient smart contracts, and (b) create more reliable data that
may be used by other members of the blockchain network.

H. Differential Privacy

In differential privacy, some noise is added to the data before
query evaluation [163]. The concept of differential privacy has
been used in various domains, like IoT data, as it ensures
individual privacy, and the addition/deletion of any single
record does not affect the ﬁnal output. The authors of [180]
provide a summary of several frameworks that use differential
privacy in vehicular networks. When the two concepts of
blockchain and differential privacy are integrated, security
concerns can be alleviated even in public query evaluation. The
authors of [163] provided technical information on integrating
differential privacy with blockchain for security concerns, and
further show how intelligent transportation systems can use
such a framework.

I. Others

Few of the frameworks use other emerging technologies for

their blockchain-based vehicular networks as follows.

i. UAVs: Su et al. proposed a UAV-assisted aerial to ground
vehicular framework for data transmission in disaster-hit
areas [140].

ii. Physical Unclonable Functions (PUFs): PUFs assign a
unique ID to an electronic device based on the process

22

variations present in it. This ID can be used for imple-
menting fast and secure authentication, and identiﬁcation
[181]. Javaid et al. used PUFs for establishing trust in
their proposed blockchain-based framework for vehicular
networks [98].

iii. Wireless Link Fingerprints: It has been used by Kamal
et al. [108] in which the channel characteristics of the
two vehicles which are communicating with each other
generates a unique link. If the variation in the received
power of the communicating vehicles is correlating, it
means no adversary has affected the communication link.
iv. 5G: 5G ensures very high-speed communication required
by vehicular networks. Gao et al. explore a combination
of blockchain and SDN for VANET systems in 5G and
fog computing paradigm [81].

Summary: This section discussed a few technologies that
have been used recently for securing vehicular networks. The
frameworks mentioned here use state-of-the-art technologies
like cloud computing, fog computing, edge computing, NDN,
SDN, DAG, DNN, DRL, DDQL, cognitive radio, federated
learning, differential privacy, 5G, etc. in IoV and VANET
networks for security reasons.

VIII. MAJOR CHALLENGES, LESSONS LEARNT AND
FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS

In this section, we discuss the major challenges faced
in implementing blockchain-based applications for securing
vehicular networks and the potential future research directions
to address them.

A. Scalability

Throughput, or the number of transactions validated per
second, is a quantitative measure of the scalability of the
blockchain system. Bitcoin has a throughput of 7 transac-
tions per second - for comparison, VISA has a transaction
throughput of 2, 000 transactions per second [182]. Generally,
lower throughputs can be improved at higher scales by suitable
modiﬁcations to the algorithm itself, such as in [98]. Vehicular
networks will generate a massive amount of data, and because
of the latency-critical environment, the blockchain will have
to scale up to a very high standard. Many of the existing
standards and protocols were developed for cryptocurrency
applications, which are not as time-sensitive. Performance can
be increased by choosing the appropriate consensus algorithms
and blockchain platforms. For instance, DPoS and DBFT
provide a signiﬁcant improvement in transaction throughput
compared to PoS and PBFT respectively. There has been
some research on speciﬁcally integrating IoV and blockchain
consensus. In [114],
the authors posit an enhanced DPoS
consensus for blockchain-based IoV applications. Hu et al.
[24] propose an IoV-speciﬁc byzantine consensus algorithm
for authentication. Consortium and private blockchains are also
much more efﬁcient than permissionless blockchains since the
number of validating nodes is fewer. In this case, there must be
a careful consideration of the trade-off between decentraliza-
tion and throughput, since consortium and private blockchains

are more centralized than permissionless blockchains. Another
issue related to scalability is the seamless integration of
multiple sensors and devices. As the IoV networks become
larger, different sensors and platforms will be used. Ensuring
they all work together seamlessly will be a challenge.

B. Privacy

When the vehicular nodes are used for edge computing,
sensitive information like travelling route, card information,
etc., are ofﬂoaded for various tasks [183]. To prevent unwanted
parties from accessing such information, the information can
be encrypted. However, cypher-text makes the analytics pro-
cess time-consuming. A speed-up is required in the privacy-
preserving blockchain framework for the querying process in
edge computing.

There is a requirement to ensure user privacy due to the
sensitive nature of the data while also allowing transparency
to comply with the legal requirements like the General Data
Protection Regulation (GDPR) [9]. Encryption and compli-
mentary access control techniques are required in a distributed
ledger to balance privacy and transparency.

C. Quantum Computing Attacks

Quantum computing is a ﬁeld of research that will have
wide applicability in the coming years [184]. Blockchain relies
heavily on the one-way property of its cryptographic hashing
techniques. With the advent of quantum computing,
these
techniques may not be as secure as they are currently. Quantum
computers offer a vastly different scale of computational
power; a few quantum computers may easily overcome the
computing power of an entire network of ordinary blockchain
nodes [185]. Khalifa et al. [186] illustrate how quantum
computers may attack proof-of-stake blockchains using both
Grover’s algorithm and Shor’s algorithm, and recommend
quantum resilient signature schemes to mitigate them. IoV
networks need to be made quantum-resistant, otherwise, they
are susceptible to 51% and byzantine attacks [187]. In an
attempt to attack the IoV network using quantum computers,
the aim is to affect a part of the network rather than just
in the
a single node. This might
blockchain network. Quantum attacks is an active area of
research, and with many other solutions being proposed [188],
[189], however, these techniques must be incorporated to make
commercially viable systems.

lead to a loss of trust

D. Prototyping and Simulation

Blockchain designed to be a decentralized system poses
a natural challenge for prototyping and simulation. Several
large-scale effects cannot be adequately modelled on a pro-
totype. Existing research works present their ﬁndings in the
form of small-scale model simulation details, many of which
use the best
they do not
technologies available, however,
accurately reﬂect several unforeseen challenges. For example,
it is very difﬁcult to accurately model the randomness that is
inherent in vehicular network topologies, even using stochastic
mechanisms. Therefore, the research community would be
well aided by the development of better simulation tools and
prototype tested frameworks [33].

23

E. Attacks on Blockchains

The unique nature of a blockchain system opens it up to
several attacks that are not of concern in conventional central-
ized systems - including, but not limited to 51% attacks, self-
ish mining, eclipse attacks, DNS attacks, and crypto-jacking
[190]. Although blockchain-enabled vehicular edge computing
provides beneﬁts like decentralization and transparency, it is
vulnerable to several attacks [183]. In the event of a signiﬁcant
number of members of the network being compromised, the
network can be hijacked and the transactions can be forged.
The attack occurs due to the lightweight consensus protocols
used in permissioned blockchain networks. Hence, a scalable
and resilient consensus protocol is required for the deployment
of different types of chains in the vehicular edge-computing
network.

IX. CONCLUSION

In this survey, we thoroughly analyzed several blockchain-
based security frameworks for vehicular networks and cate-
gorised them from three different perspectives, namely, ap-
plication perspective, security perspective, and blockchain
perspective. From the application perspective, we categorise
the frameworks based on different application scenarios such
as data trading/sharing, resource sharing, parking, trafﬁc man-
agement, etc. From the security perspective, we categorise the
frameworks based on the security attacks they protect against,
the network security requirements they meet, the authenti-
cation techniques they employ, and the security proofs they
use. From the blockchain perspective, we classify the different
frameworks based on the type of blockchain they use, the
type of blockchain platform they employ, and the consensus
algorithm used in their scheme. We also discussed various sim-
ulation tools/platforms which have been used for simulating
and testing these blockchain-based frameworks. Furthermore,
most of the blockchain-based security frameworks employ
other emerging technologies to meet requirements such as low
latency, low computation, data storage, etc. in their schemes
along with blockchain. Hence it is important to analyze these
frameworks and discuss the role of these other state-of-the-art
technologies in securing these networks. Lastly, based on the
survey, we list out the major challenges and future research
directions in this domain. This survey will act as a guide to
the researchers and professionals venturing into the research
and development of blockchain-based security solutions for
vehicular networks like IoV and VANETs.

REFERENCES

[1] P. K. Sahu, E. H.-K. Wu, J. Sahoo, and M. Gerla, “Bahg: Back-
bone-assisted hop greedy routing for vanet’s city environments,” IEEE
Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 14, no. 1, pp.
199–213, 09 2012.

[2] A.-S. K. Pathan, Security of self-organizing networks: MANET, WSN,

WMN, VANET. CRC press, 04 2016.

[3] M. A. Elsadig and Y. A. Fadlalla, “Vanets security issues and chal-
lenges: A survey,” Indian Journal of Science and Technology, vol. 9,
no. 28, pp. 1–8, 07 2016.

[4] A. Mehra, M. Mandal, P. Narang, and V. Chamola, “Reviewnet: A
fast and resource optimized network for enabling safe autonomous
driving in hazy weather conditions,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent
Transportation Systems, 08 2020.

[5] “Global Health Observatory (GHO) data,” https://www.who.int/gho/
road$ $safety/mortality/en/, 2020, [Online; accessed 14-March-2020].
[6] T. Alladi, V. Chamola, B. Sikdar, and K.-K. R. Choo, “Consumer
iot: Security vulnerability case studies and solutions,” IEEE Consumer
Electronics Magazine, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 17–25, 02 2020.

[7] T. Alladi, V. Chamola, and S. Zeadally, “Industrial control systems:
Cyberattack trends and countermeasures,” Computer Communications,
vol. 155, pp. 1–8, 04 2020.

[8] T. Alladi, S. Chakravarty, V. Chamola, and M. Guizani, “A lightweight
authentication and attestation scheme for in-transit vehicles in iov
scenario,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, 11 2020.
[9] G. Baldini, J. L. Hernandez-Ramos, G. Steri, R. Neisse, and I. N.
Fovino, “A review on the application of distributed ledgers in the
evolution of road transport,” IEEE Internet Computing, 09 2020.
[10] J. Bao, D. He, M. Luo, and K.-K. R. Choo, “A survey of blockchain

applications in the energy sector,” IEEE Systems Journal, 07 2020.

[11] J. Xie, H. Tang, T. Huang, F. R. Yu, R. Xie, J. Liu, and Y. Liu, “A survey
of blockchain technology applied to smart cities: Research issues and
challenges,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 21, no. 3,
pp. 2794–2830, 02 2019.

[12] M. B. Mollah, J. Zhao, D. Niyato, Y. L. Guan, C. Yuen, S. Sun,
K.-Y. Lam, and L. H. Koh, “Blockchain for the internet of vehicles
towards intelligent transportation systems: A survey,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2007.06022, 10 2020.

[13] T. A. Butt, R. Iqbal, K. Salah, M. Aloqaily, and Y. Jararweh, “Privacy
management
internet of vehicles: review, challenges and
blockchain based solutions,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 79 694–79 713,
06 2019.

in social

[14] Z. Su, Y. Wang, Q. Xu, M. Fei, Y.-C. Tian, and N. Zhang, “A secure
charging scheme for electric vehicles with smart communities in energy
blockchain,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 4601–
4613, 09 2018.

[15] Z. Zhou, B. Wang, Y. Guo, and Y. Zhang, “Blockchain and compu-
tational intelligence inspired incentive-compatible demand response in
internet of electric vehicles,” IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics
in Computational Intelligence, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 205–216, 05 2019.

[16] Y. Song, Y. Fu, F. R. Yu, and L. Zhou, “Blockchain-enabled internet
of vehicles with cooperative positioning: A deep neural network
approach,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 02 2020.

[17] K. Liu, W. Chen, Z. Zheng, Z. Li, and W. Liang, “A novel debt-credit
mechanism for blockchain-based data-trading in internet of vehicles,”
IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 9098–9111, 07 2019.
[18] C. Chen, J. Wu, H. Lin, W. Chen, and Z. Zheng, “A secure and efﬁcient
blockchain-based data trading approach for internet of vehicles,” IEEE
Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 68, no. 9, pp. 9110–9121,
07 2019.

[19] H. Chai, S. Leng, K. Zhang, and S. Mao, “Proof-of-reputation based-
consortium blockchain for trust resource sharing in internet of vehi-
cles,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 175 744–175 757, 12 2019.

[20] J. Fan, R. Li, and S. Li, “Research on task scheduling strategy:
Based on smart contract in vehicular cloud computing environment,” in
2018 1st IEEE International Conference on Hot Information-Centric
Networking (HotICN).

IEEE, 08 2018, pp. 248–249.

[21] X. Wang, P. Zeng, N. Patterson, F. Jiang, and R. Doss, “An improved
authentication scheme for internet of vehicles based on blockchain
technology,” IEEE access, vol. 7, pp. 45 061–45 072, 04 2019.
[22] Z. Lu, Q. Wang, G. Qu, H. Zhang, and Z. Liu, “A blockchain-based
privacy-preserving authentication scheme for vanets,” IEEE Transac-
tions on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems, vol. 27, no. 12,
pp. 2792–2801, 08 2019.

[23] D. Zheng, C. Jing, R. Guo, S. Gao, and L. Wang, “A traceable
blockchain-based access authentication system with privacy preserva-
tion in vanets,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 117 716–117 726, 08 2019.

[24] W. Hu, Y. Hu, W. Yao, and H. Li, “A blockchain-based byzantine
consensus algorithm for information authentication of the internet of
vehicles,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 139 703–139 711, 09 2019.
[25] L. Cheng, J. Liu, G. Xu, Z. Zhang, H. Wang, H.-N. Dai, Y. Wu, and
W. Wang, “Sctsc: A semicentralized trafﬁc signal control mode with
attribute-based blockchain in iovs,” IEEE Transactions on Computa-
tional Social Systems, vol. 6, no. 6, pp. 1373–1385, 04 2019.

[26] C. Chen, T. Xiao, T. Qiu, N. Lv, and Q. Pei, “Smart-contract-
based economical platooning in blockchain-enabled urban internet of
vehicles,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 16, no. 6,
pp. 4122–4133, 11 2019.

[27] M. M. Zanjireh and H. Larijani, “A survey on centralised and dis-
tributed clustering routing algorithms for wsns,” in 2015 IEEE 81st

24

Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC Spring).
1–6.

IEEE, 05 2015, pp.

[28] F. Yang, S. Wang, J. Li, Z. Liu, and Q. Sun, “An overview of internet of
vehicles,” China communications, vol. 11, no. 10, pp. 1–15, 11 2014.
[29] C. Olaverri-Monreal, P. Gomes, R. Fernandes, F. Vieira, and M. Fer-
reira, “The see-through system: A vanet-enabled assistant for overtak-
ing maneuvers,” in 2010 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium.
IEEE,
06 2010, pp. 123–128.

[30] J. Lin, S. Chen, Y. Shih, and S.-H. Chen, “A study on remote on-line
diagnostic system for vehicles by integrating the technology of obd,
gps, and 3g,” World Academy of Science, Engineering and Technology,
vol. 56, pp. 435–441, 08 2009.

[31] U. Lee, B. Zhou, M. Gerla, E. Magistretti, P. Bellavista, and A. Corradi,
“Mobeyes: smart mobs for urban monitoring with a vehicular sensor
network,” IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 13, no. 5, pp. 52–57,
11 2006.

[32] A. Tapscott and D. Tapscott, “How blockchain is changing ﬁnance,”

Harvard Business Review, vol. 1, no. 9, pp. 2–5, 03 2017.

[33] T. Alladi, V. Chamola, N. Sahu, and M. Guizani, “Applications of
blockchain in unmanned aerial vehicles: A review,” Vehicular Commu-
nications, vol. 23, p. 100249, 06 2020.

[34] T. M. Fern´andez-Caram´es, O. Blanco-Novoa, M. Su´arez-Albela, and
P. Fraga-Lamas, “A uav and blockchain-based system for industry 4.0
inventory and traceability applications,” in Multidisciplinary Digital
Publishing Institute Proceedings, vol. 4, no. 1, 2018, p. 26.

[35] A. Kapitonov, S. Lonshakov, A. Krupenkin, and I. Berman,
“Blockchain-based protocol of autonomous business activity for multi-
agent systems consisting of uavs,” in 2017 Workshop on Research,
Education and Development of Unmanned Aerial Systems (RED-UAS).
IEEE, 10 2017, pp. 84–89.

[36] K. Lei, Q. Zhang, J. Lou, B. Bai, and K. Xu, “Securing icn-based uav
ad hoc networks with blockchain,” IEEE Communications Magazine,
vol. 57, no. 6, pp. 26–32, 06 2019.

[37] A. Dorri, S. S. Kanhere, and R. Jurdak, “Towards an optimized
blockchain for iot,” in 2017 IEEE/ACM Second International Confer-
ence on Internet-of-Things Design and Implementation (IoTDI). IEEE,
04 2017, pp. 173–178.

[38] O. Novo, “Blockchain meets iot: An architecture for scalable access
management in iot,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 5, no. 2, pp.
1184–1195, 03 2018.

[39] A. Panarello, N. Tapas, G. Merlino, F. Longo, and A. Puliaﬁto,
“Blockchain and iot integration: A systematic survey,” Sensors, vol. 18,
no. 8, p. 2575, 08 2018.

[40] T. Alladi, V. Chamola, J. J. Rodrigues, and S. A. Kozlov, “Blockchain
in smart grids: A review on different use cases,” Sensors, vol. 19,
no. 22, p. 4862, 01 2019.

[41] K. Biswas and V. Muthukkumarasamy, “Securing smart cities using
blockchain technology,” in 2016 IEEE 18th international conference
on high performance computing and communications; IEEE 14th inter-
national conference on smart city; IEEE 2nd international conference
on data science and systems (HPCC/SmartCity/DSS).
IEEE, 12 2016,
pp. 1392–1393.

[42] J. Sun, J. Yan, and K. Z. Zhang, “Blockchain-based sharing services:
What blockchain technology can contribute to smart cities,” Financial
Innovation, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 1–9, 12 2016.

[43] Y. Tribis, A. El Bouchti, and H. Bouayad, “Supply chain management
based on blockchain: A systematic mapping study,” in MATEC Web of
Conferences, vol. 200. EDP Sciences, 2018, p. 00020.

[44] B. Leiding, P. Memarmoshreﬁ, and D. Hogrefe, “Self-managed and
blockchain-based vehicular ad-hoc networks,” in Proceedings of the
2016 ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous
Computing: Adjunct, 09 2016, pp. 137–140.

[45] Z. Lu, Q. Wang, G. Qu, and Z. Liu, “Bars: a blockchain-based
anonymous reputation system for trust management in vanets,” in 2018
17th IEEE International Conference On Trust, Security And Privacy In
Computing And Communications/12th IEEE International Conference
On Big Data Science And Engineering (TrustCom/BigDataSE).
IEEE,
08 2018, pp. 98–103.

[46] S. Nakamoto, “Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system,”

Manubot, Tech. Rep., 2019.

[47] M. Pilkington, “Blockchain technology: principles and applications,”
Edward Elgar

in Research handbook on digital transformations.
Publishing, 09 2016.

[48] D. Johnson, A. Menezes, and S. Vanstone, “The elliptic curve digi-
tal signature algorithm (ecdsa),” International journal of information
security, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 36–63, 08 2001.

[49] N. Szabo. (1997) The idea of smart contracts. [Online]. Available:

https://www.fon.hum.uva.nl/rob/Courses/InformationInSpeech/
CDROM/Literature/LOTwinterschool2006/szabo.best.vwh.net/smart
contracts idea.html

[50] B. Chen, D. He, N. Kumar, H. Wang, and K.-K. R. Choo, “A
blockchain-based proxy re-encryption with equality test for vehicular
communication systems,” IEEE Transactions on Network Science and
Engineering, 06 2020.

[51] B. Chen, L. Wu, H. Wang, L. Zhou, and D. He, “A blockchain-based
searchable public-key encryption with forward and backward privacy
for cloud-assisted vehicular social networks,” IEEE Transactions on
Vehicular Technology, 12 2019.

[52] Y. Lu, X. Huang, K. Zhang, S. Maharjan, and Y. Zhang, “Blockchain
empowered asynchronous federated learning for secure data sharing
in internet of vehicles,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology,
vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 4298–4311, 02 2020.

[53] F. Ahmad, C. A. Kerrache, F. Kurugollu, and R. Hussain, “Realization
of blockchain in named data networking-based internet-of-vehicles,” IT
Professional, vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 41–47, 07 2019.

[54] W. Yang, X. Dai, J. Xiao, and H. Jin, “Ldv: A lightweight dag-
based blockchain for vehicular social networks,” IEEE Transactions
on Vehicular Technology, vol. 69, no. 6, pp. 5749–5759, 01 2020.
[55] M. Baza, N. Lasla, M. Mahmoud, G. Srivastava, and M. Abdallah,
“B-ride: Ride sharing with privacy-preservation, trust and fair payment
atop public blockchain,” IEEE Transactions on Network Science and
Engineering, 12 2019.

[56] Y. Fu, C. Li, F. R. Yu, T. H. Luan, and Y. Zhang, “An autonomous lane
changing system with knowledge accumulation and transfer assisted by
vehicular blockchain,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 05 2020.
[57] C. Li, Y. Fu, F. R. Yu, T. H. Luan, and Y. Zhang, “Vehicle position
correction: A vehicular blockchain networks-based gps error sharing
framework,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems,
01 2020.

[58] C. Zhang, L. Zhu, C. Xu, C. Zhang, K. Sharif, H. Wu, and H. West-
ermann, “Bsfp: Blockchain-enabled smart parking with fairness, re-
liability and privacy protection,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular
Technology, 04 2020.

[59] M. Li, L. Zhu, and X. Lin, “Efﬁcient and privacy-preserving carpooling
using blockchain-assisted vehicular fog computing,” IEEE Internet of
Things Journal, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 4573–4584, 08 2018.

[60] Y. Yao, X. Chang, J. Miˇsi´c, V. B. Miˇsi´c, and L. Li, “Bla: Blockchain-
assisted lightweight anonymous authentication for distributed vehicular
fog services,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 3775–
3784, 01 2019.

[61] C. Lin, D. He, X. Huang, N. Kumar, and K.-K. R. Choo, “Bcppa: A
blockchain-based conditional privacy-preserving authentication proto-
col for vehicular ad hoc networks,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent
Transportation Systems, 06 2020.

[62] H. Liu, P. Zhang, G. Pu, T. Yang, S. Maharjan, and Y. Zhang,
“Blockchain empowered cooperative authentication with data trace-
ability in vehicular edge computing,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular
Technology, vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 4221–4232, 01 2020.

[63] A. Vangala, B. Bera, S. Saha, A. K. Das, N. Kumar, and Y. H. Park,
“Blockchain-enabled certiﬁcate-based authentication for vehicle acci-
dent detection and notiﬁcation in intelligent transportation systems,”
IEEE Sensors Journal, 07 2020.

[64] H. Shen, J. Zhou, Z. Cao, X. Dong, and K.-K. R. Choo, “Blockchain-
based lightweight certiﬁcate authority for efﬁcient privacy-preserving
location-based service in vehicular social networks,” IEEE Internet of
Things Journal, 02 2020.

[65] H. Tan and I. Chung, “Secure authentication and key management with
blockchain in vanets,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 2482–2498, 12 2019.
[66] Y. Li and B. Hu, “An iterative two-layer optimization charging and
discharging trading scheme for electric vehicle using consortium
blockchain,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, 12 2019.

[67] Y. Wang, Z. Su, and N. Zhang, “Bsis: Blockchain-based secure
incentive scheme for energy delivery in vehicular energy network,”
IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 3620–
3631, 04 2019.

[68] Y. Li and B. Hu, “A consortium blockchain-enabled secure and privacy-
preserving optimized charging and discharging trading scheme for
electric vehicles,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, 04
2020.

[69] H. Li, D. Han, and M. Tang, “A privacy-preserving charging scheme for
electric vehicles using blockchain and fog computing,” IEEE Systems
Journal, 07 2020.

25

[70] H. Wang, Q. Wang, D. He, Q. Li, and Z. Liu, “Bbars: Blockchain-
based anonymous rewarding scheme for v2g networks,” IEEE Internet
of Things Journal, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 3676–3687, 01 2019.

[71] G. Singh, A. Singh, M. Singh, S. Sharma, N. Kumar, and K.-K. R.
Choo, “Blocked: Blockchain-based secure data processing framework
in edge envisioned v2x environment,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular
Technology, 02 2020.

[72] X. Lin, J. Wu, S. Mumtaz, S. Garg, J. Li, and M. Guizani, “Blockchain-
based on-demand computing resource trading in iov-assisted smart
city,” IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computing, 02 2020.
[73] S. Wang, D. Ye, X. Huang, R. Yu, Y. Wang, and Y. Zhang, “Consortium
blockchain for secure resource sharing in vehicular edge computing: A
contract-based approach,” IEEE Transactions on Network Science and
Engineering, 06 2020.

[74] X. Huang, D. Ye, R. Yu, and L. Shu, “Securing parked vehicle assisted
fog computing with blockchain and optimal smart contract design,”
IEEE/CAA Journal of Automatica Sinica, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 426–441,
02 2020.

[75] Y. Yao, X. Chang, J. Miˇsi´c, and V. B. Miˇsi´c, “Lightweight and privacy-
preserving id-as-a-service provisioning in vehicular cloud computing,”
IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 69, no. 2, pp. 2185–
2194, 12 2019.

[76] J. Wang, X. Feng, T. Xu, H. Ning, and T. Qiu, “Blockchain based
model for nondeterministic crowdsensing strategy with vehicular team-
cooperation,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 06 2020.

[77] C. Lai, M. Zhang, J. Cao, and D. Zheng, “Spir: A secure and privacy-
preserving incentive scheme for reliable real-time map updates,” IEEE
Internet of Things Journal, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 416–428, 11 2019.
[78] J. Zhang, F. Yang, Z. Ma, Z. Wang, X. Liu, and J. Ma, “A decentral-
ized location privacy-preserving spatial crowdsourcing for internet of
vehicles,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 08
2020.

[79] L. Zhang, M. Luo, J. Li, M. H. Au, K.-K. R. Choo, T. Chen, and
S. Tian, “Blockchain based secure data sharing system for internet of
vehicles: A position paper,” Vehicular Communications, vol. 16, pp.
85–93, 04 2019.

[80] V. Sharma, “An energy-efﬁcient transaction model for the blockchain-
enabled internet of vehicles (iov),” IEEE Communications Letters,
vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 246–249, 11 2018.

[81] J. Gao, K. O.-B. O. Agyekum, E. B. Sifah, K. N. Acheampong, Q. Xia,
X. Du, M. Guizani, and H. Xia, “A blockchain-sdn-enabled internet
of vehicles environment for fog computing and 5g networks,” IEEE
Internet of Things Journal, vol. 7, no. 5, pp. 4278–4291, 11 2019.
[82] F. Jameel, M. A. Javed, S. Zeadally, and R. J¨antti, “Efﬁcient mining
cluster selection for blockchain-based cellular v2x communications,”
IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 07 2020.

[83] A. Lei, H. Cruickshank, Y. Cao, P. Asuquo, C. P. A. Ogah, and Z. Sun,
“Blockchain-based dynamic key management for heterogeneous intel-
ligent transportation systems,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 4,
no. 6, pp. 1832–1843, 08 2017.

[84] V. Hassija, V. Gupta, S. Garg, and V. Chamola, “Trafﬁc jam probability
estimation based on blockchain and deep neural networks,” IEEE
Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 06 2020.

[85] V. Chamola, A. Sancheti, S. Chakravarty, N. Kumar, and M. Guizani,
“An iot and edge computing based framework for charge scheduling
and ev selection in v2g systems,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular
Technology, vol. 69, no. 10, pp. 10 569–10 580, 07 2020.

[86] V. Hassija, V. Saxena, V. Chamola, and F. R. Yu, “A parking slot
allocation framework based on virtual voting and adaptive pricing
algorithm,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 69, no. 6,
pp. 5945–5957, 03 2020.

[87] A. Miglani, N. Kumar, V. Chamola, and S. Zeadally, “Blockchain for
internet of energy management: Review, solutions, and challenges,”
Computer Communications, vol. 151, pp. 395–418, 02 2020.

[88] V. Hassija, V. Chamola, S. Garg, D. N. G. Krishna, G. Kaddoum, and
D. N. K. Jayakody, “A blockchain-based framework for lightweight
data sharing and energy trading in v2g network,” IEEE Transactions
on Vehicular Technology, vol. 69, no. 6, pp. 5799–5812, 01 2020.
[89] L. Shi, Y. Li, T. Liu, J. Liu, B. Shan, and H. Chen, “Dynamic distributed
honeypot based on blockchain,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 72 234–
72 246, 05 2019.

[90] J. Kang, R. Yu, X. Huang, S. Maharjan, Y. Zhang, and E. Hossain, “En-
abling localized peer-to-peer electricity trading among plug-in hybrid
electric vehicles using consortium blockchains,” IEEE Transactions on
Industrial Informatics, vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 3154–3164, 05 2017.

[91] A. Sheikh, V. Kamuni, A. Urooj, S. Wagh, N. Singh, and D. Patel,
“Secured energy trading using byzantine-based blockchain consensus,”
IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 8554–8571, 12 2019.

[92] X. Zhang and X. Chen, “Data security sharing and storage based on a
consortium blockchain in a vehicular ad-hoc network,” IEEE Access,
vol. 7, pp. 58 241–58 254, 01 2019.

[93] M. Li, J. Weng, A. Yang, J.-N. Liu, and X. Lin, “Toward blockchain-
based fair and anonymous ad dissemination in vehicular networks,”
IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 68, no. 11, pp.
11 248–11 259, 09 2019.

[94] Z. Zhou, B. Wang, M. Dong, and K. Ota, “Secure and efﬁcient
vehicle-to-grid energy trading in cyber physical systems: Integration
of blockchain and edge computing,” IEEE Transactions on Systems,
Man, and Cybernetics: Systems, vol. 50, no. 1, pp. 43–57, 05 2019.

[95] X. Huang, C. Xu, P. Wang, and H. Liu, “Lnsc: A security model for
electric vehicle and charging pile management based on blockchain
ecosystem,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 13 565–13 574, 03 2018.
[96] H. Liu, Y. Zhang, S. Zheng, and Y. Li, “Electric vehicle power trading
mechanism based on blockchain and smart contract in v2g network,”
IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 160 546–160 558, 11 2019.

[97] W. Chen, Y. Chen, X. Chen, and Z. Zheng, “Toward secure data sharing
for the iov: a quality-driven incentive mechanism with on-chain and
off-chain guarantees,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 7, no. 3,
pp. 1625–1640, 10 2019.

[98] U. Javaid, M. N. Aman, and B. Sikdar, “A scalable protocol for
driving trust management in internet of vehicles with blockchain,” IEEE
Internet of Things Journal, 06 2020.

[99] Q. Feng, D. He, S. Zeadally, and K. Liang, “Bpas: Blockchain-
assisted privacy-preserving authentication system for vehicular ad hoc
networks,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 16, no. 6,
pp. 4146–4155, 10 2019.

[100] M. A. Ferrag and L. Maglaras, “Deepcoin: A novel deep learning and
blockchain-based energy exchange framework for smart grids,” IEEE
Transactions on Engineering Management, vol. 67, no. 4, pp. 1285–
1297, 07 2019.

[101] S. S. Manvi and S. Tangade, “A survey on authentication schemes in
vanets for secured communication,” Vehicular Communications, vol. 9,
pp. 19–30, 07 2017.

[102] M. Raya and J.-P. Hubaux, “The security of vehicular ad hoc networks,”
in Proceedings of the 3rd ACM workshop on Security of ad hoc and
sensor networks, 11 2005, pp. 11–21.

[103] ——, “Securing vehicular ad hoc networks,” Journal of computer

security, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 39–68, 01 2007.

[104] L. Li, J. Liu, L. Cheng, S. Qiu, W. Wang, X. Zhang, and Z. Zhang,
“Creditcoin: A privacy-preserving blockchain-based incentive an-
nouncement network for communications of smart vehicles,” IEEE
Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 19, no. 7, pp.
2204–2220, 01 2018.

[105] K. Zhang and H.-A. Jacobsen, “Towards dependable, scalable, and
pervasive distributed ledgers with blockchains.” in ICDCS, 2018, pp.
1337–1346.

[106] X. Liu, H. Huang, F. Xiao, and Z. Ma, “A blockchain-based trust man-
agement with conditional privacy-preserving announcement scheme for
vanets,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 12 2019.

[107] A. K. Sutrala, P. Bagga, A. K. Das, N. Kumar, J. J. Rodrigues,
and P. Lorenz, “On the design of conditional privacy preserving
batch veriﬁcation-based authentication scheme for internet of vehicles
deployment,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 69,
no. 5, pp. 5535–5548, 03 2020.

[108] M. Kamal, G. Srivastava, and M. Tariq, “Blockchain-based lightweight
and secured v2v communication in the internet of vehicles,” IEEE
Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 06 2020.
[109] F. Ahmad, F. Kurugollu, A. Adnane, R. Hussain, and F. Hussain,
“Marine: Man-in-the-middle attack resistant trust model in connected
vehicles,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 01 2020.

[110] G. Rathee, F. Ahmad, F. Kurugollu, M. A. Azad, R. Iqbal, and M. Im-
ran, “Crt-biov: A cognitive radio technique for blockchain-enabled
internet of vehicles,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation
Systems, 07 2020.

[111] Z. Yang, K. Yang, L. Lei, K. Zheng, and V. C. Leung, “Blockchain-
based decentralized trust management in vehicular networks,” IEEE
Internet of Things Journal, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 1495–1505, 05 2018.

[112] R. Mishra, A. Singh, and R. Kumar, “Vanet security: Issues, challenges
and solutions,” in 2016 International Conference on Electrical, Elec-
tronics, and Optimization Techniques (ICEEOT).
IEEE, 03 2016, pp.
1050–1055.

26

[113] F. Ahmad, A. Adnane, V. N. Franqueira, F. Kurugollu, and L. Liu,
“Man-in-the-middle attacks in vehicular ad-hoc networks: evaluating
the impact of attackers’ strategies,” Sensors, vol. 18, no. 11, p. 4040,
11 2018.

[114] J. Kang, Z. Xiong, D. Niyato, D. Ye, D. I. Kim, and J. Zhao, “Toward
secure blockchain-enabled internet of vehicles: Optimizing consensus
management using reputation and contract theory,” IEEE Transactions
on Vehicular Technology, vol. 68, no. 3, pp. 2906–2920, 01 2019.

[115] J. R. Douceur, “The sybil attack,” in International workshop on peer-

to-peer systems. Springer, 03 2002, pp. 251–260.

[116] G. Carl, G. Kesidis, R. R. Brooks, and S. Rai, “Denial-of-service attack-
detection techniques,” IEEE Internet computing, vol. 10, no. 1, pp.
82–89, 01 2006.

[117] A. Chonka, Y. Xiang, W. Zhou, and A. Bonti, “Cloud security defence
to protect cloud computing against http-dos and xml-dos attacks,”
Journal of Network and Computer Applications, vol. 34, no. 4, pp.
1097–1107, 07 2011.

[118] B. Gupta and O. P. Badve, “Taxonomy of dos and ddos attacks
and desirable defense mechanism in a cloud computing environment,”
Neural Computing and Applications, vol. 28, no. 12, pp. 3655–3682,
12 2017.

[119] J. Li, H. Lu, and M. Guizani, “Acpn: A novel authentication framework
with conditional privacy-preservation and non-repudiation for vanets,”
IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems, vol. 26, no. 4,
pp. 938–948, 02 2014.

[120] L. Bighash, K. S. Alexander, C. S. Hagen, and A. B. Hollingshead, “A
model of social eavesdropping in communication networks,” Interna-
tional Journal of Communication, vol. 14, p. 23, 06 2020.

[121] M. Z. A. Bhuiyan and J. Wu, “Collusion attack detection in net-
worked systems,” in 2016 IEEE 14th Intl Conf on Dependable,
Autonomic and Secure Computing, 14th Intl Conf on Pervasive
Intelligence and Computing, 2nd Intl Conf on Big Data Intelli-
gence and Computing and Cyber Science and Technology Congress
(DASC/PiCom/DataCom/CyberSciTech). IEEE, 08 2016, pp. 286–293.
[122] G. Bleumer, Forgery. Boston, MA: Springer US, 2005, pp. 237–238.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/0-387-23483-7 172
[123] T. Alladi, V. Chamola et al., “Harci: A two-way authentication protocol
for three entity healthcare iot networks,” IEEE Journal on Selected
Areas in Communications, 09 2020.

[124] D. Welch and S. Lathrop, “Wireless security threat taxonomy,” in
IEEE Systems, Man and Cybernetics SocietyInformation Assurance
Workshop, 2003.

IEEE, 06 2003, pp. 76–83.
[125] Z. Lu, G. Qu, and Z. Liu, “A survey on recent advances in vehicular
network security, trust, and privacy,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent
Transportation Systems, vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 760–776, 04 2018.
[126] R. Falk and S. Fries, “Method for certiﬁcate-based authentication,”

Aug. 30 2016, uS Patent 9,432,198.

[127] J. Camenisch, S. Hohenberger, and M. Ø. Pedersen, “Batch veriﬁcation
of short signatures,” in Annual International Conference on the Theory
and Applications of Cryptographic Techniques.
Springer, 05 2007,
pp. 246–263.

[128] P. P. Lee, J. C. Lui, and D. K. Yau, “Distributed collaborative key
agreement and authentication protocols for dynamic peer groups,”
IEEE/ACM Transactions On Networking, vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 263–276,
04 2006.

[129] X. Zhang and D. Wang, “Adaptive trafﬁc signal control mechanism
for intelligent transportation based on a consortium blockchain,” IEEE
Access, vol. 7, pp. 97 281–97 295, 07 2019.

[130] Z. Lu, W. Liu, Q. Wang, G. Qu, and Z. Liu, “A privacy-preserving
trust model based on blockchain for vanets,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp.
45 655–45 664, 08 2018.

[131] Y. Dai, D. Xu, K. Zhang, S. Maharjan, and Y. Zhang, “Deep rein-
forcement learning and permissioned blockchain for content caching
in vehicular edge computing and networks,” IEEE Transactions on
Vehicular Technology, vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 4312–4324, 02 2020.
[132] L. Wang, X. Lin, E. Zima, and C. Ma, “Towards airbnb-like privacy-
enhanced private parking spot sharing based on blockchain,” IEEE
Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 69, no. 3, pp. 2411–2423,
01 2020.

[133] Hyperledger,
(white
Available:
Hyperledger Arch WG Paper 1 Consensus.pdf

i
architecture,
paper),”
[Online].
Rep.,
https://www.hyperledger.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/08/

“Hyperledger
Tech.

volume

2021.

[134] N. Van Saberhagen, “Cryptonote v 2.0,” 2013.
[135] A. Mern,
ﬂing

bitcoin
blow your

cryptocurrencies

“Missed

the
to

boom?

ﬁve more

baf-
on,” URL

savings

27

https://www.theguardian.com/technology/shortcuts/2017/dec/11/missed-
bitcoin-boom-ﬁve-more-bafﬂing-cryptocurrencies-to-blow-your-
savings-on, 2016.

[136] S.-K. Kim, “Enhanced iov security network by using blockchain
governance game,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.11340, 01 2019.
[137] R. Shrestha and S. Y. Nam, “Regional blockchain for vehicular
networks to prevent 51% attacks,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 95 021–
95 033, 07 2019.

[138] H. Liao, Y. Mu, Z. Zhou, M. Sun, Z. Wang, and C. Pan, “Blockchain
and learning-based secure and intelligent task ofﬂoading for vehicu-
lar fog computing,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation
Systems, 07 2020.

[139] B. Luo, X. Li, J. Weng, J. Guo, and J. Ma, “Blockchain enabled trust-
based location privacy protection scheme in vanet,” IEEE Transactions
on Vehicular Technology, 12 2019.

[140] Z. Su, Y. Wang, Q. Xu, and N. Zhang, “Lvbs: Lightweight vehicular
blockchain for secure data sharing in disaster rescue,” IEEE Transac-
tions on Dependable and Secure Computing, 03 2020.

[141] X. Deng and T. Gao, “Electronic payment schemes based on blockchain
in vanets,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 38 296–38 303, 02 2020.
[142] J. Kang, R. Yu, X. Huang, M. Wu, S. Maharjan, S. Xie, and Y. Zhang,
“Blockchain for secure and efﬁcient data sharing in vehicular edge
computing and networks,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 6,
no. 3, pp. 4660–4670, 10 2018.

[143] S. Xia, F. Lin, Z. Chen, C. Tang, Y. Ma, and X. Yu, “A bayesian game
based vehicle-to-vehicle electricity trading scheme for blockchain-
enabled internet of vehicles,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Tech-
nology, vol. 69, no. 7, pp. 6856–6868, 04 2020.

[144] H. Chai, S. Leng, Y. Chen, and K. Zhang, “A hierarchical blockchain-
enabled federated learning algorithm for knowledge sharing in internet
of vehicles,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems,
06 2020.

[145] G. Sun, M. Dai, F. Zhang, H. Yu, X. Du, and M. Guizani, “Blockchain
enhanced high-conﬁdence energy sharing in internet of electric vehi-
cles,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 05 2020.

[146] S. Iqbal, A. W. Malik, A. U. Rahman, and R. M. Noor, “Blockchain-
based reputation management for task ofﬂoading in micro-level vehic-
ular fog network,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 52 968–52 980, 03 2020.
[147] Y.-T. Yang, L.-D. Chou, C.-W. Tseng, F.-H. Tseng, and C.-C. Liu,
“Blockchain-based trafﬁc event validation and trust veriﬁcation for
vanets,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 30 868–30 877, 03 2019.

[148] H. Liang, J. Wu, S. Mumtaz, J. Li, X. Lin, and M. Wen, “Mbid: Micro-
blockchain-based geographical dynamic intrusion detection for v2x,”
IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 57, no. 10, pp. 77–83, 10 2019.
[149] M. Cebe, E. Erdin, K. Akkaya, H. Aksu, and S. Uluagac,
“Block4forensic: An integrated lightweight blockchain framework for
forensics applications of connected vehicles,” IEEE Communications
Magazine, vol. 56, no. 10, pp. 50–57, 10 2018.

[150] T. Jiang, H. Fang, and H. Wang, “Blockchain-based internet of vehi-
cles: distributed network architecture and performance analysis,” IEEE
Internet of Things Journal, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 4640–4649, 10 2018.

[151] B. Yin, Y. Wu, T. Hu, J. Dong, and Z. Jiang, “An efﬁcient collaboration
and incentive mechanism for internet-of-vehicles (iovs) with secured
information exchange based on blockchains,” IEEE Internet of Things
Journal, 10 2019.

[152] M. Labrador and W. Hou, “Implementing blockchain technology in
the internet of vehicle (iov),” in 2019 International Conference on
Intelligent Computing and its Emerging Applications (ICEA).
IEEE,
pp. 5–10.

[153] C. Sommer, R. German, and F. Dressler, “Bidirectionally coupled
network and road trafﬁc simulation for improved ivc analysis,” IEEE
Transactions on Mobile Computing (TMC), vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 3–15,
01 2011.

[154] M. J. Haidari and Z. Yetgin, “Veins based studies for vehicular ad
hoc networks,” in 2019 International Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Data
Processing Symposium (IDAP).

IEEE, 09 2019, pp. 1–7.

[155] M. Piorkowski, M. Raya, A. L. Lugo, P. Papadimitratos, M. Gross-
glauser, and J.-P. Hubaux, “Trans: realistic joint trafﬁc and network
simulator for vanets,” ACM SIGMOBILE mobile computing and com-
munications review, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 31–33, 01 2008.

[156] V. Kumar, L. Lin, D. Krajzewicz, F. Hrizi, O. Martinez, J. Gozalvez,
and R. Bauza, “itetris: Adaptation of its technologies for large scale
integrated simulation,” in 2010 IEEE 71st Vehicular Technology Con-
ference.

IEEE, 05 2010, pp. 1–5.

[157] J. Kang, R. Yu, X. Huang, and Y. Zhang, “Privacy-preserved
pseudonym scheme for fog computing supported internet of vehicles,”

IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 19, no. 8,
pp. 2627–2637, 11 2017.

[158] M. Li, L. Zhu, Z. Zhang, X. Du, and M. Guizani, “Pros: A privacy-
preserving route-sharing service via vehicular fog computing,” IEEE
Access, vol. 6, pp. 66 188–66 197, 10 2018.

[159] D. B. Rawat, R. Doku, A. Adebayo, C. Bajracharya, and C. Kamhoua,
“Blockchain enabled named data networking for secure vehicle-to-
everything communications,” IEEE Network, 03 2020.

[160] V. Hassija, V. Chamola, G. Han, J. J. Rodrigues, and M. Guizani,
“Dagiov: A framework for vehicle to vehicle communication using di-
rected acyclic graph and game theory,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular
Technology, vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 4182–4191, 01 2020.

[161] X. Gong, F. Dong, M. A. Mohamed, O. M. Abdalla, and Z. M. Ali, “A
secured energy management architecture for smart hybrid microgrids
considering pem-fuel cell and electric vehicles,” IEEE Access, vol. 8,
pp. 47 807–47 823, 03 2020.

[162] S. Nadeem, M. Rizwan, F. Ahmad, and J. Manzoor, “Securing cognitive
radio vehicular ad hoc network with fog node based distributed
blockchain cloud architecture,” International Journal of Advanced
Computer Science and Applications, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 288–295, 01
2019.

[163] M. U. Hassan, M. H. Rehmani, and J. Chen, “Differential privacy in
blockchain technology: A futuristic approach,” Journal of Parallel and
Distributed Computing, vol. 145, pp. 50–74, 11 2020.

[164] M. Eltoweissy, S. Olariu, and M. Younis, “Towards autonomous
vehicular clouds,” in International Conference on Ad hoc networks.
Springer, 08 2010, pp. 1–16.

[165] C. Yu, B. Lin, P. Guo, W. Zhang, S. Li, and R. He, “Deployment and
dimensioning of fog computing-based internet of vehicle infrastructure
for autonomous driving,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 6, no. 1,
pp. 149–160, 10 2018.

[166] H. Lu, Q. Liu, D. Tian, Y. Li, H. Kim, and S. Serikawa, “The cognitive
internet of vehicles for autonomous driving,” IEEE Network, vol. 33,
no. 3, pp. 65–73, 05 2019.

[167] H. Wang, B. Kim, J. Xie, and Z. Han, “E-auto: A communication
scheme for connected vehicles with edge-assisted autonomous driving,”
in ICC 2019-2019 IEEE International Conference on Communications
(ICC).

IEEE, 05 2019, pp. 1–6.

[168] P. Mach and Z. Becvar, “Mobile edge computing: A survey on archi-
tecture and computation ofﬂoading,” IEEE Communications Surveys &
Tutorials, vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 1628–1656, 03 2017.

[169] V. Jacobson, D. K. Smetters, J. D. Thornton, M. F. Plass, N. H. Briggs,
and R. L. Braynard, “Networking named content,” in Proceedings of
the 5th international conference on Emerging networking experiments
and technologies, 12 2009, pp. 1–12.

[170] L. Wang, R. Wakikawa, R. Kuntz, R. Vuyyuru, and L. Zhang, “Data
naming in vehicle-to-vehicle communications,” in 2012 Proceedings
IEEE INFOCOM Workshops.

IEEE, 03 2012, pp. 328–333.

[171] K. Asaf, R. A. Rehman, and B.-S. Kim, “Blockchain technology in
named data networks: A detailed survey,” Journal of Network and
Computer Applications, vol. 171, p. 102840, 2020.

[172] D. O. Mau, Y. Zhang, T. Taleb, and M. Chen, “Vehicular inter-
networking via named data-an opnet simulation study,” in International
Conference on Testbeds and Research Infrastructures.
Springer, 05
2014, pp. 116–125.

[173] Y.-T. Yu, T. Punihaole, M. Gerla, and M. Sanadidi, “Content routing
in the vehicle cloud,” in MILCOM 2012-2012 IEEE Military Commu-
nications Conference.

IEEE, 11 2012, pp. 1–6.

[174] C. Xue, N. Xu, and Y. Bo, “Research on key technologies of software-
deﬁned network based on blockchain,” in 2019 IEEE International
Conference on Service-Oriented System Engineering (SOSE).
IEEE,
2019, pp. 239–2394.

[175] V. Chamola, C.-K. Tham, S. Gurunarayanan, N. Ansari et al., “An op-
timal delay aware task assignment scheme for wireless sdn networked
edge cloudlets,” Future Generation Computer Systems, vol. 102, pp.
862–875, 01 2020.

[176] T. J. VanderWeele and J. M. Robins, “Four types of effect modiﬁca-
tion: a classiﬁcation based on directed acyclic graphs,” Epidemiology,
vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 561–568, 09 2007.

[177] C. LeMahieu, “Nano: A feeless distributed cryptocurrency network,”
Nano [Online resource]. URL: https://nano. org/en/whitepaper (date
of access: 24.03. 2018), 04 2018.

[178] A. Churyumov, “Byteball: A decentralized system for storage and
transfer of value,” URL https://byteball. org/Byteball. pdf, 2016.

[179] S. Popov, “The tangle,” White paper, vol. 1, p. 3, 2018.

[180] M. U. Hassan, M. H. Rehmani, and J. Chen, “Differential privacy tech-
niques for cyber physical systems: a survey,” IEEE Communications
Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 746–789, 12 2019.

[181] G. Bansal, N. Naren, V. Chamola, B. Sikdar, N. Kumar, and
M. Guizani, “Lightweight mutual authentication protocol for v2g
using physical unclonable function,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular
Technology, vol. 69, no. 7, pp. 7234–7246, 02 2020.

[182] K. Croman, C. Decker, I. Eyal, A. E. Gencer, A. Juels, A. Kosba,
A. Miller, P. Saxena, E. Shi, E. G. Sirer et al., “On scaling decentralized
blockchains,” in International conference on ﬁnancial cryptography
and data security. Springer, 02 2016, pp. 106–125.

[183] S. Islam, S. Badsha, S. Sengupta, H. La, I. Khalil, and M. Atiquzza-
man, “Blockchain-enabled intelligent vehicular edge computing,” IEEE
Network, vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 125–131, 05 2021.

[184] V. Hassija, V. Chamola, A. Goyal, S. S. Kanhere, and N. Guizani,
“Forthcoming applications of quantum computing: peeking into the
future,” IET Quantum Communication, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 35–41, 12
2020.

[185] A. K. Fedorov, E. O. Kiktenko, and A. I. Lvovsky, “Quantum comput-

ers put blockchain security at risk,” 2018.

[186] A. M. Khalifa, A. M. Bahaa-Eldin, and M. A. Sobh, “Quantum attacks
and defenses for proof-of-stake,” in 2019 14th International Conference
on Computer Engineering and Systems (ICCES).
IEEE, 12 2019, pp.
112–117.

[187] S. S. Vattaparambil, R. Koduri, S. Nandyala, and M. Manalikandy,
“Scalable decentralized solution for secure vehicle-to-vehicle commu-
nication,” SAE Technical Paper, Tech. Rep., 04 2020.

[188] E. O. Kiktenko, N. O. Pozhar, M. N. Anufriev, A. S. Trushechkin,
R. R. Yunusov, Y. V. Kurochkin, A.
I. Lvovsky, and A. K.
Fedorov, “Quantum-secured blockchain,” Quantum Science and
Technology, vol. 3, no. 3, p. 035004, 05 2018. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/2058-9565/aabc6b

[189] X. Sun, M. Sopek, Q. Wang, and P. Kulicki, “Towards quantum-secured
permissioned blockchain: signature, consensus, and logic,” Entropy,
vol. 21, no. 9, p. 887, 09 2019.

[190] M. Saad, J. Spaulding, L. Njilla, C. Kamhoua, S. Shetty, D. H. Nyang,
and D. Mohaisen, “Exploring the attack surface of blockchain: A
comprehensive survey,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials,
03 2020.

Tejasvi Alladi
received the B.E. and M.S. degrees
from the Birla Institute of Technology and Science,
Pilani, India, and North Carolina State University,
Raleigh, NC, USA in 2010 and 2015, respectively,
and the Ph.D. degree from the Birla Institute of
Technology and Science, in 2021. He was a Post-
doctoral Researcher with the Department of Systems
and Computer Engineering, Carleton University, Ot-
tawa, ON, Canada from Jan 2021-Dec 2021. He is
currently an Assistant Professor with the Depart-
ment of Computer Science and Information Systems,
BITS-Pilani. He also has around six years of industrial experience working on
embedded systems in Semiconductor MNCs such as Qualcomm Technologies
and Samsung Electronics. His research interests include developing security
solutions for the Internet of Things (IoT) using cryptography, deep learning,
and blockchain technologies.

28

Vinay Chamola received the the B.E. degree in
electrical and electronics engineering and the mas-
ter’s degree in communication engineering from the
Birla Institute of Technology and Science (BITS)-
Pilani, Pilani, India, in 2010 and 2013, respectively,
and the Ph.D. degree in electrical and computer
engineering from the National University of Sin-
gapore, Singapore,
in 2016. In 2015, he was a
Visiting Researcher with the Autonomous Networks
Research Group, University of Southern California
at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA. He also
worked as a Postdoctoral Research Fellow with the National University
of Singapore. He is currently an Assistant Professor with the Department
of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, BITS-Pilani, where he heads the
Internet of Things Research Group/Lab. He has over 70 publications in high
ranked SCI journals, including more than 50 IEEE Transaction, journal, and
magazine articles. His research interests include IoT security, blockchain,
UAVs, VANETs, 5G, and healthcare. Dr. Chamola serves as an Area Editor for
the Ad-Hoc Networks (Elsevier). He serves as the Co-Chair of various reputed
workshops, such as in IEEE Globecom Workshop 2021, IEEE ANTS 2021,
and IEEE ICIAfS 2021. He is a Co-Founder and the President of a Healthcare
Startup Medsupervision Pvt., Ltd. He also serves as an Associate Editor for
the IEEE Internet of Things Magazine, IEEE NETWORKING LETTERS,
IET Quantum Communications, IET Networks, and several other journals.
He is a Guest Editor of Computer Communication (Elsevier), and also the
IET Intelligent Transportation Systems.

Nishad Sahul is currently pursuing the M.E. Em-
bedded Systems degree with the Electrical and Elec-
tronics Department, Birla Institute of Technology
and Science(BITS),Pilani, Pilani Campus. He com-
pleted his B.E. in Electrical and Electronics from
BITS Pilani, Pilani Campus in 2020. He has co-
authored 8 journal papers in SCI-indexed interna-
tional journals like IEEE Transactions on Industry
Applications, IEEE sensors, Vehicular communica-
tions etc. and 2 international conference publica-
tions. He has interned with two reputed government
research laboratories in India; DRDO, Defence Lab, Jodhpur and CSIR-
CEERI, Pilani. He has also received many awards like Top Downloaded
Paper Certiﬁcate 2018-19 by Wiley, Prof. V.S. Rao Best All-rounder award
in the 2020 graduating class of BITS Pilani, Pilani Campus, Innovator of the
year award 2019-20 by Center for Entrepreneurial Leadership(CEL), BITS
Pilani and The Avery Dennison Spirit of Invention scholarship 2017. He
received a Student Innovation grant of INR 0.35 million for his master’s thesis
from AI and Technology Park(ARTPARK), Indian Institute of Science(IISc.)
Bangalore. He is also an internationally rated chess player. His research
interests include designing hardware accelerators for AI algorithms, vehicular
networks, autonomous vehicles, IoT security, Blockchain, FPGAs, UAVs,
smart sensor development for IoT applications and system engineering.

Vishnu Venkatesh is currently working as an Asso-
ciate Design Engineer at WCB Robotics Pvt. Ltd. He
received his B.E. degree in Electrical and Electronics
Engineering from the Birla Institude of Technology
and Science, Pilani, in 2021. His primary profes-
sional interest is in embedded system development,
particularly in hardware and ﬁrmware design. He has
also worked on research projects and co-authored
papers in the ﬁelds of cryptography, photonics, IoT
security, vehicular networks, and blockchain over the
course of his undergraduate degree.

Adit Goyal is currently pursuing the B.Tech. de-
gree with the Computer Science department, Jaypee
Institute of Information Technology (JIIT), Noida.
He has completed a few projects in the ﬁeld of
data science, machine learning, and big data. He
is currently pursuing his research internship with
BITS-Pilani, Pilani, India under Dr. V. Chamola.
His research interests include machine learning, data
science, and quantum computing.

29

(S’85–M’89–SM’99–F’09)

Mohsen Guizani
re-
ceived the B.S. (with distinction), M.S. and Ph.D.
degrees in Electrical and Computer engineering from
Syracuse University, Syracuse, NY, USA. He is
currently a Professor at the Computer Science &
Engineering Department in Qatar University, Qatar.
Previously, he worked in different institutions: Uni-
versity of Idaho, Western Michigan University, Uni-
versity of West Florida, University of Missouri-
Kansas City, University of Colorado-Boulder, and
Syracuse University. His research interests include
wireless communications and mobile computing, applied machine learning,
cloud computing, security and its application to healthcare systems. He
was elevated to the IEEE Fellow in 2009. He was listed as a Clarivate
Analytics Highly Cited Researcher in Computer Science in 2019 and 2020.
Dr. Guizani has won several research awards including the “2015 IEEE
Communications Society Best Survey Paper Award” as well 4 Best Paper
Awards from ICC and Globecom Conferences. He is the author of nine books
and more than 800 publications. He is also the recipient of the 2017 IEEE
Communications Society Wireless Technical Committee (WTC) Recognition
Award, the 2018 AdHoc Technical Committee Recognition Award, and the
2019 IEEE Communications and Information Security Technical Recognition
(CISTC) Award. He served as the Editor-in-Chief of IEEE Network and is
currently serves on the Editorial Boards of many IEEE journals/Transactions.
He was the Chair of the IEEE Communications Society Wireless Technical
Committee and the Chair of the TAOS Technical Committee. He served as
the IEEE Computer Society Distinguished Speaker and is currently the IEEE
ComSoc Distinguished Lecturer.

