2
2
0
2

n
u
J

4
1

]

Y
C
.
s
c
[

5
v
1
0
2
3
0
.
1
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

FUSING BLOCKCHAIN AND AI WITH METAVERSE: A SURVEY ∗

Qinglin Yang1, Yetong Zhao 1, Huawei Huang1*, Zehui Xiong 2, Jiawen Kang 3, and Zibin Zheng1
1Sun Yat-sen University, China
2 Singapore University of Technology and Design, Singapore
3 Guangdong University of Technology, China

{yangqlin6,huanghw28}@mail.sysu.edu.cn

ABSTRACT
Metaverse as the latest buzzword has attracted great attention from both industry and academia.
Metaverse seamlessly integrates the real world with the virtual world and allows avatars to carry
out rich activities including creation, display, entertainment, social networking, and trading. Thus,
it is promising to build an exciting digital world and to transform a better physical world through
the exploration of the metaverse. In this survey, we dive into the metaverse by discussing how
Blockchain and Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) fuse with it through investigating the state-of-the-art
studies across the metaverse components, digital currencies, AI applications in the virtual world, and
blockchain-empowered technologies. Further exploitation and interdisciplinary research on the fusion
of AI and Blockchain towards metaverse will deﬁnitely require collaboration from both academia
and industries. We wish that our survey can help researchers, engineers, and educators build an open,
fair, and rational future metaverse.

Keywords Metaverse, Blockchain, Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Economy System, Digital Currency

1

Introduction

The concept of metaverse was proposed almost 30 years
ago in the science ﬁction named Snow Crash, written by
Neal Stephenson [3]. Metaverse has been one of the hottest
buzzwords to attract the tech industry’s attention due to
the rapid advancements of Blockchain, Internet of Things
(IoT), VR/AR, Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI), Cloud/Edge
Computing, etc. The sandbox game platform Roblox [4] is
the company that ﬁrstly incorporates the term ‘metaverse’
into their prospectus and proposes the key characteristics
(e.g., identity, friends, immersive experience, low friction,
civility, economy, anywhere, variety) of metaverse. The
social company, Facebook, is renamed as Meta [5] to help
bring metaverse to life and make people meet each other,
learn, collaborate and play in ways that go beyond what
they can imagine. The video game Fortnite [6] that is re-
leased by Epic games puts the players into a virtual world,
such as a post-apocalyptic, zombie-infested world, experi-
encing new levels of photorealistic interaction [7, 8, 9, 6]
and watching virtual concert [1]. Metaverse seamlessly
integrates the physical world with the virtual world and al-
lows avatars to carry out rich activities including creation,

Huawei Huang is the corresponding author.

display, entertainment, social, and trading. Nowadays,
both academia and industries dive into the exploration of
metaverse. For example, Jingteng Tech [10] has developed
BeamLink, by which users can share photos, documents,
and have an interactive meeting collaboration, as shown in
Fig. 1(a). Furthermore, the optical sensors (e.g., depth and
cameras) deployed with CNNs are commonly applied to
capture the gestures and movements of dancers. The poses
and movements of dancers, as shown in Fig.1(f), can be
clustered as a high-dimensional feature space, which is fur-
ther converted into dance performance in virtual environ-
ments [11] through techniques like dynamic time wrapping
[12]. Compared to the physical world, autonomous avatars
can understand human dancer’s voice-to-motion mapping.
Powered by deep learning, avatars can also mimic dance
moves with high dance resemblance and emotional expres-
sions. Given those potentials of metaverse, a problem
is that researchers cannot accurately judge the shape and
boundary of the future metaverse. They could only en-
vision some of its possible characteristics, such as open
space, decentralization, human-computer interaction expe-
rience, digital assets, and digital economy.

The avatars of human players, their creations, and con-
sumption in metaverse truly affect the physical world and

 
 
 
 
 
 
Q. Yang, Y. Zhao, H. Huang et al

(a) Meeting collaboration.

(b) Virtual exhibition.

(c) Metaverse concert [1]

(d) Virtual and real symbiosis.

(e) 360◦ Egocentric view of audience.

(f) An animated virtual character’s dance
[2].

Figure 1: Effects that users can experience in metaverse.

even change the behaviors of people in the physical world,
through the inﬂuence of people’s thoughts (e.g., choosing
the entertainment method). This change has a profound
social signiﬁcance [13, 14], and thus forms the lifestyle of
post-human society while reconstructing the digital eco-
nomic system. The metaverse can be viewed as a complete
and self-consistent economic system, a complete chain
of the production and consumption of digital items. The
economy of metaverse refers to the digital production-
based economic behaviors, e.g., creation, exchange, and
consumption in the digital world are the fundamental com-
ponents of the digital economy. The development of the
economic system can be regarded as one of the most chal-
lenging tasks of metaverse. This is because the production
and consumption of digital assets that can be traded in the
virtual world is a phenomenon that traditional economists
have not encountered [15]. Moreover, in a public, fair,
and self-organized virtual world, the centralized economic
system of the physical world cannot operate efﬁciently
due to the high transaction volumes involved. Considering
the interaction between the virtual world and the physical
world, metaverse should enable the currency circulation
to break the barrier of life, products, learning, working,
etc. Therefore, the economic system of metaverse must be
constructed in a decentralized manner such that the virtual
assets of avatars could be traded efﬁciently in metaverse.

Blockchain as a decentralized ledger without a centralized
authority has drawn enormous attention in diverse applica-
tion ﬁelds in recent years. Blockchain is highly expected
to bring a variety of opportunities to metaverse, and trigger
a new round of technological innovation and industrial
transformation. On the other hand, recent advances in
AI have brought promising solutions to overcoming the
challenges of metaverse development, such as big data
analytics, AI-empowered content generation, and intelli-
gence deployment. Consequently, the integration of AI
and blockchain becomes a promising trend to promote the

benign evolution of the blockchain/AI-empowered meta-
verse ecosystem. Although the advent of blockchain and
AI has spawned a large number of new technologies and
applications, the fusion of blockchain and AI with meta-
verse also poses several emerging research challenges. For
example, transaction volumes in metaverse systems are
much higher than those in the physical world due to the
features of digital products and markets. Blockchain-based
Non-Fungible Tokens (NFT) enable avatars to generate
the content that can be traded with their digital certiﬁcates
[16, 17].

We then review several representative survey articles here,
to highlight the difference between our survey. Lim et al.
[18] focus on the network demands [19] of metaverse from
the perspective of edge intelligence [20] since metaverse
is viewed as ‘the successor to the mobile Internet’. Du et
al. [21] propose a privacy-preserving targeted advertising
strategy for the wireless edge metaverse to enable meta-
verse service providers to allocate network bandwidth to
users so that the users can access metaverse from edge sites.
Jiang et al. [22] introduce a kind of collaborative comput-
ing paradigm based on Coded Distributed Computing to
support the computation requirement of metaverse services
[23]. The up-to-date survey [13] mainly reviews the state-
of-the-art technologies as enablers to implement metaverse,
such as high-speed networks (e.g., 5G) and edge comput-
ing, Blockchain, and AI. The authors’ ﬁndings demonstrate
the gap between the up-to-date technologies and the de-
mands of implementing metaverse. The other survey [24]
focuses on metaverse analytics, the search trafﬁc, news fre-
quency, and the topic concerning sustainable growth. Duan
et al. [25] highlight the representative applications for so-
cial goods and propose a three-layer metaverse architecture
from a macro perspective, which contains infrastructure,
interaction, and ecosystem. In contrast, our survey dis-
cusses how to fuse blockchain and AI technologies with
metaverse. As depicted in Fig. 2, AI technologies are ap-

2

Q. Yang, Y. Zhao, H. Huang et al

Figure 2: Fusion of AI and Blockchain in metaverse. Note that the picture at the top is from https://store.steamp
owered.com/app/1313290/Let_Them_Trade/

plied to the digital creation and digital market. Meanwhile,
blockchain can guarantee digital assets, digital currencies,
and the digital market. On the other hand, in this survey,
we emphasize the fusion of AI and blockchain technolo-
gies to establish an intelligent, open, fair, and promising
future metaverse.

The contributions of the paper include the following three
points.

items like clothes or cars from one platform to another.
Firstly, as depicted in Fig. 3, we shall describe the meta-
verse economic system according to the mainstream games
and existing research works. The metaverse economic sys-
tem is composed of four parts: digital creation, digital
asset, digital market, and digital currency, whose exploita-
tion will lead to the transformation of the conventional
economy.

• We ﬁrst present the preliminaries of the economic

system in the metaverse.

• We then discuss how blockchain and AI tech-
nologies fuse with the metaverse, and review the
state-of-the-art studies.

• Finally, we envision typical challenges and open
issues to shape the future metaverse in the next
decades.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2
mainly describes the characteristic of the ecosystem of
metaverse by comparing it with the conventional economy.
Section 3 discusses the artiﬁcial intelligence technologies
and the challenges of applications in the metaverse. In
Section 4, the fundamental Blockchain technologies and
applications are introduced in metaverse by comparing
with the current breakthroughs. Section 6 mainly discusses
the challenges and open issues of shaping the future meta-
verse. Finally, Section 7 concludes this paper.

2 Preliminaries of Economic System in

Metaverse

The economy is the fundamental component of the meta-
verse. From the more idealistic perspective, metaverse
should be interoperable such that users can trade virtual

3

• Digital Creation is the foundation of the meta-
verse. The creation progress is similar to the
material products in the physical world. The de-
velopment of the economy of the metaverse is
decided by the number of creators. Thus, the
digital creation activities urgently need a basic
authoring tool that can make the creation easily
and personalized [26, 27]. The Decentraland [28]
is a game platform that provides two kinds of
authoring tools for creating interactive Decentra-
land applications, i.e., the Builder and the Decen-
traland SDK. Players can execute a simple drag
and drop editor by the Builder without coding
required, while the Decentraland SDK enables
players to have sufﬁcient freedom to create their
applications. Lee et al. [29] summarize the re-
search works on computational arts that are rele-
vant to the metaverse, describing novel art work
(e.g., immersive arts, robotic arts.) in blended
virtual-physical realities.

• Digital Asset has the hidden property, which is
the precondition of trade. For instance, in the FPS
game Counter-Strike: Global Offensive, players
can equip their weapons with all kinds of ‘skins’
that shows the asset attributes the ‘skins’ since the
‘skins’ can be exchanged, traded, or bought at the
platforms (e.g., BUFF, Steam). However, these

Q. Yang, Y. Zhao, H. Huang et al

trade platforms need to make the users’ accounts
known to the public, which might incur privacy
issues since there is no reliable mechanism to
guarantee the digital asset and platform. Hence,
people’s conﬁrmation of digital assets is insepara-
ble from the value provided by the blockchain and
the encryption system of the blockchain. Because
encryption algorithms can capitalize on data, and
consensus mechanisms help people verify and
conﬁrm transactions.

• Digital Market is the fundamental place in
which avatars can trade to have income like in the
physical world. The mature market of metaverse
that should ensure the creation of products and
real trade accomplished in metaverse must be dif-
ferent from the existing digital market. Bourlakis
et al.
[30] examine the evolution of retailing,
i.e., from traditional to electronic to metaverse
retailing, and sheds light on the ways metaverse
inﬂuence that evolution. Cliff et al. [31] mainly
discuss the research that applies computational in-
telligence, i.e., the methods from AI and machine
learning to automatically discover, implement,
and ﬁne-tune strategies for adaptive automated
trading in ﬁnancial markets. Decentraland mar-
ketplace [32] allows users to trade all their De-
centraland on-chain assets like what they could
behave in the physical world.

• Digital Currency is the media in metaverse with
which the avatars can ﬁnish the trade and ex-
change. While in the metaverse, ﬁat currency
cannot satisfy the demands of the development
of the metaverse due to the high cost of the legal
currency system. In addition, ﬁat currency is con-
verted from physical currency (e.g., gold, silver)
that is different from the digital-based currency
of metaverse. Roblox enables players to buy var-
ious items by purchase with real currency, from
a recurring stipend given to members with the
premium membership, or from other players by
producing and selling virtual content in Roblox
[4]. The Diem payment system [33] supports
single-currency stablecoins (e.g., USD, EUR, and
GBP) and a multi-currency coin (XDX). We shall
talk about the fusion of blockchain in metaverse
in section 4.

As demonstrated in The Wealth of Nations, the traditional
economics in the real world are based on some basic
premises such as the scarcity of resources, and selﬁsh
individuals [34]. In contrast, the individuals in the meta-
verse are selﬂess and illogical. These individuals prefer to
emphasize their personal feeling such as happiness and a
sense of accomplishment. This is because there is no farm-
ing society and industrial society experienced by human
beings, and no traditional industrial structure in the virtual
world. In the metaverse, the conceptual economy will be
the basic form of economic activities. The natural form of
ﬁnancial currency can no longer be precious metals, but the

4

Figure 3: Conventional economy and metaverse economy.
icons are from https://www.flaticon.com/

virtual social currency. Hence, the difference between the
economy of the metaverse and the conventional economy
can be summarised as follows:

• In metaverse, identity determines value instead
of the undifferentiated labor in the conventional
economy.

• The marginal beneﬁts will increase in metaverse
instead of diminishing marginal beneﬁts of pro-
duction in the physical world.

• The marginal costs of products will decrease,

compared with the physical world.

• Transaction costs in metaverse tend to zero, which

will incur frequent transactions.

Now, the metaverse economic system is still in its early
stage, because it can barely transplant and test the inno-
vations of the digital economy, including various digital
currencies, test cooperative economy, sharing economy,
and inclusive ﬁnance. To enable an intelligent and secure
metaverse, we think that key technologies such as AI and
blockchain should be fused with the metaverse. Therefore,
we review the related studies that can offer us inspiration
in the following sections.

3 Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Metaverse

Artiﬁcial Intelligence is a research discipline proceeded
based on the hypothesis that every aspect of learning can
in principle be so precisely described [35]. The state-of-
the-art AI studies focus on machine learning, deep learn-
ing, and reinforcement learning in the ﬁelds including
computer vision, decision-making, and natural language
process (NLP). Intuitively, the breakthroughs of artiﬁcial
intelligence in the real world motivate people to realize
metaverse. For example, machine learning provides techni-
cal support for all systems in metaverse to reach or exceed
the level of human’s learning. It shall signiﬁcantly affect
the operational efﬁciency and the intelligence of metaverse.
Intelligent voice services provide technical support, such
as voice recognition and communication, for metaverse
users.

Q. Yang, Y. Zhao, H. Huang et al

(a) Support-Vector Machine

(b) Convolutional Neural Network

(c) Reinforcement Learning

Figure 4: Illustration of artiﬁcial intelligence technologies

3.1 Representative AI Algorithms

Machine learning algorithms (e.g., linear regression [36],
random forest [37], singular value decomposition [38])
enable machine to have the human ability by learning from
experience and data. For example, support vector ma-
chine (Fig. 4(a)) [39] is a kind of representative machine
learning algorithm and is used for the problem of pattern
classiﬁcation, regression, and learning a ranking function.
The support vector classiﬁcation aims to ﬁnd an optimiza-
tion hyperplane to separate the dataset by minimizing the
following object function:
(cid:88)

max (cid:0)0, 1 − yi
(cid:123)(cid:122)
(cid:124)
Loss function

(cid:2)ωT xi + b
] +λ(cid:107)ω(cid:107)2
2
(cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125)
(cid:125)
regularization

i=1

L(ω) =

,

(1)

where ω denotes a weight vector, b denotes the threshold,
and λ denotes a Lagrangian factor that determines the
trade-off between margin maximization and regularization
in the loss function. However, machine learning algorithms
usually require to select features manually, which limits its
wide applications since a large amount of labeled data is
needed.

The convolutional neural networks (CNNs, or ConvNets
(Fig. 4(b))) are a kind of representative deep neural net-
work inspired by biological neural network. The normal
CNNs are based on the shared-weight architecture of the
convolution kernels or ﬁlters that slide along input features
and provide translation equivariant responses known as
feature maps. CNNs are always composed of convolu-
tion layers, pooling layers and fully connected layers [40].
The great amount of reduction in CNN is achieved by a
technique called weight sharing between neurons. Given
an image X ∈ RM ×N and a ﬁlter W ∈ Rm×n, where
m << M , n << N , the convolution can be written fol-
lows:

yij =

m
(cid:88)

n
(cid:88)

u=1

v=1

ωuv · xi−u+1,y−v+1,

(2)

where ω is the shared training parameters. Thus, CNNs
are regarded as a kind of prevalent supervised learning that
could perform well in many computer vision applications
such as facial recognition, image search, augmented reality,
and more.

5

While reinforcement learning describes the sequential
decision-making problem faced by an agent that must learn
experience through trial-and-error by interacting with a dy-
namic environment [41]. The schematic of RL is demon-
strated in Fig. 4(c). Considering the Markov decision
processes (MDPs) [42] and deep neural network, deep
reinforcement learning is promising to revolutionize the
ﬁeld of AI and represent a step towards establishing an
autonomous system with a higher level of understanding of
the visual world [43]. And there are two main approaches
to solving RL problems: value functions and policy search.
Value function methods are based on estimating the value
(expected return) of being in a given state. The optimal
policy π∗, has a corresponding state-value function V ∗(s),
and vice versa; the optimal state-value function can be
deﬁned as:

V ∗(s) = max

π

E[R|s, π]. ∀s ∈ S,

(3)

where, s denotes the state, and π denotes the policy that
agent follows. By contrast, policy search methods do not
need to maintain a value function model but directly search
for an optimal policy π∗. Until now, there have been de-
veloped many deep learning-based RL (DRL) algorithms,
including deep Q-network (DQN), trust region policy op-
timization (TRPO), and asynchronous advantage actor-
critic. These DRL algorithms can be applied to achieve
over-human performance in some ﬁelds [44]. In the next
section, we review the works on AI technologies that are
related to the metaverse when it comes to the establish-
ment of a metaverse environment and object creation in
the metaverse.

3.2 Establishment of Metaverse Environment

Not only metaverse users, but the objects or things in the
physical world also interact with the metaverse, evolving to
persistently represent the structure, behaviors, and context
of a unique physical asset (such as a component, a human,
or a process) [45] in the virtual world. With the break-
throughs of digital transformation, the latest trend in every
industry is to build digital twins with the ultimate goal of
using them throughout the whole asset life-cycle with real-
time data [46]. Digital twins are instrumental not only dur-
ing the conceptualization, prototyping, testing, and design

Q. Yang, Y. Zhao, H. Huang et al

optimization phase but also during the operational phase.
The virtual world of metaverse generates a huge amount,
variety, and velocity of data, such as structured data, and
unstructured data, which makes deep learning-based digital
twin (DT) essential [47]. It can provide a better understand-
ing of the underlying mechanics to all the stakeholders by
the fusion of the virtual world with data sciences [48]. Ham
et al. [49] propose a new participatory-sensing-to-digital
twin city framework for community functioning in cities.
The work fuses crowdsourced and unstructured visual data-
based reality information with a three-dimensional (3D)
virtual city to update the 3D city model that is fed into a
computer-aided virtual environment (CAVE) for interact-
ing and immersive visualization. To address the challenge
of processing unstructured point clouds, epitomized by
high cost, movable objects, limited object classes, and
high information inadequacy/redundancy. Xue et al. [50]
present a novel unsupervised method, called Clustering Of
Symmetric Cross-sections of Objects (COSCO), to pro-
cess urban LiDAR point clouds to a hierarchy of objects
based on their characteristic cross-sections. COSCO fol-
lows the Gestalt design principles, including proximity,
connectivity, symmetry, and similarity.

Lai et al. [51] propose a novel virtual environment for
visual deep learning since the existing works have the
drawbacks, such as small scenes or limited interactions
with objects, which provides large-scale diversiﬁed indoor
and outdoor scenes. Augmented reality (AR) devices could
provide people with immersive and interactive experiences
while their applications are latency-sensitive. Hence, in the
work [52], Chen et al. exploit to address the computation
efﬁciency, low-latency objects recognition, and classiﬁ-
cation issues of AR applications by integrating mobile
edge computing paradigm with federated learning. A city
DT system depends on long-term and high-quality data to
bring to perfection. Pang et al. [64] propose a federated
learning-based DT framework to enable multiple city DTs
to share the local strategy and status quickly while accumu-
lating the insights from multiple data sources efﬁciently,
thereby enhancing privacy protection settings.

Lee et al. [65] present a serious game for self-training ﬁre
evacuation drills, in which the avatar is synchronized with
multiple trainees and can be placed in different remote
physical locations with the option of real-time supervision.
The proposed system architecture includes a wearable mo-
tion sensor and a head-mounted display to synchronize
each user’s expected motion with her/his avatar activity in
the cyberspace of the metaverse environment. This sys-
tem architecture provides an immersive and inexpensive
environment for the easy-to-use user interface of a ﬁre
evacuation training system based on network experience.
The model [55] explicitly deals with occluded body parts
by hallucinating plausible solutions of not visible joint.
Fabbri et al. propose a new end-to-end architecture that is
a three-branch multi-stage CNN with four branches (vis-
ible heat-maps, occluded heat-maps, part afﬁnity ﬁelds,
and temporal afﬁnity ﬁelds) fed by a time linker feature
extractor.

To overcome the lack of surveillance data with tracking,
body part, and occlusion annotations they created the
vastest computer graphics dataset for people tracking in
urban scenarios by exploiting a photorealistic video game.
During the initial stage of the metaverse, it still requires
technological companies or governments to collaboratively
establish the AI-based infrastructure when it comes to the
computational capacities, data, technologies, etc. While
scattered ownership of data is another barrier since com-
panies often don’t want to share commercially sensitive
information, nor do governments [66]. To address this
issue, federated learning (FL) has emerged as a kind of
collaborative learning paradigm, allowing participants to
train the shared model locally by transferring the training
parameters instead of raw data. FL paradigm can protect
the data privacy and reduce the communication overhead
[67], especially for the large-scale scenarios with large
models and massive data. With respect to the data privacy,
there have been many research on applying FL in medical
institutions [68], industries [66], banks [69], etc.

Mohammadi et al. [53] propose a semi-supervised deep
reinforcement learning-based framework that utilizes a
fusion of labeled (users’ feedback) and unlabeled (with-
out such users’ feedback) data to converge toward bet-
ter control policies instead of wasting the unlabeled data.
The proposed framework is scalable to satisfy the de-
mands of smart city services. Intuitively, this research
on semi-supervised deep reinforcement learning-based can
be mapped into the service of the metaverse. While the de-
velopment of intelligent metaverse remains the challenges,
such as integrating big and fast/streaming data analytics,
big dataset shortage, and on-device intelligence.

3.3 Object Creation in Metaverse

After the descriptions of AI-based establishment of virtual
world, we shall argue the authoring tools in metaverse
since AI-based authoring tools provide technical support
for all systems and roles to reach or exceed the level of
human learning. Authoring tools will greatly affect the
operational efﬁciency and intelligence of metaverse.

3.3.1 Avatar and Non-player Characters

The notion avatar can be derived from the Sanskrit word.
It identiﬁes the god Vishnu’s manifestations on earth. How-
ever, it was the ﬁrst to be used for player representations
in virtual worlds [70]. Avatars are not only used in games,
but also as users’ representations in e-commerce applica-
tions, virtual social environments, and in geographically
separated workplace meetings [71].

Chen et al.
[58] propose a novel method for personal
intelligent behavior avatar to make the optimal strategic
decision for the user through the interactions between the
user and agents by integrating Bayesian Networks and
reinforcement learning in the virtual environment. To cre-
ate a controllable and responsive avatar with large motion
sets in computer games and virtual environments, Lee et

6

Q. Yang, Y. Zhao, H. Huang et al

Table 1: A Summary of the Application of AI in Metaverse

Types

Description

Machine Leaning Models

Use cases

3D computer vision [51]

DRL

Learning indoor navigation, Action
recognition, Event detection, etc.

Federated learning [52]

Parameter server-based

Augmented reality applications

Virtual
Environments

To reduce the executing latency and the
drawbacks of AR [52]

Centralized FL in mobile edge comput-
ing

Collaborative learning

Enabling Cognitive Smart Cities Using
Big Data and Machine Learning [53]

Semi-supervised deep reinforcement
learning

Smart city services

Recognizing Avatar Faces [54]

Markov random ﬁeld

Detection and track [55]

NPC training [56]

OpenAI Five [57]

Face Recognition

Multi-people tracking

Three-branch multi-stage CNN (Fig.
4(b))

RL (Fig. 4(c))

RL-DOT

Distributed learning framework and
LSTM

Dota2

AI-based Object

Intelligent behavior avatar [58]

RL-based bayesian networks graph

Play game tracking

Learning-based interactive avatar con-
trol [59]

State-action

Animate and control avatars

Human-computer interaction [60]

RL (Fig. 4(c))

Avatar moving

Virtuality-Reality
Interaction

The trained controller in virtual environ-
ment can be transferred to the physical
world [61, 62, 63]

LSTM and Mixture density network

Robots training, Digital twin for human-
machine interaction

al. [59] presents a novel method of precomputing avatar
behavior from unlabeled motion data in order to animate
and control avatars at minimal runtime cost. Meanwhile,
a reinforcement learning method [60] is applied to train a
virtual character to move participants to a speciﬁed loca-
tion. The virtual environment demonstrates an alleyway
displayed through a wide ﬁeld-of-view head-tracked stereo
head-mounted display. This method opens up the door
for many such applications where the virtual environment
adapts to the responses of the human participants with the
aim of achieving particular goals.

Apart from the mentioned above, AI-driven non-player
characters (NPCs) are computer-operated characters who
act as enemies, partners, and support characters to pro-
vide challenges, offer assistance, and support the sto-
ryline. While from the game perspective, most of the
human-looking NPCs are not intelligent enough to interact
with players in speciﬁc game genres (e.g., real-time strat-
egy, some modes of ﬁrst-person shooting), which requires
strong tactical decision-making abilities. Wang et al. [56]
propose a reinforcement learning-based domination team
for playing unreal tournament (UT) domination games that
consists of a commander NPC and several solider NPCs.
During each decision cycle in the running process, the
commander NPC decides troop distribution and, according
to that decision, sends action orders to other soldier NPCs.
Each soldier NPC tries to accomplish its task in a goal-
directed way, i.e., decomposing the ﬁnal ultimate task (at-

tacking or defending a domination point) into basic actions
(such as running and shooting) that are directly supported
by UT application programming interfaces (APIs). The RL
agents as means of creating NPCs that could both progres-
sively evolve behavioral patterns and adapt to the dynamic
world by exploring their environment and learning optimal
behaviors from interesting experiences [72, 73].

Berner et al. [57] develop a distributed training system
and tools for continual training which allows researchers
to train OpenAI Five for 10 months. By defeating the Dota
2 [74] world champion (Team OG), OpenAI Five demon-
strates that self-play reinforcement learning can achieve
superhuman performance on a difﬁcult task. Rahmatizadeh
et al. [61] attempt to address the challenging problem of
behavior transfer from virtual demonstration to a phys-
ical robot through training a Long Short Term Memory
(LSTM) recurrent neural network to generate trajectories.
During the training process, a Mixture Density Network
(MDN) is applied to calculate an error signal suitable for
the multimodal nature of demonstrations. The learned con-
troller in the virtual environment can be transferred to a
physical robot (a Rethink Robotics Baxter) and success-
fully perform the manipulation tasks on a physical robot,
which motivates the avatar to create AI objects that can
impact the physical world. Similarly, the works [62, 63]
exploit the interaction between the virtual environment and
physical world by CNNs.

7

Q. Yang, Y. Zhao, H. Huang et al

3.3.2 AI-based Activities in Metaverse

In games (e.g., [8], [4], [75]), the basic characteristics
of metaverse can be perfectly explained and displayed.
However, no game has fully achieved an ideal metaverse.
Games conventionally have rules, objectives, and bound-
aries that enable them to shape a speciﬁc gameplay. In
contrast, metaverse does not require any speciﬁc gameplay.
Some online social games are very similar to metaverse,
such as sims [75]. Metaverse, however, differs from video
games, because it involves many activities that are not
necessarily for fun. Examples are reviewed as follows.

• Metaverse users can attend events (concert, vir-
tual exhibition, remote education, meeting collab-
oration, etc.) without having to travel.

• Metaverse is virtual and real symbiosis, which
means it can evolve in parallel even if people
leave the virtual world anytime.

Being aware of the difference between video games and
metaverse, we can exploit metaverse from the perspective
of video games, and extend it to the ﬁelds of manufacturing,
education, creation, entertainment, social, and so on. Ando
et al. [76] present a way how to infer the observed exhibits
in a metaverse museum from a movement log based on
Second Life. To use recommendation systems in metaverse
museums, they need some pieces of information to infer
which exhibits the user is visiting via performing this task
efﬁciently and precisely by focusing on the avatar’s states
in the museum.

Yampolskiy et al. [54] propose a set of algorithms that
are capable of veriﬁcation and recognition of avatar faces
with a high degree of accuracy. Lugrin et al. [77] propose
a method for the AI-based simulation of object behavior
so that interactive narrative can feature the physical envi-
ronment inhabited by the player character as an ‘actor’.
The prototype based on the top of the Unreal Tournament
game engine relies on a ‘causal engine’, which essentially
bypasses the native Physics engine to generate alterna-
tive consequences to player interventions. The evaluation
method [78] can be applied to the human-centered eval-
uation of AI-based games, grounded in the analysis of
player retellings of their play experiences in Civilization
VI, Stellaris, and two distinct versions of the research game
Prom Week. The reason is that it is difﬁcult to understand
through existing evaluation methods, such as the typical
narrative structure that players tend to have in their minds
when playing a speciﬁc game. The diversity of subjective
experience narratives that might occur in a speciﬁc game.

Puder et al. [79] demonstrate that an open distributed envi-
ronment can be viewed as a service market where services
are freely offered and requested. Any infrastructure which
pursues appropriate mechanisms for such an environment
should contain mediator functionality (i.e., a trader) that
matches service demands and service offers.

In the open and decentralized metaverse, DRL is expected
as a promising alternative for automated trading in the

metaverse ecosystem since DRL can enable the well-
trained agent to make the decision automatically. Liu et
al. [80, 81] believe that proper usage of AI will initiate a
paradigm shift from the conventional trading routine to an
automated machine learning approach. Therefore, Liu et
al. [80] propose a DRL-based system to achieve efﬁciently
automate trading in the ecosystem, named FinRL, which
can solve dynamic decision-making problems and build a
multi-factor model. In addition, Liu et al. [81] attempt to
reduce the simulation-to-reality gap and data processing
burden through an open-source library that includes hun-
dreds of market environments for ﬁnancial reinforcement
learning.

4 Blockchain in Metaverse

Blockchain is widely believed as one of the fundamental
infrastructures of metaverse, because it can bridge isolated
small sectors together and provide a stable economic sys-
tem, which helps offer transparent, open, efﬁcient, and
reliable rules for metaverse. For example, hash algorithms
and timestamp technologies as the major components in
the data layer of blockchain could provide metaverse users
the traceability and conﬁdentiality of the data storing in
the bottom layer of blockchains. As illustrated in Fig. 5,
the conventional Blockchain architecture includes a data
layer, network layer, consensus layer, incentive layer, con-
tract layer, and application layer. The correlations between
those layers and the metaverse are explained as follows.

• Data transmission and veriﬁcation mechanism
provide network support for various data trans-
mission and veriﬁcation of metaverse economic
system.

• Consensus mechanisms solve the credit problem

of metaverse transactions.

• Distributed storage of blockchain ensures the se-
curity of virtual assets and the identities of meta-
verse users.

• Smart contract technology offers a trustworthy
environment for all participating entities in the
metaverse. It realizes the value exchange in the
metaverse and ensures the transparent execution
of system rules described in contract codes. Once
deployed, the code of smart contracts cannot be
modiﬁed anymore. All clauses depicted in those
smart contracts must be completely executed.

Without the support of blockchain technology, it will be
difﬁcult to identify the value of the resources and goods
trading in the metaverse, especially when those virtual
elements have economic interactions with the real-world
economy. Thus, it is undoubtedly worth exploring the
blockchain technology in the metaverse.

In this section, we introduce the blockchain-empowered
applications in metaverse considering four perspectives,
i.e., Cryptocurrency, Transaction characteristics, Authen-
tication, and Market & Business.

8

Q. Yang, Y. Zhao, H. Huang et al

Figure 5: Layered Architecture of Blockchain.

4.1 Cryptocurrency for Metaverse

What is the functionality of cryptocurrency in the meta-
verse? How to issue and apply cryptocurrency in the meta-
verse? Faced with these questions, we discuss whether
the conventional cryptocurrency-issuing rule applies to
metaverse in this subsection.

Cryptocurrency is one of the main applications under
the spotlight empowered by blockchain. It also makes
blockchain more popular. The trust of a wide range of
users supports the value system of cryptocurrencies and
drives both the circulation and trading of cryptocurren-
cies. To date, more than 12,000 virtual currencies have
been issued worldwide, and new virtual currencies are still
being created every single day. The price of mainstream
cryptocurrencies keeps hitting record highs. At the time of
the writing, the exchange rate of the US dollar to Bitcoin
hits 50000:1 (USD/BTC) recently.

Like the real world builds upon ﬁat currencies, the future
metaverse inevitably needs cryptocurrencies, which de-
liver value during their circulation, payment, and currency
of settlement. In detail, blockchain systems have imple-
mented a series of operations for cryptocurrencies, such
as creation, recording, and trading. All these fundamental
operations are necessary for the metaverse.

Traditionally, Bitcoin [82] adopts the UTXO (Unspent
Transaction Outputs) transaction model to trace the usages
of this cryptocurrency, while Ethereum [83] records the
balance of each account address, which can be queried di-
rectly through the Ethereum dataset tools (e.g. Etherscan).
Both UTXO and Ethereum adopt the Proof of Work (PoW)
consensus. Miners mint coins by generating new blocks.
However, there is a cost for them to generate blocks. In
such PoW consensus, miners mine blocks by calculating
a hash puzzle, which consumes a giant amount of elec-
tricity. For Ethereum 2.0, miners under the PoS (Proof
of Stake) consensus mechanism mine blocks by electing,
which depends on the coin age of miners [84].

9

Using blockchain technologies, there are multiple ways to
deal with cryptocurrency exchanges. The vast majority of
cryptocurrency exchanges occur in centralized exchanges
such as OKEx and AOFEX. The advantages of the central-
ized exchanges include low-latency transactions, simple
interfaces and a certain level of security. However, the cen-
tralized exchanges also experience scandals such as price
manipulation by insiders taking advantage of information
asymmetries. Other cryptocurrency exchanges occur in
decentralized exchanges, where smart contracts or other
peer-to-peer network execute transactions automatically
[85]. In some cases, the smart contracts, e.g., IDex and Pa-
radex, maintain continuous-limited order books offchain, a
counterparty of the order or the exchange itself performs or-
der matching and submits order pairs to the smart contract
for processing. In other cases, such as Uniswap and Ban-
cor, the smart contract performs as a counterparty and trade
with its user directly. It is easy to foresee that metaverse
built by different corporations will coexist in the near fu-
ture. Thus, various cryptocurrencies used in those smaller
metaverses need to be exchanged like ﬁat currencies in the
physical world. We envision that multiple cryptocurrencies
will also coexist in future metaverse. The metaverse users
will naturally need to exchange different cryptocurrencies
in the same way as described above.

4.2 Transaction Characteristics in Metaverse

Metaverse is expected to have various types of ﬁnancial
issues such as estate purchases, item rentals and service
acquisitions, which include almost everything people do
in the physical world. Therefore, transactions in metaverse
are not merely related to intra-metaverse scenario, and not
only for token transferring.

Once a user launches a transaction on the conventional
blockchain, the transaction will be ﬁrst broadcast to miners
and be stored in their local transaction pools. The miner
picks up a certain number of transactions and next performs
the hash-based consensus. The block generated by the ﬁrst
miner to ﬁnd an output to the puzzle that ﬁts the speciﬁed
difﬁculty will be uploaded to the chain and broadcast to all
the other miners.

In metaverse, it is not hard to predict that those blockchain
nodes will process a giant volume of transactions since
metaverse has a signiﬁcant number of users, who trade in
the virtual world every second while using various intra-
or inter-metaverse applications. As conventional, the full
blockchain nodes working in metaverse need to store all
the historical transactions locally, which brings a great
burden for the full nodes.

Another issue associated to metaverse transactions is the
requirement of low conﬁrmation latency. Internet appli-
cations that satisfy human habits often have end-to-end
latency between tens of milliseconds and hundreds of mil-
liseconds. Even further, metaverse applications based on
three-dimensional display and interaction require an la-
tency within 10 milliseconds in order to avoid dizziness.

Q. Yang, Y. Zhao, H. Huang et al

All those low-latency applications enforce metaverse trans-
actions to have low-conﬁrmation latency.

The existing blockchain consensus protocols have several
constraints that prevent them from being directly applied
to metaverse. For instance, the PoW mechanism relies
on miner’s hash power to achieve consensus on a certain
transaction data. Considering the huge data volume of
metaverse, PoW consensus will consume a large amount of
mining resources. The PoS mechanism, on the other hand,
relies on the number and age of coins held by miner nodes
for reaching consensus towards a group of proposed trans-
actions. Since the Matthew effect is more pronounced on
metaverse, the PoS mechanism cannot ensure the fairness
of the miners participating in the consensus in metaverse.
Therefore, metaverse needs new consensus protocols and
new blockchain mechanisms to meet the rigorous require-
ments of transactions.

We then review some state-of-the-art studies to ﬁnd some
clues to address the transaction issues aforementioned. In
[86], the authors merge blockchain with IIoT architecture
and propose a hierarchical storage structure where his-
torical information is stored on the cloud and the latest
block is stored on IIoT devices. The new architecture
could offer immutable and veriﬁable services. To reduce
the cost of block validation during forwarding, Frauen-
thaler et al. [87] propose to validate the block header only
when needed, making interoperation between Ethereum-
based blockchains feasible. Yang et al. [88] change the
traditional linear structure of blockchains using Directed
Acyclic Graph (DAG) structure where blocks are orga-
nized into a compacted DAG structure. This new structure
can improve security and decrease the transaction veriﬁ-
cation time. Aumayr et al. [89] present a virtual channel
protocol based on UTXO that is compatible with almost
all cryptocurrencies, aiming to reduce the conﬁrmation
latency in the context of many transactions waiting to be
processed. To accelerate transaction relay in blockchain
networks, Zhang et al. [90] propose a Repulay protocol
where nodes select neighbors based on a reputation mecha-
nism and verify transactions only with a certain probability.
Overall, the proposed RepuLay also helps nodes save their
bandwidth while guaranteeing the quality of transaction
relay.

4.3 Blockchain-empowered Market in Metaverse

Blockchains before Ethereum, such as Bitcoin, only sup-
port token transferring. Until the emergence of the
Ethereum platform, smart contracts begin to support
Turing-complete programming. Complicated businesses
could be executed in a virtual machine through smart con-
tract codes. Ethereum realizes the upgrade of blockchain
applications from cryptocurrency to crypto-business. Var-
ious blockchain reconﬁguration of market and business
could be implemented.

Empowering by the advanced blockchain technologies,
decentralized ﬁnance (DeFi) can boost the decentralized

10

market and business in the metaverse. We review several
representative studies related to the DeFi market and busi-
ness here. In [85], the authors analyze the behavior of
arbitrage bots in the context of the cryptocurrency market.
They ﬁnd that arbitrage robots could observe the transac-
tions in the transaction pool and perform arbitrage without
risks. They also present a cooperative strategy to maxi-
mize the proﬁt of arbitrage robots and point out that miners
could act as arbitrage robots under certain circumstances.
However, the MEV (miner extractable value) could in-
centivize the emergence of forking attacks. The authors
propose a cooperative bidding strategy for them to strive
for more proﬁt. They also ﬁnd that the current amount
of MEV in a month is more than 25× the cost of a 51%
attack on Ethereum. DeFi, based on smart contracts and
Fungible Tokens (FT), offers a new approach to innovate
economic models in the metaverse. Existing successful
solutions, such as Uniswap [91], a decentralized exchange
(DEX) implemented on Ethereum, automatically provide
users with liquidity for their tokens. DEXs is a new kind of
marketplace that can offer a secure peer-to-peer exchange
of crypto-asset tokens for trading [92]. The core of a DEX,
named atomic swap, enables two parties to exchange to-
kens or crypto-assets without involving an intermediary
party. Cybex [93] as a DEXs-based DApp, provides a peer-
to-peer marketplace for tokens to be exchanged. Cybex
also issues its token called CYB. It is worth noting that
CYB is only allowed to use in the Cybex market when
paying for the exchange of new tokens, staking to bor-
row crypto-asset tokens, paying transaction fees, etc. The
Diem Blockchain [33] is the technological backbone of
the payment system, operated by a network of validator
nodes. The software that implements the blockchain is
open-sourced so that anyone can build upon it and scale
their ﬁnancial needs.

4.4 Blockchain-empowered Authentication in

Metaverse

Currently, the economic activities in metaverse mainly
include the auction of virtual assets, including land, scarce
items, precious real estate, the development and leasing
of land, the rewards of game tasks, and the proﬁts from
investing in cryptocurrency. Thus, metaverse invokes a
new form of funding that draws inspiration from both the
real and virtual world.

NFT has been mainly used to commemorate special mo-
ments or to collect digital assets, and recently it is creating
a new digital content business by combining it with meta-
verse [94, 95]. NFT can guarantee the uniqueness of the
digital assets by keeping encrypted transaction history per-
manently on the blockchain. Each token has a unique
recognizable value, which enables to authenticate the own-
ership of digital assets. For example, the blockchain-
empowered NFT has been applied to prove the uniqueness
of the avatar and the created things in metaverse [96].

Q. Yang, Y. Zhao, H. Huang et al

Table 2: A Summary of the Blockchain Technologies in Metaverse

Types

Description

Representative Works Use cases

Blockchain
Architecture

Smart contracts

Consensus mechanisms

Cryptocurrency

Applications of
Blockchain

Repulay protocol based on reputation mechanism

Incorporate probabilistic blockchain with reputation

Alliance chain with reputation

Blockchain Meets IoT

Fast certiﬁcate veriﬁcation

[85]

[84]

[82, 83]

[90]

[97]

[98]

[99]

[100]

Executing transactions

PoW, PoS

Bitcoins, Ethereum

Accelerate transaction relay

Blockchain and AI

Supply chain

Use Blockchain to manage IoTs

Certiﬁcate veriﬁcation

5

Integration of Blockchain and AI on
Metaverse

As aforementioned, we have discussed the details of AI
and blockchain, and their impacts on the metaverse. The
integration of AI and blockchain, namely blockchain intel-
ligence and intelligent blockchain, shall be explored due
to their close interactions. For example, the decentralized
AI as an integration of AI and blockchain [101] enables
to process and perform analytics or decision making on
trusted data without any support from trusted third parties.
Hence, in this section, we shall discuss their integration
and seek to answer the question: what contributions can
intelligent systems make in metaverse [102].

5.1 Blockchain for AI

5.2 AI for Blockchain

To design a blockchain, developers have to tune massive
parameters and consider trade-offs between incentive, con-
sensus, security, and many other aspects. AI technolo-
gies can be applied to deal with those problems and help
blockchain systems achieve higher performance. In ad-
dition, with the breakthroughs of machine learning, a
blockchain governed by a machine learning-based algo-
rithm might enable automatically detection of attacks and
invoke appropriate defense mechanisms. For example,
Salimitari et al. [105] propose a machine learning-based
framework, which aims to offer a secure and robust consen-
sus in blockchain-based IoT networks. The authors then
present a two-stage consensus protocol for the AI-enabled
blockchain that exploits an outlier detection algorithm in
an IoT network.

Blockchains can offer various components for AI, includ-
ing dataset, algorithms, and computing power through
trading from the decentralized marketplace. Blockchain
encourages the innovation and adoption of AI to an un-
precedented level in the context of metaverse. Several rep-
resentative examples are reviewed as follows. Mamoshina
et al.
[103] propose a blockchain-based decentralized
model that enables users to access their personal data in
an AI-moderated healthcare data exchange. The proposed
model allows users to upload their data directly to the
system and grants access to their data using transparent
pricing. Such transparent pricing is determined by a data
value model, guaranteeing fair tracking of all data usage
activities. Woods [104] analyzes the importance of fus-
ing AI techniques and blockchain infrastructure, aiming
to address the security risks faced by the Internet. The
author ﬁnds that bots-bots and human-bots interactions
have increased since 52% of the web trafﬁc is generated by
bots. Thus, bot-bot communications will exceed human-
bot interactions according to the increasing bot trafﬁc. In
metaverse, each person will have multiple avatars. This
fact inevitably leads to huge trafﬁc due to massive interac-
tions.

6 Challenges and Open Issues

Through the previous review, we found that AI and
blockchain are fundamental technologies for the metaverse.
Although those technologies are promising to build a scal-
able, reliable, and efﬁcient metaverse, we are aware that
the metaverse is still in its infant stage. Thus, this section
discusses the challenges, open issues, and suggestions for
the fusion of AI and blockchain in the metaverse.

6.1 Open Issues on Digital Economy in Metaverse

Different from the physical world, the digital creation in
the virtual world might be unlimited. The identity of digi-
tal objects determines value instead of the undifferentiated
labor in the conventional economy. In the ﬁeld of digi-
tal creation, it is necessary to develop authoring tools to
enable the users to produce original content easily and
gain rewards efﬁciently at a low cost. Those tools could
improve the enthusiasm of content producers of the meta-
verse. The marginal beneﬁts will increase in the metaverse
instead of diminishing marginal beneﬁts of production in
the physical world. The difference in marginal beneﬁts

11

Q. Yang, Y. Zhao, H. Huang et al

between the physical world and the virtual world demands
a value conversion mechanism to bridge their gap.

In future metaverse, people prefer to turn to their virtual
cabinet to select a digital outﬁt, while companies begin to
hype the virtual skins, virtual clothing, and even virtual
estates with a high price which will block a large portion
of players to join in the metaverse. Hence, it is necessary
to propose particular governance mechanisms under the
cooperation of worldwide companies. Furthermore, how
to establish a digital currency system that enables the cur-
rency exchange between the metaverse and the physical
world remains an open issue.

In addition, the transaction volume and frequency that
occurred in the metaverse will become extremely much
higher than happened in the physical world. Thus, how to
support such high-volume and high-frequency transactions
remains a challenging problem in the future metaverse.
Another issue related to future metaverse might be the
inﬂation caused by massive cryptocurrency supplements
in a decentralized economy system built upon blockchain
and AI technologies.

6.2 Artiﬁcial Intelligence Issues

The breakthroughs of artiﬁcial intelligence technologies,
especially deep learning, enable academia and industries
to make great progress in the automatic operation and de-
sign in the metaverse and perform better than conventional
approaches. For example, the study [8] applies AI to gener-
ate vivid digital characters quickly that might be deployed
by virtual service providers as conversational virtual assis-
tants to populate the metaverse. However, existing deep
learning models are usually very deep and have a mas-
sive amount of parameters, which incurs a high burden for
resource-constrained mobile devices to deploy learning-
based applications. While current AI technologies are just
at the stage where people tell the machine to do speciﬁc
tasks instead of enabling the machine to learn to learn au-
tomatically. Most learning tasks are only suitable for the
closed static environment and have poor robustness, and
poor interpretability that can not satisfy the requirement of
availability, robustness, interpretability, and adaptability in
an open and dynamic environment.

Meta-learning [106] is a promising learning paradigm that
can observe how different machine learning approaches
perform on a wide range of learning tasks. Learning from
this experience, meta-data can learn new tasks much faster
than others possible. Not only does meta-learning dramati-
cally speed up and improve the design of machine learning
pipelines or neural architectures, it also allows us to re-
place hand-engineered algorithms with novel approaches
learned in a data-driven way. Therefore, meta-learning
remains challenging to achieve auto-machine learning in
future years.

12

6.3 Blockchain-related Issues

Although blockchain technologies have achieved a lot of
improvements, there are still challenges and open issues
while fusing blockchain in metaverse. We post several
questions in the following to inspire readers to deeply dive
into the related technical studies.

• Can the existing real-world NFT platforms adapt
to the high transaction volumes in the meta-
verse? NFTs are unique cryptographic tokens
that deployed on blockchains. Assigning non-
reproducible features, NFTs digitalize real-world
items like artworks and real estate. However, the
current NFT platforms are in their initial stage.
To meet the high-volume requirement of future
metaverse’s applications, to improve the service
level of NFT platforms is an essential research
and engineering topic.

• What rules does metaverse require towards a
healthy digital blockchain-empowered market
and business? From the perspective of policy,
the combination of decentralization and regula-
tion might be a promising way for the digital
blockchain-empowered market. DAO [107] is re-
garded as an efﬁcient, decentralized, and promis-
ing paradigm that works with like-minded folks
around the globe. The members in DAO have
built-in treasuries that no one has the authority to
access without the approval of the group. DAOs
are executed through smart contracts, which are
transparent codes veriﬁable by anyone. Thus,
exploiting DAOs, decisions can be governed by
proposals and voting, to ensure everyone in the
metaverse has a countable voice.

• Is the real-world blockchain-empowered appli-
cation model able to be directly transplanted to
metaverse? Nowadays, the overwhelming specu-
lations over thousands of cryptocurrencies and the
scams of initial coin offering (ICO) have brought
notorious doubts on metaverse. Moreover, the ex-
isting blockchain-empowered application models
cannot meet the stringent requirements of meta-
verse with it low latency and high throughput
performance. Hence, a high-performance and se-
cure blockchain-empowered application model is
needed for the various applications used in future
metaverse.

• Does metaverse need new blockchain platforms
and new consensus mechanisms? The foundation
of the blockchain is consensus mechanism, such
as PoW and PoS. However, the existing consen-
sus mechanisms have shortcomings with regard
to large amount of hash computing and various
security issues. The future decentralized applica-
tions demand a blockchain platform to fulﬁll the
following desired characteristics, i.e., low latency,
high throughput, fast transaction-sequential per-
formance, ofﬂine payment of transactions, low

Q. Yang, Y. Zhao, H. Huang et al

transaction fee, modern free internet business
model, etc. Hence, new blockchain platforms
and new consensus mechanisms are expected to
appear for future metaverse.

cryptography mechanisms are open proposals for privacy
preservation in the metaverse.

7 Conclusion

6.4 Governance in Metaverse

Currently, the concept of the metaverse is mainly used and
propagated by companies such as Roblox and Meta (Face-
book previously). Predictably, the most popular ecosys-
tems soon are built and operated by these giant corpora-
tions. Tiny metaverse has only a few application scenarios.
In contrast, the macro metaverse would include all sce-
narios required by users. To realize such a vision, large
companies need to cooperate to create a huge uniﬁed meta-
verse. The problem is how to incentivize those giant com-
panies to cooperate? Once the uniﬁed metaverse is set up,
how do make uniform rules that govern the whole uniﬁed
metaverse?

On the other hand, the threats of market manipulation and
money laundering will exist in the future metaverse. Thus,
the market governance will be viewed as more signiﬁcant
from the perspective of regional jurisdiction of the meta-
verse.

Artiﬁcial intelligence and blockchain technologies are ex-
pected to play essential roles in the ever-expanding meta-
verse. For example, metaverse uses artiﬁcial intelligence
and blockchain to create a digital virtual world where any-
one can safely and freely engage in social and economic
activities that transcend the limits of the real world. Ex-
ploiting metaverse, the application of these latest AI and
blockchain technologies will be accelerated as well.

By surveying the most related works across metaverse
components, digital currencies, AI technologies and appli-
cations in the virtual world, and blockchain-empowered
technologies, we wish to offer a thoughtful review to the
experts from both academia and industries. We also envi-
sioned critical challenges and open issues in constructing
the fundamental elements of metaverse with the fusion
of AI and blockchain. Further exploitation and interdisci-
plinary research on the metaverse entail collaboration from
both academia and industries to strive for an open, fair and
rational future metaverse.

6.5 Blockchain-empowered Applications for

Metaverse

References

Various applications will boost the virtual economy in the
metaverse, such as blockchain-empowered Apps for of-
ﬁce work, social networks, NFT markets, game ﬁnance,
etc. For instance, the blockchain-based game Axie Inﬁnity
[108] establishes a digital pet universe in which players
can battle, raise, and trade fantasy creatures called Ax-
ies. The game allows players to deposit from an Ethereum
wallet to a Ronin wallet via the Ronin Bridge. In short,
the game allows the currency exchange between ﬁat and
cryptocurrency since the players can buy ETH on a cryp-
tocurrency exchange like Binance or Coinbase or with ﬁat
on Ronin, and send it to their address due to the legal-
ity of cryptocurrency in some countries. Although this
blockchain-empowered game ﬁnance does not work in
some countries, we believe that the future metaverse will
embrace a much more open, fair, and rational physical
world.

6.6 Security and Privacy for Metaverse

From the perspective of metaverse companies, developers,
and metaverse users alike, a natural question is how to
guarantee their security & privacy in metaverse which
could mean violation of their privacy, potential identity
theft, and other types of fraud [109].

[1] Erik Kain. Epic games pulls travis scott emote from
‘fortnite’ item shop.
https://www.forbes.c
om/sites/erikkain/2021/11/09/epic-game
s-pulls-travis-scott-emote-from-fortni
te-item-shop/?sh=7f5cbabe4708, Retrieved
December 16, 2021.

[2] Andreas Aristidou, Ariel Shamir, and Yiorgos
Chrysanthou. Digital dance ethnography: Organiz-
ing large dance collections. J. Comput. Cult. Herit.,
12(4), nov 2019.

[3] Judy Joshua. Information bodies: Computational
anxiety in neal stephenson’s snow crash. Interdisci-
plinary Literary Studies, 19(1):17–47, 2017.

[4] Jack Fennimore. Roblox: 5 fast facts you need
to know. https://heavy.com/games/2017/07/
roblox-youtube-free-download-corporati
on-baszucki-cassel-nerfmodder/, Retrieved
December 16, 2021.

[5] Meta. Introducing meta: A social technology com-
pany. https://about.fb.com/news/2021/10/
facebook-company-is-now-meta/, Retrieved
December 16, 2021.

[6] Epic Games. Fortnite. Epic Games, 2017.

For example, a lot of private properties in the metaverse, in-
cluding the digital assets, the identity of virtual items, cryp-
tocurrency spending records, and other private user data,
are required to be protected. Thus, metaverse-oriented

[7] Paulina Ambrasait˙e and Agn˙e Smagurauskait˙e. Epic
games v. apple: Fortnite battle that can change the
industry. Vilnius University Open Series, pages 6–
25, 2021.

13

Q. Yang, Y. Zhao, H. Huang et al

[8] Epic Games. The world’s most open and advanced
real-time 3d creation tool. https://www.unre
alengine.com/en-US/, Retrieved December 16,
2021.

[9] Mike Seymour, Chris Evans, and Kim Libreri. Meet
mike: epic avatars. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2017 VR
Village, pages 1–2. 2017.

[10] Jingteng Tech. Beamlink, Retrieved May 16, 2022.

[11] Andreas Aristidou, Ariel Shamir, and Yiorgos
Chrysanthou. Digital dance ethnography: Organiz-
ing large dance collections. Journal on Computing
and Cultural Heritage (JOCCH), 12(4):1–27, 2019.

[12] Sam Ferguson, Emery Schubert, and Catherine J
Stevens. Dynamic dance warping: Using dynamic
time warping to compare dance movement per-
formed under different conditions. In Proceedings
of the 2014 international workshop on movement
and computing, pages 94–99, 2014.

[13] LEE Lik-Hang, Tristan Braud, Pengyuan Zhou, Lin
Wang, Dianlei Xu, Zijun Lin, Abhishek Kumar, Car-
los Bermejo, and Pan Hui. All one needs to know
about metaverse: A complete survey on techno-
logical singularity, virtual ecosystem, and research
agenda.

[14] John David N Dionisio, William G Burns III, and
Richard Gilbert. 3d virtual worlds and the meta-
verse: Current status and future possibilities. ACM
Computing Surveys (CSUR), 45(3):1–38, 2013.

[15] Winona LaDuke. Traditional ecological knowledge
and enviromental futures. Colo. J. Int’l Envtl. L. &
Pol’y, 5:127, 1994.

[16] Matthieu Nadini, Laura Alessandretti, Flavio Di Gi-
acinto, Mauro Martino, Luca Maria Aiello, and An-
drea Baronchelli. Mapping the nft revolution: mar-
ket trends, trade networks and visual features. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2106.00647, 2021.

[17] Nick Lambert. Beyond nfts: A possible future for

digital art. ITNOW, 63(3):8–10, 2021.

[18] Wei Yang Bryan Lim, Zehui Xiong, Dusit Niyato,
Xianbin Cao, Chunyan Miao, Sumei Sun, and Qiang
Yang. Realizing the metaverse with edge intelli-
gence: A match made in heaven, 2022.

[19] Minrui Xu, Dusit Niyato, Jiawen Kang, Zehui
Xiong, Chunyan Miao, and Dong In Kim. Wireless
edge-empowered metaverse: A learning-based in-
centive mechanism for virtual reality. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2111.03776, 2021.

[20] Wei Chong Ng, Wei Yang Bryan Lim, Jer Shyuan
Ng, Zehui Xiong, Dusit Niyato, and Chunyan Miao.
Uniﬁed resource allocation framework for the edge
arXiv preprint
intelligence-enabled metaverse.
arXiv:2110.14325, 2021.

[21] Hongyang Du, Dusit Niyato, Jiawen Kang, Dong In
Kim, and Chunyan Miao. Optimal targeted adver-

tising strategy for secure wireless edge metaverse.
CoRR, abs/2111.00511, 2021.

[22] Yuna Jiang, Jiawen Kang, Dusit Niyato, Xiaohu
Ge, Zehui Xiong, and Chunyan Miao. Reliable
coded distributed computing for metaverse services:
Coalition formation and incentive mechanism de-
sign. CoRR, abs/2111.10548, 2021.

[23] Yue Han, Dusit Niyato, Cyril Leung, Chunyan Miao,
and Dong In Kim. A dynamic resource allocation
framework for synchronizing metaverse with iot
service and data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.00431,
2021.

[24] Jee Young Lee. A study on metaverse hype for sus-
tainable growth. International journal of advanced
smart convergence, 10(3):72–80, 2021.

[25] Haihan Duan, Jiaye Li, Sizheng Fan, Zhonghao Lin,
Xiao Wu, and Wei Cai. Metaverse for social good: A
university campus prototype. In Proceedings of the
29th ACM International Conference on Multimedia,
pages 153–161, 2021.

[26] Michael Rymaszewski, Wagner James Au, Mark
Wallace, Catherine Winters, Cory Ondrejka, and
Benjamin Batstone-Cunningham. Second life: The
ofﬁcial guide. John Wiley & Sons, 2007.

[27] Remi Arnaud and Mark C Barnes. COLLADA: sail-
ing the gulf of 3D digital content creation. CRC
Press, 2006.

[28] Decentraland. Builder. https://builder.dece

ntraland.org/, Retrieved December 16, 2021.

[29] Lik-Hang Lee, Zijun Lin, Rui Hu, Zhengya Gong,
Abhishek Kumar, Tangyao Li, Sijia Li, and Pan
Hui. When creators meet the metaverse: A
arXiv preprint
survey on computational arts.
arXiv:2111.13486, 2021.

[30] Michael Bourlakis, Savvas Papagiannidis, and Feng
Li. Retail spatial evolution: paving the way from
traditional to metaverse retailing. Electronic Com-
merce Research, 9(1):135–148, 2009.

[31] Dave Cliff and Michael Rollins. Methods matter: A
trading agent with no intelligence routinely outper-
forms ai-based traders. In 2020 IEEE Symposium
Series on Computational Intelligence (SSCI), pages
392–399, 2020.

[32] Decentraland. Marketplace. https://market
.decentraland.org/, Retrieved December 16,
2021.

[33] Diem. How the diem payment system works.
https://www.diem.com/en-us/vision/#how
_it_works, Retrieved December 16, 2021.
[34] Adam Smith. The wealth of nations [1776], volume

11937. na, 1937.

[35] Stephanie Dick. Artiﬁcial intelligence. 2019.
[36] Sreenivasa Rao Jammalamadaka. Introduction to

linear regression analysis, 2003.

14

Q. Yang, Y. Zhao, H. Huang et al

[37] Thais Mayumi Oshiro, Pedro Santoro Perez, and
José Augusto Baranauskas. How many trees in
In International workshop on
a random forest?
machine learning and data mining in pattern recog-
nition, pages 154–168. Springer, 2012.

[38] Christopher C Paige and Michael A Saunders. To-
wards a generalized singular value decomposition.
SIAM Journal on Numerical Analysis, 18(3):398–
405, 1981.

[39] Vladimir Vapnik. The nature of statistical learning
theory. Springer science & business media, 1999.

[40] Nikhil Ketkar. Convolutional neural networks. In
Deep Learning with Python, pages 63–78. Springer,
2017.

[41] Leslie Pack Kaelbling, Michael L Littman, and An-
drew W Moore. Reinforcement learning: A survey.
Journal of artiﬁcial intelligence research, 4:237–
285, 1996.

[42] Johannes Van Der Wal. Stochastic dynamic pro-
gramming. PhD thesis, Methematisch Centrum Am-
sterdam, The Netherlands, 1980.

[43] Kai Arulkumaran, Marc Peter Deisenroth, Miles
Brundage, and Anil Anthony Bharath. Deep rein-
forcement learning: A brief survey. IEEE Signal
Processing Magazine, 34(6):26–38, 2017.

[44] Kai Arulkumaran, Marc Peter Deisenroth, Miles
Brundage, and Anil Anthony Bharath. Deep rein-
forcement learning: A brief survey. IEEE Signal
Processing Magazine, 34(6):26–38, 2017.

[45] Michael G Kapteyn, Jacob VR Pretorius, and
Karen E Willcox. A probabilistic graphical model
foundation for enabling predictive digital twins at
scale. Nature Computational Science, 1(5):337–347,
2021.

[46] Omer San. The digital twin revolution. Nature
Computational Science, 1(5):307–308, 2021.

[47] Qinglin Qi and Fei Tao. Digital twin and big data to-
wards smart manufacturing and industry 4.0: 360 de-
gree comparison. Ieee Access, 6:3585–3593, 2018.

[48] KR Malik and M Farhan. Merging virtual world
Int Rob Auto J, 2(1):00012,

with data sciences.
2017.

[49] Youngjib Ham and Jaeyoon Kim. Participatory
sensing and digital twin city: updating virtual
city models for enhanced risk-informed decision-
making. Journal of Management in Engineering,
36(3):04020005, 2020.

[50] Fan Xue, Weisheng Lu, Zhe Chen, and Christo-
pher J Webster. From lidar point cloud towards
digital twin city: Clustering city objects based on
gestalt principles. ISPRS Journal of Photogramme-
try and Remote Sensing, 167:418–431, 2020.

[51] Kuan-Ting Lai, Chia-Chih Lin, Chun-Yao Kang,
Mei-Enn Liao, and Ming-Syan Chen. Vivid: Virtual

environment for visual deep learning. In Proceed-
ings of the 26th ACM international conference on
Multimedia, pages 1356–1359, 2018.

[52] Dawei Chen, Linda Jiang Xie, BaekGyu Kim,
Li Wang, Choong Seon Hong, Li-Chun Wang, and
Zhu Han. Federated learning based mobile edge
computing for augmented reality applications. In
2020 International Conference on Computing, Net-
working and Communications (ICNC), pages 767–
773, 2020.

[53] Mehdi Mohammadi and Ala Al-Fuqaha. Enabling
cognitive smart cities using big data and machine
learning: Approaches and challenges. IEEE Com-
munications Magazine, 56(2):94–101, 2018.

[54] Roman V. Yampolskiy, Brendan Klare, and Anil K.
Jain. Face recognition in the virtual world: Rec-
ognizing avatar faces. In 2012 11th International
Conference on Machine Learning and Applications,
volume 1, pages 40–45, 2012.

[55] Matteo Fabbri, Fabio Lanzi, Simone Calderara, An-
drea Palazzi, Roberto Vezzani, and Rita Cucchiara.
Learning to detect and track visible and occluded
body joints in a virtual world. In Proceedings of the
European conference on computer vision (ECCV),
pages 430–446, 2018.

[56] Hao Wang, Yang Gao, and Xingguo Chen. Rl-dot:
A reinforcement learning npc team for playing domi-
nation games. IEEE Transactions on Computational
intelligence and AI in Games, 2(1):17–26, 2009.

[57] Christopher Berner, Greg Brockman, Brooke Chan,
Vicki Cheung, Przemysław D˛ebiak, Christy Denni-
son, David Farhi, Quirin Fischer, Shariq Hashme,
Chris Hesse, et al. Dota 2 with large scale
arXiv preprint
deep reinforcement
arXiv:1912.06680, 2019.

learning.

[58] Jui-Fa Chen, Wei-Chuan Lin, Hua-Sheng Bai, Chia-
Che Yang, and Hsiao-Chuan Chao. Constructing
an intelligent behavior avatar in a virtual world: a
self-learning model based on reinforcement. In IRI
-2005 IEEE International Conference on Informa-
tion Reuse and Integration, Conf, 2005., pages 421–
426, 2005.

[59] Jehee Lee and Kang Hoon Lee. Precomputing avatar
behavior from human motion data. Graphical mod-
els, 68(2):158–174, 2006.

[60] Iason Kastanis and Mel Slater. Reinforcement learn-
ing utilizes proxemics: An avatar learns to manip-
ulate the position of people in immersive virtual
reality. ACM Transactions on Applied Perception
(TAP), 9(1):1–15, 2012.

[61] Rouhollah Rahmatizadeh, Pooya Abolghasemi,
Aman Behal, and Ladislau Bölöni. From virtual
demonstration to real-world manipulation using
lstm and mdn. In Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 2018.

15

Q. Yang, Y. Zhao, H. Huang et al

[62] Rouhollah Rahmatizadeh, Pooya Abolghasemi,
Aman Behal, and Ladislau Bölöni. Learning real
manipulation tasks from virtual demonstrations us-
ing lstm. arXiv preprint arXiv:1603.03833, 2016.

[63] Tian Wang, Jiakun Li, Yingjun Deng, Chuang Wang,
Hichem Snoussi, and Fei Tao. Digital twin for
human-machine interaction with convolutional neu-
International Journal of Computer
ral network.
Integrated Manufacturing, pages 1–10, 2021.

[64] Junjie Pang, Yan Huang, Zhenzhen Xie, Jianbo Li,
and Zhipeng Cai. Collaborative city digital twin for
the covid-19 pandemic: A federated learning solu-
tion. Tsinghua Science and Technology, 26(5):759–
771, 2021.

[65] Sangho Lee, Gyutae Ha, Hongseok Kim, and Shiho
Kim. A collaborative serious game for ﬁre disaster
evacuation drill in metaverse. Journal of Platform
Technology, 9(3):70–77, 2021.

[66] Fei Tao and Qinglin Qi. Make more digital twins,

2019.

[67] Tian Li, Anit Kumar Sahu, Ameet Talwalkar, and
Virginia Smith. Federated learning: Challenges,
methods, and future directions. IEEE Signal Pro-
cessing Magazine, 37(3):50–60, 2020.

[68] Nicola Rieke, Jonny Hancox, Wenqi Li, Fausto
Milletari, Holger R Roth, Shadi Albarqouni, Spyri-
don Bakas, Mathieu N Galtier, Bennett A Land-
man, Klaus Maier-Hein, et al. The future of dig-
ital health with federated learning. NPJ digital
medicine, 3(1):1–7, 2020.

[69] Qiang Yang, Yang Liu, Yong Cheng, Yan Kang,
Tianjian Chen, and Han Yu. Federated learning.
Synthesis Lectures on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Ma-
chine Learning, 13(3):1–207, 2019.

[70] Edward Castronova. The price of bodies: A hedo-
nic pricing model of avatar attributes in a synthetic
world. Kyklos, 57(2):173–196, 2004.

[71] Ralph Schroeder. The social life of avatars: Pres-
ence and interaction in shared virtual environments.
Springer Science & Business Media, 2012.

[72] Kathryn Merrick and Mary Lou Maher. Motivated
reinforcement learning for non-player characters in
persistent computer game worlds. In Proceedings
of the 2006 ACM SIGCHI international conference
on Advances in computer entertainment technology,
pages 3–es, 2006.

[73] Saad Razzaq, Fahad Maqbool, Maham Khalid, Iram
Tariq, Aqsa Zahoor, and Muhammad Ilyas. Zom-
bies arena: fusion of reinforcement learning with
augmented reality on npc. Cluster Computing,
21(1):655–666, 2018.

[75] Decentraland. Introduction. https://docs.dec
entraland.org/decentraland/introductio
n/, Retrieved December 16, 2021.

[76] Yuhei Ando, Ruck Thawonmas, and Frank Rinaldo.
Level of interest in observed exhibits in metaverse
museums. Proceedings of the innovations in infor-
mation and communication science and technology
IICST, pages 62–66, 2012.

[77] Jean-Luc Lugrin and Marc Cavazza. Ai-based world
behaviour for emergent narratives. In Proceedings
of the 2006 ACM SIGCHI international conference
on Advances in computer entertainment technology,
pages 25–es, 2006.

[78] Max Kreminski, Ben Samuel, Edward Melcer, and
Noah Wardrip-Fruin. Evaluating ai-based games
through retellings. In Proceedings of the AAAI Con-
ference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Interactive
Digital Entertainment, volume 15, pages 45–51,
2019.

[79] Arno Puder, Stefan Markwitz, Florian Gudermann,
and Kurt Geihs. Ai-based trading in open distributed
In Open Distributed Processing,
environments.
pages 157–169. Springer, 1995.

[80] Xiao-Yang Liu, Hongyang Yang, Jiechao Gao, and
Christina Dan Wang. Finrl: Deep reinforcement
learning framework to automate trading in quanti-
tative ﬁnance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.09395,
2021.

[81] Xiao-Yang Liu, Jingyang Rui, Jiechao Gao, Li-
uqing Yang, Hongyang Yang, Zhaoran Wang,
Christina Dan Wang, and Jian Guo. Finrl-meta: A
universe of near-real market environments for data-
driven deep reinforcement learning in quantitative
ﬁnance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.06753, 2021.

[82] Bitcoin. Bitcoin for businesses. from https://bi
tcoin.org/en/bitcoin-for-businesses, Re-
trieved December 16, 2021.

[83] Ethereum. Welcome to ethereum. https://bi
tcoin.org/en/bitcoin-for-businesses, Re-
trieved December 16, 2021.

[84] Tuyet Duong, Alexander Chepurnoy, Lei Fan, and
Hong-Sheng Zhou. Twinscoin: A cryptocurrency
via proof-of-work and proof-of-stake. In Proceed-
ings of the 2nd ACM Workshop on Blockchains,
Cryptocurrencies, and Contracts, pages 1–13, 2018.

[85] Philip Daian, Steven Goldfeder, Tyler Kell, Yunqi
Li, Xueyuan Zhao, Iddo Bentov, Lorenz Breiden-
bach, and Ari Juels. Flash boys 2.0: Frontrunning
in decentralized exchanges, miner extractable value,
and consensus instability. In 2020 IEEE Symposium
on Security and Privacy (SP), pages 910–927. IEEE,
2020.

[74] DOTA 2 Guide. Welcome to dota, you suck.
https://purgegamers.true.io/g/dota-2-g
uide/, Retrieved December 16, 2021.

[86] Gang Wang, Zhijie Shi, Mark Nixon, and Song Han.
Chainsplitter: Towards blockchain-based industrial
iot architecture for supporting hierarchical storage.

16

Q. Yang, Y. Zhao, H. Huang et al

In IEEE International Conference on Blockchain
(ICBC), pages 166–175. IEEE, 2019.

[87] Philipp Frauenthaler, Marten Sigwart, Christof
Spanring, Michael Sober, and Stefan Schulte. Eth
relay: A cost-efﬁcient relay for ethereum-based
blockchains. In IEEE International Conference on
Blockchain (ICBC), pages 204–213, 2020.

[88] Shu Yang, Ziteng Chen, Laizhong Cui, Mingwei Xu,
Zhongxing Ming, and Ke Xu. Codag: An efﬁcient
and compacted dag-based blockchain protocol. In
2019 IEEE International Conference on Blockchain
(Blockchain), pages 314–318. IEEE, 2019.

[89] Lukas Aumayr, Matteo Maffei, O˘guzhan Ersoy,
Andreas Erwig, Sebastian Faust, Siavash Riahi,
Kristina Hostáková, and Pedro Moreno-Sanchez.
Bitcoin-compatible virtual channels. In 2021 IEEE
Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP), pages
901–918. IEEE, 2021.

[90] Mengqian Zhang, Yukun Cheng, Xiaotie Deng,
Bo Wang, Jan Xie, Yuanyuan Yang, and Jiarui
relay in
Zhang.
Accelerating transactions
In 2021
blockchain networks via reputation.
IEEE/ACM 29th International Symposium on Qual-
ity of Service (IWQOS), pages 1–10. IEEE, 2021.

[91] Guillermo Angeris, Hsien-Tang Kao, Rei Chiang,
Charlie Noyes, and Tarun Chitra. An analysis of
uniswap markets. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.03380,
2019.

[92] Chris Dai. Dex: A dapp for the decentralized mar-
ketplace. In Blockchain and Crypt Currency, pages
95–106. Springer, Singapore, 2020.

[93] Cybex. Cybex introduction. https://intro.cy
bex.io/index_en.html, Retrieved December 16,
2021.

[94] Ethereum. Non-fungible tokens (nft). https://et
hereum.org/en/nft/#gatsby-focus-wrappe
r, Retrieved December 16, 2021.

[95] GDA Capital. Metaerse property. https://me
taverse.properties/buy-in-decentraland
/, 2021-11-11.

[96] Hyun-joo Jeon, Ho-chang Youn, Sang-mi Ko, and
Tae-heon Kim. Blockchain and ai meet in the meta-
verse. 2021.

[97] Tara Salman, Raj Jain, and Lav Gupta. A reputa-
tion management framework for knowledge-based
and probabilistic blockchains. In 2019 IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Blockchain (Blockchain),
pages 520–527. IEEE, 2019.

[98] Sidra Malik, Volkan Dedeoglu, Salil S Kanhere,
and Raja Jurdak. Trustchain: Trust management

in blockchain and iot supported supply chains. In
2019 IEEE International Conference on Blockchain
(Blockchain), pages 184–193. IEEE, 2019.

[99] Oscar Novo. Blockchain meets iot: An architec-
ture for scalable access management in iot. IEEE
Internet of Things Journal, 5(2):1184–1195, 2018.

[100] Minmei Wang, Chen Qian, Xin Li, Shouqian Shi,
and Shigang Chen. Collaborative validation of
public-key certiﬁcates for iot by distributed caching.
IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, 29(1):92–
105, 2020.

[101] Nebula Ai. Decentralized ai blockchain whitepaper.

Nebula AI Team, Montreal, 2018.

[102] Thang N. Dinh and My T. Thai. Ai and blockchain:
A disruptive integration. Computer, 51(9):48–53,
2018.

[103] Polina Mamoshina, Lucy Ojomoko, Yury Yanovich,
Alex Ostrovski, Alex Botezatu, Pavel Prikhodko,
Eugene Izumchenko, Alexander Aliper, Konstantin
Romantsov, Alexander Zhebrak, et al. Converg-
ing blockchain and next-generation artiﬁcial intel-
ligence technologies to decentralize and accelerate
biomedical research and healthcare. Oncotarget,
9(5):5665, 2018.

[104] J Woods. Blockchain: Rebalancing & amplifying
the power of ai and machine learning (ml). URL
https://medium.
com/cryptooracle/blockchain-
rebalancing-amplifying-the-power-of-ai-
andmachine-learning-ml-af95616e9ad9,
online, 2018.

vol.

[105] Mehrdad Salimitari, Mohsen Joneidi, and Mainak
Chatterjee. Ai-enabled blockchain: An outlier-
aware consensus protocol for blockchain-based iot
networks. In 2019 IEEE Global Communications
Conference (GLOBECOM), pages 1–6, 2019.

[106] Joaquin Vanschoren. Meta-learning: A survey.

arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.03548, 2018.

[107] Lu Liu, Sicong Zhou, Huawei Huang, and Zibin
Zheng. From technology to society: An overview
of blockchain-based dao. IEEE Open Journal of the
Computer Society, 2021.

[108] Axie inﬁnity. Play to earn. https://axieinfini

ty.com/, Retrieved December 16, 2021.

[109] ANWESHA ROY. Metaverse data protection and
privacy: The next big-tech dilemma? https://ww
w.xrtoday.com/virtual-reality/metavers
e-data-protection-and-privacy-the-next
-big-tech-dilemma/, Retrieved December 16,
2021.

17

