On Using Blockchains for Beyond Visual Line of Sight
(BVLOS) Drones Operation: An Architectural Study

TAHINA RALITERA, Université Paris-Saclay, CEA, List, France
AGNES LANUSSE, Université Paris-Saclay, CEA, List, France
ÖNDER GÜRCAN, Université Paris-Saclay, CEA, List, France

Beyond Visual Line of Sight operation enables drones to surpass the limits imposed by the reach and constraints
of their operator’s eyes. It extends their range and, as such, productivity, and pro￿tability. Drones operating
BVLOS include a variety of highly sensitive assets and information that could be subject to unintentional
or intentional security vulnerabilities. As a solution, blockchain-based services could enable secure and
trustworthy exchange and storage of related data. They also allow for traceability of exchanges and perform
synchronization with other nodes in the network. However, most of the blockchain-based approaches focus
on the network and the protocol aspects of drone systems. Few studies focus on the architectural level of
on-chip compute platforms of drones. Based on this observation, the contribution of this paper is twofold: (1)
a generic blockchain-based service architecture for on-chip compute platforms of drones, and (2) a concrete
example realization of the proposed generic architecture.

CCS Concepts: • Security and privacy;

Additional Key Words and Phrases: blockchain, drone, bvlos, authentication

ACM Reference Format:
Tahina Ralitera, Agnes Lanusse, and Önder Gürcan. 2022. On Using Blockchains for BVLOS Drones Operation:
An Architectural Study. In HiPEAC’22: International Conference on High Performance and Embedded Architectures
and Compilers, January 17–19, 2022, Budapest, Hungary. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 10 pages. https://doi.org/
10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn

1 INTRODUCTION
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) de￿nes BVLOS operation as "an operation in
which the remote pilot or Remotely Piloted Aircraft (RPA) observer does not use visual reference
to the remotely piloted aircraft in the conduct of ￿ight" [13]. This type of operation is crucial for
the large-scale expansion and economic feasibility of a large range of drone business applications
such as logistics, mapping, surveying, etc. BVLOS operation enables drones to surpass the limits
imposed by the reach and constraints of their operator’s eyes, extending their range and, as such,
productivity and pro￿tability.

However, drones include a variety of highly sensitive assets and information that could be subject
to unintentional or intentional security vulnerabilities. Attacks may arise from a number of sources,
including malicious intellectual property blocks (IPs) in the hardware, malicious or vulnerable
￿rmware and software, insecure communication of the system with other devices, eavesdropping or
"man-in-the-middle" attacks, breach of con￿dentiality of the stored data, corruption of the integrity
of collected data [20]. Therefore, secure, resilient, and tamper-proof storage is important for security
and accountability of the data.

Based on this observation, we propose a blockchain-based solution for BVLOS drones operation.
Indeed, the blockchain technology has the potential to secure data that is being dynamically
updated, through its security capabilities such as hashing, smart contracts, consensus protocols,

...
HiPEAC’22, January 17–19, 2022, Budapest, Hungary
© 2022 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-9566-3/18/06. . . $00.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn

1

HiPEAC’22, January 17–19, 2022, Budapest, Hungary

Ralitera and Lanusse, et al.

public and private keys, etc. In this way, the data is stored in an immutable manner, making it
impossible to modify neither intentionally nor unintentionally. The blockchain also allows for
traceability of exchanges and performs synchronization with other nodes in the network. Therefore,
blockchain-based services could enable trustworthy exchange and storage of the drones related
data. Moreover, it is ideally suited for drone applications which are very dynamic in nature [1].

Drones can be used for various purposes and use cases. However, using a concrete blockchain-
based solution with well-de￿ned transaction types and parameters may be complicated for these
di￿erent purposes and use cases. Consequently, we identify the generic component necessary at
the architectural level and propose a solution at that level. Concretely, the contributions of this
paper are as follows:

A generic blockchain-based service architecture dedicated to BVLOS drones operation.
A concrete example realization of the proposed generic architecture.

•
•

The remaining of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the background on
blockchain. Section 3 describes our proposed generic blockchain-based service architecture for
drones operating BVLOS. Section 4 shows the e￿ectiveness of the proposed architecture on a
realistic case study. Section 5 gives related work and Section 6 concludes the paper.

2 BACKGROUND
Blockchain systems [18] are composed of participants communicating over a peer-to-peer net-
work using transactions. Its overall objective is to maintain the consistency and coherency of
all transactions in a replicated immutable transparent append-only data structure called the
blockchain.

Fig. 1. Schematic View on the Blockchain Data-Structure

As illustrated in Figure 1, this data structure consist of blocks which are connected to each other
using cryptographic links. Each block contains an ordered list of transactions. Transactions usually
consists of references to accounts and formal elements like the type of the transaction, its ID, as
well as cryptographic elements like hashes and signatures.

Accounts on the blockchain serve as senders and receivers of transactions. An account consists
of a public key and the corresponding private key, which together form an account key pair. The

2

On Using Blockchains for BVLOS Drones Operation: An Architectural Study

HiPEAC’22, January 17–19, 2022, Budapest, Hungary

public key is used by senders and receivers of transactions while the private key is used to create
digital signatures to authorize transactions.

Participants of a blockchain system can play di￿erent roles in a blockchain network. While some
can be responsible for issuing transactions, others can be responsible for creating the blocks and
having consensus on the created blocks1.

Similarly, storage may also di￿er. While some participants store the full replica of the blockchain
(i.e. full nodes) [8], some others may choose to store less information due to their needs and
capabilities (i.e. light nodes) [21].

3 GENERIC BLOCKCHAIN-BASED SERVICE ARCHITECTURE
Blockchain-based services consist of subsystems which use a blockchain-based solution integrated
with the communication architecture of the BVLOS drone operation. The objective is to design a
blockchain solution deployable to the drones and the Ground Stations (GS) computing platforms.
This will allow adding services (authentication, trust management) using trustworthy data securely.
For that purpose, we model the entities of the U-Space (i.e. drones and ground stations) as
communicating network nodes where a local replicate of the shared blockchain is maintained. The
proposed solution is intended to be embedded inside drones and ground stations for securing the
sensitive data used by the on-chip compute platforms in the future.

Application is made in the context of the Airborne Data Collection on Resilient System Ar-
chitectures (ADACORSA) European project [19]. Figure 2 shows the blockchain-based services
(LS_Blcockchain_based_services) positioning within the overall ADACORSA system architecture
where secure communications, drone services and external entities (i.e., drones and ground stations)
are represented as Logical Actors. Note that these components are not currently embedded in
real drones but are positioned like this for evaluation purposes. In the future real implementa-
tions, they would be integrated at the Reliable Communication component level, so most of the
communications are handled through the communication layer.

The blockchain-based services system consists of a main component called Tamper-proof Storage
Service (TSS) and dedicated service components embedded in the drones and the ground stations.
Thanks to TSS, the drones and the ground stations collaboratively maintain and share sensitive
data in such a way that it is traceable, and that its integrity is protected from intentional and
unintentional modi￿cations. Blockchain technology is used to store, distribute and validate data
using a chain of cryptographically connected blocks. Concretely, the blockchain peer-to-peer
network consists of drones and grounds stations and the blockchain data structure is stored and
managed by TSS.

TSS is developed to provide a common abstract view and interface to permit in depth study of
characteristics and performances of blockchain solutions. It externalizes the interactions with the
blockchain by making explicit interactions and transactions management. Concretely, it interacts
with other services using interfaces for transaction submission. In addition, internal management
services are provided for the synchronization of nodes and for protocol support. As illustrated
in Figure 3, TSS is composed of two components: Blockchain Management and Local Blockchain
Storage.

3.0.1 Blockchain Management. Blockchain Management is responsible for generic blockchain
operations such as registering data into the Local Blockchain storage, verifying the validity of
the data, reading stored data and synchronizing data within the network. In addition, this sub-
component is responsible for the management of the external services (Service A and Service B)

1Such consensus can be achieved using various algorithms. For a review, see [22].

3

HiPEAC’22, January 17–19, 2022, Budapest, Hungary

Ralitera and Lanusse, et al.

Fig. 2. Block Diagram within the Overall System Architecture

related data structures and operations. It also contains dedicated APIs and libraries, as well as
internal management and applicative transactions.

Basically, there are two categories of transaction types that are supported:

default blockchain transactions such as coin base transaction and token transfer transaction
applicative transactions dedicated to speci￿c services. Examples are given in 4.

•
•

3.0.2 Blockchain Storage. The Local Blockchain Storage is responsible for storing data in the form
of a time-stamped network of secure logs of data. Concretely, to provide services in a trustworthy
and decentralised way, the blockchain-based services can require the data stored in the Local
Blockchain Storage.

Due to the memory and computation requirement of TSS, it is not necessary that every device
maintains a full replica of the blockchain locally. Depending on the needs and capabilities of the
support devices, the TSS can be realized in two ways: as a lightweight node or as a full node. In the
example illustrated in 4 "Blockchain-based Authentication Architecture", full nodes are deployed on
ground stations while light nodes are deployed on drones. Thus, TSS for drones communicates and
relies on full nodes (i.e. TSS for Ground Station) to provide them with the necessary information.

4

On Using Blockchains for BVLOS Drones Operation: An Architectural Study

HiPEAC’22, January 17–19, 2022, Budapest, Hungary

Fig. 3. Block Diagram of Blockchain-Based Services

4 CASE STUDY: BLOCKCHAIN-BASED AUTHENTICATION ARCHITECTURE
This section provides a concrete realization of the generic architecture described previously in
section 3 : a blockchain-based authentication service for BVLOS drones operation.

Providing decentralised authentication functionalities contributes to secure communication and
trustworthy cooperation in open networks of (semi-)autonomous drones and the Internet of Things.
The Authentication subsystem (LC_Authentication illustrated in Figure 4) enables drones operating
BVLOS to authenticate other entities in the network that can be used subsequently to establish
secure communication channels between them. The primary focus is on open networks of drones
such as ￿ying ad-hoc networks, but the developed solutions may also be suitable for networks
containing other entities like cars, smart sensors, etc. The main functions provided are decentralised
entity authentication in networks of drones and secure storage of authentication-related data.

The system consists of two main components :

•

•

TSS component (LC_DLT_TamperProofStorageService), previously described in section 3.
In this context, TSS is responsible for secure, permanent storage and management of the
authentication data in a decentralised way. Thanks to TSS, the drones and the Ground Stations
collaboratively maintain and share sensitive data so that nobody can alter the stored data
neither intentionally nor unintentionally.
Authentication Service (AS) component (LC_Authentication) which provides the protocol
and cryptographic operations required for authentication. It also handles authentication
requests. AS provides this service in a decentralised way by using TSS. Concretely, for its
operation it requires the data stored in the TSS component.

AS component provides its service (i.e. entity authentication) to cooperative applications between
drones. It uses the reliable communication hardware and software of the drone to communicate
with other drones. The drones use the authentication protocol provided by the AS component in the
process of establishing secure communication channels to authenticate the communication partner.
In the scope of this paper, the AS component abstracts from the details of the communication stack
in accordance with the OSI model.

5

HiPEAC’22, January 17–19, 2022, Budapest, Hungary

Ralitera and Lanusse, et al.

Fig. 4. Block Diagram of the Blockchain-Based Authentication Service Architecture

To ensure decentralised resilient and tamper-proof properties to the solution, it uses the so-
called TSS component that uses blockchain-based technologies notably for storage and consistency.
TSS brings by construction security properties such as veri￿able interactions, resilience, and
accountability. Due to the distributed nature of TSS, it is not necessary that every drone maintains
such a component in principle. However, it is assumed that every drone maintains its own TSS
component in order to provide the service of authentication in cases where a drone does not have
access to a TSS component at a trusted ground station.

4.1 Authentication Service (AS)
The task of this component is to authenticate drones and other entities in networks of drones,
operating BVLOS, e.g., in Flying Ad-hoc NETworks (FANETs). The authentication service outlined
in this paper is based on public key cryptography. The secure usage of public key cryptography
is enabled by a blockchain-based Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) described in details in [14]. Its
operation can be summarised as follows:

The PKI binds identities to public keys whereby the public keys can be used in a secure manner
during the authentication process. The blockchain-based PKI is used to store the identities together
with their public keys and the con￿rmations of bonds between identity and public keys. Concretely,
the task of a PKI is to guarantee the authenticity of the public keys, i.e. a certain public key belongs
to a certain identity. This allows the secure usage of public key cryptography.

In the case an entity wants to use the public key of a not previously known identity, it has to
ensure that the public key is controlled by the stated identity. For this purpose, the entity requires
a con￿rmation of this bond between identity and public key by a trusted source. Con￿rmations can
have di￿erent forms, e.g., digital certi￿cates, or in the proposed system special transaction of the
blockchain system. These con￿rmations establish (trust) relationships between the entities.

Mathematically, the authors of [14] model these relationships as a directed graph, called trust
graph. The identities and their public keys are represented by nodes. Con￿rmations are represented
by directed edges between the nodes. The so-called trust model de￿nes how con￿rmations are
interpreted, how "chains" of con￿rmations are evaluated and who is allowed to create con￿rmations.
Therefore, the task of the dedicated blockchain of the PKI is to store, update and provide the

trust graph, including the public keys and identities.

6

On Using Blockchains for BVLOS Drones Operation: An Architectural Study

HiPEAC’22, January 17–19, 2022, Budapest, Hungary

For that purpose, in addition to the default transaction types (i.e., coinbase transaction and token-

transfer transaction), the system uses the following applicative transactions for authentication:

•

•

•

•

Entity transaction: This transaction is used to store the public key for authentication with a
signature and the identity information of an entity and creates a node in the trust graph. The
identity information contains the name of the entity and some characteristic properties, like
the type of the entity. The balance of the account is reduced by the fee, and a certain number
of tokens is reserved. Every account can only make at most one entity transaction.
Revoke entity transaction: This transaction can only be made by the account if it has issued
an entity transaction, previously. This transaction destroys the node and all incoming and
outgoing edges in the trust graph. The fee of the transaction is paid by the reserved tokens,
and the remaining is added to the balance of the account.
Con￿rmation transaction: This transaction is used by a sender to con￿rm the identity-key
binding of a receiver and, hence, creates a directed edge from the sender to the receiver in
the trust graph and assigns the maximal allowed path length to it. The balance of the account
is reduced by the fee and some tokens are reserved. If an edge between two nodes already
exists, the number is updated.
Revocation transaction: This transaction is used by a sender to revoke a con￿rmation transac-
tion, performed by itself, and, consequently, the edge in the trust graph is destroyed. The
reserved number of tokens is used to pay the fee.

Since the drones have only limited capabilities to store and process data, it is not feasible that
they participate in the consensus process or store the whole blockchain. Besides their own key pairs,
they require only the trust graph, i.e., the nodes and edges, public keys and identity information.
They do not need the whole trust graph but only the parts that are relevant for them, i.e., they only
need the data of the entities to which they are connected via a valid path. Furthermore, they may
also store the block headers for the possibility to update the trust graph during a mission and to
use (unsecure) channels to the blockchain network. Consequently, the node and edges are stored in
an appropriate form.

Therefore, it is assumed that each drone maintains its own TSS component to provide a blockchain-
based authentication service in cases where a drone does not have access to a TSS component at a
ground station. TSS for drones takes the form of a lightweight node. This means that it does not
store the entire copy of the chain but only queries the current state to determine the last block, and
broadcasts transactions for processing. Thus, TSS for drones communicates and relies on full nodes
(TSS for Ground Station) to provide them with the necessary information. TSS for Ground Station
takes the form of a full node. This means that it stores a copy of the entire blockchain. Its main
tasks also include maintaining the consensus between other nodes and veri￿cation of transactions.

5 RELATED WORK
Blockchain technology enables decentralised and trustworthy exchange and storage of drone
system data. It also allows for traceability of exchanges and performs synchronization with other
nodes in the network.

In this context, according to our observation, most of the interest is on blockchain-based solutions
focusing on the network and communications aspects of drone systems [2, 3, 5, 7, 9]. For example, [5]
presents a blockchain-based network model for unauthorized drone detection in Internet of Drone
(IoD) environment. In their approach, the blockchain technology is used to record various events
in the IoD environment that facilitates any AI-enabled Big data analytics to read this data from
the blockchain and provide various statistical analytics to improve the system. Another approach

7

HiPEAC’22, January 17–19, 2022, Budapest, Hungary

Ralitera and Lanusse, et al.

for blockchain-based IoD is also described in [2]. The solution is called UTM-Chain. It allows to
secure drone ￿ight plan and to store drone’s ￿ight data records. In their architecture, the users,
drones, and ground stations act as nodes, storing the whole blockchain and participating in the
consensus protocol to verify blocks. [3] proposes a system architecture of blockchain-assisted 5G
drone network where data processing and storage are handled at the edge or the cloud. Blockchain
authenticates communications among drones by tracking all their transactions, makes it available
to all network nodes, and achieves data integrity (i.e., cryptography) to provide tamper resistance.
In [9], the authors designed a drone and blockchain-based system for Industry 4.0 inventory
and traceability applications. The proposed solution consists of a communication architecture
that uses a blockchain to store certain inventory data collected by drones. The ground station
makes use of a software module that acts as a blockchain client. The authors of [7] also proposed
a blockchain-based general architecture for data collection and management of components in
drones.

While the above examples deal with network and communication aspects, several contributions
have also been made on protocols and algorithms [4, 10, 15, 17]. The authors of [17] proposed a
blockchain-based solution to achieve cross-domain authentication for 5G-enabled drones. Their
approach employs multiple signatures based on threshold sharing to build an identity federation
for collaborative domains. Reliable communication between cross-domain devices is achieved by
utilizing smart contract for authentication. A blockchain-based technique to support multi-party
authentication to facilitate trustworthy communications between group of drones is proposed in
[10]. In [4], the authors proposed a lightweight blockchain based model to provide distributed
authentication and anonymous authorization in IoD. The authors of [15] proposed a decentralised
architecture of ￿ying ad hoc nodes based on blockchain and using Practical byzantine fault tolerance
(PBFT) for consensus among nodes.

In the end, few studies focus on the architectural level of on-chip compute platforms of drones. An
example is described in [6], where the authors proposed a concept based on blockchain embedded
in the drones and some nodes on the ground stations. Their solution is composed of two main
block components:

•

A Robot Operating System (ROS) middleware block in which the main drone functionalities
are implemented and which integrates at least three nodes:
– The Navigation node or drone state estimation node that provides the drone position and

velocities, which are necessary to the other nodes;

– The Control node or automatic pilot node that manages the behavior of the drone according
to information received from the Navigation node and and the Blockchain Management
node;

– The Blockchain management node that makes the link between the blockchain and the

other nodes.

•

A blockchain block that is assumed to communicate with ROS nodes through a web API
(REST/RPC). This block implements all the blockchain functionalities (e.g., synchronization
with the other nodes, blockchain network management, insertions of new transactions,
execution of smart contracts).

They assume that the drones only communicate together through the blockchain. The synchro-
nization of the blockchain clients allows to transfer the written data. They also identi￿ed the
Tangle-based IOTA blockchain as the best candidate among the current blockchains.

8

On Using Blockchains for BVLOS Drones Operation: An Architectural Study

HiPEAC’22, January 17–19, 2022, Budapest, Hungary

While most approaches tackle with network (or communication) and protocol (or algorithms)
aspects, few studies focus on the architectural level of on-chip compute platforms of drones.
Therefore, there is a lack of proposal on ligtweight blockchain-based service architecture for
on-chip compute platforms of drones. Our proposed solution, on the other hand, deals with a
lightweight generic blockchain-based service architecture for on-chip compute platforms of drones.

6 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we provided, in a ￿rst step, a generic blockchain-based service architecture. This
solution consists of a main component called Tamper-proof Storage Service (TSS) and dedicated
service component embedded on drone and ground station on-chip compute platform. TSS allows
the drones and the ground stations to collaboratively maintain and share sensitive data in such
a way that it is traceable, and that its integrity is protected from intentional and unintentional
modi￿cations. For that purpose, TSS contains components that are responsible for blockchain
management and the local blockchain storage.

In a second step, we provided a concrete realization of this generic blockchain-based service
architecture which is a blockchain-based authentication service. It enables secure communication
and trustworthy cooperation in open networks of (semi-)autonomous drones and the Internet of
Things. This blockchain-based authentication service is composed of an Authentication Service
(AS) that provides the protocol and cryptographic operations required for authentication and a TSS
that is used by the AS for secure, permanent storage and management of the authentication data in
a decentralised way.

As the proposed solution is intended to be embedded inside drones and ground stations for
securing the sensitive data used by the on-chip compute platforms, simulations will permit to
evaluate di￿erent protocols and algorithms for future implementation on real drones and ground
stations. To this end, and in the continuation of this work, a UTM blockchain simulation environment
model is being developed. This model will be used for tests and evaluation based on scenarios
parametrized with di￿erent types and number of drones. For that purpose, implementations are
performed using an agent-based modeling and simulation framework dedicated to blockchains
[11, 12, 16].

This simulation model will also allow to evaluate the performance of the suggested architecture

based on the following metrics :

•

•

Metrics on embeddability:
– Running time
– Energy consumption
– Latency/Delay
Metrics on authentication:
– Probability of authentication
– Degree of Reliability of the authentication

7 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work is supported by ECSEL Joint Undertaking (JU) through the Project ADACORSA under
grant agreement No 876019. The JU receives support from the European Union’s Horizon 2020
research and innovation programme and Germany, Netherlands, Austria, Romania, France, Sweden,
Cyprus, Greece, Lithuania, Portugal, Italy, Finland, Turkey.

The authors also thank Nicholas Jäger [14] who collaborates with us on the presented case study

focusing on the algorithmic details.

9

HiPEAC’22, January 17–19, 2022, Budapest, Hungary

Ralitera and Lanusse, et al.

REFERENCES
[1] Tejasvi Alladi, Vinay Chamola, Nishad Sahu, and Mohsen Guizani. 2020. Applications of blockchain in unmanned

aerial vehicles: A review. Veh. Commun. 23 (2020), 100249. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vehcom.2020.100249

[2] Azza Allouch, Omar Cheikhrouhou, Anis Koubâa, Khalifa Toumi, Mohamed Khalgui, and Tuan Nguyen Gia. 2021.
UTM-Chain: Blockchain-Based Secure Unmanned Tra￿c Management for Internet of Drones. Sensors 21, 9 (2021),
3049. https://doi.org/10.3390/s21093049

[3] Moayad Aloqaily, Ouns Bouachir, Azzedine Boukerche, and Ismaeel Al Ridhawi. 2021. Design Guidelines for Blockchain-

Assisted 5G-UAV Networks. IEEE Netw. 35, 1 (2021), 64–71. https://doi.org/10.1109/MNET.011.2000170

[4] Nitish Andola, Raghav, Vijay Kumar Yadav, S. Venkatesan, and Shekhar Verma. 2021. SpyChain: A Lightweight
Blockchain for Authentication and Anonymous Authorization in IoD. Wirel. Pers. Commun. 119, 1 (2021), 343–362.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11277-021-08214-8

[5] Basudeb Bera, Ashok Kumar Das, and Anil Kumar Sutrala. 2021. Private blockchain-based access control mechanism
for unauthorized UAV detection and mitigation in Internet of Drones environment. Comput. Commun. 166 (2021),
91–109. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.comcom.2020.12.005

[6] Mário Gabriel Santos De Campos, Caroline P. C. Chanel, Corentin Chau￿aut, and Jérôme Lacan. 2021. Towards a
Blockchain-Based Multi-UAV Surveillance System. Frontiers Robotics AI 8 (2021), 557692. https://doi.org/10.3389/frobt.
2021.557692

[7] Rupa Ch, Gautam Srivastava, Thippa Reddy Gadekallu, Praveen Kumar Reddy Maddikunta, and Sweta Bhattacharya.
2020. Security and privacy of UAV data using blockchain technology. J. Inf. Secur. Appl. 55 (2020), 102670. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.jisa.2020.102670

[8] Bitcoin Core. [n.d.]. Running A Full Node. https://bitcoin.org/en/full-node#what-is-a-full-node Accessed: 09.11.2021.
[9] Tiago M. Fernández-Caramés, Óscar Blanco-Novoa, Iván Froiz-Míguez, and Paula Fraga-Lamas. 2019. Towards an
Autonomous Industry 4.0 Warehouse: A UAV and Blockchain-Based System for Inventory and Traceability Applications
in Big Data-Driven Supply Chain Management. Sensors 19, 10 (2019), 2394. https://doi.org/10.3390/s19102394
[10] Keke Gai, Yulu Wu, Liehuang Zhu, Kim-Kwang Raymond Choo, and Bin Xiao. 2021. Blockchain-Enabled Trustworthy
Group Communications in UAV Networks. IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 22, 7 (2021), 4118–4130. https://doi.org/10.
1109/TITS.2020.3015862

[11] Önder Gürcan. 2019. Multi-Agent Modelling of Fairness for Users and Miners in Blockchains. In 2nd Workshop on
Block Chain Technologies 4 Multi-Agent Systems (BCT4MAS), co-located with PAAMS 2019, Avila, Spain, June 26-28, 2019.
[12] Önder Gürcan. 2020. On Using Agent-based Modeling and Simulation for Studying Blockchain Systems. In JFMS 2020 -
Les Journées Francophones de la Modélisation et de la Simulation - Convergences entre la Théorie de la Modélisation et la
Simulation et les Systèmes Multi-Agents. Cargèse, France.

[13] ICAO. 2017. Remotely Piloted Aircraft System (RPAS) Concept of Operations (CONOPS) for International IFR

Operations. https://www.icao.int/safety/UA/Documents/RPAS%20CONOPS.pdf Accessed: 29.10.2021.

[14] Nicholas Jäger and Andreas Aßmuth. 2021. An Approach for Decentralized Authentication in Networks of UAVs.

CLOUD COMPUTING 2021 (2021), 22.

[15] Kashish Khullar, Yishu Malhotra, and Anupam Kumar. 2020. Decentralized and Secure Communication Architecture

for FANETs using Blockchain. Procedia Computer Science 173 (2020), 158–170.

[16] Nicolas Lagaillardie, Mohamed Aimen Djari, and Önder Gürcan. 2019. A Computational Study on Fairness of the

Tendermint Blockchain Protocol. Information 10, 12 (2019). https://doi.org/10.3390/info10120378

[17] Bin Liu, Keping Yu, Chaosheng Feng, and Kim-Kwang Raymond Choo. 2021. Cross-domain authentication for
5G-enabled UAVs: a blockchain approach. In DroneCom ’21: Proceedings of the 4th ACM MobiCom Workshop on
Drone Assisted Wireless Communications for 5G and Beyond, Virtual Event, 29 October 2021. ACM, 25–30. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3477090.3481053

[18] Satoshi Nakamoto. 2008. Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system. Decentralized Business Review (2008), 21260.
[19] Airborne Data Collection on Resilient System Architectures. [n.d.]. ADACORSA. https://adacorsa.eu/ Accessed:

09.11.2021.

[20] Sandip Ray, Eric Peeters, Mark Mohammad Tehranipoor, and Swarup Bhunia. 2018. System-on-Chip Platform Security
Assurance: Architecture and Validation. Proc. IEEE 106, 1 (2018), 21–37. https://doi.org/10.1109/JPROC.2017.2714641
[21] Ethereum Wiki. [n.d.]. Light Client Protocol. https://eth.wiki/en/concepts/light-client-protocol Accessed: 09.11.2021.
[22] Yang Xiao, Ning Zhang, Wenjing Lou, and Y. Thomas Hou. 2020. A Survey of Distributed Consensus Protocols for
Blockchain Networks. IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutorials 22, 2 (2020), 1432–1465. https://doi.org/10.1109/COMST.2020.
2969706

10

