Dynamic Transaction Storage Strategies for a
Sustainable Blockchain

1st Zhao Xiongfei
Department of Computer and Information Science
University of Macau
Macau
yb97480@um.edu.mo

2nd Yain-Whar Si
Department of Computer and Information Science
University of Macau
Macau
fstasp@um.edu.mo

2
2
0
2

b
e
F
9
1

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
0
1
5
9
0
.
2
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—As the core technology behind Bitcoin, Blockchain’s
decentralized, tamper-proof, and traceable features make it the
preferred platform for organizational
innovation. In current
Bitcoin, block reward is halved every four years, and transaction
fees are expected to become the majority of miner revenues
around 2140. When transaction fee dominates mining rewards,
strategic deviations such as Selﬁsh Mining, Undercutting, and
Mining Gap could threaten the integrity and security of the
Blockchain. This paper proposes a set of Dynamic Transac-
tion Storage (DTS) strategies for maintaining a sustainable
Blockchain under the transaction-fee regime. We demonstrate
that block incentive volatility can be reduced through systematic
simulation by applying DTS strategies and avoiding strategic
deviations. With DTS, public Blockchains such as Bitcoin become
sustainable when the mining reward is solely based on the
transaction fee.

Index Terms—Blockchain, Merkle Tree, Transaction Fees,

Block Incentive, Dynamic Transaction Storage

I. INTRODUCTION

The idea of Blockchain was ﬁrst introduced by Satoshi
Nakamoto [1] in 2008 and later carried out for the ﬁrst time
as the public ledger for Bitcoin currency in 2009. Blockchain
technology becomes one of the main drivers behind digital
currencies and a potential foundation for value transfer and
public ledger. It has been widely used in various ﬁelds such as
ﬁnancial systems, intelligent transportation, Internet of things,
smart grid, voting systems, and data center networks [2], etc.
Blockchain is a distributed ledger and can be used to
record all transaction information securely. The essence of this
technology is that different nodes participate in a distributed
database, and each node records all the transactions in the
network. Transactions are packed into a block that contains
a pointer to a previous block. As a result, a Blockchain is
formed by linking the transaction information from different
time periods in the form of connected blocks. These blocks
are typically veriﬁed by nodes referred to as miners.

The role of miners is to guarantee the security, execution,
and authenticity of transactions. They group transactions wait-
ing in the transaction pool for the network to get incorporated
into a block. The miner advertises a block in the Blockchain
network once it completes its mining for this new block to
claim the mining reward. The newly mined block is veriﬁed
by the majority of miners in the Blockchain network before it

is appended to the longest chain. Mining incentive plays an es-
sential role as a ﬁnancial reward to ensure that distributed hash
power is spread among enough different miners. Therefore, no
one can monopolize over 51% mining power to initiate attacks
such as double-spending [3].

Mining incentives include a ﬁxed number of system-
generated coins and also the user-submitted transaction fees.
In Bitcoin, the coin-based reward is still the current primary
revenue source, even though it is preset to be halved approx-
imately every four years and will gradually be replaced by
transaction fees. Easley et al. [4] concluded that with increas-
ing Bitcoin price levels, transaction fees could play only a
secondary role in explaining miners’ willingness to participate.
Satoshi Nakamoto mentioned that ”The incentive can also be
funded with transaction fees. Once a predetermined number
of coins have entered circulation, the incentive can transition
entirely to transaction fees and be completely inﬂation-free”
[1].

In current Bitcoin, a block creation time is, by design,
around 10 minutes, and the general heuristic for accepting a
transaction to be valid is when the transaction is six blocks old,
which yields 60 min on average. However, as the miners are
inclined to prioritize the transactions that offer higher fees,
a typical transaction will take longer to be approved during
congested times. To this end, although Bitcoin has opened
new opportunities for value transfer and transparency against
censorship, it has been long criticized for its slow transaction
conﬁrmation times and high transaction fees.

that

The contradiction between fast settlement and transac-
in transitioning to
tion fees will become more prominent
to
a transaction-fee regime. Chiu et al. [5] suggest
discourage incentives to fork the chain,
investors need to
pledge enough transaction fees as mining rewards to maintain
a sufﬁcient amount of mining activities. Under this circum-
stance, Blockchain-based settlement systems need to make fast
settlement a scarce resource for investors to pledge transaction
fees that generate mining rewards. However, with the required
transaction fee increasing, the proportion of fee-submitting
users decreases slowly at ﬁrst, followed by a sharp decline
[6]. Thus, the system needs to balance transaction fees and
settlement speed to maximize the expected net trade surplus
while ensuring that the Blockchain is tamper-proof.

 
 
 
 
 
 
The interaction of settlement speed and high transaction
fee [7] could also limit
the scalability of Blockchain. In
often argued scenarios, settlement speed is related to block
size (how many transactions can be included in one block)
and block time (how frequently new transactions are in-
corporated into Blockchain). Increasing block size improves
Blockchain throughput, whereas reducing block time could im-
prove Blockchain latency. However, one can not set arbitrarily
bigger blocks, because smaller block creates congestion, which
is necessary for investors to pay a higher transaction fee for
early settlement. One can not set arbitrarily low block time
either because lower block time will cause rewards to split
over more blocks. As a result, it can lead to a reduction in the
reward per block as well as the mining competition [5].

Carlsten et al. [8] further revealed other severe issues when
Blockchain transitions to a transaction-fee regime. Speciﬁcally,
the time-varying nature of transaction fees allows a richer set
of strategic deviations such as Selﬁsh Mining [9], Undercut-
ting [8], Mining Gap [8], Pool Hopping [10], etc. These strate-
gic deviations would not present in the block-reward model.
Moreover, when misbehaving miners carry out strategies such
as Undercutting, they seek to enhance their chance to fork the
chain by giving up part of available transaction fees. When
miners are not maximizing mining reward by prioritizing the
transaction fee, there is also no motivation for investors to pay
higher transaction fees to compete for scarce early settlement.
This situation invalidates the theory described in the previous
paragraph, which argues that fast settlement becomes a scarce
resource.

Due to the exponentially distributed transaction arrival time
with the different transaction amounts, the volatility of the
block incentive is very high under the transaction-fee regime.
As a result, miners may adopt different deviant strategies
to deal with the situation. Carlsten et al. [8] argued that
deviant mining strategies in a transaction-fee regime could
hurt the stability of Bitcoin mining and harm the ecosystem.
In order to make the Blockchain sustainable, in this paper,
we utilize the ﬁxed block size of Bitcoin to generate stable
mining rewards, thus converting the time-varying transaction
fees into stable block rewards under the transaction-fee regime.
This fundamental thinking leads us to propose a set of novel
Dynamic Transaction Storage (DTS) strategies. To this end, in
this paper, we rigorously evaluate 14 different DTS strategies
for stabilizing the volatility. Among all the tested strategies
in the experiments, we found that the DTS strategy, which
is based on a time-based transaction incorporation priority
and a designated space for small transactions, is the most
promising strategy in reducing the block incentive volatility.
The contributions of our proposal are three folds:

a) We propose a set of Dynamic Transaction Storage (DTS)
strategies to minimize the volatility of mining incentives
for each block. Our analysis reveals that DTS strate-
gies can stabilize block incentive regardless of whether
transactions are incorporated by arrival sequence (Time-
based) or a transaction fee (Fee-based). By stabilizing
mining incentives for each block under the transaction-fee

regime, we could eliminate strategic deviations such as
Selﬁsh Mining, Undercutting, Mining Gap, Pool Hopping.
b) Stabilized block incentive for Time-based transaction
incorporation strategy opens up the possibility to make
Blockchain scalable under the transaction-fee regime. By
reducing block time, we could scale Blockchain without
worrying about not having sufﬁcient mining competition
rewards. Because in current Bitcoin, it has to maintain
settlement speed at a certain level to exploit investors’
willingness to pledge more transaction fees. However,
under the Time-based transaction incorporation mecha-
nism, fast settlement is no longer a scarce resource. The
restriction of settlement speed and high transaction fees
no longer exist.

c) In the proposed DTS approach, the size of the block that
contains higher-fee transactions is smaller compared to
other blocks. Therefore, blocks with higher transaction
fees can reach consensus more quickly on the Blockchain.
Besides, in the current Bitcoin protocol, to make fast
settlement a scarce resource, block time and block size
are used to limit how frequently new information is added
to the Blockchain. Whereas in DTS, we take advantage of
consensus latency nature to settle higher-fee transactions
faster. In DTS, the scalability of Blockchain is no longer
restrained by block time and block size.

This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 summarizes
the related work. In Section 3, we give the Background and
Preliminaries for understanding the related concepts. Section
3 describes the simulation attributes and analysis results. The
paper is concluded in Section 4.

II. RELATED WORK

A major success factor of Bitcoin is its novel reward mech-
anism. Miner’s revenues include a ﬁxed number of system-
generated Bitcoins and also the user-submitted transaction
fees. Since the coin-based reward is preset to be halved after
every 210,000 blocks are mined and eventually can reach zero
sometime around 2140 [4], the transaction fee will become
major compensation for the miners. Because Bitcoin’s issuance
structure is designed to be deﬂationary, each block incentive
depends on the Bitcoin price’s market value. While block
rewards in terms of the number of Bitcoins being mined
are decreasing, the increasing market value of Bitcoins has
ultimately resulted in a stable block reward. To this end, total
revenue for each block is still expected to be sufﬁcient to
sustain the Blockchain before the coin-based reward reaches
zero.

Besides the coin-based rewards, miners’ transaction fee
incentives also play an increasing role as the coin-based reward
dwindled. For the transaction fee incentive, users typically
submit transactions with a certain amount of associated fees to
get their desired priority and stimulate miners to conﬁrm their
transactions preferentially. All the transactions pending con-
ﬁrmation are stored in the memory pool. As time progresses,
there are more pending transactions in the system, and the
potential fees grow. Since the block size is limited, the number

of transactions that can be recorded into a block by miners is
restricted. As such, revenue-maximizing miners naturally ﬁrst
select and pack those transactions with higher priorities as
their mining basis. Bitcoin incentives are expected to transit
from block-reward regime to transaction-fee regime. More and
more studies are focusing on the impact of the transaction-fee
regime.

Under the transaction-fee regime, Bitcoin investors hope
to optimize their transaction fees to minimize their trading
costs. In this context of incorporating biding mechanism, Li
et al. [11] propose to adopt Generalized Second Price (GSP),
which is a better biding mechanism than Generalized First
Price (GFP). Under the GFP mechanism,
transactions are
processed in a pipeline with an order deﬁned by the ”rank-
by-fee” mechanism. Besides, the payment rule is deﬁned by
the ”pay-its-bid” mechanism. Transactions with higher fees are
usually conﬁrmed ﬁrst, and users need to pay their submitted
fees.

However,

transaction fees might reach or even exceed
the trading amount, especially in micro-payment scenarios.
To minimize investors’ cost, GSP adopts a weighted fee to
determine transactions’ ranks, which can be calculated by
user-submitted fees, transaction amount, quality scores, and
virtual fees accumulated from the waiting time. Conﬁrmed
transactions should transfer fees to miners, which are equal
to the next highest fee to miners. Under the GSP system, the
transaction cost can be reduced, and the system efﬁciency can
be improved.

From Bitcoin miners’ point of view, the amount of trans-
action fees included in a block is linearly proportional to its
size, and the payoff is also determined mainly by a miner’s
winning probability [12]. The expected reward increases as the
block grow larger, while the winning probability goes down
since smaller blocks tend to reach consensus faster. Jiang et
al. [13] suggest that in order to maximize miners’ proﬁt and to
ensure that miners have no incentive to misbehave, a block size
should be limited to 4 MB. Nicolas Houy [12] also suggest
that one cannot set arbitrarily large block sizes because it could
jeopardize the very existence of Bitcoin in the long term.

the miners’ proﬁt

Another factor that can affect

is the
block time, representing how frequently new transactions can
be incorporated into one block. In current Bitcoin, block
time is around 10 minutes, which means miners will spend
approximately 10 minutes to mine a new block by solving a
computationally difﬁcult problem. Chiu et al. [5] suggest that
one can not set arbitrarily low block time either. Decrease in
block time means total rewards have to be split over more
blocks, thus reducing the reward per block and the mining
competition.

From the Bitcoin group welfare point of view, mining is a
public good for validating individual transactions: once there
is a sufﬁcient amount of mining activities or, equivalently,
transaction fees, forking can be prevented independent of
the total number of transactions. Given the current Bitcoin
mechanism, a miner usually has more incentives for choosing
a set of transactions whose fees are very close to whatever

real-valued target he/she wants. Thus, the chances are high
that a transaction with a lower fee could not be processed
immediately or might not even be relayed by miners [5].

Easley et al. [4] suggest that transaction fee are not welfare-
improving. Higher transaction fees can induce users to drop
out, and increasing waiting times can also cause users to
disengage. Meanwhile, the beneﬁt for an investor to create
a fork is related to the individual transaction amount, whereas
the cost of doing so depends on the mining reward, which is
related to the aggregate transaction volume [5]. Once Bitcoin
switches to the transaction-fee regime, the correlation between
forking cost and total transaction fee in one block will become
more obvious.

Carlsten et al. [8] further revealed other severe issues when
Bitcoin mining transitions to a transaction-fee regime. Besides,
the time-varying nature of transaction fees allows a richer set
of strategic deviations outlined below. Therefore, it simply
would not present in the block-reward model because of the
high volatility of mining incentives.

• Selﬁsh Mining Volatility mining incentives could lead
to miner’s misbehavior. Selﬁsh miners hold newly mined
blocks without disclosing them, which enables miners to
get more than their fair share of rewards [9]. Also, in
a transaction-fee regime, selﬁsh mining is immediately
proﬁtable [8].

• Undercutting [8] According to Bitcoin mining protocol,
each miner can decide what and how many transactions
to include in their block. That also means miner can
deliberately leave high-fee transactions in the mempool
to attract other miners to extend their chain. If there is
a 1-block fork, it is more proﬁtable for the next miner
to break the tie by extending the block that leaves the
most available transaction fees rather than the oldest-seen
block.

• Mining Gap [8] Without a block reward, immediately
after a block is found, there is zero expected reward for
mining but nonzero electricity cost. Uncertainty in mining
rewards, and even unproﬁtable risk, makes it difﬁcult for
miners to estimate their return on investment (ROI) of
mining power and reduce their incentive to participate in
mining activities.

• Pool Hopping [10] Miner’s expected reward for partici-
pation varies over time, depending on how many shares
have been contributed since the pool found its last block.
The concern is that miners would respond by ”hopping”
in real-time to the pool that maximizes their expected
rewards.

With the decline in numbers of Bitcoin,

transaction-fee
regime supposes to play an increasingly important role. Even
further, after coin-based rewards reach zero, the transaction-
fee regime is expected to become a major mining incentive
resource to maintain the sustainability of the Blockchain.
However, these studies suggest that these welfare and user
participation effects are why transaction fees alone are not
a panacea for the dynamic challenges facing the evolving

Bitcoin Blockchain.

III. MOTIVATIONS

For Bitcoins mining in the future, under the transaction-fee
regime, there will be no steady large block reward. Instead,
the transaction fee will play a major rewarding source of
mining activities. In these circumstances, issues such as Selﬁsh
Mining [9], Undercutting [8], Mining Gap [8], Pool Hopping
[10] may affect the entire Blockchain due to the high variance
in the incentives caused by the transaction fee. To make the
Blockchain sustainable, we need to stabilize block incentives
and avoid these deviant mining strategies. As shown in Fig.1,
our main objective is to ﬂatten the block incentive curve. In
this regard, we take advantage of the ﬁxed block size feature
from the current Bitcoin design. Speciﬁcally, by dynamically
allocating block space according to the transaction fees, we
aim to stabilize the block incentive. To this end, in this paper,
we propose a set of novel Dynamic Transaction Storage (DTS)
strategies.

Fig. 1. Variation in block incentive on a Blockchain without(A) / with(B)
Dynamic Transaction Storage (DTS) Strategy

The design of the proposed DTS strategies is based on
the storage structure of the Blockchain called Merkle tree
[14]. Suppose we have some transaction data which make
up the leaves of a Merkle Tree, Merkle tree can help us
efﬁciently verify the integrity of those transaction data. In
this paper, we consider two types of storage schemes. The
ﬁrst storage scheme is called Constant Transaction Storage
(CTS) mechanism (see Fig.2). CTS is the way Bitcoin is
currently used to store transactions. Transactions are stored in
the Merkle tree’s leaf nodes, and each leaf node corresponds
to a single transaction.

In the following section, we introduce the overall idea of
DTS. Next, we demonstrate that the proposed DTS strate-
gies can stabilize block incentive volatility by simulating
different transaction incorporation mechanisms and relevant
that stable block
attributes. Experiment results also reveal

Fig. 2. Constant Transaction Storage (CTS)

rewards can regulate miners’ behavior through incentives,
making Blockchain sustainable under a transaction-fee regime.

IV. DYNAMIC TRANSACTION STORAGE (DTS)
STRATEGIES

In this paper, we propose a set of novel Dynamic Trans-
action Storage (DTS) strategies based on the CTS currently
used in the Bitcoin protocol. Fig.3 illustrates how DTS works.
First, based on the transaction fee offered by each transaction,
we calculate the space it would occupy using a Cumulative
Distribution Function (CDF). Then, based on the number of
leaves each transaction can occupy, we store the transactions
in one of the leaves and leave the rest empty. This process is
repeated for all transactions until the predeﬁned threshold of
block space for the transactions is reached.

Fig. 3. Dynamic Transaction Storage (DTS)

The CDF describes the probability that a random variable
X with a given probability distribution will be found at a
value less than or equals to x. We use CDF of the log-
normal distribution F (x) with σ = 6.8 and µ = 1 to calculate
corresponding transaction-fee x based space factor (see Eq.1).

F (x) = P r(X ≤ x) =

1
2

+

1
2

erf

(cid:20) ln(x) − µ
√
σ

2

(cid:21)

(1)

To limit the upper boundary of block incentives, we dy-
namically control
the number of transactions incorporated
based on transaction fees. We model the maximum space
that each transaction could occupy as a variable denoted m
with cumulative distribution function (CDF). Since CDF has a
maximum value of 1, the upper boundary PU B of transaction-
fee based space factor is approximately equal to m (see Eq.2).

Block IncentiveBlock 2TimelineBlock 1Block 3Block 2Block 1Block 3Block 4Block IncentiveTimeline!"#$Current Blockchain under Transaction-fee Regime!%#$Blockchain with DTS under Transaction-fee Regime !!Leaf 1Leaf 2H( )  H( )Leaf 3Leaf 4H( )  H( )TransactionAmount: $1000Fee: $2TransactionAmount: $25000Fee: $50TransactionAmount: $76000Fee: $152Root HashTransactionAmount: $48000Fee: $96Leaf 1Leaf 2H( )  H( )Leaf 3EmptyH( )  H( )H( )  H( )Leaf 7H( )  H( )H( )  H( )H( )  H( ) !!Root HashTransactionAmount: $1000Fee: $2Leaf Space: 1TransactionAmount: $25000Fee: $50Leaf Space: 1TransactionAmount: $76000Fee: $152Leaf Space: 4EmptyEmptyEmptyTransactionAmount: $48000Fee: $96Leaf Space: 2In this way, the storage space for each transaction can be
reasonably allocated, even if the transaction fee is very high.

PU B = lim
x→∞

F (x) × m = m

(2)

Assume A denotes the transaction amount, and there are
n transactions included in the block. We can deﬁne I to be
the total BTC worth of incentive of this block. Since we set
transaction fee percentage at 0.2%, we can calculate the block
total incentive I using Eq.3. The number of transactions n
which can be incorporated in one block is limited to 2,100
storage units.

I =

n
(cid:88)

i=1

An × 0.2%

(3)

Note that

the number of transactions n which can be
incorporated in one block is limited to 2,100 storage unit.
This constraint can be expressed as follows:

n
(cid:88)

i=1

F (An × 0.2%) × m < 2100

(4)

A. Attributes Considered in DTS Strategies

In the proposed set of DTS strategies, we consider four main
factors (attributes). Although we could consider additional
factors in designing the strategies, we aim to minimize the
number of factors in achieving the objectives stated in Section
1. Simplifying the number of factors considered for the DTS
strategies also allows us to better understand the impact of
each attribute on the outcome of the experiments. The factors
considered in the proposed DTS strategies are as follows:

• Transaction Storage Mechanism (A1): In the proposed
DTS strategies, we consider two types of transaction
storage schemes namely CTS and DTS. Constant Trans-
action Storage (CTS) means one transaction can take
up one leaf space of Merkle Tree as current Bitcoin.
Whereas Dynamic Transaction Storage (DTS) means that
instead of storing the transaction in one leaf, we store it
using multiple leaves. How many leaves one transaction
can occupy depends on how much transaction fee this
transaction provides.

• Transaction Incorporation Priority (A2):

In DTS
strategies, we consider Time-based and Fee-based trans-
action incorporation mechanisms instead of allowing
miners to choose which and how many transactions
to incorporate into blocks. For Time-based, transactions
are incorporated into blocks on a ﬁrst-come, ﬁrst-served
basis. For Fee-based, transactions with higher fees will
be incorporated into blocks ﬁrst.
If there are R transaction fees available in current Bitcoin,
the miner can choose to include any real-valued number
of transaction fees between 0 and R in their block. That
is, transactions are ﬁne-grained enough that a miner can

selectively choose a set of transactions whose fees are
very close to whatever real-valued target they have in
mind. Although, miner’s ability to select transactions is
the main factor causing Undercutting attacks.

• Designated Space for Small Transactions (A3): In the
early stages of Bitcoin, 50KB in each block was reserved
for high-priority transactions without fees. That means the
transaction conﬁrmations are conducted in two separate
pipelines, where the one is for transactions with fees, and
the other is for priority transactions without fees [11].
When the arrival rate of potential transactions increases,
this mechanism can avoid only transactions with fees
attached are posted to the Blockchain.
In our experiments, we extend this parameter’s scope,
and we designate block space for all the transactions
which fees are below a certain threshold. By introducing
this attribute, we can avoid only transactions with higher
fees are incorporated into blocks under the Fee-based
transaction incorporation mechanism. The beneﬁt of this
parameter goes beyond solving the Fee-based transaction
selection dilemma. It also helps both the Fee-based and
Time-based transaction incorporation mechanism to con-
trol small transaction incorporation percentages per block.
To this end, we designate 100 units of block space for
a transaction fee lower than 1.5 dollars. Therefore, the
minimum reward level of each block is limited by:

(2100 − 100) × 1.5 = 3000

(5)

• Maximum Space for One Transaction (A4): For CTS
mechanism, one transaction can only occupy one leaf
space of Merkle tree. For the proposed DTS strategies,
a transaction with a higher fee will be incorporated into
a block by occupying multiple leaf spaces. We adopt the
Cumulative Distribution Function (CDF) model to allo-
cate leaf space based on the transaction fee dynamically.
This attribute controls the maximum storage space for
each transaction and allows transactions to be reasonably
allocated, even with an arbitrarily large transaction fee.

B. Benchmark

In ﬁnance, volatility represents the variation to which
price series change over time [15]. We use volatility as the
simulation benchmark to measure the ﬂuctuation degree of
block incentive. Speciﬁcally, volatility is a measure of the
uncertainty of mining activities’ return rate and can reﬂect
the risk level of mining activity. High volatility means that the
block incentive varies dramatically from block to block. Under
these circumstances, the uncertainty of the mining reward is
also very high. Low volatility means block incentive changes
minimally, miners tend to beneﬁt from low volatility because
they can secure stable returns from mining.

The following strategic deviations are directly related to the
volatility of block incentives. Therefore, in this paper, we use
volatility to evaluate the proposed DTS strategies.

• Selﬁsh Mining strategy means miners holding newly
mined blocks without disclosing them until more high-

fee transactions arrive at the mempool and are included in
the block. Carlsten et al. [8] propose an Improved Selﬁsh-
Mine strategy. In that strategy, under the transaction-fee
regime, selﬁsh miners can base on block incentives to
decide whether to hide their blocks. This enables selﬁsh
mining to outperform both default mining and traditional
selﬁsh mining. If the volatility of block incentive is high,
it will give selﬁsh miner the opportunity to determine the
optimal cutoff time.

• In Undercutting, deviant miners could intentionally give
up part of the available transaction fees. Those unclaimed
transactions (associated with fees) can incentivize more
strategic miners to fork the chain by extending attacker’s
block to gain more rewards. But this also means the
block reward to extend older block or extend fork has
certain difference for the strategic miners. Therefore, the
block incentive volatility may enable deviant miners and
strategic miners to initiate undercutting strategy.

• During Bitcoins mining, the miners bear the costs of
electric power to run their mining rigs. In Mining Gap,
without a block reward, immediately after a block is
found,
there is zero expected reward for mining but
nonzero electricity cost, making it unproﬁtable for any
miner to mine. With high block incentive volatility,
the uncertainty over whether mining activities can be
proﬁtable is very high.

• In Pool Hopping, the block incentive is directly related
to the transaction amount in the mempool. Miners tend
to mine on the mempool, which has more and bigger
transactions to earn more block rewards. Miners will
compete to incorporate bigger transactions in the mem-
pool to maximizes their rewards. Therefore, high block
incentive volatility can make miner’s expected reward for
participation varies over time.

The standard deviation of logarithmic returns can be used
to measure the volatility [16]. In this paper, we use a similar
approach to measure the ﬂuctuation of block incentive. As-
sume that n’s block total incentive is In. By using In, we can
calculate Rn as follows:

Rn = ln(In/In−1)
To calculate the standard deviation of block incentive,
we need to calculate the average of Rn. The average of
continuously compounded block incentive Ravg can be deﬁned
as follows:

(6)

Ravg =

(cid:80)n

i=1 Ri
n

σ is the standard deviation of block incentive in a particular
period. By using a rolling window - a period of n consecutive
blocks ending on the last block, we can calculate σ as
follows:

(cid:115) (cid:80)n

σ =

i=1(Ri − Ravg)2
n − 1

(7)

(8)

V. EXPERIMENT SETTINGS

In our experiments, we use SimBlock [17] as our simulation
platform. It allows us to simulate a large-scale peer-to-peer
network of a public Blockchain such as Bitcoin [1] and Lite-
coin [18]. SimBlock can be conﬁgured with parameters such
as hash power distribution, network latencies, and incentive
mechanisms, etc. In the default setting, blocks are generated by
a probability assuming Proof-of-Work and propagated along
with the simulated Blockchain network. It can also be applied
to the public Blockchain that retains other mining mechanism
schemes such as Proof-of-Stake (PoS) [19], Proof-of-Burn
(PoB) [20], etc.

Based on the current running state of Bitcoin, we list the
assumptions for our experiment in Table I. We use Bitcoin
historical market data for the period of Dec 2019 to September
2020. These historical data contains 400,000 transactions
with minute-to-minute updates of OHLC (Open, High, Low,
Close), volume in BTC, and weighted Bitcoin price [21]. The
Bitcoin protocol itself has requirements on the block size. A
block should be bounded within 1 MB and includes all valid
transactions if available transactions are not enough to occupy
a 1 MB block fully. Different transactions contain different
sizes of information, about 500 bytes on average. We take
Bitcoin’s one-year average value of transactions per block [22],
that is, about 2,100 transactions per block.

To facilitate our experiment, we also alter SimBlock to add
mempool model with a constant arrival rate of transactions to
SimBlock. Mempool [23] is the name given to the set of valid
transactions that the miner is aware of but has not yet been
included in a block. As illustrated in Fig.4, we take the one-
year average value of Bitcoin mempool transaction volume,
that is, 16,000 transactions, as the initial value of mempool.
Based on the one-year average value of transaction rate per
second [24], we set 3.5 new transactions to arrive at mempool
every second. Bitcoin consensus algorithm sets the difﬁculty
level such that, on average, a block is added to the Blockchain
every ten minutes.

Under the current Bitcoin protocol, revenue-maximizing
miners tend to prioritize those transactions with higher fees,
forcing Bitcoin users to increase their transaction fees for
faster conﬁrmation or otherwise queue and wait. Regardless of
whether GFP or GSP mechanism is used as a transaction fee
biding mechanism, they may reduce users’ costs from a single
transaction point of view. From a block incentive point of
view of the transaction-fee regime, no matter which transaction
fee biding mechanism is used, it can not avoid deviant miner
behavior. To this end, in our experiments, transaction fees are
set for a ﬁxed percentage (0.2%) of the transaction amount to
simplify our model.

VI. EXPERIMENT RESULTS

We consider two sets of experiments, Experiment 1 includes
eight strategies (Strategy 1, Strategy 2,..., Strategy 8) based on
the combination of attributes A1, A2, A3, and A4. Experiment
2 includes six strategies (Strategy 9, Strategy 10,..., Strategy

Fig. 4. Mempool Transaction Count(A) and Transaction Rate Per Second(B)

TABLE I
SIMULATION SETTINGS BASED ON THE BLOCKCHAIN PROTOCOL

Parameter

Transaction Size

Block Size

Value

500 Byte

1 MB

Transactions for One Block

2,100 Transactions

Transactions in Mempool

16,000 Transactions

New Transaction Rate

3.5 Transactions per Second

Transaction Fee Precentage

0.2%

Fig. 5. CDF with maximum 80 leaves for One Transaction

TABLE II
STRATEGIES IN EXPERIMENT 1

Strategy

A1

A2

Strategy 1

Constant

Time-based

Strategy 2

Constant

Time-based

Strategy 3

Constant

Fee-based

Strategy 4

Constant

Fee-based

Strategy 5

Dynamic

Time-based

Strategy 6

Dynamic

Time-based

Strategy 7

Dynamic

Fee-based

Strategy 8

Dynamic

Fee-based

A3

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

A4

1

1

1

1

80

80

80

80

A1 - Transaction Storage Mechanism
A2 - Transaction Incorporation Priority
A3 - Designated Space for Small Transaction
A4 - Maximum Space for One Transaction

14) based on attributes A2 and A4. Experiment 1 is mainly
used to evaluate the effectiveness of DTS in reducing block
incentive volatility. After conﬁrming that DTS can effectively
reduce the block incentive volatility, we further verify the
effectiveness of DTS by using Experiment 2’s strategies with
different maximum spaces for one transaction.

A. Experiment 1: Strategies With/Without DTS

In Experiment 1, the ﬁrst 4 strategies Strategy 1, Strategy 2,
Strategy 3, Strategy 4 are for the Constant Transaction Storage
(CTS) mechanism and the maximum space for one transaction
is set to 1 block. The second group of strategies, Strategy
5, Strategy 6, Strategy 7, and Strategy 8 are for Dynamic
Transaction Storage (DTS) mechanism, and the maximum
space for one transaction is set to 80 blocks. As shown in
Fig.5,
the relationship between transaction fees and block
space unit is calculated according to the CDF algorithm. A
transaction needs to occupy at least one block space unit,
and can occupy up to 80 block space units based on its
transaction fee. Therefore one transaction is set to 80 blocks in
the experiments. All the strategies considered in Experiment
1 are listed in Table II.

The results of the simulation experiments for the strategies
in Experiment 1 are shown in Fig.6 and Fig.7. In general,
as the number of transactions stored in a block decreases,
the Dynamic Transaction Storage (DTS) strategy slows down
the incorporation process and consumes more blocks. It also
causes transactions queuing in the mempool for a longer time.
Due to this reason, Strategy 5-8’s are longer than others in
Fig.6.

In Strategy 1 and Strategy 2, the transaction incorporation
mechanism is ”Time-based”,
transactions are incorporated
based on their arrival sequence. Compared to Strategy 1, be-
cause storage space for small transactions is limited, Strategy
2 has the opportunity to concentrate more large transactions
into the same block. This will further increase the volatility of
the block incentive of Strategy 2. As Fig.7 shows, the volatility
of Strategy 1 and Strategy 2 is high. In addition, Strategy 2’s
volatility is also higher than Strategy 1.

Strategy 3 and Strategy 4 are similar to the current Bit-
coin incentive mechanism. Under the ”Fee-based” transaction
incorporation mechanism, transactions with higher fees will
be incorporated ﬁrst. In current Bitcoin, investors can either
accept longer lags to save trading costs or pay a higher fee to
ensure additional beneﬁts. Our ﬁxed percentage fee-charging
assumption aligns with investors’ willingness, meaning that

Transactions Per SecondAverage Transactions Per SecondTransactions Per Second3.03.23.43.63.8JanAprJulOctJan2020(B) Transactions Rate Per SecondTransactions in MempoolAverage Transactions in MempoolTransactions in Mempool020,00040,000JanAprJulOctJan2020(A) Mempool Transaction Count80 block space units as upper limit for CDFBlock space units20406080Transaction Fee1000200030004000Different block space unit as upper limit for CDFhigher fees is directly related to the transaction amount. How-
ever, for allocating a designated space for small transactions,
its impact to total block incentive is insigniﬁcant. As Fig.7
shows, in Strategy 4, small transactions take up a small portion
of the block space that would otherwise be occupied by large
transactions, and overall block incentive is slightly reduced.
In Strategy 3 and Strategy 4, each block’s total incentive
ﬂuctuates wildly, and Strategy 4’s volatility is slightly lower.
For Strategy 5 and Strategy 6, transactions are incorporated
by their arrival sequence. Even transactions are incorporated
by the arrival sequence, and investors are still motivated to
pledge higher transaction fees. Because under a Time-based
mechanism, even if a transaction is not prioritized at
the
incorporation phase due to the higher fees, the smaller size
of the block containing the higher fee transactions makes the
transaction faster to be settled on the Blockchain.

In addition to DTS being able to lower the upper limit for
block incentives, we can also raise the lower limit for block
rewards by introducing designated space for small transac-
tions. From Fig.7 we can see that Strategy 5 and Strategy
6’s volatility are much lower because DTS has successfully
lower the upper boundary of block incentive. Furthermore,
in Strategy 6, small transaction incorporation is conducted in
a separate pipeline, and the number of small transactions in
each block has been limited. This mechanism can postpone
incorporating small transactions, and thus lower boundary of
block incentive level has also been lifted. As a result, we can
observe that Strategy 6’s volatility is lower than Strategy 5.

Strategy 7 and Strategy 8 adopt the ”Fee-based” transac-
tion incorporation mechanism. From Fig.7, we can observe
that DTS can reduce the block incentive volatility for both
strategies.

In summary, Fig.7 reveals that Strategy 1–4 has high volatil-
ity, which implies the high uncertainty in mining activities’
return rate. By comparison, we can successfully reduce block
incentive volatility with DTS strategies. Through our simu-
lation, the best result is Strategy 6, in which volatility has
been reduced to 0.113. Although the volatility of Strategy 8 is
not as low as Strategy 6, under the current Bitcoin ”pay-its-
bid” mechanism, Strategy 8 can be considered as a promising
solution for designing a sustainable Blockchain.

B. Experiment 2: Strategies With Different Maximum Space

for One Transaction

In Experiment 2, we consider 6 strategies (Strategy 9,
Strategy 10, .. , Strategy 14). In these strategies, the Trans-
action storage mechanism (A1) is set to ”Dynamic” and the
designated space for a small transaction (A3) is set to ”Yes”.
The main purpose of these settings is to investigate how
different maximum spaces for one transaction can affect the
block reward volatility. These strategies are listed in Table III.
In Fig.8, we compare the block space unit that different
transactions can occupy according to their transaction fee.
CDF algorithm is used to calculate the correspondence be-
tween transaction fees and different block space units. We set

Fig. 6. Total incentive of each block for the strategies in Experiment 1

Fig. 7. Comparison of volatilities for the strategies in Experiment 1

100, 1000, and 2,100 respectively to simulate the minimum,
median and maximum value of block space as the upper limit
of one transaction can occupy.

The results of the simulation experiments are shown in
Fig.9 and Fig.10. From Fig.9, we can get even lower volatility
by maximizing the number of block space units for one
transaction. However, after the number of block space units
for a single transaction is extended to a certain point, volatility
will increase. We can also observe that with the same amount
of transactions, as the number of storage units a transaction
can occupy increases, block consumption also increases, and
the block incentive level decreases.

According to Fig.10, we can observe that the magnitude of
block incentive volatility in each block varies according to the
CDF algorithm’s parameters. The more block space unit to
hold one transaction, the volatility is higher. Therefore, it is

Total Incentive for Each BlockStrategy1Strategy2Strategy3Strategy4Strategy5Strategy6Strategy7Strategy805×10510×10505×10510×10505×10510×10505×10510×10501×10601×10601×10601×106Block Numbers by Generation Sequnece100200300400500600Strategy Simulation Under Transaction-fee Regime50,00070809010011012013050,00070809010011012013050,00070809010011012013050,0007080901001101201300.5480.5490.5800.5490.1460.1130.34620.295Volatility (𝜎)00.51.0Simulation StrategiesStrategy1Strategy2Strategy3Strategy4Strategy5Strategy6Strategy7Strategy8Fig. 8. Comparison of (a) minimum, (b) median and (c) maximum block
space unit as upper limit for CDF.

TABLE III
STRATEGIES IN EXPERIMENT 2

Strategy

A1

A2

Strategy 9

Dynamic

Time-based

Strategy 10

Dynamic

Time-based

Strategy 11

Dynamic

Time-based

Strategy 12

Dynamic

Fee-based

Strategy 13

Dynamic

Fee-based

Strategy 14

Dynamic

Fee-based

A3

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

A1 - Transaction Storage Mechanism
A2 - Transaction Incorporation Priority
A3 - Designated Space for Small Transaction
A4 - Maximum Space for One Transaction

A4

100

1000

2100

100

1000

2100

necessary to combine other variables to reduce volatility. By
increasing the storage unit of one transaction alone may not
necessarily the right approach.

C. Analysis of Simulation Results

For all the 14 strategies evaluated, we found that Strategy
9 is the most promising approach to reduce block incentive
volatility. In the following paragraphs, we summarize the
impact of DTS strategies on security and scalability properties.
1) Security: The security of Bitcoin’s consensus protocol
relies on miners behaving correctly. They are incentivized to
do so via mining rewards. Under the transaction fee regime,
the cost for revoking a trade depends on the mining reward,
which is related to the aggregate transaction volume in one
block. However, under DTS strategies, the cost for revoking a
trade is related to the low volatility block incentive. As long
as the incentive level is attractive enough to create enough
competition for miners, the forking is less likely to happen.
The stable block incentive does not rely on a predetermined
number of cryptocurrencies, and it is entirely inﬂation-free.
It is a more sustainable solution for Blockchain under the
transaction-fee regime.

Any deviant miner behavior that outperforms the default
is thus a serious threat to the security of Bitcoin. By lowing

Fig. 9. Total incentive of each block for strategies in Experiment 2

Fig. 10. Volatility of Strategies in Experiment 2

the volatility of block incentive, we summarize the possible
prevention of the existing strategic deviation as follow:

• For Improved Selﬁsh-Mine, through stabilized block in-
the difference in block incentive is
centive volatility,
small. Therefore, selﬁsh miners can not decide whether to
hide their ﬁrst block or not base on the value of the block,
thus preventing the problem of Improved Selﬁsh-Mine.
• For Undercutting, we simulate both Time-based and Fee-
based transaction incorporated mechanism. For Time-
based mechanism, miner is restricted to choose trans-
actions in mempool based on their arrival sequence by
the Blockchain protocol. Thus deviant miner can not
deliberately leave unclaimed rewards for the next strategic
miner. For the Fee-based mechanism, even a deviant
miner leaves the unclaimed reward, and the following

100 block space units as upper limit for CDF1000 block space units as upper limit for CDF2100 block space units as upper limit for CDFBlock space units05001000150020002500Transaction Fee1000200030004000Different block space unit as upper limit for CDFTotal Incentive for Each BlockStrategy13Strategy14Strategy12Strategy9Strategy10Strategy1105×10510×10505×10510×10505×10510×10505×10510×10505×10510×10505×10510×105Block Numbers by Generation Sequnece05,00010,000Strategy Simulation Under Transaction-fee Regime50,0008010012050,00080100120050,00080100120050,00080100120050,00080100120050,000801001200.1100.2860.2840.2620.3310.195Volatility (𝜎)00.51.0Simulation StrategiesStrategy9Strategy10Strategy11Strategy12Strategy13Strategy14strategic miner can not maximize his rewards by ex-
tending the deviant miner’s chain. The reason behind is
that, with low block incentive volatility, the difference in
block incentive is insigniﬁcant regardless of whether the
longest chain or deviant miner’s chain is extended. To
this end, undercutting strategy can be prevented for both
mechanisms.

• For Mining Gap, with low block incentive volatility, min-
ers can claim the expected reward for each block in order
to ensure that their constant mining power investment is
proﬁtable. This could eliminate the Mining Gap problem
fundamentally and also ensure effective hash power in
the Blockchain network. It can also prevent a malicious
miner to fork.

• For Pool Hopping, by reducing the block incentive
volatility, miner’s reward for mining activates is still
stable even when the mempool has more and bigger
transactions. Mining activity’s return rate is independent
of the available transaction fees in the mempool, stopping
miners from jumping between different mempools to
maximize their reward.

2) Scalability: By adopting the DTS strategies, we could
scale Blockchain under the transaction-fee regime by increas-
ing the block size or setting a shorter block time. The current
Bitcoin protocol is designed to create congestion to generate
fees by limiting block time and block size. Bitcoin protocol
designers can not arbitrarily increase the block size because
doing so can slow down the prorogation speed and affect
the investor’s willingness to pay for the earlier settlement.
Designers cannot set arbitrarily low block time either because
total rewards have to be split over more blocks, reducing the
reward per block.

Whereas, under the DTS strategies, the block size is no
longer ﬁxed. For a block that contains higher-fee transactions,
its size is relatively smaller. When we increase the maximum
block size to store more transactions, the prorogation speed
will not be signiﬁcantly affected for these blocks. Blocks
that contain higher-fee transactions can reach consensus more
quickly on the Blockchain. Even if the owners of these
high-value transactions have high motivation to fork, their
forking cost is relatively higher. For blocks containing lower-
fee transactions, their large size causes low prorogation speed.
But this does not compromise the integrity of the Blockchain
and the owners of those transactions are also less likely to fork
because there is little to gain. This would make the Blockchain
scalable and sustainable under the transaction-fee regime.

VII. CONCLUSION

This paper reviews current Bitcoin’s reward mechanism and
how transactions are incorporated into the block through con-
sensus mechanisms. We list the sustainability dilemma faced
by the Bitcoin designers when the block reward mechanism is
switched to transaction fee-based mechanism. In recent years,
Bitcoin is being criticized for slow transaction conﬁrmation
times and high transaction costs and the deviant strategies

that can occur when switching to the transaction-fee regime,
such as Selﬁsh Mining, Undercutting, Mining Gap, and Pool
Hopping. We argue that the root cause of these fatal strategic
deviations is the high volatility of block rewards. To this end,
a set of novel DTS strategies is proposed to alleviate this
problem.

We show that through the systemic simulation, we could
mitigate the block incentive volatility under either Time-
based or Fee-based transaction incorporation mechanism by
dynamically assigning Merkle Tree storage units based on the
transaction fee. Among the 14 strategies evaluated, we found
that strategy 9, based on a time-based transaction incorporation
priority and a designated space for small
is
the most promising strategy in reducing the block incentive
volatility. With low volatility and stable incentive ﬂuctuation,
transaction fees can play a major resource of block incentive
instead of merely acting as an incentive for miners to include
transactions in their blocks.

transactions,

Based on the proposed dynamic allocation mechanism of
block space, we discuss the difference in speed at which
transactions of different amounts settle on the Blockchain.
The advantages of DTS strategies to improve the scalability
of Blockchain are compared with traditional Blockchain. We
conclude that by adopting the DTS strategies, we can scale
Blockchain by increasing the block size or by reducing the
block time without affecting the security and integrity of the
Blockchain. On the contrary, traditional Blockchain’s scalabil-
ity is restricted, and setting a large block size or shortening
the block time could damage the Blockchain’s security and
integrity.

Although we have found a feasible way to reduce the block
incentive volatility in our approach, several variables can be
further investigated. We hope that this study could provide
a new perspective to ﬁnd a way to prevent deviant miner
behavior and eliminate the severe threat to the security of Bit-
coin under the transaction-fee regime. The proﬁt distribution
dilemma of private Blockchains is similar to that of Bitcoin
under the transaction-fee regime. By adopting our proposed
mechanism, businesses running on private Blockchain can
innovatively combine their revenue model with Blockchain’s
mining activities’ proﬁt distribution.

REFERENCES

[1] S. Nakamoto, “Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System,” p. 9,

2008.

[2] S. Aggarwal, R. Chaudhary, G. S. Aujla, N. Kumar, K.-K. R.
Choo, and A. Y. Zomaya, “Blockchain for Smart Communities:
Applications, Challenges and Opportunities,” Journal of Network and
Computer Applications, vol. 144, pp. 13–48, 2019. [Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1084804519302231

[3] G. O. Karame, E. Androulaki, and S. Capkun, “Double-Spending Fast
Payments in Bitcoin,” in Proceedings of the 2012 ACM Conference on
Computer and Communications Security, ser. CCS ’12. New York,
NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2012, p. 906–917.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/2382196.2382292

Cryptography and Data Security, J. Bonneau and N. Heninger, Eds.
Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2020, pp. 523–540.

[21] Kaggle.com,

“Bitcoin
https://www.kaggle.com/mczielinski/bitcoin-historical-data,
Last
https://www.kaggle.com/mczielinski/bitcoin-historical-data

Historical

accessed:

[Online].

2021.

Jan

20

Data,”

Available:

[22] Blockchain.com,

“Transactions

per

Block,”

https://www.blockchain.com/charts/n-transactions-per-block,
Last
https://www.blockchain.com/charts/n-transactions-per-block

accessed:

[Online].

2021.

Jan

20

Available:

[23] Blockchain,com, “Mempool,” https://www.blockchain.com/charts/mempool-

Last

count,
https://www.blockchain.com/charts/mempool-count

accessed:

2021.

Jan

20

[Online]. Available:

[24] Blockchain.com,

“Transactions

Rate

Per

https://www.blockchain.com/charts/transactions-per-second, Last
cessed:
https://www.blockchain.com/charts/transactions-per-second

[Online].

2021.

Jan

20

Second,”
ac-
Available:

[4] D. Easley, M. O’Hara, and S. Basu, “From Mining to Markets:
The Evolution of Bitcoin Transaction Fees,” Journal of Financial
Economics, vol. 134, no. 1, pp. 91–109, 2019. [Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0304405X19300583

[5] J. Chiu and T. V. Koeppl, “Blockchain-Based Settlement for Asset
Trading,” The Review of Financial Studies, vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 1716–
1753, 04 2019. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhy122

[6] J. Li, Y. Yuan, and F.-Y. Wang, “Analyzing Bitcoin Transaction Fees
Using A Queueing Game Model,” Electronic Commerce Research,
2020. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10660-020-09414-3

[7] M. M¨oser and R. B¨ohme, “Trends, Tips, Tolls: A Longitudinal Study of
Bitcoin Transaction Fees,” in Financial Cryptography and Data Security,
M. Brenner, N. Christin, B. Johnson, and K. Rohloff, Eds.
Berlin,
Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2015, pp. 19–33.

[8] M. Carlsten, H. Kalodner, S. M. Weinberg, and A. Narayanan,
the Block Reward,” in
“On the Instability of Bitcoin Without
Proceedings of
the 2016 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer
and Communications Security, ser. CCS ’16. New York, NY, USA:
Association for Computing Machinery, 2016, p. 154–167. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/2976749.2978408

[9] I. Eyal and E. G. Sirer, “Majority Is Not Enough: Bitcoin Mining Is Vul-
nerable,” in Financial Cryptography and Data Security, N. Christin and
R. Safavi-Naini, Eds. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
2014, pp. 436–454.

[10] M. Rosenfeld,

“Analysis
Systems,” CoRR, vol. abs/1112.4980, 2011.
http://arxiv.org/abs/1112.4980

of Bitcoin Pooled Mining Reward
[Online]. Available:

[11] J. Li, Y. Yuan, and F.-Y. Wang, “A Novel GSP Auction Mechanism
for Ranking Bitcoin Transactions in Blockchain Mining,” Decision
Support Systems, vol. 124, p. 113094, 2019.
[Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S016792361930123X

[12] N. Houy, “The Economics of Bitcoin Transaction Fees,” GATE WP, vol.

1407, 2014.

[13] S. Jiang and J. Wu, “Bitcoin Mining with Transaction Fees: A Game on
the Block Size,” in 2019 IEEE International Conference on Blockchain
(Blockchain), 2019, pp. 107–115.

[14] R. C. Merkle, “Protocols for Public Key Cryptosystems,” in 1980 IEEE

Symposium on Security and Privacy, 1980, pp. 122–122.

[15] L.

R. Glosten

P.

Prices

R. Milgrom,

Transaction
neously
vol.
71–100,
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0304405X85900443

and
and
in A Specialist Market With Heteroge-
of Financial Economics,
[Online]. Available:

Informed Traders,”
1,

“Bid, Ask

Journal

1985.

pp.

14,

no.

[16] G. W. Schwert,

“Stock Market Volatility,” Financial Analysts
[Online]. Available:

Journal, vol. 46, no. 3, pp. 23–34, 1990.
https://doi.org/10.2469/faj.v46.n3.23

[17] R. Banno and K. Shudo, “Simulating A Blockchain Network with
SimBlock,” in 2019 IEEE International Conference on Blockchain and
Cryptocurrency (ICBC), 2019, pp. 3–4.

[18] Coinsutra.com,
cryptocurrency/,
Available: https://coinsutra.com/litecoin-cryptocurrency/

13 March

“Litecoin,”

https://coinsutra.com/litecoin-
[Online].
2020.

accessed:

Last

[19] P. Vasin,

“Blackcoin’s

v2,” URL:
https://blackcoin. co/blackcoin-pos-protocol-v2-whitepaper. pdf, vol. 71,
2014.

Proof-of-Stake

Protocol

[20] K. Karantias, A. Kiayias, and D. Zindros, “Proof-of-Burn,” in Financial

