2
2
0
2

b
e
F
6
1

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
2
8
8
7
0
.
2
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

PhishChain: A Decentralized and Transparent System to
Blacklist Phishing URLs

Shehan Edirimannage†, Mohamed Nabeel‡, Charith Elvitigala†, Chamath Keppitiyagama†
†University of Colombo School of Computing
‡Qatar Computing Research Institute
Sri Lanka, Qatar

ABSTRACT
Blacklists are a widely-used Internet security mechanism to protect
Internet users from financial scams, malicious web pages and other
cyber attacks based on blacklisted URLs. In this demo, we introduce
PhishChain, a transparent and decentralized system to blacklisting
phishing URLs. At present, public/private domain blacklists, such
as PhishTank, CryptoScamDB, and APWG, are maintained by a
centralized authority, but operate in a crowd sourcing fashion to
create a manually verified blacklist periodically. In addition to being
a single point of failure, the blacklisting process utilized by such
systems is not transparent. We utilize the blockchain technology to
support transparency and decentralization, where no single author-
ity is controlling the blacklist and all operations are recorded in an
immutable distributed ledger. Further, we design a page rank based
truth discovery algorithm to assign a phishing score to each URL
based on crowd sourced assessment of URLs. As an incentive for
voluntary participation, we assign skill points to each user based
on their participation in URL verification.

KEYWORDS
Phishing URLs, Blacklisting, Blockchain, Smart Contracts, Crowd-
sourcing, Truth Inference

ACM Reference Format:
Shehan Edirimannage†, Mohamed Nabeel‡, Charith Elvitigala†, Chamath
Keppitiyagama†. 2021. PhishChain: A Decentralized and Transparent Sys-
tem to Blacklist Phishing URLs. In Proceedings of (WWW). ACM, New York,
NY, USA, 4 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn

1 INTRODUCTION
Crowdsourced phishing blacklists such as PhishTank, CryptoScamDB
and APWG are quite useful in practice to defend against phishing
attacks. Out of these services, PhishTank, has been the longest
serving and most widely used crowd-sourced phishing blacklist.
While it has been instrumental in maintaining a ledger of phishing
URLs, it suffers from several limitations: (1) centralized architec-
ture with a single point of failure, (2) lack of transparency, (3) lack
of incentive to participate and (4) prone to manipulations. In fact,
these are common issues for all existing centralized blacklisting

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
WWW, April 25-29, 2022, The Web Conference 2022
© 2021 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YY/MM. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn

systems. Focusing on PhishTank and for example, Figure 1 shows
inconsistent assignment of final labels to URLs in PhishTank. The
figure on the left shows a URL marked as phishing even though
all 5 crowd sourced verifiers ascertain it is phishing. The figure on
the right, on the other hand, shows that a URL is marked as not
phishing even though no one has verified it. It is not clear how
PhishTank arrived at the final decision and raises concerns on the
transparency.

We propose PhishChain, a transparent and decentralized sys-
tem to blacklist phishing URLs in a crowd-sourced manner while
addressing the limitations mentioned above. We envision a black-
listing system where a consortium of mostly targeted organizations
such as Paypal, Apple, Microsoft and Facebook form an alliance
to put our proposal to use. Our key design goals are as follows:
(1) System should be decentralized where anyone can participate
and no single authority should be controlling it, (2) All operations
should be immutable and recorded, (3) URLs should be assigned a
final phish score based on the participants’ assessment, (4) Partic-
ipants should be incentivized by assigning skill points instead of
a cryptocurrency in order to encourage voluntary participation 1,
and (5) The system and data should be publicly available for anyone
to consume.

There are a few notable efforts to build blockchain based decen-
tralized solutions for phishing blacklisting or crowd sourcing in
general. However, they suffer from one or two drawbacks. Phish-
Ledger [6] is a private blockchain solution for blacklisting phishing
URLs, and they do not support crowd sourcing. Further, the system
is not available for public consumption and is managed in a closed
environment. Hence, the verifications performed in this system
are questionable. CrowdBC [4] and ZebraLancer [7] are blockchain
based crowd sourcing systems, but they rely on a cryptocurrency
to maintain the functionality.

Demonstration Scenarios: PhishChain is designed as the next
generation decentralized phishing blacklisting system. We show
the following three use cases. (1) URL verification, (2) URL detailed
dashobard and transaction, and (3) URL verification graph and
timeline along with the phish score and verifier skill points.

2 SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE
2.1 Overall System Design
Figure 2 shows the overall system architecture. The key components
in the system are blockchain network, smart contracts, truth dis-
covery algorithm, and API services modules. The system supports
three main functions in addition to user and system management

1Phishtank and APWG work through voluntary participation, but we observe that
only a handful of participants contribute to the lists maintained.

 
 
 
 
 
 
WWW, April 25-29, 2022, The Web Conference 2022

Edirimannage et al.

Figure 1: PhishTank inconsistent examples

functionality: (1) URL submission, (2) URL verification and (3) URL
lookup.

Blockchain Network Module: Blockchain network is the back-
bone of the decentralized infrastructure. Each node in our blockchain
network is either a validator or a normal node. A validator node
validates each and every transaction whereas a normal node is a
read-only participant. Note that the validation node only participate
in the blockchain block verification process similar to committing
data to the blockchain ledger, whereas the verifier participates in
the URL verification process itself. Istanbul Byzantine Fault Toler-
ance is utilized as the consensus algorithm since our threat model
assumes that there can be malicious participants. In order to meet
our system goals, a consortium type blockchain system called, Quo-
rum [1], is employed as the blockchain network. Tessera [2] is used
to manage transactions of the Quorum network.

Smart Contract Module: The crowd source functionality is
implemented using smart contracts (Solidity version 0.5.0). We
categorize the smart contracts into three main groups: (1) user
management, (2) URL management and (3) URL verification.

Truth Discovery Module: In our crowd sourcing environment,
URL verifiers are the workers and the task is to assess if a URL is
phishing or non phishing. Due to the varying degree of expertise
and experience of verifiers, one cannot simply take, for example,
the majority answer as the final phish score of a URL. Instead,
a truth discovery algorithm which takes potentially conflicting
status for a URL and verifier information, and arrives at the final
phish score, should be employed. We observe that existing truth
discovery algorithms developed by the database community [5] are
performing poorly on our problem as these algorithms assume that
the majority of the verifiers respond to each URL verification task,
which is not true for verifying URLs. Our retrospective analysis
of PhishTank URLs show that only a handful of verifiers verify a
given URL even though there are thousands of them altogether.
Hence, we design a new truth discovery algorithm by leveraging
page ranking (PR) algorithm on verifier-verifier graph. We construct
the verifier-verifier graph by using the “follower” relationship. We
define verifier 𝑣1 follows 𝑣2 for a given URL if 𝑣1 verifies the URL
before 𝑣2. A directed edge from 𝑣1 to 𝑣2 is created in this case. The
generated graph represent real world relationships among users

which captures how users are following others and how they are
being followed. Applying the page rank algorithm on top of this
graph computes a rank, a real value number between 0 and 1, for
each node (i.e. user), indicating how important it is with respect to
the whole user population. It follows the intuition that, the more the
number of followers are, the more recognition a user receive from
its peers. We utilize the computed ranks to calculate the weighted
voting score for each URL and assess if it is phishing or not.

Table 1 shows how our algorithm outperforms in comparison
to popular truth discovery algorithms on a real-world dataset ob-
tained from PhishTank. We collect URLs submitted and verified
in PhishTank from January 1𝑠𝑡 2020 to December 23𝑟𝑑 2020. The
cleaned dataset contains 17,000 phishing URLs and 6,000 non phish-
ing URLs. We scrape the additional information of each of these
URLs to identify the verifiers and their order of verification. We use
a balanced dataset of 6,000 URLs from each class for the evaluation.
We use our PR based algorithm to assign skill points to verifiers
as well as final phish score to URLs. The skill points of verifiers are
computed based on the verifier reputation score returned by the
truth discovery algorithm and the proportion of correctly labeled
URLs. The phish score of a URL is computed with the weighted
score of phishing and non phishing verifiers.

Note that in PhishChain system, we enforce transparency and
consistency on the data by following the consensus algorithm. In
other words, all the data related to URLs (URLs themselves, votes,
status) on the blockchain is consistent and hardened from unautho-
rized modifications. While our system has a separate truth discovery
server for URL verification due to the practical limitations in the
Solidity framework utilized, as the algorithm and the data are pub-
licly available and verifiable, any user can verify the the results
produced by the URL verification proces is indeed correct.

Table 1: Truth Discovery Algorithm Comparison

Algorithm
Our Approach
EM
GLAD

Acc.
95.45%
93.71%
93.98%

Prec.
96.74%
91.01%
91.72%

Rec.
94.31%
97.75%
97.39%

PhishChain: A Decentralized and Transparent System to Blacklist Phishing URLs

WWW, April 25-29, 2022, The Web Conference 2022

Figure 2: High Level System Design

Figure 3: Cakeshop blockchain explorer showing the Quo-
rum

Figure 4: UI for URL Verification

API Services Module: This module facilitates the communica-
tion with the blockchain network. The demo web application we
build is a consumer of this API.

3 DEMONSTRATION
In this section, we describe the main use cases of our system. As
shown in Figure 3, we setup a consortium blockchain consisting of
7 validation nodes each possessing a copy of the blockchain ledger
and participating in validating each transaction. In a real-world
setup, these validation nodes are to be hosted by organizations
mostly targeted by phishers (e.g. Paypal, Facebook, Microsoft) as
such a system is in their best interest to defend against phishing
attacks and a collective effort is likely to yield a significantly better
blocklist compared to having individual systems.

3.1 URL Verification
Any user can sign up and participate in the process of submission
and verification of URLs. Figure 4 shows the UI for the verification
of a given URL as phishing or not phishing. Once user submits
their verdict, the validation nodes validate the transaction adhering
to the consensus algorithm resulting the transaction shown in
Figure 5. Once verified, if there are at least 3 votes for the URL,

truth discovery model is invoked and assigns the ULR’s calculated
score where a positive score indicates that the URL is a phishing
URL. Note that the users in here are real-world users with varying
degree of domain expertise who may either submit URLs or verify
whether the URL is phishing or not. Further, in order to limit the
abuse of the system, PhishChain enforces that each URL submitted
to the system should be accompanied with a valid email referring
to the the URL 2.

3.2 URL Detailed Dashboard
Figure 6 shows the details of the URL submitted by user 1, and it
is verified by users 3 and 4 as phishing and users 2 and 5 as non
phishing. The system assigns an overall final phishing score of
0.3452 based on PR based truth discovery algorithm. Since it is a
positive value, the system concludes that the URL is a phishing URL
at that point in time.

3.3 URL Verification Graph and Timeline
Figure 7 and Figure 8 show the verification graph and the timeline
of verification respectively. Based on the participation in the system

2Similar to existing blocklists, the goal of PhishChain to assess suspicious URLs found
in likely phishing emails.

WWW, April 25-29, 2022, The Web Conference 2022

Edirimannage et al.

Figure 5: UI for URL Verification Transaction Details

Figure 6: UI for URL Detailed Dashboard

Figure 7: UI for URL Verification Graph

and the proportion of accurately labeled URLs, each user is assigned
skill points. For example, user 1 has the highest skill points of 153.
Notice that after the 3𝑟𝑑 vote, the URL is marked as phishing with a
score of 0.64, but after the 4𝑡ℎ vote, URL is still marked as phishing
but with a lower phishing score of 0.35. The phishing score changes
with every additional vote as truth discovery algorithm is invoked
on affected URLs. Such a detailed timeline easily allows an analyst
to not only assess the latest status but also understand how our
system arrived at the decision.

4 DISCUSSION
The motivation for introducing skill points is inspired from the
question answering systems such as StackOverflow and StackEx-
change. Such systems show that even though participants do not
receive any monetary benefits by contributing, these participants

Figure 8: UI for URL Verification Timeline

attain various “expertise” levels that have far more significance
in their respective domains. We believe a similar system for mali-
cious URL verification could assist solve the problem of the limited
participation in the volunteer based blacklisting systems currently
available.

In this work, we assume that users do not maliciously try to
manipulate the truth discovery based system. However, one may
extend PhishChain to defend against such manipulations by intro-
ducing additional mechanisms that the reputation/recommender
system community has already made available [3].

5 CONCLUSIONS
We propose, PhishChain, a truly transparent and decentralized
phishing URL blacklisting system that is managed by a consortium
instead of a centralized entity. Based on the proposed page rank
based truth discovery algorithm, we compute a phish score for
each URL as well as verifier skill points. Smart contracts are em-
ployed to implement the proposed functionality over the Quorum
blockchain. We demonstrate three use cases: (1) URL verification,
(2) URL dashboard and its transaction, and (3) URL verification
graph and timeline. We believe our approach is generally applicable
to any crowd sourced blacklisting system.

REFERENCES
[1] ConsenSys. 2021. Quorum. Available at https://consensys.net/quorum.
[2] ConsenSys. 2021. Tessera. Available at https://github.com/ConsenSys/tessera.
[3] Eric Friedman, Paul Resnick, and Rahul Sami. 2007. Manipulation-resistant repu-

tation systems. Algorithmic Game Theory 677 (2007).

[4] M. Li, J. Weng, A. Yang, W. Lu, Y. Zhang, L. Hou, J. Liu, Y. Xiang, and R. Deng.
2019. CrowdBC: A blockchain-based decentralized framework for crowdsourcing.
IEEE Trans. on Para. and Dist. Sys. 30, 6 (2019), 1251–1266.

[5] Yaliang Li, Jing Gao, Chuishi Meng, Qi Li, Lu Su, Bo Zhao, Wei Fan, and Jiawei
Han. 2016. A Survey on Truth Discovery. ACM SIGKDD Explorations Newsletter
17, 2 (2016), 1–16. https://doi.org/10.1145/2897350.2897352 arXiv:1505.02463
[6] D. Liu, W. Wang, Y. Wang, and Y. Tan. 2019. PhishLedger: A decentralized phishing
data sharing mechanism. ACM International Conference Proceeding Series (2019),
84–89.

[7] Y. Lu, Q. Tang, and G. Wang. 2018. ZebraLancer: Crowdsource Knowledge atop
Open Blockchain, Privately and Anonymously. July (2018), 1–17. arXiv:1803.01256
http://arxiv.org/abs/1803.01256

