An Architecture for Web 3.0 and the Emergence of

Spontaneous Time Order

1,3,*Hengjin Cai, 2,3, *Tianqi Cai

1School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, China

2Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, China

3Wuhan Longjin Science and Technology Inc., China

*Correspondences: hjcai@whu.edu.cn; cai.tianqi@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract. In this study, we proposed an architecture for Web 3.0, which is based on

the hashed interactions among user nodes that can transform bilateral trusts into

collective time order, which is the major achievement of blockchain technology,

without the expensive Proof of Work or the questionable Proof of Stake.

1 Introduction

In 1989, Tim Berners Lee proposed the World Wide Web that has completely

changed the shape of the world economy. However, privacy and control of personal

data has become a leading problem. Blockchain technology has emerged as basis of

value exchanges networks unprecedentedly. The time order in blockchain networks is

the most important property, which is the foundation of traceability, verifiability and

value delivery. However, it suffers from the technical challenges of efficiency, security,

energy consumption and usability. In 2014, Gavin Wood, the co-founder of Ethereum

[1], proposed a new Internet operation mode of Web 3.0 with an emphasis on

individualization and privacy protection [2]. That is, the information will be released

and kept by the users themselves, their identities cannot be traced or disclosed, and

their operations can be directly delivered instead of needing help from an

intermediary organization. Since then, there have been several attempts at Web 3.0,

1

but low efficiency and costly distributed storage remain problems.

We propose a Web 3.0 solution based on hashed interactions that emphasizes

traceability and allows for free interactions and cooperation with other chains on the

premise of preserving personal privacy.

2 Hashed Interactions Leading to Intrinsic Time Order

As the first successful application of blockchain technology, Bitcoin proposed

the unspent

transaction output bookkeeping method. Through the network-wide

consensus of the Proof of Work, Bitcoin has formed a time order in the digital world,

which is an innovation from 0 to 1. [3] [4]

The token-based bookkeeping method[5]

that can support a simplified and

effective Web 3.0 architecture to deal with many problems in the digital world. The

proposed architecture is based on hash interactions and is characterized as follows:

i. Each chain or individual system is privately owned to the user.

ii. A user independently decides to interact with other chains, including the

sending and accepting associations.

X sends an association to Y, indicating that X shares the hash value of its block

summary to Y. If Y packages the hash value into its next block, Y accepts the

association with X.

This approach can solve the problems of data ownership, data classification, and

privacy. Furthermore, as

the interactions accumulate among the nodes,

the

peer-to-peer network will emerge in an order without relying on network-wide

consensus to order the data ontology. The resulting benefits are the forgettability of

the network and the savings in energy consumption.

2.1 State with Established Rules

Each chain or system is user owned, indicating that all personal data are stored in

privately owned devices or services, such as personal mobile devices, PCs, private

clouds, among others. If users want some of their data to be visible to the network,

2

they need to interact with other chains in a timely manner.

Figure 1 depicts a state with established rules wherein each chain in a network

shows a fixed interaction pattern. For example, if each private chain interacts with at

least one chain every hour, an intrinsic time sequence can be generated by a direct or

indirect relation between each chain and each block. For example, the time order in

Figure 1 can be described as

 = {1, 1, 1, 2, 2, 2, 3, 3, 3, 4, 4, 4, 5, 5}

Figure1. Example of interactions with established rules.

2.2 State of Autonomous Interaction

There is no need to constrain the interaction frequency of each user. Users are

free to control their own data and interact with others entirely on their own; the

mechanism still works but with different time granularities or time intervals for

different private chains. The various time granularities depend on how often each

chain interacts with others, corresponding to the time interval between the previous

block and the latter. Naturally, a chain that interacts frequently, especially with

well-known chains, is more granular in time, easier to verify, and more reliable.

In multi-chain systems with different time granularities, sorting is sometimes

easy, and sometimes confirming the order is difficult. Some chains may have low

3

interaction frequency, showing large time granularity, and therefore can only be

roughly sorted, which is also an acceptable result in the real world. If there are enough

chains and interactions, the data can be traced, validated, and ordered.

That is, different chains have their own time granularity, which is controlled and

responsible by the users themselves. If a user wants their own data to be more

accurately ordered, they will interact more often with other chains, and if the user

chooses to interact infrequently, then they will be responsible for the inaccuracy of

their own data ordering accordingly. For example,

in a state of completely

autonomous interaction depicted in Figure 2, the time order has the following two

possibilities.

 = {1, 1, 1, 2, 2, 2, 3, 3, 4, 3, 5}

OR

{1, 1, 1, 2, 2, 2, 3, 4, 3, 3, 5}

Figure 2. State of completely autonomous interaction.

3 Free Cooperation with Individuals

The order is an instinct emergence from the interactions among the nodes in the

system. If we attempt to reach a fixed consensus of the order of the data ontology

4

within the entire network at the time of the data being stored or chained, which is the

circumstance in current P2P networks such as Bitcoin and Ethereum, it will require

huge calculations, denoting considerable consumption of

time and resources.

Moreover, the initial data may be incorrect, and there will be frequent changes or

patches later. Implementing a digital world with personality and efficiency is difficult

if there is not enough room for understanding and reaching consensus.

The consensus is therefore separated from the data ontology in our architecture

so that different requirements have matching time granularities in their respective

ecology, and the relative nodes can order blocks, reach consensus, and validate data in

accordance with their interactions. Each user only needs to maintain its own chain,

and the data are completely private. The advantage is that the owner has a choice.

Whether the data are encrypted, shared, and accepted by others are all decided by the

user. The data can be classified naturally and encrypted from the ontology layer.

An interaction between different chains is actually a type of voting, which may

lead to a mainstream chain at one time period and bandwagoning others at another

time period. This type of governance is also closer to human thinking. People need to

organize, understand, and make decisions on data, rather than make up the mind at

first sight.

Accordingly, the storage and computing efficiencies will be greatly improved. As

each node is responsible for its own related parts, the cost of technological renovation

will be low.

An additional benefit is the forgettability of the data. For example, some periods

of time may never be shared with anyone, the data is only in the private chain, and

some data can be shared with friends or official agencies directly, instead of being

broadcast all over the network.

Therefore, payment becomes simple. The buyer is willing to pay, the seller is

willing to receive it, and the payment can be completed. With the token-based

bookkeeping method, payment can be implemented securely, efficiently, flexibly, and

accurately.

5

This paper proposed an architecture for Web 3.0, and the hashed interactions

among nodes can transform bilateral

trusts into collective time order. The high

transactions per second, low storage costs and flexibility in data management will

provide a basis for a new paradigm in individual corporation and social governance,

privacy protection and personalization.

References

[1] Buterin, V. (2013) A next-generation smart contract and decentralized application

platform. https://ethereum.org/en/whitepaper/

[2] Wood, G. (2014) Insights into a modern world. https://gavofyork.medium.com

[3] Nakamoto, S.

(2009). Bitcoin:

a peer-to-peer

electronic

cash system.

https://bitcoin.org/en/bitcoin-paper

[4] Back, A., & Bentov, I. (2014) Note on fair coin toss via Bitcoin. ArXiv:

1402.3698.

[5] Cai, T. , Cai, H. J. , Wang, H. , Cheng, X. , & Wang, L. (2019). Analysis of

blockchain system with token-based bookkeeping method. IEEE Access, 7,

50823-50832.

6

