2
2
0
2

b
e
F
5
1

]
h
p
-
t
n
a
u
q
[

1
v
4
6
7
7
0
.
2
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Paving the Way towards 800 Gbps Quantum-Secured
Optical Channel Deployment in Mission-Critical Environments

Farzam Toudeh-Fallah1, Marco Pistoia1, Yasushi Kawakura2, Navid Moazzami3, David H. Kramer1,
Robert I. Woodward4, Greg Sysak3, Benny John1, Omar Amer1, Antigoni O. Polychroniadou1,
Jeffrey Lyon1, Suresh Shetty1, Tulasi D. Movva1, Sudhir Upadhyay1, Monik R. Behera1,
Joseph A. Dolphin4, Paul A. Haigh4, James F. Dynes4, Andrew J. Shields4

1JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A.

2Toshiba America, Inc

3Ciena, Inc

4Toshiba Europe Ltd

Abstract—This article describes experimental research studies
conducted towards understanding the implementation aspects
of high-capacity quantum-secured optical channels in mission-
critical metro-scale operational environments based on Quantum
Key Distribution (QKD) technology. The test bed for this research
study was carefully designed to mimic such environments.

To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst time that an
800 Gbps quantum-secured optical channel—along with several
other Dense Wavelength Division Multiplexed (DWDM) channels
on the C-band and multiplexed with the QKD channel on the O-
band—was established at distances up to 100 km, with secure-key
rates relevant for practical industry use cases. In addition, during
the course of these trials, transporting a blockchain application
over this established channel was utilized as a demonstration of
securing a ﬁnancial transaction in transit over a quantum-secured
optical channel.

In a real-world operational environment, deployment of such
high-capacity quantum-secured optical channels multiplexed with
the quantum channel will inevitably introduce challenges due
to their strict requirements, such as high launch powers and
polarization ﬂuctuations. Therefore,
in the course of this re-
search, experimental studies were conducted on the impact
on the system performance—and speciﬁcally on the quantum
channel—of several degradation factors present in real-world
operational environments,
interference
(due to Raman scattering and nonlinear effects), attenuation,
polarization ﬂuctuations and distance dependency. The ﬁndings
of this research pave the way towards the deployment of QKD-
secured optical channels in high-capacity, metro-scale, mission-
critical operational environments, such as Inter-Data Center
Interconnects.

including inter-channel

I. INTRODUCTION

is

Quantum Key Distribution (QKD)

a well-known
symmetric-key distribution method that does not rely on
computational assumptions. Rather, it leverages principles of
quantum mechanics to provide communication channels with
unconditional security, mathematically proven by multiple
studies [1]–[3]. This article mainly concerns itself with the
implementation, deployment and integration of QKD tech-
nologies into real-world network infrastructures. For a detailed
discussion of the theory behind QKD, as well as its security,
challenges, and a survey of state-of-the-art real-world tests,
see [4]–[6].

A. Novel Contributions of This Work

This paper describes in detail a joint experimental research
study conducted by JPMorgan Chase, Toshiba and Ciena at

JPMorgan Chase’s Optical Transport Lab in Columbus, Ohio
aimed at understanding the implementation and deployment
aspects of an 800 Gbps QKD-secured optical channel
in
mission-critical metro-scale operational environments. The test
bed for this research study was carefully designed to mimic
such environments.

To the best of our knowledge, this research study is the
ﬁrst one to demonstrate an 800 Gbps QKD-secured optical
channel along with several other Dense Wavelength Division
Multiplexed (DWDM) channels on the C-band, multiplexed
with the QKD quantum channel on the O-band, at distances up
to 100 km. At a 70 km distance over a Corning SMF-28 optical
ﬁber, this system achieved a secure-key rate (SKR) of 66.16
kbps, capable of supporting 258 QKD-secured DWDM data
channels using Advanced Encryption Standard Galois/Counter
Mode encryption with a key size of 256 bits (AES-256-GCM)
and a key refresh rate of 1/sec. In addition, during the course
of these trials, transporting a blockchain application over this
established channel was utilized as a demonstration of securing
a ﬁnancial transaction in transit over a quantum-secured optical
channel.

In real-world operational environments, requiring a third
site just for the purpose of QKD to work is impractical,
since the deployment of any new technology must be done
within the facilities and sites already in place—for example
between two metro-area data centers. The experimental re-
search described in this article was conducted purely based on
real-world operational equipment, with no employment of any
kind of simulation or emulation, and without the need for the
deployment of additional sites dedicated to QKD. Therefore,
the solution presented here is directly applicable to metro-scale
operational environments.

Fiber-optic links deployed in the ﬁeld are very expensive
commodities; dedicating a ﬁber just to the quantum channel
would be considered unacceptable in a real-world operational
environment. Consequently, when considering a QKD solution
suitable for production,
the optical and quantum channels
must be multiplexed on the same ﬁber. Even though this
requirement is of utmost importance, the deployment of high-
capacity QKD-Secured optical channels multiplexed with the
quantum channel introduces challenges—such as polarization
ﬂuctuations as well as nonlinear effects associated with high
launch powers—which have been shown to have negative

 
 
 
 
 
 
impact on the performance of the quantum channel.

Thus, in the course of this experimental research project,
studies were conducted towards understanding and quantifying
the impact of several degradation factors present
in real-
world operational environments. Speciﬁcally, we investigated
the degradation of the quantum channel associated with a
high-capacity QKD-secured optical channel. Factors inducing
this type of degradation include inter-channel
interference
(due, for example, to Raman scattering and nonlinear effects),
attenuation, polarization ﬂuctuations and distance dependency.
The ﬁndings of this research pave the way towards the
deployment of future QKD-secured optical channels in high-
capacity, metro-scale, mission-critical operational environ-
ments, such as Inter-Data Center Interconnects.

B. Paper Organization

This article is organized as follows: Section II describes the
establishment of a QKD-secured 800 Gbps optical channel.
Section III presents an inter-channel interference experimental
study. Section IV focuses on the distance-dependency test
results. Sections V and VI provide the results of experiments
concerning two major degradation factors—attenuation and
polarization ﬂuctuations, respectively—on the performance of
the quantum channel. Section VIII discusses prior art in the
ﬁeld of actual deployments of QKD-secured channels, making
a comparison with the work described in this paper. Finally,
Section IX concludes this article and illustrates opportunities
for future research directions.

II. ESTABLISHING AN 800 GBPS QKD-SECURED OPTICAL
CHANNEL

Figure 1 depicts the abstract test-bed conﬁguration used in
the trial. As seen from this ﬁgure, the optical data channel and
the quantum channel are multiplexed on a Corning SMF-28
optical ﬁber, while the communications between the optical
and QKD devices are established using Application Program-
ming Interfaces (APIs) on both sides.

Figure 2 shows the actual

test-bed conﬁguration. Ciena
Waveserver 5 systems (referred to as the Waveserver systems
throughout this article) were utilized to establish an 800 Gbps
optical wave on the C-band as the Channel Under Test (CUT),
which carries pseudo-random trafﬁc. The Waveserver systems
are able to generate and receive two 800 Gbps waves per sled
and up to 4 sleds per system. However, during the course of
these experimental trials, only two ports (1/1 and 1/2) were
used to generate the 800 Gpbs waves as needed. For estab-
lishing the quantum channel, the Toshiba Multiplexed QKD
system (referred to as the QKD system throughout this article)
were utilized. This system consists of two devices which
contain transmitters, receivers and post-processing units on
both sides (Alice and Bob), capable of establishing a quantum
channel in order to generate keys based on the Decoy-State
Phase-Encoded Bennett-Brassard 1984 (BB84) QKD protocol
[7]–[9]. These devices can also multiplex incoming optical
channels on the C-band with their quantum channel generated
on the O-band, and launch both on the same optical ﬁber.

The 800 Gbps signal generated by the Waveserver system
on the C-band on port 1/1 (the CUT) was inserted into
the QKD system. The CUT was then multiplexed with the
quantum channel on the O-band by the QKD system and both
were transmitted over an optical ﬁber. On the receiver side,
the reverse operation took place. Also, as shown in Figure
2, communications between the Waveserver systems and the
QKD systems were conducted via an API link between the
Waveserver and the QKD Control Server device. This com-
munication was used by the Waveserver systems to retrieve
the QKD-generated keys from a key management system on
the QKD Control Server. The API link characteristics were
based on the speciﬁcations of the European Telecommunica-
tions Standards Institute; ETSI GS QKD 014 [10]. The two
endpoints of the QKD system were connected via a 70 km
Corning SMF-28 optical-ﬁber spool (ITU-T Recommendation
G.652.D compliant).

The following list details the relevant speciﬁcations for this

conﬁguration:

• PCUT = 0 dBm
• λCUT = 1531.51 nm
• λS1 = 1529.55 nm
• λS2 = 1530.33 nm
• λS3 = 1528.77 nm
• λQC = 1312.73 nm
• SMF-28: α1550 = 0.18 dB/km
• SMF-28: α1310 = 0.32 dB/km

Here, λCUT and PCUT represent the CUT’s wavelength and
launch power respectively, λQC indicates the wavelength of
the quantum channel, λS1, λS2, λS3 represent the three QKD
system service channels over the C-band and α is the attenu-
ation coefﬁcient.

It should be mentioned that λCUT was placed as close as
possible to the lower edge of the C-band in order to take
into account any potential interference from the QKD-secured
optical channel on the quantum channel. Due to the presence
of some of the required service channels on the C-band,
1531.51 nm was the closest channel we could select for this
purpose.

Upon deploying this conﬁguration,

the quantum-secured
optical channel at 800 Gbps was established, at which point
the QKD systems, Alice and Bob, generated the keys. Those
keys were then accessed by the Waveserver systems to se-
cure the optical link (CUT) using AES-256-GCM encryption
over the Optical Transport Network (OTN) standard protocol.
Therefore, in this conﬁguration, the keys were generated by
the QKD systems, while the actual encryption of the 800-Gbps
optical channel was performed by the Waveserver systems
using the AES-256-GCM encryption method utilizing the
QKD-generated keys.

III. INTER-CHANNEL INTERFERENCE

After successfully establishing an 800 Gbps quantum-
secured optical channel at 70 km distance, in which the CUT
and quantum channel were multiplexed on the same ﬁber, the

Fig. 1. Abstract Test-Bed Conﬁguration

next step was to add additional optical channels. This served
two purposes:

1) This conﬁguration creates a more realistic and efﬁcient
operational environment in which several optical chan-
nels are multiplexed on the C-band via DWDM.

2) Multiplexing other optical channels results into launch-
ing higher powers into the ﬁber, which in turn induces
degradation impacts—such as Raman scattering and
nonlinear effects—on the quantum channel.

As pointed out before, the Waveserver systems were able
to support generation of two 800 Gbps waves per sled. In
order to multiplex additional optical channels, the Ciena 6500
Photonic Line System (referred to as the photonic line system
throughout
this article) and the Ciena 6500 Transponders
(referred to as the transponders hereafter) were added to
the test bed. The transponders that were available in the lab
were able to establish 100 Gbps waves on the International
Telecommunication Union - Telecommunication (ITU-T) C-
band grid. By using the photonic line system, we were able to
multiplex multiple optical channels using DWDM, providing
required ampliﬁcation and preparing the signals for launching
into the ﬁber.

the
This conﬁguration is depicted in Figure 3. Here,
Waveserver systems generated two 800 Gbps waves, the CUT
on port 1/1 and the second one on port 1/2. These waves were
then inserted into the photonic line system, which multiplexed
them with eight 100 Gbps DWDM channels generated by the
transponders on the C-band. After passing through an ampliﬁer

module on the photonic line system, these multiplexed DWDM
channels (the two 800 Gbps and eight 100 Gbps channels)
were inserted into the QKD system, which in turn multiplexed
them with the quantum channel running on the O-band. As
before, the two endpoints of the QKD system were connected
via 70 km of Corning SMF-28 ﬁber. It should be noted that,
in Figure 3, N λ represents all other wavelengths that λCUT
has been multiplexed with on the C-band.

As before, these optical channels were also carefully placed
as close as possible to the lower edge of the C-band in order
to maximize the potential of any inter-channel interference on
the quantum channel. Table I provides the channel lineup for
this conﬁguration.

Channel
CUT
Second 800G
100G No. 1
100G No. 2
100G No. 3
100G No. 4
100G No. 5
100G No. 6
100G No. 7
100G No. 8

Wavelength (nm)
1531.51
1532.68
1533.86
1534.25
1534.64
1535.04
1535.43
1535.82
1536.22
1536.61

TABLE I
CHANNEL LINEUP

Figure 4 shows the Quantum Bit Error Rate (QBER) as
a function of the number of optical channels as they were
added one by one. This is useful to study the impact of the

Fig. 2. Actual Test-Bed Conﬁguration

Fig. 3. Test-Bed Conﬁguration with All the DWDM Channels Added

inter-channel
interference imposed by the optical channels
onto the quantum channel. As seen in the ﬁgure, QBER
increased slightly as a function of the number of added optical
channels (3.94% to 4.14%), due to the Raman scattering
of the DWDM optical channels causing interference with
the quantum channel. However, this increase was very well
tolerated by the system and did not have any impact on the
overall operational functionality.

IV. DISTANCE STUDY

The focus of this part of the research study was the
performance of the system as a function of the distance. For
this purpose, different ﬁber spools were used to analyze the
impact of increasing the distance on the system performance.
All ﬁbers were of type Corning SMF-28 G.652.D. It should
also be mentioned that for 80 km to 100 km distances, the
launch power on the Waveserver systems were increased to 2
dBm in order to keep the 800 Gbps optical signals within the
acceptable power levels at the receivers.

Since this test-bed conﬁguration is the closest to the actual
operational environments in the ﬁeld, the rest of the experi-
ments were conducted over this conﬁguration.

Figure 5 shows the results of this study. Here, an SKR of
66.16 kbps was achieved at a 70 km distance while securing
an 800 Gbps optical channel multiplexed with another 800

Fig. 4. QBER vs Added DWDM Channels

Gbps and eight 100 Gbps channels on the C-band. Although
in this experiment there were ten optical channels present, at
this rate the system has the potential to quantum-secure up to
258 optical channels using AES-256-GCM encryption while
refreshing the key at a rate of 1/sec. Table II illustrates the
achieved SKR as a function of the distance. Notably, an SKR
of 2 kbps was achieved at a distance of 100 km.

Distance (km)
70
80
90
100

SKR (bps)
66163
30500
12000
2000

TABLE II
ACHIEVED SKR VS DISTANCE

V. IMPACT OF ATTENUATION

Understanding the impact of increased attenuation on the
QKD system in a ﬁxed-length ﬁber scenario is important in
order to understand the behavior of the system in a mission-
critical environment. Whether the increased attenuation is
as a result of a physical line issue or the presence of an
eavesdropper, the network operator requires enough time to
proactively investigate and avert an outage. In order to conduct
this study, the ﬁber distance was set to the baseline value of
70 km and a Variable Optical Attenuator (VOA) was inserted
into the quantum channel. As shown in Figure 6, the insertion
point was right between the termination point of the 70 km
ﬁber and the receiver port on Bob’s QKD system. The VOA
had an insertion loss of 0.737 dB and the target wavelength
was set to 1310 nm in order to directly impact the quantum

channel. The VOA attenuation value was increased at 1 dB
increments on an hourly basis and measurements were taken.
Figure 7 provides the results of this study. The baseline with
the VOA insertion shows a bit lower performance compared
to the baseline without, i.e. a QBER of 3.61% vs 3.56% and
an SKR of 50 kbps vs 66.16 kbps. This might be attributed to
a combination of the VOA insertion loss and additional signal
degradation at the interfaces introduced when connecting the
signal in and out of the VOA itself.

Figure 7 also shows that the maximum attenuation tolerated
on top of a 70 km ﬁber in this conﬁguration was 9 db, after
which the key generation process stopped.This is explained
by the decreasing number of photons in the quantum channel
arriving at the receiver due to increasing channel loss. Once the
received quantum channel photons approach the noise level of
the detectors, the signal-to-noise ratio becomes insufﬁcient to
distill QKD keys. This response to the induced attenuation in
the form of gradual adjustment to the key generation rate—as
opposed to an abrupt disruption in the process—is beneﬁcial
in mission-critical operational environment. The reason for
this is that in those environments, it is vital to be aware
of any degradation in the communication channel before the
actual outage takes place. In that way, upon observing any
degradation, the operator can proactively run a diagnosis on
the system, identify the root cause (physical line issues or
presence of an eavesdropper), and take necessary action before
the system shuts down.

VI. POLARIZATION FLUCTUATIONS

State of Polarization (SOP) ﬂuctuation plays a major role as
a degradation factor in ﬁber-optic networks. This effect, mostly

246810Number of DWDM Channels3.85%3.90%3.95%4.00%4.05%4.10%4.15%QBERFig. 5. Distance Study Results

Fig. 6. Attenuation Testing Conﬁguration

is present

known as SOP Transients,
in most operational
networks as a result of vibrations in the environment such
as underground ﬁbers installed next to the railroad tracks,
lightning strikes and other factors. As an example, research
conducted on Optical Ground Wires (OPGW) has revealed
SOP Transients on the order of 5.1 Mrad/sec as a result of
lightning strikes [11]. OPGW is an aerial cable technology
speciﬁcally designed for high voltage power line installations.
These cables consist of a nucleus containing optical ﬁbers
and an armor, generally composed of one or more layers of
aluminum wire, steel wire or aluminum-coated steel wire [12].
Therefore, any system to be deployed in operational ﬁber-optic
networks should be able to tolerate such SOP ﬂuctuations in

order to prevent any service interruptions.

Figure 8 depicts the test-bed conﬁguration for the SOP
ﬂuctuation study. Here, an SOP Controller was placed between
the termination point of the 70 km ﬁber and the receiver port
on Bob’s QKD system.

During the course of this study, it was observed that setting
the SOP Controller in scrambling mode at a Stokes angular
velocity of 50 rad/sec in a sustained mode caused the key
generation process to stop. Although lightning strikes are
usually sub-millisecond events, their impact on the quantum
channel established on aerial OPGW ﬁbers should be studied.
As such, based on the ﬁndings of this trial, future research
into quantifying the exact impact of extreme SOP transients

707580859095100Distance0.00%1.00%2.00%3.00%4.00%5.00%6.00%7.00%QBER010000200003000040000500006000070000Secret Key Rate (bps)QBERSecret Key Rate (bps)Fig. 7. Results of Study on Effect of Inducing Additional Attenuation on 70 km Fiber

on quantum channels and QKD systems are recommended.

VII. ROUTING A BLOCKCHAIN APPLICATION OVER THE
QUANTUM-SECURED OPTICAL CHANNEL

Blockchain constructions regularly make extensive use of
public-key cryptography for enforcing both conﬁdentiality and
integrity through the use of encryption and digital-signature
schemes, respectively. Most commonly, these cryptographic
primitives are constructed based on postulates, such as the
discrete-log assumption used by Difﬁe-Hellman and the ellip-
tic curve cryptosystems, and the prime-factorization assump-
tion used by RSA, both of which are now known to be false
in the face of a Shor’s Algorithm and a sufﬁciently powerful
quantum computer [13]. The vulnerability of blockchain ap-
plications to the attacks conducted by quantum computers in
these ways have been well studied [14]–[16].

In this section, we discuss the possibility of mitigating some
of these weaknesses with the use of QKD-generated symmetric
keys.

We discuss here, as an example of the conﬁdentiality
afforded to the data-in-transit of an application deployed
over the quantum-secured channel, the security guarantees
we achieved experimentally against a quantum-capable eaves-
dropper hoping to compromise the security of a blockchain
application. Speciﬁcally, we installed and deployed the Liink
blockchain network [17]—a permissioned blockchain based
on the Quorum protocol [18] in use by JPMorgan Chase
to process payments—and linked the nodes over quantum-
secured channels. We start by describing brieﬂy the Liink
blockchain network to give motivation for why QKD may be
applicable to it and other permissioned blockchain networks to
protect their data in transit. Following that, we illustrate what
additional tools may be deployed to enforce further security

guarantees—this time against participants of the blockchain
protocol rather than outside attackers. Speciﬁcally, we focus
on possible methods that may be used to achieve blockchain
consensus and enforce transaction integrity.

The Liink network, as a platform used by ﬁnancial insti-
tutions, deals with large amounts of conﬁdential information.
While the information may be intended to be read by other
parties in the network, conﬁdentiality of the data while in
transit must be retained against non-participants. Currently,
the conﬁdentiality of this data in transit is protected through
the use of standard public-key cryptographic schemes, which
will not be sufﬁcient against a quantum-capable eavesdropper.
The Liink network is an example of a permissioned blockchain
network. Therefore, there is a meaningful distinction between
parties that are and are not authorized participants of the
network. As such, we can differentiate those two sets of actors
and their distinct security proﬁles. Notably, we need not ensure
that transaction data remains private from participants—only
from non-participants. We note that here—and everywhere else
we discuss conﬁdentiality—we only refer to the conﬁdentiality
of the data-in-transit against a non-participant, not the data-at-
rest.

The use of the quantum-secured channel allows us to
achieve conﬁdentiality against even quantum-equipped non-
participants. In the experimental trial, as shown in the lab test-
bed depicted in Figure 9, the Liink application and transaction
data were transmitted between two virtual machines (VMs)
across the 800 Gbps quantum-secured optical channel (the
CUT). The VMs were connected to switches that were in
turn connected to the Waveserver systems via 100 Gbps
Ethernet links, the output of which, carrying the trafﬁc, was
then sent over the CUT. A lightweight version of the Liink
application was setup for this experiment. All communications

123456789Induced Attenuation0.00%1.00%2.00%3.00%4.00%5.00%6.00%7.00%QBER010000200003000040000500006000070000Secret Key Rate (bps)QBERSecret Key Rate (bps)Fig. 8. SOP Fluctuation Study Test-Bed Conﬁguration

between the two blockchain nodes Alice and Bob, including
Peer Discovery, consensus and transaction propagation, were
conducted over the quantum-secured optical channel. Upon
initiating a transaction by node Alice, a listener process on
node Bob conﬁrmed the receipt of the transaction along
with its addition into the block. Once included in the block,
the transaction was considered conﬁrmed via the consensus
mechanism. During this experiment, the application did not
encrypt the JSON payload in the transaction that it published
on blockchain since protection was provided by the quantum-
secured channel.

Without the quantum-secured channel, the Liink protocol
must use standard public-key cryptographic schemes to secure
the conﬁdentiality of the information in transaction payloads
against eavesdroppers. Such encryption schemes rely on the
standard assumptions necessary for public key cryptography,
which are known to be vulnerable to attacks realizable on
powerful quantum computers expected to become available in
the future. By routing the trafﬁc over the quantum-secured
channel, we replaced the public-key cryptographic schemes
with QKD-enabled symmetric-key cryptography and ensured
that a quantum-equipped eavesdropper cannot decrypt
the
trafﬁc, including sensitive transaction data. As a result, we
achieve the ﬁrst of our discussed guarantees: conﬁdentiality
against a non-permissioned attacker. Ensuring that a non-
permissioned party cannot
introduce forged messages into
the network can be done through the use of symmetric-key
based information-theoretic message authentication codes [19]
thereby achieving our second guarantee: message integrity. As
a result, we achieve both of the previously discussed guaran-
tees: conﬁdentiality and integrity against a non-permissioned
attacker.

Given the above changes to the Liink application, it is
crucial that the participants of the blockchain network are
still able to achieve consensus regarding the state of the

ledger, even in the presence of some number of misbehaving
participants with access to less than 51% of the total stake
in the network. As a necessary step of the Liink protocol,
some subset of the participants, referred to as validators, all
receive, separately, a given transaction. For them to validate
the transaction and update the ledger, they must ﬁrst ensure
that they all received the same transaction, reaching consensus
on it. This is achieved through byzantine agreement schemes
[20], which commonly make use of broadcast protocols, which
enable all of the participants to verify that they have received
the same message. A natural extension of our proof of concept
to more nodes encrypts the payloads via QKD-generated
keys, making the construction and use of a broadcast channel
costly due to the necessary cross-comparisons of a byzantine
agreement protocol, but the use of optimally resilient veriﬁable
secret-sharing schemes [21], [22] can increase the efﬁciency,
in a fully connected graph, and still allow the participants to
reach consensus. In this approach, a transaction is split into n
shares according to a k-out-of-n (optionally veriﬁable) secret-
sharing scheme, with these n shares being distributed over the
QKD-secured links to the n participants in the network, under
the assumption that the network is fully connected. When it is
their turn to validate a transaction, some k participants can then
form a quorum and recover the transaction from the shares. In
doing so, they all necessarily agree on the same transaction,
ensuring consensus [23].

Finally, we note that it is necessary that participants of
the network are conﬁdent that a transaction originates from
the participant
it purports to originate from. In our case,
where the underlying QKD network is complete, and all
parties therefore share pairwise secret keys, the participants
may make use of group message-authentication codes that are
information-theoretic secure to ensure integrity [24]. With a
complete network we are then able to achieve consensus as
well as efﬁciently achieve transaction integrity without the

use of some underlying computational assumptions. In the
case of incomplete networks, the design of methods that allow
validators to verify the origin of the transactions they reach
consensus on without the use of such additional assumptions
will be part of future work.

VIII. RELATED WORK

Although experimental

trials have been previously con-
ducted to investigate QKD technology, they have been done on
a limited scale or under conditions that do not represent real-
world, high-capacity operational environments. In this section,
some of these efforts are discussed. For a more extensive
survey of previous experimental results regrading real world
QKD networks, see [6], [25].

In 2005 researchers at DARPA deployed the ﬁrst real world
QKD network in which they achieved 1 kbps SKR at 10 km
distance over a non-muxed dedicated quantum channel [26].
In [27], a SKR of 3.1 kbps with QBER of 2.6% over 33 km
of non-muxed dedicated quantum channel was achieved as
part of the SECOQC project which realized a multi-platform
QKD network operating in Vienna. Further, researchers in [28]
achieved 18 kbps at 90 km on a non-muxed dedicated quantum
channel on a link in the Tokyo QKD network in 2011. As
pointed out before, the ability to multiplex both DWDM op-
tical channels and quantum channel are of utmost importance
in the real-world operational environments. Therefore, these
works cannot be considered for such deployments.

Indeed there have also been previous efforts to multiplex the
optical channels with the quantum channel. It was ﬁrst shown
that it was possible to do so in [29], where a quantum channel
was multiplexed with a 1.2 Gbps classical channel over 28 km.
In [30] researchers followed up on this work by multiplexing
4 DWDM channels with a quantum channel, in which those 4
channels were used for key distillation and 1 Gbps encrypted
communication. This work resulted into a SKR of 11 bps at
a maximum distance of 50 km. In [31] a CV-QKD channel
multiplexed with one DWDM channel was demonstrated. In
this demonstration the single DWDM channel was run at -3
dBm and at 75 km a key rate of 0.49 kbps was achieved. In
[32] two 100 Gbps DWDM channels (at 1529.55 and 1529.94
nm) were multiplexed with the QKD quantum channel on
1547.72 nm. In [33] multiple 200 Gbps and 100 Gbps channels
were multiplexed with quantum channel running at 1310 nm.
the polarization encoding decoy-state
For this experiment,
BB84 protocol QKD was utilized. During this trial, a 3 kbps
SKR at 66 km of G652 ﬁber was achieved.

IX. CONCLUSION

To the best of our knowledge, in this research study, for
the ﬁrst time an 800-Gbps quantum-secured optical channel
along with several other DWDM channels on the C-band and
multiplexed with the QKD quantum channel on the O-band
at distances up to 100 km with secure key rates relevant
for use in real-world mission-critical applications has been
established. At 70 km distance over Corning SMF-28 ﬁber,
this system was able to provide a secure key rate of 66.16

Kpbs, which would be able to support 258 quantum-secured
DWDM data channels using AES-256-GCM encryption with
the key refresh rate of 1/sec. In addition, during the course
of these trials, transporting a blockchain application over this
established channel was utilized as a demonstration of securing
a ﬁnancial transaction in transit over a quantum-secured optical
channel. This experimental research was conducted purely
based on real-world operational equipment and no simulation
or emulation was used to replace them.

Deployment of such high-capacity quantum-secured optical
channels while multiplexed with the quantum channel in the
real-world mission-critical operational environments would
introduce challenges due to some strict requirements such as
high launch powers and polarization ﬂuctuations that would
have negative impact on the performance of the quantum
channel. Therefore, in the course of this research, experimental
studies were conducted on the impact of several degradation
factors present in the real-world operational environment on
the quantum channel, including inter-channel interference (due
to effects such as Raman scattering and nonlinear effects),
attenuation, polarization ﬂuctuations and distance dependency.
During the course of this investigation, the entire system under
test exhibited resiliency against most degradation factors.
However, based on our ﬁndings, some recommendations are
made towards meeting the strict requirements for deployment
in a mission-critical operational environments. These include
future research into quantifying the exact impact of extreme
SOP transients on quantum channels and QKD systems and
introducing quantum channel performance degradation alarms
for proactive diagnosis by the network operators to prevent
outages.

The ﬁndings of this research pave the way towards the
deployment of quantum-secured optical channels based on
QKD technology in high-capacity metro-scale mission-critical
operational environments, such as Inter-Data Center Intercon-
nects.

DISCLAIMER

This paper was prepared for information purposes by the
teams of researchers from the various institutions identiﬁed
above, including the Future Lab for Applied Research and
Engineering (FLARE) group of JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A..
This paper is not a product of the Research Department of
JPMorgan Chase & Co. or its afﬁliates. Neither JPMorgan
Chase & Co. nor any of its afﬁliates make any explicit or
implied representation or warranty and none of them accept
any liability in connection with this paper, including, but lim-
ited to, the completeness, accuracy, reliability of information
contained herein and the potential legal, compliance, tax or
accounting effects thereof. This document is not intended as
investment research or investment advice, or a recommen-
dation, offer or solicitation for the purchase or sale of any
security, ﬁnancial instrument, ﬁnancial product or service, or
to be used in any way for evaluating the merits of participating
in any transaction.

Fig. 9. Blockchain Application Transport Test-Bed Conﬁguration

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The authors would like to thank the following people for
their invaluable contributions and support to this project: Lori
Beer, George A. Sherman, Andrew J. Lang, Patrick P. Opet,
Umar Farooq, Christine Moy, Matthew Tice, Beata Shahriari,
Myron Wieneke, Stephen Gannon, Charles Carley, Douglas
B. David, Michael P. Lombardi, Mike Rutigliano, Paula Varas,
Stephen I. Winer, Jennifer H. Lavoie, Daniel Cantor, Hargun
Kalsi, Michael Hattery, Alejandro Poggi, Chaddy Huussin
and Emily Mullins from JPMorgan Chase; Terry Cronin from
Toshiba; and Patrick Skully, Daniel McCarthy, Chris Howard,
John P. Ferrel, Sebastien Gareau and Yves Cayer from Ciena.

REFERENCES
[1] P. W. Shor and J. Preskill, “Simple Proof of Security of the
BB84 Quantum Key Distribution Protocol,” Physical review
letters, vol. 85, no. 2, p. 441, 2000.

[2] H.-K. Lo and H. F. Chau, “Unconditional Security of Quantum
Key Distribution over Arbitrarily Long Distances,” science,
vol. 283, no. 5410, pp. 2050–2056, 1999.

[3] M. Koashi, “Unconditional Security of Quantum Key Distri-
bution and the Uncertainty Principle,” in Journal of Physics:
Conference Series, IOP Publishing, vol. 36, 2006, p. 016.
[4] R. All´eaume, C. Branciard, J. Bouda, et al., “Using Quantum
Key Distribution for Cryptographic Purposes: A Survey,”
Theoretical Computer Science, vol. 560, pp. 62–81, 2014.

[5] L. Gy¨ongy¨osi, L. Bacsardi, and S. Imre, “A Survey on Quan-
tum Key Distribution,” Infocommunications Journal, vol. 11,
no. 2, pp. 14–21, 2019.

[6] O. Amer, V. Garg, and W. O. Krawec, “An Introduction to
Practical Quantum Key Distribution,” IEEE Aerospace and
Electronic Systems Magazine, vol. 36, no. 3, pp. 30–55, 2021.
DOI: 10.1109/MAES.2020.3015571.

[7] M. Lucamarini, K. Patel, J. Dynes, et al., “Efﬁcient decoy-
state quantum key distribution with quantiﬁed security,” Op-
tics express, vol. 21, no. 21, pp. 24 550–24 565, 2013.
[8] C. H. Bennett and G. Brassard, “Quantum cryptography: Pub-
lic key distribution and coin tossing,” International Confer-
ence on Computers, Systems & Signal Processing, Bangalore,
India, 1984.

[9] Z. Yuan, A. Plews, R. Takahashi, et al., “10-Mb/s Quantum
Key Distribution,” Journal of Lightwave Technology, vol. 36,
no. 16, pp. 3427–3433, 2018.
https://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi gs/QKD/001 099/014/01.01.
01 60/gs QKD014v010101p.pdf.

[10]

[11] D. Charlton, S. Clarke, D. Doucet, et al., “Field Measurements
of SOP Transients in OPGW, with Time and Location Cor-
relation to Lightning Strikes,” Optics Express, vol. 25, no. 9,
pp. 9689–9696, 2017.
International Telecommunications Union, Optical ﬁbres, ca-
bles and systems, 2009.

[12]

[13] P. Shor, “Algorithms for Quantum Computation: Discrete Log-
arithms and Factoring,” in Proceedings 35th Annual Sympo-
sium on Foundations of Computer Science, 1994, pp. 124–134.
DOI: 10.1109/SFCS.1994.365700.

[14] A. K. Fedorov, E. O. Kiktenko, and A. I. Lvovsky, Quantum

Computers Put Blockchain Security at Risk, 2018.

[15] B. Rodenburg and S. P. Pappas, “Blockchain and Quantum
Computing,” The Mitre Corporation, Tech. Rep., 2017.
[16] N. Kappert, E. Karger, and M. Kureljusic, “Quantum
Computing—The Impending End for the Blockchain?” Quan-
tum, vol. 7, pp. 12–2021, 2021.

[17] Liink, Accessed on Jan 31, 2022. [Online]. Available: https:

//www.jpmorgan.com/onyx/liink.

[18] ConsenSys, Consensys/Quorum: A Permissioned Implementa-
tion of Ethereum Supporting Data Privacy, Accessed on Jan
31, 2022. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/ConsenSys/
quorum.

[20]

[19] M. N. Wegman and J. L. Carter, “New hash functions and their
use in authentication and set equality,” Journal of computer
and system sciences, vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 265–279, 1981.
J. Katz and C.-Y. Koo, “On Expected Constant-Round Pro-
tocols for Byzantine Agreement,” in Annual International
Cryptology Conference, Springer, 2006, pp. 445–462.
[21] A. Choudhury, A. Patra, et al., “A Survey on Perfectly-Secure
Veriﬁable Secret-Sharing,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.11393,
2021.

[22] A. Beimel, “Secret-Sharing Schemes: Survey,” in Interna-
tional conference on coding and cryptology, Springer, 2011,
pp. 11–46.

[23] R. Canetti and T. Rabin, “Fast asynchronous byzantine agree-
ment with optimal resilience,” in Proceedings of the Twenty-
Fifth Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing,
ser. STOC ’93, San Diego, California, USA: Association for
Computing Machinery, 1993, pp. 42–51, ISBN: 0897915917.
DOI: 10.1145/167088.167105. [Online]. Available: https://doi.
org/10.1145/167088.167105.

[24] R. Amiri, A. Abidin, P. Wallden, et al., “Efﬁcient Uncon-
ditionally Secure Signatures Using Universal Hashing,” in
Applied Cryptography and Network Security, B. Preneel and
F. Vercauteren, Eds., Cham: Springer International Publishing,
2018, pp. 143–162, ISBN: 978-3-319-93387-0.

[25] P. Sharma, A. Agrawal, V. Bhatia, et al., “Quantum Key Dis-
tribution Secured Optical Networks: A Survey,” IEEE Open
Journal of the Communications Society, vol. 2, pp. 2049–
2083, 2021. DOI: 10.1109/OJCOMS.2021.3106659.

[26] C. Elliott, A. Colvin, D. Pearson, et al., Current Status of the
DARPA Quantum Network, 2005. arXiv: quant-ph/0503058.
[27] M. Peev, C. Pacher, R. Alleaume, et al., “The SECOQC
Quantum Key Distribution Network in Vienna,” eng, NEW
JOURNAL OF PHYSICS, vol. 11, ?–? 2009, ISSN: 1367-2630.
[28] M. Sasaki, M. Fujiwara, H. Ishizuka, et al., “Field Test of
Quantum Key Distribution in the Tokyo QKD Network,”
Optics express, vol. 19, no. 11, pp. 10 387–10 409, 2011.

[29] P. D. Townsend, “Simultaneous Quantum Cryptographic Key
Distribution and Conventional Data Transmission over In-
stalled Fibre Using Wavelength-Division Multiplexing,” Elec-
tronics Letters, vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 188–190, 1997.

[30] P. Eraerds, N. Walenta, M. Legre, et al., “Quantum Key
Distribution and 1 Gbps Data Encryption over a Single Fibre,”
New Journal of Physics, vol. 12, p. 063 027, 2010.

[31] R. Kumar, H. Qin, and R. All´eaume, “Coexistence of Contin-
uous Variable QKD with Intense DWDM Classical Channels,”
New Journal of Physics, vol. 17, no. 4, p. 043 027, 2015.
J. F. Dynes, W. W. Tam, A. Plews, et al., “Ultra-high band-
width quantum secured data transmission,” Scientiﬁc reports,
vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 1–6, 2016.

[32]

[33] Y. Mao, B.-X. Wang, C. Zhao, et al., “Integrating Quantum
Key Distribution with Classical Communications in Backbone
Fiber Network,” Optics express, vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 6010–6020,
2018.

