NFTCert: NFT-Based Certiﬁcates With Online
Payment Gateway

Xiongfei Zhao
Department of Computer and Information Science
University of Macau
Macau
yb97480@umac.mo

Yain-Whar Si
Department of Computer and Information Science
University of Macau
Macau
fstasp@um.edu.mo

2
2
0
2

b
e
F
9
1

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
1
1
5
9
0
.
2
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Nowadays, academic certiﬁcates are still widely
issued in paper format. Traditional certiﬁcate veriﬁcation is
a lengthy, manually intensive, and sometimes expensive pro-
cess. In this paper, we propose a novel NFT-based certiﬁcate
framework called NFTCert, which enables the establishment of
links between a legitimate certiﬁcate and its owner through a
Blockchain. In this paper, we describe the implementation of
the NFTCert framework, including schema deﬁnition, minting,
veriﬁcation, and revocation of NFT-based certiﬁcates. We also
introduce a payment gateway into the minting process, which
enables NFTCert to be used by a wider audience. Therefore,
participants of NFTCerts do not need to rely on cryptocurrency
for transactions. All in all, the proposed framework is designed to
achieve usability, authenticity, conﬁdentiality, transparency, and
availability properties when it is compared to existing Blockchain-
based systems.

Index Terms—Blockchain, Smart Contract, NFT, Certiﬁcate

I. INTRODUCTION

Non-fungible Token (NFT) is a cryptocurrency derivative of
Ethereum smart contract and represents a unique digital iden-
tiﬁer of ownership managed by Blockchain. NFT generally
can be used to prove the authenticity and legitimacy of digital
assets existing in or originating from the digital world, such as
digital arts, ownership of physical assets, domain names, col-
lections, event tickets, etc. Among them, the digital certiﬁcate
in the form of NFT has brought many conveniences in issuance
and legitimacy authentication. Many studies have introduced
Blockchain-related technologies into certiﬁcate management
scenarios, but the research on introducing NFT into the ﬁeld
of educational certiﬁcate management is still in a very early
stage.

Nowadays, more and more international students have stud-
ied for higher educational degrees at broad or applied for jobs
worldwide. According to the national bureau of statistics of
China, in the year 2020, higher education graduates in China
exceed 12.4 million [1], they all receive a paper certiﬁcate for
now. The number of higher education graduates in OECD and
G20 countries is expected to surpass 300 million by 2030 [2].
Among these students, those who apply for overseas study
or a job are likely to be required to do language translations
and international authentications or legalization regarding their
original documents as a way to prove their authenticity (Fig.1).
Besides, if students have multiple certiﬁcates, they need to

repeat the above certiﬁcation process for each paper certiﬁ-
cate they hold and then send the certiﬁcation information to
overseas universities or companies. This cumbersome process
leads to a lengthy process of ensuring the authenticity and
legitimacy of certiﬁcates and involves considerable manual
processing. Hence, the traditional education certiﬁcate system
faces challenges from three main areas: the authenticity of
educational institutions, certiﬁcate issuance, and certiﬁcate
veriﬁcation. To alleviate these problems, in this paper, we
propose a novel NFT-based education certiﬁcate management
framework called NFTCert.

Language translation

Authentication

Educational institution

Translation Agency

Law Firm

Provide Paper Certiﬁcate

Legalization

Student

Apply for higher educational 
degrees at broad or applied 
for jobs worldwide

Fig. 1. Certiﬁcate or certiﬁcation authentication process without NFT

Oversea College or Company 

NFTCert ﬁrst adopts the private Blockchain architecture,
and only real and veriﬁed participants can join. Therefore,
educational institutions, overseas universities, or companies
must obtain permission to join the private Blockchain to obtain
certiﬁcation-related services. Secondly, in terms of certiﬁcate
issuance, NFTCert deﬁnes its own digital certiﬁcate data
format, adds the signature of students’ personal information
and certiﬁcate information, and then issues the certiﬁcate to
students and stores it in the digital wallet. Because a NFT
certiﬁcate will not contain any students’ personal information,
it can protect the personal privacy of NFT certiﬁcate holders.
Finally, during the certiﬁcate veriﬁcation process, overseas
universities or companies can clearly see which academic cre-
dentials students have based on the NFT stored in their digital
wallets. Overseas universities or companies can ﬁrst combine
the personal information provided by students through their
resumes, such as name, date of birth, place of birth, etc.,

 
 
 
 
 
 
with certiﬁcate information in the NFT to generate hash
signatures. The ownership and authenticity of the certiﬁcate
can be veriﬁed by comparing generated hash signature with
the hash signature saved in the NFT.

the introduction of related concepts. Section 4 describes the
proposed framework. In section 5, we evaluate the advantages
of the proposed framework over existing solutions. The paper
is concluded in Section 6.

Although managing certiﬁcates through NFT can bring
many beneﬁts, due to the current practice in NFT marketplace,
participants must use cryptocurrency as a mean of payment to
buy NFTs. Moreover, the high volatility of cryptocurrency of-
ten leads speculative cryptocurrency transactions, thus posing a
threat to the current monetary system. Furthermore, cryptocur-
rency is often associated with illegal activities such as drug
smuggling and money laundering. Therefore, many countries
have completely banned ﬁnancial institutions and payment
companies from providing services related to cryptocurrency
transactions, which makes it more challenging to adopt NFT
in certiﬁcate management scenarios.

In this paper, to reduce the reliance on cryptocurrency for
transactions related to certiﬁcates, we integrate the online
gateway into the NFT certiﬁcate issuance framework. By in-
troducing a widely accepted and used online payment gateway
as a payment method, our proposal can reduce the complexity
for applicants to use NFTCert. Besides, our solution can
be more widely used in regions where cryptocurrency is
strictly regulated. We also compare NFTCert with existing
Blockchain-based certiﬁcate management solutions, such as
Blockcerts [3], EduCTX [4], BCDiploma [5], Blockchain for
Education [6] and University of ZuricH Blockchain (UZHBC)
[7]. To the best of authors’ knowledge, NFTCert proposed in
this paper is the ﬁrst NFT based framework for certiﬁcates
management. Representing the educational certiﬁcate through
NFTCert brings us many advantages.

• Usability Through the online payment gateway to pay
for the cost of performing NFT-based certiﬁcate-related
transactions, we can reduce the complexity of participa-
tion and expand the application region.

• Authentication NFT’s token metadata and ownership can
be publicly veriﬁed. It is easy for students to share their
NFT wallets with overseas universities or companies to
verify their academic achievements.

• Conﬁdentiality NFTCert can ensure that the certiﬁcate
information can be veriﬁed to belong to the student, on
the premise that the student’s personal information is not
published to the Blockchain.

• Transparency The activities of NFTs, such as minting,
transferring are publicly accessible. It is easy for overseas
universities or companies to identify which educational
institution issue this NFT certiﬁcate to the applicant.
• Availability In the proposed framework, all certiﬁcation
information is stored in NFT. Students only need to record
their NFT wallet address instead of keeping very digital
certiﬁcates by themselves. The availability of Blockchain
is typically high, therefore all the issued NFTs are always
available for veriﬁcation.

This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews
existing Blockchain-based certiﬁcate solutions. Section 3 gives

II. RELATED WORK

Several institutes already developed Blockchain-based cer-
tiﬁcate systems to issue certiﬁcates. Typical Blockchain-based
certiﬁcate system examples include Blockcerts [3], EduCTX
[4], BCDiploma [5], Blockchain for Education [6] and Uni-
versity of ZuricH Blockchain (UZHBC) [7]. Blockcerts is
an initiative by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology
(MIT). Blockcerts is an open standard for issuing and verifying
Blockchain-based certiﬁcates. Digital certiﬁcates are registered
on a Blockchain, and these certiﬁcates are accessible via an
App termed Blockerts wallet. Students can share their veriﬁ-
able, tamper-proof digital diplomas with overseas universities
or companies.

EduCTX is another mature global higher education credit
platform and ecosystem-based on Blockchain. Based on the
open-source Ark Blockchain Platform, EduCTX tries to build
a globally distributed peer-to-peer network. Higher Education
Institute (EI) can join EduCTX Blockchain network as nodes
with support and recognition with other HEI institutions.
EduCTX is also based on the Concept of the European Credit
Transfer and Accumulation System (ECTS), which will issue
and manage ECTX tokens that represent the credits students
have earned by completing courses such as ECTS. Students
send their Blockchain wallet addresses and exchange scripts to
overseas universities or companies for veriﬁcation to present
completed courses.

BCDiploma, Blockchain for Education, and UZHBC are all
based on Ethereum to issue and verify diplomas. BCDiploma
generates a unique Internet link that allows students to promote
the authenticity of their diploma to the people with whom
they share this link. Blockchain for Education introduces
two smart contracts (IdentityMgmt and CertMgmt) to manage
the public keys for certiﬁcate authorities and hashes of the
certiﬁcates. Blockchain for Education also introduces IPFS
to store certiﬁcate authorities proﬁle and Basic Support for
Cooperative Work (BSCW) document management system
to store certiﬁcates and registers hash of the certiﬁcate in
Blockchain. UZHBC stores the hash of the PDF document,
which corresponds to the paper-based certiﬁcate. Overseas
universities or companies can verify the certiﬁcate by checking
the authenticity of the hash of the PDF document.

While these certiﬁcate systems have played a role in reduc-
ing fraudulent activities by taking advantage of Blockchain
characteristics, they still have several limitations. For exam-
ple, Blockcerts stores digital certiﬁcate’s hash by conducting
the costly transaction in Bitcoin. EduCTX only supports
Higher Education accomplishments and does not support
non-academic certiﬁcates. BCDiploma, Blockchain for Edu-
cation, and UZHBC all store hashes of digital certiﬁcates
on Ethereum. For BCDiploma, users need to use BCDT
currency to pay for transactions. For UZHBC, it can only

issue certiﬁcates for the University of Zurich departments.
In contrast to these approaches, in this paper, we propose a
novel NFT-based certiﬁcate management system, which not
only overcomes the weaknesses of these systems but also
introduces new features that are not supported by existing
systems. Detailed comparison with existing systems is given
in Table I.

III. BACKGROUND

In this section, we brieﬂy introduce some of the terminolo-

gies that are going to be used in the proposed framework:

PrivateBlockchain Only authentic and veriﬁed participants
can join a private Blockchain, usually implemented in an
information-sensitive private business.

EthereumBlockchain Ethereum [8] goes beyond just cryp-
tocurrency transfer, and it also enables developers to deploy
Turing-complete smart contract scripts.

Smart Contract Ethereum implements a complete Turing
system to automatically move digital assets according to pre-
deﬁned arbitrary rules called smart contracts. The contents and
conditions of execution are predetermined in smart contracts
and will be automatically executed when the conditions are
met [8].

DigitalWallet Digital wallet is similar to a bank account,
and it is a unique identiﬁer for a user to send and receive the
assets. Digital wallet is a ﬁxed number of characters address
which generated from a pair of public key and private key.

ERC20 The ERC20 (Ethereum Request for Comments 20)
[9], introduces a standard for Fungible Tokens. ERC20 tokens
are blockchain-based assets that each token is exactly the same
(in type and value) as another token.

ERC721 The ERC721 (Ethereum Request for Comments
721) [10], introduces a standard for NFT. ERC721 token is
unique and even 2 ERC721 token issued from same Smart
Contract, they can have a different value. ERC721 helps us
ﬁnd a way to present distinctive details about an asset in the
form of a token.

BlockchainOracle Blockchains and smart contracts cannot
access off-chain data (data that is outside of the network).
However, for many contractual agreements, it is vital to have
relevant information from the outside world to execute the
agreement.

Online Payment Gateway Online payment gateway such
as Paypal [11], Alipay [12], Wechat Pay [13] are payment
processing systems that authenticate the credentials, process
securely recording and transmitting necessary details of the
payment. A payment gateway issues a conﬁrmation to all the
involved stakeholders, enabling the transfer of money from the
consumer’s account to the merchant’s account.

IV. NFTCERT

In this paper, we propose a novel NFT-based certiﬁcates
management framework called NFTCert to prevent fraudulent
entities from producing fake or illegitimate certiﬁcates. Over-
seas universities or companies can access student’s educational
certiﬁcates with the functionalities of NFT. In NFTCert, we

propose an approach for using the traditional online payment
to pay the fees incurred in NFTCert. By integrating NFT-based
certiﬁcates with traditional online payment, we can reduce
the complexity of using NFT-based certiﬁcates and allow
stakeholders involved in this process to monetize the system.
Our proposal
is based on an isolated private Blockchain.
Only authentic and veriﬁed educational institutions, overseas
universities, and companies are able to join.

As shown in Fig.2, veriﬁed educational institutions join
NFTCert’s private Blockchain to mint NFT-based certiﬁcates
for students. Each educational institute participates in this
private Blockchain as nodes to maintain the integrity and
creates trust among users. Certiﬁcation fees are assessed for
direct costs incurred in issuing a certiﬁcate, and educational
institutions are charging these fees through an online payment
gateway based on the following steps:
Step 1. Veriﬁcated educational institution ﬁrst mints certiﬁ-
cate NFTs and waits for students to complete the
payment before sending this NFT to student’s digital
wallet.

Step 2. Oracle will initiate a request to the online payment
service provider to generate a pending payment order
based on the smart contract request.

Step 3. After receiving the pending payment order, students
will ﬁnish the payment through mainstream payment
apps such as Paypal, Alipay, WeChat Pay, etc.
Step 4. The payment result will be forwarded to the smart

contract through Oracle.

Step 5. After receiving the successful payment result,

the
smart contract will send the minted certiﬁcate NFT
to the student’s digital wallet.

Step 6. Student in possession of his/her NFT-based certiﬁcates
can share the digital wallet address voluntarily with
their counterparts. Colleges, employers, or any entity
who needs their certiﬁcate info can easily verify the
authenticity of the NFT-based certiﬁcates.

Step 7. Oversea universities or companies who are connected
to the private Blockchain can access the stored NFT-
based certiﬁcates.

2. Generate Pending Payment Order

Online Payment 
Service Provider

4. Notify Payment Result

Oracle

3. Complete Payment 
Through Payment APPs 
and Notify Payment Results

Smart contract

1. Start Mint Certiﬁcate 
NFTs and Waiting for 
Completion of Payment

Veriﬁed educational institution

5. Receive 
certiﬁcate NFT

Private Blockchain

7. Verify certiﬁcate NFTs

6. Provide wallet address

Student

Oversea College or Company 
Fig. 2. NFTCert certiﬁcate issuance and authentication diagram

Next, we introduce four essential components of our pro-

posed NFTCert system. The ﬁrst component is the schema,
which is based on the ECR-721 speciﬁcation and describes
the data standards or ﬁelds required for the certiﬁcate. The
second component is the minting process, which creates a
veriﬁable hash signature and issues the NFT-based certiﬁcate
on Blockchain by NFTCert, which supports online payment.
The third component is the veriﬁcation process, which demon-
strates how to base on student’s info and NFT certiﬁcate info
to verify the authenticity and ownership of the certiﬁcate.
The last component is the revocation process, which describes
actions to be made to revoke an NFTCert certiﬁcate. We do
not consider trading of NFT based certiﬁcates in the proposed
framework because these certiﬁcates are not supposed to be
traded like other NFTs.

A. Schema

According to the ERC721 standard, we deﬁne a metadata
JSON schema (Fig.3) to represent the certiﬁcate. The meta-
data JSON includes educational institution name, degree title,
degree conferral date, certiﬁcate URI, and a hash signature:

{
  "title":"Certificate Metadata",
  "properties":{
    "certifiaction_authority_name":String,
    "degree_title":String,
    "degree_conferral_date":String,
    "certificate_URI":String,
    "hash":SHA256
  }
}

Fig. 3. NFTCert metadata JSON schema

The hash in Fig.3 is populated as a SHA256 of student’s
name, date of birth, birthplace, nationality, educational insti-
tution name, degree title, degree conferral date, and certiﬁcate
URI. Overseas universities or companies can use the NFT
information with the student’s names, date of birth, birthplace,
nationality to verify whether the NFT-based certiﬁcate belongs
to the applicant. Meanwhile, such mechanism can also prevent
unauthorized disclosure of student’s personal information.

The certiﬁcate URI in Fig.3 is populated as a public URL
pointing to the certiﬁcate image stored in the college’s cen-
tralized web server. Alternatively, certiﬁcate URI can also be
populated as an Interplanetary File System (IPFS) content-
addressed hyperlink [14] that uses a hash value to uniquely
describe the content itself. Because IPFS is a peer-to-peer
distributed ﬁle system, certiﬁcate images can be cashed on
different nodes across the network with no single point of
failure.

B. Minting process

To illustrate the mining process, we present University A’s
schematic graduation certiﬁcate for John in Fig.??. After the
certiﬁcate image is stored on the Web server or IPFS, the
certiﬁcate URI in the JSON schema points to the certiﬁcate
image associated with the NFT token. University A creates a
metadata JSON schema (Fig.4) to represent certiﬁcates based
on student and educational institution information. This meta-
data JSON schema acts as a digital certiﬁcate for testifying that
the recipient has successfully completed a particular course of
study.

{
  title:"Certificate Metadata",
  "properties":{
    "certifiaction_authority_name":"University A",
    "degree_title":"Master of Science",
    "degree_conferral_date":"2010-07-14T10:52:08.374499",
    "certificate_URI":"https://www.UniversityAWebsite.com
           /GraduationCertificateforJohn.svg",
    "hash": "ecd58693ef02acdc2ae9baaffc653c4662aed8dd848c
           3724679ea9f1a1986cbf"
  }
}

Fig. 4. University A’s NFTCert metadata JSON schema

the

Educational

JSON schema

institution sends

to
Blockchain to generate NFT Token. Before NFT Token is
transferred to the student’s wallet, the recipient needs to pay
the corresponding fee to the educational institution, which is
usually a college or university. As previously explained in
Fig.2, the smart contract is responsible for interacting with
traditional payment gateways through Oracle. The pricing
information will be forwarded to the online payment service
provider via Oracle, waiting for student
to complete the
payment.

Fig.5 depicts University A’s NFT-based certiﬁcate before the
payment. Because the student has not ﬁnished the payment,
this newly minted NFT-based certiﬁcate token’s owner address
is ”0x00...000”. The creator’s address is University A’s digital
wallet address. University A then publishes the digital wallet
address on its ofﬁcial website or government websites for
public access. Overseas universities or companies can compare
creator address in Fig.5 with the digital wallet address on
University A’s ofﬁcial website to identify the origin of this
certiﬁcate.

{
  title:"Certificate Metadata",
  "properties":{......}
  "owner":{
    "address":"0x0000000000000000000000000000000000000000"
  },
  "creator":{ 
    "address":"0x4a20de27d1346d80046910dc428338a49cec53e6"
  }
}Fig. 5. University A’s NFTCert metadata JSON schema before payment

Fig.6 depicts the corresponding NFT-based certiﬁcate infor-
mation in NFTCert after payment. The owner’s address has
been updated to the student’s digital wallet address, which
indicates that this certiﬁcate NFT has been transferred to the
student’s wallet. This ﬁnally ensures that the student received
this certiﬁed certiﬁcate, and this certiﬁcate is ready to be
veriﬁed by others in the future.

{
  title:"Certificate Metadata",
  "properties":{......}
  "owner":{
    "address":"0x420c3d6a24f32438154cf261c3012366c446919f"
  },
  "creator":{
    "address":"0x4a20de27d1346d80046910dc428338a49cec53e6”
  }
}Fig. 6. University A’s NFTCert metadata JSON schema after payment

C. Veriﬁcation process

In the past, paper certiﬁcates are used for authentications
institutes. These

by prospective employers or educational

certiﬁcates can be easily lost or damaged. Moreover, paper
certiﬁcates are often vulnerable to manipulation and forgery,
and it is possible to make a counterfeit copy of the certiﬁcate
outside of the institute. In some cases, a student just adds a
fake certiﬁcate to his/her resume without achieving the real
certiﬁcate. The cost of counterfeiting is low, and the cost of
veriﬁcation is high. In NFTCert, we propose a simple and
inexpensive approach for the veriﬁcation of the authenticity
of the certiﬁcate.

Since the NFT allows veriﬁcation of its past history and
owner, it is easy to verify that the previous owner is indeed
the wallet address published by the educational institution
on an ofﬁcial or government website. To determine whether
the certiﬁcate belongs to the student, overseas universities or
companies need to ﬁrst extract the student’s names, date of
birth, birthplace, nationality from student’s resume and then
calculate the hash signature along with other certiﬁcation-
related information in the NFT metadata. By comparing signa-
ture calculation result with the hash signature in the NFT-based
certiﬁcate, they can verify the authenticity of this certiﬁcate.
Moreover, overseas universities or companies should be able to
use the NFT schema certiﬁcate URI information to access the
digital certiﬁcate image stored in an educational institution’s
server to further conﬁrm the authenticity of the certiﬁcate. The
steps for the veriﬁcation process are as follow:
Step 1. In Fig.7, overseas universities or companies ﬁrst ex-
tract the following personal information from John’s
resume.

"name": "John DOE",
"bith_day": "1988-07-14",
"place_of_birth": "Lyon",
"nationality": "France"

Fig. 7. John’s personal information extract form resume

Step 2. Overseas universities extracted other certiﬁcation-
related information (Fig.8) from University A’s cer-
tiﬁcate metadata (Fig.4).

"certifiaction_authority_name":"University A",
"degree_title":"Master of Science",
"degree_conferral_date":"2010-07-14T10:52:08.374499",
"certificate_URI":"https://www.UniversityAWebsite.com
       /GraduationCertificateforJohn.svg"

Fig. 8. John’s certiﬁcate information extract form John’s wallet

Step 3. The hash signature (Fig.9) is calculated using the
SHA256 cryptographic hash algorithm and then com-
pared to the hash signature in the A University cer-
tiﬁcate metadata.

"hash":"ecd58693ef02acdc2ae9baaffc653c4662aed8
      dd848c3724679ea9f1a1986cbf"

Fig. 9. Hash signature calculated from John’s personal and certiﬁcate
information
D. Revocation process

For education entities to revoke certiﬁcates that were issued
incorrectly, they could replace the certiﬁcate image ﬁle stored
in the educational institution’s server with a revoked decla-
ration picture notice. Overseas universities or companies can
conﬁrm the validity of a certiﬁcate by assessing the NFT’s
certiﬁcate URI information.

V. DISCUSSION

Traditional education certiﬁcate systems face three major
challenges: the authenticity of educational institutions, cer-
tiﬁcate issuance, and certiﬁcate veriﬁcation. To ensure that
NFTCert can alleviate the certiﬁcate management problem,
we analyzed the advantages of NFTCert in solving each of
the major challenges.

In our proposal, we introduce private Blockchain. Only
accredited educational
institutions can join the private
Blockchain and issue the certiﬁcate. Unaccredited certiﬁcate
authorities or certiﬁcate mills can not issue the certiﬁcate.
Meanwhile, activities of NFTs include minting and trans-
ferring, are publicly accessible. An educational
institution
can publish its NFT wallet address on authoritative channels
such as ofﬁcial institution websites and government websites.
The NFT wallet address of the educational institution on
the website is interwoven with the NFT transfer record on
the Blockchain, ensuring that each NFT was issued by the
corresponding educational institution.

NFT-based certiﬁcates can have only one ofﬁcial owner.
Since the Blockchain secures NFT-based certiﬁcates, no one
can modify the record of ownership or duplicate a new NFT-
based certiﬁcate into existence. With NFT enabled certiﬁcates,
educational entities are able to mint certiﬁed NFT-based cer-
tiﬁcates as a digital token and transfer them to ones’ digital
wallet for future veriﬁcation. Because NFT’s token metadata
and ownership are publicly accessible, we do not include any
personal information in NFT’s metadata. Instead, we add a
hash ﬁeld in NFT’s metadata, and this hash is populated as
a SHA256 of the student’s names, date of birth, birthplace,
nationality, and other certiﬁcation-related information, include
educational institution name, degree title, degree conferral
date, and certiﬁcate URI.

Using NFT to record people’s certiﬁcates in their own
digital wallets could facilitate access to educational academic
qualiﬁcations in a more efﬁcient and transparent fashion. Over-
seas universities or enterprises could use people’s NFT-based
certiﬁcates to verify how many academic accomplishments
this person has achieved. Because minting and transferring
activities of NFTs are publicly accessible, it is easy to verify
whether the corresponding educational institution issues cer-
tain NFT. When students study abroad or apply for a job, they
will provide personal information in their resumes. Overseas
universities or companies ﬁrst extract the applicant’s names,
date of birth, birthplace, nationality from the resume and
then obtain the hash signature along with other certiﬁcation-
related information in the NFT metadata. By comparing the
SHA256 hash signature with the hash signature in the NFT
certiﬁcate, they can determine whether the certiﬁcate belongs
to the applicant.

To evaluate the effectiveness of NFTCert, we compare the
proposed approach with existing state-of-the-art proposals.
The comparison results are listed in Table I. Although a
number of Blockchain-based certiﬁcate management platforms
have been developed to ease the burden of record checking

stakeholders to become NFTCert’s nodes and to make the
NFTCert framework more robust.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

This research was funded by the University of Macau (File

no. MYRG2019-00136-FST).

REFERENCES

[1] National Bureau of Statistics of China. Number of Graduates, 2021.
https://data.stats.gov.cn/english/easyquery.htm?cn=C01, Last accessed:
13 Aug 2021.

[2] OECD. Benchmarking Higher Education System Performance . 2019.
https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/content/publication/be5514d7-en, Last ac-
cessed: 13 Aug 2021.

[3] blockcerts.org. Blockcerts. https://www.blockcerts.org/, Last accessed:

04 Jul 2021.

[4] Muhamed Turkanovi´c, Marko H¨olbl, Kristjan Koˇsiˇc, Marjan Heriˇcko,
and Aida Kamiˇsali´c. Eductx: A blockchain-based higher education credit
platform. IEEE Access, 6:5112–5127, 2018.

[5] bcdiploma.com. BCDiploma. https://www.bcdiploma.com/, Last ac-

cessed: 04 Jul 2021.

[6] Wolfgang Gr¨ather, Sabine Kolvenbach, Rudolf Ruland, Julian Sch¨utte,
Christof Torres, and Florian Wendland. Blockchain for education:
In Proceedings of 1st ERCIM Blockchain
lifelong learning passport.
workshop 2018. European Society for Socially Embedded Technologies
(EUSSET), 2018.

[7] Jerinas Gresch, Bruno Rodrigues, Eder Scheid, Salil S. Kanhere, and
Burkhard Stiller. The proposal of a blockchain-based architecture for
transparent certiﬁcate handling.
In Witold Abramowicz and Adrian
Paschke, editors, Business Information Systems Workshops, pages 185–
196, Cham, 2019. Springer International Publishing.

[8] ethereum.org. Ethereum, 2020. https://ethereum.org/, Last accessed: 13

Aug 2021.

and Buterin, Vitalik.

[9] Vogelsteller, Fabian
Token

Standard.

Ethereum Improvement

20
https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-20 , Last accessed: 20 June 2021.
[10] William Entriken, Dieter Shirley, Jacob Evans, Nastassia Sachs. EIP
721: ERC-721 Non-Fungible Token Standard. Ethereum Improvement
Proposals.
https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-721, Last accessed: 20
June 2021.

EIP 20: ERC-
Proposals.

[11] paypal.com. PayPal. https://www.paypal.com, Last accessed: 13 Aug

2021.

[12] alipay.com. Alipay. https://global.alipay.com, Last accessed: 13 Aug

2021.

[13] pay.wexin.qq.com. WeChat Pay. https://pay.weixin.qq.com/index.php/public/wechatpay en,

Last accessed: 13 Aug 2021.

[14] Juan Benet. Ipfs - content addressed, versioned, p2p ﬁle system, 2014.

and veriﬁcation, our proposal still has superior advantages
in many aspects. In particular, we propose to use traditional
online payment to pay the fees incurred in the processing of
NFT-based certiﬁcate, while allowing users to collect all their
educational certiﬁcates in a digital wallet for others to browse.

TABLE I
COMPARISON OF THE EXISTING PROPOSALS IN BLOCKCHAIN BASED
CERTIFICATE MANAGEMENT
4
2

Proposal

1

3

5

6

7

Blockerts(2016) [3]

! % ! ! % % %

% % % ! ! % %

EduCTX(2018) [4]
BCDiploma(2018) [5] ! % % ! % % %
Blockchain for
Education(2018) [6]

! ! % ! % % %

UZHBC(2018) [7]

NFTCert
(proposed approach)

% % % ! % % %

! ! ! ! ! ! !

1: Support any type of certiﬁcate; 2: Accredited institutions; 3:
Certiﬁcate revocation 4: Privacy of personal
information; 5: No
cryptocurrency involved; 6: Veriﬁable certiﬁcate information is stored
solely on the Blockchain; 7: Student’s certiﬁcates are collected in
single digital wallet; !Considered; %Not considered;

VI. CONCLUSION

In this paper, we propose a novel NFT-based certiﬁcate
framework called NFTCert, which can be used to replace
traditional paper-based certiﬁcates without relying on crypto-
currency while maintaining usability, authentication, conﬁden-
tiality, transparency, and availability properties.

NFTs are non-fungible and unique, and the value of an
NFT-based certiﬁcate does not equal to the value of another
NFT-based certiﬁcate. With the increasing fraud and misuse of
educational certiﬁcates, it is crucial to design a trustworthy and
decentralized certiﬁcation system to simplify the veriﬁcation
of the authenticity of certiﬁcates. Our solution takes advantage
of NFT’s unique and easy-to-verify features to make students’
digital certiﬁcates tamper-proof in nature.

In order to enable NFTCert to be used by a wider audi-
ence, we propose the solution of using the traditional online
payment to pay the fees incurred in the processing of NFT-
based certiﬁcates. Meanwhile, our proposal allows users to
keep all educational certiﬁcates in one place for others to
browse, reducing time and efforts spent by the institute in
the veriﬁcation of their certiﬁcates. When overseas universities
or companies verify someone’s educational experience, these
organizations just need to look into his/her digital wallet,
and veriﬁable NFT-based certiﬁcates could directly point to
certiﬁcated educational certiﬁcates located in the educational
institution’s server.

As for the future work, we are planning to evaluate the
efﬁciency of NFT casting when a large number of certiﬁcates
are to be issued during the peak season. We are also plan-
ning to evaluate the reliability and stability of the proposed
framework. In addition, we are investigating the possibility
of introducing a novel incentive mechanism to attract more

