IEEEAccess· 

Multidkipliney ; ~Acwew : C)pen~Jo.Jrn.tl 

Received January 31, 2022, accepted February  17, 2022. Date of publication xxxx 00, 0000, date of current version xxxx 00, 0000. 

Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/A CCESS.2022.3154106 

A Blockchain-Based Consent Mechanism for 
Access to Fitness Data in the Healthcare Context 

MAY ALHAJRI0 1,2,  (Graduate Student Member, IEEE), CARSTEN RUDOLPHCl:>1, 
AND AHMAD SALEHI SHAHRAK1G>i,3,  (Member, IEEE) 
t Department of Software S ystems and Cybersecurity (SSC), Monash University, Melbourne , VIC 3800, Australia 
2Department of Computer Networks and Communications, King Faisal University, AI-Ahsa 31982, Saudi Arabia 
3RMIT  Blockc hain Innovation Hub (BIH) and RMIT  Centre for Cyber Security Research and Innovation (CCSRI), RMIT University, Melbourne, CBD 3000, 
Australia 

Corresponding author: May Alhaj ri  (may.alhaj ri@monash.edu) 

:  ABSlRAO Wearable fitness devices are widely used to track an individual's health and physical activities to 
improve the quality of health services. These devices sense a considerable amount of sensitive data processed 
by a centralized third party.  While many researchers have thoroughly evaluated privacy issues surrounding 
wearable fitness trackers, no study has addressed privacy issues in trackers by giving control of the data to the 
user.  Blockchain is an emerging technology with outstanding advantages in resolving consent management 
privacy concerns. As there are no fully transparent, legally compliant solutions for sharing personal fitness 
data, this study introduces an architecture for a human-centric, legally compliant, decentralized and dynamic 
consent system based on blockchain and smart contracts. Algorithms and sequence diagrams of the proposed 
system's activities show consent-related data flow among various agents, which are used later to prove the 
system's trustworthiness by formalizing the security requirements. The security properties of the proposed 
system  were  evaluated  using  the  formal  security  modeling  framework  SeMF,  which  demonstrates  the 
feasibility of the solution at an abstract level based on formal language theory. As a result, we have shown 
that blockchain  technology  is  suitable  for  mitigating the  privacy  issues of fitness  providers  by  recording 
individuals' consent using blockchain and smart contracts. 

:  INDEX TERMS  Blockchain, data protection, decentralized, fitness tracker, human-centric, privacy, regula 

tion, security requirements, trust, wearable devices. 

I.  INTRODUCTION 
Due  to  the  recent  growth  in  the  use  of  wearable  fitness 
devices, such as smartwatches, individuals are now exposed 
to vast quantities of their own sensitive health data [l]. These 
wearables track a variety of data, including health and phys 
ical  activities  such  as  sleep,  steps,  and blood pressure  [2]. 
Although individuals, clinicians and clinical researchers ben 
efit from adopting these technologies for accurate diagnosis, 
some  privacy challenges  have  emerged  [3],  [4].  The  Euro 
pean  Union's  (EU's)  General  Data  Protection  Regulation 
(GDPR) [5], which came into effect in May 20 18 [5], enforces 
data protection regulations on data processors, giving subjects 
more control over  their fitness  data by  mandating that they 
provide  consent.  The  GDPR's  [5]  consent  standards  place 
a  substantial  burden  on  fitness  providers  to  comply  in  an 

The  associate  editor  coordinating  the  review  of this  manuscript  and 

approving it for publication was Pedro R. M. InacioG>. 

attempt to address the privacy concerns raised by experts [l], 
[6]- [13]. 

Consequently, several solutions that preserve privacy [14] 
[16]  have  been  offered,  but  they  either  rely  on  a  single 
trusted authority or are not transparent to users, e.g., offering 
only one-time consent without the right to  withdraw.  Users 
expect  these  devices  to  protect  their  data  and respect their 
privacy [ 17] . These challenges in the current wearable fitness 
device  privacy  policy  urge  us  to further elevate  the  privacy 
level  of fitness  data  sharing  based  on  the  user's  consent. 
Hence, our solution brings together advances from the fields 
of consent  management,  legal  frameworks,  and  advanced 
fitness  data-sharing  control  by  maintaining  consent  in  an 
immutable legal archive. 

This  study  addresses  privacy  issues  in  fitness  providers' 
privacy  policies  by  recording  all  data  subjects'  consent  in 
immutable  storage  and  giving  the  user  more  transparency 
about the parties with whom their data have been shared. The 
main goal of this research is to build a secure system model 

VOLUME  IO, 

2022 

This work is licensed under a Cteatille Commons Anribution 4.0 License. For more infonnation, see hnps:{/aeatillecommons.org/licenses/by/ 4.0/ 

IEEEAccess· 

M. Alhajri et al.: Blockchain-Based Consent Mechanism for Access to Fitness Data in Healthcare Context

that improves data subjects’ control over the processing and
collocating of their data while simultaneously enabling data
controllers and processors to comply with GDPR obliga-
tions. Although we can repose of the ultimate trust in a
single central control system, there are associated risks of
doing so. Therefore, the built-in features of blockchain make
it a suitable candidate for addressing identiﬁed problems.
Hence, these two contributions are based on the blockchain,
which acts as a dynamic consent mechanism. The proposed
approach leverages smart contracts for all automated pro-
cesses, such as managing users’ consent by granting or deny-
ing requests for access to their ﬁtness data and utilizing smart
contracts to detect any misbehavior by ﬁtness providers. The
following is a list of the beneﬁts of moving ﬁtness provider
consent management to a blockchain platform:

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.
In Section II, we brieﬂy present related work and identify the
gaps related to preserving the privacy of ﬁtness data followed
by the proposed system’s objectives. Section III presents
the methodology used in this study. Section IV provides a
reﬁned and formal description of the system’s requirements.
Section V explores potential security concerns that moti-
vate our proposed system framework and then Section VI
describes the proposed system framework, including the
system design and architecture, action sequence diagrams,
and algorithms that demonstrate user decisions. Section VII
presents our assumptions regarding the built-in security prop-
erties of blockchain. Section VIII formalizes and validates
the security requirements. Finally, Section IX concludes the
study with a brief discussion.

• Transparency: All consent processes are visible to all

parties, including the user.

• To improve security, blockchain can ensure that all
consent-related transactions are authentic and originate
from an indented agent (authenticity), have not been
tampered with (integrity), consent transactions are han-
dled in a nonrepudiable manner (proof of authenticity),
and can control joint parties by choosing a permissioned
network (authorization).

• Scalability utilizing blockchain can provide a scalable
service to a growing number of users and nodes, includ-
ing consent requests and response actions generated by
different agents.

• Records’ immutability can help audit records and mini-
mize dispute cases by tracing the history of records orga-
nized in a speciﬁc sequence with timestamps. It serves
as a piece of ordered evidence.

• Consent and processing/collecting ﬁtness data validity
checks are predeﬁned in a logical manner in the form of
a smart contract.

This study aims to make two contributions to the preser-
vation of privacy among ﬁtness tracker providers. The key
contributions of this study are as follows.

1) The design and description of all aspects of the pro-
posed framework for dynamic consent, including system
design and architecture, and all potential system action
sequence diagrams, show the consent-related data ﬂow
and algorithms to demonstrate how decisions are created
and executed.

2) The validation of the proposed framework’s security
properties, including a formal abstract description of the
required properties of blockchain and smart contracts,
authentication, and proof of authentication, using a rig-
orous formal representation through the formal security
modeling framework SeMF proposed by [18].

Together, these two contributions aim to address privacy
issues in ﬁtness providers’ privacy policies by providing a
comprehensive framework and validating the proposed sys-
tem using SeMF [18].

II. RELATED WORK
The preservation of individual privacy by ﬁtness tracker
providers has been a subject of interest for many researchers.
Some researchers have highlighted privacy concerns resulting
from the use of ﬁtness apps. Sunyaev et al.’s [13], Mul-
der’s [10], and Hutton et al.’s [1] linguistic assessments have
revealed a gap between users’ understanding of consent and
subsequent data usage by service providers. Their ﬁndings
suggest the need to adopt a more transparent human-centric
system that clearly communicates the purpose of requesting
data. Several studies that have focused on privacy risk anal-
ysis of health and ﬁtness app behavior suggest that ﬁtness
apps involuntarily share user data with other entities [6]–[9],
[11]. Their privacy risk and behavior analysis revealed that
the involuntary sharing of data is due to unclear one-time
consent and the absence of withdrawal rights.

Although some ﬁtness applications such as Fitbit [15],
Apple Watch [14] and Strava [16] have moved from tra-
to more ﬂexible user consent
ditional one-time consent
management, privacy concerns associated with their consent
practices remain. These three Fitness applications uses a tra-
ditional data management systems that rely only on policies
in their solutions to comply with data protection regulations.
Hence, the current ﬁtness applications do not technically
enforce a transparency system. In addition, these applications
contain no interface for informing users about third-party
data access and sharing. Therefore, our proposed system
uses built-in blockchain properties that technically enforce
transparency in ﬁtness applications. The aforementioned lit-
erature, which includes linguistic, behavioral, and heuristic
assessments, shows serious privacy concerns associated with
the use of ﬁtness apps. Researchers have identiﬁed several
problems related to preserving the privacy of ﬁtness data,
including lack of system transparency, lack of privacy policy
legibility, concerns with one-time consent, and noncompli-
ance issues with new consent management. Although these
studies thoroughly analyzed the privacy issues of ﬁtness apps,
none were found to have addressed concerns in terms of
dynamic consent management that uses a transparent and
legally compliant system.

2

VOLUME 10, 2022

M. Alhajri et al.: Blockchain-Based Consent Mechanism for Access to Fitness Data in Healthcare Context

IE EE Access· 

Since privacy is a critical component for safeguarding an
individual’s data, it imposes a considerable burden on service
providers [19]. For instance, in the case of data sharing,
data controllers and processors must adhere to appropriate
standards, such as GDPR or Australian Privacy Principles
(APPs) [5], [20], which require individual consent before
collecting, processing, or sharing personal data. In contrast
to the GDPR [5] and APP [20], which protect all forms of
personal information, the Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act (HIPAA) [21] has a limited scope. For
example, ﬁtness applications are not obliged to comply with
HIPAA because they are classiﬁed as ‘‘noncovered entities’’.
However, they may be required to do so once they engage
with ‘‘covered entities’’ such as insurance companies and
healthcare professionals [21]. While legislators enact stricter
data protection laws, individuals are often overwhelmed by
lengthy, complex consent forms in which they may unwit-
tingly accept the secondary usage of their data out of bewil-
derment. Furthermore, individuals have no transparency in
knowing if the consent terms and conditions are adhered to
by service providers [21]. Thus, there needs to be a solution
that provides users more control over the use of their personal
data by obtaining their consent while likewise maintaining the
trust of different domains and preventing unlawful secondary
use (also known as ‘‘data double-spending’’) [22]. Given the
rapidly changing privacy rules adopted to give individuals
more control over their data, consent management can be seen
as the ﬁrst step for preserving privacy in any system [23].

A blockchain is a ledger with distributed ownership that
has a collection of transactions included in blocks [24]. In a
blockchain, the same ledger is copied and synced among
peers through a consensus mechanism [25]. The blockchain
holds only accepted and validated transactions encapsulated
in a block [24]. Each block in the blockchain is built on
top of the previous block, such that a sequence of blocks
with a timestamp is created [25]. It is equipped with cryp-
tographic techniques and is tamper-resistant, append-only,
and immutable. The greater the number of conﬁrmations the
block has, the harder it becomes to change [22].

Blockchain and related technologies, such as smart con-
tracts, have the potential to gain the trust of different domains
through a predeﬁned and automated program to satisfy com-
mon contractual conditions [24], [26]. A smart contract guar-
antees that it is executed immediately once a condition is
met. Smart contracts employ ‘‘if/when. . .then. . . ’’ rules that
govern transactions beyond the control of centralized author-
ities. Because smart contracts operate on a blockchain, they
have many valuable features, such as managing smart assets,
executing as written, avoiding central entities, and reducing
human interference [26], [27].

The emergence of blockchain technology has prompted the
rethinking of traditional solutions that depend on trust [28].
Its unique properties, particularly immutability and decen-
tralized authority, have attracted considerable research atten-
tion [23]. Since the initiation of Bitcoin for cryptocurrency in
2008 [29], the possibility of using blockchain in nonﬁnancial

applications has been proposed. The use of blockchain out-
side of ﬁnance has been investigated in a range of contexts,
such as supply chains [30]–[33] and health care and consent
management [17], [34]–[38].

Many studies in various domains have empirically proven
that blockchain technology can mitigate privacy preserva-
tion issues by managing consent [17], [38]–[43]. Some of
these consent scheme solutions leverage smart contracts to
manage individual consent. For example, the work outlined
in [17] involves the use of a consortium blockchain plat-
form in the IoT ecosystem to manage users’ personal data
by obtaining their consent. Another solution proposed by
the Orange Consent Management Service records consent
in the blockchain through a consent management server,
which has been demonstrated in the Hyperledger beta ver-
sion [41]. A related work proposed by Dovetail leverages
a blockchain to allow patients to consent to the sharing of
their electronic medical records (EMRs) with other entities
through a mobile application [44]. Dovetail’s blockchain
stores consent along with reference to the transferred data.
Similarly, an EMR management solution named Ancile, pro-
posed by [40], utilizes smart contracts to secure access to
patients’ EMRs through access permissions based on HIPAA.
A blockchain and smart contract-based solution introduced
by [38] proposed a novel privacy-preserving dynamic consent
management for EMRs secondary use, in which they used
Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources’ (FHIR) consent
resource in their proposed design to avoid integration failures
with EMRs.

Beyond the healthcare domain, blockchain for consent
management solutions has been used in other research
domains. For instance, Gilda and Mehrotra [42] proposed a
blockchain solution that leverages smart contracts to guar-
antee consent privacy and access control by establishing a
nested authorization process using Hyperledger Fabric and
Hyperledger Composer. Another solution introduced by [39]
uses a blockchain to record user consent and enable anony-
mous data sharing.

To that end, utilizing a blockchain-based solution in a con-
sent management system has great potential and offers out-
standing features, such as transparency, security, immutabil-
ity, and auditability [45]. Therefore, in light of the potential of
blockchain and in response to privacy issues in ﬁtness apps,
this study proposes a blockchain dynamic consent mecha-
nism that uses a smart contract to preserve privacy in access-
ing ﬁtness data, especially with regard to the management of
consent.

III. RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
This section covers the research methodology and motivates
the selection of the methods used throughout the research.
The primary goal of this research is to improve user control
over the processing of their ﬁtness data and foster transpar-
ent data processing to achieve both privacy and compliance.
This improvement is achieved by designing and describing
the high-level proposed framework for dynamic consent and

VOLUME 10, 2022

3

IEEE Access· 

M. Alhajri et al.: Blockchain-Based Consent Mechanism for Access to F'1t11ess Data in Healthcare Context 

r--+  Define the  ~ Design and 

f------1.+  Demonstrate 

I 

r  - - - - - - - - - - - - - - t - - - - T 

8 I  - - - - - - - .   ,. _____  __, 
;i I 
Problem 
Identification 
::s  I 
[:  & Motivation 
~ 1 
g I 
S. 1 
-_:g 
:::. 
El  I  .__ _____  _, 

objectives& 
~  requirements 
f 
] 

Develop a 
transparent 
and privacy 
preserved 
solution 
.._ _____  __, 

Lack of 
transparency in 
fitness apps' 
privacy policy 

1 

1

I 

1 
I 

-

-

-

- -♦- - - - - T 

I 

-

I 

1 

Develop 
Artifacts 

2 l 
j  Blockchain-based  i "i 
:i:  8 

~ 

consent 
mechanism 
architecture 

,.l( 
1 

1 
' - - - - - - - . .J   I 

Process iteration 

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

Artifacts 

- T 
I 
-----1..-. 
-~ 
i  ~ 
:;! ] 
:i ~ 
and Afgorithms  E l! 
~ 
I 

Sequence 
diagrams 

.__ _____  _, 

-

-

-

, 

-

-

-

-

-

'"'I 

Ev3:1uate 
Artifacts 

Theoretical 
proof using 
SeMF 

~ I 

~-------------------~----------~----------~----------J 

I  Solution Design Phase  I  Demonstration Phase 

I 

Evaluation Phase 

Literature Review Phase 

FIGURE 1.  DSR paradigm  (46), of blockchain-based consent mechanism. 

validating the framework's security properties, which include 
a  formal  abstract  description  of the  required  properties  of 
blockchain and smart contracts. 

We employed the design science research (DSR) paradigm 
proposed  by  Peffers  et al.  [46]  to  design  and  evaluate  our 
framework  for  dynamic  consent.  The  goal  of DSR  is  util 
ity,  which  implies  that  rather  than  researching  an  already 
existing  artifact,  it  involves  the discovery  of a  highly  rele 
vant problem through an iterative process of developing and 
assessing  solution objects.  This  research  makes  use  of the 
DSR approach to solve the issue of fitness providers' privacy 
because no existing solution has met all of our requirements; 
therefore, it involves an  innovative discovery of system arti 
facts and evaluates them in formal abstract description using 
SeMF [18]. Hevner et al. [47] and Peffers et al. [46]  empha 
sized the importance of the evaluation phase as a  "crucial" 
component of a DSR contribution; therefore, we use SeMF, 
which serves as a tool for showing the trustworthiness of our 
proposed design model  by  providing  an  exact specification 
of the proposed architecture and properties and validating the 
architecture. 

The DSR can be divided into four phases: literature review, 
solution design, demonstration, and evaluation, as  depicted 
in Fig.  l . Each  phase consists of a different  DSR  paradigm 
activity. Below, we describe each phase and its activities. 

(l)  LITERATURE  REVIEW  PHASE:  In  this  phase, 
we  identify  the  relevant  problem  and  motivation  (as 
explained in Section II) and define our objectives. Below 
are the objectives that drove our research effort: 
a)  The system must closely follow GDPR valid consent 

criteria. 

b)  Our proposed artifacts should not be allowed to over 
whelm  the  capabilities  of a  typical  fitness  tracker's 
functionality. 

c)  Auditing  all  system  actions  is  crucial  to  achieving 
transparency and GDPR compliance requirements. 
d)  In  addition,  there  were  functions  and  features  nec 
essary to  meet transparency, including an  automated 
self-report data  access check, making data available 

check, and an automated switch from valid to invalid 
consent based upon user decisions. 

e)  The proposed design for storing and exchanging user 
consent data  between  different agents  must be  scal 
able. 

f)  A security solution is  one of the main  requirements 
implemented in system design  to provide secure and 
reliable communication. 

(2)  DESIGN  AND  DEVELOPMENT  PHASE:  This 
phase involves the use of objectives from the literature 
review  phase  to  define  the  required  design  artifacts, 
which  involves  an  iterative  process  between  the  cre 
ated  IT artifacts  and  the  defined  objectives.  The  arti 
facts  in  the proposed system are as  follows:  (l) system 
architecture  (Section  VI-A),  (2)  requirements  specifi 
cation  (Section  IV)  and  (3) formal  model  and proof 
(Section IV). 

(3)  DEMONSTRATION  PHASE:  This  phase  aims  to 
demonstrate  the  utility  of the  design  artifacts  in  solv 
ing  our  identified  problems  and  then  obtain  prelimi 
nary results  (as explained in detail  in Section VI.  This 
phase involves the implementation of (l) sequence dia 
grams,  (2)  detailed  descriptions  of activities,  and  (3) 
algorithms. 

(4)  EVALUATION PHASE: We evaluated how  well  the 
demonstrated  artifacts  supported  our  identified  prob 
lem.  This  phase  involves  comparing  the  results  from 
the demonstrated artifacts  with  the defined objectives. 
The  evaluation is  based on using  SeMF and proof (as 
explained in detail in Section Vill). This process iterates 
back  to  refine  the  designed  artifact  and  improve  its 
effectiveness. 

IV.  REQUIREMENTS  SPECIFICATION 
As  a  subsequent  iterative  step of the  DSR  paradigm  [46], 
this  section  provides  a  refined  and  formal  description  of 
the system's requirements from the problems and objectives 
identified  in  Section  II,  which  is  used  in  Section  Vill for 
formal validation. Therefore, it is important to understand the 

4 

VOLUME 10, 2022 

M. Alhajri et al.: Blockchain-Based Consent Mechanism for Access to Fitness Data in Healthcare Context

IE EE Access· 

TABLE 1. List of notations and their descriptions.

TABLE 2. Security properties and description.

Notation 
U; 
RF; 
R; 

FP; 

RA 

pk; 
sk; 
D; 
A; 

>.p 
w 
r 
II' 

Explanation 
the individual user and the owner of fitness data. 
unique reference number for each consent. 
an agent in the  system  who  requests  consent to  collect data, 
known as requester or collector. 
a set of agents in a system who request consent to process data, 
known as a processor or fitness provider. 
an agent in a  system who governs  the network,  known as  the 
regulatory authority. 
public key of i where i represents an agent. 
private key of i where i represents an agent. 
the actual Data being sent or received. 
the  action or transaction performed by agents that have some 
data D;, where i represents the transaction's index. 
refers to the time which denotes the consent decision valid for 
a period of time specified by U;,  where v represents the validity 
of the grated consent. 
an agent's local view of the system. 
the sequence of actions. 
the set of actions. 
the set of all agents. 

Security property 
Confidentiality 

Authentication 

Nonrepudiation 

Description 
Only specific agents are enabled to know the value 
of  data  D.  To  ensure  that  D  is  confidential,  D 
cannot  be  disclosed  to  unauthorized  parties  or 
malicious  agents  if such  disclosure  might  affect 
the privacy  of U;,  FP;  or R;. D can include en 
tity identities (identifiers), D  in combinations that 
might  reveal  entity  identities  (quasi-identifiers), 
sensitive  or  generic  D,  and  sequences  of action 
A1 ... An. 
This  ensures  that  the  communicating  agents  are 
who  they  claim to  be by  verifying  their  identity. 
Communication  usually  occurs  in  the  form  of a 
set of actions A1 ... An. Thus, each time action A; 
occurs,  it  must be  authenticated  to  the  receiving 
agent  that the  action originated from that  sender. 
For example, each time an agent receives data D, 
it must be authenticated to the receiving agent such 
that data D  is  indeed equal to the original data D 
sent by the sending agent. 
This denotes that the system should ensure a level 
of  protection  against  any  denial  by  any  agents 
performing  an  action  A;  or  a  set  of actions  r. 
The  system  should provide proof of authenticity 
that  all  actions  A1 ...  An  originate  from  the  in 
tended  agent.  Nonrepudiation  involves  two  com 
munication pairs.  First,  a  sent transaction cannot 
be  denied.  For  example,  agent  A  sent the  trans 
action to  agent  B; thus,  agent A  cannot deny the 
sending  behavior.  Second,  a  received  transaction 
cannot be denied. For example, agent A sends the 
transaction to agent B; thus, B  cannot deny that it 
received the transaction. 
This  denotes  that the  data  D  received  by  the  re 
ceiving agent are equal to the data D provided by 
the sending agent.  Any data D  transferred during 
the  occurrence  of  actions  A1 ... An  must  not  be 
changed during the transfer and must be assured of 
being tamper-free when received by another agent. 
This denotes that the system should prevent unau 
thorized agents from being part of the system and 
performing a set of actions A1 ... An. 
This denotes that the agents in the system should 
always have access to the system's resources, and 
data D are needed to perform actions A1 ...  An. 

Integrity 

Authorization 

Availability 

C. R3: SCALABILITY
As the proposed system relies on enhancing consent manage-
ment among different agents, having a scalable infrastructure
is critical for achieving system requirements. The number of
consensus nodes, agents, and transactions handled per second
are the three key elements that determine the scalability of
a blockchain [25]. Thus, in our proposed system, we utilize
blockchain to provide a scalable service to a growing number
of users and nodes, including consent requests and response
actions generated by different agents. Although each full
node maintains a copy of the entire blockchain, only the ﬁnal
settlement of self-report data access and available transac-
tions are recorded in the chain, resulting in an overall higher
throughput [25].

D. R4: AUDITABILITY
Auditability is a built-in blockchain feature that keeps all the
data in a blockchain immutable and resistant to tampering.

requirements of the proposed system. The proposed solution
requirements and the choices made provide the rationale for
the model and mechanism properties of our proposed system,
which are discussed in detail in Sections VI-A and VI-B.
The notations used throughout
this study are listed in
Table 1.

This section discusses each of these requirements as fol-
lows: R1: level of transparency, R2: security requirements,
R3: scalability, R4: auditability, R5: preservation of the
original functionality of the ﬁtness tracker, and R6: GDPR
compliance.

A. R1: TRANSPARENCY
Transparency can be deﬁned as a way of completing an
agent’s activities openly without any hidden activities such
that users can see their data ﬂow and trust that the agent
is fair and honest. In any system, transparency is crucial
to achieve both privacy and compliance. To enhance users’
trust regarding the protection of their privacy, the GDPR [5]
and APPs [20] ensure transparency in data processing prac-
tices. Three fundamental pillars of transparent systems can
be deﬁned: transparency, privacy, and compliance. Users
must be provided transparency regarding what happens after
they consent to the processing or collection of their data.
To address this requirement, the proposed system ensures
that all three fundamental pillars of a transparent system are
considered when ﬁtness providers share data-processing logs
with users who have consented to the process.

B. R2: SECURITY
Security is an important part of the proposed system require-
ments and comprises a set of security properties that ensure
the trustworthiness of our proposed system. This section
presents the basic concepts of properties relevant to this study.
Table 2 lists the security requirements of the proposed system.
In Section VIII, we formalize the requirements in detail using
SeMF.

VOLUME 10, 2022

5

IEEEAccess· 

M. Alhajri et al.: Blockchain-Based Consent Mechanism for Access to Fitness Data in Healthcare Context

The consent recorded in the blockchain can be used to con-
duct audits by the regulatory authority RA to resolve disputes
among untrusted agents. This auditability feature can also
be used to prove the authenticity or nonrepudiation security
requirements, which are discussed in detail in Section VII.
Although auditability features might be violated due to a 51%
attack in a public blockchain, the proposed system uses a
permissioned network on which only authorized parties are
allowed to validate blocks, with some fairness among the
parties, depending on the choice of consensus algorithm (e.g.,
PoW, PoS, Byzantine fault tolerance, etc.).

0  process Location 
0  Steps count 
0  SleepData 
0  heart rate 

d Front End · 

lntergrate d update 
request afn r collect11ng  and 

~;i::;~,n~ stream of 

fitness data 

E. R5: PRESERVE FITNESS TRACKER ORIGINAL
FUNCTIONALITY
This is important because as ﬁtness trackers rely heavily on
fast processing, the proposed solution should not hinder or
burden the original functionality of the system. Although
GDPR imposes the need to obtain users’ consent to process
their ﬁtness data, it is not sufﬁcient to ask for users’ consent
every time the data are processed and recorded in the chain.
Therefore, regardless of the privacy complexity it adds to
our proposed system, we ensure a sufﬁcient level of func-
tionality by creating a ﬂexible contract (e.g., ContractToPro-
cessDataForTimePeriod() for one month or year) and giving
users the choice to revoke that contract at any time using
ConsentWithdraw(). Therefore, the privacy requirement of
the proposed system is met, and the processing operation will
not be sufﬁciently slowed such that individuals are deterred
from using the system.

F. R6: GDPR COMPLIANCE
Consent is considered valid under the GDPR [5] if it fulﬁls
certain criteria: it must be unambiguous, informed, freely
given, speciﬁc and auditable, withdrawable, and explicit [48],
[49] (as listed below).

• Unambiguous. Consent must be given by means of ‘a
clear afﬁrmative action’ (e.g., preselected options are
invalid).

• Informed. The subject of the data must be aware of all
the information associated with processing their data
before they are processed.

• Freely given. On a voluntary basis, without coercion.
The subject of the data must be aware of all the effects
of the consent.

• Speciﬁc. Consent’s request must be granular with a
speciﬁed purpose. Thus, the subject of the data must be
fully aware of the purposes and methods used to process
their data.

• Auditable. All consent information must be stored for
future auditing and can later be used as valid proofs.
• Withdrawable. Consent requests should include a way

to easily withdraw granted consent.

• Explicit. Consent should verify that it was given by the
subject of the data and should include detailed informa-

FIGURE 2. Device privacy settings.

tion on the data to which the consent applies. It must be
veriﬁable to be validated.

V. THREAT MODEL
A threat modeling phase to explore potential security con-
cerns is the best practice for designing a secure system. Using
such a model enables us to select countermeasures during the
design process of our framework model. As the privacy poli-
cies of ﬁtness providers present a variety of security threats,
we concentrated on three types of threats: consent tampering,
consent fabrication, and the unlawful processing/collection of
ﬁtness data without individual consent.

VI. PROPOSED SYSTEM MODEL
In this section, we introduce our system architecture design
model for a blockchain-based consent mechanism to access
ﬁtness data. Our proposed design focuses on privacy in terms
of the exchange and records all consent processes in the
blockchain. This works as a proof of consent by leveraging
built-in security properties of the blockchain. The three main
functionalities of the system are recording consent requests
and responses, data transmission logs, and user device pri-
vacy settings. These three main functionalities ensure that
the system is in compliance with the GDPR requirement,
as discussed in Section IV, by tracing all consent logs and
preventing any potential malicious behavior on the system
when the app runs in the phone’s background. One way to
prevent such occurrences (as shown in Fig. 2) is to record
the user’s device privacy settings in the blockchain, which
ensures that all data acquisition is performed in a legitimate
manner based on both user consent and device settings. The
device settings serve as an additional privacy-preserving layer
above the user’s consent level.

The proposed system acts as a legitimate legal archive
in which all consent and data-sharing-related activities are
recorded on the blockchain for auditing purposes. In the case
of dispute/conﬂict or noncompliance, this process automat-
ically forces both ﬁtness providers and data requesters to
comply with the legal framework when they acquire consent
from users to process or collect their ﬁtness data. GDPR

6

VOLUME 10, 2022

M. Alhajri et al:  Blockchain-Based Consent Mechanism for Access to Fitness Data in Healthcare Context 

IEEE Access· 

Blockchain 

r · ........... · •· ............................................. ·= 
... ,..... .... ...... .......... .. ........ ..... 
. 
: 
f .............. ~ ... -rtl~:::::::::::~::::: .. : ..• ·::::. ·:::::::·~ ...... 1  I  l 
• 
-:············-w- .. 
• 
. 
.  Output 

: : ■·1
·~.  _ ...,.  .• . 

.  .  ,
: 
. 
: 
: 
fD . s-,o,.....,,  •  [ 
: 

..... \ .. •• 
.  . 
j  !  s..!l ... ~ Time expiry 

. ............................................. 
. 

■·1 
. 
. ?!'!P.".•. 
Input  ill 

............. 

'  ~  • 

... . 

: 
. 
: 
: 

:  l.nput 

......

lnput 

: . . . .

~

:· 

• 

• 

. 

: 

. 

Regulatory 
authority 

................... 

Transfer 
: data stream 

•• .  : 

• 

• • • • • • 

: :  ~ ,;.. __ 'I Front End : for 
.  . 
--
-
- -
gJant  deny and 
=--=-- updat~ of data assets 
: 
'7 (consent records), 
j  shows users 
;  prefrences. 

•• • • • •  • • • •  ·  •  1 

• 

4 Fitness  provider 
: databaae 

Process data 

' 
. : 
:  • ..... ~ =--- IFrontEnd: 
:=:::-::=-
:. • • • • • • • 
request and update 
=r-= ,ollectiing and 
consent  for 
-
- -

: 
: 

processmg stream 
of fimess data 

. ........... . 

•  ♦♦• 
. 
. 
1 ~ \l_j 
••••  ~ =t=  Front End : for request 
7:::::::::,,  4  • • • • • • • • • •  
: 

and update consent 

. 

- -

. 

-

•• • •• • • • •• • • 

. 

& ··® 

Consumer device, 

-

Fitness Tracl<er 
Provider 

Fimess provider 

Hospital 

Companies 

GP 

Data Requester 

End-user IoT devices 

A  Send Consent ~est: to process and store 
'lj' fitness data. 
A  Send Conaent Request: to collect data from 
V 

fitness providen. 

• 

•  Record: record it on blockchain 

A. ~ Receive Consent Request: to process or 
V  V  collect data. 
0  Enter user consent:  deny or grant. 
e •  Send Consent Response: grant or deny. 

• •  Record: record It on bloclcchain 

• •  Record the result: record it on the blockchain. 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Receive Consent Response: to process data. 

Receive Consent Response: to collect data . 

Send Self-Report Data Acceu 

Record: record It on blockchaln 

Receive Self-Report Data Access 

• 

• 

•

Share fitness data 

• 

Send Self-Report: Data Available/ Access 

•  Record: record it on blockchain 

• 

Receive Self-Report: Data Available/ Access 

fD  Execute smart contract 

Execute smart contract 

• •  Record the result: record It on the blockchaln. 

FIGURE l.  Proposed consent management system architecture. 

fosters  transparent data  processing  to  achieve  both  privacy 
and compliance. In line with GDPR compliance, the proposed 
system  provides  transparency  by  sharing  data  transaction 
logs  back  to  the  user  to  give  the  user  a  transparent  view 
of their data transmission  and know  more  about the  parties 
with whom  their data have been shared and whether the data 
have been shared based upon granted consent. This approach 
ensures  that every  action  performed  by  the  entities  in  the 
proposed  system  remains  transparent  to  all  parties  involved 
in  the  blockchain  network.  Although  exchanging  the  data 
through  blockchain  provides a valuable solution, it creates a 
point of conflict  between blockchain  and one  of the  GDPR 
criteria,  that  is,  " right  to  be  forgotten".  The  immutability 

feature ofblockchain makes it impossible for data to be erased 
and reverses the concept to " right to  be never be forgotten". 
Although individual privacy  is a fundamental  right, auditing 
mechanisms are essential to ensure that rules and  regulations 
are obeyed. Therefore, the  proposed system was built based 
on  the  idea of decoupling  consent  management  from  data 
sharing. Neither the data nor the pointer of the data are stored 
in  the  chain.  Blockchain  only  manages  and  stores  consent 
and  data-sharing-related  activities  and  does  not  exchange 
data  through  the  blockchain.  The  blockchain  operates  as  a 
middle consent management layer between the requester and 
the  owner of the  fitness data.  Blockchain  stores the  follow 
ing data:  consent requests, consent responses (grant/denial), 

VOLUME  10, 2022 

7 

IEEEAccess· 

M. Alhajri et al.: Blockchain-Based Consent Mechanism for Access to Fitness Data in Healthcare Context

consent withdrawal, data transmission logs, legitimate report
checks of data transmission, and user device privacy settings.

A. SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE
This section presents our design of the proposed framework
for dynamic consent, including the system design and archi-
tecture, and all potential system action sequence diagrams
that show the consent-related data ﬂow and algorithms to
demonstrate how decisions are created and executed. We con-
sider the following system participants: ﬁtness provider
(FPi), data requester (Ri), regulatory authority (RAi) and user
(Ui). As shown in Fig. 3, the proposed system is composed
of four main entities that contribute differently to the system.
Here, we analyze their local view, which is used later (in
Section VIII) for the security proof.

• Fitness Provider (FPi): The local view of FPi is the
send and receive actions. FPi has three sending activ-
ities: consent requests to process data, self-report data
access, and self-report making data available. In addi-
tion, FPi has one receiving action, which is a consent
response to the process data.

• Data Requester (Ri): The local view of Ri is the send
and receive actions. Ri has two sending activities: con-
sent requests to collect data from FPi and self-report data
access. In addition, Ri has one receiving action, which
is the consent response to collect data.

• User (Ui): The local view of Ui

is the send and
receive actions. Ui has three sending activities: consent
responses to collect/process data and withdrawal of valid
consent action. Additionally, Ui has ﬁve receive actions:
two consent requests from FPi/Ri, three self-report data
accesses or making data available to ensure transparency
with the user. All the above actions are recorded in the
blockchain to ensure secure and reliable communication
among entities.

• Smart Contract (SCi): The role of smart contract SCi
is to automatically check the validity of the processing
and collecting actions of FPi/Ri. It is also used to auto-
matically switch from valid to invalid consent based on
the user’s withdrawal action and expiration time.

• Regulatory Authority (RA): RA’s role is to ensure that
the authentication information provided by other entities
is lawful. When entities ﬁrst register on the blockchain
platform, their identity is checked by the RA in which
they enter their identity authentication details. The RA
is the ﬁrst line of defense to ensure the security of the
proposed system. Therefore, unauthorized nodes cannot
tamper with consent, forge transactions, or attack smart
contracts.

B. PROPOSED SYSTEM SEQUENCE OF ACTIONS AND
ALGORITHMS
The proposed system consists of a set of consent-related
actions (cid:48) that are listed in Table 3 as (Action, Entity, Parame-
ters). The entities FPi, Ri, Ui and RA are identiﬁed as agents

TABLE 3. Actions for proposed system.

Actions (Ai) 
Consent Request 
(SendConsentRequest,F Pi! Ri, 
(ConsentToProcess/Collect, RFi)) 
(RecvConsentRequest,  Ui,(F Pi/Ri, 
ConsentToProcess/Collect, RFi)) 
Consent Response 
(SendConsentResponse, 
(ConsentDecision, RFi)) 

Ui, 

(RecvConsentResponse, 
(Ui, ConsentDecision, RFi)) 

F Pi! Ri, 

(Process-

Self-Report 
(SendSelfReportDataAccess, 
FPi/Ri, 
ing/CollectingActivitiesUpdates, 
RFi)) 
(RecvSelfReportDataAccess, 
Ui, 
(FPi!Ri, 
ing/CollectingActivitiesUpdates, 
RFi)) 
(SendReportDataAvailable, 
Ui, 
(F Pi,  CollectingActivitiesUpdates, 
RFi)) 

Process-

(RecvReportDataAvailable, 
Ui, 
(F Pi,  CollectingActivitiesUpdates, 
RFi)) 
Withdraw Consent 
(SendWithdrawConsent(F Pi/Ri, Ui, 
(WithdrawConsent, RFi)) 
(RecvWithdrawConsent, 
(Ui, WithdrawConsent, RFi)) 

F Pi! Ri, 

Explanation 

F Pi! Ri  sends  a  request  for 
consent to process data. 
Ui  receives  and processes  the 
request sent by F Pi/ Ri. 

After  receiving  a  request,  Ui 
makes  a decision  and  sends  it 
to  FPi!Ri-
F Pi! Ri  receives  and  pro 
cesses  the  decision  made  by 
Ui. 

If consent  is  granted  by  Ui, 
F Pi/ Ri  updates  Ui  with  all 
activities  associated  with  the 
consent RFi. 
Ui  receives  and processes  the 
updates sent by FPi/Ri. 

If consent  is  granted  by  Ui, 
F Pi  updates  Ui  with  all 
collecting activities associated 
with the consent RFi. 
Ui  receives  and processes  the 
updates sent by FPi!Ri-

If Ui  sends  consent withdraw 
toRFi. 
F Pi! Ri  receives  and  pro 
cesses  the  withdraw  request 
sent by Ui. 

acting in the system. To formalize the actions depicted in
Fig. 3, we abstract the way in which ﬁtness providers process
the ﬁtness data Di measured by user’s Ui wearable ﬁtness
devices and how the data are shared and processed by other
agents based on Ui’s consent. Hence, we use the actions listed
in Table 3.

Each agent in the system has its own local view denoted
by λP, in which an agent can see only its own sent actions or
received actions A1. . . An. We can summarize each agent P’s
λP by identifying the send and receive actions performed by
each agent P. Hence, the design goals of the proposed system
can be informally stated as follows.

DG1 It must be authentic for an agent that the data shown
on the agent device are the data transferred in the
blockchain.

DG2 It is authentic for agent B that the data received are the

data that were sent by agent A.

The blockchain feature allows all actions A1. . . An per-
formed by agent P to be recorded on the chain and viewable
to all agents P. This process can enable agent P to learn more
about other actions and expand their λP of system actions
beyond sending and receiving actions. All the system actions
A1. . . An are listed in Table 3. Based on the aforementioned
assumptions and our knowledge of blockchain mechanisms

8

VOLUME 10, 2022

M. Alhajri et al.:  Blockchain-Ba.sed Consent Mechanism for Access to Fimess Data in Healthcare Context 

IEEE Access· 

1 
predefined contract  ,__ 

rules 

2 

Trigger Events 

3 

---

Self-Execution 

i----

Settlement 

4 

Conditions for execution: 
• Time frame. 
• Events occur on the chain 

Trigger event occurred: 
• Transaction initiated. 
• Check  received information. 
• The set time reached. 

Once predefined conditions are 
met, the contract will execute 
the program and provide an 
output 

A new transaction will be added 
immediately on the chain to 
report back to all Agents of the 
results. 

FIGURE 4.  Smart contract execution steps. 

Conesent RF, State 

Process/Collect  RF1 State 

n-ue 

UPDATE RFi 
state = valid or 
True 

UPDATERFi 
state = invalid 
or False 

True 
♦ 
UPDATERFi 
state = invalid 
or False 

UPDATE Process/Collect 
data RF; State= valid 

UPDATE Process/Collect 
data RF1 State = invalid 

FaJs, 

RECORD transaction on blockchain 

FIGURE 5.  Smart contract sc1 logic model. 

RECORD transaction on blockchaio 

FIGURE 6.  Smart contract sc2 logic model. 

such as immutability and smart contracts, we assume that they 
can be achieved through smart contracts. 

Fig. 4  shows an illustrative diagram of the smart contract 

SC; execution steps. 

In the proposed system, we have two automated processes 
in which we can employ our assumptions  about smart con 
tracts. These automated processes are as follows. 

(A)  Smart contract SC1- Granted consent decision is valid 
for a period of time OR invalid if it has been withdrawn: 
A smart contract enables  us  to  bind  time with granted 
consent by  U;.  Once the time has  expired,  the granted 
consent becomes invalid (as shown in Fig. 5). Therefore, 
the processing and collection of data by FPi  or Ri  after 
that  set  time  would  be  unlawful.  The  smart  contract 
SC1 's input parameters are SC1 's time expiry tv and the 
initiated withdrawal transactions from U;. The output of 
SC1 adds a new transaction to  the blockchain to report 
the consent with that reference number RF;  becoming 
invalid. 
Below, we describe design  goals  based on the  proper 
ties  of  SC1 that  provide  authenticity  to  agents,  which 
can  be informally  stated  as  follows  (as  formalized  in 
Section Vill): 

D G3  It must be authentic for  all agents  that the  granted 
consent is valid upon both the consent timeframe and 
Vi 's withdrawal decision. 

(B)  Smart  contract  SC2- Check  the  validity  of  stor 
ing,  processing,  and  collecting  data  based  upon  U;'s 
granted/denied consent: 
A smart contract enables  us  to  detect any misbehavior 
from  FPi or Ri  in processing,  storing,  and  collocating 
U/s fitness  data  (as  shown  in  Fig.  6). Misbehavior is 
detected through a conditional check. Once a triggering 
action is recorded in the blockchain, its validation and 
authenticity are checked based upon  U;'s consent deci 
sion (granted/denied) previously  made for that consent 
with  RF;. SC2 depends  on three input  parameters:  the 
initiated transactions from FP; or Ri,  the output of SC1, 
and the recorded U;'s denial consent.  The identifier of 
consent is the RF; reference number. 
Below, we express the design goals informally based on 
the properties of SC2  (as formalized in Section Vill): 
DG4  The  FP;  processed  data  must  be  authentic for  Ui 

based upon U; 's granted consent. 

DG5  The R; collocated data must be authentic for U; based 

upon U;'s granted consent. 

After agent P joins the system, its authenticity is verified 
by  the system's regulatory authority RA. The agent can start 

VOLUME  IO, 2022 

9 

IEEEAccess· 

M. Alhajri et al.: Blockchain-Based Consent Mechanism for Access to Fitness Data in Healthcare Context

using the blockchain to record consent actions by sending a
consent request to user Ui, the owner of the ﬁtness data, and
waiting for granting or denial of the consent request.

Below, we deﬁne all possible steps of

the consent
request/response process (as shown in Fig.7). The sequence
diagram in Fig. 8 shows how participating agents are con-
nected and how consent is created and recorded in the chain
by showing the transaction ﬂow among them.

• Steps 1.1a and 1.1b: FPi/Ri creates a consent request
that includes three main components: consent content,
reference number RFi and time required to process or
collect data tv. We use this information as an input for
Step 2, where the user can make a decision based on
these received details. This transaction is then sent to the
target user through a blockchain network.

• Step 1.2: The transaction sent by FPi/Ri is recorded on
the blockchain. First, a transaction or set of transac-
tions A1. . . An are validated and propagated through the
network. Second, the valid set of transactions A1. . . An,
which has correct signatures and structure, is enclosed
in a new block. Finally, the new block is the next block
to the end of the longest chain (if there are competing
chains), which has already been validated and decided
by nodes on the network by reaching a consensus using
consensus algorithms. The consensus algorithm ensures
secure and reliable communication among agents P.
• Step 1.3: Ui’s blockchain account then receives transac-

tion Ai, veriﬁes it, and displays it to user Ui.

• Step 2: User Ui decides based on the received data Di
(as shown in Algorithm 1) whether to deny or grant
the consent request. The decision is based on the input
from requester Ri (as noted in Steps 1.1a and 1.1b). The
inputs are the consent content, reference number RFi,
and expiration time tv of consent. The output of this step
is used as an input in Steps 5.1 and 7.1.

• Steps 3.1 and 3.2: The user’s consent response is
returned to FPi/Ri. The response is recorded in the
blockchain following steps similar to those explained in
Step 1.2.

• Steps 3.3a and 3.3b: FPi/Ri’s blockchain account
receives transaction Ai, veriﬁes it, and displays it to
FPi/Ri.

If consent is granted in Step 2, the user has the option
to withdraw consent at any time. As noted in Step 2 and
Algorithm 1, the user is provided with a time expiry tv for
their granted decision RFi. Below, we explain all possible
steps to withdraw from the granted consent RFi in line with
the GDPR requirements (from Section VI). All possible with-
drawal transactions steps are as follows:

• Step 1.1w: User Ui decides to withdraw the consent

granted in Step 2 with reference number RFi.

• Steps 1.2w - 1.3w: The user’s withdrawal consent is
sent back to FPi/Ri. The sent withdrawal transaction is
recorded in the chain following steps similar to those
explained in Step 1.2.

Algorithm 1 Request Consent to Process/Collect Fitness
Data
Require:

• Consent details:

– Purpose of process or collection.
– Requester information, i.e., identiﬁer Ri/FPi.
– Requested ﬁtness data type.

• Expiration time tv.
• RFi
if (ConsentToProcess/Collect() = Granted) then

FPi/Ri can start the process or collect data based on the
agreed time tv after receiving a granted decision through
RecvConsentResponse(b) from Ui.
return True;
else if (ConsentToProcess/Collect() = Denied) then

The processing or collection of data after receiving a
denial decision through RecvConsentResponse(b) from Ui
is unlawful.
return False;
end if

• Steps 1.4wa and 1.4wb: After withdrawal, the trans-
action is recorded on the chain. FPi/Ri’s blockchain
account then withdraws transaction Ai, veriﬁes it, and
displays it to FPi/Ri.

• Steps 2.1w and 2.2w: In these steps, the predeﬁned
smart contract SC1 (deﬁned in Algorithm 2) is executed.
SC1 aims to change the granted valid consent to invalid
consent for processing or collecting data. The SC1 pro-
gram is executed if one of the following actions occurs:
expiration of the granted consent time tv or withdrawal
of transactions initiated by Ui from Steps 1.2w and 1.1w.

Algorithm 2 Smart Contract (SC1) for Switching Consent’s
Validity Status
Require:

– The Ui initiated withdrawal transactions.
– Expiration time tv.
– RFi
if ((tv = True) ∨ (withdrawal = True)) then

Inform the agents that the consent with RFi has become

invalid by reporting the result to the chain via SC1.
return False;
else if ((tv = False) ∧ (withdrawal = False)) then

The consent with RFi remains valid.

return True;
end if

• Step 2.3w: SC1 from Steps 2.1w and 2.2w ensures that
the proposed system design goal DG 3 is held in the
system. The results of SC1 are reported as a new transac-
tion (as formalized in Section VIII). SC1’s transaction is
recorded in the chain, following steps similar to those

10

VOLUME 10, 2022

M. Alhajri et al.: Blockchain-Ba.sed Consent Mechanism for Access to Fimess Data in Healthcare Context 

IEEE Access· 

Consent Request and Response Actions 

Withdraw Granted Consent Actions 

Stepl Consent Request 

1.la: Send action from FPi 
1.lb: Send action from  Ri 
1.2:  Record action on Blockchain 
1.3:  Receive action by Ui 

• 
• 

Step 2 U1 enters Consent Decision 

Step 3 Consent Response 

3.1:  Send action from Ui 
3.2:  Record action on Blockchain 
3.3a: Receive action by FPi 
3.3b : Receive action by Ri 

' 

Step 4 Self-Report Data Access 

4.1:  Send action from FPi 
4.2:  Record action on Blockchain 
4.3:  Receive action 

... 

Step 5  Check the validity of processing 

5.1:  Excute Smart Contract SC2 
5.2:  Send results to Blockchain 
5.3:  Record action on Blockchain 
t 
Step 6 Report Making Data Available 

6.1:  FPi share data with R; 
6.2:  Send action from FPi 
6.3:  Record action on Blockchain 
6.4:  Send action from Ri 
6.5:  Record action on Blockchain 
6.6:  Receive action by  U; 

t 
Step 7 Check the validity of Collecting 

-

7.1:  Excute Smart Contract SC2 
7.2:  Send results to Blockchain 
7.3:  Record action on Blockchain 

Stepl Withdraw Consent 

1.lw:  Withdraw GrantedConsent 
1.2w:  Send action from Ui 
1.3w:  Record action on Blockchain 
l .4wa: Receive action by FPi 
1.4wb: Receive action by Ri 

♦ 
Step2 Update Consent Validity 

2.lw: Excute Smart Contract SC1 
2.2w: Check time expiry tv and the 
initiation of withdrawal action. 
2.3w:  Send results to Blockchain 
2.4w: Record action on Blockchain 

FIGURE 7.  Summary of system  steps labels. 

Data Requester 

Fitness provider 

Blockchain 

User's blockchain 
account 

User 

(FP,, Ur, RF,, t,) 

I  l.la SendConsentRequest(a) 

.. 

(R;, U;, RF;, t,,) 
l.lb SendConsentRequest(a) 

FP·  U·  RF·  t 
3.3a RecvConsentResponse(b) 

_!  1.2 record it on blockchain 

(FPr/R,, Ur, RF,, tJ 
1.3 RecvConsentRequest(b) 

(FP/R;, U;, RF;, t,,) 

3.1 SendConsentResponse(a ) 

..... ...i  3.2 record it on blockchain 

3.3b RecvConsentResponse{b) 

U·  RF·  t 

. 

2. Enter user's consent 

Gr~n.t 

D~ny 

L_ & _J 

1.4wa RecvWilbdrawConsent(b) 

I 
(R;, U;, Rf;) 
l .4 wb RecvWitbdrawConsent(b) 
I 

I 
I 

Wilbdraw 

2.lw execute SC1 

2.3w Report result to the chain  · 

2.4w record it on blockchain 

1.lw WithdrawalGrantedConsent 

: sent transaction 
: received transaction 

a 
b 
SC1  : smart contract 
tv 

: contract valid for a time period 

FIGURE a.  A sequence diagram of consent request, response and w ithdrawal send and receive transactions, including a smart contract SC1  for switching 
consent validity status. 

explained  in  Step  1.2.  This  step  informs  agents  that 
consent to RF; has become invalid. 

Fig. 9 illustrates how the proposed system's steps to check 
the  validity  of storing,  processing,  and  collecting  data  are 

based upon U;'s granted/denied consent. The following steps 
use the  smart  contract  to  ensure  that  properties  DG 4  and 
DG  5  hold  in  the  system.  These  steps  aim  to  show  that 
if  ConsentToProcess/Collect()  is  granted,  then  FP;IR;  can 

VOLUME  IO, 2022 

11 

IEEEAccess· 

M. Alhajri et al.: Blockchain-Based Consent Mechanism for Access to Fitness Data in Healthcare Context

lawfully start processing/collecting data within the agreed
time tv. This check uses a smart contract with predeﬁned
rules, that is, a self-executing and self-enforcing contract.
Below, we deﬁne how all steps of checking the validity of
storing, processing, and collecting data are based upon Ui’s
granted/denied consent.

The sequence diagram in Fig. 9 shows the transaction ﬂow
among the participating agents (as subsequent steps of Steps
3.3a and 3.3b in Fig. 8). The steps are as follows:

• Step 4.1: Following Step 3.3a, in which FPi receives
the user’s granted consent, FPi starts processing and
collecting data from Ui’s devices based upon the granted
consent time tv. In this stage, FPi reports back to Ui that
it accessed their data and processed it, with sufﬁcient
details about where and what data have been processed
and collected.

• Step 4.2: FPi’s self-reported data access transaction is
sent back to Ui and recorded in the chain, following steps
similar to those explained in Step 1.2.

• Step 4.3: Ui’s blockchain account receives transaction
Ai, veriﬁes it, and displays it to user Ui. This received
and recorded transaction is later used as an input for
smart contract SC2 in Step 5.1.

• Step 5.1: In this step, the predeﬁned smart contract SC2
(deﬁned in Algorithm 3) is executed. SC2 aims to check
the validity of storing, processing, and collecting data
by FPi based upon Ui’s granted/denied consent. The
SC2 program is executed once a triggering action from
Step 4.2b is recorded in the blockchain. The validity and
authenticity of action are checked based on three input
parameters: the initiated transactions from FPi or Ri,
the output of SC1, and the recorded Ui’s granted/denied
consent. The identiﬁer of consent is the RFi reference
number.

• Steps 5.2 and 5.3: The smart contract SC2 from Step
5.1 ensures that the proposed system design goals DG 4
and DG 5 hold in the system and reports results of SC2 as
a new transaction (as formalized in Section VIII). SC2’s
transaction is recorded in the chain, following steps sim-
ilar to those explained in Step 1.2. This step informs the
agents that the storing, processing, and collecting of data
by FPi are valid or invalid. This smart contract SC2 acts
as a detector of any misbehavior from FPi through a
conditional check.

• Steps 6.1, 6.2, and 6.4: Following Step 3.3a, in which Ri
and FPi receive the user’s granted consent, FPi shares
Ui’s data with Ri. Concurrently, Ri starts collecting data
from the FPi database based on the granted consent and
the agreed time tv. In this stage, FPi and Ri report back
to Ui that they have made data available to Ri, accessed
their data and processed it, with sufﬁcient details about
where and what data have been processed and collected.
• Steps 6.3 and 6.5: The self-report data access by Ri
and report-making data made available by FPi are sent
back to Ui with the consent reference number RFi and

recorded on the chain, following steps similar to those
explained in Step 1.2.

• Steps 6.6a and 6.6b: Ui’s blockchain account receives
transaction Ai, veriﬁes it, and displays it to user Ui.
This received and recorded transaction is later used as
an input for smart contract SC2 in Step 7.1.

• Step 7.1: Following steps similar to those explained in
Step 5.1, predeﬁned SC2 (as explained in Section VI-B)
is executed. However, SC2 aims to check the validity of
the data-collection process of Ri.

• Steps 7.2 and 7.3: Smart contract SC2 from Step
7.1 ensures that DG 3 holds in the system by reporting
the results of SC2 in a new transaction and recording it
in the chain, following similar steps to those explained
in Step 1.2. This step determines whether the process
of collecting data by Ri is valid. This smart contract
SC2 acts as a misbehavior detector for both FPi and Ri
through a conditional check.

VII. TRUSTWORTHINESS OF PROPOSED BLOCKCHAIN
SYSTEM
As a subsequent step in the DSR paradigm, this section dis-
cusses the assumptions that model the blockchain properties,
which are later validated in Section VIII. The proposed design
includes four main agents P: RA, FPi, Ri, and Ui. Each con-
tributes differently to the blockchain and has its own λP [18].
Therefore, the trustworthiness of the system is vital to ensur-
ing that the given consent request or response is authentic,
originates from a trusted entity, and is safely stored with a
backup of all data in case of failure. Blockchain can guarantee
the trustworthiness of our proposed consent management
system by providing an immutable and transparent way to
record transactions between nontrusting entities. Entities in a
blockchain have a local view (λP) of the system and trust only

Algorithm 3 Smart Contract (SC2) Checks the Validity of
Storing, Processing, and Collecting Data Based Upon Ui’s
Granted/Denied Consent
Require:

– The FPi/Ri initiated transactions.
– The recorded Ui’s granted/denied consent.
– The output of SC1 (Algorithm 2).
– RFi
if
((ConsentToProcess/Collect()
(SC1Output = True)) then

((SendSelfReportDataAccess(a)

=

=

True) ∧
Granted) ∧

Inform the agents that the storing, processing, and

collecting of data by FPi/Ri with RFi is valid.
return True;
else if
((ConsentToProcess/Collect()
(SC1Output = False)) then

((SendSelfReportDataAccess(a) = False) ∧
Denied) ∧

=

Report a warning of misbehavior by FPi/Ri as invalid.

return False;
end if

12

VOLUME 10, 2022

M. Alhajri et al.:  Blockchain-Ba.sed Consent Mechanism for Access to Fimess Data in Healthcare Context 

IEEE Access· 

Data Requester 

Fitness provider 

Blockchain 

User's blockchain 
account 

(fP;, U;, Rf;) 

4.1 SendSelfReportDataAccess(a) 

j 4.2 record it on blockchain 
. 

r 4.3 RecvSelfReportDataAccess(  ) 

(FP;, U;, RFd 

5.1 execute SC2 

L 

I 
1  5.2 Repon result to the chain 

, 

..  i 

SC2 
j 5.3 record it on blockchain 

1

I 

(FPi, R1, U1, RF1) 

-6-.2-S-e-nd_R.:..e..;p.:..ortD..;:.:.a..;ta.:..A_v.:.:ail-. a-b-le(_a_)►•  ..... ...1  6.3 record it on blockchain 

····•···•··· 

_  JFf.r,}r1...UJ __ 
6.1 Share fitness dataO 

6.4 SendSelfReponDataAccess(a) 

: sent transaction 
: received transaction 

a 
b 
sci  : smart contract 

l 6.5 record it on blockchain 

<l·······--' 

'---------~Ii 

7.1 UK'" sc, I 
[ :;•,::::::M:,;;~ 

I 
I 

. 

FIGURE 9 .  A seq uence diagram of consent self-report tra nsactions by FP;/R;, including a smart contract sc2, to check the va lidity of 
storing, processing and collecting data based upon U;'s granted/ denied consent 

the results shown to them. Their trust in the shown results is 
based on a sequence of actions known as w (system behavior, 
i.e., consent sent/received). As Fuchs et al. [18] noted, trust in 
a technological system must always be perceived as trust in a 
system property. The proposed system relies on assumptions 
about the blockchain's built-in mechanism (entity knowledge 
about  the  system).  In  Section  VIII,  we  formally  validate 
the  properties of the proposed  system,  including  its  behav 
ior (discussed  in  Section VI),  based on  our  assumptions  of 
blockchain. 

This section discusses what the blockchain can do to ensure 
the trustworthiness of the proposed system's desired  behav 
ior.  Section  VIII  thereafter  presents  clear,  formal  seman 
tics  that  ensure  the  traceability  of  the  trust  and  security 
requirements  through  a  sequence  of actions.  Establishing 
trust  between  parties  is  critical  given  that  trust  is  strongly 
related to security and privacy. Although we can repose trust 
in  a  single  authority,  there  are  risks  associated  with  doing 
so, such as  malicious acts,  lack of transparency,  and forged 
consent. Moreover, users must blindly trust a single authority 
to handle their data rather than trust the technology  behind 
it.  Implementing  a  system  that uses  distributed  technology 
rather than  a  centralized  authority  can  resolve  trust issues. 

Blockchain technology introduces many built-in features that 
make it a suitable candidate for the proposed design. These 
features include authenticity, integrity,  tolerance to node fail 
ure  (availability),  nonrepudiation,  ledger immutability,  and 
auditability. 

Blockchain  technology  is  vulnerable  to  potential  attacks 
on  data  privacy,  making  it  less  suitable  as  a  data-sharing 
platform.  All transactions  in the blockchain are recorded in 
blocks  in  plaintext,  making  it possible  for  sensitive  infor 
mation in transactions to be exposed to all agents, including 
opponents. Therefore, in our proposed solution, we carefully 
address these security and privacy issues using a blockchain 
as a consent management platform without sharing any data. 
We  likewise  impose encryption  on  some  consent  content, 
if required. We further introduce an additional security mea 
sure to increase the trustworthiness of the system  by adding 
an  access control  layer to  the blockchain's participants  and 
ensuring confidentiality by using an encryption algorithm to 
avoid disclosing data to unauthorized agents. 

The  built-in  cryptographic  properties  of blockchain  pro 
vide  security  guarantees  to  any  system.  Each  blockchain's 
built-in  feature  provides  unique  security  properties.  In 
Section  VIII,  we  prove  that  the  security  requirements  of 

VOLUME  IO, 2022 

13 

IEEEAccess· 

M. Alhajri et al.: Blockchain-Based Consent Mechanism for Access to Fitness Data in Healthcare Context

the proposed system are met based on our assumptions of
the blockchain’s built-in security properties. Below are our
assumptions, stated as formal descriptions of the model’s
blockchain properties.

Assumption 1: If an action Ai

is received from the
blockchain, it must have been previously added via a ‘‘Send’’
action or generated by a ‘‘Smart Contract’’ (smart con-
tract/authenticity).

Assumption 2: If an action Ai is added to the chain from
a ‘‘Send’’ action, the agent’s ‘‘Send’’ action must have been
authentic (authenticity/digital signature).

Assumption 3: If action Ai is added to the chain and gener-
ated by a ‘‘Smart Contract’’, the agent’s ‘‘Send’’ action must
have been authentic (smart contract/authenticity).

Assumption 4: If

the data are shown on the agent’s
blockchain account, they must have been authentic, i.e., pre-
viously transferred in the blockchain.

Assumption 5: Whenever agents ‘‘Receive’’ data from the
chain, the ‘‘Send’’ action adding the data to the chain must
have been authentic, i.e., no data has changed (authentic-
ity/integrity).

Assumption 6: A smart contract is executed, triggered,
and automatically enforces the agreement terms when certain
predeﬁned conditions are met (authenticity/smart contract).
Having evidence on record means that actions shown must
have occurred sometime in the past in a speciﬁc sequence and
originated by the intended agent, thereby ensuring authen-
ticity. Below, this property of the blockchain is described in
Assumptions 7 and 8.

Assumption 7: If action Ai is added to the chain, Ai is
enclosed in a new block and added to the end of the longest
chain, after which the blocks are organized in a speciﬁc
sequence of order (timestamp/order evidence).

Assumption 8: A copy of the whole blockchain and its
valid transactions are maintained and propagated through
the network nodes (immutability/evidence record).

VIII. FORMALIZATION OF SECURITY REQUIREMENTS
We use SeMF, developed by [18], for formal system modeling
and validation of the security properties of the proposed sys-
tem. This framework is based on the foundation of formal lan-
guage theory, which employs ﬁne-grained notions to model
the requirements and properties of the proposed system.
A detailed description of SeMF, which is beyond the scope of
this study, can be found in [18]. In this section, we use SeMF’s
formal deﬁnitions of the security requirements to formalize
some of the proposed system model requirements. These
security requirements are (A) authentication and (B) proof
of authenticity (with integrity and authorization properties
implied in the discussion).

A. AUTHENTICATION
1) DEFINITION OF THE PROPERTY
Authentication denotes that the communicating agents are
who they claim to be by verifying their identities. We use Def-

initions 1 and 2 from SeMF [18] to formalize the authenticity
property introduced in Section IV.

2) FORMALIZE AUTHENTICITY OF ACTIONS
The blockchain type in the proposed system is a permis-
sioned blockchain in which participants are added by RA.
The process of adding participants is outside the proposed
system model and involves RA verifying their actual identity
and then issuing key pairs for blockchain accounts. In the
proposed system model, we assume that all participants were
authenticated and veriﬁed by the RA before they became part
of the system. Whenever an agent wants to add something
to the blockchain, the ﬁrst transaction is signed with skP.
Later, the transaction is validated by the blockchain using its
pkP. Therefore, the system does not need a global public key
infrastructure (PKI ), where everybody trusts the key; only
one agent, which is not a single entity but a distributed system
(blockchain), checks the authenticity. Assumptions 7 and 8
enable all agents to know whether any action in the system is
authentic and originates from the intended agent.

3) END TO END AUTHENTICATION TRUST
Agent P, as a person, is not able to validate a digital sig-
nature, which usually requires an end device or accounts to
perform the validation. Therefore, the agent accounts, not
the agents P or their end devices, validate the authenticity.
Based on Assumption 4, the entity in the proposed system that
performs the authentication validation check is a blockchain
network. Therefore, the blockchain accepts only a signed
valid transaction with the correct skP and checks the origin
of the transaction. For the blockchain to verify that the added
action Ai by agents P on the blockchain is authentic and in
fact originated by that agent, every agent P in the system has
a blockchain account or set of accounts that are composed
of pkP and skP pairs [25], as depicted in Fig. 10. To identify
the owner of each account, the hash of agent P’s pkP is
used to form an address [25]. The address is then used to
receive transactions from other agents P. SkA is used to sign
a transaction with a valid signature from sending agent A and
sends it to another agent B’s address to verify it using sending
agent pkA. Hence, agent P in the system can claim ownership
of their account using skP if their skP is kept secret on their
end devices and has not been shared with any malicious agent
P.

The blockchain’s built-in features, such as the digital sig-
nature, ensure that the proposed system’s design goals DG 1
and DG 2 hold in the system. Below, we formalize all system
authenticity properties.

• All sets of actions (cid:48) within agents λP. The authenticity
of these actions is proven using Assumptions 1, 2, 5,
and 7, which ensure that DG 1 and DG 2 hold in the
system.

• All sets of actions (cid:48) beyond agents λP are known as
empty sequences, denoted by ε. The authenticity of ε is

14

VOLUME 10, 2022

M. Alhajri et al.: Blockchain-Based Consent Mechanism for Access to Fitness Data in Healthcare Context

IEEEAccess· 

Transactions 

'i 

signed with skFp,/R,l 

,

r

Signed with .... sk_u_, ~---~v---, 

FP/R; Account 
(pkrn/Rr. skrP,fRJ pair 

A 1 , •• .. •• .. •,A n-1  , An 

U;  Account 
(pku,, skuJ pair 

t 

j 

Verified with 
U;'s addre55(Ha5/1 pku) 

Verified with 
F'Pi/R;'s address(Hasli pkr,,,;,J 

FIGURE 10. End-to-end authentication trust.

fP/R,~ ... 

T~&iWlllla 
,•
b~1n  

-

FIGURE 11. λ
actions.

Ui

for authenticity of send and received consent request

proven using Assumptions 1, 3, 5, 6 and 7, which ensures
that DG 3, DG 4 and DG 5 hold in the proposed system.

4) AUTHENTIC COMMUNICATION
Each agent in the system has a different λP and can see
only their own sent actions or received actions A1. . . An. The
authenticity of sent and received actions A1. . . An can be
interpreted as Auth(a, b, P). In other words, if a particular
action b has occurred in a sequence of actions ω, it must
be authentic for agent P that action a has occurred before.
Therefore, to validate the authenticity of these actions, a pre-
cise deﬁnition of what ‘‘authentic’’ means is required. Hence,
we use the SeMF’s [18] deﬁnitions 1 and 2.

Deﬁnition 1: A set of actions (cid:48) ⊆ (cid:54) is authentic for P ∈
P after a sequence of actions ω ∈ B with respect to WP if
alph(x) ∩ (cid:48) (cid:54)= ∅ for all x ∈ λ−1

P (λP(ω)) ∩ WP.

Although Deﬁnition 1 allows sets of actions (cid:48) to be authen-
tic, for the proposed system, a simpliﬁed deﬁnition for single
actions is sufﬁcient, as deﬁned in the following deﬁnition
from SeMF [18]:

Deﬁnition 2: For a system S with behaviour B ⊆ (cid:54)∗,
agent P ⊆ P, and actions a, b ∈ (cid:54), auth(a, b, P) holds in
B if for all ω ∈ B, whenever b ∈ alph(ω), the action a is
authentic for P.

Proposition 1: If agent B executes the ‘‘received’’ action
(b), then the matching sent action (a) by agent A is authentic.
Note: The reference number RFi in the following description
is used to identify the consent required to process action
Ai.
Proof of Proposition 1: In the proposed system, we can
verify the authenticity of these actions using Assump-
tions 1, 2, 5, and 7. This proof shows the details for one

‘‘receive’’ action (b) in which the same proof also applies to
all other receive actions in the proposed system. Fig. 11 shows
that when agent A (FPi/Ri) sends consent request transaction
a, its authenticity is veriﬁed by agent B (Ui) each time it exe-
cutes the received action b (recvConsentRequest, Ui,(FPi/Ri,
ConsentToProcess/Collect, RFi)). Hence, the set of actions
(cid:48) that will be authentic consists only of the send action
a (sendConsentRequest, FPi/Ri,(ConsentToProcess/Collect,
RFi)) and agent B (Ui), for which this action will be authentic.
It is authentic for all sequences of actions ω that contain
an action (recvConsentRequest, Ui,(FPi/Ri, ConsentToPro-
cess/Collect, RFi)).

As deﬁned in Deﬁnition 1, it can be formally denoted as:
For all sequence of actions ω ∈ S that (recvConsen-
tRequest, Ui,(FPi/Ri, ConsentToProcess/Collect, RFi)) ∈
alph(ω) implies alph(x) ∩ {(sendConsentRequest, FPi/Ri,
(ConsentToProcess/Collect, RFi))} (cid:54)= ∅ for all x
λ−1
(λUi(ω)) ∩ WUi.
Ui
This security property is provided by the proposed system
with agent B’s knowledge is equal to WB and agent B’s local
view equal to λB. WB is equal to Assumptions 1, 2, 5, and 7,
and λB is equal to received action b (recvConsentRequest, Ui,
FPi/Ri, ConsentToProcess/Collect, RFi)).

∈

To that end, we can validate Proposition 1 with agent B’s
knowledge WB equal to the blockchain’s Assumptions 1, 2, 5,
and 7:

• From Assumptions 1 and 7, we can conclude that if agent
B receives action b (cid:72)⇒ , then this implies that the
matching send action a sent by agent A is recorded in
the blockchain.

• From Assumption 2, we can conclude that if send action
a is added by agent A (cid:72)⇒ , then this implies that send
action a is authentic.

• From Assumption 5, the action is authentic, meaning

that the sent data are equal to the received data.

1

(cid:3)
Hence, the proposed system design goal DG 2 is met and

can be captured using the following formalization:
auth(sendConsentRequest(ConsentToProcess/Collect,

RFi), recvConsentRequest(ConsentToProcess/Collect,
RFi), Ui)

(1)

VOLUME 10, 2022

15

IEEEAccess· 

M. Alhajri et al.: Blockchain-Based Consent Mechanism for Access to Fitness Data in Healthcare Context

I fP/R,  I 

trmn.a:Li(lln~WO 

"""'-

~

,.....  ~ 
== ···u-u-u· 

.,!... 

-

FIGURE 12. λ

Ui

for authenticity of send and received update actions.

I fP/R;  I 

Tt-MWllllo 

@_;;;:,5· __,___,-

\""1Wwiift 
v.~~W.-~J 

SIJIWwll:li 
Mu, 

' - - - - - - - - - '  

FIGURE 13. λ
response actions.

FPi

/Ri

for authenticity of sent and received consent

I fP/R;  I 

Tnnwrtll"l~llllo 
MtdtNl11-

t.P, MWU.l!t 

these actions ε and prove that DG 3, DG 4, and DG 5 hold in
the system. Below, we discuss the possible blockchain built-
in mechanisms. Assumptions 6, 7, and 8 are used to ensure
that DG 3, DG 4, and DG 5 hold in the system by addressing
these difﬁculties. Blockchain’s Assumptions 7 and 8 allow
all sets of actions (cid:48) performed by agents P to be recorded on
the chain in a secure and reliable way and be viewable to all
agents P. This makes agent P learn more about other actions
and expands their λP of the system actions beyond the send
and receive actions.

A smart contract’s reliability and inevitability features can
fulﬁl the proposed system’s design goals DG 3, DG 4, and
DG 5. Assumption 6 effectively proves that these three design
goals hold in the proposed system. As stated before in Def-
inition 2, we state our propositions and prove them using
Assumptions 1, 3, 5, 6, and 7.

Proposition 2: If agent B executes the ‘‘received’’ action
(b), then the matching sent action (a) by the smart contract is
authentic.

Proof of Proposition 2: Following Proof 1, we can also
validate Proposition 2 with agent B’s knowledge WB equal
to Assumptions 1, 3, 5, 6, and 7.

FIGURE 14. λ
actions.

FPi

/Ri

for authenticity of sent and received withdrawal

We use the fact that Proof 1 applies to all other received
actions, such as from FPi/Ri to Ui, from Ui to FPi/Ri, and
from FPi to Ri, to satisfy DG 2. Below, we describe these
actions as follows:

• Fig. 12 illustrates the authenticity of sending and receiv-
ing update actions from FPi/Ri to Ui, which can be
formalized as follows.

2

• From Assumptions 1 and 7, we can conclude that if agent
B receives action (b) (cid:72)⇒ , then this implies that the
matching send action (a) sent by the smart contract is
recorded on the blockchain.

• From Assumptions 3 and 6, we can conclude that if send
action (a) is added by the smart contract (cid:72)⇒ , then this
implies that send action (a) is authentic.

• From Assumption 5, an action being authentic means

that the sent data equal the received data.

(cid:3)

auth(sendSelfReportDataAccess(Processing/
CollectingUpdates, RFi), recvSelfReportDataAccess
(Processing/CollectingUpdates, RFi), Ui)
(2)

• Fig. 13 shows the authenticity veriﬁcation of the sent
and received consent response actions, which can be
formally stated as follows.

auth(sendConsentResponse(ConsentDecision,

RFi), recvConsentResponse(ConsentDecision,
RFi), FPi/Ri)

(3)

• Fig. 14 depicts the authenticity veriﬁcation of sent and
received withdrawal actions and can be captured with
the following formalization:

auth(sendWithdrawConsent(WithdrawConsent,

RFi), recvWithdrawConsent(WithdrawConsent,
RFi), FPi/Ri)

(4)

However, there are some sets of actions (cid:48) in the proposed
system beyond agents λP, known as empty sequences, which
are denoted by ε. It is difﬁcult to guarantee the authenticity of

5) PROOF USING SMART CONTRACT SC1
This process aims to ensure that the granted consent decision
is valid for a period of time OR invalid if it has been with-
drawn. Based on Proof 2, the proposed system design goal
DG 3 holds in the system. This can be expressed as follows.

auth(auth(sendWithdrawConsen(WithdrawConsent,

RFi), recvWithdrawConsen(WithdrawConsent, RFi),
FPi/Ri) ∨ auth(tv(expired), RFi), P)

(5)

6) PROOF USING SMART CONTRACT SC2
This contract aims to check the validity of storing, processing,
and collecting data based upon Ui’s granted/denied consent.
Based on Proof 2, the proposed system design goal DG 5
holds in the system. This can be expressed as follows.
auth(auth(sendReportDataAvailable(ConsentToCollect,
RFi), recvReportDataAvailable(ConsentToCollect,
RFi), Ui) ∧ auth(sendConsentResponse
(ConsentDecision, RFi), recvConsentResponse
(ConsentDecision, RFi), FPi/Ri) ∧ auth(SC1results,
RFi), P)

(6)

16

VOLUME 10, 2022

M. Alhajri et al. : Blockchain-Ba.sed Consent Mechanism for Access to Fimess Data in Healthcare Context 

IEEE Access· 

Create and Signe 
Transaction 

Validate Transaction by 
other nodes 

Generate New Block 

to other node.  K" ..... I ..... __ I 

~ ~ 

A,prop-:aud 

ject 

t 

____,. 

Mining 

~~ 
t 

sic; 

pki 

Blockchain Ledger 

I Valid Transaction  I 
I Valid Transaction  : 
I Valid Transaction  I 
+ 

Organbed a, a Merkle tree 

Endcnc into 

~ 

t 

Validat Block n• 1 

Gtncri• Block 
m:!1·11 
Miffiibi§ttiN 
Ml§tt,.,;W 
ifri·'fi,Mffli 
. .  .  . 

Bloc:kl 
!m!l·l1 

. . 

Mtmt..llW 
iif"'fi,Wffil 
..  .  . 

H :  hash function 
S  :  signing (digital signature) 
V :  vtrify (digital signature) 

II  : join 
A :  transaction or action 
B:  block 

llock n 

.  . 

.. 

Mm!!!HIIII 
■l,'!~,m!•ml!!I 
•11111• 
•

Block •. 1 

Mlm1H . .  
■l!l!H l,!11!!1 
:1111!!-
-

~ Commit -

1J.."1 

1- -·1 

FIGURE 15.  Blockchain's built-in approaches to guarantee nonrepudiation. 

Similarly,  DG 4  can  be defined with FP;'s  reporting that 
FP; has accessed and processed fitness data from U;'s  fitness 
devices. This can be formalized as follows . 

auth(auth(sendSelfReportDataAccess 

(ConsentToProcess, RF;), recvSelfReportDataAccess 

(ConsentToProcess, RF;), Ui) I\  auth 

(sendConsentResponse( ConsentDecision, RFJ , 

recvConsentResponse(ConsentDecision, RF;), FP;/ R; ) 

I\ auth(SC1results, RF;), ]p>) 

(7) 

Additionally, SC2  can prove that the data collected by R; 
are valid and authentic by checking R;'s report access to FP;'s 
database. This process covers Proposition 2 and validates that 
DG 5 holds in the system. This can be formalized as follows . 

auth(auth(sendSelfReportDataAccess 

(ConsentToCollect, RF;), recvSelfReportDataAccess 

(c, RF;), U;) I\  auth(sendConsentResponse 

(ConsentDecision, RF;), recvConsentResponse 

(ConsentDecision, RF;), FP;/ R; ) I\  auth(SC1 results, 

RF;), Jp>) 

(8) 

Finally,  we formalized all system actions using SeMF and 
proved  that  l,  DG 2,  DG  3,  DG  4, and  DG  5,  concerning 
authenticity and integrity, hold in the system. 

R  PROOFOFAUTHENT/CffY 
1)  DEFINITION  OF THE  PROPERTY 
This property involves two pairs of communication in which 
both sent and received transactions cannot be denied. We use 
the definition from  SeMF  [18]  to formalize the proof of the 
authenticity property introduced in Section IV: 

Definition 3 ( Proof of authenticity):  A pair (r S, r P) with 
r S  S  1:  and r P  S  1:  is  a pair of sets of proof actions of 
authenticity for a set r  S  1:  on S with respect to (W p )PEIP'  if 
for all w  ES and for all PE ]p>  with alph(rrp(w)) n r P  =f.  0 
the foUowing holds: 
( 1)  For P the set r is authentic after w and 
(2)  for each R  E  ]p>  there exist actions a  E  1:/ P n rs and 

b  E 1:/ R n r P with wab ES. 

Agent P  E  ]p>  can give proof of authenticity of r S  1: after a 
sequence of actions w  E  S if 1 and 2 hold. 

Proposition 3:  For the received actions (b), agent B must 
always  be able  to  access  evidence  to  show proof to  other 
agents,  which enables them to  check the authenticity of the 
matching sent action  (a)  that occurred before  the  received 
action (b). 

2)  FORMALIZE ACTIONS PROOF OF AUTHENTICITY 
Blockchain  is an excellent solution  to  address  this  security 
property, which is used as an evidence recorder in which all 
transaction  and  activity  logs  of consent  are  submitted  and 
settled permanently into a shared ledger.  Based on Assump 
tion 7, a blockchain is formed by a chain of blocks in which 
each block appends links to its direct predecessor until a block 
with index 0, which is known as the genesis block [25]. Based 
on  Assumption  8,  a  copy  of whole  records  is  distributed 

VOLUME  IO, 2022 

17 

IEEEAccess· 

M. Alhajri et al.: Blockchain-Based Consent Mechanism for Access to Fitness Data in Healthcare Context

among all entities, and it keeps chronologically nontam-
perable records that are linked via hash values. A digital
signature scheme (asymmetric encryption), timestamp, and
immutability of records, in which the system’s actions can be
tracked for authenticity proof, are all effective approaches to
guarantee nonrepudiation [50]. Fig 15 depicts an overall view
of blockchain’s built-in approaches to guarantee nonrepudi-
ation. For example, if there is any malicious modiﬁcation in
any block, all the blocks after that modiﬁed block must be
recomputed because each block is tied to the hash value of
the previous block’s header, which proves that such malicious
modiﬁcations cannot be performed in this case.

Proof of Proposition 3: As deﬁned in Deﬁnition 3, we can
validate Proposition 3 with agent B’s knowledge WB equal to
Assumptions 7 and 8.

• From Assumption 8, we can conclude that if agent B
receives action (b) (cid:72)⇒ , then agent B can access the
evidence record.

• From Assumption 7, we can conclude that if agent B
can access the evidence record (cid:72)⇒ , then agent B can
provide proof that the sent action (a) has occurred before
the receive action (b).

3

To that end, after

(cid:3)
formalizing the proposed system
actions and in relation to the blockchain’s built-in features,
we guaranteed nonrepudiation by proving Proposition 3 using
Proof 3.

IX. CONCLUSION, LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK
Sharing personal ﬁtness data with third parties poses several
privacy concerns. This study aims to address such concerns
in the privacy policies of ﬁtness trackers by improving user
control over the processing of their ﬁtness data. We designed
a blockchain-based dynamic consent mechanism to miti-
gate privacy-preservation issues. The primary artifacts in the
proposed system are the system architecture, requirements
speciﬁcation, and formal proof model. This study also eval-
uates the demonstrated artifacts using the SeMF tool and
the identiﬁed blockchain assumptions. As a result, the SeMF
evaluation proves that the system satisﬁes all our design
goals. We conclude that the proposed system is suitable
for preserving user privacy by improving user control over
the processing of ﬁtness data. However, further research
is required to address the remaining gap: ﬁtness trackers
must honestly report their actual processing actions to the
blockchain.

A. LIMITATIONS
Although the proposed model has proven its effectiveness in
terms of security properties using SeMF [18], there are some
limitations to consider.

• The proposed framework requires an experimental eval-
uation to show whether the solution is practical to use in

terms of the computation, storage, and communication
overhead of each entity.

• This research provides only an abstract level of the
proposed solution discussing the feasibility of utilising
the blockchain to improve users’ control over their data
in ﬁtness apps by consent mechanisms.

• The FPi’s reported action in the proposed system still
relies on FPi behaving and reporting honestly to the
blockchain about the actual processing actions of Ui’s
ﬁtness data. Although the proposed system is based on
the idea of decoupling consent management from data
sharing, there must be a way to prove that the exchange
of data occurred upon user decision making without
relying on FPi being honest, as they own the database.

B. FUTURE WORK
This study interprets the proposed system security require-
ments in verbal descriptions and then formalizes these
requirements using the SeMF tool. The ﬁndings in this
paper are just
the ﬁrst step in designing and develop-
ing blockchain-based consent management. In future work,
we plan to conduct an experimental evaluation to demon-
strate the effectiveness of the proposed model in terms of the
computation, storage, and communication overhead of each
entity. Additionally, further research is needed to determine
the suitable choices of blockchain’s technical details to the
proposed solution, including but not limited to consensus
algorithm, usage of tokens and their economy and the method
for authenticating ﬁtness devices.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors acknowledge the efforts and contributions of
Dr. Tharuka Rupasinghe (Ph.D., Monash University, and a
Research Fellow at RMIT University), who gave tremendous
support to this research.

REFERENCES
[1] L. Hutton, B. A. Price, R. Kelly, C. McCormick, A. K. Bandara,
‘‘Assessing the
self-tracking: Heuristic evaluation
e185,

JMIR mHealth uHealth, vol. 6, no. 10, p.

T. Hatzakis, M. Meadows,
privacy of mHealth apps
approach,’’
Oct. 2018.

and B. Nuseibeh,

for

[2] R. K. Saripalle, ‘‘Leveraging FHIR to integrate activity data with
electronic health record,’’ Health Technol., vol. 10, pp. 341–352,
Apr. 2019.

[3] V. Gay and P. Leijdekkers, ‘‘Bringing health and ﬁtness data together for
connected health care: Mobile apps as enablers of interoperability,’’ J. Med.
Internet Res., vol. 17, no. 11, p. e260, Nov. 2015. [Online]. Available:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26581920

[4] R. Sallis, ‘‘Developing healthcare systems to support exercise: Exercise as
the ﬁfth vital sign,’’ Brit. J. Sports Med., vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 473–474, 2011.
[5] GDPR, Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of
the Council of 27 April 2016 on the Protection of Natural Persons
With Regard to the Processing of Personal Data and on the Free Move-
ment of Such Data, and Repealing Directive 95/46/EC (General Data
Protection Regulation), Ofﬁcial Journal of the European Union, 2016,
pp. 1–88, vol. 119. [Online]. Available: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:02016R0679-20160504&from=EN

[6] J. Ahmed, S. Yildirim, M. Nowostaki, R. Ramachandra, O. Elezaj, and
M. Abomohara, ‘‘GDPR compliant consent driven data protection in online
social networks: A blockchain-based approach,’’ in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Inf.
Comput. Technol. (ICICT), Mar. 2020, pp. 307–312.

18

VOLUME 10, 2022

M. Alhajri et al.: Blockchain-Based Consent Mechanism for Access to Fitness Data in Healthcare Context

IE EE Access· 

[7] Q. Grundy, F. P. Held, and L. A. Bero, ‘‘Tracing the potential ﬂow of
consumer data: A network analysis of prominent health and ﬁtness apps,’’
J. Med. Internet Res., vol. 19, no. 6, p. e233, Jun. 2017.

[8] M. Hatamian, J. Serna, and K. Rannenberg, ‘‘Revealing the unrevealed:
Mining smartphone users privacy perception on app markets,’’ Comput.
Secur., vol. 83, pp. 332–353, Jun. 2019.

[9] N. Momen, M. Hatamian, and L. Fritsch, ‘‘Did app privacy improve
after the GDPR?’’ IEEE Secur. Privacy, vol. 17, no. 6, pp. 10–20,
Nov. 2019.

[10] T. Mulder, ‘‘Health apps, their privacy policies and the GDPR,’’ Eur.
J. Law Technol., vol. 10, no. 20, no. 1, 2019. [Online]. Available:
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3506805

[11] R. Neisse, G. Baldini, G. Steri, Y. Miyake, S. Kiyomoto, and
A. R. Biswas, ‘‘An agent-based framework for informed consent in the
Internet of Things,’’ in Proc. IEEE 2nd World Forum Internet Things (WF-
IoT), Dec. 2015, pp. 789–794.

[12] D. Peras, ‘‘Guidelines for GDPR compliant consent and data management
model in ICT businesses,’’ in Proc. Central Eur. Conf. Inf. Intell. Syst.,
2018, pp. 113–121.

[13] A. Sunyaev, T. Dehling, P. L. Taylor, and K. D. Mandl, ‘‘Availability and
quality of mobile health app privacy policies,’’ J. Amer. Med. Inform.
Assoc., vol. 22, no. e1, pp. e28–e33, Apr. 2015.

[14] Apple. (2020). Apple Privacy Policy. [Online]. Available: https://www.

apple.com/legal/privacy/en-ww/

[15] ﬁtbit. (2020). Fitbit Privacy Policy. [Online]. Available: https://www.

ﬁtbit.com/global/au/legal/privacy-policy#your-rights-to-access

[16] Strava. (2020). Strava Privacy Policy. [Online]. Available: https://www.

strava.com/legal/privacy#full_policy

[17] K. Rantos, G. Drosatos, A. Kritsas, C. Ilioudis, A. Papanikolaou, and
A. P. Filippidis, ‘‘A blockchain-based platform for consent management
of personal data processing in the IoT ecosystem,’’ Secur. Commun. Netw.,
vol. 2019, pp. 1–15, Oct. 2019.

[18] A. Fuchs, S. Gurgens, and C. Rudolph, ‘‘A formal notion of trust–enabling
reasoning about security properties,’’ in Proc. IFIP Int. Conf. Trust Man-
age. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2010, pp. 200–215.

[19] A. Pﬁtzmann

and M. Hansen.

2010). A Terminology
for Talking About Privacy by Data Minimization: Anonymity,
Unlinkability, Undetectability, Unobservability, Pseudonymity, and
Identity Management.
http://dud.inf.
tu-dresden.de/literatur/Anon_Terminology_v0.34.pdf

[Online]. Available:

v0.34.

(Aug.

[20] OAIC. (2018). Australian Entities and the EU General Data Protection
Regulation GDPR.
https://www.oaic.gov.au/
[Online]. Available:
privacy/guidance-and-advice/australian-entities-and-the-eu-general-
data-protection-regulation

[21] A. Troiano, ‘‘Wearables and personal health data: Putting a premium
on your privacy,’’ Brooklyn Law Rev., vol. 82, no. 4, p. 1715,
2016.
https://heinonline.org/HOL/P?h=hein.
journals/brklr82&i=1759

[Online]. Available:

[22] M. Kang and V. Lemieux, ‘‘A decentralized identity-based blockchain
solution for privacy-preserving licensing of individual-controlled data to
prevent unauthorized secondary data usage,’’ Ledger, vol. 6, Nov. 2021.

[23] P. V. Kakarlapudi and Q. H. Mahmoud, ‘‘A systematic review of blockchain

for consent management,’’ Healthcare, vol. 9, no. 2, p. 137, Feb. 2021.

[24] D. Yaga, P. Mell, N. Roby, and K. Scarfone, ‘‘Blockchain technology

overview,’’ 2019, arXiv:1906.11078.

[25] C. Natoli, J. Yu, V. Gramoli, and P. Esteves-Verissimo, ‘‘Deconstructing
blockchains: A comprehensive survey on consensus, membership and
structure,’’ 2019, arXiv:1908.08316.

[26] T. Rupasinghe, ‘‘Blockchain-based dynamic consent for secondary use of
electronic medical records,’’ Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Softw. Syst. Cyber-
secur., Monash Univ., Melbourne, VIC, Australia, 2021.

[27] D. M. Maslove, J. Klein, K. Brohman, and P. Martin, ‘‘Using blockchain
technology to manage clinical trials data: A proof-of-concept study,’’ JMIR
Med. Informat., vol. 6, no. 4, Dec. 2018, Art. no. e11949.

[28] A. Alzubaidi, K. Mitra, P. Patel, and E. Solaiman, ‘‘A blockchain-based
approach for assessing compliance with SLA-guaranteed IoT services,’’
in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Smart Internet Things (SmartIoT), Aug. 2020,
pp. 213–220.

[29] S. Nakamoto, ‘‘Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system,’’ Decen-

tralized Bus. Rev., p. 21260, Mar. 2008.

[30] H. Hasan and K. Salah, ‘‘Proof of delivery of digital assets using
blockchain and smart contracts,’’ IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 65439–65448,
2018.

[31] K. Salah, N. Nizamuddin, R. Jayaraman, and M. Omar, ‘‘Blockchain-based
soybean traceability in agricultural supply chain,’’ IEEE Access, vol. 7,
pp. 73295–73305, 2019.

[32] S. Wang, D. Li, Y. Zhang, and J. Chen, ‘‘Smart contract-based product
traceability system in the supply chain scenario,’’ IEEE Access, vol. 7,
pp. 115122–115133, 2019.

[33] Q. Lin, H. Wang, X. Pei, and J. Wang, ‘‘Food safety traceability system
based on blockchain and EPCIS,’’ IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 20698–20707,
2019.

[34] A. R. Rajput, Q. Li, M. T. Ahvanooey, and I. Masood, ‘‘EACMS:
Emergency access control management system for personal health
record based on blockchain,’’ IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 84304–84317,
2019.

[35] M. M. Madine, A. A. Battah, I. Yaqoob, K. Salah, R. Jayaraman,
Y. Al-Hammadi, S. Pesic, and S. Ellahham, ‘‘Blockchain for giv-
ing patients control over their medical records,’’ IEEE Access, vol. 8,
pp. 193102–193115, 2020.

[36] G. Albanese, J.-P. Calbimonte, M. Schumacher, and D. Calvaresi,
‘‘Dynamic consent management for clinical trials via private blockchain
technology,’’ J. ambient Intell. humanized Comput., vol. 1, pp. 4909–4926,
Feb. 2020.

[37] N. Mamo, G. M. Martin, M. Desira, B. Ellul, and J.-P. Ebejer, ‘‘Dwarna:
A blockchain solution for dynamic consent in biobanking,’’ Eur. J. Human
Genet., vol. 28, no. 5, pp. 609–626, May 2020.

[38] T. Rupasinghe, F. Burstein, and C. Rudolph, ‘‘Blockchain based dynamic
patient consent: A privacy-preserving data acquisition architecture for
clinical data analytics,’’ in Proc. ICIS, 2019, pp. 1–9. [Online]. Available:
https://icis2019.aisconferences.org/

[39] K. Bhaskaran, P. Ilfrich, D. Liffman, C. Vecchiola, P. Jayachandran,
A. Kumar, F. Lim, K. Nandakumar, Z. Qin, V. Ramakrishna, E. G. Teo,
and C. H. Suen,
‘‘Double-blind consent-driven data sharing on
blockchain,’’ in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Cloud Eng. (IC2E), Apr. 2018,
pp. 385–391.

[40] G. G. Dagher, J. Mohler, M. Milojkovic, and P. B. Marella, ‘‘Ancile:
Privacy-preserving framework for access control and interoperabil-
ity of electronic health records using blockchain technology,’’ Sus-
tain. Cities Soc., vol. 39, pp. 283–297, May 2018. [Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2210670717310685

[41] P. Genestier, S. Zouarhi, P. Limeux, D. Excofﬁer, A. Prola, S. Sandon,
and J.-M. Temerson, ‘‘Blockchain for consent management in the ehealth
environment: A nugget for privacy and security challenges,’’ J. Int. Soc.
Telemed. eHealth, vol. 5, pp. GKR–e24, 2017.

[42] S. Gilda and M. Mehrotra, ‘‘Blockchain for student data privacy and con-
sent,’’ in Proc. Int. Conf. Comput. Commun. Informat. (ICCCI), Jan. 2018,
pp. 1–5.

[43] X. Liang, J. Zhao, S. Shetty, J. Liu, and D. Li, ‘‘Integrating blockchain
for data sharing and collaboration in mobile healthcare applications,’’ in
Proc. IEEE 28th Annu. Int. Symp. Pers., Indoor, Mobile Radio Commun.
(PIMRC), Oct. 2017, pp. 1–5.

[44] G. Despotou, J. Evans, W. Nash, A. Eavis, T. Robbins, and T. N. Arvanitis,
‘‘Evaluation of patient perception towards dynamic health data sharing
using blockchain based digital consent with the Dovetail digital consent
application: A cross sectional exploratory study,’’ Digit. Health, vol. 6,
Mar. 2020, Art. no. 2055207620924949.

[45] M. M. Madine, K. Salah, R. Jayaraman, I. Yaqoob, Y. Al-Hammadi,
S. Ellahham, and P. Calyam, ‘‘Fully decentralized multi-party consent
management for secure sharing of patient health records,’’ IEEE Access,
vol. 8, pp. 225777–225791, 2020.

[46] K. Peffers, T. Tuunanen, M. A. Rothenberger, and S. Chatterjee,
information systems
Inf. Syst., vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 45–77,

‘‘A design science research methodology for
research,’’
2007.

J. Manage.

[47] A. R. Hevner, S. T. March, J. Park, and S. Ram, ‘‘Design science in
information systems research,’’ MIS Quart., vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 75–105,
2004.

[48] A. C. Carvalho, R. Martins, and L. Antunes, ‘‘How-to express explicit and
auditable consent,’’ in Proc. 16th Annu. Conf. Privacy, Secur. Trust (PST),
Aug. 2018, pp. 1–5.

[49] S. Breen, K. Ouazzane, and P. Patel, ‘‘GDPR: Is your consent valid?’’ Bus.

Inf. Rev., vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 19–24, Mar. 2020.

[50] W. Fang, W. Chen, W. Zhang, J. Pei, W. Gao, and G. Wang, ‘‘Digital
signature scheme for information non-repudiation in blockchain: A state
of the art review,’’ EURASIP J. Wireless Commun. Netw., vol. 2020, no. 1,
pp. 1–15, Dec. 2020.

VOLUME 10, 2022

19

IEEEAccess· 

M. Alhajri et al.: Blockchain-Based Consent Mechanism for Access to Fitness Data in Healthcare Context

AHMAD SALEHI SHAHRAKI (Member, IEEE)
received the M.Sc. degree in information security
from the Faculty of Computing, UTM, in 2013,
the M.Phil. degree in information security from the
Science and Engineering Faculty, QUT, in 2017,
and the Ph.D. degree in cybersecurity from the
Faculty of IT, Monash University, and the DSS
Group at CSIRO’s Data61, in 2020. He held a RA
position at the Cybersecurity Laboratory, Monash
University, in 2021. He is currently a Research
Fellow at the RMIT Blockchain Innovation Hub (BIH) and the Centre
for Cyber Security Research and Innovation (CCSRI). His research inter-
ests include access control, blockchain, cryptography, cybersecurity, and
healthcare.

••• 

MAY ALHAJRI (Graduate Student Member, IEEE) received the B.Sc. degree
(Hons.) in networking and telecommunication systems from the College of
Computer and Information Sciences, Princess Nourah University, Riyadh,
Saudi Arabia, in 2017, and the M.Sc. degree in cybersecurity from the
Faculty of IT, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia, in 2021. She is
currently a Teaching Associate with the Department of Computer Networks
and Communications, College of Computer Sciences and Information Tech-
nology, King Faisal University, Al-Ahsa, Saudi Arabia. Before joining King
Faisal University, she worked as an Industrial IoT Systems Engineer, in 2018.

CARSTEN RUDOLPH received the Ph.D. degree
from QUT, in 2001. He is currently an Associate
Professor with the Faculty of IT, Monash Uni-
versity, where he heads the Department of Soft-
ware Systems and Cybersecurity (SSC). He is
the Deputy Director of the Blockchain Technol-
ogy Centre, Monash University, and the Direc-
tor of OCSC, Melbourne, Australia. Before join-
ing Monash University, he was the Head of the
Research Group on Trust and Compliance, Fraun-
hofer Institute for Secure IT, Darmstadt, Germany, and supported Huawei
in setting up the Trusted Computing Research Laboratory, Germany. His
research interests include information security, formal methods, security
engineering, and cryptographic protocols.

20

VOLUME 10, 2022

