2
2
0
2

b
e
F
7

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
8
2
4
3
0
.
2
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL

1

A Reliable Data-transmission Mechanism using
Blockchain in Edge Computing Scenarios

Peiying Zhang, Xue Pang, Neeraj Kumar, Senior Member, IEEE, Gagangeet Singh Aujla,
Senior Member, IEEE, Haotong Cao, Member, IEEE

Abstract—With the advent of the Internet of things (IoT) era, more and more devices are connected to the IoT. Under the traditional
cloud-thing centralized management mode, the transmission of massive data is facing many difﬁculties, and the reliability of data is
difﬁcult to be guaranteed. As emerging technologies, blockchain technology and edge computing (EC) technology have attracted the
attention of academia in improving the reliability, privacy and invariability of IoT technology. In this paper, we combine the characteristics
of the EC and blockchain to ensure the reliability of data transmission in the IoT. First of all, we propose a data transmission mechanism
based on blockchain, which uses the distributed architecture of blockchain to ensure that the data is not tampered with; secondly, we
introduce the three-tier structure in the architecture in turn; ﬁnally, we introduce the four working steps of the mechanism, which are
similar to the working mechanism of blockchain. In the end, the simulation results show that the proposed scheme can ensure the
reliability of data transmission in the Internet of things to a great extent.

Index Terms—Internet of Things, Data-transmission Mechanism, Blockchain, Edge Computing

(cid:70)

1 INTRODUCTION

The IoT is a large-scale network formed by the integration
of various wired and wireless devices. Relevant research
shows that by 2025, there will be more than 60 billion
devices connected to the IoT, and the generation of massive
data will make the IoT face great challenges [1] [2]. There
are various types of sensors in the IoT. Each sensor, as
an information source, can receive and send data to each
other, which makes the IoT become a comprehensive system
integrating information collection and processing.

With the rapid increase of devices connected to the IoT,
data processing, dissemination, and collection become more
and more common [3] [4] [5] [6]. Fig. 1 shows various
scenarios of data transmission in the traditional IoT, includ-
ing data transmission in the community, data transmission
in the Internet of vehicles, data transmission in medical

• This work is partially supported by the Major Scientiﬁc and Technological
Projects of CNPC under Grant ZD2019-183-006, and partially supported
by ”the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities” of
China University of Petroleum (East China) under Grant 20CX05017A,
18CX02139. (Corresponding authors: Peiying Zhang and Neeraj Kumar.)

• P. Zhang and X. Pang are with the College of Computer Science and Tech-
nology, China University of Petroleum (East China), Qingdao 266580,
China. (E-mail: zhangpeiying@upc.edu.cn, 1103746978@qq.com)

• N. Kumar is with the Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Thapar Institute of Engineering and Technology. N. Kumar is also with
Department of Computer Science and Information Engineering Asia
University Taiwan and King Abdul Aziz University Jeddah Saudi Arabia.
(Email: neeraj.kumar@thapar.edu)

• G. S. Aujla is with the School of Computing, Newcastle University,

United Kingdom. (E-mail: gagi aujla82@yahoo.com)

• H. Cao is with the Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Wireless Communications,
Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing 210003,
P.R. China. (Email: caohaotong@163.com)

system, data transmission in ﬂights, etc. The black arrow
in the ﬁgure represents the transmission from infrastructure
to cloud (i2c), and the yellow arrow represents the trans-
mission from infrastructure to infrastructure (i2i). It brings
many problems [7], especially how to ensure the reliability
of data. However, there are still many risks and challenges
to solve the reliability of data transmission in the IoT:

(1) At present, the architecture of the IoT mainly adopts
the mode of IoT cloud, which takes the cloud as the general
agent of the center, that is, all the data are centralized to the
cloud for processing and distribution. However, once this
centralized processing mode is attacked illegally, the whole
system will be paralyzed, which will cause catastrophic data
loss and tampering.

(2) The centralized data processing method is difﬁcult to
expand, but now the data of the IoT is facing the explosive
growth, and the cloud server will be difﬁcult to expand in a
short time. The inﬂux of large quantities of data makes the
cloud overload operation, unable to guarantee the integrity
and timeliness of the data. For security aware and time-
delay sensitive applications, the It would be a huge loss.

(3) In the process of data transmission, if the data is
ﬁrst transmitted to the cloud, and then sent to the IoT after
processing, it will cause data leakage, and it is difﬁcult to
ensure user privacy. Therefore, it will make it difﬁcult for
some IoT applications to provide high-quality services.

In the future research, blockchain technology is the
favorite of the academic community, and it will shine in
various ﬁelds [8] [9]. In the IoT, blockchain technology can
solve the problems caused by centralized data processing
to a large extent, such as enhancing the reliability of data
transmission, protecting the privacy of users so that data
does not leak, so as to ensure the security of the Internet
of things. In short, blockchain can be seen as a distributed
bill, which was originally proposed by Nakamoto for bitcoin
encryption. Because blockchain records data point-to-point

 
 
 
 
 
 
IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL

2

and distributed, its data can hardly be tampered with.

EC technology has made a great innovation in the IoT
technology. In the IoT, all devices are connected with cloud
devices, and all data must be processed by cloud server. This
not only increases the amount of data transmission, but also
easily brings security problems such as data leakage. EC
technology connects the IoT devices with the adjacent edge
devices. Most of the information can be directly processed
by edge devices, which greatly reduces the interaction be-
tween cloud servers and devices, and improves the security.
In this paper, we combine the characteristics of EC and
blockchain to solve the reliability problem of data transmis-
sion in the IoT. Speciﬁc contributions can be summarized as
follows:

(1) First of all, we propose a data transmission mech-
anism based on blockchain. It abandons the traditional
centralized management mode, removes the intermediate
agent, and adopts the block chain distributed framework
with immutable data. The whole architecture is divided
into three layers, which ensures that the data transmitted
by users is not tampered with, improves the reliability, and
protects the privacy of data users from being disclosed.

(2) Considering that when transmitting data between
various sensor facilities in the IoT, there may be malicious
users who destroy the order of the system, we deﬁne a
mechanism similar to proof of credit, which can calculate
the credit value of each participant, and the user with low
credit can not participate in data transmission.

(3) We introduce the four working steps of the mech-
anism, which are registration process, data transmission
process, bookkeeper selection process and reward process.
Each process is proposed based on the working mode of
blockchain, and the combination of edge computing can
better ensure the reliability of data transmission.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Sec-
tion 2 reviews the existing methods for IoT and blockchain.
Section 3 introduces the design of framework. In Section
4, we describe our proposed method in detail. The perfor-
mance of our method and other methods is evaluated in
Section 5. Section 6 concludes this paper.

2 RELATED WORKS

In this chapter, we review some existing papers [10] [11]
[12], which have made a lot of discussions in the ﬁeld of
blockchain and IoT [13] [14] [15]. Next, we will introduce
some representative works.

The authors of [16] [17] puts forward several methods
to solve the problems encountered in the IoT. Based on
the blockchain technology, the authors of document [18]
propose an architecture to manage the IoT devices, which
connects the sensor devices in the IoT into the decentralized
control system, avoiding the original centralized control.
In order to solve the security problem of vehicle network
physical system, the authors of [19] propose a novel secu-
rity cluster for effective data distribution between different
devices in vehicle network.

The authors of literature [20] and [21] propose three
blockchain systems that are suitable for combination with
the IoT. The ﬁrst system is an extensible lightweight
blockchain system, which makes great progress in reducing

latency and overhead. The second system is a memory
optimized and ﬂexible blockchain system, which can greatly
reduce memory occupation. The third system is used for
transaction And reward ﬂexible model. In literature [22]
[23], in order to solve the network insecurity of medical sys-
tem, the authors designed a medical system, which can pass
the standard authentication scheme, which is the security
protection of patients’ information.

The authors of literature [24] combine blockchain with
Virtual Network Function (VNF), and regard all processes
related to VNF, such as instantiation, upgrading, retrieval,
etc., as transactions in blockchain, and stores these transac-
tions in a distributed ledger that will never change. There-
fore, this paper proposes a decentralized framework, which
is a P2P network composed of nodes of optical network, so
as to realize the communication of optical network [25].

In document [26], the authors introduce three new tech-
nologies: SDN, EC and blockchain technology, and propose
a solution of wireless network virtualization by integrating
these three technologies. This scheme can reduce the colli-
sion between these services and improve the inter operabil-
ity of the industry. The authors of reference [27] combine
SDN with blockchain and propose an edge as a service
framework based on blockchain.

At present, the cloud centric IoT brings about the delay
problem, which hinders the interaction between sensors.
The authors of literature [28] propose a concept of micro-
service, which analyzes the performance of virtual resources
in different environments. The authors of literature [29]
and [30] have done research on the platform architecture
based on blockchain. In literature [30], the authors propose
an extensible platform architecture for the system based
on multi tenant blockchain to ensure data integrity, while
maintaining data privacy and performance isolation.

Autonomous driving is a very complex system, which
closely integrates many technologies, and the smooth in-
teraction with cloud platform is also an important issue.
These problems bring many challenges to the development
of automatic driving technology. Including data processing,
load balancing, security threats, etc. The authors of literature
[31] summarize the existing methods of automatic driving,
and further discuss them.

In recent years, many researches combine the industrial
IoT with the blockchain, which is novel [32]. However,
the blockchain has a high demand for resources, and the
resources of the industrial IoT are very limited, which brings
challenges to the research. In literature [33], the authors pro-
pose a lightweight blockchain system, which can improve
resource utilization and simplify complex formulas and con-
cepts. It not only makes the block generation faster, but also
reduces the memory consumption and greatly improves the
system performance.

Point to point energy trading is widely used in the cur-
rent industrial IoT, but the opaque trading market will bring
many security risks [34]. As a serious problem, security has
received extensive attention in the academic community. In
document [35], the authors use blockchain technology to
propose a safe energy trading system, which can reduce the
delay of trading and enhance the trust of trading when trad-
ing point-to-point. Finally, the contribution of the system to
security in industrial blockchain is proved.

IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL

3

Fig. 1. Overview of transmission in the IoT.

The authors of document [36] propose a blockchain
service framework for SDN, which combines the advantages
of SDN and blockchain, and can solve the problem of secure
transmission between various applications in smart city.

Because the IoT is distributed in all aspects of life, the
authors of literature [37] introduce many applications of
the IoT. In document [38], an IoT workﬂow composite sys-
tem is proposed, which enables IoT users to pipeline their
workﬂow in the proposed IoT workﬂow activity abstraction
mode.

In document [39], the authors analyze various solutions
for blockchain and IoT, and review the articles on these solu-
tions. The authors analyze the problems in the development
of IoT from two aspects of data and things, and study the
solutions.

3 THE ARCHITECTURE OF INTERNET OF THINGS
BASED ON BLOCKCHAIN

In this chapter, we introduce the IoT architecture based on
blockchain proposed in this paper. The architecture of the
IoT based on the blockchain is shown in Fig. 2. The architec-
ture consists of three layers: the IoT layer, the abstract IoT
layer and the blockchain layer. The following three levels
are described in detail.

IoT layer: The IoT layer is a network layer composed
of various physical infrastructures, which is located at the
bottom of the architectures. As can be seen from the ﬁgure,
the IoT includes a large number of infrastructures, including
physical facilities with sensor equipment and edge nodes.
According to the geographical location of each device, it can

Fig. 2. Overview of the proposed architecture.

messagei2i linki2c linkcloud serverRelease flight informationRelease community informationRelease medical informationRelease traffic informationBlockFull nodeLight nodeBlockchain layerAbstract IoT layer IoT layerInfrastructureBase stationIEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL

4

be connected with adjacent edge nodes and managed by
edge nodes. The devices managed by each edge node can
form a cluster, and the devices in each cluster have adjacent
geographical location and similar demand environment.
When the physical device needs to send information, it
needs to request the edge node ﬁrst. After the edge node
veriﬁes its security, it packages the information into the
block and distributes rewards for it.

Abstract IoT layer: We abstract the IoT into a physical
network model. IoT devices are represented by physical
nodes, and edge nodes can also be represented as the
IoT. However, two nodes are labeled with different colors,
representing different types of devices. The cluster managed
by each edge node can be represented by a physical domain.
Blockchain layer: Before joining the blockchain layer,
all nodes need to be registered and authorized. In the
blockchain environment, nodes can be divided into two
types, full node and light node. Full nodes are played by
edge nodes, which are responsible for managing all informa-
tion and verifying every transaction. Light nodes are played
by ordinary physical nodes, which do not participate in the
construction and maintenance of the blockchain, but use the
information in the blockchain for their own activities. When
the information requested by the optical node passes the
security veriﬁcation of the whole node, the whole node will
package the information into the block. The packaged blocks
will be connected to the blockchain, and the connection will
yield beneﬁts. Finally, dividends will be paid according to
the contribution. The top of the blockchain layer in Fig. 2
shows a simple blockchain model. In the blockchain, each
block is composed of two parts. The ﬁrst part is the block
header, which stores the hash value, version number, hash
value of the previous block, Merkle tree root hash value
and other information. The second part is the block body,
recording the transaction list. Each block is linked by a hash
pointer.

4 WORK PROCESS OF THE MODEL
In this chapter, we introduce the operation process of the
architecture. Generally speaking, it can be divided into four
major steps. Firstly, the infrastructure in the IoT needs to be
registered. Secondly, the infrastructure with sensors com-
municates through the edge nodes. Thirdly, the edge nodes
use the formula protocol to select bookkeepers, package all
information, connect to the blockchain. Fourthly, verify the
reliability of the message and reward it. Fig. 3 shows the
whole process.

4.1 Infrastructure registration

When an infrastructure with sensors wants to send mes-
sages within the framework,
it must be registered and
authorized. Registration occurs when the infrastructure ﬁrst
enters the network. First, the infrastructure sends a reg-
istration request to the level agent, which includes the
user identiﬁcation information of the infrastructure, such
as access code, equipment number, etc. After the initial
veriﬁcation, the agent will distribute secret key pairs for the
infrastructure.

SecretKeyInfi = {P K, SK} .

(1)

In equation 1, P K represents the public key of infras-
tructure Infi, which is equivalent to a public identity. All
users can know the infrastructure through the public key,
while SK represents the secret key, which is only known
by infrastructure Infi itself and will not be disclosed to the
public, so it is private. At the same time, the infrastructure
will receive its own exclusive certiﬁcate and wallet address.
The certiﬁcate is for the only identiﬁcation device, and the
wallet is for storing rewards.

4.2 Message transmission

The process of message propagation in the framework is
shown in Fig. 4. In the delivery process, we divide the
infrastructure into three categories: message sender Sender,
message receiver Recerver, and supporter Supporter. The
infrastructure can change roles according to its own needs.
When the infrastructure wants to send messages, its role is
the sender. The infrastructure receiving messages becomes
the receiver. The infrastructure proving the credibility of the
sender in the process of sending is the supporter. In Fig.
4, for example, three roles and edge nodes are ready. First
of all, the sender prepares the message he needs to send
and uploads it to the edge node, equation 2 represents the
message structure.

M essage = {content||P Ksender||P Kreceiver||
Signaturesender} ,

stutus = {−1, 0, 1} .

(2)

(3)

At ﬁrst, the message includes the message content, the
public key of the sender, the public key of the receiver, the
signature of the sender. Each message has three statuses:
being processed, received and failed to accept, as shown
in equation 3, -1 represents failed to accept, 0 represents
under processing, and 1 represents acceptance success. After
receiving the sender’s request, the edge node ﬁrst authen-
ticates the credit of sender and receiver. In this paper, the
trust degree of almost every facility can be calculated by the
following formula.

T (Infi) =

αl (Infi) − βh (Infi)
(cid:80) num (message)

.

(4)

This formula represents the trust degree of each infras-
tructure, and its result depends on the legal messages sent
by each infrastructure and the number of paid messages. In
equation 4, l (Infi) represents the number of legal messages
sent by each infrastructure, h (Infi) represents the number
of illegal messages sent by each infrastructure, α and β are
the standard parameters, and (cid:80) num (message) represents
almost all messages sent by the infrastructure. The credit of
the sender and receiver can be represented by equation 5.

Cre(Infi) = γ · T (Infi) + δ · q(Infi).

(5)

In this formula, γ and δ are harmonic coefﬁcients,
T (Infi) represents the trust degree of infrastructure, and
q(Infi) represents the task quality assessment of edge nodes
to infrastructure. If the sender’s credit rating meets the
requirements, the edge node will collect the signature of the
message’s certiﬁer. At this time, the sender needs to send a
request to the surrounding users with higher credit rating,

IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL

5

Fig. 3. Workﬂow chart of the framework.

and reward them with a certain reward. After the supporter
receives the task, it will send the signature to the edge node.

M essage = {content||P Ksender||P Kreceiver||
Signaturesender||Signaturesupporter} .

(6)

The ﬁnal qualiﬁed message is shown in equation 6,
which adds the signature of the supporters compared with
the original message. When the number of supporters meets
the requirements, the edge node will ﬁnd the community
of the receiver, and then send the information to the edge
node of the community, and then the edge node will send
the information to the recipient.

Fig. 4. The process of message propagation.

4.3 Elect bookkeeper

The edge nodes in the architecture can communicate and
compete with each other. When there are various kinds of
messages in the system, each edge node wants to compete

for the position of bookkeeper, because it can get higher re-
ward. This part introduces how to elect bookkeeper through
consensus mechanism.

In bitcoin transaction, the problem is usually solved by
pow. In this paper, we propose a POR consensus mech-
anism. Firstly, we deﬁne the problem solving formula, as
shown in equation 7.

Hash(nonce|Hash(blockhead)) ≤ D (Q) · target.

(7)

The process of generating a block is to ﬁnd a nonce, so
that the hash value is less than or equal to a speciﬁed target
pre value, even if equation 7 holds. There are many ﬁelds
in the block header, one of which is the random number
nonce that we can set, and the other is the hash value of the
original block header. The process of solving is to try the
random number continuously until we ﬁnd the appropriate
nonce value. Where D (Q) is the difﬁculty coefﬁcient of the
solution. The difﬁculty of solution is a very key parameter.
When the difﬁculty of solution is too small, the block out
time will be too short, which is easy to cause block chain
bifurcation and threat to the system. When the difﬁculty of
solution is too large, it will reduce the enthusiasm of the
solver and cause a vicious circle. Therefore, the difﬁculty of
solution should be adjusted according to the actual situa-
tion. The adjustment formula is as follows:

D(Q) =

targetD(Q)=1
target

,

(8)

where, the denominator represents the current target, and
the numerator represents the target value when the difﬁ-
culty is 1 (when the difﬁculty is 1, it means the lowest difﬁ-
culty). Among them, target adjustment also needs to follow
certain rules, and its adjustment formula is as follows:

target = target ×

actual time
expected time

.

(9)

In equation 9, actual time refers to the actual time needed
to generate a block, expected time refers to the expected
time to generate a block, and the value of target changes
continuously with the formula.

Bookkeeper selection is based on the trust and calcula-
tion ability of each bookkeeper. In the voting stage, each
edge node with voting right can vote for the edge node it
trusts. The weight of voting depends on the trust degree of

STEP 1Infrastructure registrationSTEP 2Message transmissionSTEP 3Elect bookkeeperSTEP 4Verification and rewardRegistration requestSecret key and public keyConsensus mechanismMessage sending requestRequest supportCertification and signatureMessageMessage ID: No.1Pubic key of sender: Public key of recipient:Sign of sender:Status: under process1Request to send message2Verify trust level3Request support4Send signature for support5Send message to edge nodeMessageMessage ID: No.1Pubic key of sender: Public key of recipient:Sign of sender:Sign of supporters:Status: under processMessageMessage ID: No.1Pubic key of sender: Public key of recipient:Sign of sender:Sign of supportwes:Status: accepted6Send message to recipientHash(A)    Hash(B)Hash(C)    Hash(D)Hash(E)    Hash(F)Hash(G)    Hash(H)Merkle rootPre_HashNonceTime_stampPrevious blockHash(AB)  Hash(CD)Hash(EF)   Hash(GH)Hash(ABCD)     Hash(EFGH)Merkle rootPre_HashNonceTime_stampCurrent blockMerkle rootPre_HashNonceTime_stampNext blocktxtxtxtxtxtxtxtxIEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL

6

the edge node. The credit of edge nodes can be obtained by
equation 10.

Cre(Infj) =

1
1 + e−T (Infj )

.

(10)

The higher the credit, the higher the proportion of vot-
ing. At the end of voting, the edge node with the highest
number of votes becomes the whole node, and the other
edge nodes are the light nodes. All the nodes will run for
bookkeeper through workload proof, which is to solve a
nonce value together, so that the value of hash is equal to
the set target value. The difﬁculty of the problem is adjusted
with the solution speed of the node. The ﬁrst node to solve
the problem will get the bookkeeping right. The speed of
solving the problem generally depends on the computing
power of the node. The higher the computing power, the
faster the solution speed and the greater the probability of
success. Therefore, the node with higher computing power
is more likely to become bookkeeper. The bookkeeper’s re-
sponsibility is to collect all behavior data in the IoT, arrange
them in chronological order, generate Merkle trees for all
things according to hash values, store them in the block
body of the block, and connect the block to the longest legal
chain. The process is shown in Fig. 4. Therefore, the block
contains the list of things, and the block header contains the
hash value of the previous block and other information.

4.4 Veriﬁcation and reward

In many scenarios, the existence and accuracy of messages
are challenged. Therefore, we propose a method to verify
the existence of messages: backtracking. The success of this
method depends on the application of Merkle tree. Merkle
tree can provide Merkle proof, that is, path from root back
to edge. Taking Fig. 4 as an example, suppose a light node
wants to know whether the yellow transaction in the ﬁgure
is included in the Merkle tree. The light node does not con-
tain the transaction list, does not have the speciﬁc content of
this Merkle tree, and only has a root hash value. At this time,
the light node sends a request to a whole node to prove that
the yellow transaction is included in the Merkle proof in
this Merkle tree. After the whole node receives the request,
it only needs to send the three hash values marked in red
to the light node. With these hash values, the light node
can locally calculate the three green hash values marked
in the graph. First, calculate the hash value of the yellow
transaction, that is, the green hash value directly above it,
and then connect it with the red hash value next to it to
calculate the green hash value of the upper node. Then, we
can splice, calculate the upper green hash value, and then
splice, we can calculate the root hash value of the whole tree.
The light node compares the root hash value with the root
hash value in the block header. If it is the same, it proves
that the yellow transaction is in the Merkle tree.

Fig. 5. Message interception rate under different attack rates.

When the message transmission is successful and has
been connected to the blockchain, the bookkeeper will re-
ceive a reward and update its trust value. We introduce
the mining pool model in the blockchain into reward dis-
tribution. In this model, the edge node can be regarded
as the miner, and the infrastructure managed by him can
be regarded as the miner. When the miner successfully
generates the block and connects to the blockchain, the
reward obtained will be regarded as the income of the whole
mining pool. Miners will receive 50% of their income, and
the remaining income will be distributed according to the
principle of ”more work, more pay” for each infrastructure.

020040060080010001200140016001800200022000.30.40.50.60.70.8  interception ratenumber of messages p=2 p=4 p=6 p=8020040060080010001200140016001800200022000.30.40.50.60.70.80.9  interception ratenumber of messages p=2 p=4 p=6 p=8020040060080010001200140016001800200022000.40.50.60.70.8  interception ratenumber of messages p=2 p=4 p=6 p=8IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL

7

The contribution of infrastructure is determined by the
number of messages it sends. The more reliable messages
it sends, the higher the proﬁt it gets from dividends. The
infrastructure can also gain revenue by testifying to the
sender, and ﬁnally update the trust of the infrastructure.

5 SIMULATION EXPERIMENT AND ANALYSIS

In this chapter, we prove the performance of the proposed
algorithm through simulation experiments. The simulation
experiment is carried out on the operating system of win-
dows 10, the code runs on eclipse, the program is written
in Java language, and the ﬁnal experimental results are
displayed by the origin drawing tool. TABLE 1 shows the
range of parameters in the experiment.

TABLE 1
The Settings of Parameters

Parameter Items
the amount of infrastructures
the amount of edge nodes
the amount of communities
the connection rate of infrastructures
the trust level of infrastructures
the trust level of edge nodes
parameter α
parameter β

The Range
100
20
20
0.6
U[1,10]
U[1,10]
0.5
0.5

Fig. 6. The comparison of message interception rate between proposed
and traditional scheme.

Fig. 5 shows the interception rate of our scheme under
different attack rates. Message interception rate refers to the
ratio of the number of messages successfully intercepted
to all illegal messages. The ﬁrst ﬁgure in Fig. 5 shows the
interception rate of the method under different witnesses
when the illegal attack rate is 0.2. The second ﬁgure and
the third ﬁgure show the situation when the illegal attack
rate is 0.4 and 0.6 respectively. From the ﬁgure, we can see
that when p represents the number of supporters, when
the number of supporters is 2, the message interception
rate of the architecture is about 0.4, when the number of
supporters is 4, the message interception rate is about 0.5
to 0.6, when the number of supporters is 8, the message
interception rate is about 0.8. Experiments show that the

interception rate of our proposed architecture increases with
the increase of the number of supporters. Therefore, when
the demand of supporters is large, the proof of message
reliability will be more accurate, which can intercept illegal
messages and prove legitimate messages. Therefore, our
proposed mechanism can improve the reliability of message
transmission.

Fig. 6 compares the proposed scheme with the tradi-
tional centralized scheme. As can be seen from the ﬁgure,
the scheme proposed in this paper has a higher interception
rate than the traditional scheme when the supporter is 4, and
a higher interception rate than the traditional scheme when
the supporter is 8. But when the supporter is 4, the intercep-
tion rate of the proposed scheme is lower than that of the
traditional scheme when the supporter is 8, which shows
that the number of supporters has a strong decisive role.
At the same time, it can be seen that the scheme proposed
in this paper has more obvious interception effect than
the traditional centralized method in the same situation.
In conclusion, the blockchain based scheme proposed in
this paper has obvious advantages in ensuring transmission
reliability.

6 CONCLUSION

The security of data transmission in the Internet of things
has been widely concerned. With the rapid growth of
Internet of things devices and data, the traditional cloud
centric centralized processing mode is facing overload. The
emergence of edge computing can alleviate the trouble of
data centralized processing to a certain extent, but it still
can not fundamentally solve the drawbacks of cloud object
architecture. As a new technology, blockchain plays an im-
portant role in many ﬁelds. This paper combines blockchain
with Internet of things and edge computing, and proposes
a message transmission architecture based on blockchain.
This architecture abandons the traditional cloud server,
adopts the distributed architecture, and allocates the cloud
processing to each participant. The solution of blockchain
can make the data have the advantages of non-tamper
ability and traceability. Through simulation experiments, it
can be proved that the architecture proposed in this paper
can ensure the transmission of messages in the Internet of
things, and improve the reliability of transmission.

In the future work, we will always pay attention to
the latest research progress, and intend to combine edge
computing with network virtualization to conduct more in-
depth research.

REFERENCES

[1] C. K. Pyoung and S. J. Baek, “Blockchain of ﬁnite-lifetime blocks
with applications to edge-based iot,” IEEE Internet of Things Jour-
nal, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 2102–2116, 2020.
J. Ding, M. Nemati, C. Ranaweera, and J. Choi, “Iot connectivity
technologies and applications: A survey,” IEEE Access, vol. 8,
pp. 67646–67673, 2020.

[2]

[3] Y. Liu, Q. Lu, H. Paik, X. Xu, S. Chen, and L. Zhu, “Design-pattern-
as-a-service for blockchain-based self-sovereign identity,” CoRR,
vol. abs/2005.01346, 2020.

[4] M. Stoyanova, Y. Nikoloudakis, S. Panagiotakis, E. Pallis, and
E. K. Markakis, “A survey on the internet of things (iot) forensics:
Challenges, approaches, and open issues,” IEEE Commun. Surv.
Tutorials, vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 1191–1221, 2020.

020040060080010001200140016001800200022000.30.40.50.60.70.8  interception ratesimulation time proposed p=4 proposed p=8 traditional p=4 traditional p=8IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL

8

ization,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 57, no. 10, pp. 50–55,
2019.

[27] A. Jindal, G. S. Aujla, and N. Kumar, “SURVIVOR: A blockchain
based edge-as-a-service framework for secure energy trading
in sdn-enabled vehicle-to-grid environment,” Comput. Networks,
vol. 153, pp. 36–48, 2019.

[28] M. Samaniego and R. Deters, “Hosting virtual iot resources on
edge-hosts with blockchain,” in 2016 IEEE International Conference
on Computer and Information Technology, CIT 2016, Nadi, Fiji, Decem-
ber 8-10, 2016, pp. 116–119, 2016.

[29] Q. Lu, X. Xu, Y. Liu, I. Weber, L. Zhu, and W. Zhang, “ubaas: A
uniﬁed blockchain as a service platform,” Future Gener. Comput.
Syst., vol. 101, pp. 564–575, 2019.

[30] I. Weber, Q. Lu, A. B. Tran, A. Deshmukh, M. G ´orski, and
M. Strazds, “A platform architecture for multi-tenant blockchain-
based systems,” in IEEE International Conference on Software Archi-
tecture, ICSA 2019, Hamburg, Germany, March 25-29, 2019, pp. 101–
110, IEEE, 2019.

[31] S. Liu, L. Liu, J. Tang, B. Yu, Y. Wang, and W. Shi, “Edge com-
puting for autonomous driving: Opportunities and challenges,”
Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 107, no. 8, pp. 1697–1716, 2019.
[32] C. Jiang, Y. Chen, Y. Gao, and K. J. R. Liu, “Joint spectrum sensing
and access evolutionary game in cognitive radio networks,” IEEE
Trans. Wirel. Commun., vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 2470–2483, 2013.

[33] Y. Liu, K. Wang, Y. Lin, and W. Xu, “LightChain: A lightweight
blockchain system for industrial internet of things,” IEEE Trans.
Ind. Informatics, vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 3571–3581, 2019.

[34] X. Zhu, C. Jiang, L. Kuang, N. Ge, and J. Lu, “Non-orthogonal
multiple access based integrated terrestrial-satellite networks,”
IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 35, no. 10, pp. 2253–2267, 2017.
[35] Z. Li, J. Kang, R. Yu, D. Ye, Q. Deng, and Y. Zhang, “Consortium
blockchain for secure energy trading in industrial internet of
things,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informatics, vol. 14, no. 8, pp. 3690–3700,
2018.

[36] G. S. Aujla, M. Singh, A. Bose, N. Kumar, G. Han, and R. Buyya,
“Blocksdn: Blockchain-as-a-service for software deﬁned network-
ing in smart city applications,” IEEE Network, vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 83–
91, 2020.

[37] A. Y. Zomaya, N. Kumar, J. J. P. C. Rodrigues, and G. S. Aujla,
“Guest editorial: Special section on intelligent informatics for
edge of things in smart industrial ecosystem,” IEEE Trans. Ind.
Informatics, vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 1933–1937, 2020.

[38] Y. Li, D. N. Jha, G. S. Aujla, G. Morgan, A. Y. Zomaya, and
R. Ranjan, “Iotwc: Analytic hierarchy process based internet of
things workﬂow composition system,” in 2020 IEEE International
Conference on Cloud Engineering, IC2E 2020, Sydney, Australia, April
21-24, 2020, pp. 1–10, 2020.

[39] S. K. Lo, Y. Liu, S. Y. Chia, X. Xu, Q. Lu, L. Zhu, and H. Ning,
“Analysis of blockchain solutions for iot: A systematic literature
review,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 58822–58835, 2019.

[5] F. J. Dian, R. Vahidnia, and A. Rahmati, “Wearables and the
internet of things (iot), applications, opportunities, and challenges:
A survey,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 69200–69211, 2020.
S. M. H. Bamakan, A. Motavali, and A. B. Bondarti, “A survey
of blockchain consensus algorithms performance evaluation crite-
ria,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 154, p. 113385, 2020.

[6]

[7] Q. Lu, A. B. Tran, I. Weber, H. O’Connor, P. Rimba, X. Xu,
M. Staples, L. Zhu, and R. Jeffery, “Integrated model-driven en-
gineering of blockchain applications for business processes and
asset management,” CoRR, vol. abs/2005.12685, 2020.

[8] L. Lao, Z. Li, S. Hou, B. Xiao, S. Guo, and Y. Yang, “A survey of iot
applications in blockchain systems: Architecture, consensus, and
trafﬁc modeling,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 18:1–18:32,
2020.
S. Choi and J. Lee, “Blockchain-based distributed ﬁrmware update
architecture for iot devices,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 37518–37525,
2020.

[9]

[10] D. Minoli, “Special issue of the elsevier iot journal on blockchain
applications in iot environments,” Internet Things, vol. 10,
p. 100149, 2020.

[11] D. Jiang, Y. Wang, Z. Lv, W. Wang, and H. Wang, “An energy-
efﬁcient networking approach in cloud services for iiot networks,”
IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 38, no. 5, pp. 928–941, 2020.
[12] S. Biswas, K. Sharif, F. Li, S. Maharjan, S. P. Mohanty, and Y. Wang,
“Pobt: A lightweight consensus algorithm for scalable iot business
blockchain,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 2343–2355,
2020.

[13] D. Jiang, W. Wang, L. Shi, and H. Song, “A compressive sensing-
based approach to end-to-end network trafﬁc reconstruction,”
IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 507–519, 2020.

[14] G. Gianini, L. G. Fossi, C. Mio, O. Caelen, L. Brunie, and E. Dami-
ani, “Managing a pool of rules for credit card fraud detection
by a game theory based approach,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst.,
vol. 102, pp. 549–561, 2020.

[15] D. Jiang, Y. Wang, Z. Lv, S. Qi, and S. Singh, “Big data analysis
based network behavior insight of cellular networks for indus-
try 4.0 applications,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informatics, vol. 16, no. 2,
pp. 1310–1320, 2020.

[16] A. Mostefaoui, Z. Fawaz, and H. N. Noura, “A robust image-
encryption approach against transmission errors in communicat-
ing things networks,” Ad Hoc Networks, vol. 94, 2019.

[17] M. A. Merzoug, A. Boukerche, A. Mostefaoui, and S. Chouali,
“Spreading aggregation: A distributed collision-free approach for
data aggregation in large-scale wireless sensor networks,” J. Paral-
lel Distributed Comput., vol. 125, pp. 121–134, 2019.

[18] O. Novo, “Blockchain meets iot: An architecture for scalable access
management in iot,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 5, no. 2,
pp. 1184–1195, 2018.

[19] R. S. Bali and N. Kumar, “Secure clustering for efﬁcient data
dissemination in vehicular cyber-physical systems,” Future Gener.
Comput. Syst., vol. 56, pp. 476–492, 2016.

[20] A. Dorri, A Scalable Lightweight Blockchain-based Framework for IoT
Security and Anonymity. PhD thesis, University of New South
Wales, Sydney, Australia, 2020.

[21] S. Wang, Y. Li, S. Pang, Q. Lu, S. Wang, and J. Zhao, “A task
scheduling strategy in edge-cloud collaborative scenario based
on deadline,” Scientiﬁc Programming, vol. 2020, pp. 3967847:1–
3967847:9, 2020.

[22] R. Amin, S. H. Islam, G. P. Biswas, M. K. Khan, and N. Kumar,
“An efﬁcient and practical smart card based anonymity preserving
user authentication scheme for TMIS using elliptic curve cryptog-
raphy,” J. Medical Syst., vol. 39, no. 11, p. 180, 2015.

[23] S. Challa, A. K. Das, V. Odelu, N. Kumar, S. Kumari, M. K. Khan,
and A. V. Vasilakos, “An efﬁcient ecc-based provably secure three-
factor user authentication and key agreement protocol for wireless
healthcare sensor networks,” Comput. Electr. Eng., vol. 69, pp. 534–
554, 2018.

[24] A. Nag, A. Kalla, and M. Liyanage, “Blockchain-over-optical
networks: A trusted virtual network function (vnf) management
proposition for 5g optical networks,” in 2019 Asia Communications
and Photonics Conference (ACP), pp. 1–3, 2019.

[25] C. Jiang, Y. Chen, K. J. R. Liu, and Y. Ren, “Renewal-theoretical
dynamic spectrum access in cognitive radio network with un-
known primary behavior,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 31,
no. 3, pp. 406–416, 2013.

[26] D. B. Rawat, “Fusion of software deﬁned networking, edge com-
puting, and blockchain technology for wireless network virtual-

