The role of Blockchain in DDoS attacks mitigation
: techniques, open challenges and future directions

Rajasekhar Chaganti, Bharat Bhushan, Vinayakumar Ravi

1

2
2
0
2

b
e
F
8

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
7
1
6
3
0
.
2
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—With the proliferation of new technologies such
as Internet of Things (IOT) and Software-Deﬁned Networking
(SDN) in the recent years, the distributed denial of service (DDoS)
attack vector has broadened and opened new opportunities for
more sophisticated DDoS attacks on the targeted victims. The
new attack vector includes unsecured and vulnerable IoT devices
connected to the internet, denial of service vulnerabilities like
southbound channel saturation in the SDN architecture. Given
the high-volume and pervasive nature of these attacks, it is ben-
eﬁcial for stakeholders to collaborate in detecting and mitigating
the denial of service attacks in a timely manner. The blockchain
technology is considered to improve the security aspects owing
to the decentralized design, secured distributed storage and
privacy. A thorough exploration and classiﬁcation of blockchain
techniques used for DDoS attack mitigation is not explored in
the prior art. This paper reviews and categorizes the existed
state-of-the-art DDoS mitigation solutions based on blockchain
technology. The DDoS mitigation techniques are classiﬁed based
on the solution deployment location i.e. network based, near
attacker location, near victim location and hybrid solutions in
the network architecture with emphasis on the IoT and SDN
architectures. Additionally, based on our study, the research
challenges and future directions to implement the blockchain
based DDoS mitigation solutions are discussed. We believe that
this paper could serve as a starting point and reference resource
for future researchers working on denial of service attacks
detection and mitigation using blockchain technology.

Index Terms—Denial of service attack, IoT botnet, Software
Deﬁned Networks, Smart contract, Blockchain, DDoS attacks,
Internet Service Provider

I. INTRODUCTION

In the recent years, distributed denial of service (DDoS)
attacks has been growing and always seen the upward trend
[1]. Work from home and increased use of cloud technologies
owing to the Covid pandemic in the ﬁrst quarter of 2020 has
increased the volume and intensity of DDoS attacks in 2020.
For example, launching various ampliﬁcation and UDP-based
attacks to ﬂood target networks increased 570 percent for the
second quarter of 2020 in comparison with the previous year
for the same time period [2]; the traditional threshold-based
mitigation methods are insufﬁcient to detect these attacks and
the machine learning models are able to accurately detect
as long as the attack pattern follows the trained data model
and if any new attack pattern can easily evade these models
[2]. Although the DDoS attack vectors existed for years and
many solutions proposed for handling the attacks, it is still an

Rajasekhar Chaganti was with the Department of Computer Science, UTSA,

San Antonio, TX, 78256 USA e-mail: raj.chaganti2@gmail.com

Vinayakumar Ravi

Intelligence,
Prince Mohammad Bin Fahd University, Khobar, Saudi Arabia. e-
mail:(vravi@pmu.edu.sa)

is with the Center

for Artiﬁcial

important problem to be addressed as the new technologies
increases the attack surface and exploitable vulnerabilities.

As the number of devices connected to the internet increases
and new network protocol vulnerabilities are uncovered, e.g.,
the UDP Memcached vulnerability [3], DDoS attack rates
have increased exponentially over the last decade, as shown in
Figure 1. A nominal enterprise organization may not be able
to effectively handle or mitigate the current terabit rate sized
attacks, and it’s already late to bring up the network Operators
and internet service providers to react and mitigate DDoS
attacks when attackers target these enterprises. However, as
mentioned in Table II, we can see that the cloud service
providing organizations like Amazon Web Services (AWS) and
Google Cloud Platform (GCP) were handled approximately
more than 2 Tbps attack rate at the edge level and served the
public cloud application customers with no performance or
service impact in the last two years. In 2016, the IOT devices
such as routers and cameras connected to the internet were
compromised, and attack code deployed to launch mirai bot
reﬂection attacks to generate attack trafﬁc rates in excess of 1
Tbps targeting DYN (a dynamic DNS service provider), OVH
(cloud service provider), and security blogger Brian Krebs’s
website [4] [5][6].

The emerging technologies such as cloud Computing, In-
ternet of Things (IoT), Software Deﬁned Networking (SDN)
change the internet network architecture and offers new op-
portunities for the attackers ﬁnding the loopholes and perform
Denial of service attacks. The challenge of large-scale DDoS
attacks is to mitigate them within a short span of time and
avoid the loss of business and reputation for the enterprise
organizations involved in the attack. Therefore, a rapid co-
ordination and response required between the stakeholders
like network operators, edge protection providers, Internet
service providers, impacted organizations, third party DDoS
mitigation services etc. Authenticating and establishing trust
among the parties involved is essential to execute the legiti-
mate actions for stopping the attacks.

A blockchain is a distributed ledger that can record the
transactions in an efﬁcient and permanent way. It is man-
aged by peer-to-peer (P2P) network nodes with standard
protocols designed for internode communication to approve
the transaction records and validate the blocks. Owing to
the inherent security by design and unalterable transaction
records in the chain of blocks, a blockchain can be used
for many applications including ﬁnance, healthcare, supply
chain, cryptocurrency, cybersecurity, smart contacts in par-
ticular validating the identity, providing the user anonymity
[7][8]. The blockchain utility for cybersecurity application

 
 
 
 
 
 
has been growing with demand to build secured systems and
applications. The decentralized consortium blockchain imple-
mentation for industrial IoT [9] [10], credit based consensus
mechanism for approving the transactions in industrial IoT
[11] and implementing blockchain based data storage and
protection mechanism for defending the security attacks in
IoT systems [12] [13] are some of the applications of the
blockchain in IoT. Additionally, blockchain is leveraged for
security in other areas like secured storage of the data in
mobile ad hoc networks [14], decentralized DNS database for
DNS attacks mitigation such as cache poisoning attacks [15],
secured data storage in cloud and defend against the keyword
guessing attacks [16]. Furthermore, based on the blockchain
exhibiting security properties, we could see that the potential
to utilize the blockchain for security threat information sharing
among the key stakeholders.

Figure 1: DDoS attack rate growth trend in the last decade
[17].

Recently, a few researchers proposed blockchain based so-
lutions for threat information sharing like malicious IP address
for blocklist, identifying the IOT bots in the network at the
network gateway level, enabling content distribution network
(CDN) nodes near the victim using private blockchain when
denial of service is identiﬁed, security operating center threat
sharing to users accessed in private blockchain is investigated
in several recent works [18] [19] [20] [21] [22]. But there is
a knowledge gap between network security experts, who aim
to mitigate DDoS attacks in real time and blockchain experts,
who develop decentralized applications but may not be experts
in network attacks. Our prior art research shows that there
is no signiﬁcant work on investigating blockchain’s role to
mitigate the DDoS attacks. Therefore, we believe that there
is a need for a systematic thorough review of the blockchain
technology to handle the denial of service attacks. In addition,
the blockchain based solutions are categorized based on the
DDoS mitigation deployment location in internet. To the end,
the main contributions of this paper are as follows:

• We performed systematic review and classiﬁcation of the
role of blockchain technology in DDoS attack detection
and blockchain based DDoS mitigation solutions.

2

• We discussed the open challenges and future directions to
implement and propose new solutions for handling DDoS
attacks using blockchain.

• We categorized and described the existing blockchain
related DDoS solutions based on the solution deployment
location in the internet architecture.

• Our ﬁndings show that secured collaboration among the
stakeholders to share the DDoS threat indicators with
blockchain is achievable while addressing the limitations.
The abbreviations used in the paper are given in Table I. The
remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section II
discusses the key concepts such as DDoS attacks, Blockchains
and Emerging technology network architecture paradigms and
related work in association with our topic in the paper. Section
III presents the Blockchain based solutions to mitigate the
DDoS attacks. Section IV presents the current open challenges
to utilize the blockchain in the context of DDoS attacks.
Section V depicts the future directions in accordance with ad-
vancement with Blockchain technology. Section VI concludes
the paper.

II. KEY CONCEPTS AND RELATED WORK

In this section, we review DDoS attack types and the solu-
tions proposed to mitigate them, describe the main fundamen-
tal and terminology of blockchain technology, and describe the
emerging technologies such as internet of things and software
deﬁned networking paradigm. These are essential and play a
signiﬁcant role in the understanding of recent DDoS attack
variants and their mitigation solutions using blockchain.

A. DDoS Attack Types and Known Solutions

Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) Attack is a well-
known and major concern in cybersecurity area violating
the security principle “Availability” of services. DDoS attack
vectors exploit various features of the internet protocols, most
of which were designed decades ago when security was not
a concern. The relationship between an attacker exploiting
the protocol features such as TCP connection setup using 3-
way handshake and its victim is asymmetric in nature. DDoS
attacks are mainly classiﬁed into two categories: bandwidth
depletion and resources depletion attacks [23]. In the former
attack, high volumes of trafﬁc that looks legitimate but not
intended for communication is directed to a victim. In the latter
attack, the victim is inundated with bogus service requests that
deplete its resources and prevent it from serving legitimate
requests. Multiple bots (network nodes compromised and
controlled by an attacker) are often used to launch DDoS
attacks. Direct attacks on a victim typically use ﬂooding in
which many packets are sent from multiple bots to the victim;
examples include TCP SYN ﬂoods, UDP ﬂoods, ICMP ﬂoods,
and HTTP ﬂoods [24].

Another tactic used in DDoS attacks is ampliﬁcation: the
attacker sends requests to network service providers such
as Domain Name System (DNS) servers or network time
providers (NTP) spooﬁng victim’s IP address as the source
IP address so that the responses, which are typically several
times larger than the queries/requests, are sent to the victim

Table I: List of Abbreviations used in the paper.

ACK
AMQP
AMP
API
AWS
AS
BFT
BGP
CDN
CoAP
CIDS
CLDAP
CPU
DDoS
DNS
DOTS
DoS
DOS
DPOS
EVM
GRE
GCP
HTTPS
HTTP
ICMP
IoT
IPFS
IP
ISP
KNN
LSTM
MLP
ML

TCP Acknowledgement Flag
Advanced Message Queuing Protocol
Asynchronous Messaging Protocol
Application Programming interface
Amazon Web Services
Autonomous System
Byzantine Fault-Tolerant
Border Gateway Protocol
content distribution network
Constrained Application Protocol
Collaborative Intrusion Detection System
Connection-less Lightweight Directory Access
Central processing unit
Distributed Denial of Service
Domain Name System
DDoS Open Threat Signaling
Denial of Service
Decentralized Oracle Service
Delegated Proof of Stake
Ethereum Virtual Machine
Generic Routing Encapsulation
Google Cloud Services
Hypertext Transfer Protocol Secure
Hypertext Transfer Protocol
Internet Control Message Protocol
Internet of Things
InterPlanetary File System
Internet Protocol
Internet Service provider
k-nearest neighbor
Long short-term memory
Multi-Layer Perceptron
Machine learning

MQTT Message Queuing Telemetry Transport
Neighbor Discovery Protocol
NDP
Network Time Protocol
NTP
Open Flow
OF
Practical Byzantine fault tolerance
PBFT
Principal component analysis
PCA
Proof of Stake
PoS
Proof of Work
PoW
TCP Push ﬂag
PSH
Peer to Peer
P2P
Programming protocol-independent packet processor
P4
Random-access memory
RAM
Software Deﬁned Network
SDN
Recurrent neural network
RNN
Simple Mail Transfer Protocol
SMTP
Simple Network Management Protocol
SNMP
Security Operating Center
SOC
TCP Synchronization Flag
SYN
Transmission Control Protocol
TCP
Support Vector Machine
SVM
Transaction
TX
User Datagram Protocol
UDP
Unspent Transaction Unit
UTX
Extensible Messaging and Presence Protocol
XMPP

and overwhelm the victim’s network and resources. Examples
of ampliﬁcation attacks include Smurf, Fraggle, SNMP, NTP,
DNS ampliﬁcation [24]. In addition, protocol exploitation
attacks like TCP SYN ﬂooding can be performed on the
victim infrastructure by taking advantage of TCP connection
establishment mechanism and sending the ﬂood of TCP SYN
packets with no ACK responses to consume the victim ma-
chine resources [25]. The adversary may also use automated
scripts to send TCP ﬂags ACK, PUSH, RST, FIN packet
ﬂoods to saturate the communication channel along the victim

3

infrastructure. Another category of DDoS attack are ping of
death and land attack. Ping of death attack focused on sending
Ping command with packet size greater than maximum packet
size 65536 bytes to crash the victim the system. In land attack,
An attacker may send forged packets with same sender and
destination IP address to target the victim to send the packet
to itself forming an inﬁnite loop and crashing the victim
machine [25]. A zero-day can vulnerability also be leveraged
to compromise the legit machines and successfully lunch the
denial of service attack [26].

Signiﬁcant research work is done on the detection and
mitigation of DDoS attacks for the last two decades. The
proposed mitigation solutions differ in the location and timing
of deployment [27]. The deployment location-based solutions
are categorized into four types

• Source-based defense implemented in the attack source

edge routers or source Autonomous Systems.

• Destination-based implemented at the victim edge routers

or victim AS level.

• Network-based defense implemented by the ISP and core
networks and usually required to respond the attacks at
the intermediate network level and

• Hybrid defense : the combination of the source, destina-

tion and network based mechanisms.

Although the source-based defenses aim to detect and mitigate
the attacks in early stages of the attack, it is very difﬁcult to
distinguish the legitimate and malicious DDoS trafﬁc at the
source level owing to the use of bots to distribute the attack
trafﬁc generation.

The destination-based defense mechanisms are easier and
cheaper to implement since the attack trafﬁc will be concen-
trated closer to the victim. However, before they are detected;
the attack trafﬁc consumes the resources on the paths leading
to the victim. The network-based defense solutions detects and
mitigate the DDoS attacks at the Autonomous System (AS) or
Internet Service Provider (ISP) levels, which are closer to the
attack sources. But they incur storage and processing overhead
at the network infrastructure level, for example, by the edge
or ISP routers, or might need additional DDoS protection
devices like middle boxes to process the trafﬁc. Also, the
attack detection will be difﬁcult owing to lack of aggregation
of trafﬁc destined to the victim. However, attack mitigation
in the internet core has the advantage of not passing the
trafﬁc till the victim network and preventing congestion of
communication channel with attack network trafﬁc as well
as saving the victim’s computing and network resources. The
hybrid defense approach promises to be more robust since
it allows to use the combination of defensive mechanism
to defend against DDoS attacks. Furthermore, detection and
mitigation can be implemented more efﬁciently. For instance,
the detection can occur at the destination or network level
and the mitigation technique can be applied near the source to
effectively handle the DDoS attacks. However, its implemen-
tation is more challenging because it requires collaboration
and cooperation between different entities to exchange attack
information without receiving sufﬁcient incentives for some
of the participants like service providers [27] and there needs

Mirai Krebs [4]

2016 Mirai,

TCPSYN,

Table II: Major DDoS attacks in the history.

Year Attack Type
2020 Reﬂection Attack

Attack Rate
2.3 Tbps

Duration Amp Ratio
3 days

56 - 70

Protocols Involved
UDP, CLDAP

Impact
No

4

2017 Reﬂection

ACK, ACK+PSH

2016 Mirai,

TCPSYN,

ACK, ACK+PSH
2016 Mirai, Reﬂection
2018 Memcached Reﬂection
2012 Brobot

2.5 Tbps

Krebs
620Gbps
OVH
Tbps
1.5Tbps
1.35Tbps
60 Gbps

2014 Brobot,TCP

SYN,

500Gbps

HTTPS Flood

2013 Reﬂection Attack
2014 Reﬂection Attack

300 Gbps
400 Gbps

6
months
2-7 days

1.1

2-7 days

6-70

CLDAP, DNS, SMTP

No

-

-

TCP, GRE, HTTP

Krebs Ofﬂine

TCP, GRE, HTTP

OVH minimal

1 day
20 min
˜2 days

-

-
-

Up to 100
51000

-

-

DNS
UDP
HTTP, HTTPS, DNS,
TCP
TCP,HTTPS

Internet Outage
Service Outage
Web Service Out-
age
Minimal

Up to 100
Up to 206

DNS,TCP
NTP

Ofﬂine
No

DDoS Attack
AWS
[28][18]
Google Attack [17]

Attack

OVH [5]

Mirai Dyn [6]
GitHub Attack [3]
Six Banks [29]

Hongkong Central
[30]
Spamhaus [31]
Cloudﬂare [32]

to be trust between the stakeholders, given the fact that the
service providers are diverse and not easy to trust the entities.
For descriptions of various DDoS mitigation techniques
such as anomaly or signature-based detection, machine learn-
ing algorithms to attack detection, scrubbing, rerouting, and
ﬁltering/blocking techniques, see Zargar et al. [27].

B. Blockchain Technology and Their Types

A blockchain is a digital, public ledger that records list of
transactions and maintains the integrity of the transactions by
encrypting, validating and permanently recording transactions
[33]. Blockchain technology has emerged as a potential digital
technology disrupting many areas including ﬁnancial sector,
security, data storage, internet of things and more. One of the
best known uses of blockchains is the design of cryptocurren-
cies such as Bitcoin [34], [34], [35].

A blockchain is typically managed by a peer-to-peer net-
work and uses peer-to-peer protocol such as the Distributed
Hash Table (DHT) for internode communication as well as
validating new transactions. Figure 2 illustrates the typical
structure of a block: a linked list of blocks with a header
block. Each block comprises a set of transactions, a count of
the transactions in the block, and a header. The block header
includes block version, which tells the current version of block
structure, a merkle tree root hash to incorporate the uniqueness
of the transaction set in the block by determining the ﬁnal hash
value achieved from all the transactions in the block as well
as maintain the integrity between the transactions in the block.
Therefore, the transactions secured in a blockchain and cannot
be tampered. The block header also contains Timestamp, i.e.
the time at which the block is created and it plays an important
role in extending a blockchain to record new transactions.
There is a special data structure that points to the most recent
block in a chain. Using the back pointers other blocks in the
chain can be accessed.

Blockchain exhibits properties like decentralization, persis-
tency, anonymity, and auditability. The essential property of
anonymity is achieved using asymmetric cryptography like
RSA algorithm and digital signature [36]. Each user has
a private and public key pair for applying an asymmetric
cryptography algorithm. The hash values obtained from the

Figure 2: Blockchain Internal Components

existing transactions will be utilized to get the digital signature
and validate the user’s authenticity. The user validation is a
two-step process: signing and veriﬁcation. Figure 3 shows
the asymmetric cryptography and digital signature calculation
steps during the validation process [37]. The peer-to-peer
blockchain system has no centralized node and uses consensus
algorithms, which typically require participating entities to win
a computing challenge, to authorize an entity to create the
next block of veriﬁed transactions and append to the exiting
blockchain.

A consensus algorithm, as indicated above,

is used to
select nodes in peer-to-peer blockchains to add a block of
new transactions to the existing blockchain. Some of the
widely used algorithms are proof of work (POW), proof of
stake (POS), practical Byzantine fault tolerance (PBFT), ripple
consensus algorithm and delegated proof of stake (DPOS)
[38]. In POW, used by Bitcoin, every node computes the hash
value of the block header and the computed value should be
less than the speciﬁc value, according to the algorithm. The

5

the non-tampered chain of blocks [38] [7].

In general, blockchain platforms are typically classiﬁed
in which the existing
into three types. Public blockchain,
transactions can be read by anyone in public and open to
join for public. But the transactions cannot be tampered and
provide high level security, even though its computation delay
is high. Bitcoin is a classic example of public blockchain.
Anyone can read the user account balance and the transactions
that the user account involved, given the fact that the user
bitcoin wallet address is known. In consortium Blockchain,
only selected nodes are participated in transactional operations
and a good example multiple organization in a particular
sector want to use the blockchain for business applications.
Each node represents a member from the organization. The
consensus process is fast, and only privileged users can
read the information from the blockchain. Private Blockchain
requires permission to join the network and usually maintained
within the organization. The nodes can be the participants
from the same organization to share the data within the
organization or storing the data records securely and more.
The private blockchain usually becomes centralized in nature
and the transaction can be tampered if untrustworthy nodes
participate in the mining process. The detailed comparison of
the blockchain types is described in Table III.

Since the existence of the Bitcoin, there are number of
coins developed by the blockchain community focusing on
speciﬁc industry application. Some of the major notable coins
are Ethereum, Litecoin and Ripple [39]. The second popular
and largest market capitalization cryptocurrency is Ethereum,
which works on smart contract functionality. Ethereum has
been proposed to address some limitations in Bitcoin scripting
language. Ethereum supports the turing complete program-
ming language meaning that we can perform all computations
including the loops. This is achieved by smart contracts
functionality, which runs cryptographic rules when certain
conditions are met. The smart contracts in the nodes are
translated into EVM code and then the nodes execute the code
to complete the transaction (can be creating a user account,
the result of code execution).

There has been a lot of attention on Hyperledger recently
owing to the applicability of enterprise standard version
blockchain deployment capabilities and known to be rigor-
ously used in academic research community for research ac-
tivities. Hyperledger is an open source community contributed
suite, which comprises tools, frameworks, and libraries for
enterprise blockchain application deployments. One of the
notable tool
is the Hyperledger fabric [40], a distributed
ledger user for developing blockchain applications and can
have private blockchain for serving the applications to speciﬁc
services. The fabric consists of model ﬁle, script ﬁle, access
ﬁle and query ﬁle and all zipped together to form business
network archive. Fabric has a concept called ”Chaincode”,
which is similar to Ethereum smart contract for performing
secured blockchain transactions. We can also include the
distributed ﬁle storage i.e. Interplanetary File System (IPFS),
which store the data and the data can be shared across the
nodes in the blockchain. For example, A decentralized web
application can be hosted with content stored in IPFS for

Figure 3: Basic cryptographic operations in blockchain [37].

successfully computed node will be veriﬁed by the other nodes
and selected as an authorized node to add the transaction
in the block; the update is propagated to all other nodes of
the blockchain. Computation of the hash value within the
constraints requires requires extensive computing, which is
called mining. In POS, the users that have more currency can
get an authority to add the transactions in the blockchain.
So, richer entities will become richer, and, potentially, a
few participants dominate the blockchain management and
extension; on the other hand, this method does not require
extensive computing power, and is likely to more efﬁcient. The
consensus algorithm based on PBFT requires that a signiﬁcant
majority of the nodes participating in the blockchain should
approve the transaction to be appended in the network and can
tolerate 1/3rd of the node failures. The consensus process starts
by choosing a primary node to process all the transactions
in a block. It is a three-step process i.e. pre-prepare, prepare
and commit; If 2/3rds of the nodes accept the request, then
the transaction is appended to the block. Hyperledger’s fabric
is an example of using PBFT as a consensus mechanism to
complete the transactions in the network. In Delegated Proof
of Stake(DPOS), the delegated maximum currency stakeholder
is chosen for adding the transactions. Some platforms like
Tendermint operates on the combination of the algorithms
(DPoS+PBFT) [38].

With decentralized consensus methods such as POW,
branching, in which competing entities may propose different
sets of transactions to create a new block and extend a current
blockchain, can occur due to the decentralized nature for
mining to approve the transaction as well as having a delay
to validate the 51% of the blockchain nodes or participants
prior to adding the transaction to blockchain; nBits, which
is being used for miner
signiﬁes the difﬁculty level
computations to add the transactions to the block; nonce,
which represents a random number created by the creator of
the block and can be used only once; parent block hash, which
is a cryptographic hash value of the parent block to maintain
the integrity between the two consecutive blocks and maintain

that

Table III: Types of Blockchain and their Properties [38]

6

Property
Consensus participants
Efﬁciency
Readability
Decentralized
Consensus authorization
Example
Application
Immutability

Public
All mining nodes
Low
Anyone
Yes
Permissionless
Bitcoin
Bitcoin currency, voting
Nearly impossible to tamper

Private
Nodes within the organization
High

Consortium
Selected nodes
High
Anyone or restricted members Members within the organization
Partial
Permissioned
R3
Banking, payments
Possibly tampered

No
Permissioned
Hyperledger
Supply chain, health care, retail
Possibly tampered

serving web content to users. Overall, Hyperledger is very
useful platform for blockchain technology and have been
widely using for developing the applications including DDoS
mitigation.

C. Emerging Technology Network Architectures

Some of the notable recent technologies such as IoT, SDN
and cloud computing essentially changed network paradigm. It
is important to review these advanced network architectures to
study the advanced DDoS attacks exploiting the architecture
limitations and propose the new solutions to mitigate these
attacks using blockchain technology.

1) IOT Architecture: IoT is a system of computing devices
including the physical objects with network connectivity to
connect to internet and transfer the data over the network with
or without requiring the human interaction. The tremendous
progress towards smart homes, smart cities, smart transporta-
tion, and smart grid applications in recent years shows that
rapid advancements in Internet of Things (IOT) technology.
Gartner predicted that there will be 65 billion IOT devices con-
nected to the internet by 2025 and the current statistics show
that around 31 billion IOT devices deployed and connected to
internet [41]. Figure 4 depicts a typical IoT architecture with
main components. The IoT devices can be sensors, actuators
or other appliance installed in home, industry, person body,
vehicle, farming platform to monitor or sense the current state
or activity and pass the information to the nearest IoT gateway
through wireless communication like Bluetooth, Wi-Fi, NFC
and ZigBee. The IoT gateways connected to the public internet
for sending the information to IoT service provider for data
analytics, tracking the status, display in user console etc. Using
IoT network protocols such as MQTT, AMP, HTTP and CoAP
but not limited. Owing to the limited CPU, memory, and
power capabilities of IoT devices and the existence of the
multivendor IoT platforms, conventional security solutions are
not compatible in IoT environment and securing IoT devices
is challenging.

2) SDN Architecture: Recent advances in wide area net-
works (WAN) and data center networks are the culmination
of the SDN paradigm. SDN enable logically the centralized
management of network layer 2 and layer 3 devices such
as Switches and Routers, including the management of wide
area networks of the organizations where the network devices
located from multiple sites are monitored/controlled using an
SDN controller [42]. As depicted in Figure 5, the central
controller monitors manage all the network device in data
plane layer and communicated through southbound API like

Figure 4: A typical IoT Architecture.

Openﬂow standard. A network administrator can develop the
applications on top of the control layers to perform network
management operations. SDN technology can be used at the
autonomous system level, internet service provider level or
data center level for network monitoring and management. Al-
though SDN provides lot of advantages including programma-
bility, centralized control, and security, it also inherits security
vulnerabilities due to the new architecture paradigm. For
instance, an adversary may target the controller with TCP SYN
ﬂooding attack and other protocol exploitation techniques to
saturate the controller and shutdown the whole network [43].
Leveraging the blockchain technology open up new research
possibilities to secure the Software deﬁned network itself from
malicious denial of service attempts [44] as well as mitigation
of the denial of service attacks in conventional networks.

D. Related Work

Technologies such as machine learning (ML), blockchain,
IoT, and SDN are well suited to improve the security in digital
world but also exhibit new security concerns and issues [45]
[46] [47] [48][49][43][50][51][52][53]. Some researchers also
used combinations of these technologies to address security
challenges ranging from malware analysis, DNS Security, to
network security as well as privacy issues [54] [55] [56][57]
[58]. Our focus in this paper is speciﬁc to DDoS-attack
detection and mitigation techniques in conventional networks,
software deﬁned networks, cloud environments and internet

7

III. DDOS ATTACKS MITIGATION USING BLOCKCHAIN

In this section,

the existing research works on solving
the DDoS attack detection and mitigation problem using
blockchain technology is presented and discussed. In addition
to blockchain, the role of technologies such as SDN, IoT and
ML/DL in addressing DDoS attacks near the attacker domain
location, the internet core, or near the victim network domain
are reviewed.

We discuss the existing DDoS mitigation blockchain solu-
tions based on the location of solution deployment in internet
architecture.

A. Network level mitigation

The network level mitigation DDoS mitigation schemes
using blockchain technology is deployed at
the Internet
service provider (ISP) level on the internet, which may be
far from attacker or victim location. The Table V illustrates
technologies involved
the blockchain key concepts used,
in the research works proposed for DDoS mitigation using
blockchain. We can clearly see that smart contract based
Ethereum network is used for
implementing the DDoS
mitigation solutions for most of the previous contributions, as
shown in the Table IV. The blockchain access level policy is
controlled by the owners to make the transactions accessible
for public or private.

Tayyab et al. [69] take the approach that each IDS in the
network acts as a blockchain node and collaborate with other
blockchain IDS nodes to share the attack information like
correlated alarms. This decentralized correlated information
sharing is used for the detection of ICMP6 based DDoS
attacks. Although
improves DDoS
IDS collaboration
attack detection capability, the practical implementation of
collaboration can may have difﬁculties. For example, the IDS
vendor interoperability to support the blockchain technology
is needed in enterprise environment. Denial of service attacks
detection at
is too late and might already
congest
the edge network communication channels or the
content delivery network communications.

the IDS level

The following papers [21] [70] [71][72] [73] [74] [71]
[67] [75] [65] [64] [18] focused on utilizing the SDN and
blockchain technologies in the autonomous system (AS)
level to detect the denial of service attempts and activating
the DDoS mitigation mechanisms at
the network level.
The authors considered the autonomous system consists of
SDN architecture, controlled by SDN controller. The core
in these papers include leveraging the centralized
concept
controller application of
the SDN to manage how the
network devices in the autonomous system should handle
the trafﬁc (whitelist/blocklist) originating from malicious
IP addresses, which are used to launch the DDoS attacks
on the autonomous system. The SDN controller node also
acts as a blockchain node running decentralized application
like Ethereum to store or validate the attack IP address list,
and their blocklist/whitelist status as a transaction in the
blockchain, and distribute the added transactions to all the

Figure 5: A typical SDN Architecture

of things [25] [56] [59] [60] [61]. The currently known tech-
niques include machine learning or deep learning (ML/DL)
algorithms to classify the attacks, anomaly-based detection,
and signature-based detection.
A recent advancement

to peer networks with
in peer
blockchain technology enabled utilization of decentralized
network concepts for multiple application areas like ﬁnance,
healthcare, real estate, supply chain management, security
[62]. Although blockchain mainly provides the anonymity,
privacy and secured data storage in security applications,
researchers also explored the applicability of blockchain tech-
nology in DDoS attack information sharing, threat intelligence
information sharing to quickly respond to the DDoS attacks.
Singh et al. [63] present a survey of DDoS mitigation tech-
niques using blockchain technology. The authors considered
four known blockchain based DDoS mitigation approaches
for comparison; highlighted the operation of these mitiga-
tion mechanisms and assessed the practical applicability of
these implementations [64] [65] [66][67]. Wani et al. [68]
discussed the prior art distributed denial of service attack
mitigation using blockchain by describing the methodology
on how the related papers are collected and proposing the
taxonomy based on the technologies like artiﬁcial intelligence,
information sharing capability and blockchain types. However,
a comprehensive and systematic review of the state-of-the-art
work with classiﬁcation based on the solution implementation
location by leveraging the blockchain technology to detect and
mitigate the DDoS attacks in digital world and also detail
description of DDoS attacks targeting Blockchain platforms
to protect decentralized networks is not covered in the prior
art. Our motivation for this work is to bridge the knowledge
gap between network security researchers and the blockchain
developing community, and enable the researchers to access
this article as a reference point to continue the research of
using blockchain technology in network security.

nodes (SDN controller in other autonomous systems) in the
blockchain. Ethereum smart contracts were used to store
the IP addresses with malicious ﬂag status as a transaction.
The DDoS detection/mitigation mechanism was tested in
Ethereum testing platform Rapsten testing network and also
used Ganache for testing in local blockchain network [76].

to conﬁrm the illegitimacy of

Yeh et al. [21], Yeh et al. [72], Shaﬁ et al. [79] and
Hajizadeh et al. [77] discussed the threat information sharing
including DDoS threat data among the collaborators for
secure data sharing using blockchain based smart contracts
technology and decentralized data storage. The Security
operation centers can be upload the threat data and ISP
act as veriﬁer
the threat
data prior to adding to the blockchain transaction in [21],
[72]. The Ethereum based smart contract
implementation
for DDoS data sharing is performed for evaluation. But, in
[77] and [79], the Hyperledger caliper is used to implement
information sharing among the organizations.
the threat
Each organization may have the SDN controller to run the
blockchain application and act as a blockchain node for
updating the threat information in other nodes.

Rodrigues et al. [75] [64] [18] proposed the Ethereum
based architecture for DDoS mitigation and their hardware
implementation to allow or block the malicious IP addresses
in the ISP level. Each transaction may include the IP address
and their status to detect the malicious IP address performing
the denial of service attacks. The main limitation of the IP
address data storage in the transactions may have limitations.
But, Burger et al. [65] discussed that Ethereum is not an
ideal technology for DDoS attack IP based signaling using
blockchain due to the scalability issue. The authors also
mention that Ethereum smart contracts can be applicable
for small number of IP addresses space related applications.
They recommend that storing the list of IP address in a ﬁle
storage like IPFS, and the URL of the storage location can
be pointed to the blockchain transactions, and the location
integrity is veriﬁed using hash value.

Pavlidis et al. [70] proposed a blockchain based network
provider collaboration for DDoS mitigation. The AS’s are
selected based on the reputation scores to participate in the
DDoS mitigation plan. The programmable data planes are used
to implement the mitigation mechanism for DDoS attacks,
which is in contrast to most of the works using SDN Openﬂow
protocol.

In the papers [81] [73], the machine learning algorithms
such as K-nearest neighbors (KNN), decision tree and
random forest as well as deep learning technique long
short-term memory (LSTM) are applied to the network
trafﬁc to determine the DDoS attack and considered
blockchain technology to whitelist/blocklist the IP addresses
at
the
the autonomous system level of the network. But,
machine learning application on the network trafﬁc requires
infrastructure and computation capabilities, and ownership
responsibility to allocate the resources need to be addressed.
Any speciﬁc entity like ISP, security service providers will

8

not be interested to perform data analytics unless they have
any monetary beneﬁts or business advantages.

Overall, we can clearly see that the combination of SDN in
AS level and Ethereum smart contract can be implemented to
track the IP addresses status and update all the nodes across
the internet to mitigate the DDoS attacks. However, there
are some limitations like blockchain integration with legacy
networks, handling spoofed IP addresses need to be solved
for adopting the blockchain based DDoS mitigation in the
network level.

B. Near attack domain location

The DDoS attacks mitigation at the attacker network is an
effective way to handle DDoS attacks, as the attack trafﬁc will
not be propagated to the internet network. Most of the latest
DDoS botnets are formed by compromising the legitimate IoT
devices located all over the internet and target the victims to
send malicious network trafﬁc. So, detection and mitigation of
IoT botnets at the source network in essential. Chen et al. [82]
focused on detecting and mitigating IoT based DDoS attacks
or botnets in IoT environment using blockchain. The edge
devices or IoT gateways acts as a blockchain node to perform
transactions when a network anomaly or attack detected in
the IoT environment. The techniques used for network trafﬁc
analysis in the paper include statistical analysis, conventional
bot detection techniques like community detection. The smart
contracts are used to write attack alerts data in transactions
and Ethereum network distribute the data across the IoT
nodes. But, the IoT gateway nodes are not usually customer-
centric and deploying the blockchain client application in the
gateway is challenging for real-time production environment.

Javaid et al. [66] discussed the blockchain based DDoS
attack detection on the servers connected to the IoT devices.
The IoT devices sending data to the server is approved by
the Ethereum network with an expense of gas cost. When
a rogue IoT device trying to send the malicious network
trafﬁc, the IoT device is penalized with high gas cost and
only trusted devices are approved for connecting to the
network. The integration of the IoT with Ethereum enables
the denial of service mitigation on the IoT device connected
servers. Sagirlar et al. [83] proposed a blockchain solution for
detecting the IoT related peer to peer botnets. The assumption
is that botnets frequently communicate to each other to
perform malicious activity. The authors mentioned that the
network trafﬁc between the botnet nodes are considered
as blockchain transactions in permissioned Byzantine Fault
Tolerant (BFT) and use these transactions to identify the
botnet IoT devices. The proposal method may not be a
viable solution, as the network trafﬁc ﬂows are enormous and
blockchain may not accommodate the transaction capacity
needed for storing in blockchain nodes.

Spathoulas et al. [84] presented an outbound network
trafﬁc sharing among the blockchain enabled IoT gateways

9

Table IV: DDoS mitigation near network using Blockchain

Title
Yeh et al. [21]
Yang et al. [74]
Yeh et al. [72]
Rodrigues et al. [75]
Burger et al. [65]
Rodrigues et al. [64]
Rodrigues et al. [18]
Hajizadeh et al. [77]
Essaid et al. [73]
Aujla et al. [78]
Shaﬁ et al. [79]
Pavlidis et al. [70]
Abou et al. [71]

Blockchain
Ethereum
Ethereum
Ethereum
Ethereum
Ethereum
Ethereum
Ethereum
Hyperledger Fabric
Ethereum
Generic
Hyperledger
Ethereum
Ethereum

Type
Consortium
Permission
Consortium
Public
Public
Public
Consortium
Private
Public
Private
-
Public, Private
Public

Consensus
Proof of Work
Proof of work
Proof of work
Proof of Work
Proof of Work
Proof of Work
Proof of Work
Kafka
Proof of work
-
Kafka
Proof-of-Authority
Proof of work

Technologies
Smart contracts, Swarm, DOS, Bloom ﬁlter
Smart Contract
Smart contract, Swarm, Oracle
Smart Contract, SDN and VNF.
Smart Contract, Bloom ﬁlter
SmartContract, SDN
Smart Contract, IPFS, SDN
Chain code, SDN, Threat Platform
Smart Contract, Deep learning(LSTM), SDN
SDN
SDN, IoT
Smart Contract
Smart Contract, Software Deﬁned Networking

Table V: Advantages and limitations of near network based Blockchain solutions

Title
Yeh et al. [21]

Objective
Decentralized DDoS info sharing

Advantage
SOC may use DDoS data among peers

Yang et al. [74]

Yeh et al. [72]
Rodrigues et al. [75]

Burger et al. [65]

Rodrigues et al. [64]

Rodrigues et al. [18]
Hajizadeh et al. [77]

Shaﬁ et al. [79]

Essaid et al. [73]
Pavlidis et al. [70]

Abou et al. [80]

Blockchain based DDoS mitigation ser-
vices
Collaborative DDoS info sharing
Blockchain based DDoS mitigation ar-
chitecture
Scalable Ethereum based DDoS detec-
tion
Blockchain architecture and design for
DDoS
Ethereum testbed for DDoS mitigation
Blockchain based threat intelligent plat-
form
Mitigate the IoT based DDoS attempts
in SDN
DL and smart contract DDoS detection
collaborative DDoS mitigation at
the
AS level
Intra-domain and inter-domain DDoS
mitigation

Client validation and provider authenti-
cation
SOC info share platform
First
architecture
Blockchain
Practical implementation

for DDoS and

Limitations
Selecting the data certiﬁer is
challenging
Spoofed IP’s are ignored

Spoofed IP’s are ignored
Spoofed IP’s are ignored

Questions on Ethereum usage

Detection and mitigation also included

not for spoofed IP

Tested on hardware
Important security application

Scalability
Fault tolerance

-

Not support for non-SDN

DL based
Network level DDoS mitigation

Effective DDoS mitigation

Standard dataset
Difﬁcult
DDoS attacks
Spoofed IP’s are ignored

to identify slow

Table VI: DDoS mitigation near attack location using Blockchain.

Title
Chen et al. [82]
Javaud et al. [66]
Sagirlar et al. [83]
Spathoulas et al. [84]
Abou et al. [71]
Kataoka et al. [67]

Blockchain
Ethereum
Ethereum
Hyperledger (Future work)
Ethereum (Future work)
Ethereum
Ethereum

Type
Public
Public
permission
Public
Permission
Public, Private

Consensus
Proof of work
Proof of work
BFT
Proof of work
Proof of work
Proof of work

Technologies
Smart contract, IOT
Smart Contract, IoT
IoT, Chaincode
IoT, Smart Contract
SDN, IOT
Smart Contract, SDN, IoT

to detect the IoT botnet. The authors performed simulations
on the proposed solution and showed the promising results
using detection efﬁciency parameter. But, the solution is not
tested in the real blockchain nodes installed in the gateway
and mentioned that Ethereum smart implementation is one
of their future work. But, in general, the IoT gateways are
multivendor devices and interoperability among the devices
is an issue.

Abou et al.

[71] discussed collaboration among the
autonomous systems to detect the DDoS attacks. Each AS
contain SDN controller,
in which blockchain application
like Ethereum client is installed to distribute the malicious
IP addresses among other AS’s. Whenever a malicious IP
address is identiﬁed in the AS, the SDN controller updates

to the Ethereum client and then Ethereum clients update
to all the SDN controller in the AS’s for DDoS detection
and mitigation. To implement this solution, the AS’s should
support the same SDN controller and agree to collaboratively
work for DDoS mitigation. Kataoka et al. [67] presented
a similar [71] blockchain and SDN based architecture for
whitelisting the IoT devices in the network. The trusted
proﬁle consist of IoT devices will be stored in smart contract
based blockchain transaction and the SDN controller will
the switches and routers in the SDN network.
update all
This implementation enable the malicious or IoT botnets
will be blocked in the attack network itself and protect the
networks. Considering there is a huge number of IoT devices
connected to internet approximately 31 billion devices as of
2020, the implementation of the blockchain for each gateway

in IoT environment is challenging and practically impossible.
In addition,
the IoT gateway vendors interoperability and
supporting the blockchain nodes just for the sake of DDoS
detection and mitigation may not seem to be reasonable with
the current state-of-the-art technology.

C. Near Victim Location

Yang et al.

[74] proposed a real-time DDoS mitiga-
tion service leveraging a consortium based or permissioned
blockchain. Each DDoS service provider has an account in the
permission blockchain to provide DDoS mitigation service.
The victim looks for the attacker IP-AS mapping in the
blockchain, and the trusted service provider IP tagged with
AS is authorized to provide the DDoS mitigation service. The
authors also proposed the reputation or credibility validation
mechanism of the service providers. However, if the attack
IP is spoofed, the author’s proposed blockchain based DDoS
mitigation service is not applicable. Kyoungmin Kim et al.
[19] proposed a decentralized CDN service to mitigate the
DDoS attacks with the help of private blockchain and particu-
larly used by government and military agencies to protect their
service. The victims usually the service providers hosting the
web content servers. They can protect the servers using the
decentralized the CDN services.

The context of the attacker and victim location may be
changed based on the attack type and how the attack is con-
ducted. For example, an attacker may use their infrastructure
to send the malicious trafﬁc. In this case, the blockchain based
solutions proposed in the attacker domain can be considered
as near attacker based solutions. Additionally, the attacker
compromise the legitimate IoT devices and use them as a
botnet to attack another victim. Here, the solutions deployed
in the IoT device locations also comes under near attacker
based solutions. The solutions solely implemented in the main
victim (not the legitimate IoT bot owner victim) are considered
under the Near victim location based solutions. We can say
that near the victim based solution research articles are far too
less than the network based and near attacker based solutions.
It is too late to mitigate the DDoS attacks near the victim. So,
the existing solutions mainly focused on the network level or
near attacker.

D. Hybrid solutions

The hybrid DDoS detection and mitigation solution can be
the combination of the network based, near attacker location
and the near victim location based solution. For effective
mitigation of the DDoS attacks, the multi level mitigation
solutions are needed. But, the implementation of these solu-
tions require the collaboration among stakeholders. Abou et al.
[80] proposed intra domain and inter domain DDoS detection
and mitigation solution using blockchain. The intra-domain
detection include near the victim based solution and inter
domain detection meaning that network based solution. The
Ethereum smart contract is deployed in each AS to distribute
the DDoS threat information and the SDN controller is used
to update the AS network trafﬁc ﬁltering rule to block the

10

malicious trafﬁc for inter domain DDoS mitigation. On the
other hand, the trafﬁc from switches and routers in the same
domains are monitored using SDN controller applications and
apply the ﬂow control rules in switches/routers using open ﬂow
switch protocol. This mechanism mitigate the internal attacks
originating from the same domain. Based on our research,
there is limited work done on proposing solutions in multi
levels of internet architecture and scope for new research
contributions in this area.

IV. OPEN CHALLENGES

In this section, we discuss the research challenges to lever-
age the blockchain technology for DDoS attack detection and
mitigation solutions. The detail description of the decentral-
ized technologies adoption in conventional network issues are
presented to handle the DDoS attacks.

A. Integration with Legacy Network

Distributed denial of service attacks mitigation involves
the network operators, internet service providers and edge
network service providers to respond and block the malicious
actor trafﬁc. These stakeholders run the network services in
legacy platforms and has been providing services for decades
and adapting to the decentralized blockchain technology is a
major concern. The reasons could be the lack of memory and
computation requirements for blockchain in legacy networks
[77], trust on the technology, unavailability of blockchain pro-
fessional workforce, fear of failure to protect customers while
using blockchain. In addition, a collaboration between the
ISP’s is required to share the malicious data indicators among
the ISP’s and all the stakeholder’s may not be comfortable,
as there is no monetization aspect for the internet service
providers and usually only beneﬁted by the attack victims.
So, a responsible organization or service provider should be
stepped up to coordinate among the stakeholders and make
sure the involved stakeholders get beneﬁted.

B. Bitcoin/Ethereum P2P Network Zero-Day Vulnerabilities

The Blockchain transactions process include the network
trafﬁc passing through the internet from one node and other
nodes in the network; the cryptocurrency exchanges can also
act as a blockchain node on behalf of the client and perform
the transactions in the exchange conventional network. The
attack vector for the blockchain is quite broader and the cost
of a single vulnerability in the applications is in millions of
dollars. For instance, a parity check vulnerability in Ethereum
causes lost $300 million dollars [85] and a small bug found
in cryptocurrencies has a huge impact on the decentralized
network. It is also important to note that the cryptocurrency
exchanges having conventional network will have a major
consequence to impact
the P2P applications. We envision
that there is a scope to progress for developing the ﬂawless
applications and monitoring the trafﬁc for illegitimate activity
detection.

11

Table VII: Advantages and limitations of near attack location based blockchain solutions

Title
Chen et al. [82]

Objective
IoT based DDoS detection using blockchain

Javaid et al. [66]

Ethereum and IoT integration for DDoS

Sagirlar et al. [83]

IoT botnet detection using BFT.

Spathoulas et al. [84]

IoT botnets detection using blockchain

Abou et al. [71]
Kataoka et al. [67]

AS level SDN and blockchain solution
IoT botnets detection using SDN and
blockchain

the

Advantage
The Attacks can be stopped at
source network
Automated control of the server IoT
inbound trafﬁc
First blockchain-based IoT botnet de-
tection
Outbound trafﬁc exchange using IOT
gateway
Network level DDoS detection
Attacker location based detection

Limitations
Practically may not be viable

Only applicable to server DDoS

May not be scalable

Not practically implemented

AS legacy networks issue
Not applicable to non SDN based
IoT

C. Lack of Blockchain P2P Network Datasets

V. FUTURE DIRECTIONS

Monitoring the anomalous behavior of the blockchain net-
work trafﬁc and transactions dataset using machine learning
and deep learning techniques is one of the solutions for
detecting the DDoS attacks proposed in the prior art [69]
[53]. But
there are very few datasets available in public
for continuing research and improving the detection metrics.
Mt.Gox exchange trading activity data from 2011 to 2013
is available for public to use for research purpose [86]. The
quality of the data and how older the data is questionable for
testing and detecting the real time attacks. We believe that
having standard datasets and application of big data analytics
in the future is a must requirement for research progress in
DDoS detection in cryptocurrency networks.

D. Spoofed IP DDoS Attacks Detection

The proposed solutions for DDoS attacks detection mainly
identiﬁes the source IP address and use blockchain technology
to store the transactions and share the IP address among
the stakeholders to block/whitelist the IP address with trust
and validation at the network level [71][72] [73] [74] [71]
[67] [75] [65]. These solutions assume that the originating
malicious IP addresses are not spoofed, and this condition is
not always true. In most of the scenarios, as seen in Table
II, the attacker performs a reﬂection attack, in which the
spoofed trafﬁc is being sent to the victim to consume the
communication capacity or saturating the CPU or memory
resources for successful DDoS attack. The researchers also
not addressed the IPv6 trafﬁc and can be critical storing the IP
version 6 data in blockchain in terms of memory consumption.

E. IOT and SDN Vendor Interoperability

The existing state-of-art essentially utilized the software de-
ﬁned networks and internet of things technology to address the
denial of service attacks either at the victim level or network
level. Even though those solutions prove that the attacks can
be mitigated, there is a real challenge when trying to adopt the
techniques in industry. The IoT device or gateway vendors are
quite diversiﬁed and there are multitude of SDN supporting
network device providers for enterprise solution. We tend
to see incompatibility issue and also supporting blockchain
node issues in these network paradigms and deploying a
decentralized application across their stakeholder network is
impractical. It is desirable to depend on the Blockchain based
DDoS mitigation as a service solution like Gladius [87].

In this section, the future directions of dealing with DDoS
attacks using blockchain technology is explored. We have
presented the research directions in terms of the advancements
in blockchain and how these advancements can be used to
address the DDoS attacks.

A. Internet of Blockchain

The current blockchain technologies

like Bitcoin or
Ethereum smart contracts transaction process is sequential
and hence, it is very slow to add the transactions in the
blockchain. To solve the scalability and interoperability issue
between blockchain nodes, internet connected blockchain has
been proposed and can concurrently process the transactions
from different blockchains. Paralism [88] built the blockchain
infrastructure with unlimited scalability and digital economy
platform supported by parallel blockchain. Customized script
and chain virtualization make paralism support any amount
of sub-chains and independently operated chain-based ap-
plications and also become the backbone of the internet in
decentralized world. This technology is in the early stages of
the development and lot of scope to work on utilizing parallel
blockchain to share the threat data across the blockchain appli-
cations and protect denial of service attacks. We also think that
the parallel blockchain surfaces new security issues including
leaking the information between the blockchain applications
and will be the topic to focus for researchers while building the
blockchain internet backbone. Another notable advancement in
the blockchain is Xrouter, which acts as blockchain router to
communicate one blockchain like bitcoin to smart contracts,
supporting interchain and multichain services [89].

B. Programmable data planes (P4) for Blockchain based
DDoS Solutions

The network paradigms keep changing as the new tech-
nology trends emerged in the enterprises. The Internet of
Things supports IP protocol and IoT application protocols
MQTT, XMPP, AMQP etc. The denial of service attacks can
be carried by leveraging the weaknesses in the protocol and
ﬂooding the trafﬁc on the victim machine. The combination
of Programmable data planes at the gateway level and the
blockchain technology for sharing the attack data is effective
for mitigation of the attacks. The P4 device in the switch level
that can parse any type of network protocol and makes easy

for applying the blockchain technology. We envision that the
future work would be proposing new architecture with P4
for mitigation of attacks, developing smart contracts for the
gateway level device to monitor and mitigate the attacks using
Programmable data planes.

C. Threat Information Sharing using Blockchain

Consortium or private based blockchains are most compat-
ible for sharing the threat information among the Blockchain
participants. Numerous Ethereum based techniques has ap-
plied to share the information with integrity and anonymity.
Leveraging the decentralized ﬁle storage such as swarm, IPFS
enables to store the information rather than keeping the data in
transactions and causing time delay to process the sequential
transactions. We believe that the information sharing ﬁeld us-
ing blockchain requires improvement and architecture changes
to implement secured information sharing network.

D. Ethereum 2.0 Network for DDoS mitigation

DDoS solutions implemented using Ethereum network [72]
[71]faces scalability, speed challenges, in particular transac-
tions refer to allow or block attack IP addresses. Ethereum
2.0 has been proposed and implemented for the last few years
[90]. From August 2020, the upgradation to Ethereum 2.0 is
initiated with three phases to complete the process. ETH 2.0
works-based proof of stake (POS) rather than POW, which
is a major change and the upgradation supports the drastic
increase in network bandwidth, Lower Gas Costs and beneﬁt
for scalability of the network. We envision implementing the
DDoS mitigation scheme in Ethereum 2.0 in the near future.

VI. CONCLUSION

Blockchain is emerged as a disruptive technology in recent
times and the blockchain application capabilities are promising
to use in the ﬁeld of cybersecurity. DDoS attacks are well
known and still considered as a major threat to disrupt the busi-
nesses. We have performed a detailed review of the blockchain
based solutions for DDoS attacks detection and mitigation
including the consideration of the different network environ-
ments such as SDN, IoT, cloud or conventional network. The
solutions are categorized based on the solution deployment
location such as network based, near attack location, near
victim location and hybrid solutions. We determined that most
of the existing solutions focused on storing the malicious IP
addresses in blockchain transactions implemented using smart
contract and distribute the IP addresses across the AS’s in
the network level. However, limited research is performed to
propose near victim location and hybrid solutions. Finally, we
described the open challenges based on the existing research
contributions and the future directions based on the advance-
ments in blockchain technologies like parallel blockchain,
Xroute, Ethereum 2.0 to effectively handle the DDoS attacks.
We believe that our review will be a great reference resource
for readers and the future researchers interested to pursue the
research in the combination of Blockchain and DDoS attacks
domain.

12

REFERENCES

[1] Real Security.

Evolution

REAL

-
evolution-of-ddos-in-the-last-decade/, 2019.

security.

of DDoS in

decade
the
https://www.real-sec.com/2019/08/

last

[2] Nexusguard. DDoS Threat Report 2020 Q2. https://blog.nexusguard.

com/threat-report/ddos-threat-report-2020-q2, 2020.

[3] Lily Hay Newman.

the Largest
Yet Recorded. https://www.wired.com/story/github-ddos-memcached/,
2018.

A 1.3-Tbs DDoS Hit GitHub,

[4] Brian Krebs.
— Krebs
Security.
krebsonsecurity-hit-with-record-ddos/, 2016.

KrebsOnSecurity Hit With Record DDoS
https://krebsonsecurity.com/2016/09/

on

[5] John Kennedy. OVH suffers 1.5Tbps DDoS attack via 145,000 webcams.

https://tinyurl.com/ze5juxzv, 2016.

[6] Steven J. Vaughan-Nichols. The Dyn report: What we know so far about
the world’s biggest DDoS attack. https://tinyurl.com/bajaty4, 2016.
[7] Xiaoying Zheng, Yongxin Zhu, and Xueming Si. A survey on challenges
and progresses in blockchain technologies: A performance and security
perspective. Applied Sciences (Switzerland), 9(22):1–24, 2019.
[8] Blockchain - Wikipedia. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blockchain.
[9] Zhetao Li, Jiawen Kang, Rong Yu, Dongdong Ye, Qingyong Deng, and
Yan Zhang. Consortium blockchain for secure energy trading in indus-
IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics,
trial internet of things.
14(8):3690–3700, 2018.

[10] Jiafu Wan, Jiapeng Li, Muhammad Imran, and Di Li. A blockchain-
based solution for enhancing security and privacy in smart factory. IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Informatics, 15(6):3652–3660, 2019.
[11] Junqin Huang, Linghe Kong, Guihai Chen, Min You Wu, Xue Liu,
and Peng Zeng. Towards secure industrial iot: Blockchain system with
IEEE Transactions on Industrial
credit-based consensus mechanism.
Informatics, 15(6):3680–3689, 2019.

[12] Gaoqi Liang, Steven R. Weller, Fengji Luo, Junhua Zhao, and Zhao Yang
Dong. Distributed Blockchain-Based Data Protection Framework for
Modern Power Systems Against Cyber Attacks. IEEE Transactions on
Smart Grid, 10(3):3162–3173, 2019.

[13] Ruinian Li, Tianyi Song, Bo Mei, Hong Li, Xiuzhen Cheng, and Limin
Sun. Blockchain for Large-Scale Internet of Things Data Storage and
Protection. IEEE Transactions on Services Computing, 12(5):762–771,
2019.

[14] Abbas Yazdinejad, Reza M. Parizi, Ali Dehghantanha, Qi Zhang, and
Kim Kwang Raymond Choo. An Energy-Efﬁcient SDN Controller
Architecture for IoT Networks with Blockchain-Based Security. IEEE
Transactions on Services Computing, 13(4):625–638, 2020.

[15] Zecheng Li, Shang Gao, Zhe Peng, Songtao Guo, Yuanyuan Yang, and
Bin Xiao. B-DNS: A Secure and Efﬁcient DNS Based on the Blockchain
Technology. IEEE Transactions on Network Science and Engineering,
8(2):1674–1686, 2021.

[16] Yuan Zhang, Chunxiang Xu,

and
Xuemin Sherman Shen. Blockchain-assisted Public-key Encryption with
Keyword Search against Keyword Guessing Attacks for Cloud Storage.
IEEE Transactions on Cloud Computing, PP(c):1, 2020.

Jianbing Ni, Hongwei Li,

[17] Damian Menscher.

Identifying and protecting against

the largest
DDoS attacks. https://cloud.google.com/blog/products/identity-security/
identifying-and-protecting-against-the-largest-ddos-attacks, 2020.
[18] Bruno Rodrigues, Thomas Bocek, and Burkhard Stiller. Enabling a
Cooperative, Multi-domain DDoS Defense by a Blockchain Signaling
System (BloSS). https://www.ieeelcn.org/lcn42demos/1570382330.pdf,
2017.

[19] Kyoungmin Kim, Youngin You, Mookyu Park, and Kyungho Lee.
DDoS Mitigation: Decentralized CDN Using Private Blockchain.
In
International Conference on Ubiquitous and Future Networks, ICUFN,
volume 2018-July, pages 693–696. IEEE Computer Society, 8 2018.

[20] Syed Badruddoja, Ram Dantu, Logan Widick, Zachary Zaccagni, and
Integrating DOTS with blockchain can secure
Kritagya Upadhyay.
In Proceedings - 2020 IEEE 34th International
massive IoT sensors.
Parallel and Distributed Processing Symposium Workshops, IPDPSW
2020, pages 937–946. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
Inc., 5 2020.

[21] Lo Yao Yeh, Peggy Joy Lu, Szu Hao Huang, and Jiun Long Huang.
SOChain: A Privacy-Preserving DDoS Data Exchange Service Over
IEEE Transactions on Engineering
SOC Consortium Blockchain.
Management, 2020.

[22] Noshina Tariq, Muhammad Asim, Feras Al-Obeidat, Muhammad Zubair
Farooqi, Thar Baker, Mohammad Hammoudeh, and Ibrahim Ghaﬁr. The
security of big data in fog-enabled iot applications including blockchain:
A survey. Sensors (Switzerland), 19(8):1–33, 2019.

[23] C. Douligeris and A. Mitrokotsa. DDoS attacks and defense mech-
anisms: A classiﬁcation. Proceedings of the 3rd IEEE International
Symposium on Signal Processing and Information Technology, ISSPIT
2003, pages 190–193, 2003.

[24] Rochak Swami, Mayank Dave, and Virender Ranga. Software Deﬁned

Networking Based DDoS Defense Mechanisms. 1(1), 2018.

[25] A Srivastava, B B Gupta, A Tyagi, Anupama Sharma, and Anupama
Mishra. A Recent Survey on DDoS Attacks and Defense Mechanisms.
Technical report, 20.

[26] Catalin Cimpanu. DDoS botnets have abused three zero-days in LILIN

video recorders for months. https://tinyurl.com/c32ja6w, 2020.

[27] Saman Taghavi Zargar, James Joshi, and David Tipper. A survey of de-
fense mechanisms against distributed denial of service (DDOS) ﬂooding
attacks. IEEE Communications Surveys and Tutorials, 15(4):2046–2069,
2013.

[28] Amazon. AWS Shield Threat Landscape Report – Q1 2020. https:

//aws-shield-tlr.s3.amazonaws.com/2020-Q1 AWS Shield TLR.pdf,
2020.

[29] Lucian Constantin.

60 Gbps — CIO.

At
ddos-attacks-against-us-banks-peaked-at-60-gbps.html, 2012.

DDoS Attacks Against US Banks Peaked
https://www.cio.com/article/2389721/

[30] JON RUSSELL. Hong Kong Group Battles Huge DDoS Attack. https:

//tinyurl.com/2jfbb9vf, 2014.

[31] Jaikumar Vijayan. Update: Spamhaus hit by biggest-ever DDoS attacks
https://www.computerworld.com/article/2495967/

— Computerworld.
update--spamhaus-hit-by-biggest-ever-ddos-attacks.html, 2013.

[32] Cadie

Thompson.

CloudFlare´s
record-breaking-ddos-attack-strikes-cloudﬂares-network.html, 2014.

network.

Record-breaking DDoS

strikes
https://www.cnbc.com/2014/02/11/

attack

[33] Blockchain Deﬁnition.

https://www.bankrate.com/glossary/b/

blockchain/.

[34] Satoshi Nakamoto. Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System.

Technical report, 2009.

[35] Cryptocurrency Prices, Charts And Market Capitalizations — CoinMar-

ketCap. https://coinmarketcap.com/, 2021.

[36] Anthony Albertorio. Public Key Cryptography and Digital Signatures.

https://tinyurl.com/3cebahnn, 2018.

[37] Julija Golosova and Andrejs Romanovs. The advantages and disadvan-
In 2018 IEEE 6th Workshop on
tages of the blockchain technology.
Advances in Information, Electronic and Electrical Engineering, AIEEE
2018 - Proceedings. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
Inc., 12 2018.

[38] Zibin Zheng, Shaoan Xie, Hongning Dai, Xiangping Chen, and Huaimin
Wang. An Overview of Blockchain Technology: Architecture, Consen-
sus, and Future Trends. In Proceedings - 2017 IEEE 6th International
Congress on Big Data, BigData Congress 2017, pages 557–564. Institute
of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc., 9 2017.

[39] NATHAN REIFF.

The 10 Most

Other
most-important-cryptocurrencies-other-than-bitcoin/, 2020.

Bitcoin.

Than

Important Cryptocurrencies
https://www.investopedia.com/tech/

[40] hyperledger/fabric: Hyperledger Fabric is an enterprise-grade permis-
sioned distributed ledger framework for developing solutions and ap-
plications. Its modular and versatile design satisﬁes a broad range
of industry use cases. It offers a unique approach to consensus that
enables performance at scale while preserving privacy. https://github.
com/hyperledger/fabric.

[41] Girad.

The IoT Rundown For 2020: Stats, Risks, and Solu-
tions – Security Today. https://securitytoday.com/Articles/2020/01/13/
The-IoT-Rundown-for-2020.aspx?Page=2, 2020.

[42] Kannan Govindarajan, Kong Chee Meng, and Hong Ong. A literature
review on Software-Deﬁned Networking (SDN) research topics, chal-
lenges and solutions. In 2013 5th International Conference on Advanced
Computing, ICoAC 2013, pages 293–299. Institute of Electrical and
Electronics Engineers Inc., 10 2014.

[43] Rajendra V. Boppana, Rajasekhar Chaganti, and Vasudha Vedula. An-
alyzing the vulnerabilities introduced by ddos mitigation techniques
for software-deﬁned networks. In Advances in Intelligent Systems and
Computing, volume 1055, pages 169–184. Springer, 6 2020.

[44] Liuwei Huo, Dingde Jiang, Sheng Qi, and Lei Miao. A Blockchain-
Based Security Trafﬁc Measurement Approach to Software Deﬁned
Networking. Mobile Networks and Applications, pages 1–11, 1 2020.

[45] Iuon-Chang Lin and Tzu-Chun Liao. A Survey of Blockchain Security
International Journal of Network Security,

Issues and Challenges.
19(5):653–659, 2017.

[46] Mudassar Ahmad, Tanveer Younis, Muhammad Asif Habib, Rehan
Ashraf, and Syed Hassan Ahmed. A review of current security issues
In EAI/Springer Innovations in Communication
in internet of things.

13

and Computing, pages 11–23. Springer Science and Business Media
Deutschland GmbH, 2019.

[47] Ammar Muthanna, Abdelhamied A. Ateya, Abdukodir Khakimov, Irina
Gudkova, Abdelrahman Abuarqoub, Konstantin Samouylov, and Andrey
Koucheryavy. Secure and reliable IoT networks using fog computing
with software-deﬁned networking and blockchain. Journal of Sensor
and Actuator Networks, 8(1), 2019.

[48] Xianmin Wang, Jing Li, Xiaohui Kuang, Yu an Tan, and Jin Li. The
security of machine learning in an adversarial setting: A survey. Journal
of Parallel and Distributed Computing, 130:12–23, 8 2019.

[49] Shang Gao, Zecheng Li, Bin Xiao, and Guiyi Wei. Security Threats
IEEE Network,

in the Data Plane of Software-Deﬁned Networks.
32(4):108–113, 7 2018.

[50] Chao Qu, Ming Tao, and Ruifen Yuan. A hypergraph-based blockchain
model and application in internet of things-enabled smart homes. Sen-
sors (Switzerland), 18(9), 2018.

[51] Felipe S. Dantas Silva, Esau Silva, Emidio P. Neto, Marcilio Lemos,
Augusto J. Venancio Neto, and Flavio Esposito. A taxonomy of DDoS
attack mitigation approaches featured by SDN technologies in IoT
scenarios. Sensors (Switzerland), 20(11):1–28, 2020.

[52] Ashutosh Dhar Dwivedi, Gautam Srivastava, Shalini Dhar, and Rajani
Singh. A decentralized privacy-preserving healthcare blockchain for IoT.
Sensors (Switzerland), 19(2):1–17, 2019.

[53] Shailendra Rathore, Yi Pan, and Jong Hyuk Park. BlockDeepNet: A
blockchain-based secure deep learning for IoT network. Sustainability
(Switzerland), 11(14):1–15, 2019.

[54] Fatima Hussain, Rasheed Hussain, Syed Ali Hassan, and Ekram Hos-
sain. Machine Learning in IoT Security: Current Solutions and Future
Challenges. IEEE Communications Surveys and Tutorials, 22(3):1686–
1721, 7 2020.

[55] Kelton A.P. da Costa, Jo˜ao P. Papa, Celso O. Lisboa, Roberto Munoz,
and Victor Hugo C. de Albuquerque.
Internet of Things: A survey
on machine learning-based intrusion detection approaches. Computer
Networks, 151:147–157, 3 2019.

[56] Shi Dong, Khushnood Abbas, and Raj Jain. A Survey on Distributed
Denial of Service (DDoS) Attacks in SDN and Cloud Computing
Environments. IEEE Access, 7:80813–80828, 2019.

[57] Kaijun Liu, Shengwei Xu, Guoai Xu, Miao Zhang, Dawei Sun, and
Haifeng Liu. A Review of Android Malware Detection Approaches
Based on Machine Learning. IEEE Access, 8:124579–124607, 2020.

[58] Vasiliy Elagin, Anastasia Spirkina, Andrei Levakov, and Ilya Belozert-
sev. Blockchain behavioral trafﬁc model as a tool to inﬂuence service
IT security. Future Internet, 12(4):1–12, 2020.

[59] P. J. Beslin Pajila and E. Golden Julie. Detection of DDoS Attack Using
In Lecture Notes on Data Engineering and
SDN in IoT: A Survey.
Communications Technologies, volume 33, pages 438–452. Springer, 2
2020.

[60] Krushang Sonar and Hardik Upadhyay. A Survey: DDOS Attack on

Internet of Things. Technical Report 11, 2014.

[61] Jin Ho Park and Jong Hyuk Park. Blockchain security in cloud
computing: Use cases, challenges, and solutions. Symmetry, 9(8):1–13,
2017.
[62] Blockchain
2020
blockchain-technology-applications-use-cases.

in
Use
https://www.businessinsider.com/

- Business

Applications

Technology

Insider.

Cases

&

[63] Rajeev Singh, Sudeep Tanwar, and Teek Parval Sharma. Utilization
of blockchain for mitigating the distributed denial of service attacks.
Security and Privacy, 3(3), 5 2020.

[64] Bruno Rodrigues, Thomas Bocek, Andri Lareida, David Hausheer,
Sina Rafati, and Burkhard Stiller. A blockchain-based architecture for
collaborative DDoS mitigation with smart contracts. In Lecture Notes
in Computer Science (including subseries Lecture Notes in Artiﬁcial
Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics), volume 10356 LNCS,
pages 16–29. Springer Verlag, 7 2017.

[65] Jonathan Burger Zurich, Sina Rafati, and Thomas Bocek. Collaborative
DDoS Mitigation Based on Blockchains. Technical report, 2017.
[66] Uzair Javaid and Muhammad Naveed Aman. Mitigating loT Device

based DDoS Attacks using Blockchain. (June), 2018.

[67] Kotaro Kataoka, Saurabh Gangwar, and Prashanth Podili. Trust list:
Internet-wide and distributed IoT trafﬁc management using blockchain
and SDN. In IEEE World Forum on Internet of Things, WF-IoT 2018 -
Proceedings, volume 2018-Janua, pages 296–301. Institute of Electrical
and Electronics Engineers Inc., 5 2018.

[68] Sharyar Wani, Mohammed Imthiyas, Hamad Almohamedh, Khalid M
Alhamed, and Sultan Almotairi. Distributed Denial of Service ( DDoS )
Mitigation Using Blockchain — A Comprehensive Insight. pages 1–21,
2021.

14

[86] Tyler Vasek, Marie; Thornton, Micah; Moore. Replication data for: Em-
pirical Analysis of Denial-of-Service Attacks in the Bitcoin Ecosystem
- TU Security Economics Lab Dataverse, 2014.

[87] Gladius: CDN Decentralized And DDoS Protection On The Blockchain.

https://tinyurl.com/hmjd5s9u, 2017.

[88] Paralism Commercial White Paper.

https://www.paralism.com/blog/

paralism-commercial-white-paper/, 2019.

[89] Introducing XRouter: Developers Can Now Mix And Match Any
Blockchain Via The World’s First Blockchain Router. https://tinyurl.
com/m89h9cnv, 2019.

[90] Rene Millman. What is Ethereum 2.0 and Why Does It Matter? -
Decrypt. https://decrypt.co/resources/what-is-ethereum-2-0, 2020.

[69] Mohammad Tayyab, Bahari Belaton, and Mohammed Anbar. ICMPv6-
Based DoS and DDoS Attacks Detection Using Machine Learning
Techniques, Open Challenges, and Blockchain Applicability: A Review.
IEEE Access, 8:170529–170547, 9 2020.

[70] Adam Pavlidis, Marinos Dimolianis, Kostas Giotis, Loukas Anagnostou,
Nikolaos Kostopoulos, Theocharis Tsigkritis, Ilias Kotinas, Dimitrios
Kalogeras, and Vasilis Maglaris. Orchestrating DDoS mitigation via
blockchain-based network provider collaborations. Knowledge Engi-
neering Review, 35, 2020.

[71] Zakaria Abou, El Houda, Abdelhakim Haﬁd, and Lyes Khoukhi. Co-IoT:
A Collaborative DDoS mitigation scheme in IoT environment based on
blockchain using SDN. 2019 IEEE Global Communications Conference
(GLOBECOM), pages 1–6, 2019.

[72] Lo Yao Yeh, Jiun Long Huang, Ting Yin Yen, and Jen Wei Hu. A
Collaborative DDoS Defense Platform Based on Blockchain Technology.
In Proceedings - 2019 12th International Conference on Ubi-Media
Computing, Ubi-Media 2019, pages 1–6. Institute of Electrical and
Electronics Engineers Inc., 8 2019.

[73] Meryam Essaid, Dae Yong Kim, Soo Hoon Maeng, Sejin Park, and
Hong Taek Ju. A Collaborative DDoS Mitigation Solution Based
In 2019 20th Asia-
on Ethereum Smart Contract and RNN-LSTM.
Paciﬁc Network Operations and Management Symposium: Management
in a Cyber-Physical World, APNOMS 2019. Institute of Electrical and
Electronics Engineers Inc., 9 2019.

[74] Xue Yang, Bingyang Liu, Fei Yang, and Chuang Wang. A blockchain
based online trading system for DDoS mitigation services. Proceedings
- 16th IEEE International Symposium on Parallel and Distributed
Processing with Applications, 17th IEEE International Conference on
Ubiquitous Computing and Communications, 8th IEEE International
Conference on Big Data and Cloud Computing, 11t, pages 1036–1037,
2019.

[75] Bruno Rodrigues, Thomas Bocek, and Burkhard Stiller. Multi-domain
DDoS mitigation based on blockchains. In Lecture Notes in Computer
Science (including subseries Lecture Notes in Artiﬁcial Intelligence and
Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics), volume 10356 LNCS, pages 185–190.
Springer Verlag, 7 2017.

[76] Moses Sam Paul. Deploy Smart Contracts on Ropsten Testnet through

Ethereum Remix. https://tinyurl.com/nymnyc5c, 2018.

[77] Mehrdad Hajizadeh, Nima Afraz, Marco Rufﬁni, and Thomas Bauschert.
Collaborative cyber attack defense in SDN networks using blockchain
technology. In Proceedings of the 2020 IEEE Conference on Network
Softwarization: Bridging the Gap Between AI and Network Softwariza-
tion, NetSoft 2020, pages 487–492. Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers Inc., 6 2020.

[78] Gagangeet Singh Aujla, Maninderpal Singh, Arnab Bose, Neeraj Kumar,
Guangjie Han, and Rajkumar Buyya. BlockSDN: Blockchain as a
Service for Software Deﬁned Networking in Smart City Applications.
IEEE Network, 34(2):83–91, 3 2020.

[79] Qaisar Shaﬁ and Abdul Basit. DDoS Botnet Prevention using Blockchain
in Software Deﬁned Internet of Things. In Proceedings of 2019 16th
International Bhurban Conference on Applied Sciences and Technology,
IBCAST 2019, pages 624–628. Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers Inc., 3 2019.

[80] Zakaria Abou El Houda, Abdelhakim Senhaji Haﬁd, and Lyes Khoukhi.
Cochain-SC: An Intra- and Inter-Domain Ddos Mitigation Scheme
IEEE Access,
Based on Blockchain Using SDN and Smart Contract.
7:98893–98907, 2019.

[81] D.V.V.S. Manikumar and B Uma Maheswari. Blockchain Based DDoS
Mitigation Using Machine Learning Techniques. pages 794–800. Insti-
tute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE), 9 2020.

[82] Meizhu Chen, Xiangyan Tang, Jieren Cheng, Naixue Xiong, Jun Li, and
Dong Fan. A DDoS Attack Defense Method Based on Blockchain for
IoTs Devices. In Communications in Computer and Information Science,
volume 1253 CCIS, pages 685–694. Springer Science and Business
Media Deutschland GmbH, 7 2020.

[83] Gokhan Sagirlar, Barbara Carminati, and Elena Ferrari. AutoBotCatcher:
Blockchain-based P2P botnet detection for the internet of things.
In
Proceedings - 4th IEEE International Conference on Collaboration and
Internet Computing, CIC 2018, pages 1–8. Institute of Electrical and
Electronics Engineers Inc., 11 2018.

[84] Georgios Spathoulas, Nikolaos Giachoudis, Georgios Paraskevas
Damiris, and Georgios Theodoridis. Collaborative blockchain-based
detection of distributed denial of service attacks based on internet of
things botnets. Future Internet, 11(11), 11 2019.

[85] How Ethereum lost $300 Million Dollars — Hacker Noon. https://
hackernoon.com/how-ethereum-lost-300-million-dollars-bfedf7ba0c19,
2017.

