Blockchain-based Digital Twin for Supply Chain Management:  

State-of-the-Art Review and Future Research Directions 

Jiongbin Liu1, William Yeoh2, Youyang Qu1, and Longxiang Gao1 

1 School of Information Technology, Deakin University, 221 Burwood Highway, Burwood, VIC 3125 

Australia 

2 Department of Information Systems and Business Analytics, Deakin University, 70 Elgar Road, 

Burwood, VIC 3125 Australia 

Supply chain management (SCM) plays a vital role in the global economy, as evidenced by 

recent  COVID-19  supply  chain  challenges.  Traditional  SCM  faces  security  and  efficiency 

issues,  but  they  can  be  addressed  by  leveraging  digital  twins  (DTs)  and  blockchain 

technology.  The  combination  of  blockchain  and  DTs  can  refine  the  concepts  of  both 

technologies  and  reform  SCM  to  advance  into  Industry  4.0.  In  this  paper,  we  provide  a 

comprehensive literature review of the blockchain-based digital twin (DT) solutions to optimise 

the processes of data management, data storage, and data sharing in SCM. We also investigate 

the  key  benefits  of  the  integration  of  blockchain  and  DTs  and  examine  their  potential 

implementation in various SCM areas, including smart manufacturing, intelligent maintenance, 

and  blockchain-based  DT  shop  floor,  warehouse,  and  logistics.  Finally,  we  put  forward 

recommendations for future research directions.  

Keywords: Blockchain; Digital twins; Supply chain management; Industry 4.0 

1    INTRODUCTION 

Since blockchain technology and DTs were first proposed in 2008 and 2012, respectively, they 

have  been  developing  rapidly  to  revolutionise  SCM  through  improving  the  security  and 

efficiency  of  data  processing,  storage,  and  exchange.  A  DT  is  a  digital  representation  of  a 

physical asset, enabling engineers to perform a  simulation to understand, evaluate, and predict 

behaviours for maintenance even before establishing the physical object [1]. However, the 

interaction between the physical and digital spaces will generate a great amount of data that 

need to be transmitted and stored in diverse infrastructures, such as clouds and fogs. These 

traditional data storage methods are considered to suffer from various security and privacy 

issues  [1]. Therefore,  the  emergence  of  blockchain  technology  is  ideal  for  improving  the 

security and reliability of the DT data due to its decentralisation, transparency, and immutability 

nature. Additionally, the utilisation of a smart contract ensures the tamper-proof DT data and 

transactions  within  the  supply  chain  system.  According  to  Gartner,  over  two-thirds  of 

companies  implementing  IoT  would  decide  to  deploy  at  least  one  DT  in  their  production 

process [2].  

 
Blockchain-based Digital Twin for Supply Chain Management	

Fig. 1.  Evolution of the supply chain industry 

The supply chain industry has evolved in four revolutions from Industry 1.0–4.0, as shown in 

Figure 1. In Industry 1.0 and 2.0, the design methods mainly utilised 2D drawings and physical 

prototypes, resulting in huge commissioning costs [3]. In Industry 3.0, the supply chain industry 

entered into the computer era with the development of computer-aided design (CAD) software 

that proposed the concept of digital prototypes and applied 3D model simulations to reduce the 

cost of failure [3]. In Industry 4.0, the supply chain is developed with mass individualisation 

and integration of the cyber-physical system and DTs [3]. As a consequence, the transactions 

among supply chain parties and the data transmission between the physical and digital spaces 

are becoming more challenging. Notably, the emergence of blockchain technology can benefit 

the  DTs  through  improved  security,  traceability,  transparency,  and  efficiency  of  DTs  data 

processing. Therefore, this paper aims to conduct a comprehensive review of blockchain-based 

DT literature for SCM. Specifically, we identify four research questions that guide our literature 

survey: 

1)  RQ1: What are the definitions and characteristics of DTs and blockchains from the 

current literature? 

2)  RQ2: Which blockchain- and/or DT-related research papers for SCM were most 

instrumental in driving the development of the literature thus far? 

3)  RQ3:  What  are  the  key  benefits  and  potential  implementations  of  blockchain-based 

DT  for  various  areas of SCM? 

4)  RQ4: What are the future research directions for integrating blockchain and DTs for 

Page 2 of 34 

 
 
 
 
 
Blockchain-based Digital Twin for Supply Chain Management	

SCM? 

To  the  best  of  our  knowledge,  there  is  limited  literature  survey  on  the  key  benefits  and 

potential implementation of various aspects of SCM, leveraging DTs and blockchain technology.  

Existing  surveys  regarding  blockchain  and  DTs  did  not  focus  on  how  the  data  processing 

benefited  from  integrating  these  two  technologies  and  failed  to  investigate  the  potential 

implementation of blockchain and DTs in SCM. 

In  this  paper,  we  provide  a  comprehensive  literature  review  for  the  blockchain-based     DT 

solutions  to  optimise  the  processes  of  data  management,  data  storage,  and  data  sharing. 

We also     focus on the blockchain-based DT implementation for SCM, including the aspects of 

smart  manufacturing,  intelligent  maintenance,  and  blockchain-based  DT  shop  floors, 

warehouses, and logistics. The main contributions of this literature survey are as follows: 

l This  paper  provides  a  comprehensive  literature  review  for  the  blockchain-based  DT 

solutions in addressing the data-related issues. 

l This paper investigates the key benefits of integrating blockchain and DTs with SCM that 

can act as guidelines to facilitate further development. 

l This  paper  analyses  the  implementation  of  blockchain  and  DT  in  various  SCM areas   to 

address the gaps in current literature. 

l This  paper  provides  recommendations  for  future  research  directions  for  implementing 

blockchain and DT in SCM. 

  Applying  literature  survey  approach,  we  examined  the most relevant and recent research 

papers. First, we defined three different strings of words to be searched on the databases: ‘DTss’ 

and ‘blockchain’ and ‘supply chain’ or ‘supply chain management’. Since there is no published 

paper related to these three words altogether, we searched either ‘digital twins’ or ‘blockchain’ 

with ‘supply chain’ or ‘supply chain management’ or ‘digital twins’ and ‘blockchain’ only. A 

literature search on blockchain-based DT for SCM is conducted in the Web of Science database 

using the aforementioned search string. Additionally, we utilised the screening criteria to exclude 

duplicate papers and those not written in English. We include those published in a scientific 

journal, book chapter, or conference.  The statistics of the collected literature with the three groups 

of keywords are shown in Figures 2-4. 

Page 3 of 34 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Blockchain-based Digital Twin for Supply Chain Management	

(a) 

Fig. 2.  Statistics of collected literature (digital twins and blockchain) 

Fig. 3.  Statistics of collected literature (digital twins and supply chain) 

Fig. 4.  Statistics of collected literature (blockchain and supply chain) 

     The remainder of this paper  is organised  as  follows.  Section  2  provides  the  background 

regarding DTs and blockchain, and presents the integration of DTs and blockchain to address 

Page 4 of 34 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Blockchain-based Digital Twin for Supply Chain Management	

data-related  issues.  Section  3  investigates  the  key  benefits and the potential implementation 

of  DTs  and  blockchain  in  various  SCM  areas.  Section  4  outlines  and  discusses  the  future 

research directions. Section 5 concludes the survey. 

2  BACKGROUND 

2.1  Digital  Twins 

Grieves  first  introduced  the  concept  of  DTs  in  2003  for  the  management of the whole product 

lifecycle in the virtual space [4]. There are various definitions for DTs collected from different 

sources. In 2012, the definition of DTs was proposed by the National Aeronautics and Space 

Administration  (NASA),  which  refers  to  an  integrated  multi-physics,  multi-scale,  and 

probabilistic simulation, mirroring the state of a physical object in real-time based on historical 

data, physical model data, and sensor data [5]. Pethuru Raj [6] defined DTs as an exact virtual 

representation or replica of any tangible physical system or process. According to L Hou et al. 

[7], the concept of DT is to create a digital replica of a physical asset and then synchronise data 

generated from the digital and physical objects to monitor, simulate and optimise the physical 

asset. A DT is an essential component of the concept of the Cyber-Physical System [8, 9] that 

can  be  considered  as  any  physical  object,  process,  system,  and  the  like  that perform  an 

interaction with a digital space through a communication network [10, 11].  

   A DT is not only a simple simulation model [4, 12-14]. It is also an intelligent model that can 

monitor, operate and optimise the lifecycle of its physical twin and continuously interact and 

predict future possible defects, failures, or damages. Additionally, DT can maintain the physical 

asset preventively through simulating and testing its digital configurations [11]. As shown in 

Figure 5, the DT model is defined through several components, including sensors and actuators 

from the physical space. Then, it creates, communicates and integrates with the digital space 

for data analysis and continuous updates. Additionally, a DT can act as a software program to 

input a variety of data from real-world scenarios and output useful simulations and predictions 

to enable an improved decision-making process [6]. 

Page 5 of 34 

 
 
 
 
Blockchain-based Digital Twin for Supply Chain Management	

Fig. 5. Manufacturing process DT model 

2.2  Blockchain Technology 

Blockchain technology was first proposed as an underlying technology for cryptocurrencies, 

such as Bitcoin and Etherum [15, 16]. The development of blockchain has brought great changes 

to various domains, including finance, government, healthcare, and supply chains, thanks to its 

characteristics  of  security,  decentralisation,  immutability,  transparency,  traceability,  and 

irreversibility.  Blockchain  can  be  defined  as  a  distributed  and  decentralised  append-only 

database by utilising cryptographic and computer networking techniques to ensure data storage 

and sharing security [17, 18], also acting as a platform for implementing digital transactions [19, 

20].  

   A  block’s  fundamental  elements  contain  an  index,  timestamp,  transaction  data,  and  hashes  of 

current  and  previous  transactions.  Then,  two  or  more  blocks  are  chained  together,  adopting 

asymmetric  cryptography  to  enhance  the  security  of  transaction  data  [21].  Additionally, 

blockchain distributed ledgers allow each transaction to be verified by network nodes through 

a  consensus  mechanism  before  being  added  to  the  blockchain  [22-24].  Along  with  the 

consensus  mechanism,  the  smart  contract  is  another  essential  component  of  blockchain,  as 

described in the next sub-section. 

2.3  Blockchain-based Digital Twin 

As mentioned above, DTs enable engineers to analyse historical data in the past, track current 

performances of the physical asset, and predict the state of the device in the future throughout 

Page 6 of 34 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Blockchain-based Digital Twin for Supply Chain Management	

the entire lifecycle. During each lifecycle phase of DT, the physical object sends various data 

to  its  DT  counterpart.  At  the  same  time,  blockchain  technology  can  be  utilised  to  securely 

document  these  data  and  provide  real-time  synchronisation  and  continuous  updates  due  to 

blockchain  technology's  distributed,  immutable,  decentralisation,  and  trustless  attributes. 

Furthermore, blockchain ensures provenance data to be tracked and traced on-chain, making it 

an effective solution to monitor the creation process of DTs [10, 25]. Blockchain enables DT 

data to be stored in a secure and tamper-proof ledger and ensures the efficient creation of virtual 

models [26]. Therefore, the development of blockchain technology can refine the DT process 

by ensuring transparent, efficient, and secure data management, data storage, and data sharing 

in industrial sectors, including SCM.  A summary of blockchain for DT research is provided in 

Table 1.  

Table 1. Summary of blockchain for DT research 

Papers 

Focus Area 

Problem Addressed  Main 

Key Contributions 

[27] 

Data 
management, 
data storage, 
and data 
sharing 

Efficiency and 
security issues for 
managing DT data 
in a complex 
network 

Approach 
Proposed 
framework, 
case study 

[28] 

Data 
management 

[29] 

Data 
management 
and data 
storage 

Conceptual, 
proposed 
mechanism 

Proposed 
framework 

Distrust between 
stakeholders and 
insufficient 
interactions 
between physical 
and digital spaces 
in manufacturing 
service 
collaboration 
Trustworthiness 
and security issues 
of data 
management and 
data storage 

1. Propose a data management 
method for DT of product 
based on blockchain. 
2. Establish a peer-to-peer 

network and utilise a smart 
contract to enhance data 
sharing efficiency. 
3. Integrate blockchain to 
improve data storage 
security. 

1. Design a blockchain-based 
DT manufacturing service 
collaboration mechanism. 
2. Explore DT and blockchain-
enhanced manufacturing 
service management based 
on the industrial Internet 
platform. 

1. Apply data provenance and 
data twinning to enhance 
data trustworthiness. 

2. Propose a blockchain-based 
framework to improve the 
security of data 
management and data 
storage. 

[1] 

Data storage  The lack of a 

common narrative 
about DT and 

Proposed 
framework, 
case study 

1. Build a common narrative 
for DT by proposing a DT 
framework. 

Page 7 of 34 

 
 
 
 
Blockchain-based Digital Twin for Supply Chain Management	

[30] 

Data storage 
and data 
sharing 

[31] 

Data sharing 

security and 
efficiency issues of 
the DT data storage 

The lack of a 
secure data sharing 
model for the 
interaction of DTs 
and lifecycle 
parties 
Integrity and 
confidentiality 
issues for secure 
DT data sharing 

2. Design a blockchain 

solution to improve the 
efficiency of DT data 
storage. 

Conceptual, 
prototype 
design 

1. Define a fine-grained access 
control for DT data sharing. 
2. Propose a blockchain-based 

DT prototype for 
information management. 

Theory-
building, 
proposed 
framework, 
use case 

1. Explore the requirements 

for secure DT data sharing. 

2. Propose a distributed 

ledger-based framework for 
secure DT data sharing. 

3  BLOCKCHAIN-BASED  DIGITAL  SUPPLY  CHAIN  TWIN  (BC-DSCT) 

Traditional  SCMs  are  considered  high  risks  due  to  the  asymmetry  of  information 

communicated among various parties in the ecosystem, the lack of transparency and visibility 

during production, the difficulty of control and traceability of actions in the distribution process, 

and  the  inaccuracy  of  information  exchange  within  the  supply  chain  parties.  Several 

technologies have been implemented with the supply chain to mitigate these risks, including 

IoT  devices,  RFID  technology,  and  ERP  system.  However,  since  they  are  centralised,  these 

technologies make it hard to address certain problems, such as data tampering, privacy leakage, 

and trust issues. Therefore, the decentralisation feature and distributed ledgers of blockchain 

technology could improve the security and transparency in a trustless supply chain environment. 

Additionally, the integration of blockchain can build a resilient supply chain. For example, IBM 

has  established  blockchain-based  supply chain  solutions  by  using  smart  contracts  to  be 

automatically triggered when predefined business conditions are met, providing near real-time 

visibility into operations [32]. 

The  implementation  of  DT  is  another  promising  trend  to  improve  the  performance  and 

efficiency of SCM. A digital supply chain twin is a digital replica of the physical supply chain 

consisting of lifecycle parties, including manufacturers, suppliers, distributors, and maintainers. 

The 3M company has created a DT to achieve standardisation and optimisation of their supply 

chain, and BMW is designing a complete DT of an entire factory that can be utilised to simulate 

31 factories. The DT approach they applied will produce 30% more efficient planning processes 

[13].  Moreover,  DT  for  SCM  can  improve  the  decision-making  process  through  a  range  of 

advanced  predictive  and  prescriptive  analytics  of  models  created  for  the  end-to-end  supply 

chain [33-35]. 

Page 8 of 34 

 
 
 
 
Blockchain-based Digital Twin for Supply Chain Management	

Increasing technologies could be leveraged together to achieve certain objectives in various 

industrial sectors, such as the integration of artificial intelligence (AI), machine learning, and 

blockchain  technology  to  enhance  IoT  security.  In  this  survey,  we  analyse  the  BC-DSCT 

concerning the key benefits of integration and the potential implementation for SCM in Industry 

4.0,  including  smart  manufacturing,  intelligent  maintenance,  DT  shop  floor,  and  DT 

warehouses and distribution centres. These are described in detail in the following sub-sections. 

3.1  Key Benefits of Integrating DT with Blockchain 

3.1.1 Enhanced Security and Fraud Prevention. Secure data exchange and fraud prevention are 

two of the major objectives to improve the security of SCM. However, it is hard to realise in 

a centralised business environment because every point at which data is exchanged between 

supply  chain  parties  presents  an opportunity  for  it  to  be  tampered  with  maliciously  or 

inadvertently. Additionally, increasingly skilled and rampant  counterfeits  have  brought  an 

enormous loss and damage of reputation for the manufacturers. Thus, the integration of DT and 

blockchain  with  SCM  could  resolve  the  data  security  issue  and  combat  the  problem  of 

counterfeits. On the one hand, DTs are implemented to record historical data and collect current 

data of all physical products and their transactions for analytics within the entire asset lifecycle. 

Further,  the  data  stored on the blockchain can provide the integrity of DTs [30]. The real-time 

data generated from sensors deployed on the actual devices can help DT to perform a simulation 

to foresee security problems before they arise, which could also improve the data security of the 

DT supply chain. On the other hand, DT and blockchain are combined to ensure that counterfeit 

products are identified by providing product authenticity. For instance, there are a great number 

of replicas of luxury products with fake documents to prove their authenticity. Nevertheless, 

DTs can act as digital certificates stored on the blockchain to make them unable to be tampered 

with or stolen [6]. 

3.1.2 Traceability of Digital Supply Chain Twin Data (DSCT). In the past, it was extremely 

hard to track and trace which supply chain parties should take responsibility for the data or 

product  issues,  such  as  information  leakage,  malicious  data  tampering,  and  counterfeits. 

Progress has been made by introducing promising technologies, including RFID tracking and 

IoT devices, to address traceability issues. Meanwhile, the central and trust problems remain. 

Thus,  the  traceability  of  data  exchanged  among  supply  chain  parties  is  further  enhanced  by 

integrating  the  provenance-enabled  blockchain  technology  and  the  real-time  data  tracking 

between physical and digital spaces in DTs. The historical data is tracked through DTs to ensure 

the  integrity  and  high  accuracy  of  data  in  SCM.  The  current  state  of  data  is  sent  from 

Page 9 of 34 

 
 
 
 
 
Blockchain-based Digital Twin for Supply Chain Management	

multiple sensors deployed in the physical asset and received by the digital counterpart to 

obtain feedback for improvement. The future data is predicted for precaution of any possible 

malfunction and maintenance. These data are recorded on the tamper-proof blockchain and 

enable  authorised  supply  chain  stakeholders  to track  without  any  third  party  from  multiple 

locations securely. Additionally, the cause of deviations between the physical and digital spaces 

can be identified by accessing DT data from the origin to the present to improve data security 

and authenticity [36]. 

3.1.3 Transparency and Privacy-Preserving for DSCT Data Transaction. In traditional SCM, 

an  asymmetric information  transfer  is  a  primary  issue  that  needs  to  be  addressed  as  a 

priority,  which  would  result in  security  risks,  such  as  fraud  and  corruption,  due  to  the  lack 

of  transparency.  However,  the  supply chain parties are unwilling to disclose their information 

of transactions and DT data since improving transparency might cause a privacy leakage risk. 

Therefore, blockchain technology can be implemented to enforce transparency through smart 

contracts executed completely on blockchains, where the terms of the agreement are recorded on 

the distributed ledger as a chain code. Furthermore, the REST APIs can be used to develop 

blockchain  applications  and  deploy  blockchain  networks  that  enable  users  to  invoke  a 

transaction and query or  view  the  status  and  history  of  the  transaction  anonymously  in  their 

private profiles. At the same time, privacy can also be preserved through asymmetric encryption, 

that is, the utilisation of public keys and private keys to protect the transaction from DT data 

generated  from product  lifecycle based  on  the peer-to-peer supply  chain  network.  Thus,  the 

implementation  of  blockchain  into  the  DSCT  data  transaction  addresses  the  balance  issue 

between enhanced transparency and privacy-preserving. 

3.1.4 Decentralisation and Immutability of DSCT Data Storage. The prevalent technologies adopted 

in SCM, including RFID, the ERP system, and IoT, are operated in a centralised architecture, 

where  data  hacking and tampering  risks  exist. When  DT  data  are  transferred  bidirectionally 

between  many  physical  objects,  consisting  of  physical  assets,  shop  floors,  warehouses  and 

distribution  centres  in  the  supply  chain  industry,  and  their  digital  models  are  stored  in 

centralised databases, similar issues might arise influence the security of DT data negatively. 

Therefore,  blockchain  is  characterised  as  a  promising  technology  that  can enhance  security 

through cryptographic hashing algorithms. Further, the DT data can be stored on distributed 

ledgers,  which  is  decentralised,  and  anyone  can  verify  the  integrity  of  data  recorded  on  the 

ledgers.  However, the aforementioned  different  types  of  blockchain  affect  the  degree  of 

decentralisation. For example, a private blockchain  is  not  fully  decentralised  like  a  public 

Page 10 of 34 

 
 
 
 
 
Blockchain-based Digital Twin for Supply Chain Management	

blockchain. Hence, the public blockchain is more secure than the private one concerning DT 

data  storage.  Additionally,  blockchain  ensures  the  immutability  of  DT  data  by remaining 

indelible and keeping the unalterable historical data of DTs. This benefits the DT audit process 

efficiently  and  cost-effectively,  improves  the  level  of  trust  significantly,  and  ensures  the 

integrity of DT data  [37]. 

3.1.5 Blockchain-based Access Control on DSCT Data. Traditional access control mechanisms are 

considered vulnerable to cyber security attacks. For instance, a number of security and privacy 

issues are found for the transaction in SCM due to the centralised approaches utilised to deal with 

access  control  mechanisms  that rely  on  a  third  party.  The  approaches  are  constrained  by 

availability and scalability. However, blockchain avoids unauthorised access that might cause 

malicious data manipulation, and only authorised supply chain parties to have access privileges 

to  view,  modify  and  simulate  the  DT  data.  Furthermore,  blockchain-based  access  control 

strengthens security through secure socket layer certificates, which are deployed on each DT. 

Further,  the  certificate  data  is  stored  on  blockchain  [37].  Thus,  integrating  a  tamper-proof 

blockchain with DT in the supply chain industry will enable fine-grained access control for 

only authorised supply chain parties permitted to take action on the DT data. 

3.1.6 Secure DSCT Data in a Trustless Blockchain System. In traditional SCM, two separated 

profit groups, such as two downstream supply chain parties, have to share profits, so they would 

be unwilling to share information to gain a competitive advantage.  The untrusted relationship 

between  supply  chain  stakeholders  has  to  rely  on  a  third  party  during  transactions.  In  some 

cases,  over-reliance  on  intermediaries  might  cause  a  series  of  corruption  problems,  such  as 

bribery or data manipulation. A more serious issue is that hackers tend to conduct cyber-attacks 

on these centralised organisations. Once they succeed, all clients' confidential information will 

be exposed, and the stolen data are difficult to recover since they are all stored in the systems 

of  centralised  organisations. Moreover, DT  data  need  to  be  stored  and  utilised  in  a  trustless 

environment even more, given that if the DT data is tampered with, the physical asset might be 

collapsed,  and  the  shop  floor  might  fall  into  disorder  or  even  harm  the  entire  supply  chain 

operation. For this purpose, the trustless nature of blockchain that adopts distributed ledgers is 

a  platform  where  supply  chain  parties  can  interact  with  each  other  in  a  purely  peer-to-peer 

network  without  having  to  trust  anyone  in  the  blockchain  system.  Furthermore,  the  data 

generated from the physical machines, shop floor, warehouse, and distribution centre and their 

digital model data across the entire lifecycle can be stored, transferred, and simulated securely 

in a trustless blockchain network. 

Page 11 of 34 

 
 
 
 
 
Blockchain-based Digital Twin for Supply Chain Management	

3.2  Potential Implementation in Industry 4.0 

With a wide range of implementation-enabling technologies, including IoT, AI and cloud 

computing, and  t h e   rapid  development  of  promising  technologies,  such  as  blockchain  and 

5G  network  in  Industry  4.0, it is only a matter of time before the industry moves forward to a 

DT age [38]. In recent years, increasing organisations have developed DT solutions, integrating 

with various enabling technologies in various industries to optimise the performance of their 

physical assets, processes or systems. The Norwegian company, Visualiz, developed a DT start-

up to establish a platform for the visualisation of physical assets in various industries. They 

integrated VR to create a collaborative space for users to monitor the status of assets online and 

detect the defects for maintenance [39]. Microsoft launched Azure DTs that allowed users to 

design digital models and knowledge graphs with the help of AI algorithms. Azure DTs enable 

users  to  model  environments,  such  as  a  shop  floor,  warehouse,  and  distribution  centre,  by 

connecting assets like IoT devices and  existing  business  systems  [40].  Oracle  develops  a  DT 

implementation based on IoT devices that operate on three pillars: virtual twin, predictive twin, 

and twin projections. This is done to address various issues. However, a virtual twin creates 

a virtual representation of a physical asset in the cloud, leveraging machine learning techniques. 

A  predictive  twin  provides  accurate  predictions  using  a  robust  analytical  model,  and  twin 

projections  generate  the  predictions  and  insights  to  monitor  the  predicted  state  of  the 

environment [40]. However, blockchain has the potential to become the most relevant and 

capable technology to address centricity, security, transparency and privacy issues in DTs [41, 

43]. For example, in the car design process, blockchain is utilised for securely coordinating 

the  activities  or  processes  during  the  car  design,  including structural  design,  appearance 

design, stereoscopic measurement, and selecting the manufacturing method. The DTs of these 

processes  perform  interactions  between  the  physical  and  digital  spaces  through  smart 

contracts,  which  can  achieve  transparent  and  secure  communications  across  the  car  design 

processes with their DTs [37]. 

Table 2. Mapping a catalogue for the potential implementation of blockchain and DTs in SCM 

Potential 
Implementation 
Smart 
Manufacturing 

Description 

Digital Twin 

Blockchain  

References 

Apply smart 
machinery to 
monitor the 
production 
operation, and 
use data 
analytics to 
improve the 

A virtual replica of 
the physical 
manufacturing 
machinery for 
collecting real-
time DT data and 
performing 
simulations to 

Blockchain stores 
and transacts data 
from machinery 
components and 
validates 
certificates and 
transactions in the 
manufacturing 

[3], [44], 
[45], [1], 
[28], [46], 
[47], [48] 

Page 12 of 34 

 
 
 
 
Blockchain-based Digital Twin for Supply Chain Management	

Intelligent 
Maintenance 

Blockchain-
based DT Shop 
Floor 

Blockchain-
based DT 
Warehouse and 
Logistics 

[49], [50], 
[51], [52] 

[53], [54], 
[55], [56], 
[57] 

[58], [59], 
[60], [61], 
[62], [63], 
[64], [65] 

manufacturing 
performance. 
Use data 
collected from 
machinery to 
perform 
predictive and 
preventive 
analysis of 
defects. 

A factory and a 
basic unit of 
manufacturing 
for 
manufacturers to 
operate the 
machines to 
complete tasks 

Finished goods 
or raw materials 
stored in a 
warehouse are 
transported 
inbound and 
outbound for 
production or 
sale. 

optimise the 
performance. 
A digital replica of 
the physical 
objects for 
analysing and 
predicting the 
health status and 
performing 
maintenance in 
advance. 
The interaction 
between the 
physical and 
virtual shop floor 
enhances security 
and efficiency in 
the manufacturing 
process. 

DTs optimise 
warehouse 
operations and 
management, 
reduce the 
collection and 
distribution time 
and management 
costs, and provide 
insights during 
shipment and 
transportation. 

process. 

Blockchain 
manages lifecycle 
data and stores 
different types of 
data to improve 
the accuracy and 
reliability of 
predictive 
maintenance. 
The decentralised 
nature of 
blockchain 
protects data by 
storing data in 
shop floor 
blockchain and 
service blockchain 
separately. 
Blockchain 
improves the 
security and 
efficiency of 
warehouse data 
management and 
enhances 
transparency in 
the logistical 
process by 
tracking all 
needed 
information on the 
blockchain 
network. 

Concerning the implementation of DT and blockchain into the supply chain industry, we 

can define the DSCT as a real-time simulation model of a physical supply chain that can 

predict  the  behaviour  and dynamics of SCM to make effective decisions. By integrating DT 

and blockchain with SCM, the authenticity of products is guaranteed, and the counterfeiting 

of goods is eradicated effectively so that supply chain parties can save money and increase 

revenue significantly. DTs usually act as digital certificates stored on  blockchain to ensure 

the data embedded in the certificates cannot be copied, tampered with, or deleted by hackers. 

Furthermore, the digital certificate will keep updating within the entire product lifecycle since 

the product is designed and manufactured. The shipment data transferred from multiple IoT 

sensors deployed in the containers will be updated with timestamps during the transportation 

Page 13 of 34 

 
 
 
 
Blockchain-based Digital Twin for Supply Chain Management	

stage. Hence the customers can track and trace the authenticity of the product by verifying its 

DT data stored on the blockchain [6].  

General Electric (GE) is one of the industry pioneers implementing DT to collect data from 

its manufacturing, maintenance, operations, and operating environments. It utilises this data 

to create a unique model of each of its assets, systems or processes. The objectives of GE to 

develop DT solutions are to increase reliability and availability, reduce risk, lower maintenance 

costs, improve production, and achieve faster time-to-value [66, 67]. Additionally, the 3M 

company draws up a future project regarding the development of DT for their supply chain 

to optimise, visualise, and control all their processes [68].       BMW also endeavoured to develop 

DTs of their factories to optimise their performance [13]. Therefore, the following sub-sections 

focus on combining DT and blockchain into various aspects of the supply chain, as summarised 

in  Table  2,  including  smart  manufacturing,  intelligent  maintenance,  DT  shop  floor,  and  DT 

warehouse and logistics. This was done through analysing their current research development 

and  potential  practical  implementation  in  Industry  4.0.  Besides,  different  research 

approaches applied in existing papers for these focus areas are catalogued in Table 3. 

Table 3. Cataloguing research approaches in various focus areas 

Focus Areas 

Smart 
Manufacturing 
Intelligent 
Maintenance 
Shop Floor 

Warehouse and 
Logistics 

Proposed 
Framework 
[3], [1], [46], 
[28] 
[51], [52] 

[54], [55], [53] 

[61], [62], [63] 

Case Study 

Conceptual 

[1], [47] 

[51] 

[3], [44], [45], 
[47], [48] 
[49], [50] 

Designed 
Prototype 
[46] 

N/A 

[54], [55], [56], 
[57] 
[58], [61], [63], 
[65] 

[53], [56], [57]  N/A 

[60], [62], [64], 
[65] 

[58], [59], [61], 
[63] 

3.2.1 Smart Manufacturing. Smart manufacturing is a technology-driven approach that applies 

Internet-connected  machinery  to  monitor  the  production  process.  The  objective  of  smart 

manufacturing is to achieve automating operations and utilise data analytics to improve the 

performance of the manufacturing process. However, a DT acts as a virtual replica of the 

real-time status of the manufacturing machinery. A great number of multi-faceted sensors 

and  actuators  are  embedded  with 

these  machineries  across  the  entire  physical 

manufacturing  process.  Data  collected  from  the  sensors  are  continuously  transmitted to 

the DT application, which would instantly analyse the data to detect any defects [69]. In 

this case, blockchain can be utilised to store and transact records of these tested data sets for a 

particular component of the machinery. Then, the DT model could perform simulations and 

Page 14 of 34 

 
 
 
 
 
Blockchain-based Digital Twin for Supply Chain Management	

predictions  for  the  component  to  improve  performance  and  maintenance.  Furthermore, 

blockchain provides append-only functionality for the validation of certificates and transactions 

in the manufacturing process [47].  

Table 4. Summary of BC-DSCT research related to smart manufacturing 

Papers  Highlights 

[3] 

[44] 

[45] 

[1] 

[28] 

[46] 

[47] 

DT-based smart 
manufacturing 
system design 
Integration of DT 
with the control of 
the Manufacturing 
Execution Systems 
Comparison and 
integration of DT 
and big data in 
smart 
manufacturing 
A blockchain 
solution for the 
secure and efficient 
management of DT 
data 

DT- and 
blockchain-
enhanced smart 
manufacturing 
service 
collaboration 
Combination of 
IoT with 
blockchain and the 
configuration of a 
data- and 
knowledge-driven 
DT manufacturing 
cell 

Establishment of a 
blockchain-based 
DT additive 
manufacturing in 
the aircraft industry 

Main 
Technologies 
Digital twin 

Digital twin 

Digital twin, 
big data 

Digital twin, 
blockchain 

Digital twin, 
blockchain 

Blockchain, 
IoT, digital 
twin 

Digital twin, 
blockchain 

[48] 

Exploitation of 
blockchain for 

Blockchain 

Key Findings 

A framework is proposed to review how 
DTs are integrated into and facilitate the 
smart manufacturing system design. 
A DT environment in a laboratory is 
proposed to overcome the discrepancies 
between literature and implementations 
of DT. 
The concepts, similarities, differences, 
and complementarity of DT and big data 
in smart manufacturing are reviewed and 
discussed. 

A spiral DT framework is presented for 
building a common narrative for DT, and 
a blockchain solution, twin chain, is 
proposed for optimising DT data 
management. A case study is conducted 
to deploy the twin chain in smart 
manufacturing. 
A DT- and blockchain-enhanced 
manufacturing service collaboration 
mechanism is proposed to address the 
trust issue between stakeholders for the 
process of cyber-physical integration in 
the Industrial Internet platform. 
A manufacturing blockchain of 
architecture for the configuration of a 
data- and knowledge-driven DT 
manufacturing cell is proposed to ensure 
the security, traceability and 
decentralisation of intelligent 
manufacturing systems. A blockchain 
prototype is established to implement the 
proposed architecture. 
Phases of the metal additive 
manufacturing process are discussed to 
further a DT in the aircraft industry. A 
case study is designed to integrate 
blockchain with additive manufacturing 
in the aircraft industry. 
Measurements for the implementation of 
blockchain applications in the 

Page 15 of 34 

 
 
 
 
Blockchain-based Digital Twin for Supply Chain Management	

solving 
cybersecurity 
issues in the 
manufacturing 
system 

manufacturing system are discussed to 
overcome the cybersecurity issues, and 
reference architecture of the blockchain-
secured smart manufacturing system is 
proposed to standardise blockchain 
computing. 

Figure 6 illustrates the blockchain-based DT assembly process, which is a crucial and final 

stage of smart manufacturing. It ultimately determines the quality of a complex product. 

The  DT-driven  assembly  process  based  on IoT  achieves  the  in-depth  integration  of  the 

physical and virtual spaces and realises the precise control of components, equipment and 

assembly processes through the implementation of intelligent software service platforms and 

tools. Furthermore, the DT-driven product assembly process is uniformly and efficiently 

controlled  to  realise  the  product  assembly  system's  self-organisation,  self-adaption,  and 

dynamic response. 

One of the most important applications of DT- and blockchain-based smart manufacturing in 

Industry  4.0  lies  in  the  operation  monitoring  and  controlling  for  complex  products  that  can 

realise intelligent interconnection, especially high-end intelligent equipment. The real-time 

sensor  data  collected  from  the  operation  of  machinery  and  stored  on  the 

blockchain is transferred to its DT model for simulation analysis to diagnose the 

machinery's  health  status  and  malfunction  risk.  If  the  operating  conditions  of  the 

product change, the DT model will be virtually verified on the blockchain platform. If there is 

no problem, then the operating parameters of the physical product can be adjusted. However, 

the integration of DT into smart manufacturing has been applied widely in the aviation industry.  

Table 4 discusses the main technologies applied and the key findings of BS-DSCT research 

related to smart manufacturing. The introduction of DT into smart manufacturing can improve 

quality management by continuously monitoring product data collected from the embedded IoT 

devices.  It  can  perform  better  product  design  by  detecting  design  flaws  in  advance  and 

enhancing supply chain efficiency through a deeper and more decisive view on materials usage 

and lean and just-in-time manufacturing realised by DT [66]. Furthermore, the implementation 

of blockchain technology can  also  be  utilised  in  the  aircraft  industry  to  create  a  DT  for  this 

complex manufacturing process. Additionally, blockchain is an effective technology to address 

the cybersecurity issues of the manufacturing sector, such as the traceability of operations [70], 

cyber-attacks  to  the  digital  thread  [71],  device  spoofing  and  false  authentication  in data 

sharing [72], interoperability, among heterogeneous equipment [43], confidentiality and trust 

between participants [73], information vulnerability and reliability across systems [74], and the 

failure of key nodes in centralised platforms [75]. 

Page 16 of 34 

 
 
 
 
Blockchain-based Digital Twin for Supply Chain Management	

Fig. 6.  Blockchain-based DT-driven complex product intelligent assembly 

Fig. 7. Intelligent maintenance planning and execution 

3.2.2 Intelligent Maintenance. Intelligent maintenance is defined as a system that utilises data 

collected from machinery to perform predictive and preventive analysis of potential defects 

or failures for the assets, systems, or processes. Figure 7 shows that the intelligent maintenance 

Page 17 of 34 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Blockchain-based Digital Twin for Supply Chain Management	

planning and execution process can be divided into five steps: detection, planning, scheduling, 

guiding, and quality inspection and learning. The first step is related to the detection of  the 

maintenance  demand  and  classification  into  specific  maintenance  cases,  which  contains  the 

collection of production and sensor data. Based on the detected maintenance case, the second 

step  will  generate  the  work  plan  to  evaluate  the  degree  of  urgency  for  scheduling  the 

maintenance. Step three is selecting the best resource  and  finding  an  optimal  schedule.  Step 

four is related to the guidance and assistance provided to  the  maintenance  personnel  during 

t h e  execution of the maintenance procedures. In the last step, quality inspection and learning 

will be conducted to correct the applied procedures and information regarding the maintenance, 

including unknown maintenance cases and materials or tools updates [76]. 

Table 5. Summary of BC-DSCT research related to intelligent maintenance 

Papers  Highlights 

[49] 

[50] 

[51] 

[52] 

Design of 
intelligent 
maintenance 
systems for the 
optimisation of 
maintenance 
operations 
DT applications 
for maintenance 

DT-driven 
predictive 
maintenance of 
enhancing 
reliability and the 
accuracy of the 
CNC machine tool 
Combination of 
blockchain and DT 
for the intelligent 
maintenance of 
complex 
equipment 

Main 
Technologies 
N/A 

Key Findings 

Intelligent prognostic and health 
management are utilised to identify effective 
maintenance strategies. Examples of system-
level strategies are illustrated to present the 
effectiveness of the optimised maintenance 
operations. 

Digital twin  Different maintenance strategies and the 
application of DTs in these strategies are 
discussed to fill the gaps in the current 
literature. 

Digital twin  A DT model-based and DT data-driven 
hybrid approach is proposed to realise 
reliable predictive maintenance of the CNC 
machine tool. A case study regarding the 
lifecycle prediction of the cutting tool is 
conducted to demonstrate the feasibility and 
accuracy of the approach. 
An intelligent maintenance framework is 
proposed to utilise blockchain for the 
creation of DT and protection of data and 
offers blockchain and DT based solutions 
for the intelligent maintenance of complex 
equipment. 

Blockchain, 
digital twin 

Concerning  DT  for  predictive  maintenance,  a  digital  replica  of  the  underlying  asset, 

process, or  system can  be  utilised  to  analyse  and  predict  the  health  status  and  perform 

maintenance  in  advance  to  ensure all operations run normally. Table 5 discusses the main 

technologies applied and key findings of BS-DSCT research related to intelligent maintenance. 

Page 18 of 34 

 
 
 
 
 
Blockchain-based Digital Twin for Supply Chain Management	

The  company  Ansys  devotes to developing Multiphysics engineering simulation software 

for product design, testing and operation. It provides DT services to wind power companies 

to avoid unplanned downtime and to achieve predictive maintenance, operation control, and 

optimisation [77]. Further, Ansys and GE have cooperated to promote DT applications to 

perform  product  lifecycle management, remote diagnosis, and intelligent maintenance to 

help  customers  analyse  specific working  conditions  and  predict  faults  through  leveraging 

sensor data and simulation technology. They also combine the failure modes in the historical 

maintenance data of the engine with the three-dimensional structure model and performance 

model to establish a failure model for the fault diagnosis and prediction  [78]. However, the 

integration of blockchain and DT with intelligent maintenance can realise condition motoring, 

fault diagnosis and life prediction of complex equipment. Besides, blockchain can be utilised 

to  manage  the  lifecycle  data  and  store  different  types  of  data,  including  component  data, 

installation data, and operation process data for predictive maintenance [52]. Blockchain also 

applies cryptographic technology and distributed consensus protocols to enhance the security 

of  DT  data  transmission,  thereby  improving  the  accuracy  and  reliability  of  predictive 

maintenance. 

Table 6. Summary of BC-DSCT research related to blockchain-based DT shop floor 

Paper  Highlights 

[53]  A DT shop floor 
realising 
interaction and 
convergence 
between physical 
and digital spaces 

Key Findings 

Main 
Technologies 
Digital twin  A DT shop-floor paradigm is proposed to 

promote the development of smart 
manufacturing by building a conceptual 
model of a DT shop floor, including the 
interactions of a physical shop floor, virtual 
shop floor, shop floor service system, and 
shop floor DT data. 

[54] 

[55] 

Shop-floor DT acts 
as a digital 
mapping model of 
the physical shop 
floor that needs to 
be built and 
applied properly. 

Integration of DT 
with the complex 
product assembly 
shop floor for 
smart 
manufacturing 
management and 

Digital twin  An implementation framework is proposed 
for constructing and applying shop floor DT 
to model the objects and dimensions, 
monitor the real-time status, and predict the 
future status. A case study is conducted 
regarding the development of a DT-based 
visual monitoring and prediction system for 
the shop floor operating status. 
A DT-based smart production management 
and control framework is proposed for the 
interactions among physical and DT 
assembly shop floor, as well as DT and big 
data-driven assembly shop floor service, 
storage, and management platforms in a 
satellite assembly shop floor. 

Digital twin, 
big data 

Page 19 of 34 

 
 
 
 
Blockchain-based Digital Twin for Supply Chain Management	

[56] 

[57] 

control 
Combination of 
MTConnect and 
the Manufacturing 
Execution System 
for data collection 
in the shop floor 
DT 
Integration of 
blockchain with 
the maintenance in 
the shop floor 
using smart 
contracts 

Digital twin, 
cloud 
computing 

Blockchain 

The development and implementation of a 
novel Manufacturing Execution System 
utilising mobile devices and cloud 
computing are proposed to integrate 
MTConnect for data collection. A case study 
is conducted to combine MES and 
MTConnect in a manufacturing facility. 
A case is discussed for the maintenance of 
manufacturing machines, and a blockchain 
solution is proposed to separate a blockchain 
from the shop floor blockchain and service 
blockchain for data protection and data 
security. 

3.2.3 Blockchain-based Digital Twin Shop Floor. A shop floor is the area of a factory, machine 

shop, and a basic unit of manufacturing, where manufacturers work on machines to complete 

the tasks. However, with the development of promising technologies in Industry 4.0, including 

IoT, big data, AI, cloud computing, and blockchain technology, the traditional shop floor has 

evolved  to  the  virtual  or  digital  generation  based  on  the  cyber-physical  system.  Thus,  the 

interaction between the virtual and physical shop floors can significantly improve  the  security 

and  efficiency  in  the  manufacturing  process.  Tao and Zhang [53] first proposed a new shop 

floor paradigm, namely a digital twin shop floor (DTS), to  achieve  the  convergence  of  shop 

floors  in  the  physical  and  virtual  spaces.  The  paradigm  consists  of  four  key  components: 

physical shop floor (PS), virtual shop floor (VS), shop floor service system (SSS), and shop floor 

DT data (SDTD), as shown in Figure 8. Concerning their relationships, PS strictly follows the 

predefined orders from VS and SSS and organises production. Meanwhile, VS provides control 

orders for PS and optimises strategies for SSS. SSS integrates various computer-aided tools, 

models,  and  algorithms  to  form  composite  services  for  specific  demands  from  PS  and  VS. 

SDTD  fuses  data  of  the  previous  three  components  and  the  existing  methods  for modelling, 

optimising and predicting, which can also eliminate the information isolated island for more 

comprehensive and  consistent  information.  Table  6  discusses  the  main  technologies  applied 

and key findings of the BS-DSCT research related to the blockchain-based DT shop floor. 

Page 20 of 34 

 
 
 
 
 
Blockchain-based Digital Twin for Supply Chain Management	

Fig. 8. Conceptual model of DTS 

However, regardless of whether big data or cloud storage is used, they are centralised and 

might cause security issues, such as data tampering, malicious deletion, and data fraud. This 

could result in data inconsistency between the physical shop floor and the DTS or even cause 

disorder or stagnation of the shop floor. Therefore, blockchain technology has transformative 

power in the way of data protection, thanks to its decentralised architecture. Data can be stored 

in two types of blockchains, a shop floor blockchain and service blockchain, based on different 

levels of detail of the stored data to achieve data protection. The shop floor blockchain contains 

detailed information of the data generated from the physical shop floor and the DTS, including 

machine  logs  and  maintenance  reports.  Meanwhile,  the  service  blockchain  is  provided  to 

different service providers and contains partial information, such as the maintenance reports 

without confidential data or internal data and tokenised artefacts like machine learning models. 

The advantage of the separation of the blockchain lies in the removal of unnecessary data stored 

in the service blockchain that could enhance data security, improve blockchain scalability, and 

reduce data storage costs. For instance, the service blockchain is not affected by a great number 

of  transactions  imposed  by  storing  the  machine  data,  which is only  stored in  the  shop floor 

blockchain [57]. 

Page 21 of 34 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Blockchain-based Digital Twin for Supply Chain Management	

Table  7.  Summary  of  BC-DSCT  research  related  to  blockchain-based  DT  warehouse  and 

Main 
Technologies 
Digital twin 

Digital twin, 
cloud, 5G 

logistics 

Papers  Focus Area  Highlights 

[58] 

Warehouse 

3D packing and 
storage 
assignment in 
the warehouse 
can be 
optimised in the 
DT system 

[59] 

Warehouse  A warehouse 
management 
system with 
UAV based on 
DT for 
intelligent and 
controllable 
warehouse 
management 

[60] 

Warehouse 

Integration of 
IoT-based smart 
warehouse with 
blockchain 

IoT, 
blockchain 

[61] 

Logistics 

[62] 

Logistics 

[63] 

Logistics 

Digital twin 

Digital twin 

A physical and 
cyber logistics 
system for a 
DT-based 
supply chain 
control 

A DT-based and 
simulation-
based decision 
support tool for 
the in-house 
logistics system 

Combine DT 
into the logistic 
production 
system to 
systematically 

Digital twin, 
cloud 
computing, 
fog 
computing, 

Page 22 of 34 

Key Findings 

A DT-driven joint 
optimisation approach is 
proposed to aggregate real-
time data for mapping the 
physical warehouse to the 
digital model. A prototype of 
the DT system is built with a 
case study to demonstrate it. 
A DT-based warehouse 
management system is 
developed to upload the data 
and information of the 
warehouse to the cloud using 
5G communication, which is 
then sent to the DT platform 
for the collection of real-time 
warehouse data and feedback 
for the operation of the UAV. 
A hybrid model for an end-to-
end data warehouse solution is 
proposed to implement IoT 
blockchain and smart contract, 
and the comparisons between 
centralised and decentralised 
approaches and the proposed 
model are discussed. 
A cyber-physical logistics 
system is proposed with a 
multi-level architectural 
framework to provide 
technical functionalities on 
DT simulation for resilient 
supply chain control. 
A simulation-based decision 
support tool is proposed to 
develop the architecture of a 
DT for in-house logistics and 
simulation models for 
analysing logistics activities 
for both distribution and 
production facilities. 
A multi-level DT-based 
system is proposed for the 
real-time monitoring, 
decision-making and control 
of a production logistics 

 
 
 
Blockchain-based Digital Twin for Supply Chain Management	

[64] 

Logistics 

[65] 

Logistics 

monitor and 
evaluate the 
real-time 
operation status 

edge 
computing 

Blockchain 

Blockchain 

A systematic 
literature review 
of blockchain 
applications in 
supply chains, 
logistics and 
transport 
management 

The lack of 
standard 
methodology for 
the design of a 
strategy to 
develop and 
validate a 
blockchain 
solution 

synchronisation system. A 
cloud-fog-edge-based DT 
control framework is 
developed to address the large 
computation scale, low 
computation efficiency and 
high information delay issues 
at the decision level. 
The four clusters of the  
blockchain (technology, trust, 
trade, and 
traceability/transparency) are 
discussed for the applications 
of the supply chain, logistics, 
and transport, such as 
increased synchronisation 
across logistics entities and 
enhanced trust by sharing 
secure and customised 
transport data. 
A standard GUEST 
methodology is proposed to 
design real-world fresh food 
logistics using a case-utilising 
blockchain solution for 
reducing logistics costs and 
optimising operations. 

3.2.4 Blockchain-based Digital Twin Warehouse and Logistics. Warehouses have evolved rapidly 

in  the  last  few  decades,  from  the  traditional  warehouses  that  primarily  utilise  a  manual 

handling  system  to  the semi-automated  warehouses  using  partially  automated  storage 

solutions and a Warehouse Management System  (WMS)  to  today’s  automated  warehouses 

integrating a number of Industry 4.0 technologies. 

However, DTs can be implemented to optimise warehouse operations and management while 

minimising  disruptions  to  the  working  tasks.  The  digital  twin  warehouse  (DTW)  is  a 

bidirectional  simulation  model  of  the  physical  structure  of  the  warehouse,  which  will  be 

updated continuously with new data collected from smart sensors and RFID systems deployed 

around  the  warehouse.  According  to  McKinsey,  the  global  budget for  the  companies  on 

warehousing a year is around 350 billion dollars. With the implementation of DTW, warehouse 

efficiency  is  predicted  to  increase  by  20–25%,  helping  companies  significantly save  their 

operating and capital expenses [79]. Leveraging blockchain technology into DTW can further 

improve  the  security  and  efficiency  of  the  WMS,  especially  concerning  data  management. 

Page 23 of 34 

 
 
 
 
Blockchain-based Digital Twin for Supply Chain Management	

Blockchain allows warehouses, distribution centres, suppliers, manufacturers and other supply 

chain parties to interact with each other through permanent records of all transactions, which 

are  stored  and  tracked  within the decentralised blockchain network. Besides, the DTW can 

utilise smart contracts to automate verifications and payment. Thus, the blockchain-based DTW 

can significantly improve warehouse prediction and management accuracy and visibility. 

A  warehouse  is  built  where  goods  or  raw  materials  are  stored  for  production  or  sale. 

Meanwhile, logistics refers to the inbound and outbound flow of goods transported in and out of 

a  warehouse.  Therefore,  the  traceability of  data,  such  as  location  information,  logistics 

networks, and the state of goods, is one of the most important concerns during transportation 

or  internal  movement  within  the  warehouse.  DTs  can  be  created  for  the  physical  logistics 

network to achieve this goal, and the digital replica of physical assets can provide insights about 

the status, potential risks, and precise positionings during shipment and transportation. Besides, 

shipping containers  connected  to  the  blockchain  and  embedded  with  IoT  sensors  can  bring 

complete transparency to the logistics process. The items can be tracked and traced with the 

help of IoT sensors through creating a DT on the blockchain platform. This ensures each 

authorised  supply  chain  party  involved  in  the  logistics  process  has  complete  information 

regarding  the  items,  containers,  and  conveyances.  Table  7  discusses  the  main  technologies 

applied and key findings of BS-DSCT research related to blockchain-based DT warehouses and 

logistics. 

On  the  other hand,  the  documents  needed  for  the  transportation  process  and  the  DT  data 

collected  from  the  IoT  sensors  deployed  in  each  item  can  be  transmitted  and  stored  on  the 

blockchain  distributed  ledgers  to  eliminate  the  risks  of  forgery  or  duplication.  Then,  data, 

documents  and  transactions  can  be  tracked  digitally  and  immutably  [80].  Figure  9  shows  a 

scenario  of  shipping  goods,  where  several  parties  are  involved,  including  manufacturers, 

suppliers, shippers, third-party logistics, warehouses, carriers and consignees. Each equipment 

or system related to each party is embedded with multiple IoT sensors and has a digital replica. 

Then,  DT  data  are  transmitted  to  and  stored  in  the  blockchain  network  for  tracking  and 

validating. Besides, each transaction and document that occurred during the logistics process 

will generate a permanent ledger record that is easily validated by anyone authorised to access 

the blockchain network. Then, the network members can establish a transparent and efficient 

platform for managing all documents and transactions involved in the logistics process. 

Page 24 of 34 

 
 
 
 
Blockchain-based Digital Twin for Supply Chain Management	

Fig. 9. Blockchain-based DT warehouse and logistics 

4  FUTURE RESEARCH OPPORTUNITIES 

Based on the literature review, we put forward future research opportunities.  

l  Establishment of a BC-DSCT Platform. The existing studies, such as [30] and [27], have 

developed  DApps  to  achieve  the  decentralised  data  sharing and  management  of  DT 

components and their associated data. By leveraging their work, future research can 

develop  a  BC-DSCT  platform  or  DApp,  which  enables  complete  solutions  of 

decentralised management, storage, and sharing of DT data while transmitting among 

the physical and digital spaces and then uploading storing on the blockchain network. 

The transactions of DT data among supply chain parties can also be tracked and verified 

in  a  transparent  and  tamper-proof  environment.  Considering  that most  participants 

within the supply chain system can constitute a consortium, implementing a consortium 

blockchain is the most suitable for the development of BC-DSCT DApps. Thus, we 

suggest  utilising  Hyperledger  Fabric  to  establish  the  platform  to  realise  the 

aforementioned functions and perform better  scalability  in  a  permissioned  blockchain. 

Besides, it is necessary to develop feasible approaches that combine on-chain and off-chain 

storage  to  deal  with  a  huge  amount  of  DT  data,  significantly  reducing  latency and 

computing power compared to uploading all data onto the blockchain network. 

l  Development  of  Data  Management  Methods.  The  increasing  DT  data  stored  in  the 

blockchain network will reduce the query efficiency of the blockchain, and the latency of 

query might cause security issues that need to be improved in future work regarding data 

management  of  DTs  on  blockchain  systems  [27].  Suggested  future  directions  focus  on 

several aspects. First, current data models applied in various blockchain platforms are 

Page 25 of 34 

 
 
 
 
 
Blockchain-based Digital Twin for Supply Chain Management	

not suitable for complex supply chain applications. Hence, we need to create a unified 

model to support different types of DT data  storage  in  a  single  blockchain  platform  to 

protect data privacy. Second, each blockchain platform used by supply chain organisations 

will have different data schemas, which might cause data authenticity issues. Hence, it 

requires the development of a cross-chain network utilising smart contracts run across 

various  blockchain  systems.  Third,  a  great  amount  of  DT  data  generated  from  the 

interaction of the physical and digital spaces in SCM operation stored on the blockchain 

network  is  infeasible  due  to  several  limitations,  including  the  storage  size,  transaction 

latency, and throughput. Therefore, it is important to develop a novel blockchain system 

integrated with a built-in offline storage method, which can deal with a huge amount of 

DT data [81]. 

l  Design of Reference Architecture. A reference architecture provides the best practice of 

IT  solutions  by  utilising  an  easy-to-understand  format.  However, current research lacks 

recommended structures for the integration of blockchain and DTs. Thus, it  is  necessary  to 

establish  a  reference  architecture  for  guiding  the  implementation  of  BC-DSCT  to 

effectively address the interoperability issue. This should define a series of aspects, such 

as the level of integration, supply chain application, and data pattern, for the development, 

operation, simulation, and prediction of BC-DSCT solutions. The reference architecture 

should answer questions regarding how different levels of integration of blockchain and 

DTs can address specific issues in SCM, where and by what means to utilise blockchain 

and DTs in various parties and processes within the supply chain industry, and what data 

pattern  could  be  used  to  synchronise  and  transmit  DT  data  storing  on  the  blockchain 

network.  Similar  research  was  conducted  by  Zuo  [82],  who  constructed  a  reference 

architecture to integrate blockchain to industry 4.0 smart manufacturing. Future research 

can focus on establishing a more comprehensive reference architecture for BC-DSCT by 

adding more aspects to achieve the best practice in supply chains. 

l 

Implementation of BC-DSCT Standards. Standardisation refers to the process of technical 

standards and consensus development and implementation for different supply chain parties 

to  develop  a  unified  system  through  all  components  of  a  product  or system created and 

measured  uniformly. However,  supply  chain standardisation  involves building standards 

among  supply  chain  organisations  worldwide,  which  requires  changes  or  restructuring 

of  business  processes.  On  the  other  hand,  ISO  [83]  has  released  a  number  of 

international  blockchain  standards  from  2019,  including  interactions  between  smart 

contracts and distributed ledger technology systems,  privacy  and  personally  identifiable 

information  protection  considerations, 

the  security  management  of  digital  asset 

Page 26 of 34 

 
 
 
Blockchain-based Digital Twin for Supply Chain Management	

custodians,  and  blockchain  vocabulary.  Meanwhile,  ISO  and  IEC  [84]  jointly  involved 

themselves in the standardisation of DTs, including the term definition, system architecture, and 

reference model of DTs. However, the  lack  of  industry  standards  for  adopting  blockchain 

and  DTs  in  SCM  will  cause  inefficiency and  data  inconsistency  issues.  Thus,  it  is 

necessary  to  develop  relevant  standards  for  BC-DSCT  regarding  technical  guidelines, 

adoption  requirements,  evaluation  criteria,  instances,  and  capabilities.  For  example, 

seamless  integration  of  DT  data  is  required  by  implementing  an  open  data  structure 

utilising  a  uniform  linked  data  language  and  several  interoperate,  agile,  and  scalable 

blockchains  to  improve  interoperability  and  efficiency  of  BC-DSCT  [36,  85].  Future 

researchers can also develop unified data and model standards for designing, developing, 

and  implementing  blockchain  and  DTs  integration  platforms  suitable  for  supply  chain 

applications. 

l 

Integration of BC-DSCT with Other Technologies. Except for the perfect match between 

blockchains  and  DTs,  integrating  several  other  technologies  can  also  significantly 

accelerate  the  adoption  in  SCM.  Current  research,  such  as  [86-88],  has  integrated 

blockchains and DTs with federated learning to minimise costs and product delivery times 

while [36] discussing the combination of blockchain-based DTs and AI.  IoT technology 

is closely associated with BC-DSCT since IoT sensors are widely deployed in each product 

within  the  supply  chains  to  send  data  to  the  digital  counterpart  and  receive  data  for 

maintenance.  Meanwhile,  IoT  devices  can  utilise  blockchains  to  achieve  autonomous 

transactions  and  improve  security  and  privacy.  Therefore,  future  research  can  focus  on 

conducting deeper research on the integration of BC-DSCT with IoT, federated learning, 

edge  computing  and  AI.  Besides,  leveraging  BC-DSCT  and  big  data  for  predictive 

manufacturing is a promising direction in the future [89]. 

5  CONCLUSION 

Blockchain  and  DTs  are  perfectly  compatible  in  the  domain  of  SCM,  especially  for  the 

implementation of smart manufacturing, intelligent maintenance, blockchain-based DT shop 

floors, warehouses and logistics, due to the characteristics of improved security and efficiency 

of  data  management.  In  this  paper,  we  conducted  a  comprehensive  literature  review  of  the 

blockchain-based  DT  integration  for  SCM.  Based  on  the  literature  review,  we  put  forward 

future research directions to guide the future improvement of BC-DSCT. We believe that this 

literature survey addresses  the  gap  of  the  integration  of  blockchain  and  DTs  with  SCM and 

contributes to the development of DT adoption by leveraging blockchain technology to optimise 

the data management process. 

Page 27 of 34 

 
 
 
 
Blockchain-based Digital Twin for Supply Chain Management	

REFERENCES 

[1] Abid Khan, Furqan Shahid, Carsten Maple, Awais Ahmad, and Gwanggil Jeon.  Towards 

smart manufacturing using spiral digital twin framework and twinchain. IEEE 

Transactions on Industrial Informatics, 18(2), 1359-1366, 2020 

[2] Gartner. Gartner survey reveals digital twins are entering mainstream use. 

https://www.gartner.com/en/newsroom/press-releases/ 2019-02-20-gartner-survey-reveals-

digital-twins-are-entering-mai. Accessed November 24, 2021. 

[3] Jiewu Leng, Dewen Wang, Weiming Shen, Xinyu Li, Qiang Liu, and Xin Chen.  Digital 

twins-based smart manufacturing system design in industry 4.0: A review. Journal of 

Manufacturing Systems, 60:119–137, 2021. 

[4] Michael Grieves. Digital twin: manufacturing excellence through virtual factory replication. 

White paper, 1:1–7, 2014. 

[5] Edward Glaessgen and David Stargel. The digital twin paradigm for future nasa and us air 

force vehicles. In 53rd AIAA/ASME/ASCE/AHS/ASC structures, structural dynamics and 

materials conference 20th AIAA/ASME/AHS adaptive structures conference 14th AIAA, 

page 1818, 2012. 

[6] Pethuru Raj. Empowering digital twins with blockchain. Advances in Computers, 121:267, 2021. 

[7] Lei Hou, Shaoze Wu, Guomin Kevin Zhang, Yongtao Tan, and Xiangyu Wang. 

Literature review of digital twins applications in construction workforce safety. Applied 

Sciences, 11(1):339, 2021. 

[8] Greyce N Schroeder, Charles Steinmetz, Carlos E Pereira, and Danubia B Espindola. 

Digital twin data modeling with automationml and a communication methodology for data 

exchange. IFAC-PapersOnLine, 49(30):12–17, 2016. 

[9] Kazi Masudul Alam and Abdulmotaleb El Saddik.  C2ps: A digital twin architecture reference 

model for the cloud-based cyber-physical systems. IEEE access, 5:2050–2062, 2017. 

[10] Haya R Hasan, Khaled Salah, Raja Jayaraman, Mohammed Omar, Ibrar Yaqoob, Saša 

Pesic, Todd Taylor, and Dragan Boscovic.  A blockchain-based approach for the creation of 

digital twins. IEEE Access, 8:34113–34126, 2020. 

[11] Barbara Rita Barricelli, Elena Casiraghi, and Daniela Fogli.  A survey on digital twin: 

definitions, characteristics, applications, and design implications. IEEE access, 7:167653–

167671, 2019. 

[12] Werner Kritzinger, Matthias Karner,  Georg Traar, Jan  Henjes, and Wilfried  Sihn. 

Digital twin in  manufacturing: A categorical literature review and classification. IFAC-

PapersOnLine, 51(11):1016–1022, 2018. 

[13] Stefan Boschert and Roland Rosen. Digital twin—the simulation aspect. In Mechatronic futures, 

pages 59–74. Springer, 2016. 

[14] Elisa Negri, Luca Fumagalli, and Marco Macchi.  A review of the roles of digital twin in 

Page 28 of 34 

 
 
 
Blockchain-based Digital Twin for Supply Chain Management	

cps-based production systems.  Procedia Manufacturing, 11:939–948, 2017. 

[15] Satoshi Nakamoto. Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system. Decentralized Business 

Review, page 21260, 2008. 

[16] Abhishek Srivastava, Pronaya Bhattacharya, Arunendra Singh, Atul Mathur, U Pradesh, 

and U Pradesh. A systematic review on evolution of blockchain generations.  International 

Journal of Information Technology and Electrical Engineering, 7(6):1–8, 2018. 

[17] Arthur Carvalho.  A permissioned blockchain-based implementation of lmsr prediction 

markets.  Decision Support Systems, 130:113228, 2020. 

[18] Arthur Carvalho.  Bringing transparency and trustworthiness to loot boxes with 

blockchain and smart contracts.  Decision Support Systems, 144:113508, 2021. 

[19] Aaron Wright and Primavera De Filippi. Blockchain and the law: the rule of code. Harvard 

University Press, 2018. 

[20] Florian Glaser, Florian Hawlitschek, and Benedikt Notheisen.  Blockchain as a platform.  In 

Business transformation through Blockchain, pages 121–143. Springer, 2019. 

[21] Tien Tuan Anh Dinh, Rui Liu, Meihui Zhang, Gang Chen, Beng Chin Ooi, and Ji Wang. 

Untangling blockchain: A data processing view of blockchain systems. IEEE transactions 

on knowledge and data engineering, 30(7):1366–1385, 2018. 

[22] Massimo Di Pierro. What is the blockchain? Computing in Science & Engineering, 19(5):92–95, 

2017. 

[23] Valentina Gatteschi, Fabrizio Lamberti, Claudio Demartini, Chiara Pranteda, and Victor 

Santamaria.  To blockchain or not to blockchain: That is the question. IT Professional, 

20(2):62–74, 2018. 

[24] Shuchih E Chang and Yichian Chen.  When blockchain meets supply chain: A systematic 

literature review on current development and potential applications. IEEE Access, 

8:62478–62494, 2020. 

[25] Pingcheng Ruan, Gang Chen, Tien Tuan Anh Dinh, Qian Lin, Beng Chin Ooi, and Meihui 

Zhang. Fine-grained, secure and efficient data provenance on blockchain systems. 

Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, 12(9):975–988, 2019. 

[26] Konstantinos Christidis and Michael Devetsikiotis.  Blockchains and smart contracts for the 

internet of things.  Ieee Access, 4:2292–2303, 2016. 

[27] Sihan Huang, Guoxin Wang, Yan Yan, and Xiongbing Fang. Blockchain-based data 

management for digital twin of product. Journal of Manufacturing Systems, 54:361–371, 

2020. 

[28] Fei Tao, Yongping Zhang, Ying Cheng, Jiawei Ren, Dongxu Wang, Qinglin Qi, and Pei 

Li.  Digital twin and blockchain enhanced smart manufacturing service collaboration and 

management. Journal of Manufacturing Systems, 2020. 

[29] Sabah Suhail, Rasheed Hussain, Raja Jurdak, and Choong Seon Hong.  Trustworthy 

digital twins in the industrial internet of things with blockchain. IEEE Internet Computing, 

Page 29 of 34 

 
 
 
Blockchain-based Digital Twin for Supply Chain Management	

2021. 

[30] Benedikt Putz, Marietheres Dietz, Philip Empl, and Günther Pernul.  Ethertwin: 

Blockchain-based secure digital twin information management. Information Processing & 

Management, 58(1):102425, 2021. 

[31] Marietheres Dietz, Benedikt Putz, and Günther Pernul.  A distributed ledger approach to 

digital twin secure data sharing.  In IFIP Annual Conference on Data and Applications 

Security and Privacy, pages 281–300. Springer, 2019. 

[32] IBM. Blockchain for supply chain solutions. https://www.ibm.com/blockchain/supply-chain. 

Accessed November 17, 2021. 

[33] Tim Payne.  Digital planning requires a digital supply chain twin. 

https://www.gartner.com/en/doc/375403-supply-chain-brief- digital-planning-requires-

a-digital-supply-chain-twin. Accessed December 2, 2021. 

[34] Shan Ren, Xibin Zhao, Binbin Huang, Zhe Wang, and Xiaoyu Song. A framework for 

shopfloor material delivery based on real-time manufacturing big data. Journal of Ambient 

Intelligence and Humanized Computing, 10(3):1093–1108, 2019. 

[35] Benoit Lheureux, W. Roy Schulte, and Alfonso Velosa. Why and how to design digital 

twins. https://www.gartner.com/en/documents/ 3888980/why-and-how-to-design-digital-

twins. Accessed December 2, 2021. 

[36] Sabah  Suhail,  Rasheed  Hussain,  Raja  Jurdak,  Alma  Oracevic,  Khaled  Salah,  Raimundas 

Matulevičius,  and  Choong  Seon  Hong. Blockchain-based digital twins: Research trends, 

issues, and future challenges. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 2021. 

[37] Ibrar Yaqoob, Khaled Salah, Mueen Uddin, Raja Jayaraman, Mohammed Omar, and 

Muhammad Imran. Blockchain for digital twins: Recent advances and future research 

challenges. IEEE Network, 34(5):290–298, 2020. 

[38] Piotr F Borowski.  Digitization, digital twins, blockchain, and industry 4.0 as elements of 

management process in enterprises in the energy sector. Energies, 14(7):1885, 2021. 

[39] StartUs  Insights. 4  top  digital  twin  startups  impacting  the  energy  industry. 

https://www.startus-insights.com/innovators-guide/4- top-digital-twin-startups-impacting-

energy-industry/. Accessed November 20, 2021. 

[40] Emergen Research.  Top 10 digital twin companies impacting industry 4.0 innovations in 

2021.  https://www.emergenresearch.com/ blog/top-10-digital-twin-companies-impacting-

industry-4-0-innovations-in-2021.  Accessed November 20, 2021. 

[41] Cankal Altun, Bulent Tavli, and Halim Yanikomeroglu. Liberalization of digital twins of 

iot-enabled home appliances via blockchains and absolute ownership rights. IEEE 

Communications Magazine, 57(12):65–71, 2019. 

[42] Khaled Salah, M Habib Ur Rehman, Nishara Nizamuddin, and Ala Al-Fuqaha.  Blockchain for ai: 

Review and open research challenges. IEEE Access, 7:10127–10149, 2019. 

[43] Jiewu Leng, Douxi Yan, Qiang Liu, Kailin Xu, J Leon Zhao, Rui Shi, Lijun Wei, Ding 

Page 30 of 34 

 
 
 
Blockchain-based Digital Twin for Supply Chain Management	

Zhang, and Xin Chen. Manuchain: Combining permissioned blockchain with a holistic 

optimization model as bi-level intelligence for smart manufacturing. IEEE Transactions on 

Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems, 50(1):182–192, 2019. 

[44] Chao Zhang, Guanghui Zhou, Han Li, and Yan Cao. Manufacturing blockchain of things 

for the configuration of a data-and knowledge-driven digital twin manufacturing cell. IEEE 

Internet of Things Journal, 7(12):11884–11894, 2020. 

[45] Claudio Mandolla, Antonio Messeni Petruzzelli, Gianluca Percoco, and Andrea 

Urbinati. Building a digital twin for additive manufacturing through the exploitation of 

blockchain: A case analysis of the aircraft industry. Computers in Industry, 109:134–152, 

2019. 

[46] Chiara Cimino, Elisa Negri, and Luca Fumagalli.  Review of digital twin applications in 

manufacturing.  Computers in Industry, 113:103130, 2019. 

[47] Qinglin Qi and Fei Tao. Digital twin and big data towards smart manufacturing and industry 

4.0: 360 degree comparison. Ieee Access, 6:3585–3593, 2018. 

[48] Jiewu Leng, Shide Ye, Man Zhou, J Leon Zhao, Qiang Liu, Wei Guo, Wei Cao, and Leijie 

Fu.  Blockchain-secured smart manufacturing in industry 4.0: A survey. IEEE Transactions 

on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems, 51(1):237–252, 2020. 

[49] Weichao Luo, Tianliang Hu, Yingxin Ye, Chengrui Zhang, and Yongli Wei. A hybrid 

predictive maintenance approach for cnc machine tool driven by digital twin. Robotics and 

Computer-Integrated Manufacturing, 65:101974, 2020. 

[50] Qiuan Chen, Zhenwei Zhu, Shubin Si, and Zhiqiang Cai. Intelligent maintenance of 

complex equipment based on blockchain and digital twin technologies. In 2020 IEEE 

International Conference on Industrial Engineering and Engineering Management (IEEM), 

pages 908–912. IEEE, 2020. 

[51] Jay Lee, Jun Ni, Jaskaran Singh, Baoyang Jiang, Moslem Azamfar, and Jianshe Feng. 

Intelligent maintenance systems and predictive manufacturing. Journal of Manufacturing 

Science and Engineering, 142(11):110805, 2020. 

[52] Itxaro Errandonea, Sergio Beltrán, and Saioa Arrizabalaga. Digital twin for maintenance: A 

literature review. Computers in Industry, 123:103316, 2020. 

[53] Cunbo Zhuang, Tian Miao, Jianhua Liu, and Hui Xiong. The connotation of digital twin, 

and the construction and application method of shop-floor digital twin. Robotics and 

Computer-Integrated Manufacturing, 68:102075, 2021. 

[54] Zhuang Cunbo, Jianhua Liu, and Hui Xiong. Digital twin-based smart production 

management and control framework for the complex product assembly shop-floor.  The 

international journal of advanced manufacturing technology, 96(1-4):1149–1163, 2018. 

[55] Fei Tao and Meng Zhang. Digital twin shop-floor: a new shop-floor paradigm towards smart 

manufacturing. Ieee Access, 5:20418–20427, 2017. 

[56] Pedro Daniel Urbina Coronado, Roby Lynn, Wafa Louhichi, Mahmoud Parto, Ethan 

Page 31 of 34 

 
 
 
Blockchain-based Digital Twin for Supply Chain Management	

Wescoat, and Thomas Kurfess. Part data integration in the shop floor digital twin: Mobile 

and cloud technologies to enable a manufacturing execution system. Journal of 

manufacturing systems, 48:25–33, 2018. 

[57] Dominik Welte, Axel Sikora, Daniel Schönle, Jan Stodt, and Christoph Reich. Blockchain 

at the shop floor for maintenance. In 2020 International Conference on Cyber-Enabled 

Distributed Computing and Knowledge Discovery (CyberC), pages 15–22. IEEE, 2020. 

[58] Kyu Tae Park, Yoo Ho Son, and Sang Do Noh. The architectural framework of a cyber physical 

logistics system for digital-twin-based supply chain control. International Journal of 

Production Research, 59(19):5721–5742, 2021. 

[59] Fábio Coelho, Susana Relvas, and AP Barbosa-Póvoa. Simulation-based decision support 

tool for in-house logistics: the basis for a digital twin. Computers & Industrial 

Engineering, 153:107094, 2021. 

[60] YH Pan, T Qu, NQ Wu, M Khalgui, and GQ Huang. Digital twin based real-time 

production logistics synchronization system in a multi-level computing architecture. 

Journal of Manufacturing Systems, 58:246–260, 2021. 

[61] Jiewu Leng, Douxi Yan, Qiang Liu, Hao Zhang, Gege Zhao, Lijun Wei, Ding Zhang, Ailin Yu, 

and Xin Chen. Digital twin-driven joint optimisation of packing and storage assignment in 

large-scale automated high-rise warehouse product-service system. International Journal 

of Computer Integrated Manufacturing, 34(7-8):783–800, 2021. 

[62] Guido Perboli, Stefano Musso, and Mariangela Rosano. Blockchain in logistics and supply 

chain: A lean approach for designing real-world use cases. Ieee Access, 6:62018–62028, 

2018. 

[63] Rudra Prasad Tripathy, Manoj Ranjan Mishra, and Satya Ranjan Dash. Next generation 

warehouse through disruptive iot blockchain. In 2020 International Conference on 

Computer Science, Engineering and Applications (ICCSEA), pages 1–6. IEEE, 2020. 

[64] Mehrdokht Pournader, Yangyan Shi, Stefan Seuring, and SC Lenny Koh. Blockchain 

applications in supply chains, transport and logistics: a systematic review of the literature. 

International Journal of Production Research, 58(7):2063–2081, 2020. 

[65] Shazhou Chen, Wei Meng, Weiyuan Xu, Zhuoqiang Liu, Jiachuang Liu, and Fengyan Wu. A 

warehouse management system with uav based on digital twin and 5g technologies. In 2020 7th 

International Conference on Information, Cybernetics, and Computational Social Systems 

(ICCSS), pages 864–869. IEEE, 2020. 

[66] Pethuru Raj and Chellammal Surianarayanan. Digital twin: the industry use cases. In 

Advances in Computers, volume 117, pages 285–320. Elsevier, 2020. 

[67] GE Digital. Digital twin-apply advanced analytics and machine learning to reduce 

operational costs and risks. https://www.ge.com/ digital/applications/digital-twin. 

Accessed November 20, 2021. 

[68] Jose Antonio Marmolejo-Saucedo. Design and development of digital twins: A case study 

Page 32 of 34 

 
 
 
Blockchain-based Digital Twin for Supply Chain Management	

in supply chains. Mobile Networks and Applications, 25:2141–2160, 2020. 

[69] Preetha Evangeline et al. Digital twin technology for “smart manufacturing”. In Advances 

in Computers, volume 117, pages 35–49. Elsevier, 2020. 

[70] Nader Mohamed and Jameela Al-Jaroodi. Applying blockchain in industry 4.0 

applications. In 2019 IEEE 9th annual computing and communication workshop and 

conference (CCWC), pages 0852–0858. IEEE, 2019. 

[71] Logan D Sturm, Christopher B Williams, Jamie A Camelio, Jules White, and Robert Parker. 

Cyber-physical vulnerabilities in additive manufacturing systems: A case study attack on 

the. stl file with human subjects. Journal of Manufacturing Systems, 44:154–164, 2017. 

[72] Nallapaneni Manoj Kumar and Pradeep Kumar Mallick. Blockchain technology for 

security issues and challenges in iot. Procedia Computer Science, 132:1815–1823, 2018. 

[73] Ghosh Debabrata and Tan Albert. A framework for implementing blockchain technologies 

to improve supply chain performance. 2018. 

[74] Dimitris Mourtzis and Michalis Doukas. Decentralized manufacturing systems review: 

challenges and outlook. In Robust Manufacturing Control, pages 355–369. Springer, 2013. 

[75] Weiming Shen. Distributed manufacturing scheduling using intelligent agents. IEEE intelligent 

systems, 17(1):88–94, 2002. 

[76] Simon Kranzer, Dorian Prill, Davood Aghajanpour, Robert Merz, Rafaela Strasser, 

Reinhard Mayr, Helmut Zoerrer, Matthias Plasch, and Robert Steringer. An intelligent 

maintenance planning framework prototype for production systems. In 2017 IEEE 

International Conference on Industrial Technology (ICIT), pages 1124–1129. IEEE, 2017. 

[77] Ansys. Digital twin-transform your operations with data-driven and simulation-based 

digital twin software. https://www.ansys.com/ products/digital-twin. Accessed November 

22, 2021. 

[78] Ansys. Ansys collaborates with ge to drive  digital  twin  value  and  deliver  the  

promise  of  the  industrial  internet  of things. https://www.prnewswire.com/news-

releases/ansys-collaborates-with-ge-to-drive-digital-twin-value-and-deliver-the- 

promise-of-the-industrial-internet-of-things-300363787.html. Accessed November 22, 

2021. 

[79] Felipe  Bustamante,  Ashutosh  Dekhne,  Jörn  Herrmann,  and  Vedang  Singh. Improving 

warehouse  operations—digitally.  https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/operations/our-

insights/improving-warehouse-operations-digitally. Accessed November 23, 2021. 

[80] Naveen Joshi. The curious case of digital twins and blockchain. 

https://www.allerin.com/blog/the-curious-case-of-digital-twins-and- blockchain. Accessed 

November 24, 2021. 

[81] Hoang Tam Vo, Ashish Kundu, and Mukesh K Mohania. Research directions in blockchain 

data management and analytics. In EDBT, pages 445–448, 2018. 

[82] Zuo, Y. (2021). Making smart manufacturing smarter–a survey on blockchain technology 

Page 33 of 34 

 
 
 
Blockchain-based Digital Twin for Supply Chain Management	

in Industry 4.0. Enterprise Information Systems, 15(10), 1323-1353. 

[83] ISO. Blockchain standards. 

https://www.iso.org/search.html?q=blockchain&hPP=10&idx=all_en&p=0&hFR%5Bcategory

%5D%5B0% 5D=standard. Accessed November 26, 2021. 

[84] IEC. Moving ahead on standardization for digital twin. https://www.iec.ch/blog/moving-

ahead-standardization-digital-twin. Accessed November 26, 2021. 

[85] Subin Shen. Blockchain and its standardization work. https://www.itu.int/en/ITU-

T/academia/kaleidoscope/2017/Documents/special/ SS02.pdf. Accessed December 10, 

2021. 

[86] Yunlong  Lu,  Xiaohong  Huang,  Ke  Zhang,  Sabita  Maharjan,  and  Yan  Zhang. 

Communication-efficient  federated  learning  and permissioned blockchain for digital twin 

edge networks. IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 8(4):2276–2288, 2020. 

[87] Yunlong Lu, Xiaohong Huang, Ke Zhang, Sabita Maharjan, and Yan Zhang. Low-latency 

federated learning and blockchain for edge association in digital twin empowered 6g 

networks. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, 17(7):5098–5107, 2020 

[88] Li Jiang, Hao Zheng, Hui Tian, Shengli Xie, and Yan Zhang.  Cooperative federated 

learning and model update verification in blockchain empowered digital twin edge 

networks. IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 2021 

[89] Bao, J., Guo, D., Li, J., & Zhang, J. (2019). The modelling and operations for the digital 

twin in the context of manufacturing. Enterprise Information Systems, 13(4), 534-556. 

Page 34 of 34 

 
 
 
