2
2
0
2

b
e
F
8
1

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
7
0
2
9
0
.
2
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Leveraging Self-Sovereign Identity, Blockchain, and Zero-Knowledge
Proof to Build a Privacy-Preserving Vaccination Pass

Maurício Barrosa,∗, Frederico Schardonga,b,1 and Ricardo Felipe Custódio.a

aPrograma de Pós-Graduação em Ciência da Computação, Departamento de Informática e Estatística, Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina,
88040-370, Florianópolis, Brazil
bInstituto Federal de Educação, Ciência e Tecnologia do Rio Grande do Sul - Campus Rolante, 95690-000, Rolante, Brazil

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Vaccination Pass
Privacy
Self-Sovereign Identity
Zero-Knowledge Proof
Blockchain

The current humanitarian health crisis popularized the debate on data privacy. At the same time,
several cities, states, and even countries put the mandatory presentation of health pass to access ser-
vices into practice. In this article, we explore the concepts of self-sovereign identity, blockchain, and
zero-knowledge proofs to propose a solution to the problem of presenting proof of vaccination. This
solution allows users to prove that they are vaccinated for diﬀerent pathogens without revealing their
identity. The architecture is loosely coupled, allowing components to be exchanged, which we discuss
when we present the implementation of a working prototype.

1. Introduction

The COVID-19 pandemic surprised the world, generat-
ing an enormous health crisis with profound social and eco-
nomic implications. Reopening the economy becomes a la-
tent issue as many countries are vaccinating considerable
portions of their populations [44].

The transition period between the prohibition of access
to services and the complete and unrestricted reopening of
the economy has been marked by the use of proof of vacci-
nation for the SARS-CoV-2 virus, commonly called COVID
passports, or COVID pass [32]. Countries, states, and cities
are now demanding proof of vaccination, as is the case in
the city of São Paulo [43] and the state of New York [42].
Such vaccination certiﬁcates help economic recovery, allow-
ing vaccinated people to access services that invariably re-
quire close contact with others.

However, the use of vaccination certiﬁcates poses privacy-

related challenges. For example, you need to ensure that
whoever presents a vaccination certiﬁcate is who they say
they are. It is not trivial to solve this problem without de-
anonymizing the certiﬁcate submitter. Another challenge is
to allow a vaccinated person, in addition to proving their vac-
cination anonymously, not to reveal which laboratory manu-
factured their vaccine or even the exact date of vaccination.
Vaccination certiﬁcates can be made in various ways,
from a physical version of paper or plastic card to electronic.
While the physical version is more vulnerable to fraud and
doesn’t solve the challenges listed above, it’s cheap and read-
ily available to everyone. The electronic version, which pre-
supposes access to technology, can oﬀer greater privacy, se-
curity, and scalability if properly designed and developed,

∗Corresponding author

mauricio.v.barros@gmail.com (M. Barros); frede.sc@gmail.com (F.

Schardong); frederico.schardong@rolante.ifrs.edu.br (F. Schardong);
ricardo.custodio@ufsc.br (R.F. Custódio.)

ORCID(s): 0000-0001-6825-892X (M. Barros); 0000-0003-4492-163X (F.

Schardong); 0000-0001-9611-5694 (R.F. Custódio.)

1This study was supported by the Federal Institute of Education, Sci-

ence and Technology of Rio Grande do Sul (IFRS).

possibly successfully tackling the challenges described above.
One promising way to attack such challenges electronically
is to use Self-Sovereign Identity (SSI).

SSI is a user-centric paradigm of digital identity [1, 46].
In an SSI-based ecosystem, the user is central to identity
management, having control and cryptographic guarantees
over shared personal data. The SSI concept is especially rel-
evant in sensitive personal data, such as health data. In addi-
tion to GDPR [14], health data generally have speciﬁc legis-
lation, such as HIPAA [6], which establishes a legal frame-
work requiring special care regarding the storage, handling,
and sharing of health information.

We tackled the challenge of creating a digital vaccina-
tion pass that respects users’ privacy in this work. It allows
their proof of vaccination to be veriﬁed while reducing the
exposure of personal and health data. Our SSI solution to
this challenge maintains user anonymity through blockchain
and Zero-Knowledge Proof (ZKP).

This article is organized as follows.

In Section 2, we
present the concepts of Digital Identity and Self-Sovereign
Identity. Section 3 introduces concepts required to follow
this work, namely Veriﬁable Credentials (VCs), ZKP, De-
centralized Identiﬁers (DIDs), and Blockchain. We present
our proposal and detail our implementation in Sections 4 and
5, respectively. In Section 6, related works are discussed,
and in Section 7, we close the article presenting our conclu-
sions.

2. Digital Identity

ISO 24760-1, which addresses security and privacy for
identity management, deﬁnes digital identity as “a set of at-
tributes related to an entity” [30]. In [11], digital identity
is deﬁned as the representation of an entity linked to a spe-
ciﬁc context. Linking digital identity to speciﬁc contexts is
a commonly accepted idea in the literature [18, 46, 31].

Identity management also called Identity and Access Man-

agement (IAM), is a set of policies, processes, and technolo-
gies related to the administration of digital identities [30].

M Barros et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 1 of 10

 
 
 
 
 
 
Leveraging Self-Sovereign Identity, Blockchain, and Zero-Knowledge Proof to Build a Privacy-Preserving Vaccination Pass

IdP

IdP

User

SP
IdP

User

SP

IdP
User

SP

IdP
User

SP

(a) Centralized

(b) Outsourced IdP

(c) User-centric

(d) SSI

Figure 1: The four IAM models. Constant lines represent interactions, and dashed lines
mean trust [46]

An identity management system deﬁnes how entities are iden-
tiﬁed, authenticated, and authorized to access restricted ac-
cess services [18]. Digital identity and IAMs can be mod-
eled in diﬀerent ways. In this section, we describe the three
traditional models of digital identity [1], pointing out their
problems to, ﬁnally, explain SSI and how this fourth model
attacks the issues of the previous models.

2.1. Isolated Identity

The isolated model was the ﬁrst identity model.
It is
the simplest model [18], as depicted in Figure 1(a). In this
paradigm, only the user and the service provider (SP) exist,
and the SP also operates as an Identity Provider (IdP). Each
web service that requires authentication and authorization
must implement its own IAM.

One of the consequences of this model is that users have
many digital identities spread across diﬀerent online services.
Furthermore, each SP has to bear the costs of implementing
and maintaining an IAM, which involves protecting against
possible attacks, vulnerabilities, and taking care of the de-
mands imposed by GDPR.

2.2. Outsourced IdP

The natural evolution of the previous model is the sepa-
ration of IAM functionalities into a speciﬁc service for this
purpose, giving rise to the identity provider as a service in
itself. In this way, the IdP positions itself as an intermediary
between the user and the SP, as shown in Figure 1(b). In this
model, the SP outsources identity management to the IdP.

This model tackles the problems of (i) usability, i.e. users
having many accounts, and; (ii) responsibility of SPs, i.e.
SPs having to design, implement and care for sensitive user
information. In this model, users do not need to have several
distinct identities, and SPs do not need to implement their
own IAM framework.

However, this model generated unexpected consequences,
such as an immense concentration of data in the hands of a
few IdPs, e.g. Facebook, Google, and Twitter. These com-
panies have become substantial data silos, trapping people
in an oligarchy of few IDPs without portability among them-
selves [46].

By concentrating high amounts of personal data, these
silos have become centers of attention, decoys for attacks.
In addition, issues such as data leaks, security, data property,

and privacy raise concerns. The data belongs to users, but
they do not own and control them and are unaware of all
services that consume them.

2.3. User-Centric

One of the answers to the problem of users having to
hand over their data to an IdP was given by the user-centric
identity model [31], illustrated in Figure 1(c). The proposal
is for the user to store access credentials issued by SPs in a
personal authentication device, such as a smartcard or smart-
phone. The user authenticates to the personal authentication
device using a PIN code or another method, and the authen-
tication device, in turn, authenticates with the SP.

Although this model advances privacy, allowing the user
to control their access credentials, it does not address the
management of user attributes or the incorporation of at-
tributes guaranteed by third parties. The latter issue is of
great relevance, as many SPs will only trust the value of at-
tributes if they are issued by the IdPs they trust. For example,
a car rental company will not accept a driver’s license if the
user issues it.

2.4. Self-Sovereign Identity

Although a precise deﬁnition of SSI is still under debate,
as discussed in [46], [40] and [18], the SSI literature solidi-
ﬁes the idea that the user should own and manage their data.
In other words, both attributes and credentials, which can
be self-signed or signed by third parties, must be controlled
only by users, who present their data to SPs whenever they
desire. This is depicted in Figure 1(d). Therefore, users can
choose to have few or many digital personas, and no silos of
personal data are created.

In 2016, Christopher Allen proposed ten guiding princi-
ples for SSI [1], and although it is a blog post, it is treated
as a whitepaper in the area [46]. The ten principles are as
follows. (i) Existence; the user must exist independent of
any service provider/identity provider. (ii) Control; the user
must control their identities. (iii) Access; the user must al-
ways have access to their data. (iv) Transparency; all sys-
tems and algorithms must be transparent to the user. (v) Per-
sistence; identities must be persisted. (vi) Portability; the
services and information about the user’s identity must be
transportable. (vii) Interoperability; identities should have
as wide a range of use as possible across diﬀerent systems.

M Barros et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 2 of 10

Leveraging Self-Sovereign Identity, Blockchain, and Zero-Knowledge Proof to Build a Privacy-Preserving Vaccination Pass

(viii) Consent: The user must always consent to the usage
of his identity data. (ix) Minimization; when necessary to
show some information, always show as little as possible to
accomplish the task. (x) Protection; users’ rights must be
protected.

While it is possible to implement SSI without Blockchain [5]

technology, using it brings signiﬁcant beneﬁts. For example,
storing credential revocation schemes on the ledger brings
high availability and an immutable record of revoked data.
Another advantage is to remove third parties when establish-
ing trust by allowing entities to be part of the network and
prove they are who they say they are in novel ways. For in-
stance, a customer physically accessing a bank agency scans
a QR code posted on the wall and connects to the bank, thus
not requiring the bank to have an x509 certiﬁcate within a
PKI hierarchy nor an IANA-controlled DNS domain. Fi-
nally, using blockchain to implement SSI fosters an ontologi-
cally coherent ecosystem, as it publishes credential metadata
that can be reused and augmented by all participants.

3. Terminology and Concepts

This section introduces the fundamental concepts needed
to understand this work. These are the decentralized identi-
ﬁers, veriﬁable credentials standards, the concept of Zero-
Knowledge Proofs (ZKP), and blockchain.

3.1. Decentralized Identiﬁers

SSI aims to give users control over their data. Part of this
eﬀort consists of ensuring that communications in peer-to-
peer relations do not involve third parties. However, trust in
today’s communications over the internet is rooted in third-
party authorities: chains of certiﬁcates tied to root certiﬁcate
authorities (CAs) chosen a priori by browsers and operat-
ing systems. The decentralized identiﬁers (DIDs) standard
is being developed at W3C to mitigate the participation of
authorities in communications and relationships in SSI [52].
DIDs are designed to operate independently of central-
ized registries, identity providers, and CAs. Every DID is
linked to a unique DID document, a JSON structure that
can be stored on-chain or oﬀ-chain, that describes an entity,
specifying public keys, service endpoints, etc. For instance,
an entity can be a person, a group, a relationship between
entities, an organization, or an internet of things object [52].
The format of a DID identiﬁer is a textual string com-
posed of three parts separated by colons, where the ﬁrst part
is always DID; the second is a method identiﬁer; the third is an
entity identiﬁer in this method. A DID method is a technique
that describes the creation and management of method-speciﬁc
identiﬁers and how to obtain their respective DID documents.
For example, the did:indy method describes identiﬁers on
Hyperledger Indy blockchains, while the did:key method de-
scribes identiﬁers generated from cryptographic keys. An
example of DID address of this method is did:key:z6MkpTHR8VN
sBxYAAWHut2Geadds9dVWtWAnuB.

3.2. Veriﬁable Credentials

Working with user attributes is a crucial part of any sys-
tem that operates with digital identities. Attributes are com-
monly organized into structures called credentials, which are
also used for identiﬁcation and authentication. A credential
contains a set of one or more claims made by an issuer about
an entity [40]. More formally, a credential is a set of claims
and not attributes because claims can be false or represent an
incomplete perception of the whole. In contrast, attributes
are properties, i.e. absolute truths, of entities.

Veriﬁable Credential (VC) is a set of claims and meta-
data that can cryptographically prove the identity of the is-
suer through a digital signature, providing integrity and au-
thenticity [51]. VCs have metadata that describes the is-
suer, expiration date, public key, and revocation informa-
tion. Regarding the latter, the cryptographic accumulator is
often employed to create private-preserving revocation reg-
istries. The cryptographic accumulator is an algorithm that
combines a set of values into one short accumulator, such
that evidence is produced that the accumulator incorporated
a given value without revealing it. [17].

Part of the W3C VC standard deﬁnes the veriﬁable pre-
sentation (VP) of claims [51]. VP is the process of revealing
one or more claims to a veriﬁer. The veriﬁer may or may not
trust the claims presented but must always be able to verify
integrity and authenticity. VPs can also reveal the result of
operators on claims, for instance, that someone’s birth date
was at least 18 years ago. This technique is called Zero-
Knowledge Proof (ZKP).

3.3. Zero-Knowledge Proof

Zero-Knowledge Proof (ZKP) is a cryptographic proto-
col where one proves to someone else that they know a value,
but without revealing any other information other than the
fact that they know it [47]. Formally, ZKP is an interactive
prooﬁng system (𝑃 , 𝑉 ) for proving a language membership
statement over a language 𝐿 = {0, 1}∗ with two actors, the
prover 𝑃 and the veriﬁer 𝑉 . To prove that an instance 𝑥 ∈ 𝐿,
𝑃 and 𝑉 must share 𝑥, denoted by (𝑃 , 𝑉 )(𝑥). Then, 𝑃 and
𝑉 exchange a sequence of messages so that at the end of the
interactions, the result is (𝑃 , 𝑉 )(𝑥) ∈ {𝑎𝑐𝑐𝑒𝑝𝑡, 𝑟𝑒𝑗𝑒𝑐𝑡}, rep-
resenting the acceptance or not of 𝑉 for the statement of 𝑃
that 𝑥 ∈ 𝐿 [29].

ZKP schemes must have two properties [20]: (i) com-
pleteness, an interactive proof is complete if the participants
are honest, i.e. follow the protocol correctly, and the protocol
succeeds with overwhelming probability; and (ii) soundness,
an interactive proof is sound if a dishonest prover can only
mislead 𝑉 with negligible probability. ZKPs are not proofs
in the mathematical sense as there is a small probability of
convincing 𝑉 of a false statement. Thus, multiple protocol
instances are used to reduce the likelihood to a negligible
probability of convincing 𝑉 of a false statement.

In the context of VCs, ZKPs are used to build VPs that
convince the veriﬁer about something concerning the claims
it contains without revealing them. For instance, a driver’s
license was issued to me and is valid, or my credit score is

M Barros et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 3 of 10

Leveraging Self-Sovereign Identity, Blockchain, and Zero-Knowledge Proof to Build a Privacy-Preserving Vaccination Pass

higher than a given threshold. To reduce the communication
between the prover and the veriﬁer, Non-Interactive Zero-
Knowledge Proof (NIZKP) [39] is used. NIZKP enables
proofs to be built and sent via an out-of-band method, such as
a QR code. This technique uses Fiat-Shamir paradigm [19]
to remove interactions from the protocol.

3.4. Blockchain

Most SSI systems [40] use distributed ledger technology
to: (i) decentralize storage and, consequently, reduce author-
itarian control over data; and (ii) have guaranteed immutabil-
ity of the information stored in the ledger.

Those features are possible because of the properties of
blockchain data structures such as append-only hash lists and
Merkle trees [38]. In a blockchain, blocks of data contain,
together with its data, the hash of the previous block. Thus,
to modify the data of a single block within a sequence of
linked blocks (i.e. a chain), one would need to change all
subsequent blocks.

Having an append-only structure guarantees immutabil-
ity on a local level. Nonetheless, this structure must be dis-
tributed in a network, and all participant nodes must agree on
the correct values of the blocks. This agreement is achieved
through a consensus algorithm. Most solutions for this prob-
lem are attempts on solving the Byzantine generals prob-
lem [34]. The most popular solution to this problem are algo-
rithms based on proof of work, popularised by Bitcoin [41].

4. Digital Vaccination Pass

The undertaking of designing a credential for COVID
vaccination is complex. Such a credential must comply with
diﬀerent actors from diﬀerent areas, both local and interna-
tional. Several study groups and collaborative eﬀorts [21,
37, 55] were formed around the world to design or stan-
dardize these vaccination certiﬁcates. One such initiative,
the Good Health Pass Collaborative (GHPC) [21] is a multi-
sector initiative to create a blueprint for the interoperability
of digital health pass systems [23].

In their ﬁrst White Paper, the GHPC initiative deﬁned
four critical requirements that health credential systems must
satisfy [22]: (i) the credential must be able to work across
borders and comply with local and international legislation;
(ii) the credential must have the collaboration of diﬀerent
areas such as health, governments, tourism, travel, etc; (iii)
the credential must comply with privacy and data protection
regulations and must be able to link to the credential holder;
and (iv) the credential shall not add costs or other burdens
to users. This work aims to comply with these requirements,
adopting open-source tools and open standards as a way to
make this technology available.

SSI introduces essential ideas and principles regarding
people’s privacy. The ten principles are especially relevant
in the contemporary context of the COVID-19 pandemic,
which has accelerated the digitization of society and popu-
larized the debate over the privacy of health data [32]. Based
on the ten SSI principles, the concepts discussed above, and
the requirements laid down by the GHPC, it is possible to

tackle the challenge of allowing a person to prove their vacci-
nation status while preserving their privacy. In other words,
to prove whether or not one is vaccinated for a disease with-
out revealing when or where they were vaccinated or even
hide the laboratory that produced the vaccine.

Our proposal for a proof of vaccination uses the concepts
discussed above. It starts with a public or private entity pre-
viously authorized to administer vaccines, namely a vacci-
nator. It is registered on the blockchain to issue VCs for vac-
cinated people, i.e. the vaccinees. Since any entity on the
blockchain can issue VCs, it is necessary to use VC issu-
ing authorization schemes as proposed in [35] to ensure that
only VCs issued by authorized entities are legitimately rec-
ognized. Figure 2 illustrates the three entities involved in our
solution.

Digital Wallet

Vaccinee

Veriﬁable
Credential

Veriﬁable
Presentation

Vaccinator

Trust

Veriﬁer

Figure 2: The three roles and their relations in our solution.

The VC states the vaccinee’s full name and date of birth,
the laboratory that produced the administered vaccine, the
applied dose (ﬁrst, second, third, or more if applicable), and
the date it was administered. Our VC format does not in-
clude country-speciﬁc identiﬁers, such as the SSN of USA or
South Corea’s Resident’s Registration Number, for two rea-
sons: (i) our solution is country independent; and (ii) there
are countries with large numbers of unregistered citizens [9].
The vaccinee stores the VC in a digital wallet. This digi-
tal wallet can be a smartwatch, a smartphone app that uses a
secure hardware element, or another Personal Assistant De-
vice (PAD). Sending the VC from the vaccinator to the vac-
cinee takes place immediately after the act of vaccination
through the most convenient and secure way for the user. For
instance, if the PAD has Near Field Communication (NFC)
and Bluetooth, NFC is favored because of the low range of
the protocol. QR code scanning is also available. Regardless
of the communication technology used to connect the digital
wallet with the issuer, DIDs represent the entities involved
and identify the relationship between these two entities.

Note that the credential is held by the user in their wallet,
causing no personal data to be stored on the blockchain, and
therefore the system has no GDPR compliance obligations.

M Barros et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 4 of 10

Leveraging Self-Sovereign Identity, Blockchain, and Zero-Knowledge Proof to Build a Privacy-Preserving Vaccination Pass

Personal data are in possession of their owner, and their con-
sent is required for sharing them. This arrangement makes
it diﬃcult for issuing organizations to track user data activi-
ties. In addition, in the hands of the owners, it is an excellent
way to transport this data across borders without the need for
substantial centralized data centers.

When needed, the vaccinee can use her PAD’s digital
wallet to produce a VP, proving that she is vaccinated to a
veriﬁer. The user can customize the VP to have more or less
personal data. In this way, the amount of exposed data can be
adjusted to suit the context better. For instance, suppose the
vaccinee does not wish to reveal the laboratory that produced
her vaccine. In this case, she can create a VP using ZKP to
prove that the value of the laboratory ﬁeld on her VC is one
of the values in a list of laboratories accepted by the veriﬁer.
Alternatively, the veriﬁer might deﬁne the VP format.
For instance, suppose that to access a social event such as
a concert or play, the veriﬁer (i.e. the entity responsible for
the event) needs to ensure that participants have taken at least
one dose of the COVID-19 vaccine. The veriﬁer deﬁnes a
VP request with a speciﬁc format in this case. They send it
to the customers, who, through their digital wallets, accept
or not to produce a VP following the requested format. An
airline, however, may be obliged to demand complete vac-
cination of its passengers 14 days before the ﬂight. In this
case, the airline constructs a VP request for this context, and
passengers agree or disagree to produce a VP when boarding
the plane.

Finally, the veriﬁer validates the VP and chooses to trust
it if they trust the vaccinator who issued the VC. Veriﬁers
can conﬁrm the authentication and authorization of vacci-
nators through the DID registered in the blockchain. The
blockchain also stores the value of the cryptographic accu-
mulator, which is used to create a revocation registry of VCs,
which can be used if, for example, expired vaccine doses
have been applied by mistake.

5. Empirical Experimentation

The shift of focus regarding data ownership introduced
by SSI allows us to propose a privacy-preserving digital vac-
cination pass. This section presents the tools and technolo-
gies adopted to realize our goal, an architectural overview of
our system, and speciﬁc implementation details and results.

5.1. Underlying Technologies

We previously presented concepts, standards, and tech-
nologies, and now we discuss the tools employed in our solu-
tion and how they work. With regards to the blockchain, we
use a blockchain specially created for identity management
in the SSI model named Hyperledger Indy. It is an open-
source project of the Hyperledger community that provides
an ecosystem for SSI based on Blockchain [26]. The Indy
distributed ledger consists of two subprojects, Indy-Plenum
and Indy-Node. While the former is a general-purpose blockchain
that implements the consensus algorithm, the latter is a spe-
cialization of the former, where identity-speciﬁc transactions
are implemented [48]. It is important to note that Indy does

not store personal data on the blockchain. The data saved on
the ledger are DIDs of entities that issue VCs, their public
keys, contact endpoints, a cryptographic accumulator value
to serve as a revocation list, and VC schema metadata.

Using blockchain here has diﬀerent advantages. It is pos-
sible to create an international chain of trust through decen-
tralization, with various governments issuing their lists of
trusted DIDs. It also makes it challenging to have a point of
failure that would stop the system. Also, a centralized per-
sonal and health data repository cannot be created because
there is no personal data on the blockchain or elsewhere.

To foster and facilitate the adoption of SSI, the Hyper-
ledger community has also created Hyperledger Aries [28].
It is an abstraction layer above Indy, implementing methods
to produce, transfer and store VCs and VPs independent of
the blockchain solution below. Through this abstraction, de-
velopers can focus on business rules and not worry about
implementation details. The abstraction layer that Aries in-
troduces happens through a software agent called the Aries
agent.

The Aries agent interacts with other entities via DID Com-
munication (DIDComm) or other communication protocols.
DIDComm is a protocol that allows asynchronous commu-
nication of DIDs through encrypted messages [8]. Two parts
make up the Aries agent, namely the agent and the controller.
The former is responsible for creating, signing, and reading
transactions on the blockchain, interacting with other agents,
managing secure storage, creating and presenting VPs us-
ing ZKP, and exchanging messages with the controller. The
latter implements business logic, indicating how the agent
should respond to events. The agent and controller commu-
nicate via REST API. The agent sends HTTP webhook calls
to the controller, which in turn analyzes and responds to the
agent accordingly [27].

5.2. System Overview

We have previously presented the three roles involved in
the vaccine pass and their interactions. We now detail the
architecture of our system and how these roles concretely
interact using the technologies presented. Figure 3 shows
the architecture of our system.

First, it’s important to note that the ﬁrst time an organiza-
tion instantiates our solution, some preparation is required.
Speciﬁcally, an Aries agent must communicate with the Indy
blockchain to: (i) record the DID of each health agency that
will administer vaccines; (ii) deﬁne the format of the VCs
that will be issued; and (iii) specify the revocation registra-
tion of the VCs. To ensure the chain of trust, DIDs issued to
health agencies must be endorsed by the government or the
responsible agency. The government then makes available a
list of trusted DIDs, contributing to a global chain of trust.

After carrying out the preparations described above, each
health agency authorized to administer vaccines must con-
trol an Aries agent through software, mobile app, or website.
The Aries agent can run on the same device that controls
it or remotely from an organization’s or third-party cloud
data center. When a health agency representative vaccinates

M Barros et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 5 of 10

Leveraging Self-Sovereign Identity, Blockchain, and Zero-Knowledge Proof to Build a Privacy-Preserving Vaccination Pass

Vaccinator

REST API

Aries
Agent

DIDComm

REST API

Hyperledger Indy

Vaccinee’s
Digital Wallet

REST API

REST API

Veriﬁer

Aries
Agent

DIDComm

Figure 3: System architecture.

someone, an HTTP call via REST API is made to the health
agency’s agent requesting the issuance of a VC. The vac-
cinee’s name and date of birth are sent in the request, along
with information about the applied vaccine such as manufac-
turing laboratory, pathogen the vaccine ﬁghts, dose number,
place, and date of application. The information sent to the
agent can be customized.

The Aries agent controlled by the health agency stores
the private key of the entity it represents in a secure enclave
and uses it to issue a VC for the received data. The newly
created VC belongs to the vaccinee and must be forwarded
to him. A peer-to-peer connection using DIDComm is made
between the vaccinator’s Aries agent and the vaccinee’s dig-
ital wallet to transfer the VC. It is important to note that the
blockchain only stores the value of the cryptographic accu-
mulator, to prove the unrevoked status of the VC and nothing
else.

Finally, the vaccinee can create a VP to prove something
about his VC as described earlier. The secure environment of
the digital wallet creates the VP and sends it via DIDComm
to the Aries agent of the veriﬁer. The veriﬁer’s agent con-
nects to Indy to check whether the VC that originated the VP
is revoked or not. All data exchanges are private and peer-
to-peer, between issuer and holder and between holder and
veriﬁer.

5.3. Prototype Implementation

We employ the tools described above to implement a
privacy-preserving solution to the problem of proving vacci-
nation status, which is available online2. With regards to the
blockchain, our prototype uses Sovrin, an implementation of
Hyperledger Indy that acts as a network of interoperable SSI
networks [50]. It is one of the ﬁrst SSI oﬀerings and perhaps
the most studied [33, 40, 36], allowing diﬀerent SSI systems
to share VC metadata and to interoperate, thus fostering the
adoption of SSI.

2URL omitted for peer-review

We created two websites that adapt to desktops and mo-
bile devices using HTML and JavaScript for the proof-of-concept
implementation. The vaccinator operates one website to is-
sue VCs, while the veriﬁer uses the second website to deﬁne
VP formats and present this request to vaccinees. We inte-
grated the backend of each website with an Aries agent. We
chose to use a proprietary Aries agent implementation called
Verity because it is readily available and runs in the cloud. It
is a product of Evernym, the company that created Indy and
donated it to the Hyperledger Foundation [53]. Nonethe-
less, there are free and open-source Aries agents such as
ACA-Py [25].

Once a vaccine is applied, the vaccine and vaccinee data
are submitted to the vaccinator’s website as shown in Fig-
ure 4. In the background, the system requests its Aries agent
to create a VC and transfer it to the vaccinee’s digital wallet.
The transference begins with the vaccinee reading a QR code
that is returned by our application, as shown in Figure 5.

Figure 4: The website where the vaccinator ﬁlls in the vaccine
and vaccinee data.

In our implementation, we used the digital wallet connect.me

to perform the actions of a vaccinee [15]. There are a variety
of free and paid digital wallets capable of receiving VCs and
producing VPs [45]. Figure 6(a) shows connect.me asking for
user conﬁrmation to either accept or deny connecting to the
vaccinator after scanning the QR code. Although the wallet
does not inform how this connection happens to the user, it is
a peer-to-peer connection using DIDComm. Figure 6(b) shows
the wallet asking the vaccinee to accept or deny receiving
their VC, which occurs immediately after conﬁrming the in-
coming connection from the vaccinator. Upon acceptance,

M Barros et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 6 of 10

Leveraging Self-Sovereign Identity, Blockchain, and Zero-Knowledge Proof to Build a Privacy-Preserving Vaccination Pass

Figure 5: VC transfer via QR code. Vaccinee needs to scan
the QR code with their digital wallet.

the vaccinee can use their digital wallet to produce VPs and
prove their vaccination status.

Establishing a biometric link between the wallet and the
vaccinee is imperative in all transactions. For instance, when
the issuer connects to the vaccinee to send a VC, the issuer
must mandate that the wallet is secured with a biometric fac-
tor, such as ﬁngerprint or facial recognition. Likewise, when
the veriﬁer checks a VP, the wallet that created the VP must
be secured with a biometric factor, ensuring that the wal-
let holder is, in fact, the owner of the VC. In the connect.me
wallet, blocking and unblocking by biometric factors is avail-
able.

The interaction between vaccinee and veriﬁer also be-
gins through QR code, which we omit for lack of space.
Figure 7 shows the veriﬁer’s interface, which deﬁnes a VP
request format. The vaccinee will need to present the labora-
tory and pathogen their vaccinee ﬁghts, and the dose number
must be greater than or equal to 1. Figure 8(a) shows how
the digital wallet shows the VP request to the vaccinee.

Finally, we show in Figure 8(b) a VP request that the
vaccinee cannot produce. In this case, the vaccinee is asked
to prove that she has taken three or more vaccine doses for
SARS-CoV-2. However, since no VC satisﬁes this require-
ment, the digital wallet cannot produce the VP for this re-
quest.

Selective disclosure and ZKP allow the holder to pro-
duce speciﬁc VPs for each context. With ZKP, it is possible
to issue a credential and create fully anonymous VPs. Such
anonymity makes no sense in a context where the holder is
already identiﬁed, e.g., at work or university, and VPs can
be adapted to that.

It is important to remark that all interactions of our sys-
tem are contactless, helping with the necessary distancing
measures to combat the pandemic.

(a) Digital wallet requesting conﬁr-
mation to connect with the vaccina-
tor.

(b) Digital wallet requesting conﬁr-
mation to receive the VC.

Figure 6: Vaccinee connects to vaccinator through DIDComm and
receives her VC.

6. Related Work

In early 2021, the Good Health Pass Collaborative (GHPC)

was launched [21] with more than 25 companies and orga-
nizations from multiple sectors. In the second half of 2021,
the GHPC initiative released its blueprint [23] with recom-
mendations regarding credential and operational infrastruc-
ture. Design considerations and technical choices are based
on ﬁve pillars: (i) individuals must be at the center of data
exchange; (ii) the credential must allow the individual to pro-
vide evidence of their vaccination status; (iii) a decentralized
approach is needed for global security and scalability; (iv)
open standards are essential for interoperability and partic-
ipation; and (v) pragmatic and realistic approach. The au-
thors agree and adopt the recommendations of the GHPC
for the elaboration of this work.

In a similar eﬀort, the World Health Organization (WHO)
created the Digital Documentation of COVID-19 Certiﬁcates
(DDCC) intending to establish standards for an architecture
for digital vaccination certiﬁcates [55]. In the second half of
2021, the DDCC published a report [54] with the technical
speciﬁcations and implementation guide for the COVID-19
certiﬁcates. The document assumes an existing Public Key
Infrastructure (PKI) for each member state and proposes a
digital counterpart to the paper certiﬁcate. It recognizes the
importance of a global trust framework but does not detail
how to implement a global health trust framework to store
the public keys of member states. It is outside the report’s
scope to present technical features for the prospect of selec-

M Barros et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 7 of 10

Leveraging Self-Sovereign Identity, Blockchain, and Zero-Knowledge Proof to Build a Privacy-Preserving Vaccination Pass

Figure 7: Request for proof of ﬁrst dose.

tive disclosure. So, unlike our approach, DDCC is not con-
cerned with implementing a global chain of trust or a certiﬁ-
cate that cares about data anonymity.

Similar to the WHO initiative, the European Union cre-
ated the EU Digital COVID Certiﬁcate [13]. This initiative
also uses PKI and certiﬁcates whose data come in plain text,
without anonymity. The approach is feasible within the Eu-
ropean Union with its own PKI. Still, acceptance in foreign
countries is uncertain, depending on case-by-case interoper-
ability agreements between nations.

In addition to national and international institutions, sev-
eral private companies have also created their versions of
health passes, such as the BLOK Pass [4] and the Evernym
Travel Pass [16]. Both initiatives follow SSI principles and
keep users’ data only on their smartphones. However, a dig-
ital vaccination pass must be open-source, enabling code
transparency and making it possible for anyone to verify the
system.

Regarding academic eﬀorts with similar objectives to this
work, we present three research papers and point out their
shortcomings.

The authors of [10] acknowledge that proof of vaccina-
tion or robust antibody testing will be in high demand and
question what format such a certiﬁcate should take. They
claim that a digital certiﬁcate would make more sense as
long as it is: (i) privacy-preserving; (ii) un-forgeable; (iii)
easy to administer; (iv) easy to verify while preserving pri-
vacy; (v) scalable to millions of users; and (vi) cost-eﬀective.
To achieve these goals, the authors propose a mobile ap-
plication that implements an architecture based on: (i) VC;
(ii) the Solid [49] decentralized data platform, which stores

(a) Digital wallet asks the vaccinee
to share a VP.

(b) Digital wallet is unable to create
the requested VP.

Figure 8:
the digital wallet.

Interactions between vaccinee and veriﬁer through

the VCs issued on the user’s smartphone; and (iii) a private
Ethereum blockchain that uses proof of authority [7], where
nodes are previously registered and authorized to conﬁrm
transactions. This solution, however, needs to register each
user and each issued certiﬁcate in the blockchain, resulting in
a high amount of transactions. Our solution does not require
the blockchain for vaccinee registration and VC issuance, as
it uses direct communication between the vaccinator and the
vaccinee via DIDComm.

In [24] the authors seek to solve the challenge of propos-
ing an immunity pass using Blockchain, SSI, and re-encryption
proxies [2], which allow an encrypted message with the pub-
lic key of 𝐴 to be decrypted with the private key of 𝐵 through
a proxy that re-encrypts the ciphertext. The solution fea-
tures smart contracts for the Ethereum Blockchain [12]. The
patient’s smart contract stores the hash of the vaccination
and immunity records and travel history to perform contact
tracing. However, as it is based on smart contracts in the
Ethereum network, transactions have costs, although small,
making it necessary for those involved to have ﬁnancial re-
sources available for execution.

Lastly, the authors of [3] chose to demonstrate the use of
blockchain to create immunity certiﬁcates for SARS-CoV-2
in a pre-vaccine period with a document that certiﬁes that
the individual has been infected and is immune. The au-
thors claim that the use of “immunity licenses” could create
restrictions on who can and cannot interact in social spaces,
encouraging counterfeiting. Therefore, the paper proposes
using a government-operated blockchain registry, although
it does not specify which one. After an antibody test, the

M Barros et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 8 of 10

Leveraging Self-Sovereign Identity, Blockchain, and Zero-Knowledge Proof to Build a Privacy-Preserving Vaccination Pass

details are kept in a smart contract conﬁdentially. Their pro-
posal uses biometric authentication as a private key for the
“account” of patients on the blockchain, and their data is en-
crypted with the biometric data of the tested patient. How-
ever, the work does not oﬀer any empirical evidence of the
functioning of the proposed system.

7. Final Remarks

SSI brings greater privacy, security, and ownership to
user data than previous identity models. This work presents
a system architecture that allows the issuance and veriﬁca-
tion of VCs based on SSI for proof of vaccination. Our im-
plementation produces a VC with vaccination information
that, through selective disclosure and ZKP, ensures proof
of vaccination with a high level of privacy. While no sin-
gle solution will be universally appropriate, researchers and
practitioners can easily customize our system for diﬀerent
use cases by exchanging components such as digital wallets,
blockchain, and software agents to their needs.

References
[1] Allen, C., 2016.

The path to self-sovereign identity.
http://www.lifewithalacrity.com/2016/04/the-path-to-self-
soverereign-identity.html. Retrieved on February 10, 2022.
[2] Ateniese, G., Fu, K., Green, M., Hohenberger, S., 2006.

Im-
proved proxy re-encryption schemes with applications to secure dis-
tributed storage. ACM Trans. Inf. Syst. Secur. 9, 1–30. doi:10.1145/
1127345.1127346. Retrieved on February 10, 2022.

URL:

[3] Bansal, A., Padappayil, R., 2020. Optimizing the implementation of
covid-19 “immunity certiﬁcates” using blockchain. Journal of Medi-
cal Systems 44, 140. doi:10.1007/s10916-020-01616-4.

[4] Blok Bioscience ltd, 2022. A health passport with privacy by de-
sign. URL: https://blokbioscience.com/blok-pass-app/. Retrieved on
February 10, 2022.

[5] van Bokkem, D., Hageman, R., Koning, G., Nguyen, L., Zarin, N.,
2019. Self-sovereign identity solutions: The necessity of blockchain
technology. arXiv:1904.12816.

[6] Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, 1996.

The Health
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA).
URL: https://aspe.hhs.gov/reports/health-insurance-portability-
accountability-act-1996.

[7] Curran, B., 2018. What is proof of authority consensus? staking your
identity on the blockchain. Demand Solutions News, Io ́𝜈𝜆𝜄o𝜍 URL:
https://blockonomi.com/proof-of-authority/. Retrieved on February
10, 2022.

[8] Curren, S., Looker, T., Terbu, O., 2020. Aries RFC 0434: Out-of-
Band Protocol 1.1. Technical Report. Decentralized Identity Foun-
dation. URL: https://identity.foundation/didcomm-messaging/spec/.
Retrieved on February 10, 2022.

[9] Desai, V., Diofasi, A., Lu, J., 2018.

The global identiﬁcation
challenge: Who are the 1 billion people without proof of identity?
URL:
https://blogs.worldbank.org/voices/global-identification-
challenge-who-are-1-billion-people-without-proof-identity.
Retrieved on February 10, 2022.

[10] Eisenstadt, M., Ramachandran, M., Chowdhury, N., Third, A.,
Domingue, J., 2020. Covid-19 antibody test/vaccination certiﬁca-
tion: There’s an app for that. IEEE Open Journal of Engineering in
Medicine and Biology 1, 148–155. doi:10.1109/OJEMB.2020.2999214.

[11] El Maliki, T., Seigneur, J.M., 2007. A survey of user-centric iden-
tity management technologies, in: The International Conference on
Emerging Security Information, Systems, and Technologies (SE-
CUREWARE 2007), pp. 12–17. doi:10.1109/SECUREWARE.2007.4385303.

[12] Ethereum, 2021. Welcome to ethereum. URL: https://ethereum.org/

en/. Retrieved on February 10, 2022.

[13] European Commission, 2022. Eu digital covid certiﬁcate. URL:
https://ec.europa.eu/info/live-work-travel-eu/coronavirus-
response/safe-covid-19-vaccines-europeans/eu-digital-covid-
certificate. Retrieved on February 10, 2022.

[14] European Parliament, Council of the European Union, 2016. Regu-
lation (eu) 2016/679. URL: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg/2016/679/
oj. Retrieved on February 10, 2022.

[15] Evernym, 2018. Connect.me. URL: https://www.connect.me/. Re-

trieved on February 10, 2022.

[16] Evernym, 2021. Introducing travel pass: The easiest, safest way to
verify travel and health credentials. URL: https://www.evernym.com/
travelpass/. Retrieved on February 10, 2022.

[17] Fazio, N., Nicolosi, A., 2002. Cryptographic accumulators: Deﬁni-
tions, constructions and applications. Technical Report. Courant Insti-
tute of Mathematical Sciences. URL: https://cs.nyu.edu/~nicolosi/
papers/accumulators.pdf.

[18] Ferdous, M.S., Chowdhury, F., Alassaﬁ, M.O., 2019. In search of self-
sovereign identity leveraging blockchain technology. IEEE Access 7,
103059–103079. doi:10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2931173.

[19] Fiat, A., Shamir, A., 1986. How to prove yourself: Practical solutions
to identiﬁcation and signature problems, in: Conference on the theory
and application of cryptographic techniques, Springer. pp. 186–194.
doi:10.1007/3-540-47721-7_12.

[20] Goldreich, O., Oren, Y., 1994. Deﬁnitions and properties of zero-
knowledge proof systems. Journal of Cryptology 7, 1–32. doi:10.1007/
BF00195207.

[21] Good Health Pass Collaborative, 2021a. Good health pass. URL:
https://www.goodhealthpass.org/. Retrieved on February 10, 2022.
[22] Good Health Pass Collaborative, 2021b. Good health pass: A safe
path to global reopening. URL: https://www.goodhealthpass.org/join-
us. Retrieved on February 10, 2022.

[23] Good Health Pass Collaborative, 2021c. Good health pass interop-
erability blueprint. URL: https://www.goodhealthpass.org/blueprint.
Retrieved on February 10, 2022.

[24] Hasan, H.R., Salah, K., Jayaraman, R., Arshad, J., Yaqoob, I., Omar,
M., Ellahham, S., 2020. Blockchain-based solution for covid-19 dig-
ital medical passports and immunity certiﬁcates.
IEEE Access 8,
222093–222108. doi:10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3043350.

[25] Hyperledger, 2019. Aries cloud agent python code documentation.
URL: https://aries-cloud-agent-python.readthedocs.io/en/latest/.
Retrieved on February 10, 2022.

[26] Hyperledger,

2020.

Hyperledger
https:
//www.hyperledger.org/use/hyperledger-indy. Retrieved on February
10, 2022.

URL:

indy.

[27] Hyperledger, 2021.

Becoming a indy/aries developer. URL:

https://github.com/hyperledger/aries-cloudagent-python/tree/
main/docs/GettingStartedAriesDev. Retrieved on February 10, 2022.
[28] Hyperledger Foundation, 2020. Hyperledger aries. URL: https://
www.hyperledger.org/use/aries. Retrieved on February 10, 2022.
[29] Ibrahem, M.K., 2012. Modiﬁcation of diﬃe-hellman key exchange
algorithm for zero knowledge proof, in: 2012 International Confer-
ence on Future Communication Networks, pp. 147–152. doi:10.1109/
ICFCN.2012.6206859.

[30] ISO, 2019.

ISO/IEC 24760-1:2019 IT Security and Privacy — A
framework for identity management — Part 1: Terminology and con-
cepts. URL: https://www.iso.org/obp/ui/}iso:std:iso-iec:24760:-1:
ed-2:v1:en. Retrieved on February 10, 2022.

[31] Jøsang, A., Pope, S., 2005. User centric identity management, in:
AusCERT Asia Paciﬁc information technology security conference,
APCERT Secretariat, Kyoto, Japan. p. 77.

[32] Karopoulos, G., Hernandez-Ramos, J.L., Kouliaridis, V., Kam-
bourakis, G., 2021. A survey on digital certiﬁcates approaches for the
covid-19 pandemic. IEEE Access doi:10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3117781.

[33] Kuperberg, M., 2019. Blockchain-Based Identity Management:
A Survey From the Enterprise and Ecosystem Perspective.
IEEE
Transactions on Engineering Management 67, 1–20. doi:10.1109/

M Barros et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 9 of 10

Leveraging Self-Sovereign Identity, Blockchain, and Zero-Knowledge Proof to Build a Privacy-Preserving Vaccination Pass

https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-2019-nCoV-
Digital_certificates-vaccination-2021.1. Retrieved
ary 10, 2022.

on Febru-

[55] World Health Organization, 2022. Smart vaccination certiﬁcate work-
ing group. URL: https://www.who.int/groups/smart-vaccination-
certificate-working-group. Retrieved on February 10, 2022.

TEM.2019.2926471.

[34] Lamport, L., Shostak, R., Pease, M., 2019. The byzantine generals
problem, in: Concurrency: the Works of Leslie Lamport, pp. 203–
226. doi:10.1145/357172.357176.

[35] Lauinger, J., Ernstberger, J., Regnath, E., Hamad, M., Steinhorst, S.,
2021. A-poa: Anonymous proof of authorization for decentralized
identity management, in: 2021 IEEE International Conference on
Blockchain and Cryptocurrency (ICBC), IEEE. IEEE, Sydney, Aus-
tralia. pp. 1–9. doi:10.1109/ICBC51069.2021.9461082.

[36] Lim, S.Y., Fotsing, P.T., Almasri, A., Musa, O., Kiah, M.L.M., Ang,
T.F., Ismail, R., 2018. Blockchain Technology the Identity Manage-
ment and Authentication Service Disruptor: A Survey. International
Journal on Advanced Science, Engineering and Information Technol-
ogy 8, 1735–1745. doi:10.18517/ijaseit.8.4-2.6838.

[37] Linux Foundation Public Health, 2021. Covid credentials initiative.
URL: https://www.covidcreds.org/. Retrieved on February 10, 2022.
[38] Merkle, R.C., 1987. A digital signature based on a conventional en-
cryption function, in: Conference on the theory and application of
cryptographic techniques, Springer. pp. 369–378. doi:10.1007/3-540-
48184-2_32.

[39] Micali, S., 2000. Computationally sound proofs. SIAM Journal on

Computing 30, 1253–1298. doi:10.1137/S0097539795284959.

[40] Mühle, A., Grüner, A., Gayvoronskaya, T., Meinel, C., 2018. A sur-
vey on essential components of a self-sovereign identity. Computer
Science Review 30, 80–86. doi:10.1016/j.cosrev.2018.10.002.
[41] Nakamoto, S., 2008. Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash sys-
tem. URL: https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf. Retrieved on February
10, 2022.

[42] New York State, 2021.

Excelsior pass and excelsior pass
plus. URL: https://covid19vaccine.health.ny.gov/excelsior-pass-
and-excelsior-pass-plus. Retrieved on February 10, 2022.

[43] Prefeitura de São Paulo, 2021. Decreto nº 60.488, de 27 de agosto
de 2021. URL: https://www.prefeitura.sp.gov.br/cidade/secretarias/
upload/saude/pg_0001%20diario%20oficial%2028082021.pdf. Retrieved
on February 10, 2022.

[44] Ritchie, H., Mathieu, E., Rodés-Guirao, L., Appel, C., Giattino, C.,
Ortiz-Ospina, E., Hasell, J., Macdonald, B., Beltekian, D., Roser, M.,
2020. Coronavirus pandemic (covid-19). Our World in Data URL:
https://ourworldindata.org/coronavirus. Retrieved on February 10,
2022.

[45] Roelofs, C., 2021. Ssi wallets. URL: https://github.com/Gimly-

Blockchain/ssi-wallets. Retrieved on February 10, 2022.

[46] Schardong, F., Custódio, R., 2021. Self-sovereign identity: A sys-
tematic map and review. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2108.08338,
arXiv:2108.08338. Retrieved on February 10, 2022.

[47] Schnorr, C.P., 1989. Eﬃcient identiﬁcation and signatures for smart
cards, in: Conference on the Theory and Application of Cryptology,
Springer. pp. 239–252. doi:10.1007/0-387-34805-0_22.

[48] Shcherbakov, A., 2019. Hyperledger indy public blockchain node
with alexander shcherbakov. URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=
UJbJRqur4ng. Retrieved on February 10, 2022.

[49] Solid, 2021. Solid. URL: https://solidproject.org/. Retrieved on

February 10, 2022.

[50] Sovrin, 2021. Sovrin. URL: https://sovrin.org/. Retrieved on Febru-

ary 10, 2022.

[51] Sporny, M., Longley, D., Chadwick, D., 2019. Veriﬁable creden-
tials data model 1.0. URL: https://www.w3.org/TR/vc-data-model/. Re-
trieved on February 10, 2022.

[52] Sporny, M., Longley, D., Sabadello, M., Reed, D., Steele, O., Allen,
C., 2021. Decentralized identiﬁers (dids) v1.0. URL: https://
www.w3.org/TR/did-core/. Retrieved on February 10, 2022.

Technical Report. The Sovrin Foundation.

[53] Tobin, A., Reed, D., 2016. The Inevitable Rise of Self-Sovereign
URL:

Identity.
https://sovrin.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/The-Inevitable-
Rise-of-Self-Sovereign-Identity.pdf. Retrieved on February 10,
2022.

[54] World Health Organization,

2021.

tion of covid-19 certiﬁcates:

vaccination status.

Digital documenta-
URL:

M Barros et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier

Page 10 of 10

