Metaverse Native Communication: A Blockchain
and Spectrum Prospective

Hao Xu, Zihao Li, Zongyao Li, Xiaoshuai Zhang, Yao Sun, Lei Zhang

2
2
0
2

r
a

M
6
1

]

C
D
.
s
c
[

1
v
5
5
3
8
0
.
3
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Metaverse depicts a vista of constructing a virtual
environment parallel to the real world so people can communicate
with others and objects through digital entities. In the real world,
communication relies on identities and addresses that are recog-
nized by authorities, no matter the link is established via post,
email, mobile phone, or landline. Metaverse, however, is different
from the real world, which requires a single identity belongs to
the individual. This identity can be an encrypted virtual address
in the metaverse but no one can trace or verify it. In order to
achieve such addresses to hide individuals in the metaverse, re-
mapping the virtual address to the individual’s identity and a
speciﬁc spectrum to support the address-based communication
for the metaverse are needed. Therefore, metaverse native or
meta-native communications based on blockchain could be a
promising solution to directly connect entities with their native
encrypted addresses that gets rid of the existing network services
based on IP, cellular, HTTP, etc. This paper proposes a vision of
blockchain, encrypted address and address-based access model
for all users, devices, services, etc. to contribute to the meta-
verse. Furthermore, the allocation architecture of a designated
spectrum for the metaverse is proposed to remove the barrier to
access to the metaverse/blockchain in response to the initiatives
of metaverse and decentralized Internet.

Index Terms—Metaverse, Meta-native, Communications, Dis-

tributed Ledger Technology, Blockchain.

I. INTRODUCTION

M ETAVERSE, the combination of the preﬁx “meta” with

the word “universe”, describes a hypothetical synthetic
environment linked to the physical world [1]. The word meta-
verse was ﬁrst coined in a piece of speculative ﬁction named
Snow Crash, written by Neal Stephenson in 1992. In this
novel, Stephenson deﬁnes the metaverse as a massive virtual
environment parallel to the physical world, in which users
interact through digital avatars [2]. Metaverse is presenting
an appealing world for cyber enthusiast and visionary people
to take networking and society to the unknown edge.

In recent, the consensus from multi mega-companies sets
their goals to bring the metaverse to life by leveraging diverse
techniques as the enablers such as virtual reality, artiﬁcial
intelligence, human-computer interaction, internet of things,
and blockchain [1], [3].

A. Metaverse can be all about blockchain

As a key building brick of metaverse, blockchain, stemming
from the ﬁrst decentralized digital cryptocurrency Bitcoin pro-
posed by Satoshi Nakamoto [4], is a distributed and immutable

H. Xu, Zongyao Li, X. Zhang, Y. Sun and L. Zhang are with the
James Watt School of Engineering, University of Glasgow, UK; E-mail:
{H.Xu.2, L.Zongyao.1}@research.gla.ac.uk; {Xiaoshuai.Zhang, Yao.Sun,
Lei.Zhang}@glasgow.ac.uk. Zihao. Li is with CREATe Centre, School of Law,
University of Glasgow, UK; E-mail: Z.Li.6@research.gla.ac.uk.
Corresponding author: Lei Zhang.
This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication.Copyright
may be transferred without notice, after which this version may no longer be
accessible.

ledger that enables transparent transactions. Blockchain tech-
nology is a combination of modern cryptography, peer-to-peer
network communication, distributed storage with consistency,
and smart contracts to implement data exchange, process,
and storage. A key beneﬁt of blockchain is the decentralized
consensus mechanism to realize anonymous and accountable
transactions that may suitable for metaverse. In blockchain,
when new blocks are veriﬁed, they can be linked to previous
ones by cryptographic hash operation. As a consequence,
blockchain can achieve tamper resistance by consensus mech-
anisms and public ledgers, i.e., it is computationally infeasible
to distort the transactions that have been published in the
blockchain. Therefore, such properties encourage blockchain
to be considered as a fundamental component of metaverse,
which is naturally distributed to address information exchange
and storage, trade, access control, and so on [5].

Metaverse was a concept, and it will still be a concept for
a while, because the reality of metaverse is a collection of
multiple technologies and services. However, the metaverse
may only exist because of the universal record kept by a
immutable record medium, e.g., blockchain, and that is the
evidence of the existence of metaverse due to its immunity
to changes and the resilience of decentralization. The strict
deﬁnition on assets and ownerships on blockchain or other
immutable records, may be the key to maintain a sustainable
metaverse ecosystem. Meanwhile, preferences interpreted by
other technologies (e.g., Virtual Reality (VR), Hepatic gloves,
Holographic, etc.) to that extent, can be varied due to rendering
conﬁgurations.

Subtle differences of metaverse-ready virtual world expe-
rience and the existing virtual world experience are syn-
chronous, persistent, independence in the world, and most
importantly, the events have an integrated life-cycle in the
metaverse, where they naturally start, develop and end. In the
future, metaverse service providers will allow users to interact
using users’ encrypted identities (which can be considered
as the start of things in metaverse) and addresses instead
of offering them account registration services for maximum
user privacy and anonymity and end-to-end security. From that
point, the metaverse has started forming with the blockchain
as its ﬁrst building block. In fact, the early age of metaverse
has emerged with the encrypted identity (address) at the ﬁrst
instance of decentralized cryptocurrencies, the Bitcoin.

While the metaverse is likely to recognizes the blockchain’s
most
important feature, non-fungible token (NFT), as the
ownership identiﬁer [6], it is also largely depending on the
blockchain natural capability, where a record is transparent
and immutable in the proper blockchain network. In our vision
of metaverse, NFT might become the place for advertisements
and the entrance to the service. The service provider can forge
their NFTs for their content, and the content is accessible to the

 
 
 
 
 
 
public. Such beneﬁts make the NFT the gateway for advertised
services.

B. Accessibility of metaverse for all

Leading by the blockchain, NFT and many distributed
applications, Internet is pacing into its next revolution, where
the decentralization banners are leading the way. However, in
the current infrastructure, there is an inherent impossibility
for the craved decentralization, as access to the network was
never free to individuals [7]. To make the Internet a more
decentralized place, the free and decentralized network access
infrastructure such as a speciﬁc spectrum for decentralized
networks should be on the list for Web 3.0 from public
opinion [7]. On the other hand, decentralized autonomous
organizations (DAO) with Blockchain and cryptocurrencies
and NFT have made a huge fortune from the Internet, but their
underlying networks have only paid a little cost of trafﬁcs to
the whole network. As DAO, the stakeholder of blockchains,
might be the core of decentralized network, hosting a web that
is going to be built by all, it should consider the basic access
right for all, and consider the maintenance of the network as its
duty, in contradictory to current offerings. Hence, DAOs and
Over-the-top (OTT) service providers are likely to be among
the top of lists of eligible parties of affording the true cost of
the network, the spectrum and the infrastructure that are going
to make the Internet free for access.

the benefactor, e.g.,

Since every entity may be known by its encrypted address
in the metaverse, we envision that the communication should
be optimized from the root level to ensure the reachability
and security of every encrypted address with minimal third
party involvement. Meanwhile, blockchain is natural to cryp-
tocurrencies, and it generates huge proﬁts while maintaining
the network. Thereby,
the DAO and
any account holders of the cryptocurrency, has the reason to
open up the access to the network. One feasible way is to
let the blockchain and metaverse service provider own the
dedicated service spectrum, making the access to the service
free of access charge, as shown in Fig. 1, where the spectrum
can be classed into unlicensed, licensed and operator owned,
and a subclass under operator licensed spectrum for private
blockchain/meta-spectrum. By introducing the metaverse spec-
trum,
the service running on the spectrum can be totally
metaverse native, and the access to such service can be assured
by identity-based Service Level Agreement (SLA) or zero-
rate policy. Further details on metaverse service spectrum are
discussed in Section. II-D.

C. Motivations and Contributions

Metaverse has a tight bind with blockchain, as it is naturally
embracing encrypted identities, and the address associated
with distributed ledger can be directly used for mutual au-
thentication between address owners. The underneath stacks
of identity management, authentications and transactions are
the native ability of blockchain. Metaverse is also fundamen-
tally related to the ownership and interactions on blockchain.
Therefore, the only meta-information available in metaverse is
the same encrypted address used for blockchain identity of all
entities. No matter how the service changes, every entity can
be tracked back to an encrypted address. However, employing

blockchain in metaverse may incur high overhead since reach-
ing a consensus in the blockchain requires massive communi-
cation and computing resources [8]. Therefore, communication
and computing should be rooted deep from the metaverse and
be metaverse-native. An architectural evolution of blockchain-
enabled communication networks for the metaverse should
be considered with an additional blockchain controller to the
control plane.

Combined the above motivation,

two key problems in
utilizing blockchain to construct metaverse pop up: Who is
paying for the massive communication and computing cost of
metaverse? How do the governing bodies regulate the service
on the metaverse, as it is completely decentralized and privacy-
preserving? To this end, computing resource is also falling
into the scope of metaverse resources, as an integrated assets
within the metaverse. Moreover, besides the ﬂexibility of
accessing resource in the decentralized metaverse network, it
also requires a way to quantify how much communication and
computing resource used for a user or a service provider, thus
to determine the cost and price of a metaverse service (not to
be confused with free access to the metaverse and blockchain).
Based on these, novel communication and computing resource
managements are required in metaverse.

to encrypted addresses. Then,

In this paper, we explore how to support metaverse in
wireless networks, where a novel Meta-native network has
been proposed based on the Distributed Ledger Technology.
In the Meta-native network, we ﬁrst introduce an identity-
based access model for all users, devices, and services with
respect
the management of
both computing and communication resources has been dis-
cussed. More importantly, a concept of metaverse/blockchain
dedicated service spectrum is deﬁned for freeing the public
blockchain access, ensuring the quality of blockchain services
and the operation model between metaverse/blockchain service
providers, operators and authorities. Finally, some challenges
and future directions of the Meta-native network are given to
further speed up the implementations.

II. META-NATIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND COMPUTING

We can assume that anything recorded on the blockchain or
other recording medium can be considered as an entity in the
metaverse, as they have their unique identity and address. By
generating encrypted addresses, entities can be found on the
blockchain, and users from the whole metaverse can acquire
the connection information in a decentralized manner, where
the identity is not issued by a central agency. Due to the
decentralization of identity generation, trust among each other
is considered minimal, and the connection between any entities
should be mutually authenticated at ﬁrst instance.

A. Encrypted address is native to Metaverse

The key to the reachability of encrypted address is to make
every recorded encrypted address (i.e., the wallet address for
blockchain transactions) connectable and directly via MAC
layer or Network Layer (Layer 2 and 3) abstraction. It is crit-
ical to maintain the communication between each encrypted
identity in a lower layer to remove further requirements of
additional identities, in order to avoid identity leakage and
injections. For instance, in Fig. 1, the service accessed by the
user shall accept the user’s encrypted address as its identity and

Fig. 1. Metaverse Native Spectrum and Network Architecture

provide services based on the agreement with the encrypted
address, in comparison to the common IP addresses which are
only used for the addressing purpose. The direct access can
be achieved by building an encrypted tunnel overlay network,
and one possible way is to make the blockchain, the medium
of records, naturally routable, which is further detailed as a
challenge in the later section.

Metaverse may only requires the user to have its wanted
destination, without adding meta-external information, such
as MAC address, International Mobile Equipment Identiﬁer
(IMEI), Subscriber ID, IP address, etc., these things should
be hidden by the deep down network, and users should
perform any actions without referring to any of them. It
requires users to build a uniﬁed tunnel to contain the above
routing and identity information, establishing secured end-
to-end connections between the user and destination either
by appointing the destination address or on ad-hoc basis if
multiple entities are involved, as elabrated in Fig. 1.

Therefore, Meta-native wireless communications should
treat the encrypted address as its fundamental user information
with support to implemented blockchain-enabled mutual au-

thentication mechanism [9] to connect all other devices in the
network. In the case of mobile network, users should be able
to choose whichever carrier for its metaverse data, if possible,
even with the metaverse native operators.

In order to gain the native support of encrypted addresses
in the metaverse, the connection to the serving network shall
be treated natively with the help of an embedded blockchain
controller at the access network, as shown in Fig. 2, where
the controller acts as the agency for entities to interact with
blockchain network and relay the information to entities who
may not support blockchain access, concluded as Blockchain
Access Points in Fig. 1. The controller is responsible for build-
ing the encrypted tunnel between two entities and forwarding
the trafﬁc as requested using its Network functions illustrated
in Fig. 2 on the left. It also acts as a bridge to the conventional
network and newly proposed encrypted network, with the
network interpreter and translation of network addresses and
encrypted addresses, as a part its identity functions. Mean-
while, the important feature, the authentication gateway for all
entities shall be considered as integration at the access network
level, and the authentication should be performed with the help

MAC LayerNetwork LayerPhysical LayerService LayerLicensed Universal MetaverseSpectrumEthereumBitcoinMeta (Facebook...)IPFSPermissionless Spectrum Access forBlockchain and Meta servicesRegionalBlockchainARegionalBlockchainB...3G/4G/5G SpectrumOperator Licensed SpectrumLicensedMetaverseSpectrumBlockchainABlockchainBMetaserviceA...Unlicensed Universal MetaverseSpectrumPersonal/AmaturebandCommercial band forlicensed providersPrivate/IndustrialbandsOperator Infra. Blockchain ControllerMix Infra. BlockchainControllerDedicated BlockchainController3GPP AccessOther AccessesUserFinanceSmart contracts,NFTMetaserviceStorageBlockchain Access PointsCall &DataConsortiumtransactionsInternet/UPFGatewayBlockchain-enabledEncrypted TunnelBlockchain Networks and Metaverse ServicesLocal metaverse party...MEC hostedservicesOtherusersOtherusersVideoIndependentMetaverse serviceproviderIndependentMetaverse serviceproviderDirecttunnelRelayedtunnelDirecttunnelUser &EncryptedEntityof blockchain controller, indicated in Fig. 2 with supporting
modules such as Trusted Execution Environment and Trusted
Platform Module. An example of blockchain-enabled mutual
authentication for internal and external security is shown in
Fig. 3, where the blockchain is the medium of all entity
addresses, and the user can initiate access requests with any
entities in a decentralized, point-to-point manner using their
encrypted addresses to request authentications. The details of
referred authentication scheme can be found in [9].

Fig. 2. Blockchain controller for enabling encrypted address at Radio Access
Network

Fig. 3. An example of blockchain-enabled mutual authentication [9]

B. Computing resource and service sensing and direct access
via communication

Beyond the NFT as the real estate of metaverse, other
resources should also be considered as the building blocks
of metaverse and become the assets in metaverse based on
encrypted addresses. Entity processors, for example, not only
run their own systems, but they also process numerous re-
quests, commands, transactions, calculations, and interactions
with vast amounts of data in real-time. Therefore, computing
resources are very key in the metaverse. Our terminals, such
as VR devices, smartwatches, mobile phones, are extremely
limited in terms of their processing capacity. In contrast, the
computing power of servers or PCs is more ideal and it is
possible to share computing resources in the metaverse. When
we map processors into the metaverse, they become digital

encrypted assets for metaverse users as well. Users can pay to
use the asset as they would do the same in the real world.
When their own computing resources are insufﬁcient, they
can use distributed communication means to send requests to
the terminals with low processor occupancy around, which
can maximize the utilization of computing resources in the
metaverse. Therefore, distributed resource scheduling would
be a very efﬁcient way to utilize excess computing resource.
In metaverse, different communication methods can be
used to provide computing services. Resource requests can
be made through wireless direct access between devices. For
example, Huawei has proposed a set of “Distributed Soft Bus”
in Harmony operating system, which encapsulates all steps
required for direct communication between devices into a set
of protocols, including discovery, connection, authorization,
authentication, etc. Devices equipped with HarmonyOS can
interact through unimpeded wireless communication so that
devices with weak computing capacity can beneﬁt from those
devices with strong computing power. Based on “Distributed
Data Management Scheme” supported by HarmonyOS, it suc-
cessfully solves the problem of allowing services to migrate on
different terminals without interruption. Furthermore, service
discovery can be easily obtained by broadcasting requests. If
an entity capable of providing such a service receives the
request, it may decide whether to establish a channel with
the
the requester based on certain conditions. Meanwhile,
distributed ledger allows each entity to attach its own service
list. Based on the consensus mechanism, users can access the
latest service information in the blockchain and route to the
speciﬁc entities when needed. In this way, the metaverse ter-
minals can discover and connect with reachable local or global
blockchain resources through data link layer and network layer
with encrypted addresses and uniﬁed identiﬁcation framework
using wireless distributed soft bus and direct access protocol.

C. Meta-native Wireless Access Network

While we are re-deﬁning the new paradigm of metaverse
native communications and computing, wireless communica-
tions are important for local metaverse entities since most users
connect with each other via mobile network, and in particular
with nearby or remote metaverse related devices (VR/AR
goggle, haptic gloves, computing hardware, etc.), which are
meant to be accessed via owners/users encrypted identities, as
the device is also an asset on the blockchain. Meanwhile, the
privacy in Web 3.0 and metaverse may concern the users to
avoid privacy-central communication network, as their privacy
may be at risks from data breach and surveillance. Thereby,
one of the most important innovations for meta-native wireless
communication is to enable the access with encrypted address,
as illustrated in Fig. 1 upon the network layer. With the state-
of-the-art cellular network, users are bounded by the require-
ment of subscription of mobile network, not only for billing
reasons, but also for the limitation of centralized architecture,
as it needs pre-stored credentials to offer services to users
and to discover users from its network, which is not feasible
in the era of decentralization. The native interpretation of
encrypted identities by wireless communication infrastructures
can signiﬁcantly improve the security, latency and scalabil-
ity of local metaverse services while pushing the boundary
of decentralization towards communication infrastructures. In

Blockchain ControllerIdentity ManagementDistributedLedgerMutual AuthenticationTrusted Hardwareand Runtime (TPM,TEE)Network interpreterNetwork InterfaceEncrypted AddressTunnel IPsec Tunnel withencrypted addressLocal mapping ofentitiesOrdinary trafficLedgerAPINetwork FunctionsAuthenticationsLedger StorageLedger CacheIdentityFunctionsAliceAuth Request {BC ADDB!, ADDA, PKA, nonce1, (ADDA, nonce1)SKA}Auth Response {BC ADDA!, ADDA**, ADDB, PKB, nonce2, (ADDA, ADDB, nonce2)SKB}Session Key  {BC ADDB!, ADDB**, ADDA, (Key Material)PKB**} BobLedger onBlockchainNodeRegistry (BC ADDA*, ADDA*)MutualAuthenticationRegistry (BC ADDB*, ADDB*)ADD Binding ! Pre-trusted identity     * Claimed  identity   ** Verified identityMinimal trust zoneTrusted zoneCommunication is set up via theaddress pair stored on Blockchainaddition to that, Mobile Edge Computing (MEC), on top right
of Fig. 1 can be integrated into such a paradigm without
concerning identity and security challenges [10], or the need
of core network to support to this extent.

Use case: Native encrypted address support on the control
plane and user plane: Once we have ruled out the native
concept of metaverse communication, it is important to realize
the access to the public radio access network with the private
generated credentials, e.g., public key pairs and encrypted
address (in blockchain ﬂavor, shown in Fig. 3), in fact, the
credential is not only used to access the network, but also
facilitating the connection in a permissionless manner.

In the case of one user who wants to connect to a VR
Head Mount Display (HMD), both the user’s terminal device
and the HMD are within the coverage of the mobile network.
Taking into account that the HMD and the user have not
been paired before, and they have no knowledge of each
other, but the HMD has been declared on the blockchain
with its encrypted address. Thanks to the declaration of
HMD’s encrypted address, the user is able to discover the
HMD in the metaverse and initiates the connection. During
the connection,
their encrypted addresses will be used as
authentication materials, exchanged using blockchain-enabled
mutual authentication protocols, and establish a secured tunnel
between them.

In this use case, all information exchanged with blockchain
network is carried by control plane, which plays an important
role in signaling and access management. It is responsible for
sending and receiving the access request from user/UE with
its encrypted address, on par with its destination address. Note
that, due to decentralized scheme of identity management,
there is no central authority that keeps tracking on user’s
mobility and liveness, therefore, the connection is stateless
unless the destination node replies. Once the base station
receives the control plane signals with the encrypted address
of destination, it looks up the address in the blockchain with
the help of blockchain controller. The blockchain controller,
as shown in Fig. 2, on the one hand, helps the UE to ﬁnd
the route to the destination over the blockchain records. In
the case of fully native encrypted address access scheme (e.g.,
routing is done over the blockchain), the blockchain controller
will decide the ﬂow of control plane message, if the entity
is found within the same coverage of the base station or
nearby communicable base stations, the ﬂow of control plane
message will be deﬁned within the region, and the initial link
between two encrypted entities will be established and mutual
authentication over control plane starts.

initial connection,

Upon the successful

the two entities
exchange a session key for further communication over user
plane as indicated in Fig. 3, and a point-to-point tunnel will
also be established using the addresses and credential key
materials provided. Using the established tunnel, user plane
with encrypted addresses becomes the bearer of user data,
and the service carried upon it may beneﬁt from the mutual
authentication for further identiﬁcation. Above example shows
the combination usage of control plane and user plane in
the scope of wireless network for establishing point-to-point
mutual authenticated encrypted communication.

D. Blockchain and Metaverse Service Spectrum

In addition, blockchain as a general service is required by all
entities and other services ubiquitously, and it is so important
that comes to a necessity of having its dedicated serving spec-
trum and allocations for public available blockchain records,
which can be known as Meta-spectrum, as shown in Fig. 1.
Every user shall be able to use the dedicated or designated
spectrum for wireless blockchain service without subscribing
to operators, so the blockchain can always have the latest
inputs from users and broadcast all latest blocks to users.
Such Meta-spectrum shall be considered as the generic service
spectrum for metaverse related public services and freely
accessible.

Operators, metaverse service providers, and DAO can bid
for spectrum. Free access for all can mean many things, but a
dedicated band for global/regional blockchain and metaverse
service (as they are considered the universal building blocks
and base for all metaverse concepts) is a good starting point,
so global DAO, metaverse service companies can also bid
for the global band of spectrum. On the other hand, regional
spectrum bands can also be sold to local blockchain/metaverse
service providers. The dedicated band can be used for public
blockchain downlink and uplink transmission, so the access
to the network can be totally independent, and free/tolled.
Note that, the internal functions and structures of controllers in
dedicated or shared spectrum are consistent, they are classiﬁed
by their access to the certain resources in different domain.
People may think the world of decentralization comes with
free access to the network, and that is not necessarily true,
but it is important to provide it as it was free. It is important
to charge blockchain/P2P service via the spectrum if they are
native to wireless.

III. CHALLENGES

A. Routing over blockchain and encrypted address

As illustrated that metaverse system should be empowered
by a blockchain-enabled distributed network, where the en-
crypted address is the only required information for meta-
service provisioning. In this way, challenges of routing for data
transmissions over these distributed nodes pop up due to the
lack of IP address, which leads to the fact that classical routing
protocols like IPv4/IPv6 cannot be applicable anymore. More
importantly, the network topology in terms of node connectiv-
ity, link capacity, path reachability, etc. cannot be precisely
obtained based on these encrypted addresses. In this case,
even the two nodes with different encrypted addresses can
interact with each other, it is not aware of how the nodes are
connected (connected directly or via multi-hop). Therefore, it
is quite challenging to design an efﬁcient routing scheme for
fully encrypted metaverse native communication.

Besides the unawareness of network topology, the dynamics
of service requests may also bring some extra difﬁculties on
routing. Speciﬁcally, one physical metaverse node may have
multiple encrypted addresses generated for different meta-
service or logical entities. Considering the numerous meta-
service requests, the routing based on encrypted address should
have high scalability. Moreover, not all the encrypted addresses
are always in active mode due to the ending or sleeping
of the service. Hence, a dynamic routing scheme for data

forwarding/transmission should be required with respect to the
transition of active and inactive mode.

Meanwhile, there is no dedicated entity (like routers in tra-
ditional computer networks) in the meta-native communication
system taking care of routing function. Hence, it is rather
challenging to determine who and how to update/analyze/store
routing-related data thus achieving a low-latency and high
there is one
reliability of data transmission. Furthermore,
practical issue that some users/nodes may have low willingness
to help others forward data. A potential solution is to exploit
incentive schemes from blockchain system to motivate users
to participate in routing-related activities. However, a careful
design of the incentive scheme is required in this case.

In addition, the encrypted identity framework is also leading
to concerns from regulatory perspectives, i.e., how should
law regulate such encrypted network. Compared with the
traditional online infrastructure, the blockchain-native meta-
verse does not allow third parties to access the content of
services and all information is encrypted and encapsulated into
the point-to-point encrypted tunnel, which means that legal
enforcement is difﬁcult to interfere. Such encrypted network
is likely to be a shroud for criminal activity and therefore
an obstacle to law enforcement [11]. Efforts to combat crime
and illicit behavior in metaverse are weakened or broken
by such encryption infrastructure. It has been pointed out
that encryption is a key threat and serious impediment to
the detection, investigation, and prosecution of such criminal
activity. However, such dilemma is not only confronted by
this project. An alternative solution could be that more legal
elements should be taken into account in design stage to
achieve regulation-by-design, which could avoid conﬂicts in
advance. Metaverse as a brand-new sphere also needs to
establish its own legal and ethical framework to regulate users’
behaviors. Therefore, further research needs from both legal
and engineering perspectives to explore the regulatory rules in
metaverse.

B. Spectrum allocation and wireless capacity

Because spectrum is a limited national resource and most
countries consider it as an exclusive property of state, it leads
to another potential challenge that how to convince governing
bodies for designated spectrum allocation. As a result, a
spectrum market could be introduced to trade the spectrum in
the secondary market. Such a spectrum property right could
assure the ownership of spectrum and lead to more efﬁcient
spectrum usage, since spectrum owners are highly likely to
economize their resources [12] for proﬁts.

While trading the spectrum is boosting the capacity of wire-
less metaverse and blockchain, the spectrum is still regarded
as a limited resource, both in licensed and unlicensed range.
The emerging metaverse services, e.g., Mixed Reality (MR),
Augmented Reality (AR), etc., requires huge bandwidth that
may be not feasible for large scale coverage, hence the service
providers are required to ensure the capacity of wireless access
network on the spot. With commercialized spectrum exchange,
the service providers have more choice on their expansion
strategy, choosing between operator managed network or self-
managed network.

C. Post-quantum Metaverse

Encrypted identity and address face challenges from quan-
tum computing, in particular, the public key scheme adopted
in the vision. An urgent need to ﬁnd post-quantum public key
algorithm is eminent [13], as the discrete logarithm problem
is no longer a challenging problem in the realm of quantum
computation with [14]. Many quantum proof algorithms have
emerged with the introduction of Lattice-based cryptography
[13], which is seen as the next generation of public key basis, it
helps public key to prevent quantum supremacy against public
key based encrypted identity, the vision presented in this paper
shall be secure thereafter.

IV. CONCLUSION

In this paper, we illustrate the insight of how the blockchain
can contribute to the metaverse as the blockchain is native to
the metaverse concept. Blockchain gives the metaverse a solid
course towards reality, and powers up the identity framework,
service ecosystems for the metaverse, where the encrypted
address can be regarded as the entry point for all entities in the
metaverse. Furthermore, we discuss the necessity to promote
speciﬁc spectrums for blockchain and metaverse to enable free
access to services and devices for users, access management
for business use cases, and the ecological innovation on the
network maintenance in a highly decentralized manner.

REFERENCES

[1] L.-H. Lee, T. Braud, P. Zhou, L. Wang, D. Xu, Z. Lin, A. Kumar,
C. Bermejo,
to Know about
Metaverse: A Complete Survey on Technological Singularity, Virtual
Ecosystem, and Research Agenda,” Oct 2021. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/2110.05352

“All One Needs

and P. Hui,

[2] J. Joshua, “Information bodies: Computational anxiety in neal stephen-
son’s snow crash,” Interdisciplinary Literary Studies, vol. 19, no. 1, pp.
17–47, 2017.

[3] Meta,

“Introducing meta: A social

company,”
[Online]. Available: https://about.fb.com/news/2021/10/

technology

Nov 2021.
facebook-company-is-now-meta/

[4] S. Nakamoto, “Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system,”
Manubot, Tech. Rep., 2008. [Online]. Available: http://www.bitcoin.
org/bitcoin.pdf

[5] D. van der Merwe, “The metaverse as virtual heterotopia,” in 3rd world

conference on research in social sciences, 2021.

[6] F.-Y. Wang, R. Qin, Y. Yuan, and B. Hu, “Nonfungible Tokens:
Constructing Value Systems in Parallel Societies,” IEEE Transactions on
Computational Social Systems, vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 1062–1067, oct 2021.
[Online]. Available: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9552990/
[7] The New York Times, “Why Free Can Be a Problem on the
Internet,” 2015. [Online]. Available: https://www.nytimes.com/2015/11/
15/opinion/sunday/why-free-can-be-a-problem-on-the-internet.html
[8] L. Zhang, H. Xu, O. Onireti, M. A. Imran, and B. Cao, “How Much
Communication Resource is Needed to Run a Wireless Blockchain
Network?” IEEE Network, no. April, pp. 1–8,
jan 2021. [Online].
Available: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9537926

[9] H. Xu, L. Zhang, E. Sun, and C.-L.

I, “BE-RAN: Blockchain-
enabled Open RAN with Decentralized Identity Management and
Privacy-Preserving Communication,” jan 2021.
[Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/2101.10856

[10] J. Kang, Z. Xiong, D. Niyato, D. Ye, D. I. Kim, and J. Zhao,
“Toward Secure Blockchain-Enabled Internet of Vehicles: Optimizing
Consensus Management Using Reputation and Contract Theory,” IEEE
Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 68, no. 3, pp. 2906–2920,
2019.

[11] European Police Ofﬁce, “Internet Organised Crime Threat Assessment,”

European Police Ofﬁce, Tech. Rep., 2016.

[12] R. Berry, M. Honig, and R. Vohra, “Spectrum markets: motivation,
IEEE Communications Magazine,
[Online]. Available:

challenges,
vol. 48, no. 11, pp. 146–155, nov 2010.
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/5621982/

and implications,”

[13] R. Del Pino, V. Lyubashevsky, and G. Seiler, “Lattice-based group
signatures and zero-knowledge proofs of automorphism stability,” in
Proceedings of the 2018 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and
Communications Security, 2018, pp. 574–591.

[14] P. W. Shor, “Polynomial-Time Algorithms for Prime Factorization
and Discrete Logarithms on a Quantum Computer,” SIAM J.
Comput., vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 1484–1509, 1997. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1137/S0097539795293172

