Blockchain as privacy and security
solution for smart environments: A
Survey

MAAD EBRAHIM1, ABDELHAKIM HAFID1 (Member, IEEE), and ETIENNE ELIE2
1Department of Computer Science and Operations Research (DIRO), University of Montreal, Montreal, QC H3T1J4 Canada
2Intel Corporation, 2200 Mission College Blvd, Santa Clara, CA 95054

Corresponding author: Maad Ebrahim (e-mail: maad.ebrahim@umontreal.ca).

2
2
0
2

r
a

M
6
1

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
1
0
9
8
0
.
3
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

ABSTRACT Blockchain was always associated with Bitcoin, cryptocurrencies, and digital asset trading.
However, the beneﬁts of Blockchain are far beyond that. It has been recently used to support and augment
many other technologies, including the Internet-of-Things (IoT). IoT, with the help of Blockchain, paves
the way for futuristic smart environments, like smart homes, smart transportation, smart energy trading,
smart industries, smart supply chains, and more. To enable these smart environments, IoT devices,
machines, appliances, and vehicles, will need to intercommunicate without the need for a centralized
trusted party. Blockchain can replace third trusted parties by providing secure means of decentralization
in such trustless environments. They also provide security enforcement, privacy assurance, authentication,
and other important features to IoT ecosystems. Besides the beneﬁts of Blockchain-IoT integration for
smart environments, other technologies also have important features and beneﬁts that attracted the research
community. Software-Deﬁned Networking (SDN), Fog, Edge, and Cloud Computing technologies, for
example, play an important role in enabling realistic IoT applications. Moreover, the integration of Machine
Learning and Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) algorithms provides smart, dynamic, and autonomous decision-
making capabilities for IoT devices in smart environments. To push the research further in this domain,
we provide in this paper a comprehensive survey that includes state-of-the-art technological integration,
challenges, and solutions for smart environments, and the role of Blockchain and IoT technologies as the
building blocks of such smart environments. We also demonstrate how the level of integration between
these technologies has increased over the years, which brings us closer to the futuristic view of smart
environments. We further discuss the current need to provide general-purpose Blockchain platforms that
can adapt to different design requirements of different applications and solutions. Finally, we provide a
simpliﬁed architecture of futuristic smart environments that integrates all these technologies, showing the
advantage of such integration.

INDEX TERMS Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI), Blockchain, Cloud Computing, Edge Computing, Fog
Computing, Internet-of-Things (IoT), Software-Deﬁned Networking (SDN), Smart Environments

I. INTRODUCTION
Technology development is progressing rapidly, even faster
than the expectations decades ago. The reason for such
explosion in the technology is the huge effort that is be-
ing conducted by the research community, which aims to
facilitate human life via developing a futuristic view of a
smarter earth. There has been a lot of academic work and
industrial adoption to create and implement prototypes of
smart cities, which include smart homes, smart factories,
smart cars, smart transportation, and various smart human
gadgets. A lot of core technologies helped reaching this
point of success for this futuristic human civilization. These
technologies include, but not limited to, Internet-of-Things
(IoT), Software-Deﬁned Networking (SDN), Artiﬁcial In-

telligence (AI), and Cloud, Fog, and Edge Computing. In
addition, Blockchain was able to augment those technologies
with more features that are essential for the full automation
that is needed in smart environments. The role of IoT and
Blockchain in Smart environments can be understood from
the increase in popularity of the web search terms that are
shown in Fig. 1 over the last few years.

IoT enabled every physical device to be connected to the
internet in order to communicate with other physical devices
and services. This can enable, for example, a fridge in the
future to automatically detect missing items for its users
and automatically order those items from the nearest grocery
store. The system in the grocery store can respond to this
order and automatically receive the required monetary value

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
Ebrahim et al.: Blockchain as privacy and security solution for smart environments: A Survey

FIGURE 1. Google Trends search interest for IoT, Smart Home and
Blockchain terms between 2004-2020.

when accepting the transaction. The grocery items are then
automatically collected and sent to the customer using a
self driving vehicle. In this futuristic world, the owner of
the house does not need to set his smart alarm clock, as it
is automatically synchronized to wake him up for his next
meeting. To reach his meeting on time, his self-driving car
chooses the fastest and safest path using real-time informa-
tion of the trafﬁc in the city. The car is notiﬁed in real-time
of nearby accidents in order to optimize its route. This car
can communicate with other smart vehicles along the route
to provide the safest driving experience for all vehicles on
the road.

Besides IoT, SDN enables for dynamic and programmable
control and management of the underlying network in a smart
way. SDN best suits IoT networks, since they change rapidly
in terms of the number of devices, their locations, and the
amount of data they send. Moreover, SDN enables for the
integration of AI and machine learning into the decision-
making process of load balancing, computational ofﬂoading,
trafﬁc control, and data ﬂow in the network. SDN is consid-
ered one of the major factors in enabling IoT, and hence smart
cities innovation [1]. However, it requires intensive computa-
tions and storage requirements that cannot be provided by the
low-power and limited-resources IoT devices. That is why
Cloud, Fog, and Edge Computing technologies were intro-
duced to basically help providing storage and computation
resources as paid services to manage such networks.

Cloud Computing provides theoretically unlimited storage
and computation resources as paid services. They are usually
located in central data centers located in distant geograph-
ical locations. The distance can burden the core network
by the huge amount of trafﬁc created by IoT devices. This
distance also increases the service response time (delay)
for IoT devices, specially when they need a feedback on
their requests. Such delay might not be acceptable for time-
sensitive IoT applications, such as self-driving cars, where
a delay in milliseconds can cause catastrophic incidents.
Hence, technologies such as Fog and Edge Computing pro-
vide solutions to these problems by bringing those resources
closer to the IoT infrastructure. They minimize the delay and
save the network bandwidth by performing preliminary pre-
processing and analysis on IoT data before sending it to the
cloud for heavier processing and permanent storage.

There is one missing connection for all those technologies
in order to enable the futuristic concept of "trustless" smart

2

FIGURE 2. The integration of IoT with Blockchain, SDN, AI, Cloud, Fog, and
Edge Computing technologies.

cities we talked about earlier. To enable the communica-
tion among multiple IoT devices that are usually manufac-
tured/owned by different organizations, a third trusted party
is usually needed to provide the trust among the devices
performing the transactions. Blockchain can act here as that
missing connection in order to provide this trust mechanism
in a decentralized manner. Blockchain can also be used as
a mechanism to permanently log the transactions executed
by IoT devices, manage digital assets trading, and perform
monetary transactions between them. Actually, Blockchains
can do much more than that; they can support and enrich
the development of the IoT industry, and they can mitigate
many of the current limitations in SDN, Cloud, Fog, and
Edge solutions for IoT applications.

In this paper, we present a comprehensive survey that
shows what Blockchain can provide by its integration with
other technologies to build the foundation for future smart
environments. This integration is oriented towards IoT ap-
plications and supported by different emerging technologies
(see Fig. 2). We also show few applications that are brought
to life with the help of Blockchain and its integration with
those technologies. We further discuss some of the challenges
and open research problems of Blockchain and its integra-
tion with those technologies. These challenges need to be
addressed by the research community in order to provide a
ready-to-go Blockchain-based decentralization platform for
smart environments.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
compares this work with existing surveys. We then start by
introducing our deﬁnition for smart environments in Section
III. Section IV brieﬂy introduces Blockchain and some of its
applications. In Section V, we present IoT-Blockchain inte-
gration and some applications for such integration. Section
VI describes the beneﬁts of integrating Cloud, Fog, and Edge
Computing technologies into Blockchain-IoT ecosystems.
Sections VII and VIII show how SDN and AI technologies,
respectively, help supporting Blockchain-IoT infrastructures.

Ebrahim et al.: Blockchain as privacy and security solution for smart environments: A Survey

In Section IX, we discuss some challenges and open research
problems that need to be addressed to successfully enable
smoother technological integration. Finally, we present in
Section X a general smart environment architecture that
integrates the technologies presented in this survey to satisfy
its requirements.

II. OUR WORK AND EXISTING SURVEYS
Presenting Blockchain integration into multiple technologies
in the context of smart environments is what makes this work
unique compared to previous surveys. We show how this
integration is able to augment those technologies, and how
it helps pave the way for smart environments of the future.
Beside giving a brief introduction about Blockchain and
its applications in smart environments, this work discusses
Blockchain integration with IoT to allow for full automation
in smart devices. We then study how Blockchain-based IoT
solutions are augmented with SDN, Cloud, Fog, and Edge
Computing to enhance the capabilities of IoT applications.
Finally, we study the impact of AI and machine learning
algorithms to make such solutions even smarter.

Table 1 shows the level of technological integration to
Blockchain-IoT solutions in reviews and surveys. The ta-
ble shows that most existing surveys do not consider the
inclusion of all these technologies to enhance Blockchain-
IoT integration. In addition, existing surveys do not elaborate
on the direct impact such integration on smart environment
applications. Most surveys focus on integrating Cloud Com-
puting to mitigate the resource limitations of IoT devices
while considering Fog and Edge technologies to provide
privacy and minimize the delay. However, there is a lack of
surveys covering the recent interest in using SDN and AI
technologies for dynamic network management and complex
optimization problems, respectively.

Stojkoska and Trivodaliev [24], for example, focused on
the role of IoT in smart home applications. In addition,
Bhushan et al. [25] discussed the integration of Blockchain
to support IoT applications in smart cities. Even though
our work is oriented towards smart environments, we also
study the effect of technological integration to establish such
smart environments. We cover how other technologies help
mitigate several problems in Blockchain-based IoT smart
systems. Other surveys also discussed IoT integration with
other technologies, like AI [26], or SDN [27]. However, these
surveys do not consider smart environment applications, and
do not cover the beneﬁts of Blockchain decentralization
properties.

The majority of the surveys only focus on Blockchain and
IoT integration, including the beneﬁts and challenges of such
integration [2], [5], [6], [9], [14]. Ali et al. [11], for example,
reviewed Blockchain-based platforms and services that are
used to augment IoT applications. Similarly, Lao et al. [17]
covered the use of Blockchain to address IoT limitations
and secure IoT networks. They also gave a comprehensive
overview of IoT-Blockchain applications, including architec-
tures, communication protocols, and trafﬁc models for such

TABLE 1. The integration of Cloud, Edge, Fog, SDN, and AI technologies in
Blockchain-IoT solutions.

Authors

Year Integration with

g
o
F

/
e
g
d
E

d
u
o
l
C

N
D
S

I

A

2016
2016
2018 (cid:51)
2018
2018 (cid:51)

Conoscenti et al. [2]
Christidis and Devetsikiotis [3]
Reyna et al. [4]
Ramachandran and Krishnamachar [5]
Panarello et al. [6]
Fernández-Caramés and Fraga-Lamas [7] 2018 (cid:51) (cid:51) (cid:51)
2018 (cid:51) (cid:51) (cid:51)
Banerjee et al. [8]
Atlam et al. [9]
2018
Zheng et al. [10]
2018
2019 (cid:51) (cid:51) (cid:51)
Ali et al. [11]
2019 (cid:51) (cid:51) (cid:51)
Dai et al. [12]
2019 (cid:51) (cid:51) (cid:51)
Ferrag et al. [13]
2019 (cid:51) (cid:51)
Makhdoom et al. [14]
2019 (cid:51) (cid:51)
Salah et al. [15]
2019 (cid:51) (cid:51) (cid:51)
Yang et al. [16]
Lao et al. [17]
2020
2020 (cid:51) (cid:51) (cid:51)
Alharbi [18]
(cid:51)
LI et al. [19]
2020
2020 (cid:51) (cid:51)
Luo et al. [20]
2020 (cid:51)
Xie et al. [21]
2020 (cid:51) (cid:51)
Mohanta et al. [22]
2020 (cid:51)
Chamola et al. [23]

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)
(cid:51)

(cid:51)
(cid:51)

(cid:51)
(cid:51)

applications. There are several other surveys that only focus
on the effort to secure IoT networks using Blockchain [8],
[28]. Riabi et al. [28], for example, covered contributions
that use Blockchain to mitigate single-points-of-failures in
centralized access control architectures for IoT devices.

Even though the majority of the surveys only deal with
Blockchain-IoT integration, some of them have different
focus or interest. Reyna et al. [4] did cover Blockchain-
IoT integration, in particular, running Blockchain on IoT
devices. Fernández-Caramés and Fraga-Lamas [7] reviewed
Blockchain-IoT integration in healthcare, logistics, smart
cities, and energy management systems. Likewise, Ferrag et
al. [13] focused on Blockchain-IoT integration for applica-
tions in Internet-of-Vehicles (IoV), Internet-of-Energy (IoE),
Internet-of-Cloud (IoC), and Edge Computing. In addition to
those applications, Mohanta et al. [22] did overview existing
security solutions for IoT networks using Blockchain and
AI technologies. Garcia [29] reviewed the integration of AI,
IoT, and Blockchain from the taxation, legal, and economical
point of views.

There are also other surveys that focus on the integration
of Blockchain and other technologies outside the context of
IoT. Ekramifard et al. [30], for example, produced a system-
atic literature review on the integration of Blockchain with
AI; particularly identifying the applications that can beneﬁt
from such integration. Similarly, Salah et al. [15] surveyed
the way Blockchain can enhance and solve AI limitations.
They also reviewed the role of Blockchain in achieving
decentralized AI schemes. Additionally, Akter et al. [31]
investigated a diverse set of applications in the literature that

3

Ebrahim et al.: Blockchain as privacy and security solution for smart environments: A Survey

are based on Blockchain, AI, and Cloud technologies. Xie
et al. [21] surveyed Blockchain-based solutions to augment
the Cloud Computing technology. They did study the role
of Blockchain to provide decentralized Cloud Exchange ser-
vices.

Other surveys focused on Blockchain integration with Fog
and/or Edge computing technologies. For instance, Bani-
ata and Kertesz [32] covered contributions that integrate
Blockchain with Fog Computing. likewise, Yang et al. [16]
provided a survey on Blockchain integration with Edge com-
puting, which can help decentralize network management.
Moreover, SDN integration with Blockchain has been also
presented in other surveys [18], [19]. Alharbi [18], for exam-
ple, surveyed existing papers that secure SDN architectures
from different attacks using Blockchain. Moreover, LI et
al. [19] reviewed how Blockchain and SDN technologies
complement each other when integrated together.

Our work goes far beyond few technological integration
between Blockchain and IoT to mitigate some of their limita-
tions. We review existing work according to different levels
of technological integration, which is oriented towards smart
environment applications. We brieﬂy discuss the beneﬁts of
Blockchain technology itself, and the beneﬁts of Blockchain-
IoT solutions in smart environments. Then, we present the
beneﬁts of integrating Cloud, Fog, Edge, SDN, and AI tech-
nologies in Blockchain-IoT smart systems. We then present
open research problems to be addressed to create smooth
technological integration for smart futuristic environments.
Finally, we provide a simpliﬁed smart environment architec-
ture that shows how Blockchain help integrating the various
technologies discussed in this paper.

III. SMART ENVIRONMENTS
Over history, humans have always created innovative solu-
tions to make their lives easier. The recent technological
inventions allowed us to live in an environment that was con-
sidered science ﬁction in the past. However, scientists always
wanted to push this further by creating a smarter world where
automation is included in every aspect of human lives. This
was only possible through introducing IoT technology, where
IoT sensors and actuators are embedded in physical devices
and machines, making them able to interconnect through the
internet. IoT, with the help of Big data analysis, AI, Machine
Learning, and many other innovative technologies allowed
for the realization of these smart environments [33], [34].

Governments, industries, and scientists are all racing to-
wards creating and prototyping smart cities for boosting
the life quality of their citizens. Smart homes, for example,
provide a futuristic domestic environment that delivers a
technologically advanced living experience for people [35].
While smart education includes smart campuses, smart uni-
versities, and smart classrooms for students in these smart
cities [36]. Various innovative solutions were used to mit-
igate different challenges in realizing these environments,
like using Blockchain to secure smart city applications [37].
The difﬁculty in realizing these applications increases as the

4

human interactions with the smart infrastructure get more
complex, as in the case of smart transportation systems [38].
Therefore, the research in these complex smart infrastruc-
tures, including smart transportation systems, had become a
dominant research topic in the context of smart environments
[39].

The fourth industrial revolution, also called Industry 4.0, is
another important component of smart environments, which
could only be realized after introducing smart factories and
smart supply chain systems [40]. To decrease the cost while
increasing the quality of mass production, businesses stood
up for shifting from traditional manufacturing to smart fac-
tories [41]. The introduction of Smart Industry allows for the
automation of intelligent predictive maintenance strategies,
which provide major cost saving over time-based preventive
maintenance [42]. The fourth industrial revolution in smart
cities also led to the development of distributed smart energy
trading systems, which require Blockchain for security and
reliability [43].

Smart farming is another component of smart environ-
ments, which was enabled by IoT, Wireless Sensor Networks
(WSN), Cloud Computing, Fog Computing, as well as Big
data analytics [44]. Big data analytic plays an important
role in bringing real-time decision-making capabilities into
smart farming environments by obtaining valuable informa-
tion from the collected data [45]. For example, machine
learning can automate decision-making in smart farming en-
vironments by predicting soil drought and crop productivity
[46]. Smart vehicles also exist in almost all smart envi-
ronments, including smart farming, smart factories, smart
cities, and smart transportation systems, and we also see how
Blockchain can secure the transactions between these smart
vehicles [47].

IoT paved the way to pervasive computing, also called
ubiquitous computing, which is the interconnection of sen-
sors with computing capabilities through the internet. These
smart devices are the main building blocks for smart en-
vironments, which aim at providing a comfortable living
experience for humans via performing repetitive or risky
tasks using these devices. Furthermore, other technologies
are needed to get the full beneﬁt out of these devices, in-
cluding AI, machine learning, Big data analytics, as well as
computer networks, parallel and distributed computing, and
much more. The realization of smart environments needs a
lot of work, so in this paper, we focus on how Blockchain
provides security, privacy, and other features into smart envi-
ronments with the help of other technologies. The outcomes
of this research spot the light on what Blockchain can provide
for smart environments. Besides, it proposes a simpliﬁed IoT-
based smart environment architecture using Blockchain with
Cloud/Fog computing, SDN, and AI technologies.

IV. BLOCKCHAIN AND ITS APPLICATIONS
Starting by Bitcoin in 2008, Blockchain went far beyond the
world of cryptocurrencies as it was proposed by Nakamoto
et al. [48]. Blockchain enabled many smart environment

Ebrahim et al.: Blockchain as privacy and security solution for smart environments: A Survey

FIGURE 3. The concept of Blockchain.

applications and solutions as has been clearly seen in recent
studies. For example, Blockchain provides authentication and
authorization for smart city applications [49], like managing
real estate deals in smart cities [50]. Blockchain was also
used as a core framework to secure smart vehicles [50] and
smart grid systems [51].

Blockchain is essentially a distributed ledger that
is
made up of blocks (list of transactions) that are backward-
connected through hash pointers as shown in Fig. 3. Be-
sides the transactions’ Merkel tree inside each block. These
pointers guarantee the immutability of this ledger. Different
consensus algorithms, such as Proof-of-Work (PoW) [48],
have been proposed to securely update the ledger without the
need to a centralized entity. In PoW, the nodes in the network
compete to solve a puzzle that is solved only by trying dif-
ferent Nonce values. Blockchain can provide pseudonymity
and traceability, which are very useful in dozens of do-
mains. Those features are achieved with the help of different
technologies, including cryptography, hashing, and digital
signatures.

In a public Blockchain, anyone can participate in the
network to create and validate transactions and blocks. Con-
trarily, only authorized nodes can join a private Blockchain
to read, create, or validate transactions and blocks. A consor-
tium Blockchain has mixed features of both private and pub-
lic Blockchain implementations, where only permissioned
users can perform Blockchain transaction with different lev-
els of restrictions. Bitcoin and Ethereum are examples of
public Blockchain implementations, and Hyperledger Fabric
[52] is an example of a consortium Blockchain. We can
also have a private Blockchain using a private version of
Hyperledger Fabric or Ethereum [53]. Zheng et al. [10]
gave a taxonomy on different types and implementations of
Blockchain, and the different consensus algorithms used in
them. Beside PoW and Proof-of-Stake (PoS) consensus algo-
rithms, Delegated-PoS (DPoS) [54] and Practical Byzantine
Fault Tolerant (PBFT) [55] have been also considered in
different implementations. However, PoW is still the most
secure consensus algorithm despite its huge computational
and energy consumption.

The peer-to-peer (P2P) network of Blockchain should have
decentralized management of the data that is synchronized
among all peers in the network. To keep the data synchro-
nized efﬁciently, two message transfer protocols are usually
adopted between the nodes, i.e. Gossip [56] and Kademlia
[57]. Bitcoin uses Gossip, which spreads information by

communicating only with neighbors, mimicking the spread
of epidemic diseases. Ethereum communication protocol on
the other hand is inspired by Kademlia, which maintains
a distributed hash table that speciﬁes the communicating
neighbors for each node. The peers in the network are usually
of three types, i.e. core, full, and light nodes. All peers partic-
ipate in validating and broadcasting transactions and blocks.
Core nodes are responsible for network routing, whereas full
nodes are responsible for storing the whole Blockchain. Light
nodes are only responsible for maintaining users’ accounts in
resource-constrained devices.

Asymmetric cryptography and zero-knowledge proof [58]
can be used to secure users’ data with the help of Blockchain
[59]. Hence, Blockchain can be used as a secure distributed-
database system, e.g. medical record system. The patients can
ensure data integrity and privacy by giving data access only to
speciﬁc medical ﬁrms. Records from different hospitals and
clinics can be obtained in a secure manner without vulnerable
central authorities. Peng et al. [60] implementation prevents
falsiﬁed data retrieval to ensure authenticity, integrity, and
efﬁciency of Blockchain data queries. With the help of smart
contracts, automation in such systems mitigate the need for
human centric auditing and revisioning.

Smart contracts [61] were proposed in the 1994 by Nick
Szabo [62] and rediscovered in the context of Blockchain
with Ethereum [63]. They enforce rules and conditions in-
side transactions to lower the cost induced by third central
parties, such as law ﬁrms. These contracts are automated
and permanently stored in Blockchain immutable ledger.
Running code inside Blockchain using smart contracts adds
decentralization to applications in trustless environments.
Smart contracts adds automation to network management,
security services, and IoT applications. However, Blockchain
still suffer many challenges and problems, like scalability
[64] and privacy leakage [65]. Electricity consumption of
PoW and the capitalism problem in PoS algorithm [66] are
some consensus-related problems in Blockchain. Moreover,
the ﬁnancial use of Blockchain still needs much work from
legal and law enforcement perspectives [67].

A. BLOCKCHAIN APPLICATIONS
Zheng et al. [10] classiﬁed Blockchain applications to ﬁnance
systems, reputation systems, public and social services, and
security and privacy applications. In this survey however,
we focus on security [68], AI [15], IoT [14], and healthcare
[69] applications. We show how Blockchain has led to the
development and enhancement of many applications in these
domains. We give below brief descriptions of few Blockchain
applications that demonstrate the power of Blockchain in
enhancing and simplifying humans lives. Such applications
and prototypes pave the way for the smart environments of
the future we are looking for:

MedRec [70]: Is a distributed Electronic Health Records
(EHR) and medical research data. This decentralized medical
claim system handles EHRs using Blockchain. It allows
patients to easily and securely share their medical records

5

Other InfoNonceTx1Tx2TxnHashOther InfoNonceTx1Tx2TxnHashPrevious BlockNext Block……Ebrahim et al.: Blockchain as privacy and security solution for smart environments: A Survey

across different health insurance companies, medical insti-
tutions, clinics, and pharmacies. It guarantees authentica-
tion, conﬁdentiality, accountability for sharing patients’ data.
Medical stakeholders can be incentivized to play the role of
block miners in this system.

BitAV [71]: Is a Blockchain-based fast anti-malware scan-
ning application that secures entire networks. It can provide
security services in a decentralized manner to computational-
limited environments, like IoT networks, given enough RAM
and storage. It is 1,400% faster than conventional antivirus
software, and 500% less in terms of average update propaga-
tion ﬂow. It achieves this performance using the P2P network
maintenance mechanism inspired by Blockchain consensus.
OriginChain [72]: Is an adaptable Blockchain-based trace-
ability system. It is decentralized, transparent, and tamper-
proof; it traces the origin of products across complex supply
chains. Private data, customer/product information, product
certiﬁcates and photos are kept off-chain to increase the
performance and save space. However, the hashes of that data
are kept on-chain to ensure immutability.

E-Voting: Are decentralized electronic voting systems that
are usually required to scale well to large scale voting [73].
Yang et al. [74] used an Ethereum smart contract to give
a prototype of a voting system that provides conﬁdentiality
using homomorphic encryption. The eligibility of the voters,
and the integrity and validity of their votes can also be veri-
ﬁed. Similarly, Khoury et al. [75] created transparent, consis-
tent, and deterministic Ethereum smart contracts, which can
be modiﬁed by voting organizers. Voters should pre-register
with mobile phone numbers and can only vote once in that
voting platform. Hjálmarsson et al. [76] used a smart contract
in a private version of Ethereum to guarantee transparency
and privacy. They used Blockchain-as-a-Service to host na-
tionwide elections, but they still need additional measures to
support countries with huge population.

Reputation Systems: Are decentralized systems for re-
wards and educational records. Sharples and Domingue [77]
democratise educational reputations beyond the academic
community using a decentralized Blockchain-based frame-
work. It creates a permanent distributed record of intellectual
effort and associated reputational reward. It can be also
used for crowd-sourced timestamped patenting, i.e. proof of
academic, art, and scientiﬁc work.

V. BLOCKCHAIN & INTERNET OF THINGS (IOT)
IoT devices in smart environments should be digitally con-
nected in order to share their data and automate their tasks.
These devices are usually made up of sensors and actua-
tors that connect through the internet. Blockchain can be
used to increase IoT automation and solve a number of
its limitations, including security, privacy, and scalability.
That makes Blockchain one of the enabling technologies for
IoT networks in smart environments. Using Blockchain for
decentralized monetary transaction and digital asset trading
is also an enabler for IoT devices in smart environments.
Blockchain was also used as a distributed access management

6

system for the ever-growing IoT networks to mitigate the
overhead of centralized architectures [78].

IoT is one of the biggest trends in today’s innovations
[79]. It enables physical devices to communicate through the
internet to send/receive data, and can perform actions. IoT
has already emerged in humans life in different domains,
such as smart home devices [24], smart cities [80], and smart
transportation [81]. It has been proven to be well suited for
E-business models, specially with the help of Blockchain
and smart contracts [82], [83]. As an example, Zhang and
Wen [82] proposed an E-business architecture to build sys-
tematic, highly efﬁcient, ﬂexible, reasonable, and low cost
business-oriented IoT ecosystems. In addition, Zheng et al.
[10] discussed IoT-Blockchain integration and its associated
challenges. They identiﬁed scalability, ever-growing storage,
privacy leakage, and selﬁsh mining as critical problems.
They pointed out that big-data analytics and AI can enhance
Blockchain-IoT integration and their applications.

Blockchain technology is a good solution to mitigate the
problems of traditional central communication and manage-
ment systems for large scale IoT devices. On one hand,
resource limitations of IoT devices, and scalability issues in
Blockchain create big problems for Blockchain-IoT integra-
tion. On the other hand, the continuous research effort has led
to innovative solutions to these problems, such as IoTA [84].
IoTA is not an abbreviation; rather it comes from IoT and
the word "iota", which means an extremely small amount.
The name reﬂects its purpose to connect IoT devices through
micro/zero value transactions. Shabandri and Maheshwari
[85] developed this architecture as a protocol to provide
trust in IoT networks. It eliminates transaction fees and the
concept of mining to solve both of those problems. The main
component of the IoTA is what they called the Tangle, which
is a guided acyclic graph (DAG) for transaction storage. Sha-
bandri and Maheshwari [85] demonstrated the performance
of IoTA by implementing two IoT applications, namely a
smart utility meter system and a smart car transaction system.
ADEPT (Autonomous Decentralized Peer-to-Peer Teleme-
try) [86] is another example of a Blockchain-based database-
like framework for decentralized IoT networks. It is a proof-
of-concept that was produced by a collaboration between
IBM and Samsung. ADEPT provides a secure and a low-
cost interaction mechanism for IoT devices, where devices
have the ability to make orders, pay for them, and conﬁrm
their shipment autonomously. The underlying technologies
behind ADEPT are Ethereum smart contracts, BitTorrent ﬁle
sharing and TeleHash peer-to-peer messaging. They used a
mix of PoW and PoS consensus algorithms to provide secure
decentralization for transaction approval.

The huge number of IoT devices creates a burden on the
network and raises problems such as data security, privacy,
and integrity. Two of the most challenging issues in IoT
security are heterogeneity and scalability of IoT devices that
are distributed over the network. Blockchain can solve the
security, privacy, and data integrity issues in a decentralized
manner. Blockchain is also able to create traceable IoT

Ebrahim et al.: Blockchain as privacy and security solution for smart environments: A Survey

networks, where transaction data are recorded and veriﬁed
without intermediary management and control [17]. Dis-
tributed Blockchain-based management of IoT devices can
be also performed at the edge of the network to avoid using
distant resources [87]–[89]. Blockchain can also provide a
distributed digital payment system for IoT devices to reduce
the cost induced by third parties.

To protect IoT data in a Blockchain, a hybrid combination
of private and public Blockchains is needed [90]. Data pri-
vacy is maintained by private management nodes, whereas
the consensus algorithm is maintained by public nodes. In
addition, traditional Blockchain consensus algorithms are
not suitable for IoT-Blockchain solutions because of their
computational and time requirements. To solve this prob-
lem, Samaniego and Deters [91] proposed a Blockchain-
as-a-service platform for IoT applications. They introduced
structural improvements for Blockchain to ﬁt IoT networks
by improving consensus algorithms.

Atlam et al. [9] listed several beneﬁts for using Blockchain
for IoT, like publicity, decentralization, resiliency, security,
speed, cost saving, immutability, and anonymity. However,
they also highlighted the challenges, such as scalability,
processing power, time delay, storage requirements, lack
of skills, legal and compliance, and naming and discovery.
Similarly, Ramachandran and Krishnamachari [5] proposed
Blockchain-based monetary exchange for data and compute
in IoT networks. IoT transactions can also be recorded on
Blockchain for future accounting and auditing. However,
they were also concerned by Blockchain challenges, like la-
tency, bandwidth consumption, transaction fees, transaction
volumes, partition tolerance, and physical attacks on IoT
devices.

Dorri et al. [92] investigated the delay, expensive compu-
tations, and bandwidth overhead problems of Blockchain to
better ﬁt IoT applications. They proposed a secure, private,
and lightweight hierarchical architecture for Blockchain-IoT
applications. The hierarchical architecture is made up of three
layers, namely local network (smart home), overlay network,
and cloud storage (see Fig. 4). Likewise, Reyna et al. [4]
argued the beneﬁts of Blockchain-IoT integration to securely
push code into IoT devices to speed up the deployment of
new IoT ecosystems. They proposed Blockchain-based direct
ﬁrmware update without the need to trust third-parties. Since
IoT devices are manufactured by different vendors, they may
not agree on sharing a common Blockchain. Hence, IoT
devices should be able to send transactions across different
Blockchain implementations with different consensus proto-
cols.

Dai et al. [12] named the integration of Blockchain and
IoT as Blockchain-of-Things (BCoT). They stated that a
successful integration requires interoperability, traceablitiy
[72], reliability, and autonomicity [82]. They also stated that
decentralization, heterogeneity, poor interoperability, privacy
and security vulnerabilities [3] are critical issues for such
integration. Beside those problems,
the lack of publicly
available IoT datasets for the research community is another

FIGURE 4. Hierarchical Blockchain-based IoT architecture for smart homes.

problem to be addressed. Thus, Banerjee et al. [8] worked on
standards for securely developing and sharing IoT datasets.
They proposed two conceptual solutions to ensure IoT data
integrity and privacy using Blockchain.

Reyna et al. [4] proposed using three different communica-
tion approaches for the communication between IoT devices
with the help of Blockchains (see Fig. 5). The ﬁrst approach
is IoT-IoT interactions, where IoT interactions take place off-
chain. This approach is the fastest among other approaches
since only a part of IoT data is stored on-chain. The second
approach is IoT-Blockchain, where all the interactions take
place through Blockchain. With this approach, all IoT data
are stored on-chain to ensure traceable interactions. The third
approach is hybrid, where only part of the interactions/data
goes through Blockchain, while the rest is done directly
between IoT devices. The hybrid approach is better in terms
of performance and security; however, it requires careful
orchestration for those interactions.

The impact of IoT on industry and enterprise systems
asked for standardizing this technology to speed up its de-
velopment and spread in this domain [93]. Christidis and
Devetsikiotis [3] showed that Blockchain-IoT integration
will cause transformations across industries, and open the
door for new business models and distributed applications. It
will also facilitate service and resource sharing, and automate
time-consuming workﬂows. Blockchain smart contracts are
the main source of such automation for complex multistep
processes. They can reduce cost and time for future business
models and applications in smart environments.

7

Blockchain-basedCloud StorageCentralized Private BlockchainSmart IoTDevicesLocal StorageSmartHomeOverlay P2P NetworkEbrahim et al.: Blockchain as privacy and security solution for smart environments: A Survey

energy. Each transaction is saved on the immutable ledger for
future prooﬁng.

Smart Things: Panarello et al. [6] did a systematic survey
of Blockchain-IoT integration. They covered various smart-
application domains, such as smart homes, smart properties,
and smart cities. They also covered smart energy-trading,
smart manufacturing, smart data-marketplaces, and other
generic smart applications. They classiﬁed existing work
based on the development levels, consensus algorithms, and
technical challenges. They also identiﬁed the challenges that
include conﬁdentiality, authentication, integrity, availability,
and nonrepudiation.

Conoscenti et al. [2] gave a systematic literature review of
Blockchain applications for IoT. They discussed 18 use cases
of Blockchain, 4 of which are speciﬁcally designed for IoT.
The rest of the use cases are applications for decentralized
private data management systems that are inline with IoT
applications. The four IoT-related Blockchain applications
they discussed are:

1) E-business models for IoT solutions: Zhang and Wen
[82] designed a methodology for transactions and pay-
ments between smart IoT devices using Blockchain
smart contracts.

2) IoT Data-Market: Wörner and von Bomhard [97] pro-
posed a prototype for a system where sensors can sell
data directly to a data-market in exchange of Bitcoins.
3) Public-Key Infrastructure: Axon and Goldsmith [98]
adapted what is called Certcoin [99] to a privacy-
aware Blockchain-based public-key infrastructure to
avoid web certiﬁcate authorities, provide certiﬁcate
transparency, and mitigate single points of failures.
4) Enigma: An autonomous Blockchain-based decentral-
ized computation platform proposed by Shrobe et al.
[100]. It allows different users to run computations on
personal data with guaranteed privacy.

In order to fully beneﬁt from IoT applications and systems,
we need to start by mitigating their current limitations and
challenges. The power and resource limitations of IoT de-
vices do not make them suitable to process heavy computa-
tions and store large data. Cloud Computing helped providing
theoretically unlimited storage and computational resources
for IoT devices. In addition, Fog and Edge Computing bring
those resources closer to IoT devices to decrease network
delay and bandwidth consumption. Cloud, Fog, and Edge
resources allow for performing heavy analysis on IoT data
and maintain real-time performance for time-sensitive IoT
applications. These resources will extend the capabilities of
Blockchain-IoT integration and mitigate many of its limita-
tions and issues.

VI. BLOCKCHAIN & CLOUD, FOG, AND EDGE
COMPUTING
The huge amount of IoT data generated in smart environ-
ments needs to be processed in large data centers that have
enough computing and storage capacities. That is why Cloud
Computing was proposed as the ﬁrst solution for big data

FIGURE 5. Three different Blockchain-IoT interaction architectures proposed
by Reyna et al. [4].

A. BLOCKCHAIN-IOT APPLICATIONS
A number of key applications were developed for smart
environments with the help of Blockchain-IoT integration.
Prototypes of these applications are necessary to study them
and solve their limitations and issues. Here, we list few appli-
cations, case studies, and prototypes for smart environments
that are brought to live using Blockchain-IoT integration:

Smart Homes: Dorri et al. [92] proposed a smart-home
case study that uses Blockchain to add security and pri-
vacy features to various IoT applications. They presented
a lightweight secure system for IoT-based smart homes to
minimize the overhead of consensus algorithms. Their hi-
erarchical architecture consists of smart homes, an overlay
network, and cloud storage. Other works later analyzed this
architecture and the role of smart homes as miners in a
private Blockchain [94], [95]. They used simulation results
to show the insigniﬁcance of Blockchain overhead, including
power consumption, compared to achieving conﬁdentiality,
integrity, availability, security, and privacy.

Energy Trading: Sikorski et al. [96] presented a proof-of-
concept and a detailed implementation for energy trading
using realistic data. It is a machine-to-machine electricity
market for the chemical industry. They used a Blockchain
smart contract for automatic conﬁrmation of trading and
payment commitments. They implemented a scenario of two
electricity producers and one consumer that automatically
trades energy using IoT. Producers publish energy trading
offers for a given price, while consumers can read, analyse,
and accept, or refuse those offers. Consumers can pick and
accept the offer with the minimum cost using a smart contract
execution as an atomic exchange of assets, i.e. currency for

8

FogCloudData Interactions (a)IoT-IoT(b) IoT-Blockchain(c) Hybrid ApproachEbrahim et al.: Blockchain as privacy and security solution for smart environments: A Survey

analysis and storage for IoT-based applications in smart
environments [101]. However, Fog Computing paradigm was
evolved to support the Cloud in order to mitigate latency in-
tolerance of real-time IoT applications in smart environments
[102], such as autonomous vehicles. Similarly, Edge Com-
puting utilizes available computational resources in smart en-
vironments, such as the resources in smart vehicles or smart
phones, in order to reduce the latency even further [103].
Blockchain was again able to support these technologies by
securing and protecting the privacy of this big data in smart
environments [104].

With the advent of the Cloud Computing technology, it is
possible to perform very expensive computational tasks and
store tremendous amount of data. Payment is only for the cost
of usage, which is better than purchasing expensive resources
for time-framed tasks. The Cloud technology removes the
overhead of maintenance and resource management, which is
usually related to owning resources by small to medium sized
companies. Furthermore, the Cloud enables resource and
power-limited devices, such as smartphones and IoT devices,
to perform heavy computations and store huge amounts of
data. Those devices need to only use a lightweight remote
interface with the cloud as a solution to mitigate their power
and resource limitations.

Cloud Computing is the outcome of integrating parallel,
distributed, and grid computing [105]. Although it has been
proposed in the 60s, the technology has started to be widely
used commercially in 2006 by Amazon [106]. Services are
usually provided as packages, namely Software-as-a-Service
(SaaS), Platform-as-a-Service (PaaS), and Infrastructure-as-
a-Service (IaaS). Zhou et al. [107] added the possibility
of having Data-as-a-Service (DaaS), Identity and Policy
Management as-a-Service (IPMaaS), Network-as-a-Service
(NaaS). X-as-a-Service (XaaS) is a term called for the count-
less number of services that can be provided by cloud com-
puting [108]. XaaS allows for more service packages, which
enable the creation of various applications and systems based
on the services provided.

Jadeja and Modi [106] categorized the deployment of
the cloud infrastructures into public, private, hybrid, and
community clouds. They listed easy management, cost reduc-
tion, uninterrupted services, disaster management, and green
computing as the main advantages of Cloud Computing. A
tremendous number of systems and applications were built
based on Cloud services since 2010 [107]. Ma and Zhang
[108] studied a provider for cloud services called Google
App Engine (GAE). They explored three of its services, i.e.
Google File System (GFS), MapReduce, and Bigtable. They
showed how these services opened the doors for Big Data
Analysis in IoT environments.

Before discussing how Cloud integrates into Blockchain-
based IoT solutions, we ﬁrst show how Blockchain helped
the Cloud technology itself. Blockchain has been used for
Cloud Exchange [21], which allows for provisioning and
management of multiple Cloud providers. It can lower the
price and can provide ﬂexible options for Cloud users.

Xie et al. [21] proposed using Blockchain to decentralize
Cloud exchange services. It mitigates malicious attacks and
the cheating behaviors of third-party auctioneers. Further-
more, Blockchain form new models for security-aware Cloud
schedulers, like the lightweight Proof–of–Schedule (PoSch)
consensus algorithm [109]. In addition, integrating the Cloud
with Blockchain-IoT solutions enables for seamless authen-
tication, data privacy, security, easy deployment, robustness
against attacks, and self-maintenance [7].

Because of limited power, storage, and computational
resources, IoT devices heavily depend on Cloud resources.
However, relying on the cloud can create unacceptable de-
lays, specially when a feedback is required. Fog and Edge
technologies can be used to reduce these delays; in addition,
they provide better privacy by processing IoT data in prox-
imity to IoT devices. Therefore, they are more convenient
than the Cloud, specially for Blockchain-IoT applications.
Samaniego and Deters [91] evaluated both edge-based and
cloud-based Blockchain implementations for IoT networks.
They did show, via simulations, that edge-based Blockchain
implementations outperform cloud-based implementations.

Transferring massive amounts of data, that is produced by
IoT devices, to the Cloud consumes considerable amount of
network bandwidth. Flooding the core network with massive
trafﬁc, like in streaming IoT applications, will create network
bottlenecks and single points of failures. There are also prob-
lems with privacy exposure, and context and geographical
location unawareness. Edge Computing solves these prob-
lems by forming a distributed and collaborative computing
resources. It reduces power consumption, provides real-time
service, and improves scalability for many industrial IoT so-
lutions [110]. In addition, Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs)
can act as limited-resource edge servers in environments with
limited or no infrastructures [111]. Blockchain can be used
to provide mutual-conﬁdence between UAVs of different
providers [112], and to preserve privacy and security for their
data [113].

Fog Computing has been also proposed to pre-process and
trim IoT data before sending it to the cloud for computa-
tionally expensive analysis [114]. Fog servers are usually
deployed in smart gateways, which are equipped with decent
computational resources. They eliminate unnecessary com-
munication to the cloud to save the network bandwidth and
reduce the load in its data centers. Fog Computing should not
be mixed with Edge Computing, as Edge Computing brings
the computations very close to the end devices. Edge servers
are usually deployed in Radio Access Networks (RANs) or
mobile Base Stations (BSs). On the other hand, Fog Com-
puting provides distributed mini-cloud resources between the
end devices and the cloud (see Fig. 6). Both technologies
reduce the network delay, and provide better Quality-of-
Service and Experience (QoS & QoE). These technologies
are essential parts in real-time/streaming IoT applications,
which might also require location/context-aware information
processing.

Mobile Edge Computing, also called Multiaccess Edge

9

Ebrahim et al.: Blockchain as privacy and security solution for smart environments: A Survey

devices provides real-time services for the users. To mitigate
malicious attacks on fog nodes, Wu and Ansari [121] pro-
posed partitioning the fog nodes into different clusters. The
nodes in each cluster have their own access control list, which
is protected and managed by Blockchain. They showed, using
simulations, the effectiveness of their approach in reducing
the computational and storage requirements of Blockchain.
They included a heuristic algorithm to reduce the time needed
to solve the consensus puzzle by having all fog nodes perform
the computations cooperatively.

Cloud, Fog, and Edge computing technologies provided
IoT devices with more capabilities, which increased their
adoption in new applications and domains. The continuous
expansion of IoT networks and their dynamic nature ask
for intelligent and dynamic management of such networks.
Adaptive control of the network does not only save in terms
of hardware cost, but also dynamically optimizes the opera-
tions in the network. Network optimization can be done using
Software-Deﬁned Networking, which dynamically changes
data ﬂow in the network based on its state. SDN can incor-
porate Artiﬁcial Intelligence algorithms to optimally choose
between using Cloud, Fog, or Edge resources, or even a
combination of them, to process IoT data.

VII. BLOCKCHAIN & SOFTWARE-DEFINED
NETWORKING (SDN)
SDN Technology demonstrated its importance in managing
routing decisions in smart environment IoT networks since
they are usually vulnerable to node/link failures [122]. SDN
has been used to mitigate latency issues, like congestion and
transmission delays, in time-sensitive smart industrial IoT
environments [123]. SDN also balances the load between
Fog nodes, which can be vehicles in IoV environments, and
the Cloud to allow time-sensitive tasks meet their deadlines
[124]. When a Fog is overloaded, SDN dynamically makes
ofﬂoading decisions to select the best ofﬂoading Fog node
based on computational and network resource information
[125]. Blockchain augments SDN beneﬁts for IoT networks
by providing security, privacy, ﬂexibility, scalability, and
conﬁdentiality to increase energy utilization and throughput
while reducing end-to-end delay [126].

SDN enables network management and protocols to be
adaptable and programmable. It was proposed in 2006, in
the OpenFlow whitepaper, to test experimental protocols in
university campus networks [127]. SDN ﬁts to the rapid
changes and demands in network applications, and eliminates
the need for pre-programmed, vendor-speciﬁc, and expensive
network devices. SDN achieves this ﬂexibility by separating
the control and data planes in the network. The control
plane makes decisions on the trafﬁc ﬂow in the network,
whereas the data plane is responsible for forwarding that
trafﬁc. Indeed, the control plane is the network brain, and is
usually a centralized software entity called SDN controller.

The SDN architecture uses the concept of Application
Programming Interface (API) in a three-layer structure. Fig.
7 shows two common interfaces between these layers, i.e.

FIGURE 6. Cloud, Fog, and Edge Computing for IoT networks.

Computing (MEC), is a speciﬁc type of Edge Computing that
leverages mobile Base Stations. It complements cloud com-
puting by ofﬂoading computations closer to mobile and IoT
devices. MEC supports ultralow latency and delay-sensitive
IoT applications in 5G networks [115]. Xiong et al. [116]
proposed a prototype for MEC-enabled Blockchain for mo-
bile IoT applications. However, the limited MEC resources
makes it critical to optimally ofﬂoad heavy computations to
different Edge, Fog, or Cloud resources. Liu et al. [117],
for example, optimized the joint computation ofﬂoading and
content caching problems to tackle the intensive computa-
tions in PoW consensus algorithm.

Xiong et al. [118] studied the relationship between cloud
or fog providers and PoW-based Blockchain miners with
limited computation resources. They chose to ofﬂoad the
computational intensive part of PoW to the cloud and/or fog
nodes. The computing nodes offer services to the miners for
a given price using a game theoretic approach. The miners
can then decide on the amount of service to purchase from
the computing nodes. Tuli et al. [119] also used Blockchain
to provide authentication and encryption services to secure
IoT sensitive data and operations. They proposed FogBus, a
lightweight end-to-end platform-independent framework for
IoT applications. It enables easy deployment, scalability, and
cost efﬁciency by integrating IoT into cloud, fog, and edge
computing with the help of Blockchain.

Blockchain has been used to provide distributed access
control for IoT devices [28]. Almadhoun et al. [120] pro-
posed a user authentication system for IoT devices using fog
computing. In their proposed system, fog nodes utilize an
Ethereum smart contract to authenticate the users and man-
age access permissions. The proximity of fog nodes to IoT

10

IoT Layer →Edge Layer →Fog Layer →Cloud Layer →Ebrahim et al.: Blockchain as privacy and security solution for smart environments: A Survey

dynamism, adaptability, and remote conﬁguration of SDN
networks provide a lot of support for IoT networks. Bera
et al. [27] showed how these features can provide efﬁcient,
scalable, seamless, and cost-effective management of IoT
devices. SDN also realizes the real-time demands of IoT
applications by its ability to optimize trafﬁc ﬂow and load
balancing. Such optimization improves the bandwidth uti-
lization in the network and mitigates bottlenecks.

Jararweh et al. [129] proposed a comprehensive SDN-
based IoT framework to simplify IoT management and mit-
igate several problems in traditional IoT architectures. They
integrated software-deﬁned networks, storage, and security
into a single software-deﬁned control model for IoT de-
vices. The software-deﬁned storage manages big IoT data
by separating the data control layer, which controls stor-
age resources, from the underlying infrastructure of storage
assets. Finally, the software-deﬁned security separates the
data forwarding plane from the security control plane. They
included a proof-of-concept to show the performance of their
framework in handling huge amounts of IoT data.

The global network view in SDN controllers addresses
the heterogeneity, scalability, optimal routing, and bottleneck
issues in IoT networks. Kalkan and Zeadally [130] discussed
the beneﬁts and drawbacks of SDNs in IoT networks and fo-
cused on single-point-of-failure issues in traditional central-
ized SDN controllers. They separated the roles of single con-
trollers to multiple hosts using a distribution-of-risks scheme.
The bandwidth utilization was improved by distributing the
communication trafﬁc among three different controllers, i.e.
Intrusion, Key, and Crypto Controllers. The intrusion con-
troller mitigates possible intrusions besides managing and
securing the routes. The key controller controls symmetric
and asymmetric key distribution in the whole ecosystem.
The crypto controller provides cryptographic services for
authentication, integrity, conﬁdentiality, privacy, and identity
management.

LI et al. [19] focused on the security challenges and
solutions for Blockchain-based SDN systems. They focused
on DoS and DDoS attacks on centralized SDN controllers,
and insider attacks on distributed SDN controllers. They
highlighted Blockchain ability to secure distributed SDN
controllers and data plane forwarding devices. They also
listed scanning, spooﬁng, hijacking, DoS, and Man-in-the-
middle attacks as SDN vulnerabilities. At the end, they listed
trafﬁc-ﬂow control, policy enforcement, and DoS defence
mechanisms as possible solutions for those vulnerabilities.
Blockchain was also used to ensure the security and consis-
tency of the statistics in SDN-based IoT networks [131].

Medhane et al. [132] proposed a security framework for
next generation IoT by integrating Blockchain with SDN,
edge, and cloud computing technologies. The framework fea-
tures security attack mitigation, continuous conﬁdentiality,
authentication, and robustness. The attacks in IoT networks
are detected in the cloud and reduced at the edge nodes. SDN
controllers examine and manage the trafﬁc ﬂow to actively
mitigate doubtful trafﬁc. Similarly, Sharma et al. [133] de-

11

FIGURE 7. The three-layers SDN architecture.

Northbound and Southbound APIs. Two additional interfaces
are sometimes considered to allow the communication be-
tween multiple controllers in the control layer, i.e. Eastbound
and Westbound APIs [27]. A master controller is usually
needed to coordinate the decisions of multiple controllers.
A controller is the interface between network elements and
applications like ﬁrewalls and load balancing applications
[128]. It provides agility to network infrastructures, like
routers and switches, by dynamically optimizing the network
resources. Like other emerging technologies, SDN intro-
duces new security challenges to network infrastructures.
At the same time Blockchain can mitigate those challenges
by providing conﬁdentiality, integrity, and availability to the
network devices [18].

Denial of Service Attacks (DoS) and Distributed Denial
of Service Attacks (DDoS) target centralized network ar-
chitectures. These attacks stop network services from serv-
ing legitimate users, devices, and applications. Such attacks
can target SDN controllers to malfunction and paralyze the
whole network. Blockchain can mitigate these attacks and
help avoiding single-points-of-failures in centralized network
architectures. Blockchain can provide decentralized trust in
physically distributed, logically centralized, SDN controller
architectures [18]. Using SDN and Blockchain, network
administrators can easily program and conﬁgure network
components using smart contracts. Those components can
securely perform their software updates by accessing policies
and conﬁgurations from Blockchain-based SDN controllers.
Blockchain integration with SDN did not attract the re-
quired level of attention yet by the research community [18].
Alharbi [18] explained the role of Blockchain in providing
and improving security features in SDN architectures. The

Application LayerControl LayerInfrastructure LayerSouthboundNorthboundDefines Network PoliciesDefines Forwarding RulesPerforms Packet ForwardingControl Plane:Data Plane:Ebrahim et al.: Blockchain as privacy and security solution for smart environments: A Survey

scribed a distributed cloud architecture at the edge of the
network; i.e. Fog nodes, which is secured using Blockchain
and SDN. They securely aggregate IoT data using fog nodes
before it is sent to the cloud for heavier analysis and/or long-
term storage. Their architecture supports large IoT data using
low-cost, high-performance, and on-demand secure services.
They signiﬁcantly reduced trafﬁc load and delay compared to
traditional IoT architectures.

Sharma et al. [89] proposed DistBlockNet, a decentralized
and secure Blockchain-based SDN architecture that updates
ﬂow-rule tables in large-scale IoT networks. Blockchain was
used to verify ﬂow-rule tables’ versions, and securely down-
load them to IoT/forwarding devices. Sharma et al. [134]
also proposed SoftEdgeNet to extend their previous works
[89], [133]. SoftEdgeNet improved their previous designs
by pushing the storage and computations to the extreme
edge to manage real-time trafﬁc and avoid resource star-
vation. It is a distributed network management architecture
for edge computing networks. It mitigates ﬂooding attacks
and provides real-time network analytics using Blockchain,
SDN, fog, and edge nodes. SoftEdgeNet has an efﬁcient
ﬂow-rule allocation and partitioning algorithm at the edge of
the network that minimizes trafﬁc redirection, and creates a
sustainable network.

Blockchain has been also used to secure the conﬁguration,
management, and migration of Virtual Network Functions
(VNFs) [135]. VNF, also called Network Function Virtual-
ization (NFV), allows devices with adequate resources to
perform multiple tasks simultaneously, or at least in real-
time. VNF achieves multitasking by separating the control
plane from the physical devices [136]. Alvarenga et al.
[135] implemented a prototype that makes VNF conﬁgu-
ration immutable, auditable, nonrepudiable, consistent, and
anonymous. Their design eliminates single-points-of-failures
and provides high availability of the network’s conﬁguration
information with a delay of about two seconds. The archi-
tecture is resilient to Blockchain collusion attacks, and the
conﬁguration information cannot be compromised even with
a successful collusion attack. Such resiliency is achieved
by using a variant of the Byzantine Fault Tolerant (BFT)
consensus protocol called Ripple protocol [137].

Blockchain was also used in wireless network virtual-
ization ecosystems to prevent double spending of wireless
resources at a given time and location [138], [139]. Wireless
network virtualization enables sharing physical wireless in-
frastructures and radio frequency slices to improve coverage,
capacity, and security. Proof-of-Wireless-Resources (PoWR)
[139] has been proposed to mitigate double spending of the
same wireless resources. Rawat [138] used SDN to provide
dynamic and efﬁcient network conﬁguration, and used Edge
Computing to decrease delays by avoiding the use of high-
speed backhauls. Such fusion of Blockchain with SDN and
edge computing guarantees QoS for end users, and provides
trust, transparency, and seamless subleasing of resources in
trustless wireless networks. The use of Blockchain makes it
practically infeasible to create malicious attempts to sublease

12

other’s wireless resources.

The dynamic capabilities of SDN-based networks open
the doors for many applications, specially in IoT ecosys-
tems. These capabilities can be further enhanced by adding
intelligent decision making into their controllers. Such in-
telligent decisions are now possible to be inferred using
AI and machine learning algorithms. With the advent of
Deep Neural Networks (DNN), these algorithms can learn
on highly complex environments. Recent DNN-based al-
gorithms achieved accuracies that exceed human abilities
in different domains. SDN controllers can deploy DNN-
based Reinforcement Learning algorithms to create intel-
ligent agents that dynamically adapt to network changes.
These capabilities are a must for IoT networks in future smart
environments.

VIII. BLOCKCHAIN & ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE (AI)
AI and Machine Learning algorithms play an essential role
in adding automation and intelligence into different smart
environment applications, including smart cities applications
[140]. Besides supporting smart applications, AI also aug-
ments various underlying technologies, like optimizing SDN
monitoring to minimize network latency [141]. Furthermore,
Blockchain empowers AI decision-making by making it
more secure and efﬁcient [142]. For example, integrating
Blockchain and AI provides decentralized authentication for
smart cities [143], where user identities are kept secret while
attackers are automatically identiﬁed. In smart health sys-
tems, Blockchain integration with AI helped secure medical
data sharing [144] and protect personal healthcare records
[145]. For smart energy trading, Blockchain-enforced Ma-
chine Learning predictive analysis models provide real-time
support and monitoring as well as immutable transaction
logs for decentralized trading [146]. Likewise, Blockchain
integration with Machine Learning in smart factories can
secure system transactions and deliver smarter quality control
schemes [147].

Akter et al. [31] deﬁned the ABCD of digital business as
AI, Blockchain, Cloud, and Data analytic. They considered
these emerging technologies as transformation factors for fu-
ture digital business models. For successful digital business,
Garcia [29] proposed a complete legal doctrine for smart
digital economy. Technologies like Blockchain, AI, IoT, and
big data guide governments’ annual budget plans to simplify
and maximize the application of taxes for digital businesses.
Garcia also showed that Blockchain and cryptocurrencies
augments AI and IoT to create smart economy in smart dig-
ital world. Ekramifard et al. [30] studied how AI algorithms
improve Blockchain designs and operations. They discussed
the effect of this integration in the medical ﬁeld, like the
ability to gather, analyse, and make decisions on medical
datasets. AI and Blockchain helped in different medical
applications, including systems for the ongoing COVID-19
pandemic [148], [149]. Mashamba-Thompson and Crayton
[149] integrated Blockchain and AI to create a low cost self
testing and tracking system for COVID-19. Their system

Ebrahim et al.: Blockchain as privacy and security solution for smart environments: A Survey

is ideal in environments with poor access to laboratory in-
frastructures. Similarly, Nguyen et al. [148] discussed how
Blockchain and AI were used in the literature to compact the
COVID-19 pandemic.

Al-Garadi et al. [26] discussed the role of machine learn-
ing and deep learning in IoT security. They suggested inte-
grating Edge computing and Blockchain into machine learn-
ing and deep learning to provide reliable and effective IoT
security methods. In their work, they investigated the use
of Neural Networks (NN) and other machine learning algo-
rithms (see Fig. 8) to detect attacks in IoT networks. Based
on IoT and network data, IoT network state is classiﬁed
into normal (secure), early warning, or attacked state. Fig. 8
shows a brief taxonomy of different algorithms in the ﬁeld of
AI that can be adopted in IoT ecosystems. Those algorithms
can be classiﬁed into classical machine learning algorithms
and algorithms based on DNN. Each of those classes can be
further categorized into supervised, unsupervised, and semi-
supervised methods. The supervision in learning algorithms
means introducing training labels with training examples that
were prepared by professional or computer software. It is
sometimes impractical or hard to create labeled datasets; in
this case, we can use unsupervised algorithms to categorize
and cluster the data into different groups. Semi-supervised
algorithms lay between those two classes, where only a small
portion of the data is labeled, whereas there are no labels for
the rest of the data.

AI integration is essential

to provide smart decision-
making capabilities into different technologies in a smart en-
vironment ecosystem. The breakthroughs in machine learn-
ing and Deep Learning algorithms make them suitable for
solving complex problems in rapidly changing environments,
such as IoT networks. AI is important to enhance the perfor-
mance of technologies, like Blockchain, IoT, SDN, Cloud,
Fog, and Edge Computing. Self-driving vehicles, smart trans-
portation, automatic delivery robots are some examples of
smart environment applications that need AI integration into
Blockchain-IoT solutions. AI can also be used to optimize the
global energy consumption in a smarter and greener world to
decrease the effect of climate change and local air pollution.
Kumari et al. [150], for example, studied the advantages
and challenges of integrating Blockchain with AI in Energy
Cloud Management (ECM) systems. Using IoT and Smart
Grids (SG), this integration allows for sustainable energy
management and efﬁcient load prediction in a trustless en-
vironment (see Fig. 9). They also proposed a decentralized
Blockchain-based AI-powered ECM framework for energy
management to mitigate security and privacy issues in tradi-
tional implementations.

AI can provide best pricing for IoT data to be sold and/or
computations to be performed. AI can also empower SDN
controllers to choose optimal network routes to forward
data trafﬁc. AI-based SDN trafﬁc control can minimize net-
work delay and bandwidth consumption. It is challenging
to optimally ofﬂoad computations between end-devices and
the Cloud, Fog, and/or Edge servers jointly considering

FIGURE 8. A taxonomy of Artiﬁcial Intelligence algorithms for IoT ecosystems.

delay, computations, and power resources. AI algorithms,
like Deep Reinforcement Learning (DeepRL), have been
recently considered for task ofﬂoading and orchestration in
edge computing applications [151], [152]. Dai et al. [151]
used DeepRL to dynamically orchestrate edge computing
and caching resources in complex vehicular networks. The
complexity of such networks comes from vehicles mobility
and content popularity/localization, e.g. a car accident at a
given location. Furthermore, Dai et al. [152] proposed to in-
tegrate AI and Blockchain to provide intelligent architectures
for ﬂexible and secure resource sharing and content caching
in 5G networks.

13

AI for IoTDeep LearningSupervisedConvolutional NNRecurrent NNUnsupervisedAuto EncodersRestricted Boltzmann MachinesDeep Belief NetworksSemi-supervisedGenerative Adversarial NetworksEnsemble of Deep NNRLDeep Q-NetworkSoft Actor CriticPolicy GradientMachine LearningSupervisedSupport Vector Machine (SVM)Decision TreeNaïve BayesKNNRandom ForestAssociation RulesEnsemble LearningUnsupervisedK-MeansPrincipal Component Analysis (PCA)Semi-supervisedOne-class SVMCollaborative RegressionRLQ-LearningMote CarloTemporal DifferenceDynamic ProgrammingEbrahim et al.: Blockchain as privacy and security solution for smart environments: A Survey

selection algorithm to increase trust, provide protection, and
save time and cost in automotive supply chain ecosystems
that are owned by different organizations.

IX. OPEN RESEARCH PROBLEMS
A lot of work is still needed to allow for smoother integration
between Blockchain and IoT technologies to create smarter
things. Law and regulation issues are some of the main prob-
lems that are discussed in the literature for using Blockchain
for basic monetary transactions. Hence, these issues will
directly impact machine-to-machine monetary transactions
using Blockchain. Akins et al. [67] discussed income taxa-
tion of cryptocurrency transactions, such as Bitcoins, when
used for purchases with monetary value. Sapovadia [158]
discussed the legal issues in cryptocurrencies that are similar
to those of foreign currencies. Emelianova and Dementyev
[159] argued for a uniﬁed supranational legal act for cryp-
tocurrencies, similar to the European Union (EU) directives.
They discussed the provisions in many European and Asian
countries for the use and taxation of cryptocurrencies, which
differs from one government to another. Omololu [160] em-
phasized the need for full law enforcement of Blockchain
applications as they still do not conform to current legal
structures. This requires countries to supervise Blockchain
integration in different applications and domains, including
IoT, to ensure that they comply with the law.

To create an IoT-oriented Blockchain platform, both hard-
ware and software should be highly optimized to perform
Blockchain operations. IBM has taken the lead in this path
by creating a 10-cents tiny edge CPU architecture that can
efﬁciently run Blockchain operations [161]. It can be em-
bedded into IoT devices to support Blockchain operations.
IBM called this project "Crypto Anchors", as they want to
anchor physical objects into Blockchain-IoT applications.
However, the difference between such CPU architectures and
standard Computer CPUs requires speciﬁc Blockchain im-
plementations for Crypto Anchor CPUs. Hence, we believe
that this is a good research direction to create an operating
system for those CPUs that is capable of bridging this gap,
such as the work by Wright and Savanah [162]. Building
Blockchain-oriented CPUs, ﬁrmware, and operating systems
is a great step towards more robust Blockchain-IoT inte-
gration. However, we believe that the research should also
continue on improving Blockchain architectures, including
consensus algorithms and communication protocols.

In terms of consensus algorithms, there has been an effort
to replace the most secure consensus algorithm in practice,
i.e. PoW. The main reason is the power consumption of PoW,
which does not ﬁt resource-limited IoT devices. PoS [66] and
DPoS [54] are two promising alternatives, but they are still
criticized for not being as secure as PoW [163]. Ethereum
plans to migrate from using PoW to PoS [164], because
it is currently the best alternative for PoW [165]. DPoS is
currently adopted in EOS [166] and few other Blockchain
implementations. There is a strong debate around the level
of decentralization in DPoS and PoW [167]. To show the

FIGURE 9. Smart energy management for sustainable energy and green
smart environments.

Qiu et al. [153] provided trust in SDN Industrial IoT
networks using Blockchain consensus protocols. In their
design, Blockchain collects, synchronizes, and distributes
network views between distributed SDN controllers. To im-
prove the throughput, they used a Dueling Deep Q-Learning
(DDQL) approach to jointly optimize view changes, access
selection, and computational resource allocation. Deep Q-
Learning (DQL) was also used in Distributed Software-
Deﬁned Vehicular Network (DSDVN) to adapt to the variety
of data, network-ﬂow, and vehicle types [154]. To increase
the throughput of a permissioned Blockchain, consensus
schemes were used to reach consensus efﬁciently and se-
curely in DSDVN using DQL. It optimizes compute and
network resources by jointly considering the trust features of
Blockchain nodes to improve the throughput.

Blockchain integration with all those technologies was a
major factor in the deployment of smart environment appli-
cations. Sharma et al. [155], for example, used Blockchain to
allow for decentralized coordination and control for vehicular
networks in smart cities. Moreover, Sharma and Park [156]
integrated Blockchain and SDN to provide a two-layer net-
work architecture that was specially designed for smart cities.
It is composed of core and edge networks, and leverages
the beneﬁts of both centralized and distributed architectures.
Their design supports IoT heterogeneity and provides a scal-
able and secure architecture using edge computing. They
used a memory-hardened PoW scheme to enforce distributed
privacy and security, and to avoid tampering of information
by attackers. Sharma et al. [157] used a private version of
Ethereum to simulate a distributed framework for automotive
industries in smart cities. They proposed a novel miner node

14

SmartEnergy ManagementEbrahim et al.: Blockchain as privacy and security solution for smart environments: A Survey

difference, Li and Palanisamy [167] studied a DPoS-based
cryptocurrency for social media, called Steem [168], and the
PoW-based Bitcoin Blockchain. They showed that Bitcoin is
more decentralized compared to Steem among top miners,
but less decentralized in general due to Bitcoin mining pools.
Consensus algorithms are a major factor in determining
Blockchain performance, and that is why researchers try
to increase the security and lower power consumption of
these algorithms [169], [170]. Even lightweight Blockchain
platforms that are built speciﬁcally for resource-limited IoT
applications have some drawbacks. DAG-based platforms for
example, like IoTA, suffer from double-spending attacks.
Hence, there is always a security vs. performance trade-
off when choosing between different Blockchain platforms
or consensus algorithms. Such trade-off should be carefully
selected to meet the different requirements of different IoT
applications. Pongnumkul et al. [53], for example, studied
the trade-off between choosing the most secure PoW vs.
the fastest PBFT consensus algorithms in Ethereum and
Hyperledger Fabric, respectively.

However, it is sometimes necessary to compare different
Blockchain platforms using factors other than consensus
algorithms. Developers can falsify Blockchain performance,
and attract investors only based on the consensus perfor-
mance. However, choosing a Blockchain platform based
solely on the consensus performance can badly affect its
performance in large scale IoT networks or in smart city
applications. Hence, Zheng et al. [10] argued for Blockchain
testing schemes to help practitioners select Blockchain plat-
forms that ﬁt the requirements of different IoT applications.
They also discussed the drawbacks of mining pools in public
Blockchain implementations, which can cause loss of de-
centralization. Another Blockchain related problem in IoT
applications are Smart Contract bugs. These bugs shorten
the life-cycle of that code and loosen its agility in the ever
changing IoT networks.

Furthermore, using Oracles [171], which are trusted third
party information sources, exposes Blockchain to lose its
inherited security. Oracles provide external data and infor-
mation to Blockchain Smart Contracts to enrich the capabil-
ities of Blockchain applications, including IoT applications.
Oracles query, verify, and authenticate external data sources
to provide trust for such sources. Blockchain should trust
oracles, since they make decisions based on the data they
provide. However, the trust issues of Oracles will directly im-
pact Blockchain security that was meant to work in trustless
environments. Oracles might still suffer from centralization,
collusion, Sybil, and Man-in-the-middle attacks [172]. They
are also possibly exposed to physical attacks on IoT devices
that are usually the source for external Blockchain data. An
example of physical attacks in IoT food or drug supply chain
systems is the displacement of temperature or GPS sensors
that are usually attached on supply chain shipping trucks. The
displacement of IoT devices feeds Blockchain ecosystems
with falsiﬁed information, which causes those systems to
loose their security features, and hence to fail.

51% attacks, cost, regulations, conﬁrmation time, forks,
and scalability are common technical Blockchain-related
problems [173]. Scalability, for example, has been discussed
a lot in literature, and different solutions have been proposed
[64]. In addition, there are also domain-speciﬁc challenges,
such as the challenges for using Blockchain for AI [68],
Security [68], Healthcare [174], Education [175], Product
Traceability [176], E-Voting [73], [74], [177], [178], and IoT
applications. There is a need to reduce Blockchain energy
consumption and operation cost to make it feasible to in-
tegrate with various technologies, including IoT. However,
security, privacy, scalability, and Oracle inherited Blockchain
issues need to be addressed before looking for integration
issues [20]. Finally, real deployment of Blockchain-IoT so-
lutions in smart city prototypes might reveal new issues
compared to what simulation results currently demonstrate.

To focus more on Blockchain-IoT integration challenges,
Makhdoom et al. [14] used a test case for a supply chain
monitoring system. The challenges include the lack of IoT-
centric consensus protocols, IoT-based transaction validation
rules, IoT-oriented Blockchain interfaces, and storage capac-
ity for IoT data. They added other Blockchain-related chal-
lenges, like consensus ﬁnality, resistance to DoS attacks, fault
tolerance, scalability, and transaction volume. The test case
required a secure and synchronized software upgrade scheme
for IoT devices and the underlying Blockchain platform. The
upgrade scheme can ﬁx bugs and protect the system against
new vulnerabilities. In addition, we need to be careful when
integrating SDN and Blockchain technologies to fully beneﬁt
from SDN features for IoT applications. Blockchain is decen-
tralized by nature, whereas SDN controllers are supposed to
be centralized. Moreover, SDN controllers need to update the
ﬂow-rule tables to the forwarding devices in real-time, while
Blockchain consensus works periodically on a longer time
frame.

The challenges brought by integrating Blockchain with
Cloud, Fog, and Edge Computing directly relate to IoT-
Blockchain challenges. That is because these technologies
are mainly meant to support IoT networks. The lack for per-
fectly implemented Blockchain-speciﬁc IoT infrastructures,
and the absence of energy-efﬁcient mining are some of those
challenges [13]. Authentication, adaptability, network secu-
rity, data integrity, veriﬁable computation, and low latency
are requirements for integrating Blockchain with Cloud, Fog,
and specially Edge Computing [16]. Yang et al. [16] iden-
tiﬁed load balancing, task ofﬂoading, resource management
and function integration on heterogeneous platforms as chal-
lenges to be addressed for successful integration. Addressing
all these issues is essential to support next generation appli-
cations in fully automated futuristic smart environments. In
such environments, all these technologies should be smoothly
integrated, ﬂawlessly functioning, and securely handling IoT
data.

15

Ebrahim et al.: Blockchain as privacy and security solution for smart environments: A Survey

X. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
In this paper, we present the strengths of Blockchain beyond
its traditional use for monetary and digital asset trading. We
focus on Blockchain integration with IoT to create a futuristic
view of smart environments. Implementing such autonomous
smart environment architectures will simplify human lives
and increase their effectiveness. We discuss the role of AI,
SDN, Cloud, Fog, and Edge Computing in enhancing the ca-
pabilities of Blockchain-IoT applications, and providing such
automation in smart environments. Blockchain augments IoT
applications with automation, security, privacy and many
other features that are essential for smart environments. We
showed in this work how Blockchain was able to address
a number of issues, limitations, and challenges in all those
technologies.

Table 2 shows the level of technological integration of
some Blockchain-IoT applications and prototypes in the lit-
erature. The table also shows the recent research interest to
integrate more technologies into such systems. Powered by
Blockchain-IoT integration, these prototypes served differ-
ent needs and solved different problems in different smart
applications. To build those systems, some of the authors
had to create their own Blockchain implementation and/or
its consensus algorithm. Speciﬁc application requirements
usually ask for different Blockchain characteristics that are
not usually available in traditional implementations. Hence,
there is a need for a Blockchain implementation with the
possibility to plug in new features when needed by devel-
opers and practitioners. This will allow the industry and
the research community to focus more on developing more
smart applications, and mitigating different technological
limitations.

Figure 10 shows a simpliﬁed architecture for smart en-
vironments using the technologies discussed in this pa-
per. It shows the use of Blockchain to securely share and
store IoT data in trustless environments. In this architecture,
Blockchain can be deployed using Cloud, Fog, or Edge
resources, or even a combination of them. The AI-powered
SDN trafﬁc control can manage the trafﬁc ﬂow of IoT data
in a dynamic smart way. AI can also be used to provide
best pricing for IoT data that needs to be sold in such a
system, like sensor data. It can be also used to provide the
best target to process this data using the Cloud, Fog, or
Edge computing. In addition, private data can be securely
stored in Blockchain, and can be obtained by authentic users
using different encryption and security measures. Blockchain
will work as an access control mechanism for data access,
including IoT data, for IoT devices and their users.

There are a number of challenges and open research
problems that still need to be tackled to provide a smoother
technological integration. A major problem of such integra-
tion is the difﬁculty of testing using physical deployment
in real smart environments in order to reveal hidden issues.
Physical deployment is needed because simulation results
alone are insufﬁcient to demonstrate the performance and
issues in such systems. In addition, creating a general purpose

16

FIGURE 10. Architecture of Smart Envrinoments.

Blockchain platform that can be easily adapted to solve
different problems is of a great importance for the research
community. Creating such a general purpose platform will
remove the burden that is imposed by modifying Blockchain
architectures to meet certain features and requirements.

REFERENCES

[1] U. Ghosh, P. Chatterjee, S. Shetty, and R. Datta, “An sdn-iot-based

framework for future smart cities: Addressing perspective,” 2020.

[2] M. Conoscenti, A. Vetrò, and J. C. De Martin, “Blockchain for the
internet of things: A systematic literature review,” in 2016 IEEE/ACS
13th International Conference of Computer Systems and Applications
(AICCSA), Nov 2016, pp. 1–6.

[3] K. Christidis and M. Devetsikiotis, “Blockchains and smart contracts for
the internet of things,” IEEE Access, vol. 4, pp. 2292–2303, 2016.
[4] A. Reyna, C. Martín, J. Chen, E. Soler, and M. Díaz, “On blockchain and
its integration with IoT. challenges and opportunities,” Future Generation
Computer Systems, vol. 88, pp. 173 – 190, 2018. [Online]. Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167739X17329205

[5] G. S. Ramachandran and B. Krishnamachari, “Blockchain for the
IoT: Opportunities and challenges,” CoRR, vol. abs/1805.02818, 2018.
[Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1805.02818

[6] A. Panarello, N. Tapas, G. Merlino, F. Longo, and A. Puliaﬁto,
“Blockchain and IoT integration: A systematic survey,” Sensors, vol. 18,
no. 8, 2018. [Online]. Available: https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/18/
8/2575

[7] T. M. Fernández-Caramés and P. Fraga-Lamas, “A review on the use of
blockchain for the internet of things,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 32 979–
33 001, 2018.

[8] M. Banerjee, J. Lee, and K.-K. R. Choo, “A blockchain future for
internet of things security: a position paper,” Digital Communications
and Networks, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 149 – 160, 2018. [Online]. Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2352864817302900
[9] H. F. Atlam, A. Alenezi, M. O. Alassaﬁ, and G. Wills, “Blockchain
with internet of things: Beneﬁts, challenges, and future directions,”
International Journal of Intelligent Systems and Applications, vol. 10,
no. 6, pp. 40–48, June 2018. [Online]. Available: https://eprints.soton.ac.
uk/421529/

[10] Z. Zheng, S. Xie, H.-N. Dai, X. Chen, and H. Wang, “Blockchain
challenges and opportunities: A survey,” International Journal of Web and
Grid Services, vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 352–375, 2018.

IoTEnd DevicesBlockchain(Cloud/Fog/EdgeDeployment)Private DataData MarketAI-based SDNtraffic controlOptimizecostanddelay…IoT dataPrivate dataData for saleAI-based data pricingAI-based computations pricingSmart EnvironmentsEbrahim et al.: Blockchain as privacy and security solution for smart environments: A Survey

TABLE 2. Technological integration of Cloud, Edge, Fog, SDN, and AI technologies into Blockchain-IoT prototypes.

Paper Year Integration with

Platform

Functionality

Mining

Type

Transactions

g
o
F

/
e
g
d
E

d
u
o
l
C

N
D
S

I

A

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

PoW

MultiChain

PoW
PoW
PoW
PoW

2018 (cid:51) (cid:51)
(cid:51)
2018
2018 (cid:51)
2018

Ethereum
Wireless BC7
Bitcoin6
Fabric

Public
Public
Public
Private
Public
Public
Private
Public
Public

Data Market
Data Market
Decentralized Data Management

2014
2015 (cid:51)
2015
2016 (cid:51)
2016 (cid:51)
2017
2017 (cid:51)
2017
2017
2017
2017

UTXOs
UTXOs & Scripts
Data & Queries
Smart Contracts
IoT Data
Digital Signatures
IoT Data
Smart Contracts
Smart Contracts

Bitcoin
Bitcoin
Bitcoin6
Ethereum D2D Communication & Marketplace
Bitcoin6
NameCoin
Bitcoin6
Ethereum
Ethereum

[97]
[82]+
[179]
[87]
[92]+
[98]
[94]+
[88]
[112]
[89]+
[96]
[133]+ 2018 (cid:51) (cid:51) (cid:51)
[120]
[117]
[139]
(cid:51) (cid:51)
[154]
[134]+ 2018 (cid:51) (cid:51) (cid:51)
(cid:51) (cid:51)
[156]+ 2018
2018 (cid:51) (cid:51)
[116]
[152]+ 2019 (cid:51) (cid:51)
2019
[153]
2019
[138]
2019
[157]
2019 (cid:51) (cid:51)
[118]
2019 (cid:51) (cid:51)
[119]
2020 (cid:51) (cid:51) (cid:51)
[131]
[132]+ 2020 (cid:51) (cid:51) (cid:51)
2020 (cid:51)
[109]
2020 (cid:51) (cid:51) (cid:51)
[121]
(cid:51)
[180]
2020
1Contract execution beside monetary and data transactions. 2Proof-of-Schedule. 3Proof-of-Service. 4Aardvark, RBFT, & PBFT. 5Proof-of-Wireless-Resources.
6A different Bitcoin implementation based on the same concepts and architecture. 7A simulation for a wireless Blockchain implementation.
+The design or prototype has a hierarchical or multilayer architecture. Blank Cells: Information was not provided in the corresponding paper.

Smart Homes
Privacy-Aware PKI
Smart Homes
D2D Communication
D2D Communication
Decentralized SDN (DSDN)
D2D Marketplace
Distributed Cloud
Authentication
Ofﬂoading PoW Computations
Wireless Network Virtualization
Vehicular Networks
DSDN for Edge Computing
Smart Cities
Edge Computing Mining
Intelligent Wireless Networks
DSDN Consensus
Wireless Network Virtualization
Supply Chain Management
Ofﬂoading PoW Computations
Data Privacy and Integrity
Securing Trafﬁc Measurements
Distributed Network Security
Secure Cloud Scheduler
Secure Fog Computing
DSDN Consensus

IoT Data Hashes
IoT Data
Network Data
Trafﬁc/Control Data
Network Data
Smart Contracts1
Random Data
IoT Data
Network Statistics
IoT & Network Data
Task Scheduling Info
Access Control Lists
Trafﬁc/Control Data

PoW
PoW
PoW
Round Robin
PoSer3
PoW
PoW
PoWR5
PBFT
PoW
PoW
PoW
PBFT
PBFT

Private
Private
Consortium
Private
Public
Private
Private

Digital Assets
Smart Contracts1
Smart Contracts

Bitcoin6
Ethereum
Ethereum
Bitcoin6

PoSch2
Cooperative
BFT4

Network Data
Smart Contracts1

Their Own
Their Own
Bitcoin6

Private
Private
Public

Ethereum
Ethereum

PoW
PoW
PoW

Public
Private

(cid:51) (cid:51)
(cid:51) (cid:51)

Private

Public

(cid:51)
(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

[11] M. S. Ali, M. Vecchio, M. Pincheira, K. Dolui, F. Antonelli, and M. H.
Rehmani, “Applications of blockchains in the internet of things: A com-
prehensive survey,” IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials, vol. 21,
no. 2, pp. 1676–1717, Secondquarter 2019.

[12] H. Dai, Z. Zheng, and Y. Zhang, “Blockchain for internet of things:
A survey,” CoRR, vol. abs/1906.00245, 2019. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1906.00245

[13] M. A. Ferrag, M. Derdour, M. Mukherjee, A. Derhab, L. Maglaras, and
H. Janicke, “Blockchain technologies for the internet of things: Research
issues and challenges,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 6, no. 2, pp.
2188–2204, 2019.

[14] I. Makhdoom, M. Abolhasan, H. Abbas, and W. Ni, “Blockchain’s
adoption in iot: The challenges, and a way forward,” Journal of
Network and Computer Applications, vol. 125, pp. 251 – 279,
2019. [Online]. Available: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S1084804518303473

[15] K. Salah, M. H. U. Rehman, N. Nizamuddin, and A. Al-Fuqaha,
“Blockchain for AI: Review and open research challenges,” IEEE Access,
vol. 7, pp. 10 127–10 149, 2019.

[16] R. Yang, F. R. Yu, P. Si, Z. Yang, and Y. Zhang, “Integrated blockchain
and edge computing systems: A survey, some research issues and chal-
lenges,” IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials, vol. 21, no. 2, pp.
1508–1532, 2019.

[17] L. Lao, Z. Li, S. Hou, B. Xiao, S. Guo, and Y. Yang, “A survey of IoT
applications in blockchain systems: Architecture, consensus, and trafﬁc
modeling,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 53, no. 1, Feb. 2020. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3372136

networks: A survey,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 9146–9156, 2020.
[19] W. LI, W. MENG, Z. LIU, and M.-H. AU, “Towards blockchain-based
software-deﬁned networking: Security challenges and solutions,” IEICE
Transactions on Information and Systems, vol. E103.D, no. 2, pp. 196–
203, 2020.

[20] C. Luo, L. Xu, D. Li, and W. Wu, “Edge computing integrated
with blockchain technologies,” in Complexity and Approximation: In
Memory of Ker-I Ko, D.-Z. Du and J. Wang, Eds. Cham: Springer
International Publishing, 2020, pp. 268–288.
[Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-41672-0_17

[21] S. Xie, Z. Zheng, W. Chen, J. Wu, H.-N. Dai, and M. Imran,
“Blockchain for cloud exchange: A survey,” Computers and Electrical
Engineering, vol. 81, p. 106526, 2020.
[Online]. Available: http:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0045790618332750
[22] B. K. Mohanta, D. Jena, U. Satapathy, and S. Patnaik, “Survey on
IoT security: Challenges and solution using machine learning, artiﬁcial
intelligence and blockchain technology,” Internet of Things, vol. 11,
p. 100227, 2020. [Online]. Available: http://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S2542660520300603

[23] V. Chamola, V. Hassija, V. Gupta, and M. Guizani, “A comprehensive re-
view of the covid-19 pandemic and the role of iot, drones, ai, blockchain,
and 5g in managing its impact,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 90 225–90 265,
2020.

[24] B. L. R. Stojkoska and K. V. Trivodaliev, “A review of internet of
things for smart home: Challenges and solutions,” Journal of Cleaner
Production, vol. 140, pp. 1454 – 1464, 2017. [Online]. Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S095965261631589X

[18] T. Alharbi, “Deployment of blockchain technology in software deﬁned

[25] B. Bhushan, A. Khamparia, K. M. Sagayam, S. K. Sharma,

17

Ebrahim et al.: Blockchain as privacy and security solution for smart environments: A Survey

M. A. Ahad, and N. C. Debnath, “Blockchain for smart cities:
integration trends and future research
A review of architectures,
directions,” Sustainable Cities and Society, vol. 61, p. 102360,
2020. [Online]. Available: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S2210670720305813

[26] M. A. Al-Garadi, A. Mohamed, A. Al-Ali, X. Du, I. Ali, and M. Guizani,
“A survey of machine and deep learning methods for internet of things
(iot) security,” IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials, pp. 1–1, 2020.
[27] S. Bera, S. Misra, and A. V. Vasilakos, “Software-deﬁned networking for
internet of things: A survey,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 4,
no. 6, pp. 1994–2008, Dec 2017.

[28] I. Riabi, H. K. B. Ayed, and L. A. Saidane, “A survey on blockchain based
access control for internet of things,” in 2019 15th International Wireless
Communications Mobile Computing Conference (IWCMC), 2019, pp.
502–507.

[29] A. R. Garcia, AI, IoT, Big Data, and Technologies in Digital Economy
with Blockchain at Sustainable Work Satisfaction to Smart Mankind: Ac-
cess to 6th Dimension of Human Rights. Cham: Springer International
Publishing, 2020, pp. 83–131.

[30] A. Ekramifard, H. Amintoosi, A. H. Seno, A. Dehghantanha, and R. M.
Parizi, A Systematic Literature Review of Integration of Blockchain and
Artiﬁcial Intelligence. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2020,
pp. 147–160.

[31] S. Akter, K. Michael, M. R. Uddin, G. McCarthy, and M. Rahman,
“Transforming business using digital innovations: the application of
ai, blockchain, cloud and data analytics,” Annals of Operations
Research, May 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10479-020-03620-w

[32] H. Baniata and A. Kertesz, “A survey on blockchain-fog integration

approaches,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 102 657–102 668, 2020.

[33] Y. Hajjaji, W. Boulila, I. R. Farah, I. Romdhani, and A. Hussain, “Big data
and iot-based applications in smart environments: A systematic review,”
Computer Science Review, vol. 39, p. 100318, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1574013720304184

[34] D. M. El-Din, A. E. Hassanein, and E. E. Hassanien, Smart
Environments Concepts, Applications, and Challenges. Cham: Springer
International Publishing, 2021, pp. 493–519.
[Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-59338-4_24

[35] H. S. Woods, “Smart homes: domestic futurity as infrastructure,”
Cultural Studies, vol. 0, no. 0, pp. 1–24, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1080/09502386.2021.1895254

[36] A. Molnar, “Smart cities education: An insight into existing drawbacks,”
Telematics and Informatics, vol. 57, p. 101509, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0736585320301684

[37] U. Majeed, L. U. Khan,

I. Yaqoob, S. A. Kazmi, K. Salah,
iot-based smart cities: Recent
and C. S. Hong, “Blockchain for
advances, requirements, and future challenges,” Journal of Network and
Computer Applications, vol. 181, p. 103007, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1084804521000345

[38] T. Roy, A. Tariq, and S. Dey, “A socio-technical approach for resilient
connected transportation systems in smart cities,” IEEE Transactions on
Intelligent Transportation Systems, pp. 1–10, 2021.

[39] B. Xu and G. Thakur, “Introduction to the special

issue on
smart transportation,” GeoInformatica, Mar 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10707-021-00432-3

[40] X.-F. Shao, W. Liu, Y. Li, H. R. Chaudhry, and X.-G. Yue, “Multistage
implementation framework for smart supply chain management under
industry 4.0,” Technological Forecasting and Social Change, vol. 162,
p. 120354, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S004016252031180X

[41] J. Lee, Y. C. Lee, and J. T. Kim, “Migration from the traditional
to the smart factory in the die-casting industry: Novel process data
acquisition and fault detection based on artiﬁcial neural network,”
Journal of Materials Processing Technology, vol. 290, p. 116972, 2021.
[Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0924013620303939

[42] M. Pech, J. Vrchota, and J. Bednáˇr, “Predictive maintenance and
intelligent sensors in smart factory: Review,” Sensors, vol. 21, no. 4,
2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/21/4/1470
[43] Z. Guan, X. Lu, W. Yang, L. Wu, N. Wang, and Z. Zhang,
“Achieving efﬁcient and privacy-preserving energy trading based
on blockchain and abe in smart grid,” Journal of Parallel and
Distributed Computing, vol. 147, pp. 34–45, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0743731520303609

18

[44] J. Sahoo and K. Barrett, “Internet of things (iot) application model for

smart farming,” 2021.

[45] E. M. Ouaﬁq, A. Elrharras, A. Mehdary, A. Chehri, R. Saadane, and
M. Wahbi, “Iot in smart farming analytics, big data based architecture,”
in Human Centred Intelligent Systems, A. Zimmermann, R. J. Howlett,
and L. C. Jain, Eds. Singapore: Springer Singapore, 2021, pp. 269–279.
[46] N. G. Rezk, E. E.-D. Hemdan, A.-F. Attia, A. El-Sayed, and M. A.
El-Rashidy, “An efﬁcient
farming system using
machine learning algorithms,” Multimedia Tools and Applications,
vol. 80, no. 1, pp. 773–797, Jan 2021. [Online]. Available: https:
//doi.org/10.1007/s11042-020-09740-6

iot based smart

[47] G. Madaan, B. Bhushan, and R. Kumar, Blockchain-Based Cyberthreat
Mitigation Systems for Smart Vehicles and Industrial Automation.
Singapore: Springer Singapore, 2021, pp. 13–32. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-15-7965-3_2

[48] S. Nakamoto et al., “Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system,”

2008. [Online]. Available: https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf

[49] C. Esposito, M. Ficco,

and B. B. Gupta,

“Blockchain-based
authentication and authorization for smart city applications,” Information
Processing & Management, vol. 58, no. 2, p. 102468, 2021.
[Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0306457320309584

[50] C. Oham, R. A. Michelin, R. Jurdak, S. S. Kanhere, and S. Jha,
“B-ferl: Blockchain based framework for securing smart vehicles,”
Information Processing & Management, vol. 58, no. 1, p. 102426, 2021.
[Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0306457320309183

[51] A. Hasankhani, S. Mehdi Hakimi, M. Bisheh-Niasar, M. Shaﬁe-khah,
and H. Asadolahi, “Blockchain technology in the future smart grids:
A comprehensive review and frameworks,” International Journal of
Electrical Power & Energy Systems, vol. 129, p. 106811, 2021.
[Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S014206152100051X

[52] C. Cachin, “Architecture of the hyperledger blockchain fabric,” in Work-
shop on Distributed Cryptocurrencies and Consensus Ledgers, vol. 310.
IBM Research, Zurich, 2016.

[53] S. Pongnumkul, C. Siripanpornchana, and S. Thajchayapong, “Perfor-
mance analysis of private blockchain platforms in varying workloads,”
in 2017 26th International Conference on Computer Communication and
Networks (ICCCN), July 2017, pp. 1–6.

[54] D. Larimer, “Delegated proof-of-stake (dpos),” Bitshare whitepaper,

2014.

[55] M. Castro, B. Liskov et al., “Practical byzantine fault tolerance,” in OSDI,

vol. 99, 1999, pp. 173–186.

[56] D. Kempe and J. Kleinberg, “Protocols and impossibility results for
gossip-based communication mechanisms,” in The 43rd Annual IEEE
Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, 2002. Proceedings.,
Nov 2002, pp. 471–480.

[57] P. Maymounkov and D. Mazières, “Kademlia: A peer-to-peer information
system based on the xor metric,” in Peer-to-Peer Systems, P. Druschel,
F. Kaashoek, and A. Rowstron, Eds. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, 2002, pp. 53–65.

[58] E. Ben-Sasson, A. Chiesa, D. Genkin, E. Tromer, and M. Virza, “Snarks
for c: Verifying program executions succinctly and in zero knowledge,”
in Advances in Cryptology – CRYPTO 2013, R. Canetti and J. A. Garay,
Eds. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2013, pp. 90–108.
[59] W. Ou, M. Deng, and E. Luo, “A decentralized and anonymous data
transaction scheme based on blockchain and zero-knowledge proof in
vehicle networking (workshop paper),” in Collaborative Computing:
Networking, Applications and Worksharing, X. Wang, H. Gao, M. Iqbal,
and G. Min, Eds. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2019, pp.
712–726.

[60] Z. Peng, H. Wu, B. Xiao, and S. Guo, “Vql: Providing query efﬁciency
and data authenticity in blockchain systems,” in 2019 IEEE 35th Inter-
national Conference on Data Engineering Workshops (ICDEW), April
2019, pp. 1–6.

[61] V. Buterin et al., “A next-generation smart contract and decentralized

application platform,” white paper, vol. 3, no. 37, 2014.

[62] N. Szabo, “Smart contracts,” 1994. [Online]. Available: http://www.

fon.hum.uva.nl/rob/Courses/InformationInSpeech/CDROM/Literature/
LOTwinterschool2006/szabo.best.vwh.net/smart.contracts.html

[63] G. Wood et al., “Ethereum: A secure decentralised generalised transac-
tion ledger,” Ethereum project yellow paper, vol. 151, no. 2014, pp. 1–32,
2014.

Ebrahim et al.: Blockchain as privacy and security solution for smart environments: A Survey

[64] A. Haﬁd, A. S. Haﬁd, and M. Samih, “Scaling blockchains: A compre-
hensive survey,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 125 244–125 262, 2020.
[65] A. Biryukov, D. Khovratovich, and I. Pustogarov, “Deanonymisation
of clients in bitcoin p2p network,” in Proceedings of the 2014 ACM
SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security, ser.
CCS ’14. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery,
2014, p. 15–29. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/2660267.
2660379

[66] S. King and S. Nadal, “Ppcoin: Peer-to-peer crypto-currency with proof-

of-stake,” self-published paper, vol. 19, August 2012.

[67] B. W. Akins, J. L. Chapman, and J. M. Gordon, “A whole new world: In-
come tax considerations of the bitcoin economy,” Pittsburgh Tax Review,
vol. 12, p. 25, 2014-2015.

[68] W. Meng, E. W. Tischhauser, Q. Wang, Y. Wang, and J. Han, “When in-
trusion detection meets blockchain technology: A review,” IEEE Access,
vol. 6, pp. 10 179–10 188, 2018.

[69] C. Pirtle and J. Ehrenfeld, “Blockchain for healthcare: The next
generation of medical records?” Journal of Medical Systems, vol. 42,
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/
no. 9, p. 172, 2018.
s10916-018-1025-3

[70] A. Ekblaw, A. Azaria, J. D. Halamka, and A. Lippman, “A case study
for blockchain in healthcare: “MedRec” prototype for electronic health
records and medical research data,” in Proceedings of IEEE Open and
Big Data Conference, vol. 13.

IEEE, 2016, p. 13.

[71] C. Noyes, “Bitav: Fast anti-malware by distributed blockchain consensus
and feedforward scanning,” CoRR, vol. abs/1601.01405, 2016. [Online].
Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1601.01405

[72] Q. Lu and X. Xu, “Adaptable blockchain-based systems: A case study for
product traceability,” IEEE Software, vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 21–27, November
2017.

[73] M. Seifelnasr, H. S. Galal, and A. M. Youssef, “Scalable open-vote
network on ethereum,” Cryptology ePrint Archive, Report 2020/033,
2020. [Online]. Available: https://eprint.iacr.org/2020/033

[74] X. Yang, X. Yi, S. Nepal, and F. Han, “Decentralized voting: A
self-tallying voting system using a smart contract on the ethereum
blockchain,” in Web Information Systems Engineering – WISE 2018,
H. Hacid, W. Cellary, H. Wang, H.-Y. Paik, and R. Zhou, Eds. Cham:
Springer International Publishing, 2018, pp. 18–35.

[75] D. Khoury, E. F. Kfoury, A. Kassem, and H. Harb, “Decentralized voting
platform based on ethereum blockchain,” in 2018 IEEE International
Multidisciplinary Conference on Engineering Technology (IMCET), Nov
2018, pp. 1–6.

[76] F. Þ. Hjálmarsson, G. K. Hreiðarsson, M. Hamdaqa, and G. Hjálmtýsson,
“Blockchain-based e-voting system,” in 2018 IEEE 11th International
Conference on Cloud Computing (CLOUD), July 2018, pp. 983–986.

[77] M. Sharples and J. Domingue, “The blockchain and kudos: A distributed
system for educational record, reputation and reward,” in Adaptive and
Adaptable Learning, K. Verbert, M. Sharples, and T. Klobuˇcar, Eds.
Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2016, pp. 490–496.

[78] O. Novo, “Blockchain meets iot: An architecture for scalable access
management in iot,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 5, no. 2, pp.
1184–1195, 2018.

[79] A. Whitmore, A. Agarwal, and L. Da Xu, “The internet of things–
topics and trends,” Information Systems Frontiers,
[Online]. Available: https:

a survey of
vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 261–274, 2015.
//doi.org/10.1007/s10796-014-9489-2

[80] Zhihong Yang, Yingzhao Yue, Yu Yang, Yufeng Peng, Xiaobo Wang,
and Wenji Liu, “Study and application on the architecture and key
technologies for IOT,” in 2011 International Conference on Multimedia
Technology, July 2011, pp. 747–751.

[81] J. Xie and S. M. Shugan, “Electronic tickets, smart cards, and online pre-
payments: When and how to advance sell,” Marketing Science, vol. 20,
no. 3, pp. 219–243, 2001.

[82] Y. Zhang and J. Wen, “An IoT electric business model based on the pro-
tocol of bitcoin,” in 2015 18th International Conference on Intelligence
in Next Generation Networks, Feb 2015, pp. 184–191.

[83] Y. Zhang and J. Wen, “The IoT electric business model: Using blockchain
technology for the internet of things,” Peer-to-Peer Networking and
Applications, vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 983–994, 2017. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12083-016-0456-1

[84] D. Sonstebo, S. Ivancheglo, D. Schiener, and D. S. Popov, “IOTA,” 2015.
[Online]. Available: https://www.iota.org/get-started/what-is-iota
[85] B. Shabandri and P. Maheshwari, “Enhancing iot security and privacy us-
ing distributed ledgers with iota and the tangle,” in 2019 6th International

Conference on Signal Processing and Integrated Networks (SPIN), 2019,
pp. 1069–1075.

[86] S. Panikkar, S. Nair, P. Brody, and V. Pureswaran, “ADEPT: An IoT Prac-
titioner Perspective,” 2015. [Online]. Available: https://www.coindesk.
com/ibm-reveals-proof-concept-blockchain-powered-internet-things
[87] A. Bahga and V. K. Madisetti, “Blockchain platform for industrial
internet of things,” Journal of Software Engineering and Applications,
vol. 9, no. 10, pp. 533–546, 2016.

[88] S. Huh, S. Cho, and S. Kim, “Managing iot devices using blockchain
platform,” in 2017 19th International Conference on Advanced Commu-
nication Technology (ICACT), Feb 2017, pp. 464–467.

[89] P. K. Sharma, S. Singh, Y. Jeong, and J. H. Park, “Distblocknet: A dis-
tributed blockchains-based secure SDN architecture for IoT networks,”
IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 55, no. 9, pp. 78–85, Sep. 2017.

[90] G. Ateniese, M. T. Chiaramonte, D. Treat, B. Magri, and D. Venturi,

“Hybrid blockchain,” May 28 2019, uS Patent 10,305,875.

[91] M. Samaniego and R. Deters, “Blockchain as a service for iot,” in
2016 IEEE International Conference on Internet of Things (iThings) and
IEEE Green Computing and Communications (GreenCom) and IEEE
Cyber, Physical and Social Computing (CPSCom) and IEEE Smart Data
(SmartData), Dec 2016, pp. 433–436.

[92] A. Dorri, S. S. Kanhere, and R. Jurdak, “Blockchain in internet of things:

Challenges and solutions,” 2016.

[93] L. D. Xu, W. He, and S. Li, “Internet of things in industries: A survey,”
IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 2233–
2243, Nov 2014.

[94] A. Dorri, S. S. Kanhere, R. Jurdak, and P. Gauravaram, “Blockchain for
iot security and privacy: The case study of a smart home,” in 2017 IEEE
International Conference on Pervasive Computing and Communications
Workshops (PerCom Workshops), March 2017, pp. 618–623.

[95] A. Dorri, S. S. Kanhere, and R. Jurdak, “Towards an optimized
blockchain for iot,” in 2017 IEEE/ACM Second International Conference
on Internet-of-Things Design and Implementation (IoTDI), 2017, pp.
173–178.

[96] J. J. Sikorski, J. Haughton, and M. Kraft, “Blockchain technology
in the chemical
industry: Machine-to-machine electricity market,”
Applied Energy, vol. 195, pp. 234 – 246, 2017. [Online]. Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0306261917302672

[97] D. Wörner and T. von Bomhard, “When your sensor earns money:
Exchanging data for cash with bitcoin,” in Proceedings of the 2014 ACM
International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing:
Adjunct Publication, ser. UbiComp ’14 Adjunct. New York, NY, USA:
Association for Computing Machinery, 2014, p. 295–298. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/2638728.2638786

[98] L. Axon. and M. Goldsmith., “Pb-pki: A privacy-aware blockchain-
based pki,” in Proceedings of the 14th International Joint Conference
on e-Business and Telecommunications - Volume 4: SECRYPT, (ICETE
2017), INSTICC. SciTePress, 2017, pp. 311–318.

[99] C. Fromknecht, D. Velicanu, and S. Yakoubov, “A decentralized
public key infrastructure with identity retention.” IACR Cryptol.
ePrint Arch., vol. 2014, p. 803, 2014. [Online]. Available: https:
//allquantor.at/blockchainbib/pdf/fromknecht2014decentralized.pdf
[100] H. Shrobe, D. L. Shrier, and A. Pentland, CHAPTER 15 Enigma:
Decentralized Computation Platform with Guaranteed Privacy. MITP,
2018, pp. 425–454.
[Online]. Available: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/
document/8333139

[101] Y. Hajjaji, W. Boulila, I. R. Farah, I. Romdhani, and A. Hussain, “Big data
and iot-based applications in smart environments: A systematic review,”
Computer Science Review, vol. 39, p. 100318, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1574013720304184

[102] M. Kumar, K. Dubey, and R. Pandey, “Evolution of emerging com-
puting paradigm cloud to fog: Applications, limitations and research
challenges,” in 2021 11th International Conference on Cloud Computing,
Data Science Engineering (Conﬂuence), 2021, pp. 257–261.

[103] J. Vijaykumar, P. Rajkumar, and S. Rakoth Kandan, “Fog computing
based secured mobile cloud for cumulative integrity in smart
environment and internet of things,” Materials Today: Proceedings, 2021.
[Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S2214785320408521

[104] Z. Lv, L. Qiao, M. S. Hossain, and B. J. Choi, “Analysis of using
blockchain to protect the privacy of drone big data,” IEEE Network,
vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 44–49, 2021.

19

Ebrahim et al.: Blockchain as privacy and security solution for smart environments: A Survey

[105] S. Zhang, S. Zhang, X. Chen, and X. Huo, “Cloud computing research
and development trend,” in 2010 Second International Conference on
Future Networks, Jan 2010, pp. 93–97.

[106] Y. Jadeja and K. Modi, “Cloud computing - concepts, architecture and
challenges,” in 2012 International Conference on Computing, Electronics
and Electrical Technologies (ICCEET), March 2012, pp. 877–880.
[107] M. Zhou, R. Zhang, D. Zeng, and W. Qian, “Services in the cloud
computing era: A survey,” in 2010 4th International Universal Communi-
cation Symposium, Oct 2010, pp. 40–46.

[108] W. Ma and J. Zhang, “The survey and research on application of cloud
computing,” in 2012 7th International Conference on Computer Science
Education (ICCSE), July 2012, pp. 203–206.

[109] A. Wilczy´nski and J. Kołodziej, “Modelling and simulation of
security-aware task scheduling in cloud computing based on blockchain
technology,” Simulation Modelling Practice and Theory, vol. 99,
p. 102038, 2020. [Online]. Available: http://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S1569190X19301698

[110] C. Chen, M. Lin, and C. Liu, “Edge computing gateway of the industrial
internet of things using multiple collaborative microcontrollers,” IEEE
Network, vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 24–32, Jan 2018.

[111] S. Jeong, O. Simeone, and J. Kang, “Mobile edge computing via a UAV-
mounted cloudlet: Optimization of bit allocation and path planning,”
IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 67, no. 3, pp. 2049–
2063, March 2018.

[112] A. Kapitonov, S. Lonshakov, A. Krupenkin, and I. Berman, “Blockchain-
based protocol of autonomous business activity for multi-agent systems
consisting of UAVs,” in 2017 Workshop on Research, Education and
Development of Unmanned Aerial Systems (RED-UAS), Oct 2017, pp.
84–89.

[113] A. Kumar, A. Kundu, C. A. Pickover, and K. Weldemariam, “Un-
manned aerial vehicle data management,” Sep. 20 2018, uS Patent App.
15/463,147.

[114] M. Aazam and E. Huh, “Fog computing and smart gateway based
communication for cloud of things,” in 2014 International Conference
on Future Internet of Things and Cloud, Aug 2014, pp. 464–470.
[115] N. Abbas, Y. Zhang, A. Taherkordi, and T. Skeie, “Mobile edge com-
puting: A survey,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 5, no. 1, pp.
450–465, Feb 2018.

[116] Z. Xiong, Y. Zhang, D. Niyato, P. Wang, and Z. Han, “When mobile
blockchain meets edge computing,” IEEE Communications Magazine,
vol. 56, no. 8, pp. 33–39, August 2018.

[117] M. Liu, F. R. Yu, Y. Teng, V. C. M. Leung, and M. Song, “Computation
ofﬂoading and content caching in wireless blockchain networks with
mobile edge computing,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology,
vol. 67, no. 11, pp. 11 008–11 021, Nov 2018.

[118] Z. Xiong, S. Feng, W. Wang, D. Niyato, P. Wang, and Z. Han, “Cloud/fog
computing resource management and pricing for blockchain networks,”
IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 4585–4600, June 2019.
[119] S. Tuli, R. Mahmud, S. Tuli, and R. Buyya, “Fogbus: A blockchain-based
lightweight framework for edge and fog computing,” Journal of Systems
and Software, vol. 154, pp. 22 – 36, 2019. [Online]. Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0164121219300822

[120] R. Almadhoun, M. Kadadha, M. Alhemeiri, M. Alshehhi, and K. Salah,
“A user authentication scheme of iot devices using blockchain-enabled
fog nodes,” in 2018 IEEE/ACS 15th International Conference on Com-
puter Systems and Applications (AICCSA), Oct 2018, pp. 1–8.

[121] D. Wu and N. Ansari, “A cooperative computing strategy for blockchain-
secured fog computing,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, pp. 1–1, 2020.
[122] S. L. Aljohani and M. J. F. Alenazi, “Mpresisdn: Multipath resilient
routing scheme for sdn-enabled smart cities networks,” Applied
Sciences, vol. 11, no. 4, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.mdpi.
com/2076-3417/11/4/1900

[123] V. Balasubramanian, M. Aloqaily, and M. Reisslein, “An sdn architecture
for
iot,” Computer Networks, vol. 186,
p. 107739, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S1389128620313256

time sensitive industrial

[124] A. J. Kadhim and J. I. Naser, “Proactive load balancing mechanism
for fog computing supported by parked vehicles in iov-sdn,” China
Communications, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 271–289, 2021.

[125] L.-A. Phan, D.-T. Nguyen, M. Lee, D.-H. Park, and T. Kim,
“Dynamic fog-to-fog ofﬂoading in sdn-based fog computing systems,”
Future Generation Computer Systems, vol. 117, pp. 486–497, 2021.
[Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0167739X20330831

20

[126] A. Rahman, M. J. Islam, A. Montieri, M. K. Nasir, M. M. Reza, S. S.
Band, A. Pescape, M. Hasan, M. Sookhak, and A. Mosavi, “Smartblock-
sdn: An optimized blockchain-sdn framework for resource management
in iot,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 28 361–28 376, 2021.

[127] N. McKeown, T. Anderson, H. Balakrishnan, G. Parulkar, L. Peterson,
J. Rexford, S. Shenker, and J. Turner, “Openﬂow: Enabling innovation
in campus networks,” SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. Rev., vol. 38,
no. 2, p. 69–74, Mar. 2008. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/
1355734.1355746

[128] S. Badotra and S. N. Panda, “Software-deﬁned networking: A novel
approach to networks,” in Handbook of Computer Networks and
Cyber Security: Principles and Paradigms, B. B. Gupta, G. M.
Cham: Springer
Perez, D. P. Agrawal, and D. Gupta, Eds.
International Publishing, 2020, pp. 313–339.
[Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-22277-2_13

[129] Y. Jararweh, M. Al-Ayyoub, A. Darabseh, E. Benkhelifa, M. Vouk,
and A. Rindos, “SDIoT: a software deﬁned based internet of
things framework,” Journal of Ambient Intelligence and Humanized
Computing, vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 453–461, 2015. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12652-015-0290-y

[130] K. Kalkan and S. Zeadally, “Securing internet of things with software
deﬁned networking,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 56, no. 9,
pp. 186–192, Sep. 2018.

[131] L. Huo, D.

Jiang, S. Qi, and L. Miao, “A blockchain-based
security trafﬁc measurement approach to software deﬁned networking,”
Mobile Networks and Applications, 2020. [Online]. Available: https:
//doi.org/10.1007/s11036-019-01420-6

[132] D. V. Medhane, A. K. Sangaiah, M. S. Hossain, G. Muhammad, and
J. Wang, “Blockchain-enabled distributed security framework for next
generation iot: An edge-cloud and software deﬁned network integrated
approach,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, pp. 1–1, 2020.

[133] P. K. Sharma, M. Chen, and J. H. Park, “A software deﬁned fog node
based distributed blockchain cloud architecture for iot,” IEEE Access,
vol. 6, pp. 115–124, 2018.

[134] P. K. Sharma, S. Rathore, Y. Jeong, and J. H. Park, “SoftEdgeNet:
SDN based energy-efﬁcient distributed network architecture for edge
computing,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 56, no. 12, pp. 104–
111, December 2018.

[135] I. D. Alvarenga, G. A. F. Rebello, and O. C. M. B. Duarte, “Securing
conﬁguration management and migration of virtual network functions
using blockchain,” in NOMS 2018 - 2018 IEEE/IFIP Network Operations
and Management Symposium, April 2018, pp. 1–9.

[136] T. Wood, K. K. Ramakrishnan, J. Hwang, G. Liu, and W. Zhang, “Toward
a software-based network: integrating software deﬁned networking and
network function virtualization,” IEEE Network, vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 36–
41, May 2015.

[137] D. Schwartz, N. Youngs, A. Britto et al., “The ripple protocol consensus

algorithm,” Ripple Labs Inc White Paper, vol. 5, no. 8, 2014.

[138] D. B. Rawat, “Fusion of software deﬁned networking, edge computing,
and blockchain technology for wireless network virtualization,” IEEE
Communications Magazine, vol. 57, no. 10, pp. 50–55, 2019.

[139] D. B. Rawat and A. Alshaikhi, “Leveraging distributed blockchain-based
scheme for wireless network virtualization with security and qos con-
straints,” in 2018 International Conference on Computing, Networking
and Communications (ICNC), 2018, pp. 332–336.

[140] R. P. França, A. C. B. Monteiro, R. Arthur, and Y.

Iano, An
Overview of the Machine Learning Applied in Smart Cities. Cham:
Springer International Publishing, 2021, pp. 91–111. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-60922-1_5

[141] K. Rajkumar, M. Ramachandran, F. Al-Turjman, and R. Patan, “A
reinforcement learning optimization for future smart cities using software
deﬁned networking,” International Journal of Machine Learning and
Cybernetics, Jan 2021. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/
s13042-020-01245-w

[142] S. S. Panda and D. Jena, “Decentralizing ai using blockchain technology
for secure decision making,” in Advances in Machine Learning and
Computational Intelligence, S. Patnaik, X.-S. Yang, and I. K. Sethi, Eds.
Singapore: Springer Singapore, 2021, pp. 687–694.

[143] W. Serrano, “The blockchain random neural network for cybersecure
iot and 5g infrastructure in smart cities,” Journal of Network and
Computer Applications, vol. 175, p. 102909, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1084804520303696

[144] R. Kumar, W. Wang, J. Kumar, T. Yang, A. Khan, W. Ali, and
I. Ali, “An integration of blockchain and ai for secure data sharing

Ebrahim et al.: Blockchain as privacy and security solution for smart environments: A Survey

and detection of ct images for the hospitals,” Computerized Medical
Imaging and Graphics, vol. 87, p. 101812, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0895611120301075

Journal of Research and Development, vol. 63, no. 2/3, pp. 4:1–4:12,
2019.

[162] C. S. Wright and S. Savanah, “Operating system for blockchain iot

[145] S. Aich, N. K. Sinai, S. Kumar, M. Ali, Y. R. Choi, M. I. Joo, and
H. C. Kim, “Protecting personal healthcare record using blockchain
federated learning technologies,” in 2021 23rd International Conference
on Advanced Communication Technology (ICACT), 2021, pp. 109–112.
[146] F. Jamil, N. Iqbal, Imran, S. Ahmad, and D. Kim, “Peer-to-peer energy
trading mechanism based on blockchain and machine learning for sus-
tainable electrical power supply in smart grid,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp.
39 193–39 217, 2021.

[147] Z. Shahbazi and Y.-C. Byun, “Integration of blockchain, iot and machine
learning for multistage quality control and enhancing security in smart
manufacturing,” Sensors, vol. 21, no. 4, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/21/4/1467

[148] D. Nguyen, M. Ding, P. N. Pathirana, and A. Seneviratne, “Blockchain
and ai-based solutions to combat coronavirus (covid-19)-like epidemics:
A survey,” Apr 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://www.techrxiv.
org/articles/preprint/Blockchain_and_AI-based_Solutions_to_Combat_
Coronavirus_COVID-19_-like_Epidemics_A_Survey/12121962/1
[149] T. P. Mashamba-Thompson and E. D. Crayton, “Blockchain and artiﬁcial
intelligence technology for novel coronavirus disease-19 self-testing,”
Diagnostics, vol. 10, no. 4, p. 198, Apr 2020. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/diagnostics10040198

[150] A. Kumari, R. Gupta, S. Tanwar, and N. Kumar, “Blockchain
and AI amalgamation for energy cloud management: Challenges,
solutions, and future directions,” Journal of Parallel and Distributed
Computing, vol. 143, pp. 148 – 166, 2020.
[Online]. Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S074373152030277X

[151] Y. Dai, D. Xu, S. Maharjan, G. Qiao, and Y. Zhang, “Artiﬁcial intelligence
empowered edge computing and caching for internet of vehicles,” IEEE
Wireless Communications, vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 12–18, June 2019.
[152] Y. Dai, D. Xu, S. Maharjan, Z. Chen, Q. He, and Y. Zhang, “Blockchain
and deep reinforcement learning empowered intelligent 5g beyond,”
IEEE Network, vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 10–17, May 2019.

[153] C. Qiu, F. R. Yu, H. Yao, C. Jiang, F. Xu, and C. Zhao, “Blockchain-based
software-deﬁned industrial internet of things: A dueling deep Q -learning
approach,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 4627–4639,
June 2019.

[154] C. Qiu, F. R. Yu, F. Xu, H. Yao, and C. Zhao, “Blockchain-based
distributed software-deﬁned vehicular networks via deep q-learning,”
in Proceedings of the 8th ACM Symposium on Design and Analysis
of Intelligent Vehicular Networks and Applications, ser. DIVANet’18.
New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2018, p.
8–14. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3272036.3272040

[155] P. K. Sharma, S. Y. Moon, and J. H. Park, “Block-vn: A distributed
blockchain based vehicular network architecture in smart city.” Journal
of information processing systems, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 184–195, 2017.
[Online]. Available: http://jips-k.org/q.jips?cp=pp&pn=440

[156] P. K. Sharma and J. H. Park, “Blockchain based hybrid network
architecture for the smart city,” Future Generation Computer Systems,
[Online]. Available: http://www.
vol. 86, pp. 650 – 655, 2018.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167739X1830431X

[157] P. K. Sharma, N. Kumar, and J. H. Park, “Blockchain-based distributed
framework for automotive industry in a smart city,” IEEE Transactions
on Industrial Informatics, vol. 15, no. 7, pp. 4197–4205, July 2019.

[158] V. Sapovadia, “Chapter 13 -

issues in cryptocurrency,” in
Handbook of Digital Currency, D. L. K. Chuen, Ed.
San Diego:
Academic Press, 2015, pp. 253 – 266. [Online]. Available: http:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780128021170000138

legal

[159] N. N. Emelianova and A. A. Dementyev, “Cryptocurrency, taxation
and international law: Contemporary aspects,” in Artiﬁcial Intelligence:
Anthropogenic Nature vs. Social Origin, E. G. Popkova and B. S. Sergi,
Eds. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2020, pp. 725–731.

[160] A. A. Omololu, “Legal ramiﬁcations of blockchain technology,” in
Decentralised Internet of Things: A Blockchain Perspective, M. A.
Khan, M. T. Quasim, F. Algarni, and A. Alharthi, Eds. Cham: Springer
[Online]. Available:
International Publishing, 2020, pp. 217–230.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-38677-1_10

[161] V. S. K. Balagurusamy, C. Cabral, S. Coomaraswamy, E. Delamarche,
D. N. Dillenberger, G. Dittmann, D. Friedman, O. Gökçe, N. Hinds,
J. Jelitto, A. Kind, A. D. Kumar, F. Libsch, J. W. Ligman, S. Munetoh,
C. Narayanaswami, A. Narendra, A. Paidimarri, M. A. P. Delgado,
J. Rayﬁeld, C. Subramanian, and R. Vaculin, “Crypto anchors,” IBM

devices,” May 23 2019, uS Patent App. 16/097,497.

[163] A. Poelstra et al., “Distributed consensus from proof of stake is impossi-

ble,” Self-published Paper, 2014.

[164] P. B, M. I, and M. M, “Migration from pow to pos for ethereum,” Oct

2019. [Online]. Available: engrxiv.org/ad8en

[165] F. Saleh, “Blockchain without waste: Proof-of-stake,” Available at SSRN

3183935, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3183935

[166] D.

Larimer,
[Online]. Available:
master/TechnicalWhitePaper.md

“EOS.IO Technical White

2018.
https://github.com/EOSIO/Documentation/blob/

Paper

v2,”

[167] C. Li and B. Palanisamy, “Comparison of decentralization in DPoS and

PoW blockchains,” 2020.

[168] ——, “Incentivized blockchain-based social media platforms: A case
study of steemit,” in Proceedings of the 10th ACM Conference on
Web Science, ser. WebSci ’19. New York, NY, USA: Association
for Computing Machinery, 2019, p. 145–154. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3292522.3326041

[169] M. Vukoli´c, “The quest for scalable blockchain fabric: Proof-of-work vs.
bft replication,” in Open Problems in Network Security, J. Camenisch
and D. Kesdo˘gan, Eds. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2016,
pp. 112–125.

[170] J. Garay, A. Kiayias, and N. Leonardos, “The bitcoin backbone protocol:
Analysis and applications,” in Advances in Cryptology - EUROCRYPT
2015, E. Oswald and M. Fischlin, Eds.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, 2015, pp. 281–310.

[171] A. Beniiche, “A study of blockchain oracles,” 2020.
[172] H. Al-Breiki, M. H. U. Rehman, K. Salah, and D. Svetinovic, “Trust-
worthy blockchain oracles: Review, comparison, and open research chal-
lenges,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 85 675–85 685, 2020.

[173] I.-C. Lin and T.-C. Liao, “A survey of blockchain security issues and
challenges.” IJ Network Security, vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 653–659, 2017.
[174] A. A. Siyal, A. Z. Junejo, M. Zawish, K. Ahmed, A. Khalil, and
G. Soursou, “Applications of blockchain technology in medicine and
healthcare: Challenges and future perspectives,” Cryptography, vol. 3,
no. 1, p. 3, Jan 2019. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/
cryptography3010003

[175] V. Garcia-Font, “Blockchain: Opportunities and challenges in the
educational context,” in Engineering Data-Driven Adaptive Trust-
based e-Assessment Systems: Challenges and Infrastructure Solutions,
D. Baneres, M. E. Rodríguez, and A. E. Guerrero-Roldán, Eds.
Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2020, pp. 133–157. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-29326-0_7

[176] S. S. Kamble, A. Gunasekaran, and R. Sharma, “Modeling the blockchain
enabled traceability in agriculture supply chain,” International Journal of
Information Management, vol. 52, p. 101967, 2020. [Online]. Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0268401218312118

[177] K. M. Khan, J. Arshad, and M. M. Khan, “Investigating performance
constraints for blockchain based secure e-voting system,” Future Genera-
tion Computer Systems, vol. 105, pp. 13 – 26, 2020. [Online]. Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167739X19310805

[178] U. C. Çabuk, E. Adıgüzel, and E. Karaarslan, “A survey on feasibility
and suitability of blockchain techniques for the e-voting systems,”
IJARCCE, vol. 7, no. 3, p. 124–134, Mar 2018. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.17148/IJARCCE.2018.7324

[179] G. Zyskind, O. Nathan, and A.

. Pentland, “Decentralizing privacy:
Using blockchain to protect personal data,” in 2015 IEEE Security
and Privacy Workshops, 2015, pp. 180–184.
[Online]. Available:
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7163223/keywords#keywords
[180] J. Luo, Q. Chen, F. R. Yu, and L. Tang, “Blockchain-enabled software-
deﬁned industrial internet of things with deep reinforcement learning,”
IEEE Internet of Things Journal, pp. 1–1, 2020.

21

Ebrahim et al.: Blockchain as privacy and security solution for smart environments: A Survey

MAAD EBRAHIM is currently a Ph.D. student at
the Department of Computer Science and Oper-
ations Research (DIRO), University of Montreal,
Canada. He received his M.Sc. degree in 2019
from the Computer Science Department, Faculty
of Computer and Information Technology, Jordan
University of Science and Technology, Jordan. His
B.Sc. degree in Computer Science and Engineer-
ing has been received from the University of Aden,
Yemen, in 2013. His research experience includes
Computer Vision, Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Machine learning, Deep Learning,
Data Mining, and Data Analysis. His current research interests include
Fog and Edge Computing technologies, Blockchains, and Reinforcement
Learning.

ABDELHAKIM HAFID spent several years as
the Senior Research Scientist with Bell Commu-
nications Research (Bellcore), NJ, USA, work-
ing in the context of major research projects on
the management of next generation networks. He
was also an Assistant Professor with Western
University (WU), Canada, the Research Director
of Advance Communication Engineering Center
(venture established by WU, Bell Canada, and
Bay Networks), Canada, a Researcher with CRIM,
Canada, the Visiting Scientist with GMD-Fokus, Germany, and a Visiting
Professor with the University of Evry, France. He is currently a Full
Professor with the University of Montreal. He is also the Founding Director
of the Network Research Laboratory and Montreal Blockchain Laboratory.
He is a Research Fellow with CIRRELT, Montreal, Canada. He has extensive
academic and industrial research experience in the area of the management
and design of next generation networks. His current research interests
include the IoT, fog/edge computing, blockchain, and intelligent transport
systems.

ETIENNE ELIE is Solutions and Systems Archi-
tect and Engineering Lead at Intel Corporation,
California, USA. Prior to joining Intel Corpora-
tion, Dr. Elie was the technology and engineering
manager for CARTaGENE, a public research plat-
form and biobank of the Sainte-Justine Learning
Hospital. He also served as ASIC Architecture
Engineer at Nortel Networks and Advanced Micro
Devices (AMD). Before moving to the US, Elie
spent a short period of time with PSP Investments,
one of Canada’s largest pension investment managers. Beside his role at Intel
Corporation, Dr. Elie is a key contributor for the development of a large-
scale general-purpose neuromorphic Community Infrastructure (CI). Dr.
Elie holds a Ph.D. in Computer Architecture from Université de Montréal,
with focus on optimization of data movements in computer systems. He also
holds a master’s degree, and Bachelor of Science in Engineering with great
distinction.

22

