Towards On-Device AI and Blockchain for 6G
enabled Agricultural Supply-chain Management

Muhammad Zawish, Nouman Ashraf, Rafay Iqbal Ansari, Steven Davy, Hassaan Khaliq Qureshi, Nauman Aslam,
Syed Ali Hassan

1

2
2
0
2

r
a

M
2
1

]
I

A
.
s
c
[

1
v
5
6
4
6
0
.
3
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—6G envisions artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) powered so-
lutions for enhancing the quality-of-service (QoS) in the network
and to ensure optimal utilization of resources. In this work, we
propose an architecture based on the combination of unmanned
aerial vehicles (UAVs), AI and blockchain for agricultural supply-
chain management with the purpose of ensuring traceability,
transparency, tracking inventories and contracts. We propose
a solution to facilitate on-device AI by generating a roadmap
of models with various resource-accuracy trade-offs. A fully
convolutional neural network (FCN) model is used for biomass
estimation through images captured by the UAV. Instead of
a single compressed FCN model for deployment on UAV, we
motivate the idea of iterative pruning to provide multiple task-
speciﬁc models with various complexities and accuracy. To
alleviate the impact of ﬂight failure in a 6G enabled dynamic UAV
network, the proposed model selection strategy will assist UAVs
to update the model based on the runtime resource requirements.

Index Terms—on-device AI, deep neural networks, edge com-

puting, 6G, blockchain, agriculture.

I. INTRODUCTION

T HE development of 6G communication has brought about

several new technologies to enhance user experience by
providing seamless connectivity and high quality-of-service
(QoS). The technologies that have undergone development
under the aegis of 5G networks include machine-to-machine
(M2M) communication,
internet of everything (IoE) and
device-to-device (D2D) networks, to name a few [1]. Recently,
the utilization of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) as access
points has been explored as a viable candidate for providing
on-demand services [2] for 6G networks. The UAV base
stations can provide connectivity to ground users in an ad-
hoc manner, thereby supporting the conventional network in-
frastructure. Moreover, artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) empowered
solutions have been proposed to enhance the QoS in 6G
networks [3]. To this end, a signiﬁcant amount of work has
focused on using AI to optimise 6G enabled wireless systems,
but limited attention has been paid to device level resource

M. Zawish (Corresponding Author) and S. Davy are with Walton Institute
for Information and Communication Systems Science, Waterford Institute of
Technology (WIT), Waterford, Ireland
Emails:{muhammad.zawish, steven.davy}@waltoninstitute.ie
N. Ashraf is with Walton Institute, Ireland and Turku University of Applied
Sciences, Finland Email: {nouman.ashraf}@turkuamk.ﬁ
R. I. Ansari and N. Aslam are with the Department of Computer and
Information Sciences, Northumbria University Newcastle, UK.
Emails: {rafay.ansari, nauman.aslam}@northumbria.ac.uk
H. K. Qureshi and S. A. Hassan are with the Department of Electrical Engi-
neering, SEECS, National University of Sciences and Technology, Pakistan.
Email: {hassaan.khaliq, ali.hassan}@seecs.edu.pk

optimisation of AI models, speciﬁcally for use in UAVs. Thus,
the AI-led 6G networks will leverage the opportunities offered
by the aforementioned technologies for the development of
new applications.

In this work, we propose an architecture based on UAVs
empowered by AI and blockchain for agriculture supply-chain
management by capturing images of the ﬁelds and estimating
biomass through UAVs. We propose a system model based on
a combination of blockchain and on-device AI for ensuring
traceability, transparency, tracking provenance of crops by ob-
serving the state of farms, inventories and contracts in the agri-
culture supply-chain. Typically, the UAV is only responsible
to collect data via its sensors and transmit it to a remote cloud
server for processing. Although this cloud-centric approach
helps UAVs in saving energy by transmitting computation-
intensive tasks,
the wireless transmission of raw data in-
latency and security issues. However,
troduces signiﬁcant
shifting AI from cloud to the device restricts unnecessary data
transfer and ensures network security as a key performance
indicator (KPI) of 6G enabled wireless systems [2]–[4]. The
proposed architecture is sensitive to both latency and privacy
which can not be tolerated in a cloud-centric approach, thus
on-device computation is the preferred approach. However,
UAVs usually possess limited computational and low-power
capabilities which hamper the task of on-device processing.
Thereby, the computational complexity of the underlying AI
algorithm plays a key role in realizing on-device processing
[5].

Deep learning as an extension of AI has resulted in nu-
merous prominent algorithms such as convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) for image classiﬁcation, segmentation etc.
Recently, CNNs have caught the spotlight in a wide range
of mobile vision applications such as self-driving cars, cyber-
physical systems, autonomous systems and many more [5], [6].
In this work, we propose the use of a fully convolutional neural
network (FCN) a type of CNN [6] for semantic segmentation
of biomass pixels from the image captured by the UAV. Based
on the above discussion, embedding a FCN directly into a
UAV is not a feasible solution due to its limited resources.
To enable the on-device processing using CNNs, recent works
have focused on providing a ﬁxed compressed model using
techniques such as network pruning, weight quantization,
and knowledge distillation [7]. Instead of providing a single
compressed model using the above techniques for on-device
execution, we leverage the idea of iterative pruning to provide
multiple task-speciﬁc models with various resource-accuracy
trade-offs. This approach is more signiﬁcant when performing

 
 
 
 
 
 
on-device processing because different UAVs possess different
battery timing, processing and storage capacities [2], thus, it
is not feasible to design a model with rigid characteristics.
The aim of providing models with various complexities and
accuracy trade-offs is to allow UAVs to fetch the required
model based on the dynamic resources during the ﬂight.

The motivation behind utilizing blockchain for supply-chain
is to ensure transparency in information management. The
system model is summarised in the ﬂowchart shown in Fig. 1.
A detailed discussion of the ﬂow chart is provided in Section
III. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In section
II, we present the motivation behind different aspects of our
model. In section III, we present our system model, followed
by proposed approach in Section IV, and section V presents
the experimental setup and results, followed by conclusions
and future directions in Section VI.

II. MOTIVATION AND CONTRIBUTION

In this section, we discuss the motivation behind different
aspects of the proposed model. Speciﬁcally, in II-A, we present
a brief overview of the role of UAVs for 6G networks and
motivate their use in agri-food supply-chain management. In
subsection II-B, we describe the signiﬁcance of on-device
approach over cloud-centric approach in the proposed use-
case. II-C discusses the signiﬁcance of blockchain to ensure
traceability in food supply-chain. Lastly, section II-D high-
lights the contributions of this work.

A. UAVs and 6G networks

UAVs have found a wide use in several applications ranging
from security to agriculture, especially in the context of
providing ubiquitous connectivity for 6G networks. Global
mobile trafﬁc has seen a mushroom growth in recent years,
which builds the case for exploring new technologies such as
UAVs to assist the traditional networks. UAVs are particularly
helpful in realizing the concept of Heterogeneous networks
(HetNets), where several small cells are deployed to enhance
the network capacity. The main feature of UAVs that makes
them an ideal solution for adhoc networks is their agility,
allowing a quick and ﬂexible deployment [8]. Hence, they can
be particularly useful for emergency networks. It is envisioned
that UAVs will become a part of the wider terrestrial-air
integrated network. However, this integration will also lead to
challenges such as allocation of resources, reliability, security
and path planning [9].

Our aim is to exploit the UAVs for agri-food supply-chain
management by capturing and processing the images of the
agri ﬁelds. The main motivations behind employing a UAV
for agri-food supply-chain management comprises of the fol-
lowing focal points: i) the ease of movement of UAVs makes
them ideal for on-demand deployment to capture images of
a ﬁeld; ii), the UAVs possess the capability to process and
transmit the information to the cloud; iii), UAVs can help in
covering large area and can help in gathering images from
different angles; iv), UAVs can be operated from a central
location to introduce transparency for agri-food supply-chain
management; v), UAVs can dynamically select a light weight

2

AI-based solution that can reduce the bandwidth requirement
and conserve resources; vi), UAVs can provide timely updates
about the production to the supply-chain, thereby reducing the
processing costs for large volumes of centralized data.

B. On-Device vs Cloud-centric AI

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) as a subclass of AI al-
gorithms have evolved over the past several years due to
availability and accessibility of i) Big Data,
ii) hardware
accelerators, and iii) open-source software platforms to train
and optimize them [10]. The superior performance of DNNs
depends on their ability to extract high-level representations
from raw data generated by Internet of Things (IoTs) and
several other devices. Since DNNs are able to process a large
amount of data, they require huge computational power to
execute the ﬂoating point operations per second (FLOPS)
inside their layers. A typical DNN is made up of multiple
convolutional and fully connected layers stacked on top of
each other, with thousands of nodes/ﬁlters interconnected in
each layer that account for the millions of parameters and
gigaFLOPS (GFLOPS) [5]. Therefore, for training or inference
of these DNNs, traditional IoT applications rely on the pow-
erful capabilities of cloud data centres and high performance
computers (HPCs). Generally,
the raw data generated by
devices is moved to the remote cloud data centre for processing
and the decision is taken on the cloud once inferences are
made. Although this status-quo approach alleviates the end
devices’ load,
the energy consumption, end-to-end latency
and privacy issues occurring from wireless transmission are
inevitable. On the other hand, pushing computations from
cloud to end device is an emerging solution to the latency,
energy, and privacy bottlenecks [2]. In this approach, the DNN
model is served on the end device that means data is being
generated and processed at the same physical location. For
instance, as shown in Fig. 1, our approach motivates the
on-device computation in smart agricultural application by
computing the biomass from images on the UAV, instead of
sending them to the cloud. Our approach ensures the privacy
and low latency by restricting the raw data and computations
within the boundaries of the farm. However, the low power
end devices can not afford the computational complexity of
DNNs. This pushed researchers to compress the DNN models
so that they can be embedded into low power end devices [7].
There are various methods to make DNNs light-weight
such as ﬁlter pruning, weights quantization, and knowledge
distillation. Among them, ﬁlter pruning is simple, faster and
efﬁcient as it reduces redundant ﬁlters from the convolutional
layers that accounts for most of the FLOPS [11]. In this
approach, the ﬁlters of each convolutional layer are ranked
based on a certain scoring function such as average percentage
of zeros, or l1-norm. These scoring functions are used to
estimate the importance of ﬁlters towards the accuracy of the
task, and then only the top-m ranked ﬁlters are kept intact
for ﬁne-tuning [7]. This single stage pruning approach results
in the pruned and ﬁne-tuned model with lower computational
complexity for deployment on end devices. However, in the
proposed scenario, we can not rely on a model with ﬁxed

3

Figure 1: Proposed AI and blockchain based agricultural supply-chain management network

complexity due to dynamic resource demands of the UAV.
Thus, we motivate the scheme of providing a family of models
with various resource-accuracy characteristics, so that the most
efﬁcient model can be selected based on the requirements of
a certain IoT application.

C. Blockchain

The global agri-food supply-chain is a naturally dynamic
structure that has evolved since the time of hunter-gatherers
through subsistence agriculture. It is now a globalized envi-
ronment with many moving pieces that make it much more
complex. One of the biggest challenge includes a lack of
cooperation among players due to individualistic mindsets and
skewed views, as well as a lack of accountability, which may
contribute to food security issues [12]. Such problems can be
tackled by introducing blockchain technology in agriculture.
From customer desire for transparency and more knowledge
about
the food they purchase to record-keeping and food
integrity concerns, this exciting emerging technology can hold
the key.

• In contrast to traditional biomass extraction techniques,
we leverage the powerful capabilities of FCN model to
provide pixel-wise label maps for biomass estimation.
• We motivate the utilization of blockchain to keep track
of crop’s provenance and transactions (between farmers
and processing plants) for ensuring traceability and trans-
parency in the supply-chain network.

• Lastly, to operate an AI algorithm reliably over a 6G
enabled dynamic UAV network, we provide a model
selection approach using iterative model compression
which generates multiple task-speciﬁc AI models with
various complexities and accuracy trade-offs. As opposed
to single light-weight model approaches, our results show
trade-off among a variety of models to enable ﬂexible AI
on UAVs by selecting the desired model.

It
to
is to be noted that our focus in this paper is not
propose a combination of AI and blockchain, but to propose
an architecture based on on-device AI and blockchain for the
novel application under consideration to address a serious issue
in agriculture scenario.

D. Contributions

III. SYSTEM MODEL

The contributions of this work are summarized as follows:
• We propose a novel architecture for agricultural supply-
chain management based on UAVs empowered by AI for
on-device biomass estimation of the crops.

The system model ﬂow diagram is shown in Fig. 1. In the
proposed architecture, we assume that the UAV acts as an end
device and collects images of the ﬁelds. The purpose of the
proposed architecture is to collect the image data using UAVs,

4

Figure 2: FCN Architecture for semantic segmentation of Biomass Pixels

process it and transmit it to the cloud. The cloud collects
the information provided by the UAVs and any transactions
between a farmer and a processing plant are also uploaded to
the cloud. The diagram also shows two smart contracts; First,
for the biomass comparison by tracking the provenance of
crops and second to compare the amount of raw crops which
has been supplied to the processing plant and the prepared
product provided by the processing plant to the market. This
traceability helps in mitigating the risks of black marketing of
the raw material as well as the ﬁnal product at both farmers
and industrial levels. In case of any transaction between the
farmer and the processing plant, for example, if a farmer sells
sugarcane to the processing plant, then the information will be
updated through a blockchain network at the cloud. Each trans-
action generates information such as the farmer (seller) ID, the
processing plant (buyer) ID, the quantity sold and the product
ID. The processing at the UAV also involves the biomass
comparison with updates provided by the transactions. In case
of any anomaly between the biomass estimated value and the
quantity updated by the farmer-processing plant transaction,
a ﬂag is generated and sent to the regulatory authority (e.g.
government agency). Moreover, the outputs of the processing
plant are also updated over a blockchain network. The aim is
to check if the output of the processing plant corresponds to
the input. Similar to the previous case, a ﬂag is generated in
case of any anomalies between the processing plant output and
the projected output. The purpose of the proposed architecture
is to introduce transparency in the supply-chain management.

IV. PROPOSED APPROACH BASED ON AI AND
BLOCKCHAIN

Based on the above system model, this section demonstrate
the AI based on-device biomass estimation, and blockchain
based smart contract.

A. On-Device Biomass Estimation

In real practice, the most common approach to calculate
biomass is to conduct ﬁeld surveys and visually observe the
height of grasses using pre-deﬁned criteria [13]. Although this
process provides accurate results but it is labour intensive and
time consuming as it involves human efforts. On the other
hand, traditional image processing approaches rely highly on
domain expertise and manual feature engineering on images

to estimate biomass. However, deep learning techniques learn
useful features automatically from the images with the help
of convolutional ﬁlters [6]. During training of CNNs, con-
volutional ﬁlters play a vital role in replacing the manual
feature extractors. For this reason, they require minimal human
intervention and provide state-of-the-art results. We approach
the task of biomass estimation using semantic segmentation
of biomass pixels in the images using FCN. Fig. 2 shows
the proposed FCN which takes an input image of arbitrary
size and performs downsampling and upsampling using con-
volutional and transposed convolutional layers respectively to
make pixel-wise predictions. The encoder part (downsampling
layers) produce the class activation maps (CAMs) to increase
the ﬁeld of view (FOV) for the decoder part over input.
Unlike traditional approaches, where images captured by end
devices are forwarded to the cloud for biomass estimation,
we propose on-UAV computation where UAV is responsible
for both image acquisition and biomass estimation tasks. This
approach not only reduces the latency and communication
cost, but also improves privacy as data does not go out of the
farm. Once an image is captured by UAV, it will be given
to FCN which will perform semantic segmentation. Given
the pixel-wise class labels of the image, the biomass will be
calculated as the percentage of pixels identiﬁed as biomass.
Lastly, instead of sending the images to the cloud, UAV will
only update the estimated biomass to the blockchain along
with the latitude and longitude of the respective farm land.

1) Model Compression: The complexity of CNNs is usu-
ally measured by the number of FLOPs and amount of
memory they require for execution. Thereby, the base FCN
model which is used for on-device biomass estimation has
approximately 125 GFLOPS, and consumes 513 megabytes
(MBs) of memory when deployed [5]. This thus generates
the corresponding need for memory requirements. Although
modern UAVs are capable of handling signiﬁcant amounts of
computations and storage, it is not feasible to execute the raw
model given the energy efﬁciency requirements. We employ
ﬁlter pruning as a technique to compress the base model by
removing the redundant ﬁlters from convolutional layers at a
loss of small accuracy. For each ﬁlter F, we compute its l1-
norm ( (cid:107)𝐹 (cid:107) 1) to rank its importance in a layer. The argument
is that the ﬁlters with lower l1-norm essentially generate very
small activations, thus the corresponding ﬁlters can be pruned
out. The pruning ratio determines the number of ﬁlters to be

Input ImageFCNFeature MapsDecoderSegmented Maskremoved from each layer, and the model is ﬁne-tuned on the
rest of ﬁlters. The purpose of choosing l1-norm over other
scoring criteria is to reduce the extra computations required
during the pruning process [10].

2) Dynamic Model Selection: When performing on-UAV
inference,
the key challenges posed by UAV includes i)
processing the incoming data with minimal delay to make
critical decisions, and ii) consuming low energy in order to
navigate smoothly and maximise ﬂight time [2]. Thus,
to
overcome these challenges, we propose a dynamic model
selection strategy using iterative pruning. It is obvious from the
discussion of model compression that accuracy can be traded
off with lower complexity of compressed models. Therefore,
our approach provides a roadmap of models with different ac-
curacy, complexity, and energy trade offs. The required model
can be fetched on-the-ﬂy given the dynamic resource and
accuracy requirements. For instance, if the processing capacity
of UAV depletes during the ﬂight, then the existing model can
be replaced with a model having lower computational cost to
avoid any failure.

B. Smart Contract - Blockchain

The main aim of employing blockchain in the proposed
framework is to ensure the transparency in the supply-chain
network comprised of farmers and processing plants. More-
over, regulatory authorities perform audits more often and
trusting third party auditors is not a viable solution. Therefore,
we ensure veriﬁable auditability with the help of blockchain
networks. Firstly, farmers and processing plants are regis-
tered on the blockchain network and are assigned a unique
blockchain address. This blockchain address can be used to
see the historical transactions made on the blockchain network.
Farmers are registered along with their unique ID, the crop
type and latitude and longitude of their crop ﬁeld. Similarly,
processing plants are registered along with the unique IDs
and product type. Once they are registered, they are assigned
a unique blockchain address and they record all their trades
on the blockchain network. Recording all the data will be
advantageous for farmers as they will get good return for
their crops. Moreover, the availability of different processing
plants will provide farmers with the option to select the one
with better rates. Similarly, processing plants can easily locate
farmers with different quantities and types of crops.

Once the entities are registered,

they will start making
transactions on the blockchain network regarding their trades.
In our proposed blockchain based architecture, we are using
two smart contracts, i.e., one to ensure the traceability and
auditability of farmers and other for processing plant. UAVs
over the crop ﬁelds are going to assist the smart contract for
biomass comparison. UAVs will capture and analyse pictures
and store this information on the blockchain network. This
to make a compari-
information will help smart contract
son if the farmers harvested crops. Moreover,
if they are
harvested, did farmers record the trade on the blockchain
network? UAV assisted images will ensure transparency for the
trades. The smart contract for biomass comparison will fetch
the previously stored information on the blockchain network

5

and compare it with the recent captured image by UAV. If
the biomass data is different, smart contracts will emit an
anomaly notiﬁcation to the regulatory authority. Thus, the
smart contract functionality will ensure transparency as well
as auditability of the farmers.

Similarly, we propose another smart contract in order to en-
sure auditability of processing plants, i.e., if they are utilizing
all the crops to make products. Processing plants will report
their products along with their quantity on the blockchain
network. This stored information will be compared with the
input crops quantity recorded by the farmers. If the information
shows any discrepancy, a notiﬁcation alert will be emitted to
the regulatory authority. Therefore, the blockchain network
will ensure the auditability of the processing plants and enforce
them to do their duty honestly.

The updating mechanism inside smart-contract simply in-
volves updation of the estimated biomass value. Smart-contract
involves limited number of mathematical computations and
the implementation complexity is thus reasonable. However,
it would induce an additional delay, which we intend to
investigate in our future work. Moreover, it must be noted
that the complexity is also affected by the sampling size of
the ﬁeld area. The smaller the sampling size the higher is
the complexity as the computations have to be repeated more
frequently and need to be updated via blockchain.

V. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS

In this section, we provide an overview of our experi-
ments and analyse the results achieved from iterative pruning
technique. We show how iterative pruning can assist UAV
to adaptively select a DNN model for on device semantic
segmentation. The aim of our experiments is to explore
multiple variants of a single application-speciﬁc DNN model
with different computational complexities so that a suitable
model can be picked up.

A. Training Baseline

In order to run through the pruning experiments, we initially
train a baseline DNN semantic segmentation model which is
FCN. For training FCN, we use pre-trained weights of VGG-
16 model on ImageNet dataset to initialize the parameters of
the encoder part of FCN, while the parameters of decoder part
are initialised randomly. The network is trained using Keras
deep learning API with Tensorﬂow as backend on Nvidia Tesla
K20 GPU. We ﬁne tune the network on a dataset obtained
from [13] after performing data augmentation techniques such
as scaling, contrast transformation, mirroring, and rotation.
On setting a learning rate of 10-2 with SGD optimiser, the
model minimised the pixel-wise loss to a sufﬁcient level on
128 epochs.

B. Iterative pruning

The base model is not suitable for deployment directly on
the UAV due to the resource and computational constraints.
On the other hand, deploying a predetermined compressed
model on the device does not satisfy the dynamic requirements

6

Figure 3: (a) shows trade-off between accuracy and model size over different pruning ratios p and iterations (itr), and (b) shows
trade-off between accuracy and FLOPs over different pruning ratios p and iterations (itr)

of UAV. Therefore, our work addresses this challenge by
using iterative pruning on pre-trained base model to create
a roadmap of descendant models with various complexity-
accuracy trade-offs as illustrated in Fig. 3 (a) and (b). Instead
of one stage - single pruning technique where the model
is pruned for once with a very high pruning rate and then
retrained, we use an iterative approach which is more effective
and fast. In other words, if 30% reduction in computational
complexity is required, it is better to prune the model upto
some iterations without retraining instead of pruning 30% at
once and again retraining the model. For this reason, we have
explored the model with various iterations and pruning ratios
so that the probability of choosing the right model increases.
We perform experiments by pruning the model upto iteration
(itr)=3, and for each iteration we vary the pruning ratio p
from 0.1 to 0.9 which gives us in total 27 variants of the
base model. It is interesting to note that we achieved 98%
reduction in model size (Fig. 3 (a)) and 99% reduction in
FLOPs (Fig. 3 (b)) on itr=3 and p=0.9 but at the cost of
losing 46% accuracy. This scale of reduction is momentous
when accuracy is not the concern for the application but low
latency and minimal energy consumption is required. However,
in our proposed framework, we not only have to take care of
resource consumption but also accuracy, so given the threshold
of accuracy and computational complexity, UAV can fetch
the appropriate model from the local edge server taking full
advantage of 6G. Therefore, referring to Fig. 3 (a) and (b),
as can be seen that with a small pruning ratio p=0.2, the
accuracy loss is very minimal upto 3% at itr=3 as compared
to single iteration itr=1. On the other hand, we achieve 54%
reduction in FLOPS, and 51% reduction in model size at itr=3
and p=0.2 as compared to itr=1 and p=0.2. Thus, iterative
pruning on the same ratio p produces a much smaller model
with minimal accuracy loss as compared to pruning only once.
Moreover, there is no need to retrain the model because UAV
needs to replace the model as quickly as possible in order to
minimise the effect on ﬂight time and battery. We also analyse
the feasibility of the model in terms of the energy consumption

and inference time as shown in Fig. 4 (a) and (b) respectively.
Inference time is measured as a delay in output required by
the model to produce segmentation output. While the energy
consumption of the model is based on the arithmetic operations
and data access on the device. We assume that each 32-bit
FLOP consumes 2.3 pJ, so energy required by arithmetic
operations can be calculated by product of FLOP count and
energy consumption of a single FLOP. Regarding the data
access, we assume that retrieving 1MB of data from DRAM
consumes 640 pJ, so for each model, it can be calculated as
a product of model size and energy required to access each
MB i.e. 640 pJ. The results shown in Fig. 4 (a) and (b) are
consistent with Fig. 3 (a) and (b), because energy efﬁciency
and inference time are essentially dependent on model size
and FLOP counts [11]. Thus, to efﬁciently manage the battery
power and ﬂight
these two parameters can
also be used as a selection criteria. Lastly, generating models
with ﬂexible resource-accuracy trade-offs at the runtime assist
mobile vision systems like UAV to tackle dynamic resource
needs by fetching the desired model.

time of UAV,

Table I: Comparison with state-of-the-art approaches on FCN
model. ↓ denotes the reduction in percentage with respect to
the original model.

Approach
Mixed-Pruning [14]
Network Slimming [15]
Proposed Approach

Accuracy ↓
5.09 %
8.81 %
6.18 %

FLOPs ↓ Memory ↓
31.21 %
31.47 %
31.28 %

28.89 %
29.53 %
29.48 %

1) Comparative analysis: For the sake of comparison, we
have performed comparative analysis by reproducing a few
state-of-the-art approaches on model pruning. We used same
simulation parameters as mentioned in the original papers.
In the Table I, we show the drop in accuracy, FLOPs and
memory after pruning FCN model using the Mixed-pruning
[14], network slimming [15], and the proposed approach. Our
approach losses 6.18% of accuracy which is lesser than the
network slimming which dropped 8.81%. In contrast, mixed-
pruning losses relatively lower accuracy as compared to ours,

(a)(b)7

Figure 4: (a) shows depletion of energy consumption over different pruning ratios p and iterations (itr), and (b) shows depletion
of inference time over different pruning ratios p and iterations (itr)

however, this approach is based on multi-stage process which
introduces additional complexity in the compression scheme.
Since our approach simply evaluates the l1-norm of the ﬁlters
which does not put additional burden, thus it outweighs the
drop in accuracy as compared to mixed-pruning.

pruning approach, the delay can be minimised with different
pruning ratio and iterations as shown in Fig. 5. This is
signiﬁcant for delay sensitive applications, for instance, using
pruning ratio of 0.5 over a few iterations, we can achieve
approximately 50% reduction in latency.

Remark: It is to be noted that for the sake of this paper,
we have not considered the effects of the mobility, which in
reality will affect the battery power and communication link
of the UAV with the cloud. We aim to consider these effects
in our future work.

VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS

In this work, we motivate the utilization of UAVs for
agriculture supply-chain management by capturing images of
the ﬁelds and estimating biomass through UAVs. Our proposed
is based on the combination of blockchain
system model
and on-device AI. The aim of the proposed model
is to
ensure transparency and traceability. We proposed on-device
processing of FCN for semantic segmentation of biomass
pixels from the images captured by the UAV. Moreover, to deal
with the dynamic resource management on UAV, we provide
an iterative compression strategy which generates a road-map
of models with resource-accuracy trade-offs. Instead of single
compressed model which could cause failure during a UAV
ﬂight, we show in our results that with multiple iterations
over different pruning ratios we can get multiple models for
a speciﬁc task. Thereby, UAV can update the models with
respect to changing resource requirements during the ﬂight in
order to be fault tolerant.

In this paragraph, we highlight the limitations of our pro-
posed architecture and provide a few future research directions
to improve the proposed architecture. Firstly, the utilisation
of intrusion prevention system with the proposed architecture
is one of the future directions of this work. The intrusion
prevention can help to secure the network against any unwar-
ranted nodes (such as UAVs) and lead to an enhanced security.
Secondly, privacy preservation mechanism can be utilized

Figure 5: Depletion of inference time over different pruning
ratios p and iterations (itr)

2) Usability in UAV scenario: We also evaluate the
performance of iterative pruning on FCN model for the
usability in UAV scenario. Since UAVs are usually resource-
constrained, thus we evaluate our proposed approach on a
resource-constrained device for the sake of simulations. We
measure the latency of the FCN model on an OpenStack
virtual machine (VM) with 2 CPUs, 4GB of RAM, and
10GB of the hard disk. We execute the FCN model on 100
random images, and show the average latency in Fig. 5.
This latency indicates the delay incurred by FCN model
in making an inference on an image while execution on
a resource-constrained device. The unpruned model had
approximately 107 ms of latency, while using the proposed

(a)(b)0.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.9020406080100Itr=1Itr=2Itr=38

with the proposed architecture, which can add anonymity
and persuade those users that are concerned about privacy
to participate in the network. Moreover, battery power is
one of the major constraints for sustaining the UAV based
network. Therefore, the utilisation of a hybrid energy model
that utilizes alternate energy sources such as solar can help in
enhancing the network sustainability. The selection of the AI-
based model can be done dynamically based on the available
energy resources.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

This research was supported by Science Foundation Ireland
and the Department of Agriculture, Food and Marine on behalf
of the Government of Ireland VistaMilk research centre under
the grant 16/RC/3835.

REFERENCES

[1] M. Sun, X. Xu, X. Tao, P. Zhang, and V. C. M. Leung, “Noma-based
D2D-enabled trafﬁc ofﬂoading for 5G and beyond networks employing
licensed and unlicensed access,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Com-
munications, vol. 19, no. 6, pp. 4109–4124, 2020.

[2] H. Wang, H. Zhao, W. Wu, J. Xiong, D. Ma, and J. Wei, “Deployment
algorithms of ﬂying base stations: 5G and beyond with UAVs,” IEEE
Internet of Things Journal, vol. 6, no. 6, pp. 10 009–10 027, 2019.
[3] H. Yang, A. Alphones, Z. Xiong, D. Niyato, J. Zhao, and K. Wu,
“Artiﬁcial-intelligence-enabled intelligent 6G networks,” IEEE Network,
vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 272–280, 2020.

[4] F. Tariq, M. R. Khandaker, K.-K. Wong, M. A. Imran, M. Bennis, and
M. Debbah, “A speculative study on 6G,” IEEE Wireless Communica-
tions, vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 118–125, 2020.

[5] A. Canziani, A. Paszke, and E. Culurciello, “An analysis of deep neural
network models for practical applications,” ArXiv, vol. abs/1605.07678,
2016.

[6] J. Long, E. Shelhamer, and T. Darrell, “Fully convolutional networks
for semantic segmentation,” in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition, 2015, pp. 3431–3440.

[7] S. Han, H. Mao, and W. J. Dally, “Deep compression: Compressing
deep neural networks with pruning, trained quantization and huffman
coding,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1510.00149, 2015.

[8] B. Li, Z. Fei, and Y. Zhang, “UAV communications for 5g and beyond:
Recent advances and future trends,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal,
vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 2241–2263, 2019.

[9] Y. Cao, S.-Y. Lien, and Y.-C. Liang, “Deep reinforcement learning for
multi-user access control in non-terrestrial networks,” IEEE Transactions
on Communications, vol. 69, no. 3, pp. 1605–1619, 2021.

[10] X. Zhang, J. Zou, K. He, and J. Sun, “Accelerating very deep convolu-
tional networks for classiﬁcation and detection,” IEEE transactions on
pattern analysis and machine intelligence, vol. 38, no. 10, pp. 1943–
1955, 2015.

[11] R. Xie, X. Jia, L. Wang, and K. Wu, “Energy efﬁciency enhancement
for CNN-based deep mobile sensing,” IEEE Wireless Communications,
vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 161–167, 2019.

[12] J. Premanandh, “Horse meat scandal–a wake-up call for regulatory

authorities,” Food control, vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 568–569, 2013.

[13] L. Zhang, B. Verma, D. Stockwell, and S. Chowdhury, “Density
weighted connectivity of grass pixels in image frames for biomass
estimation,” Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 101, pp. 213–227,
2018.

[14] X. Chang, H. Pan, W. Lin, and H. Gao, “A mixed-pruning based
framework for embedded convolutional neural network acceleration,”
IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers, vol. 68,
no. 4, pp. 1706–1715, 2021.

[15] Z. Liu, J. Li, Z. Shen, G. Huang, S. Yan, and C. Zhang, “Learning
efﬁcient convolutional networks through network slimming,” in Proceed-
ings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, 2017, pp.
2736–2744.

