1

A Full Dive into Realizing the Edge-enabled
Metaverse: Visions, Enabling Technologies, and
Challenges

Minrui Xu, Wei Chong Ng, Wei Yang Bryan Lim, Jiawen Kang, Zehui Xiong, Dusit Niyato,

Qiang Yang, Xuemin Sherman Shen, and Chunyan Miao

2
2
0
2

g
u
A
0
2

]
I

N
.
s
c
[

2
v
1
7
4
5
0
.
3
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Dubbed “the successor to the mobile Internet", the
concept of the Metaverse has grown in popularity. While there
exist lite versions of the Metaverse today, they are still far from
realizing the full vision of an immersive, embodied, and interoper-
able Metaverse. Without addressing the issues of implementation
from the communication and networking, as well as computation
perspectives, the Metaverse is difﬁcult to succeed the Internet,
especially in terms of its accessibility to billions of users today. In
this survey, we focus on the edge-enabled Metaverse to realize its
ultimate vision. We ﬁrst provide readers with a succinct tutorial
of the Metaverse, an introduction to the architecture, as well
as current developments. To enable ubiquitous, seamless, and
embodied access to the Metaverse, we discuss the communication
and networking challenges and survey cutting-edge solutions and
concepts that leverage next-generation communication systems
for users to immerse as and interact with embodied avatars
in the Metaverse. Moreover, given the high computation costs
required, e.g., to render 3D virtual worlds and run data-hungry
artiﬁcial intelligence-driven avatars, we discuss the computation
challenges and cloud-edge-end computation framework-driven
solutions to realize the Metaverse on resource-constrained edge
devices. Next, we explore how blockchain technologies can aid
in the interoperable development of the Metaverse, not just in
terms of empowering the economic circulation of virtual user-
generated content but also to manage physical edge resources in
a decentralized, transparent, and immutable manner. Finally, we
discuss the future research directions towards realizing the true
vision of the edge-enabled Metaverse.

Index Terms—Metaverse, Edge Networks, Communication and

Networking, Computation, Blockchain, Internet Technology

A. Birth of the Metaverse

I. INTRODUCTION

The concept of the Metaverse ﬁrst appeared in the science
ﬁction novel Snow Crash written by Neal Stephenson in 1992.

Minrui Xu, Dusit Niyato, and Chunyan Miao are with the School
of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological Univer-
sity, Singapore (e-mail: minrui001@e.ntu.edu.sg; dniyato@ntu.edu.sg; as-
cymiao@ntu.edu.sg).

Wei Chong Ng and Wei Yang Bryan Lim are with Alibaba Group and
Alibaba-NTU Joint Research Institute, Nanyang Technological University,
Singapore (e-mail: weichong001@e.ntu.edu.sg; limw0201@e.ntu.edu.sg).

Jiawen Kang is with the School of Automation, Guangdong University of

Technology, China (e-mail: kavinkang@gdut.edu.cn).

Zehui Xiong is with the Pillar of Information Systems Technology and
Design, Singapore University of Technology and Design, Singapore 487372,
Singapore (e-mail: zehui_xiong@sutd.edu.sg).

Qiang Yang is with the Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong, and Webank
(e-mail: qyang@cse.ust.hk).

Xuemin Sherman Shen is with the Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada, N2L 3G1 (e-
mail: sshen@uwaterloo.ca).

More than twenty years later, the Metaverse has re-emerged as
a buzzword. In short, the Metaverse is commonly described as
an embodied version of the Internet. Just as how we navigate
today’s web pages with a mouse cursor, users will explore the
virtual worlds within the Metaverse with the aid of augmented
reality (AR), virtual reality (VR), and the tactile Internet.

To date, tech giants have invested heavily towards realizing
the Metaverse as “the successor to the mobile Internet". In the
future, the Metaverse will succeed the Internet towards revo-
lutionizing novel ecosystems of service provisions in all walks
of life, e.g., in healthcare [1], education [2], entertainment, e-
commerce [3], and smart industries [4]. In 2021, Facebook was
rebranded as “Meta"1, as it reinvents itself to be a “Metaverse
company" from a “social media company", to reinforce its
commitment towards the development of the Metaverse.

There are two fundamental driving forces behind the excite-
ment surrounding the Metaverse. First, the Covid-19 pandemic
has resulted in a paradigm shift
in how work, entertain-
ment, and socializing are experienced today [5]–[7]. As more
users grow accustomed to carrying out these conventionally
physical activities in the virtual domain, the Metaverse has
been positioned as a necessity in the near future. Second,
emerging technological enablers have made the Metaverse a
growing possibility. For example, beyond 5G/6G (B5G/6G)
communication systems promise eMBB (enhanced Mobile
Broadband) and URLLC (Ultra Reliable Low Latency Com-
munication) [8]–[12], both of which enable AR/VR and haptic
technologies [13] that will enable users to be visually and
physically immersed in the virtual worlds.

The Metaverse is regarded as an advanced stage and the
long-term vision of digital transformation [14]. As an ex-
ceptional multi-dimensional and multi-sensory communication
medium [15], the Metaverse overcomes the tyranny of distance
by enabling participants in different physical
locations to
immerse in and interact with each other in a shared 3D virtual
world [16]. To date, there exist “lite" versions of the Metaverse
that have evolved mainly from Massive Multiplayer Online
(MMO) games. Among others, Roblox2 and Fortnite3 started
as online gaming platforms. Recently, virtual concerts were
held on Roblox and Fortnite and attracted millions of views.
Beyond the gaming industry, cities around the world have

1https://about.fb.com/news/2021/10/facebook-company-is-now-meta/
2https://www.roblox.com/
3https://www.epicgames.com/fortnite/en-US/home

 
 
 
 
 
 
begun ambitious projects to build their meta-cities [17] in the
Metaverse.

However, we are still far from realizing the full vision of the
Metaverse [18]. Firstly, the aforementioned “lite" versions are
distinct virtual worlds operated by separate entities. In other
words, one’s Fortnite avatar and virtual items cannot be used
in the Roblox world. In contrast, the Metaverse is envisioned
to be a seamless integration of various virtual worlds, with
each virtual world developed by separate service providers.
Similar to life in the physical world, one’s belongings and
assets should preserve their values when brought over from
one virtual world to another. Secondly, while MMO games can
host more than a hundred players at once, albeit with high-
speciﬁcation system requirements, an open-world Virtual Re-
ality MMO (VRMMO) application is still a relatively nascent
concept even in the gaming industry. As in the physical world,
millions of users are expected to co-exist within the virtual
worlds of the Metaverse. It will be a challenge to develop
a shared Metaverse, i.e., one that does not have to separate
players into different server sessions. Thirdly, the Metaverse
is expected to integrate the physical and virtual worlds, e.g., by
creating a virtual copy of the physical world using the digital
twin (DT) [19]. The stringent sensing, communication, and
computation requirements impede the real-time and scalable
implementation of the Metaverse. Finally, the birth of the
Metaverse comes amid increasingly stringent privacy regula-
tions [20]. A data-driven realization of the Metaverse brings
forth new concerns, as new modes of accessing the Internet
using AR/VR imply that new modalities of data such as eye-
tracking data can be captured and leveraged by businesses.

Though the Metaverse is considered to be the succes-
i.e., devices connected
sor to the Internet, edge devices,
to the Metaverse via radio access networks [21], may lack
the capabilities to support interactive and resource-intensive
applications and services, such as interacting with avatars
and rendering 3D worlds. To truly succeed as the next-
generation Internet, it is of paramount importance that users
can ubiquitously access the Metaverse, just as the Internet
entertains billions of users daily. Fortunately, as AR/VR,
the tactile Internet, and hologram streaming are key driving
applications of 6G [22], [23], it has become apparent that
future communication systems will be developed to support the
Metaverse. Moreover, the timely shift from the conventional
focus on classical communication metrics such as data rates
towards the co-design of computation and communication
systems [24], implies that the design of next-generation mobile
edge networks will also attempt
to solve the problem of
bringing the Metaverse to computationally constrained mobile
users. Finally, the paradigm shift from centralized big data to
distributed or decentralized small data [22] across the “Internet
of Everything" implies that the blockchain [25], [26] will play
a fundamental role in realizing the Metaverse at mobile edge
networks. With the above considerations in mind, this survey
focuses on discussing the edge-enabled Metaverse. We will
discuss the key communication and networking, computation,
and blockchain/distributed ledger technologies (DLT) that will
be instrumental in solving the aforementioned challenges and
realizing the edge-enabled Metaverse.

2

B. Related Works and Contributions

Given the popularity of the Metaverse, several surveys on
related topics have appeared recently. A summary of these
surveys and how our survey adds value is shown in Table I.
The study in [16] is among the ﬁrst to provide a tutorial
on the Metaverse. In [16], the authors discuss the Metaverse’s
role in promoting social good. Then, the architecture of the
Metaverse, as well as examples of the emerging developments
in the industry are described. The survey of [27] discusses
the technological enablers of the Metaverse in greater detail.
The topics of eXtended reality (XR), IoT and robotics, user
interface (UI) design, AI, and blockchain are introduced.

Following [16], [27], other surveys subsequently discuss
more speciﬁc subsets of topics afﬁliated with the Metaverse.
Given the recent advancements of AI,
the study in [28]
discusses how AI can play a part in developing the Meta-
verse, e.g., in terms of natural language processing to create
intelligent chatbots or machine vision to allow AR/VR devices
to effectively analyze and understand the user environment.
The study in [25] discusses how convergence of AI and
blockchain can facilitate service delivery in the Metaverse.
For example, AI can be used to train virtual characters that
populate the Metaverse, whereas the blockchain can be used to
facilitate transactions within the Metaverse. The study in [29]
focuses its discussion on the present applications and industrial
developments of the Metaverse, as well as provides forecasts
on the future prospects from an industrial perspective.

However, these surveys do not focus on the implementation
challenges of the Metaverse at mobile edge networks from a
resource allocation [38], communication, and networking, or
computation perspective. While it is important to understand
what are the enabling technologies of the Metaverse, it is also
important to discuss how they can be implemented on mobile
edge networks. For example, while [27] surveys applications
of AR/VR that can enhance the immersion experience of a
user in the Metaverse, an equivalently important question to
ask is: how can the communication and networking hurdles
be crossed to bring AR/VR to potentially millions of edge
devices while respecting the stringent latency and data rate
requirements? Surveys on AR/VR service delivery [30]–[32]
do focus on how AR/VR can be implemented over 5G
mobile edge networks, as well as discuss the computing and
ofﬂoading architectures involved. However, these surveys are
not Metaverse-speciﬁc and therefore do not address some of
the key challenges discussed in our survey. For example, the
Metaverse will have massive users accessing and interacting
with the virtual worlds with AR/VR simultaneously. These
users will also interact with each other, thereby setting a
stringent constraint on the round-trip communication latency.
The challenges of interoperability, heterogeneity, and massive
simultaneous stochastic network demands are important topics
that we will discuss in this survey. In addition, the primary
focus of [30]–[32] is on AR/VR service delivery. In contrast,
our survey adopts a holistic view of how other enablers of
the Metaverse such as AI model training or blockchain can
be implemented at the edge. Our approach therefore opens
up further discussions and challenges as compared to that of

3

Reference
[16]★
[27]★
[28]★
[25]★
[29]★

Key focus of survey
Discusses the architecture of the Metaverse, current examples, and its role in promoting
social good, and the development of a campus prototype
Discusses technology enablers of the Metaverse, e.g., VR, AR, and IoT
Discusses how AI can aid in the development of the Metaverse
Discusses how AI and blockchain can enrich applications in the Metaverse
Discusses the industrial examples, applications, and forecasts of the Metaverse

[30]–[32]

Discusses how VR/mobile AR can be realized with 5G mobile edge computing, the
computing architectures and applications

[33], [34]

[35]–[37]

Discusses how AI can be conducted at the edge and how AI can facilitate edge
resource management
Discusses how edge computing can be used to improve IoT through computation
and communication support

How our survey differs
Our survey discusses how enablers of Metaverse can be implemented at a scale
at mobile edge networks
Instead of focusing on what are the enabling technologies, we focus on how
the enablers of the Metaverse can be implemented at mobile edge networks. We
discuss the implementation challenges and solutions from the communication and networking,
computation, and blockchain perspectives
AR/VR are just ways to access the Metaverse. Our survey adopts a holistic view of
implementation challenges, e.g., of distributed computation and blockchain. Our survey also
focuses on the challenges of adopting a Metaverse that will host a massive number of users
simultaneously, similar to VRMMO games

As the optimization or resource allocation objectives are not Metaverse speciﬁc, several studies
look at network optimization from the conventional perspectives. Our survey introduces the
challenge of multi-sensory optimization objectives such as QoA.

TABLE I: Summary of related works vs. our survey. The references marked with the asterisk symbol are Metaverse-speciﬁc.

conventional AR/VR service delivery.

Similarly, while the aforementioned surveys [25], [27], [28]
discuss the AI algorithms that can empower autonomous
applications in the Metaverse, it is equally important to explore
how these data and computing hungry algorithms can be exe-
cuted on resource-constrained edge devices. Currently, surveys
on how AI can be implemented at the edge conduct their
discussions from the perspectives of edge intelligence [33],
[34]. Surveys on the convergence of the Internet of Things
(IoT) and edge computing [35]–[37] also studies challenges
and resource allocation solutions from the conventional IoT
perspective. These surveys review and discuss studies based
on conventional metrics such as data rate or energy efﬁciency.
On the other hand, as the Metaverse involves 3D immersion
and physical-virtual world synchronization, our survey aims
to discuss how the challenges of multi-sensory optimization
objectives such as quality of augmentation (QoA) can be
solved, e.g., through leveraging next-generation communica-
tion paradigms such as semantic/goal-aware communication.
Moreover, beyond discussing the blockchain’s function of
enabling decentralized and sustainable economic ecosystems,
the importance of blockchain in managing edge communi-
cation and networking resources is under-explored in the
aforementioned surveys [16], [25], [27]. Without addressing
these fundamental implementation issues and proposing viable
solutions, it is practically challenging for the Metaverse to
be the “successor to the mobile Internet" beyond the proof
of concept. This motivates us to write a survey that dis-
cusses challenges from the perspectives of communication
and networking, computation, and blockchain at mobile edge
networks. Through discussing conceivable solutions for the
challenges, our survey provides critical insights and useful
guidelines for the readers to better understand how these
implementation issues could be resolved towards realizing an
immersive, scalable, and ubiquitous Metaverse.

The contributions of our survey are as follows:
• We ﬁrst provide a tutorial that motivates a deﬁnition
and introduction to the architecture of the Metaverse.
In our tutorial, we highlight some examples of current
implementations and development frameworks for the
Metaverse. Through this succinct tutorial, the readers can
catch up with the forefront developments in this topic.
• We identify key communication and networking chal-
lenges towards realizing the immersive Metaverse. Dif-
ferent from conventional AR/VR, the Metaverse involves
massive volumes of user interactions and differentiated

services. We discuss desirable characteristics of the Meta-
verse from the communication and networking perspec-
tive. Then, we survey key communication and networking
solutions that will be fundamental towards realizing these
characteristics. We particularly focus on next-generation
communication architectures such as semantic commu-
nication and real-time physical-virtual synchronization.
This way, readers are able to understand how the devel-
opment of future communication systems can potentially
play their roles in the edge-enabled Metaverse.

• We discuss key computation challenges towards realizing
the ubiquitous Metaverse for resource-constrained users
at
the network edge. We survey methods from two
classiﬁcations of works. The ﬁrst classiﬁcation of our sur-
veyed solutions leverages the cloud-edge-end computa-
tion paradigm to tap on cloud/edge computation resources
for resource-constrained users to access the Metaverse.
The second classiﬁcation of our work studies selected
AI-driven techniques to improve the efﬁciency of com-
putation, e.g., in terms of accelerating processing speed
and reducing storage cost. Our survey in this section aims
to provide general readers with a holistic view of how
the Metaverse can be accessed at anytime and anywhere,
especially on computation-constrained edge devices.
• We explore how blockchain technologies can aid in the
development of the interoperatable Metaverse. Different
from the aforementioned surveys that focus only on the
application value of blockchain, e.g., in empowering eco-
nomic ecosystems in the Metaverse, we also emphasize
the infrastructure value of blockchain. Speciﬁcally, we
expound on how the blockchain can support the edge
communication and networking aspects of the Metaverse,
e.g., through secure and decentralized edge data storing
and sharing for reliable Metaverse, blockchain sharding,
and cross-chain for scalability and interoperability of the
Metaverse. This is in line with the B5G/6G vision [22]
that DLT will play a fundamental role in enabling native
secure and reliable communication and networking.

• We outline the research directions to pave the path
towards future research attempts on realizing the Meta-
verse at mobile edge networks. Our survey serves as an
initial step that precedes a comprehensive and insightful
investigation of the Metaverse at mobile edge networks,
helping researchers quickly grasp the overview of visions,
enabling technologies, and challenges in the area.

The survey is organized as follows. Section II discusses

the architecture of the Metaverse and current developments.
Section III discusses communication and networking chal-
lenges and key solutions. Section IV discusses the computation
challenges and solutions. Section V discusses the blockchain
technology and its functions in the edge-empowered Meta-
verse. Section VI discusses the future research directions.
Section VII concludes.

II. ARCHITECTURE, DEVELOPMENTS, AND TOOLS OF THE
METAVERSE

In this section, we present the architecture, examples, and

development tools for the Metaverse.

A. Deﬁnition and Architecture

The Metaverse is an embodied version of the Internet that
comprises a seamless integration of interoperable, immersive,
and shared virtual ecosystems navigable by user avatars. In
the following, we explain each key word in this deﬁnition.

• Embodied: The Metaverse blurs the boundary between the
virtual and physical worlds [39], where users can “phys-
ically" interact with the virtual worlds with a tangible
experience, e.g., by using 3D visual, auditory, kinesthetic,
and haptic feedback. The Metaverse can utilize AR to
extend the virtual worlds into the physical world.

• Seamless/Interoperable: Much like the physical world,
belonging of users’ avatars in one virtual world should not
lose its value when brought to another seamlessly, even
if the virtual worlds are developed by separate entities. In
other words, no a single company “owns” the Metaverse.
• Immersive: The Metaverse can be “experienced" beyond
2D interactions that allow users to interact with other
users similar to that in the physical world.

• Shared: Much like the physical world, thousands of users
should be able to co-exist in a single server session, rather
than having users separated into different virtual servers.
With users accessing the Metaverse and immersing them-
selves anytime and anywhere, the life-like interaction of
users is thus shared globally, i.e., an action may affect
any other users just as in an open world, rather than only
for users at a speciﬁc server.

• Ecosystem: The Metaverse will support end-to-end ser-
vice provisions for users with digital identities (DIDs),
e.g., content creation, social entertainment, in-world value
transfer regardless of nationalities of users, and physical
services that will cross the boundary between the physical
and virtual worlds. The Metaverse ecosystem empowered
by the decentralized design of blockchains is expected
to be sustainable as it has a closed-loop independent
economic system with transparent operating rules.

Next, we discuss the architecture of the Metaverse with

some foundemental enabling technologies (Fig. 1).

1) Physical-virtual synchronization: Each non-mutually-
exclusive stakeholder in the physical world controls
components that inﬂuence the virtual worlds. The action
of the stakeholder has consequences in the virtual worlds
that may, in turn, give feedback to the physical world.
The key stakeholders are:

4

• Users can immerse the virtual worlds as avatars
through various equipment, such as, Head Mounted
Displays (HMDs) or AR goggles [40]. In the virtual
societies The users can, in turn, execute actions to
interact with other users or virtual objects.

• IoT and sensor networks deployed in the physical
world collect data from the physical world. The in-
sights derived are used to update the virtual worlds,
e.g., to maintain DTs for physical entities. Sensor
networks may be independently owned by sensing
service providers (SSPs) that contribute live data
feeds (i.e., sensing as a service [41]) to virtual
service providers (VSPs) to generate and maintain
the virtual worlds.

• Virtual service providers (VSPs) develop and main-
tain the virtual worlds of the Metaverse. Similar
to user-created videos today (e.g., YouTube), the
Metaverse is envisioned to be enriched with user-
generated content (UGC) that includes games, art,
and social applications [42]. These UGC can be
created, traded, and consumed in the Metaverse.
• Physical service providers (PSPs) operate the physi-
cal infrastructure that supports the Metaverse engine
and respond to transaction requests that originate
from the Metaverse. This includes the operations of
communication and computation resources at edge
networks or logistics services for the delivery of
physical goods transacted in the Metaverse.
2) The Metaverse engine obtains inputs such as data from
stakeholder-controlled components that are generated,
maintained, and enhanced by entities and their activities
in the physical and virtual worlds.

• AR/VR enables users to experience the Metaverse
visually, whereas haptics enables users to experience
the Metaverse through the additional dimension of
touch, e.g., using haptic gloves. This enhances user
interactions, e.g., through transmitting a handshake
across the world, and opens up the possibilities of
providing physical services in the Metaverse, e.g.,
remote surgery. These technologies are developed
by the standards that facilitate interoperability, e.g.,
Virtual Reality Modelling Language (VRML)4, that
govern the properties, physics, animation, and ren-
dering of virtual assets, so that users can traverse
the Metaverse smoothly and seamlessly.

• Tactile Internet enables users in the Metaverse to
transmit/receive haptic and kinesthetic information
over the network with a round-trip delay of ap-
proximately 1 ms [43]. For example, Meta’s haptic
glove project5 aims to provide a viable solution to
one of Metaverse’s essential problems: using the
tactile Internet with haptic feedback to enable users
in the physical world to experience the embodied
haptic and kinesthetic feeling of their avatars during

4https://www.web3d.org/documents/speciﬁcations/14772/V2.0/part1/

javascript.html

5https://about.fb.com/news/2021/11/reality-labs-haptic-gloves-research/

5

Fig. 1: The Metaverse architecture features the immersive and real-time physical-virtual synchronization supported by the
communication and networking, computation, and blockchain infrastructure subsequently discussed in the labeled sections.

interacting with virtual objects or other avatars.

• Digital

twin enables some virtual worlds within
the Metaverse to be modeled after the physical
world in real-time. This is accomplished through
modeling and data fusion [44], [45]. DT adds to
the realism of the Metaverse and facilitates new
dimensions of services and social interaction [46].
For example, Nvidia Omniverse6 allows BMW to

blend its physical automotive factories and VR, AI,
and robotics to improve its industrial precision and
ﬂexibility, which ﬁnally increases BMW’s planning
efﬁciency by around 30 percent.

• Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) can be leveraged to incor-
porate intelligence into the Metaverse for improved
user experience, e.g., for efﬁcient 3D object ren-
dering, cognitive avatars, and AIGC. For example,

6https://blogs.nvidia.com/blog/2021/04/13/nvidia-bmw-factory-future/

InfrastructurePhysical worldVirtual serviceproviderMetaverse EngineVirtual worldUserIoT/SensorAR/VRTactile InternetBridging thephysical andvirtual worldSynchronizing thephysical and virtualworldDigital TwinAIEconomyHuman-avatarcommunicationHuman-humancommunicationModeling/Simulationoptimization High-dimensional  data processingData fusionAR/VR recommendationAI-generated contentIntelligent managementCogitive avatarsReal-time and intelligentScalableSharedUbiquitousInteroperableDevelopmentVirtualgoods/serviceprovisionPhysical/Virtual world ecosystemFor virtual worldnavigationE.g., virtual workspaceand educationE.g., virtual concert andgraduation ceremony E.g. e-commerce, civilservices, and logisticsPhysical serviceproviderTangible goods/service transactionsUser-generated contentNFT tradingMaket and mechanismGameFi & SocialFiImmersive streamingAR adaptationLight field interactionPoint cloud displayingImmersion and embodiedVirtual goods/serviceTangible goods/serviceVirtual environmentAvatarSection III. Communication and NetworkingA. Rate-Reliability-Latency 3D Multimedia Networks  1) Resource Allocation for VR Streaming  2) Resource Allocation for AR Adaptation  3) Edge Caching for AR/VR Content  4) Hologram StreamingB. Human-in-the-loop Communication  1) URLLC for the tactile Internet  2) Semantic/Goal-aware                             Communication C. Real-time Physical-Virtual Synchronization  1) Resource Allocation for Physical-                   Virtual Synchronization  2) Intelligent Edge Network-aided                 Virtual-Physical Synchronization Section IV. ComputationA. The Cloud-Edge-End Computing Paradigm B. Efficient AR/VR Cloud-Edge-End Rendering  1) Stochastic Demand and Network Condition  2) Stragglers at Edge Networks  3) Heterogeneous Tasks C. Scalable AI Model Training  1) Parameter Pruning and                           Quantization  2) Low-rank Approximation  3) Knowledge Distillation D. Privacy and Security  1) Trusted Execution Environment  2) Federated Learning  3) Adverse Machine Learning Section V. BlockchainA. The Blockchain-based Metaverse                Economic System   1) User-generated Content  2) Non-Fungible Tokens  3) Game and Social Financial Systems B. Decentralized Edge Data Storage and Sharing  1) Data Storage 2) Data Sharing D. Blockchain in Edge Resource Management  1) Edge Multimedia Networks  2) Physical-Virtual Synchronization  3) Edge Computation Offloading  4) Edge Intelligence C. Blockchain Scalability and Interoperability  1) Scalability   2) Interoperabilitythe MetaHuman project7 by EpicGames utilizes
machine learning (ML) to generate life-like digital
characters quickly. The generated characters may be
deployed by VSPs as conversational virtual assis-
tants to populate the Metaverse. A comprehensive
review of AI training and inference in the Metaverse
is presented in [28].

• Economy governs incentives and content creation,
UGC trading, and service provisioning to support all
aspects of the Metaverse ecosystem. For example,
VSP can pay the price to SSP in exchange for
data streams to synchronize the virtual and physical
world [47]. Metaverse service providers can also
purchase computing resources from cloud services
[48] to support resource-constrained users. More-
over, the economic system is the driving engine that
incentivizes the sustainable development of digital
assets and DIDs for the sustainable development of
the Metaverse.

3) The infrastructure layer enables the Metaverse to be

accessed at the edge.

• Communication and Networking: To prevent breaks
in the presence (BIP), i.e., disruptions that cause a
user to be aware of the real-world setting, AR/VR
and haptic trafﬁc have stringent rate, reliability,
and latency requirements [49]. Due to the expected
explosive data trafﬁc growth, ultra-dense networks
deployed in edge networks can potentially alle-
viate the constrained system capacity. Moreover,
the B5G/6G communication infrastructure [10] will
play an instrumental role towards enabling post-
Shannon communication to alleviate bandwidth con-
straints in managing the explosive growth of com-
munication costs. We discuss these concepts in
greater detail in Section III.

• Computation: Today, MMO games can host more
than a hundred players in a single game session
and hence require high-speciﬁcation GPU require-
ments. VRMMO games, which are the rudiments
of the Metaverse system, are still scarce in the
industry. The reason is that VRMMO games may
require devices such as HMDs to be connected to
powerful computers to render both the immersive
virtual worlds and the interactions with hundreds
of other players. To enable ubiquitous access to
the Metaverse, a promising solution is the cloud-
edge-end computation paradigm. Speciﬁcally, local
computations can be performed on edge devices for
the least resource-consuming task, e.g., computa-
tions required by the physics engine to determine the
movement and positioning of an avatar. To reduce
the burden on the cloud for scalability and further
reduce end-to-end latency, edge servers can be lever-
aged to perform costly foreground rendering, which
requires less graphical details but lower latency [50].
less delay-
The more computation-intensive but

6

sensitive tasks, e.g., background rendering, can, in
turn, be executed on cloud servers. Moreover, AI
techniques of model pruning and compression, as
well as distributed learning, can reduce the burden
on backbone networks. We further discuss these
concepts in Section IV.

• Blockchain: The DLT provided by the blockchain
will be the key to provide proof-of-ownership of
virtual goods, as well as establishing the economic
ecosystem within the Metaverse. It is difﬁcult for
current virtual goods to be of value outside the
platforms on which they are traded or created.
Blockchain technology will play an essential role in
reducing the reliance on such centralization. For ex-
ample, a Non-fungible token (NFT) serves as a mark
of a virtual asset’s uniqueness and authenticates
one’s ownership of the asset [51]. This mechanism
protects the value of virtual goods and facilitates
peer-to-peer trading in a decentralized environment.
As virtual worlds in the Metaverse are developed
by different parties, the user data may also be man-
aged separately. To enable seamless traversal across
virtual worlds, multiple parties will need to access
and operate on such user data. Due to value isolation
among multiple blockchains, cross-chain is a crucial
technology to enable secure data interoperability. In
addition, blockchain technology has found recent
successes in managing edge resources [52]. We
discuss these concepts in Section V.

B. Current Developments

As shown in Fig. 2, the development of the Metaverse is
still in its infancy. We are only in a “proto-verse" on the
development side, with much more to be done to realize the
vision of the Metaverse discussed in Section II-A. Based on the
communication and networking, computation, and blockchain
infrastructure, the physical-virtual synchronization, including
the physical-to-virtual (P2V) synchronization and the virtual-
to-physical (V2P) synchronization, will help the Metaverse
to realize the digital experience in the physical world while
realize the physical experience in the virtual worlds. For
example, by designing more comfortable, cheaper, and lighter
AR/VR devices and overcoming the challenges that would be
encountered in bringing them to reality. The development of
the Metaverse should be viewed from two perspectives. The
ﬁrst perspective is, how can actions in the virtual world affect
the physical world? The digital goods in the Metaverse will
have real (monetary) value. For example, the company Larva
Labs built Meebits8 as a marketplace to trade avatars on the
Ethereum blockchain. In addition, DTs have been utilized to
empower smart manufacturing. The second perspective is, how
can the actions in the physical world be reﬂected in the virtual
world? This is driven by the digitization and intelligentization
of physical objects. For example, a virtual 3D environment
will reﬂect the status of the physical world in real-time to

7https://www.unrealengine.com/en-US/digital-humans

8https://meebits.larvalabs.com/

7

Fig. 2: The development path in the Metaverse from the perspective of the physical and virtual worlds.

enable remote working, socializing, and service delivery such
as education [53].

Companies across many sectors, such as entertainment,
ﬁnance, healthcare, and education, can work closely to develop
Metaverse hand in hand. For example,
theme parks have
become one of the ideal candidates to be situated in the
Metaverse since they are expensive to construct in the physical
world but can be done quickly and safely in the Metaverse.
In 2020, Disney unveiled their plans to create a theme park in
the Metaverse. The company reiterated this vision at the 2021
Q4 earnings call [54]. This section looks at some existing
and prospective developments that are “early forms" of the
Metaverse. These developments are mainly classiﬁed into two
types of categories as follows.

1) Massive Multiplayer Online Role-playing Games: Many
have argued that the Metaverse is not new since it has long
been implemented in video games. While video games of
today may not completely be classiﬁed as the Metaverse
according to the technical deﬁnition provided in Section II,
many video games have features that are rather similar to the
Metaverse. For example, in massive multiplayer online role-
playing games (MMORPG), players can enter the game and
live in the digital world using their avatars. These avatars have
roles tagged to the players, just as how one has a job in the
physical world. MMORPGs can support a massive number of
players to interact in a 3D rendered virtual world. Some key
examples are as follows:

• Second Life: This is among the ﬁrst attempt to create
a complete virtual world in which players could live.
In second life, players control their avatars and can do
almost anything they can in the physical world, from
job seeking to get married [55]. Besides, players can
customize the environment they live in. The economy in
Second Life is supported by the Linden Dollar9, a virtual
currency, which can be traded for real-world currency.

• Minecraft: The popular game allows anyone to create
their own content by using 3D cubes in an inﬁnite virtual
world, and it supports user access using VR devices such
as Oculus Rift. Digital copies of cities around the world,
e.g., Kansas and Chicago, have been built using Minecraft
and can be accessed by any user10.

• DragonSB: DragonSB is the ﬁrst Metaverse MMORPG
built on Terra Protocol and Binance Smart Chain Plat-
form [56]. The players will be rewarded with SB tokens,
where the token will be listed on both centralized and
decentralized exchanges.

Other popular MMORPGs are World of Warcraft, Grand
Theft Auto Online, Final Fantasy XIV, Pokemon Go, and
Animal Crossing: New Horizons. For a detailed discussion
of these games, the reader may refer to [16]. Following the
classiﬁcation framework [16], we present a taxonomy for the
above gaming Metaverse according to their features in Table II.

2) Applications of the Metaverse: Beyond the gaming in-
dustry, multiple entities, from governments to tech companies,
have announced their interest in establishing a presence in the
Metaverse. This includes the smart cities [60], entertainment
industry, education institutions, working environments, and
healthcare (Fig. 3).

• Metaverse Seoul: The Seoul Metropolitan Govern-
ment plans to release Metaverse Seoul in Seoul Vision
2030 [18]. This platform contains a virtual city hall,
tourism destinations, social service centers, and many
other features. The local users can meet with avatar
ofﬁcials for consultations and provisions of civil services.
The foreign users can tour vividly replicated locations and
join in celebrating festival events while wearing their VR
headsets. This aims to boost the tourism industry.

• Barbados Metaverse Embassy: Barbados, an island
nation, is prepared to declare digital real estate sovereign

9https://www.investopedia.com/terms/l/linden-dollar.asp

10https://www.minecraftmaps.com/tags/real-cities-in-minecraft

Physical-to-Virtual (P2V) SynchornizationVirtual-to-Physical (V2P) SynchornizationCommunication& NetworkingCommunication& NetworkingComputationBlockchainRealization of thedigital experienceRealization of thephysical experiencePhysicalworldVirtualworldDigital compus (Minecraft)Xirang (Virtual conference)The CUHKSZ MetaverseMeebits (Marketplace)BMW virtual factoryPower grid DT (IdentiQ)P2V examplesV2P examplesTABLE II: Features of representative Metaverse examples.

8

Metaverse Example

World of Warcraft

Grand Theft Auto Online

Final Fantasy XIV

Pokemon Go

Animal Crossing: New Horizons
Second Life
Minecraft
DragonSB

Smart Cities

Entertainment

Education

Work

Metaverse Seoul
Barbados Metaverse
Embassy
AltspaceVR
Decentraland
Xirang
CUHKSZ

Horizon Workrooms

Microsoft Mesh

Healthcare

Telemedicine

MMORPG

Applications
of the
Metaverse

Blockchain AR/VR DT UGC
(cid:55)

(cid:51)

(cid:55)

(cid:55)

(cid:55)

(cid:55)

(cid:55)

(cid:55)
(cid:55)
(cid:55)
(cid:51)
(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)
(cid:51)
(cid:51)
(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:55)

(cid:55)

(cid:51)

(cid:55)
(cid:55)
(cid:51)
(cid:55)
(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)
(cid:51)
(cid:51)
(cid:55)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:55)

(cid:51)

(cid:55)
(cid:55)
(cid:55)
(cid:55)
(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)
(cid:55)
(cid:51)
(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:55)

(cid:51)
(cid:51)
(cid:51)
(cid:51)
(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)
(cid:51)
(cid:51)
(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)
(cid:51)
(cid:51)
(cid:51)
(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)
(cid:51)
(cid:51)
(cid:51)

(cid:51)

AI

AI enemies
AI in rockstar
advanced game engine
AI enemies
Plan route
more strategically
AI NPCs
AI NPCs
Platform to train AI
AI enemies
AI NPCs

AI NPCs

AI NPCs
AI NPCs
AI NPCs
AI NPCs
Tools for designing
virtual content

(cid:51) Tools for avatars, holoportation,

(cid:51)

and spatial rendering
Data analysis
and collaboration

(a) Screenshot of AltspaceVR platform [57].

(b) Screenshot of the non-fungible LAND tokens
constitute the Decentraland Metaverse [58].

(c) Nvidia Omniverse for modeling physics, ma-
terials, and real-time path tracing [59].

Fig. 3: Screenshots of (a) AltspaceVR, (b) Decentraland, and (c) Nvidia Omniverse.

property by establishing a Metaverse embassy [18]. The
government works with multiple Metaverse companies
the design of
to aid the country in land acquisition,
virtual embassies and consulates,
the development of
infrastructure to provide services such as “e-visas", and
the construction of a “teleporter" that will allow users to
transport their avatars across worlds.

• AltspaceVR: AltspaceVR is a virtual meeting space
designed for live and virtual events, and it is compatible
with a variety of operating systems [61]. Basically, the
users of AltspaceVR are allowed to meet and engage
online through the use of avatars. It recently implemented
a safety bubble feature to reduce the risk of inappropriate
behavior and harassment.

• Decentraland: Decentraland is built on the Ethereum
blockchain [58]. It is a decentralized virtual world that
allows users to buy and sell virtual
land. Users can
make their own micro-worlds complete with virtual trees,
planes, and other features. Everything that is available in
the physical world can be found in Decentraland, from

transportation systems to hotels.

• Xirang: The Chinese tech giant Baidu has released a
Metaverse application named Xirang (which means land
of hope), allowing the users to explore the virtual worlds
using portable gadgets such as smartphones and VR
devices [62]. In addition, personalized avatars can be
automatically generated from the user’s uploaded images.
Xirang hosted a three-day virtual AI developers’ confer-
ence in 2021 that supports 100,000 users at once. This is
an important step towards realizing the shared Metaverse.
• The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
(CUHKSZ): CUHKSZ Metaverse is a virtual copy of the
physical campus. It is powered by the blockchain to pro-
vide the students with an interactive Metaverse, a hybrid
environment in which students’ real-world behaviors can
have an impact on the virtual world, and vice versa [16].
• Telemedicine: Telemedicine is immersion in health-
care industry, allowing patients to connect virtually
with healthcare professionals when they are physically
apart [63]. Doctors and their patients can meet in the

virtual world through VR to provide telemedicine con-
sultations. While physical follow-ups, medical scans, and
tests can then be booked and performed in a facility near
the patient, the results can be sent to any preferred doctor.

C. Tools, Platforms, and Frameworks

In this section, we will discuss a variety of key tools,
platforms, and frameworks used currently in the development
of the Metaverse. Some examples are AnamXR, Microsoft
Mesh, Structure Sensor, Canvas, and Gaimin. Table III pro-
vides a summary of the features of these development tools
that support the Metaverse ecosystem. Some of the screen
captures of these tools are also shown in Fig. 3.

• Unity: Unity is a 3D content creation environment that
includes a fully integrated 3D engine as well as studio
design [64]. Virtual reality, augmented reality, and Meta-
verse experience can be created using the aforementioned
features. Decentralization options in the Metaverse are
provided by the Unity components store, which includes
features such as edge computing, AI agents, microser-
vices, and blockchain.

• Unreal Engine: Unreal Engine is a Metaverse develop-
ment tool. It includes designing studios, i.e., MetaHuman
Creator, and an asset marketplace [64]. Using MetaHu-
man Creator, the required time of user avatar creation
process can be reduced from months to hours with
unprecedented quality, ﬁdelity, and realism.

• Roblox: While Roblox is known by many as a game,
it has slowly evolved into becoming a platform that
provides multitudes of development tools such as avatar
generation11 and teleportation mechanisms [64]. Roblox
offers a proprietary 3D engine connected with the design
platform and a marketplace where creators may trade
assets and code.

• Nvidia Omniverse: The graphics and AI chips company
Nvidia is going to build a Metaverse platform called
Omniverse [59]. Omniverse is a scalable, multi-GPU real-
time reference development platform for 3D simulation
and design collaboration [59]. Content producers can use
the Omniverse platform to integrate and expedite their 3D
workﬂows, while developers may quickly construct new
tools and services by plugging into the platform layer of
the Omniverse stack. Nvidia will simulate all factories in
the Omniverse to reduce the amount of waste. Nvidia’s
CEO Jensen Huang created his own avatar with AI and
computer graphics modeling and presented it at a press
conference in April 2021.

• Meta Avatars: Meta Avatars is an avatar system to
offer support to all Unity developers on Quest, Rift, and
Windows-based VR platforms [65]. Users may customize
their Meta Avatars by using a platform-integrated editor,
ensuring that all apps that use the Meta Avatars SDK
reﬂect them consistently and authentically. Hand tracking,
controller tracking, and audio input are all used by Meta
Avatars to produce expressive Avatar representations.

11https://developer.roblox.com/en-us/api-reference/class/Tool

9

• Meta Haptics Prototype: Meta’s haptic glove allows
the users to feel an object and it also acts as a VR
controller [66]. The glove contains inﬂatable plastic pads
to ﬁt along the wearer’s palm, underside of ﬁngers, and
ﬁngertips. When the VR application runs, the system
will regulate the level of inﬂation and exert pressure on
different portions of the hand. If the user contacts an
object, the user will experience the sensation of a virtual
object pressing into the skin. When the user grips a virtual
item, the lengthy ﬁnger actuators tighten, giving the user
a resistive feeling.

• Hololens2: HoloLens2 is a head-mounted mixed reality
device and comes with an onboard computer and built-
in Wi-Fi [67]. It has more computing power, better
sensors, and longer battery life when compared with
its predecessor. Hololens2 can be used together with
Microsoft Mesh to connect users worldwide. The user can
communicate, maintain eye contact, and observe other
users’ facial expressions who are located elsewhere.
• Oculus Quest2: Oculus Quest2 is a head-mounted VR
device from Meta [68], which can be connected to a
desktop computer with USB or Wi-Fi to run compatible
VR applications.

D. Lessons Learned

1) The Metaverse cannot be realized by a standalone tech-
nology: From the aforementioned deﬁnition, we can learn that
the Metaverse is built from the convergence of multiple en-
gines for its physical synchronization, i.e., AR/VR, the tactile
Internet, DT, AI, and blockchain-based economy. However, the
Metaverse cannot be considered as only one or some of them.
In detail, the lessons learned are listed as follows:

• AR/VR: AR/VR is only one of the most popular methods
to immerse users in 3D virtual worlds during the V2P
synchronization of the Metaverse. In detail, AR/VR will
offer Metaverse users with 3D virtual/auditory content.
• Tactile Internet: As another popular method to immerse
users in 3D virtual worlds during the V2P synchro-
nization of the Metaverse, tactile Internet can offer tac-
tile/kinesthetic content to users in the Metaverse as the
supplementary to visual/auditory content of AR/VR.
• Digital twin: DT is the foundation during the P2V syn-
chronization of the Metaverse that provides ubiquitous
connectivity between physical and virtual entities. Based
on DT of the physical world, the Metaverse can support
a better V2P synchronization but cannot directly provide
the immersive experience to users.

• AI: The Metaverse is considered to be AI-native, where
ubiquitous AI exists in the physical and virtual worlds.
AI can make the physical-virtual synchronization become
more efﬁcient. However, it cannot facilitate the synchro-
nization directly.

• Blockchain-based Economy: Blockchain-based Economy,
a.k.a, Web 3.0, is envisioned as the decentralized Internet.
Evolving from the read Web 1.0, the read/write Web 2.0,
the Web 3.0 is read/write/own. However, the Metaverse is
the next important stage and long-term vision of the con-

10

TABLE III: The summary of the development tools, platforms, and frameworks that support the Metaverse ecosystem.

Tools
Unity

Unreal Engine

Roblox

Features
A platform for creating real-time 2D/3D content, including 3D rendering, physics, collision detection, and etc.
Real-time 3D creation platform with features like photorealistic rendering, dynamic physics and effects, lifelike
animation, and robust data translation
Similar to Unity and Unreal Engine, provides a platform for content creators to create content in the Metaverse

Nvidia Omniverse A platform for 3D simulation and design based on Nvidia RTX technologies

Meta Avatars
Meta’s Haptics
Prototype
Hololens2
Oculus Quest2
Xverse
AnamXR
Microsoft Mesh
Structure Sensor
Canvas
Gaimin

A avatar system that can be implemented in various platforms to ease the creation of authentic avatars

A glove that allows the users to feel when the virtual object is touched

A head-mounted mixed reality device
A head-mounted VR device
Blockchain-based virtual ecosystem, where users may use their digital assets to play, create, share, and work
Cloud-based virtual e-commerce platform based on Unreal Engine to transform physical objects into pixels
A platform that enables presence and shared experience from any device through mixed reality applications
A 3D sensor that can be mounted onto mobile devices for 3D scanning
Software for 3D room scanning, creating accurate 3D models using Structure Sensor
Allow game/content developers to build gaming tokens into the Metaverse

tinuous digital transformation, which is more informative
that the discrete deﬁnition of Web 1.0/2.0/3.0.

and cryptocurrencies. We revisit challenges and solutions for
blockchain technology subsequently.

2) Implementation challenges: The representative Meta-
verse examples discussed in Table II may be “prototypes"
or early development examples of the Metaverse. Still, many
of them, e.g., Grand Theft Auto Online, already require
high-speciﬁcation computers to run. Moreover, the application
examples such as Metaverse Seoul are ambitious projects that
require computation-intensive rendering, real-time updating of
DTs, and low-latency reliable communications to be realized.
Clearly, the implementation challenges of the Metaverse have
to be addressed. We do so from the communication and
networking, computation, as well as blockchain perspectives
in the subsequent sections.

3) Standardized Protocols, Frameworks, and Tools: Each
company is building its own Metaverse based on different
protocols, frameworks, and tools. Collaborative efforts have to
be made to standardize the Metaverse protocols, framework,
and tools. Once standardized, it will be easier for the content
creators to create content as the content can be easily transfer-
able among various virtual worlds, even if they are developed
by different companies. Furthermore, the users can experience
a smooth transition when they are “teleported” across different
virtual worlds in the Metaverse. The interconnected virtual
worlds will be the Metaverse’s main difference/advantage as
compared to the MMORPG games discussed previously.

4) Metaverse Ecosystem and Economics: Many of the
examples given in this section rely on and enable UGC and
open-source contributions. For example, Roblox allows game
creation by any user, and Meta Avatars supports user-friendly
game development. The functioning of the Metaverse ecosys-
tem will therefore leverage the contribution of users world-
wide. The UGC and services provided by users, therefore,
can be supported and valued with cryptocurrency-promoted
transactions without the reliance on third-party entities. Due to
safety and security reasons, the transactions in the Metaverse
are mainly based on cryptocurrencies. However, the current
payment gateway interface is complex/not user-friendly to the
general public. A simple interface can have better support in
digital currency exchanges and payment across ﬁat currencies

III. COMMUNICATION AND NETWORKING

The early representative developments of the Metaverse
discussed in Table II are mostly ambitious projects that will
require high-speciﬁcation edge devices to run. The accessi-
bility of the Metaverse is, therefore, a signiﬁcant challenge.
The mobile edge networks are expected to provide users with
efﬁcient communication and networking coverage with high-
speed, low-delay, and wide-area wireless access so that users
can immerse themselves in the Metaverse and have seamless
and real-time experience [16]. To achieve this, stringent com-
munication requirements have to be met (Table IV). Unlike the
traditional transmission of 2D images, the need to transmit 3D
virtual items and scenarios in the Metaverse to provide users
with an immersive experience places a signiﬁcant burden on
the current 5G network infrastructure. For example, the Meta-
verse for mobile edge networks proposed in [69] demonstrates
that massive connectivity of Metaverse enablers, e.g., AR/VR,
tactile Internet, avatars, and DT, require large bandwidth and
URLLC to support immersive content delivery and real-time
interaction. In addition, a Metaverse-native communication
system based on the blockchain is proposed in [70] to provide
decentralized and anonymous connectivity for all physical and
virtual entities with respect to encrypted addresses. Virtual
concerts and executions of manufacturing decisions have to
be in real-time. Overall, the following characteristics of the
Metaverse present signiﬁcant new challenges to mobile edge
networks in providing Metaverse services:

1) Immersive 3D streaming: To blur the boundary of the
physical and virtual worlds, 3D streaming enables the
immersive experience of users in the Metaverse to be
delivered to millions of users at mobile edge networks.
2) Multi-sensory communications: The Metaverse consists
of multiple 3D virtual worlds [71], where users can im-
merse as avatars with multi-sensory perception, includ-
ing visual, auditory, haptic, and kinesthetic. Therefore,
edge users need to have ubiquitous connectivity to the

Metaverse to access the 3D multimedia services, such as
AR/VR and the tactile Internet, anytime and anywhere.
3) Real-time interaction: Massive types of interactions,
including human-to-human (H2H), human-to-machine
(H2M), and machine-to-machine (M2M) communica-
tions, form the basis for user-user and user-avatar real-
time interactions in the Metaverse. Therefore, social
multimedia services in the Metaverse have to be deliv-
ered under stringent requirements in real-time interac-
tions, such as motion-to-photon latency [72], interaction
latency, and haptic perception latency.

4) Seamless physical-virtual synchronization: To provide
seamless synchronization services among the physical
and virtual worlds, physical and virtual entities need to
communicate and update their real-time statuses with
each other. The importance and valuation of synchro-
nizing data may be affected by the age of information
(AoI) or the value of information (VoI) [73].

5) Multi-dimensional collaboration: Maintenance of the
Metaverse entails a multi-dimensional collaboration of
VSPs and PSPs in both the physical and virtual
worlds [74]. For example, as discussed in Section II-A,
the physical entities in edge networks, e.g., sensor
networks operated by PSPs, need to collect information
in the physical world regularly to ensure the freshness
of information for P2V synchronization. In return, de-
cisions in the virtual worlds can be transformed into
actuation in the physical world. This loop requires the
collaboration of a multitude of physical and virtual
entities over multiple dimensions, e.g., time and space.

To address these issues, we provide a review of cutting-
edge communication and networking solutions for the edge-
enabled Metaverse. First, users must immerse in the Metaverse
via the delivery of 3D multimedia services seamlessly in
Section III-A. This includes the support of VR streaming and
AR adaptation, allowing users and physical entities to synchro-
nize with the virtual worlds seamlessly. Beyond conventional
content delivery networks, communication and networking that
supports the Metaverse must prioritize user-centric considera-
tions in the content delivery process as shown in Section III-B.
The reason is that the Metaverse is full of contextual and
personalized content-based services like AR/VR and the tactile
Internet. Moreover, the explosive growth of data and limited
bandwidth necessitates a paradigm shift away from the conven-
tional focus of classical information theory. In response, we
review semantic/goal-oriented communication solutions [75]
that can serve to alleviate the spectrum scarcity for next-
generation multimedia services. Finally, real-time bidirectional
physical-virtual synchronization, i.e., DT, is essential for the
construction of the Metaverse, which is discussed in Sec-
tion III-C. The sensing and actuation interaction between
the physical and virtual worlds will have to leverage intel-
ligent communication infrastructures such as reconﬁgurable
intelligent surface (RIS) and unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV).
We present the instrumental mathematical tools and human-
oriented metrics in Fig. 4, as well as a brief summary of the
reviewed papers, in terms of scenarios, problems, performance

11

metrics, and mathematical tools in Table V.

A. Rate-Reliability-Latency 3D Multimedia Networks

The seamless and immersive experience of embodied telep-
resent via AR/VR brought by the Metaverse places high
demands on the communication and network infrastructure of
mobile edge networks in terms of transmission rate, reliability,
and latency [22]. In particular,
the high volume of data
exchanged to support AR/VR services that traverse between
the virtual worlds and the physical world requires the holistic
performance of the edge networking and communication in-
frastructure that optimizes the trade-off among rate, reliability,
and latency.

The ﬁrst dimension of consideration is the data rate that
supports round-trip interactions between the Metaverse and
the physical world (e.g., for users and sensor networks aid-
ing in the physical-virtual world synchronization) [77]–[79].
Second, interaction latency is another critical challenge for
users to experience realism in the AR/VR services [8]. Mobile
edge networks, for example, allow players to ubiquitously
participate in massively multiplayer online games that require
ultra-low latency for smooth interaction. The reason is that
latency determines how quickly players receive information
about their situation in the virtual worlds and how quickly
their responses are transmitted to other players. Finally, the
third dimension is the reliability of physical network services,
which refers to the frequency of BIP for users connecting
to the Metaverse [80]. Moreover, the reliability requirements
of AR/VR applications and users may vary dynamically over
time, thereby complicating the edge resource allocation for
AR/VR services provision of VSPs and PSPs.

1) Resource Allocation for VR Streaming: In the Meta-
verse, the most direct way for wireless users to access the
virtual worlds at mobile edge networks is through VR stream-
ing. Edge servers are expected to stream VR content to users
immersed in the Metaverse with high-performance guaran-
tees in terms of rate, reliability, and latency [81]. However,
spectrum resources of edge networks and wireless devices’
energy resources are limited, leading to challenging resource
allocation problems for VR streaming services. Performance
analysis and optimization of VR streaming services in the
Metaverse require a trade-off between multiple objectives
and a shift from simple averaging to ﬁne-grained analysis to
address spurs, distribution, and quality of service (QoS) issues.
For example, to address the spurs of heterogeneous users,
mobile edge networks provide a variety of alternative VR
transmission modes, allowing users to choose the service mode
that best suits their needs. Meanwhile, users can dynamically
decide the quality and utility of multimedia services based
on their own demand and cost of distribution. Finally, the
multimedia service providers in the mobile edge network
dynamically adjust their 3D services and user ﬁeld-of-view
(FoV), i.e., the user attention window, prediction to maximize
the utility of all Metaverse users in edge networks.

a) VR streaming model selection: The VR content of the
Metaverse is expected to be delivered in 6G heterogeneous
networks (HetNets) [82], [83]. First, VR content delivered in

12

TABLE IV: Communication requirements of services in the Metaverse [76].

Services

VR entertainment
The tactile Internet
Digital twin of smart city
AR smart healthcare
Hologram education (point could)
Hologram education (light ﬁeld)

Reliability (%)
1 - 10−5
1 - 10−6
1 - 10−5
1 - 10−6
1 - 10−5
1 - 10−5

Latency (ms) Data Rate (Mbit/s)

7-15
1
5-10
5
20
20

250
1
10
10,000
500-2,000
1 ×105-1 ×106

Connection Density
(devices/km2)
1,000-50,000
1,000-50,000
100,000
50
1,000
1,000

marcocell broadcasting can provide the largest coverage but
identical QoS to all VR users within the coverage of marco-
cells [84]. Second, to improve the performance of marcocell
broadcasting, small cell unicasting VR streaming [85] can help
marcocells to extend their coverage and thus improve QoS of
the VR streaming system. To efﬁciently utilize the available
communication resources of mobile devices, VR users can
also adaptively participate in device-to-device (D2D) multicast
clusters and send shared reused tracking signals to service
providers. In this way, the performance of the VR steaming
system can be improved by increasing the total bit rate within
the cell while ensuring short-term equality among users [86].
To provide accurate indoor positioning services to VR users,
the authors in [87] develop a VR service provisioning model
over terahertz (THz) /visible light communication (VLC) wire-
less networks. The THz/VLC wireless networks [88] are capa-
ble of providing larger available bandwidth for the VR content
transmission requiring unprecedentedly high data rate [89]. In
the proposed framework, VR users can turn on a suitable
VLC access point and select the base station with which
they are associated. Aiming at the quick adaptation of new
users’ movement patterns, they propose a meta reinforcement
learning (RL) algorithm to maximize the average number
of successfully served users. Finally, to integrate these three
types of streaming schemes, the authors in [83] propose an
intelligent streaming mode selection framework to improve
the throughput of VR streaming systems, using unsupervised
learning for D2D clustering and RL for online transmission
mode selection. From their performance evaluation results, the
proposed hybrid transmission mode selection framework can
achieve more than twice the average data rate as compared to
the baseline schemes that only rely on small cell unicasting
or macrocell broadcasting.

b) Field-of-view prediction in VR streaming: In addition
to the dynamic selection of transmission modes for VR ser-
vices, tiling and prefetching (e.g., from edge server caches) of
VR content are promising solutions to enhance the user expe-
rience in 360◦ VR video streaming [90]. For example, tiling of
VR content can save bandwidth by only transmitting the pixels
that are watched. Moreover, prefetching VR content before
they are rendered can reduce the latency of 3D multimedia
services. However, the performance of tiling and prefetching
techniques depends on the allocated resources and the FoV
prediction accuracy. Therefore, it is important to consider how
to balance the allocation of communication resources and
the fetched VR scenes when streaming to multiple wireless
users. To address this complex problem, the authors in [91]

propose a federated learning (FL)-based approach to train
VR viewpoint prediction models in a distributed and privacy-
preserving manner. In this way, VR viewpoint prediction
models with good performance can reduce the download of
VR tiles that are not rendered, thereby saving a large portion
of the data transfer rate and improving the resource efﬁciency
of mobile edge networks [92]. In detail, the authors consider
the impact of viewpoint prediction and prefetching in multi-
user scenarios and develop a VR stochastic buffering game
for the resource allocation problem in wireless edge networks.
In this game formulation, VR users independently decide the
requested data rate depending on the dynamics of the local
network and their current viewing states. Since each user has
limited information, the analytical solution of this game cannot
be obtained. The users’ observations, actions, and utility are
modeled as a partially observable Markov decision process,
with long-term utility maximized using the Dueling Double
Deep Recurrent Q-Network [93] algorithm. The experimental
results show that the proposed learning-based algorithm can
improve the viewing utility by 60% over the baseline algorithm
with the exact prediction accuracy and double the utility with
the same number of resource blocks.

c) Scalable VR streaming systems: The scalability and
self-adaptability of VR streaming systems are essential con-
siderations for the Metaverse at mobile edge networks. In [50],
the authors propose a joint optimization algorithm to maximize
the quality of experience (QoE) of VR users. Speciﬁcally, they
classify the VR service problem into VR user association,
VR service ofﬂoading, and VR content caching. Due to the
intractability of this joint optimization problem, they propose
a two-stage ofﬂine training and online exploitation algorithm
to support
the delivery of high-quality VR services over
mmWave-enabled mobile edge networks. Different from the
conventional transmission of 2D objects, VR content is 360◦
and panoramic. As users move through the 3D world in the
Metaverse, their eyes focus on speciﬁc FoV. To accurately
optimize for high-quality delivery of content, the movements
of users’ eyes and heads, or hands for interaction with the
virtual worlds, have to be closely tracked. The authors in [94]
propose a joint metric that accounts for tracking accuracy
and processing and transmission latency, based on the multi-
attribute utility theory. The multi-attribute utility theory model
assigns a unique value to each tracking and delay component
of VR QoS while allowing the proposed sum utility function to
capture the VR QoS effectively. They aim to rationally allocate
resources in the small-cell networks to meet users’ multi-
attribute utility requirements. Therefore, they formulate this

resource allocation problem of VR as a non-cooperative game
among base stations. To obtain a hybrid policy equilibrium
they propose a low-complexity ML
for VR transmission,
algorithm to capture the multi-attribute utility of VR users
for the service.

d) Multimodal VR streaming: Beyond visual content,
multimodal content delivery is essential to provide users with
immersive experience in the Metaverse. The authors in [49]
investigate the problem of simultaneously supporting visual
and haptic content delivery from a network-slicing perspec-
tive. While high-resolution visual content delivery demands
medium reliability and maximum data rate, haptic perception
requires a ﬁxed data rate and very high reliability. There-
fore, visual content needs to be provided to VR users over
eMMB networks, and haptic content has to be delivered over
URLLC networks. Moreover, to mitigate the problem of self-
interference in multimodal VR services, they employ succes-
sive interference cancellation (SIC) [95] for visual-haptic VR
services in different transmission power domains. To derive
the expression for the average rate in this eMMB-URLLC
multiplexed VR service model,
the authors use stochastic
geometry to analyze the orthogonal multiple access (OMA)
and non-orthogonal multiple access (NOMA) downlinks in
large-scale cellular networks.

e) Edge wireless VR service marketplace: As the afore-
mentioned studies leverage edge resources to support the high-
quality delivery of content, economic consideration of service
pricing of scarce resources at the edge is also essential. The
economic mechanisms for pricing services for entities involved
in Metaverse, such as VSP, PSP, and data owners, are neces-
sary to facilitate collaborative efforts to achieve Metaverse.
In [96], the authors design a learning-based double Dutch
auction scheme to price and match users with VR service
providers (e.g., base stations) in the Metaverse. In this scheme,
VR users and service providers can make fast transactions
within the call market to meet the short-term demand for VR
services. Experimental results show that this learning-based
scheme can achieve near-optimal social welfare while reducing
the auction information exchange cost.

2) Resource Allocation for AR Adaptation: In addition
to VR streaming, another way to access the Metaverse is to
adapt to the real-world environment through AR or mobile
AR (MAR) [30]. At mobile edge networks, users use edge-
supported AR devices to upload and analyze their environ-
ment. After AR customization, they download the appropriate
AR content from edge servers and access the Metaverse.
However, resources on the edge networks are limited, while
the customization and communication resources used for AR
adaptation are enormous [97]–[99]. Therefore, the resource al-
location problem has to be solved for efﬁcient AR adaptation.
Speciﬁcally, users need to balance a trade-off between accu-
racy of adaptation and latency of interaction, i.e., the longer
the adaptation time, the higher accuracy of AR adaptation.

a) Adaptive conﬁguration of MAR services: Mobile edge
networks can provide two typical types of MAR services to
Metaverse users, namely the precise AR and the approximate
AR [100]. The precise AR detects all possible objects in
uploaded images using computer vision algorithms to provide

13

Fig. 4: Mathematical tools and human-oriented metrics for
designing multi-sensory multimedia networks.

a rich AR interaction experience. In contrast, the approximate
AR detects only the targets where visual attention of AR
users are focusing, thereby reducing the computation and com-
munication overhead on edge servers. Therefore, the precise
AR usually requires higher computing capacity and service
delay than the approximate AR. The reason is that the high-
resolution image data needs to be uploaded for the precise
AR requires more communication resources to transmit and
more computation resources to process. The QoA for MAR
services reﬂects the accuracy of the analysis and the latency
of AR adaptation services. To maximize the QoA for users
under different network conditions and edge servers with
various computing capacities, the authors in [100] propose
a framework for dynamically conﬁguring adaptive MAR ser-
vices. In their proposed framework, MAR users can upload the
environmental content that needs to be processed to the edge
server, depending on their service requirements and wireless
channel conditions. Based on the computation resources, AR
service providers select the object detection algorithms and
allocate computation resources to process the environmental
information uploaded by MAR users after analyzing MAR
requests (e.g., the size of video frames).

b) Tradeoff between latency and AR accuracy: In gen-
eral, the higher the latency of AR services (i.e., the longer
the processing time of the AR service provider and the
longer the upload time of the MAR user), the higher the
analysis accuracy of the service. To improve performance over
edge MAR systems, the authors in [101] develop a network
coordinator to balance the trade-off between analysis accu-
racy and service latency. They rely on the block coordinate
descent method [102] to develop a multi-objective analysis
algorithm for MAR services that enables quick and precise
target analysis of AR content. This way, the AR server’s
resource allocation efﬁciency is improved, and it can better
serve MAR users with different requirements in frame size
and frame rate.

c) Shared multi-user AR: Multiple users in popular ar-
eas simultaneously request AR services from AR service

   KinestheticHapticMachine LearningOptimization TheoryGame TheoryStochasticGeometryAuction TheoryContract TheoryAuditoryVisualReliability Interaction latency Aggregate data rate Experience consistency Motion-to-photon latency Haptic-perception rate Wraping distance FairnessQuality ofaugmentationFoV predictionAccuracyproviders. To extend MAR to multi-user scenarios, the authors
in [103] propose a multi-user collaborative MAR framework in
edge networks called Edge AR X5. They present a multi-user
communication and prediction protocol that considers cross-
platform interaction, efﬁcient communication, and economic
computation requirements of heterogeneous AR users at mo-
bile edge networks. They propose a multi-user communication
protocol and a prediction-based key-frame selection algorithm.
In detail, AR users and service providers can dynamically
create appropriate communication schemes in the multi-user
communication protocol according to their respective network
environments. Moreover, the key frames of AR applications
can be predicted based on the movement information of AR
users. Moreover, a peer-to-peer co-processing scheme solves
the initialization problem when AR users join. To enhance
the interactivity and sharing of MAR, the authors in [104]
propose a shared AR framework, where AR user providers
can experience the same AR services for their range of content
MAR users and interact with each other. Through this type of
shared MAR service, MAR service providers can signiﬁcantly
enhance their users’ immersion and social acceptance in the
Metaverse [16], [105].

3) Edge Caching for AR/VR Content: Real-time AR/VR
delivery is required to immerse users in the shared 3D virtual
worlds of the Metaverse. At mobile edge networks, AR/VR
content caches can be deployed at edge servers and edge de-
vices to reduce transmission overhead [106]–[109]. However,
these shared 3D worlds present a new challenge for distributed
edge caching. The question of efﬁciently using the edge cache
while ensuring the uniformity of Metaverse content across
geographically distributed edge servers has yet to be resolved.
The base stations can leverage their caching resources to
improve the QoE of wireless users [110]. In the Metaverse
vision, most of the services provided are closely related to the
context in which the content is provided, such as AR/VR and
DT. Context-aware services for these applications can beneﬁt
from caching popular content on edge servers to ensure low
latency and efﬁcient allocation of network resources. In the
Metaverse, where users are immersed in a ubiquitous, real-
time shared and consistent digital world, caching devices at the
edge receive large amounts of heterogeneous edge stream data.
Building an integrated Metaverse with distributed caching is
a formidable challenge for mobile edge networks.

At mobile edge networks, edge servers can cache panoramic
VR videos to reduce bandwidth consumption through an
adaptive 360◦ VR streaming solution based on the users’
FoV [111]. The FoV refers to the scene that the user’s attention
is focused on currently. The authors in [111] allow the edge
servers to use probabilistic learning to develop appropriate
FoV-based caching policies for VR video delivery using his-
torical VR video viewing data and current user preferences.
Their experimental results show that
their proposed FoV-
aware caching scheme can improve the cache hit ratio and
bandwidth saving by a factor of two, thus reducing network
latency and relieving pressure on the network bandwidth of
VR services. To fully utilize the uplink bandwidth of users
in VR services, the authors in [112] design a point-to-point
VR content distribution system serving the edge network with

14

high-density devices. They propose a pre-caching algorithm
for VR videos to maximize the QoE of VR services. In detail,
the algorithm perceives the probability of caching content
based on the user’s interest and popularity to improve the
accuracy and efﬁciency of edge caching.

The QoS of VR may also be affected by the behavior
of the VR user (e.g., position or rapid head movements).
In particular,
if the prediction of these movements is not
taken into account, the streaming VR content will experience
undesirable jitter and degradation of the playback quality. The
authors in [113] propose a VR content caching scheme that
uses wireless HMD caching to address this problem. In this
scheme, a linear regression-based motion prediction algorithm
reduces the motion-to-photon latency of VR services. The
HMD of the VR user renders the image based on the predicted
location and then stores and displays it on the HMD. The
authors use a new VR service metric called Warping Distance
to measure the quality of the VR video provided. Since mobile
devices used to display AR display are usually resource-
constrained, the QoS of the MAR cache requires a trade-
off between communication resources and energy latency.
To optimize mobile cache size and transmission power, the
authors in [114] provide a framework for AR content cache
management for mobile devices, introducing an optimization
problem in terms of service latency and energy consumption to
provide satisfactory MAR services at mobile edge networks.
In addition to accessing the
Metaverse via AR/VR services, users can also project every
detailed information about themselves into the physical world
via wireless holographic communication. Holography [115]
is a complex technique that relies on the interference and
to record and re-
diffraction of objects with visible light
produce the amplitude and phase of optical wavefronts, in-
cluding optical holography and computer graphics holography
(CGH), and digital holography (DH). The authors in [115]
propose a forward error correction coding scheme based on
unequal error protection to optimize the QoS of wireless holo-
graphic communication at different bit levels of coding rates.
Furthermore,
the authors in [115] introduce an immersive
wireless holographic-type communication mode for remote
holographic data over wireless networks and rendering (e.g.,
point clouds [116] and light ﬁelds [117]) interaction.

4) Hologram Streaming:

Point clouds are the representation of immersive 3D graph-
ics consisting of a collection of points with various attributes,
e.g., color and coordinate [118]. To stream high-quality point
clouds to mobile users, the authors in [119] propose a point
cloud streaming system over wireless networks. Based on the
information of user devices and available communication and
computation resources, their system can reduce unnecessary
streaming while satisfying the experience of users. However,
real-time point cloud streaming requires adaptive resource
scheduling according to dynamic user requirements and net-
work conditions. Therefore, the authors in [120] leverage the
power of ML and propose an AI-empowered point cloud
streaming system at mobile edge networks. In the system,
intelligent edge servers can extract key features of 3D point
clouds based on FoV and network conditions of edge devices.
As such, immersive 3D content is streamed to users in a cost-

efﬁcient manner. Since the privacy concerns on Metaverse
users’ FoV information and network conditions, the authors
in [121] propose a federated RL-based encoding rate selection
scheme to optimize the personalized QoE of users.

Different from the point clouds with only color and intensity
values, light ﬁelds consist of multiple viewing angles of 3D
graphics and allow users to interact with the same 3D objects
from different angles in parallel [117]. The light ﬁelds can
provide users with a glasses-free 3D experience when they
are immersing in the Metaverse. In [122], the authors study
the QoE evaluation of the dynamic adaptive streaming for
light ﬁeld videos with both spatial and angular resolution. In
addition to viewpoint selection in point cloud streaming, view
angle selection is also important to improve the quality of
light ﬁeld streaming. Therefore, the authors in [123] study the
user-dependent view selection and video encoding algorithm
for personalized light ﬁeld streaming to provide ground truth
light ﬁeld videos while reducing around 50% required bitrate.
To adapt to real-time demands of edge users, the authors
in [124] propose a graph neural network-based solution for
light ﬁeld video streaming systems under best-effort network
conditions. This intelligent streaming solution can improve
the reliability and stability of light ﬁeld streaming systems
in heterogeneous networks.

B. Human-in-the-loop Communication

The Metaverse is envisioned as a human-centric 3D virtual
space supported by massive machine-type communication.
The future of wireless networks will be driven by these
human-centric applications, such as holography AR social
media, immersive VR gaming, and healthcare with the tactile
Internet [43], [130]. Creating highly simulated XR systems
requires the integration of not only engineering in service
provision (communication, computation, storage) but also the
interdisciplinary considerations of human body perception,
cognition, and physiology for haptic communication [131]–
[133]. The haptics in haptic communication refers to both
kinesthetic perception (information of forces, torques, position,
and velocity that is sensed by muscles, joints, and tendons
of the human body) and tactile perception (knowledge of
surface texture and friction that is felt by different types of
mechanoreceptors in the human skin). To further evaluate
the performance of the service providers in the Metaverse,
some new metrics, such as Quality of Physical Experience
(QoPE) [22] are proposed to evaluate the quality of human-in-
the-loop communication. The trend of these metrics is to blend
the physical factors, such as physiological and psychological
perception, of human users with the classical inputs of QoS
(latency, rate, and reliability) and QoE (average opinion score).
The factors affecting QoPE are inﬂuenced by various human-
related activities such as cognition, physiology, and gestures.
1) URLLC for the tactile Internet: Unlike traditional
Internet multimedia services (audio and video), multimedia
services in the Metaverse allow users to immerse themselves
in the 3D world in a multi-sensory embodied manner. The
Metaverse requires not only 360◦ visual and auditory content
for the immersive experience but also haptic and kinematic

15

interaction. Fortunately, the tactile Internet is paving the way
for the emergence of the Metaverse that provides users with
haptic and kinematic interaction. However, this interaction of
the tactile Internet requires extremely reliable and responsive
networks for immersive experience during real-time interac-
tion [13]. The Gaming experience in the Metaverse, such
as, Assassination, for example, is an important task in Role-
playing games (RPGs) of the fantasy or action genre. The
assassination usually takes place from the blind spot of the
victim. As such, the assassinated does not receive feedback
from visual and auditory information but is aware of being
assaulted from behind by the tactile sensation delivered to
his game controller. Therefore, humans’ tactile and kinematic
information in the bilateral remote sensing operating system is
exchanged via wireless networks. In the Metaverse’s teleoper-
ation, the transmission of tactile information is more sensitive
to the stability and latency of the system, which requires a very
strict end-to-end latency, at around 1ms [134], as a supplement
to visual and auditory information. Beyond the gaming indus-
try, such a breakthrough in haptic-visual feedback control will
also change the way humans communicate worldwide, i.e.,
human-in-the-loop communication [135].

The extremely demanding of reliability and latency in the
tactile Internet presents new challenges for resource alloca-
tion at mobile edge networks. As a real-time transmission
medium for touch and motion, the tactile Internet, together
with AR/VR, will provide multi-sensory multimedia services
for Metaverse users [18]. However, unlike eMBB required by
AR/VR, the tactile Internet requires URLLC for the human-
human and human-avatar interaction. Noticing that the tactile
Internet applications are sensitive to network jitters [136], the
authors propose a forecasting algorithm for delayed or lost
data in [125] that uses scalable Gaussian process regression
(GPR) for content prediction. To support telerobotic surgery,
they build an online learning model using GPR coefﬁcients
and a low-rank matrix decomposition for service context.

In addition, the very bursty arrival process of packets on
the tactile Internet complicates the allocation of resources in
the wireless edge network. Therefore, the authors in [126]
formulate an optimization problem for minimizing the re-
served bandwidth under service and reliability constraints.
Based on unsupervised learning, they propose a model- and
technical data-based approach to cluster the fractional arrival
process of users to reduce the classiﬁcation error and improve
the longitudinal spectrum efﬁciency in wireless networks.
Considering the perceptual coding and symmetric design in the
tactile Internet, the authors in [127] decompose the resource
allocation problem in the tactile Internet and propose a two-
step solution. They offer a low-complexity heuristic algorithm
and a near-optimal approach to the wireless resource alloca-
tion algorithm to overcome the analytical and computational
difﬁculties.

2) Semantic/Goal-aware Communication: The Metaverse
is a comprehensive multimedia system consisting of many
semantically oriented applications. Metaverse content dissem-
ination services can place a massive burden on today’s data-
oriented communication [137], where real-time trafﬁc requires
a channel with inﬁnite capacity. Therefore, applications in the

TABLE V: Summary of scenarios, problems, performance metrics, and mathematical tools for AR/VR, the tactile Internet,
hologram streaming, and semantic-communication.

16

Scenarios

MBMS over 5G

Problems
Physical layer design and
analysis

Performance Metrics
VR service ﬂexibility,
capacity, and coverage

Mathematical Tools
Flexible numerology and
conﬁgurations

Ref.

[84]

[85]

[86]

[87]

[91]

[49]

[50]

[94]

[96]

[100]

[111]

[112]

[113]

[114]

[120]

[121]

[122]

[123]

[124]

[125]

[126]

[127]

[128]

[129]

[83]

VR streaming in 5G HetNet

Interactive
mmWave-enabled VR
gaming
D2D-enhanced MBMS
with single frequency
Indoor VR over THz/VLC
wireless network

Buffer-aware VR video
streaming
Downlink VR multimodal
perceptions
mmWave-enabled wireless
VR systems

mmWave resource
allocation

D2D radio resource
management
VAP selection and user
association
Mode selection for
streaming
Personalized and private
viewport prediction
Multiplexing design under
OMA and NOMA
Task ofﬂoading for
real-time VR rendering

Wireless VR over small
cell networks

Joint uplink and downlink
resource allocation

Non-panoramic wireless
VR
MAR with dynamic edge
resource

Market and mechanism
design

[101]

Edge-based MAR system

System design and analysis

[103]

Mobile Web AR over 5G
networks

Adaptive motion-aware key
frame selection

[104]

Shared multi-user AR

System implementation and
evaluation

Adaptive 360◦ VR
streaming

D2D-assisted VR video
distribution systems

FoV-aware caching
replacement

Video pre-caching
deployment

Real-time cinematic VR
service

VR caching replacement on
HMD

Interaction latency

Matching theory

Aggregate data rate and
short-term fairness
VR service reliability and
bitrate
Algorithm convergence and
VR streaming throughput
User-wise accuracy and
streaming utility
Integrated resolution and
haptic rate

Greedy algorithm and
iterative search algorithm

Meta RL

Unsupervised learning and
reinforcement learning

FL and DRL

Stochastic geometry

QoE and convergence time

DRL and game theory

Tracking accuracy,
processing delay, and
transmission delay
Social welfare and auction
information exchange cost

Game theory and deep
learning

Auction theory and DRL

Analytics accuracy and
service latency
Communication efﬁciency
and feature
extraction-tracking accuracy
Virtual Object pose
accuracy, jitter and drift,
and end-to-end latency
Number and duration of
rebuffering events, accuracy
of FoV.

Optimization mechanisms

Planning mechanisms

Fine-grained control
mechanism

Probabilistic learning

Stability and QoE

Optimization mechanism

MAR service conﬁguration

Quality of augmentation

Optimization mechanisms

MEC-assisted MAR
services
Point cloud video streaming
over wireless networks
Adaptive point cloud video
streaming
Adaptive streaming for
light ﬁeld videos
Personalized light ﬁeld
streaming
Light ﬁeld video streaming
systems in heterogeneous
networks
The 5G-enabled tactile
Internet remote surgery
URLLC in the tactile
Internet
Haptic remote operation
over mobile networks
Semantic-aware wireless
networks
Semantic communication
system in wireless IoT

Joint mobile cache and
power management

Key feature extraction

Encoding rate selection

Spatial and angular mode
selection

Warping distance and
consistency of VR
experience
Service latency and energy
consumption
Point cloud compression
ratio
Privacy preservation and
QoE

QoE

View angle selection

QoE and required bitrate

Linear regression

Optimization mechanism

AI-powered transmission
mechanism

Federated RL

Subjective tests

Personalized compression
method

Streaming mode selection

Reliability and stability

Graph neural network

Delayed and lost content
prediction
Burstiness-aware bandwidth
reservation

Radio resource allocation

Semantic-aware resource
allocation

Energy allocation problem

Relative error and
prediction time

Gaussian process regression

Bandwidth efﬁciency

Unsupervised learning

Algorithm complexity and
QoE

Canonical duality theory
and Hungarian method

Semantic spectral efﬁciency

Optimization mechanism

Sentence similarity score
and BLEU score

DL-based auction

17

needs to complete the corresponding actions in the semantic
features without restoring them in the source message.

In contrast

to the conventional bit error rate in data-
oriented communication, the performance metrics of semantic
communication must consider the factor of human perception.
In [142], the authors propose a metric called sentence similar-
ity to measure the semantic error of transmitted sentences in
semantic communication systems. Based on this metric, they
apply natural language processing to physical layer commu-
nication’s encoding and decoding process. In particular, deep
learning (DL)-based machine translation techniques are used
to extract and interpret the transmitted messages. Experimental
results show that the proposed system can achieve higher
information transmission efﬁciency than the reference system,
especially with a low signal-to-noise ratio.

Using visual question answering (VQA) as an example, the
authors in [143] extend the previous model to a semantic
communication system with multimodal data. However, IoT
devices are often resource-constrained, making it difﬁcult to
support computation and energy-intensive neural networks in
semantic communication. Therefore, in [144], the authors pro-
pose a lightweight semantic communication system for low-
complexity text transmission in IoT. In this system, the authors
use neural network pruning techniques to remove redundant
nodes and weights from the semantic communication model to
reduce the computational resources required for the semantic
communication models. This way, IoT devices can afford
semantic communication and signiﬁcantly reduce the required
communication bandwidth between them and the cloud/edge.
On the other hand, the authors in [145] propose a scheme for
information semantics of audio signals. They use a wave-to-
vector structure in which convolutional neural networks form
the autoencoder to convert auditory information to semantic
features. To reduce the communication overhead associated
with co-training the semantic communication model, they also
introduce an FL-based approach that allows edge devices
to jointly train a federated semantic communication model
without sharing private information.

In parallel to the design of the semantic communication
system, its deployment in the mobile edge network requires
efﬁcient resource allocation to reduce the consumption of
computation resources in semantic communication [75]. The
authors in [128] note that resource allocation problems for
semantic networks remain unexplored and propose an opti-
mization mechanism to maximize semantic spectral efﬁciency
(S-SE). Their simulation results show that the proposed seman-
tic resource allocation model is valid and feasible to achieve
higher S-SE than the baseline algorithms. From the perspective
of economics-driven semantic communication system design,
the authors in [129] propose a DL-based auction for energy
allocation for IoT devices. They propose an energy evaluation
scheme based on the sentence similarity score and the bilin-
gual evaluation score (BLEU) for semantic communication
systems. The results show that the semantic service provider’s
revenue is maximized when individual rationality (IR) and
incentive compatibility (IC) are satisﬁed.

Fig. 5: Comparison of data-oriented, semantic-oriented, and
goal-oriented communication systems.

Metaverse require service diversity and service-level optimiza-
tion to reduce the load on the wireless channels at mobile edge
networks. In human-in-the-loop communication, communica-
tion is not simply the presentation of original data in bits to the
user but the presentation of information in semantic structures.
Semantic communication combines knowledge representation
and reasoning tools with ML algorithms, paving the way for
semantic recognition, knowledge modeling, and coordination.
As shown in Fig. 5, there are three Semantic Communication
Components of a semantic-aware communication system [75],
[138]:

• The semantic encoder (source) detects and identiﬁes
the semantic information, i.e., knowledge, of the input
source signal and compresses or removes the irrelevant
information from the current conversation.

• The semantic decoder (target) decodes the received se-
mantic information and restores it in a form understand-
able to the target user.

• The semantic noise interferes with semantic information
in communication and causes the receiver to misun-
derstand or misperceive it. It is common in semantic
encoding, transmission, and decoding.

As one of the promising approaches to overcome the Shan-
non capacity limit [138], semantic communication, one of the
intelligent solutions on the physical layer, can transmit only
the information required for the respective task/goal [139].
For example, in signal compression and signal detection in
wireless networks, deep neural networks (DNN) can extract
knowledge about the environment in different scenarios based
on historical
the authors propose
a robust end-to-end communication system in [139] aiming
to facilitate intelligent communication at the physical layer.
For goal-oriented communication [140] shown in Fig. 5, the
authors in [141] propose a joint source-channel coding (JSSC)
scheme for extracting and transmitting semantic features in
messages to perform speciﬁc tasks. In this scheme, the se-
mantic sender removes and transmits the semantic elements
in the sent message. In contrast, the semantic receiver only

training data. Therefore,

Input source: Text, Speech, Image,  Video and Haptic informationOutput Effect: Actuation, FeelingSource CodingChannel CodingChannel DecodingSource DecodingText, Speech, Image,Video, and HapticinformationSemantic ExtractionSemantic CodingJSCC CodingJSCC DecodingSemantic DecodingPreprocessingSemanticExtractionSemanticFilteringSemantic  Post-ProcessingStorageTransmissionTasks/ GoalsbitschannelsbitsData-oriented CommunicationSemantic-aware CommunicationGoal-oriented CommunicationfeaturesfeatureschannelsDecision Makerchannelsbitsfeaturesfeaturesbits18

Moreover,

distributed incentive mechanism based on the alternating direc-
tion method of multipliers to incentivize vehicles contributing
their resources to the physical-virtual synchronization in the
Metaverse. This mechanism can maximize the energy efﬁ-
ciency of vehicular twin networks in dynamic environments.
the complex network topology in DT net-
works poses challenges to the design of resource allocation
schemes [151]. The authors in [152] consider the probabilistic
arrival of synchronization tasks in DT networks to propose
efﬁcient methods for ofﬂoading computation and allocating
resources. In particular, they combine the problems of of-
ﬂoading decisions, transmission power, network bandwidth,
and computational resource allocation to balance resource
consumption and service delay in DT networks. However,
since this joint problem is non-convex, they transform the
original problem into a long-term revenue maximization prob-
lem using the advantage actor-critic algorithm and Lyapunov
optimization techniques. At mobile edge networks, the spa-
tiotemporal dynamics of mobile physical entities require that
the service delivery framework of existing edge networks
provide resilient synchronization resources. To respond to the
random synchronization requests of edge devices on time, the
authors propose a congestion control scheme based on contract
theory in [153]. The scheme uses Lyapunov optimization to
maximize the long-term proﬁt maximization of DT service
providers while satisfying individual rationality and incentive
compatibility by taking into account the delay sensitivity of the
services offered. Moreover, in [154], the privacy-preserving
approaches such as FL are also employed to develop an
effective collaborative strategy for providing physical-virtual
synchronization using DNN models.

2) Intelligent Edge Network-aided Virtual-Physical Syn-
chronization: The DT of the physical edge networks that sup-
ports the Metaverse provides a possible intelligence solution to
the traditional edge networks for improving their performance
through physical-virtual synchronization [155]–[158]. For ex-
ample, the energy efﬁciency of real-world edge networks can
be enhanced by communication and coordination of DT within
the Metaverse. The authors in [159] design a DT that mirrors
the mobile edge computing systems by modeling the network
topology and the channel and queueing model. The optimiza-
tion goal of this system is to support URLLC services and
delay-tolerant services in this system with maximum energy
efﬁciency. To reduce energy consumption in this system, the
authors use the DT data to train a DL architecture to jointly
determine user grouping, resource allocation, and ofﬂoading
probability. Moreover, as the complexity of edge networks
and the diversity of mobile applications increase, slicing-edge
networks can provide ﬁne-grained services to mobile users.
In [160], the authors propose an intelligent network slicing
architecture based on DT. In this architecture, graph neural
networks are used to capture the interconnection relationships
between slices in different physical network environments, and
DT are used to monitoring the end-to-end scalability metrics
of the slices.

In traditional edge networks, wireless resources are often
allocated by sensing network conditions and then passively
adjusting the information and power transmitted. Fortunately,

Fig. 6: An illustration of real-time physical-virtual synchro-
nization between the Metaverse and Intelligent edge networks.

C. Real-time Physical-Virtual Synchronization

The Metaverse is an unprecedented medium that blurs the
boundary of the physical and virtual worlds [16]. For example,
by maintaining a digital representation of the physical wireless
environment in the virtual worlds [69], the Metaverse can
improve the performance of mobile edge networks via ofﬂine
simulation and online decision-making. For example, employ-
ees can build digital copies of their physical ofﬁces using DTs
to facilitate work-from-home in the Metaverse. To maintain
bidirectional real-time synchronization between the Metaverse
and the physical world, widely distributed edge devices and
edge servers are required for sensing and actuation [146].
As shown in Fig. 6, one of the possible solutions for such
virtual services is the DT [47], i.e., digital replications of real-
world entities in the Metaverse, e.g., city twins and copies
of smart factories. Based on the historical data of digital
replications, the DT can provide high ﬁdelity modeling, simu-
lation, and prediction for physical entities. Though intra-twin
communication and inter-twin communication, the Metaverse
can be used to improve the efﬁciency of the edge networks.
Speciﬁcally, by monitoring the DTs of edge devices and
edge infrastructure such as RIS, UAV, and space-air-ground
integrated network (SAGIN) [147]–[149], users can instantly
control and calibrate their physical entities in the physical
world through the Metaverse.

1) Resource Allocation for Physical-Virtual Synchroniza-
tion: Efﬁcient resource allocation in internal communication
between physical and virtual entities in the mobile edge net-
work during synchronization of physical and virtual worlds is
key to seamless real-time immersion in the Metaverse [10]. To
this end, the authors in [47] design a data collection incentive
mechanism for self-interested edge devices. In this mechanism,
IoT devices act as PSPs to collect data in the physical world.
This mechanism uses a dynamic evolutionary approach that
allows different device owners to enter into various contracts
to update their policies. Eventually, service providers converge
to a policy that copes with time-varying resource supply and
demand to maximize the dynamic rewards. To extend [47]
into dynamic IoV scenarios, the authors in [150] propose a

Smart citiesB5G/6GIntelligent edgenetworksThe MetaverseCitytwinB5G/6G twinUAV  twinSatellite twinSatellitesUAVsCloud twinEdgetwinVirtual-Physical  synchronizationEdgetwinSimulation &  PredictionHigh fidelity modelingSpaceAirGroundIntra-twin communicationInter-twincommunicationRIS technologies in 6G can transform the wireless environ-
ment by adaptively phasing RIS elements [161], [162]. This
way, RIS can actively change the environment of the wireless
network so that the transmission is not limited by physical
conditions [163]. In addition, RIS can also be leveraged to
stream immersive content [164]. However, the optimal phase
conﬁguration of RIS and power allocation of beamforming
signals is still challenging. In [165], the authors propose an
Environmental Twin (Env-Twin) scheme, where the infrastruc-
ture in wireless networks is virtualized into a DT network. By
monitoring and controlling different cell layouts (macrocells,
small cells, terrestrial and non-terrestrial networks), spectrum
ranges (including millimeter waves, terahertz, and even visible
light communication), and RISs in complex edge networks, the
wireless edge environment can be optimized into an intelligent
edge environment. In this Env-Twin,
the techniques from
DL predict the most appropriate RIS conﬁguration for each
new receiver site in the same wireless network to maximize
spectrum efﬁciency in edge networks. To enable faster con-
vergence of intelligent wireless environments to a satisfactory
performance, the authors in [161] propose an ambient AI
approach to control RIS through RL. In this approach, the
RIS acts as a learning agent to learn the optimal strategies
during interaction with intelligent edge networks without prior
knowledge of the wireless environment.

To provide ubiquitous coverage to Metaverse users, IoV,
UAV, and RIS in the wireless edge network need to form a
SAGIN with satellites [166]–[168]. In [169], the authors set up
a DT network in the virtual space for SAGIN to enable secure
vehicle communication in SAGIN. By communicating with
virtual entities in the virtual space, physical entities can protect
the efﬁcient and secure information transmission between ve-
hicles. Besides, while spectrum sharing can improve spectrum
utilization in SAGIN, it is still vulnerable to eavesdropping
and malicious threats. To address this issue, they propose a
mathematical model for the secrecy rate of the satellite-vehicle
link and the secrecy rate of the base station-vehicle link. They
solve the secure communication rate maximization problem in
SAGIN using relaxation and planning methods.

D. Lessons Learned

1) Efﬁcient

Immersive Streaming and Interaction: The
Metaverse is driven by an amalgamation of VR/AR/tactile
Internet and involves multimodal content delivery involving
images, audio, and touch. Moreover, different from traditional
VR/AR, which tends to focus on single-user scenarios, the
Metaverse will involve a massive number of users co-existing
and interacting with each other in the virtual worlds within.
As such, there exists a crucial need for efﬁcient resource allo-
cation to optimize the efﬁciency of service delivery to a mas-
sive number of users at the edge. Besides high-performance
communication networks, the real-time user interactions and
rendering of 3D FoVs will require computation-intensive cal-
culations. We revisit the computation challenges and edge-
driven solutions in Section IV.

2) AI for the Intelligent Edge Communication: The com-
plex and dynamic network environment necessitates the use of

19

AI methods to efﬁciently manage communication resources.
The “AI for edge" approach in the works that we review
utilizes AI to improve the allocation efﬁciency of resources
at the edge, e.g., for efﬁcient task ofﬂoading and bandwidth
allocation. AI can be used to supplement conventional opti-
mization tools, e.g., in reducing the communication cost and
speeding up the convergence of auctions as means to price the
services of PSPs. However, the concern is that such AI models
are computationally costly to train and store on resource-
constrained devices. In Section IV, we discuss the edge-driven
solutions and techniques to manage the computation cost of
AI deployment at the edge.

3) Context-aware Immersive Content Delivery:

In the
Metaverse immersive content distribution network, VSPs de-
ploy a cache of immersive content to PSPs based on the
current user’s contextual preferences, such as current FoVs,
view angles, and interacting objects. Consequently, the user-
perceived latency becomes lower while the total bandwidth
required for immersive streaming and interaction is reduced.
In Section IV, we will describe how to accurately predict
recommendations for the immersive content delivery.

4) Self-sustainable Physical-Virtual Synchronization: From
Section III-C, we can learn that the physical-virtual synchro-
nization is self-sustainable. On one hand, in the P2V syn-
chronization, the physical world maintains DTs in the virtual
worlds, which requires a large overhead in communication
resources. On the other hand, in the V2P synchronization,
the DYs in the virtual worlds can transform the physical
environment into smart wireless networks to reduce the com-
munication resources in return.

5) Decentralized Incentive Mechanism: The Metaverse is
based on the vast amounts of data provided by wireless
sensors in the physical world. VSPs and PSPs are typically
self-interested and unwilling to provide their communication
resources and energy for data collection. The right incentives
for wireless sensors at scale will help maintain the long-term
sustainability of the Metaverse.

IV. COMPUTATION

Beyond reliable and low-latency communication systems,
the resource-intensive services provided by the Metaverse will
require costly computation resources to support [16]. Some
screenshots of exemplary Metaverse applications, such as
Meta AR, hand gesture AR, and AI-generated content (AIGC)
applications, are illustrated in Fig. 7. In speciﬁc, the Metaverse
requires the execution of the following computations:

• High-dimensional Data Processing: The physical and
virtual worlds will generate vast quantities of high-
dimensional data, such as spatiotemporal data [173], that
allows users to experience realism in the Metaverse.
For example, when a user drops a virtual object,
its
behavior should be governed by the laws of physical for
realism. The virtual worlds with physical properties can
be built upon physics game engines, such as the recently
developed real-time Ray Tracing technology to provide
the ultimate visual quality by calculating more bounces
in each light ray in a scene [174]. During these activities,

20

(a) Meta collaborates with leading museums to
provide the users with a brand new perspective
when connecting with the culture [170].

(b) Meta’s demo of AI generated content though
audio inputs and 3D object ouputs [171].

(c) AI technology combines hand gestures and
AR to copy and paste ﬁles across computers [172].

Fig. 7: Screenshots of Meta AR, AIGC demo, and gesture AR.

this generated high-dimensional data will be processed
and stored in the databases of the Metaverse.

• 3D Virtual World Rendering: Rendering is the process
of converting raw data of virtual worlds into displayable
3D objects. When users are immersing in the Metaverse,
all the images/videos/3D objects require a rendering pro-
cess to display on AR/VR devices for users to watch.
For example, Meta operates research facilities that set up
collaborations with museums to transform 2D painting
into 3D [170] as illustrated in Fig. 7(a). In addition,
Metaverse are expected to produce and render 3D objects
in an intelligent way. For example, as shown in Fig. 7(b),
3D objects, e.g., clouds, islands, trees, picnic blankets,
tables, stereos, drinks, and even sounds, can be generated
by AI (i.e., AIGC) through audio inputs [171].

• Avatar Computing: Avatars are digital representations
of user in the virtual worlds that require ubiquitous
computation and intelligence in avatar generation and
interaction. On one hand, the avatar generation is based
on the ML technologies, such as computer vision (CV)
and natural language processing (NLP). On the other
hand, the real-time interaction between avatars and users
is computationally intensive to determine and predict
the interaction results. For example, AI can synergize
with AR applications to provide avatar services such
as retrieving text information from the users’ view, text
ampliﬁcation on paper text, and using a hand gesture to
copy and paste ﬁles between computers [172] in Fig. 7(c).

The Metaverse should be built with ubiquitous accessibility
for users at mobile edge networks. Therefore, computation
resources are required not only by service providers of the
Metaverse, e.g., for user analytics but also from users’ edge
devices to access the Metaverse at mobile edge networks.
For example, using data on mobile devices, a AR/VR rec-
ommender system can be trained to recommend immersive
content that satisﬁes users [175]. Second, AR/VR rendering
requested users to have an immersive experience. In the
following, we present the key computation considerations:

1) Ubiquitous computing and intelligence: Users equipped
with various types of resource-constrained devices can
access the Metaverse anytime and anywhere, requiring

ubiquitous computing and intelligence services to sur-
round and support them [28]. On one hand, users can
ofﬂoad computation-intensive tasks to edge computing
services for mitigating straggler effects to improve per-
formance. On the other hand, stochastic demand and
user mobility require adaptive and continuous computing
and intelligence services at mobile edge networks.
2) Embodied telepresent: Users in different geographic
locations can be simultaneously telepresent in the virtual
worlds of the Metaverse, regardless of the limits of
physical distance [27]. To provide users with embodied
telepresent, the Metaverse is expected to render 3D ob-
jects in AR/VR efﬁciently with ubiquitous computation
resources at mobile edge networks.

3) Personalized AR/VR recommendation: Users have per-
sonal preferences for different AR/VR content in the
Metaverse [16]. Therefore, content providers need to cal-
culate personalized recommendations for AR/VR con-
tent based on users’ historical and contextual informa-
tion. In this way, the QoE of users is improved.

4) Cognitive Avatars: Users control their avatars, which are
endowed with cognitive abilities, to access the Meta-
verse. The cognitive avatars [176], which are equipped
with AI, can automatically move and act in the Meta-
verse by mirroring the behavior and actions of their
owners. In this way, users are able to control multiple
avatars simultaneously in different virtual worlds. In
addition, users can be relieved from some simple but
heavy tasks that can be done by the cognitive avatars.
5) Privacy and security: The Metaverse will be sup-
ported by ubiquitous computing servers and devices
for various types of computation tasks from AR/VR
rendering to avatar generating. However, the reliance
on distributed computing paradigm, e.g., mobile cloud
computing, implies that users may have to share their
private data with external parties. The Metaverse will
collect extensive users’ physiological responses and
body movements [177], which includes personal and
sensitive information such as user habits and their phys-
iological characteristics. Therefore, privacy and security
in computation is an indispensable consideration that

prevent data from leaked to third parties during the user’s
immersion in the Metaverse.

In this section, we survey are based on two categories
of solutions. For the ﬁrst category, we begin by providing
the readers with a concise background of the cloud-edge-end
computation paradigm in Section IV-A. Then, we describe
the computation schemes for resource-efﬁcient AR/VR cloud-
edge-end rendering in Section IV-B. For the second category,
we discuss AI-driven techniques. In Section IV-C, we discuss
studies that propose to compress and accelerate AI model
training. In Section IV-D, we discuss privacy and security
measures for AI in the Metaverse.

A. The Cloud-Edge-End Computing Paradigm

In this subsection, we ﬁrst introduce the mobile cloud-edge-
end collaborative computing paradigm, as shown in Fig. 8, that
provides ubiquitous computing and intelligence for users and
service providers in the Metaverse.

Mobile Cloud Computing: Several of the world’s tech
behemoths have made the full dive Metaverse as their newest
macro-goal. In the next decade, billions of dollars will be
invested in cloud gaming [178], with the notion that such
technologies will underlie our online-ofﬂine virtual future [39].
Cloud gaming integrates cloud computing to enable high-
quality video games. Mobile cloud computing provides com-
puting services to either mobile devices or mobile embedded
systems. The cloud provider installs computing servers in
their private infrastructure, and services are provided to clients
via virtual machines [179]. However, the most cost-effective
approach for an organization is to combine cloud and in-
house resources rather than choosing one over the other [180].
Fortunately, a few system architectures such as Cloudlet [181]
and CloneCloud [182] are proposed to manage mobile cloud
computing and provide support for the device with weak
computation so that they can access the Metaverse.

Edge Computing: The Metaverse is a black hole of com-
putational resource. It will always require as much compu-
tation capacity as possible and the mobile users accessing
the Metaverse require the latency to be as low as possible to
deliver real-time, advanced, computation-intense capabilities
like speech recognition and AR/VR [183]. Therefore, edge
computing provides low latency, high efﬁciency, and security
to sustain the Metaverse. The concept of edge computing is
similar to fog computing. Both the edge and fog computing
observe the computation capability in the local network and
compute the task that could have been carried out in the cloud,
thereby reducing latency and burden on backbone networks.
However, in edge computing, the additional computation ca-
pacity and storage of devices on edge are used. We can treat
the fog layer as a layer between the edge and the mobile
cloud, which extends the mobile cloud closer to the nodes
that produce and act on IoT data [184].

Fog Computing: The Metaverse is envisioned to provide
ubiquitous connectivity for millions of users and IoT devices.
This will cause an unprecedented generation of huge amounts
and heterogeneous modalities of data [185]. Therefore, mobile
cloud computing can no longer support the high demands

21

Fig. 8: Various types of computing infrastructure to support
the computation in the Metaverse and their characteristics.

for real-time interaction of immersive and social applica-
tions [186] given the unavoidable transmission latency to
distant cloud servers. As a consequence, fog computing is ﬁrst
proposed in [187] to extend cloud services closer to users in
order to reduce the latency when the computation tasks are
ofﬂoaded. The authors in [188] show theoretically that fog
computing results in a lower latency as compared to traditional
cloud computing. Different from mobile cloud computing, fog
computing deploys many fog nodes between the cloud and
the edge devices [189]. For example, mobile users commuting
on trains are unable to access the Metaverse as they cannot
attain a stable connection with the cloud. Fog computing
nodes can therefore be installed in the locomotive to improve
the connectivity. Fog nodes could be the industrial gateways,
routers, and other devices with the necessary processing power,
storage capabilities, and network connection [190]. To reduce
the latency, fog nodes can connect edge devices/users through
wireless connection modes, such as B5G/6G, and provide
computation and storage services.

B. Efﬁcient AR/VR Cloud-Edge-End Rendering

The edge-enabled Metaverse can be accessed using various
types of mobile and wired devices, including HMD and AR
goggles, VR allows the users to experience a simulated virtual
world while in the physical world. The VR devices generate
sensory images that form the virtual worlds [16]. Real-time
rendering is required in the Metaverse so that the sensory
images can be produced quickly enough to form a continu-
ous ﬂow rather than discrete events. For example, education
platforms can incorporate VR to improve lesson delivery in
the virtual world. Unlike VR, AR allows the user to interact
with the physical world that has been digitally modiﬁed or
augmented in some way. AR applications are best suited for
scenarios in which users are physically present in the physi-
cal world, such as on-the-job training and computer-assisted
tasks [191]. However, users’ devices have limited computation
capability, memory storage, and battery. Intensive AR/VR
applications that are required for the immersive Metaverse

Characteristics Low latency Limited capacity Short distanceLow latency Medium capacity Short distanceDistance away  from usersMobile EdgeComputingComputationin MetaverseCloudletCloneCloudHigh Latency High capacityLong distanceInfrastructuresCloud  data centersFog/Edge  nodesEdge  devicesFar-endFront-endNear-endcannot run smoothly on such devices. Fortunately, based on
the cloud-edge-end collaborative computing paradigm, users’
devices can leverage ubiquitous computing resources and
intelligence for remote rendering and task ofﬂoading [192]
to overcome these challenges.

At mobile edge networks, the cloud-edge-end computing ar-
chitecture allows the computations, such as high-dimensional
data processing, 3D virtual world rendering, and avatar com-
puting, to be executed where data is generated [193]. For
example, when the user is interacting with avatars in the Meta-
verse from a vehicle to perform task computation, the vehicle
can send the data to nearby vehicles or roadside units to
perform the computation instead of cloud ofﬂoading, thereby
dramatically reducing end-to-end latency. The proposed cloud-
edge-end collaborative computing paradigm is a promising
solution to reduce latency for mobile users [194] by leveraging
computing capacities at the mobile edge networks [36]. This is
important as mobile users should be able to access Metaverse
anytime and anywhere. Furthermore, mobile edge computing
lightens the network trafﬁc by shifting the computation from
the Internet to the edge. At mobile edge networks, edge servers
are equipped with edge servers that can provide computing
resources to mobile users [194]. For example, the authors
in [195] partition a task into smaller sub-tasks and decide if the
mobile users should perform binary ofﬂoading to edge servers
or perform minimum ofﬂoading. Hence, VR content can be
transmitted to nearby edge servers for real-time rendering to
improve the QoS of the users. We discuss some of the AR/VR
rendering challengers in the following. Table VI summarizes
the approaches to efﬁcient AR/VR cloud-edge-end rendering.
According to the surveyed approaches, it can be observed that
the most common advantage of them is that they can adapt to
various environments and requirements of AR/VR rendering.
However, they have different disadvantages, such as they might
be myopic, unfair, unscalable, or inaccurate solutions.

1) Stochastic Demand and Network Condition: The Meta-
verse will host millions of users concurrently, and try to satisfy
each user has a different demand schedule and usage require-
ments. When an AR/VR device is used, the AR/VR device
may associate with an edge server to provide computation
support for real-time services. However, the optimal number
of edge computation services cannot be precisely subscribed in
advance if the user’s demand is uncertain. Moreover, given the
stochastic ﬂuctuations in demand schedule, it is not practical
for the users’ demand to be assumed as a constant. If the
Metaverse VSP subscribes to insufﬁcient edge servers for the
AR/VR devices to ofﬂoad, the AR/VR applications would
be unable to provide real-time services. The authors in [48]
propose two-stage stochastic integer programming (SIP) to
model the uncertainty in user demand. The simulation results
show that despite the uncertainty regarding user demand,
the optimal number of edge servers required to meet
the
latency requirement can be obtained while minimizing the
overall network cost. A more in-depth ofﬂoading guideline
is proposed by the authors in [172], and the simulations are
conducted based on running AR applications on AR devices
such as Google Glass. It has been suggested in the ofﬂoading
scheme that the AR device should compute the task locally if

22

the network condition is poor or ofﬂoad AR rendering tasks
to edge servers across edge networks.

2) Stragglers at Edge Networks: Next, we look at some
of the AR device ofﬂoading schemes that further reduce the
overall latency and the required device resources at mobile
edge networks. In the Metaverse, all users are immersed
simultaneously in the shared virtual worlds. The stragglers on
edge networks with poor connections can affect the immersive
experience of other users by causing delayed responses to
social
interaction. The reliance on the AR device can be
reduced when parts of the task are ofﬂoaded to other edge
devices. The authors in [201] propose a parallel computing
approach that leverages the computation capabilities of edge
servers and nearby vehicles. This approach partitions the AR
task into two sub-tasks at a calibrated proportion so that
the edge server and the nearby vehicle can compute the
two sub-tasks simultaneously. A joint ofﬂoading proportion
and resource allocation optimization algorithm is proposed to
identify the ofﬂoading proportion, communication, and com-
putation resource allocation. Whenever the computational task
complexity is high, most of the computations are performed
within the edge server rather than in the vehicle so that the
computing resources in edge servers can be fully utilized.

As several AI-driven AR/VR rendering tasks in the Meta-
verse, e.g., training DL models, are mainly performing matrix
multiplications, the computation process can be sped up if we
can accelerate the matrix multiplication process. The authors
in [196] propose a coding scheme known as polynomial codes
to accelerate the computation process of large-scale distributed
matrix-matrix multiplications. It can achieve the optimal re-
covery threshold, and it is proven that the recovery threshold
does not increase with the number of worker nodes. In the ve-
hicular Metaverse, the authors in [197] propose a collaborative
computing paradigm based on CDC for executing Metaverse
rendering tasks collaboratively among vehicles. To improve
reliability and sustainability of the proposed paradigm, they
leverage the reputation-based coalition formulation and the
Stackelberg game to selection workers in the vehicular Meta-
verse. In addition, they propose a blockchain-based secure
reputation calculation and management scheme for physical
entities, i.e., vehicles, to store historical records during CDC.
Their experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness and
efﬁciency in alleviating stragglers with malicious workers.

However,

the large number of physical entities in the
Metaverse increases the encoding and decoding cost in CDC.
In response, various types of coding schemes, such as MatDot
codes and PolyDot codes are proposed in [198], can be
adopted in CDC of the Metaverse. These coding techniques
can be implemented in edge computing to achieve smooth
performance degradation with low-complexity decoding with
a ﬁxed deadline [202]. MatDot codes have a lower recovery
threshold than the polynomial codes by only computing the
relevant cross-products of the sub-tasks, but it has a higher
communication cost. PolyDot codes use polynomial codes
and MatDot codes as the two extreme ends and construct a
trade-off between the recovery threshold and communication
cost. By adopting PolyDot codes, the authors in [2] propose a
coded stochastic ofﬂoading scheme in the UAV edge network

23

TABLE VI: Summary of the approaches in efﬁcient AR/VR cloud-edge-end rendering.

Ref.

[48]

[172]

[196]

[197]

[198]

Issue
Stochastic demand
and network
condition
Stochastic demand
and network
condition
Stragglers in edge
networks
Stragglers in edge
networks

Stragglers in edge
networks

[2]

Stragglers in edge
networks

[199]

Heterogeneous tasks

Main Idea

Selecting the optimal decision based on demand
uncertainty

Computational ofﬂoading guidelines are proposed for
AR applications

Proposed coding technique Polynomial codes to use
recovery threshold to mitigate stragglers
Selecting workers based on reputation and
game-theoretic scheme
Following [196], MatDot code is proposed to reduce
the recovery threshold at the expense of high
communication cost and PolyDot code to characterize
the trade-off between the recovery threshold and
communication costs
Adopt PolyDot code in [196] to mitigate the stragglers
in edge computing
Multiple fog nodes are used to replace remote servers
to minimize the average latency

[200]

Heterogeneous tasks Meta RL to improve task ofﬂoading adaptation

Pros

Adaptive
allocation

Ofﬂoading
guideline

Large-scale
ofﬂoading

Cons

General
framework

Myopic
solution

Unfair

Reliable

Unscalable

Latency
guaranteed

Inaccurate

Energy
Efﬁcient
Long-term
optimization
Fast
adaptation

Collaboration
of UAVs

Unfair

Complex

to mitigate stragglers. The ofﬂoading scheme makes use of
SIP to model the stragglers’ shortfall uncertainty to achieve
the optimal ofﬂoading decisions by minimizing the UAV
energy consumption. When comparing the ﬁxed (i.e., when the
occurrence of straggler nodes is a constant) and SIP schemes,
it can be identiﬁed that the SIP scheme has a lower cost. The
reason is that the ﬁxed schemes do not account for the shortfall
uncertainty of stragglers.

3) Heterogeneous Tasks: The diversity of the Metaverse
infotainment, and
AR/VR applications,
including working,
socializing, generates different computational tasks with vari-
ous delay requirements, e.g., rendering foreground VR scenes
has much more stringent latency requirements than render-
ing background VR scenes. The design of AR/VR remote
rendering schemes should therefore consider the coexistence
of various tasks in the Metaverse in order to improve the
rendering efﬁciency. The authors in [199] adopt a deep re-
current Q-network (DRQN) to classify the ofﬂoaded tasks
according to their performance requirements to maximize the
number of completed tasks within the time limit of completion.
Basically, DRQN combines deep Q-learning (DQN) with a
layer to provide a decision when there is only
recurrent
partial observation. The proposed DRQN further adopts a
scheduling method to reduce the number of incorrect actions
in the training process. In this computation ofﬂoading scheme,
multiple edge nodes cooperate with each other to guarantee
the speciﬁc QoS of each task. Each edge node executes an
individual action with a joint goal of maximizing the average
rewards of all nodes. However, AR/VR rendering algorithms
that rely on DRL often have low adaptability, as the DRL
model has to be retrained whenever the environment changes.
This is especially applicable for Metaverse applications in
which the services provided to users are consistently evolv-
ing. In response, the authors in [200] propose an ofﬂoading
framework in edge computing that is based on a meta RL
algorithm. Different from DRL, meta RL utilizes a limited

amount of gradient updates and samples that can quickly
adapt to different environments. The AR/VR applications can
be modeled as Directed Acyclic Graphs (DAGs) and the
ofﬂoading policy by a sequence-to-sequence neural network.

C. Scalable AI Model Training

The virtual services, e.g., AR/VR recommender systems
and cognitive avatars, offered by the Metaverse should be
intelligent and personalized. To achieve this vision at scale,
AI, such as in speech recognition and content generation, will
be a key engine. The virtual services in the Metaverse can even
mimic the cognitive abilities of avatars by using AI techniques
so that non-player characters (NPCs) in the Metaverse are
smart enough to make intelligent decisions. Even tools can be
provided to the users to build their avatars in the Metaverse.
However, today’s complex DL models are often computation-
and storage-intensive when performing training or computing
for inference results. It is especially so for consumer-grade
edge devices with resource constraints. Therefore, besides
the ofﬂoading techniques discussed above, the computation
efﬁciencies of the edge devices can also be increased through
DL model compression and acceleration. Model compression
improves the processing speed and also reduces the storage
and communication cost [210] such that it is more feasible
for model training and inference to be performed locally on
edge devices with limited resources, e.g., HMDs.

A complex DL model requires high demand for memory
and CPUs/GPUs. It is difﬁcult to run real-time Metaverse
applications on edge devices when the inference speed of
AI model is slow and the computing consumption is high.
Therefore, it is essential to convert the complex DL model into
a lightweight one. Lightweight DL models have been success-
fully implemented in HMDs [211], e.g., to predict the FoVs of
users. Together with AR, a walk-in-place navigation interface
can appear in front of the user to assist the navigation in
the Metaverse. In the food and beverage industry, AI-enabled

24

TABLE VII: Summary of the approaches in scalable AI model training.

Approach

[203]
[204]
[205]
[206]
[207]
[208]
[209]

Compression/
Acceleration
Compression
Compression
Acceleration
Compression
Compression
Compression
Compression

Loss in
Accuracy
No
No
1% drop
Yes
No
Yes
No

AlexNet VGG-S VGG-16 GoogLeNet

Models

9×
35×
-
5.46×
-
-
-

-
-
-
7.4×
-
-
-

13×
49×
-
1.09×
-
-
-

-
-
-
1.28×
-
-
-

ResNet18
-
-
-
-
2.5×
-
-

ResNet34
-
-
-
-
7.5×
-
-

physical world
-
-
4.5×
-
-
1.5×
10.4×

HMDs can provide personalized AR/VR recommendations
to users with regard to the users’ preferences [212]–[214].
Furthermore, through AR, non-physical information about the
selected 3D objects can be displayed via virtual AR layers that
can help users make informed purchasing decisions [215]. As
edge intelligence is ubiquitous in the Metaverse at mobile edge
networks, it is crucial to reduce the DL models’ sizes when
the number of AI-enabled services increases and AI models
become more complex. In the following, we discuss selected
model compression and acceleration methods. The reviewed
approaches are summarized in Table VII.

1) Parameter Pruning and Quantization:

In the Meta-
verse, the DL models are expected to provide QoE analysis,
evaluation and prediction for multitude Metaverse applica-
tions [218]–[221]. However, the Metaverse applications should
not contain only simple DL models for QoE evaluation.
Compared with complex DL models, simple DL models can
only provide applications with limited features. However,
complex DL models may comprise millions of weights, most
edge devices may be unable to train or store such mod-
els. A solution is to prune the unimportant or redundant
weights/connections/neurons with zero, such that the model
size can be reduced without compromising on the perfor-
mance. Fig. 9 shows a visualization of connection pruning
in a neural network. The magnitude-based pruning (MP) is
proposed by the authors in [203]. MP mainly consists of
three steps. The important connections in the network are ﬁrst
learned. Then, the magnitudes of the weights are compared
is pruned when the
with a threshold value. The weight
magnitude is below the threshold. The third step will retain the
network to ﬁne-tune the remaining weights. MP can reduce the
number of parameters in the AlexNet by a factor of 9 times
without affecting the accuracy. MP can also be extended to
layer-wise magnitude-based pruning (LMP) to target the multi-
layer nature of DNNs. For each layer, LMP uses MP at the
different threshold values.

Besides pruning, another method known as quantization is
to reduce the storage size of the weights in the DL model
by replacing ﬂoating points with integers. Once the weights
and inputs are converted to integer types, the models are less
costly to store in terms of memory and can be processed
faster. However, there is a trade-off with quantization. The
model accuracy may drop when the quantization is more
aggressive. Typically, the DL models are able to deal with
such information loss since they are trained to ignore high
levels of noise in the input. The authors in [204] proposed a
three-stage pipeline that involves pruning, trained quantization,

and Huffman coding. Pruning reduces the number of weights
by ten times, quantization further improves the compression
rate by reducing the number of bits, and Huffman coding pro-
vides even more compression. Throughout the compression,
the accuracy of the model is not lost. As a result, the DL
model can be stored on edge devices without affecting the
model accuracy. This method manages to reduce the storage
requirement of AlexNet by 35 times and VGG-16 by 49 times.
The lightweight models that do not result in a signiﬁcant
compromise in inference accuracies will be instrumental in
running intelligent applications on mobile devices that can
access the Metaverse ubiquitously.

2) Low-rank Approximation: It is crucial to design smaller
models that can be conveniently stored on edge devices to
make inferences locally to support
the real-time physical-
virtual synchronization between the physical and virtual
worlds. Besides pruning redundant parameters to reduce the
model’s size, we can perform decomposition to factorize a
large matrix into smaller matrices, which is known as low-
rank approximation. It compresses the layers in this way so
that the memory footprint of AI models required in Metaverse
applications can be reduced. The authors in [205] take advan-
tage of cross-ﬁlter redundancy to speed up the computation
within the layers. Basically,
it reduces the computational
complexity in the convolution process by approximating the
ﬁlters with a high rank with a linear combination of lower
rank ﬁlters. This scheme can help to speed up text character
recognition applications in AR/VR applications. From the
simulation result, the scheme can speed up 2.5 times and
ensure zero loss in accuracy.

As explained in Section IV-B, DL should be able to be
deployed in AR/VR devices to enhance user experience in the
Metaverse. The authors in [206] proposed a scheme called
one-shot whole network compression so that the DL model
can be deployed in edge devices. This scheme involves three
steps: (1) rank selection, (2) Tucker decomposition, and (3)
ﬁne-tuning to restore accuracy. Variational Bayesian matrix
factorization is applied on each kernel tensor to determine the
rank. Then, Tucker-2 decomposition is used from the second
convolutional layer to the ﬁrst fully connected layers, while
Tucker-1 decomposition is used for the rest of the layers to
compress the network. Finally, back-propagation is used to
ﬁne-tune the network to recover the loss of accuracy. Simula-
tions are conducted on edge devices based on AlexNet, VGGS,
GoogLeNet, and VGG-16 models, and the scheme is shown to
reduce the run time and model size signiﬁcantly. Apart from
using aforementioned DL models, the authors in [207] used

25

Fig. 9: A visualization of connection pruning in a neural
network [216].

Fig. 10: A visualization of
paradigm [217]

the student-teacher network

other DL models, such as ResNet18 and ResNet34, to combine
low-rank approximation and quantization to enable DL in edge
devices. Simulations are performed based on multiple datasets,
and the compressed models can produce a slightly higher test
accuracy than the non-compressed model. This is because low-
rank approximation and quantization are orthogonal as the
former utilizes redundancy in over-parameterization, and the
latter utilizes redundancy in parameter representation. There-
fore, combining these two approaches results in a signiﬁcant
compression without reducing the accuracy.

3) Knowledge Distillation: The concept of knowledge
transfer is proposed by [222] to transfer the knowledge of a
large model (teacher) to a smaller model (student). The authors
in [208] name this concept knowledge distillation. Figure 10
shows an illustration of the student-teacher network paradigm.
The edge devices do not have to store or run the actual
DL model locally with this knowledge transfer. Instead, the
teacher can be trained, whereas only the student is deployed
to the edge devices. The teacher transfers the knowledge of
predicted class probabilities to the student as a soft target. The
distillation process occurs when a hyperparameter temperature
𝑇 is included in the softmax function. When 𝑇 = 1, it will be a
standard softmax function. When 𝑇 increases, the probability
distribution of the output generated by the softmax becomes
softer, this means that the model can provide more informa-
tion to which classes the teacher found more similar to the
predicted class [208]. The student learns the class probabilities
generated by the teacher, known as soft targets. It is pointed
out in [208] that hyperparameter 𝑇 should not be very high,
i.e., a lower 𝑇 usually works better. This is reasonable as when
𝑇 is high, the teacher model will incorporate more knowledge,
and the student model cannot capture so much knowledge
because it is smaller in size of parameters.

The authors in [209] extend the work in [208] and ﬁnd that
using the teacher’s intermediate hidden layers of information
can improve the ﬁnal performance of the student. With this
information, the authors propose FitNets. Unlike [208], the
student in FitNets is deeper and thinner than the teacher so that
it can generalize better or run faster. Simulation results conﬁrm

that the deeper models generalize better, and the thinner model
signiﬁcantly reduces the computational burden on resource-
constrained devices. In the smallest network, the student is
36 times smaller than the teacher, with only a 1.3% drop
in performance. Although there is a slight trade-off between
efﬁciency and performance, the student is always signiﬁcantly
faster than the teacher, and the student is small in size. This
shows the effectiveness of knowledge distillation in deploying
lightweight models on resource-constrained mobile devices.
As such, the cognitive avatars in the Metaverse can interact
with human players in real-time and release their power to
help users handle some simple but tedious work.

D. Privacy and Security

While the emergence of AR/VR will enhance the QoS
delivery in the Metaverse, this also implies that the data can be
collected in new modalities. For example, since HMDs instead
of smartphones are used by the user, the eye tracking data
of users may be captured. While this data may be vital in
improving the efﬁciency of VR rendering, the data can also
be used by companies to derive the attention span of users
in order to market their products better [223]. As a result,
a risk assessment framework can be designed to investigate
the negative outcome of any privacy or security intrusion and
predict the probability of these events [224]. With the help
of the framework, the threats can be prioritized accordingly,
and administrators can have better visibility about VR system
component vulnerability based on the score values.

AR has the potential

to work together with Metaverse
applications to alter our lifestyles and revolutionize several
industries. However, it is key for policies to be implemented to
protect users as this technology becomes more widely adopted.
The value of security and data protection and the new ways
in which users may be impacted must not be neglected. One
way to enforce the security of edge devices is to restrict
the sensor data accessed by the AR applications [225]. As
AR content delivery requires the users to upload images or
video streams, sensitive information can be leaked when this
information is shared with a third-party server. As such, only

Teacher networkStudent networkTraining dataPredictionPredictionDistillation lossTrue label26

Sensitive data is placed inside the secure portion, and the
application code can only access them within the enclaves. An
encrypted communication channel can be created between an
enclave and an edge device if the enclave successfully attests
itself to the edge device. Sensitive data can then be provided
to the enclave. Fig. 11 shows the visual illustration of an Intel
SGX-compatible system. The Metaverse platform owner can
set up a list of requirements to prevent the users from using
edge devices that are not using SGX-enabled Intel CPU. With
the help of SGX, edge devices can trust the data running on a
platform with the latest security updates. The authors in [229]
analyze the feasibility of deploying TEE on the edge platform.
It ﬁrst analyzed the switching time, i.e., the time required to
enter and quit the enclave on the edge device. Then, it analyzes
the amount of overhead to move the sensitive computation
into the enclave. The result shows that the CPU performance
in normal mode and enclave are similar, and the overhead of
moving the sensitive computation depends on the switching
overhead. Finally, it shows that the performance of the non-
sensitive computation on the edge device is not affected when
the sensitive computation is running inside the TEE.

2) Federated Learning: Federated learning [236]–[238] is
similar to distributed learning. Both processes speed up the ML
process for applications in the Metaverse by splitting compu-
tation across many different edge devices/servers. However,
in distributed learning, the data from Metaverse applications
are ﬁrst collected in a centralized location, then shufﬂed and
distributed over computing nodes [239]. In FL, ML models
are trained without moving the data to a centralized location.
Fig. 12 illustrates an example of FL at mobile edge networks.
FL will send the initial ML model parameters to each of
the edge devices, which are trained based on their own local
data [239]. Edge devices send the trained model parameters
to update the global model in the server. The global model
can be updated in many ways, such as federated averaging,
to combine the local models from the edge devices. Once the
global model is updated, a new global model is then sent back
to the edge devices for further local training. This process will
repeat itself until the global model reaches a certain accuracy.
training to
enable Metaverse applications. First, FL reduces communi-
cation costs since only the model parameters are transmitted
to the parameter server rather than the raw data. This is
important, especially when the training data is 3D objects or
high-resolution video streams [240]. Second, FL models can
be constantly trained locally to allow continual learning. ML
models will not be outdated since they are trained using the
freshest data that is detected by the edge devices’ sensors.
Third, FL enables privacy protection as the user data does
not have to be sent to a centralized server. For data-sensitive
applications, e.g., in healthcare [241], data privacy laws may
not allow data to be shared with other users. These applications
can therefore leverage FL to improve the model quality.
Fourth, since personal data is used to train the ML model,
personalization can be built into FL to deliver tailored services
to users [242].

FL provides several beneﬁts for ML model

Even though personal data protection is enabled when the
users’ Metaverse data is only trained on the edge devices, FL

Fig. 11: Applications can be protected by placing them into
enclaves.

the most necessary data, such as gestures and voice commands,
should be accessed by third parties in order to protect the
user while maintaining an immersive experience. Even so,
proper authentication is required to validate the correct inputs
and block the undesired content. Without authentication, the
attacker can copy voice commands and physical gestures to
access the user’s data. For voice access protection, a voice-
spooﬁng defense system can be used to identify whether the
voice command is coming from the environment or from the
person who is using the device [226]. For gesture access
protection, a GaitLock system can be used to authenticate the
users based on their gait signatures [227]. GaitLock does not
require additional hardware such as a ﬁngerprint scanner. It
only uses the onboard inertial measurement units.

The privacy and security in AR/VR technology should be
enhanced from two aspects, computational ofﬂoading (using
trusted execution environment and FL) and ML (using ad-
versarial ML). In the following, we discuss trusted execution
environment (TEE), FL, and adversarial ML techniques. Ta-
ble VIII summarizes the approaches discussed in this section.
During edge training and inference, the approaches can protect
sensitive data and models of edge devices, while they will add
extra overhead or degraded performance.

1) Trusted Execution Environment: As mentioned in Sec-
tion IV-B, AR/VR devices can be treated as edge devices to
perform the computation locally or ofﬂoad to edge servers or
fog/mobile cloud servers. There can be two types of processing
environments within an AR/VR device, a trusted execution
environment (TEE) and a rich execution environment [234].
A TEE is a trusted and secure environment that consists of
processing, memory, and storage capabilities. In contrast, the
device operating system and Metaverse applications run in
a rich execution environment [235]. The operating system
will partition the Metaverse applications to restrict sensitive
operations and data to the TEE whenever the security is com-
promised. Implementing TEE can remove hardware tokens for
authentication. For example, tokens can be used to wirelessly
open doors in buildings or automobiles. The service provider’s
cost can be reduced without lowering the security level.

Intel software guard extensions (SGX) are implemented in
Intel architecture that adopts TEE to isolate speciﬁc applica-
tion code and data in memory [228]. The secured memory
is known as enclaves. Basically, the AR/VR applications can
be split into two parts, the secure and non-secure portions.

Intel SGX EnclaveHackerAppAppMalwareBad codeAttackIntel SGX-compatible system27

TABLE VIII: Summary of the approaches in computing privacy and security.

Ref.

[228]

[229]

[230]

[231]

Technique
Trusted Execution
Environment
Trusted Execution
Environment
Federated
Learning

Federated
Learning

[232]

Adversarial ML

Main Idea
Encrypt a portion of CPU memory to isolate speciﬁc
application in memory
Evaluate the feasibility of deploying TEE on edge
device with different CPU
Integrate differential privacy into FL to improve the
protection level
Following [230], randomized mechanisms are added
together with DP to hide users’ contributions during
training
Distance between data points and
distribution-estimation based outlier detection
algorithms are used to defense against poisoning attack

[233]

Adversarial ML

Propose to use multiple models to form a model family
so that it is more robust in white-box attack scenario

Pros
Separate data
portions
Feasible for edge
devices
Prevent privacy
leakage

Cons
Switching
overhead
Switching
overhead
Degraded
performance

Personalized

Lower accuracy

Attacker-proof

Multi-model
defense in
low-cost

Attacker
discovery
overhead

Risky for spare
networks

still has limitations in data privacy.

• Data Poisoning: Users of the Metaverse may train ML
models using their devices such as smartphones or HMDs.
The highly distributed nature of FL means that the attack
surfaces inevitably increase. Malicious users may train
the model on mislabeled or manipulated data to mislead
the global model.

• Inference Attacks : FL training usually involves updating
the global model using multiple local models located
on the user’s devices. For every update, the adversarial
participants can save the model parameters from the local
models, and much information can be leaked through
the model update, e.g., unintended features about par-
ticipants’ training data. Therefore, the attackers can infer
a signiﬁcant amount of private information, e.g., recover
the original training samples of users [243].

A natural way to prevent privacy leakage from shared
parameters is to add artiﬁcial noise into the updated local
model parameters before the global aggregation phase. This is
known as differentially private (DP) techniques [230], where
noise is added to the parameter such that an attacker is
unable to distinguish the individual contributor’s ID. The
authors in [230] add noise before sending the model param-
eters to the server for aggregation. A trade-off is derived
between the privacy protection and the model performance,
i.e., a better model performance leads to a lower level of
privacy protection. Using the 𝐾-random scheduling strategy,
the proposed framework obtains the optimal number of edge
devices to participate in the model aggregation in order to
achieve the best performance at a ﬁxed privacy level. From
the simulations, if the number of edge devices participating in
the model aggregation is sufﬁciently large, the framework can
achieve a better convergence performance as it has a lower
variance of the artiﬁcial noise.

3) Adversarial Machine Learning: The authors in [231]
also introduce a DP approach to FL. At the same time, it is also
shown that the edge device’s participation can be hidden in FL
at the expense of a minor loss in model performance with a
randomized mechanism. The randomized mechanism consists
of random sub-sampling and distorting. The edge device’s data
is protected if the attacker does not know if the edge device

Fig. 12: Federated learning in edge networks.

is participating in the training. A drawback of DP techniques
in FL is that when the number of edge devices participating
in the model aggregation is small, the model accuracy is
signiﬁcantly below the non-DP model performance. However,
when there are more devices participating in the training, the
model accuracies are similar.

DL models in the Metaverse are often large and compli-
cated, and they are known for being black boxes, which means
that we lack an understanding of how they derive predictions.
As a result, attackers may be able to ﬁnd and exploit hidden
issues when these black-box models are deployed in a dis-
tributed manner across edge devices. For example, the attack-
ers could deceive the model into making inaccurate predictions
or revealing conﬁdential user information. In addition, without
our knowledge, fake data could be exploited to distort models.
Speciﬁcally, the attacks may target the following parties:

• Metaverse platforms: The Metaverse platforms mostly
rely on data to provide better services to the users. The
attackers can alter the data to manipulate the AR/VR
applications, e.g., by targeting recommender systems to
push undesirable content to users [244].

• Virtual service providers: The VSPs may utilize ML
as a service for users who have insufﬁcient computation

Device 1Device 2Device 3Device 4Aggregated global modelLocal model updateLocal model updateLocal model updateLocal model updatecapacity [245]. Attackers can eavesdrop on the parameters
exchanged to infer the membership of users or contami-
nate the AI model.

• Users : The AR/VR/haptic devices are the devices used
by the users to connect with the Metaverse. Once the
attacker controls the devices, they can inject adversarial
training examples to contaminate the AI model.

Adversarial ML is a ﬁeld that seeks to address these issues.
The adversarial attack can be prevented by using adversarial
training. The DL models should be trained to identify the
injected adversarial examples. The authors in [232] propose
a defense mechanism that allows the edge devices to pre-
ﬁlter the training dataset to remove the adversarial examples.
This defense mechanism is built based on outlier detection
techniques. It assumes that a small portion of data points are
trusted. If all the data points in the Metaverse are untrusted,
then defending against adversarial examples is even harder to
discover these adversarial examples. The removal of outliers is
crucial for VR devices in user authentication mechanisms. The
VR device should only be unlocked by the owner or autho-
rized users, while outliers are prohibited from access [246].
Different outlier detection techniques are used to compare
the model accuracy. The distribution-based approach outlier
detection algorithms [247] have the best detection accuracy
when the outlier detection threshold is at the 99 percentile.

The security can be further enhanced by deploying mul-
tiple DL models within AR/VR applications. Considering
the unique features of DL models, the adversarial examples
generated for a speciﬁc Metaverse application cannot transfer
to other applications. The edge devices can store multiple DL
models to act as an illusion to the attacker. The authors in [233]
propose a multi-model defense technique known as MULDEF.
The defense framework consists of two components, i.e., the
model generator and runtime model selection. The model
generator will train multiple models to form a model family to
achieve robustness diversity so that the adversarial examples
can only successfully attack one DL model. The runtime
model selection has a low-cost random strategy to randomly
select a model from a model family. From the simulation
result, it has been clearly indicated that the edge devices
are more robust against adversarial examples by having more
models in MULDEF. More models mean that the chance of
selecting a robust model is higher.

E. Lessons Learned

1) Adaptive AR/VR Cloud-Edge-End Rendering: Lever-
aging the ubiquitous computing and intelligence in mobile
edge networks, users can ofﬂoad AR/VR tasks to available
computing nodes in the network for rendering. With the cloud-
edge-end collaborative computing paradigm, the performance
bottlenecks in AR/VR rendering, such as stochastic demand
and network condition, stragglers at edge networks, and het-
erogeneous tasks, can be adaptively addressed through efﬁcient
coordination of ubiquitous computing and intelligence.

2) On-demand and Generalized Model Compression:
Model compression can reduce the required hardware re-
quirements of the local devices to access the Metaverse.

28

However, there will be devices still facing resource constraints
such as storage, computational power, and energy. Therefore,
implementing an additional on-demand model compression is
vital to compress the model further. The trade-off between
the accuracy and users’ QoE should be studied to strike
the balance of the on-demand model compression [248]. On
the other hand, a generalized model compression technique
can be introduced to derive the most suitable compression
technique or level of compression for heterogeneous tasks for
the computational interoperability in the Metaverse.

3) User-centric Computing: The Metaverse should be en-
forced in a trustworthy and privacy-preserving manner if it is
to be accepted by users. The protection can be enforced from
two aspects, i.e., the virtual and physical worlds. In virtual
worlds, the applications should protect the sensitive informa-
tion located in the edge devices when the applications perform
the computation. In the physical world, information such as
GPS locations, the voice of the users, and eye movements
captured by external gadgets like AR/VR devices should also
be protected as they can reveal additional information about
the users [249]. While data-hungry AI algorithms need a lot
of such data input, it is important to ensure that users’ privacy
is protected through data minimum principles.

4) Secure Interoperable Computing:

In this section, we
have discussed computation paradigms from a general per-
spective. In practice, however, the data of users may be stored
in separate edge/cloud servers. The development frameworks
utilized for the virtual worlds may also differ from another,
thereby complicating the process of edge or cloud ofﬂoading.
As such, it is important to consider distributed storage so-
lutions to ensure users can traverse among the physical and
virtual worlds. We will revisit this in Section V.

5) From Distribution to Decentralization: The distributed
computation paradigms discussed in this section involve
cloud/edge servers or centralized parameter servers. While
distributed computing technologies, such as FL, discussed can
mitigate privacy loss, the involvement of centralized servers
is at risk of a single point of failure. In Section V, we
will discuss the decentralized data storage/sharing and edge
ofﬂoading techniques that can address this issue.

V. BLOCKCHAIN

Security and privacy are critical concerns for embodied
users and service providers in the Metaverse at mobile edge
networks, as discussed in Section IV-D. The blockchain, as a
decentralized and tamper-proof database, is another promising
feasible solution that can protect the assets and activities of
both Metaverse users and service providers without third-party
authorities [197], [251]. With outstanding properties such as
immutability, auditability, and transparency, the blockchain
can support proof-of-ownership for goods and services in the
Metaverse [25], [252]. First, users immerse in virtual worlds
as avatars, which contain a large amount of private user data.
The users can generate virtual content during their activities
and interactions in the Metaverse, such as gaming items and
digital collectibles. After the blockchain stores the metadata
and media data in its distributed ledger, this virtual content

becomes digital assets and can be proved for ownership and
uniqueness. Second, during the construction and maintenance
of the Metaverse, physical-virtual synchronization supported
by PSPs, such as IoT devices and sensors, is also recorded
as transactions in the blockchain. As a result, the avatar-
related data and edge resources can be governed by the
blockchain in a secure and interoperable manner. Furthermore,
blockchain-based interoperability allows economic systems in
virtual worlds to synchronize the economic system in the
physical world with more robust and ﬂuent circulation. For
example, as shown in Fig. 13, the authors in [250] user-
deﬁned decentralized FL framework for industrial IoT devices
in the Metaverses. To seamlessly utilize data generated in
the physical and virtual worlds, a hierarchical blockchain
architecture with a main chain and multiple subchains is
proposed to aggregate the global model securely. In detail,
the components of blockchain as an infrastructure for the
Metaverse are shown in Fig. 14. To achieve a secure and
reliable Metaverse at mobile edge networks, the following
criteria should be satisﬁed:

1) Decentralized consensus and trust: With the smart con-
tracts and consensus algorithms in the blockchain [25],
the blockchain can ensure security and trust for data
and activities in the Metaverse in a decentralized and
tamper-proof manner without third-party authorities.
2) Proof-of-ownership: The digital content created by users
in the Metaverse can be permanently recorded and stored
on the blockchain as NFTs [51], and thus the ownership
of UGC is provable and unique. This motivates users
to actively generate contents that will populate the
Metaverse. The digital content can be traded for digital
or ﬁat currencies in the Metaverse Economic system.
3) Scalability and Interoperability: The Metaverse is ex-
pected to blur the boundary of the physical world
and virtual worlds via seamless synchronization among
the
massive physical and virtual entities. Therefore,
blockchain needs to provide scalability and interoper-
ability for various virtual services [27]. The scalability
allows massive devices and users to access the Metaverse
the same time, while the interoperability enables
at
avatars in different virtual worlds to interact seamlessly.

Fig. 13: Decentralized FL empowered by a cross-chain system
for the Metaverse [250].

29

Fig. 14: Components of Blockchain-as-an-Infrastructure for
the Metaverse at mobile edge networks.

4) Automatic edge resource management: Through various
types of smart contracts,
the blockchain allows IoT
devices, sensors, and PSPs, to automatically manage
resources at mobile edge networks. In addition,
the
blockchain can motivate PSPs to support the physical-
virtual synchronization by distributing incentives [96].
5) Transparency and Privacy: In the blockchain, informa-
tion of goods and services is transparent and anonymous
for all participating entities [16]. In this way, all informa-
tion in the Metaverse is open-access in the blockchain,
overcoming the asymmetric information of traditional
networks. Moreover, anonymous users and providers in
the blockchain allow the blockchain to protect
their
privacy to the greatest extent possible.

A. The Blockchain-based Metaverse Economic System

The Metaverse economic system is a merge of the physical
economic system with ﬁat currencies and the virtual economic
systems with cryptocurrency, stablecoins, central bank digital
currencies (CBDCs) [253]. Based on the economic systems
in the physical world, the Metaverse economic systems are
essential to facilitate the circulation of digital and physical
currencies, goods, and services in the Metaverse [16]. How-
ever, there is no centralized government in the Metaverse.
Therefore, the virtual Metaverse economic systems built upon
the blockchain are expected to provide transparent and veri-
ﬁable economic operation without third-party authorities. To
support the creator economy in the Metaverse at mobile edge
networks, users can be creators of UGC in the Metaverse based
on the communication and computation resources provided by
PSPs [254]. Next, the uniqueness and ownership of UGC can
be protected via the wireless blockchain by minting the UGC
as NFTs for collecting and trading. Finally, these tradable
NFTs in games and social activities can be sold for revenue
in the form of digital currencies or physical currencies.

1) User-generated Content: User-generated content is one
of the most important features of the Metaverse, in which
users at mobile edge networks can be creators of virtual assets,
e.g., videos, music, and proﬁle pictures, rather than having
the platform’s developers/operators offer them for sale in a
marketplace [16]. The development of Metaverse applications

Virtual spacePhysical spaceRelay chainCross-chain Management PlatformDataMain chain MSubchain VSubchain PDataDataDataTask publisherIIoT nodesEdge devicesc. Perform local model traininga. Publish a  federated learning taskb. Allocate the task to workers through the relay chainf. Aggregate local models and generate new global modeld. Upload local model parametersc. Perform local model trainingd. Upload local model parameterse. Relay updated model parameters in a cross-chain management platformGameFiSocialFiIDPlay-to-earnSocial effectWalletIoT dataAI modelsSpectrumaccessGameassetsStatusArtsSoftwaresResourceBlockDecentralized cloud  storage InterPlanetary file systemGoodData filesystemArweaveData integrity andauthenticityVehicular datasharingHealthcaredata sharingDecentralizeddata marketCertificate-freecryptography Reputation-based  data sharingProof-of-collaborationMulti-chain networkslicing modelCross-chain trustedsmart contractProof ofDepositCross-chainstorage modelNotarymechanismReputation-assistedshardingDRL-based shardingInteroperabilityNetwork  sharding schemeDAG-basedshardingScalabilityEconomicNFTAvatarData SharingData StorageReputationinevitably generates huge amounts of data, which poses data
processing and storage challenges for Metaverse PSPs [29].
Fortunately, UGC can be stored in distributed cloud and
edge servers. For example, the authors in [255] propose a
blockchain-empowered resource management framework for
UGC data close to the data source. A shared edge structure
is proposed that enables the adaptable use of heterogeneous
data and available edge resources, reducing service delay and
network load, but without considering the single point of
failure of edge servers in UGC storage.

2) Non-Fungible Tokens: Non-fungible tokens are digital
assets that link ownership to unique physical or digital items,
which can help to tokenize UGC like arts, music, collectibles,
video, and in-game items [256]. The NFTs ensure uniqueness
by permanently storing encrypted transaction history on the
blockchain. Each NFT has a unique ID value, which is
used to verify the ownership of digital assets and assign
a value to future transactions [51]. NFTs are mainly used
to commemorate special moments and collect digital assets.
Recently, NFTs have been integrated into Metaverse to create
a new digital content business [51]. In March 2021, a breaking
NFT event, where a digital work of art created by Beeple was
sold for $69.3 million at Christie’s, happened in the UK [257].
This story shows the great potential of NFTs in Metaverse
for our future life, which requires secure and reliable NFT
management, especially NFT storage.

Normally, UGC creators record the metadata of NFTs by
on-blockchain or off-chain mechanisms [258], [259]. For the
blockchain-based storage, the metadata is permanently stored
with their NFT tokens. For example, Decentraland is a virtual
platform built on the Ethereum blockchain for UGC storage
and monetization as NFTs [260]. The Decentraland stores
ownership of NFTs and other tradable information on the
Ethereum blockchain. However, the blockchain storage cost is
usually more expensive than that of the off-chain mechanisms.
To save storage cost on Ethereum and improve the scalability
of Decentraland, the user location information and scene status
for real-time interaction is stored on off-chain, such as end
devices and edge servers. Similarly, Sandbox is a blockchain-
based virtual sandbox game system that can maintain users’
ownership of digital land and UGC [16]. In Sandbox, the
transaction data of digital assets are stored on the Ethereum
blockchain, while the media data of digital assets are stored
on the InterPlanetary File System (IPFS), and the uncasted
digital assets are stored on the Amazon’s S3 cloud servers [16].
Therefore, off-chain storage solutions are becoming more and
more popular for digital asset management, especially NFTs.
Currently available off-chain storage solutions mainly include
centralized data centers, decentralized cloud/edge storage, and
IPFS. Taking one of the representative NFT projects named
CryptoPunks as an example, a centralized server is utilized to
store the integrated product picture, and smart contracts are
used to store the encrypted hash value of the metadata and
media data for veriﬁcation [261]. In this way, with the non-
tampering characteristic of the blockchain, the picture can be
veriﬁed whether there is any modiﬁcation according to its hash
value. However, the media data is stored in the central server
instead of the entire blockchain nodes as in NFT ownership

30

storage, which leads to many security risks, including data loss
and denial of service.

3) Game and Social Financial Systems: Games and social
media are typical applications in the Metaverse, where users
can interact with avatars in the Metaverse for entertainment
and socializing. Moreover, the game and social ﬁnance are also
an essential part of the economic systems in the Metaverse. In
common usage, Game Financial (GameFi) refers to decentral-
ized applications (dApps) with economic incentives, i.e., play
to earn [262]. Similarly, Social Financial (SocialFi) means the
social acceptance and effects in the Metaverse that if there are
more users in the Metaverse, the valuation of the Metaverse is
also higher [263]. The authors provide a comprehensive and
detailed overview of blockchain games in [264]. Speciﬁcally,
GameFi and SocialFi in the Metaverse consist of three main
components. First, players with resource-constrained edge de-
vices can purchase Metaverse services from edge/cloud servers
to access 3D virtual worlds. Second, the blockchain-based
economic system in the Metaverse allows players to trade with
other players and VSPs for digital or ﬁat currencies. Third, the
value of assets created by players in the virtual worlds might
cover the fees charged by PSPs, and thus increasing player
satisfaction and enabling players to immerse in the Metaverse
with greater enthusiasm.

The authors in [265] propose a token-based gaming system
called CloudArcade that uses transparent blockchain-backed
tokens. In CloudArcade, a silent payment method based on
blockchain is proposed to protect the game quality, enhance
players’ trust in services, and protect their privacy. Cooper-
ative game worlds still lack a suitable system to motivate
participants to contribute their trustworthy data. Therefore,
the authors in [266] introduce reciprocal crowdsourcing games
among wireless users, a new decentralized cooperative game
model based on the blockchain to strengthen trust between
game participants through transparent and collaborative work.
In a campus-based Metaverse, the authors in [16] develop
a virtual economic system to incentivize academic activities
for students on the campus. Based on GPS information of
students’ smart phones, this ﬁnancial system is linked to real
campus buildings so that students are rewarded with more
tokens in library than in dormitories.

B. Decentralized Edge Data Storage and Sharing

To protect against the risks, IPFS is widely used to achieve
redundant backup and stable content addressing. Unlike cen-
tralized storage solutions that rely on a central server, IPFS
maintains an addressing network running on multiple nodes
without the problems of data invalidation and tampering [267].
Although off-chain storage has a higher upper bound on
storage space, the scalability of storage systems still needs to
be improved to meet the increasing demands of NFT storage
in the Metaverse. Therefore, sidechain/multiple blockchain-
based storage systems can improve the storage capacity of
the blockchain for NFTs [51]. First, multiple blockchains can
cooperate to create a common storage platform with abundant
blockchain and off-chain storage resources for NFT storage.
However, existing NFT schemes are separated from each other

without interoperability due to the limitations of the underlying
blockchain platform.

1) Blockchain-based Data Storage: Typical decentralized
data storage projects include Storj DCS (Decentralized Cloud
Storage) and IPFS. Speciﬁcally, Storj DCS stores and archives
large amounts of data in a decentralized cloud and provides
users with encrypted, secure, and affordable blockchain data
storage services [268]. In contrast, IPFS is a protocol used
in peer-to-peer data networks to store and share data in a
decentralized ﬁle system where each ﬁle is uniquely identiﬁed
to address the content and prevent multiple identical ﬁles from
being uploaded to the data networks [269]. To move IPFS from
the cloud to the edge, GoodData File System (GDFS) is a more
efﬁcient, domain-aware decentralized ﬁle system developed
by GoodData based on IPFS and blockchain cloud storage.
Compared to IPFS, GDFS can help users store multiple
copies and ensure the reliability, availability, and longevity
of data storage, especially UGC data in the Metaverse. At
the same time, GDFS allocates highly reliable, available, and
conﬁdential edge storage resources from PSPs to users nearby,
ensuring efﬁcient utilization of storage resources [270].

In contrast to traditional pricing schemes for blockchain
data storage systems based on the number of data accesses,
Arweave proposes a permanent pricing scheme for blockchain
data storage [271]. In Arweave’s pricing scheme, a data node is
rewarded for long-term data storage, i.e., when a node creates
a new data block to prove storage, the storage capacity of that
proof is used as a tariff for the Arweave network to reward the
node. When a node stops storing data blocks, Arweave does
not penalize the node but stops rewarding it. In Arweave, users
pay a transaction fee for uploading data, a portion of which
goes to the miner, while the network retains the rest. To im-
prove sustainability of blockchain-based data storage systems
running on edge nodes, the authors in [272] propose a resilient
incentive mechanism for blockchain data storage that enables
a longer-term, healthier ecology of blockchain data storage
systems. Their proposed incentive scheme allows multiple
blockchains to balance increasing storage requirements with
decreasing mining revenues. Moreover, to improve fairness of
the data storage systems running among heterogeneous nodes,
the authors in [273] model the incentive scheme for blockchain
data storage as a two-stage game analyzing a Nash equilibrium
with negative externalities and unfair lagged prices.

2) Blockchain-based Data Sharing: Blockchain is in-
tended to be a practical approach to ensure data security
and improve efﬁciency in the Metaverse at mobile edge
networks. For example, vehicle-to-vehicle data exchange and
data analytics can enrich existing vehicle services in vehicular
networks [274], [275]. However, RoadSide Units (RSUs) and
vehicles can be malicious and untrusted [276]. To solve
this problem,
the authors in [277] propose a consortium
blockchain-based system protected by smart contracts for
secure data storage and exchange in vehicular networks. This
system deploys smart contracts on RSUs and vehicles to
achieve secure and efﬁcient data storage and sharing. To
improve the trustworthiness of data, they propose a reputation-
based data sharing system that uses a three-level subjective
logic model to measure the reputation of data sources. To

31

minimize the energy consumption of mobile edge networks
and maximize the throughput of the blockchain-based sys-
tems, the authors [278] use an asynchronous learning-based
approach for efﬁcient strategy discovery in dynamic network
environments. Healthcare services generate a large amount of
private medical data about patients. To leverage the data to
provide effective and secure medical services to patients while
maintaining privacy, the authors in [279] propose a medical
edge blockchain framework. In this framework, blockchain
technologies are used for fast and secure exchange and storage
of a large amount of medical data. They are also developing an
optimization model for this framework to improve the latency
and computational cost of sharing medical data between
different medical institutions.

The authors in [280] design a secure and accountable IoT
storage system using blockchain. It overcomes the drawbacks
of certiﬁcate cryptosystems by providing a convenient way to
broadcast the public key of any IoT device with the public
ledger of the blockchain system. Certiﬁcate-free cryptography
signiﬁcantly reduces redundancy while providing efﬁcient
ways to authenticate IoT devices. Aiming to develop resource-
efﬁcient techniques for blockchain-based data exchange in
the Metaverse, the authors in [281] propose the proof-of-
collaboration consensus mechanism by reducing the compu-
tational complexity in edge devices. The proposed transaction
ofﬂoading module and optimization method can save 95% of
storage resources and 30% of network resources, respectively.
By jointly considering data storage and sharing in MEC,
the authors in [282] propose a blockchain-based secure, and
efﬁcient data management mechanism for IoT devices with
limited resources. In this system, the fault tolerance of this
mechanism is improved by key sharing, where the private
signature keys are stored in different blocks of the blockchain.
Moreover, this mechanism supports anonymous authentication,
which enables trusted edge nodes with powerful computing
power to implement data proxy signatures, reduce the load on
IoT devices with limited computing resources, and ensure the
integrity and authenticity of Big Data.

C. Blockchain Scalability and Interoperability

Due to value isolation among multiple blockchains in
the Metaverse, interoperability of multiple virtual worlds is
required for data interaction and collaboration between dif-
ferent blockchains [283]. Therefore, cross-chain is a critical
technology for secure data interoperability [284]. Meanwhile,
sharding is a ﬂexible way to improve the scalability of the
blockchain so that a signiﬁcant number of connections can be
accommodated in the Metaverse [285]. Therefore, to improve
blockchain scalability,
introduce shard-
ing technology to divide the entire Metaverse into multiple
connected shards. Each shard of the Metaverse contains its
independent state and transaction history, and certain nodes
will only process transactions in certain slices, increasing the
transaction throughput and scalability of the blockchain [52].
Meanwhile, cross-chain is also an effective solution to scala-
bility issues [286]. Cross-chain is a technology that enables the
interconnection between blockchain networks in the Metaverse

the Metaverse will

by allowing the exchange of information and value to improve
the scalability and interoperability of blockchains.

[288] to B5G/6G networks,

1) Blockchain Scalability: Access control without a trusted
third-party platform is one of the essential ways to protect
privacy in the Metaverse [287]. Given the limited resources
for lightweight IoT devices,
the authors in [288] propose
the Network Sharding Scheme to improve the scalability of
the blockchain-based access control systems in IoT. In this
scheme, edge nodes are divided into multiple shards that man-
age their own local blockchains, while cloud nodes manage a
global blockchain. In this way, the transaction processing rate
can be improved, and the storage pressure of each node can
be reduced when multiple blockchains process transactions in
parallel. According to their theoretical analysis, the routing
cost of querying transactions can be reduced to 𝑂 (1). To
extend
the authors in [289]
propose a blockchain sharding scheme based on a directed
acyclic graph (DAG) that combines the efﬁcient data recording
of sharding and the secure blockchain update of DAG. In this
scheme, DAG can maintain a global state that combines the
computational power of different committees without causing
security problems. Moreover, they design a resource-efﬁcient
consensus mechanism that saves the computational cost of the
consensus process and improves the spectrum efﬁciency in
B5G/6G networks. To handle the sub-optimum performance
issues caused by blockchain sharding, some intelligence-based
blockchain sharding schemes are proposed in [290], [291].
Speciﬁcally, the authors in [290] use a DRL-based algorithm
to determine the number of partitions, the size of microblocks,
and the interval for generating large blocks. The authors
in [291] use reputation-based DRL to form shards in a self-
organized manner. Each peer selects its shard independently to
maximize its payoff, which depends on the peer’s throughput.
Finally, the authors in [290] and [291] both analyze the secu-
rity and throughput performance of their proposed schemes.
2) Blockchain Interoperability: In addition to blockchain
sharding for scalability, cross-chain is another powerful tech-
nology to provide the Metaverse for interoperability that
breaks down the siloed nature of the blockchain to create
an intertwined distributed Metaverse ecosystem [292]. To
achieve secure and efﬁcient IoT data management, the authors
in [286] design a cross-chain framework based on the notary
mechanism to integrate multiple blockchains. The proposed
framework can provide ﬁne-grained and interactive decentral-
ized access control for these IoT data in different blockchains.
However, the notary mechanism as a cross-chain consensus
mechanism may compromise the security of cross-chain trans-
action storage due to the limited number of notaries. To secure
cross-chain transaction storage among heterogeneous edge
nodes, the authors in [293] develop a secure and decentralized
cross-chain storage model with their proposed tree structures
that has a good performance in tamper-proof data protection
and can defend against conspiracy node attacks.

The Metaverse is expected to provide various applications
and services that have requirements with multiple QoS pa-
rameters [1]. These applications need a network fragmentation
service level agreement (SLA) to provide customized network
services for Metaverse users. To protect the consistency of

32

services on multiple network slices simultaneously using the
blockchain, the authors in [294] design a multi-chain net-
work slicing framework. The framework deploys a separate
blockchain on each edge network slice to reduce the frequency
of information exchange between slices and improve service
efﬁciency. In this framework, authorities deploy smart service
quality contracts only in the service quality chain to coordi-
nate and formulate the recommended smart contracts for the
censorship and the evaluation chains. However, different types
of information about electric vehicles and charging piles need
to be stored and queried simultaneously for energy security
purposes in shared charging systems. Therefore, the authors
in [295] propose a multi-chain charging model based on cross-
chain trusted smart contracts for electric vehicular networks. In
the model, different types of information are stored in different
blockchains to ensure the authenticity, real-time, and mutual
exclusion for write operations of cross-chain information.

Decentralized exchanges based on decentralized networks
and computation play important roles in the blockchain-based
Metaverse economic systems that enable cross-chain token
or NFT circulation, as shown in Fig. 15. To this end, the
authors in [296] propose a distributed cryptocurrency trading
system that employs a decentralized cryptocurrency exchange
protocol. In this protocol, two types of consensus mechanisms
(i.e., PoW and Proof of Deposit) are used to select trustworthy
users for a validation committee. The experimental results
show that this cross-chain exchange platform can be suitable
for multi-user scenarios. The platform overhead (i.e., provi-
sioning and execution costs) depends only on the number of
participants instead of the number of transfers made by a single
participant. With these attractive advantages,
the proposed
platform is expected to be deployed at edge nodes in mobile
edge networks and thus enable transactions to be processed at
where they are generated.

D. Blockchain in Edge Resource Management

The existence of ubiquitous connections in the Metaverse,
especially at mobile edge networks, and the mobility of
devices pose new challenges for security and privacy in the
Metaverse. Therefore, blockchain plays an essential role in
communication in the Metaverse. On the one hand, blockchain
provides access control [297], process management [298],
and account auditing [299] services for AR/VR services in
the Metaverse. On the other hand, the blockchain stores the
synchronized records of the physical and virtual worlds so that
the data is secure and private throughout its lifecycle.

On the other hand, the computational capabilities provided
by the network edge enable users in the Metaverse to pro-
cess data and draw conclusions with lower latency than in
the cloud [300]. The computational security of data in the
Metaverse is threatened by the widespread presence of hetero-
geneous edge devices in the mobile edge network, often owned
by different stakeholders [27]. Fortunately, the blockchain en-
ables these edge devices belonging to various interest parties,
such as AR/VR service providers and DT service providers,
to process the computation tasks together without a trusted
third party. By using blockchain to protect edge computing, the

33

is often vulnerable to malicious manipulation and falsiﬁcation.
To ensure the security and privacy of eye-tracking data col-
lected from remote individuals, the authors in [304] propose
a proof-of-concept (PoC) consensus-based decentralized eye-
tracking data collection system. This system implements PoC
consensus and smart contracts for eye-tracking data on the
Ethernet blockchain. In this way, they do not need a centralized
third party to reward and data management, which is optimal
from a privacy perspective.

Besides, augmented reality can provide a visual experience
for biomedical health informatics applications. In [305], the
authors propose a blockchain-based AR framework for col-
lecting, processing, and managing data in health applications.
Speciﬁcally, they built a system for managing medical models
based on Ethereum. In this system, the proof-of-work (PoW)
consensus mechanism is used to ensure that data is shared
between different agents without compromising privacy. By
leveraging the PoW consensus mechanism, this framework
can ensure the privacy of biomedical health data across the
different agents. To overcome the resource inefﬁciency of
PoW, the authors in [306] propose a proof-of-computation
ofﬂoading (PoCO) consensus mechanism. In this PoCO, the
IoT nodes with better caching performance should be given
a higher probability of becoming a block veriﬁer and thus
receive higher beneﬁts. Compared with the PoW mechanism,
the proposed PoCO mechanism is less powerful in terms of
cache hit rate, the number of caches hits, and node trafﬁc. To
protect the security of military IoT without compromising its
performance, the authors in [307] propose a blockchain-based
military IoT mixed reality framework. In this framework,
inventory management, remote mission control, and battleﬁeld
support in military IoT are handled by a blockchain-based
data management system. Therefore, smart contracts ensure
the security of data storage and sharing in a multi-user
environment.

2) Blockchain in Physical-Virtual Synchronization: Dur-
ing the physical-virtual synchronization for constructing and
maintaining the Metaverse, the blockchain enhances the data
monitoring and command execution in the DT by providing
transparency, immutability, decentralized data management,
and peer-to-peer collaboration [308]. Existing DT networks
enable cyber-physical systems (CPS) to predict and respond to
changes in real-time by assuming that DT data can be trusted
throughout the product life cycle. However, this assumption is
vulnerable when there are multiple stakeholders in the system,
making data propagation and course correction unreliable. To
develop a reliable distributed DT solution, the authors in [309]
propose an AI-assisted blockchain-based DT framework that
provides timely and actionable insights for CPS. In this
framework, CPS extracts process knowledge from blockchain-
protected product lifecycle data. Using AI algorithms, this
knowledge is used to predict potential security threats in
the system. To preserve data privacy, the authors in [310]
extend the learning-based prediction scheme of [309] to FL
to improve system reliability and security.

In Industry 4.0, actionable insights that the DT obtained
from analyzing a massive amount of data are used to help
industrial plants make important decisions [311]. However,

Fig. 15: Various scenarios of wireless blockchain for virtual
and physical services in the Metaverse. The blue arrows
indicate the economic circulation of virtual content generated
by users that virtual content is minted as NFTs and traded for
cryptocurrency. The brown arrow indicates the interoperation
between multiple blockchains for economic systems, avatar
society management, and edge resource management.

computation tasks, such as AR/VR rendering, in the Metaverse
can be transparent and privacy-preserving. On the other hand,
the processing of data and knowledge (e.g., AI models) in the
Metaverse can be effectively protected by the blockchain [25].
1) Blockchain in Edge Multimedia Networks: Multimodal
multimedia services require a large amount of user privacy
data to optimize the QoS and immerse users in the Meta-
verse. Therefore, blockchain as a distributed ledger can record
private information, such as preferred FoV, for Metaverse
users [276]. Using fog-based access points as logging nodes
of the blockchain, the authors in [301] propose blockchain-
enabled fog radio access networks to provide decentralized
logging services for VR services. To reduce the message
exchange in the original practical Byzantine Fault Tolerance
(PBFT) mechanism [302], they propose a two-layer PBFT
mechanism to improve the scalability and network coverage
of multimedia networks. To reduce the energy consumption of
multimedia networks, they use the DRL algorithm to learn the
optimal resource allocation strategy for blockchain consensus
and VR streaming. For a wireless VR-enabled medical treat-
ment system with sensitive health data, the authors in [303]
propose a blockchain-enabled task ofﬂoading and resource
allocation scheme. In this system, each edge access point can
serve as a mining node to ensure secure storage, processing,
and sharing of medical data. Similar to [301], a collective RL-
based joint resource allocation scheme is proposed in [303]
for viewport rendering, block consensus, and content trans-
mission. Eye-tracking data helps multimedia service providers
assess user attention to improve the quality of multimedia
services. However, centralized collection of eye-tracking data

UGCcreationNFT tradingImmersive streamingDigital twinEconomicsystemsDecentralizedcomputationDecentralizednetworksSocialacceptance: Currencies: Non-fungible tokensdata inconsistency and unreliability can disrupt the develop-
ment of data-driven decisions in industrial systems. To address
the authors in [312] propose a blockchain-
this problem,
based DT for the industrial IoT that aggregates heterogeneous
data from different data sources. Moreover,
this DT can
also provide consistency guarantees for data interactions in
continuous physical and discrete virtual spaces. In this way,
critical events such as device failures and risks in the industrial
IoT can be diagnosed and avoided in advance. The authors
in [313] propose a blockchain-based social DT system for
smart home devices and data management. They deploy a
private blockchain to support privacy-preserving smart home
applications and provide human-centric services. In this private
blockchain-based DT framework, a homeowner has shared
ownership of physical devices and their DTs at homes.

3) Blockchain in Edge Computation Ofﬂoading: As men-
tioned in the previous section on computation, there are a large
number of resource-constrained devices in the Metaverse at
mobile edge networks to perform computationally intensive,
latency-critical Metaverse services, such as 3D rendering,
AI model training, and blockchain mining [300], [314]. To
reduce computation loads of VR devices in edge medical
treatment systems, the authors in [303] propose a blockchain-
enabled ofﬂoading and resource allocation framework. In this
framework, edge access points act as the blockchain nodes
to execute and reach the consensus on the VR resources
management and thus improve the security and privacy of the
system. However, the ofﬂoading process is vulnerable to data
incompleteness, while edge devices are often overloaded or un-
derloaded when processing disproportionate resource requests,
resulting in incomplete data at task ofﬂoading. The authors
in [315] propose a blockchain-enabled computation ofﬂoading
system using genetic algorithms to create a balanced resource
allocation policy. Under a fair resource allocation scheme,
the system can determine the optimal additive weighting and
achieve efﬁcient multi-criteria decision-making.

To extend the problem of constrained computation resources
to edge servers, the authors study peer-ofﬂoading scenarios
in [316]. To motivate selﬁsh edge servers to participate in
they propose a blockchain-
collaborative edge computing,
based distributed collaborative edge platform called CoopEdge
to solve the trust and incentive problem of edge servers.
In CoopEdge, the historical performance of edge servers in
performing peer-to-peer ofﬂoading tasks is recorded in the
blockchain to evaluate the reputation of edge servers. The
reputation of these edge servers is input into the Proof of
Edge Reputation (PoER) consensus mechanism, which allows
miners on the blockchain to record their consensus on the
performance of peer-ofﬂoading tasks on the blockchain. To
securely update, validate, and store trust
information in a
vehicular cloud network, the authors [317] propose a hier-
archical blockchain framework in which long-term reputation
and short-term trust variability are jointly considered. In this
hierarchical blockchain framework, the vehicle blockchain is
used to compute, validate, and store local subjective trust,
the RSU blockchain is used for objective trust, and the cloud
blockchain is used for social trust, because the heterogeneous
resource distribution in this vehicular cloud network places

34

different performance requirements on each blockchain.

4) Blockchain in Edge Intelligence: In the Metaverse, the
blockchain provides decentralized management of data and
knowledge resources that are important for communication
and computing services. Blockchain-based data and knowl-
edge sharing among edge devices in the physical and virtual
worlds can be more secure and reliable [308]. Nevertheless,
blockchain-based data sharing becomes less efﬁcient and risky
as the volume of user data increases and privacy becomes
more important. Fortunately, Metaverse can be built on top
of many AI models that can extract knowledge and make
inferences from vast amounts of edge-aware data. To enable
AI models to trade securely in the AI-powered IoT,
the
authors propose a blockchain-based peer-to-peer knowledge
marketplace in [318]. In this marketplace, they developed a
new cryptocurrency named Knowledge Coin, smart contracts,
and a new consensus mechanism called proof-of-transaction
(PoT), combining PoW with the proof-of-stake (PoS), for
secure and efﬁcient knowledge management and transactions.
In the Metaverse, multiple physical and virtual entities can
leverage FL to collaboratively train a global model without
privacy concerns for social-aware avatars and AR/VR recom-
mendation services. However, edge devices may upload unre-
liable local models in FL, thus tempting the global aggregator
to degrade the performance of the global model. For example,
a mobile device could launch a data poisoning attack on the
federation, i.e., intentionally providing unreliable local models,
or use only low-quality data for updates, i.e., unintentionally
performing unreliable updates. To address this problem, the
authors in [319] propose a secure FL system based on feder-
ated chains. First, they capture and compute the performance
of historical model updates of edge devices participating in FL
with a reputation as a metric. Then, a consortium blockchain is
proposed to efﬁciently and securely manage the reputation of
edge devices. To extend reputation-based employee selection
in [319], the authors propose a reputation-based crowdsourcing
incentive mechanism in [320] to motivate more customers to
participate in FL model training tasks and reduce malicious
updates and toxic updates. However, the reliability of the
central server is still doubtful. To solve this problem, the
authors propose a fully decentralized FL framework with
committee consensus in [321]. In this framework, elected com-
mittee members review model updates and aggregate models.
In this way, honest FL nodes can reinforce each other and
continuously improve the performance of the global model.
At the same time, intentionally or unintentionally, unreliable
updates are discarded to protect the global model. Finally,
the framework is ﬂexible, where FL nodes can join or leave
without interrupting the training process.

E. Lessons Learned

1) Synchronization of Physical-Virtual Economic Systems:
In the Metaverse economic system, multiple monetary sys-
tems co-exist, including the physical monetary system with
ﬁat currencies and virtual monetary systems with in-game
tokens, stablecoins, CBDCs, and cryptocurrencies. Under the
Metaverse economic system, users can ﬁrst purchase P2V

synchronization services to access the Metaverse. Then, users
can create and trade digital assets for digital currencies.
Finally, through the V2P synchronization services, users can
exchange their digital currencies back into ﬁat currencies
in the physical world. By synchronizing the physical-virtual
economic systems in the Metaverse, new liquidity is brought
to the global ﬁnancial system in a secure and robust manner.
2) Off-chain Data Storage: Due to the limited storage space
in on-chain storage, the enormous volume of data generated
by physical and virtual entities in the Metaverse is preferred
to be stored in an off-chain manner. In the construction and
maintenance of Metaverse, the blockchain-based data storage
and sharing system veriﬁes and stores the metadata on-chain
while storing the complete data off-chain. This way, the Meta-
verse is more sustainable while guaranteeing immutability.

3) Intelligent Scalability and Interoperability: The Meta-
verse is expected to support ubiquitous physical and virtual
entities for real-time physical-virtual synchronization, which
requires the scalability and interoperability of the blockchain.
For enhancing the scalability of the Metaverse, AI can pro-
vide intelligent solutions for the adaptive sharding of the
blockchain. In addition, learning-based schemes can be uti-
lized in robust notary selection of cross-chain schemes and
thus improving interoperability.

4) Anonymous Physical-Virtual Synchronization: Based on
the blockchain, the Metaverse can provide encrypted addresses
and address-based access models for physical and virtual
entities to anonymously request immersive streaming and syn-
chronization services in Section III. This way, physical entities,
e.g., mobile devices, can allocate immersive steaming and edge
rendering from virtual entities, e.g., AR/VR recommenders,
to facilitate the V2P synchronization. In addition, IoT devices
and sensors in the physical world can update the DT models
anonymously with encrypted addresses.

5) Decentralized Edge Intelligence: In the Metaverse, edge
intelligence mentioned in Section IV can be empowered by
the blockchain to become decentralized during edge training
and inference. This way, edge intelligence can avoid a single
point of failure during collaborative training between edge
devices and servers, and thus improving the reliability of
edge networks. In addition, the blockchain-based reputation
management scheme and incentive mechanism can enhance
the robustness and sustainability of edge networks.

VI. FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS
This section discusses the future directions that are im-
portant when various technologies are implemented in the
Metaverse.

Advanced Multiple Access for Immersive Streaming:
Heterogeneous services and applications in the Metaverse,
such AR/VR, the tactile Internet, and hologram streaming,
necessitates the provisioning of unprecedented ubiquitous ac-
cessibility, extremely high data rate, and ultra-reliable and
low-latency communications of the mobile edge networks.
Speciﬁcally, the shared Metaverse expects advanced multiple
access schemes to accommodate multiple users in the allotted
resource blocks, e.g, time, frequency, codes, and power, for
sharing the virtual worlds in the most effective manner.

35

Multi-sensory Multimedia Networks: Unlike the tradi-
tional 2D Internet, the Metaverse provides multi-sensory multi-
media services to users, including AR/VR, the tactile Internet,
and hologram streaming. These multi-sensory multimedia ser-
vices require mobile edge networks to be capable of providing
holographic services (e.g., AR/VR and the tactile Internet)
simultaneously. However, it is intractable to design resource
allocation schemes for such complex multi-sensory multimedia
services, as different types of network resources are required
simultaneous. For instance, AR/VR requires eMMB services
while the tactile Internet requires URLLC services. In detail,
AR services often occupy the network’s uplink transmission
resources and computing capabilities, while VR services often
occupy the network’s downlink transmission resources and
caching capabilities. Therefore, in these multi-sensory multi-
media networks, efﬁcient and satisfactory resource allocation
schemes should be proposed to support the immerse experi-
ence of users.

Multimodal Semantic/Goal-aware Communication: By
automatically interpreting AI models, semantic communica-
tion allows mobile edge networks to evolve from data-oriented
to semantic-oriented to support a wide variety of context-
aware and goal-driven services in the Metaverse. However,
existing semantic communication models tend to focus on
semantic extraction, encoding, and decoding for a single
task, such as speech or images. In the Metaverse, service
models tend to be multimodal and include multiple types
of immediate interactions, such as audio services and video
services. This raises new issues for semantic communication,
i.e., i) How to design a multimodal semantic communication
model to provide multi-sensory multimedia services in the
Metaverse, ii) How to efﬁciently extract semantics from the
data transmitted by users, iii) How to allocate resources in
the edge network to support the training and application of
semantic communication models.

Integrated Sensing and Communication: Communication
and sensing in the edge network are ubiquitous from the
construction of the Metaverse (through physical-virtual syn-
chronization) to the user access. However, in future mobile
edge networks, the spectrum traditionally reserved for sensing
(e.g., mmWave, THz, and visible light) will be used for
communication as well. Therefore, the integration of commu-
nication and sensing needs to be given the necessary attention
to ensure the establishment and sustentation of the Metaverse.
For example, the Metaverse is created by a DT for real-world
physical entities that contain a large amount of static and
dynamic information. Furthermore, the Metaverse needs to in-
stantly distribute such information to desired users and enable
Metaverse users to seamlessly communicate and interact with
the entities. We envision that the further integration of sensing
and communications will enable real-time digital replication
of the physical world and empower more diverse services in
the Metaverse.

Digital Edge Twin Networks: DT is the Metaverse’s most
effective engine to synchronize the physical and virtual worlds
in real-time. At mobile edge networks, the DT can digitally
replicate, monitor and control real-world entities with the help
of a large number of edge nodes and Internet of Everything

devices. Moreover, entities in edge networks can operate in the
physical world more efﬁciently through the interconnection of
digital entities in the Metaverse. While DT can bring smarter
operation and maintenance to mobile edge networks, they also
require signiﬁcant communication, computation, and storage
resources, making it hard for edge networks with limited
resources to handle. Therefore, more efﬁcient DT solutions
and smarter DT-enabled mobile edge network operations and
maintenance will be a purposeful research direction.

Edge Intelligence and Intelligent Edge: To realize the
Metaverse amid its unique challenges, future research should
focus on the edge intelligence driven infrastructure layer,
which is a core feature of the future wireless networks.
In short, edge intelligence is the convergence between edge
computing and AI. The two major features of edge intelligence
should be adopted, i.e., i) Edge for AI: which refers to the
end-to-end framework of bringing sensing, communication, AI
model training, and inference closer to where data is produced,
and ii) AI for Edge: which refers to the use of AI algorithms to
improve the orchestration of the aforementioned framework.
Sustainable Resource Allocation: The Metaverse will
always be resource hungry. Cloud/fog/edge computing ser-
vices are always needed so that mobile devices or portable
gadgets with low storage and computing capability can pro-
vide mobile users with excellent and immersive QoE. There-
fore, the amount of energy used to provide the Metaverse
with communication and computation power will continue
to rise, exacerbating the energy consumption and increasing
environmental concerns such as greenhouse gas emissions.
Green cloud/fog/edge networking and computing are therefore
needed to achieve sustainability. Some possible solutions can
be i) new architectures can be designed with sustainability in
mind to support green cloud/fog/edge networking and comput-
ing in the Metaverse, ii) energy-efﬁcient resource allocation
in green cloud/fog/edge networking and computing, and iii)
combining green cloud/fog/edge networking and computing
with other emerging green technologies.

Avatars (Digital Humans): The Metaverse users are telep-
resent and immersed in the virtual worlds as digital humans,
a.k.a., avatars. Since human-like avatars may require a large
number of resources to create and operate, an important ques-
tion to ask is: how can we establish dynamic avatar services at
mobile edge networks to optimize the QoE of avatar services?
Moreover, during the provision of avatar services, each avatar
has to collect and store a large amount of private biological
data of the user or other users that have mapping relationships
with the avatar in the virtual worlds or related physical entities
in the physical world. Therefore, it is signiﬁcant to secure the
data and safeguard privacy protection during avatar generation
and operation.

Intelligent Blockchain: Intelligent blockchain applies AI
algorithms to enable conventional blockchain to be more adap-
tive to the prevailing network environment in the consensus
and the block propagation processes. As AI is the main engine
and blockchain is the main infrastructure of the Metaverse,
their intersection allows the Metaverse to efﬁciently protect
the security and privacy of users. There are some prelimi-
nary studies on the intelligent blockchain, such as adaptive

36

block propagation models and dynamic routing algorithms for
payment channel networks. However, the existing research
on the intelligent blockchain only focuses on making the
blockchain operate more efﬁciently in digital environments. In
the Metaverse, intelligent blockchain will have to be linked to
the physical world, changing the manner in which physical
entities (e.g., wireless base stations, vehicles, and UAVs)
operate in the physical world.

Quality of Experience: The human perceived QoE of users
and their avatars should be properly evaluated and satisﬁed
while immersing in the virtual worlds and interacting with
other users. Both subjective and objective QoE assessments
based on physiological and psychological studies can be
leveraged to score and manage the provisioned services in the
Metaverse.

Market and Mechanism Design for Metaverse Services:
For interactive and resource-intensive services in the Meta-
verse, novel market and mechanism design is indispensable
to facilitate the allocation and pricing for Metaverse service
providers and users. As the Metaverse can blur the boundary
between the physical and virtual worlds,
the market and
mechanism design for Metaverse services should consider
local states of the physical and virtual submarkets while taking
into account the interplay effects of them.

The Industrial/Vehicular Metaverse: The emerging in-
dustrial Metaverse will integrate the physical factories and
virtual worlds for next-generation intelligent manufacturing.
The industrial Metaverse obtains data from various production
and operation lines by the Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT),
and thus conducts effective data analysis and decision-making,
thereby enhancing the production efﬁciency of the physical
space, reducing operating costs, and maximizing commer-
cial value. Meanwhile,
the vehicular Metaverse integrates
immersive streaming and real-time synchronization, which is
expected to provide better safety, more efﬁcient driving, and
immersive experience for drivers and passengers in vehicles.
The future research directions for the Metaverse at mobile
edge networks are based on three aspects,
i.e., embodied
user experience, harmonious and sustainable edge networks,
and extensive edge intelligence. First, the service delivery
with an immersive and human-aware experience of the 3D
embodied Internet in the Metaverse will push the development
of multi-sensory multimedia networks and human-in-the-loop
the emergence of the Metaverse
communication. Second,
drives mobile edge networks to provide sustainable computing
and communication services through real-time physical-virtual
synchronization and mutual optimization in digital edge twin
networks. Third, empowered by extensive edge intelligence
and blockchain services, environments in virtual and physical
worlds can be exchanged and mutually affected in the Meta-
verse without security and privacy threats.

VII. CONCLUSION

In this survey, we ﬁrst begin by introducing the readers to
the architecture of the Metaverse, the current developments,
and enabling technologies. With the focus on edge-enabled
Metaverse, we next discuss and investigate the importance

of solving key communication and networking, computation,
and blockchain challenges. Lastly, we discuss the future re-
search directions towards realizing the ultimate vision of the
Metaverse. The survey serves as the initial step that precedes
a comprehensive investigation of the Metaverse at edge net-
works, offering insights and guidance for the researchers and
practitioners to expand on the edge-enabled Metaverse with
continuous efforts.

REFERENCES

[1] X. Yu, D. Owens, and D. Khazanchi, “Building socioemotional envi-
ronments in metaverses for virtual teams in healthcare: A conceptual
exploration,” in Proc. of International Conference on Health Informa-
tion Science, Berlin, Heidelberg, Apr. 2012, pp. 4–12.

[2] W. C. Ng, W. Y. B. Lim, J. S. Ng, S. Sawadsitang, Z. Xiong,
and D. Niyato, “Optimal stochastic coded computation ofﬂoading in
unmanned aerial vehicles network,” in Proc. in IEEE Global Commu-
nications Conference (GLOBECOM), Madrid, Spain, Dec. 2021, pp.
1–6.

[3] H. Jeong, Y. Yi, and D. Kim, “An innovative e-commerce platform
incorporating metaverse to live commerce,” International Journal of
Innovative Computing, Information and Control, vol. 18, no. 1, pp.
221–229, Feb. 2022.

[4] C. Kwon, “Smart city-based metaverse a study on the solution of urban
problems,” Journal of the Chosun Natural Science, vol. 14, no. 1, pp.
21–26, Mar. 2021.

[5] A. Bick, A. Blandin, and K. Mertens, “Work from home before and
after the covid-19 outbreak,” Available at SSRN 3786142, Feb. 2021,
[Online]. Available: https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_
id=3786142.

[6] S. R. Pandi-Perumal, S. R. Vaccarino, V. K. Chattu, N. F. Zaki, A. S.
BaHammam, D. Manzar, G. Maestroni, D. Suchecki, A. Moscovitch,
F. Zizi et al., “‘distant socializing,’ not ‘social distancing’ as a public
health strategy for covid-19,” Pathogens and global health, vol. 115,
no. 6, pp. 357–364, Sep. 2021.

[7] A. E. Bates, R. B. Primack, B. S. Biggar, T. J. Bird, M. E. Clinton,
R. J. Command, C. Richards, M. Shellard, N. R. Geraldi, V. Vergara
et al., “Global covid-19 lockdown highlights humans as both threats
and custodians of the environment,” Biological conservation, vol. 263,
pp. 109 175–109 193, Nov. 2021.

[8] X. You, C.-X. Wang, J. Huang, X. Gao, Z. Zhang, M. Wang, Y. Huang,
C. Zhang, Y. Jiang, J. Wang et al., “Towards 6g wireless communica-
tion networks: Vision, enabling technologies, and new paradigm shifts,”
Science China Information Sciences, vol. 64, no. 1, pp. 1–74, Nov.
2021.

[9] J. Thompson, X. Ge, H.-C. Wu, R. Irmer, H. Jiang, G. Fettweis,
and S. Alamouti, “5g wireless communication systems: Prospects and
challenges [guest editorial],” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 52,
no. 2, pp. 62–64, Feb. 2014.

[10] X. Shen, J. Gao, W. Wu, M. Li, C. Zhou, and W. Zhuang, “Holistic
network virtualization and pervasive network intelligence for 6g,” IEEE
Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 1–30, Dec.
2021.

[11] W. Xiang, K. Zheng, and X. S. Shen, 5G mobile communications.

Springer, 2016.

[12] F. Tang, X. Chen, M. Zhao, and N. Kato, “The roadmap of com-
munication and networking in 6g for the metaverse,” IEEE Wireless
Communications, Jun. 2022.

[13] S. K. Sharma, I. Woungang, A. Anpalagan, and S. Chatzinotas,
“Toward tactile internet in beyond 5g era: Recent advances, current
issues, and future directions,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 56 948–56 991,
Mar. 2020.

[14] Y. Yuan, S. Mann, T. Furness, P. Rosedale, N. Trevett, R. Lebaredian,
C. Kalinowski, D. Lange, E. Miralles, O. Inbar, and M. Ball, “Meta-
verse landscape & outlook: Metaverse decoded by top experts,” May
2022, IEEE Metaverse Congress, [Online]. Available: https://lnkd.in/
eWC36DuV.

[15] S. Mann, J. C. Havens, J. Iorio, Y. Yuan, and T. Furness, “All
reality: Values,
taxonomy, and continuum, for virtual, augmented,
extended/mixed (X), mediated (X, Y), and multimediated real-
ity/intelligence,” in Proc. of the AWE Conference, vol. 30, Santa Clara,
CA, Jun. 2018.

37

[16] H. Duan, J. Li, S. Fan, Z. Lin, X. Wu, and W. Cai, “Metaverse for
social good: A university campus prototype,” in Proc. of the 29th ACM
International Conference on Multimedia, Virtual Event, China, Oct.
2021, pp. 153–161.

[17] Y. Zhou, X. Xiao, G. Chen, X. Zhao, and J. Chen, “Self-powered
sensing technologies for human metaverse interfacing,” Joule, vol. 6,
no. 7, pp. 1381–1389, Jul. 2022.

[18] W. Y. B. Lim, Z. Xiong, D. Niyato, X. Cao, C. Miao, S. Sun, and
Q. Yang, “Realizing the metaverse with edge intelligence: A match
made in heaven,” IEEE Wireless Communications, pp. 1–9, Jul. 2022.
[19] Y. Wu, K. Zhang, and Y. Zhang, “Digital twin networks: a survey,”
IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 8, no. 18, pp. 13 789–13 804,
May 2021.

[20] Y. Cheng, Y. Liu, T. Chen, and Q. Yang, “Federated learning for
privacy-preserving ai,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 63, no. 12,
pp. 33–36, May 2020.

[21] J. C. Guevara, R. d. S. Torres, and N. L. da Fonseca, “On the classiﬁ-
cation of fog computing applications: A machine learning perspective,”
Journal of Network and Computer Applications, vol. 159, p. 102596,
Jun. 2020.

[22] W. Saad, M. Bennis, and M. Chen, “A vision of 6g wireless systems:
Applications, trends, technologies, and open research problems,” IEEE
network, vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 134–142, Oct. 2019.

[23] Y. Yang, M. Ma, H. Wu, Q. Yu, P. Zhang, X. You, J. Wu, C. Peng,
T.-S. P. Yum, S. Shen, H. Aghvami, G. Y. Li, J. Wang, G. Liu, P. Gao,
X. Tang, C. Cao, J. Thompson, K.-K. Wong, S. Chen, M. Debbah,
S. Dustdar, F. Eliassen, T. Chen, X. Duan, S. Sun, X. Tao, Q. Zhang,
J. Huang, S. Cui, W. Zhang, J. Li, Y. Gao, H. Zhang, X. Chen,
X. Ge, Y. Xiao, C.-X. Wang, Z. Zhang, S. Ci, G. Mao, C. Li,
Z. Shao, Y. Zhou, J. Liang, K. Li, L. Wu, F. Sun, K. Wang, Z. Liu,
K. Yang, J. Wang, T. Gao, and H. Shu, “6g network ai architecture for
everyone-centric customized services,” Mar. 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.09944

[24] K. B. Letaief, Y. Shi, J. Lu, and J. Lu, “Edge artiﬁcial intelligence
for 6g: Vision, enabling technologies, and applications,” IEEE Journal
on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 5–36, Nov.
2021.

[25] Q. Yang, Y. Zhao, H. Huang, Z. Xiong, J. Kang, and Z. Zheng, “Fusing
blockchain and ai with metaverse: A survey,” IEEE Open Journal of
the Computer Society, vol. 3, pp. 122–136, Jul. 2022.

[26] T. R. Gadekallu, T. Huynh-The, W. Wang, G. Yenduri, P. Ranaweera,
Q.-V. Pham, D. B. da Costa, and M. Liyanage, “Blockchain
for
[Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.09738

the metaverse: A review,” Mar. 2022.

[27] L.-H. Lee, T. Braud, P. Zhou, L. Wang, D. Xu, Z. Lin, A. Kumar,
C. Bermejo, and P. Hui, “All one needs to know about metaverse:
A complete survey on technological singularity, virtual ecosystem,
and research agenda,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.05352, Oct. 2021,
[Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.05352.

[28] T. Huynh-The, Q.-V. Pham, X.-Q. Pham, T. T. Nguyen, Z. Han,
and D.-S. Kim, “Artiﬁcial intelligence for the metaverse: A survey,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.10336, Feb. 2022, [Online]. Available: https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2202.10336.

[29] H. Ning, H. Wang, Y. Lin, W. Wang, S. Dhelim, F. Farha, J. Ding, and
M. Daneshmand, “A survey on metaverse: the state-of-the-art, technolo-
gies, applications, and challenges,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.09673,
Nov. 2021, [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2111.09673.
[30] Y. Siriwardhana, P. Porambage, M. Liyanage, and M. Ylianttila, “A
survey on mobile augmented reality with 5g mobile edge computing:
Architectures, applications, and technical aspects,” IEEE Communica-
tions Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 1160–1192, Feb. 2021.
[31] M. Erol-Kantarci and S. Sukhmani, “Caching and computing at the
edge for mobile augmented reality and virtual reality (ar/vr) in 5g,” Ad
Hoc Networks, vol. 223, pp. 169–177, Jan. 2018.

[32] E. Ahmed and M. H. Rehmani, “Mobile edge computing: opportunities,

solutions, and challenges,” pp. 59–63, May 2017.

[33] X. Wang, Y. Han, V. C. Leung, D. Niyato, X. Yan, and X. Chen,
“Convergence of edge computing and deep learning: A comprehensive
survey,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 22, no. 2, pp.
869–904, Jan. 2020.

[34] W. Y. B. Lim, N. C. Luong, D. T. Hoang, Y. Jiao, Y.-C. Liang,
Q. Yang, D. Niyato, and C. Miao, “Federated Learning in Mobile Edge
Networks: A Comprehensive Survey,” IEEE Communications Surveys
& Tutorials, vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 2031–2063, Apr. 2020.

[35] W. Yu, F. Liang, X. He, W. G. Hatcher, C. Lu, J. Lin, and X. Yang, “A
survey on the edge computing for the internet of things,” IEEE access,
vol. 6, pp. 6900–6919, Nov. 2017.

[36] N. Abbas, Y. Zhang, A. Taherkordi, and T. Skeie, “Mobile edge
computing: A survey,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 5, no. 1,
pp. 450–465, Sep. 2017.

[37] J. Lin, W. Yu, N. Zhang, X. Yang, H. Zhang, and W. Zhao, “A survey
on internet of things: Architecture, enabling technologies, security and
privacy, and applications,” IEEE internet of things journal, vol. 4, no. 5,
pp. 1125–1142, Mar. 2017.

[38] N. H. Chu, D. T. Hoang, D. N. Nguyen, K. T. Phan, and E. Dutkiewicz,
“Metaslicing: A novel resource allocation framework for metaverse,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.11087, May 2022, [Online]. Available: https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2205.11087.

[39] B. Matthew, “The metaverse: What

it

who will build it,” Accessed Dec. 7 2021.
https://www.matthewball.vc/all/themetaverse

is, where to ﬁnd it, and
[Online]. Available:

[40] N.-N. Zhou and Y.-L. Deng, “Virtual reality: A state-of-the-art survey,”
International Journal of Automation and Computing, vol. 6, no. 4, pp.
319–325, Nov. 2009.

[41] X. Sheng, J. Tang, X. Xiao, and G. Xue, “Sensing as a service:
Challenges, solutions and future directions,” IEEE Sensors journal,
vol. 13, no. 10, pp. 3733–3741, May 2013.

[42] J. Kim, “The institutionalization of youtube: From user-generated
content to professionally generated content,” Media, culture & society,
vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 53–67, Jan. 2012.

[43] G. P. Fettweis, “The tactile internet: Applications and challenges,”
IEEE Vehicular Technology Magazine, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 64–70, Mar.
2014.

[44] Z. Liu, N. Meyendorf, and N. Mrad, “The role of data fusion in
predictive maintenance using digital twin,” in Proc. of AIP conference,
vol. 1949, no. 1, Apr. 2018, p. 020023.

[45] L. U. Khan, E. Mustafa, J. Shuja, F. Rehman, K. Bilal, Z. Han,
and C. S. Hong, “Federated learning for digital twin-based vehicular
networks: Architecture and challenges,” 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2208.05558

[46] P. Bellavista, C. Giannelli, M. Mamei, M. Mendula, and M. Picone,
“Digital twin oriented architecture for secure and qos aware intelligent
communications in industrial environments,” Pervasive and Mobile
Computing, vol. 85, p. 101646, Sep. 2022.

[47] Y. Han, D. Niyato, C. Leung, C. Miao, and D. I. Kim, “A dynamic
resource allocation framework for synchronizing metaverse with iot
service and data,” in Proc. of IEEE International Conference on
Communications (ICC), Seoul, Korea, May 2022, pp. 1196–1201.
[48] W. C. Ng, W. Y. B. Lim, J. S. Ng, Z. Xiong, D. Niyato, and C. Miao,
“Uniﬁed resource allocation framework for the edge intelligence-
enabled metaverse,” in Prof. of IEEE International Conference on
Communications (ICC), Seoul, Korea, May 2022, pp. 5214–5219.
[49] J. Park and M. Bennis, “Urllc-embb slicing to support vr multimodal
perceptions over wireless cellular systems,” in Proc. of IEEE Global
Communications Conference (GLOBECOM), Abu Dhabi, UAE, Dec.
2018, pp. 1–7.

[50] F. Guo, F. R. Yu, H. Zhang, H. Ji, V. C. Leung, and X. Li, “An
adaptive wireless virtual reality framework in future wireless networks:
A distributed learning approach,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular
Technology, vol. 69, no. 8, pp. 8514–8528, May 2020.

[51] Q. Wang, R. Li, Q. Wang, and S. Chen, “Non-fungible token (nft):
Overview, evaluation, opportunities and challenges,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2105.07447, May 2021, [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/
2105.07447.

[52] R. Yang, F. R. Yu, P. Si, Z. Yang, and Y. Zhang, “Integrated blockchain
and edge computing systems: A survey, some research issues and
challenges,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 21, no. 2,
pp. 1508–1532, Jan. 2019.

[53] Microsoft, “Microsoft mesh,” Accessed Dec. 7 2021, https://www.

microsoft.com/en-us/mesh.
ANWESHA,
The

16

and

[54] R.

“Media
future

in
the
Accessed
metaverse:
Feb.
https://www.xrtoday.com/virtual-reality/
media-and-entertainment-in-the-metaverse-the-future-is-already-here/.
[55] V. Diami, “What comparisons between second life and the metaverse
miss,” Accessed Feb. 16 2022, https://slate.com/technology/2022/02/
second-life-metaverse-facebook-comparisons.html.

entertainment
here,”

already

2022,

is

[56] DragonSB, “Dragonsb,” Accessed Feb. 16 2022. [Online]. Available:

https://dragonsb.ﬁnance/

[57] L. Ben, “Microsoft’s social vr platform ‘altspacevr’ revamped for
improved event hosting,” Accessed Feb. 16 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://www.roadtovr.com/microsoft-altspacevr-update-event-hosting/

38

“Nvidia

[59] S. Kevin,

[58] Decentraland, “Decentraland land - what drives long term value,”
Accessed Feb. 16 2022. [Online]. Available: https://decentral.games/
blog/decentraland-land-what-drives-long-term-value
ceo

save
companies billions of dollars in the real world,” Accessed Nov.
25, 2021.
[Online]. Available: https://www.cnbc.com/2021/11/19/
nvidia-ceo-says-the-metaverse-could-save-companies-billions.html
[60] K. Zhang, J. Ni, K. Yang, X. Liang, J. Ren, and X. S. Shen, “Security
and privacy in smart city applications: Challenges and solutions,” IEEE
Communications Magazine, vol. 55, no. 1, pp. 122–129, Jan. 2017.

the metaverse

could

says

[61] AltspaceVR, “Altspacevr be together, anywhere.” Accessed Feb. 16

2022. [Online]. Available: https://altvr.com/

[62] L.

Jiaxing,

“Baidu

Accessed Dec. 16 2021.
baidu-launches-xirang-metaverse-environment

launches

xirang metaverse

environment,”
[Online]. Available: https://kr-asia.com/

Bernard,
the

healthcare
[63] M.
in
[On-
line]. Available: https://www.forbes.com/sites/bernardmarr/2022/02/
23/the-amazing-possibilities-of-healthcare-in-the-metaverse/

“The
metaverse,”

amazing
Accessed

possibilities

2022.

Feb.

16

of

[64] V. Eagle, “What are the metaverse development

tools,” Accessed
https://eaglevisionpro.com/

16

Feb.
what-are-the-metaverse-development-tools/

[Online]. Available:

2022.

[65] H. Scott, “Meta’s latest avatar system is ﬁnally rolling out

to
all unity developers,” Accessed Feb. 16 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://www.roadtovr.com/facebooks-oculus-avatar-sdk-release/

objects

“Meta’s

sci-ﬁ haptic glove prototype

lets you feel
[66] R. Adi,
vr
2022.
[Online]. Available: https://www.theverge.com/2021/11/16/22782860/
meta-facebook-reality-labs-soft-robotics-haptic-glove-prototype
[67] Microsoft, “Microsoft hololens 2,” Accessed Feb. 16 2022. [Online].

pockets,” Accessed

using

Feb.

air

16

Available: https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/hololens

[68] Meta, “Meta oculus,” Accessed Feb. 16 2022. [Online]. Available:

https://www.oculus.com/

[69] L. U. Khan, Z. Han, D. Niyato, E. Hossain, and C. S. Hong,
“Metaverse for wireless
systems: Vision, enablers, architecture,
and future directions,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.00413, Jul. 2022.
[Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2207.00413

[70] H. Xu, Z. Li, Z. Li, X. Zhang, Y. Sun, and L. Zhang, “Metaverse
native communication: A blockchain and spectrum prospective,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.08355, Mar. 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.08355

[71] B.

CAULFIELD,

[Online].
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2022-01-15/

the metaverse?”

Available:
gameﬁ-is-a-new-crypto-craze-what-s-it-all-about-quicktake.

“What

is

[72] J. Zhao, R. S. Allison, M. Vinnikov, and S. Jennings, “Estimating the
motion-to-photon latency in head mounted displays,” in Proc. of IEEE
Virtual Reality (VR), Los Angeles, CA, Mar. 2017, pp. 313–314.
[73] P. Popovski, F. Chiariotti, V. Croisfelt, A. E. Kalør, I. Leyva-Mayorga,
L. Marchegiani, S. R. Pandey, and B. Soret, “Internet of things
(iot) connectivity in 6g: An interplay of time, space, intelligence,
and value,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.05811, Nov. 2021. [Online].
Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2111.05811

[74] J. Pan, L. Cai, S. Yan, and X. S. Shen, “Network for ai and ai for
network: Challenges and opportunities for learning-oriented networks,”
IEEE Network, vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 270–277, Sep. 2021.

[75] W. Yang, Z. Q. Liew, W. Y. B. Lim, Z. Xiong, D. Niyato, X. Chi,
X. Cao, and K. B. Letaief, “Semantic communication meets edge
intelligence,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.06471, Feb. 2022. [Online].
Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2202.06471

[76] H. Alves, G. D. Jo, J. Shin, C. Yeh, N. H. Mahmood, C. Lima,
C. Yoon, N. Rahatheva, O.-S. Park, S. Kim et al., “Beyond 5g
urllc evolution: New service modes and practical considerations,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.11825, Jan. 2021.
[Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.11825

[77] K. B. Letaief, W. Chen, Y. Shi, J. Zhang, and Y.-J. A. Zhang, “The
roadmap to 6g: Ai empowered wireless networks,” IEEE Communica-
tions Magazine, vol. 57, no. 8, pp. 84–90, Aug. 2019.

[78] N. Quang Hieu, D. N. Nguyen, D. T. Hoang, and E. Dutkiewicz,
“When virtual reality meets rate splitting multiple access: A joint
communication and computation approach,” arXiv e-prints, pp. arXiv–
2207, Jul. 2022. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.12114
[79] Y. Mao, O. Dizdar, B. Clerckx, R. Schober, P. Popovski, and H. V.
Poor, “Rate-splitting multiple access: Fundamentals, survey, and future
research trends,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, pp. 1–1,
Jul. 2022.

[80] H. Tataria, M. Shaﬁ, A. F. Molisch, M. Dohler, H. Sjöland, and
F. Tufvesson, “6g wireless systems: Vision, requirements, challenges,

insights, and opportunities,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 109, no. 7,
pp. 1166–1199, Mar. 2021.

[81] E. Bastug, M. Bennis, M. Médard, and M. Debbah, “Toward intercon-
nected virtual reality: Opportunities, challenges, and enablers,” IEEE
Communications Magazine, vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 110–117, Jun. 2017.

[82] G. I. Tsiropoulos, A. Yadav, M. Zeng, and O. A. Dobre, “Cooperation
in 5g hetnets: Advanced spectrum access and d2d assisted communi-
cations,” IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 110–117,
Oct. 2017.

[83] L. Feng, Z. Yang, Y. Yang, X. Que, and K. Zhang, “Smart mode
selection using online reinforcement learning for vr broadband broad-
casting in d2d assisted 5g hetnets,” IEEE Transactions on Broadcasting,
vol. 66, no. 2, pp. 600–611, Mar. 2020.

[84] J. J. Gimenez, J. L. Carcel, M. Fuentes, E. Garro, S. Elliott, D. Vargas,
C. Menzel, and D. Gomez-Barquero, “5g new radio for terrestrial
broadcast: A forward-looking approach for nr-mbms,” IEEE Transac-
tions on Broadcasting, vol. 65, no. 2, pp. 356–368, Mar. 2019.
[85] M. S. Elbamby, C. Perfecto, M. Bennis, and K. Doppler, “Edge
computing meets millimeter-wave enabled vr: Paving the way to cutting
the cord,” in Proc. of IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking
Conference (WCNC), Barcelona, Spain, Apr. 2018, pp. 1–6.

[86] L. Militano, M. Condoluci, G. Araniti, A. Molinaro, A. Iera, and G.-
M. Muntean, “Single frequency-based device-to-device-enhanced video
delivery for evolved multimedia broadcast and multicast services,”
IEEE Transactions on Broadcasting, vol. 61, no. 2, pp. 263–278, Mar.
2015.

[87] Y. Wang, M. Chen, Z. Yang, W. Saad, T. Luo, S. Cui, and H. V. Poor,
“Meta-reinforcement learning for reliable communication in thz/vlc
wireless vr networks,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications,
pp. 1–1, Mar. 2022.

[88] C. Chaccour, M. N. Soorki, W. Saad, M. Bennis, and P. Popovski,
“Can terahertz provide high-rate reliable low latency communications
for wireless vr?” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, Jan. 2022.

[89] A. E. Abbas, “Constructing multiattribute utility functions for decision
analysis,” Risk and Optimization in an Uncertain World, pp. 62–98,
Sep. 2010.

[90] M. Hu, X. Luo, J. Chen, Y. C. Lee, Y. Zhou, and D. Wu, “Virtual
reality: A survey of enabling technologies and its applications in iot,”
Journal of Network and Computer Applications, vol. 178, p. 102970,
Mar. 2021.

[91] R. Zhang, J. Liu, F. Liu, T. Huang, Q. Tang, S. Wang, and F. R.
Yu, “Buffer-aware virtual reality video streaming with personalized
and private viewport prediction,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in
Communications, vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 694–709, Oct. 2021.

[92] S.-J. Chung, “Hand pose estimation and prediction for virtual reality

applications,” Ph.D. dissertation, Carnegie Mellon University, 2018.

[93] J. Ou, X. Guo, M. Zhu, and W. Lou, “Autonomous quadrotor obstacle
avoidance based on dueling double deep recurrent q-learning with
monocular vision,” Neurocomputing, vol. 441, pp. 300–310, Jun. 2021.
[94] M. Chen, W. Saad, and C. Yin, “Virtual reality over wireless networks:
Quality-of-service model and learning-based resource management,”
IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 66, no. 11, pp. 5621–
5635, Jun. 2018.

[95] J. M. Meredith, “Study on downlink multiuser superposition transmis-

sion for lte,” in TSG RAN Meeting, vol. 67, 2015.

[96] M. Xu, D. Niyato, J. Kang, Z. Xiong, C. Miao, and D. I. Kim, “Wireless
edge-empowered metaverse: A learning-based incentive mechanism
for virtual reality,” in Proc. of IEEE International Conference on
Communications (ICC), Seoul, Korea, Aug. 2022, pp. 5220–5225.
[97] H. Qiu, F. Ahmad, F. Bai, M. Gruteser, and R. Govindan, “Avr:
Augmented vehicular reality,” in Proc. of the 16th Annual International
Conference on Mobile Systems, Applications, and Services, Munich,
Germany, Jun. 2018, pp. 81–95.

[98] L. Liu, H. Li, and M. Gruteser, “Edge assisted real-time object detection
for mobile augmented reality,” in Proc. of the 25th Annual International
Conference on Mobile Computing and Networking, Los Cabos, Mexico,
Aug. 2019, pp. 1–16.

[99] X. Huang, W. Zhong, J. Nie, Q. Hu, Z. Xiong, J. Kang, and
T. Q. S. Quek, “Joint user association and resource pricing for
metaverse: Distributed and centralized approaches,” Aug. 2022.
[Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2208.06770

[100] Q. Liu and T. Han, “Dare: Dynamic adaptive mobile augmented reality
with edge computing,” in Proc. of IEEE 26th International Conference
on Network Protocols (ICNP), Cambridge, UK, Sep. 2018, pp. 1–11.
[101] Q. Liu, S. Huang, J. Opadere, and T. Han, “An edge network orches-
trator for mobile augmented reality,” in Proc. of IEEE INFOCOM,
Honolulu, HI, Apr. 2018, pp. 756–764.

39

[102] L. Grippo and M. Sciandrone, “On the convergence of the block
nonlinear gauss–seidel method under convex constraints,” Operations
research letters, vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 127–136, Apr. 2000.

[103] P. Ren, X. Qiao, Y. Huang, L. Liu, C. Pu, S. Dustdar, and J.-L. Chen,
“Edge ar x5: An edge-assisted multi-user collaborative framework for
mobile web augmented reality in 5g and beyond,” IEEE Transactions
on Cloud Computing, pp. 1–1, Dec. 2020.
[104] X. Ran, C. Slocum, M. Gorlatova,

“Sharear:
Communication-efﬁcient multi-user mobile augmented reality,” in Pro-
ceedings of the 18th ACM Workshop on Hot Topics in Networks, Nov.
2019, pp. 109–116.

and J. Chen,

[105] M. Conti, J. Gathani, and P. P. Tricomi, “Virtual inﬂuencers in online
social media,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 60, no. 8, pp.
86–91, May 2022.

[106] J. L. Hennessy and D. A. Patterson, Computer architecture: a quanti-

tative approach. Elsevier, 2011.

[107] G. S. Paschos, G. Iosiﬁdis, M. Tao, D. Towsley, and G. Caire, “The
role of caching in future communication systems and networks,” IEEE
Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 36, no. 6, pp. 1111–
1125, Sep. 2018.

[108] L. Li, G. Zhao, and R. S. Blum, “A survey of caching techniques in
cellular networks: Research issues and challenges in content placement
and delivery strategies,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials,
vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 1710–1732, Mar. 2018.

[109] J. Gao, S. Zhang, L. Zhao, and X. Shen, “The design of dynamic
probabilistic caching with time-varying content popularity,” IEEE
Transactions on Mobile Computing, vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 1672–1684,
Jan. 2020.

[110] S. Wang, X. Zhang, Y. Zhang, L. Wang, J. Yang, and W. Wang, “A
survey on mobile edge networks: Convergence of computing, caching
and communications,” Ieee Access, vol. 5, pp. 6757–6779, Mar. 2017.
[111] A. Mahzari, A. Taghavi Nasrabadi, A. Samiei, and R. Prakash, “Fov-
aware edge caching for adaptive 360 video streaming,” in Proceedings
of the 26th ACM international conference on Multimedia, Seoul, Korea,
Oct. 2018, pp. 173–181.

[112] H. Huang, B. Liu, L. Chen, W. Xiang, M. Hu, and Y. Tao, “D2d-assisted
vr video pre-caching strategy,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 61 886–61 895,
Sep. 2018.

[113] S. Zhang, M. Tao, and Z. Chen, “Exploiting caching and prediction to
promote user experience for a real-time wireless vr service,” in Proc. of
IEEE Global Communications Conference (GLOBECOM), Waikoloa,
HI, Dec. 2019, pp. 1–6.

[114] Y.-J. Seo, J. Lee, J. Hwang, D. Niyato, H.-S. Park, and J. K. Choi, “A
novel joint mobile cache and power management scheme for energy-
efﬁcient mobile augmented reality service in mobile edge computing,”
IEEE Wireless Communications Letters, vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 1061–1065,
Feb. 2021.

[115] Y. Huo, P. T. Kovács, T. J. Naughton, and L. Hanzo, “Wireless
holographic image communications relying on unequal error protected
bitplanes,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 66, no. 8,
pp. 7136–7148, Jan. 2017.

[116] R. Mekuria, K. Blom, and P. Cesar, “Design, implementation, and
evaluation of a point cloud codec for tele-immersive video,” IEEE
Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology, vol. 27,
no. 4, pp. 828–842, Mar. 2016.

[117] J. Karaﬁn, “On the support of light ﬁeld and holographic video display
technologies,” ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 29/WG 11 Macau, CN, 2017.
[118] A. Clemm, M. T. Vega, H. K. Ravuri, T. Wauters, and F. De Turck,
“Toward truly immersive holographic-type communication: Challenges
and solutions,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 58, no. 1, pp.
93–99, Jan. 2020.

[119] J. Li, C. Zhang, Z. Liu, W. Sun, W. Hu, and Q. Li, “Demo abstract: Nar-
whal: A dash-based point cloud video streaming system over wireless
networks,” in IEEE INFOCOM 2020-IEEE Conference on Computer
Communications Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS), Toronto, Canada,
Jul. 2020, pp. 1326–1327.

[120] Y. Huang, Y. Zhu, X. Qiao, Z. Tan, and B. Bai, “Aitransfer: Progressive
ai-powered transmission for real-time point cloud video streaming,” in
Proc. of the 29th ACM International Conference on Multimedia, Virtual
Event, China, Oct. 2021, pp. 3989–3997.

[121] Y. Gao, P. Zhou, Z. Liu, B. Han, and P. Hui, “Fras: Federated
reinforcement
cloud video
learning empowered adaptive point
streaming,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.07394, Jul. 2022. [Online].
Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.07394

[122] P. A. Kara, A. Cserkaszky, M. G. Martini, A. Barsi, L. Bokor, and
T. Balogh, “Evaluation of the concept of dynamic adaptive streaming

of light ﬁeld video,” IEEE Transactions on Broadcasting, vol. 64, no. 2,
pp. 407–421, May 2018.

[123] B. Wang, Q. Peng, E. Wang, K. Han, and W. Xiang, “Region-of-interest
compression and view synthesis for light ﬁeld video streaming,” IEEE
Access, vol. 7, pp. 41 183–41 192, Mar. 2019.

[124] X. Hu, Y. Pan, Y. Wang, L. Zhang, and S. Shirmohammadi, “Multiple
description coding for best-effort delivery of light ﬁeld video using
gnn-based compression,” IEEE Transactions on Multimedia, pp. 1–1,
Nov. 2021.

[125] F. Boabang, A. Ebrahimzadeh, R. H. Glitho, H. Elbiaze, M. Maier, and
F. Belqasmi, “A machine learning framework for handling delayed/lost
packets in tactile internet remote robotic surgery,” IEEE Transactions
on Network and Service Management, vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 4829–4845,
Aug. 2021.

[126] Z. Hou, C. She, Y. Li, T. Q. Quek, and B. Vucetic, “Burstiness-
aware bandwidth reservation for ultra-reliable and low-latency com-
munications in tactile internet,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in
Communications, vol. 36, no. 11, pp. 2401–2410, Oct. 2018.
[127] A. Aijaz, “Toward human-in-the-loop mobile networks: A radio re-
source allocation perspective on haptic communications,” IEEE Trans-
actions on Wireless Communications, vol. 17, no. 7, pp. 4493–4508,
Apr. 2018.

[128] L. Yan, Z. Qin, R. Zhang, Y. Li, and G. Y. Li, “Resource allocation
for semantic-aware networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.06023, Jan.
2022. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.06023

[129] Z. Q. Liew, Y. Cheng, W. Y. B. Lim, D. Niyato, C. Miao, and
S. Sun, “Economics of semantic communication system in wireless
powered internet of things,” in ICASSP 2022-2022 IEEE International
Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP),
Singapore, May 2022, pp. 8637–8641.

[130] M. Tang, L. Gao, and J. Huang, “Enabling edge cooperation in tactile
internet via 3c resource sharing,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in
Communications, vol. 36, no. 11, pp. 2444–2454, Nov. 2018.
[131] M. Simsek, A. Aijaz, M. Dohler, J. Sachs, and G. Fettweis, “5g-enabled
tactile internet,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications,
vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 460–473, Feb. 2016.

[132] S. Hirche and M. Buss, “Human-oriented control for haptic teleoper-
ation,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 100, no. 3, pp. 623–647, Jan.
2012.

[133] K. Antonakoglou, X. Xu, E. Steinbach, T. Mahmoodi, and M. Dohler,
“Toward haptic communications over the 5g tactile internet,” IEEE
Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 3034–3059,
Jan. 2018.

[134] D. A. Lawrence, “Stability and transparency in bilateral teleoperation,”
IEEE transactions on robotics and automation, vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 624–
637, Oct. 1993.

[135] L. Duan, L. Huang, C. Langbort, A. Pozdnukhov, J. Walrand, and
L. Zhang, “Human-in-the-loop mobile networks: A survey of recent
advancements,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications,
vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 813–831, Apr. 2017.

[136] C. Sarathchandra, S. Robitzsch, M. Ghassemian, and U. Olvera-
Hernandez, “Enabling bi-directional haptic control in next generation
communication systems: Research, standards, and vision,” in 2021
IEEE Conference on Standards for Communications and Networking
(CSCN), Thessaloniki, Greece, Dec. 2021, pp. 99–104.

[137] E. C. Strinati and S. Barbarossa, “6g networks: Beyond shannon
towards semantic and goal-oriented communications,” Computer Net-
works, vol. 190, p. 107930, May 2021.

[138] Z. Qin, X. Tao, J. Lu, and G. Y. Li, “Semantic communications:
Principles and challenges,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.01389, Dec.
2021. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.01389

[139] Z. Qin, H. Ye, G. Y. Li, and B.-H. F. Juang, “Deep learning in physical
layer communications,” IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 26, no. 2,
pp. 93–99, Mar. 2019.

[140] M. Kalfa, M. Gok, A. Atalik, B. Tegin, T. M. Duman, and O. Arikan,
“Towards goal-oriented semantic signal processing: Applications and
future challenges,” Digital Signal Processing, vol. 119, p. 103134, Dec.
2021.

[141] E. Bourtsoulatze, D. B. Kurka, and D. Gündüz, “Deep joint source-
channel coding for wireless image transmission,” IEEE Transactions
on Cognitive Communications and Networking, vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 567–
579, May 2019.

[142] H. Xie, Z. Qin, G. Y. Li, and B.-H. Juang, “Deep learning enabled
semantic communication systems,” IEEE Transactions on Signal Pro-
cessing, vol. 69, pp. 2663–2675, Apr. 2021.

40

[143] H. Xie, Z. Qin, and G. Y. Li, “Task-oriented multi-user semantic
communications for vqa,” IEEE Wireless Communications Letters,
vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 553–557, Dec. 2021.

[144] H. Xie and Z. Qin, “A lite distributed semantic communication system
for internet of things,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communi-
cations, vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 142–153, Nov. 2020.

[145] H. Tong, Z. Yang, S. Wang, Y. Hu, O. Semiari, W. Saad, and C. Yin,
“Federated learning for audio semantic communication,” Frontiers in
Communications and Networks, vol. 2, Jan. 2021.

[146] H. Zhang, H. Zhang, B. Di, M. Di Renzo, Z. Han, H. V. Poor, and
L. Song, “Holographic integrated sensing and communication,” IEEE
Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, Mar. 2022.

[147] N. Cheng, F. Lyu, W. Quan, C. Zhou, H. He, W. Shi, and X. Shen,
“Space/aerial-assisted computing ofﬂoading for iot applications: A
learning-based approach,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Com-
munications, vol. 37, no. 5, pp. 1117–1129, Mar. 2019.

[148] N. Cheng, W. Xu, W. Shi, Y. Zhou, N. Lu, H. Zhou, and X. Shen, “Air-
ground integrated mobile edge networks: Architecture, challenges, and
opportunities,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 56, no. 8, pp.
26–32, Aug. 2018.

[149] M. Xu, D. Niyato, Z. Xiong, J. Kang, X. Cao, X. S. Shen, and
C. Miao, “Quantum-secured space-air-ground integrated networks:
Concept, framework, and case study,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.08673,
Apr. 2022. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.08673
[150] W. Sun, P. Wang, N. Xu, G. Wang, and Y. Zhang, “Dynamic digital
twin and distributed incentives for resource allocation in aerial-assisted
internet of vehicles,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 9, no. 8,
pp. 5839–5852, Feb. 2021.

[151] L. U. Khan, Z. Han, W. Saad, E. Hossain, M. Guizani, and
C. S. Hong, “Digital twin of wireless systems: Overview, taxonomy,
[Online]. Available:
challenges, and opportunities,” Feb. 2022.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2202.02559

[152] Y. Dai, K. Zhang, S. Maharjan, and Y. Zhang, “Deep reinforcement
learning for stochastic computation ofﬂoading in digital twin networks,”
IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 17, no. 7, pp. 4968–
4977, Aug. 2020.

[153] X. Lin, J. Wu, J. Li, W. Yang, and M. Guizani, “Stochastic digital-twin
service demand with edge response: An incentive-based congestion
control approach,” IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, pp. 1–1,
Oct. 2021.

[154] Y. Lu, X. Huang, K. Zhang, S. Maharjan, and Y. Zhang,
“Communication-efﬁcient federated learning for digital twin edge net-
works in industrial iot,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics,
vol. 17, no. 8, pp. 5709–5718, Jul. 2020.

[155] L. U. Khan, W. Saad, D. Niyato, Z. Han, and C. S. Hong, “Digital-twin-
enabled 6g: Vision, architectural trends, and future directions,” IEEE
Communications Magazine, vol. 60, no. 1, pp. 74–80, Feb. 2022.
[156] M. Li, J. Gao, C. Zhou, X. S. Shen, and W. Zhuang, “Slicing-
based artiﬁcial intelligence service provisioning on the network edge:
Balancing ai service performance and resource consumption of data
management,” IEEE Vehicular Technology Magazine, vol. 16, no. 4,
pp. 16–26, Oct. 2021.

[157] J. Li, W. Shi, Q. Ye, S. Zhang, W. Zhuang, and X. Shen, “Joint virtual
network topology design and embedding for cybertwin-enabled 6g core
networks,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 8, no. 22, pp. 16 313–
16 325, Jul. 2021.

[158] B. Fan, Z. Su, Y. Chen, Y. Wu, C. Xu, and T. Q. S. Quek, “Ubiquitous
control over heterogeneous vehicles: A digital twin empowered edge
ai approach,” IEEE Wireless Communications, pp. 1–8, Aug. 2022.

[159] R. Dong, C. She, W. Hardjawana, Y. Li, and B. Vucetic, “Deep learning
for hybrid 5g services in mobile edge computing systems: Learn from a
digital twin,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 18,
no. 10, pp. 4692–4707, Jul. 2019.

[160] H. Wang, Y. Wu, G. Min, and W. Miao, “A graph neural network-based
digital twin for network slicing management,” IEEE Transactions on
Industrial Informatics, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1367–1376, Dec. 2020.
[161] M. Di Renzo, M. Debbah, D.-T. Phan-Huy, A. Zappone, M.-S.
Alouini, C. Yuen, V. Sciancalepore, G. C. Alexandropoulos, J. Hoydis,
H. Gacanin et al., “Smart radio environments empowered by recon-
ﬁgurable ai meta-surfaces: An idea whose time has come,” EURASIP
Journal on Wireless Communications and Networking, vol. 2019, no. 1,
pp. 1–20, Dec. 2019.

[162] W. Mei, B. Zheng, C. You, and R. Zhang, “Intelligent reﬂecting surface-
aided wireless networks: From single-reﬂection to multireﬂection de-
sign and optimization,” Proceedings of the IEEE, pp. 1–21, May 2022.
[163] Q. Wu and R. Zhang, “Intelligent reﬂecting surface enhanced wireless
network via joint active and passive beamforming,” IEEE Transactions

on Wireless Communications, vol. 18, no. 11, pp. 5394–5409, Aug.
2019.

Conference on Fog and Mobile Edge Computing (FMEC), Valencia,
Spain, May 2017, pp. 62–67.

41

[164] X. Liu, Y. Deng, C. Han, and M. Di Renzo, “Learning-based prediction,
rendering and transmission for interactive virtual reality in ris-assisted
terahertz networks,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communica-
tions, vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 710–724, Oct. 2021.

[165] B. Sheen, J. Yang, X. Feng, and M. M. U. Chowdhury, “A digital twin
for reconﬁgurable intelligent surface assisted wireless communication,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.00454, Sep. 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2009.00454

[166] C. Zhou, W. Wu, H. He, P. Yang, F. Lyu, N. Cheng, and X. Shen,
“Deep reinforcement learning for delay-oriented iot task scheduling in
sagin,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 20, no. 2,
pp. 911–925, Oct. 2020.

[167] M. Centenaro, C. E. Costa, F. Granelli, C. Sacchi, and L. Vangelista,
“A survey on technologies, standards and open challenges in satellite
iot,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 23, no. 3, pp.
1693–1720, May 2021.

[168] D. Liu, H. Wu, C. Huang, J. Ni, and X. Shen, “Blockchain-based
credential management for anonymous authentication in sagvn,” IEEE
Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, pp. 1–1, Aug. 2022.

[169] Z. Yin, N. Cheng, T. H. Luan, and P. Wang, “Physical layer security
in cybertwin-enabled integrated satellite-terrestrial vehicle networks,”
IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 71, no. 5, pp. 4561–
4572, Dec. 2021.

[170] Meta, “Reality labs,” Accessed Jan. 3 2022. [Online]. Available:

https://tech.fb.com/ar-vr/

[171] Microsoft, “Inside the lab: Building for the metaverse with ai,” Ac-
cessed Aug. 12 2022. [Online]. Available: https://www.facebook.com/
MetaAI/videos/inside-the-lab-building-for-the-metaverse-with-ai/
1170892023445972/

[172] B. Shi, J. Yang, Z. Huang, and P. Hui, “Ofﬂoading guidelines for
augmented reality applications on wearable devices,” in Proc. of the
23rd ACM international conference on Multimedia, Brisbane, Australia,
Oct. 2015, pp. 1271–1274.

[173] Y. Wang, Z. Su, N. Zhang, D. Liu, R. Xing, T. H. Luan, and
X. Shen, “A survey on metaverse: Fundamentals, security, and
privacy,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.02662, Mar. 2022.
[Online].
Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.02662

[174] Meta, “Ray tracing – what does it mean to you?” Accessed Feb.
16 2022. [Online]. Available: https://blog.unity.com/manufacturing/
ray-tracing-what-does-it-mean-to-you

[175] K. Y. Lam, L. H. Lee, and P. Hui, “A2w: Context-aware recommen-
dation system for mobile augmented reality web browser,” in Proc. of
the 29th ACM International Conference on Multimedia, Virtual Event,
China, Oct. 2021, pp. 2447–2455.

[176] M. Kocur, P. Schauhuber, V. Schwind, C. Wolff, and N. Henze, “The
effects of self-and external perception of avatars on cognitive task
performance in virtual reality,” in Proc. of the 26th ACM Symposium
on Virtual Reality Software and Technology, Virtual Event, Canada,
Nov. 2020, pp. 1–11.

[177] R. Di Pietro and S. Cresci, “Metaverse: Security and privacy issues,”
in 2021 Third IEEE International Conference on Trust, Privacy and
Security in Intelligent Systems and Applications (TPS-ISA), Atlanta,
GA, Dec. 2021, pp. 281–288.

[178] Y. Han, D. Guo, W. Cai, X. Wang, and V. Leung, “Virtual machine
placement optimization in mobile cloud gaming through qoe-oriented
resource competition,” IEEE transactions on cloud computing, Jun.
2020.

[179] M. Li, Z. Sun, Z. Jiang, Z. Tan, and J. Chen, “A virtual reality platform
for safety training in coal mines with ai and cloud computing,” Discrete
Dynamics in Nature and Society, vol. 2020, Oct. 2020.

[180] B.-R. Huang, C. H. Lin, and C.-H. Lee, “Mobile augmented reality
based on cloud computing,” in Anti-counterfeiting, Security, and Iden-
tiﬁcation, Taipei, Taiwan, Aug. 2012, pp. 1–5.

[181] T. M. Fernández-Caramés, P. Fraga-Lamas, M. Suárez-Albela, and
M. Vilar-Montesinos, “A fog computing and cloudlet based augmented
reality system for the industry 4.0 shipyard,” Sensors, vol. 18, no. 6,
p. 1798, Jun. 2018.

[182] B.-G. Chun and P. Maniatis, “Augmented smartphone applications

through clone cloud execution.” in HotOS, vol. 9, 2009, pp. 8–11.

[183] Y. Zhang, L. Jiao, J. Yan, and X. Lin, “Dynamic service placement for
virtual reality group gaming on mobile edge cloudlets,” IEEE Journal
on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 37, no. 8, pp. 1881–1897,
Jul. 2019.

[184] K. Bierzynski, A. Escobar, and M. Eberl, “Cloud, fog and edge:
the Second International

Cooperation for the future?” in Proc. of

[185] P. Hu, S. Dhelim, H. Ning, and T. Qiu, “Survey on fog computing:
architecture, key technologies, applications and open issues,” Journal
of network and computer applications, vol. 98, pp. 27–42, Nov. 2017.
[186] D. You, T. V. Doan, R. Torre, M. Mehrabi, A. Kropp, V. Nguyen,
H. Salah, G. T. Nguyen, and F. H. Fitzek, “Fog computing as an enabler
for immersive media: Service scenarios and research opportunities,”
IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 65 797–65 810, May 2019.

[187] F. Bonomi, R. Milito, J. Zhu, and S. Addepalli, “Fog computing and
its role in the internet of things,” in Proc. of the ﬁrst edition of the
MCC workshop on Mobile cloud computing, Helsinki, Finland, Aug.
2012, pp. 13–16.

[188] Y. Sun, J. Chen, Z. Wang, M. Peng, and S. Mao, “Enabling mobile vir-
tual reality with open 5g, fog computing and reinforcement learning,”
IEEE Network, Jul. 2022.

[189] Z. Tan, H. Qu, J. Zhao, S. Zhou, and W. Wang, “Uav-aided edge/fog
computing in smart iot community for social augmented reality,” IEEE
Internet of Things Journal, vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 4872–4884, Feb. 2020.

[190] J. Santos, J. van der Hooft, M. T. Vega, T. Wauters, B. Volckaert,
and F. De Turck, “Srfog: A ﬂexible architecture for virtual reality
content delivery through fog computing and segment routing,” in
Proc. of IFIP/IEEE International Symposium on Integrated Network
Management (IM), Bordeaux, France, May 2021, pp. 1038–1043.

reality
Jan.

“How
training,”

augmented
Accessed

revolutioniz-
[On-
https://www.honeywell.com/us/en/news/2018/02/

[191] Honeywell,
job
ing
line]. Available:
how-ar-and-vr-are-revolutionizing-job-training?utm_source=TW
[192] Y. Chen, N. Zhang, Y. Zhang, X. Chen, W. Wu, and X. Shen, “Energy
efﬁcient dynamic ofﬂoading in mobile edge computing for internet of
things,” IEEE Transactions on Cloud Computing, vol. 9, no. 3, pp.
1050–1060, Feb. 2019.

2022.

is

3

[193] A. Sunyaev, “Fog and edge computing,” in Internet computing.

Springer, 2020, pp. 237–264.

[194] M. T. Beck, M. Werner, S. Feld, and S. Schimper, “Mobile edge
computing: A taxonomy,” in Proc. of the Sixth International Conference
on Advances in Future Internet, Lisbon, Portugal, Nov. 2014, pp. 48–
55.

[195] C. You, K. Huang, H. Chae, and B.-H. Kim, “Energy-efﬁcient resource
allocation for mobile-edge computation ofﬂoading,” IEEE Transactions
on Wireless Communications, vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 1397–1411, Dec. 2017.
[196] Q. Yu, M. A. Maddah-Ali, and A. S. Avestimehr, “Polynomial codes:
an optimal design for high-dimensional coded matrix multiplication,”
in Proc. of the 31st International Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems, Long Beach, California, Jan. 2017, pp. 4406–4416.
[197] Y. Jiang, J. Kang, D. Niyato, X. Ge, Z. Xiong, and C. Miao,
“Reliable coded distributed computing for metaverse services:
Coalition formation and incentive mechanism design,” CoRR, vol.
abs/2111.10548, Nov. 2021. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/
2111.10548

[198] S. Dutta, M. Fahim, F. Haddadpour, H. Jeong, V. Cadambe, and
P. Grover, “On the optimal recovery threshold of coded matrix multi-
plication,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 66, no. 1,
pp. 278–301, Jul. 2019.

[199] J. Baek and G. Kaddoum, “Heterogeneous task ofﬂoading and resource
allocations via deep recurrent reinforcement learning in partial observ-
able multifog networks,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 8, no. 2,
pp. 1041–1056, Jul. 2020.

[200] J. Wang, J. Hu, G. Min, A. Y. Zomaya, and N. Georgalas, “Fast adaptive
task ofﬂoading in edge computing based on meta reinforcement learn-
ing,” IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems, vol. 32,
no. 1, pp. 242–253, Aug. 2020.

[201] J. Zhou, F. Wu, K. Zhang, Y. Mao, and S. Leng, “Joint optimization of
ofﬂoading and resource allocation in vehicular networks with mobile
edge computing,” in Proc. of tje 10th International Conference on
Wireless Communications and Signal Processing (WCSP), Hangzhou,
China, Oct. 2018, pp. 1–6.

[202] K. T. Kim, C. Joe-Wong, and M. Chiang, “Coded edge computing,” in
Proc. of IEEE INFOCOM, Toronto, ON, Jul. 2020, pp. 237–246.
[203] S. Han, J. Pool, J. Tran, and W. J. Dally, “Learning both weights
and connections for efﬁcient neural networks,” in Proc.s of the 28th
International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems,
Montreal, Canada, Dec. 2015, pp. 1135–1143.

[204] S. Han, H. Mao, and W. J. Dally, “Deep compression: Compressing
deep neural networks with pruning, trained quantization and huffman
coding,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1510.00149, Oct. 2015.
[Online].
Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1510.00149

[205] M.

Jaderberg, A. Vedaldi,

“Speeding up
convolutional neural networks with low rank expansions,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1405.3866, May 2014.
[Online]. Available: https:
//arxiv.org/abs/1405.3866

and A. Zisserman,

[206] Y.-D. Kim, E. Park, S. Yoo, T. Choi, L. Yang, and D. Shin,
“Compression of deep convolutional neural networks for fast and low
power mobile applications,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06530, Nov.
2015. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1511.06530

[207] N. Kozyrskiy and A.-H. Phan, “Cnn acceleration by low-rank approxi-
mation with quantized factors,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.08878, Jun.
2020. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.08878

[208] G. Hinton, O. Vinyals, and J. Dean, “Distilling the knowledge in
a neural network,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1503.02531, Mar. 2015.
[Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1503.02531

[209] A. Romero, N. Ballas, S. E. Kahou, A. Chassang, C. Gatta,
and Y. Bengio, “Fitnets: Hints for thin deep nets,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1412.6550, Dec. 2014. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/
1412.6550

[210] Y. Cheng, D. Wang, P. Zhou, and T. Zhang, “A survey of
model compression and acceleration for deep neural networks,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.09282, Oct. 2017.
[Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/1710.09282

[211] J. Lee, A. Pastor, J.-I. Hwang, and G. J. Kim, “Predicting the torso
direction from hmd movements for walk-in-place navigation through
deep learning,” in Proc. of the 25th ACM Symposium on Virtual Reality
Software and Technology, Nov. 2019, pp. 1–2.

[212] J. Ahn, J. Williamson, M. Gartrell, R. Han, Q. Lv, and S. Mishra,
“Supporting healthy grocery shopping via mobile augmented reality,”
ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications, and
Applications (TOMM), vol. 12, no. 1s, pp. 1–24, Oct. 2015.

[213] A. Z. Tan, H. Yu, L. Cui, and Q. Yang, “Towards personalized feder-
ated learning,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning
Systems, Mar. 2022.

[214] Y. Zhou, J. Liu, J. H. Wang, J. Wang, G. Liu, D. Wu, C. Li, and S. Yu,
“Usst: A two-phase privacy-preserving framework for personalized
recommendation with semi-distributed training,” Information Sciences,
May 2022.

[215] F. Gutiérrez, K. Verbert, and N. N. Htun, “Phara: an augmented reality
grocery store assistant,” in Proc. of the 20th International Conference
on Human-Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services
Adjunct, Barcelona, Spain, Sep. 2018, pp. 339–345.

[216] tensorﬂow, “Tensorﬂow model optimization toolkit — pruning api,”
Accessed Jan. 25 2022. [Online]. Available: https://blog.tensorﬂow.
org/2019/05/tf-model-optimization-toolkit-pruning-API.html

[217] L. Wang and K.-J. Yoon, “Knowledge distillation and student-teacher
learning for visual intelligence: A review and new outlooks,” IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, vol. 44,
no. 6, pp. 3048–3068, Jun. 2022.

[218] H. Du, B. Ma, D. Niyato, and J. Kang, “Rethinking quality of
experience for metaverse services: A consumer-based economics
perspective,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.01076, Aug. 2022. [Online].
Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2208.01076

[219] H. Du, J. Wang, D. Niyato, J. Kang, Z. Xiong, D. I. Kim et al.,
“Exploring attention-aware network resource allocation for customized
metaverse services,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.00369, Aug. 2022.
[Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2208.00369

[220] H. Du, J. Liu, D. Niyato, J. Kang, Z. Xiong, J. Zhang, and
D. I. Kim, “Attention-aware resource allocation and qoe analysis for
metaverse xurllc services,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.05438, Aug.
2022. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2208.05438

[221] Y.-J. Liu, H. Du, D. Niyato, G. Feng, J. Kang, and Z. Xiong,
“Slicing4meta: An intelligent
integration framework with multi-
dimensional network resources for metaverse-as-a-service in web 3.0,”
Aug. 2022. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2208.06081
[222] C. Buciluˇa, R. Caruana, and A. Niculescu-Mizil, “Model compression,”
in Proc. of
the 12th ACM SIGKDD international conference on
Knowledge discovery and data mining, Philadelphia, PA, Aug. 2006,
pp. 535–541.

[223] X. Zhang, H. Gu, L. Fan, K. Chen, and Q. Yang, “No free
security and utility in federated learning,”
lunch theorem for
arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.05816, Mar. 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.05816

[224] A. Gulhane, A. Vyas, R. Mitra, R. Oruche, G. Hoefer, S. Valluripally,
P. Calyam, and K. A. Hoque, “Security, privacy and safety risk assess-
ment for virtual reality learning environment applications,” in 2019
16th IEEE Annual Consumer Communications Networking Conference
(CCNC), Las Vegas, NV, Jan. 2019, pp. 1–9.

42

[225] S. Jana, D. Molnar, A. Moshchuk, A. Dunn, B. Livshits, H. J. Wang,
and E. Ofek, “Enabling ﬁne-grained permissions for augmented reality
applications with recognizers,” in Proc. of the 22nd USENIX Security
Symposium, Washington, D.C., Aug. 2013, pp. 415–430.

[226] J. Shang and J. Wu, “Enabling secure voice input on augmented reality
headsets using internal body voice,” in Proc. of the 16th Annual IEEE
International Conference on Sensing, Communication, and Networking
(SECON), Boston, MA, Jun. 2019, pp. 1–9.

[227] Y. Shen, H. Wen, C. Luo, W. Xu, T. Zhang, W. Hu, and D. Rus,
“Gaitlock: Protect virtual and augmented reality headsets using gait,”
IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing, vol. 16,
no. 3, pp. 484–497, Jan. 2019.

[228] V. Costan and S. Devadas, “Intel sgx explained.” IACR Cryptol. ePrint

Arch., vol. 2016, no. 86, pp. 1–118, 2016.

[229] Z. Ning, J. Liao, F. Zhang, and W. Shi, “Preliminary study of trusted
execution environments on heterogeneous edge platforms,” in 2018
IEEE/ACM Symposium on Edge Computing (SEC), Seattle, WA, Oct.
2018, pp. 421–426.

[230] K. Wei, J. Li, M. Ding, C. Ma, H. H. Yang, F. Farokhi, S. Jin,
T. Q. Quek, and H. V. Poor, “Federated learning with differential
privacy: Algorithms and performance analysis,” IEEE Transactions on
Information Forensics and Security, vol. 15, pp. 3454–3469, Apr. 2020.
[231] R. C. Geyer, T. Klein, and M. Nabi, “Differentially private federated
learning: A client level perspective,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.07557,
Dec. 2017. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1712.07557
[232] A. Paudice, L. Muñoz-González, A. Gyorgy, and E. C. Lupu,
“Detection of adversarial
training examples in poisoning attacks
through anomaly detection,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.03041, Feb.
2018. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1802.03041

[233] S. Srisakaokul, Y. Zhang, Z. Zhong, W. Yang, T. Xie, and B. Li,
“Muldef: Multi-model-based defense against adversarial examples
for neural networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.00065, Aug. 2018.
[Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1809.00065

[234] J.-E. Ekberg, K. Kostiainen, and N. Asokan, “The untapped potential
of trusted execution environments on mobile devices,” IEEE Security
& Privacy, vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 29–37, Apr. 2014.

[235] B. Corinne, “trusted execution environment (tee),” Accessed Jan.
25 2022. [Online]. Available: https://searchitoperations.techtarget.com/
deﬁnition/trusted-execution-environment-TEE

[236] Q. Yang, Y. Liu, T. Chen, and Y. Tong, “Federated machine learning:
Concept and applications,” ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems
and Technology (TIST), vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 1–19, Jan. 2019.

[237] J. Kang, Z. Xiong, D. Niyato, S. Xie, and J. Zhang, “Incentive mech-
anism for reliable federated learning: A joint optimization approach
to combining reputation and contract theory,” IEEE Internet of Things
Journal, vol. 6, no. 6, pp. 10 700–10 714, Sep. 2019.

[238] K. Zhang, X. Song, C. Zhang, and S. Yu, “Challenges and future
directions of secure federated learning: a survey,” Frontiers of computer
science, vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 1–8, Oct. 2022.

[239] J. Koneˇcn`y, H. B. McMahan, D. Ramage, and P. Richtárik, “Federated
optimization: Distributed machine learning for on-device intelligence,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1610.02527, Oct. 2016.
[Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/1610.02527

[240] W. Y. B. Lim, J. S. Ng, Z. Xiong, J. Jin, Y. Zhang, D. Niyato, C. S.
Leung, and C. Miao, “Decentralized Edge Intelligence: A Dynamic
Resource Allocation Framework for Hierarchical Federated Learning,”
IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems, 2021.
[241] M. J. Sheller, B. Edwards, G. A. Reina, J. Martin, S. Pati, A. Kotrotsou,
M. Milchenko, W. Xu, D. Marcus, R. R. Colen et al., “Federated learn-
ing in medicine: facilitating multi-institutional collaborations without
sharing patient data,” Scientiﬁc reports, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 1–12, Jul.
2020.

[242] M. G. Arivazhagan, V. Aggarwal, A. K. Singh, and S. Choudhary,
“Federated learning with personalization layers,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1912.00818, Dec. 2019. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/
abs/1912.00818

[243] L. Lyu, H. Yu, and Q. Yang, “Threats to Federated Learning:
A Survey,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.02133, Mar. 2020. [Online].
Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.02133

[244] L. Zhao, S. J. Pan, and Q. Yang, “A uniﬁed framework of active transfer
learning for cross-system recommendation,” Artiﬁcial Intelligence, vol.
245, pp. 38–55, Apr. 2017.

[245] P. Gopal,

Singh,
(mlaas)

“Best machine
service
platforms
you want
that
data
[Online]. Available: https:
scientist,” Accessed Feb. 16 2022.
//neptune.ai/blog/best-machine-learning-as-a-service-platforms-mlaas

learning
to

check

as

as

a

a

[246] H. Zhu, W. Jin, M. Xiao, S. Murali, and M. Li, “Blinkey: A two-factor
user authentication method for virtual reality devices,” Proc. of the
ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies,
vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 1–29, Dec. 2020.

[247] M. M. Breunig, H.-P. Kriegel, R. T. Ng, and J. Sander, “Lof: iden-
tifying density-based local outliers,” in Proc. of the ACM SIGMOD
international conference on Management of data, Dallas, Texas, May
2000, pp. 93–104.

[248] R. Wang, M. Chen, N. Guizani, Y. Li, H. Gharavi, and K. Hwang,
“Deepnetqoe: Self-adaptive qoe optimization framework of deep net-
works,” IEEE Network, vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 161–167, Jun. 2021.
[249] H. Du, D. Niyato, J. Kang, D. I. Kim, and C. Miao, “Optimal
targeted advertising strategy for secure wireless edge metaverse,”
CoRR, vol. abs/2111.00511, Nov. 2021. [Online]. Available: https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2111.00511

[250] J. Kang, D. Ye, J. Nie, J. Xiao, X. Deng, S. Wang, Z. Xiong,
“Blockchain-based federated learning
Incentive scheme with optimal aoi,”
[Online]. Available:

R. Yu,
for
arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.07384, Jun. 2022.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.07384

and D. Niyato,
industrial metaverses:

[251] Z. Zheng, S. Xie, H.-N. Dai, X. Chen, and H. Wang, “Blockchain
challenges and opportunities: A survey,” International Journal of Web
and Grid Services, vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 352–375, 2018.

[252] H.-N. Dai, Z. Zheng, and Y. Zhang, “Blockchain for internet of things:
A survey,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 8076–
8094, Jun. 2019.

[253] B. S. Fung and H. Halaburda, “Central bank digital currencies: a
framework for assessing why and how,” Available at SSRN 2994052,
Jun. 2016.
[Online]. Available: https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.
cfm?abstract_id=2994052

[254] L.-H. Lee, Z. Lin, R. Hu, Z. Gong, A. Kumar, T. Li, S. Li, and P. Hui,
“When creators meet the metaverse: A survey on computational arts,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.13486, Nov. 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2111.13486

[255] B. Yang, D. Wu, and R. Wang, “Cue: An intelligent edge computing

framework,” IEEE Network, vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 18–25, May 2019.

[256] L. V. Kiong, DeFi, NFT and GameFi Made Easy: A Beginner’s Guide
to Understanding and Investing in DeFi, NFT and GameFi Projects.
Liew Voon Kiong, 2021.

[257] Everydays: the First 5000 Days(2021). [Online] Available: https://en.

wikipedia.org/wiki/Everydays:_the_First_5000_Days.

[258] Z. Hong, S. Guo, R. Zhang, P. Li, Y. Zhan, and W. Chen, “Cycle:
Sustainable off-chain payment channel network with asynchronous re-
balancing,” in 2022 52nd Annual IEEE/IFIP International Conference
on Dependable Systems and Networks (DSN), Baltimore, MD, Jun.
2022, pp. 41–53.

[259] T. Cai, Z. Hong, S. Liu, W. Chen, Z. Zheng, and Y. Yu, “Socialchain:
Decoupling social data and applications to return your data ownership,”
IEEE Transactions on Services Computing, Nov. 2021.

[260] C. Goanta, “Selling land in decentraland: The regime of non-fungible
tokens on the ethereum blockchain under the digital content directive,”
in Disruptive Technology, Legal Innovation, and the Future of Real
Estate. Springer, Oct. 2020, pp. 139–154.

[261] M. Dowling, “Is non-fungible token pricing driven by cryptocurren-

cies?” Finance Research Letters, p. 102097, Jan. 2021.

[262] O. Kharif, “Why gameﬁ is crypto’s hot new thing (and what is it?) =
https://blogs.nvidia.com/blog/2021/08/10/what-is-the-metaverse.”
[263] J. Nie, J. Luo, Z. Xiong, D. Niyato, and P. Wang, “A stackelberg
game approach toward socially-aware incentive mechanisms for mo-
bile crowdsensing,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications,
vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 724–738, Dec. 2018.

[264] T. Min, H. Wang, Y. Guo, and W. Cai, “Blockchain games: A survey,”
in Proc. of IEEE conference on games (CoG), London, UK, Aug. 2019,
pp. 1–8.

[265] J. Zhao, Y. Chi, Z. Wang, V. C. Leung, and W. Cai, “Cloudarcade:
A blockchain empowered cloud gaming system,” in Proc. of the 2nd
ACM International Symposium on Blockchain and Secure Critical
Infrastructure, Taipei, Taiwan, Oct. 2020, pp. 31–40.

[266] K. Xin, S. Zhang, X. Wu, and W. Cai, “Reciprocal crowdsourcing:
building cooperative game worlds on blockchain,” in 2020 IEEE
International Conference on Consumer Electronics (ICCE), Las Vegas,
NV, Jan. 2020, pp. 1–6.

[267] R. Kumar, N. Marchang, and R. Tripathi, “Distributed off-chain storage
of patient diagnostic reports in healthcare system using ipfs and
blockchain,” in 2020 International Conference on COMmunication
Systems & NETworkS (COMSNETS), Bengaluru, India, Jan. 2020, pp.
1–5.

[268] Storj DCS (2021). [Online] Available: https://docs.storj.io/dcs/.
[Online] Available:
[269] IPFS

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/

(2021).

43

InterPlanetary_File_System.

[270] GDFS: A New Solution

(2021).
gdfs-a-new-solution-for-decentralized-data-storage-13f70357a617.

[Online] Available:

for Decentralized Data

Storage
https://medium.com/gooddatafound/

[271] S. Williams, V. Diordiiev, L. Berman, and I. Uemlianin, “Arweave:
A protocol for economically sustainable information permanence,”
Arweave Yellow Paper, 2019.
[Online]. Available: https://www.
arweave.org/yellow-paper.

[272] Y. Liu, Z. Fang, M. H. Cheung, W. Cai, and J. Huang, “An incentive
mechanism for sustainable blockchain storage,” IEEE/ACM Transac-
tions on Networking, May 2022.

[273] E. Daniel and F. Tschorsch, “Ipfs and friends: A qualitative comparison
of next generation peer-to-peer data networks,” IEEE Communications
Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 31–52, Jan. 2022.

[274] D. Liu, C. Huang, J. Ni, X. Lin, and X. S. Shen, “Blockchain-cloud
transparent data marketing: Consortium management and fairness,”
IEEE Transactions on Computers, pp. 1–1, Feb. 2022.

[275] M. Xu, D. T. Hoang, J. Kang, D. Niyato, Q. Yan, and D. I. Kim, “Se-
cure and reliable transfer learning framework for 6g-enabled internet
of vehicles,” IEEE Wireless Communications, May 2022.

[276] X. S. Shen, C. Huang, D. Liu, L. Xue, W. Zhuang, R. Sun, and B. Ying,
“Data management for future wireless networks: Architecture, privacy
preservation, and regulation,” IEEE Network, vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 8–15,
Feb. 2021.

[277] J. Kang, R. Yu, X. Huang, M. Wu, S. Maharjan, S. Xie, and Y. Zhang,
“Blockchain for secure and efﬁcient data sharing in vehicular edge
computing and networks,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 6,
no. 3, pp. 4660–4670, Jun. 2018.

[278] L. Liu, J. Feng, Q. Pei, C. Chen, Y. Ming, B. Shang, and M. Dong,
“Blockchain-enabled secure data sharing scheme in mobile-edge com-
puting: An asynchronous advantage actor–critic learning approach,”
IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 2342–2353, Dec.
2020.

[279] A. A. Abdellatif, L. Samara, A. Mohamed, A. Erbad, C. F. Chi-
asserini, M. Guizani, M. D. O’Connor, and J. Laughton, “Medge-chain:
Leveraging edge computing and blockchain for efﬁcient medical data
exchange,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 8, no. 21, pp. 15 762–
15 775, Nov. 2021.

[280] R. Li, T. Song, B. Mei, H. Li, X. Cheng, and L. Sun, “Blockchain
for large-scale internet of things data storage and protection,” IEEE
Transactions on Services Computing, vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 762–771, Sep.
2018.

[281] C. Xu, K. Wang, P. Li, S. Guo, J. Luo, B. Ye, and M. Guo, “Making big
data open in edges: A resource-efﬁcient blockchain-based approach,”
IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems, vol. 30, no. 4,
pp. 870–882, Apr. 2018.

[282] L. Zhang, M. Peng, W. Wang, Z. Jin, Y. Su, and H. Chen, “Secure
and efﬁcient data storage and sharing scheme for blockchain-based
mobile-edge computing,” Transactions on Emerging Telecommunica-
tions Technologies, vol. 32, no. 10, p. e4315, Jun. 2021.

[283] R. Belchior, A. Vasconcelos, S. Guerreiro, and M. Correia, “A survey
on blockchain interoperability: Past, present, and future trends,” ACM
Computing Surveys (CSUR), vol. 54, no. 8, pp. 1–41, Oct. 2021.
“Sidechains

and
interoperability,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.04077, Mar. 2019.
[Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1903.04077

Johnson, P. Robinson,

and J. Brainard,

[284] S.

[285] M. Zamani, M. Movahedi, and M. Raykova, “Rapidchain: Scaling
blockchain via full sharding,” in Proc. of the 2018 ACM SIGSAC Con-
ference on Computer and Communications Security, Toronto, Canada,
Oct. 2018, pp. 931–948.

[286] Y. Jiang, C. Wang, Y. Wang, and L. Gao, “A cross-chain solution to
integrating multiple blockchains for iot data management,” Sensors,
vol. 19, no. 9, p. 2042, May 2019.

[287] Z. Zheng, H.-N. Dai, and J. Wu, Blockchain Intelligence: Methods,

Applications and Challenges. Springer, 2021.

[288] M. Li and Y. Qin, “Scaling the blockchain-based access control frame-
work for iot via sharding,” in Proc. of IEEE International Conference
on Communications (ICC), Montreal, Canada, Jun. 2021, pp. 1–6.

[289] J. Xie, K. Zhang, Y. Lu, and Y. Zhang, “Resource-efﬁcient dag
blockchain with sharding for 6g networks,” IEEE Network, vol. 36,
no. 1, pp. 189–196, Nov. 2021.

[290] S. Yuan, J. Li, J. Liang, Y. Zhu, X. Yu, J. Chen, and C. Wu, “Sharding
for blockchain based mobile edge computing system: A deep rein-
forcement learning approach,” in 2021 IEEE Global Communications
Conference (GLOBECOM).

IEEE, 2021, pp. 1–6.

44

[312] S. Suhail, R. Hussain, R. Jurdak, and C. S. Hong, “Trustworthy digital
twins in the industrial internet of things with blockchain,” IEEE Internet
Computing, Feb. 2021.

[313] C. Altun, B. Tavli, and H. Yanikomeroglu, “Liberalization of digital
twins of iot-enabled home appliances via blockchains and absolute
ownership rights,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 57, no. 12,
pp. 65–71, Dec. 2019.

[314] Z. Li, M. Xu, J. Nie, J. Kang, W. Chen, and S. Xie, “Noma-enabled
cooperative computation ofﬂoading for blockchain-empowered internet
of things: A learning approach,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal,
vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 2364–2378, Aug. 2020.

[315] X. Xu, X. Zhang, H. Gao, Y. Xue, L. Qi, and W. Dou, “Become:
Blockchain-enabled computation ofﬂoading for iot
in mobile edge
computing,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 16,
no. 6, pp. 4187–4195, Aug. 2019.

[316] L. Yuan, Q. He, S. Tan, B. Li, J. Yu, F. Chen, H. Jin, and Y. Yang,
“Coopedge: A decentralized blockchain-based platform for cooperative
edge computing,” in Proc, of the Web Conference, Ljubljana, Slovenia,
Apr. 2021, pp. 2245–2257.

[317] S. Xu, C. Guo, R. Q. Hu, and Y. Qian, “Blockchain inspired secure
computation ofﬂoading in a vehicular cloud network,” IEEE Internet
of Things Journal, Jan. 2021.

[318] X. Lin, J. Li, J. Wu, H. Liang, and W. Yang, “Making knowledge
tradable in edge-ai enabled iot: A consortium blockchain-based efﬁcient
and incentive approach,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics,
vol. 15, no. 12, pp. 6367–6378, May 2019.

[319] J. Kang, Z. Xiong, D. Niyato, Y. Zou, Y. Zhang, and M. Guizani,
“Reliable federated learning for mobile networks,” IEEE Wireless
Communications, vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 72–80, Feb. 2020.

[320] Y. Zhao, J. Zhao, L. Jiang, R. Tan, D. Niyato, Z. Li, L. Lyu, and
Y. Liu, “Privacy-preserving blockchain-based federated learning for iot
devices,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 1817–1829,
Aug. 2020.

[321] Y. Li, C. Chen, N. Liu, H. Huang, Z. Zheng, and Q. Yan, “A blockchain-
based decentralized federated learning framework with committee
consensus,” IEEE Network, vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 234–241, Dec. 2020.

[291] A. Asheralieva and D. Niyato, “Reputation-based coalition formation
for secure self-organized and scalable sharding in iot blockchains with
mobile-edge computing,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 7,
no. 12, pp. 11 830–11 850, Jun. 2020.

[292] A. Siriweera and K. Naruse, “Internet of cross-chains: Model-driven
cross-chain as a service platform for the internet of everything in smart
city,” IEEE Consumer Electronics Magazine, pp. 1–1, Nov. 2021.

[293] Y. Wang, B. Yang, J. Liu, H. Zeng, and C. Xia, “Virtual chain: A
storage model supporting cross-blockchain transaction,” Concurrency
and Computation: Practice and Experience, p. e5899, May 2020.

[294] Y. He, C. Zhang, B. Wu, Y. Yang, K. Xiao, and H. Li, “Cross-chain
trusted service quality computing scheme for multi-chain model-based
5g network slicing sla,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, Dec. 2021.
[295] ——, “A cross-chain trusted reputation scheme for a shared charging
platform based on blockchain,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, Jul.
2021.

[296] H. Tian, K. Xue, X. Luo, S. Li, J. Xu, J. Liu, J. Zhao, and D. S. Wei,
“Enabling cross-chain transactions: A decentralized cryptocurrency
exchange protocol,” IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and
Security, vol. 16, pp. 3928–3941, Jul. 2021.

[297] G. Zyskind, O. Nathan et al., “Decentralizing privacy: Using
blockchain to protect personal data,” in Proc. of IEEE Security and
Privacy Workshops, San Jose, CA, May 2015, pp. 180–184.

[298] W. Viriyasitavat, L. Da Xu, Z. Bi, and A. Sapsomboon, “Blockchain-
based business process management (bpm) framework for service
composition in industry 4.0,” Journal of Intelligent Manufacturing,
vol. 31, no. 7, pp. 1737–1748, Oct. 2020.

[299] A. Cannavo and F. Lamberti, “How blockchain, virtual reality, and aug-
mented reality are converging, and why,” IEEE Consumer Electronics
Magazine, vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 6–13, Sep. 2020.

[300] Z. Xiong, Y. Zhang, D. Niyato, P. Wang, and Z. Han, “When mobile
blockchain meets edge computing,” IEEE Communications Magazine,
vol. 56, no. 8, pp. 33–39, Aug. 2018.

[301] Y. Liu, Q. Chang, M. Peng, T. Dang, and W. Xiong, “Virtual reality
streaming in blockchain-enabled fog radio access networks,” IEEE
Internet of Things Journal, vol. 9, no. 11, pp. 8067–8077, Sep. 2021.
tolerance,”
in Proc. of the Third Symposium on Operating Systems Design and
Implementation, vol. 99, no. 1999, New Orleans, Feb. 1999, pp. 173–
186.

[302] M. Castro, B. Liskov et al., “Practical byzantine fault

[303] P. Lin, Q. Song, F. R. Yu, D. Wang, and L. Guo, “Task ofﬂoading for
wireless vr-enabled medical treatment with blockchain security using
collective reinforcement learning,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal,
vol. 8, no. 21, pp. 15 749–15 761, Jan. 2021.

[304] E. Bozkir, S. Eivazi, M. Akgün, and E. Kasneci, “Eye tracking data col-
lection protocol for vr for remotely located subjects using blockchain
and smart contracts,” in Proc. of IEEE International Conference on
Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Virtual Reality (AIVR), Utrecht, Netherlands,
Dec. 2020, pp. 397–401.

[305] Y. Djenouri, A. Belhadi, G. Srivastava, and J. C.-W. Lin, “Secure
collaborative augmented reality framework for biomedical informatics,”
IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics, Dec. 2021.
[306] S. Liao, J. Wu, J. Li, and K. Konstantin, “Information-centric massive
iot-based ubiquitous connected vr/ar in 6g: A proposed caching con-
sensus approach,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 8, no. 7, pp.
5172–5184, Oct. 2020.

[307] A. Islam, M. Masuduzzaman, A. Akter, and S. Y. Shin, “Mr-block:
A blockchain-assisted secure content sharing scheme for multi-user
mixed-reality applications in internet of military things,” in 2020 In-
ternational Conference on Information and Communication Technology
Convergence (ICTC), Jeju, Korea, Oct. 2020, pp. 407–411.

[308] I. Yaqoob, K. Salah, M. Uddin, R. Jayaraman, M. Omar, and M. Imran,
“Blockchain for digital twins: Recent advances and future research
challenges,” IEEE Network, vol. 34, no. 5, pp. 290–298, Apr. 2020.

[309] S. Suhail, S. U. R. Malik, R. Jurdak, R. Hussain, R. Matuleviˇcius,
and D. Svetinovic, “Towards situational aware cyber-physical systems:
A security-enhancing use case of blockchain-based digital
twins,”
Computers in Industry, vol. 141, p. 103699, Oct. 2022.

[310] Y. Lu, X. Huang, K. Zhang, S. Maharjan, and Y. Zhang, “Low-latency
federated learning and blockchain for edge association in digital twin
empowered 6g networks,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics,
vol. 17, no. 7, pp. 5098–5107, Aug. 2020.

[311] M. Xu, J. Peng, B. Gupta, J. Kang, Z. Xiong, Z. Li, and A. A. Abd El-
Latif, “Multi-agent federated reinforcement learning for secure incen-
tive mechanism in intelligent cyber-physical systems,” IEEE Internet
of Things Journal, May 2021.

