1

A Survey on Metaverse: Fundamentals, Security,
and Privacy
Yuntao Wang†, Zhou Su†∗, Ning Zhang‡, Rui Xing†, Dongxiao Liu§, Tom H. Luan†, and Xuemin Shen§
†School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China
‡Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Windsor, Windsor, ON, Canada
§Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada
∗Corresponding author: Zhou Su (zhousu@ieee.org)

2
2
0
2

p
e
S
9

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

4
v
2
6
6
2
0
.
3
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Metaverse, as an evolving paradigm of

the next-
generation Internet, aims to build a fully immersive, hyper spa-
tiotemporal, and self-sustaining virtual shared space for humans to
play, work, and socialize. Driven by recent advances in emerging
technologies such as extended reality, artiﬁcial
intelligence, and
blockchain, metaverse is stepping from science ﬁction to an upcom-
ing reality. However, severe privacy invasions and security breaches
(inherited from underlying technologies or emerged in the new
digital ecology) of metaverse can impede its wide deployment. At the
same time, a series of fundamental challenges (e.g., scalability and
interoperability) can arise in metaverse security provisioning owing
to the intrinsic characteristics of metaverse, such as immersive re-
alism, hyper spatiotemporality, sustainability, and heterogeneity. In
this paper, we present a comprehensive survey of the fundamentals,
security, and privacy of metaverse. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst investigate a
novel distributed metaverse architecture and its key characteristics
with ternary-world interactions. Then, we discuss the security and
privacy threats, present the critical challenges of metaverse systems,
and review the state-of-the-art countermeasures. Finally, we draw
open research directions for building future metaverse systems.

Index Terms—Metaverse, security, privacy, distributed virtual

worlds, extended reality, artiﬁcial intelligence, and blockchain.

I. INTRODUCTION

The metaverse, literally a combination of the preﬁx “meta”
(meaning transcendence) and the sufﬁx “verse” (shorthand for
universe), is a computer-generated world with a consistent value
system and an independent economic system linked to the physi-
cal world. The term metaverse was created by Neal Stephenson in
his science ﬁction novel named Snow Crash in 1992. In this novel,
humans in the physical world enter and live in the metaverse (a
parallel virtual world) through digital avatars (in analogy to user’s
physical self) via virtual reality (VR) equipment. Since its ﬁrst
appearance, the concept of metaverse is still evolving with various
descriptions, such as a second life [1], 3D virtual worlds [2],
and life-logging [3]. Commonly, the metaverse is regarded as a
fully immersive, hyper spatiotemporal, and self-sustaining virtual
shared space blending the ternary physical, human, and digital
worlds [4]. Metaverse is recognized as an evolving paradigm
of the next-generation Internet after the web and the mobile
Internet revolutions [5], where users can live as digital natives
and experience an alternative life in virtuality.

The metaverse integrates a variety of emerging technologies
[6]–[8]. In particular, digital twin produces a mirror image of the
real world, VR and augmented reality (AR) provide immersive
3D experience, 5G and beyond offer ultra-high reliable and ultra-
low latency connections for massive metaverse devices, wearable

Fig. 1. Three phases of the development of the metaverse.

sensors and brain-computer interface (BCI) enable user/avatar
interaction in the metaverse, artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) enables the
large-scale metaverse creation and rendering, and blockchain and
non-fungible token (NFT) play an important role in determining
authentic rights for metaverse assets [9]. Currently, with the popu-
larity of smart devices and the maturity of enabling technologies,
the metaverse is stepping out of its infancy into an upcoming
reality in the near future. Furthermore, signiﬁcant innovations and
advances in the above emerging technologies are giving birth to
a new information ecology and new demands for applications,
as well as the metaverse for becoming a platform of the new
ecology and applications [8]. Driven by realistic demands and
the prospect of feasibility of metaverse construction, metaverse
recently has attracted increasing attention from around the world
and many tech giants such as Facebook, Microsoft, Tencent,
and NVIDIA have announced their ventures into Metaverse.
Particularly, Facebook rebranded itself as “Meta” to dedicate
itself to building the future metaverse [10].

Generally,

the development of metaverse consists of three
successive phases from a macro perspective [6]: (i) digital twins,
(ii) digital natives, and eventually (iii) surreality, as depicted in
Fig. 1. The ﬁrst phase produces a mirror world consisting of
large-scale and high-ﬁdelity digital twins of humans and things
in virtual environments, aimed for a vivid digital representation of
the physical reality. In this phase, virtual activities and properties
such as user emotion and movement are imitations of their
physical counterparts, where reality and virtuality are two parallel
spaces. The second phase mainly focuses on the native content
creation, where digital natives represented by avatars can produce
innovations and insights inside the digital worlds and these digital
creations may only exist in the virtual spaces. In this phase, the
massively created contents in the digital world become equal with
their physical counterparts, and the digital world has the ability
to transform and innovate the production process of the physical
world, thereby creating more intersections between these two
worlds. The metaverse grows to its maturity in the last phase and

Physical worldVirtual worldPhysical worldVirtual worldPhysical worldVirtual worldPhase 1Phase 2Phase 3Digital twinsDigital  natives Surreality 
 
 
 
 
 
turns into a persistent and self-sustaining surreality world which
assimilates the reality into itself. The seamless integration and
mutual symbiosis of physical and virtual worlds will be realized
in this phase, where the scope of the virtual world will be larger
than that of the real world and more scenes and lives that do not
exist in reality can exist in virtual realms.

A. Challenges for Securing Metaverse

In spite of the promising sign of metaverse, security and
privacy issues are the prime concerns that hinder its further devel-
opment. A wide range of security breaches and privacy invasions
may arise in the metaverse from the management of massive
data streams, pervasive user proﬁling activities, unfair outcomes
of AI algorithms, to the safety of physical infrastructures and
human bodies. Firstly, since metaverse integrates a variety of
latest technologies and systems built on them as its basis, their
vulnerabilities and intrinsic ﬂaws may also be inherited by the
metaverse. There have been incidents of emerging technologies,
such as hijacking of wearable devices or cloud storage, theft of
virtual currencies, and the misconduct of AI to produce fake news.
Secondly, driven by the interweaving of various technologies,
the effects of existing threats can be ampliﬁed and become
more severe in virtual worlds, while new threats nonexistent in
physical and cyber spaces can breed such as virtual stalking
and virtual spying [11]. Particularly, the personal data involved
in the metaverse can be more granular and unprecedentedly
ubiquitous to build a digital copy of the real world, which
opens new horizons for crimes on private big data [12]. For
example, to build a virtual scene using AI algorithms, users will
inevitably wear wearable AR/VR devices with built-in sensors to
comprehensively collect brain wave patterns, facial expressions,
eye movements, hand movements, speech and biometric features,
as well as the surrounding environment. Besides, as users need
to be uniquely identiﬁed in the metaverse, it means that headsets,
VR glasses, or other devices can be used for tracking users’
real locations illegally [13]. Lastly, hackers can exploit system
vulnerabilities and compromise devices as entry points to invade
real-world equipments such as household appliances to threaten
personal safety, and even threaten critical infrastructures such as
power grid systems, high-speed rail systems, and water supply
systems via advanced persistent threat (APT) attacks [14].

Nevertheless, existing security countermeasures can still be
ineffective and lack adaptability for metaverse applications. Par-
ticularly, the intrinsic characteristics of metaverse including im-
mersiveness, hyper spatiotemporality, sustainability, interoper-
ability, scalability, and heterogeneity may bring about a series of
challenges for efﬁcient security provision. 1) The real-time fully
immersive experience in the metaverse brings not only sensual
pleasures of the ﬂawless virtual environment, but also challenges
in the secure fusion of massive multimodal user-sensitive big
data for interactions between users and avatars/environments. 2)
The integration of the ternary world contributes to the hyper
spatiotemporality in the metaverse [15], which greatly increases
the complexity and difﬁculty of trust management. Due to the
deepening blurring of the boundary between the real and the vir-
tual, the metaverse will make the fact and ﬁction more confusing
such as Deepfake events, especially for regulations and digital
forensics. 3) To avoid the single point of failure (SPoF) and the

2

control by a few powerful entities, the metaverse should be built
on a decentralized architecture to be self-sustaining and persistent
[16], which raises severe challenges in reaching unambiguous
consensus among massive entities in the time-varying metaverse.
4) The interoperability and scalability in the metaverse indicate
users can freely shuttle across various sub-metaverses concur-
rently under different scenes and interaction modes, which also
poses challenges to ensure fast service authorization, compliance
auditing, and accountability enforcement
in seamless service
mitigation and multi-source data fusion. 5) The virtual worlds
in the large-scale metaverse can be highly heterogeneous in
terms of hardware implementation, communication interfaces,
and softwares, which poses huge interoperability difﬁculties.

B. Related Works

The topic of metaverse has attracted various research attention.
Until now, there have been several survey papers from different
aspects of the metaverse. For example, Dionisio et al. [2] specify
four characteristics of viable 3D virtual worlds (or metaverse)
including ubiquity, realism, scalability, and interoperability, and
discuss ongoing improvements of the underlying virtual world
technology. Lee et al. [6] review and examine eight fundamental
technologies to build up the metaverse as well as its opportunities
from six user-centric factors. Huynh-The et al. [17] study the
role of AI approaches in the foundation and development of
the metaverse. Yang et al. [7] investigate the potential of AI
and blockchain technologies for future metaverse construction.
Ning et al. [4] present a survey of the development status of
metaverse in terms of national policies, industrial projects, in-
frastructures, supporting technologies, VR, and social metaverse.
Park et al. [18] discuss three components (i.e., hardware, soft-
ware, and content) of metaverse and review the user interaction,
implementation, and representative applications in the metaverse.
Xu et al. [19] present an in-depth survey on the edge-enabled
metaverse from communication, networking, computation, and
blockchain perspectives. Leenes [11] investigate potential privacy
risks in the online game Second Life from both social and legal
perspectives. Different from the above existing surveys on the
general metaverse [2], [4], [6], [11], [18], AI-empowered meta-
verse [7], [17], edge-enabled metaverse [19], or the potential in
service provisioning in social VR/AR games [12], retailing [20],
education [21], social goods [8], and computational arts [22],
we focus on the perspective of metaverse security and privacy
such as potential security/privacy threats, critical security/privacy
challenges, and state-of-the-art defenses, etc.

In this paper, we present a comprehensive survey on the
fundamentals of metaverse, as well as the key challenges and
solutions to build the secure and privacy-preserving metaverse. By
discussing existing/potential solutions for the challenges facing
the metaverse, our survey offers critical insights and useful guide-
lines for readers to better understand how these security/privacy
threats could arise and be prevented in the metaverse. The
contributions of this survey are four-fold.

• We discuss the fundamentals of metaverse including the
general architecture, key characteristics, and enabling tech-
nologies, as well as existing modern prototypes of metaverse
applications.

3

TABLE I
A COMPARISON OF CONTRIBUTION BETWEEN OUR SURVEY AND RELEVANT
SURVEYS

Year.

Refs.

2008

2009

2013

2018

2020
2021

2021

[11]

[20]

[2]

[12]

[21]
[8]

[6]

2021

[4]

2021

2022

[22]

[7]

2022

[17]

2022

[18]

2022

[19]

Now

Ours

Contribution
Discussions on privacy risks in the game Second Life
from both social and legal perspectives.
Survey on metaverse applications in terms of retailing.
Discussions on key features of metaverse and ongoing
improvements of the underlying virtual world technology.
Survey on privacy issues and countermeasures related to
digital footprints in social metaverse games.
Survey on metaverse applications in terms of education.
Survey on metaverse applications in terms of social goods.
Review on eight fundamental technologies to build up the
metaverse and its opportunities from six user-centric factors.
Overview of metaverse development in terms of national
policies, industrial projects, infrastructures, supporting
technologies, VR, and social metaverse.
Survey on metaverse applications in terms of digital arts.
Discuss the potential of AI and blockchain technologies
in future metaverse construction.
Discuss the role of AI from six technical aspects
in the development of the metaverse.
Discuss the hardware, software, and content components
of metaverse and review user interaction, implementation,
and representative applications in the metaverse.
An in-depth survey on the edge-enabled metaverse in terms
of communication, networking, and computation.
Comprehensive survey of the fundamentals, security, and
privacy of metaverse, discussions on the general architecture,
characteristics, and security/privacy threats of the metaverse,
discussions on critical challenges, state-of-the-art solutions,
and future research directions in building secure metaverse.

• We investigate the security and privacy threats in the
metaverse from seven aspects (i.e., authentication & access
control, data management, privacy, network, economy, gov-
ernance, and physical/social effects) and discuss the critical
challenges to address them.

• We survey the state-of-the-art security and privacy counter-
measures in both academic and industry and discuss their
feasibility toward building the secure and privacy-preserving
metaverse paradigm.

• We outline open future research directions in building the
secure, privacy-preserving, and efﬁcient metaverse realm.
Table I summarizes the contribution of our work in comparison

to previous relevant surveys in the metaverse.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Sec-
tion II presents the standards, architecture, characteristics, sup-
porting technologies, and current prototypes of the metaverse.
Sections III–IX present the taxonomy of security and privacy
threats in the metaverse and discuss critical challenges and exist-
ing/potential solutions to resolve them from seven aspects. Then,
we discuss open research issues in Section X. Finally, we draw
the conclusions in Section XI. Fig. 2 illustrates the organization
of this survey. The key acronyms are listed in Table II.

II. AN OVERVIEW OF METAVERSE
In this section, we introduce the metaverse from the fol-
lowing aspects: existing standards, the general architecture, key
characteristics, enabling technologies, potential applications, and
existing prototypes.

A. Existing Metaverse-Related Standards

In what follows, we brieﬂy introduce two existing metaverse-

related standards: ISO/IEC 23005 [23] and IEEE 2888 [24].

Fig. 2. Organization structure of this paper.

1) As the ﬁrst standardized framework for networked virtual
environments (NVEs) in the metaverse, ISO/IEC 23005 (MPEG-
V) aims to standardize the interfaces between the real world and
the virtual world, and among virtual worlds, to realize seamless
information exchange, simultaneous reactions, and interoperabil-
ity [23]. Its ﬁrst version was published in 2011, and the latest
4th edition was released in 2020. ISO/IEC 23005 standards are
applicable for a variety of metaverse-related business services,
where the association of audiovisual information, rendered sen-
sory effects, and characteristics of virtual objects (e.g., avatars
and virtual items) can beneﬁt the interactions between virtual and
real worlds. Fig. 3 illustrates the general architecture of ISO/IEC

Section II: An Overview of MetaverseExisting Metaverse-related StandardsMetaverse ArchitectureSection III: Threats and Countermeasures to Authentication & Access Control in MetaverseSection IV: Threats and Countermeasures to Data Management in MetaverseThreats to Authentication in MetaverseThreats to Access Control in MetaverseSecurity Countermeasures to Metaverse Authentication & Access ControlSummary and Lessons LearnedThreats to Data Management in MetaverseSecurity Countermeasures to Metaverse Data ManagementSection X: Future research directionsEndogenous Security Empowered MetaverseCloud-Edge-End Orchestrated MetaverseEnergy-Efficient and Green MetaverseContent-Centric and Human-Centric MetaverseSection XI: ConclusionKey Characteristics of MetaverseEnabling Technologies of MetaverseExisting Modern Prototypes of Metaverse ApplicationsSummary and Lessons LearnedSection V: Privacy Threats and Countermeasures in MetaversePrivacy Threats in MetaversePrivacy Countermeasures in MetaverseSummary and Lessons LearnedSection VI: Network-related Threats and Countermeasures in MetaverseThreats to Metaverse NetworkSituational Awareness in MetaverseSummary and Lessons LearnedSection VII: Economy-related Threats and Countermeasures in MetaverseThreats to Metaverse EconomyOpen and Decentralized Creator EconomySummary and Lessons LearnedSection IX: Governance-related Threats and Countermeasures in MetaverseThreats to Metaverse GovernanceDigital Governance in MetaverseSummary and Lessons LearnedSection VIII: Threats to Physical World and Human Society and Countermeasures in MetaverseThreats to Physical World and Human SocietyPhysical SafetySociety ManagementSummary and Lessons Learned4

TABLE II
SUMMARY OF IMPORTANT ABBREVIATIONS IN ALPHABETICAL ORDER

Abbr.
ABE
APT
CA
DP
GDPR
IoT
NFT
PUGC
PPG
SMC
QoE
VR

Deﬁnition
Attribute-Based Encryption
Advanced Persistent Threat
Certiﬁcate Authority
Differential Privacy
General Data Protection Regulation
Internet of Things
Non-Fungible Token
Professional- and User-Generated Content
Photoplethysmography
Secure Multi-party Computation
Quality-of-Experience
Virtual Reality

Deﬁnition
Abbr.
Augmented Reality
AR
Brain-Computer Interface
BCI
Cyber-Physical-Social System
CPSS
Electrocardiogram
ECG
HCI
Human-Computer Interaction
MMO Massive Multi-player Online
NPC
PGC
SDN
SPoF
QoS
XR

Non-Player Character
Professional-Generated Content
Software-Deﬁned Network
Single Point of Failure
Quality-of-Service
Extended Reality

Deﬁnition
Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Beyond 5G
Deep Learning
Federated Learning
Homomorphic Encryption
Mixed Reality
Online Social Network
Public Key Infrastructure
Self-Sovereign Identity

Abbr.
AI
B5G
DL
FL
HE
MR
OSN
PKI
SSI
SVM Support Vector Machine
User-Generated Content
UGC
Zero-Knowledge Proof
ZKP

Fig. 3. The architecture of ISO/IEC 23005 (MPEG-V) standards [23]. R → V
adaptation means the conversion of sensory data from the real world (RW) to
virtual world (VW) object characteristics. V → R adaptation means the conversion
of sensory effects from VW into actuator commands to RW. V → V adaptation
means the conversion of native representations of information in a VW to the
standard format.

Fig. 4. The architecture of IEEE 2888 standards [24]. IEEE 2888.1, IEEE 2888.2,
and IEEE 2888.3 specify the standards on sensor interface, actuator interface, and
orchestration of digital synchronization, respectively.

23005 standards.

2) ISO/IEC 23005 standards mainly focus on the sensory
effects and lack capability in offering general-purpose interfaces
between virtual and real worlds. As a supplement to ISO/IEC
23005 standards, IEEE 2888 project launched in 2019 aims to
deﬁne standardized interfaces for synchronization of cyber and
physical worlds [24]. By specifying information formats and
application program interfaces (APIs) to control actuators and
obtain sensory information, IEEE 2888 standards offer founda-
tions for building metaverse systems, where both virtual and real
worlds can affect each other. Fig. 4 illustrates the general architec-
ture of IEEE 2888 standards. In Fig. 4, the sensory information
and actuator-related information are exchanged between virtual
and real worlds via IEEE 2888.1 and IEEE 2888.2 standards,
respectively. Besides, the deﬁnition, synchronization, and mission
control data are deﬁned by the IEEE 2888.3 standard for digital
things (i.e., virtual objects).

Fig. 5. The architecture of metaverse in integration of the human, physical, and
digital worlds.

B. Metaverse Architecture

Metaverse is a self-sustaining, hyper spatiotemporal, and 3D
immersive virtual shared space, created by the convergence of
physically persistent virtual space and virtually enhanced physical
reality. In other words, the metaverse is a synthesized world which
is composed of user-controlled avatars, digital things, virtual envi-
ronments, and other computer-generated elements, where humans
(represented by avatars) can use their virtual identity through any
smart device to communicate, collaborate, and socialize with each
other. The construction of metaverse blends the ternary physical,
human, and digital worlds. Fig. 5 shows the general architecture
of the metaverse with consideration of its intrinsic ternicity. In
the following, we elaborate on the relationships between the three
worlds, the components in the metaverse, and the information
ﬂow of the metaverse in detail.

Real  worldSensorsActuatorsUsersR→V AdaptationV→R Adaptationsensory datasensor capacitysensing/ actuation preferenceactuatorcommandactuator capacitysensory datasensory effectsvirtual worldobjectcharacteristicsVirtual  worldVirtual world #1Virtual world #2...V→V AdaptationReal  worldSensorsActuatorsactuatorcommandactuator capacityVirtual  worldVirtual world #1Virtual world #2...actuator APIsensory datasensor capacitysensor APIDigital Things Definition, Synchronization & Mission ControlIEEE 2888.1IEEE 2888.2IEEE 2888.3Human worldPhysical worldDigital worldHuman societyDigital avatarsDigital lifeAIBlockchain Digital twinservicecontentInteractionfeedbackbig data...Metaversevirtual world #1...virtual world #2virtual world #3Interconnected virtual worldsSensor & ActuatorCommunicationComputationStoragecloud-edge-end computingCloud cachingLocal cachingEdge cachingInfrastructureVirtual environmentsVirtual goods/servicesConsensus Smart contractNFTDe-Fi3D modelingInteractivity3D simulationData fusionScene rendingTranslationScene creationRecommendation ARBCIVRMRMetaverse EngineXRservicecontent1) Human Society: The metaverse is regarded as human-
centric [25]. Human users along with their inner psychologies
and social interactions constitute the human world. Equipped
with smart wearable devices (e.g., VR/AR helmets), humans can
interact and control their digital avatars to play, work, socialize,
and interact with other avatars or virtual entities in the metaverse
via human-computer interaction (HCI) and extended reality (XR)
technologies [26] (as depicted in the ﬁlm Ready Player One).

2) Physical Infrastructures: The physical world offers sup-
porting infrastructures (including sensing/control, communica-
tion, computation, and storage infrastructures) to the metaverse to
support multi-sensory data perception, transmission, processing,
and caching, as well as physical control, thereby enabling efﬁcient
interactions with both the digital and human worlds. Speciﬁcally,
pervasive smart objects, sensors, and actuators constitute the
infrastructure to enable all-around and multi-
sensing/control
modal data perception from the environment and human bodies
and high-accuracy device control. Networking is provided via
the communication infrastructure consisting of various heteroge-
neous wireless or wired networks (e.g., cellular communications,
unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) communications, and satellite
communications). Besides, powerful computation and storage
capacities are provisioned via the computation and storage infras-
tructure assisted by cloud-edge-end computing [27]. For instance,
a virtual world runs at a minimum rate of 30 frames per second
[28], posing huge computational demands and latency constraints
(e.g., within 1/30th of a second at most) in rendering high-quality
graphics for each avatar.

3) Interconnected Virtual Worlds: According to ISO/IEC
23005 and IEEE 2888 standards [23], [24], the digital world
can be composed of a series of interconnected distributed virtual
worlds (i.e., sub-metaverses), and each sub-metaverse can offer
certain kinds of virtual goods/services (e.g., gaming, social dating,
online museum, and online concert) and virtual environments
(e.g., game scenes and virtual cities) to users represented as
digital avatars.

• Digital avatars. Avatars refer to the digital representation
of human users in the metaverse. A user can create various
avatars in different metaverse applications, and the produced
imaginary
avatars can be like a human shape, animals,
creatures, etc.

• Virtual environments. Virtual environments refer to the sim-
ulated real or imaginary environments (consisting of 3D
digital things and their attributes) in the metaverse. Besides,
the virtual environments in the metaverse can have distinct
spatiotemporal dimensions (e.g., in ancient times or future
worlds) for users to experience an alternate life.

• Virtual goods/services. Virtual goods refer to the tradeable
commodities (e.g., skins, digital arts, and land parcels)
produced by virtual service providers (VSPs) or the users
in the metaverse. Virtual services in the metaverse have a
broad of scopes including digital market, digital currency,
digital regulation, social service, etc.

There are two main sources of information in the metaverse: one
is the input of the real world (i.e., the captured information and
obtained knowledge from the real space digitally displayed in
the virtual space), and the other is the output of virtual worlds
(i.e., the information generated by avatars, digital objects, and

5

Fig. 6. General network architecture and key characteristics of the metaverse.

metaverse services in the virtual space). For the massive ﬁne-
grained metaverse data collected/generated in real time, efﬁcient
authentication and access control should be enforced, as well as
the data reliability, traceability, and privacy protection in the life-
cycle of metaverse services.

4) Metaverse Engine: The metaverse engine [19] uses the big
data from the real world as inputs to generate, maintain, and
update the virtual world via the interactivity, AI, digital twin,
and blockchain technologies. Particularly, with the assistance
of XR and HCI (especially brain-computer interaction (BCI))
techniques, users situated in physical environments are able
to immersively control
their digital avatars in the metaverse
via their senses and bodies for diverse collective and social
activities such as car racing, dating, and virtual item trading.
The virtual economy as a spontaneous derivative of such digital
creation activities of avatars can be built in the metaverse. AI
algorithms perform personalized avatar/content creation, large-
scale metaverse rending, and intelligent service offering to enrich
the metaverse ecology. Besides, the knowledge derived via AI-
based big data analytics can be beneﬁcial to perform simulating,
digitalizing, and mirroring the real world via digital twin technol-
ogy to produce vivid virtual environments for users to experience.
Finally, the created digital twins, as well as native contents created
by avatars, can be transparently managed, uniquely tokenized,
and monetized by the blockchain technology to enable trust-
free trading and service offering, towards building the economic
system and value system in the metaverse. More details of these
enabling technologies are elaborated at Sect. II-D.

In summary, information is the core resource of the metaverse
and the free data ﬂow in the ternary world makes the digital
ecology, which eventually promotes the integration of virtual and
actual worlds. Next, we discuss the information ﬂow in a single
world and across different worlds, respectively.

In the physical world,

5) In-World Information Flow: The human society or human
world is interconnected by social networks and formed based on
common activities and mutual interactions among human beings.
in-
frastructure plays an important role in digitalizing/transforming
the physical world via pervasive sensors and actuators, and the
generated IoT big data is transmitted and processed via network
and computation infrastructures.

the IoT-enabled sensing/control

In the digital world, the produced digital information of phys-
ical and human worlds are processed and managed via the meta-
verse engine to support large-scale metaverse creation/rendering
and various metaverse services. Besides, users, represented as

Sub MetaverseSub MetaverseReal world...MetaverseVirtual worldInfrastructure (sensing/control, network, computation, storage)AvatarUser Scalability ImmersivenessHyper SpatiotemporalitySustainability Interoperability ScalabilityHeterogeneityKey characteristics of metaverseavatars, can produce and distribute digital creations across various
sub-metaverses to promote the creativity of metaverse.

6) Information Flow Across Worlds: As depicted in Fig. 5,
the subjective consciousness, the Internet, and the IoT are the
main media among the three worlds. (i) Humans can interact
with physical objects via HCI technology and experience virtually
augmented reality (e.g., holographic telepresence) via XR tech-
nology. (ii) The human world and the digital world are connected
through the Internet, i.e., the largest computer network in the
world. Users can interact with the digital world via smart devices
such as smartphones, wearable sensors, and VR helmets, for the
creation, sharing, and acquisition of knowledge. (iii) The IoT
infrastructure bridges the physical world and the digital world
by using inter-connected smart devices for digitalization, and
thereby information can ﬂow freely between the two worlds [29].
Besides, the feedback information from the digital world (e.g.,
processed results of big data and intelligent decisions) can guide
the transformation (e.g., manufacturing process) of the physical
world. As the metaverse blends physical systems, human society,
and cyber worlds, threats in virtual worlds can be ampliﬁed and
severely affect physical infrastructures and personal safety, which
also raises huge governance demands and challenges.

C. Key Characteristics of Metaverse

In web 1.0, Internet users are just content consumers, where
contents are provided by the websites. In web 2.0 (i.e., mobile
Internet), users are both content producers and consumers, and
the websites turn into platforms for service offering. Typical such
platforms include Wikipedia, WeChat, and TikTok. Metaverse is
recognized as the evolving paradigm of web 3.0. In metaverse,
as shown in Fig. 6, users represented as digital avatars can seam-
lessly shuttle across various virtual worlds (i.e., sub-metaverses)
to experience a digital life, as well as make digital creations
and economic interactions, supported by physical infrastructures
and the metaverse engine. Speciﬁcally, metaverse exhibits unique
features from the following perspectives.

that

immersiveness means

1) Immersiveness: The

the
computer-generated virtual space is sufﬁciently realistic to allow
users to feel psychologically and emotionally immersed [30]. It
can be also called immersive realism [2]. According to the per-
spective of realism, human beings interact with the environment
through their senses and their bodies. The immersive realism can
be approached through the structure of sensory perception (e.g.,
sight, sound, touch, temperature, and balance) and expression
(e.g., gestures).

2) Hyper Spatiotemporality: The real world is restricted by the
ﬁniteness of space and the irreversibility of time. As metaverse
is a virtual space-time continuum parallel to the real one, the
hyper spatiotemporality refers to the break of limitations of time
and space [4]. As such, users can freely shuttle across various
worlds with different spatiotemporal dimensions to experience
an alternate life with seamless scene transformation.

3) Sustainability: The sustainability indicates that the meta-
verse maintains a closed economic loop and a consistent value
system with a high level of independence. On the one hand, it
should be open, i.e., continuously arousing users’ enthusiasm in
digital content creation as well as open innovations. On the other
hand, to remain persistent, it should be built on a decentralized

6

Fig. 7. The illustration of six underlying technologies including its roles and key
components in the metaverse.

architecture to get rid of SPoF risks and prevent from being
controlled by a few powerful entities.

4) Interoperability: The interoperability in the metaverse rep-
resents that (i) users can seamlessly move across virtual worlds
(i.e., sub-metaverses) without interruption of the immersive expe-
rience [6]; and (ii) digital assets for rendering or reconstruction of
virtual worlds are interchangeable across distinct platforms [2].
5) Scalability: The scalability refers to the capacity of
metaverse to remain efﬁcient with the number of concurrent
users/avatars, the level of scene complexity, and the mode of
user/avatar interactions (in terms of type, scope, and range) [2].
6) Heterogeneity: The heterogeneity of metaverse includes
heterogeneous virtual spaces (e.g., with distinct implementations),
heterogeneous physical devices (e.g., with distinct interfaces),
heterogeneous data types (e.g., unstructured and structured),
heterogeneous communication modes (e.g., cellular and satellite
communications), as well as the diversity of human psychology.
It also entails the poor interoperability of metaverse systems.

D. Enabling Technologies of Metaverse

As shown in Fig. 7,

there are the following six enabling

technologies underlying the metaverse.

1) Interactivity: With the maturity of miniaturized sensors,
embedded technology, and XR technology, XR devices such as
helmet-mounted displays (HMDs) are expected to be the main
terminal for entering the metaverse [31]. The XR deeply incorpo-
rates virtual reality/augmented reality/mixed reality (VR/AR/MR)
technologies to offer multi-sensory immersiveness, augmented
experience, and real-time user/avatar/environment interaction via
front-projected holographic display, HCI (especially BCI), and
large-scale 3D modeling [32]. Particularly, VR provides immer-
sive experiences in a virtual world, AR delivers true presence
experiences of virtual holograms, graphics, and videos in the
real world, and MR offers a transition experience between VR
and AR. The wearable XR devices perform ﬁne-grained human-
speciﬁc information perception, as well as ubiquitous sensing
for objects and surroundings, with the assistance of indoor
smart devices (e.g., cameras). In this manner, the user/avatar
interactivity will no longer be limited to mobile inputs (e.g.,
hand-held phones and laptops), but all kinds of interactive devices

MetaverseBlockchainAIDigital twinInteractivityNetworkingUbiquitous computingconnected to the metaverse. Besides, negative experiences such as
dizziness in wearing XR helmets can be resolved by low-latency
edge computing systems and AI-empowered real-time rendering.
2) Digital Twin: Digital twin represents the digital clone of
objects and systems in the real world with high ﬁdelity and
consciousness [33]. It enables the mirroring of physical entities,
as well as prediction and optimization of their virtual bodies, by
analyzing real-time streams of sensory data, physical models, and
historical information. In digital twin, data fed back from physical
entities can be used for self-learning and self-adaption in the mir-
rored space. Moreover, digital twins can provide precise digital
models of the expected objects with intended attributes in the
metaverse with high accuracy through the simulation of complex
physical processes and the assistance of AI technologies, which
is beneﬁcial for large-scale metaverse creation and rendering.
Besides, digital twin enables predictive maintenance and accident
traceability for physical safety, due to the bidirectional connection
between physical entities and their virtual counterparts, thereby
improving efﬁciency and reducing risks in the physical world.

3) Networking:

In the metaverse, networking technologies
such as 6G, software-deﬁned network (SDN), and IoT empower
the ubiquitous network access and real-time massive data trans-
mission between real and virtual worlds, as well as between
sub-metaverses. Beyond 5G (B5G) and 6G offer possibilities
for ubiquitous, real-time, and ultra-reliable communications for
massive metaverse devices with enhanced mobility support [34].
In 6G, space-air-ground integrated network (SAGIN) [35] is a
promising trend for seamless and ubiquitous network access
to metaverse services. SDN enables the ﬂexible and scalable
management of large-scale metaverse networks via the separation
of the control plane and data plane. In SDN-based metaverse,
the physical devices and resources are managed by a logically
centralized controller using a standardized interface such as
OpenFlow, thereby virtualized computation, storage, and band-
width resources can be dynamically allocated according to real-
time demands of various sub-metaverses [36]. Besides, IoT is
a network of numerous physical objects that are embedded
with sensors, softwares, communication components, and other
technologies with the aim to connect, exchange, and process data
between things, systems, clouds, and users over the Internet. In
the metaverse, IoT sensors are extensions of human senses.

4) Ubiquitous Computing: Ubiquitous computing, or ubicomp
aims to create an environment where computing appears anytime
and everywhere for users [37]. Through pervasive (often mobile)
smart objects embedded in the environment or carried on the
human body, ubiquitous computing enables smooth adaptation to
the interactions between human users and the physical space.
With ubicomp, instead of using speciﬁc equipment (e.g., lap-
top), human users can freely interact with their avatars and
experience real-time immersive metaverse services via ubiquitous
smart objects and network access in the environment. For im-
proved users’ quality-of-experience (QoE) in ubicomp, the cloud-
edge-end computing [27] orchestrates the highly scalable cloud
infrastructures (with powerful computation and storage capac-
ity) and heterogeneous edge computing infrastructures (closer
to end users/devices) via complex inner/inter-layer cooperation
paradigms. As such, it allows ﬂexible and on-demand resource
allocation to satisfy various requirements of end users/devices in
different metaverse applications.

7

Fig. 8. The role of blockchain technologies in bridging the conventional economy
and metaverse economy.

5) AI: AI technology acts as the “brain” of metaverse which
empowers personalized metaverse services (e.g., vivid and cus-
tomized avatar creation), massive metaverse scene creation and
rendering, multilingual support in the metaverse by learning from
massive multimodal input via big data inference [17]. Moreover,
AI enables smart interactions (e.g., smart shopping guide and user
movement prediction) between user and avatar/NPC (non-player
character) via intelligent decision-making. For example, by con-
tinuously learning users’ facial expressions, emotions, hairstyles,
and so on, AI algorithms can create vivid and personalized avatars
and intelligently recommend interested goods or information to
users in the metaverse. More details of AI in the metaverse can
refer to the survey [17].

6) Blockchain: To be persistent,

the metaverse should be
constructed on a decentralized architecture to avoid centralization
risks such as SPoF, low transparency, and control by a few entities
[16]. Besides, the virtual economy and value system provided
by the blockchain are essential components of the metaverse.
As shown in Fig. 8, blockchain technologies offer an open and
decentralized solution for building the sustainable virtual econ-
omy, as well as constructing the value system in the metaverse.
Blockchain is a distributed ledger, in which data is structured
into hash-chained blocks and featured with decentralization,
immutability, transparency, and auditability [35]. The blockchain
can be classiﬁed into three categories, i.e., public, consortium, and
private, based on the decentralization degree [35]. The consensus
protocols are the key component of blockchain, which determines
the ledger consistency and system scalability. Besides, smart
contracts can be deployed atop the blockchain to allow automatic
function execution among distrustful parties in a prescribed
fashion. NFT represents irreplaceable and indivisible tokens [38],
which can help asset identiﬁcation and ownership provenance
in the blockchain. De-Fi stands for decentralized ﬁnance, which
aims to deliver secure, transparent, and complex ﬁnancial services
(e.g., stock/currency exchange) in the metaverse.

E. Existing Modern Prototypes of Metaverse Applications

In this subsection, we introduce existing representative proto-

types in the following metaverse applications.

1) Game: Game is the current hottest metaverse application.
Considering the technological maturity, user matching, and con-
tent adaptability, games are an excellent way to explore the
metaverse. We list some representative examples of metaverse

Real worldVirtual world (Metaverse)Blockchain technologyReal-world EntityReal-world CurrencyReal-world EntityReal-world TransactionDigital IdentityVirtual CurrencyVirtual AssetMetaverse TransactionHash & Timestamp TechnologyDistributed LedgersSmart ContractStock ExchangeMetaverse FinanceVirtual Creator EconomyManufacturingDigital CreationReal-world EconomyDe-FiNon-Fungible Token (NFT)games. The sandbox game Second Life1 offers a modiﬁable 3D
virtual world where players can join in as avatars and create their
virtual architectures and sell them, as well as participate in social
activities such as art shows and even political gatherings and
visiting embassy. Roblox2 is a global user-created game platform,
in which players can create games and design items such as skins
and clothes. It proposes eight key features of the metaverse:
identity, friends, immersion, anywhere, diversity, low latency,
economy, and civilization [39]. Fortnite3 is a massive multi-player
online (MMO) shooter game designed by Epic Games, where
players can build buildings and bunkers as well as construct
islands, while the in-game items such as skins can only be
designed by the platform.

2) Social Experience: Metaverse can revolutionize our society
and enable a series of immersive social applications such as
virtual lives, virtual shopping, virtual dating, virtual chatting,
global travel, and even space/time travel. For example, Lil Nas
X held a virtual concert on Roblox in 2020, with over 30 million
fans participating. Players can unlock special Lil Nas X goods in
the digital store, e.g., commemorative items and emotions. Due
to the COVID-19 situation, UC Berkeley celebrated graduation
festivities virtually in Minecraft in 2020 by digitally copying the
campus scenery. Besides, Tencent developed a Digital Palace
Museum4 in 2018 which allows tourists to freely visit the palace
museum and its exhibitions with a panoramic and immersive view
by wearing VR helmets in their homes.

3) Online Collaboration: Metaverse also opens new possibili-
ties for immersive virtual collaboration in terms of telecommuting
in virtual workplaces, studying and learning in virtual classrooms,
and panel discussion and meeting in virtual conference rooms. For
example, Horizon Workroom5 is an ofﬁce collaboration software
(run in Oculus Quest 2 helmet) released by Meta (parent company
of Facebook), which allows people in any physical location to
work and meet together in the same virtual room. Microsoft
Mesh6 is an MR platform supported by Azure, which enables
users working from multiple sites to cooperate virtually via
holographic presence and shared experience from anywhere in
a digital copy of their ofﬁce.

4) Simulation & Design: Another promising application is 3D
simulation, modeling, and architectural design on metaverse. For
example, NVIDIA has built its open platform named Omniverse7
to support multi-user real-time 3D simulation and visualization
of physical objects and attributes in a shared virtual space for in-
dustrial applications, e.g., automotive design. Besides, Omniverse
can be compatible with Disney Pixart’s open-source platform
Universal Scene Description (USD).

5) Creator Economy: The metaverse mainly includes four
modes of content creation: professional-generated content (PGC),
professional- and user-generated content (PUGC), user-generated
content (UGC), and AI-generated content (AIGC), as illustrated
in Table III. In PGC mode, contents (e.g., games) are created

1https://secondlife.com/
2https://developer.roblox.com/en-us/
3https://www.epicgames.com/fortnite/en-US/home
4https://en.dpm.org.cn/about/news/2019-09-18/3089.html
5https://www.theverge.com/2021/8/19/22629942/facebook-workrooms-

horizon-oculus-vr

6https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/mesh
7https://www.nvidia.com/en-us/omniverse/

8

TABLE III
A SUMMARY OF CONTENT CREATION MODES IN THE METAVERSE

Mode

PGC

Description

Contents are produced
by professionals

PUGC

Contents are produced by
professionals and users

UGC

AIGC

Contents are produced
and traded among users

Contents are produced or
partially produced by AI

Feature
Centralization,
low diversiﬁcation,
high quality & cost
Semi-centralization,
medium diversiﬁcation,
medium cost
Decentralization,
high diversiﬁcation,
uneven quality & low cost
High efﬁciency,
low cost & fast

Instance

GTA,
Unity

Second Life,
Minecraft,
Fortnite
Roblox,
Decentraland,
Cryptovoxels

MetaHuman

by professional content producers on the platform, and ordinary
users are just participants and content viewers/experiencers. In
UGC mode, all users produce contents and trade them freely in
the marketplace provided by the platform, which is featured with
high freedom degree, low cost, high diversiﬁcation, and decentral-
ization [40]. Users are dominant in the content production process
under the UGC mode. For example, creators of game scenes,
skins, and items in Roblox can earn a certain percentage of Robux
(i.e., virtual tokens exchangeable with real-world currency) paid
by their experiencers, leading to a virtuous cycle. The PUGC
mode is the combination of PGC and UGC modes, in which
contents are jointly produced by professionals and ordinary users.
In the metaverse, as the number of content consumers can be far
greater than the number of content producers, the AIGC mode can
help VSPs to create massive qualiﬁed and personalized contents
with much-improved efﬁciency and much-reduced cost. In AIGC,
there exist two types of content creation: (i) AI fully replaces
users for content production; and (ii) AI assists users to produce
contents. An example is that in the MetaHuman project [41], Epic
Games leverages AI algorithms to quickly create life-like virtual
characters such as conversational virtual assistants.

There are existing decentralized virtual worlds with a built-
in creator economy supported by the Ethereum blockchain such
as Decentraland8 and Cryptovoxels9. In Decentraland, users can
trade the land parcel and equipments in the marketplace and build
their own buildings as well as social games by calling the builder
function, where the trading details are immutably recorded in
Ethereum for auditablility. In Cryptovoxels, players can trade the
lands and build virtual stores and art galleries in the virtual world
“Origin City”. Besides, users can display and trade their digital
assets such as artwork inside buildings.

Table IV summarizes existing modern prototypes in different
metaverse applications in terms of the six key characteristics of
the metaverse.

In the next sections (i.e., from Sect. III to Sect. IX), based on
existing surveys [42], [43], we classify a broad scope of security
threats in the metaverse from the following seven dimensions:
authentication & access control, data management, privacy, net-
work, economy, physical/social effects, and governance. More-
over, we review existing/potential defense mechanisms for the
above security and privacy threats in the metaverse. Fig. 9 depicts
the proposed taxonomy of security threats and the corresponding
security countermeasures in the metaverse.

8https://decentraland.org/
9https://www.cryptovoxels.com/

TABLE IV
SUMMARY OF EXISTING METAVERSE PROTOTYPES IN DIFFERENT APPLICATIONS

Prototype

Application

Immersive Hyper Spatiotemporal

Second Life
Roblox
Fortnite
Digital Palace Museum
Horizon Workroom
Omniverse
Decentraland
Cryptovoxels

MMO Game
MMO Game
MMO Game
Travelling
Working
Simulation
Game
Game

Partly
(cid:88)
(cid:88)
(cid:88)
(cid:88)
(cid:88)
(cid:88)
(cid:88)

(cid:88)
(cid:88)
(cid:88)
×
×
(cid:88)
(cid:88)
(cid:88)

Sustainable

Open
Partly
(cid:88)
Partly
×
×
(cid:88)
(cid:88)
(cid:88)

Decentralized
×
×
×
×
×
×
(cid:88)
(cid:88)

Interoperable

Scalable Heterogeneous

×
Partly
Partly
×
×
Partly
×
×

(cid:88)
(cid:88)
(cid:88)
Partly
Partly
(cid:88)
(cid:88)
(cid:88)

N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
(cid:88)
Partly
Partly

9

Fig. 9. The taxonomy of security threats and corresponding security countermeasures in the metaverse.

III. THREATS AND COUNTERMEASURES TO
AUTHENTICATION & ACCESS CONTROL IN METAVERSE
In metaverse, identity authentication and access control play a
vital role for massive users/avatars in metaverse service offering.

A. Threats to Authentication in Metaverse

The identities of users/avatars in the metaverse can be illegally
stolen, impersonated, and interoperability issues can be encoun-
tered in authentication across virtual worlds.

1) Identity Theft. If the identity of a user is stolen in the
metaverse, his/her avatars, digital assets, social relationships, and
even the digital life can be leaked and lost, which can be more
severe than that in traditional information systems. For example,
hackers can steal users’ personal information (e.g., full names,
secret keys of digital assets, and banking details) in Roblox
through hacked personal VR glasses, phishing email scams, and
authentication loopholes to commit fraud and crimes (e.g., steal
the victim’s avatar and digital assets) in Roblox. For example, in
2022, the accounts of 17 users in the Opensea NFT marketplace
are hacked due to smart contract ﬂaws and phishing attacks,
causing a lost of $1.7 million [44].

2) Impersonation Attack. An attacker can carry out the im-
personation attack by pretending to be another authorized entity
to gain access to a service or system in the metaverse [14].
For example, hackers can invade the Oculus helmet and exploit
the stolen behavioral and biological data gathered by the in-
built motion-tracking system to create digital replicas of the
user and impersonate the victim to facilitate social engineering
attacks. The hackers can also create a fake avatar using digital

replicas of the victim to deceive, fraud, and even commit a crime
against the victim’s friends in the metaverse. Another example
is that attackers can exploit Bluetooth impersonation threats [45]
to impersonate trusted endpoints and illegally access metaverse
services by inserting rogue wearable devices into the established
Bluetooth pairing.

3) Avatar Authentication Issue. Compared with real-world
identity authentication, the authentication of avatars (e.g., the
veriﬁcation of their friends’ avatars) for users in the metaverse
can be more challenging through verifying facial features, voice,
video footage, and so on. Besides, adversaries can create multiple
AI bots (i.e., digital humans), which appear, hear, and behave
identical to user’s real avatar, in the virtual world (e.g., Roblox)
by imitating user’s appearance, voice, and behaviors [12]. As
a consequence, more additional personal information might be
required as evidence to ensure secure avatar authentication, which
may also open new privacy breach issues.

4) Trusted and Interoperable Authentication. For users/avatars
in the metaverse, it is fundamental to ensure fast, efﬁcient, and
trusted cross-platform and cross-domain identity authentication,
i.e., across various service domains and virtual worlds (built on
distinct platforms such as blockchains) [2]. For example, the trust-
free and interoperable asset exchange and avatar transfer between
Roblox and Fortnite, as well as among distinct administrative
domains for offering different services in Roblox.

B. Threats to Access Control in Metaverse

1) Unauthorized Data Access. Complex metaverse services will
generate new types of personal proﬁling data (e.g., biometric

Authentication & Access control(Sects. III-A&B)Data Management(Sect. IV-A)Privacy-related(Sect. V-A)Network-related(Sect. VI-A)Governance-related(Sect. IX-A) Data Tampering Attack False Data Injection  SPoF Attacks DDoS Attacks Sybil AttacksMisbehaving RegulatorsThreats to Collaborative GovernanceEconomy-related(Sect. VII-A)Service Trust in UGC & Virtual Object TradingThreats to Digital Asset OwnershipPhysical/Social Effects(Sect. VIII-A) Threats to Personal Safety Threats to Infrastructure Safety Social EffectsIdentity TheftImpersonation Trusted & Interoperable AuthenticationUnauthorized Data Access Threats to Data Quality of UGC and Physical Input Threats to UGC Ownership & ProvenancePervasive Data Collection Privacy Leakage in Data Transmission Privacy Leakage in Data ProcessingPrivacy Leakage in Cloud/Edge StorageIdentity Linkability in Ternary Worlds Threats to AccountabilityThreats to Customized PrivacyThreats to Economic Fairness Strategic users/avatarsFree-riding users/avatarsCollusive users/avatarsThreats to Digital ForensicsAuthentication & Access control(Sect. III-C) Data Management(Sect. IV-B)Privacy Enhancement(Sect. V-B)Situational Awareness(Sect. VI-B)Creator Economy(Sect. VII-B)Physical Safety & Social Management(Sects. VIII-B, VIII-C)Digital Governance(Sect. IX-B) Threats to Digital FootprintsSecurity Threats to MetaverseAvatar AuthenticationManaging New Types of Metaverse DataThreats to Intellectual Property ProtectionRogue/Compromised End DevicesNew Laws & Regulations for Virtual CrimesMisuse of User/Avatar Datainformation, daily routine, and user habits). To deliver seamless
personalized services (e.g., customized avatar appearance) in the
metaverse, different VSPs in distinct sub-metaverses need to
access real-time user/avatar proﬁling activities [46]. Malicious
VSPs may carry out attacks for unauthorized data access to earn
beneﬁts. An example is that malicious VSPs may illegally elevate
their rights in data access via attacks such as buffer overﬂow
and tampering access control lists [47]. Besides, as such massive
personal information is produced and transmitted in real time, it
is complicated to decide exactly what personal information to be
shared, with whom, under what condition, for what purpose, and
when it is destroyed.

2) Misuse of User/Avatar Data. In the life-cycle of data ser-
vices in the metaverse, user/avatar-related data can be disclosed
intentionally by attackers or unintentionally by VSPs to facilitate
user proﬁling and targeted advertising activities. Besides, due
to the potential non-interoperability of certain sub-metaverses,
it is hard to trace the data misuse activities in the large-scale
metaverse.

C. Security Countermeasures to Metaverse Authentication &
Access Control

For the metaverse, secure and efﬁcient identity management
is the basis for user/avatar interaction and service provisioning.
Generally, digital identities can be classiﬁed into the following
three kinds.

• Centralized identity. Centralized identity refers to the digital
identity authenticated and managed by a single institution,
such as the Gmail account.

• Federated identity [48]. Federated identity refers to the
digital identity managed by multiple institutions or feder-
ations. It can reduce the administrative cost in identity au-
thentication for cross-platform and cross-domain operations,
and alleviate the cumbersome process of typing personal
information repeatedly for users.

• Self-sovereign identity (SSI) [49]. SSI refers to the digital
identity which is fully controlled by individual users. It
allows users to autonomously share and associate different
personal information (e.g., username, education information,
and career information) in performing cross-domain opera-
tions to enable identity interoperability with users’ consent.
In the metaverse, centralized identity systems can be prone to
SPoF risks and suffer potential leakage risks. Federated identity
systems are semi-centralized and the management of identities is
controlled by a few institutions or federations, which may also
suffer potential centralization risks. The identity systems built
on SSIs will be dominant in future metaverse construction [5].
According to [50], identity management schemes in the metaverse
should follow the following design principles: (i) scalability to
massive users/avatars, (ii) resilience to node damage, and (iii) in-
teroperability across various sub-metaverse during authentication.
Fig. 10 compares the hardware terminals for entering the web,
mobile Internet, the metaverse. As shown in Fig. 10, in the
metaverse, empowered by XR and HCI technologies, wearable
devices such as HMD and BCI enable user/avatar interactions
and are expected as the major terminal to enter the metaverse [6].
Besides, the metaverse usually includes various administrative
domains and the sub-metaverses can be implemented on distinct

10

Fig. 10. Comparison of hardware terminals for entering the web, mobile Internet,
and the metaverse.

blockchain platforms [16]. In the following, we ﬁrst review
existing works on the metaverse in terms of key management
and identity authentication for wearable devices. Then, we give
the literature review in cross-domain identity authentication in
the metaverse.

1) Key Management for Wearable Devices: Wearable devices
such as Oculus helmets and HoloLen headsets are anticipated
to be the major terminal
to enter the metaverse. Key man-
agement (including generation, negotiation, distribution, update,
revocation, and recovery) is essential for wearable devices to
establish secure communication, deliver sensory data, receive
immersive service, etc. Conventional key management mech-
anisms are mainly built upon cryptographic systems such as
Difﬁe-Hellman cryptosystem and public key infrastructure (PKI).
These mechanisms usually require strict constraints on available
resources (e.g., computation power, memory size, bandwidth,
and transmit power) for sensor node operations, which are not
applicable for battery-powered wearable devices with compact
battery size and limited computational capacity. In the literature,
works [51]–[54] take the intrinsic features of distinct wearable
devices (e.g., wireless channel and gait signal) into account
in designing efﬁcient key management schemes, which can be
beneﬁcial for future metaverse construction.

Aimed to bridge the contactless secret key establishment
among tiny wearable devices under wireless communication en-
vironments, Li et al. [51] design an innovative key establishment
approach by utilizing unique wireless channel characteristics
based on the positioning of wearable devices. The authors
leverage the received signal strength (RSS) trajectories of two
moving wearables to construct
the secret key by moving or
shaking the wearable devices. Rigorous security analysis proves
the defense of eavesdropping and experimental results validate
its practicability for wearables with short-range communications
and frequent movements. Apart from the RSS,
the channel
impulse response (CIR) is another typical unique physical-layer
characteristic between communication parties.

To secure communications between wearable devices inte-
grated with accelerometers, Sun et al. [52] exploit the gait-based
biometric cryptography to design a group key generation and
distribution scheme for wearable devices based on signed sliding
window coding and fuzzy vault. The proposed acceleration-based
key generation mechanism takes advantage of the randomness of
noise signals imposed on the raw acceleration signals to produce
a group key. Besides, it utilizes the common characteristic of gait
signals sampled from distinct parts of the human body for key

Mobile InternetPCWebSmartphone/Tablet PCMetaverseXR glassesBCISmart headsetSmart watchesHaptic glovesHMDWearable device...distribution to other sensors on the same body. Simulations prove
that it can pass both the NIST and Dieharder statistical tests.

To further reduce system overheads and reduce response delay
for resource-limited wearable devices, Chen et al. [53] introduce
a lightweight and real-time key establishment model with gait
regularity hiding functions for wearables by analyzing gestures
and motions through the integrated accelerometer. In their work,
the shared key is established in real time based on user’s motion
(e.g., shaking and walking), and a lightweight bit-extraction
method is devised based on the value difference of neighboring
the generation rate of
samples. Simulation results show that
shake-to-generate key is 2.027 bit/sec and the matching rate can
reach 91%.

To protect patients from fatal cyber attacks, Zheng et al.
[54] propose an electrocardiogram (ECG) signal based key
distribution mechanism for wearable and implantable medical
devices (WIMDs). In their work, two widely used cryptographic
primitives, i.e., fuzzy commitment and fuzzy vault, are compared.
Experimental results show that the solution built on fuzzy vault
achieves a lower acceptable false reject rate (i.e., 5%) and
less energy cost of WIMDs, while the solution built on fuzzy
commitment attains a higher false acceptance rate.

2) Identity Authentication for Wearable Devices: Identity au-
thentication for wearable devices to guarantee device/user au-
thenticity is also a promising topic in the metaverse. To adapt to
wearable devices with extremely low computing/storage capacity,
Srinivas et al. [55] present a cloud-based mutual authentication
model with low system cost for wearable medical devices to
prevent device impersonation in healthcare monitoring systems
with password change and smart card revocation functions.
Rigorous security analysis and formal security veriﬁcation prove
the security of created session key in defense against active
and passive attacks. However,
the one-time authentication in
[55] may cause friction such as unauthorized privileges. To
resolve this issue, Zhao et al. [56] propose a novel continuous
authentication model to support seamless device authentication at
a low cost. In [56], unique cardiac biometrics are extracted from
photoplethysmography (PPG) sensors (embedded in wrist-worn
wearables) for user authentication. Experimental results show
that their proposed system obtains a high average continuous
authentication accuracy rate of 90.73%. Jan et al. [57] design
a privacy-aware mutual authentication mechanism for wearable
devices, where a hidden Markov model (HMM) is devised to
predict privacy risks of patient data leakage. Besides, the security
of [57] is analyzed using Burrows–Abadi–Needham (BAN) logic.
In the metaverse, Bluetooth may play an important role in
short-range communications for wearables. Aksu et al. [58] study
the wearable device identiﬁcation issue using the Bluetooth proto-
col. In their work, a smart wearable ﬁngerprinting method tailored
to Bluetooth is devised using a series of AI algorithms, and real
tests on wearables validate its functionality and feasibility. By
using two representatives (i.e., Google Nest Learning Thermostat
and Nike+ Fuelband Fitness Tracker) as test devices, Arias et
al. [59] present a real attack using a hardware with particular
attack vectors to bypass software authentications and compromise
the two devices. Lessons show that it is necessary to secure
all update channels and disable the microcontroller’s external
reprogrammability and any debug interface for wearable devices.

11

3) Cross-Domain Identity Authentication: The metaverse typi-
cally contains various administrative security domains created by
distinct operators/standards. Identity authentication across distinct
administrative domains (e.g., VR/AR services run by distinct
VSPs) in the metaverse is critical to deliver seamless metaverse
services for users/avatars. Traditional cross-domain authentication
mechanisms mainly rely on a trusted intermediary and bring
heavy overhead in key management. To address this issue, Shen et
al. [60] employ blockchain technology to design a decentralized
and transparent cross-domain authentication scheme for industrial
IoT devices in different domains (e.g., factories). In their work,
a consortium blockchain is employed to establish trust among
distinct domains, and identity-based encryption (IBE) is used
for device authentication. Besides, an anonymous authentication
protocol with identity revocation capability is proposed to remedy
the drawback of IBE in terms of identity revocation. In addition,
real domain-speciﬁc information are moved to off-chain storage
to reduce storage burdens in the blockchain system.

In the PKI system, it only identiﬁes certiﬁcates in its domain.
In accessing services in other domains such as Kerberos, users’
identities usually could not be recognized or it involves extremely
complex operations for cross-domain authentication. By leverag-
ing the distributed consensus of the blockchain, Chen et al. [61]
propose an efﬁcient cross-domain authentication scheme named
XAuth. In their work, to improve the response speed arising
from the low throughput of blockchains as well as protect user
privacy, the authors design an optimized blockchain approach and
privacy preservation functions in cross-domain authentication.
An anonymous authentication protocol based on zero-knowledge
proof is also devised to ensure privacy protection. An imple-
mented proof-of-concept (PoC) prototype proves its functionality
and feasibility.

4) Fine-grained Access Control and Usage Audit for Wear-
ables and UGCs: The massive personally identiﬁable information
(PII) handled by wearables can pose a huge risk of unauthorized
exposure. To address this issue, Ometov et al. [65] propose a
novel delegation-of-use mode for wearable devices with privacy
guarantees, where owners can lend their personal devices to
others for temporary use. However, the associated attacks along
with scalability and efﬁciency issues still need more investigations
in real-world implementation.

The native content creation (e.g., UGCs) produced by avatars
is essential to maintain the creativity and sustainability of the
metaverse. As UGCs inevitably contain sensitive and private
user information, efﬁcient UGC access control and usage audit
schemes should be designed. The following works [62], [63],
[66] discuss the UGC access control. Different from conventional
access control schemes which enforce a single access policy
for a speciﬁc content, Ma et al. [66] design a scalable access
control scheme to allow multiple levels of access privileges for
sharing user-generated media contents (UGMCs) in the cloud.
The detailed construction based on scalable CP-ABE mecha-
nism is also presented with formal security proof. However,
the above scheme cannot support time-domain UGMC access
control. To address this issue, Yang et al. [62] propose a time-
domain attribute-based access control mechanism with provable
security for sharing user-generated video contents (UGVCs) in
the cloud. In their mechanism, the allowed time slots for access
are embedded into both ciphertexts and keys in CP-ABE, thereby

TABLE V
SUMMARY OF EXISTING/POTENTIAL SECURITY COUNTERMEASURES TO IDENTITY AUTHENTICATION AND ACCESS CONTROL IN METAVERSE

12

Ref.

[51]

[52]

Security
Threat

Eavesdropping, RSS
trajectory prediction

Robust key sequence
generation

[53]

Gait predictability

[54]

Hijack of WIMDs

[55]

Dolev-Yao threat

[56]

[60]

Random attack,
synthesis attack

Eavesdropping,
impersonation,
man-in-the-middle

[61]

Impersonation

[62]

[63]

[64]

Unauthorized UGVC
access

Illegal UGC
redistribution

Unintended UGC
usage

(cid:63) Purpose
• Advantages
◦ Limitations

(cid:63)RSS trajectoriy based secret key establishment for wearables
•Defense of eavesdropping and high efﬁciency in indoor/outdoor scene
◦Only work for wearables with short-range communications
(cid:63)Gait-based biometric group key management for wearable devices
•Pass both Dieharder and NIST tests with high efﬁciency
◦Lack real-world thorough test
(cid:63)Real-time and lightweight key establishment for wearable devices
•High matching rate of shake-to-generate secret keys
◦Lack complete and thorough evaluation (e.g., NIST tests)
(cid:63)Efﬁcient ECG-based key distribution for WIMDs
•High false acceptance rate
◦Relatively low precision in ECG signal processing
(cid:63)Low-cost mutual authentication for wearable medical devices
•Efﬁcient authentication with low communication cost
◦Without consideration of the immersiveness of users
(cid:63)Low-cost PPG-based continuous authentication for wearables
•Low communication overhead and computation cost
◦Unscalable to large-scale networks
(cid:63)Decentralized cross-domain authentication in industrial IoT
•Anonymous identity authentication and low overhead
◦Low response speed due to the low throughput of blockchains
(cid:63)Efﬁcient cross-domain authentication in optimized blockchain
•Fast response, anonymous authentication, and low overhead
◦Lack large-scale real-world test
(cid:63)Time-domain access control with provable security for UGVC sharing
•Support time-domain UGVC access control
◦Lack consideration of illegal UGC redistribution
(cid:63)Secure encrypted UGMC sharing scheme with fair traitor tracing
•High traitor tracing accuracy and perceptual quality
◦Ignore UGMC usage control
(cid:63)Fine-grained and transparent UGC usage/processing audit
•Low computational overheads in UGC usage/processing audit
◦Lack large-scale and real-world performance test

Utilized
Technology

RSS trajectory

Fuzzy vault

HCI

Fuzzy commitment,
fuzzy vault

Real-or-Random
model

Motion artifacts,
gradient boosting tree

Blockchain

Blockchain,
multiple Merkle tree

CP-ABE

Proxy re-encryption,
fair watermarking

Smart contract,
trusted computing

the
only authorized users in speciﬁc time slots can decrypt
UGVCs. Moreover, queries on UGVCs created in previous time
slots along with efﬁcient attribute updating and revoking are
supported. Nevertheless, the above works overlook that autho-
rized entities may become traitors to illegally redistribute UGCs
to the public, i.e., illegal UGC redistribution. To address this
realistic threat, Zhang et al. [63] propose a novel secure encrypted
UGMC sharing scheme with traitor tracing in the cloud via the
proxy re-encryption mechanism (for secure UGMC sharing) and
watermarking mechanism (for traitor tracing).

The above works mainly focus on the access control of UGCs,
while the usage control (i.e., shared UGCs can be only used
for intended purposes) is ignored. To bridge this gap, Wang et
al. [64] propose a novel data processing-as-a-service (DPaaS)
mode to complement the current data sharing ecosystem and
exploit blockchain technologies for ﬁne-grained data usage policy
making on the user’s side, policy execution atop smart contracts,
and policy audit on transparent ledgers. Yu et al. [47] combine
both sensitiveness of UGMC (to be shared) and trustworthiness
of user (being granted) to train a tree classiﬁer for ﬁne-grained
privacy setting conﬁgurations. In their scheme, a deep network
is utilized to extract discriminative features and identify privacy-
sensitive object classes/events, and users are clustered into social
groups for trustworthiness characterization.

D. Summary and Lessons Learned

The metaverse requires users to autonomously control their
identity and behavioral data, where users can independently

manage the UGCs, assets and behavior data generated in different
sub-metaverses, avoiding the risk of private data being abused.
Moreover, under the premise of autonomous authorization, users
can provide data to other subjects to share the beneﬁts generated
by these data. For identity authentication and access control
in the metaverse, we have learned that apart from traditional
cryptography system design, the fusion of sensory signals (e.g.,
ECG and PPG) of wearable devices and biometrics (e.g., face and
gait) of users can be beneﬁcial for efﬁcient key generation and
identity authentication in the metaverse. Besides, blockchain can
build trust-free digital identities for metaverse users. Moreover,
continuous-time dynamic authentication, as well as cross-chain
and cross-domain authentication need further investigation under
the metaverse environment. A comparison of existing/potential
security countermeasures to identity authentication and access
control in the metaverse is presented in Table V.

IV. THREATS AND COUNTERMEASURES TO DATA
MANAGEMENT IN METAVERSE

A. Threats to Data Management in Metaverse

The data collected or generated by wearable devices and
users/avatars may suffer from threats in terms of data tampering,
false data injection,
low-quality UGC, ownership/provenance
tracing, and intellectual property violation in the metaverse.

1) Data Tampering Attack. Integrity features ensure effective
checking and detection of any modiﬁcation during data commu-
nication among the ternary worlds and various sub-metaverses.

Adversaries may modify, forge, replace, and remove the raw data
throughout the life-cycle of metaverse data services to interfere
with the normal activities of users, avatars, or physical entities
[67]. Besides, adversaries may remain undetected by falsifying
corresponding log ﬁles or message-digest results to hide their
criminal traces in the virtual space.

2) False Data Injection Attack. Attackers can inject falsiﬁed
information such as false messages and wrong instructions to
mislead metaverse systems [68]. For example, AI-aided content
creation can help improve user immersiveness in the early stage
of the metaverse, and adversaries can inject adversary training
samples or poisoned gradients during centralized or distributed AI
training, respectively, to generate biased AI models. The returned
wrong feedbacks or instructions may also threaten the safety
of physical equipment and even personal safety. For example,
falsiﬁed feedbacks such as excessive voltage can cause damage
and malfunction of wearable XR devices. Another example is
that the tampered hundredfold magniﬁcations of bodily pain in
being shot in Fortnite (a metaverse game) may cause the death
of human user.

3) Issues in Managing New Types of Metaverse Data. Com-
pared with the current Internet,
the metaverse requires new
hardware and devices to gather various new types of data (e.g.,
eye movement, facial expression, and head movement), which is
previously uncollected, to make fully immersive user experiences
[28]. Besides, end-devices in the metaverse (e.g., VR glasses
and haptic gloves) can be capable of capturing iris biometrics,
ﬁngerprints, or other user-sensitive biometric information. Con-
sequently, it raises new challenges in collecting, managing, and
storing these enormous user-sensitive metaverse data, as well as
the cyber/physical security of metaverse devices.

For each virtual world (e.g., Horizon and Fortnite), the cor-
porations (e.g., Meta and Epic Games) that create and manage
it can monetize these private data to streamline and tailor their
services or products towards users’ expectations, thereby facili-
tating precision marketing for beneﬁts. Other relevant issues to
be addressed include who will be the subject of responsibility for
collecting, handling, storing, securing, and destroying these data.
4) Threats to Data Quality of UGC and Physical Input.
In metaverse, selﬁsh users/avatars may contribute low-quality
thereby
contents under the UGC mode to save their costs,
undermining user experience such as unreal experience in the
synthesized environment. For example, they may share unaligned
and severe non-IID data during the collaborative training process
of the content recommendation model in the metaverse, causing
inaccurate content recommendation. Another example is that
uncalibrated wearable sensors can generate inaccurate and even
erroneous sensory data to mislead the creation of digital twins in
the metaverse, causing poor user experience.

5) Threats to UGC Ownership and Provenance. Different from
the asset registration procedure supervised by the government in
the real world, the metaverse is an open and fully autonomous
space and there exists no centralized authority. Due to the lack
of authority, it is hard to trace the ownership and provenance of
various UGCs produced by massive avatars under different virtual
worlds in the metaverse, as well as turn UGCs into protected
assets [69]. Besides, UGCs can be shared in real time within the
virtual world or across various virtual worlds and unlimitedly
replicated due to the digital attributes, making it harder for

13

Fig. 11. Illustration of blockchain-enabled digital twin (DT)-as-a-service (DTaaS)
in intelligent transportation systems (ITS) [72].

efﬁcient provenance and ownership tracing.

6) Threats to Intellectual Property Protection. Different from
the actual world, the deﬁnition of intellectual property in the
metaverse should be adapted to enforce licensing boundaries and
usage rights for the owners with the evolvement and expand-
ing scale of the metaverse [70]. Moreover, severe challenges
may arise in deﬁning and protecting intellectual property (e.g.,
avatars, UGCs, and AIGCs) in the new metaverse ecology, as
the geographic boundaries of countries are broken down in the
metaverse. For example, there have already been disputes owing
to the use of celebrity lookalikes in video games [71]. Given the
commercial value created by avatars, such kinds of disputes may
spike exponentially in the future metaverse.

B. Security Countermeasures to Metaverse Data Management

The metaverse is a digital world built on digital copies of the
physical environment and avatars’ digital creations. Analogy to
the value created by human activities in the real world, digital
twins and UGCs as well as avatars’ behaviors (e.g., chat records
and browsing records) will produce certain value in the metaverse
[8]. Information security is an important prerequisite for the
development and prosperity of the metaverse. In the following, we
discuss the data security in metaverse in terms of data reliability,
data quality, and provenance.

1) Data Reliability of AIGC, Digital Twin, and Physical Input:
In the metaverse, AI such as generative adversarial network
(GAN) can help generate high-quality dynamic game scenarios
and context images, but also poses security threats such as adver-
sarial and poisoned samples which is hard to detect for humans.
In the literature, by taking adversarial samples as part of training
data, various efforts have been done to resist adversarial samples
via virtual adversarial learning [73], adversarial representation
learning [74], adversarial reinforcement learning [75], adversarial
transfer learning [76], and so on, which can be beneﬁcial to resist
adversarial threats in the construction of the metaverse.

The works [72], [77] discuss the data reliability of digital twins
in the metaverse. Gehrmann et al. [77] propose a reliable state
replication method for digital twin synchronization in industrial

UAVUserData transmissionSatellite networkAir networkGround networkBlockchainAttacker Satellite Wireless linkDT of satellite DT of UAV DT of user DT of vehicle Coverage areaPhysical ITS systemDigital twin ITS modelDigital Twin (DT) TechnologyDT controlMassive ITS dataDT transactions•  DT Service Time•  DT Service Attributes•  DT Service Type•  DT Service Price•  DT Control•  Blockchain- secured ITS ServiceDT transactionsDT: Digital Twinapplications and identify seven key requirements in security archi-
tecture design. Besides, the authors formally deﬁne the synchro-
nization consistency as a metric of the robustness of digital twin
synchronization. A PoC implementation using programmable
logic controllers (PLCs) validates its effectiveness. However, the
trustworthiness of data collected from disparate data silos is not
studied in [77]. To address this issue in the metaverse, as shown
in Fig. 11, Liao et al. [72] leverage permissioned blockchain
technology for trusted digital
twin (DT) service transactions
between VSPs and service requesters in intelligent transportation
systems (ITS). A DT-DPoS (delegated proof of stake) consensus
protocol is devised to improve consensus efﬁciency by using
distributed DT servers to form the validator committee. Besides,
to facilitate users’ customized DT services, an on-demand DT-
as-a-service (DTaaS) architecture is presented for fast response
to meet diverse DT requirements in ITS.

The works [78], [79] investigate parametric audio rendering to
match and improve the visual experience in 3D virtual worlds.
Zimmermann et al. [78] present an interactive audio streaming
mechanism with high scalability based on peer-to-peer (P2P)
topology for immersive interaction in NVEs. Their mechanism
combines two concepts: area of interest (AoI) and aural sound-
scape to make proximal and spatialized audio interactions. Specif-
ically, AoI limits the distribution area of audio streams as avatars
are more likely to interact with others in proximity (the distance
is measured by virtual coordinates), and aural soundscape allows
distributively audio rendering from different sources to match the
visual landscape. Jot et al. [79] design an interactive audio engine
based on 6-degree-of-freedom (6DoF) object for parametric audio
scene programming (i.e., controllable acoustic orientation, size,
orientation, and other properties) in audiovisual metaverse experi-
ences. Fig. 12 illustrates the difference of 6DoF with conventional
3DoF in using VR devices. Simulation results in [78], [79] show
the feasibility of their design.

2) Data Quality of UGC and Physical Input: Low-quality data
input from physical sensors and the UGCs produced by avatars
can deteriorate the quality-of-service (QoS) of metaverse services
and the QoE of users. Effective quality control mechanisms
are important to offer efﬁcient metaverse services and maintain
sustainability of the creator economy. Dickinson et al. [80] give a
user study on 68 participants in a VR environment and show that
user perception of character believability is inﬂuenced positively
by behavioral features while negatively by visual elements.

In the literature, game theory and AI methods have been
widely utilized to motivate users’ high-quality data contribution
or service offering, which can offer some lessons in the metaverse
design. For example, Xu et al. [81] propose a dynamic Stackel-
berg game to model the interactions between the content provider
and edge caching devices (ECDs), where content provider is
the game-leader which makes its payment strategy of caching
service while each ECD serves as the game-follower to decide
its strategy on quality of caching service. A two-tier Q-learning
based mechanism is devised in [81] to dynamically derive the
optimal strategies for each side. In [82], Su et al. propose a
deep RL (DRL)-based incentive mechanism to encourage users’
high-quality model contribution in distributed AI paradigms with
consideration of both non-IID effects and collaboration between
edge/cloud servers.

The works [34], [83] study the data availability in metaverse in

14

Fig. 12.
Illustration of (a) 3DoF and (b) 6DoF. 3DoF means an object can
rotationally move around the 3D space (i.e., x, y, and z axes), while 6DoF has ad-
ditional translational movement along those axes (i.e., moving forward/backward,
up/down, and left/right).

terms of data synchronization and QoS, respectively. For accurate
DT synchronization with its physical counterpart, Han et al. [83]
propose a hierarchical game for dynamic DT synchronization
in the metaverse, where end devices collectively gather the
status information of physical objects and VSPs decide proper
synchronization intensities. In their work, every user selects the
optimal VSP in the lower-level evolutionary game, and every
VSP makes the optimal synchronization strategy in the upper-
level differential game based on users’ strategies and value of
DT. Simulation results demonstrate that the proposed mechanism
attains a higher accumulated revenue for VSP. By leveraging
covert communication methods, Du et al. [34] propose an op-
timal targeted advertising strategy for the VSP to maximize its
payoff in offering high-quality access services for end-users while
attaining close-to-one detection error for attackers. In their work,
the Vidale-Wolfe advertising model is exploited, and a novel
metric meta-immersion is introduced to measure users’ feelings
in metaverse experience. Simulation results show that the VSP
can boost its payoff in comparison with that without advertising.
For dynamic metaverse applications, the information freshness
(e.g., age of information) can be further considered in data/service
offering.

3) Secure Data Sharing in XR Environment: Metaverse ap-
plications are usually multi-user such as multi-player gaming
and remote collaboration. Aimed for secure content sharing
under multi-user AR applications, Ruth et al. [84] study an AR
content sharing control mechanism and implement a prototype
on HoloLens to allow AR content sharing among remote or co-
located users with inbound and outbound control. By rigorously
exploring user’s design space on various AR apps, the authors
also deﬁne various mapping manners of AR contents into the
real world. In WebVR (a VR-based 3D virtual world on HTML
canvases), Lee et al. [85] identify three new ad fraud threats
(i.e., blind spot tracking, gaze and controller cursor-jacking, and
abuse of an auxiliary display) in content sharing. User studies
on 82 participants show the success rates range from 88.23% to
100%. Besides, a defense mechanism named AdCube is presented
in [85] via visual conﬁnement of 3D ad entities and sandboxing
technique. Experimental results show the defense effectiveness of
AdCube with a small system cost for 9 WebVR demo sites.

4) Provenance of UGC: Data provenance can realize the
traceability of historical archives of a piece of UGC, which is
essential to evaluate data quality, trace data source, reproduce
data generation process, and conduct audit trail to quickly identify
data responsible subjects. In the metaverse, UGC provenance
information such as the source, circulation, and intermediate

.(a) 3DoF(b) 6DoF15

TABLE VI
SUMMARY OF EXISTING/POTENTIAL SECURITY COUNTERMEASURES TO DATA MANAGEMENT IN METAVERSE

Ref.

[77]

[72]

[83]

[84]

[85]

Security
Threat

Threats to
digital twin

Trustworthiness
of digital twin

Synchronization
of digital twin

Insecure AR
content sharing

Cursor-jacking attack,
blind spot attack

[86]

Low data quality

(cid:63) Purpose
• Advantages
◦ Limitations

(cid:63)Reliable state replication method for digital twin synchronization
•Low computational cost and synchronization latency
◦Lack trustworthiness guarantee of data gathered from disparate data silos
(cid:63)Trustworthy data dissemination for digital twins on customized DTaaS
•High reliability of data sources in digital twin creation
◦Lack accurate representation of digital footprints
(cid:63)Dynamic and optimized DT synchronization strategies of VSPs
•Higher accumulated revenue for VSP
◦Interoperability issues among VSPs
(cid:63)Content sharing control module in multi-user AR apps
•Feasibility via prototype validation on Microsoft HoloLens
◦Lack location privacy protection in AR applications
(cid:63)Allow behavior speciﬁcation and enforcement of TTP’s ad code
•High defense success rate with low page loading time and frame-per-second drop
◦Lack visibility reporting
(cid:63)Quality-aware vehicular service access with mobility support
•High average service quality and network success rate
◦Lack impact analysis on trust management and security issues

Utilized
Technology

Cloud computing,
digital twin

Blockchain

Hierarchical game

Multi-user AR

WebVR,
Sandbox

Generation tree,
bi-direction buffering

processing information is often stored in disparate data silos (e.g.,
distinct blockchains), making it difﬁcult to monitor and track in
real time. Existing works on IoT data provenance can offer some
lessons for UGC provenance design in the metaverse.

Satchidanandan et al. [87] design a dynamic watermarking
techniques which exploits indelible patterns imprinted in the
medium to detect misbehaviors (e.g., signal tampering) of ma-
licious sensors or actuators. Besides, advanced watermarking
technique can be utilized for intellectual property protection and
ownership authentication in the metaverse. Liang et al. [69]
present a blockchain-based cloud ﬁle provenance architecture
named ProvChain with three stages, i.e., collection, storage, and
veriﬁcation of provenance information. ProvChain ensures source
tamper resistance, user privacy, and reliability of cloud storage.
For multi-hop IoT, Mohsin et al. [88] design a lightweight
protocol to enable data provenance in wireless communications,
where the RSS indicator of the communicating IoT node is
exploited to produce the unique link ﬁngerprint.

In the metaverse, the life-cycle of UGCs involves the ternary
worlds and multiple sub-metaverses, which can be more complex
than that in traditional IoT. Moreover, smart contracts are antic-
ipated to play an important role in enforcing UGC provenance
across various metaverse platforms, and more research efforts on
its functionality, efﬁciency, and security are required. Besides,
the scalability, trust, and efﬁciency (e.g., response delay) are still
challenging issues in the provenance of massive UGCs in the
large-scale metaverse.

C. Summary and Lessons Learned

For data management in the metaverse, we have learned that
the integration of various cutting-edge technologies in the meta-
verse results in more attack surfaces on UGC, physical inputs,
and metaverse outputs. Besides, blockchain offers a potential
solution to ensure data reliability in digital twin creation and
mitigation. With the ﬂourishing and expanding scale of future
metaverse systems, brand new threats emerged speciﬁcally under
a metaverse setting can breed, where new defenses for them need
to be designed. Essentially, as various emerging technologies are
incorporated by the metaverse as its foundation, their intrinsic

ﬂaws and vulnerabilities may also be inherited by the metaverse.
In addition, the effects of existing threats can be ampliﬁed and
become more severe in the metaverse, driven by the interweaving
of various technologies. A comparison of existing/potential secu-
rity countermeasures to metaverse data management is presented
in Table VI.

V. PRIVACY THREATS AND COUNTERMEASURES IN
METAVERSE

A. Privacy Threats in Metaverse

When enjoying digital lives in the metaverse, user privacy
including location privacy, habit, living styles, and so on may
be offended during the life-cycle of data services including data
perception, transmission, processing, governance, and storage.

1) Pervasive Data Collection. To immersively interact with an
avatar, it requires pervasive user proﬁling activities at an unrea-
sonably granular level [12] including facial expressions, eye/hand
movements, speech and biometric features, and even brain wave
patterns. Besides, via advanced XR and HCI technologies, it can
facilitate the analysis of physical movements and user attributes
and even enable user tracking [13]. For example, the motion
sensors and four built-in cameras in the Oculus helmet help
track the head direction and movement, draw our rooms, as
well as monitor our positions and environment in real time with
submillimeter accuracy, when we browse the Roblox and interact
with other avatars. If this device is hacked by attackers, severe
crimes can be committed on the basis of these large-volume of
sensitive data.

Another example is the attractive virtual ofﬁce (e.g., Horizon
Workroom and Microsoft Mesh), which may arise signiﬁcant
security and privacy risks to employees. On one hand, employee
conversations, the emails they send, the URLs they visit, their
behaviors, and even the tones of their voices may be monitored by
the managers. On the other hand, the immersive workplace may
be prone to other security and privacy issues such as intrusions,
snooping, and impostors.

2) Privacy Leakage in Data Transmission. In metaverse sys-
tems, abundant personally identiﬁable information collected from

wearables (e.g., HMDs) are transferred via wired and wireless
communications,
the conﬁdentiality of which should be pro-
hibited from unauthorized individuals/services [65]. Although
communications are encrypted and information is conﬁdentially
transmitted, adversaries may still access the raw data by eaves-
dropping on the speciﬁc channel and even track users’ locations
via differential attacks [89] and advanced inference attacks [90].
3) Privacy Leakage in Data Processing. In metaverse services,
the aggregation and processing of massive data collected from
human bodies and their surrounding environments are essential
for the creation and rendering of avatars and virtual environments,
in which users’ sensitive information may be leaked [91]. For
example, the aggregation of private data (belonging to different
users) to a central storage for training personalized avatar appear-
ance models may offend user privacy and violate existing real-
world regulations such as General Data Protection Regulation
(GDPR) [92]. Besides, adversaries may infer users’ privacy (e.g.,
preferences) by analyzing and linking the published processing
results (e.g., synthetic avatars) in various virtual spaces such as
Roblox and Fortnite.

4) Privacy Leakage in Cloud/Edge Storage. The storage of
the private and sensitive information (e.g., user proﬁling) of
massive users in cloud servers or edge devices may also raise
privacy disclosure issues. For example, hackers may deduce
users’ privacy information by frequent queries via differential
attacks [89] and even compromise the cloud/edge storage via
distributed denial-of-service (DDoS) attacks [93]. In 2006, a
customer database of the Second Life (a metaverse game) was
hacked and the user data was breached including unencrypted
usernames and addresses, as well as encrypted payment details
and passwords [94].

5) Rogue or Compromised End Devices. In the metaverse,
more wearable sensors will be placed on human bodies and their
surroundings to allow avatars to make natural eye contact, capture
hand gesture, reﬂect facial expression, and so on in real time. A
signiﬁcant risk is that these wearable devices can have a com-
pletely authentic sense of who you are, how you talk, behave, feel,
and express yourself. The use of rogue or compromised wearable
end devices (e.g., VR glasses) in the metaverse is becoming
an entryway for data breaches and malware invasions, and the
problem may be more severe with the popularity of wearable
devices for entering the metaverse [13]. Under the manipulation
of rogue or compromised end devices, the avatars in the metaverse
may turn into a source of data collection, thereby infringing
user privacy. For example, as advanced wearable devices such
as Oculus helmets and haptic gloves can track eye movements
and hand gestures, hackers can recreate user actions and even
sensitive passwords for personal accounts by following the eye
and ﬁnger movements in tapping in codes on a virtual keypad.

6) Threats to Digital Footprints. As the behavior pattern,
preferences, habits, and activities of avatars in the metaverse
can reﬂect the real statuses of their physical counterparts, at-
tackers can collect the digital footprints of avatars and exploit
the similarity linked to real users to facilitate accurate user
proﬁling and even illegal activities [4]. Besides, metaverse usually
offers the third person view with a wider viewing angle of their
avatar’s surroundings than that in the real world [11], which may
infringe on other players’ behavior privacy without awareness.
For example, an avatar may conduct the virtual stalking/spying

16

attack in Roblox by following your avatar and recording all your
digital footprints, e.g., purchasing behaviors, to facilitate social
engineering attacks.

7) Identity Linkability in Ternary Worlds. As the metaverse
assimilates the reality into itself, the human, physical, and virtual
worlds are seamlessly integrated into the metaverse, causing
identity linkability concerns across the ternary worlds [70]. For
example, a malicious player A in Roblox can track another player
B by the name appeared above the corresponding avatar of player
B and infer his/her position in the real world. Another example
is that hackers may track the position of users via compromised
VR headsets or glasses [13].

8) Threats to Accountability. XR and HCI devices intrinsically
gather more sensitive data such as locations, behavior patterns,
and surroundings of users than traditional smart devices. For
example, in Pok´emon Go (a location-based AR game), players
can discover, capture, and battle Pok´emon using mobile devices
with GPS. The accountability in the metaverse is important to
ensure users’ sensitive data are handled with privacy compliance.
For metaverse service providers, the audit process of the com-
pliance of privacy regulations (e.g., GDPR) for accountability
can be clumpy and time-consuming under the centralized service
offering architecture. Besides, it is hard for VSPs to ensure the
transparency of regulation compliance during the life-cycle of
data management [64], especially in the new digital ecology of
metaverse.

9) Threats to Customized Privacy. Similar to existing Internet
service platforms, distinct users generally exhibit customized pri-
vacy preferences for different services or interaction objects [95]
under distinct sub-metaverses. For example, a user in Roblox may
be more sensitive to monetary trading activities than social activ-
ities. Besides, users/avatars may be more sensitive in interacting
with strangers than acquaintances, friends, or relatives. However,
challenges exist in developing customized privacy preservation
policies for personal data management while considering avatars
in the metaverse as individual information subjects [96], as well
as the characteristics of users and sub-metaverses.

B. Privacy Countermeasures in Metaverse

1) Privacy in Metaverse Games: AR/VR games are the current
most popular metaverse application for users. AR/VR games
usually contain three steps: the game platform (i) collects sensory
data from users and their surroundings, (ii) identiﬁes objects
according to these contexts, and lastly (iii) performs rendering
on game senses for immersiveness.

Existing works have demonstrated the security and safety
concerns related to metaverse games using case studies [97] and
qualitative studies [13], [98]. Bono et al. [97] offer two case
studies (i.e., Second Life and Anarchy Online) and show that
a hacker can exploit the features and vulnerabilities of MMO
metaverse games to fully compromise and take over players’
devices (e.g., laptops). Lebeck et al. [98] carry out a qualitative
lab study using Microsoft HoloLen (an AR headset), whose result
shows that players can easily be immersed in AR experiences and
treat virtual objects as real, as well as various security, privacy,
and safety issues are uncovered. Shang et al. [13] identify a
novel user location tracking attack in location-based AR games
(e.g., Pok´emon Go) by solely exploiting the network trafﬁc of

the player, and real-world experiments on 12 volunteers validate
that the proposed attack model attains ﬁne-grained geolocation of
any player with high accuracy. Besides, three possible mitigation
approaches are presented in [13] to alleviate attack effects.

To prevent potential privacy issues in metaverse games,
Laakkonen et al. [99] introduce privacy-by-design principles in
digital games from both qualitative and quantitative perspectives,
where nineteen privacy attributes divided into three levels are
accounted for privacy evaluation. In [100], Corcoran et al. dis-
tinguish the individual privacy and group privacy in privacy-
preserving interactive metaverse game design. The former refers
to the purchasing patterns, behavioral
traits, communication,
image/video data, and location/space related to an individual,
while the latter refers to the privacy associated with a group of
individuals (e.g., a social group, an organization, and a nation).

2) Privacy-Preserving UGC Sharing and Processing: Exist-
ing privacy-preserving schemes for data sharing and processing
mainly focus on four ﬁelds: differential privacy (DP), federated
learning (FL), cryptographic approaches (e.g., secure multi-party
computation (SMC), homomorphic encryption (HE), and zero-
knowledge proof (ZKP)), and trusted computing. The following
works [89], [101]–[103] discuss privacy-preserving UGC sharing
in the metaverse. To offer privacy-preserving trending topic rec-
ommendation services in the metaverse, Wei et al. [89] propose a
graph-based local DP mechanism, where a compressive sensing
indistinguishability method is devised to produce noisy social
topics to prevent user-linkage association and protect keyword
correlation privacy with high efﬁciency. To enable smart health
sensing without violating users’ private data in the metaverse,
Zhang et al. [101] present a FL-based secure data collaboration
framework where wearable sensors periodically send local model
updates trained on their private sensory data to the server which
synthesizes a global abnormal health detection model. To resolve
class imbalance concerns of participants under FL, the authors in
[101] further design a novel local update method based on rein-
forcement learning (RL) and an adaptive global update method
via online regret minimization. To enhance privacy protection in
the blockchain-based metaverse, Guan et al. [102] utilize ZKP
to empower current account-model blockchains (e.g., Ethereum)
with privacy preservation functions in terms of hiding sender-
recipient
linkage, account balances, and transaction amounts.
Xu et al. [103] identify the co-photo privacy threat in social
metaverse that a shared photo may contain not only the indi-
vidual privacy but also the privacy of others in photos. Besides,
by utilizing SMC and SVM techniques, the authors design a
personalized facial recognition method to differentiate photo co-
owners without disclosing their privacy in users’ private photos.

Privacy-preserving UGC processing in the metaverse has also
attracted various attention. Based on Okamoto-Uchiyama HE,
Li et al. [91] present a veriﬁable privacy-preserving method for
data processing result prediction in edge-enabled CPSSs. Besides,
batch veriﬁcation is supported for multiple prediction results at
one time to reduce communication burdens. Wang et al. [64]
leverage the trusted computing technique to design a privacy-
preserving off-chain data processing mechanism, where private
UGC datasets are processed in an off-chain trusted enclave and
the exchange of processed results and payment are securely
executed via the designed fair exchange smart contract.

17

3) Conﬁdentiality Protection of UGC and Physical Input:
The conﬁdentiality of UGCs (inside the metaverse) along with
physical inputs (to the metaverse) should be ensured to prevent
private data leakage and sensitive data exposure. The authenti-
cation &access control (in Sect. III-C) and privacy computing
technologies (in Sect. V-B2) are enablers to maintain UGC conﬁ-
dentiality in the metaverse. For conﬁdentiality of physical inputs,
Raguram et al. [104] propose a novel threat named compromising
reﬂections, which can automatically reconstruct user typing on
virtual keyboards, thereby compromising data conﬁdentiality and
user privacy. Experiment results show that compromising reﬂec-
tions of a device’s screen (e.g., sunglass reﬂections) are sufﬁcient
for automatic and accurate reconstruction with no limitation on
the motion of handheld cameras even in challenging scenarios
such as a bus and even at long distances (e.g., 12m for sunglass
reﬂections).

4) Digital Footprints Protection:

In the metaverse, privacy
inside avatars’ digital footprints can be classiﬁed into three types
[12]: (i) personal information (e.g., avatar proﬁling), (ii) vir-
tual behaviors, and (iii) interactions or communications between
avatars or between avatar and NPC. Avatars’ digital footprints can
be tracked via virtual stalking/spying attacks in the metaverse
to disclose user’s real identity and other private information,
e.g., shopping preferences, location, and even banking details.
A potential solution is avatar clone [4], which creates multiple
virtual clones of the avatar which appear identical to confuse the
attackers. Nevertheless, it brings other challenging issues such
as managing multiple representations of each user and managing
millions of clones roaming around the metaverse.

Another potential solution is to disguise by periodically chang-
ing avatar’s appearance to confuse attackers, or mannequin by
replacing the avatar with a single clone (e.g., bot) which imitates
user’s behavior and teleport user’s true avatar to another location
when being tracked. Other privacy preservation mechanisms [12]
include invisibility, private enclave, lockout. Invisibility indicates
the avatar is made to be temporarily invisible in case of suspected
stalking. Private enclaves allow certain locations inside the
metaverse to be occupied by individuals, which are unobserved
by others. In private enclaves, owners have control over who can
enter into the enclave by teleporting, thereby offering a maximum
level of privacy. Lockout means certain areas inside the metaverse
are temporarily locked out for private use. After the lock expires,
the restriction is lifted and other users are allowed to enter the
area.

Metaverse:

5) Personalized

Privacy-Preserving
As
users/avatars are featured with personalized privacy demands
and service preferences, existing privacy computing technologies
(in Sect. V-B2) should also take their customized privacy/service
proﬁles into account in designing privacy-enhanced metaverse.
Existing works on personalized privacy computing are mainly
based on similarity [96], randomized response [95], personalized
FL [105], and so on. With the growth of metaverse, more
research on new personalized privacy preservation methods is
required to serve new applications and the new ecology in the
metaverse.

6) Privacy-Enhancing Advances in Industry: In the metaverse,
there have been incidents such as VR groping and VR sexual
harassments in Horizon Worlds [106]. In the real world, people
potentially keep an appropriate distance from others to maintain

18

Fig. 13.
Illustration of personal space in real and virtual worlds. (a) Four types
of personal spaces: public area (350-750 cm), social area (125-350 cm), personal
area (50-125 cm), and intimate area (within 50 cm). (b) Meta’s personal boundary
function for avatars with default private border of 2-foot.

personal spaces when socializing. According to the interpersonal
intimacy, psychologist Stanley Hall quantiﬁed and divided four
types of personal spaces: public area (350-750 cm), social area
(125-350 cm), personal area (50-125 cm), and intimate area
(within 50 cm), as shown in Fig. 13 (a). It means that for less
familiar people, the more personal space we require. Similarly,
each avatar also requires personal space even in the virtual world.
Recently, Meta announced the private boundary function in its
metaverse platforms Horizon Venues and Horizon Worlds to avoid
groping and harassments, where the default personal border for
every avatar is a 2-foot circle [107]. As shown in Fig. 13 (b),
avatars need to keep at least 4 feet (about 1.2 m) away from
others to maintain private space.

Google has built a Privacy Sandbox on Android apps in 2022
to promote private advertising solutions by curbing the sharing
of private information with third parties and removing cross-
app identiﬁers (including advertising ID) [108]. Besides, Google
debuts its open-source DP tool named PipelineDP with Python
library in 2022 by creating pipelines which aggregate personal
data to derive valuable insights in a differentially private manner.
Apple also utilizes local DP to gather individual data from end
devices running on macOS or iOS for privacy-preserving ser-
vices [109] such as lookup hints, Emoji suggestions, QuickType
suggestions, and Safari autoplay intent detection.

C. Summary and Lessons Learned

In traditional Internet services, the platform operators (e.g.,
enterprises) control the user data for commercial purposes. Such
a centralized management pattern has intrinsic principal-agent
risks, and is more prone to privacy leakage and data abuse. In the
metaverse, users (as privacy subjects) need to take back control
of their private data. Notably, the PII (including user proﬁling
and biometric data) collected and processed in the metaverse
can be more granular and unprecedentedly pervasive to make
fully immersive experiences, where the device for acquisition
massive user-sensitive data, as well as the transmission, storage,
processing, access control, and destruction process should be
well-protected in the life cycle of private data. For privacy in
the metaverse, we have learned that existing privacy threats can
be ampliﬁed, and new threats related to digital footprints can
emerge. Therefore, users may suffer more privacy exposure and
higher leakage impact, and require stricter privacy protection

Fig. 14. An illustrative example of Sybil attack and DDoS attack in metaverse.

in the metaverse. A comparison of existing/potential security
countermeasures to metaverse privacy issues is presented in
Table VII.

VI. NETWORK-RELATED THREATS AND COUNTERMEASURES
IN METAVERSE

A. Threats to Metaverse Network

In the metaverse, traditional threats (e.g., physical-layer secu-
rity) to the communication networks can also be effective, as
the metaverse evolves from the current Internet and incorporates
existing wireless communication technologies. Here, we list some
typical threats as below.

1) SPoF. In the construction of metaverse systems, the central-
ized architecture (e.g., cloud-based system) brings convenience
for user/avatar management and cost saving in operations. Nev-
ertheless, it can be prone to the SPoF caused by the damage
of physical root servers and DDoS attacks [35]. Besides, it raises
trust and transparency challenges in trust-free exchange of virtual
goods, virtual currencies, and digital assets across various virtual
worlds in the metaverse.

2) DDoS. As the metaverse includes massive tiny wearable de-
vices, adversaries may compromise these metaverse end-devices
and make them part of a botnet [93] (e.g., Mirai) to conduct
DDoS attacks to make network outage and service unavailability
by overwhelming the centralized server with giant trafﬁc within
short time periods, as depicted in the upper part of Fig. 14.
Besides, owing to the constrained communication pressure and
storage space on the blockchain, part of NFT functions may be
performed on off-chain systems in practical applications [110],
where adversaries may launch DDoS attacks to cause service
unavailability of the NFT system.

3) Sybil Attacks. Sybil adversaries may manipulate multiple
faked/stolen identities to gain disproportionately large inﬂuence
on metaverse services (e.g., reputation service, blockchain con-
sensus, and voting-based service in digital governance) and

intimate area50 cm50-125 cm125-350 cmpersonalareasocial  areapublic area350-750 cm4 feet(a)(b)Repeated connectionsHackingCompromised avatarsLegal avatarFail to obtain service  Metaverse serviceDDoS attackSybil attackGenerating Sybil avatarsCompromised metaverse serviceSybil avatarsMalicious votingLegal userLegal avatarMetaverse...digital governancereputation serviceblockchain consensus19

TABLE VII
SUMMARY OF EXISTING/POTENTIAL PRIVACY COUNTERMEASURES IN METAVERSE

Ref.

[13]

[89]

Security
Threat

Location tracking
in AR games

Privacy exposure
in UGC sharing

[101]

Privacy exposure
in UGC sharing

[103]

Co-photo privacy

[104]

[12]

Compromising
reﬂections

Threats to
digital footprints

(cid:63) Purpose
• Advantages
◦ Limitations

(cid:63)Attack model construction and possible mitigation design
•Fine-grained and high-accuracy location tracking attack modeling
◦Lack complete defense analysis under real-world test
(cid:63)Graph-based local DP for privacy-preserving topic recommendation
•High-level privacy and high efﬁciency in user-linkage unassociation
◦Lack image indistinguishability mechanism in practical use
(cid:63)Secure data collaboration with class imbalance scenarios
•High accuracy in abnormal health detection
◦Lack Byzantine robustness in FL
(cid:63)Personalized facial recognition with privacy protection in photo sharing
•High recognition ratio and efﬁciency in OSNs
◦Lack implementation and test on personal clouds (e.g., Dropbox)
(cid:63)Automatically reconstruct user typing on virtual keyboards
•Effective attack execution with high robustness and accuracy
◦Lack effective defense design
(cid:63)Privacy preservation tools for digital footprints in social metaverse
•Offer complete confusion and private copy tools for avatars
◦Lack user experience analysis and practical deployment of such tools

Utilized
Technology

Cloud, AR,
access control

Local DP

FL

Facial recognition

Feature extraction
and matching

Avatar confusion,
private copy

even take over the metaverse network, thereby compromising
system effectiveness, as shown in the lower part of Fig. 14. For
example, adversaries may be able to out-vote genuine nodes by
producing sufﬁcient Sybil identities to refuse to deliver or receive
some blocks, thereby effectively blocking other nodes from a
blockchain network in the metaverse.

B. Situational Awareness in Metaverse

Situational awareness is an effective tool for security moni-
toring and threat early-warning in large-scale complex systems
such as the metaverse [111]. In the metaverse, local situational
awareness is essential for monitoring a single security domain
and global situational awareness can assist early-warning of large-
scale distributed threats targeted at multiple sub-metaverses.

1) Local Situational Awareness: Situational awareness for de-
vices and systems built on XR technology has received increasing
attention in the metaverse [111]–[113]. Woodward et al. [111]
review the presentation of information in AR headsets, and
discuss the potential in applying AR technologies to enhance
users’ situational awareness in perception and understanding the
surroundings. Apart from AR technology, VR technology can
enhance situational awareness capacities in various applications.
Ju et al. [112] carry out realistic and immersive driving simu-
lations, whose ﬁndings validate that acoustic cues can help VR
drivers remain alert in emergencies (e.g., accidents) under VR
car-driving scenarios. Lv et al. [113] present a smart intrusion
detection model to detect attack behaviors on 3D VR-based in-
dustrial control systems based on support vector machine (SVM).
Experimental results on a simulated VR industrial scenario show
that its average accuracy can keep above 90%. However, the
proposed model cannot resist unknown/new attack types.

To effectively detect unknown/new threats, Vu et al. [114]
design a representation learning approach for better prediction
of unknown attacks, where three regularized autoencoders (AEs)
are deployed to learn the latent representation. The effective-
ness of their work is evaluated on nine recent IoT datasets.
To be further adaptive to wearable devices with extreme size
and energy constraints, Heartﬁeld et al. [115] propose a multi-
layered lightweight anomaly detection method by exploiting

Fig. 15.
situational awareness [119].

Illustration of SDN-enabled virtual honeynet services for collaborative

radio-frequency wireless communications to/from them to iden-
tify potentially malicious transactions. In [116], RL methods are
employed for intrusion detection in small-scale applications such
as smart homes. In practical applications, it is usually hard and
costly to label massive attack samples. To deal with the challenges
of few labeled data and the corresponding over-ﬁtting issues,
Zhou et al. [117] combine few-shot learning and Siamese neural
network to mitigate over-ﬁtting and intelligently detect diverse
attack types in industrial systems.

To summarize, existing security measures can be categorized
into two groups: reactive approaches (aim to counter past known
attacks) and proactive approaches (aim to mitigate future un-
known attacks). In general cases, reactive defenses built on timely
attack trapping, frequent retraining, and decision veriﬁcation can
be more convenient and effective than pure proactive defenses.
Besides, proactive defenses can be classiﬁed into two paradigms
[118]: security by design defenses (against white-box attacks)
and security by obscurity defenses (against black-box attacks).
The above defense approaches can provide some lessons to resist
unknown/new threats in the metaverse.

2) Global Situational Awareness: The above works mainly
focus on situational awareness in a local security domain. Global
situational awareness can facilitate understanding global security
statuses in defending large-scale attacks in the metaverse. Both
works [120], [123] utilize data-driven approaches for global

Honeypot serverIPSIDS...Control planeData planeSecurity commandAPPAPPAPPAPPSDN Controller...Virtual resource poolSituation AwarenessIPSIDSvIDSvIDSvIPSvIPSvIPSvIDSvIDSvIDSvIDSvIDSvIPSvIPSvIPSvIPSData WarehouseOpenflow policyHoneynet Captured attack behaviorsDataCommunicationSDN switchTraditional switchVirtual IDSVirtual IPSIntrusion Detection System (IDS)Intrusion Protection System (IPS)20

TABLE VIII
SUMMARY OF EXISTING/POTENTIAL SECURITY COUNTERMEASURES TO NETWORK-RELATED THREATS IN METAVERSE

Ref.

[113]

[120]

[121]

[122]

[119]

Security
Threat

Intrusion of VR
control system

Malicious events
in distribution grid

Intrusion of industrial
control system

Large-scale
network intrusion

Large-scale
network intrusion

(cid:63) Purpose
• Advantages
◦ Limitations

(cid:63)Smart intrusion detection to detect attacks in 3D VR environments
•High classiﬁcation and detection accuracy
◦Cannot resist unknown/new attack types
(cid:63)Data-driven situational awareness in large-scale distributed power grids
•High accuracy in malicious event labeling
◦Rely on additional expert knowledge for costly event labeling
(cid:63)Monitoring and proﬁling of potential attack behaviors
•High detection/prediction accuracy and low response time
◦Lack merging other cutting-edge technologies into this framework
(cid:63)Honeynet-based situational awareness to deceive attackers
•Rapid honeynet deployment with adaptability to unknown threats
◦Low scalability and programmability in large-scale deployment
(cid:63)SDN-enabled virtual honeynet with high scalability and ﬂexibility
•Successful implementation and test in real-world EU project
◦Lack resilience of compromised domain operators

Utilized
Technology

SVM

Multi-class SVM

SDN,
digital twin

Honeynet

SDN,
honeynet

situational awareness in large-scale distributed power grids. In
[120], Shahsavari et al. propose a multi-class SVM classiﬁer
to extract malicious events from collected raw metering data.
However, their approach relies on additional expert knowledge
for costly event labeling. To resolve this issue, Wu et al. [123]
further model legitimate users and attackers as an evolutionary
game and devise a two-phase RL algorithm to solve the game.
Proﬁling of potential attack behaviors is another challenge in the
metaverse. Krishnan et al. [121] combine digital twin and SDN to
build a behavioral monitoring and proﬁling system where security
strategies are evaluated on digital twins before being deployed in
the real network.

Honeynets consisting of collaborative honeypots offer an al-
ternative solution for building a secure metaverse to defend
against large-scale distributed attacks. Zhang et al. [122] propose
a honeynet-based situational awareness system where each hon-
eypot built on the Docker environment traps attackers, monitors
their attack behaviors, and exchanges these information with each
other coordinated by the honeynet controller. However, the work
[122] has a drawback in terms of scalability and programmability
in large-scale deployment. Zarca et al. [119] further propose
SDN-enabled virtual honeynet services with higher degree of
scalability and ﬂexibility, and the efﬁciency of the proposed
approach is validated using real implementations and tests. As
shown in Fig. 15, based on speciﬁc security policies, security
virtual network functions (VNFs) (e.g., virtual honeynet, IDS,
IPS, and ﬁrewall) can be conﬁgured and instanced on demand
reactively or proactively, coordinated by the SDN controller.
Thereby, appropriate defense mechanisms (including situation
monitoring, attack trapping, and security resource allocation) can
be provisioned quickly and feasibly to enable self-protection, self-
repair, and self-healing. However, the trust issues and resilience
of compromised domain operators in aggregating local situational
awareness into the global one require further investigation.

C. Summary and Lessons Learned

For situational awareness in the metaverse, we have learned
that AR, AI, honeypot, and SDN technologies can help build
situational awareness systems in the metaverse. Besides, global
situational awareness can assist monitoring and early-warning of
large-scale distributed threats targeted at multiple sub-metaverses.

A comparison of existing/potential security countermeasures to
network-related threats in the metaverse is presented in Ta-
ble VIII.

VII. ECONOMY-RELATED THREATS AND
COUNTERMEASURES IN METAVERSE

A. Threats to Metaverse Economy

Various attacks may threaten the creator economy in the
metaverse from the service trust, digital asset ownership, and
economic fairness aspects.

1) Service Trust Issues in UGC & Virtual Object Trading. In the
open metaverse marketplace, avatars may be distrustful entities
without historical interactions. There exist inherent fraud risks
(e.g., repudiation and refusal-to-pay) during UGC and virtual
object trading among different stakeholders in the metaverse.
Besides, in the construction of virtual objects via digital twin
technologies, the metaverse has to guarantee that the produced
and deployed digital copies are authentic and trustworthy [72].
For example, malicious users/avatars may buy UGCs or virtual
objects in Roblox and illegally sell
the digital duplicates of
them to others to earn proﬁts. In addition, adversaries may
exploit vulnerabilities in metaverse systems to commit fraud and
undermine service trust. An example is that the metaverse project
Paraluni based on Binance Smart Chain (BSC) lost over $1.7
million in 2022 due to the reentrancy ﬂaw in smart contracts
[124].

2) Threats to Digital Asset Ownership. Due to the lack of
central authority and the complex circulation and ownership
forms (e.g., collective ownership and shared ownership [125]) in
the distributed metaverse system, it poses huge challenges for the
generation, pricing, trusted trading, and ownership traceability in
the life-cycle of digital assets in the creator economy. Empowered
by blockchain technology, the indivisible, tamper-proof, and irre-
placeable NFT offers a promising solution for asset identiﬁcation
and ownership provenance in the metaverse [38]. However, NFTs
also face threats such as ransomware, scams, and phishing attacks.
For example, adversaries may mint the same NFT on multiple
blockchains at the same time. Besides, evil actors may cash out
their shares after inﬂating the value of NFTs, or they may sell
NFTs to gain beneﬁts before minting anything, where these De-Fi
scams cause $129 million lost in 2020 [126].

3) Threats to Economic Fairness in Creator Economy. Well-
designed incentives [127], [128] are benign impetuses to promote
user participation and open creativity in resource sharing and
digital asset trading in the creator economy. The following three
adversaries who threaten economic fairness are considered.

• Strategic users/avatars may manipulate the digital market in
the metaverse to make enormous proﬁts by breaking the
supply and demand status [127]. For example, in metaverse
auctions, strategic avatars may overclaim its bid, instead of
its true valuation, to manipulate the auction market and win
the auction.

• Free-riding users/avatars may unfairly gain revenues and
enjoy metaverse services without contributing to the meta-
verse market [129], thereby compromising the sustainability
of creator economy. For example, a free-riding avatar may
submit meaningless local updates in collectively training an
intelligent 3D navigation model under distributed AI and
unfairly enjoy the beneﬁts from the trained metaverse model.
• Collusive users/avatars in the metaverse may collude with
each other or with the VSP to perform market manipulation
and gain economic beneﬁts [128]. For example, collusive
avatars may collude to manipulate the results of metaverse
auctions and earn illegal revenues.

B. Open and Decentralized Creator Economy

Creator economy is an essential component of the metaverse to
maintain its sustainability and promote avatars’ open creativity.
Besides, it should be built on a decentralized architecture to
prevent centralization risks, e.g., SPoF, non-transparency, and
control by a few entities. Speciﬁcally, the metaverse economy
should simultaneously achieve three goals: (1) make data/assets
trustworthy, and
from different sources mutually identiﬁable,
veriﬁable (see Sects. III and IV); (2) design suitable incentive
mechanisms for data/assets circulation to form a benign data
sharing and coordination pattern; (3) allow data subjects, data
controller, data processor, and the user have the right to negotiate
the rules and mechanisms of data protection and applications.

1) Trusted UGC/Asset/Resource Trading: As shown in Fig. 8,
blockchain technologies (e.g., NFT and smart contract) provide
the sustainable creator
a decentralized solution to construct
economy. NFT is the irreplaceable and indivisible token in the
blockchain [38] and is regarded as the unique tradable digital
asset associated with virtual objects (e.g., land parcel and digital
drawing). For example, in the game Cryptokitties, players can buy
virtual pet cats with unique genetic attributes identiﬁed by NFT
and breed them. Besides, smart contracts enable the automatic
transaction enforcement and ﬁnancial settlement in trading virtual
objects, items, and assets. The works [130]–[132] discuss the
usage of blockchain technology for virtual economy design.

Rehman et al. [130] discuss several design principles in cryp-
tocurrency ecosystems including centrality, privacy, price manipu-
lation, insider trading, parallel and shadow economy, governance,
usability, and security. Considering the cooperation of heteroge-
neous smart devices, Biase et al. [131] propose a swarm econ-
omy model for digital resource sharing which incorporates their
spontaneous collaboration and dynamic organization in large-
scale networks. A blockchain-based transaction model is also
developed in [131] for transparent and immutable currency audit,

21

thereby ensuring trading trust among distrustful devices. How-
ever, the work [131] has drawbacks in terms of non-automatic
transaction settlement, high computational overhead, and non-
supervisability. To address these issues, Liu et al. [132] propose
a blockchain-based automatic transaction settlement framework,
in which a three-layer sharding blockchain architecture is devised
for enhanced system scalability. Moreover, the authors in [132]
devise an encryption scheme with keyword search to uncover
criminal transactions and achieve crime traceability, where the
supervision right
is equally allocated among all participants.
Jiang et al. [133] introduce FL-enabled digital twin (DT) edge
networks, where access points (APs) serve as edge nodes to help
end-user devices build DT models. In [133], a directed acyclic
graph (DAG) blockchain is employed to securely record both
local model updates and global model updates in FL, as well as
the resource transactions between APs and users.

Apart from the trust-free blockchain approaches,

trust or
reputation management offer a quantiﬁable solution to evaluate
the trustworthiness of participants and services with less com-
putation/energy/storage consumption. Das et al. [134] propose
dynamic trust models and metrics based on user interactions in-
cluding direct/indirect trust (derived from local/recommendation
experience) and recent/historical trust (considering time decay
effects). To achieve “trust without identify”, Wang et al. [135]
present an anonymous trust and reputation management system
in mobile crowdsensing. However, most of the current works on
trust or reputation evaluation may rely on the speciﬁc rules to
determine trust scores and cannot intelligently learn from histor-
ical interaction information. To cope with this issue, Jayasinghe
et al. [29] exploit AI techniques to design an intelligent trust
model, which classiﬁes various individual trust attributes (e.g.,
frequency, duration, and cooperativeness) and aggregates them to
produce ﬁnal trust values.

2) Economic Fairness for Manipulation Prevention: Collab-
oration is essential to the creator economy. Nevertheless, it is
hard to promote collaboration among all individual users/avatars
without sufﬁcient incentives. Besides, the economic fairness in
metaverse markets may be violated by strategic, free-riding,
and collusive users/avatars. Strategy-proof incentive mechanisms,
e.g., truthful auctions [136] and truthful contracts [137], can pre-
vent strategic users/avatars from market manipulating. However,
truthful participation also violates user’s privacy, e.g., the true bid
in auctions may reveal user’s true valuation on the items. Existing
strategy-proof and privacy-preserving auctions mainly depend
on cryptographic mechanisms (e.g., ZKP [138], HE [139]), DP
[127]), which may bring large system burdens for energy-limited
wearable devices or large data utility decrease in practical meta-
verse applications. A trade-off mechanism between privacy and
utility is needed for users/avatars with diverse preferences in the
metaverse.

Existing schemes to prevent free-riders (who try to enjoy bene-
ﬁts of the good/service without contributing to it) mainly focus on
node behavior modeling [129], cryptographic mechanism [140],
[141], and contribution certiﬁcation [142]. For example, Li et
al. [129] observe that BitTorrent systems (account for 35% of
the trafﬁc on the Internet) may fail to overcome free-riders if
a large number of seeds (who have all pieces of the ﬁle) exist.
To bridge this gap, the authors design a ﬂuid model for non-free-
riders and free-riders in P2P ﬁle sharing systems (e.g., BitTorrent)

to capture and mitigate free-riding effects by designing optimal
seed bandwidth allocation strategies. Theoretical analysis shows
the existence of Nash equilibrium (NE) in their strategy, and sim-
ulation results show its effectiveness in free-riding penalization
and cooperation promotion.

As the economic fairness may conﬂict with other vital metrics
(such as economic efﬁciency and QoE) to some extent, Shin
et al. [140] introduce two principles in incentive design: (i)
strict economic fairness to forbid free-riders; and (ii) adaptive
but non-exploitable newcomer bootstrapping for economic efﬁ-
ciency. Based on symmetric key cryptography and pay-it-forward
strategy, the authors in [140] design a lightweight and easy-to-
implement fairness algorithm named T-Chain to prevent free-
riders and enforce reciprocity under fully distributed coopera-
tive scenarios such as BitTorrent-like ﬁle sharing. Experiments
on BitTorrent validate the efﬁciency of T-Chain in free-riding
prevention, fast newcomer bootstrapping, and low efﬁciency loss
(e.g., only 1% additional overhead on bandwidth and storage).
To mitigate free-riding attacks, Li et al. [141] utilize smart con-
tracts and ZKP to generate proof-of-ad-receiving commitments
in blockchain systems with anonymity and conditional linkability
guarantees.

To avoid tragedy of the commons in P2P networks, Ma
et al. [142] propose a service differentiation framework with
free-rider forbidden capabilities, where differentiated services
are offered to peers based on their prior contribution levels
in service offering. In their work, peers’ competing resource
request/distribution interactions are formulated as a dynamic
competition game. Theoretical analysis proves its efﬁciency in
reaching NE, and numerical examples illustrate its functionality in
service differentiation and free-rider prevention. As users/avatars
in the metaverse may also exhibit free-riding behaviors, the above
works can provide lessons for free-rider modeling, detection, and
prevention in metaverse services.

Multi-user/avatar collusion prevention is also important for
fairness in the creator economy. Existing collusion-resistant
mechanisms mainly focus on AI-based collusion behavior detec-
tion [143], cryptographic approaches [144], game theory [128],
and optimization theory [145], which can be beneﬁcial for
collusion defense in metaverse services. Besides, future research
efforts are required in designing fair mechanisms with the
combination of strategy-proofness, collusion-resistance, free-rider
prevention, along with privacy preservation in the metaverse.

In the literature, various works leverage game theory and
learning-based methods to improve economic efﬁciency for meta-
verse services, including iterative double auction for resource
pricing in DT construction [72], [133], DRL-based double Dutch
auction for VR service trading [46], two-tier Q-learning for secure
edge caching services [81], optimization theory for resource
allocation in virtual education [146], and hierarchical game for
coded distributed computing services in metaverse [147].

3) Ownership Traceability of Digital Assets: In the metaverse,
blockchain provides a promising solution to manage the complex
asset provenance and ownership tracing in the life-cycle of digital
assets by recording the evidence of content/asset originality and
involved operations on the public ledgers. As the recorded histori-
cal activities on blockchain ledgers are maintained by the majority
is ensured to be democratic,
it
of entities in the metaverse,
immutable, transparent, auditable, and non-repudiable. Besides,

22

smart contracts offer an intelligent traceability solution by coding
the ownership management
logic into scripts which are run
atop the blockchain. Existing works have utilized blockchain
technologies for food supply [148], cloud storage [69], charging
pile sharing [149], and ride sharing [150]. In addition to private
ownership, there can exist multiple types of ownership forms in
the metaverse such as collective ownership and shared ownership
[125], which raise extra challenges in ownership management
of virtual objects and metaverse assets. In current metaverse
projects, there have been increasing interest in utilizing NFT for
asset identiﬁcation and ownership provenance [38]. Nevertheless,
NFTs also face vulnerabilities such as cross-chain fraud, inﬂation
attack, phishing, and ransomware. An example is that bad actors
may concurrently mint the same NFT on multiple blockchains.

C. Summary and Lessons Learned

For creator economy in the metaverse, we have learned that
blockchain technology is the key to build the decentralized
virtual economy ecosystem from virtual currency creation and
trusted UGC/asset/resource trading to economic fairness and
ownership traceability. Moreover, the interoperability, resilience,
and efﬁciency issues are prime concerns to construct a sustainable
creator economy. A comparison of existing/potential security
countermeasures to metaverse economy is presented in Table IX.

VIII. THREATS TO PHYSICAL WORLD AND HUMAN SOCIETY
AND COUNTERMEASURES IN METAVERSE

The threats occurring in the metaverse may also affect the

physical world and threaten human society.

A. Threats to Physical World and Human Society

The metaverse is an extended form of the cyber-physical-
social system (CPSS) [151], in which physical systems, human
society, and cyber systems are interconnected with complex
interactions. The threats in virtual worlds also severely affect
physical infrastructures, personal safety, and human society.

1) Threats to Personal Safety. In the metaverse, hackers can
attack wearable devices, XR helmets, and other indoor sensors
(e.g., cameras) to obtain the life routine and track the real-time
position of users to facilitate burglary, which may threaten their
safety [152]. A report released by the XR Security Initiative
(XRSI) shows that an adversary can manipulate a VR device to
reset the hardware’s physical boundaries [153]. Thereby, a user
in metaverse can be potentially pushed toward a ﬂight of stairs
or misdirected into dangerous physical situations (e.g., a street).
Besides, the metaverse can open up new opportunities for
misconducts and crimes. In the metaverse, risks of physical
trauma may be limited, but users could be mentally scarred. For
example, due to the immersive realism of metaverse, hackers can
suddenly display harmful and scary content (e.g., ghost pictures)
in the virtual environment in front of the avatar, which may lead
to the death of fright of the corresponding user. Moreover, the
lack of laws and regulations can further increase the possibility
of criminal or abusive actions.

2) Threats to Infrastructure Safety. By snifﬁng the software or
system vulnerabilities in the highly integrated metaverse, hackers
may exploit the compromised devices as entry points [154] to

23

TABLE IX
SUMMARY OF EXISTING/POTENTIAL SECURITY COUNTERMEASURES TO METAVERSE ECONOMY

Ref.

[131]

[132]

[133]

[29]

[139]

[129]

[141]

[128]

Security
Threat

Low cooperation
in creator economy

Lack supervisability
on criminal transaction

Fraud in
DT construction

Compromised
nodes/services

Economic fairness,
strategic users

Economic fairness,
free-riding attack

Economic fairness,
free-riding attack

Economic fairness,
collusion attack

(cid:63) Purpose
• Advantages
◦ Limitations

(cid:63)Swarm economy model for cooperative and dynamic digital resource sharing
•Real-world implementation of blockchain in such economy model
◦Non-supervisability in transaction settlement and high computational overhead
(cid:63)Three-layer sharding blockchain for scalable and automatic transaction
•Enhanced system scalability and traceability of criminal transactions
◦Lack vulnerability analysis and large-scale real-world simulations
(cid:63)Trusted and on-demand DT services in DT edge networks
•Transparent DT model training and resource trading
◦Lack efﬁciency and scalability analysis of their DAG blockchain
(cid:63)Intelligent trust model to quantitatively evaluate user/service trustworthiness
•Aggregate multi-dimensional trust attributes for high-accuracy trust computing
◦Lack complexity and scalability analysis, as well as cold start issues
(cid:63)Strategy-proof and privacy-preserving auction for heterogeneous spectrum
•Privacy protection, strategy-proofness, and high social welfare
◦Vulnerable to collusive bidders in auction
(cid:63)Mitigate free-riding effects in BitTorrent by optimizing seed bandwidth allocation
•Effective free-rider penalization and cooperation promotion
◦Lack real-world tests on robustness and lack analysis of heterogeneous peers
(cid:63)Blockchain-based fair ad delivery among connected vehicles
•Enable anonymity and conditional linkability
◦Not support batch veriﬁcation of aggregated dissemination proofs
(cid:63)Collusion-resistant auction design in cooperative communications
•Truthfulness, collusion-resistance, and budget-balance
◦Only apply to wireless cooperative communications

Utilized
Technology

Blockchain

Blockchain
sharding

FL, DT, DAG

Machine learning

HE,
auction

Fluid model

Smart contracts,
ZKP

Game theory

invade critical national infrastructures (e.g., power grid systems
and high-speed rail systems) via APT attacks [14].

3) Social Effects. Although metaverse offers an exciting digital
society, severe side effects can also raise in human society such as
user addiction [155], rumor prevention [156], child pornography,
biased outcomes, extortion, cyberbullying, cyberstalkers [11], and
even simulated terrorist camps [157]. For example, the immersive
metaverse can provide future potentials for extremists and terror-
ists by making it easier to recruit and meet up, offering new ways
for training and coordination, and lowering costs for ﬁnding new
targets [157]. Essentially, the immersive training in digital clones
of actual buildings can assist terrorists to plan attacks and escape
routes. Another example is that the metaverse, in its ultimate
form, is fully controlled by AI algorithms (as depicted in the
ﬁlm Matrix), in which the code can be the law to rule everything
and severe ethical issues such as race/gender bias may arise.

B. Physical Safety

In this subsection, we review existing potential solutions to
the physical safety in the metaverse from the cyber insurance
and cyber-physical interaction aspects.

1) Cyber Insurance-based Solutions: Cyber insurance offers a
ﬁnancial instrument for risk mitigation of critical infrastructures
in cyberthreats. To resolve the high premium stipulation in
insurance offered by insurance companies, Lau et
traditional
al. [158] propose the coalitional insurance in power systems
where the coalitional premium is computed by considering loss
distributions, vulnerabilities, and budget compliance in an insur-
ance coalition. Feng et al. [159] integrate cyber insurance into
blockchain services to prevent potential damages under attacks,
where a sequential game theoretical framework is developed
to model
the interactions among users, blockchain platform,
and cyber-insurer. The user’s optimal demand of blockchain
service, blockchain platform’s optimal pricing strategy, and cyber-
insurer’s optimal investment strategy are analytically derived by

solving the joint market equilibrium problem. However, when
applying to the metaverse, the scalable and dynamic insurance
coalition formation along with fair premium design under diverse
cyber threats (e.g., anti-forensics) require further investigation.

2) CPSS-based Solutions: Apart from the single cyber per-
spective, existing CPSS-based solutions afford lessons for cy-
berthreat defense and physical safety protection in the metaverse
from the perspective of interactions between cyber and physical
worlds. Vellaithurai et al. [154] introduce cyber-physical security
indices for security measurement of power grid infrastructures.
The cyber probes (e.g., IDS) are deployed on host systems to
proﬁle system activities, where the generated logs along with
the topology information are to build stochastic Bayesian models
using belief propagation algorithms. To resolve the issues (e.g.,
low-level abstraction) in task-based programming paradigm, Tariq
et al. [160] propose a service-oriented paradigm with QoS-aware
operation and resource-aware deployment for better support of
disruption-free incremental system implementation and reconﬁg-
uration. Different from CPSSs, metaverse is an immersive and
hyper spatiotemporal virtual space with a sustainable economy
ecosystem, which adds extra challenges in solution migration.

C. Society Management

In this subsection, we review existing works on society man-

agement in the metaverse from the following two perspectives.

1) Misinformation Spreading Mitigation: The extremely rapid
information spreading (e.g., gossip) in the metaverse makes the
so-called “butterﬂy effect” more challenging in social governance
and public safety in the real world. As an attempt to address this
issue, Zhu et al. [156] propose to minimize the misinformation
inﬂuence in online social networks (OSNs) by dynamically
selecting a series of nodes to be blocked from the OSN. However,
it only works in traditional static OSNs and it is challenging to
be applied in the fully interactive metaverse with a huge and
time-varying social graph structure.

24

TABLE X
SUMMARY OF EXISTING/POTENTIAL SECURITY COUNTERMEASURES TO PHYSICAL AND SOCIAL THREATS IN METAVERSE

Ref.

[159]

[154]

[158]

[156]

[152]

Security
Threat

Threats to cyber
insurance

Stochastic risk
on power system

High premium
stipulation

Butterﬂy effect in
information spreading

Human joystick
attack

(cid:63) Purpose
• Advantages
◦ Limitations
(cid:63)Game theoretical modeling among users, blockchain platform, and cyber-insurer
•Analytically derive the market equilibrium with all participants’ optimal strategies
◦Lack scalable and dynamic insurance coalition formation and fair premium design
(cid:63)Cyber-physical security indices for security measurement of power systems
•Efﬁcient indices computing under actual attacks in real-world test-bed
◦Lack merging other cutting-edge technologies into this framework
(cid:63)Coalitional insurance with budget compliance for risk control in power grids
•High defense level with long-term reduced premiums
◦Lack dynamic insurance design and dependence analysis of cyberthreats
(cid:63)Minimize misinformation inﬂuence via dynamic node blocking in OSNs
•Low misinformation spreading value and misinformation interactions
◦Challenging to be applied to the dynamic and time-varying metaverse
(cid:63)Construct human joystick attack model in immersive VR systems
•Deceive and move immersed players to intended physical locations unconsciously
◦Lack effective defense design

Utilized
Technology

Sequential game

Graph theory

Cyber-insurance

Heuristic greedy

HCI, VR

2) Human Safety and Cyber syndromes: The full

immer-
siveness in metaverse can also raise immersion concerns, e.g.,
occlusion and chaperone attack, as well as cybersickness [161].
Casey et al. [152] investigate a new attack named human joystick
attack in immersive VR systems such as Oculus Rift and HTC
Vive. In their work, adversaries can modify VR environmental
factors to deceive, disorient, and control immersed human players
and move them to other physical locations without consciousness.
Valluripally et al. [155] present a novel cybersickness mitigation
method and several design principles in social VR learning
scenarios via threat quantiﬁcation and attack-fault tree model
construction. However, the ethical issues and adaptations to dif-
ferent attack-defense strategies are not considered in their work,
which is an important factor for future metaverse construction.
Besides, more research efforts are required on the mitigation of
other immersion risks to human body and human society.

3) Society Acceptance Advances in Industry: To enforce age-
appropriate interactions within its platforms, Meta has enhanced
its age certiﬁcation mechanism with GDPR-compliance, where
a tool named Transfer Your Information (TYI) is developed in
2021 [162]. In TYI, users are allowed to retract their personal
information from Meta whenever they intend.

D. Summary and Lessons Learned

For physical safety and social effect in the metaverse, we have
learned that existing cyber-insurance and CPSS based approaches
can offer some insights for protecting physical devices. More
related technological and sociological efforts in this ﬁeld consid-
ering the characteristics of metaverse are required. A comparison
of existing/potential security countermeasures to physical safety
and social effect in the metaverse is presented in Table X.

IX. GOVERNANCE-RELATED THREATS AND
COUNTERMEASURES IN METAVERSE
Driven by the above threats, it raises huge governance demands
and poses huge regulation challenges to metaverse lawmakers and
regulators.

A. Threats to Metaverse Governance

In analogy to the social norms and regulations in the real world,
the interactions among avatars (e.g., content creation, social

activities, and virtual economy) in the metaverse should align
with the digital norms and regulations to ensure compliance [163].
In the supervision and governance process of metaverse, the
following threats may deteriorate system efﬁciency and security.
1) New Laws & Regulations for Virtual Crimes. Essentially,
it
to decide whether a virtual crime is the same
is difﬁcult
as a real one. Thereby, it is hard to directly apply the laws
and regulations in real life to enforce penalization for criminal
actions [70] such as abusive language, virtual harassment, virtual
stalking/spying, and so on. For example, if an avatar is verbally
abusive in the metaverse, it can be easily regarded as verbal abuse
either in virtual or real worlds. However, if an avatar attempts to
virtually stalk or harass another user’s avatar in the metaverse,
the deﬁnitions of these crimes may be adapted from the real
ones, as well as the appropriate punishments, which should be
reconsidered for metaverse lawmakers and regulators.

2) Misbehaving Regulators. Regulators may misbehave and
cause system paralysis, and their authorities also need super-
vision. Dynamic and effective punishment/reward mechanisms
should be enforced for misbehaving/honest regulators, respec-
tively. To ensure sustainability, punishment and reward rules
should be maintained by the majority of avatars in a decen-
tralized and democratic manner [164]. Automatic regulations
implemented by smart contracts without reliance on trusted
intermediaries may be a promising solution. However, it also
raises new issues such as information disclosure, mishandled ex-
ceptions, and susceptibility to short address attacks and reentrancy
attacks [165].

3) Threats to Collaborative Governance. To avoid the con-
centration of regulation rights, collaborative governance under
hierarchical or ﬂat mode is more suitable for large-scale meta-
verse maintenance [166]. Nevertheless, collusive regulators may
undermine the metaverse system even under collaborative gover-
nance scenarios. For example, they can collude to make a certain
regulator partitioned from the network via wormhole attacks.

4) Threats to Digital Forensics. Digital forensics in the meta-
verse means the virtual reconstruction of cybercrimes by identi-
fying, extracting, fusing, and analyzing evidences obtained from
both real and virtual worlds [167]. Nevertheless, due to the high
dynamics and interoperability issues of various virtual worlds,
it is challenging for efﬁcient forensics investigation including

entity-behavior association,
identiﬁcation, and tracing among
anonymous users/avatars with diverse behavior patterns in the
metaverse. In addition, due to the blurred boundary between
real and virtual worlds, the metaverse can make us confused
to distinguish between the true and false. For example, bad
actors may produce fake news, faces, audios, and videos via AI
algorithms to mislead the public, just like the recent Deepfake
event.

B. Digital Governance in Metaverse

Apart from the laws or regulations (i.e., “hard law”), the “soft
law” is also signiﬁcant to adjust social relations and regulate
user’s behaviors in public metaverse governance. The soft law
refers to legal norms including autonomy and self-discipline
norms and advocacy rules created by various organizations.
Almeida et al. [163] highlight three principles in the digital
governance of content moderation ecosystems: (i) open, trans-
parent, and consensus-driven, (ii) respect human rights, and (iii)
publicly accountable. Here, we review existing potential solutions
to metaverse governance from the following three ﬁelds.

1) AI Governance: With the pervasive fusion of perception,
computing, and actuation, AI will play a leading role to allow
digital self-governance of individuals and society in the metaverse
in a fully automatic manner. AI approaches can be employed for
detecting misbehaving entities and abnormal or Sybil accounts
in the metaverse. He et al. [168] exploit a multi-factor attention-
enhanced LSTM model to dynamically reveal suspicious signals
of malicious accounts in online dating applications by mining the
user-generated textual information and the interplay of accounts’
temporal-spatial activities. Experiments performed on the real-
world dataset demonstrate its effectiveness in detection accuracy.
However, as the work [168] mainly focuses on AI-based
malicious account detection, the association of massive avatar-
activity-cluster needs further investigations. Besides,
the out-
comes of AI governance algorithms can be biased and unfair (e.g.,
race bias), thereby arising ethical concerns. Gasser et al. [169]
propose a three-layer AI governance model from the sociological
perspective, where the bottom technical layer allows the data
governance and algorithm accountability; the middle ethical layer
guides decision-making and data processing via ethical criteria
and norms; and the top social and legal layer addresses the
allocation of responsibilities in regulation. Zambonelli et al.
[170] investigate the potential risks including interpretability,
trust, autocracy, and ethic issues in delegating the governance
of human activities and society to the algorithmic engines in the
metaverse. Nevertheless, the concrete governance protocols and
algorithms with ethic-compliance (e.g., how to deﬁne a malicious
behavior/avatar) require more research efforts. To summarize,
both technological and sociological insights are required to build
an AI-governed future metaverse.

2) Decentralized Governance: For governance in the large-
scale metaverse maintenance, centralized regulatory can face
multiple technical and standard obstacles and difﬁculty in the
compatibility of transnational regulations. Collaborative gover-
nance can avoid concentration of regulation rights and promote
democracy for avatars. Blockchain technologies offer potential
decentralized solutions for collaborative governance in the meta-
verse, where smart contracts offer a straightforward approach

25

for decentralized governance in an automatic manner. Febrero
et al. [164] present a blockchain-based decentralized framework
in digital city governance to encourage users’ active engagement
and witness in all administrative processes. In their approach, a
veriﬁer group is dynamically selected from digital citizens for
transaction veriﬁcation in the hybrid blockchain. A private-prior
peer prediction mechanism is devised for collusion prevention
among veriﬁers, and a Stackelberg game theoretical approach is
designed to motivate citizens’ participation.

Based on SDN, Bai et al. [166] design a decentralized data
lifecycle governance architecture, where UGC owners can im-
plement customized governance rules for data usage to VSPs,
aiming to promote an open environment to satisfy users’ diverse
requirements. To further defend against opportunistic attackers
in market manipulation, Li et al. [171] study a Dirichlet-based
probabilistic detection model to detect compromised local agents
in decentralized power grid control systems by evaluating their
reputation levels using historical operating observations. The im-
plementation of AI governance under decentralized architectures
is a future trend for metaverse governance. Besides, tailored
blockchain solutions to metaverse governance are required includ-
ing metaverse-speciﬁc consensus protocols, new on/off-chain data
storage mechanisms, law-compliant regulated blockchain, etc.

3) Trusted Digital Forensics: Digital forensics is an enabler
for accountability in the metaverse under disputes, which has
been widely investigated in images and videos. For example,
Swaminathan et al. [172] develop a general forensic mechanism
for digital camera images, according to the observation that
in-camera and post-camera image processing leaves a series
of distinct ﬁngerprint traces on the digital camera image. The
estimated post-camera ﬁngerprints can be employed to validate
image is
image authenticity (i.e., whether a speciﬁc digital
from a speciﬁc scanner, camera, or computer graphics program).
However, the use of anti-forensics makes trusted digital forensics
challenging. To address this issue, Stamm et al. [173] propose
an automatic video frame addition or deletion forensics method
with anti-forensics detection, according to the observation that a
modiﬁed video’s motion vectors (i.e., ﬁngerprint) can be imposed
in the anti-forensics process.

An obstacle of digital forensics in the metaverse lies in
trustworthiness and labor cost especially for cross-platform oper-
ations. Blockchain can offer a decentralized solution to establish
trust and enhance automation in multi-party cross-platform digital
forensics. For example, Li et al. [167] utilize blockchain to design
a decentralized forensics method, where customized cryptography
enables ﬁne-grained forensics data access control and smart
contracts enforce auditable forensics execution. In the metaverse,
smart contracts can enforce automated forensics procedure among
multiple entities and platforms with improved convenience and
mitigated cost, which still require more research efforts.

Digital forensics can also be utilized for accountability of
privacy violations. Zou et al. [174] propose a privacy leakage
forensics scheme with taint analysis and RAM mirroring to
obtain digital evidences without
touching user’s privacy data
in a simulated virtual environment. More research efforts are
required in terms of resilience, collaboration, QoS enhancement,
and privacy preservation in the implementation of digital forensics
for metaverse applications.

26

TABLE XI
SUMMARY OF EXISTING/POTENTIAL SECURITY COUNTERMEASURES TO METAVERSE GOVERNANCE

Ref.

[168]

[164]

[171]

Security
Threat

Abnormal social
accounts

Centralized governance
risks

Opportunistic attacks
for price manipulation

[172]

Image authenticity

[173]

Anti-forensics
attack

[174]

Privacy violation

(cid:63) Purpose
• Advantages
◦ Limitations

(cid:63)Dynamically reveal suspicious signals of malicious accounts in online dating
•High F1-score and AUC on a real-world dataset gathered from Momo
◦Challenging to be applied to dating services atop the blockchain
(cid:63)Decentralized digital city governance with incentives for user engagement/witness
•High user utility and time efﬁciency in decentralized governance
◦Scalability and security issues in practical system deployment
(cid:63)Detect compromised local agents in decentralized power systems using reputation
•Fast aggressive attacker detection using the PowerWorld simulator
◦Lack credibility analysis for historical operations in reputation evaluation
(cid:63)General camera image forensic via post-camera ﬁngerprints
•High efﬁciency in non-intrusive digital image forensics
◦Absense of anti-forensics defense
(cid:63)Automatic video frame addition or deletion forensics with anti-forensics detection
•Able to automatically detect video tampering/forgeries with high accuracy
◦Lack trusted whole-process video forensics
(cid:63)Privacy leakage forensics to ensure accountability of privacy violations
•High detection efﬁciency of privacy leakage paths on real malware samples
◦Only consider limited detection attributes and privacy leakage paths

Utilized
Technology

Attention-based
LSTM

Blockchain,
Stackelberg game

Dirichlet-based
probabilistic model

Image ﬁngerprints

Anti-forensic,
game theory

Cloud forensics

C. Summary and Lessons Learned

For digital governance in the metaverse, we have learned
that AI-enabled governance and decentralized governance are
two trends for future metaverse regulation. Moreover, trusted
digital forensics offers a promising tool to regulate the metaverse.
Besides, it is important to leverage AI and blockchain technolo-
gies to promote the self-governance capabilities of metaverse
communities, where each community forms an autonomous code
of conduct and users can report the violation behavior according
to the terms. More research efforts are required from both
technological and sociological perspectives. Due to the intrinsic
characteristics (e.g., interoperability, decentralization, scalability,
and heterogeneity) of the metaverse, a series of critical challenges
may arise in directly applying existing security countermeasures
into the metaverse. Advanced security solutions tailored to the
metaverse setting are needed. A comparison of existing/potential
security countermeasures to metaverse governance is presented
in Table XI.

X. FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS
In this section, we discuss several future research directions in

the metaverse from the following aspects.

A. Endogenous Security Empowered Metaverse

Existing commercial metaverse systems mainly depend on the
brought-in security such as frequent security patch upgrades after
the system deployment. Although security upgrades can enhance
system security to an extent, the passive defense mechanisms
built on security patching strategies inevitably result in the curse
of being continuously broken. With the continuity of ubiquitous
cyber-physical attack surfaces in the metaverse, current bring-
in security defenses can be fragile and costly in practical use,
like the sword of Damocles hanging overhead. Endogenous
security theory offers a promising solution for provisioning built-
in security or called secure by design mechanisms with self-
protection, self-evolution, and autoimmunity capabilities [175],
which takes security and privacy factors into account before the
system design. Thereby, the future metaverse can resist the ever-
increasing known/unknown security vulnerabilities and privacy

Fig. 16.

Illustration of cloud-edge-end computing in metaverse service offering.

threats. An example of endogenous security is the quantum key
distribution (QKD) [176], which utilizes channel-based secret
keys to resolve information disclosure in wireless transmissions
via quantum entanglement properties. Besides, quantum-resistant
cryptography (QRC) for quantum secure metaverse applications
is another promising research direction.

B. Cloud-Edge-End Orchestrated Secure Metaverse

Unlike the conventional 2D Internet, the metaverse gathers
massive multi-sensory multimodal
information from the real
world to provide users with fully immersive 3D experiences.
In the metaverse, different users/services have distinct QoE/QoS
requirements, which incurs huge difﬁculty for the metaverse
network to simultaneously offer these holographic services for
massive users/avatars. For instance, VR usually requires downlink
transmission and caching capabilities, AR mainly focuses on
uplink transmission and computing capabilities, while the tactile
Internet generally requires ultra-reliable low-latency communica-
tions [19]. The orchestration of cloud-edge-end computing offers
a potential solution by collaboratively and dynamically sharing
computation, communication, and storage resources among vari-

Cloud  EdgeEnd UserMetaverseEdge-Cloud CooperationUser inputData exchangeUser inputServiceServiceServiceUser inputUser inputServiceEdge-Edge CooperationEdge-Cloud CooperationEnd-End CooperationEnd-End Cooperationous entities [27], thereby enhancing the QoE for users/avatars and
QoS for metaverse services, as shown in Fig. 16. Besides, cloud-
edge-end computing can assist edge intelligence and user privacy
protection by aggregating and processing users’ private data at
edge devices (e.g., home gateways) via federated edge learning
[82]. In addition, by analyzing the metaverse system as a whole,
the cooperation among various sub-metaverses is essential to
facilitate seamless security provision and privacy protection and
requires further investigation. An attractive case is to dynamically
allocate spatiotemporal security resources (e.g., ﬁrewall, IDS, and
IPS) among heterogeneous sub-metaverses (consisting of various
edge/cloud servers) in an on-demand manner. Future works to be
investigated include the design of speciﬁc edge-edge, edge-cloud,
and edge-end collaboration mechanisms in the metaverse.

C. Cross-Chain Interoperable and Regulatory Metaverse

By getting rid of trusted third parties, blockchain is recog-
nized as the underlying technology to build the future trust-free
economy ecosystem in the metaverse. However, distinct sub-
metaverses may deploy services on heterogeneous blockchains
(e.g., using different transaction formats, block structures, and
consensus protocols) to meet QoS requirements, resulting in
severe interoperability concerns. As shown in Fig. 17, efﬁcient
cross-chain authentication and governance are essential to en-
sure the security and legitimacy of digital asset-related activ-
ities (e.g., asset trading) across different sub-metaverses built
on heterogeneous blockchains. Current cross-chain mechanisms
mainly focus on digital asset transfer and rely on the notary
scheme, hash-locking, relay chain, and sidechain (details can
refer to [35]), and few of them consider cross-chain authenti-
cation and governance in the metaverse. The implementation,
efﬁciency, and security of identity authentication across various
domains and blockchains in the metaverse need to be further
investigated. Moreover, novel decentralized, hierarchical, and
penetrating cross-chain governance mechanisms need further
research efforts in the metaverse. Besides, efﬁcient metaverse-
speciﬁc consensus mechanisms, redesigned block structures, as
well as well-designed user incentives are required for distinct
metaverse applications. To summarize, open challenges include
application-speciﬁc governance rule design, programmable and
scalable cross-chain governance architecture design, on-chain en-
tity identiﬁcation and risk assessment, dynamic and collaborative
cross-chain governance, etc.

D. Energy-Efﬁcient and Green Metaverse

In the metaverse, on one hand, the wearable XR devices may
be resource-constrained and their communication/computation
capacities can be highly heterogeneous. On the other hand, the
metaverse can be always resource hungry and the computational
power demanded in the metaverse will continue to rise, causing
increasing environmental concerns (e.g., greenhouse gas emis-
sion). The future metaverse design should be energy-efﬁcient and
green to attain sustainability. Users/avatars’ cooperation can offer
a possible solution for green metaverse in terms of UGC/AIGC
dissemination, cooperative networking, and cooperative compu-
tation. For example, users’ social/locational cooperation can be
beneﬁcial to create and distribute high-quality UGC games via
the formation of cooperative social groups. Besides, the collab-
oration among heterogeneous metaverse devices with temporal

27

Fig. 17.
Illustration of cross-chain services among three sub-metaverses which
are built on three different blockchains. A relay chain is established to support
cross-chain transactions [177], where the relay chain synchronizes the information
of source blockchain A to allow destination blockchains B and C to verify the
correctness of transactions on source blockchain A.

and spatial correlations can be leveraged to design energy-
efﬁcient consensus protocols [35] tailored to resource-limited
metaverse environments. Apart from user cooperation and new
green technology design, other possible solutions include new
architecture design, new green edge-cloud computing design, new
energy-efﬁcient consensus protocol design, etc., to support green
networking and computing in the metaverse.

E. Content-Centric and Human-Centric Metaverse

In the future metaverse, a surge of UGC is expected to be
created, requested, and delivered across various sub-metaverses.
Existing IP-based content transmissions can face critical chal-
lenges in securing UGC dissemination to massive heterogeneous
end devices over the large-scale metaverse across virtual worlds.
Content-centric networking (CCN) stands for a paradigm shift
of current Internet architecture. In contrast to current IP-based
and host-oriented Internet architecture, contents are addressed and
routed directly by their naming information in CCN instead of
IP addresses. In CCN-based metaverse, the UGC consumer can
request the desired UGC object by sending an interest message
to any CCN node that hosts the matched UGC. Besides, CCN
embodies a security model which explicitly ensures the security
of individual content pieces instead of securing the “pipe” or the
connection. Therefore, the deployment of CCN can offer a more
ﬂexible, scalable, and secure network in the metaverse. However,
CCN also brings new security concerns in the metaverse and one
of them is content poisoning, in which adversaries can contam-
inate the cache space of metaverse nodes by injecting poisoned
UGCs and further cause the delay and even failure in retrieving
valid UGCs via ﬂooding attacks. In addition,
the design of
metaverse should be human-centric. For example, users/avatars’
personalized privacy preferences should be ensured in developing
privacy-preserving approaches in metaverse environments.

XI. CONCLUSION

In this paper, we have presented an in-depth survey of the
fundamentals, security, and privacy of metaverse. Speciﬁcally,
we have introduced a novel distributed metaverse architecture
and discussed its key characteristics, enabling technologies, and
modern prototypes. Afterward, the security and privacy threats,
as well as the critical challenges in security defenses and pri-
vacy preservation, have been investigated under the distributed

Blockchain ACross-chain transactionBlockchain BBlockchain CCross-chain transactionRelay chainMetaverseSub-metaverse Sub-metaverse Cross-chain transactionusermetaverse architecture. Furthermore, we have reviewed the exist-
ing/potential solutions in designing tailored security and privacy
countermeasures for the metaverse. We expect that this survey
can shed light on the security and privacy provision in meta-
verse applications, and inspire more pioneering research in this
emerging area.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

This work was supported in part by NSFC (nos. U20A20175,
U1808207), and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central
Universities.

REFERENCES

[1] J. Sanchez, “Second life: An interactive qualitative analysis,” in Society for
Information Technology & Teacher Education International Conference,
Mar. 2007, pp. 1240–1243.

[2] J. D. N. Dionisio, W. G. B. III, and R. Gilbert, “3D virtual worlds and
the metaverse: Current status and future possibilities,” ACM Computing
Surveys (CSUR), vol. 45, no. 3, pp. 1–38, Jul. 2013.

[3] A. Bruun and M. L. Stentoft, “Lifelogging in the wild: Participant
experiences of using lifelogging as a research tool,” in IFIP Conference
on Human-Computer Interaction, Aug. 2019, pp. 431–451.

[4] H. Ning, H. Wang, Y. Lin, W. Wang, S. Dhelim, F. Farha, J. Ding, and
M. Daneshmand, “A survey on metaverse: the state-of-the-art, technologies,
applications, and challenges,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.09673, 2021.

and M. Maximo. The metaverse: Web3.0

virtual
[5] D. Grider
cloud
[Online]. Avail-
able: https://grayscale.com/wp-content/uploads/2021/11/Grayscale Metav
erse Report Nov2021.pdf

economies. Accessed: Nov.

2021.

1,

[6] L.-H. Lee, T. Braud, P. Zhou, L. Wang, D. Xu, Z. Lin, A. Kumar,
C. Bermejo, and P. Hui, “All one needs to know about metaverse:
A complete survey on technological singularity, virtual ecosystem, and
research agenda,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.05352, 2021.

[7] Q. Yang, Y. Zhao, H. Huang, and Z. Zheng, “Fusing blockchain and AI
with metaverse: A survey,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.03201, 2022.
[8] H. Duan, J. Li, S. Fan, Z. Lin, X. Wu, and W. Cai, “Metaverse for social
good: A university campus prototype,” in ACM International Conference
on Multimedia (MM), Oct. 2021, pp. 153–161.

[9] W. Y. B. Lim, Z. Xiong, D. Niyato, X. Cao, C. Miao, S. Sun, and Q. Yang,
“Realizing the metaverse with edge intelligence: A match made in heaven,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.05471, 2022.

[10] Facebook Inc. rebrands as Meta to stress ’metaverse’ plan. Accessed:
October 28, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://machinaresearch.com/news
/press-release-global-internet-of-things-market-to-grow-to-27-billion-dev
ices-generating-usd3-trillion-revenue-in-2025/

[11] R. Leenes, “Privacy in the metaverse: Regulating a complex social con-
struct in a virtual world,” The Future of Identity in the Information Society,
pp. 95–112, Jul. 2008.

[12] B. Falchuk, S. Loeb, and R. Neff, “The social metaverse: Battle for
privacy,” IEEE Technology and Society Magazine, vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 52–61,
Jun. 2018.

[13] J. Shang, S. Chen, J. Wu, and S. Yin, “ARSpy: Breaking location-based
multi-player augmented reality application for user location tracking,”
IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 433–447,
Feb. 2022.

[14] P. Hu, H. Li, H. Fu, D. Cansever, and P. Mohapatra, “Dynamic defense
strategy against advanced persistent threat with insiders,” in IEEE Confer-
ence on Computer Communications (INFOCOM), 2015, pp. 747–755.
[15] K. J. Nevelsteen, “Virtual world, deﬁned from a technological perspective
and applied to video games, mixed reality, and the metaverse,” Computer
Animation and Virtual Worlds, vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 1–22, 2018.

[16] C. T. Nguyen, D. T. Hoang, D. N. Nguyen, and E. Dutkiewicz, “Metachain:
A novel blockchain-based framework for metaverse applications,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2201.00759, 2021.

[17] T. Huynh-The, Q.-V. Pham, X.-Q. Pham, T. T. Nguyen, Z. Han, and D.-S.
Kim, “Artiﬁcial intelligence for the metaverse: A survey,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2202.10336, 2022.

[18] S.-M. Park and Y.-G. Kim, “A metaverse: Taxonomy, components, appli-
cations, and open challenges,” IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 4209–4251, Jan.
2022.

[19] M. Xu, W. C. Ng, W. Y. B. Lim, J. Kang, Z. Xiong, D. Niyato, Q. Yang,
X. Shen, and C. Miao, “A full dive into realizing the edge-enabled
metaverse: Visions, enabling technologies,and challenges,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2203.05471, 2022.

28

[20] M. Bourlakis, S. Papagiannidis, and F. Li, “Retail spatial evolution: Paving
the way from traditional to metaverse retailing,” Electronic Commerce
Research, vol. 9, no. 1–2, pp. 135–148, Jun. 2009.

[21] J. D´ıaz, C. Andr´es, D. Saldaa, C. Alberto, and R. Avila, “Virtual world
as a resource for hybrid education,” International Journal of Emerging
Technologies in Learning (iJET), vol. 15, no. 15, pp. 94–109, 2020.
[22] L. Lee, Z. Lin, R. Hu, Z. Gong, A. Kumar, T. Li, S. Li, and P. Hui, “When
creators meet the metaverse: A survey on computational arts,” CoRR, vol.
abs/2111.13486, 2021.

[23] ISO/IEC 23005 (MPEG-V) standards. Accessed: Sep. 20, 2021. [Online].

Available: https://mpeg.chiariglione.org/standards/mpeg-v

[24] IEEE 2888 standards. Accessed: Dec. 20, 2021. [Online]. Available:

https://sagroups.ieee.org/2888/

[25] L. Heller and L. Goodman, “What do avatars want now? posthuman
embodiment and the technological sublime,” in International Conference
on Virtual System Multimedia (VSMM), Oct. 2016, pp. 1–4.

[26] A. C. S. Genay, A. Lecuyer, and M. Hachet, “Being an avatar “for real”:
a survey on virtual embodiment in augmented reality,” IEEE Transac-
tions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, Fourthquarter 2021, doi:
10.1109/TVCG.2021.3099290.

[27] C. Kai, H. Zhou, Y. Yi, and W. Huang, “Collaborative cloud-edge-end
task ofﬂoading in mobile-edge computing networks with limited commu-
nication capability,” IEEE Transactions on Cognitive Communications and
Networking, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 624–634, Aug. 2021.

[28] S. Kumar, J. Chhugani, C. Kim, D. Kim, A. Nguyen, P. Dubey, C. Bienia,
and Y. Kim, “Second life and the new generation of virtual worlds,”
Computer, vol. 41, no. 9, pp. 46–53, Sept. 2008.

[29] U. Jayasinghe, G. M. Lee, T.-W. Um, and Q. Shi, “Machine learning
based trust computational model for IoT services,” IEEE Transactions on
Sustainable Computing, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 39–52, Jan.-Mar. 2019.

[30] J. Han, J. Yun, J. Jang, and K.-r. Park, “User-friendly home automation
based on 3D virtual world,” IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics,
vol. 56, no. 3, pp. 1843–1847, Aug. 2010.

[31] M. Sugimoto, “Extended reality (XR: VR/AR/MR), 3D printing, hologra-
phy, AI, radiomics, and online VR Tele-medicine for precision surgery,”
in Surgery and Operating Room Innovation.
Springer, Nov. 2021, pp.
65–70.

[32] C. Jaynes, W. B. Seales, K. Calvert, Z. Fei, and J. Grifﬁoen, “The meta-
verse: A networked collection of inexpensive, self-conﬁguring, immersive
environments,” in Proceedings of the Workshop on Virtual Environments,
ser. EGVE ’03, 2003, pp. 115–124.

[33] Y. Wu, K. Zhang, and Y. Zhang, “Digital twin networks: A survey,” IEEE
Internet of Things Journal, vol. 8, no. 18, pp. 13 789–13 804, Sept. 2021.
[34] H. Du, D. Niyato, J. Kang, D. I. Kim, and C. Miao, “Optimal targeted
advertising strategy for secure wireless edge metaverse,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2111.00511, 2021.

[35] Y. Wang, Z. Su, J. Ni, N. Zhang, and X. Shen, “Blockchain-empowered
space-air-ground integrated networks: Opportunities, challenges, and so-
lutions,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 24, no. 1, pp.
160–209, Firstquarter 2022.

[36] E. H.-K. Wu, C.-S. Chen, T.-K. Yeh, and S.-C. Yeh, “Interactive medical
VR streaming service based on software-deﬁned network: Design and im-
plementation,” in IEEE International Conference on Consumer Electronics
- Taiwan (ICCE-Taiwan), Sept. 2020, pp. 1–2.

[37] S. Vural, D. Wei, and K. Moessner, “Survey of experimental evaluation
studies for wireless mesh network deployments in urban areas towards
ubiquitous Internet,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 15,
no. 1, pp. 223–239, First Quarter 2013.

[38] Q. Wang, R. Li, Q. Wang, and S. Chen, “Non-fungible token (NFT):
Overview, evaluation, opportunities and challenges,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2105.07447, 2021.

[39] J. Han, J. Heo, and E. You, “Analysis of metaverse platform as a new play
culture: Focusing on Roblox and ZEPETO,” in International Conference
on Human-centered Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Oct. 2021, pp. 27–36.

[40] V. Kasapakis and D. Gavalas, “User-generated content in pervasive games,”
ACM Computers in Entertainment, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 1–23, Spring 2018.
the MetaHuman. Accessed: Jan. 20, 2022. [Online]. Available:

[41] Meet

https://www.unrealengine.com/en-US/digital-humans

[42] A. Alwarafy, K. A. Al-Thelaya, M. Abdallah, J. Schneider, and M. Hamdi,
“A survey on security and privacy issues in edge-computing-assisted
internet of things,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 8, no. 6, pp.
4004–4022, Mar. 2021.

[43] K. Tange, M. De Donno, X. Fafoutis, and N. Dragoni, “A systematic survey
of industrial internet of things security: Requirements and fog computing
opportunities,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 22, no. 4,
pp. 2489–2520, Fourthquarter 2020.

[44] NFT investors lose $1.7m in OpenSea phishing attack. Accessed: Mar. 1,
2022. [Online]. Available: https://threatpost.com/nft-investors-lose-1-7m-i
n-opensea-phishing-attack/178558/

[45] D. Antonioli, N. Tippenhauer, and K. Rasmussen, “BIAS: Bluetooth
impersonation attacks,” in IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP),
May 2020, pp. 549–562.

[46] M. Xu, D. Niyato, J. Kang, Z. Xiong, C. Miao, and D. I. Kim, “Wireless
edge-empowered metaverse: A learning-based incentive mechanism for
virtual reality,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.03776, 2021.

[47] J. Yu, Z. Kuang, B. Zhang, W. Zhang, D. Lin, and J. Fan, “Leveraging
content sensitiveness and user trustworthiness to recommend ﬁne-grained
privacy settings for social image sharing,” IEEE Transactions on Informa-
tion Forensics and Security, vol. 13, no. 5, pp. 1317–1332, May 2018.

[48] J. Jensen and M. G. Jaatun, “Federated identity management - we built
it; why won’t they come?” IEEE Security & Privacy, vol. 11, no. 2, pp.
34–41, Mar.-Apr. 2013.

[49] E. Samir, H. Wu, M. Azab, C. S. Xin, and Q. Zhang, “DT-SSIM: A
decentralized trustworthy self-sovereign identity management framework,”
IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 2021, doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2021.3112537.
[50] M. De Ree, G. Mantas, A. Radwan, S. Mumtaz, J. Rodriguez, and I. E.
Otung, “Key management for beyond 5G mobile small cells: A survey,”
IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 59 200–59 236, May. 2019.

[51] Z. Li, Q. Pei, I. Markwood, Y. Liu, and H. Zhu, “Secret key establishment
via RSS trajectory matching between wearable devices,” IEEE Transac-
tions on Information Forensics and Security, vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 802–817,
Mar. 2018.

[52] F. Sun, W. Zang, H. Huang, I. Farkhatdinov, and Y. Li, “Accelerometer-
based key generation and distribution method for wearable IoT devices,”
IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 1636–1650, Feb. 2020.
[53] Z. Chen, W. Ren, Y. Ren, and K.-K. R. Choo, “LiReK: A lightweight
and real-time key establishment scheme for wearable embedded devices
by gestures or motions,” Future Generation Computer Systems, vol. 84,
pp. 126–138, Jul. 2018.

[54] G. Zheng, R. Shankaran, W. Yang, C. Valli, L. Qiao, M. A. Orgun, and
S. C. Mukhopadhyay, “A critical analysis of ECG-based key distribution
for securing wearable and implantable medical devices,” IEEE Sensors
Journal, vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 1186–1198, Feb. 2018.

[55] J. Srinivas, A. K. Das, N. Kumar, and J. J. Rodrigues, “Cloud centric
authentication for wearable healthcare monitoring system,” IEEE Transac-
tions on Dependable and Secure Computing, vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 942–956,
Sept.-Oct. 2018.

[56] T. Zhao, Y. Wang, J. Liu, Y. Chen, J. Cheng, and J. Yu, “Trueheart:
Continuous authentication on wrist-worn wearables using PPG-based bio-
metrics,” in IEEE Conference on Computer Communications (INFOCOM),
Jul. 2020, pp. 30–39.

[57] M. A. Jan, F. Khan, R. Khan, S. Mastorakis, V. G. Menon, M. Alazab, and
P. Watters, “Lightweight mutual authentication and privacy-preservation
scheme for intelligent wearable devices in industrial-CPS,” IEEE Transac-
tions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 17, no. 8, pp. 5829–5839, Aug. 2021.
[58] H. Aksu, A. S. Uluagac, and E. S. Bentley, “Identiﬁcation of wearable
devices with Bluetooth,” IEEE Transactions on Sustainable Computing,
vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 221–230, Apr.-Jun. 2021.

[59] O. Arias, J. Wurm, K. Hoang, and Y. Jin, “Privacy and security in
internet of things and wearable devices,” IEEE Transactions on Multi-Scale
Computing Systems, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 99–109, Apr.-Jun. 2015.

[60] M. Shen, H. Liu, L. Zhu, K. Xu, H. Yu, X. Du, and M. Guizani,
“Blockchain-assisted secure device authentication for cross-domain indus-
trial IoT,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 38,
no. 5, pp. 942–954, May 2020.

[61] J. Chen, Z. Zhan, K. He, R. Du, D. Wang,

and F. Liu,
“XAuth: Efﬁcient privacy-preserving cross-domain authentication,” IEEE
Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing, 2021, doi:
10.1109/TDSC.2021.3092375.

[62] K. Yang, Z. Liu, X. Jia, and X. Shen, “Time-domain attribute-based access
control for cloud-based video content sharing: A cryptographic approach,”
IEEE Transactions on Multimedia, vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 940–950, May 2016.
[63] L. Y. Zhang, Y. Zheng, J. Weng, C. Wang, Z. Shan, and K. Ren, “You can
access but you cannot leak: Defending against illegal content redistribution
in encrypted cloud media center,” IEEE Transactions on Dependable and
Secure Computing, vol. 17, no. 6, pp. 1218–1231, Nov.-Dec. 2020.
[64] Y. Wang, Z. Su, N. Zhang, J. Chen, X. Sun, Z. Ye, and Z. Zhou, “SPDS: A
secure and auditable private data sharing scheme for smart grid based on
blockchain,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 17, no. 11,
pp. 7688–7699, Nov. 2021.

[65] A. Ometov, S. V. Bezzateev, J. Kannisto, J. Harju, S. Andreev, and
Y. Koucheryavy, “Facilitating the delegation of use for private devices
in the era of the internet of wearable things,” IEEE Internet of Things
Journal, vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 843–854, Aug 2017.

29

[66] C. Ma, Z. Yan, and C. W. Chen, “Scalable access control for privacy-
aware media sharing,” IEEE Transactions on Multimedia, vol. 21, no. 1,
pp. 173–183, Jan. 2019.

[67] Z. Su, Y. Wang, Q. Xu, and N. Zhang, “LVBS: Lightweight vehicular
blockchain for secure data sharing in disaster rescue,” IEEE Transactions
on Dependable and Secure Computing, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 19–32, Jan.-Feb.
2022.

[68] G. Liang, S. R. Weller, J. Zhao, F. Luo, and Z. Y. Dong, “The 2015 Ukraine
blackout: Implications for false data injection attacks,” IEEE Transactions
on Power Systems, vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 3317–3318, Jul. 2017.

[69] X. Liang, S. Shetty, D. Tosh, C. Kamhoua, K. Kwiat, and L. Njilla,
“Provchain: A blockchain-based data provenance architecture in cloud
environment with enhanced privacy and availability,” in IEEE/ACM Inter-
national Symposium on Cluster, Cloud and Grid Computing (CCGRID),
May 2017, pp. 468–477.

[70] A. Hendaoui, M. Limayem, and C. W. Thompson, “3D social virtual
worlds: Research issues and challenges,” IEEE Internet Computing, vol. 12,
no. 1, pp. 88–92, Jan.-Feb. 2008.

[71] The right of publicity: Likeness lawsuits against video game companies.
Accessed: Feb. 2, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://btlj.org/2014/12/the-r
ight-of-publicity-likeness-lawsuits-against-video-game-companies/
[72] S. Liao, J. Wu, A. K. Bashir, W. Yang, J. Li, and U. Tariq, “Digital
twin consensus for blockchain-enabled intelligent transportation systems
in smart cities,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems,
2021, doi: 10.1109/TITS.2021.3134002.

[73] T. Miyato, S.-I. Maeda, M. Koyama, and S. Ishii, “Virtual adversarial train-
ing: A regularization method for supervised and semi-supervised learning,”
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, vol. 41,
no. 8, pp. 1979–1993, Aug. 2019.

[74] S. Mai, H. Hu, and S. Xing, “Modality to modality translation: An ad-
versarial representation learning and graph fusion network for multimodal
fusion,” in AAAI, 2019, pp. 1–9.

[75] J. Sun, T. Zhang, X. Xie, L. Ma, and Y. Liu, “Stealthy and efﬁcient
adversarial attacks against deep reinforcement learning,” in AAAI, 2020,
pp. 1–9.

[76] H. Zheng, Z. Zhang, J. Gu, H. Lee, and A. Prakash, “Efﬁcient adversarial
training with transferable adversarial examples,” in IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 1–10.
[77] C. Gehrmann and M. Gunnarsson, “A digital twin based industrial au-
tomation and control system security architecture,” IEEE Transactions on
Industrial Informatics, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 669–680, Jan. 2020.

[78] R. Zimmermann and K. Liang, “Spatialized audio streaming for networked
virtual environments,” in ACM International Conference on Multimedia
(MM), Oct. 2008, pp. 299–308.

[79] J.-M. Jot, R. Audfray, M. Hertensteiner, and B. Schmidt, “Rendering
spatial sound for interoperable experiences in the audio metaverse,” in
International Conference on Immersive and 3D Audio (i3DA), Sep. 2021,
pp. 1–15.

[80] P. Dickinson, A. Jones, W. Christian, A. Westerside, and A. Parke,
“Experiencing simulated confrontations in virtual reality,” in ACM CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI), May 2021,
pp. 1–10.

[81] Q. Xu, Z. Su, and R. Lu, “Game theory and reinforcement learning based
secure edge caching in mobile social networks,” IEEE Transactions on
Information Forensics and Security, vol. 15, pp. 3415–3429, Mar. 2020.

[82] Z. Su, Y. Wang, T. H. Luan, N. Zhang, F. Li, T. Chen, and H. Cao,
“Secure and efﬁcient federated learning for smart grid with edge-cloud
collaboration,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 18, no. 2,
pp. 1333–1344, Feb. 2022.

[83] Y. Han, D. Niyato, C. Leung, D. I. Kim, K. Zhu, S. Feng, X. Shen, and
C. Miao, “A dynamic hierarchical framework for iot-assisted metaverse
synchronization,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.03969, 2022.

[84] K. Ruth, T. Kohno, and F. Roesner, “Secure multi-user content sharing
for augmented reality applications,” in 28th USENIX Security Symposium
(USENIX Security 19), Aug. 2019, pp. 141–158.

[85] H. Lee, J. Lee, D. Kim, S. Jana, I. Shin, and S. Son, “AdCube: WebVR
ad fraud and practical conﬁnement of Third-Party ads,” in 30th USENIX
Security Symposium (USENIX Security 21), Aug. 2021, pp. 2543–2560.

[86] Z. Ning, X. Hu, Z. Chen, M. Zhou, B. Hu, J. Cheng, and M. S. Obaidat,
“A cooperative quality-aware service access system for social internet of
vehicles,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 2506–2517,
Aug. 2018.

[87] B. Satchidanandan and P. R. Kumar, “Dynamic watermarking: Active
defense of networked cyber–physical systems,” Proceedings of the IEEE,
vol. 105, no. 2, pp. 219–240, Feb. 2017.

[88] M. Kamal and s. Tariq, “Light-weight security and data provenance for
multi-hop internet of things,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 34 439–34 448, 2018.

[89] J. Wei, J. Li, Y. Lin, and J. Zhang, “LDP-based social content protection for
trending topic recommendation,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 8,
no. 6, pp. 4353–4372, Mar. 2021.

[90] S. Wasserkrug, A. Gal, and O. Etzion, “Inference of security hazards from
event composition based on incomplete or uncertain information,” IEEE
Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, vol. 20, no. 8, pp.
1111–1114, Aug. 2008.

[91] X. Li, J. He, P. Vijayakumar, X. Zhang, and V. Chang, “A veriﬁable
privacy-preserving machine learning prediction scheme for edge-enhanced
HCPSs,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, Aug. 2021, doi:
10.1109/TII.2021.3110808.

[92] General data protection regulation (GDPR). Accessed: Mar. 2, 2022.

[Online]. Available: https://gdpr-info.eu/

[93] E. Bertino and N. Islam, “Botnets and internet of things security,” Com-

puter, vol. 50, no. 2, pp. 76–79, Feb. 2017.

[94] Metaverse breached: Second Life customer database hacked. Accessed:
Jan. 15, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://techcrunch.com/2006/09/08/me
taverse-breached-second-life-customer-database-hacked/

[95] H. Song, T. Luo, X. Wang, and J. Li, “Multiple sensitive values-oriented
personalized privacy preservation based on randomized response,” IEEE
Transactions on Information Forensics and Security, vol. 15, pp. 2209–
2224, Dec. 2020.

[96] Z. Wu, G. Li, Q. Liu, G. Xu, and E. Chen, “Covering the sensitive
subjects to protect personal privacy in personalized recommendation,”
IEEE Transactions on Services Computing, vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 493–506,
May-Jun. 2018.

[97] S. Bono, D. Caselden, G. Landau, and C. Miller, “Reducing the attack
surface in massively multiplayer online role-playing games,” IEEE Security
& Privacy, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 13–19, May-Jun. 2009.

[98] K. Lebeck, K. Ruth, T. Kohno, and F. Roesner, “Towards security and
privacy for multi-user augmented reality: Foundations with end users,” in
IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP), 2018, pp. 392–408.
[99] J. Laakkonen, J. Parkkila, P. J¨appinen, J. Ikonen, and A. Seffah, “Incorpo-
rating privacy into digital game platform design: The what, why, and how,”
IEEE Security & Privacy, vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 22–32, July-Aug. 2016.
[100] P. M. Corcoran and C. Costache, “A privacy framework for games &
interactive media,” in IEEE Games, Entertainment, Media Conference
(GEM), Aug. 2018, pp. 1–9.

[101] D. Y. Zhang, Z. Kou, and D. Wang, “FedSens: A federated learning
approach for smart health sensing with class imbalance in resource
constrained edge computing,” in IEEE Conference on Computer Commu-
nications (INFOCOM), May 2021, pp. 1–10.

[102] Z. Guan, Z. Wan, Y. Yang, Y. Zhou, and B. Huang, “BlockMaze: An efﬁ-
cient privacy-preserving account-model blockchain based on zk-SNARKs,”
IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing, May-Jun. 2020,
doi: 10.1109/TDSC.2020.3025129.

[103] K. Xu, Y. Guo, L. Guo, Y. Fang, and X. Li, “My privacy my decision:
Control of photo sharing on online social networks,” IEEE Transactions on
Dependable and Secure Computing, vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 199–210, Mar.-Apr.
2017.

[104] R. Raguram, A. M. White, Y. Xu, J.-M. Frahm, P. Georgel, and F. Monrose,
“On the privacy risks of virtual keyboards: Automatic reconstruction
of typed input from compromising reﬂections,” IEEE Transactions on
Dependable and Secure Computing, vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 154–167, May-
Jun. 2013.

[105] J. Mills, J. Hu, and G. Min, “Multi-task federated learning for personalised
deep neural networks in edge computing,” IEEE Transactions on Parallel
and Distributed Systems, vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 630–641, Mar. 2022.
[106] The metaverse has a groping problem already (MIT technology review).
Accessed: Dec. 17, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.technologyrevi
ew.com/2021/12/16/1042516/the-metaverse-has-a-groping-problem/

[107] Meta

4-foot

groping.

establishes

deter
VR
Avail-
able: https://arstechnica.com/gaming/2022/02/meta-establishes-four-foot-p
ersonal-boundary-to-deter-vr-groping/

to
[Online].

boundary”

Accessed:

“personal

2022.

Feb.

9,

[108] The Privacy Sandbox. Accessed: Mar. 20, 2022. [Online]. Available:

https://privacysandbox.com/

[109] Learning with privacy at scale. Accessed: Mar. 9, 2022.

[Online].
Available: https://docs-assets.developer.apple.com/ml-research/papers/lea
rning-with-privacy-at-scale.pdf

[110] Key

of

infrastructure

and
challenges of NFT data storage. Accessed: Feb. 2, 2022.
[Online].
Available: https://www.hashkey.com/key-infrastructure-of-the-metaverse-s
tatus-opportunities-and-challenges-of-nft-data-storage/

the metaverse:

opportunities,

status,

[111] J. Woodward and J. Ruiz, “Analytic review of using augmented reality for
situational awareness,” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics, 2022, doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2022.3141585.

30

[112] U. Ju, L. L. Chuang, and C. Wallraven, “Acoustic cues increase situational
awareness in accident situations: A VR car-driving study,” IEEE Transac-
tions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, pp. 1–11, Apr. 2020.
[113] Z. Lv, D. Chen, R. Lou, and H. Song, “Industrial security solution for
virtual reality,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 8, no. 8, pp. 6273–
6281, Apr. 2021.

[114] L. Vu, V. L. Cao, Q. U. Nguyen, D. N. Nguyen, D. T. Hoang, and
E. Dutkiewicz, “Learning latent representation for IoT anomaly detection,”
IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics, pp. 1–14, May. 2020.

[115] M. Zhang, A. Raghunathan, and N. K. Jha, “MedMon: Securing medical
devices through wireless monitoring and anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans-
actions on Biomedical Circuits and Systems, vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 871–881,
Dec. 2013.

[116] R. Heartﬁeld, G. Loukas, A. Bezemskij, and E. Panaousis, “Self-
intrusion detection for smart homes using
conﬁgurable cyber-physical
reinforcement learning,” IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and
Security, vol. 16, pp. 1720–1735, Dec. 2021.

[117] X. Zhou, W. Liang, S. Shimizu, J. Ma, and Q. Jin, “Siamese neural network
based few-shot learning for anomaly detection in industrial cyber-physical
systems,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 17, no. 8, pp.
5790–5798, Aug. 2021.

[118] B. Biggio and F. Roli, “Wild patterns: Ten years after the rise of adversarial
machine learning,” Pattern Recognition, vol. 84, pp. 317–331, Dec. 2018.
[119] A. M. Zarca, J. B. Bernabe, A. Skarmeta, and J. M. Alcaraz Calero,
“Virtual IoT honeynets to mitigate cyberattacks in SDN/NFV-enabled IoT
networks,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 38,
no. 6, pp. 1262–1277, Jun. 2020.

[120] A. Shahsavari, M. Farajollahi, E. M. Stewart, E. Cortez, and H. Mohsenian-
Rad, “Situational awareness in distribution grid using micro-PMU data: A
machine learning approach,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 10,
no. 6, pp. 6167–6177, 2019.

[121] P. Krishnan, K. Jain, R. Buyya, P. Vijayakumar, A. Nayyar, M. Bilal,
and H. Song, “MUD-based behavioral proﬁling security framework for
software-deﬁned IoT networks,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, May
2021, doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2021.3113577.

[122] W. Zhang, B. Zhang, Y. Zhou, H. He, and Z. Ding, “An IoT honeynet
based on multiport honeypots for capturing IoT attacks,” IEEE Internet of
Things Journal, vol. 7, no. 5, pp. 3991–3999, May 2020.

[123] J. Wu, K. Ota, M. Dong, J. Li, and H. Wang, “Big data analysis-based
security situational awareness for smart grid,” IEEE Transactions on Big
Data, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 408–417, Sept. 2018.

[124] Hackers exploited reentrancy vulnerability to attack Paraluni, making
more than $1.7 million. Accessed: Mar. 14, 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://webscrypto.com/hackers-exploited-reentrancy-vulnerability-to-att
ack-paraluni-making-more-than-1-7-million-about-1-3-of-which-has-flo
wed-into-tornado/

[125] H. Ritzdorf, C. Soriente, G. O. Karame, S. Marinovic, D. Gruber, and
S. Capkun, “Toward shared ownership in the cloud,” IEEE Transactions
on Information Forensics and Security, vol. 13, no. 12, pp. 3019–3034,
Dec. 2018.

[126] Don’t get rugged: DeFi scams go from zero to $129 million in a year
to become top ﬁnancial hack. Accessed: Aug. 25, 2021. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://www.techrepublic.com/article/dont-get-rugged-defi-scams-g
o-from-zero-to-129-million-in-a-year-to-become-top-financial-hack/
[127] M. Zhang, L. Yang, S. He, M. Li, and J. Zhang, “Privacy-preserving
data aggregation for mobile crowdsensing with externality: An auction
approach,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, vol. 29, no. 3, pp.
1046–1059, Jun. 2021.

[128] Z. Xu and W. Liang, “Collusion-resistant repeated double auctions for
relay assignment in cooperative networks,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless
Communications, vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 1196–1207, Mar. 2014.

[129] M. Li, J. Yu, and J. Wu, “Free-riding on BitTorrent-like peer-to-peer ﬁle
sharing systems: Modeling analysis and improvement,” IEEE Transactions
on Parallel and Distributed Systems, vol. 19, no. 7, pp. 954–966, Jul. 2008.
[130] M. H. u. Rehman, K. Salah, E. Damiani, and D. Svetinovic, “Trust in
blockchain cryptocurrency ecosystem,” IEEE Transactions on Engineering
Management, vol. 67, no. 4, pp. 1196–1212, Nov. 2020.

[131] L. C. C. De Biase, P. C. Calcina-Ccori, G. Fedrecheski, G. M. Duarte,
P. S. S. Rangel, and M. K. Zuffo, “Swarm economy: A model for
transactions in a distributed and organic IoT platform,” IEEE Internet of
Things Journal, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 4561–4572, Jun. 2019.

[132] C. Liu, Y. Xiao, V. Javangula, Q. Hu, S. Wang, and X. Cheng, “Norma-
Chain: A blockchain-based normalized autonomous transaction settlement
system for IoT-based E-commerce,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal,
vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 4680–4693, Jun. 2019.

[133] L. Jiang, H. Zheng, H. Tian, S. Xie, and Y. Zhang, “Cooperative fed-
erated learning and model update veriﬁcation in blockchain empowered

digital twin edge networks,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 2021, doi:
10.1109/JIOT.2021.3126207.

[134] A. Das and M. M. Islam, “SecuredTrust: A dynamic trust computation
model for secured communication in multiagent systems,” IEEE Transac-
tions on Dependable and Secure Computing, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 261–274,
Mar.-Apr. 2012.

[135] X. Wang, W. Cheng, P. Mohapatra, and T. Abdelzaher, “Enabling repu-
tation and trust in privacy-preserving mobile sensing,” IEEE Transactions
on Mobile Computing, vol. 13, no. 12, pp. 2777–2790, Dec. 2013.
[136] F. Wu, T. Zhang, C. Qiao, and G. Chen, “A strategy-proof auction
mechanism for adaptive-width channel allocation in wireless networks,”
IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 34, no. 10, pp.
2678–2689, Oct. 2016.

[137] Y. Wang, Z. Su, T. Luan, R. Li, and K. Zhang, “Federated learning
with fair incentives and robust aggregation for UAV-aided crowdsensing,”
IEEE Transactions on Network Science and Engineering, 2021, doi:
10.1109/TNSE.2021.3138928.

[138] Z. Wan, T. Zhang, W. Liu, M. Wang, and L. Zhu, “Decentralized
privacy-preserving fair exchange scheme for V2G based on blockchain,”
IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing, 2021, doi:
10.1109/TDSC.2021.3059345.

[139] Y. Chen, X. Tian, Q. Wang, M. Li, M. Du, and Q. Li, “ARMOR: A secure
combinatorial auction for heterogeneous spectrum,” IEEE Transactions on
Mobile Computing, vol. 18, no. 10, pp. 2270–2284, Oct. 2019.

[140] K. Shin, C. Joe-Wong, S. Ha, Y. Yi, I. Rhee, and D. S. Reeves, “T-
Chain: A general incentive scheme for cooperative computing,” IEEE/ACM
Transactions on Networking, vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 2122–2137, Aug. 2017.

[141] M. Li, J. Weng, A. Yang, J.-N. Liu, and X. Lin, “Toward blockchain-
based fair and anonymous ad dissemination in vehicular networks,” IEEE
Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 68, no. 11, pp. 11 248–11 259,
Nov. 2019.

[142] R. Ma, S. Lee, J. Lui, and D. Yau, “Incentive and service differentiation in
P2P networks: A game theoretic approach,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on
Networking, vol. 14, no. 5, pp. 978–991, Oct. 2006.

[143] H. Shen, Y. Lin, K. Sapra, and Z. Li, “Enhancing collusion resilience
in reputation systems,” IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed
Systems, vol. 27, no. 8, pp. 2274–2287, Aug. 2016.

[144] J. Liu and B. Yang, “Collusion-resistant multicast key distribution based on
homomorphic one-way function trees,” IEEE Transactions on Information
Forensics and Security, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 980–991, Sept. 2011.

[145] K. Li, S. Wang, X. Cheng, and Q. Hu, “A misreport- and collusion-proof
crowdsourcing mechanism without quality veriﬁcation,” IEEE Transactions
on Mobile Computing, 2021, doi: 10.1109/TMC.2021.3052873.

[146] W. C. Ng, W. Y. B. Lim, J. S. Ng, Z. Xiong, D. Niyato, and C. Miao,
“Uniﬁed resource allocation framework for the edge intelligence-enabled
metaverse,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14325, 2021.

[147] Y. Jiang, J. Kang, D. Niyato, X. Ge, Z. Xiong, and C. Miao, “Reliable
coded distributed computing for metaverse services: Coalition formation
and incentive mechanism design,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.10548, 2021.
[148] S. Mondal, K. P. Wijewardena, S. Karuppuswami, N. Kriti, D. Kumar, and
P. Chahal, “Blockchain inspired RFID-based information architecture for
food supply chain,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 6, no. 3, pp.
5803–5813, Jun. 2019.

[149] Y. Wang, Z. Su, J. Li, N. Zhang, K. Zhang, K.-K. R. Choo, and
Y. Liu, “Blockchain-based secure and cooperative private charging pile
sharing services for vehicular networks,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular
Technology, vol. 71, no. 2, pp. 1857–1874, Feb. 2022.

[150] M. Baza, N. Lasla, M. M. E. A. Mahmoud, G. Srivastava, and M. Abdallah,
“B-Ride: Ride sharing with privacy-preservation, trust and fair payment
atop public blockchain,” IEEE Transactions on Network Science and
Engineering, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 1214–1229, Apr.-Jun. 2021.

[151] Y. Zhou, F. R. Yu, J. Chen, and Y. Kuo, “Cyber-physical-social systems:
A state-of-the-art survey, challenges and opportunities,” IEEE Communi-
cations Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 389–425, Firstquarter 2020.
[152] P. Casey, I. Baggili, and A. Yarramreddy, “Immersive virtual reality attacks
and the human joystick,” IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure
Computing, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 550–562, Mar.-Apr. 2021.

[153] Metaverse rollout brings new security risks, challenges. Accessed: Feb.
8, 2022. [Online]. Available: https://www.techtarget.com/searchsecurity/ne
ws/252513072/Metaverse-rollout-brings-new-security-risks-challenges

[154] C. Vellaithurai, A. Srivastava, S. Zonouz, and R. Berthier, “CPIndex:
Cyber-physical vulnerability assessment for power-grid infrastructures,”
IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 566–575, Mar. 2015.
[155] S. Valluripally, A. Gulhane, K. A. Hoque, and P. Calyam, “Modeling
and defense of social virtual reality attacks inducing cybersickness,”
IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing, 2021, doi:
10.1109/TDSC.2021.3121216.

[156] J. Zhu, P. Ni, and G. Wang, “Activity minimization of misinformation
inﬂuence in online social networks,” IEEE Transactions on Computational
Social Systems, vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 897–906, Aug. 2020.

31

[157] The metaverse

offers

for
[Online].
https://theconversation.com/the-metaverse-offers-a-future-ful

terrorists and extremists,
Available:
l-of-potential-for-terrorists-and-extremists-too-173622

full
future
a
too. Accessed:

potential
Jan. 7, 2022.

of

–

[158] P. Lau, L. Wang, Z. Liu, W. Wei, and C.-W. Ten, “A coalitional cyber-
insurance design considering power system reliability and cyber vulnerabil-
ity,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 36, no. 6, pp. 5512–5524,
Nov. 2021.

[159] S. Feng, W. Wang, Z. Xiong, D. Niyato, P. Wang, and S. S. Wang,
“On cyber risk management of blockchain networks: A game theoretic
approach,” IEEE Transactions on Services Computing, vol. 14, no. 5, pp.
1492–1504, Sept.-Oct. 2021.

[160] M. U. Tariq, J. Florence, and M. Wolf, “Improving the safety and security
of wide-area cyber–physical systems through a resource-aware, service-
oriented development methodology,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 106,
no. 1, pp. 144–159, Jan. 2018.

[161] F.-Y. Wang, R. Qin, X. Wang, and B. Hu, “MetaSocieties in Metaverse:
MetaEconomics and MetaManagement for MetaEnterprises and MetaCi-
ties,” IEEE Transactions on Computational Social Systems, vol. 9, no. 1,
pp. 2–7, Feb. 2022.

[162] Improving user experience in our transfer your information tool. Accessed:
Oct. 1, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://about.fb.com/news/2021/08/impr
oving-user-experience-in-our-transfer-your-information-tool/

[163] V. Almeida, F. Filgueiras, and D. Doneda, “The ecosystem of digital
content governance,” IEEE Internet Computing, vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 13–
17, May-June 2021.

[164] Y. Bai, Q. Hu, S.-H. Seo, K. Kang, and J. J. Lee, “Public participation
consortium blockchain for smart city governance,” IEEE Internet of Things
Journal, vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 2094–2108, Feb. 2022.

[165] S. Sayeed, H. Marco-Gisbert, and T. Caira, “Smart contract: Attacks and
protections,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 24 416–24 427, Jan. 2020.
[166] G. Huang, C. Luo, K. Wu, Y. Ma, Y. Zhang, and X. Liu, “Software-deﬁned
infrastructure for decentralized data lifecycle governance: Principled design
and open challenges,” in IEEE International Conference on Distributed
Computing Systems (ICDCS), Jul. 2019, pp. 1674–1683.

[167] M. Li, J. Weng, J.-N. Liu, X. Lin, and C. Obimbo, “Towards vehicular dig-
ital forensics from decentralized trust: An accountable, privacy-preserving,
and secure realization,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, May. 2021, doi:
10.1109/JIOT.2021.3116957.

[168] X. He, Q. Gong, Y. Chen, Y. Zhang, X. Wang, and X. Fu, “DatingSec:
Detecting malicious accounts in dating apps using a content-based attention
network,” IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing,
vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 2193–2208, Sept.-Oct. 2021.

[169] U. Gasser and V. A. Almeida, “A layered model for AI governance,” IEEE

Internet Computing, vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 58–62, Nov./Dec. 2017.

[170] F. Zambonelli, F. Salim, S. W. Loke, W. De Meuter, and S. Kanhere, “Al-
gorithmic governance in smart cities: The conundrum and the potential of
pervasive computing solutions,” IEEE Technology and Society Magazine,
vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 80–87, June 2018.

[171] B. Li, R. Lu, W. Wang, and K.-K. R. Choo, “DDOA: A Dirichlet-based
detection scheme for opportunistic attacks in smart grid cyber-physical
system,” IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security, vol. 11,
no. 11, pp. 2415–2425, Nov. 2016.

[172] A. Swaminathan, M. Wu, and K. R. Liu, “Digital image forensics via
intrinsic ﬁngerprints,” IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and
Security, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 101–117, Mar. 2008.

[173] M. C. Stamm, W. S. Lin, and K. J. R. Liu, “Temporal forensics and
anti-forensics for motion compensated video,” IEEE Transactions on
Information Forensics and Security, vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 1315–1329, Aug.
2012.

[174] D. Zou, J. Zhao, W. Li, Y. Wu, W. Qiang, H. Jin, Y. Wu, and Y. Yang,
“A multigranularity forensics and analysis method on privacy leakage in
cloud environment,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 6, no. 2, pp.
1484–1494, Apr. 2019.

[175] Z. Zhou, X. Kuang, L. Sun, L. Zhong, and C. Xu, “Endogenous security
defense against deductive attack: When artiﬁcial intelligence meets active
defense for online service,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 58,
no. 6, pp. 58–64, Jun. 2020.

[176] Y. Cao, Y. Zhao, Q. Wang, J. Zhang, S. X. Ng, and L. Hanzo, “The
evolution of quantum key distribution networks: On the road to the
qinternet,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 24, no. 2, pp.
839–894, Secondquarter 2022.

[177] P. Frauenthaler, M. Sigwart, C. Spanring, and S. Schulte, “Testimonium:
A cost-efﬁcient blockchain relay,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.12837, 2020.

Yuntao Wang is working on his Ph.D degree with
the School of Cyber Science and Engineering of Xi’an
Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China. His research interests
include security and privacy protection in general wire-
less networks and vehicular networks.

32

Tom H. Luan received the Ph.D. degree from the
University of Waterloo, Canada, in 2012. He is cur-
rently a Professor with the School of Cyber Science
and Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, China. He
has authored/coauthored more than 40 journal articles
and 30 technical articles in conference proceedings. He
awarded one U.S. patent. His research mainly focuses
on content distribution and media streaming in vehicular
ad hoc networks and peer-to-peer networking and the
protocol design and performance evaluation of wireless
cloud computing and edge computing. He served as a

TPC Member for IEEE Globecom, ICC, and PIMRC.

Zhou Su has published technical papers, including top
journals and top conferences, such as IEEE JOUR-
NAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICA-
TIONS, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION
FORENSICS AND SECURITY,
IEEE TRANSAC-
TIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUT-
ING, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MOBILE COMPUT-
ING, IEEE/ACM TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK-
ING, and INFOCOM. His research interests include
multimedia communication, wireless communication,
and network trafﬁc. Dr. Su received the Best Paper
Award of International Conference IEEE ICC2020, IEEE BigdataSE2019, and
IEEE CyberSciTech2017. He is an Associate Editor of IEEE INTERNET OF
THINGS JOURNAL, IEEE OPEN JOURNAL OF COMPUTER SOCIETY, and
IET Communications.

Ning Zhang received the Ph.D degree from University
of Waterloo, Canada,
in 2015. He is an Associate
Professor at University of Windsor, Canada. He serves as
an Associate Editor of IEEE Internet of Things Journal,
IEEE Transactions on Cognitive Communications and
Networking, IEEE Access, and IET Communications,
and Vehicular Communications (Elsevier); and a Guest
Editor of several international journals, such as IEEE
Wireless Communications, IEEE Transactions on Indus-
trial Informatics, and IEEE Transactions on Cognitive
Communications and Networking. He also serves/served
as a track chair for several international conferences and a co-chair for several
international workshops. He received the Best Paper Awards from IEEE Globecom
in 2014, IEEE WCSP in 2015, and Journal of Communications and Information
Networks in 2018, IEEE ICC in 2019, IEEE Technical Committee on Transmis-
sion Access and Optical Systems in 2019, and IEEE ICCC in 2019, respectively.

Rui Xing is currently working toward the Ph.D degree
with the School of Cyber Science and Engineering,
Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China. His research
interests include security protection and system opti-
mization in wireless networks and vehicular networks.

Dongxiao Liu received the PhD degree in the De-
partment of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Uni-
versity of Waterloo, Canada in 2020. He is currently
a Postdoctoral Fellow in the Department of Electrical
and Computer Engineering, University of Waterloo. His
research interests include security and privacy in intel-
ligent transportation systems, blockchain, and mobile
networks.

Xuemin (Sherman) Shen (Fellow, IEEE) received the
Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from Rutgers
University, New Brunswick, NJ, USA, in 1990. He is
currently a University Professor with the Department
of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of
Waterloo, Canada. He is also a registered Professional
Engineer in ON, Canada. He is an Engineering Institute
of Canada Fellow, a Canadian Academy of Engineering
Fellow, a Royal Society of Canada Fellow, a Chinese
Academy of Engineering Foreign Member, and a Dis-
tinguished Lecturer of the IEEE Vehicular Technology
Society and Communications Society. He received the R.A. Fessenden Award
from IEEE, Canada, in 2019; the Award of Merit from the Federation of Chinese
Canadian Professionals, ON, Canada, in 2019; the Technical Recognition Award
from the Wireless Communications Technical Committee in 2019; the James
Evans Avant Garde Award from the IEEE Vehicular Technology Society in 2018;
the Education Award in 2017 and the Joseph LoCicero Award in 2015 from
the IEEE Communications Society; the AHSN Technical Committee in 2013;
the Excellent Graduate Supervision Award from the University of Waterloo in
2006; and the Premier’s Research Excellence Award (PREA) from the Province
of Ontario, Canada, in 2003. He served as the Technical Program Committee
Chair/Co-Chair for IEEE Globecom’16, IEEE Infocom’14, IEEE VTC’10 Fall,
and IEEE Globecom’07, and the Chair for the IEEE Communications Society
Technical Committee on Wireless Communications. He was the Vice President
for the Technical and Educational Activities and Publications; a Member-at-Large
on the Board of Governors; and the Chair of the Distinguished Lecturer Selection
Committee. He is also the President Elect of the IEEE Communications Society.
He served as the Editor-in-Chief for IEEE Internet of Things Journal, IEEE
Network, and IET Communications.

