Blockchain for the Metaverse: A Review

Thippa Reddy Gadekallu, Senior Member, IEEE, Thien Huynh-The, Member, IEEE, Weizheng Wang,
Gokul Yenduri, Pasika Ranaweera, Member, IEEE, Quoc-Viet Pham, Member, IEEE,
Daniel Benevides da Costa, Senior Member, IEEE, and Madhusanka Liyanage, Senior Member, IEEE

1

2
2
0
2

r
a

M
1
2

]
I
S
.
s
c
[

2
v
8
3
7
9
0
.
3
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Since Facebook ofﬁcially changed its name to Meta-
verse in Oct. 2021, the metaverse has become a new norm
of social networks and three-dimensional (3D) virtual worlds.
The metaverse aims to bring 3D immersive and personalized
experiences to users by leveraging many pertinent technologies.
Despite great attention and beneﬁts, a natural question in
the metaverse is how to secure its users’ digital content and
data. In this regard, blockchain is a promising solution owing
to its distinct features of decentralization,
immutability, and
transparency. To better understand the role of blockchain in
the metaverse, we aim to provide an extensive survey on the
applications of blockchain for the metaverse. We ﬁrst present
a preliminary to blockchain and the metaverse and highlight
the motivations behind the use of blockchain for the metaverse.
Next, we extensively discuss blockchain-based methods for the
metaverse from technical perspectives, such as data acquisition,
data storage, data sharing, data interoperability, and data privacy
preservation. For each perspective, we ﬁrst discuss the technical
challenges of the metaverse and then highlight how blockchain
can help. Moreover, we investigate the impact of blockchain on
key-enabling technologies in the metaverse, including Internet-of-
Things, digital twins, multi-sensory and immersive applications,
artiﬁcial intelligence, and big data. We also present some major
projects to showcase the role of blockchain in metaverse applica-
tions and services. Finally, we present some promising directions
to drive further research innovations and developments towards
the use of blockchain in the metaverse in the future.

Index Terms—Blockchain, metaverse, privacy, vertical appli-

cations.

I. INTRODUCTION

The metaverse is the next phase of digital evolution that
can revolutionize the digital adoption to a staggering level and
extends the domain of services beyond the standard systems
with online access. Digitization of services has become the
trend for improving the efﬁciency in the ﬁelds of business,

Thien Huynh-The is with the ICT Convergence Research Center, Kumoh
National Institute of Technology, Gumi, Gyeongsangbuk-do 39177, Korea (e-
mail: thienht@kumoh.ac.kr).

Thippa Reddy Gadekallu and Gokul Yenduri are with the School of
Information Technology, Vellore Institute of Technology, Tamil Nadu- 632014,
India (e-mail: {thippareddy.g, gokul.yenduri}@vit.ac.in).

Weizheng Wang is with the Department of Computer Science, City Uni-

versity of Hong Kong, Hong Kong (e-mail: weizheng.wang@ieee.org).

Pasika Ranaweera is with the School of Computer Science, University

College Dublin, Ireland (e-mail: pasika.ranaweera@ucdconnect.ie).

Quoc-Viet Pham is with the Korean Southeast Center for the 4th Industrial
Revolution Leader Education, Pusan National University, Busan 46241, Korea
(e-mail: vietpq@pusan.ac.kr).

Daniel Benevides da Costa is with the AI & Telecom Research Center,
Technology Innovation Institute, Abu Dhabi, UAE, and Future Technology
Research Center, National Yunlin University of Science and Technology,
Taiwan, R.O.C. (e-mail: danielbcosta@ieee.org).

Madhusanka Liyanage is with the School of Computer Science, Uni-
versity Collage Dublin, Ireland and Centre for Wireless Communications,
University of Oulu, Finland (e-mail: madhusanka@ucd.ie and madhu-
sanka.liyanage@oulu.ﬁ).

entertainment, education, or any other system that can be
integrated with online access over the past few decades. These
services and systems were improved to its maximum potential
with the capabilities provided with digital systems and online
storage/ processing facilities at remote data centres and cloud
platforms. With the efﬁciency, performance, and quality of the
service access reaching to its highest potential, the perspective
has been shifted towards the consumer experience. Thus, the
demand for improved service experience with more interactive
capability is ever increasing and service providers are keen on
elevating their existing standards to the next level. In fact,
consumers are demanding haptic and immersive capabilities
with their digital interfacing, where such traits are only pos-
sible with the emerging technologies of Virtual Reality (VR),
Augmented Reality (AR), Mixed Reality (MR), and Extended
Reality (XR) [1]. The metaverse is the solution that amalga-
mate all these pertinent technologies in the global context. This
concept creates a simulated digitized environment that can be
endured as an immersive virtual world for its prosumers. Users
can interact with this virtual eco system through their digital
avatars in compliance to the duality principle [2]. Concretely,
the avatars are the virtual embodiments of the users, and has
the same legal authority in the metaverse as one’s legal rights
in the real world; this makes the avatar warranted for any
transactions made within the virtual domain and restricts from
repudiating any committed action. The access can be gained
by any person having a VR/ AR enabled immersive device,
such as a headset or a glass under the minimal capability [3].
On the contrary, full-body haptic bodysuits such as Teslasuit
or Holosuit carries the potential to embrace the immersive
experience to its peak with the capability to track the motions,
extract haptic feedback along with transcended biometrics.

Despite the metaverse being developed and intended to
expand the scope of capabilities in social media, its potential
for other industrial, commercial, societal, educational, medical,
military, and governmental sectors are immense. Lack of
immersive experience is a well-known drawback with the
online remote access and control systems. Specially in the
instances of controlling Supervisory Control and Data Ac-
quisition (SCADA) or Programmable Logic Controller (PLC)
based remote automation systems [4], ﬁtting on apparels,
perception in commercial real-estate or architecture, under-
standing Three-Dimensional (3D) visualization in medical/
engineering/ or architectural education, remote controlling of
unmanned aerial/ naval/ or ground vessels, experiencing digital
entertainment beyond the 2 dimensions are areas that required
more innovation. Though AR and VR technologies offered
standalone solutions for these areas, an all-in-one platform
or an environment was lacking to combine these tools. The

 
 
 
 
 
 
metaverse offers this digital eco-system to the world, and
widely open the scope of possibilities beyond measure. The
concept of Digital Twins (DTs) empowers the remote oper-
ation and controlling of machines or vehicles with improved
visualization and coordination, and beneﬁt both industrial and
military sectors [5]. Three-dimensional visualization is leading
that
for better accuracy and understanding of the context
beneﬁt both educational and entertainment applications. In
addition, novel directives such as AR based remote robotic
controlling, AR based remote surgery are achievable with
the concept such as
the metaverse platform [6]. Further,
cryptocurrency [7], digital-biometrics [8], and explainable arti-
ﬁcial intelligence (XAI) [9] are facing unavoidable challenges
when implementing them in the real-world; with the issues of
integrating to existing systems, compatibility, inter-operability,
legal, and ethical discrepancies. As the metaverse is a newly
building world, implementing these strategies at the design
stages would allow more assurance on security and privacy
for its users with enhanced service experience.

Though the metaverse is produced as a panacea for future
digital expansion, there exist challenges and pragmatic issues
hovering around it. Most critical
issue being the lack of
a serviceable digital
infrastructure to offer the guaranteed
services and applications with attributed processing and net-
working capabilities. Even such an infrastructure exists, access
technologies required to offer the envisaged speciﬁcations are
only viable with emerging 5G mobile technology, which is
in its experimental stages and not deployed globally.
still
The compatibility and inter-operability between the virtual
and physical worlds are to be understood and standardized
before launching the metaverse. It is obvious that, even with
a formidable level of a processing capability at the metaverse
engines, resources might not be sufﬁcient to serve the demand
considering its potential and scalability with the social-media
backbone. Thus, optimum processing and operation strategies
must be adopted to alleviate the cost in terms of processing,
storage, networking, and ﬁnancial. Such strategies are only
possible through automated AI based approaches and requires
more assimilation and research on that subject. As a person
is required to be equipped with a headset or a AR glass to
access the metaverse at the minimum, the higher personal
investment makes it a privileged service rather than a open
system for everyone. Further, security and privacy of the users
are imperative aspects, where certain privacy laws possible
in the real-world might not be accountable in the virtual
domain, while the prominent biometrics in the real-world can
be replicated within the digital domain. Therefore, deploying
the metaverse in a pragmatic context requires much more
research and proper standardization.

XR is an obvious technology required for the metaverse
development, where current AR and MR technologies should
be improved to the level in which to advocate full integration
of virtual entities to a super-realistic level, and to improve
its omnipresence. AI, as speciﬁed earlier, plays a key role in
automating the metaverse eco-system to hand in the complete
control to the digital governance. AI involvement will fur-
ther assure the prosumers of their digital assets and content
is bounded by their avatar. Existing computer
safety,

that

2

vision processing should be empowered with AI integration
to enhance the 3D image processing, while image/video/3D
rendering technologies can be improved to accelerate the query
processing of the visual and telemetry data. XAI practices
should be employed at the design stages to ensure global
compliance for compatibility. As the existing cloud computing
based storage and processing infrastructure lacks the required
networking capability to host the metaverse applications, edge
computing is a nascent paradigm essential to launch it that
enables elevated access capacity along with context and lo-
cation aware features due to its proximate nature. Further,
network slicing can be employed to organize and structure the
metaverse application ﬂow among the eight enablers presented
in [2].

Introduced with the bitcoin cryptocurrency, blockchain rose
to fame due to its unique ability to form a shared economy
and laid the foundation to existing digital currency market.
Blockchain has been considered a breakthrough technique
for security and privacy preservation [10]. In simpler terms,
blockchain is a ledger that stores the committed transactions
to facilitate digital asset tracing and securing in a commercial
network. These transactions or records being stored as blocks,
are linked together using cryptographic measures, or hashing
mechanisms to be precise, ensures the ledgers‘ immutability
and enables secure sharing capability even in an insecure envi-
ronment. Most salient feature of blockchain is its capability to
operate on decentralized ledger content without a centralized
authority [11]. Since blockchain is employing proof of work
as the consensus mechanism, the method itself deems it more
secure and suitable for e-commerce platforms. In the context
of the metaverse, blockchain is the pertinent enabler intended
to enforce accountability into the digital eco-system.

The requirement for blockchain is imminent, where securing
the digital content in possession of all the users of the meta-
verse is its prime purpose. The metaverse eco-system relies
on blockchain for accounting their content and transactions to
ensure user integrity, privacy, and reputation.

A. Related Works and Contributions

The metaverse related studies and surveys are widely
available and has incremented over the past few years [12].
In spite of its evident potential, blockchain based studies
are limited and its wide adoption for various applications
are not available at present. The authors in [2] presented
a comprehensive survey, and can be considered as the ﬁrst
scientiﬁc publication that discussed about the metaverse on a
broader technical context. Blockchain has been introduced as
one of the technological enablers out of seven other pillars.
The authors identiﬁed data storage, data sharing, and data
interoperability as the main uses of blockchain. A deeper study
was not conducted on blockchain as the scope of the paper is
quite wide. The important position blockchain holds in the
metaverse inception is discussed in [12] concerning govern-
mental and economic sectors while its possible utilization for
virtual reality object connection is speciﬁed. However, this
survey fails to build on those speciﬁed facts descriptively.

The idea of fusing blockchain and AI for the metaverse
development was presented in [11] as a survey. This paper

TABLE I
EMPHASIZING THE CONTRIBUTION OF THIS PAPER IN CONTRAST TO THE
STATE-OF-THE-ART

Context

Metaverse Technical Perspec-
tive
Blockchain as an Enabling
Technology for Metaverse
Applications of Blockchain
Technical
Adoptable
Methods
Impact
Metaverse Enablers

of
Blockchain

of Blockchain

Perspective

for

]
2
1
[

]
2
[

]
1
1
[

]
3
1
[

]
4
1
[

]
6
1
[

s
r
u
O

(cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88)

(cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88)

(cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88)
(cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88)

(cid:88)
(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88) Technical Analysis

(cid:88) High Level

(cid:88) Introducing

discusses the potential correlation between the metaverse
and blockchain through the layered architecture composed of
data, network, consensus, incentive, contract, and application
layers. Though the authors present four blockchain empowered
applications, they are mostly focused on the commercial usage
of blockchain. Contribution of blockchain and AI for the
metaverse was presented in [13], where handling and reusing
high quality/ rich data, stabilizing the decentralized network,
privacy of data, and handling of economic related data are
discussed brieﬂy. In addition, there are various studies [14]–
[16] that mention blockchain as a requisite for the metaverse,
though fails to discuss them rigorously. Table I emphasizes
the contribution of this paper. To the best of our knowledge,
there hasn’t been a study that discusses the utilization of
blockchain for the metaverse applications. Thus, our study
presents diverse potential applications for the metaverse where
blockchain integration would enhance their efﬁciency, and
impact of blockchain for enabling technologies.
The main contributions of this survey are:
• Firstly, we present a brief overview of blockchain and the
metaverse, followed by the motivation behind integration
of blockchain in the metaverse.

• Secondly, we discuss application of blockchain for ad-
dressing the challenges faced by several technical aspects
of the metaverse including, data acquisition, data stor-
age, data sharing, data interoperability, and data privacy
preservation.

• Thirdly, we discuss about the impact of blockchain on
some of the key enabling technologies in the metaverse
such as Internet of Things, digital twins, multi-sensory
XR and hologrtaphic telepresence, AI, and the big data.
the interesting
projects such as Decentraland, Sandbox, Axie Inﬁnity,
and Illuvium that leverage blockchain in the metaverse.
• Finally, we conclude the paper with some potential future

• Fourthly, we discuss about some of

research directions.

B. Paper Organization

The rest of

is organized as follows. The
fundamentals of blockchain,the metaverse, and the role of

this paper

3

blockchain in the metaverse are presented in Section II. The
applications of blockchain for the metaverse from technical
perspectives are discussed in Section III. In Section IV, we
discuss the impact of blockchain for enabling technologies in
the metaverse, including IoT, digital twin, multi-sensory XR
applications and holographic telepresence, AI, and big data.
After that, we discuss about some of the exciting projects
related to blockchain enabled metavserse applications in Sec-
tion V. Finally, we conclude the paper with some potential
research directions in Section VI.

II. BLOCKCHAIN AND THE METAVERSE: PRELIMINARIES

The preliminary introduction to blockchain and the meta-
verse is presented in this section, followed by the role of
blockchain in the metaverse.

A. Preliminaries of Blockchain

The conception of blockchain origins from a white paper
written by Nakamoto Satoshi in 2008 [17]. Blockchain, also
called distributed ledger, owns consecutive blocks, which are
linked with each other through the hash value of previous
block header. Other than the inevitable cryptographic hash,
timestamp, nonce and transaction data are also included in
a block [18]. The block timestamp is considered valid only
if its value is more than the network-adjusted time plus two
hours and greater than the median timestamp of prior eleven
blocks, which prevents adversary to manipulate the blockchain
possibly. Note that network-adjusted time refers to median
of the timestamps from entire connected nodes. The smooth
execution of blockchain is not
just maintained by one or
several nodes, instead, each node in the blockchain network
should comply with a common consensus protocol to generate
and validate new blocks. Consensus protocol is the backbone
of blockchain where the operating principles and legitimate
actions are all regulated [19]. The famous bitcoin adopts
Proof of Work (PoW) mechanism, which demands miners to
contribute a great number of computing power to ﬁgure out an
answer for the random mathematical problem [20]. In order
to avoid centralization of computing power, the difﬁculty, also
called nonce of next block generation, is dynamically changed
on the basis of 10 minutes per block. Although unimagin-
able computation power hinder majority of attackers, PoW
also leads to inefﬁcient transaction rate and excessive energy
consumption. Proof-of-Stake (PoS) alleviates the problems
brought by PoW, so the miner who becomes ultimate winner
depends on their quantity of holdings in the corresponding
cryptocurrency rather than computing power [21]. The recent
emerging InterPlanetary File System (IPFS) propagates Proof
of Space (PoSpace) consensus, which requires participants to
supply some storage space to prove a challenge posted by
the service provider [22]. The transaction data is organized
in the form of Merkle tree for each block, which improves
the veriﬁcation efﬁciency. Note that Merkle tree enables users
to download any branch for check without full transaction
records. The above-mentioned general parts of blockchain and
the processing of transactions in a blockchain are depicted in
Fig. 1 and Fig. 2 respectively.

The representative of ﬁrst generation blockchain is bitcoin,
which only decentralizes the transaction records. Later, re-
searchers found the blockchain can overload more functions
such as asset management and family trust not merely a ledger.
Hence, the second generation of blockchain-Ethereum came
into the picture. The main innovation brought by Ethereum
is the emergence of smart contracts [23]. The rules of smart
contract written into codes are stored in the blockchain. The
transactions can be used to trigger the corresponding functions
in the smart contracts, which automatically transfer funds
or send notiﬁcations to the predetermined accounts. Since
the smart contract
is accessible to everyone, a series of
applications spring up in a short time. For example, smart
contracts strengthen the security of voting process, which
becomes hard to be manipulated and decoded by the malicious
guys. Moreover, the insurance industry unites hospitals to track
and record patient information in the blockchain, where the
smart contract can help the corporations claim settlement to
the patient immediately. Recently, one of the smart contract
derivation–Non-fungible tokens (NFTs) are popular around
the world. Ethereum issues some standards such as ERC-
721 and ERC-1155 to introduce the features of assets built
on NFTs. Unlike cyrptocurrencies in Bitcoin and Ethereum,
each NFTs are non-interchangeable and cannot be divided.
The NFT market is now worth more than $7 billion dollar,
including art, games, sports, copyright, insurance and many
other areas [24].

Fig. 1. General structure of a blockchain, in which blocks connected with
each other through their respective hash codes.

B. Preliminaries of the Metaverse

1) What is the metaverse?: The word “meta” origins from
the Greek language, which is a preﬁx that means “more
comprehensive” or “transcending”1. The word “Verse” is ab-
breviated version of universe, which represents a space/time

4

Fig. 2.

Illustration of a transaction processed by the blockchain technology.

container 2. When these two words are combined, a brand new
word “Metaverse” comes into the picture, where the traditional
social systems are transformed into a novel digital living space.
State-of-the-art technologies such as virtual reality (VR), dig-
ital twin, blockchain, etc are used to build the metaverse that
maps everything in our real world [15] to a parallel universe.
For example, users can work, live and play with friends from
any place in the metaverse. In 1992, Neal Stephenson, in his
famous science ﬁction novel called Snow Crash [25] ﬁrstly
proposed the initial conception of the metaverse, where people
utilize digital avatars to control and compete with each other
to upgrade their status. However, till now, the metaverse is in
its conceptional stage; there are common standards and very
few real implementations are available.

2) What are enabling technologies of metaverse?: The
metaverse is a fusion of multiple emerging technologies such
as 6G, artiﬁcial intelligence (AI), VR and digital twins. The
core technologies required in the metaverse are:

1) The most important technology for realization of the
metaverse is extended reality technology, including AR
and VR. While AR can overlay and superimpose digital
information onto the physical environment, VR allows
users to experience the digital world in a vivid way
[26]. Both these techniques are very important in the
development of the metaverse, which creates digital
space where the users can interact as in the real world.
2) The second important technology is digital twin, which
establishes a virtual
twin of a real world object by
utilizing real world data to predict the expected behavior
of the real world object [27]. In the metaverse, digital
twin can mirror the real world into the virtual world.
Correspondingly, the metaverse can also ﬁnd some trial
solutions to the unsolved issues in the real world.
3) The third technology–blockchain plays two irreplaceable
roles in the metaverse. On one side, blockchain tech-
nology serves as a repository, so users can use it to
store data anywhere in the metaverse. On the other side,
blockchain technology can provide a complete economic

1https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Met

2https://alldimensions.fandom.com/wiki/Category:Verse

Block 1 HeaderHash Value of thePrevious BlockHeaderRoot of Hash TreeTX1-1TX1-2TX1-3Block 2 HeaderHash Value of thePrevious BlockHeaderRoot of Hash TreeTX2-1TX2-2TX2-3Block 3 HeaderHash Value of thePrevious BlockHeaderRoot of Hash TreeTX3-1TX3-2TX3-3Hash ValueHHHHash ValueHash ValueHHash ValueHash ValueHHash ValueHash ValueTX2-1TX2-nTX2-2TX2-3H...HHash functionConnection of BlocksCollection of TransactionsTransactionsA transactionis requestA block representingthe transaction iscreatedThe block is transmitted to a peer-to-peer networking computersscratter across the worldThe network validates andconfirms the transaction'svalidity built in the blockThe block is chainedtogether creatig a longhistory of all transactions.Nodes in the networkreceive a reward forthe Proof of workThe transaction iscompletesystem to connect the virtual world of the metaverse with
the real world. Especially, the above-mentioned NFTs
allow virtual goods to become physical objects. Users
are allowed to trade virtual items in the same way as in
the real world. Hence, blockchain bridges the real world
and the metaverse [13].

3) What are applications of the metaverse?: Some of the

popular applications of the metaverse are as follows.

• Online video conference: In the surreal atmosphere of
the Covid-19 pandemic, many small corporations are kept
alive through the application of telecommuting. However,
as we all know, face-to-face communication is signiﬁcant,
70% expression of people comes from body language
rather than verbal language. Telecommuting has a number
of problems unlike traditional face-to-face collaboration,
such as inefﬁcient cooperation, delay interaction and
misunderstood feedback [28]. However, in the metaverse,
people can utilize a friendly avatar to walk around and
work in the virtual space. Even the body language or eye
interaction can be used to communicate with working
partner from different angles, which will greatly improve
telecommuting.

• Digital Real Estate: In general, real estate refers to
property consisting of land and buildings, which can be
used for establishment, living, investment, rent, sale and
buy. In the metaverse, the above-mentioned activities can
also be implemented. Besides, the same factors in the
reality such as location, amenities and transportation can
inﬂuence house prices in the virtual world. For example,
in the metaverse, users can collect and sell households
to the public for a second time, as well as organize art
exhibitions, music festivals, gaming competitions and so
on. The virtual platform explicitly emphasises the scarcity
of virtual land to users, which is offered to users at
auction and traded for NFTs [29].

• Digital Arts: Traditionally, people establish the 3D im-
ages through some modelling tools such as Maya and
ZBrush. However, the metaverse has a strong focus on the
display layer, which brings new ways of expression and
artwork creation, so we can draw ﬁgures by using a brush
directly. On one side, with the growing popularity of AI
painting, digital art is gradually coming to the public’s
attention. On the other hand, the emerging blockchain
technology has also brought traditional artworks from
ofﬂine to online. In the virtual gallery placed in the
metaverse, the users can enter the gallery to appreciate
from all dimensions [30].

C. Role of Blockchain in the Metaverse

When it comes to the metaverse,

the imagination of a
variety of dazzling experiences or fun games may rise in
our mind. However, the scenario closely related to us is just
a parallel world, where the economic ecology is inevitable.
Moreover, the digital assets are the core functions provided
by the blockchain, such as the homogenized tokens based on
ERC-20 and the non-homogenized tokens based on ERC-721
or ERC-1155. Since the blockchain technology can maintain

5

the smooth economic operation of metaverse, blockchain tech-
nology is the soul of the metaverse.

The motivation behind integration of blockchain in the

metaverse are summarized below

• Ensuring Data Privacy and Security: The metaverse
collects vast volumes of sensitive information in order to
present the user with the greatest possible experiences.
The organizations or the applications need this data for
the successful development of targeting systems. If the
information is leaked into the hands of the wrong people
they might also target users in the real world. Blockchain,
with its authentication, access control, and the consensus
mechanisms provide the users complete control of their
data thereby securing the data privacy of the users.
The blockchain uses asymmetric-key encryption and hash
functions which ensure security of data in the metaverse.
the Data: The metaverse
receives data from multiple applications ranging from
healthcare to entertainment. The AI models in the meta-
verse rely on this data for making key decisions for its
stakeholders. The creation of the objects in the metaverse
relies highly on the quality of data shared by the users
from the real world. Blockchain, provides complete audit
trails of transactions, allowing individuals and organiza-
tions to validate all transactions. This will increase the
data quality in the metaverse.

• Ensuring the Quality of

• Enabling Seamless and Secured Data Sharing: The
metaverse depends on AR and VR devices, resulting
in a more connected and immersive world. The meta-
verse’s real beneﬁt resides in its integration with AR
on digital and physical objects. The metaverse’s success
is dependent on the seamless sharing of AR and VR
data, which enables the development of new, advanced
applications that aid in resolving real-world problems.
The blockchain’s advanced encoding information system
enables the metaverse’s data sharing to be seamless and
secure.

• Enabling Data Interoperability: In the metaverse, stake-
holders need to access and hold assets in different virtual
worlds and use a variety of applications. Data interoper-
ability across these virtual worlds is limited due to the dif-
ferent environments in which they are built. It is possible
to exchange data on two or more blockchains located in
distinct virtual worlds using a cross-chain protocol. Users
can migrate more easily between these virtual worlds
because of the blockchain’s interoperability.

• Ensuring Data Integrity: The metaverse’s data must be
maintained consistently and accurately. The stakeholders
may lose faith in the metaverse if the integrity of the
data is compromised. The metaverse data is saved as a
copy in every block throughout the chain that can’t be
amended or removed without the consent of majority of
the participants, due to the immutability provided by the
blockchain. This mechanism of blockchain ensures the
data integrity of the metaverse.

Some use cases of application of blockchain in the meta-

verse are discussed below.

• Financial system: Tamper-proof, openness, transparency
and decentralization are the four signiﬁcant features in
blockchain. In the metaverse, millions of transactions
happen for goods exchange in a short
time [31], so
the security and efﬁciency of these transactions must
be guaranteed. Based on the above-mentioned features,
blockchain is a good candidate for the large-scale and
scalable economic system construction in the virtual
world.

• Smart contract deployment: The inherent nature of the
blockchain network allows smart contracts to be auto-
mated, programmable, open, transparent and veriﬁable
among other remarkable features, thus allowing for on-
chain trusted interactions without the need for a third-
party veriﬁcation platform. If the ﬁnancial system in
the metaverse is built on top of the blockchain,
the
characteristics of smart contracts can be used to decen-
tralise the operation of contracts in a programmed, non-
custodial, veriﬁable, traceable and trustworthy manner,
thus signiﬁcantly reducing the harmful behaviours such
as rent-seeking, corruption and underhanded operations
that may exist in the ﬁnancial system, and can be widely
used in the ﬁnancial, social and gaming sectors.

• NFTs: The most important feature of NFT is indivision
and uniqueness, which make it suitable for identity rep-
resentation, for example, assets that are exclusive and
indivisible and can be freely traded and transferred. In
the metaverse, these virtual assets come with certiﬁcates
called NFTs that indicate ownership [24].

III. BLOCKCHAIN FOR THE METAVERSE: TECHNICAL
PERSPECTIVE

This section investigates the state-of-the-art blockchain-
based methods for the metaverse from the technical perspec-
tives, including data acquisition, data storage, data sharing,
data interoperability, and data privacy preservation. The il-
lustration of blockchain for the above-mentioned technical
aspects in the metaverse is depicted in Fig. 3.

A. Data Acquisition

1) Introduction: Data acquisition is an important step in
the metaverse ecosystem. Some of the sensitive data from the
users such as bank/credit card details are acquired when the
users make payments. In addition, sensitive data such as bio-
metrics poses/gestures of the users have to be acquired in the
metaverse to create digital avatars [32]. Data acquisition helps
in training the AI/ML algorithms that can assist in decision
making, digital product development, recommendation system
development, and marketing in the metaverse [15]. Data ac-
quisition in the metaverse will help applications create better
insights, able to change over time, and adapt to new situations.
The metaverse will be a digital marketplace where people
can buy, sell, play, talk, and work digitally using various
devices as depicted in Fig. 3. Hence, massive amounts of
heterogeneous data will be generated [33]. Some of the data
acquisition methods that can be used in the metaverse are as
follows. Web forms will be one of the data collection tools

6

in the metaverse for gathering information from users. Clients
can quickly and easily ﬁll out information using web forms
before being granted access to the metaverse capabilities. Bots
can capture personal information and required authentication
elements like the social security number from the users [34].
A high-deﬁnition camera in the metaverse helps to gather
information about a user’s physical attributes. The physical
attributes of the user are used to build a digital representation
of the user in the virtual world [29]. The client will beneﬁt
from the use of AR/VR gadgets to explore the metaverse.
These gadgets will be used to gather information about the
user’s behavior [35].

2) Challenges of Data Acquisition in the Metaverse:
Data generated through decentralized applications (Dapps) like
in the
WeiFund, Etheria, 4G Capital, and Ampliative Art
metaverse will be huge, unstructured, and real-time. It poses
a signiﬁcant challenge in acquiring the enormous data being
generated. Data assurity or integrity will become important
for building applications like recommender systems in the
metaverse. These systems will be affected if the data is
gathered from unknown sources as it can impact the reliability
of these systems [36]. The volume of data will skyrocket in
the metaverse as it provides high-quality digital services like
Horizon Worlds and Horizon Venues applications using VR
headsets [37]. This will create a burden on data acquisition
systems due to increase in streaming in entertainment and
other applications [38]. Duplicate and inaccurate data may also
be acquired which will affect the quality of data [39].

3) How Blockchain Can Help: Acquisition of authentic
data in the metaverse will be made easier for applications like
social networking with the adaption of blockchain technol-
ogy. Distributed ledger in blockchain will allow validation of
transaction records and tracing the data in the metaverse [40],
[41]. As a result, data acquisition is resistant to attacks as
the majority of nodes in the ledger must approve any changes
to the data in the metaverse [42]. All the data acquired in
the metaverse is subjected to a blockchain-speciﬁc validation
procedure which is powered by consensus mechanisms [43],
[44]. In a blockchain, every activity is recorded as a transaction
and each block contains a cryptographic hash of the previous
block along with a timestamp and the metadata [45]. Hence,
in a block, data cannot be altered without altering the other
blocks. The data obtained from any block is resistant
to
tampering [46]. The chance of creating a duplicate block is
almost zero which ensures no duplication in the process of data
acquisition. As every block is authorized in the blockchain, the
data acquired through blockchain enabled acquisition systems
in the metaverse will be reliable [47].

4) Summary: In the metaverse, data acquisition presents a
challenge in terms of ensuring high-quality and authentic data.
Although blockchain technology will enable data acquisition
systems to overcome these constraints, blockchain can be slow
due to its complexity and distributed nature [48]. Transactions
on a blockchain can take much longer to complete. The entire
transaction may take a few days. As a result, transaction fees
are higher than usual, and the number of users on the network
is limited [49]. Data collected in a blockchain must be copied
along the chain, increasing storage demand. The more data

7

Fig. 3. Blockchain for technical aspects in the metaverse.

collected, the more storage space is needed [50]. To address
these issues in data acquisition systems, there is still room for
research in developing matured blockchain for the metaverse.

B. Data Storage

1) Introduction: The metaverse is a digital realm that exists
alongside the physical world and is governed by humans.
The metaverse will comprise of experiences, places, and the
things accessible over the Internet. The metaverse requires
massive amounts of data storage. Every person who enters the
metaverse creates a data ﬁle, and the data continues to grow as
a result of social interactions. Massive amounts of data will be
generated once the metaverse is built and implemented, laying
a signiﬁcant strain on the real world’s ability to process that
information. Data storage will have to be a top priority in order
to put the metaverse to use [29].

2) Challenges of Data Storage in the Metaverse: In the
metaverse, a digital reality exists alongside the physical world.
As more people join the digital worlds, large amounts of data
ﬁles are created, and as a result, the metaverse will generate
voluminous data. The physical world’s data storage capacity
will be pushed to the limits as soon as the metaverse is
fully operational. As a result, data storage will be a major
challenge for deploying metaverse applications like gaming,
entertainment, real estate, healthcare, etc [51]. There is a risk
of data leakage, tampering, or loss if the metaverse relies on
a central storage system. The high probability of data loss
[52] and corruption in centralized applications endangers the
metaverse’s ability to provide biometric data, vocal inﬂections,

and vital signs that rely on sensitive data [53]. Data labeling
and organization will be another signiﬁcant challenge with
huge amounts of data produced by the metaverse applications
[54].

3) How blockchain can help: For every transaction, a new
block is created, making the metaverse storage impenetrable
to tampering [55]. Consequently, data is saved as a replica of
the original blocks throughout the chain, boosting data relia-
bility and transparency in the metaverse [13]. The metaverse
applications, ranging from real estate to digital objects will
be at high risk if the centralized data storage is compromised
[56]. The use of blockchain technology will result in numerous
blocks contributing to data distribution and thereby increasing
data availability in applications like vital monitoring and life
support alerts in the metaverse. The decentralized nature of
blockchain technology allows data scientists in the metaverse
to collaborate and work on data cleansing, which will signiﬁ-
cantly reduce the time and costs associated with labeling data
and preparing datasets for analytics [57].

4) Summary: The decentralized nature of blockchain tech-
nology will reduce the time it takes to identify and label
data while also serving as a collaborative platform for data
scientists. Furthermore, in the metaverse, the blockchain pro-
vides data reliability, transparency, and availability as depicted
in the Fig. 3. The data will be backed up in every block
of the blockchain. A consensus-based distributed ledger will
help the data in the metaverse to be resistant to tampering
and duplication [58]. However, more research is required to
address the issue of latency, as any data added must be

SecurityAnonymityAuditsAuthenticationAnti-temperingAccess ControlVirtual RealEstateBLOCKCHAINMetaverseData PrivacyData InteoperabilityPaymentsNFTPrivate key & public keyThird party applicationsTraceabilityTransparencyFlexibilityAdaptabilityData SharingSmartContractCrosschain Technology& Zero TrustMechanismDiversifiedProgramming &Smart ContractInterplanetary FileSystemHigh TransactionCostsDecentralizedLabelingLedgerAvailabilityImmutabilityData StorageDecentralizedStorageLatency & HardForksImmutabilitySmartGlassesAR/VRDevicesAI BotsHapticGlovesIoTDevicesSmartDevicesData AcquisitionHigh quality and authentic dataBlock chainspecific validationRequireshugestoragemirrored throughout the entire chain. Although data tampering
is impossible in blockchain, a hard fork is a possibility that
must be considered.

C. Data Sharing

1) Introduction: Data sharing can beneﬁt a diverse spec-
trum of the metaverse stakeholders in numerous ways. As
people and applications share the same platform, they may
collaborate more effectively as depicted in Fig. 3. Everyone,
from scientists to the general public, will beneﬁt from data
exchange in the metaverse [59]. The data collected from
AR/VR and IoT devices in the metaverse will be used to
create personalized systems that are customized to the users’
actions. This will enable a wide variety of applications to
deliver a more positive user experience [60]. Organizations
will be able to conduct data analytics through the metaverse
by disseminating information across applications. Shared data
will help understand customers, evaluate advertising, person-
alize content, establish content strategies, and build products
in the metaverse [53].

2) Challenges of Data Sharing in metaverse: Sharing data
in centralized data exchange platforms can expose sensitive
and private data of the data owners to heavy risk in the meta-
verse [61], [62]. Data in the traditional sharing environment
is highly mutable, this results in high latency and lower data
availability. Scaling the mutable data is challenging compared
to the immutable data [63]. In the metaverse, numerous
applications like healthcare, trafﬁc optimization, media, and
entertainment will generate large volumes of data and will
be mostly real-time. Data ﬂexibility becomes an issue when
the demand for real-time data increases in a traditional data-
sharing environment.

3) How blockchain can help: Blockchain technology can
make the transactions in crypto exchange, education, and other
applications more transparent and precise in the metaverse
[62]. Applications like governance and ﬁnance will generate a
decentralized, immutable record of all transactions, allowing
stakeholders to view these records. Hence, the stakeholders
of the metaverse will beneﬁt from greater data transparency
[64]. Blockchain will enable applications and their users
to understand how third-party applications like thunderbird,
the bat, and pegasus manage data and can eliminate grey
market transactions which will boost user conﬁdence [65].
In addition, the data owner will have complete control over
the information. Data audits can also beneﬁt from distributed
ledger technology. As a result, blockchain reduces the time
and money spent on validating the data [66]. Smart contracts
will improve the ﬂexibility in data sharing. They are typically
used to automate the execution of an agreement so that
all participants can be certain of the outcome immediately,
without the involvement of an intermediary or the loss of
time. Blockchain allows smart contracts to be heterogeneous in
programming. Hence, it will beneﬁt applications like Nmusik,
Ascribe, Tracr, UBS, and Applicature [67].

4) Summary: The use of blockchain technology will im-
prove the ﬂexibility and adaptability of the metaverse data.
A blockchain must replicate copies of data along the chain

8

resulting in greater delay when transferring information [68].
As the number of people in the metaverse increases,
the
number of blocks must increase as well, necessitating the use
of massive amounts of computing resources [69]. Users will be
charged a higher transaction cost for the validation of shared
transactions as a result of this. Future-generation blockchains
have to address this issue for effective sharing of the data in
the metaverse.

D. Data Interoperability

1) Introduction: Interoperability will be the major driving
force behind the metaverse. A diverse set of applications
like ﬁnance and healthcare will be able to communicate and
exchange information in the metaverse. The metaverse will be
a social and cultural interaction platform for virtual worlds.
virtual bridges will be created progressively to allow users to
keep their avatars and possessions while easily transferring
them between virtual worlds. A unique set of credentials
is issued to the user using an identity standard, and these
credentials can be used across virtual world borders [53],
[70], [71]. This could be the same as our real-life license
numbers, social security numbers, passport numbers, and other
identiﬁcation numbers.

2) Challenges of Data Interoperability in the Metaverse:
The metaverse will be created through the fusion of numerous
digital realms. The traditional centralized digital platforms
that are currently available are disjointed and unorganized.
Individuals must set up their accounts, avatars, hardware, and
payment infrastructure to participate in different realms [51]. A
user’s options for transferring his or her digital possessions like
NFT and avatar to another digital environment are restricted.
It
is tough to relocate in virtual worlds due to lack of
openness, for example, using the same account in decentraland
to roblox is not possible. The potential to use an application
in the virtual world will depend on the interconnection among
the virtual worlds. Regardless of where they are located or
what technology is being utilized, digital world applications
should be able to freely communicate information with one
another. The metaverse interoperability is dependent on the
capacity to manage the interactions between virtual worlds in
an appropriate manner which is a serious limitation of the
traditional approach [14].

3) How blockchain can help: To ensure interoperability
between virtual worlds in the metaverse, a cross-chain protocol
is a perfect solution [72], [73]. This allows the exchange of
possessions like avatars, NFT’s, and payment between virtual
worlds as depicted in the Fig. 3. This protocol will provide
the groundwork for widespread the metaverse adoption. Inter-
operability between virtual worlds will be enabled through the
use of cross-blockchain technology [74], eliminating the need
for intermediaries in the metaverse. Blockchain will make it
simple for people and applications to connect in the metaverse.
4) Summary: Despite the potential of blockchain in in-
creasing the interoperability between virtual worlds in several
metaverses, further research is required. The main challenge
in cross-blockchain enabled the metaverse interoperability is
the existence of several public blockchains in different virtual

9

worlds that do not share a common language. Various plat-
forms will provide varying degrees of smart contract capabil-
ities, making adaptation difﬁcult. Additionally, the transaction
architecture and consensus processes utilized in these virtual
worlds vary considerably, limiting interoperability [75].

and the privacy of data in the metaverse. In the metaverse,
attackers can easily target third-party applications since they
tend to make use of inadequate security mechanisms, resulting
in the compromise of personal information [82]. There is still
a lot of potential for an investigation into how blockchain can
be used in the metaverse to ensure user data privacy.

E. Data Privacy Preservation

1) Introduction: The metaverse will make use of advanced
human-computer interface (HCI) technologies, allowing users
to participate in social interactions as well as interact with their
virtual surroundings [76]. Web 2.0 is centralized and raises
concerns about data privacy. As the Internet of the metaverse,
also known as Web 3.0 grows in scope and complexity,
the metaverse will reduce the boundaries between the real
world and the virtual world [77]. The consequences of the
Web 2.0 impact on personal rights protection are yet to be
addressed. Hence, the problem of data privacy will become
even more complicated in upcoming Web 3.0. The amount
of data generated in the metaverse will increase dramatically;
hence, inadequate security procedures of applications will raise
the likelihood of a data breach [78]. Privacy preservation is a
major cause of concern when it comes to safeguarding the
conﬁdentiality of personal data [34].

2) Challenges related to Privacy Preservation in the meta-
verse: The metaverse ecosystem will be difﬁcult to adapt at
the initial stages where the attackers can trick the users and can
steal sensitive information. If an artiﬁcial intelligence bot like
promobot is deployed, the user will not be aware of whom
they are dealing with, and the user may believe that they
are interacting with a real person, resulting in them being
deceived. Personal identiﬁable information (PII) is a cause
of concern when it comes to safeguarding the conﬁdentiality
of personal data [79]. Integrating validity information in the
metaverse will increase the difﬁculty to manage large volumes
of the data at the same time.

3) How blockchain can help: Blockchain technology gives
users of the metaverse the ability to control their data through
the use of private and public keys, effectively granting them
ownership of their data. In the blockchain-enabled metaverse,
third-party intermediaries are not permitted to misuse or gain
data from other parties. In the case of personal data kept on
the blockchain-enabled the metaverse, the data owners will be
able to regulate when and how a third party can access their
information [80]. An audit trail is included as a standard in
blockchain ledgers, ensuring that transactions in the metaverse
are complete and consistent as depicted in the Fig. 3. The
adoption of zero-knowledge proof on the blockchain allows
individuals with convenient access to the identiﬁcation of
essential data in the metaverse while protecting their pri-
vacy and maintaining ownership over their possessions. Zero-
knowledge proofs are a mechanism of blockchain by which
users can persuade applications that something about them is
real without disclosing the information [81].

4) Summary: The adoption of blockchain technology can
assist users in the privacy preservation of their data; but, a
single human error, such as the loss of a private key, has the
potential to compromise the security of blockchain technology

IV. IMPACT OF BLOCKCHAIN ON KEY ENABLING
TECHNOLOGIES IN THE METAVERSE

Blockchain can enhance the key enabling technologies in
the metaverse that will allow users in participating social
and economic activities without fear of repercussions. The
illustration of blockchain on key enabling technologies in the
metaverse is depicted in Fig. 4.

A. Blockchain for IoT in the Metaverse

1) Introduction: The metaverse platform gathers data from
a variety of Internet of Things (IoT) devices to ensure that it
runs efﬁciently in several applications of the metaverse such
as medicine, education, and smart cities [83]. The IoT devices
will connect the metaverse through the use of a diverse range
of hardware, controllers, and physical items. Connecting to the
metaverse and navigating both physically and virtually is made
possible by IoT devices equipped with specialized sensors. The
capacity of IoT devices to perform operations in the metaverse
will be critical to the user’s ability to operate in the metaverse
[56].

2) Challenges related to IoT in the Metaverse: There will
be a huge number of connected IoT sensors in the metaverse.
With so many connected devices, IoT storage and security are
undoubtedly a concern. It is incredibly difﬁcult to analyze IoT
data that is unstructured and real-time [84]. The quality of data
can be judged by the amount, precision, and speed of data [85].
In addition, the metaverse data must be error-free for analysis.
The use of a centralized strategy is not advantageous when it
comes to storing data across virtual worlds. If even a single
piece of data has been tampered with, it will harm the entire
set of results produced by the IoT devices. The cross-platform
capabilities of IoT devices are critical for sharing data between
virtual worlds [86]. IoT data must be tracked for safety and
regulatory compliance reasons.

3) How blockchain can help: Blockchain enables the IoT
devices in the metaverse to communicate data through cross-
chain networks, which in turn produce tamper-resistant records
of shared transactions in virtual worlds as depicted in Fig. 4
. As a result of blockchain technology, applications and users
will be able to share and access IoT data without the need for
centralized management or control [87]. To eliminate conﬂicts
and increase conﬁdence among the metaverse users, each
transaction is recorded and authenticated. In the metaverse,
IoT-enabled blockchain enables the storage of data in real-
time. All stakeholders can rely on the data and take action
promptly and efﬁciently because of immutable blockchain
transactions [88]. Blockchain technology allows stakeholders
to keep track of their IoT data records in shared blockchain
ledgers this will help resolve issues in the metaverse.

10

Fig. 4. Blockchain for key enabling technologies of the metaverse.

4) Summary: Blockchain will enable IoT devices to share
and store real data securely over multiple virtual worlds.
Blockchain technologies require a signiﬁcant amount of pro-
cessing power to keep them running. Blockchains are vulner-
able if a small group of miners controls most of the network’s
total mining hash rate. It is not possible to verify IoT data
that is not public due to a lack of governance before it is
published on the blockchain in the metaverse. Smart contracts
in the metaverse that are executed on a distributed transaction
ledger may violate the laws. It is difﬁcult to trace down all
IoT transactions involving unlawful services in the metaverse
because of the anonymity provided by blockchain technology.
While the blockchain’s automatic function offers numerous
advantages, pinpointing which parties are responsible for
speciﬁc behaviors remains a difﬁcult challenge [89]. The
blockchain should be regularized to carry out the expansion
of the metaverse.

B. Blockchain for Digital Twins in the Metaverse

1) Introduction: Digital twins [5] are sophisticated digital
representations of everything in the metaverse, ranging from
simple assets to complex products and surroundings. There-
fore, anything that is relevant to the user’s needs could be a
component of the ecosystem using digital twins. Two-way IoT
connections enable users to bring their preferred models to life
while keeping them in synchronization with the actual world.
The applications of the metaverse will not be able to work
properly unless a connection between the physical and digital
worlds is established at the beginning. Digital twins will be
important to understand how the metaverse environment will
evolve and will aid in the prediction of the future [90]. Using
digital twins, it is possible to predict when hardware will need
to be serviced or to estimate the demands of users before they
arrive in the metaverse [91].

2) Challenges related to Digital Twins in the Metaverse:
Digital twin models in the metaverse will be developed using

information obtained from several remote sensors. Digital twin
model accuracy is affected by the quality of the data that is
used to create the model. In other words, data provided by the
source must be genuine and up to standard in terms of quality
[92]. Collaboration between digital twins in different virtual
worlds should be possible. It will improve the outcomes of
the metaverse. Digital twins need to interact and link to other
digital twins ranging from healthcare to ﬁnancial markets.
Virtual worlds are constantly changing, and digital twins in
the metaverse should detect and respond to these changes. The
digital twins should be capable of identifying and ﬁxing errors,
which results in more accurate and consistent communication.
When a variety of devices and sensors are brought together
to develop digital
is
challenging to keep data safe from botnets and other malware
[93].

twin models using real-time data,

it

3) How blockchain can help: Blockchain encryption capa-
bilities and historical data transparency enable digital twins
resistant to attacks and securely share data [94] over different
virtual worlds. Data can be shared between digital twins in vir-
tual worlds using an intelligent distributed ledger. Real-world
objects will be stored on the blockchain and synchronized to
digital twins in the metaverse using an intelligent distributed
ledger as depicted in Fig. 4. Additionally, the deployment of
digital twins on a blockchain will aid in the resolution of
issues related to privacy and data security [95]. By merging
blockchain with AI, it will be feasible to track sensor data
and produce high-quality digital twins in the metaverse. Every
digital twin action in the metaverse will be recorded as a
transaction on the blockchain, which is immutable and requires
consensus to change [94].

4) Summary: The incorporation of blockchain technology
into digital twins enables the metaverse stakeholders to ef-
ﬁciently manage data on a shared distributed ledger while
also addressing data trust,
integrity, and safety concerns.
Standardization, privacy, and scalability are all issues that must
be addressed for blockchain to be successfully implemented

UsersIoTDigital TwinsAIBig DataXR AppsReal-time sensory datafrom different devicesImmearuablerange of tasksHistorical data, sensorydata, and modelsVirtual modelsBlockchainSecurityDecentralizedTraceabilityConsensusMetaverseSmart contractImmutabilityImmersiveexperienceCategorized dataDecisionsMultiple data sourcesUser input, real-time andhistorical dataSpeech, eye tracking,gesture, VR/ARin digital twin applications in the metaverse. The combination
of blockchain, XAI, and federated learning approaches will
improve the quality of digital twins in the metaverse [9].

C. Blockchain for AI in the Metaverse

1) Introduction: AI is one of the most important enabling
technology for the foundation and development of the meta-
verse, which helps it in reaching its full potential. Based on
the original image or 3D scan, an AI model will analyze
user images automatically and create a very realistic simulated
rendition called avatars. In the metaverse, the representational
attributes and features of avatar affect the overall quality of
user experience. Concretely, AI can plot a variety of facial ex-
pressions, feelings, fashions, aging-related characteristics, and
so on for the avatar to make it more dynamic [29]. As a result
of signiﬁcant artiﬁcial intelligence training, the metaverse will
be available to individuals all across the world, regardless of
their linguistic competence. Making the metaverse experience
that is both entertaining and authentic while salable will be
challenging without the use of AI.

2) Challenges related to AI in the Metaverse:

In terms
of science and technology, the metaverse represents a new
frontier, and establishing AI there will be a difﬁcult task. It is
difﬁcult to track down the ownership of AI-powered material
in the metaverse. Users have no means of knowing whether
they are interacting with a real person or a computer-generated
avatar as depicted in Fig. 4. Users may employ AI technologies
to engage in the metaverse interactions and illegally exploit
resources, for example, by utilizing AI code to win games or
by stealing resources from other users [96]. It is also possible
that AI will make errors that consequently cause people to
lose faith in the metaverse. Furthermore, it is an obstacle to
employ a similar type of blockchain across a variety of AI
applications in the metaverse.

3) How blockchain can help: The encryption provided by
blockchain technology facilitates the metaverse users with
complete control over their data, making it simple to transfer
ownership of AI consent to another party. Users can persuade
applications and others that speciﬁc information about them is
accurate without disclosing this information to the applications
themselves through the use of zero-knowledge proofs, this
provides the right to use data for AI model training. As a com-
mon feature, blockchain ledgers provide an audit trail, which
can be used to check the accountability of all transactions
occurring in the metaverse. A zero-knowledge evidence system
enables individuals to identify critical facts in the metaverse
while also protecting their privacy and retaining ownership of
their resources from deepfakes [97]. This will prevent AI from
exploiting resources in the metaverse.

4) Summary: The combination of AI and blockchain will
protect the highly sensitive data that AI-driven systems must
acquire, store, and use. The sensitive data and information,
from coarse to ﬁne, in the metaverse are substantially better
protected as a result of this approach. Public blockchains are
secure and have authentic data processing, but the collected
data are open to all stakeholders in the metaverse. This could
be a source of concern and will also harm the AI models

11

in the metaverse. The attackers will exploit
the weakness
of AI if there are no blockchain standards or regulations in
place. Remarkably, it is necessary to introduce a cross-chain
converter that enables AI applications to be familiar with the
metaverses built on different blockchains.

D. Blockchain for Big Data in the Metaverse

1) Introduction: Data in the metaverse is more diverse and
arrives in greater volumes and with high velocity than data
in the real world. When new data sources in the metaverse
are discovered, big data techniques in the metaverse will be
used to assemble larger and more sophisticated datasets. The
massive amount of data generated by the metaverse will be
useful for a wide range of activities, ranging from customer
service to data analytics [98]. Big data will provide new
insights that will lead to the creation of new opportunities
and business models in the metaverse.

2) Challenges related to Big Data in the Metaverse:
Although data storage technologies have advanced, the amount
of data has progressively doubled and will continue to increase
in the metaverse. Keeping up with the amount and speed at
which data is generated in the metaverse is a complicated task
to accomplish. The heterogeneity of the data generated by the
metaverse applications is also a big challenge. The ability to
put data to good use in the metaverse is what makes it valuable,
and curation is the method by which this is accomplished. Data
collection and organization that is essential to the consumer in
the metaverse requires a large investment of time and effort.
Data scientists will spend the majority of their time preparing
and organizing data for it to be used by stakeholders [15].
Finally, big data technology is progressing at a rapid speed.
Keeping up with the latest big data technological developments
in the metaverse is a never-ending challenge.

3) How blockchain can help: The use of blockchain tech-
nology will aid in the collection of data from trusted data
sources, hence reducing the amount of improper data obtained
as depicted in Fig. 4. The data owners will have total con-
trol over their data, and any data manipulation by a third
party will be restricted. This assures that data ﬂows in the
metaverse are of a high standard of quality [41]. Due to the
decentralized nature of blockchain technology, data scientists
in the metaverse will be able to communicate and collaborate
on data cleaning, which will signiﬁcantly reduce the time
and expense associated with classifying data and creating
datasets for analytics applications, as well as the risk of data
contamination. Because of the immutability of the blockchain,
it will not be feasible to tamper with the data because it will
be duplicated throughout the network [99]. This will improve
the availability of data for stakeholders of the metaverse.

4) Summary: Blockchain holds a great deal of potential for
the future of big data analytics. Users will be able to maintain
complete control over their personal information and ﬁnancial
activities in the metaverse. There will be no need for a third
party to obtain trusted data and to label that data because of
the blockchain. Some of the issues, like consensus models,
the cost of mining blocks, and the veriﬁcation of transactions
are still challenging [41]. Blockchain offers solutions that

require major changes to existing systems or the complete
replacement of these systems. As a result, it will be hard
and time-consuming to change the whole system. Even though
blockchain integration with the metaverse is still in its early
stages, these issues will be resolved in the future, paving the
way for a wide range of new and exciting opportunities.

E. Blockchain Multi-sensory XR Applications, Holographic
Telepresence in the Metaverse

1) Introduction: The metaverse provides immersive, and
real-world experiences through the use of technology like
holographic telepresence and augmented reality applications as
depicted in Fig. 4. These applications incorporate audio, video,
cognition, and other components. They provide a real-time
representation of virtual and physical objects in the metaverse.
XR applications will make use of sensors to create a more
realistic experience by incorporating real-world objects [100].
As a result of these advancements, holographic telepresence
and multi-sensory XR applications enable a user to experience
both the real and virtual worlds concurrently.

2) Challenges related to Multi-sensory XR Applications,
Holographic Telepresence in the Metaverse: XR technologies
like VR, AR, and holographic telepresence are key enabling
technologies in the metaverse. However, they may also raise
personal and societal concerns. Using the information gath-
ered from these technologies,
the companies will be able
to develop a recommendation system. The quality of these
recommendation systems in the metaverse can be inﬂuenced
by behavioral data collected from a variety of sources. This
technology necessitates enormous amounts of data storage,
which must be readily accessible at all times for the users
in the metaverse. Sensitive data like biometric information
collected by AR/VR devices can be used to identify users and
infer additional information about them in the virtual world
[29]. The metaverse must ensure the privacy of such sensitive
information of the users. These gadgets exchange or transfer a
massive amount of data between virtual worlds. The metaverse
must enable data transparency when various stakeholders and
third parties are involved in the data sharing process [101].

3) How blockchain can help:

In the metaverse, a
blockchain-based distributed ledger would enable the valida-
tion of holographic telepresence and other XR applications
records, as well as trace the source of erroneous data. This
will help build a more accurate recommendation system.
Holographic telepresence and other XR applications will
ﬁnd it easier to share data securely between virtual worlds
with the zero-trust mechanism and cross-chain technology of
the blockchain [101]. For XR applications and holographic
telepresence, the interplanetary ﬁle system provided by the
blockchain ensures data integrity. The data collected by these
devices and saved on a blockchain will be immutable due
to the consensus mechanism. Blockchain ensures trust among
AR/VR stakeholders by making the veriﬁcation and ownership
transfer of digital assets transparent [102].

4) Summary: Multi-sensory XR applications combined
with holographic telepresence and blockchain technology will
help to integrate digital economies into uniﬁed platforms

TABLE II
IMPACT OF BLOCKCHAIN FOR TECHNICAL ASPECTS IN THE METAVERSE

12

y
t
i
c
a
p
a
C

n
o
i
t
i
s
i
u
q
c
A
a
t
a
D

e
g
a
r
o
t

S

a
t
a
D

g
n
i
r
a
h
S

a
t
a
D

y
t
i
l
i
b
a
r
e
p
o
r
e
t
n
I

a
t
a
D

n
o
i
t
a
v
r
e
s
e
r
P

y
c
a
v
i
r
P

a
t
a
D

L
H
H
L
H M H
L M L
L
H
H

H
L
H
H M H
H
L
H
L
H
L

Technical Perspective

IoT
Digital Twins
XR Applications
AI
Big Data

L Low Impact

M Medium Impact

H High Impact

where assets and payments in the metaverse can be managed
efﬁciently and unambiguously. VR/AR technology will not
have the global reach of smartphones or computers in the
foreseeable future. A concern and a problem for blockchain
will be the use of enhanced AI deep fakes [103], which must
be addressed by new emerging blockchain platforms.

IoT devices, digital twins, and XR applications will gen-
erate big data in the metaverse. Blockchain will assist these
technologies in high quality, secured acquisition of authentic
data in the metaverse. Blockchain will store and handle the
big data in the metaverse data in a secured manner through
the immutability and transparency properties offered by the
blockchain. Enabling technologies like IoT, digital twins, and
XR will be beneﬁted considerably in terms of higher data
transparency and adaptability provided by the blockchain.
NFTs and the real estate or the digital assets produced
using digital twins in the metaverse will become interoper-
able because of the zero-trust and cross-chain mechanisms
of the blockchain. The metaverse-enabled technologies will
be beneﬁted from the high degrees of data privacy due to
anonymity, audits, authentication, anti-tampering, and access
control offered by blockchain. Table II summarizes the impact
of the blockchain on the technical aspects and various enabling
technologies of the metaverse.

V. THE METAVERSE PROJECTS

This section brieﬂy introduces some well-known the meta-
verse projects: Decentraland, Sandbox, Axie Inﬁnity, and
Illuvium, which have exploited blockchain as the core tech-
nology of the metaverse foundation and development, and
additionally to deliver multifarious blockchain-based services
and applications in the virtual world, from real estate to E-
commerce and real estate. The landscapes inside the virtual
worlds of the projects are shown in Fig. 5.

Decentraland3: Decentraland is a virtual reality platform
powered by the Ethereum blockchain, which allows users to
experience, create, and monetize economic assets, hyperreal

3https://decentraland.org/

13

Fig. 5.

Inside the virtual worlds of different metaverse projects (left to right): Decentraland, Sandbox, Axie Inﬁnity, and Illuvium.

contents, and applications. Land in Decentraland is perma-
nently owned by the community with full surveillance and con-
trol over their creative activities. In the virtual world of Decen-
traland, a virtual land is identiﬁed uniquely as a non-fungible,
transferrable, and scare digital asset stored in the Ethereum
smart contract, which can be claimed on the blockchain-based
ledger with ERC20 (Ethereum Request for Comments 20)
tokens call MANA. Different from other traditional virtual
worlds and social networks, Decentraland is not managed and
supervised by any centralized organization; that is, no single
agent has permission to change the rules of software, content,
economic mechanism, or prevent others from accessing the
world, trading digital products, and providing services.

Decentraland is with the proof of concept to enable the
ownership of digital real estate to the user on the Ethereum
blockchain, wherein its blockchain payment network is built
to obtain short-to-medium-term scalability. This payment net-
work is with low fees to encourage the economic development
of the Decentraland metaverse. In the perspective of user
cases, Decentraland considers content curation, advertising,
social (forums, chat groups, and multiplayer games), ap-
plications (games, gambling, and dynamic 3D scenes with
scripting language toolset), and others (such as therapy, 3D
design, education, and virtual tourism). In the perspective of
architecture, the Decentraland protocol is comprised of three
layers: consensus layer, land content layer, and real-time layer
besides two supportive systems, including payment channel
infrastructure and identity system. With the Ethereum smart
contract to maintain a ledger of ownership for a piece of land
in the virtual world, Decentraland remarks non-fungible digital
assets LAND which is generated by burning MANA tokens
via the LAND smart contract. For ownership identiﬁcation,
Decentraland uses the Ethereum Name Service to create of a
layer of ownership over in-world items.

Sandbox4: As built on the Ethereum blockchain, Sandbox is
a user-generated the decentralized metaverse, in which users
can build, own, and monetize immersed gaming experiences
using SAND, its native platform’s utility token with ERC-
20. Inspired by Minecraft5 and Roblox6, Sandbox uplifts the
gaming experience from a 2D mobile pixel environment to a
fully 3D world by using a voxel gaming platform. In the Sand-
box metaverse, users can freely create and animate 3D objects
(such as people, animals, buildings, and tools) by VoxEdit, a
built-in voxel gaming package, with true ownership as NFTs.
These creations can be traded on the Sandbox marketplace as

game assets and the creators can receive their reward/incentive
by SAND tokens (compatible with ERC-721 and ERC-1155).
With the utility of NFTs, the Sandbox users will receive the
following beneﬁts: (i) true digital ownership (every game item
can be tokenized to easily own, trade, and sell), (ii) security
and immutability (the risks of fraud and theft are minimized
with the distributed ledger of blockchain technology), (iii)
trading (ultimate digital asset control without in-game value
abandon), and (iv) cross-platform interoperability (in-game
items can be available for usage in different games that
allow it). The Sandbox metaverse adopts The InterPlanetary
File System to store the actual digital assets and ensure
the assets can be modiﬁed without owner permission. The
main concern of Ethereum chain-aided projects is scalability,
which motivates the Sandbox team to look at layer-2 solutions
(scale an application by handling transactions off the Ethereum
Mainnet while taking advantage of decentralized security).

Axie Inﬁnity7: As one of the revolutionary Play-to-Ern meta-
verse projects, Axie Inﬁnity builds a crypto-meet-Pok´emon
game universe with fantasy creatures, called Axies, that play-
ers can collect, raise, breed, and battle for building their Axies
kingdoms. Like Decentraland and Sandbox, Axie Inﬁnity has a
user-centric economy system that allows players to truly own,
sell, buy, and trade in-game resources over gaming activities
and contributions to the ecosystem. A key difference between
Axie and other traditional games is that the blockchain-based
economic mechanism of the Axie metaverse allows players
to increase their digital assets by improving in-game skills
to reach certain levels. Players can have fun with many play
modes (PvP - player versus player and PvE - player versus
environment) and numerous tournaments while earning in-
game resources for trading with real monetary value possibly.
Axie Inﬁnity Shards (AXS), the ERC-20 governance token of
the Axie metaverse, can be claimed as rewards when players
stake their AXS tokens, play the game, and participate in
governance activities. Furthermore, they can earn AXS tokens
when playing different games involved by Axie Inﬁnity Uni-
verse and creating user-generated content. Axies creatures and
other virtual real estates can be bought, sold, and traded via an
in-game marketplace in the form of NFTs. Remarkably, most
transactions are processed on an Ethereum-linked sidechain,
called Ronin, which is specially designed to achieve lower fees
than the standard Ethereum blockchain. Besides AXS, Axie
Inﬁnity has a secondary token, namely Small Love Position
(SLP), which is awarded to players via in-game activities.

4https://www.sandbox.game/en/
5https://www.minecraft.net/en-us
6https://www.roblox.com/

7https://axieinﬁnity.com/

Illuvium8: Often touted as the ﬁrst open-world fantasy battle
game metaverse built on the Ethereum blockchain, Illuvium
to regular gamers
can provide a source of entertainment
and decentralized ﬁnance (DeFi) users through a range of
collecting and trading features. The virtual world of Illuvium
is inhabited by fantasy creatures, called Illuvials, which can
be captured by players when defeating them in casual battles.
From then on, these Illuvials become a loyal team of the
player’s collection and be carried out to combat against other
players via a random PvP gameplay. In other words,
the
Illuvium’s game is a combination of an open-world exploration
game and a PvP battle game, where players can immerse
different gameplays, i.e., freely exploring the virtual world
while planning battle statics. Each Illuvial is associated with
a unique NFT and can be traded on the in-game marketplace
or external exchange platform without gas fees.

The native token used within the Illuvium ecosystem is ILV
which has three main use cases: rewarding players for in-
game achievements, presenting players for their vault (a private
wallet of each user) distribution, and participating in gover-
nance activities of the game via decentralized autonomous
organization (DAO). To obtain the scalability of applications
with NFT functionality, Illuvium leverages Immutable X, a
layer-2 Ethereum scaling solution that allows users to trade
NFTs with zero gas fees and instant transaction ﬁnality by
using an innovative technique known as Zero-Knowledge
Rollup. Besides layer-2 integration, Illuvium is featured by a
built-in decentralized exchange platform that facilitates trading
activities of Illuvial NFTs.

VI. CONCLUSION AND RESEARCH DIRECTIONS

The paper has comprehensively investigated and analyzed
the roles and impacts of blockchain for the foundation and
development of applications and services in the metaverse.
The fundamental concepts of blockchain and the metaverse
were sketched at the beginning of this work, along with the
role of blockchain regarding the foundation and development
of the metaverse. Later in this work, several prominent tech-
nical aspects and use cases of blockchain in the metaverse
were investigated exhaustively besides the insightful challenge
analysis and applicability discussion given. Finally, some
technical improvements of blockchain were provisioned for
the metaverse, which in turn enhances the performance and
practicality of potential applications and services in the virtual
world. Besides making the conclusion, we sketch out some
future research directions as below.

Relying on the systematic investigation of blockchain for
the metaverse in both the technical and use case perspectives,
blockchain had showed a great potential to revolutionize the
immersive experience with various applications and services
built
in the virtual world. Many technical and applicable
aspects of all current blockchain versions have been attract-
ing much more research activities, including consensus algo-
rithms, network management, and blockchain interoperability.
As consensus algorithms ensure the agreement of states of
certain data among authorized nodes in a distributed network,

8https://www.illuvium.io/

14

numerous variations of consensus mechanisms have been
introduced to achieve high throughput and low latency, but
security, scalability, and decentralization could not be obtained
concurrently [104]. In this context, it is necessary to develop
and sharpen some hybrid innovative consensus algorithms
(e.g., Proof-of-Capability, Proof-of-Burn, and Leased Proof-
of-Stake) to effectively handle the above-mentioned issues.
As a serious global issue noticed by many governments and
blockchain communities, high energy consumption and green-
house gas emission derived by the operation of a large number
of participating nodes in a network has caused negative climate
and environmental impacts. For a sustainable solution, the
Stellar consensus protocol [105] allows authenticating transac-
tions based on a set of trustworthy nodes rather than running
the authentication process for the whole network as PoW or
PoS algorithm, which in turn accelerates the speed and reduces
energy in use.

Nowadays, numerous networks and blockchains have been
designed for speciﬁc applications and services under the
umbrella of different community organizations and govern-
ment departments; therefore, interconnecting existing and new
chains is necessary to boost the development of emerging
technologies in the metaverse. Cross-chain is introduced as
the ultimate solution to obtain the interoperability between
different chains, which allows users to execute transactions
(with value and information) successfully between different
blockchain networks [106]. For instance, users would be able
to send the information from an Ethereum blockchain to
a Polygon blockchain and vice versa. This interoperability
technique also actuates the increasing development of fully
decentralized systems with cross-chain bridges. For a long-
term evolution of blockchain to reach multi-chain interoper-
ability, omni-chain [107], which is deﬁned as a blockchain-
as-a-service platform to interact with a wide variety of en-
terprise networks, can provide blockchain-based applications
and services (including asset management, smart contract,
transaction management, and shared data ledger) with many
appreciated beneﬁts, such as greater transparency, enhanced
security, improved traceability, and better efﬁciency and speed.
In traditional organizations adopting classical company hi-
erarchy, most of the important decisions have been made
by directors and area managers, which are usually risky and
faulty due to human mistakes. To overcome these problems,
DAOs are introduced as the next generation of organizational
structure, which involves a group of incognito people sharing
the information together according to a self-enforcing proto-
col [108]. DAOs are governed by the smart contract algo-
rithms that live on a blockchain network to reduce transaction
management fees while presenting better transparency and
incorruptibility. All governance rules of a DAO are recorded on
a transparent, secure, and open-source ledger of the blockchain
network. Noticeably, native token stakeholders do not have
permission to override rules, but they can use tokens to vote
proposals via DAO’s consensus rules. Concerning sharehold-
ers’ common goals, the immutability of smart contracts in
DAOs will preserve the economic proﬁt and other interests of
any governed organizations over a tamper-proof shared ledger,
where all activities and transactions on the network will be

recorded. In the future, services (e.g., DeFi) and products
(e.g., NFT) in the metaverse can be developed and maintained
automatically by DAO, in which smart contracts and consensus
rules will govern all major functionalities.

REFERENCES

[1] Y. Lee, C. Moon, H. Ko, S.-H. Lee, and B. Yoo, “Uniﬁed representation
for XR content and its rendering method,” in The 25th International
Conference on 3D Web Technology, 2020, pp. 1–10.

[2] L.-H. Lee, T. Braud, P. Zhou, L. Wang, D. Xu, Z. Lin, A. Kumar,
C. Bermejo, and P. Hui, “All one needs to know about metaverse: A
complete survey on technological singularity, virtual ecosystem, and
research agenda,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.05352, 2021.

[3] R. K. Bolger, “Finding wholes in the metaverse: Posthuman mystics
as agents of evolutionary contextualization,” Religions, vol. 12, no. 9,
p. 768, 2021.

[4] T. Thepmanee, S. Pongswatd, F. Asadi, and P. Ukakimaparn, “Imple-
mentation of control and scada system: Case study of allen bradley plc
by using wirelesshart to temperature control and device diagnostic,”
Energy Reports, vol. 8, pp. 934–941, 2022.

[5] S. P. Ramu, P. Boopalan, Q.-V. Pham, P. K. R. Maddikunta, T.-H. The,
M. Alazab, T. T. Nguyen, and T. R. Gadekallu, “Federated learning
enabled digital twins for smart cities: Concepts, recent advances, and
future directions,” Sustainable Cities and Society, p. 103663, 2022.
[6] P. Ranaweera, M. Liyanage, and A. D. Jurcut, “Novel MEC based
approaches for smart hospitals to combat COVID-19 pandemic,” IEEE
Consumer Electronics Magazine, vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 80–91, 2020.
[7] E. Bouri, T. Saeed, X. V. Vo, and D. Roubaud, “Quantile connectedness
in the cryptocurrency market,” Journal of International Financial
Markets, Institutions and Money, vol. 71, p. 101302, 2021.

[8] C. Bisogni, G. Iovane, R. E. Landi, and M. Nappi, “ECB2: a novel
encryption scheme using face biometrics for signing blockchain trans-
actions,” Journal of Information Security and Applications, vol. 59, p.
102814, 2021.

[9] S. Wang, M. A. Qureshi, L. Miralles-Pechua´an, T. Huynh-The, T. R.
Gadekallu, and M. Liyanage, “Explainable AI for B5G/6G: Tech-
nical aspects, use cases, and research challenges,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2112.04698, 2021.

[10] T. R. Gadekallu, Q.-V. Pham, D. C. Nguyen, P. K. R. Maddikunta,
N. Deepa, B. Prabadevi, P. N. Pathirana, J. Zhao, and W.-J. Hwang,
“Blockchain for edge of things: Applications, opportunities, and chal-
lenges,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 964–988,
2022.

[11] Q. Ynag, Y. Zhao, H. Huang, and Z. Zheng, “Fusing blockchain and
AI with metaverse: A survey,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.03201, 2022.
[12] H. Ning, H. Wang, Y. Lin, W. Wang, S. Dhelim, F. Farha, J. Ding, and
M. Daneshmand, “A survey on metaverse: the state-of-the-art, technolo-
gies, applications, and challenges,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.09673,
2021.

[13] H.-j. Jeon, H.-c. Youn, S.-m. Ko, and T.-h. Kim, “Blockchain and AI
meet in the metaverse,” Advances in the Convergence of Blockchain
and Artiﬁcial Intelligence, p. 73, 2022.

[14] S. Mystakidis, “Metaverse,” Encyclopedia, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 486–497,

2022.

[15] F.-Y. Wang, R. Qin, X. Wang, and B. Hu, “Metasocieties in metaverse:
Metaeconomics and metamanagement for metaenterprises and metac-
ities,” IEEE Transactions on Computational Social Systems, vol. 9,
no. 1, pp. 2–7, 2022.

[16] S.-M. Park and Y.-G. Kim, “A metaverse: taxonomy, components,
applications, and open challenges,” IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 4209–
4251, 2022.

[17] S. Nakamoto, “Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system,” Decen-

tralized Business Review, p. 21260, 2008.

[18] R. Huo, S. Zeng, Z. Wang, J. Shang, W. Chen, T. Huang, S. Wang,
F. R. Yu, and Y. Liu, “A comprehensive survey on blockchain in
industrial
internet of things: Motivations, research progresses, and
future challenges,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, 2022.
[19] M. Dotan, Y.-A. Pignolet, S. Schmid, S. Tochner, and A. Zohar, “Sur-
vey on blockchain networking: Context, state-of-the-art, challenges,”
ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 1–34, 2021.
[20] B. Alangot, D. Reijsbergen, S. Venugopalan, P. Szalachowski, and K. S.
Yeo, “Decentralized and lightweight approach to detect eclipse attacks
on proof of work blockchains,” IEEE Transactions on Network and
Service Management, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1659–1672, 2021.

15

[21] S. E. Thomsen and B. Spitters, “Formalizing nakamoto-style proof of
stake,” in 2021 IEEE 34th Computer Security Foundations Symposium
(CSF), 2021, pp. 1–15.

[22] X. Jian, P. Leng, Y. Wang, M. Alrashoud, and M. S. Hossain,
“Blockchain-empowered trusted networking for unmanned aerial ve-
hicles in the B5G era,” IEEE Network, vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 72–77, 2021.
[23] A. A. Zarir, G. A. Oliva, Z. M. Jiang, and A. E. Hassan, “Developing
cost-effective blockchain-powered applications: A case study of the gas
usage of smart contract transactions in the ethereum blockchain plat-
form,” ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology
(TOSEM), vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 1–38, 2021.

[24] M. Nadini, L. Alessandretti, F. Di Giacinto, M. Martino, L. M. Aiello,
and A. Baronchelli, “Mapping the NFT revolution: market trends, trade
networks, and visual features,” Scientiﬁc reports, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 1–
11, 2021.

[25] N. Stephenson, Snow crash: A novel. Spectra, 2003.
[26] G. Koutitas, S. Smith, and G. Lawrence, “Performance evaluation of
AR/VR training technologies for ems ﬁrst responders,” Virtual Reality,
vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 83–94, 2021.

[27] F. Tao, H. Zhang, A. Liu, and A. Y. Nee, “Digital twin in industry:
State-of-the-art,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 15,
no. 4, pp. 2405–2415, 2018.

[28] Y. Chang, C. Chien, and L.-F. Shen, “Telecommuting during the
coronavirus pandemic: Future time orientation as a mediator between
proactive coping and perceived work productivity in two cultural
samples,” Personality and individual differences, vol. 171, p. 110508,
2021.

[29] H. Duan, J. Li, S. Fan, Z. Lin, X. Wu, and W. Cai, “Metaverse for social
good: A university campus prototype,” in Proceedings of the 29th ACM
International Conference on Multimedia, 2021, pp. 153–161.

[30] S. Y. Ko, H. K. Chung, J.-I. Kim, and Y. Shin, “A study on the
typology and advancement of cultural leisure-based metaverse,” KIPS
Transactions on Software and Data Engineering, vol. 10, no. 8, pp.
331–338, 2021.

[31] T. Kim and S. Kim, “Digital

transformation, business model and
metaverse,” Journal of Digital Convergence, vol. 19, no. 11, pp. 215–
224, 2021.

[32] H.-S. Cha and C.-H.

facial
electromyogram-based facial-expression recognition for social virtual
reality applications using linear discriminant analysis adaptation,” Vir-
tual Reality, pp. 1–14, 2021.

Im, “Performance enhancement of

[33] N. Xi, J. Chen, F. Gama, M. Riar, and J. Hamari, “The challenges of
entering the metaverse: An experiment on the effect of extended reality
on workload,” Information Systems Frontiers, pp. 1–22, 2022.
[34] A. Jovanovi´c and A. Milosavljevi´c, “Vortex metaverse platform for
gamiﬁed collaborative learning,” Electronics, vol. 11, no. 3, p. 317,
2022.

[35] P. A. Rauschnabel, B. J. Babin, M. C. tom Dieck, N. Krey, and T. Jung,
“What is augmented reality marketing? its deﬁnition, complexity, and
future,” pp. 1140–1150, 2022.

[36] H. Tao, M. Z. A. Bhuiyan, A. N. Abdalla, M. M. Hassan, J. M. Zain,
and T. Hayajneh, “Secured data collection with hardware-based ciphers
for IoT-based healthcare,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 6,
no. 1, pp. 410–420, 2018.

[37] L. Brunschwig, R. Campos-L´opez, E. Guerra, and J. de Lara, “Towards
domain-speciﬁc modelling environments based on augmented reality,”
in IEEE/ACM 43rd International Conference on Software Engineering:
New Ideas and Emerging Results (ICSE-NIER), 2021, pp. 56–60.
[38] J.-B. Jeong, S. Lee, and E.-S. Ryu, “Rethinking fatigue-aware 6dof
video streaming: Focusing on mpeg immersive video,” in International
Conference on Information Networking (ICOIN), 2022, pp. 304–309.
[39] W.-L. Shiau and L.-C. Huang, “Scale development for analyzing the
ﬁt of real and virtual world integration: an example of pok´emon go,”
Information Technology & People, 2022.

[40] A. Islam and S. Y. Shin, “BUAV: A blockchain based secure UAV-
assisted data acquisition scheme in internet of things,” Journal of
Communications and Networks, vol. 21, no. 5, pp. 491–502, 2019.

[41] N. Deepa, Q.-V. Pham, D. C. Nguyen, S. Bhattacharya, B. Prabadevi,
T. R. Gadekallu, P. K. R. Maddikunta, F. Fang, and P. N. Pathirana,
“A survey on blockchain for big data: approaches, opportunities, and
future directions,” Future Generation Computer Systems, vol. 131, pp.
209–226, 2022.

[42] C. Xu, Y. Qu, T. H. Luan, P. W. Eklund, Y. Xiang, and L. Gao, “A light-
weight and attack-proof bidirectional blockchain paradigm for internet
of things,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 9, no. 6, pp. 4371–
4384, 2022.

[43] S. Bouraga, “A taxonomy of blockchain consensus protocols: A survey
and classiﬁcation framework,” Expert Systems with Applications, vol.
168, p. 114384, 2021.

[44] B. Lashkari and P. Musilek, “A comprehensive review of blockchain
consensus mechanisms,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 43 620–43 652, 2021.
[45] Y. Luo, Z. Su, W. Zheng, Z. Chen, F. Wang, Z. Zhang, and J. Chen,
“A novel memory-hard password hashing scheme for blockchain-based
cyber-physical systems,” ACM Transactions on Internet Technology
(TOIT), vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 1–21, 2021.

[46] L. Zhang, Z. Zhang, W. Wang, Z. Jin, Y. Su, and H. Chen, “Research
on a covert communication model realized by using smart contracts in
blockchain environment,” IEEE Systems Journal, 2021.

[47] J. Guo, X. Ding, and W. Wu, “Reliable trafﬁc monitoring mechanisms
based on blockchain in vehicular networks,” IEEE Transactions on
Reliability, 2021.

[48] X. Xu, G. Sun, L. Luo, H. Cao, H. Yu, and A. V. Vasilakos, “Latency
performance modeling and analysis for hyperledger fabric blockchain
network,” Information Processing & Management, vol. 58, no. 1, p.
102436, 2021.

[49] S. M. Alrubei, E. A. Ball, J. M. Rigelsford, and C. A. Willis, “La-
tency and performance analyses of real-world wireless IoT-blockchain
application,” IEEE Sensors Journal, vol. 20, no. 13, pp. 7372–7383,
2020.

[50] L. Chen, Q. Fu, Y. Mu, L. Zeng, F. Rezaeibagha, and M.-S. Hwang,
“Blockchain-based random auditor committee for integrity veriﬁca-
tion,” Future Generation Computer Systems, pp. 183–193, 2022.
[51] Y. Bian, J. Leng, and J. L. Zhao, “Demystifying metaverse as a new
paradigm of enterprise digitization,” in International Conference on
Big Data, 2021, pp. 109–119.

[52] X. Wang, X. Liu, C.-T. Cheng, L. Deng, X. Chen, and F. Xiao, “A
joint user scheduling and trajectory planning data collection strategy
for the UAV-assisted WSN,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 25,
no. 7, pp. 2333–2337, 2021.

[53] L. V. Kiong, Metaverse Made Easy: A Beginner’s Guide to the
Metaverse: Everything you need to know about Metaverse, NFT and
GameFi. Liew Voon Kiong, 2022.

[54] T. Scargill, Y. Chen, S. Eom, J. Dunn, and M. Gorlatova, “Environ-
mental, user, and social context-aware augmented reality for supporting
personal development and change,” in IEEE Workshop for Building the
Foundations of the Metaverse, 2022.

[55] W. Liang, Y. Fan, K.-C. Li, D. Zhang, and J.-L. Gaudiot, “Secure data
storage and recovery in industrial blockchain network environments,”
IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 16, no. 10, pp. 6543–
6552, 2020.

[56] D. Yang, J. Zhou, R. Chen, Y. Song, Z. Song, X. Zhang, Q. Wang,
K. Wang, C. Zhou, L. Zhang et al., “Expert consensus on the metaverse
in medicine,” Clinical eHealth, 2022.

[57] “Can Blockchain do AI and data labeling. Effect.AI thinks they
can, and will”.
[Online]. Available:
[Accessed on 08.03.2022].
https://medium.com/@lawrence.effect/can-blockchain-do-ai-and-data
-labeling-effect-ai-thinks-they-can-and-will-9ea94229dbf1.

[58] J. Xie, F. R. Yu, T. Huang, R. Xie, J. Liu, and Y. Liu, “A survey on
the scalability of blockchain systems,” IEEE Network, vol. 33, no. 5,
pp. 166–173, 2019.

[59] S. Kraus, D. K. Kanbach, P. M. Krysta, M. M. Steinhoff, and N. Tomini,
“Facebook and the creation of the metaverse: Radical business model
innovation or incremental transformation?” International Journal of
Entrepreneurial Behavior & Research, 2022.

[60] J.-E. Jeon, “The effects of user experience-based design innovativeness
on user-metaverse platform channel relationships in south korea,”
Journal of Distribution Science, vol. 19, no. 11, pp. 81–90, 2021.
[61] L. Liu, J. Feng, Q. Pei, C. Chen, Y. Ming, B. Shang, and M. Dong,
“Blockchain-enabled secure data sharing scheme in mobile-edge com-
puting: an asynchronous advantage actor–critic learning approach,”
IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 2342–2353, 2020.
[62] B. Egliston and M. Carter, “Critical questions for facebook’s virtual
reality: Data, power and the metaverse,” Internet Policy Review, vol. 10,
no. 4, pp. 1–23, 2021.

[63] K. Yu, L. Tan, M. Aloqaily, H. Yang, and Y. Jararweh, “Blockchain-
enhanced data sharing with traceable and direct revocation in iiot,”
IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 17, no. 11, pp. 7669–
7678, 2021.

[64] A. Rashid, A. Masood, H. Abbas, and Y. Zhang, “Blockchain-based
public key infrastructure: A transparent digital certiﬁcation mechanism
for secure communication,” IEEE Network, vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 220–225,
2021.

16

[65] N. Vashistha, M. M. Hossain, M. R. Shahriar, F. Farahmandi, F. Rah-
man, and M. Tehranipoor, “eChain: A blockchain-enabled ecosystem
for electronic device authenticity veriﬁcation,” IEEE Transactions on
Consumer Electronics, 2021.

[66] T. Min and W. Cai, “Portrait of decentralized application users: an
overview based on large-scale ethereum data,” CCF Transactions on
Pervasive Computing and Interaction, pp. 1–18, 2022.

[67] O. Ali, A. Jaradat, A. Kulakli, and A. Abuhalimeh, “A comparative
study: Blockchain technology utilization beneﬁts, challenges and func-
tionalities,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 12 730–12 749, 2021.

[68] Y. Luo, H. Jin, and P. Li, “A blockchain future for secure clinical data
sharing: A position paper,” in Proceedings of the ACM International
Workshop on Security in Software Deﬁned Networks & Network
Function Virtualization, 2019, pp. 23–27.

[69] Y. Gao, W. Wu, P. Si, Z. Yang, and F. R. Yu, “B-rest: Blockchain-
enabled resource sharing and transactions in fog computing,” IEEE
Wireless Communications, vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 172–180, 2021.

[70] M. Sparkes, “What is a metaverse,” New Scientist, vol. 251, no. 3348,

p. 18, 2021.

[71] C. Stokel-Walker, “Welcome to the metaverse,” New Scientist, vol. 253,

no. 3368, pp. 39–43, 2022.

[72] R. Belchior, A. Vasconcelos, S. Guerreiro, and M. Correia, “A survey
on blockchain interoperability: Past, present, and future trends,” ACM
Computing Surveys (CSUR), vol. 54, no. 8, pp. 1–41, 2021.

[73] M. Madine, K. Salah, R. Jayaraman, Y. Al-Hammadi, J. Arshad,
and I. Yaqoob, “appxchain: Application-level
interoperability for
blockchain networks,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 87 777–87 791, 2021.
[74] R. Jabbar, N. Fetais, M. Krichen, and K. Barkaoui, “Blockchain
technology for healthcare: Enhancing shared electronic health record
interoperability and integrity,” in IEEE International Conference on
Informatics, IoT, and Enabling Technologies (ICIoT), 2020, pp. 310–
317.

[75] S. Wibowo and T. Sandikapura, “Improving data security, interoper-
ability, and veracity using blockchain for one data governance, case
study of local tax big data,” in International Conference on ICT for
Smart Society (ICISS), vol. 7, 2019, pp. 1–6.

[76] A. Siyaev and G.-S. Jo, “Towards aircraft maintenance metaverse using
speech interactions with virtual objects in mixed reality,” Sensors,
vol. 21, no. 6, p. 2066, 2021.

[77] ˙I. S. ARVAS, “Gutenberg galaksisinden meta evrenine: ¨Uc¸ ¨unc¨u kus¸ak
internet, web 3.0,” AJIT-e: Bilis¸im Teknolojileri Online Dergisi, vol. 13,
no. 48, pp. 53–70, 2022.

[78] O. Kostenko, “Electronic jurisdiction, metaverse, artiﬁcial intelligence,
digital personality, digital avatar, neural networks: Theory, practice,
perspective,” World Science, no. 1 (73), 2022.

[79] I. Hughes, “The metaverse: Is it the future?” ITNOW, vol. 64, no. 1,

pp. 22–23, 2022.

[80] P. Kumar, R. Kumar, G. Srivastava, G. P. Gupta, R. Tripathi, T. R.
Gadekallu, and N. N. Xiong, “PPSF: a privacy-preserving and secure
framework using blockchain-based machine-learning for IoT-driven
smart cities,” IEEE Transactions on Network Science and Engineering,
vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 2326–2341, 2021.

[81] J. Sedlmeir, F. V¨olter, and J. Str¨uker, “The next stage of green
electricity labeling: using zero-knowledge proofs for blockchain-based
certiﬁcates of origin and use,” ACM SIGENERGY Energy Informatics
Review, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 20–31, 2021.

[82] M. U. Hassan, M. H. Rehmani, and J. Chen, “Privacy preservation in
blockchain based IoT systems: Integration issues, prospects, challenges,
and future research directions,” Future Generation Computer Systems,
vol. 97, pp. 512–529, 2019.

[83] T. G. Kanter, “The metaverse and extended reality with distributed

IoT,” IEEE Internet of Things Magazine (IoT), 2021.

[84] L. Zhang, F. Li, P. Wang, R. Su, and Z. Chi, “A blockchain-assisted
massive IoT data collection intelligent framework,” IEEE Internet of
Things Journal, 2021.

[85] F. Rollo, B. Sudharsan, L. Po, and J. G. Breslin, “Air quality sensor
network data acquisition, cleaning, visualization, and analytics: a real-
world IoT use case,” in Adjunct Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Interna-
tional Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing and
Proceedings of the 2021 ACM International Symposium on Wearable
Computers, 2021, pp. 67–68.

[86] Y. Hajjaji, W. Boulila, I. R. Farah, I. Romdhani, and A. Hussain, “Big
data and IoT-based applications in smart environments: A systematic
review,” Computer Science Review, vol. 39, p. 100318, 2021.

[87] U. Majeed, L. U. Khan, I. Yaqoob, S. A. Kazmi, K. Salah, and C. S.
Hong, “Blockchain for IoT-based smart cities: Recent advances, re-

17

quirements, and future challenges,” Journal of Network and Computer
Applications, vol. 181, p. 103007, 2021.

[88] A. Dorri, F. Luo, S. Karumba, S. Kanhere, R. Jurdak, and Z. Y.
Dong, “Temporary immutability: A removable blockchain solution
for prosumer-side energy trading,” Journal of Network and Computer
Applications, vol. 180, p. 103018, 2021.

[89] M. A. Uddin, A. Stranieri, I. Gondal, and V. Balasubramanian, “A
survey on the adoption of blockchain in IoT: Challenges and solutions,”
Blockchain: Research and Applications, vol. 2, no. 2, p. 100006, 2021.
[90] Q. Chen and S.-J. Lee, “Research status and trend of digital twin: Visual
knowledge mapping analysis,” International journal of advanced smart
convergence, vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 84–97, 2021.

[91] K. Yoon, S.-K. Kim, S. P. Jeong, and J.-H. Choi, “Interfacing cyber
and physical worlds: Introduction to IEEE 2888 standards,” in IEEE
International Conference on Intelligent Reality (ICIR), 2021, pp. 49–
50.

[92] C. Zhuang, J. Gong, and J. Liu, “Digital twin-based assembly data
management and process traceability for complex products,” Journal
of manufacturing systems, vol. 58, pp. 118–131, 2021.

[93] L. U. Khan, W. Saad, D. Niyato, Z. Han, and C. S. Hong, “Digital-
twin-enabled 6G: Vision, architectural trends, and future directions,”
IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 60, no. 1, pp. 74–80, 2022.
[94] D. Lee, S. H. Lee, N. Masoud, M. Krishnan, and V. C. Li, “Integrated
digital twin and blockchain framework to support accountable infor-
mation sharing in construction projects,” Automation in construction,
vol. 127, p. 103688, 2021.

[95] W. Shen, T. Hu, C. Zhang, and S. Ma, “Secure sharing of big digital
twin data for smart manufacturing based on blockchain,” Journal of
Manufacturing Systems, vol. 61, pp. 338–350, 2021.

[96] B. K. Wiederhold, “Ready (or not) player one: Initial musings on the

metaverse,” pp. 1–2, 2022.

[97] A. A. Hussain and F. Al-Turjman, “Artiﬁcial

intelligence and
blockchain: A review,” Transactions on Emerging Telecommunications
Technologies, vol. 32, no. 9, p. e4268, 2021.

[98] S. Han and T. Kim, “News big data analysis of ‘metaverse’using topic
modeling analysis,” The Journal of Digital Contents Society, vol. 22,
no. 7, pp. 1091–1099, 2021.

[99] D. M. Gligor, K. G. Pillai, and I. Golgeci, “Theorizing the dark side
of business-to-business relationships in the era of AI, big data, and
blockchain,” Journal of Business Research, vol. 133, pp. 79–88, 2021.
[100] J. O. Yang and J. S. Lee, “Utilization exercise rehabilitation using
metaverse (vr· ar· mr· xr),” Korean Journal of Sport Biomechanics,
vol. 31, no. 4, pp. 249–258, 2021.

[101] P. Bhattacharya, D. Saraswat, A. Dave, M. Acharya, S. Tanwar,
G. Sharma, and I. E. Davidson, “Coalition of 6G and blockchain in
AR/VR space: Challenges and future directions,” IEEE Access, vol. 9,
pp. 168 455–168 484, 2021.

[102] S. Kumar, A. K. Bharti, and R. Amin, “Decentralized secure storage
of medical records using blockchain and IPFS: A comparative analysis
with future directions,” Security and Privacy, vol. 4, no. 5, p. e162,
2021.

[103] D. G. Johnson and N. Diakopoulos, “What to do about deepfakes,”
Communications of the ACM, vol. 64, no. 3, pp. 33–35, 2021.
[104] M. N. M. Bhutta, A. A. Khwaja, A. Nadeem, H. F. Ahmad, M. K.
Khan, M. A. Hanif, H. Song, M. Alshamari, and Y. Cao, “A survey
on blockchain technology: Evolution, architecture and security,” IEEE
Access, vol. 9, pp. 61 048–61 073, 2021.

[105] Stellar Development Foundation, “Stellar consensus protocol: Proof
and code,” 2015. [Online]. Available: https://www.stellar.org/blog/stell
ar-consensus-protocol-proof-code

[106] D. Geroni, “Blockchain interoperability: Why is cross chain technology
important?” 2021. [Online]. Available: https://101blockchains.com/blo
ckchain-interoperability/

[107] R. Zarick, B. Pellegrino, and C. Banister, “LayerZero: trustless om-
nichain interoperability protocol,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.13871,
2021.

[108] S. Voshmgir, “Tokenized networks: What is a DAO?” 2020. [Online].
Available: https://blockchainhub.net/dao-decentralized-autonomous-o
rganization/

