Self-employment for autonomous robots using smart contracts

Eduardo Castell´o Ferrer*1,2, Ivan Berman6, Aleksandr Kapitonov6, Vadim Manaenko6,
Makar Chernyaev6, Pavel Tarasov6 Bryan Wilson2,3, Dazza Greenwood1,2,3, Ed Walters4,5
1MIT Media Lab, 2MIT Connection Science & Engineering, 3MIT Computational Law Report
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA
4Georgetown University Law Center, Washington, DC, USA
5Cornell Law School & Cornell Tech, New York, NY, USA
6M2M Economy, Inc (“Merklebot”), San Francisco, CA, USA

2
2
0
2

t
c
O
2

]

O
R
.
s
c
[

2
v
1
1
4
3
0
.
3
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract— The physical autonomy of robots is well under-
stood both theoretically and practically. By contrast, there
is almost no research exploring a robot’s potential economic
autonomy. In this paper, we present the ﬁrst economically
autonomous robot—a robot able to produce marketable goods
while having full control over the use of its generated income.
In our proof-of-concept, the robot is self-employed as an artist.
It produces physical artistic goods and uses blockchain-based
smart contracts on the Ethereum network to autonomously
list its goods for sale in online auctions. Using the blockchain-
based smart contract, the robot then uses its income from sales
to autonomously order more materials from an online shop,
pay for its consumables such as network fees, and remunerate
human assistance for support tasks. The robot also uses its
income to repay investor loans that funded its initial phase
of production. In these transactions, the robot interacts with
humans as a peer, not as a tool. In other words, the robot
makes peer ﬁnancial transactions with humans in the same
way that another human would, ﬁrst as an investment vehicle,
then as a seller at an auction, and then as a shop customer
and a client. Our proof-of-concept is conducted as an in-lab
experiment, but gives rise to an important discussion of the legal
implications of economically autonomous robots, which under
existing frameworks can already be embedded in corporate
entities that are classed as artiﬁcial persons.

I. INTRODUCTION
Robots and cyber-physical systems deployed in the real
world are reaching increasing levels of autonomy and ver-
satility. They can be programmed to perform tasks with
little to no human intervention and can vary signiﬁcantly
in size, functionality, mobility, dexterity and intelligence.
In general, physical autonomy (i.e., the ability to observe
and act on a physical environment autonomously) is well
understood and the state of the art is quite advanced, both
theoretically and practically. However, the increasing physi-
cal autonomy of devices and systems in the real world opens
up new issues beyond the physical environment: for instance,
security, accountability, auditability, and other social and
ethical issues [1]–[3]. In contrast to physical autonomy, very
little research has been done on the social and economic
autonomy (i.e., the ability to observe and act on a social or
economic environment autonomously) of robots and cyber-
physical systems.

The idea of economically autonomous robots has been
explored in philosophical, social, legal, and economic theory.
For instance, [4] deﬁnes a fully economically autonomous

Corresponding author: Eduardo Castell´o Ferrer, ecstll@mit.edu

robot as one that can use its generated income to cover the
costs of its manufacture and maintenance and to reproduce
itself. In the ﬁeld of management and marketing, [5] explores
the question of what happens when home robots and digital
assistants not only make purchases on behalf of their owners,
but take consumer responsibilities such as ﬁltering goods and
services for their owner to choose from. In the meantime,
a novel line of research has begun to explore the concept
of machina economicus [6], or rational AI agents that can
reason in economic contexts—either as an ideal synthetic
version of the perfectly rational homo economicus [7], or
using new incentive mechanisms. An early practical example
of this concept is the use of software agents for automatic
trading or for AI-driven setting of market prices [8], in which
AI agents might perform better economic reasoning than
humans. The concept of machina economicus has also been
expanded from artiﬁcial agents that mimic humans to the
concept of automata economicus, in which artiﬁcial agents
achieve new types of economic value creation and build an
artiﬁcial “creative economy” [9]. The legal implications of
economically autonomous robots are also being explored,
e.g., legal personhood for robots [10], [11], robot-based tax
systems [12], copyright and intellectual property rights of
robot creations [13], [14], and whether robots need to obey
copyright law [15]. Although some of these theory develop-
ments are more than a decade old, there have been limited
practical advances, and no prototype of an economically
autonomous robot has yet been built.

i.e., a robot

In this paper, we present the ﬁrst proof-of-concept eco-
nomically autonomous robot,
that can au-
tonomously generate income by producing marketable goods
or services and can use the income to autonomously maintain
itself through the purchase of resources. Our economically
autonomous robot is a self-employed robot artist that au-
tonomously makes physical paintings, sells them in online
auctions, and uses the income it generates to purchase
supplies from an online shop, remunerate physical
tasks
from a human assistant, and repay start-up loans from initial
investors. The proof-of-concept uses blockchain technology,
through rules encoded as Smart Contracts (SCs)—computer
code embedded in the blockchain that directly controls the
transfer of digital assets between parties [16]. The control
logic for the robot resides in the SC while the actuation
takes place in the physical world.

 
 
 
 
 
 
A. Blockchain-based robotics

The ﬁrst proof-of-concept

robotics system that used
blockchain technology to make ﬁnancial transactions was
the ADEPT [17] protocol introduced by Samsung and IBM.
The project focuses on increasing the autonomy of devices
or machines that operate in a decentralized manner within
they used a
(industrial) IoT. For their proof-of-concept,
washing machine (W9000) that could autonomously order
detergent every time it ran out. The ADEPT project also led
to a pilot of a Blockchain-of-Devices (BoD), where devices
work together autonomously and make decisions about tasks
or orders [18]. Along these lines, the Plantoid (2015) art
project by Okhaos2 proposed a metallic robotic sculpture
designed to look and move like a plant and be displayed
in a public space. If humans like the sculpture and make
a small donation to it, the sculpture dances with plant-like
movements and music and lights. Contributions are made via
the Bitcoin blockchain. Once the sculpture has collected a
sufﬁcient quantity of Bitcoins in its crypto wallet, it will ask
humans to help it by reproducing it (creating a new sculpture)
and placing the “offspring” in a new location.
the washing
in the ﬁrst example (ADEPT),
machine did not have control over the value or income used
to complete tasks or make the orders, and in the second
example (Plantoid), the robotic sculpture did not produce
external goods or services nor did it make consumer choices
and purchases autonomously. Moreover, its donation-based
model might also lead to long wait times and deadlocks.
In contrast, an economically autonomous robot must have
control over the action of entering the market to offer goods
or services and over the consumer purchases it makes using
the income that it generates. Therefore, although these two
projects are important precedents in devices making transac-
tions using blockchain-technology, they are not economically
autonomous robots.

However,

Beyond economic autonomy, recent research has demon-
strated many security and robustness beneﬁts of combining
autonomous robots with blockchain-based technology [19]–
[21], using both SCs and Merkle trees. In these research
works, the robots are used as nodes in a network and their
interactions are encapsulated in cryptographic transactions.
Blockchain technology can give data conﬁdentiality and
entity validation to robots [22], making them suitable for
applications in which privacy and security are a concern [23].
In summary, previous literature has overlooked a prototype
of an economically autonomous robot than not only directly
manages its income generation and the resources it needs
to maintain its creation of economic value (e.g., recharging
batteries, paying for supplies), but also adapts to market
needs. Historically, robots have participated in labor roles
(e.g., in factories, assembly lines), but with new decentralized

2News articles on the Plantoid (2015) art project by Okhaos:
in
Furtherﬁeld, “Plantoid: The Blockchain-Based Art That Makes Itself”
by Robert Myers, available at https://www.furtherﬁeld.org/tag/autopoesis,
and in Coindesk, “This Robot Plant Needs You and Bitcoin to
Reproduce” by Grace Caffyn, available at https://www.coindesk.com/
this-robot-plant-needs-you-and-bitcoin-to-reproduce.

Fig. 1. A) Gaka-chu (“painter” in Japanese), a 6-axis robot arm (KUKA
KR6 R900) programmed using an Ethererum-based SC while painting a
canvas. Gaka-chu’s work area dimensions are 2.53 × 2.57 meters and are
specially designed to maximize safety. B) Typical workﬂow for a painting
job: (1) The robot uses its sensing, computation, and actuation capabilities
to paint a canvas. (2) The robot puts the painting up for auction, participants
can place their bids in the auction website. (3) A winner is selected when
the painting process is ﬁnished and the ﬁnal bid is deposited (by using ETH:
the cryptocurrency of the Ethereum network). (4) Ownership of the painting
is transferred to the winner of the auction. (5) The payment is transferred to
the robot’s account. (6)-(7) The robot can order supplies from an art shop
to maintain its painting activities.

ﬁnancial tools such as blockchain-based SCs, robots can
also take part in other aspects of our economic environment,
redeﬁning their role as not mere tools but potential peers.

B. Gaka-chu: a self-employed autonomous robot artist

In this paper, we present an economically autonomous
robot named Gaka-chu. Gaka-chu paints canvases, uses
blockchain-based technology to sell the paintings it makes in
online auctions, generates and collects income, and uses its
income to purchase the material and labor resources needed
to maintain its activity, all with minimal human interven-
tion (Fig. 1). Finally, Gaka-chu is able to pay back initial
investors. The three main challenges of an economically
autonomous robot are that: (1) the robot should generate
income to maintain itself, (2) the robot should have an
mechanism that reacts and adapts to market changes, and
(3) when interacting with third-party agents such as online
shops or human bidders, the robot should do so as a peer,
not as a tool. In this paper, Gaka-chu meets these three
main challenges, demonstrated in a 6-month experiment.

ABFig. 2. Workﬂow for topic selection: Gaka-chu ﬁrst (I) selects the English keyword with the largest number of searches that day in Google Trends, (II)
translates the keyword into Japanese characters, (III) converts the resulting text into an image, and (IV) uses the image as an input for the physical painting
process.

Our ﬁndings show that Gaka-chu can reach economical
autonomy: fulﬁl a job, get rewarded for it, and invest the
beneﬁts in its own sustainability.

The remainder of this paper is structured as follows.
Section II describes (II-A) how the robot selects a topic for
painting, (II-B) the sensing, planning, and actuation when
painting a canvas, (II-C) how the online auctions are orga-
nized and ﬁnancial transactions made, and (II-D) how the
robot interacts with the autonomous online shop and human
assistants to provide the robot with the necessary painting
consumables and manual assistance. Section III presents the
results of a 6-month experiment including a start-up “loan”
from human investors, making and auctioning four paintings,
and fulﬁlling ﬁnancial transactions with webshops and hu-
man peers (customers, and assistants). Section IV discusses
the results, especially the legal implications of economically
autonomous robots and the relationship to existing frame-
works of artiﬁcial legal personhood, and proposes future
directions. Finally, Section V provides our conclusions.

II. METHODS

As any artist painter, Gaka-chu has four main challenges:
(1) how to select a topic for the painting, (2) how to actually
paint it, (3) how to sell the painting to obtain economic
resources, and ﬁnally, (4) how to use the generated income to
purchase the necessary materials and assistance to continue
with its activity. All
involved software described in this
section is available at our public GitHub repository3.

A. Selecting a topic for a painting

Each painting by Gaka-chu consists of a set of kanjis
(i.e., Japanese characters) which together form a keyword.
Gaka-chu adapts to the market by choosing the kanjis based
on keywords that are popular in Google Trends. The topic
selection process (Fig. 2) proceeds as follows: (I) Gaka-chu
requests the keyword with the maximum number of searches
for the current day from the Google Trends4 API. (II)
Gaka-chu translates the selected keyword to Japanese using
the Google Translate5 API. (III) Gaka-chu converts the
text-based Japanese kanjis into an image of black strokes
(forming the kanjis) in the center of a white background,
using the Python Image Library (PIL) [24], and (IV) saves
the image for further processing. In this approach, Gaka-chu
chooses topics that are generally popular and potentially
proﬁtable for sale, and still the paintings are not associated
with any previous copyright claims.

3Github repository: https://github.com/Multi-Agent-io/gaka-chu.online
4Google Trends: https://trends.google.com
5Google Translate: https://translate.google.com

B. Painting process

After an image of the selected keyword is created and
stored, Gaka-chu starts the physical painting process. The
three main components—sensing, planning, and actuation—
are depicted in Fig. 3.

Fig. 3. Functional scheme and workﬂow for the Gaka-chu painting process.
In summary, the sensing part gets the information about the canvas (e.g.,
position, orientation) from a depth camera installed at the end-effector.
This information is sent to the planning part, which runs in an Intel NUC
single-board computer and calculates all trajectories for the Gaka-chu joints.
Finally, in the actuation part, calculated trajectories are sent to the internal
motor controllers, which execute the movements.

1) Sensing: In the sensing pipeline (see the left block of
Fig. 3), a depth camera (Intel RealSense D435i) is mounted
on Gaka-chu’s end-effector and connected to a single-board
computer (Intel NUC7i5BNB) via USB. The position and
orientation of the canvas is detected from the point cloud
information from the depth camera (Fig. 4). This process
is handled by a ROS [25] camera node, working in client-
service mode and based on the realsense library6. The ROS
camera node also publishes the dimensions and center point
of the canvas which are necessary for the correct coordinate
transformation from the canvas to the camera frames. It
then provides this information upon request to the planning
component of the system through its ROS interface.

2) Planning:

In the planning pipeline (see the center
block of Fig. 3), Gaka-chu calculates the end-effector tra-

6https://dev.intelrealsense.com

Createimage from textFig. 4. An example of canvas detection using the Intel RealSense D435i
depth camera. The image shows the angle of rotation of the canvas relative
to Gaka-chu’s horizontal axis.

jectories needed to paint the image generated in Sec. II-
A. First, Gaka-chu pre-processes the stored image by con-
verting the binary 2D shapes of kanjis into 1D curves, i.e.,
“skeletonization” [26] (Fig. 5 A and B), using the OpenCV
library [27]. The 1D curves are represented as pixels in a
2D coordinate frame. The pixel coordinates are passed to
the Local Task Planner (LTP), which translates the pixels
of the skeletonized image from their starting image-based
coordinate frame to Gaka-chu’s canvas coordinate frame,
with the z axis taking into account
the 3D position of
the canvas relative to Gaka-chu. Then, the LTP coverts the
coordinates from pixels to meters. At this point, Gaka-chu
has all the necessary coordinates to paint the strokes that will
form the desired painting.

For Gaka-chu’s motion planning, we use the MoveIt
Framework [28], with a customized MoveIt module for
inverse kinematics. Our custom module extends the stan-
dard module by taking into account that the manipulator
in different positions has different kinetic energy (i.e., the
moment of inertia changes). This would eventually lead to
blockage of the movement by the KUKA internal controller.
First, the planner interpolates paths to build splines relative
to the end-effector coordinate system. Our MoveIt module
solves the inverse kinematics and obtains paths for each
link of the robot. The motion planner then conducts time
parameterization, taking into account the maximum speeds
and accelerations for each link of the robot, and ﬁnally
prepares the calculated trajectories to be sent from ROS to
the Ethernet KRL Interface (EKI)7.

3) Actuation: In the actuation pipeline (see the right block
of Fig. 3), Gaka-chu’s internal computer runs executable
code written in the KUKA Robot Language (KRL)—a
programming language similar to Pascal. The KRL program
receives the trajectory information calculated in the planning
pipeline through the EKI interface and organizes the transfer
of the necessary rotation angles, speeds, and accelerations to
the KUKA drives. If the controller detects any problems dur-
ing the movement (e.g., physical impossibility of movement),
the manipulator stops and the corresponding error messages

Fig. 5. An example of the skeletonization and painting process. (A) 5
kanjis form the Japanese term 女性史月間 obtained after translating the
Google Trends keyword “Women’s History Month.” (B) The same image
after skeletonization of the 2D shapes into 1D curves and conversion from
pixels to meters. Different colors represent different strokes in the painting
process. (C) An image of the ﬁnished painting.

are sent back.

The technique Gaka-chu uses to paint the canvas is based
on the existing literature on drawing with strokes [29], [30].
The paint cup is installed at a known position, to one side
of the manipulator. The painting algorithm is organized as
follows: (1) the robot moves to the position above the paint
cup, (2) it dips the brush into the paint and withdraws it, (3)
it moves to the starting point of the trajectory with a slight
offset along the z axis, (4) it descends to the starting point,
(5) it paints one segment of the trajectory, and (6) it raises
the brush and repeats the process until the whole painting is
complete (Fig. 5 C). After testing several types of paints and
brushes, we realized that nylon and bristly brushes as well
as acrylic paint show the best ﬁnishing quality.

C. Generating income: selling paintings

After the painting has been completed, Gaka-chu puts it
up for sale in an online auction. The online auctions are
hosted on an external service, where Gaka-chu maintains
its own page8. The logic of the auction is encoded in

7EKI is a TCP/IP protocol which allows the exchange of XML and binary

data between the manipulator and the external system.

8Rarible auction page: https://rarible.com/gakachu

BACit completes a painting, and decides to purchase a set of
supplies (canvases, paints, and brushes) when the counter
reaches one. Using this software, Gaka-chu generates a mes-
sage containing the composition of the order, the Ethereum
address, and the amount of ETH tokens to be paid, and
sends the message to the art shop through its server API. If
the parameters for the purchase are acceptable, the art shop
agrees to execute it. All steps in this two-way communication
are conducted through an Ethereum-based SC, obliging the
art shop to fulﬁll
its liabilities to provide consumables.
The SC ends with the sending of a ﬁnal message about a
successful purchase and the sending of ETH tokens to the
shop’s Ethereum address. When supplies are received by
post, a human assistant paid by Gaka-chu places the canvas,
paint, and brush in their positions. The human assistant is
remunerated with ETH that Gaka-chu sends to the human’s
crypto wallet. Finally, after succesfully selling a batch of
paintings, Gaka-chu pays back the initial investments that
were used to start its activity (e.g., pay for the auction site
platform and sign-up fees).

III. RESULTS

To demonstrate the feasibility of an economically au-
tonomous robot, we ran a 6-month experiment in which
Gaka-chu received a starting “loan” from early human
investors, painted canvases and sold them at auction to
human bidders, used the generated income to maintain its
economic activity by purchasing supplies and manual human
assistance, and paid back its human investors. During the
experiment, Gaka-chu painted four canvases which were put
up and sold at online auctions.

Figure 7 shows the balance changes on Gaka-chu’s
Ethereum wallet12 during a 6-month period of time (March to
September 2021). Initially, in order to setup an account on the
auction site, Gaka-chu requires to send several transactions
and pay network and platform fees (grey dots). For that
purpose, Gaka-chu received an initial “loan” from human
investors (red squares transactions). Gaka-chu then sold four
completed paintings at different auctions,
transferred the
ownership of the paintings to the highest bidders, and in
return received the corresponding bid amount in ETH (green
diamonds). Gaka-chu was then able to pay back its human
investors (orange square), purchase more art supplies (blue
triangles) and pay for assistance and operational fees (yellow
dots). The videos of all Gaka-chu’s completed paintings and
results of its four closed auctions can be retrieved from the
auction host website.

IV. DISCUSSION

A. General discussion

Robots of all

types, from autonomous vehicles to 3D
printing devices, are revolutionizing a wide variety of indus-
tries: mobility, manufacturing, and logistics. The emergence
of robotics is commonly acknowledged as one of the main
disruptive changes that will have substantial socioeconomic

Screenshot of the auction site where Gaka-chu advertises the
Fig. 6.
completed paintings. Potential customers bid with their own blockchain-
based assets until the auction closes and the highest bidder wins the auction
lot. Four completed auctions, illustrated in the balance graph, are located at
the very end of the list.

an Ethereum-based SC9 and is uploaded in the Ethereum
Mainnet blockchain.

When a painting is completed, Gaka-chu advertises its
availability by creating a dedicated tab for it within its
own page and uploading a video of the entire painting
process. Human bidders are then able to place bids in a given
time limit in ETH (i.e., the cryptocurrency of the Ethereum
blockchain) using their own crypto wallets. Once the auction
is closed, the ownership of the painting is assigned10 to
the Ethereum address of the highest bidder, and the bid
amount is sent to Gaka-chu’s Ethereum address. The process
of arranging shipping and delivery of the physical painting
to the mailing address of the highest bidder is of course
arranged off-chain, with the manual help of a human assistant
remunerated by Gaka-chu.

D. Using income: purchasing consumables and paying back
investors

Gaka-chu can use its generated income to order the art
materials needed for future painting jobs (e.g., canvases,
paints, brushes) and to hire human assistants. Gaka-chu
autonomously places orders at an online art shop that accepts
payments in ETH by using a web-app we developed11.
Gaka-chu decrements its canvas stock counter each time

9https://docs.rarible.org/ethereum/smart-contracts/smart-contracts/
10Digital ownership is assigned using a non-fungible token (NFT). More

information is available at www.gaka-chu.online.

11Art shop interface: https://dapp.robonomics.network/#/art-shop

12https://etherscan.io/address/0xcc3672c869c923b90f2c1bfba2c7801e3924114a

Fig. 7. Balance on Gaka-chu’s Ethereum wallet from March 22nd 2021 to September 3rd 2021. In the ﬁgure, red squares represent transactions from
initial investors to fund the system. Green diamonds represent the sale of a painting. Blue triangles represent the purchase of supplies for the next jobs.
Grey dots, represent the payment of network fees and logistic fees. Yellow dots represent human assistance and operational fees. Finally, the orange square
represents “loan” repayment for the initial investors.

impact in upcoming decades [31]. As countries and com-
panies attempt to recover from the COVID-19 pandemic,
interest in robotics will continue to increase—automation
is key to improving productivity. In the one hand, ﬁnancial
software-based agents (e.g., Paypal, High Frequency Trading,
eCommerce) have had a huge impact on productivity, but
they do not impact the physical realm directly. On the other
hand, modern robots and cyber-physical systems interact
with the physical world in powerful ways (i.e., sense, plan,
and actuate), but they lack the technical ability to directly
participate in ﬁnancial transactions due to insufﬁcient agency.
However, Blockchain-based technologies such as SCs al-
low robots to become online, digital economic actors that can
ﬁnancially operate with minimal human intervention. The
combination of both ﬁelds opens the door towards ﬁnancial
autonomous robots that can redeﬁne their role as not mere
tools but potential peers. This opens a debate not only about
the concept of property and ownership under increasing
robot autonomy but also whether these systems can become
a future cornerstone of societal economic activity (e.g., a
Universal Basic Income [32] through taxation of robot’s
economical activities).

B. Legal implications

questions related to legal viability13. In a traditional busi-
ness environment, to autonomously purchase supplies and
assistance as well as sell goods and services, a robot would
need many of the commercial rights that humans enjoy.
However, present legal frameworks do not allow robots to
sign contracts on their own behalf [33], a key to commercial
transactions. Also, robots are not currently allowed to own
money or property—these rights are historically reserved
for “natural persons.” In addition, robots that create works
are not allowed to own the resultant Intellectual Property
(IP). For instance, machines that write articles, stories, or
books cannot receive copyright protection [34] and U.S.
federal courts have held that machines cannot be listed as
the inventor in U.S. patents, requiring the inventor to be a
natural person [35].

However, law does not restrict commerce or IP exclusively
to humans. Indeed, “artiﬁcial persons” have existed in law
for hundreds of years [36]. Many jurisdictions recognize
personhood rights in inanimate objects, such as landmarks
or animals, and certain jurisdictions even provide person-
hood to ships, temples, and church buildings [37]. Yet, the
most common grant of rights to “artiﬁcial persons” is the
treatment of corporations as “persons” in law under certain
circumstances. Corporations may own bank accounts, sign

In addition to technical and economic considerations,
the topic of self-employed robots raises several important

13For the sake of simplicity, this section will discuss the legal aspects
of this research based on the laws and jurisdiction of the United States, to
illustrate the general global trend in this matter.

0.000000.500001.000001.500002.000002.500003.0000022/03/21 10:0022/03/21 10:0022/03/21 20:0922/03/21 20:3222/03/21 21:2123/03/21 9:1023/03/21 9:2523/03/21 9:3723/03/21 10:2530/03/21 15:0930/03/21 15:1630/03/21 15:1630/03/21 15:2030/03/21 15:2030/03/21 15:2930/03/21 15:2930/03/21 15:3130/03/21 15:3131/03/21 13:3702/04/21 14:2902/04/21 20:3230/06/21 10:0927/08/21 13:1127/08/21 13:1302/09/21 11:5203/09/21 15:44TimestampsETHExperimentstartsPlatform and network feesInvestor loansInvestor repaymentAssistance and operational feesPainting saleConsumable purchasecontracts, and engage in commerce in the same ways as
natural persons [36]. Although a company may not be an
author or inventor, people are able to assign copyrights
or trademarks to companies. Companies can be the owner,
purchaser, or seller of IP rights. Even though the concept of
a corporation as a “person” is a legal ﬁction, nations have
protected the authority of corporations as “artiﬁcial persons”
to achieve commercial goals and promote commerce.

Because corporations are already considered “artiﬁcial
persons” under many current legal frameworks, we might
be able to legally achieve several of the autonomy goals
presented in this work, by incorporating new technology
(e.g., blockchain-based SCs and robotics) into corporate
dynamics. As an example, incorporating a robot would allow
the machine to act on behalf of a corporate entity, not
dissimilar from the way that people complete commercial
transactions online today. For example, when a user makes a
purchase from Amazon through its online store, it is a person
completing a contract by conducting a transaction through
Amazon’s software. The software is an electronic agent on
behalf of the company, and the transaction is legally binding
even though there is no natural person signing the contract. In
addition, a corporation is able to enforce its rights in court
(e.g., ﬁle lawsuits or serve as a defendant) in a way that
machines currently cannot. In this regard, a “corporate robot”
would be able to purchase, sell, and hold trademarks, patents,
and copyrights. For IP created by machines, the company
can involve a human writer or inventor as a third party in
the same way that the robot in our proof-of-concept secures
human assistance. In this scenario, the human assistant could
ﬁle applications for IP protection, then assign any IP to
the company associated with the robot. However, there are
still some legal restrictions on full autonomy—for instance,
traditional corporations are still required to have boards of
directors which are required to be natural persons.

However, new legislation is being created to extend the
autonomy of robots (both software and hardware based)
in the corporate world. In the United States, Wyoming
recently recognized a new legal entity called a Decentralized
Autonomous Organization (DAO) LLC14: an artiﬁcial person
in law, with the right to sue, be sued, and own property
that could be explicitly managed by an algorithm. Simul-
taneously, the United Kingdom’s Parliament is reviewing a
ﬂexible framework for regulatory bodies to provide case-by-
case context-sensitive guidance to assign legal liability and
personhood for AI systems [38]. Under this framework, legal
validity could be provided for a limited number of exceptions
to be made for speciﬁc products and services (e.g., ﬁnancial
or legal advice) that are within clearly deﬁned contexts.

In this research, we showed that blockchain-based tech-
nology such as SCs provides robots with the technical
foundation to become economically autonomous actors. In
addition, current legal frameworks allow robots to engage
in certain commercial actions. However, robots cannot hold

14The statute enacted into law by Wyoming can be found here:

https://wyoleg.gov/2022/Enroll/SF0068.pdf

liability or IP rights for any of the services or works
they provide, which might represent an obstacle to moving
this technology from pure academic research to real-world
deployments. A possible way forward is to enclose a robot
in an existing “artiﬁcial person” such as a corporation. In
this case, the robot could be allowed by the company to
complete ﬁnancial transactions with some autonomy, and
the company would have legal accountability for the robot.
A foreseeable future might include for-proﬁt organizations
managed by autonomous entities that provide digital or
tangible services. These organizations would provide a new
way of building autonomous systems in which robots are
no longer constrained to the labor ﬁeld but expand to the
capital and investment domain to become “entrepreneurs.”
is key that new legislation
it
However,
foresees this possibility and creates guarantees that these
systems are secure, safe, and explainable. One of the aims
of this paper is to highlight this need, because future studies
will require tight collaboration between the legal, social, and
technological disciplines.

in this context,

C. Future Work

For future work, we would like to focus on improving
the selection of the keyword to paint and after a series of
sales, the topic selection strategy could be adjusted based on
historical data. In addition, ﬁnancially autonomous robots
also need to be able to make purchases to maintain their
continued viability. For instance, future robotics systems
using this technology might need to be able to pay for
electricity (e.g., to a street charger), spare or replacement
parts (e.g., to Mouser), training data (e.g., to MTurk), or
to TaskRabbit) with their
skilled human resources (e.g.,
blockchain-based ﬁnancial assets. Developing new payment
gateways and interfaces to these services is a promising way
forward.

V. CONCLUSIONS

In the robotics research ﬁeld, physical autonomy (i.e., the
ability to observe and act on a physical environments) is well
understood and the state of the art is advanced. However,
very little research has been done on the economic autonomy
of robots. In this work, we have presented and demonstrated
the ﬁrst economically autonomous robot, using blockchain-
based smart contracts. In our proof-of-concept, the control
logic for the robot is embedded in a smart contract on the
Ethereum blockchain network and the actuation takes place
in the physical world. The robot makes physical paintings,
sells them to humans in online auctions, and uses the
income it generates to purchase supplies from an online shop,
remunerate a human assistant, and repay initial investors.
In other words, during the 6-month proof-of-concept exper-
iment, the robot demonstrates economic autonomy: it fulﬁls
a job, gets rewarded for it, and uses the beneﬁts to fund its
own sustainability. Finally, we discuss the legal implications
of economically autonomous robots, which under current
frameworks could be embedded in existing “artiﬁcial person”
entities such as corporations.

REFERENCES

[24] P. Umesh, “Image processing in python,” CSI Communications,

[1] S. Bijani and D. Robertson, “A review of attacks and security ap-
proaches in open multi-agent systems,” Artiﬁcial Intelligence Review,
vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 607–636, 2014.

[2] R. N. Akram, K. Markantonakis, K. Mayes, O. Habachi, D. Sauveron,
A. Steyven, and S. Chaumette, “Security, Privacy and Safety Evalua-
tion of Dynamic and Static Fleets of Drones,” 2017.

[3] “The moral machine experiment,” Nature, vol. 563, no. 7729,
https://doi.org/10.1038/
[Online]. Available:

pp.
2018.
59–64,
s41586-018-0637-6

[4] C. Reynolds, A. Cassinelli, and M. Ishikawa, “Economically au-
tonomous robotic entities,” in International Conference on Robotics
and Automation, ICRA, vol. 7, 2008.

[5] S. H. Ivanov and C. Webster, “The robot as a consumer: a research
agenda,” in Marketing: experience and perspectives” Conference,
2017, pp. 29–30.

[6] D. C. Parkes and M. P. Wellman, “Economic reasoning and artiﬁcial

intelligence,” Science, vol. 349, no. 6245, pp. 267–272, 2015.

[7] S. D. Levitt and J. A. List, “Homo economicus evolves,” Science, vol.

319, no. 5865, pp. 909–910, 2008.

[8] P. Danassis, A. Filos-Ratsikas, and B. Faltings, “Achieving diverse
objectives with ai-driven prices in deep reinforcement learning multi-
agent markets,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.06060, 2021.

[9] G. F. Nobre, “Automata economicus: Machinesthat create value and
the artiﬁcial creative economy,” Econom´ıa Creativa, no. 9, pp. 10–26,
2018.

[10] R. Michalski, “How to sue a robot,” Utah Law Review, vol. 2018, no. 5,

p. 51, 2018. [Online]. Available: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3757790

[11] R. Calo, “Robots in american law,” University of Washington School
of Law Research Paper, vol. 2016, no. 2016’04, 2016. [Online].
Available: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2737598

[12] S. H. Ivanov, “Robonomics-principles, beneﬁts, challenges, solutions,”

2017.

[13] C. R. Davies, “An evolutionary step in intellectual property rights–
intelligence and intellectual property,” Computer Law &

artiﬁcial
Security Review, vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 601–619, 2011.

[14] M. Buning, “Is the eu exposed on the copyright of robot creations,”

Robotics Law Journal, vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 8–9, 2015.

[15] J. Grimmelmann, “Copyright for literate robots,” Iowa L. Rev., vol.

101, p. 657, 2015.

[16] V. Buterin et al., “A next-generation smart contract and decentralized

application platform,” white paper, vol. 3, p. 37, 2014.

[17] P. Veena, S. Panikkar, S. Nair, and P. Brody, “Empowering the edge-
practical insights on a decentralized internet of things,” Empowering
the Edge-Practical Insights on a Decentralized Internet of Things. IBM
Institute for Business Value, vol. 17, 2015.

vol. 23, 2012.

[25] M. Quigley, K. Conley, B. Gerkey, J. Faust, T. Foote, J. Leibs,
R. Wheeler, and A. Y. Ng, “ROS: an open-source Robot Operating
System,” in ICRA workshop on open source software, vol. 3, 2009,
pp. 1–5.

[26] P. K. Saha, G. Borgefors, and G. S. de Baja, Skeletonization: Theory,

methods and applications. Academic Press, 2017.

[27] G. Bradski, “The OpenCV Library,” Dr. Dobb’s Journal of Software

Tools, 2000.

[28] M. G¨orner, R. Haschke, H. Ritter, and J. Zhang, “Moveit! task
constructor for task-level motion planning,” in 2019 International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA).
IEEE, 2019, pp.
190–196.

[29] T. Lindemeier, J. Metzner, L. Pollak, and O. Deussen, “Hardware-
based non-photorealistic rendering using a painting robot,” in Com-
puter graphics forum, vol. 34, no. 2. Wiley Online Library, 2015,
pp. 311–323.

[30] L. Scalera, S. Seriani, A. Gasparetto, and P. Gallina, “Busker robot:
A robotic painting system for rendering images into watercolour
artworks,” in IFToMM Symposium on Mechanism Design for Robotics.
Springer, 2018, pp. 1–8.

[31] G.-Z. Yang, J. Bellingham, P. E. Dupont, P. Fischer, L. Floridi,
R. Full, N. Jacobstein, V. Kumar, M. McNutt, R. Merriﬁeld, B. J.
Nelson, B. Scassellati, M. Taddeo, R. Taylor, M. Veloso, Z. L. Wang,
and R. Wood, “The grand challenges of science robotics,” Science
Robotics, vol. 3, no. 14, 2018.

[32] T. Straubhaar, “On the economics of a universal basic income,”

Intereconomics, vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 74–80, 2017.

[33] L. B. Solum, “Legal personhood for artiﬁcial intelligences,” in Ma-
chine Ethics and Robot Ethics. Routledge, 2020, pp. 415–471.
[34] P. Samuelson, “Allocating ownership rights in computer-generated

works,” U. pitt. L. rev., vol. 47, p. 1185, 1985.

[35] K. Taylor, “The patentability of inventions with artiﬁcial intelligence
listed as an inventor following Thaler v. Hirshfeld,” The University of
Cincinnati Intellectual Property and Computer Law Journal, vol. 6,
no. 2, p. 1, 2022.

[36] N. Banteka, “Artiﬁcially intelligent persons,” Houston Law Review,

vol. 58, no. 3, p. 19357, 2021.

[37] M. Ganado, J. Ellul, G. J. Pace, S. Tendon, and B. Wilson, “Mapping

the future of legal personality,” 2020.

for Digital, Culture, Media

and Sport,
[38] Secretary of State
regulating AI,”
a
“Establishing
Parliament of
the United Kingdom, Policy Paper 978-1-5286-
3639-1, 2022. [Online]. Available: https://www.gov.uk/government/
publications/establishing-a-pro-innovation-approach-to-regulating-ai

pro-innovation

approach

to

[18] S. Higgins,
powered
16-March-2015].
ibm-reveals-proof-concept-blockchain-powered-internet-things

for blockchain-
posted
[Online;
[Online]. Available: https://www.coindesk.com/

“Ibm reveals proof of
things,” March

concept
2015,

internet

of

[19] V. Strobel, E. Castell´o Ferrer,

and M. Dorigo,

“Managing
byzantine robots via blockchain technology in a swarm robotics
collective decision making scenario,” in Proceedings of
the 17th
International Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent
Systems, ser. AAMAS ’18. Richland, SC: International Foundation
for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, 2018, pp. 541–
549. [Online]. Available: http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=3237383.
3237464

[20] V. Strobel, E. Castell´o Ferrer, and M. Dorigo, “Blockchain
technology secures robot swarms: A comparison of consensus
resilience to byzantine robots,” Frontiers
protocols and their
in Robotics and AI, vol. 7, 2020.
[Online]. Available: https:
//www.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/frobt.2020.00054

[21] E. C. Ferrer, E. Jim´enez, J. L. Lopez-Presa, and J. Mart´ın-Rueda, “Fol-
lowing leaders in byzantine multirobot systems by using blockchain
technology,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics, pp. 1–17, 2021.

[22] E. C. Ferrer, O. Rudovic, T. Hardjono,

and A. Pentland,
“Robochain: A secure data-sharing framework for human-robot
interaction,” CoRR, vol. abs/1802.04480, 2018. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1802.04480

[23] E. C. Ferrer, T. Hardjono, A. Pentland, and M. Dorigo, “Secure
swarms,” Science Robotics,
[Online]. Available: https:

and secret
vol. 6, no. 56, p. eabf1538, 2021.
//www.science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/scirobotics.abf1538

cooperation in robot

