Is Blockchain for Internet of Medical Things a Panacea for COVID-19 Pandemic?

Xuran Lia, Bishenghui Taob, Hong-Ning Daib,∗, Muhammad Imranc, Dehuan Wand, Dengwang Lia

aShandong Key Laboratory of Medical Physics and Image Processing, School of Physics and Electronics, Shandong Normal University,
Jinan, Shandong, China; sdnulxr@sdnu.edu.cn; dengwang@sdnu.edu.cn
bFaculty of Information Technology, Macau University of Science and Technology, Macau SAR;
2009853YII30001@student.must.edu.mo, hndai@ieee.org
cCollege of Applied Computer Science, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia; dr.m.imran@ieee.org
dGuangdong University of Finance, Guangzhou, China; wan e@gduf.edu.cn

2
2
0
2

r
p
A
6
1

]

C
D
.
s
c
[

1
v
5
2
7
7
0
.
4
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract

The outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic has deeply inﬂuenced the lifestyle of the general public and the healthcare
system of the society. As a promising approach to address the emerging challenges caused by the epidemic of infectious
diseases like COVID-19, Internet of Medical Things (IoMT) deployed in hospitals, clinics, and healthcare centers can save
the diagnosis time and improve the eﬃciency of medical resources though privacy and security concerns of IoMT stall the
wide adoption. In order to tackle the privacy, security, and interoperability issues of IoMT, we propose a framework of
blockchain-enabled IoMT by introducing blockchain to incumbent IoMT systems. In this paper, we review the beneﬁts
of this architecture and illustrate the opportunities brought by blockchain-enabled IoMT. We also provide use cases of
blockchain-enabled IoMT on ﬁghting against the COVID-19 pandemic, including the prevention of infectious diseases,
location sharing and contact tracing, and the supply chain of injectable medicines. We also outline future work in this
area.

Keywords: Blockchain, Internet of Medical Things, Security, Privacy, COVID-19

1. Introduction

Since the year 2020, the whole world has been strug-
gling to ﬁght against the spread of the new coronavirus
disease called SARS-CoV-2 (aka, COVID-19). COVID-19
is a dangerous respiratory infection that rapidly spreads
from humans to humans. Even though many countries are
sparing their eﬀorts to slow down or control the outbreaks
of COVID-19 and gradually restore regular lives, we still
have a long way to go before the COVID-19 pandemic
being fully solved. The widespread of the COVID-19 pan-
demic has led to an adverse inﬂuence on almost all aspects
of human life and has also exposed the limitations on med-
ical sources of the current healthcare systems.

Since the emergence of the COVID-19 pandemic, sub-
stantial eﬀorts have been paid on exploiting technological
advances to eﬀectively ﬁght against this disease. Among
all these technologies, the Internet of Medical Things
(IoMT) is one of the most promising approaches to help
to prevent the widespread of this infectious disease [1, 2].
IoMT is a remote healthcare system, which is mainly com-
posed of medical sensor devices, medical data servers, and
professional medical staﬀ (i.e., doctors, nurses, and so on).
The medical sensor devices (including various biomedical
sensors, RFID tags, and QR tags) collect the medical data

∗Corresponding author
Email address: hndai@ieee.org (Hong-Ning Dai )

of patients and then transmit the data to medical data
servers. The authorized professional medical staﬀ can then
access the medical data, conduct an early diagnosis, and
provide medical therapy measures. Meanwhile, IoMT can
monitor the status of patients so as to provide professional
medical support.

The wide adoption of IoMT systems to incumbent med-
ical institutions and agencies brings potentials to address
the COVID-19 pandemic. First, the time of waiting for
an early diagnosis can be saved. The early diagnosis for
COVID-19 is necessary since the contagiousness rate of
COVID-19 is very high [3]. However, the medical resources
(such as hospitals and doctors) are limited and the chances
of early diagnosis for many patients are missed. When
physiological data of a potential patient is collected by
medical sensor devices, the professional medical staﬀ can
soon diagnose if the potential patient is infected. Second,
monitoring patients with medical sensors can reduce the
possibility of medical staﬀ being infected. The possibility
of direct contact between patients and medical staﬀ can
be minimized with IoMT-enabled remote healthcare ser-
vice. Last but not least, limited medical resources can be
saved. When a patient gets out of emergency status and
only needs more rest for recovery, the medical staﬀ can
monitor this patient at given time intervals with the help
of IoMT. The constrained medical resources (i.e., hospital
beds, medical devices, and medical staﬀ) can be saved for
those patients in emergency status.

Preprint submitted to Journal of LATEX Templates

April 19, 2022

 
 
 
 
 
 
Though the adoption of IoMT is beneﬁcial to combat
COVID-19, there are some challenges to be solved before
IoMT can be widely deployed. Due to the limited com-
puting capability and battery capacity, complicated en-
cryption algorithms are not feasible for most wearable or
implanted medical sensor devices. Consequently, wireless
data transmission of IoMT can be vulnerable to exter-
nal attacks [4, 5]. Since medical data contains sensitive
personal information of patients, it is crucial to allow the
authorized users to access the medical data while preserv-
ing the privacy of patients [6]. In addition, there are di-
verse types of medical sensor devices [7] and heterogeneous
IoMT networks, thereby leading to the poor interoperabil-
ity of IoMT.

One promising solution to the aforementioned chal-
lenges is integrating blockchain with IoMT [8, 9, 2]. The
inherent nature of blockchain includes decentralization,
trustworthiness, traceability, and transparency. Therefore,
blockchain can potentially address the security, privacy,
and interoperability challenges [10, 11]. Firstly, the decen-
tralized blockchain can protect the sensitive medical data
of patients from being fully controlled by third-party enti-
ties. Secondly, the decentralization of blockchain can also
avoid the single point of failure and mitigate the bottleneck
at central servers due to the increasing number of medical
sensor devices. Thirdly, blockchain-based IoMT can guar-
antee the security and traceability of IoMT data because
the contents on the blockchain will not be controlled by
any single entity, and the medical data as well as event logs
stored on the blockchain are immutable [12]. Fourthly, the
decentralized peer-to-peer (P2P) network architecture can
help to process the heterogeneous IoMT data and improve
the interoperability of IoMT.

The convergence of blockchain and IoMT may improve
the security of IoMT, enhanced the privacy protection of
IoMT data, and ameliorate the interoperability of IoMT
systems. Hence, we explore the convergence of blockchain
and IoMT in this paper. In particular, we propose a frame-
work for integrating blockchain with IoMT, investigate
the solutions of blockchain-enabled IoMT to tackle the
COVID-19 pandemic, discuss the potential applications of
blockchain-enabled IoMT, and outline future directions in
blockchain-enabled IoMT. The main contributions of this
paper are summarized as follows:

• We present the technical overview of blockchain
and IoMT. Speciﬁcally, we introduce the blockchain
structure, consensus algorithms, smart contract, and
categories of blockchain systems.

• We propose a framework of integrating blockchain
with IoMT and analyze the potentials brought by
this framework.
In particular, blockchain helps to
improve the security of IoMT, enhance privacy pro-
tection of IoMT, and ameliorate the interoperability
of IoMT systems.

• We provide use cases of blockchain-enabled IoMT

This paper

Section 1: Introduction

Section 2: Related Work

Section 3: Overview of Blockchain and IoMT

2.1: Blockchain

2.2: Internet of Medical Things

Section 4: Blockchain-enabled IoMT

4.1: Architecture of BCeMT

4.2: Opportunities of BCeMT

4.3: Challenges of BCeMT

Section 5: Applications of BCeMT

5.1: Location sharing and contact tracing

5.2: Prevention of infectious diseases

5.3: Traceable information chain of vaccines

Section 6: Future directions

6.1: IoMT data sharing

6.2: Scalability and optimization

6.3: Big data analytics of BCeMT

6.4: Integration of AI with BCeMT

Section 7: Conclusion

Figure 1: Structural diagram of the paper.

including
in combating the COVID-19 pandemic,
the prevention of infectious diseases, location shar-
ing and contact tracing, and the supply chain of in-
jectable medicines.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Sec-
tion 2 provides related studies in literature. Section 3
presents the technological review of blockchain and IoMT.
Section 4 introduces an architecture of blockchain-enabled
IoMT. The case studies of blockchain-enabled IoMT are
provided in Section 5. The future directions are summa-
rized in Section 6. Section 7 concludes this paper.

2. Related Works

The outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic has brought
severe inﬂuence on the whole world due to the high infec-
tiousness of COVID-19. One of the potential solutions to
address the COVID-19 pandemic is deploying IoMT across
medical institutions as well as communities. The authors
in [13] present a comparison between the traditional med-
ical ecosystem and IoMT medical ecosystem and discuss
the applications of IoMT systems in combating COVID-
In another work [14], a point-
19 in diﬀerent countries.

2

References Main contributions

Blockchain

IoMT

Table 1: The comparison of related works with this work

Integrating
blockchain
with IoMT

Use cases in
combating
COVID-19

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

This paper

Presenting the architecture of the IoMT medical
ecosystem and the applications of IoMT systems in
combating COVID-19

Proposing a point-of-care diagnostics based IoMT
platform for COVID-19 diagnosis and monitoring

Proposing the IoMT system for mobility restricted
orthopedic patients during COVID-19 pandemic

Proposing a privacy-preserving framework for contact
tracing based on the blockchain

Designing and implemented the security and privacy
IoMT framework based on the blockchain and inter-
planetary ﬁle system

Presenting a system architecture of
integrated
blockchain with IoMT and developed an app based
on this architecture

Proposing a data-ﬂow architecture for the integration
of blockchain and IoMT and presenting the use cases

Proposing a blockchain-enabled storage mechanism in
the cloud-assisted WBAN

Designing the authentication protocol for the system
integrating cloud-assisted WBAN with blockchain

Proposing a blockchain-based lightweight consensus
mechanism for a cloud-assisted WBAN enabled re-
mote patient monitoring system

Proposing a framework of integrating blockchain with
IoMT and analyze the potentials brought by this
framework, presenting use cases in combating the
COVID-19 pandemic

×

×

×

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

×

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

×

×

×

×

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

×

×

×

×

×

×

(cid:88)

of-care diagnostics-based IoMT platform is proposed for
patients infected by COVID-19. With this platform, the
patients can dynamically monitor the disease status them-
selves and receiving medical support without spreading the
virus. Meanwhile, the IoMT system for providing medi-
cal support to orthopedic patients with limited mobility
during this COVID-19 pandemic environment is designed
in [15]. However, most medical sensor devices in IoMT
systems are limited in terms of computing capability and
battery capacity. Moreover, there are heterogeneous types
of medical sensor devices, leading to the complexity of the
IoMT system. The main challenges of deploying the IoMT
lie in 1) diﬃculty in assuring the security of patient’s data
and 2) the poor interoperability between medical sensor
devices.

One promising solution for addressing these chal-
lenges of the IoMT system is blockchain.
The re-
search [16] presents a blockchain-enabled framework for
digital contact-tracing applications in the COVID-19 pan-
demic. In this framework, both the trust and privacy of
users are guaranteed by the blockchain. Another research
investigates enhancing the security and privacy of medi-
cal systems with blockchain in [17]. In this research, the
blockchain and interplanetary ﬁle systems are utilized for
constructing the security and privacy framework of IoMT.
The authors in [18] investigate the performance improve-
ment of the blockchain network and present the system
architecture of utilizing blockchain in IoMT. They develop

a smartphone app for the automation of medical records
based on their proposed architecture. The integration of
blockchain and IoMT is also investigated in [19]. In this
research, a data-ﬂow architecture is proposed for the in-
tegration of blockchain and IoMT, and the corresponding
use cases are presented.

Considering the limitation of the storage capability of
blockchain and the massive amount of physiological data
collected from patients, the integration of cloud-assisted
wireless body area network (WBAN) with blockchain in
the smart medical system is investigated in studies [20,
21, 22]. In [20], a blockchain-enabled storage mechanism in
the cloud-assisted WBAN is proposed. Meanwhile, the au-
thors in [21] investigate a telecare medical information sys-
tem, which is implemented in the cloud-assisted WBAN.
To guarantee the security of patient health data, they also
design the blockchain-based authentication protocol for
this system. The work [22] investigates a cloud-assisted
WBAN enabled remote patient monitoring system. In this
system, they designed a lightweight consensus mechanism
based on blockchain.

Diﬀerent from the aforementioned researches, this pa-
per proposes the framework of integrating blockchain with
IoMT and analyzes the potential brought by this frame-
work, especially in the context of COVID-19. In addition,
we provide use cases of this framework in combating the
COVID-19 pandemic, including the prevention of infec-
tious diseases, location sharing and contact tracing, and

3

Figure 2: Blockchain technology system.

Figure 3: Blockchain structure.

the supply chain of injectable medicines. The comparison
of the related studies with this paper is shown in Table 1.

3. Overview of Blockchain and IoMT

This section presents a technical overview on both

blockchain and IoMT.

3.1. Blockchain

In 2009, Nakamoto put forward Bitcoin, this brand
new digital currency without any authoritative interme-
diary’s coordination.
In the system of Bitcoin, peo-
ple who do not trust each other can directly make deal
with this cryptocurrency [23]. In December 2013, a new
blockchain-framework platform Ethereum was proposed
by Buterin [24].
In addition to the built-in algorithms
based on digital currency transactions, Ethereum also
provides the Turing-complete programming language for
the smart contract, which was the ﬁrst applied to the
blockchain.

In-
The blockchain has a distinctive data structure.
formation is encapsulated into every single block, and the
blocks are sequentially combined into a chain. Block ci-
pher is used to ensure that the data cannot be altered and
forged. The system is decentralized, implying that there
is no central node in the network of blockchain. Thus,
any two nodes can trade with each other directly. Hence,
blockchain networks mostly choose P2P protocol as the
network transmission protocol. In this way, the blockchain
system can be totally distributed so that the failures of a
single point are tolerated.

The nodes in the blockchain network generally have key
characteristics of equality, autonomy, distribution, and so
on [25, 26]. Moreover, as shown in Figure 2, every node
can freely join or depart from this system. During the in-
formation propagation, every single node always listens to
the broadcasting messages in the network. Once a node
receives a new transaction or block from neighbor peers,
the broadcast message will be veriﬁed. The message in-
cludes a digital signature, proof of work, hash value, and

4

so on. In order to prevent the invalid data from recording,
only when the veriﬁcation of the information has been to a
consensus, the message would be encrypted and appended
into the blockchain.

3.1.1. Blockchain structure

The structure of a blockchain is built as a connected
block list.
In this chain-like list, every single block has
a hash pointing to the previous one. A correct (or con-
ﬁrmed) chain contains a complete block list and the trans-
actions.
It is available for every node to download and
maintain the chain, implying that the blockchain system
acts like a distributed public ledger. Figure. 3 presents
an instance of the blockchain structure. Each block in a
chain consists of a block body and a block header, with a
hash pointer contained in the header pointing to its prior
block, which is also called its parent block. And the initial
block which does not have any parent block is also called
genesis block [25]. Some information for identiﬁcation and
marking will be stored in the block header, such as Nonce
and Time Stamp. Meanwhile, the majority of complete
data is stored in the block body, such as transaction data,
smart contracts, etc.

A block contains a block header and a block body. Gen-
erally, as listed in Table 2, a block header includes a block
version, Merkle tree root hash, timestamp, nBits, nonce,
and the previous block hash [27]. It is worth mentioning
that the information in the block cannot be modiﬁed by
others with a hash pointer in the block header. The block
body contains validated transactions as well as a transac-
tion counter. Take the Bitcoin block as an example. The
maximum size of a single block is deﬁned as 1 MB and a
transaction usually has a size of around 250 bytes. Thus,
each block has a limit of 4,000 transactions. According to
the real-time data of the Blockchain Explorer, the recent
number of transactions of Bitcoin is about 2,000 trans-
actions per block [28]. Moreover, the average Ethereum
block size is between 20 to 30 KB mostly [29].

BlockchainConsensusCryptographyP2P	networkjoindepartBlock BodyHashBlock HeaderBlock Body HashBlock BodyHashTime StampTx1Tx2TxnSmartContractBlockGenesis BlockNonceBlockBlock HeaderBlock HeaderTransactionsTable 2: An example of block header components and description.

Components

Description

Block Version

Indicates which version of proto-
col and validation rules that the
block defers to.

Merkle Tree Root
Hash

The hash value of every transac-
tion within the block.

Time Stamp

nBits

Nonce

Previous block hash

Current time as seconds in uni-
versal
time since January 1,
1970.

Current hashing target in a com-
pact format.

random number, usually starts
with 0 and increases for every
hash calculation.

A 256-bit hash value of the pre-
vious block.

3.1.2. Consensus algorithms

Various consensus algorithms are deployed to deter-
mine how to achieve agreement when verifying and record-
ing new transactions and blocks. An eﬃcient consensus
mechanism needs to allow all participants to reach an
agreement in a non-trusted environment and maintain the
system under a good fault tolerance. There are diﬀerent
consensus algorithms in diﬀerent platforms. As the ﬁrst
and the widest deployed consensus mechanism, the Proof
of Work (PoW) introduced by the Bitcoin network assumes
that all candidates take part in racing with their comput-
ing power, to ﬁnd a required nonce value to construct the
right block [23]. PoW guarantees a decentralized network
and a public ledger system for trustless entities dealing
with each other. However, PoW suﬀers from excessive
power consumption.

Proof of Stake (PoS) can potentially overcome the
drawbacks of PoW. The PoS comes from the concept that
the more stake coins a node has, the higher chance it can
fabricate the new block [30]. Therefore, nodes with more
tokens are generally believed to be more inclined to main-
tain the security of the network in order to protect their
own rights. PoS avoids a massive consumption of comput-
ing power, thereby being more energy-eﬃcient than PoW.
However, PoS still confronts the risk of attacks due to its
low mining cost.

Delegated proof of stake (DPoS) is an extension of
the PoS. This consensus protocol supports the users who
have stakes to vote the delegate or witnesses, to build the
blocks and chain, or change the parameters of the net-
work. DPoS demonstrates better operational eﬃciency
and double-spending attack protection. However, DPoS
can result in a centralized network due to a limited num-
ber of selected delegates.

To protect the system from the attacks of potential ma-
licious nodes, Hyperledger Fabric [31] utilizes the Practi-
cal byzantine fault tolerance(PBFT) [32]. In PBFT, repli-

cations among nodes reach consensus despite the failing
or incorrect information propagation in the distributed
network so as to enable the Byzantine faults tolerance.
Moreover, after introducing the idea of voting nodes to
record the transactions, delegated byzantine fault toler-
ance (DBFT) is implemented for saving communication
consumption.
In addition, Ripple protocol requires less
trust to maintain the consensus with low latency, by uti-
lizing collectively-trusted subnetworks from the larger net-
work [33], thereby showing robustness when facing the
Byzantine failures.

3.1.3. Smart contract

A smart contract is a protocol or a computing program
deployed on the blockchain to automatically execute, con-
trol, or verify actions under the agreement between dif-
ferent parties. The conception of the smart contract was
ﬁrst proposed by Szabo in the 1996 [34] to reduce the re-
quirement of trust, cost of enforcement, and exceptions
of malicious attacks during the transaction. On top of
the blockchain system, every user can call and interact
with smart contracts to conduct various business activi-
ties, such as making transactions with others, receiving
and sending messages, and voting activities [35]. Smart
contracts share similar characteristics to the blockchain,
such as distribution, decentralization, and immutability.
Once a smart contract is deployed, no one can modify it,
ensuring the security of transactions and systems. For an
instance, Ethereum implements smart contracts in vari-
ous computer languages like Solidity, Serpent, or LLL [36].
When a smart contract is called, it will run immediately
in the content of an Ethereum Virtual Machine (EVM) on
the decentralized network computers.

3.1.4. Categories of Blockchain systems

The current blockchain systems can be categorized as
public blockchains, private blockchains, and consortium
blockchains. The access permission and network proper-
ties vary from diﬀerent blockchain systems. we next brieﬂy
describe three typical blockchain systems.

Public Blockchains: Every user within a public
blockchain system can freely take part in and interact with
the blockchain. Blockchain-based cryptocurrency systems
such as Bitcoin [23], Ethereum [24], and Litecoin have this
mechanism. With no central node in charge of this de-
centralized and trustless network, the cryptography algo-
rithm and consensus ensure the validity and integrity of
data, thereby maintaining the fairness and equality of the
system.

Private Blockchains: Unlike public blockchains, not
anyone has access permission in private blockchain sys-
tems. Only authorized entities can access the on-chain
data and initiate transactions, whereas the blockchain is
essentially a centralized database. Private blockchains
have generally been used for data conﬁdentiality, authen-
tication, and organization management of internal infor-
mation.

5

3.2.1. System architecture of IoMT

The recently proposed IoMT-based medical system ar-
chitecture usually consists of three layers [7, 39]. As shown
in Figure 4, the three layers of IoMT architecture are com-
posed of the data collection layer, the data management
layer and the medical service layer.

Perception/Actuation layer: On the one hand, the
perception/actuation layer collects the physiological data
of patients and preprocess these physiological data with
patients’ privacy information. On the other hand, this
layer can also enforce some actions on the IoMT. This
layer is mainly composed of two types of devices: medical
sensor/actuator devices and edge servers. Medical sens-
ing devices are wearable or implanted biosensors, which
are used to collect physiological data of patients, such as
blood sugar, blood pressure, heart rate, electrocardiogram
(ECG), electromyography (EMG) and electroencephalo-
gram (EEG), etc. The medical sensor devices conduct the
on-demand monitoring and collect the patient’s physiolog-
ical data at set intervals when the patients’ physiological
parameters are normal. When the patient’s physiological
parameters become abnormal or under the request of an
authorized user (patient, doctor, nurse, etc.), the medical
sensor devices will conduct continuous intensive monitor-
ing of the patient.

After collecting the patients’ physiological data, the
medical sensor devices transmit the collected patient’s
physiological data to the edge servers. Edge servers may
be gateways in the network, local base stations, or per-
sonal smart devices. The main function of edge servers is
to preprocess the collected physiological data with various
formats, eliminate the redundancy of the data, compress
and encrypt these data. The edge servers can also con-
duct preliminary analysis and storage of the data, and
generate alarming signals when physiological parameters
become abnormal. When the edge servers complete the
preliminary processing of the collected patients’ physio-
logical data, the data is uploaded to the data management
layer through WiFi, LTE or 5G network.

Data management layer: In the data management
layer, the patients’ physiological data uploaded by edge
servers are further processed, stored and analyzed on
the data management equipment. The data management
equipment in this layer needs to eﬀectively manage and
analyze the heterogeneous physiological data of patients,
and classify the data according to the timeliness and the
priority of the analysis task. In addition, the data manage-
ment equipment needs to establish an eﬃcient distributed
storage mechanism for a large amount of data to support
eﬃcient data processing and analysis. In the scenario of
intensive care, sudden disease detection and vital parame-
ters monitoring, the real-time changes of physiological pa-
rameters such as heart rate and blood pressure reﬂect the
health status of individuals. Therefore, these data need to
be processed in a very short time, and then the analytical
results on patients’ physiological data should be rapidly

Figure 4: Overview of IoMT.

Consortium Blockchains: As a combination of pub-
lic blockchains and private blockchains,
consortium
blockchains have typically been under the control of some
reign entities. The access mechanism is determined by
manager nodes to decide who can join the network, initiate
transactions, or participate in the consensus. Hyperledger
Fabric [31], Quorum [37], and Corda [38] are the typical
examples of consortium blockchains.

3.1.5. Summary

Blockchain technologies have various irreplaceable
characteristics that are quite suitable for the application
of the IoMT. For example, the immutability and trace-
ability of blockchains can bring innovations to the data
storage, security, and privacy protection of the IoMT. It
makes the tracing and tracking of medical incidents more
eﬃcient while also avoiding privacy leakage and tampering
attacks. Furthermore, nodes in the blockchain system can
join and exit the system freely; this feature is very suitable
for ﬂexible connections of perception or actuation devices.
Moreover, the application of smart contracts can provide
new solutions for medical services and data management in
IoMT, such as epidemic spread control, vaccination statis-
tics, and medical equipment management.

Besides, among the various categories of blockchain
systems, they have corresponding appropriate application
scenarios. Due to the sensitivity of physiological data from
patients, the private blockchain that a single group or mul-
tiple groups control (e.g., doctors, patients, administra-
tors) is the most feasible type of blockchains for the IoMT
applications. Besides, compared with public blockchains,
private blockchains have better performance in scalabil-
ity and ﬂexibility. Patients’ physiological data are not of
high sensitivity for some scenarios, and the consortium
blockchains may also be feasible.

In short, the integration of blockchain technology with
the existing medical information system is a promising di-
rection. Undeniably, it will also make new contributions
to combat against COVID-19.

3.2. Internet of Medical Things

The system architecture and existing challenges of

IoMT are presented in the following subsections.

6

Perception/ actuationData ManagementMedical servicesMedical dataData serversRobotreturned to the medical professionals and the patient to
deal with the emergencies.

Since the data management equipment needs to an-
alyze patients’ physiological data eﬃciently and rapidly,
some recent studies employ cloud servers to conduct
data processing, data storage and data analysis in this
layer [40, 41]. The cloud servers extract features of the
collected physiological data and classify the data to help
medical professionals (such as doctors) providing better
medical service. In this way, medical professionals can ob-
tain the processed data with the easy observed form, and
provide prediction as well as treatment advice faster and
better. With the permission of the patient, the algorithms
and programs for the assessment of expected diagnosis and
rehabilitation progress can be run on the data management
equipment.
In this layer, access control mechanisms or
identity authentication mechanisms are applied to ensure
that only authorized entities can access patient’s physio-
logical data, so that data security and patients’ privacy are
protected. In addition, patients’ information and related
proﬁles will be anonymous before sharing data with other
entities such as research centers.

Medical service layer: The medical service layer
aims to provide users with basic visual data analysis re-
sults. The visualized data are used to generate reports
and send them to healthcare participants (including doc-
tors, patients, and nursing staﬀ) involved in clinical ob-
servation, patient diagnosis, and intervention processes.
Medical personnel (such as doctors) with appropriate au-
thentication and authorization credentials can access the
reports on patient’s physiological data and provide medical
advice to patients timely.

The medical professionals can track designated pa-
tients and access the reports based on the daily activities
of patients. On the one hand, through real-time analysis,
the changes in patients’ physiological parameters can be
detected immediately to avoid sudden diseases. When the
patient’s physiological parameters become abnormal, the
medical service equipment sends a notiﬁcation alarm to
the nursing staﬀ for further treatment advice. Then the
medical professionals could guard against risk and initiate
the necessary action plan to deal with emergencies such
as heart attack, falls, etc. On the other hand, through
long-term monitoring and analysis of patient physiological
data, the medical professionals can track the health sta-
tus of patients’ daily life and predict some potential health
risks, such as obesity and hypertension. In addition, con-
sidering the physiological characteristics of individuals, in-
dividual treatment simulations can be carried out to assess
the health risk and design the best medical plan.

3.2.2. Challenges in IoMT

The advent of IoMT still confronts the following chal-

lenges.

Absence of interoperability: There are a variety of med-
ical sensor devices in the data collection layer of IoMT,

where the medical sensor devices are diﬀerent in comput-
ing capability, memory, energy supply and embedded soft-
ware. The data formats of collected patient’s physiological
data vary from device to device, consequently resulting in
the diﬃculty of managing the data in the data manage-
ment layer.

Another reason caused the poor interoperability lies in
the heterogeneity of wireless/wired protocols. When the
patient’s physiological data is collected, the medical sen-
sor devices transmit the collected data to edge servers.
During this transmission process, diﬀerent wireless proto-
cols are employed. For some powerful wearable medical
sensor devices, the protocols like WiFi, NB-IoT and Blue-
tooth Low Energy (BLE) are utilized. The protocols like
Near-ﬁeld communication (NFC), Radio Frequency Iden-
tiﬁcation (RFID) are employed for medical sensor devices
implanted into the patient’s body. The poor interoperabil-
ity across diﬀerent IoMT systems will result in the diﬃ-
culty of medical information exchange in diﬀerent medical
institutions.

Privacy and security: The leakage of patients’ sen-
sitive physiological information may lead to serious prob-
lems to patients. However, most medical sensor devices
in the data collection layer are resource-constrained. The
limitations of computing power, memory, energy supply
in medical sensor devices also result in the infeasibility
of traditional complicated encryption mechanisms. The
patient’s sensitive physiological data from medical sensor
devices to edge serves may be wiretapped by illegal de-
vices.

To protect the privacy of patients’ sensitive informa-
tion in the data management layer and health service layer,
various access control mechanisms and identity authenti-
cation mechanisms are designed [4]. However, the data
storage of patients’ sensitive physiological data still relies
on the third party, where the bugs on information leakage
may exist in the data server. Consequently, data storage
or cloud services providers may mistakenly or intentionally
release patients’ privacy-sensitive data.

4. Blockchain-enabled IoMT

In this section, we propose an architecture for incorpo-
rating blockchain into IoMT systems, namely BCeMT, and
investigate the beneﬁts as well as challenges of BCeMT.

4.1. Architecture of Blockchain-enabled IoMT

The convergence of blockchain and IoMT can amelio-
rate the interoperability of IoMT systems, signiﬁcantly im-
prove the security of IoMT, and enhance the privacy pro-
tection of IoMT [2]. Figure 5 depicts a system architec-
ture of BCeMT. In this architecture, the blockchain layer
is essentially serving for the entire IoMT, i.e., covering the
perception/actuation layer, data management, and medi-
cal services layer.

In this architecture, the blockchain is serving as a
crucial infrastructure connecting diﬀerent layers of IoMT.

7

of patients’ Electronic health record (EHR) data in the
blockchain-based e-health system. In this scheme, the at-
tribute assignments and delegation control are managed
by the blockchain in a lightweight style. Meanwhile, the
research [47] proposed a permissioned blockchain-enabled
framework and an access control scheme to protect the pri-
vacy of patients’ EHR data. In their framework, the dis-
tributed proxy re-encryption method and the correspond-
ing re-encryption contract are utilized. With the proxy re-
encryption method, keys as well as small encrypted records
can be stored on the blockchain.

Due to the limited storage capacity of IoMT, the
lightweight cryptographic operations in BCeMT are in-
vestigated. Particularly, the authors of
[49] designed
a private blockchain-based access control mechanism for
the applications of IoMT. The privacy preservation of this
mechanism is achieved by the elliptic curve cryptography
(ECC) enabled signature approach. Moreover, in [50], a
blockchain-based data access mechanism is proposed to
guarantee that medical data accessibility is controlled by
the patients. In this mechanism, the lightweight public key
cryptographic operations are conducted with ECC cryp-
tographic function. The work [51] proposed a platform to
protect the privacy of patients’ EHR data by storing the
sensitive information on the blockchain. In this platform,
the ECC cryptographic function is applied to achieve the
pseudonymity of patients.

In addition to access control schemes, attribute-based
signature mechanisms can be utilized to preserve the pri-
in [52], the authors
In particular,
vacy of patients.
designed an attribute-based signature mechanism for a
blockchain-based EHR system. To ensure the anonymity
of patients and immutability of data in EHRs, this mech-
anism introduced multiple authorities. Another attribute-
based signature scheme in a blockchain-based EHR sys-
tem is proposed in [53]. While in this mechanism, the
attributes are revocable by utilizing the KUNodes algo-
rithm, and therefore the identity privacy of users (both
patients and doctors) is protected.

Utilizing more than one blockchain is another possi-
ble solution to deal with the privacy leakage problem of
IoMT. The research [54] proposed a privacy-preserving
framewrork enabled by two blockchains for the smart
healthcare system. In this framework, one blockchain is
used for publishing data and the other is used for ﬁne-
grained access control, while the medical data is stored in
a ﬁle system.
In this way, neither the patients’ medical
data nor the doctors’ diagnoses will be tampered. The
authors in [55] proposed another two-blockchains enabled
privacy-preserving framework. In this framework, a per-
missioned blockchain is applied to store the medical data
as well as patients’ personal information, and periodically
anchors the medical data to a permission-less blockchain.
Medical data sharing is enabled and the privacy of patients
is protected.

Some researches

focus on designing Applications
(Apps) to make sure that patients could manage their own

Figure 5: System architecture of BCeMT.

Blockchains are endowed with cryptographic schemes (i.e.,
digital signature and public encryption), P2P networks,
distributed consensus, smart contracts, and a chain of
blocks. Consequently, the blockchain can ensure a cer-
tain security of IoMT. The employment of the authenti-
cation [42], homomorphic obfuscations, and group signa-
ture [43] to blockchains can further protect the data pri-
vacy of IoMT. Moreover, the overlaid P2P networks in
blockchain systems can connect diﬀerent sectors in IoMT
together so as to improve the interoperability across the
entire IoMT.

4.2. Opportunities of BCeMT

BCeMT can overcome challenges of IoMT and oﬀer the

following opportunities to enhance IoMT.

4.2.1. Interoperability improvement

The introduction of blockchain to IoMT can essentially
connect fragmented sectors of IoMT together via the over-
laid P2P network, which is a crucial part of blockchain
systems. Thereafter, diﬀerent IoMT sectors, such as med-
ical centers, clinics, hospitals, and homes can be connected
together to oﬀer a ubiquitous Internet service across the
entire IoMT [44]. Therefore, the interoperability across
diﬀerent healthcare sectors has been improved.

In addition, this novel architecture can also help to col-
lect, preprocess, and store diverse IoMT data. During this
process, heterogeneous IoMT data can be converted, trans-
formed, encrypted, compressed, and stored in blockchain
(i.e., on-chain data) [45]; alternatively IoMT data can be
saved in an oﬀ-chain fashion, in which only hashes of IoMT
data are stored in blockchain [46]. Consequently, the in-
teroperability of IoMT has also been greatly improved.

4.2.2. Privacy preservation of IoMT data

To preserve the privacy of patients, only authorized
users are allowed to access the sensitive medical data
of patients. The research [48] proposed an attribute-
based access control scheme to address the privacy issues

8

Perception/ actuationData ManagementMedical servicesBlockchain layerChain structureSmart contractConsensusCryptographyhospitalBSMedical dataComputing facilitiesP2P network[48]

[49]

[50]

[51]

[53]

[54]

[55]

References Blockchain

Design objectives

Main contributions

Methods

Table 3: Applying blockchain technique for privacy preserving of IoMT

type

[47]

permissioned

protecting the privacy of pa-
tients’ EHR data

access
scheme
control
with proxy re-encryption
method

storing keys and encrypted records on the
blockchain

not mentioned

addressing the privacy issues
of patients’ EHR data

attribute
control scheme

based

access

managing the attribute assignments and del-
egation control with blockchain

private

preserving the privacy of pa-
tients

access control mechanism

ECC-enabled signature scheme

private or per-
missioned

medical data accessibility is
controlled by the patient

data accessibility mecha-
nism

lightweight public key cryptographic opera-
tions

permissioned

protect the privacy of pa-
tients’ EHR data

[52]

not mentioned

ensuring the anonymity of
patients and immutability of
data in EHRs

a platform to store the
sensitive personal
infor-
mation on blockchain

attribute-based signature
mechanism

ECC cryptographic function is applied to
achieve the pseudonymity of patients

introducing multiple authorities to this sys-
tem and sharing pseudorandom function seed
in every two authorities and keep secretly

permissioned

privacy preservation both
patients and doctors

attribute-based signature
scheme

utilizing the KUNodes algorithm for revoca-
tion

public

both

protecting
medical
doctors’ diagnoses

data

patients’
the

and

permissioned
and permission-
less

protecting the privacy of pa-
tients during the medical
data sharing process

a two blockchains enabled
privacy preserving frame-
work

a framework consists of
two blockchains

[56]

permissioned

allowing patients to selec-
tively share the medical data

An App for BCeMT

[57]

private

ensuring patients to manage
their own medical data by
themselves

An App for BCeMT

one blockchain used for sharing data and the
other used for ﬁne-grained access control

a permissioned blockchain stores the medical
data and patiens’ personal information, and
send the medical data to the permission-less
blockchain at set intervals

the access control list of medical data is gen-
erated according to the settings and opera-
tions of patients

integrating the traditional database with
gateway, and blockchain helps to store medi-
cal data

medical data by themselves. In [56], the authors designed
a mobile App in a permissioned blockchain-enabled medi-
cal data sharing system. With this App, the patients shall
selectively share the medical data according to the neces-
sity of their own judgment. The research [57] proposed
another App based on an architecture that integrating the
traditional database with the gateway.
In this architec-
ture, the blockchain helps to store medical data and pa-
tients are clearly aware of the usage of medical data.

A summary of the researches on utilizing blockchain
technique to preserve the privacy of patients in IoMT is
given in Table 3.

4.2.3. Security assurance of IoMT

To protect the sensitive medical data of IoMT from
being wiretapped, the medical data is required to be
encrypted before the transmission and retrieval process.
In [9], the authors designed an authenticated key manage-
ment protocol for a BCeMT environment with lightweight
cryptographic operations. Speciﬁcally, the one-way cryp-
tographic hash function and bitwise XOR operations are
applied to conduct the lightweight cryptographic opera-
tions for computing resources limited medical sensor de-
vices. Their protocol helps to protect the security of pa-
tient’s medical data, and the security performance of this
protocol is veriﬁed by the tool AVISPA. The work [58] pro-
posed a lightweight decentralized authentication scheme
for patients in distributed IoMT with a public blockchain.

9

In this authentication scheme, the symmetric key encryp-
tion algorithm ARX is utilized to conduct lightweight en-
cryption operations on the data of medical sensor devices.
The smart contract can be utilized to help secure the
blockchain-based IoMT. The authors in [59] proposed a
blockchain-enabled framework to ensure the security of
medical data. In this framework, two smart contracts are
applied to securely share and store the medical data indi-
vidually, and a graph neural network based trust model
is used to detect the malicious nodes. The proxy re-
encryption method is utilized in their scheme so that pa-
tients shall dynamically provide or revoke the permissions
of their medical data access. Meanwhile, in [60], the au-
thors introduced the process of securing medical data with
smart contract in a blockchain-enabled remote healthcare
system.

In some cases, the volume of medical data is too large
to be stored in the blockchain, so that only the vital part
of the data will be stored on the blockchain. In [61], the
authors proposed a BCeMT system to protect the pa-
tients’ sensitive information security in the medical im-
age retrieval process. The feature vectors of each image
are extracted and encrypted before storing them in the
blockchain. The integrity and accuracy of encrypted image
features will be veriﬁed by miners with a hash signature
when the information is uploading to the blockchain. An-
other research [62] also utilizes blockchain technology to

References Blockchain

Design objective

Main contributions

Methods

Table 4: Applying blockchain technique for security assurance of IoMT

type

public

[9]

[58]

public

[59]

[60]

[61]

consortium

not mentioned

not mentioned

[62]

not mentioned

the

protecting
patients’ medical data
BCeMT

security of
in

the

protecting
patients’ medical data
BCeMT

security of
in

authenticated key man-
agement protocol

one-way cryptographic hash function and bit-
wise XOR operations

lightweight decentralized
authentication scheme

lightweight symmetric key encryption algo-
rithm ARX

ensure the security of medical
data

a BCeMT framework

two smart contracts are utilized to securely
share and store the medical data individually

protect patients’ personal and
information and medical data

a remote medical system
based on blockchain

securing medical data with smart contract

protect the patients’ sensitive
information security in the
medical
image retrieval pro-
cess

ensuring the patients to con-
trol their identity information
by themselves in medical im-
ages sharing process

a BCeMT system for med-
image retrieval pro-
ical
cess

storing the extracted and encrypted feature
vectors of each image into the blockchain

a BCeMT framework for
medical
retrieval
image
process

identities of patients are stored on the
blockchain as
randomly-generated public
keys

[63]

public

securing the medical data
sharing system

a blockchain enabled med-
ical framework

utilizing the patients’ digital medical identi-
ties to encrypt the to be shared medical data

protect the patients’ sensitive information in medical im-
ages. In this research, the identities of patients are stored
on the blockchain as randomly generated public keys, and
the patients’ identity information is controlled by them-
selves in medical image sharing.

In [63], the authors proposed a blockchain-enabled
framework for securing the medical data sharing system.
In this framework, the patients’ digital medical identities
are utilized to encrypt the medical content to be shared
and the security of medical data is enhanced. Based on this
framework, a case study of decentralized App for sharing
medical data is demonstrated.

A summary of the researches on utilizing blockchain
techniques to protect the security of patients’ data in IoMT
is given in Table 4.

4.3. Challenges of BCeMT

Although the BCeMT architecture brings a number op-
portunities, there are still a few challenges that remain to
be addressed before BCeMT can be practically adopted.

4.3.1. Resource Constraints

Storage and computation capability constraints may
limit the widespread applications of BCeMT architecture.
On one hand, a massive amount of physiological data may
be generated from the IoMT network, thereby posing strin-
gent requirements on high storage and computation capa-
bility. Moreover, the chain in the blockchain network has
kept growing and each node stores a replica of the entire
chain. On the other hand, the processing ability of each
node in the blockchain network is also limited [45].

One potential solution to this challenge is to introduce
cloud services into this architecture. In this way, we can
upload a large amount of less privacy-sensitive data to the
remote clouds while storing the sensitive data (e.g., the

sensitive private information of patients) at the blockchain.
Processing most medical data on the clouds will also re-
lease the computation burden at nodes in the blockchain.

4.3.2. Governance issues
current

The

emerged private and permissioned
blockchain applications are granted “write” permissions
to a predeﬁned peer or set of peers [64]. In the sensitive
healthcare domain, the legal regulations on the BCeMT
are required to explicitly deﬁne the nodes, users, peers
and validators of the blockchain.

For governance, only participating hospitals and insti-
tutions, as well as selected patients who are permissioned,
are included in the blockchain network [65]. The adop-
tion of BCeMT architecture needs to be backed by legal
instruments.

5. Applications of BCeMT

BCeMT can potentially address the crisis caused by the
COVID-19 epidemic. We list several possible applications
of BCeMT in tackling the COVID-19 crisis.

5.1. Location sharing and contact tracing

According to recent studies [66, 67], there are two main
transmission pathways of the COVID-19 virus. The ﬁrst is
the direct human-to-human transmission through respira-
tory droplets from the coughing, sneezing or even breath-
ing of patients. The second is an indirect pathway through
touching the staﬀ surface infected by patients. Therefore,
obtaining the location information of patients and trac-
ing their close contacts are vital to prevent the transmis-
sion of the COVID-19 virus. However, the conventional
information-sharing methods may lead to privacy leakage
and the patients may lose control of their personal data.

10

Figure 6: Location sharing and contact tracing.

The blockchain-based IoMT may solve this problem
with the decentralized architecture and unforgeability
characteristic. As shown in Figure 6, the potential patients
and general public in the social occasion ﬁrst upload the
location and medical information to the blockchain-based
database, where the patients’ information pseudonymity
can be achieved by cryptographic functions [51]. Next, the
authenticated medical centers will obtain the medical data
and conduct the COVID-19 assessment. If the assessment
result is positive, the blockchain-based database will con-
nect to the medical center for medical support and inform
the gateway on social occasions to generate the alarming
signal to warn the general public. Privacy preservation
can be achieved with the location sharing scheme [68] and
the transparency feature of blockchain may guarantee the
unforgeability of contact traceability.

5.2. Prevention of infectious diseases

As indicated in [69], keeping a social distance is an ef-
fective way to prevent the outbreaks of infectious diseases
like COVID-19. BCeMT can oﬀer a solution to social-
distancing measures. For example, as shown Figure 7, sen-
sors as well as cameras can detect, identify, and count the
number of customers in a restaurant, consequently oﬀer-
ing early warnings of an overcrowded environment. More-
over, [70] shows that the increment of air ventilation in a
crowded environment can also diminish the aerosol trans-
mission of coronavirus. The controller of a ventilation fan
or an air conditioner can dynamically adjust the ventila-
tion volume according to the crowd density which can be
obtained by cameras and ambience sensors. The ventila-
tion fans or central air conditioning systems can be shut
down or reduced airﬂow for the sparse crowd so as to save
energy consumption.

The outbreaks of COVID-19 also result in overcrowded
hospitals. It becomes extremely important to improve air
In
ﬁltration inwards or emergency rooms in a hospital.

11

Figure 7: Prevention of infectious diseases.

addition, it is also crucial to ensure the functioning of ex-
haust fans in restroom facilities of a hospital so as to reduce
the air transmission risk of coronavirus. However, it is la-
borious for technicians to troubleshoot every fan and air
conditioner in the entire ventilation system. In addition,
it can also cause health risks for technicians to manually
check the ventilation system due to the contaminated sur-
faces and ﬁlters [71]. In this case, the wide proliferation
of diverse sensors and actuators (like controllers of fans)
in IoMT can oﬀer a solution to this emerging issue. On
the one hand, sensors can report the possible faults of fans
and abnormal functioning of the ventilation system. On
the other hand, actuators of fans can dynamically adjust
airﬂow volumes as shown in Figure 7.

5.3. Traceable information chain of COVID-19 vaccines

Undoubtedly, vaccines play an indispensable role in the
control of the COVID-19 epidemic. Researchers around
the world have invested enormous eﬀort in vaccine devel-
opment, testing, and mass production as soon as possible
to ﬁght against the spread of the virus. Due to the huge
demand for this vaccine, we can reasonably speculate that
there will be many problems in the mass production and
distribution of injections, such as quality control, trans-
portation, and storage safety. In fact, some suspected ad-
verse reactions after injection have also been found in ex-
isting tests and injection results [72]. Therefore, it is nec-
essary to design and build a vaccine supply chain system
based on the blockchain to ensure the quality, safety, and
traceability of the vaccine. When a problem occurs, this
vaccine-tracing system can quickly trace back and locate
In addition, due to massive
the source of the problem.
COVID-19 vaccine production, the production of other
vaccines may also be aﬀected due to excessive production
lines, raw materials, and manpower requirements. The
system combined with IoMT can also provide data sup-
port for the rational distribution of productivity.

The immutability and security of the blockchain are
suitable for data recording and storage in the injectable
medical supply chain. As shown in Figure 8, from vac-
cine research and testing to follow-up observation of vac-
cine injections, and health declaration, information can
be collected and recorded on the chain. In the operation

ConsensusMedical assessmentBlockchainData managementSocialoccasionAssessment reportMedical dataPersonal dataAltering informationGatewayFan  Social distance Ventilation Fan Fan Fan Actuator (valve) Sensor legislation of medical data [73]. Secondly, another obstacle
in medical data sharing lies in patients’ concerns on how
their medical data is shared and exploited [74].

To dispel the public’s misgivings of IoMT data shar-
ing, there are several working directions in the future.
Firstly, substantial legislative eﬀorts are necessary to be
made to regulate IoMT data sharing and data governance.
Clear deﬁnitions and regulations on how to share IoMT
data, which part of IoMT data to be shared, and which
party to use IoMT data. During this process, blockchain
may also serve a crucial role in promoting the regulations
and standardization of IoMT data sharing. For example,
traceable blockchain can make the data-sharing process be
fully traceable so as to improve the transparency of data
sharing and governance. Secondly, blockchain can play
as a catalyst for data sharing. For example, built-in in-
centive/pricing mechanisms of blockchain can be adopted
to encourage the public or patients to share their medi-
cal data. Medical and research agencies can pay for the
shared IoMT data. It is worth mentioning that data pri-
vacy protection mechanisms are still necessary for medical
data sharing.

6.2. Scalability and optimization of blockchain

The emerging BCeMT also poses stringent require-
ments on blockchains in terms of throughput and storage.
Thus, the scalability, throughput eﬃciency, and modular-
ity of blockchains will become valuable research directions
in the future.

Both the scalability and throughput eﬃciency of the
blockchain have received extensive attention [44]. The
massive IoMT data may overload the existing blockchain
systems. There are several possible solutions to this issue.
1) Adopting new blockchain data storage method, for exam-
ple, the combination of on-chain and oﬀ-chain data storage
can avoid the problem of huge on-chain data redundancy
and diﬃculty to synchronize. 2) Eﬃciency of consensus
algorithms, we can adjust existing consensus algorithms
after ﬁnding the best performance consensus parameters,
such as encryption algorithm, block size, block interval,
etc. 3) hybrid blockchain type, a ﬂexible consortium chain
integrating the private chain or public chain may possibly
increase the transaction volume per unit time.

Moreover, the modularity of blockchains can also of-
fer a ﬂexible manner to disassembling and reconstructing
blockchain systems so as to support diverse applications
(especially for COVID-19) without aﬀecting the security
of blockchain data. The modularity can be achieved by
designing suitable smart contract deployment plans.

6.3. Privacy-preserving big data analytics of BCeMT

In the IoMT system, a large amount of medical data
will be continuously collected by the medical sensor de-
vices. With the help of big data technology, the collected
medical data in IoMT may be utilized more eﬀectively
and eﬃciently in disease prediction and other applications.

Figure 8: Supply chain of injectable medicines.

and maintenance, various IoMT devices can evolve, such
as sensors, Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation (RFID) tags,
bracelets, etc [2]. In the IoMT blockchain system as illus-
trated in Figure 8, vaccine information at diﬀerent stages
will be encapsulated on the chain, including the results
of research and testing, the source of production materi-
als, process factories, transportation logistics and storage
warehouse information, hospitals and medical staﬀs, the
follow-up symptom observation after the injection. Among
them, RFID tags, Quick Response tags (QR tags), Bar
code tags, and sensors can ensure that information record-
ing is more eﬃcient and non-falsiﬁable. The patients after
vaccine injections can declare their health status regularly
during the observation period, thereby ensuring the sub-
sequent collection of injections more complete.

6. Future directions

Although BCeMT has the great potential to address
the COVID-19 crisis, there are a number of issues to be
tackled. We discuss the open issues as follows.

6.1. Legislation and incentives of IoMT data sharing

Although BCeMT is promising in fostering interoper-
ability of IoMT systems, oﬀering privacy preservation of
IoMT data, and guaranteeing the security of IoMT sys-
tems, incumbent medical institutions, organizations and
the public have their concerns or misgivings to share IoMT
data. The ﬁrst reason is the absence of regulations and the

12

Production& PackageTransportation& StorageMedicalinjectionVaccinatedperson trackingResearch&TestBioprocessFormula& RawMaterialsManufactoringPackagingLogisticsWarehouseMedicalinstitutionsInjectionHealthdeclarationVaccinetrackingRFIDRFIDRFIDRFIDRFIDRFIDRFIDRFIDwristbandBar codeQR codeBar codeBar codeHowever, one of the main obstacles in utilizing the med-
ical data with big data technique is the requirement of
patients’ privacy protection [75].

The adoption of blockchain to IoMT systems is a
promising solution to solve the privacy problem of med-
ical data in IoMT. The BCeMT system can preserve the
privacy of patients and remove the obstacle of utilizing
medical data with big data.
In particular, the integra-
tion of attribute-based encryption [76] and blockchains can
achieve data analysis on encrypted data [77]. In the future,
the implementation of big data techniques in BCeMT sys-
tems can further extract useful information while preserv-
ing data privacy.

6.4. Integration of AI with BCeMT

Artiﬁcial intelligence, especially advances in machine
learning (ML) and deep learning (DL) may potentially im-
prove the service quality of the IoMT system. The intelli-
gent services empowered by ML/DL may make up for the
absence of medical resources. The massive IoMT data can
be used to train ML/DL models so as to obtain reliable
prediction models with high accuracy [78]. Once a reliable
disease prediction model with high accuracy is built for
the IoMT system, the spread of infectious diseases such as
COVID-19 will be signiﬁcantly inhibited.

Though the IoMT system continuously provides med-
ical data, diﬀerent medical institutes need to share the
encrypted medical data to obtain more data so to im-
prove the performance of their prediction model. In this
case, a large number of computational operations are re-
quired. Thus, distributed computing is a solution [79]. In
the BCeMT system, the architecture is distributed and
the blockchain-based encryption operations ensure the se-
In the future, task
curity and privacy of medical data.
decomposition across the entire BCeMT system will be
further investigated.

7. Conclusion

In this article, we explore the application of blockchain-
enabled IoMT (BCeMT) to ﬁght against the COVID-
19 pandemic. We ﬁrst present a technical overview of
blockchain and IoMT. We also summarize the challenges
on privacy, security, and interoperability of incumbent
IoMT systems. We then present the architecture of
BCeMT and elaborate on the opportunities brought by
BCeMT. We discuss the beneﬁts of this architecture, in-
cluding the security improvement of IoMT, privacy pro-
tection assurance of IoMT, and the interoperability ame-
lioration of IoMT systems. We next provide several use
cases of BCeMT on combating the COVID-19 pandemic.
The applications of BCeMT include the prevention of in-
fectious diseases, location sharing and contact tracing, and
the supply chain of injectable medicines. Finally, we out-
line the future directions of BCeMT.

References

[1] A. H. Mohd Aman, W. H. Hassan, S. Sameen, Z. S. Attar-
bashi, M. Alizadeh, L. A. Latiﬀ, Iomt amid covid-19 pandemic:
Application, architecture, technology, and security, Journal of
Network and Computer Applications (2020) 102886.

[2] H.-N. Dai, M. Imran, N. Haider, Blockchain-enabled Internet of
Medical Things to Combat COVID-19, IEEE Internet of Things
Magazine 3 (3) (2020) 52–57. doi:10.1109/IOTM.0001.2000087.
[3] H. Habibzadeh, K. Dinesh, O. Rajabi Shishvan, A. Boggio-
Dandry, G. Sharma, T. Soyata, A survey of healthcare internet
of things (hiot): A clinical perspective, IEEE Internet of Things
Journal 7 (1) (2020) 53–71.

[4] Y. Sun, F. Lo, B. Lo, Security and privacy for the internet
of medical things enabled healthcare systems: A survey, IEEE
Access 7 (2019) 183339–183355.

[5] W. Raﬁque, L. Qi, I. Yaqoob, M. Imran, R. U. Rasool, W. Dou,
Complementing iot services through software deﬁned network-
ing and edge computing: A comprehensive survey, IEEE Com-
munications Surveys & Tutorials 22 (3) (2020) 1761–1804.
[6] M. Shen, Y. Deng, L. Zhu, X. Du, N. Guizani, Privacy-
IoT Systems: A
Preserving Image Retrieval
Blockchain-Based Approach, IEEE Network 33 (5) (2019) 27–
33.

for Medical

[7] X. Li, H.-N. Dai, Q. Wang, M. Imran, D. Li, M. A. Im-
ran, Securing internet of medical things with friendly-jamming
schemes, Computer Communications 160 (2020) 431 – 442.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.comcom.2020.06.026.

[8] P. P. Ray, D. Dash, K. Salah, N. Kumar, Blockchain for iot-
based healthcare: Background, consensus, platforms, and use
cases, IEEE Systems Journal ( Early Access ) (2020) 1–10.
[9] N. Garg, M. Wazid, A. K. Das, D. P. Singh, J. J. P. C. Ro-
drigues, Y. Park, Bakmp-iomt: Design of blockchain enabled
authenticated key management protocol for internet of medical
things deployment, IEEE Access 8 (2020) 95956–95977.

[10] S. Moin, A. Karim, Z. Safdar, K. Safdar, E. Ahmed, M. Im-
ran, Securing iots in distributed blockchain: Analysis, require-
ments and open issues, Future Generation Computer Systems
100 (2019) 325 – 343.

[11] J. Wan, J. Li, M. Imran, D. Li, Fazal-e-Amin, A blockchain-
based solution for enhancing security and privacy in smart fac-
tory, IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics 15 (6) (2019)
3652–3660.

[12] M. S. Ali, M. Vecchio, M. Pincheira, K. Dolui, F. Antonelli,
M. H. Rehmani, Applications of blockchains in the internet of
things: A comprehensive survey, IEEE Communications Sur-
veys & Tutorials 21 (2) (2019) 1676–1717.

[13] A. H. Mohd Aman, W. H. Hassan, S. Sameen, Z. S. Attarbashi,
M. Alizadeh, L. A. Latiﬀ, IoMT amid COVID-19 pandemic:
Application, architecture, technology, and security, Journal of
Network and Computer Applications 174 (2021) 102886. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jnca.2020.102886.

[14] T. Yang, M. Gentile, C.-F. Shen, C.-M. Cheng, J. Arada, Com-
bining point-of-care diagnostics and internet of medical things
(iomt) to combat the covid-19 pandemic, Diagnostics 10 (2020).
doi:10.3390/diagnostics10040224.

[15] R. Pratap Singh, M. Javaid, A. Haleem, R. Vaishya, S. Ali, In-
ternet of medical things (iomt) for orthopaedic in covid-19 pan-
demic: Roles, challenges, and applications, Journal of Clinical
Orthopaedics and Trauma 11 (4) (2020) 713–717. doi:https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.jcot.2020.05.011.

[16] P. V. Klaine, L. Zhang, B. Zhou, Y. Sun, H. Xu, M. Im-
ran, Privacy-preserving contact tracing and public risk assess-
ment using blockchain for covid-19 pandemic, IEEE Internet of
Things Magazine 3 (3) (2020) 58–63. doi:10.1109/IOTM.0001.
2000078.

[17] R. Kumar, R. Tripathi, Towards design and implementation of
security and privacy framework for internet of medical things
(iomt) by leveraging blockchain and ipfs technology, The Jour-
nal of Supercomputing (2021) 1–40.

[18] F. Alam Khan, M. Asif, A. Ahmad, M. Alharbi, H. Aljuaid,
Blockchain technology, improvement suggestions, security chal-

13

lenges on smart grid and its application in healthcare for sus-
tainable development, Sustainable Cities and Society 55 (2020)
102018.

[19] P. P. Ray, D. Dash, K. Salah, N. Kumar, Blockchain for iot-
based healthcare: Background, consensus, platforms, and use
cases, IEEE Systems Journal 15 (1) (2021) 85–94. doi:10.1109/
JSYST.2020.2963840.

[20] Y. Ren, Y. Leng, F. Zhu, J. Wang, H. J. Kim, Data storage
mechanism based on blockchain with privacy protection in wire-
less body area network, Sensors 19 (10) (2019) 2395.

[21] S. Son, J. Lee, M. Kim, S. Yu, A. K. Das, Y. Park, Design of
secure authentication protocol for cloud-assisted telecare medi-
cal information system using blockchain, IEEE Access 8 (2020)
192177–192191. doi:10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3032680.

[22] M. A. Uddin, A. Stranieri, I. Gondal, V. Balasubramanian, A
decentralized patient agent controlled blockchain for remote pa-
tient monitoring, in: 2019 International Conference on Wire-
less and Mobile Computing, Networking and Communications
(WiMob), 2019, pp. 1–8. doi:10.1109/WiMOB.2019.8923209.

[23] S. Nakamoto, Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system,

Tech. rep., Manubot (2019).

[24] G. Wood, et al., Ethereum: A secure decentralised generalised
transaction ledger, Ethereum project yellow paper 151 (2014)
(2014) 1–32.

[25] Z. Zheng, S. Xie, H.-N. Dai, X. Chen, H. Wang, Blockchain
challenges and opportunities: A survey, International Journal
of Web and Grid Services 14 (4) (2018) 352–375.

[26] S. Hakak, W. Z. Khan, G. A. Gilkar, M. Imran, N. Guizani,
Securing smart cities through blockchain technology: Architec-
ture, requirements, and challenges, IEEE Network 34 (1) (2020)
8–14.

[27] Z. Zheng, S. Xie, H. Dai, X. Chen, H. Wang, An overview
of blockchain technology: Architecture, consensus, and future
trends, in: 2017 IEEE international congress on big data (Big-
Data congress), IEEE, 2017, pp. 557–564.

[28] D. Koops, Predicting the conﬁrmation time of bitcoin transac-

tions, arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.10596 (2018).
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1809.10596

[29] S. Rouhani, R. Deters, Performance analysis of ethereum trans-
actions in private blockchain, in: 2017 8th IEEE International
Conference on Software Engineering and Service Science (IC-
SESS), IEEE, 2017, pp. 70–74.

[30] G.-T. Nguyen, K. Kim, A survey about consensus algorithms
used in blockchain., Journal of Information processing systems
14 (1) (2018).

[31] E. Androulaki, A. Barger, V. Bortnikov, C. Cachin, K. Chris-
tidis, A. De Caro, D. Enyeart, C. Ferris, G. Laventman,
Y. Manevich, et al., Hyperledger fabric: a distributed oper-
ating system for permissioned blockchains, in: Proceedings of
the thirteenth EuroSys conference, 2018, pp. 1–15.

[32] M. Castro, B. Liskov, et al., Practical byzantine fault tolerance,

in: OSDI, Vol. 99, 1999, pp. 173–186.

[33] D. Schwartz, N. Youngs, A. Britto, et al., The ripple protocol
consensus algorithm, Ripple Labs Inc White Paper 5 (8) (2014).
[34] N. Szabo, Smart contracts: building blocks for digital markets,
EXTROPY: The Journal of Transhumanist Thought,(16) 18 (2)
(1996).

[35] Z. Zheng, S. Xie, H.-N. Dai, W. Chen, X. Chen, J. Weng,
M. Imran, An Overview on Smart Contracts: Challenges, Ad-
vances and Platforms, Future Generation Computer Systems
105 (2020) 475–491.

[36] S. Wang, Y. Yuan, X. Wang, J. Li, R. Qin, F.-Y. Wang, An
overview of smart contract: architecture, applications, and fu-
ture trends, in: 2018 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV),
IEEE, 2018, pp. 108–113.

[37] J. M. Chase, Quorum whitepaper (2016).
[38] R. G. Brown, J. Carlyle, I. Grigg, M. Hearn, Corda: an intro-

duction, R3 CEV, August 1 (2016) 15.

[39] Y. A. Qadri, A. Nauman, Y. B. Zikria, A. V. Vasilakos, S. W.
Kim, The future of healthcare internet of things: A survey of
emerging technologies, IEEE Communications Surveys & Tuto-

rials 22 (2) (2020) 1121–1167.

[40] J. H. Abawajy, M. M. Hassan, Federated internet of things and
cloud computing pervasive patient health monitoring system,
IEEE Communications Magazine 55 (1) (2017) 48–53.

[41] R. Cao, Z. Tang, C. Liu, B. Veeravalli, A scalable multicloud
internet of
storage architecture for cloud-supported medical
things, IEEE Internet of Things Journal 7 (3) (2020) 1641–1654.
[42] Y. Wu, H.-N. Dai, H. Wang, K.-K. R. Choo, Blockchain-based
Privacy Preservation for 5G-enabled Drone Communications,
IEEE Network 35 (1) (2021) 50–56. doi:10.1109/MNET.011.
2000166.

[43] S. Zhang, J. Lee, A Group Signature and Authentication
Scheme for Blockchain-Based Mobile-Edge Computing, IEEE
Internet of Things Journal 7 (5) (2020) 4557–4565.
doi:
10.1109/JIOT.2019.2960027.

[44] Y. Wu, H. N. Dai, H. Wang, Convergence of Blockchain and
Edge Computing for Secure and Scalable IIoT Critical Infras-
tructures in Industry 4.0, IEEE Internet of Things Journal 8 (4)
(2021) 2300–2317. doi:10.1109/JIOT.2020.3025916.

[45] H.-N. Dai, Z. Zheng, Y. Zhang, Blockchain for internet of things:
A survey, IEEE Internet of Things Journal 6 (5) (2019) 8076–
8094.

[46] J. Eberhardt, S. Tai, On or oﬀ the blockchain? insights on
oﬀ-chaining computation and data, in: European Conference
on Service-Oriented and Cloud Computing, Springer, 2017, pp.
3–15.

[47] G. G. Dagher, J. Mohler, M. Milojkovic, P. B. Marella, Ancile:
Privacy-preserving framework for access control and interoper-
ability of electronic health records using blockchain technology,
Sustainable Cities and Society 39 (2018) 283 – 297.

[48] H. S. Gardiyawasam Pussewalage, V. A. Oleshchuk, Blockchain
based delegatable access control scheme for a collaborative e-
health environment, in: 2018 IEEE International Conference on
Internet of Things (iThings) and IEEE Green Computing and
Communications (GreenCom) and IEEE Cyber, Physical and
Social Computing (CPSCom) and IEEE Smart Data (Smart-
Data), 2018, pp. 1204–1211.

[49] S. Saha, A. K. Sutrala, A. K. Das, N. Kumar, J. J. P. C. Ro-
drigues, On the design of blockchain-based access control pro-
tocol for iot-enabled healthcare applications, in:
ICC 2020 -
2020 IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC),
2020, pp. 1–6.

[50] V. Ramani, T. Kumar, A. Bracken, M. Liyanage, M. Yliant-
tila, Secure and eﬃcient data accessibility in blockchain based
healthcare systems,
in: 2018 IEEE Global Communications
Conference (GLOBECOM), 2018, pp. 206–212.

[51] A. A. Omar, M. Z. A. Bhuiyan, A. Basu, S. Kiyomoto, M. S.
Rahman, Privacy-friendly platform for healthcare data in cloud
based on blockchain environment, Future Generation Computer
Systems 95 (2019) 511 – 521.

[52] R. Guo, H. Shi, Q. Zhao, D. Zheng, Secure attribute-based sig-
nature scheme with multiple authorities for blockchain in elec-
tronic health records systems, IEEE Access 6 (2018) 11676–
11686.

[53] Q. Su, R. Zhang, R. Xue, P. Li, Revocable attribute-based sig-
nature for blockchain-based healthcare system, IEEE Access 8
(2020) 127884–127896.

[54] J. Xu, K. Xue, S. Li, H. Tian, J. Hong, P. Hong, N. Yu,
Healthchain: A blockchain-based privacy preserving scheme for
large-scale health data, IEEE Internet of Things Journal 6 (5)
(2019) 8770–8781.

[55] T. Zhou, X. Li, H. Zhao, Med-ppphis: Blockchain-based per-
sonal healthcare information system for national physique mon-
itoring and scientiﬁc exercise guiding, Journal of Medical Sys-
tems 43 (9) (2019) 1–23.

[56] X. Liang, J. Zhao, S. Shetty, J. Liu, D. Li,

Integrating
blockchain for data sharing and collaboration in mobile health-
care applications,
in: 2017 IEEE 28th Annual International
Symposium on Personal, Indoor, and Mobile Radio Commu-
nications (PIMRC), 2017, pp. 1–5.

[57] X. Yue, H. Wang, D. Jin, M. Li, W. Jiang, Healthcare data gate-

14

K. Zheng, L. Ohno-Machado, Patient Perspectives About Deci-
sions to Share Medical Data and Biospecimens for Research,
JAMA Network Open 2 (8) (2019) e199550–e199550.
doi:
10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2019.9550.

[75] S. Shi, D. He, L. Li, N. Kumar, M. K. Khan, K.-K. R. Choo,
Applications of blockchain in ensuring the security and privacy
of electronic health record systems: A survey, Computers &
Security 97 (2020) 101966.

[76] K. Zhang, J. Long, X. Wang, H. Dai, K. Liang, M. Imran,
Lightweight searchable encryption protocol for industrial in-
ternet of things, IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics
(2020) 1–1doi:10.1109/TII.2020.3014168.

[77] W. Liang, Y. Fan, K. C. Li, D. Zhang, J. L. Gaudiot, Secure
data storage and recovery in industrial blockchain network envi-
ronments, IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics 16 (10)
(2020) 6543–6552. doi:10.1109/TII.2020.2966069.

[78] M. Zhao, et al., SEENS: Nuclei segmentation in Pap smear im-
ages with selective edge enhancement, Future Generation Com-
puter Systems 114 (2021) 185–194. doi:https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.future.2020.07.045.
URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0167739X20304271

[79] H.-N. Dai, Y. Wu, M. Imran, H. Wang, N. Haider, Blockchain-
empowered Edge Intelligence for Internet of Medical Things
Against COVID-19, IEEE Internet of Things Magazine (2021)
1–8.

ways: Found healthcare intelligence on blockchain with novel
privacy risk control, Journal of Medical Systems 40 (218) (2016).
[58] A. Yazdinejad, G. Srivastava, R. M. Parizi, A. Dehghantanha,
K. K. R. Choo, M. Aledhari, Decentralized authentication
of distributed patients in hospital networks using blockchain,
IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics 24 (8)
(2020) 2146–2156.

[59] Z. Wang, N. Luo, P. Zhou, Guardhealth: Blockchain empow-
ered secure data management and graph convolutional network
enabled anomaly detection in smart healthcare, Journal of Par-
allel and Distributed Computing 142 (2020) 1 – 12.

[60] H. L. Pham, T. H. Tran, Y. Nakashima, A secure remote health-
care system for hospital using blockchain smart contract, in:
2018 IEEE Globecom Workshops (GC Wkshps), 2018, pp. 1–6.
[61] M. Shen, Y. Deng, L. Zhu, X. Du, N. Guizani, Privacy-
A
preserving image retrieval
blockchain-based approach, IEEE Network 33 (5) (2019) 27–33.
[62] V. Patel, A framework for secure and decentralized sharing of
medical imaging data via blockchain consensus, Health Infor-
matics Journal 25 (4) (2019) 1398–1411.

for medical

systems:

iot

[63] P. Zhang, J. White, D. C. Schmidt, G. Lenz, S. T. Rosen-
bloom, Fhirchain: Applying blockchain to securely and scalably
share clinical data, Computational and Structural Biotechnol-
ogy Journal 16 (2018) 267 – 278.

[64] A. Reyna, C. Mart´ın, J. Chen, E. Soler, M. D´ıaz, On blockchain
and its integration with iot. challenges and opportunities, Fu-
ture Generation Computer Systems 88 (NOV.) (2018) 173–190.
[65] T. K. Mackey, T. T. Kuo, B. Gummadi, K. A. Clauson,
G. Church, D. Grishin, K. Obbad, R. Barkovich, M. Palom-
bini, ’ﬁt-for-purpose?’ – challenges and opportunities for ap-
plications of blockchain technology in the future of healthcare,
BMC Medicine 17 (1) (2019).

[66] K. Al Huraimel, M. Alhosani, S. Kunhabdulla, M. H. Stietiya,
SARS-CoV-2 in the environment: Modes of transmission, early
detection and potential role of pollutions, Science of The Total
Environment 744 (2020) 140946.

[67] M. Kumar, K. Taki, R. Gahlot, A. Sharma, K. Dhangar, A
chronicle of sars-cov-2: Part-i - epidemiology, diagnosis, prog-
nosis, transmission and treatment, Science of The Total Envi-
ronment 734 (2020) 139278.

[68] J. Yaxian, Z. Junwei, M. Jianfeng, Y. Chao, Y. Xin, Bmpls:
Blockchain-based multi-level privacy-preserving location shar-
ing scheme for telecare medical information systems, Journal of
Medical Systems 42 (8) (2018) 1–13.

[69] J. A. Lewnard, N. C. Lo, Scientiﬁc and ethical basis for social-
distancing interventions against covid-19, The Lancet. Infec-
tious diseases 20 (6) (2020) 631.

[70] J. Lu, J. Gu, K. Li, C. Xu, W. Su, Z. Lai, D. Zhou, C. Yu, B. Xu,
Z. Yang, Covid-19 outbreak associated with air conditioning in
restaurant, guangzhou, china, 2020, Emerging infectious dis-
eases 26 (7) (2020) 1628.

[71] V. A. Mouchtouri, M. Koureas, M. Kyritsi, A. Vontas,
L. Kourentis, S. Sapounas, G. Rigakos, E. Petinaki, S. Tsio-
dras, C. Hadjichristodoulou, Environmental contamination of
sars-cov-2 on surfaces, air-conditioner and ventilation systems,
International Journal of Hygiene and Environmental Health 230
(2020) 113599. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheh.2020.
113599.
URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1438463920305459

[72] S. P. Kaur, V. Gupta, COVID-19 Vaccine: A comprehensive
status report, Virus Research 288 (2020) 198114. doi:https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.virusres.2020.198114.
URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0168170220310212

[73] R. Milne, K. I. Morley, H. Howard, E. Niemiec, D. Nicol,
C. Critchley, B. Prainsack, D. Vears, J. Smith, C. Steed, et al.,
Trust in genomic data sharing among members of the general
public in the uk, usa, canada and australia, Human genetics
138 (11) (2019) 1237–1246.

[74] J. Kim, H. Kim, E. Bell, T. Bath, P. Paul, A. Pham, X. Jiang,

15

