2
2
0
2

r
p
A
2

]

Y
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
3
2
8
0
0
.
4
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Recordism: A social-scientiﬁc prospect of
blockchain from social, legal, ﬁnancial, and
technological perspectives

Zihao Li∗, Hao Xu†‡, Yang Fang§, Boyuan Zhao¶and Lei Zhang†

April 5, 2022

Abstract

Blockchain has the potential to reform the architecture of cyberspace
and transform the storage, circulation and exchange of information
through decentralization, transparency and de-identiﬁcation. Mean-
ing that ordinary participants can become traders, miners, retailers,
and customers simultaneously, breaking the barriers and reducing the
information gap between participants in the community, contributing
to the futuristic metaverse with an open progressive and equal ideol-
ogy. Such information transformation empowered by blockchain also
profoundly impacts our methodological cognition, legal governance on
cyberspace and ﬁnancial and technological development.

This study explores the main question: what are the implica-
tions of the blockchain-driven information revolution for soci-
ety and social sciences? In order to answer this main question, this
paper chooses four perspectives, which are methodological, legal, ﬁnan-
cial and technical. By analysis of these four perspectives, this paper is
expected to provide a more comprehensive analysis of the blockchain-
driven impact on society, social sciences, and technology to contribute
to current scholarships. Additionally, regarding blockchain as an inno-
vative methodological cognition, it grows on top of other technologies
while helping advance other technologies. This paper concludes that
although there are few frictions between blockchain and current social
architecture, blockchain is so much more than the technology itself,

∗CREATe Centre, School of Law, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK
†James Watt School of Engineering, University of Glasgow, UK
‡Co-responding Author: H.Xu.2@research.gla.ac.uk
§School of Finance and Accounting, University of Westminster, UK.
¶Technology Transfer Center, The Shanghai Cooperation Organization, China

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
that can be a representative of the community, acting as the source of
trust, watcher of governance, law enforcer for virtual activities, and an
incubator for future technologies.

Keywords— Blockchain, Law, Finance, Community governance, metaverse,

Distributed Ledger Technology

1

Introduction

The past few years have ushered in an enormous shift of digitization in our daily
life, especially with the widespread of COVID-19. In the context of less in-person
interaction and panic of the pandemic, the trust among individuals and society are
more fragile than ever (Bootsma and Ferguson, 2007). However, with the advent of
Distributed Ledger Technologies (DLTs) (Underwood, 2016), a.k.a., blockchain, it
provides us with a cryptography-based trust mechanism. Due to its unique frame-
work and mechanism, blockchain reforms cyberspace and transforms the storage,
circulation and exchange of information through decentralization, transparency and
pseudonymization (Tschorsch and Scheuermann, 2015). These features deeply in-
ﬂuence society from a centralized social world to a brave decentralized world. Such
a decentralization mechanism through technology shakes the foundation of society,
i.e., trust, where all the trust are secured by every one of us rather than any au-
thority we know from reality. Therefore, the information transformation empowered
by blockchain also have a profound impact on our methodological cognition, legal
governance on cyberspace and ﬁnancial and technological development (Sarmah,
2018).

The ﬁrst shift enabled by blockchain is methodological cognition. Blockchain-
driven information revolution refreshes the cognition of the source of governance in
the society and challenges the traditional centralized source of governance. By con-
trast, a blockchain-based framework provides a decentralized source of governance
where anyone could be a part of the source to establish trust and governance. More
importantly, if blockchain is viewed from a methodological perspective, it reshapes
the world with its design philosophy. Blockchain can act as a panoptical instru-
ment to boost the self-discipline of individuals. On the other hand, the governor
is also restrained from abusing their power as any action will be recorded on the
chain and be transparent to everyone (Hassan and De Filippi, 2017; Bal´azs, 2021;
Shi, 2020). Therefore, the blockchain-driven information revolution realigns the
balance between individual and government. It may also change society where the
source of power is ultimately bottom-up and no information asymmetry. This paper
argues that such information transformation could lead to the new methodological
cognition, called “recordism” (the term for the prescribed idea of attributing the
signiﬁcance of recording elements of individuals).

Secondly, the blockchain-enabled information revolution has a great inﬂuence
on the legal governance of cyberspace (Hassan and De Filippi, 2017; Bal´azs, 2021).
Because of the decentralization of blockchain framework, trust among individuals

2

and cyberspace is re-established through cryptography, which also alters the foun-
dation of legislation (De Filippi and Wright, 2018). Accordingly, there has been a
corresponding shift in legal regulation (from the single regulatory body to multiple
regulatory bodies) and changes in the approaches and methods to legal research
(code as law). Furthermore, blockchain refreshes many legal notions (e.g. trust,
transparency etc.), the forms of legislation (e.g. machine-readable Legislation), and
alters the form of electronic evidence and the legal executions (e.g. the legal exe-
cution issues of data protection law) (Finck, 2018). Apart from that, if blockchain
is viewed as instrumentality from a philosophical perspective, a blockchain-based
system has provided us with a new view of the law, that we make law as de-facto
the product of consensuses and keep it to ourselves, independently. To further ex-
perience the magic of blockchain-law relationship, there is a vision from us that the
blockchain native law lives longer than the community who made it especially in
the private sector, as it is maintained, modiﬁed lively by the contemporary groups
of stakeholders, and long live the blockchain native law.

Thirdly, the blockchain-enabled information revolution also enables many new

applications in the business and ﬁnancial area (Underwood, 2016; Tschorsch and Scheuermann,
2015). As the market of bitcoin, the forerunner of blockchain application mined its
genesis block in 2008 (Nakamoto, 2008), keep growing in a formidable fashion, it
has transformed the ﬁnance market and challenged the old world of centralization.
However, bitcoin does not unleash the full power of blockchain, as the blockchain
means so much more than just cryptocurrency (Tschorsch and Scheuermann, 2015),
which was already an earth-breaking application from the decentralization idea.
Meanwhile, in the area of business and ﬁnance, blockchain brings more revolution-
ary changes (Shi, 2020). For example, smart contract powered by blockchain could
improve the eﬃciency of the ﬁnancial market and optimize corporate governance.
Also, the various central bank starting to establish digital currencies is another
example to show the inﬂuence of blockchain on the ﬁnancial sector (Cunha et al.,
2021).

Except for these already shown impacts of blockchain on society, we are ex-
pected to see blockchain deepening its impact in our day-to-day business, the way
we think and the principle we trust. In fact, philosophy has predicted the world
with the tools of similar functionality, in Foucault’s work (Foucault, 1977), namely
the panopticon theory1. When the tool has ﬁnally become available to the general
public, we are excited to describe the instrumentality of blockchain and how it
widens our path to power and self-discipline.

Blockchain not only has a great impact on society, but also demonstrates a great
potential in combination with other technologies if it is regarded as an innovative
methodological cognition (Xu et al., 2020). For example, in the era of Big Data
(Hassani et al., 2018), blockchain can increase the size of big data and improve its

1The panopticon is a type of institutional building and a system of control designed
by the English philosopher and social theorist Jeremy Bentham in the 18th century. The
concept of the design is to allow all prisoners of an institution to be observed by a single
security guard, without the prisoners being able to tell whether they are being watched.

3

security and value by structuring and preparing it for big data analytics. The focus
of blockchain is on data storage, while big data is concentrated on data analyses and
forecasts from the huge amount of data. Through the combination of both, data
can be gathered and authenticated on the blockchain by large corporations, thereby
adding value to the dataset and enterprises. Apart from that, the combination
of blockchain and other technologies can unleash the greater potential of diverse
other technologies and blockchain itself. For example, the combination of functional
consensus and blockchain could make blockchain more environmental-friendly, and
the extra thermal energy generated by the blockchain can be used as part of the
room heating system. Also the conjecture of combination between revolutionary
storage medium (e.g. biological genetic material, including DNA and RNA) and
blockchain could provide new solutions to distributed storage and data handling.

Based on the above introduction, therefore, this paper focuses on two main
research questions: (i) what are the implications of the blockchain-driven
information revolution for the social sciences? (ii) how should the impact
be positively harnessed by society and social sciences? In order to answer
these two research questions, this paper mainly choose four perspectives, which are
methodological, legal, ﬁnancial and technical. By analysing these four perspectives,
this paper is expected to provide a more comprehensive analysis of the blockchain-
driven impact on society and social sciences to contribute to current scholarships.
The paper is structured as follows: a brief introduction to the deﬁnition of
blockchain and its features that could greatly impact society and social sciences is
presented. Then the paper investigates the details of how blockchain as a novel
methodology and instrumentality transforms to the concept of the source of power,
the discipline and the information inequality. Following that, the legal implica-
tions from the blockchain-driven information revolution will be discussed regarding
theoretical (e.g. basic notion of trust, transparency) and practical impacts (elec-
tronic evidence, privacy and data protection).
In addition to law, blockchain’s
ﬁnancial and economic envisioning is discussed from both corporate governance
and central bank and digital currencies. Lastly, the paper analyzes the potentials
of blockchain-enabled scenarios with other technology from the scope of Big Data,
functional consensus to futuristic biological genetic material.

2 What is the blockchain?

As for the terms ‘blockchain’, it is an old concept of chaining data together proposed
from mid-1980s (Shi, 2020). Now it appears to be the pillar of booming cryptocur-
rency technology, as it enables a trustless, decentralized and tamper-proof ledger
(Nakamoto, 2008). As its name suggested, the data are stored in the form factor of
blocks (Nakamoto, 2008), and then chained by the previous block’s hash to ensure
data integrity and security. Hence the later block can locate itself from the current
block’s hash value, which is a unique identiﬁer based on the content in the block.
In most cases, such distributed manner and consistency of blockchain is decided by
consensus protocols, a.k.a., consensus algorithms, under which data processing and

4

storage formation is embedded when each node runs.

Unlike the traditional centralized system, trust in the blockchain system is
established through cryptography (Nakamoto, 2008), and the blockchain can be
roughly divided into public chains and private chains based on their access settings.
In the case of a public chain, anyone is free to join and participate in the core
activities of the blockchain network. Therefore, in the context of the public chain,
blockchain allows any user to store a local copy of the blockchain and propose new
blocks, which lay down the foundation for a trustless environment.

Another most appealing aspect of blockchain technology is the degree of trans-
parency that it can provide (Shi, 2020). From the design philosophy, blockchain is
designed as a transparent framework in which anyone can join the network (espe-
cially in the public chain) and therefore, can see all information on the chain. In
Distributed Ledger Technologies (DLT) mechanism, data is grouped into each block
and bonded with the existing blocks through hash check and consensus algorithm.
The data on the chain include diﬀerent metadata, for instance, the hash of all
transactions contained in the block, a timestamp and a hash of the previous block.
Such hash-based cryptographic chain makes the records traceable and appended-
only characteristics and increases transparency and accountability. Through the
traceability of information, blockchain could safeguard the transparency that noth-
ing is unduly modiﬁed without recording the changes and, as a result, everything
is transparent.

Additionally, blockchain could enable self-tamper-proof and self-authentication
applications (Nakamoto, 2008; Shi, 2020). Due to every block being linked and
veriﬁed through the hash algorithm, data integrity and security can be guaranteed.
If necessary, the blockchain network could trace back to the history transaction
without any third parties. Therefore, blockchain-based applications can achieve
self-tamper-proof and self-authentication.

3 Blockchain and the source of governance

Blockchain has shaped the recording of humanity, with a new world that no records
can be easily altered, erased, or disguised in every single transaction of blockchain
participants. In the traditional thinking of power, information asymmetry can be
regarded as one of the most important sources of power (Lightfoot and Wisniewski,
2014), which people are classiﬁed based on their disclosure of information. The
blockchain-driven information revolution has transformed it permanently, as the
transparency opens up all possibilities for ordinary participants to outlook the soci-
ety with no gaps or asymmetry, stepping forward from the paper-based medium and
beyond the scope of the Internet, where the information is still held by a minority of
users (Beshiri and Susuri, 2019). The origin of the panoptic tower, which was ﬁrst
proposed as a prison model, (Foucault, 1977; Bentham and Boˇzoviˇc, 1995) provides
analytical thinking of the utopia that everyone is watched by a surreal tower that
knows all secrets of the member, which in fact, is not far away from daily political
practice in a surveillance state. The blockchain can also regulate individuals, just

5

like any centralized government. The panoptic tower is represented by the gover-
nors of blockchain, which see through the identities of blockchain network users and
enforce the order based on their data. The blockchain has been given the instru-
mental way of power in terms of philosophy. The panoptic model can be resurrected
to the reality, essentially helping develop the sophisticated cryptographically-safe
panoptical instrument for everyone without tampering the much-concerned privacy,
human rights, and freedom.

A panoptical instrument for personal behaviors is the tool to reach a society
with better order, discipline, honesty and reality. During the progress of recording
more behaviors on the blockchain, for instance, the daily transactions and interac-
tions with civil services, commercial transactions, juries records, records of lawsuits,
healthcare records, etc., the value carried by blockchain increases, and the enforce-
ment of social order can be greatly eased. The transparency of personal data in
certain ﬁelds related to the governor provides an opportunity to enrich the con-
cept of surveillance (Lightfoot and Wisniewski, 2014), discipline, and punishment
(Foucault, 1977). Meanwhile, being gazed by authority, individuals are motivated
to self-discipline and behave responsively to society and community, embracing the
new reality of transparent society.

On the other hand, blockchain also protects the user against the government.
Because the governor is disciplined by all transparent records accumulated in his-
tory, refrain them from touching any individuals in the regime of blockchain social
practice, as any actions against individuals will be seen on the blockchain by all
communities. Therefore, it forms a balance between individuals and the govern-
ments. One does not want to leave the evidence of inappropriate records nor weaken
the power by leaving bad records on actions to individuals. The longer the record
exists within the community, reputations and deterrence are as strong as the record
itself. It leaves us an open opportunity if the governances can be originated from
the record rather than the political quorum of representatives. Whoever vows to
provide the community with civil services shall commit to protecting records, as it
is the source of power without any political interests.

The shift of power from the governing body to the records held by blockchain
transforms the whole society. It reforms the community from the bottom to the
top and reduces the information gap between them (Hassan and De Filippi, 2017),
which later will result in a reduced classes gap. New ethics emerges when the
recordism populates the space and time of the society and lead to the new scale of
power concentration, as there is no other reason to stop concentrating the power if
the power is also gazed by the public and recorded in the public visible medium, i.e.,
Blockchain. Such concentration is a revelation of the new democracy that settles
the dispute in no time.

Thanks to the nature of the distributed ledger, blockchain provides a new scope
of power regulation. By recording the power in action, blockchain improvises the
power in both the past and the future (auditing the enacted actions from the past
and supervising the future legislation). The power also beneﬁts from the records of
all individuals that self-regulating themselves thanks to the transparency of records.
There is no comparable feature in history that provides such functionality binding

6

to the record in every individual and every action. The theory of recordism is
becoming the principle of society in a foreseeable time, no matter how the adoption
of blockchain is realized. In fact, the modern world has long been an information-
based society, but blockchain provides a clearer direction to freedom and democracy
where privacy, trust and transparency can be preserved by design, embedded in the
infrastructure of society (Xu et al., 2021; 2022).

4 The Impact from Blockchain to Law

The advent of blockchain alters the cyber framework and transforms informa-
tion storage, circulation and exchange through decentralization, transparency and
pseudonymization. This transformation has accordingly posed new opportunities
and challenges to how law normally regulates online information-related areas. This
section will discuss the key question of the impact of the blockchain-enabled infor-
mation revolution on the law. It will analyze the theoretical impact from blockchain
to law, including the cyber law theory, the foundation of trust and online trans-
parency from a data protection perspective. From a practical side, it analyses the
blockchain-based machine-readable legislation, the impact of blockchain-based elec-
tronic evidence systems and, most importantly, the inﬂuence of blockchain on data
protection law.

4.1 From Code is Law to Code as Law: Blockchain as an

Alternative Architecture

As Lawrence Lessig put forward in his book Code: And Other Laws of Cyberspace,
the regulation of the Internet is not only about the legislation but also include social
norms, market forces and particularly the architecture, which is so-called “pathetic
dot theory” (Lessig, 2006). In the pre-Internet era, the world was normally regu-
lated and aﬀected by four main factors: legislations are enacted by the government
to regulate behaviors directly; social norms are shaped by community gradually;
market regulates rational individuals and architecture subtly inﬂuences behavior
(Lessig, 2006). This phenomenon has been deepened in the Internet age. Online
giants, as an intermediary, has directly inﬂuenced users’ behavior. They can set
rules, code of conduct and even enforce penalties. This is because architecture, the
coder, as a kind of way that shapes both the physical and digital worlds are, easily
inﬂuences the users’ behavior and choice by default.

The emergence of blockchain technology presents new opportunities and chal-
lenges (Sun et al., 2019). On the one hand, the blockchain-based mechanism can
increase the legal regulation by default, which means that code can be a kind of
manner to achieve legal objectives. On the other hand, a blockchain-based legal
system causes certain problems as traditionally, the law is woven by natural lan-
guage rather than machine-readable code. It leads to the issues of how to translate
the legal language to machine-readable code, which contains the spirit of the law

7

in a less ﬂexible context (De Filippi and Wright, 2018)2.

From Lessig’s theory, the answer to the machine is the machine. In other words,

‘the best way to regulate a code-based system is through code itself’ (De Filippi and Wright,
2018). In the context of a blockchain-based legal system, it can indeed set up a new
framework of code-based regulation to regulate people, companies, and machines.
Through blockchain technology and relevant smart contract, legal rules can be in-
terpreted simply as machine-readable rules that could be automatically executed
by architecture. To this extent, code-based technical rules could achieve the legal
function and play the same role as legislation. In the same vein, computer code
not only can be a complement to law, but also it can be another form of law in
cyberspace. Filippi and Hassan describe this tendency as from ‘code is law’3 to
‘code as law’4 (Hassan and De Filippi, 2017).

4.1.1 Blockchain as the Foundation of Trust

In the traditional world, trust among individuals, entities and government is
normally established and maintained by law. One of the important reasons law
can maintain trust is that legislation represents the consensus that citizens have
reached in the democratic mechanism (Li et al., 2022). Legislation is endorsed by
the trust and trustworthiness of the state. However, when it comes to cyberspace,
legislation cannot establish trust as eﬀectively as it does in the physical world. Es-
pecially, the ongoing COVID pandemic has brought again the complicated trust
dilemma between citizens, government, large private entities and emerging tech-
nologies. People may always ask similar questions: can we trust the online news
regarding the pandemic? Can we trust the man who said he is vaccinated and does
not wear facial masks? Can we trust the COVID contact tracing app that does not
leak users’ sensitive data to third parties, although the government developed the
app? Those are all emerging but long-standing issues. Generally, if people want
to trust something or someone, there should be multiple trust sources to prove one
fact. People, for example, can listen to the public service broadcaster, scientists,
friends or online gossip networks for information on vaccines and masks. However,
the internet and digital technologies have broken this balance.

On the internet, multiple news sources are emerging every day, but users cannot
distinguish the truth. Many transactions are conducted without authenticity, as
Sztompka and Bal´azs argue that we normally rely on communal trust, public trust
and private trust to establish the trust before the Internet era. However, these three
important trust infrastructures are becoming unreliable in the online environment
(Sztompka, 1998). For example, the familiarity that consists of ethnic or religious
relations, the community with shared location or shared past is becoming unreliable

2A more detailed analysis regarding machine-readable legislation will be shown in the

below section.

3“Code is Law” is developed from Lessig’s theory, which refers to using code to imple-

ment speciﬁc rules into technology.

4“Code as Law” refers to relying on the technology itself to both deﬁne and implement

mandatory laws.

8

to establish the communal trust (Bal´azs, 2021). By the same token, public trust
infrastructures such as public education, public service media and public press are
challenged and undermined by a ﬂow of online key opinion leaders (KOL) and online
news platforms. Regarding the private trust infrastructures, it often establishes
the trust through their services or commodities on the market. The independent
entities, for example, banks, insurance companies and other independent companies,
establish trust for a service fee. However, with the emergence of Internet giants, few
oligarchies occurred. Because of the prominence and monopoly in the industry, if
the trust could be established remain doubtful.5(BBC, 2021) However, blockchain
and similar systems create a restrictive and prescriptive technical environment that
establishes trust through embedded traceability.

Without the endorsement of a third party or state, blockchain also can es-
tablish trust among individuals. Such trust is not built from legislation but from
the cryptography and architecture of blockchain. With such cryptography-based
trust, blockchain can act as a complement to law to establish trust that is em-
bedded in cyberspace by design. Blockchain allows any user to store a local copy
of the blockchain and propose new blocks, which lay the foundation for a trust-
less environment.
In contrast, nowadays, trust is built in a trusted third party.
In the physical world, trust is realized through personal reputation, social norms
or government endorsement, for instance, the legislations and contract (Hoelting,
2017). For example, the reason why clients trust their bank is that their bank
as a legitimate organization is not worthwhile to harm clients’ interests (Bal´azs,
2021). More importantly, such trust is also built partially on the previous ex-
perience and mostly based on the recourses when something bad happens. Such
recourses include immediate response and guidance, regulatory intervention, and
private legal action. However, legal compliance would generate expensive transac-
tion costs from a law and economic perspective when both parties are strangers.
Similarly, in cyberspace, users need an online intermediary to establish the trust
to trade. However, such centralized architecture causes various issues regarding
the online gatekeepers, including data privacy, anti-competition etc. By contrast,
blockchain can overturn the traditional architecture and redeﬁne online trust by
design. This a trustless environment can be established through three overlapping
dimensions in the blockchain: users, nodes and miners.

In a permissionless blockchain, for example, the Bitcoin system can allow anyone
to generate a public, private key pair and a Bitcoin address through open-source
software. The software broadcasts the users’ transactions over the network, and
miners will incorporate the transactions into blocks. Meanwhile, anyone, includ-
ing users themselves, can be a node via relevant software and store the blockchain
archive. Nodes store a local copy of the whole chain. Full nodes store a complete
copy of the chain, and the light nodes will only store the partial record to verify
transactions. Nodes will be connected and maintained with each other through a
P2P network. It also checks the previous transactions to ensure the current trans-
action is valid. After the new block is valid, a node will add it into the copy of the

5For example, Facebook users receive losses due to massive personal data breaches.

9

chain and broadcast it to the whole network. Through this mechanism, the whole
procedure of the transaction will be recorded in a decentralized manner. Miner
works to distribute the transactions into a block and broadcast blocks across the
chain while rewarding with a new cryptocurrency, for instance, Bitcoin. Of course,
such distributed manner and consistency of blockchain is decided by consensus
protocols under which the rules are embedded when each node runs.

Because the records on the blockchain cannot be duplicated, manipulated or
faked, it increased visibility in every user. Such immutable and timestamped records
of transactions endow blockchain with the ability to promote trust through each
other because of the ‘endorsement of code.’ Therefore, blockchain can establish
trust without third parties in cyberspace since all transactions are veriﬁed and
recorded across the whole network.

4.1.2 Blockchain and Transparency in Data Protection Law

One of the most appealing aspects of blockchain technology is the degree of trans-
parency that it can provide. From the design philosophy, blockchain is designed as
a transparent framework in which anyone can join the network (especially in the
public chain) and therefore, can see all information on the chain. As discussed early,
such hash-based cryptographic chain makes the chain traceable and appended-only
characteristics and increases the whole transparency and accountability.

However, as some scholars argue, the transparency that blockchain could pro-
vide is conditional (Filippi, 2016). To some extent, it scariﬁes the user’s privacy to
achieve transparency, although users’ data are encrypted by asymmetric cryptol-
ogy. Indeed, some degree of sacriﬁce of privacy in the blockchain is unavoidable,
allowing the network to reach a decentralized consensus. However, such a sacri-
ﬁce of privacy can be limited only to the blockchain’s basic layer. For instance,
just like the Internet framework, there are multiple layers to transfer data. In the
blockchain, the additional layer of encryption and obfuscation also can be built to
conceal personal data (Finck, 2018). Furthermore, permissionless blockchains are
often more public, permissioned ledgers are frequently more speciﬁc and privacy-
friendly. These two forms also can be hybrid. When the actions of others need
to be overseen and veriﬁed, the chain can be designed as a permissionless ledger
so every user can verify the transaction. When parties want to have a degree of
autonomy, for example, making the smart contract, then the chain can be designed
as a permissioned ledger.

Therefore, some scholars argue that it is better to describe blockchain as a type
of ideology rather than a single technology (Finck, 2018). Trust in the world is
achieved through cryptography rather than institutions or third parties. However,
currently the convergence between law and distributed ledgers is lacking. For ex-
ample, to what extent should the transparency or accountability of these concepts
stipulated in our constitution be translated or transplanted to the context where
the law is expressed and enforced through code? By the same token, is the concept
of transparency in the technology ﬁeld equal to the legal one? Therefore, we should
scrutinize both law and technology to see if the concept of transparency in law is

10

equal in technology, particularly in the blockchain.

Transparency, as required by General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR)
(Voigt and von dem Bussche, 2017)6, is one of the key elements in protecting users’
data privacy rights as only if the data subject know who is processing their data
for which purpose, they could exercise their data privacy rights. According to the
Recital 58 of GDPR, the principle of transparency requires that “any information
addressed to the public or to the data subject be concise, easily accessible and easy
to understand, and that clear and plain language and, additionally, where appropri-
ate, visualization can be used.” Because, in EU data protection law, transparency
is the ground of users’ rights to information and access to personal data (Art.
13 and Art. 14). Data subject needs such transparency to identify the data con-
troller/processor to exercise their data rights. Therefore, the transparency in GDPR
implies that any data related to the data subject should be (i) concise, (ii) easily
accessible and easy to understand, and (iii) that clear and plain language, (iv) addi-
tionally, where appropriate, visualization can be used (Voigt and von dem Bussche,
2017). From this perspective, blockchain may be hard to achieve legal obligations.
Because it deploys a decentralized framework, to the most extent, it is hard to
distinguish the role of data controllers, processors and even users. This point will
be discussed further in the following section regarding blockchain and GDPR.

From another angle, transparency in GDPR also indicates that data subject

should be aware of certain risks regarding their personal data processing (Voigt and von dem Bussche,
2017). It connects the principle of transparency to the principle of accountability.
It obliges the data controller to demonstrate that personal data is processed trans-
parently. If the data subject anticipates any potential risks, they could withdraw
their consent at any time. According to Article. 29 Working Party (hereinafter:
Art. 29 WP), the concept of transparency is quite user-centric rather than le-
galistic (Article 29 Working Party, 2016). From this perspective, blockchain-based
technologies could assist data protection law to achieve its goal. Since blockchain is
designed as a transparent and decentralized mechanism, every user and node could
be involved in data transactions. Therefore, data subject on the chain can see how
their personal data are used and processed.

4.1.3 Blockchain and Machine-readable Legislations

The idea of machine-readable legislation is to replace rules written in a legal lan-

guage with computer code to achieve legal regulation in cyberspace (Micheler and Whaley,
2020). Unlike the traditional legislations, machine-readable rules can directly alter
the environmental architectures to enforce the law. Legislators could state ex-
actly which behavior is forbidden or encouraged to shape cyberspace without extra
work. If laws need to be modiﬁed or adapted as social development, legislators can
also adapt legislation quickly through machine-readable laws and implement them

6Article 5(1), (Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Coun-
cil of 27 April 2016 on the Protection of Natural Persons with Regard to the Process-
ing of Personal Data and on the Free Movement of Such Data, and Repealing Directive
95/46/EC, 2016)

11

rapidly in cyberspace. Meanwhile, because no intermediaries are needed, execution
costs will be reduced. The eﬃciency of execution will also be increased thanks to
mathematical consensus algorithms instead of bureaucratic mechanisms.

Represented by smart contracts, blockchain technology has the potential to
enable machine-readable laws (Rahman et al., 2020). Smart contracts work by fol-
lowing simple “if/when. . . then. . . ” conditional statements that are written into
code on a blockchain. When predetermined conditions have been met and veri-
ﬁed, the code will automatically execute the action (De Filippi and Wright, 2018).
In a such smart contract, there can be as many provisions as necessary to satisfy
the participants’ requirements to complete the task. All parties or participants
must determine how the transactions and their data will be represented on the
blockchain in the “if/when...then. . . ” form to establish the terms and conditions.
Also it is necessary to explore a few possible exemptions and dispute resolution
frameworks.
In machine-readable contracts, blockchain oﬀers a convenient por-
tal for all parties signing the contract with an immutable and auditable archive.
The sophisticated encrypted identiﬁcation can also help signee to identify the legit
parties. By appointing a certain contract towards a speciﬁc address of blockchain
records, a machine-readable contract can be pointed to the address, hence readable
when the address is identiﬁed.

There are many potential application scenarios. For instance, it could be used
for registration service, refund, and ticket purchase. The blockchain will be updated
to record the transaction when it is completed. It guarantees the integrity of the
transaction, which means no one can change or modify it. Therefore, if there may
be a dispute in the future, such a record can be directly used as electric evidence
in court. This point will be detailed discussed in the later sector.

However, blockchain as a form of machine-readable laws also poses diﬀerent
challenges. Unlike translation from one language to another language, translat-
ing natural legal language into computer code language is not easy. Because of the
interpretability of legal language, the natural legal language usually needs a lawyer,
judge or third party to interpret it when it applies to real case (Micheler and Whaley,
2020). Meanwhile, diﬀerent provisions, articles of the legislation normally follow
the principles and aims of the diﬀerent laws. Any excessively mechanical interpre-
tation of a particular legal word or provision may lead to a misinterpretation of the
law by making that particular law contrary to the principles and purposes of the
original law as a whole (De Filippi and Wright, 2018). Additionally, as discussed
above, before coming into a smart contract, every party should list possible ex-
emptions. However, the exceptions cannot be exhausted by enumeration. More or
less, there will be other new exceptions. In this case, machine-readable laws are
hard to recognize the new exceptions. Therefore, a dispute resolution framework is
required.

From a more general viewpoint, blockchain-based machine-readable rules may
deprive citizens’ right to choose to obey or disobey the law. From economic legal
theory, the reason why the law is deterrent is that there is a cost of breaking
the laws.
In other words, so long as the cost of breaking the law is low, illegal
behavior will thrive. However, from another perspective, if the illegal cost can be

12

tolerated, people can choose to break the law in some speciﬁc situation.
In the
context of machine-readable laws, however, it ultimately changes the architecture
of cyberspace, which lacks ﬂexibility and implies that one can no longer choose to
break the law in a particular situation.

To conclude, similar to other technologies, blockchain-based machine-readable
laws bring both opportunities and challenges. It is clear that the machine-readable
laws are easier to execute, and the cost of implementation will be reduced. Mean-
while, once the dispute occurs, the data on the blockchain can be directly used as
electronic evidence thanks to the immutability of DLT. The law enforcement pro-
cess will be more transparent because every data is veriﬁed through every relevant
party. However, the drawbacks of machine-readable rules are also apparent due
to a lack of ﬂexibility. Therefore, further research should focus on exploring the
circumstances in which machine-readable laws can be advantageous and in which
circumstances such laws do not apply. A case-by-case analysis may be required to
explore the function of machine-readable laws in diﬀerent sectors. For example, in
criminal law or the case of extremist crimes, these behaviors have to be prohibited
so that they can be forbidden by machine-readable rules through the architecture
of cyberspace.

4.2 Blockchain-based Electronic Evidence: New Understand-

ing of Evidence in Cyberspace

With the burgeoning development of Internet industries, traditional forms of
evidence and forensic methods have been challenged, and electronic evidence (e-
evidence) is gradually being used and admitted (Rice and Cooper, 2005). In or-
der to be legally recognized, the e-evidence normally needs to satisfy three con-
ditions: objectivity, relevance and legality (Rice and Cooper, 2005). Moreover,
compared to traditional evidence, most e-evidences are time-sensitive vulnerable to
tamper, deleted and unstable. Without a quick and easy way to lawfully obtain and
preserve e-evidences, it will be signiﬁcantly more diﬃcult to recover the evidence
(Wu and Zheng, 2020).

Currently, the two most common methods to obtain and store e-evidence law-
fully are: (i) obtained and stored by the individual through taking photos, down-
loading or taking screenshots; (ii) obtained through notarization. The advantages
and disadvantages of both methods are clear. The ﬁrst method is easy and inexpen-
sive to operate, but the evidentiary capacity and probative force are weak as it is
insecure and easy to be tampered. As a result, it leads to the less inadmissibility in
the court. Regarding the e-evidence obtained by notarization, it largely solves the
problem of the authenticity and legitimacy of e-evidence due to the high credibility
of the notary. However, it requires a high time cost. In the process of notarization,
it is necessary to make an appointment for notarization, commission a notary, go to
the notary oﬃce, communicate with the notary about the details of the operation,
etc., which all cost time. Due to the easy tampering of e-evidence, high time cost is
likely to lead to the loss of evidence. Also, the cost of notarization might be high.
The cost of e-evidence forensics can be thousands of dollars, which makes it more

13

diﬃcult to defend individuals’ rights.

Another emerging approach is that verifying e-evidence through timestamp
technology to ensure authenticity. For example, in Article 11 of Chinese Provisions
of the Supreme People’s Court on Several Issues Concerning Trial of Cases by the
Internet Courts 2018 (Chinese Supreme People’s Court, 2018), it recognizes that
the Internet Court shall conﬁrm the authenticity of electronic data submitted by
the parties, if it can be proved by technical means of evidence collection, such as
electronic signature, trusted timestamp, hash value veriﬁcation, blockchain, etc.
Currently, the common timestamp is that the service provider issues a certiﬁcate
to prove the authenticity and integrity of e-evidence without access to its content.
Although compared with the notarization, the timestamp is quite cheaper, and
there are many uncertainties and drawbacks. Firstly, the validity and admissibility
are inferior to that of the notarization. This largely depends on the judge’s dis-
cretion to decide whether such e-evidence can be accepted (Wu and Zheng, 2020).
Additionally, if there is any inconsistency between the notarized evidence and the
timestamped evidence, the judge is more likely to accept the notarized evidence.
Secondly, the scope of the use of the timestamp is limited. For example, it requires
that websites must be static and operated by PC.

Overall, currently there is no uniﬁed approach that can be applied across all
scenarios and circumstances. In the face of the dilemma of e-evidence’s authenticity
and integrity, because of the characteristics of blockchain, it can eﬀectively elimi-
nate the vulnerability of e-evidence to tamper and greatly reduce the necessity for
judges to have relevant technological knowledge because blockchains are append-
only digital databases where information can be added to ensure the integrity of
data (Li, 2020). One good example of Non-fungible Token (NFT) has come into
the practice of copyright and has been accepted as a major reference and copyright
certiﬁcate for the ownership of the data and content, which eﬀectively prevents
hacking and other activities that may destroy evidence (Bod´o et al., 2018). Unlike
the traditional complex and costly copyright legal regime (Li, 2019), NFT can en-
able digital asset trading accompanied by the deed of copyright license. Therefore,
blockchain inherently makes e-evidence self-tamper-proof and self-authentication
endorsement to ensure its authenticity and integrity (Wu and Zheng, 2020).

Moreover, blockchain not only can serve as a repository to store e-evidence but
also it can act as a platform to generate e-evidence, store e-evidence and notariza-
tion of e-evidence (Chen et al., 2020). Such a combination of generating, preserv-
ing, and notarization platform is a better reﬂection of recordism. For example,
the Chinese Hangzhou Internet Court has already employed such a system where
a consortium blockchain-based system connects courts, notarial agencies, forensic
institutions and all users(Wu and Zheng, 2020). The application also can be used
for daily transaction services for enterprises or individual users. When a dispute
occurs, the enterprises or individual users can directly use the application to show
the e-evidence with a notarial certiﬁcation. Therefore, it can avoid the issue of
authenticity and integrity essentially.

However, a blockchain-based e-evidence system also challenges the legal sys-
tem. Because not every jurisdiction currently recognizes the e-evidence generated

14

and stored by blockchain. It may lead to a new legal amendment of current evidence
forensics laws in the EU or China. Thus, the law must keep pace with technological
developments to ensure that, on the one hand, the law can still regulate technol-
ogy and, on the other hand, technology could more easily achieve legal objectives.
Meanwhile, the design stage of blockchain-based evidence systems also requires the
combined eﬀorts of technical staﬀ and legal practitioners to ensure that blockchain
e-evidence is also fully compliant with the requirements of legal practice.

4.3 Blockchain’s Implication for Privacy and Data Protec-

tion

Blockchain as a new way to store and process data has posed both positive and
negative sides to privacy and data protection. On the one hand, blockchain could
achieve legal objectives (especially data protection law) to realize transparency,
privacy protection, zero-trust mechanism and decentralization. However, on the
other hand, it interferes with the data protection legal regime. Because the data
protection law is designed for the concept that there is at least one data controller
and data can be deleted through the data controller. However, under the circum-
stance of blockchain, it is tough to comply with these legal principles and rights
(Klaine et al., 2021). This sector will focus on what advantages the blockchain could
bring to data protection law and how to mitigate the potential conﬂicts between
blockchain and data protection law.

4.3.1 De-identiﬁcation to Achieve Privacy-Preserving

One of the advantages of blockchain is that it can enable trust and auditable
transactions through a decentralized network (Li, 2021). In the identity-sensitive
sector, blockchain could provide a secure and transparent record of who shared
sensitive data with whom while protecting the content of the data itself. Blockchain
is premised on mathematically derived pseudonyms for veriﬁcation of distributed
ledger. Such a mechanism can de-identify the users’ data and achieve privacy
protection.

Although GDPR regards pseudonymous data as personal data since it can be
linked to the individual by combination, the design of the blockchain is inher-
ently a privacy-friendly framework. Because it uses asymmetric encryption as a
safeguard to protect users’ identiﬁcation. Also according to Recital 28, it states
that “The application of pseudonymization to personal data can reduce the risks
to the data subjects concerned and help controllers and processors to meet their
data-protection obligations”(European Parliament, 2016). Meanwhile, it is also
encouraged that pseudonymization should be incentivized (European Parliament,
2016). The GDPR also considers pseudonymization of data as a means of data
protection by design and data protection by default (European Parliament, 2016).
Therefore, the use of pseudonymization in blockchain should be considered as a
privacy-friendly measurement.

15

The blockchain mechanisms also challenge the data protection laws represented
by the GDPR. Compared with the strict requirement of anonymization, pseudonymiza-
tion is easier to achieve, but the law does not provide enough incentives (Voigt and von dem Bussche,
2017). Data protection law should incentivize the proportional use of pseudony-
mous data when pseudonymization can provide enough protection to users’ privacy
in the diﬀerent context-based environments. Because of the improvement of big
data, the distinction between anonymous data and pseudonymous data becomes
blurred. The dichotomy between anonymization and pseudonymization becomes
unpractical. By contrast, a dynamic approach demonstrates ﬂexibility and prag-
matic and sometimes, even more, privacy friendly. According to data protection
law’s deﬁnition, although some data is pseudonymous, it can achieve a similar ef-
fect as anonymous data. Such dynamic de-identiﬁcation can reveal diﬀerent levels
and types of data to diﬀerent parties at diﬀerent times, for diﬀerent purposes, at
diﬀerent places. Therefore, the law needs to be revised to cater to the technologies
represented by blockchain.

4.3.2 Blockchain as a Tool to Boost Data Free Flow

One of the legal objectives of GDPR is to boost personal data free ﬂow. Just like
oil, the value of data lies in its free ﬂow and use. Therefore, many jurisdictions are
dedicated to establishing such digital data marketplace where personal and non-
personal data can be shared, traded and free ﬂow. For example, European Commis-
sion considers that the data marketplace can be used to unlock the value of data for
the Digital Single Market and also render the EU more competitive in the context
of artiﬁcial intelligence (European Comission, 2017). Similarly, in China the data
trade marketplaces are booming. Many data marketplaces, for example, Shanghai
Data Exchange Centre (Shanghai Data Exchange Corp, 2018) and Guiyang Global
Big Data Exchange Centre (Guiyang Global Big Data Exchange Centre, 2015), are
taking shape. Data marketplace powered by blockchain can oﬀer users conﬁden-
tiality and convenience for data sharing by listing their data on the marketplace.
Potential buyers are eligible for using the data with authentication records from
data providers when the trade has been secured by the marketplace (Klaine et al.,
2021).

Blockchain as a digital database that is shared and synchronized, maintained
through a consensus algorithm and stored on multiple nodes can oﬀer considerable
advantages to build up such data trade marketplace while providing extra protec-
tion to data privacy. Firstly, blockchain is a decentralized framework, which means
that the data exchange can be operated without a central trusted intermediary. Be-
cause blockchain could enable the zero-trust mechanism (Dhar and Bose, 2021), it
can be used for the transaction of data and make data free ﬂow. Such a mechanism
can allow participants to provide proof of a statement without disclosing identity
information. For example, the blockchain-based system can reveal whether a trans-
action has occurred without revealing the public key and the transaction value.

Furthermore, the blockchain-based data governance tool can establish a smart
contract, which can automate data sharing and reduce transaction costs. With

16

the support of blockchain technology, it is apparent that the data marketplace is
easier and safer to build up and stimulate data sharing and the digital economy.
Meanwhile, such a system also can be used to achieve legal objectives of users’ data
rights.

4.3.3 Blockchain as a Manner to Empower User with Data Rights

Due to the characteristic of blockchain, it could give users more control over their
personal data (Filippi, 2016). As stipulated in Recital 7 of GDPR, informational
self-determination is one of the principles of GDPR. It implies that data subject
shall have the ability to determine their personal data. Therefore, GDPR vests
various data rights to the data subject, for example, the right of access (Article 15
GDPR) or the right to data portability (Article 20 GDPR).

With the assistance of blockchain, it is easier and safer to achieve these data
rights. On the one hand, blockchain could enable users with more access to their
data in accordance with Article 15 GDPR. With such a mechanism, data subjects
can easily know who accessed their personal data and for what purpose, as well as
at what time and how the personal data is processed (Finck, 2019). It satisﬁes the
requirement by GDPR and provides extra user accessibility with their data.

Apart from the user’s right to access, another advantage of blockchain is that
it is easier to achieve data portability in practice. The right to data portability is a
new type of data right which empowers users to move, copy or transfer their data
from one platform to another (Voigt and von dem Bussche, 2017). However, data
portability is often diﬃcult to achieve due to low interoperability between platforms
in practice (De Hert et al., 2018). Blockchain technology is capable of addressing
the issue by mitigating the transfer costs as it can facilitate direct relationships
and transactions between an individual and multiple organizations. Because the
user’s data can be cryptographically secured by a private key, the data subject can
grant or revoke third-parties access to that data anytime. If the user would like
to switch the data to a new service provider, they only need is to grant the new
service provider permission to access the data and revoke the permission from the
old one. Therefore, blockchain could make it easier for data subjects to smoothly
transfer their data without relying on any organization to port it, guaranteeing
data integrity and security during the data transfer.

Furthermore, blockchain could render data subject monitoring their data port-
ing process while exercising their right to portability (Finck, 2019). Because the
data subjects do not know the procedure of porting, they would face the dilemma
of identifying lapses and mistakes, and if necessary, taking the further requisite
steps to correct these situations. Blockchain-based data management tools can
provide data subjects oversight of the porting process without the need to impose
obligations on platforms.

However, it is worth noting that blockchain and DLT must never accomplish
these goals automatically. Rather, they must be intentionally designed through
interdisciplinary collaborations between engineers and lawyers. Otherwise, there
are many potential conﬂicts between blockchain and law.

17

4.3.4 The Conﬂicts between Blockchain and Data Protection Law:

A Legal Interpretivism Required

As aforementioned, there are many potential conﬂicts between blockchain and
data protection law. It is mainly because the GDPR is designed based on legislators’
past experience in cyberspace. However, blockchain inaugurates a new type of data
storage. It subverts many traditional cognitions to cyberspace. For example, there
is no central data controller/processor, and the data is tough to modify or delete
to guarantee data integrity and transparency. Therefore, the data protection law
should respond to such challenges to oﬀer legal certainty for the development of
emerging technologies. Broad legal interpretivism may be helpful.

In terms of the right to erasure and rectiﬁcation, although GDPR stipulates
that data subjects shall have the right to ask the controller to erase their per-
sonal data, there is no speciﬁc deﬁnition on the meaning of erasure, rectiﬁcation
or deletion (Voigt and von dem Bussche, 2017). It leaves room for data deletion
on blockchain and requires a further legal amendment to explain this issue. By
using legal interpretivism and teleological approach, erasure not only can be ex-
plained as the completely erasing or deletion of the data itself but also means that
it makes data content inaccessible to others and eliminates subsequent impact on
the data subject. Therefore, de-link to data should also be seen to exercise the right
to erasure. In Google Spain case (Court of Justice of the European Union, 2014),
the judge also conﬁrmed that de-listing of information from research results could
be considered to amount to erasure. Although the de-list was requested by the
claimant, who did not request Google to delete the original data, it is still inspir-
ing for the practical application of the right to erasure in other cases. Because in
cyberspace, complete deletion of data is not an easy task. If nobody can access the
data and no subsequent impact on the data subject, it should be amount to erasure
from a teleological interpretation. Therefore, in the context of blockchain, the right
to erasure can also be applied in this way. Although deletion is hard, removing the
link and destroying the private key, making data inaccessible is not tough. Thus,
legal interpretivism and teleological approach are necessary to explain such issues.
Regarding the data controller and processor, in the context of DLT, lots of
entities could be qualiﬁed as (Joint-) controllers, but some of them may not have
full ability to control over the data (Finck, 2019). For instance, nodes in principle
only see encrypted and hashed data where data has been modiﬁed when put on
the blockchain. However, a single node cannot exercise the request of the data
subject. By the same token, the deﬁnition of data controller and processor must
be interpreted teleologically. Otherwise, it is impossible to distinguish the respon-
sibility of each participant. According to the explanation of Article 29 Working
Party (Article 29 Working Party, 2010), data controllers normally can determine
the purposes and means of processing. It means that data controller(s) has the
ability to determine respectively the ’why’ and the ’how’ of certain processing ac-
tivities. Therefore, in the private chain or consortium chain, the participant who
can determine the why and how data is processed is the data controller(s). Sim-
ilarly, in the context of the public chain, the participant who initiates the chain

18

and can determine the data processing manner satisfy the deﬁnition of the data
controller and in some circumstances, miners and nodes also can be the joint-data
controller. In this case, miners and nodes must follow the main data controllers’
requirement to undertake their own responsibilities.

5

Implications of Blockchain from a ﬁnancial prospect

Blockchain brings a new revolution in information processing, storage and ex-
change, enabling many new applications in ﬁnance, corporate governance and dig-
ital currencies. For example, it could contribute to community governance and
collaborative production without revealing the roles of participants, which means
that ordinary participants can become a trader, a miner, a retailer and a customer
simultaneously, hence breaking the market barriers and reducing the information
gap between participants in the community, as all records are clearly visible to each
other.

Meanwhile, blockchain-enabled business applications can easily achieve trans-
parency and trust the tamper-proof records. These new features empower the tra-
ditional business model with new meanings and promote the evolution of the new
business model. This section concentrates on analyzing such impact that blockchain
brings to ﬁnancial and business industries.
It will analyze how the blockchain-
enabled information revolution inﬂuences corporate governance and central bank
digital currencies.

5.1 Blockchain and corporate governance

Smart contract is the critical technology to improve the eﬃciency of ﬁnancial
markets.7 Simple extensions enable blockchains to keep self-executing transac-
tions. Regarding the automaticity and time-saving feature, using blockchain could
resolve several long-standing issues originating from corporate governance area
(Kahn and Winton, 1998). Even more important, blockchain has the potential
capability to yield unparalleled transparency, identifying the ownership proportion
of debt and equity by investors or senior management and minimizing the risk
of malfeasance on the part of listed companies, exchanges, and regulators. For
market participators, the execution of blockchain allows for faster, economic acqui-
sitions of shares, but with far less conﬁdentiality than under the centralized system
(Yermack, 2017). Financial records would become far more transparent, reducing
the chances for proﬁts manipulation and other accounting tricks, and related party
transactions such as shadow banking would be far more accessible. The execution
of blockchain also promotes the speed and cost of trading in the ﬁnancial market.
In the United States, stock trades typically take three business days to settle and
transfer ownership from seller to buyer. Market attendees such as brokers, indi-
vidual and institutional investors are engaged, involving direct and indirect fees

7Smart contract are programs recorded on a blockchain that executes when certain

circumstances are satisﬁed.

19

(via commissions and the bid-ask spread separately). However, a blockchain-based
stock transaction would be instantaneous and erase the existence of these middle-
men. While stock exchanges will likely continue to connect buyers and sellers in
some other form, liquidity would skyrocket, owning to cheaper costs and fast trad-
ing time. Based on the existed literature (Amihud, 2002; Bhide, 1993; Ma et al.,
2020; De Santis, 2014), liquidity is a critical threshold with the funding ﬂow and
caters to the interest demand of fund managers and investors. It has a high likeli-
hood of generating high-frequency trading generally through the low cost of trading
under the blockchain application.

Besides transparency and low trading cost, blockchain technology has been
presented as a voting platform for all sorts of the election. Numerous studies,
including (Brav and Mathews, 2011; Nenova, 2003; Villarreal, 2019) have shown the
existing diﬃculties with corporate elections, including inaccurate voter lists, limited
ballot distribution and even chaotic vote counting.
In a blockchain system, the
token can be regarded as a valid ticket to record the choices by voters. As claimed
by (Kshetri and Voas, 2018; Wright and De Filippi, 2015), voting under blockchain
could encourage shareholders to engage actively in corporate governance and vote
on a broader range of issues more frequently. Under a similar spirit, election fraud,
especially the 2020 US president election rumor, can eﬀectively be avoided under
the blockchain-based voting system.

5.1.1 Blockchain and central bank digital currencies (CBDC)

Central banks and global ﬁnancial regulators are debating how blockchain will
aﬀect their own technology underpinnings, and the underlying technology of com-
mercial banks and ﬁnancial institutions. Because representative cryptocurrency
Bitcoin is undertaking a recognized part of the ﬁnancial landscape, worldwide cen-
tral banks are becoming more interested and taking seriously the potential appli-
cation of digital money. Feared by the possible risk of losing sovereign currency
issuance, central banks in the UK, the US, the EU, New Zealand and elsewhere are
considering whether it is possible to establish their own central bank digital cur-
rencies (CBDCs). And the extensive discussion and conception are published in a
ﬂood of white papers(Bank of England, 2020; Reserve Bank of New Zealand, 2021;
European Central Bank, 2020; Board of Governors of Federal Reserve System, 2022).
Although CBDC is commonly connected with Distributed Ledger Technology,
the majority central bank attitude towards such linkage is disapproval, considering
the centralized payment system is the foundation of absolute control of currency.
However, a blockchain-based ledger has several potential breakthroughs that can
be utilized independently, allowing the author to discuss the particular features of
the blockchain system that are most relevant and useful in a CBDC setting. Smart
contract can be independently implemented over a number of diﬀerent kinds of
ledgers, including a centralized system. Further, it could achieve security and eﬃ-
ciency targets through restricting the broad function accessible inside a smart con-
tract programming language. Besides that, cryptography could also be employed to
strengthen the CBDC system. Based on the white paper from (Bank of England,

20

2020), it is necessary to upgrade the cryptographic approaches since particular cryp-
tographic functions can be weak over time and vulnerable to high-turnover cyber
attacks.
In a nutshell, an indisputable fact is that the innovation of blockchain
technology triggers the revolution of the ﬁnancial system and boosts the inven-
tion of CBDC. Although it is still in the early development phase in a majority of
countries, the People’s Bank of China completed salary payouts in the digital yuan
utilizing blockchain technology in 2020 and plan to popularize in the forthcoming
Olympic Winter Games (Kharpal, 2021).

6 Blockchain’s potential from a technological per-

spective

Blockchain not only has a great impact on society but also demonstrates great
potential in combination with other technologies if it is regarded as an innovative
methodological cognition.
In other words, blockchain can not only beneﬁt the
advancement of other technologies, but the development in other technologies can
also promote the development of blockchain. This section analyses how blockchain
could be positively harnessed more sustainably through combination with other
techniques.

6.0.1 Blockchain and big data

The integration of blockchain technology and big data has the potential to provide
a slew of fascinating opportunities (Meijer, 2019). Although blockchain has not
been widely investigated in big data management, it should be seen as two sides of
the coin. As (Fedak, 2018) states, blockchain not only increases the size of big data
but also improves its security and value by structuring and preparing it for big data
analytics. While blockchain is focused on storage data, big data is concentrated on
data analyses and forecasts from a large amount of data. Alternatively, it can be
regarded as quantity for Big Data and quality for Blockchain. Therefore, the data
gathered and authenticated on the blockchain by big companies will add value to
enterprises (Hassani et al., 2018).

There are multiple blockchain-based big data analytics enhancements that ben-
eﬁt corporate governance and eliminate exposure. More speciﬁcally, the expo-
sure contains fraud prevention, agency cost, information asymmetry and reverse
causality. As blockchain technology enables to implement the real-time account-
ing, the business’ entire ledger would then be available to interest parties like a
shareholder, lender, creditor or others (Yermack, 2017). The instant accounting
statements replace the existence of quarterly ﬁnancial statements and accounting
audits. Furthermore, the real-time accounting feature can relieve the dilemma for
Small and mid-size enterprises (SMEs) to access external ﬁnancing, especially for
shadow banking. Equipped with instantons accounting records through blockchain-
based big data platforms, bank groups and relevant ﬁnancial institutions can easily
grant loans to SMEs without complicated risk assessment procedures.

21

6.1 Sharing and sustainable development of blockchain econ-

omy

6.1.1 Distribution system of income and wealth

Blockchain in the regime of the economy has been widely accepted in the form
of cryptocurrencies. However, blockchain is way beyond the scope the cryptocur-
rencies.
It has reshaped the world with its encrypted nature and opens up the
opportunity for every individual with the power to mine or mint tokens that can
be used in every possible way (Novak, 2019). Tokens are the essential carrier of
the value of blockchain.
It makes sense when people pass on tokens to perform
transactions on the blockchain. It brings the breakthrough of the distribution sys-
tem of income, where the individual has total control of its earning and earns an
extra bit of fees when the individual is serving the network. Since the distribution
of tokens is direct and transparent, it equalizes participants’ roles and creates the
legal person’s unique jurisdiction in the blockchain aspect, where the actual man
is mapped with an encrypted identity used for the legal person. To the greatest
extent possible, a widely open distributed ledger provides the ultimate audit to the
economic system (Novak, 2019).

6.1.2 Functional Consensus for sustainable development

Consensus, the step of getting the agreement among all peer nodes, should never
be the weakness of blockchain but a way of promoting the blockchain. However,
ever since the rise of bitcoin, blockchain has been linked with high power con-
In the
sumption, low eﬃciency, waste of resources with environmental impacts.
ﬁrst quarter of 2021, Cambridge estimates that to be 84.6 TWh, and it expands
the estimation rapidly, later with a staggering 112.82 TWh electricity to be con-
sumed yearly, which is a huge amount of electricity and a huge producer of carbon
footprint (University of Cambridge, 2021). A well-criticized reason is that the con-
sensus used by blockchains is not productive but a puzzle-solving game with no
real value to reality. In the near future, Proof-of-Work consensuses are still con-
sidered the safest and most accepted public chain solution, and it will be hard to
replace them without substantial changes to the current acknowledgment of Bitcoin
and the transitional understanding to greener consensus. On the other hand, there
are practical functional consensuses, which are utilizing the puzzles or the con-
sensus itself being an essential service, for instance, Proof-of-Replication (PoRep)
(Xu et al., 2020) used by Filecoin makes use of the replication status of ﬁle shar-
ing for miner election (Protocol Labs, 2017), hence providing data query service in
parallel with the PoRep consensus. Functional consensus is a major step forward
in making a sustainable ecosystem for blockchain. It is also challenging to design
a functional consensus considering the eﬃciency, availability, security and integrity
of the network.

Application-speciﬁc integrated circuit (ASIC) is a type of computing machine
that has been designed to solve particular problems, in our case, the search of
hash. It produces enormous heat while running, and the cooling of them costs extra

22

electricity for air conditioners, increasing the temperature around the ASICs. Room
heating using mining ASIC has been well-practiced in homes with low electricity
price and low-temperature (Smith, 2019). The heat generated by the energy-hungry
machine produces roughly 2 kW each with a radiator design ﬁtted to the cooling
unit. The savings from the heating cost during the winter and the added value from
mined crypto assets reach balances in a short cycle and eventually cover the cost
of ASIC hardware. This has been recognized as a mitigation to the environmental
impacts of ASIC mining activities, and the market of ASIC radiator rental has
grown with more and more interest from greenhouses and winter gardens.

6.1.3 Guidelines for prohibiting non-renewable energies and car-

bon tax for cryptos

Considering huge carbon and greenhouse gases and the waste of non-renewable
energies, non-renewable energies should not be used to power blockchain networks,
especially the cryptocurrency network, in line with the commitments made by the
governing body and local communities. The legislation shall consider putting guide-
lines and standardizing the energy source for blockchain application, providing its
role and responsibility to the environmental impacts. Essential services powered
by blockchain shall be allowed to use any energies regarding its jurisdiction of local
regulations. However, Proof-of-Work based cryptos, for instance, shall be refrained
from using coal/oil/gas generated electricity and has to pay the carbon tax based
on its power rating. By setting up the guidelines and regulations for blockchain
energy policies, the environmental impact of blockchain can be greatly reduced and
provides a renewable future-proof legal status for blockchain maintenance. Com-
pared to the tax diﬃculty of cryptocurrencies, taxing the mining machine can help
reduce greenhouse gas emissions and beneﬁts the climate with the tax collected.
(Jiang et al., 2021)

6.1.4 Storage medium revolution for blockchain in the future

Blockchain provides immutable records to the public with its persistent storage
of all records stored on the blockchain.
It will be a great waste of resources if
the records keep growing to inﬁnity. Though, there is mitigation help to reduce
the storage size on each node, that comes with great risk of data integrity and
availability and tempers the blockchain’s basic principle of immutable. Hence,
the need for persistent distributed storage of all records in a distributed way is
a critical issue for future blockchain storage. There are yet no answers to how to
persistently store all records in a distributed manner with acceptable cost, but there
are candidates for such desired feature.

With the exploration of new material, biological genetic material, i.e., DNA
and RNA, are good examples of storoing a full copy of the record in a distributed
way. That is saying that any individual DNA carries the same piece of information
from its parent DNA when it performs mitosis during cell division. The double
helix shape of linkage also resembles the immunity of blockchain, considering its

23

hash linkage. Also, the art of folded protein is a way to eﬃciently store the copy of
the blockchain in the near future, thanks to its compact size and persistent nature.
Recent protein-based storage (Wang et al., 2021) progress provides a practical way
to distribute store the same piece of information with a highly stable shape and
link. The protein can be rapidly scanned to ﬁnd out the diﬀerence in their structure
hence ﬁguring out the data changes. It is a suitable medium for blockchain long-
term storage and fast validation of data records.

7 Conclusion

It is apparent that the development of sciences and technology will drive the
progress and transformation of society, which could have a great social impact, vice
versa. Therefore, this paper analyses the implications of blockchain technology
to social sciences from methodological, legal and ﬁnancial perspectives. It found
that although there are few negative impacts from blockchain to the legal side,
blockchain technology is still of great potential. Therefore, this paper also answers
how blockchain should be harnessed in a more sustainable and compatible way in
society. The principle and design philosophy of blockchain have high relevance in
social sciences and could have a great impact on society as a whole. Regarding
methodological cognition of blockchain in social sciences, the blockchain-driven in-
formation revolution refreshes the cognition of the source of power. It challenges
the traditional centralized source of governance by providing a new architecture
where the power of governance is bottom-up.

In the context of legal regulation in cyberspace, blockchain refreshes the legal
research approach and many legal concepts, for example, trust and transparency.
It re-establishes these notions through cryptography, therefore, embedding these
notions into the cyber architecture. Through cyber architecture, blockchain en-
ables machine-readable legislation, a more convenient e-evidence system and the
objectives of data protection law through privacy-by-design. However, the decen-
tralization of blockchain also challenges the implementation of data protection law.
Therefore, a legal interpretivism approach is required to handle this issue. As to
the implication of blockchain to the economy and ﬁnance, this paper found that
blockchain could enable new applications in corporate governance. Blockchain could
break the market barriers and reduce the information gap between participants. It
also found that although CBDC is commonly connected with Distributed Ledger
Technology, the majority central bank attitude towards such linkage is disapproval,
considering the centralized payment system is the foundation of absolute control of
currency. Regarding blockchain technology, it promotes the development of other
disciplines and beneﬁts from the development of other technologies. Moreover,
we are keen to see a more connected scene of blockchain-enabled interdisciplinary
cooperation, to make the data ﬂow eﬀortlessly and easily accessible.

24

References

Amihud, Y. (2002), ‘Illiquidity and stock returns: Cross-section and time-series

eﬀects’, Journal of Financial Markets 5(1).

Article 29 Working Party (2010), ‘Opinion 1/2010 on the concepts of ”controller”

and ”processor”’, Article 29 Working Party .

Article 29 Working Party (2016), Guidelines on Transparency under Regulation

2016/679, Technical report, European Commission.
URL: https://ec.europa.eu/newsroom/article29/items/622227/en

Bal´azs, B. (2021), The Commodiﬁcation of Trust.

Bank of England (2020), Central bank digital currency, Technical Report March,

Bank of England.

BBC (2021), ‘Facebook faces mass legal action over data leak’.
URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-56772772

Bentham, J. and Boˇzoviˇc, M. (1995), The panopticon writings, Verso Trade.

Beshiri, A. and Susuri, A. (2019), ‘Dark Web and Its Impact in Online Anonymity
and Privacy: A Critical Analysis and Review’, Journal of Computer and Com-
munications 07, 30–43.

Bhide, A. (1993), ‘The hidden costs of stock market liquidity’, Journal of Financial

Economics 34(1).

Board of Governors of Federal Reserve System (2022), ‘What is a Central Bank
Digital Currency? Is the Federal Reserve moving toward adopting a digital
dollar?’.
URL:
currency.htm

https://www.federalreserve.gov/faqs/what-is-a-central-bank-digital-

Bod´o, B., Gervais, D. and Quintais, J. P. (2018), ‘Blockchain and smart contracts:
The missing link in copyright licensing?’, International Journal of Law and In-
formation Technology 26(4), 311–336.

Bootsma, M. C. J. and Ferguson, N. M. (2007), ‘The eﬀect of public health measures

on the 1918 inﬂuenza pandemic in U.S. cities’, 104, 7588–7593.

Brav, A. and Mathews, R. D. (2011), ‘Empty voting and the eﬃciency of corporate

governance’, Journal of Financial Economics 99(2).

Chen, S., Zhao, C., Huang, L., Yuan, J. and Liu, M. (2020), ‘Study and imple-
mentation on the application of blockchain in electronic evidence generation’,
Forensic Science International: Digital Investigation 35, 301001.

25

Chinese Supreme People’s Court (2018), ‘Provisions of the Supreme People’s Court
on Several Issues Concerning Trial of Cases by the Internet Courts 2018 (2018
SPC Internet Courts Provisions’.
URL: https://uk.practicallaw.thomsonreuters.com/w-021-7454)

Court of Justice of the European Union (2014), ‘Google Spain SL and Google Inc. v
Agencia Espa˜nola de Protecci´on de Datos (AEPD) and Mario Costeja Gonz´alez’.
URL: https://curia.europa.eu/juris/liste.jsf ?num=C-131/12

Cunha, P. R., Melo, P. and Sebasti˜ao, H. (2021), ‘From Bitcoin to Central Bank
Digital Currencies: Making Sense of the Digital Money Revolution’, Future In-
ternet 13(7).
URL: https://www.mdpi.com/1999-5903/13/7/165

De Filippi, P. and Wright, A. (2018), Blockchain and the Law: The Rule of Code,

Harvard University Press.

De Hert, P., Papakonstantinou, V., Malgieri, G., Beslay, L. and Sanchez, I. (2018),
‘The right to data portability in the gdpr: Towards user-centric interoperability
of digital services’, Computer law & security review 34(2), 193–203.

De Santis, R. A. (2014), ‘The euro area sovereign debt crisis: Identifying ﬂight-to-

liquidity and the spillover mechanisms’, Journal of Empirical Finance 26.

Dhar, S. and Bose, I. (2021),

‘Securing IoT Devices Using Zero Trust and
Blockchain’, Journal of Organizational Computing and Electronic Commerce
31(1), 18–34.

European Central Bank (2020), Report on a digital euro, Technical report, Euro-

pean Central Bank.

European Comission (2017), Commission Staﬀ Working Document on the free ﬂow
of data and emerging issues of the European Data Economy, Technical report,
European Commission.
URL: https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/library/staﬀ-working-document-
free-ﬂow-data-and-emerging-issues-european-data-economy

European Parliament (2016), ‘Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parlia-
ment and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the Protection of Natural Persons
with Regard to the Processing of Personal Data and on the Free Movement of
Such Data, and Repealing Directive 95/46/EC’.

Fedak, V. (2018), ‘Blockchain and big data: The match made in heavens’, Towards

Data Science .

Filippi, P. D. (2016), ‘The interplay between decentralization and privacy: the

case of blockchain technologies’, Journal of Peer Production 7, 18.
URL:
technologies-draft.pdf

http://peerproduction.net/wp-content/uploads/2016/08/blockchain-

26

Finck, M. (2018), Blockchain Regulation and Governance in Europe, Cambridge

University Press, Cambridge.
URL:
governance-in-europe/A722E0522BC6C5300AA0813340BD6C04

https://www.cambridge.org/core/books/blockchain-regulation-and-

Finck, M. (2019), ‘Blockchain and the General Data Protection Regulation: Can
distributed ledgers be squared with Blockchain and the General Data Protection
Regulation Law?’, European Parliamentary Research Service .

Foucault, M. (1977), Discipline and punish :

the birth of the prison, Pantheon

Books.

Guiyang Global Big Data Exchange Centre (2015), ‘Introduction to Guiyang Global

Big Data Exchange Centre’.
URL: http://www.gbdex.com/website/view/aboutGbdex.jsp

Hassan, S. and De Filippi, P. (2017), ‘The Expansion of Algorithmic Governance:
From Code is Law to Law is Code’, Field Actions Science Reports (17), 88–90.
URL: http://journals.openedition.org/factsreports/4518

Hassani, H., Huang, X. and Silva, E. (2018), ‘Banking with blockchain-ed big data’.

Hoelting, J. (2017), ‘Building trust in communities — UMN Extension’.

URL: https://extension.umn.edu/vital-connections/building-trust-communities

Jiang, S., Li, Y., Lu, Q., Hong, Y., Guan, D., Xiong, Y. and Wang, S. (2021),
‘Policy assessments for the carbon emission ﬂows and sustainability of Bitcoin
blockchain operation in China’, Nature Communications 12(1), 1938.
URL: http://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-021-22256-3

Kahn, C. and Winton, A. (1998), ‘Ownership structure, speculation, and share-

holder intervention’, Journal of Finance 53(1).

Kharpal, A. (2021), ‘China has given away millions in its digital yuan trials. This

is how it works’.
URL: https://www.cnbc.com/arjun-kharpal/

Klaine, P. V., Xu, H., Zhang, L., Imran, M. and Wang, C. (2021), ‘A Privacy-

Preserving Blockchain Platform for a Data Marketplace’.

Kshetri, N. and Voas, J. (2018), ‘Blockchain-Enabled E-Voting’, IEEE Software

35(4).

Lessig, L. (2006), Code and other laws of cyberspace : version 2.0, Basic Books,

New York.

Li, Z. (2019), ‘The Copyright Protection of Video Games from Reskinning in China-
A Comparative Study on UK, US and China Approaches’, Tsinghua China Law
Review 11(2), 293–340.

27

Li, Z. (2020), Standardisation of Blockchain and Distributed Ledger Technolo-
gies—A Legal Voice from the Data Protection Law Perspective, in K. Jakobs,
ed., ‘25th EURAS Annual Standardisation Conference – Standards for Digital
Transformation: Blockchain and Innovation’, The European Academy for Stan-
dardisation, Glagsow, pp. 171–187.

Li, Z. (2021), ‘Confronting algorithm bias risks : Will blockchain provide new
opportunities or challenges for data protection law ?’, Dublin Law and Politics
Review 2(1), 43.

Li, Z., Xu, H., Fang, Y., Zhao, B. and Zhang, L. (2022), The Implications of DLT
and Blockchain: A Legal and Financial Aspects, in ‘Handbook of Blockchain
Analytics’, Springer.

Lightfoot, G. and Wisniewski, T. P. (2014), ‘Information Asymmetry and Power in

a Surveillance Society’, SSRN Electronic Journal .

Ma, Y., Xiao, K. and Zeng, Y. (2020), ‘Mutual Fund Liquidity Transformation and

Reverse Flight to Liquidity’, SSRN Electronic Journal .

Meijer, C. R. W. D. (2019), ‘Blockchain and big Data: A great mariage’.

URL: https://www.ﬁnextra.com/blogposting/16596/blockchain-and-big-data-a-
great-mariage

Micheler, E. and Whaley, A. (2020), ‘Regulatory Technology: Replacing Law with
Computer Code’, European Business Organization Law Review 21(2), 349–377.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s40804-019-00151-1

Nakamoto, S. (2008), ‘Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system’.

URL: http://www.bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf

Nenova, T. (2003), ‘The value of corporate voting rights and control: A cross-

country analysis’, Journal of Financial Economics 68(3).

Novak, M. (2019), The Implications of Blockchain for Income Inequality,

in
‘Blockchain Economics: Implications of Distributed Ledgers’, chapter Chapter
12, pp. 235–250.

Protocol Labs (2017), Whitepaper: Filecoin: A Decentralized Storage Network,

Technical report, Protocol Labs.
URL: https://ﬁlecoin.io/ﬁlecoin.pdf

Rahman, R., Liu, K. and Kagal, L. (2020), From legal agreements to blockchain
smart contracts, in ‘2020 IEEE International Conference on Blockchain and
Cryptocurrency (ICBC)’, IEEE, pp. 1–5.

Reserve Bank of New Zealand (2021), ‘Reserve Bank conﬁrms consultations “key

to the future of how New Zealanders pay and save”’.

28

URL:
consultations-key-to-the-future-of-how-new-zealanders-pay-and-save

https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/news/2021/07/reserve-bank-conﬁrms-

Rice, P. R. and Cooper, C. (2005), Electronic evidence: law and practice, American

Bar Association.

Sarmah, S. S. (2018), ‘Understanding Blockchain Technology’, Computer Science

and Engineering 8(2), 23–29.

Shanghai Data Exchange Corp (2018), ‘Introduction of Shanghai Data Exchange

Corp’.
URL: https://www.chinadep.com/

Shi, E. (2020), Foundations of Distributed Consensus and Blockchains.

URL: http://elaineshi.com/docs/blockchain-book.pdf

Smith, T. (2019), ‘Heating My Home with Crypto Mining’.

URL:
137d2a29b62a

https://medium.com/swlh/heating-my-home-with-crypto-mining-

Sun, Y., Zhang, L., Feng, G., Yang, B., Cao, B. and Imran, M. A. (2019),
‘Blockchain-enabled wireless internet of things: Performance analysis and op-
timal communication node deployment’, IEEE Internet of Things Journal
6(3), 5791–5802.
URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8668426/

Sztompka, P. (1998), ‘Trust, Distrust and Two Paradoxes of Democracy’, European

Journal of Social Theory 1(1), 19–32.
URL: http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/136843198001001003

Tschorsch, F. and Scheuermann, B. (2015), ‘Bitcoin and Beyond: A Technical

Survey on Decentralized Digital Currencies’, 18(3), 2084–2123.

Underwood, S. (2016), ‘Blockchain beyond bitcoin’, Communications of the ACM

59(11), 15–17.
URL:
https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/2994581

http://scet.berkeley.edu/wp-content/uploads/BlockchainPaper.pdf

University of Cambridge (2021), ‘Cambridge Bitcoin Electricity Consumption In-

dex’.
URL: https://cbeci.org/index

Villarreal, O. L. (2019), ‘The problem of the validity or invalidity of shareholders
agreements on corporate directors’ voting’, Revista Chilena de Derecho 46(1).

Voigt, P. and von dem Bussche, A. (2017), The EU General Data Protection Reg-
ulation (GDPR): A Practical Guide, 1st edn, Springer Publishing Company,
Incorporated.

29

Wang, J., Qian, F., Huang, S., Lv, Z., Wang, Y., Xing, X., Chen, M., Han, S.-
T. and Zhou, Y. (2021), ‘Recent Progress of Protein-Based Data Storage and
Neuromorphic Devices’, Advanced Intelligent Systems 3(1), 2000180.
URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/aisy.202000180

Wright, A. and De Filippi, P. (2015), ‘Decentralized Blockchain Technology and

the Rise of Lex Cryptographia’, SSRN Electronic Journal .

Wu, H. and Zheng, G. (2020), ‘Electronic evidence in the blockchain era: New rules

on authenticity and integrity’, Computer Law and Security Review 36.

Xu, H., Klaine, P. V., Onireti, O., Cao, B., Imran, M. and Zhang, L. (2020),
‘Blockchain-enabled resource management and sharing for 6G communications’,
Digital Communications and Networks 6(3), 261–269.
URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S2352864820300249

Xu, H., Li, Z., Li, Z., Zhang, X., Sun, Y. and Zhang, L. (2022), Metaverse Native
Communication : A Blockchain and Spectrum Prospective, in ‘2022 International
Conference on Communications’.

Xu, H., Zhang, L., Sun, E. and I, C.-L. (2021), ‘BE-RAN: Blockchain-enabled Open
RAN with Decentralized Identity Management and Privacy-Preserving Commu-
nication’.
URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2101.10856

Yermack, D. (2017), ‘Corporate governance and blockchains’.

30

This figure "intersections.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/2204.00823v1

