Toward Understanding the Use of
Centralized Exchanges for Decentralized
Cryptocurrency

Zhixuan Zhou1, Bohui Shen2

1 University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

zz78@illinois.edu

2 BNU-HKBU United International College

r130233082@mail.uic.edu.hk

ABSTRACT

Cryptocurrency has been extensively studied as a decentralized financial technology
built on blockchain. However, there is a lack of understanding of user experience
with cryptocurrency exchanges, the main means for novice users to interact with
cryptocurrency. We conduct a qualitative study to provide a panoramic view of user
experience and security perception of exchanges. All 15 Chinese participants
mainly use centralized exchanges (CEX) instead of decentralized exchanges (DEX)
to trade decentralized cryptocurrency, which is paradoxical. A closer examination
reveals that CEXes provide better usability and charge lower transaction fee than
DEXes. Country-specific security perceptions are observed. Though DEXes provide
better anonymity and privacy protection, and are free of governmental regulation,
these are not necessary features for many participants. Based on the findings, we
propose design implications to make cryptocurrency trading more decentralized.

Keywords: Blockchain, Cryptocurrency Exchange, User Experience, Security

INTRODUCTION

Cryptocurrency built on blockchain, such as Bitcoin and Ethereum, has become
increasingly popular. Such features as anonymity of users and regulation-free
enable them to disrupt the traditional financial industry. People trade cryptocurrency
via both decentralized exchanges (DEXes) and centralized exchanges (CEXes).
DEXes such as Uniswap are built on the Ethereum blockchain and are completely

free of centralized regulation. On the other hand, CEXes such as Binance and
Coinbase run on centralized servers, and more resemble traditional stock exchanges.

Toward understanding user experience and security perception of cryptocurrency
exchanges, a key infrastructure supporting cryptocurrency trading yet receiving
limited attention from the research community (Jang et al. 2021), we interviewed 15
exchange users in China. It is worth noticing that we recruited exchange users in
general, yet all of them mainly relied on CEXes. This echoes with CoinGecko’s
ranking of cryptocurrency exchanges by trust score, a metric of popularity and
security (Jin, 2020), where top-ranked exchanges are all CEXes, such as Binance,
OKX, KuCoin, Gate.io and Crypto.com (top 5 as of April 4th, 2022). The highest-
ranked DEXes are Maiar (80th), Cyber DEX (89th), and Uniswap (90th). In general,
CEXes dominate the decentralized cryptocurrency market, which seems paradoxical,
and may compromise the decentralization nature of cryptocurrency.

Throughout the interviews, we find that users prefer CEXes due to their good
overall experience, learnability and low transaction fee. High gas/transaction fee are
main concerns of our participants for DEXes. They are not willing to “pay for
decentralization” and indicate that they would only turn to DEXes after the fee is
lowered. Despite good user experience of CEXes, privacy violations are found
common in C2C transactions and KYC (know your customer) process in the
initiation of CEX use. CEXes are also susceptible to regulation by the Chinese
government. Country-specific mentalities toward (de)centralization and privacy are
an interesting phenomenon. For example, many of these participants from China
regard sensitive information leakage during KYC as less severe an issue, since they
have been used to it, and for them, decentralization is not a necessary pursuit.

Contributions of this study are thus 2-fold. Firstly, we obtain a deep understanding
of user experience and security perceptions of cryptocurrency exchanges, especially
CEXes. Secondly, we inform future designs of DEXes to make them more usable
for users, toward creating a fully decentralized financial world.

RELATED WORK

User Experience/Usability of Blockchain and Cryptocurrency

Blockchain has been applied to various fields, from insurance (Gatteschi et al. 2018)
to non-fungible tokens (Sharma et al. 2022). User experience is key to the wide
adoption of blockchain, especially for novice users. A recent work (Voskobojnikov
et al. 2021) identified and qualitatively analyzed 6,859 reviews regarding user
experience of
the wallet
initialization process was found tedious by some app reviewers, and lack of
guidance during the setup process made it challenging to create a wallet. Albayati et
al. (2021) combined User Experience Questionnaire (UEQ) with usability to

five mobile cryptocurrency wallets. For example,

comprehend UX and added trust as a significant construct to understand the impact
of user trust in cryptocurrency wallets.

Trading through exchanges is the most common way to get cryptocurrency (Kim et
al. 2018). However, user study toward understanding user practices with exchanges
is insufficient. Jang et al. (2021) asked twenty participants to perform 6 tasks and
evaluate 7 items of usability and showed that the blockchain-based cryptocurrency
exchange (KDEX) has worse usability than the centralized exchange (Bithumb). We
approach the user experience of exchanges with qualitative interviews of Chinese
users, relating it to a specific cultural context.

Security and Trust in Blockchain and Cryptocurrency

In (Abramova et al. 2021), risk perceptions and security behaviors of different types
of crypto-asset users such as cypherpunks, hodlers, and rookies are identified
through a survey. Regarding trust in blockchain, in (Sas and Khairuddin, 2017), 20
interviews were conducted in Malaysia to understand users’ experience with bitcoin
and trust challenges. Blockchain’s characteristics supporting users’ credibility
include honesty ensured by decentralization and public ledger’s transparency,
reputation supported by large companies’ interest in bitcoin, ease of use grounded in
ease and quick transactions, limited risk due to transactions’ low cost, and the
decentralized, unregulated nature of blockchain which limits the risk of institutional
power abuse. Gaggioli et al. (2019) pointed out that the adoption of blockchain was
not only a technological, but also a psychological challenge, which crucially
depended on the possibility of creating a trust management approach that matched
the underlying distributed communication system.

Despite the key role of exchanges for people to interact with cryptocurrency, and
the large number of attacks targeting exchanges (Marella et al. 2021), little research
has been conducted on people’s security perceptions and trust evaluations of
exchanges. We bridge this research gap with an exploratory interview study.

METHODOLOGY

We recruited interview participants in the authors’ personal contact, as well as on
WeChat
interviews.
Demographics of the participants are summarized in Table 1.

eventually had 15 participants

and Weibo. We

for

the

covered

participants’

Interview questions
of
cryptocurrency, exchange(s) they are using, and overall experience/learnability/
/transaction fee/regulation/security/privacy of the exchanges. The interviews were
conducted by two native Chinese speakers between March and April, 2022, audio-
taped with consent, and transcribed for data analysis. We used an AI-powered
transcription tool to generate raw transcripts, and manually corrected mistakes.

understanding

general

We started the analysis while the data were being collected. We used thematic
coding (Gibbs, 2007) to interpret the interview transcripts and identify emerging
themes, and used a mind mapping tool to organize corresponding quotes into a
hierarchy of themes. We did the analysis iteratively, and regularly discussed to
reach a consensus. In this paper, we will use individual quotes, which were
translated into English, to illustrate our points. All quotes are anonymized to protect
privacy of the participants.

Table 1: Basic information of study participants (exchange users).

ID
P1 M
F
P2

Gender Occupation
Programmer
PhD student

P3

F

P4 M

P5 M
P6 M
P7 M
F
P8
F
P9
F
P10
P11
F
P12 M
P13 M

P14 M
F
P15

Undergraduate
student
HR/Master
student
PhD student
Investment intern
Gym consultant
Master student
Product manager
Product manager
Master student
Master student
PhD student

Master student
Researcher

2

6

4
<1
1
1
2
1
1
2
3

7
1

FINDINGS

Platform(s)

Year(s) Exchange(s)
<1
1

Binance/PancakeSwap Mobile
Mobile/
Binance
Desktop
Mobile

OKX

Huobi

Mobile

Mobile
Binance/Huobi
Mobile
OKX/Gate.io
Mobile
Binance
Mobile
Binance
OKX/Binance/Uniswap Mobile
Binance /OKX/Gate.io Mobile
OKX
Binance
Binance/Gate.io/
BitCoke/FTX
Binance
Binance

Web
Mobile
Mobile/Web/
Desktop
Web
Mobile

In this section, we will first briefly report on participants’ general experience with
cryptocurrency, as a context
to understand their exchange usage. Then we’ll
elaborate on their experiences and perceptions of CEXes.

The Use of Decentralized Cryptocurrency

Our participants have interacted with cryptocurrency from less than one year (P1,
P6) to 7 years (P14). The average self-evaluated expertise of them was 3.54 on a 1-
10 scale (1 indicates novice and 10 indicates savvy), leaning toward the novice end.

Generally, they had pleasurable experience with cryptocurrency, and believed in its

value. Most of our participants used cryptocurrency for investment purposes, given
its high volatility in price. For example, P3 treated cryptocurrency as “a very risky
stock.” Several participants (P4, P9, P11) also traded cryptocurrency out of curiosity.

The Use of Centralized Exchanges

As can be seen from Table 1, most participants (13/15) only used CEXes. P1 and P9
mostly relied on CEXes, and only used DEXes occasionally. A direct reason for the
popularity of CEXes was their advertising and brand building efforts to attract new
users. As P1 noticed, Huobi would “pay influencers (“大V”) in the cryptocurrency
field on Weibo and let them recommend Huobi to newcomers.”

To understand why novice users inclined to use CEXes, we explored their user
experience and security perception of CEXes in terms of overall experience,
learnability, transaction fee, regulation, security, and privacy. We also introduced
the concept of DEXes to them, and probed their preference between DEXes and
CEXes.

Overall Experience. The participants had good overall experience with the CEXes
they used. For example: (P3, OKX) “I think it’s very professional, I mean, the
whole platform seems very professional. The function and the user interface are
good. The experience of using it is very happy and smooth.”

Learnability. User interface (UI) of CEXes resembled that of stock exchanges, thus
users could easily get used to them, as pointed out by P9. P10 shared a similar
opinion and added that the UI design of Binance well accommodated the needs and
habits of Chinese users. CEXes were easy to learn even for people without prior
experience in trading. P2 gave credit to Binance’s rich educational resources in
forms of text, video and interactive tutorials: “It’s easy to learn. It will show you
how to buy USDT or bitcoin or other digital currency… If you click on some
buttons, you’ll be directed into some information pages.” OKX similarly provided
educational materials to “teach users how to change CNY into digital money, and
how to buy/sell.” (P3)

Many of our participants were not frequent traders, thus they did not need to learn
more complicated functions such as leveraged trading. P8 noted that Binance users
could shift between Lite and Professional versions in the app, and the Lite version
only included basic functions like buy/sell, well suiting novice users’ needs.

Transaction Fee. Generally, transaction fees on CEXes were much lower than
DEXes. As told by some participants, the transaction fee rate on Uniswap was
0.875%, while that on Binance was only 0.1%. P1 acknowledged that he would only
consider DEXes if one day the transaction fee was lowered in DEXes.

Regulation. CEXes were susceptible to governmental regulations. The participants
repeatedly mentioned restrictions on cryptocurrency trading in China, e.g., Internet

connection issue, and being denied transactions by banks and payment applications
(e.g., Alipay). P6 regarded this as a paradox: “While the crypto community puts a
heavy emphasis on decentralization, most strict regulations are put on exchanges.”
The regulations put great mental burdens on the participants. P8 said, “I’m very
concerned that one day the country will stop cryptocurrency trading completely, and
I can’t withdraw my assets from the exchanges.”

Chinese users could not access CEXes without a VPN, which set a barrier for
people to download and use them. P2 talked about
the difficulties when
downloading and registering at the beginning: “When I tried to download the
Binance app, I needed to use the VPN. However, when I download it using an
American IP address, I could not register with a Chinese mobile phone number. So,
it took me quite some time to solve this problem.” In addition, every time the
CEXes needed upgrading, users had to use a VPN to download them again.

It was also challenging to buy USDT using Chinese Yuan (CNY), or convert USDT
to CNY. For example, Alipay would stop P2’s transaction, and check if she was
trading cryptocurrency: “The customer service center will call me and check if I’m
doing something with digital currencies. And I say no. If I’m lucky, I can succeed in
my second purchase.” P10 avoided such inconvenience by doing fiat-
cryptocurrency trading with friends instead of C2C sellers.

Trading cryptocurrency was like a gray zone in China. There were official
regulations prohibiting cryptocurrency trading, but
they were not enforced so
strictly. P5 told the author that many users, especially on Huobi, got their bank
accounts frozen, for their cryptocurrency-fiat transactions. In extreme cases, CEXes
stopped serving active Chinese users without compensating them after being caught
by the police. Unfortunate users like P8 suffered from financial losses.

Security. P1 thought Binance was secure for “its international reputation, advanced
technology to protect users’ assets, and its history of timely compensation for users’
financial losses in cyber-attacks.” P11 also inclined to use well-known exchanges.
P14 added that attacking “big platforms” was much harder, and they were less likely
to vanish. On the contrary, one of P10’s friends deposited all his/her assets into an
unknown exchange, and one day the exchange disappeared.

Several participants had concerns for security of CEXes. For example, P4 talked
about server breakdowns in Huobi, especially when Bitcoin price went up sharply,
and the trading volume exploded. Another concern raised by our participants was
asset security during C2C transactions. P12 talked about the burden of telling
whether the sellers were legitimate, and preferred trading with the exchanges
directly, which was unavailable in CEXes.

Privacy. Several participants mentioned possible privacy violation in the KYC
process, in which first-time users had to disclose their ID card number and mobile
phone number. Several participants valued their privacy and were angry about the

frequent privacy violation in China. For example, P15 complained, “I feel that I
have no privacy, though they claim to protect my privacy. I’m angry, and mentally
numb. I’m getting so used to it.” P11 said, “Chinese people don’t give a shit about
privacy, but I do. Whatever platform you register, they’ll check your background
information. This makes me uncomfortable, but you know, I’m in China.”

Often, if one needed to use an app, she had no choice but to give out her personal
information. P1 acknowledged, “I actually don’t like it, but I have no choice but to
accept it, so that I can use these exchanges.” P6 added, “Even if you don’t like it,
you have no choice. You want to play this game.” Although P8 was worried that the
government would see her transactions, and affect her social credit score (Creemers,
2018), she gave out her face ID and ID card number anyways, because she
desperately wanted to buy cryptocurrency as an investment.

Interestingly, several participants thought collecting private user information could
add to exchange security, as P2 said, “It’ll be easier for them to trace the
transactions, like this money is from whom and whom.” Similarly, P9 regarded
KYC as a process required in all financial business to assure asset safety, and P7
thought by providing his ID card number, he could easily reset his password.

Another scenario where privacy could be compromised was C2C transaction, where
users bought cryptocurrency using fiat currency from sellers in the exchanges, often
via debit card and WeChat/Alipay. Sellers often asked to see buyers’ recent
transaction history to check if there was invalid/illegal money, which severely
violated users’ privacy, as noted by P1: “Every time you trade with them, they want
to see your recent transactions in your bank account. And that’s privacy and I feel
awkward showing them. But everyone requires them, and I have no choice.”

The most apparent consequence of such privacy leakage was frequent scam phone
calls, as in the case of P4 and many others.

CEX vs. DEX. While all our participants mainly used CEXes, we introduced
DEXes to them as anonymous, regulation-free exchanges which charged more
transaction fees than CEXes. We then asked them whether they would turn to
DEXes.

A few participants preferred DEXes after knowing this concept. For example, P3
thought DEXes were safer than CEXes. P10 liked the convenience of DEXes: “One
could use DEXes as long as she connects her wallet to them.” P12 valued privacy
provided by DEXes. P9 wanted more freedom over her own assets, and did not want
any state regulation: “I just like the concept of decentralization. I value free rights,
and that’s why I choose cryptocurrency.”

On the contrary, P2 regarded decentralization as “unnecessary and useless” for her
own investment. P6 believed there was no way to escape regulation in China:
“There’s no big difference between CEXes and DEXes. All your behavior is

transparent to the state.” Usability was a key issue for many. For example, P11 did
not choose to use DEXes because she thought
the documentations were too
technical to follow for novice users. P13 valued the low transaction fee and usability
of CEXes, and did not view privacy as a priority, because his “personal information
was already given away when registering CEXes.” P10 chose CEXes because they
did not have the slippage mechanism as in DEXes, and prices were consistent at the
same time, thus would not cause financial losses to users.

DISCUSSION

With an interview study, we provided a holistic view of user experience and
security perception of cryptocurrency exchanges, especially CEXes, adding to the
existing literature on blockchain usability (Voskobojnikov et al. 2021; Jang et al.
2021). Further, we partially explain why CEXes are preferred over DEXes by
Chinese users. Generally, CEXes are valued by their good user experience,
learnability, and low transaction fee, yet suffer from heavy governmental regulation
(restricted internet access, prohibited C2C transaction), security vulnerabilities
(server breakdown, unreliable C2C transactions), and privacy leakage during the
KYC and C2C process. People’s privacy perceptions toward CEXes vary, but most
valued usability and low transaction fee more than privacy and decentralization.

Country-specific Mentality of Decentralization and Privacy

Trading decentralized cryptocurrency with centralized exchanges, which are
regulated, is a paradox, which intrinsically degrades the level of decentralization of
cryptocurrency. For example, Chinese users can only access CEXes with a VPN,
which is feasible for our participants who are relatively young and educated, but
may not be possible for the majority of people who are not able to bypass the Great
Firewall of China (Ensafi et al. 2015). Such a compromise of decentralization is
viewed as acceptable by many of our participants.

Country-specific mentalities toward (de)centralization and privacy are an interesting
phenomenon. Compared to findings in (Sas and Khairuddin, 2017), our participants
similarly favor reputation, ease of use, and low transaction fee of exchanges, but put
much less emphasis on decentralization and freedom from regulation. Many of the
participants from China regard sensitive information leakage, such as providing
phone number and ID card number during the KYC process, as less severe an issue,
because they have been used to this. They claim to have no choice but to give out
personal information, to use mobile applications. Another interesting opinion is that:
many think they cannot escape governmental regulation even if they turn to DEXes,
showing the perceived effectiveness of
the regulation system. Only a few
participants valued decentralization and privacy.

Implications for Design

Decentralization is the vision and ultimate goal of cryptocurrency, yet is hard to
achieve due to the cost of decentralization (gas fee), and the high barrier for novice
users to interact with the underlying blockchain. As a result, users incline to use
CEXes, which are perceived more usable and cheaper than DEXes.

Similar to the finding of (Jang et al. 2021), our participants also point out the
advantage of CEXes over DEXes regarding usability. CEXes are described as easy
to use, rich in educational resources, resembling stock exchanges, having intuitive
and familiar UI, etc. On the other hand, DEXes provide better privacy protection
and are regulation-free. Thus, it is a promising direction to combine usability of
CEXes and decentralization of DEXes, as insightfully put by P5. For example,
DEXes can be built with CEX-like UI, which embraces users’ habit in traditional
financial services such as stock exchanges.

High gas fee and transaction fee are main concerns of our participants for DEXes.
Some of them are not willing to “pay for decentralization” and indicate that they
would only turn to DEXes after the fees are lowered. One possible way to lower
transaction and gas fees is to build DEXes on Layer-2 blockchains (Stark, 2018),
which are solutions for the high gas fee and scalability issue of Ethereum.

While several participants see providing their personal information such as ID card
number as a way to recover their account, DEX designers could also think of
effective ways to recover seed phrases or private keys (Pal et al. 2021).

CONCLUSION

In this paper, we report results of an empirical study on user experience and security
perception of cryptocurrency exchanges. While all our participants mainly use
CEXes for cryptocurrency trading, we find that CEXes often provide better usability
and cheaper transaction fees than DEXes. In addition, many of these Chinese users
do not put an emphasis on their own privacy, and feel acceptable for their privacy to
be compromised when using CEXes heavily regulated by the government. Based on
these findings, we reflect on country-specific mentalities on privacy and
decentralization and propose design implications toward more decentralized
cryptocurrency. Future work could consider large-scale survey studies to understand
cross-cultural security/privacy perceptions of cryptocurrency exchange users.

REFERENCES

Abramova, S., Voskobojnikov, A., Beznosov, K. and Böhme, R., 2021, May. Bits
under the mattress: Understanding different risk perceptions and security

behaviors of crypto-asset users. In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 1-19).

Albayati, H., Kim, S.K. and Rho, J.J., 2021. A study on the use of cryptocurrency
wallets from a user experience perspective. Human Behavior and Emerging
Technologies, 3(5), pp.720-738.

Creemers, R., 2018. China's Social Credit System: an evolving practice of

control. Available at SSRN 3175792.

Ensafi, R., Winter, P., Mueen, A. and Crandall, J.R., 2015. Analyzing the Great

Firewall of China Over Space and Time. Proc. Priv. Enhancing
Technol., 2015(1), pp.61-76.

Gaggioli, A., Eskandari, S., Cipresso, P. and Lozza, E., 2019. The middleman is
dead, long live the middleman: the “trust factor” and the psycho-social
implications of blockchain. Frontiers in Blockchain, 2, p.20.

Gatteschi, V., Lamberti, F., Demartini, C., Pranteda, C. and Santamaría, V., 2018.
Blockchain and smart contracts for insurance: Is the technology mature
enough?. Future internet, 10(2), p.20.

Gibbs, G.R., 2007. Thematic coding and categorizing. Analyzing qualitative

data, 703, pp.38-56.

Jang, H., Han, S.H., Kim, J.H. and Kwon, K., 2020, December. Usability

Evaluation for Cryptocurrency Exchange. In Joint Conference of the Asian
Council on Ergonomics and Design and the Southeast Asian Network of
Ergonomics Societies (pp. 192-196). Springer, Cham.

Jin, S., 2020. Trust score explained. In CoinGecko.
Kim, C.Y. and Lee, K., 2018. Risk management to cryptocurrency exchange and

investors guidelines to prevent potential threats. In international conference on
platform technology and service (pp. 1-6). IEEE.

Marella, V., Kokabha, M.R., Merikivi, J. and Tuunainen, V., 2021. Rebuilding
Trust in Cryptocurrency Exchanges after Cyber-attacks. In HICSS.

Pal, O., Alam, B., Thakur, V. and Singh, S., 2021. Key management for blockchain

technology. ICT Express, 7(1), pp.76-80.

Sas, C. and Khairuddin, I.E., 2017, May. Design for trust: An exploration of the

challenges and opportunities of bitcoin users. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 6499-6510).

Sharma, T., Zhou, Z., Huang, Y. and Wang, Y., 2022. “It's A Blessing and A Curse”:
Unpacking Creators’ Practices with Non-Fungible Tokens (NFTs) and Their
Communities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.13233.

Stark, J., 2018. Making sense of ethereum’s layer 2 scaling solutions: State channels,

plasma, and truebit. Medium.

Voskobojnikov, A., Wiese, O., Mehrabi Koushki, M., Roth, V. and Beznosov, K.,
2021, May. The U in crypto stands for usable: An empirical study of user
experience with mobile cryptocurrency wallets. In Proceedings of the 2021
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 1-14).

