Telechain: Bridging Telecom Policy and Blockchain Practice

Sudheesh Singanamalla†,1,2, Apurv Mehra1, Nishanth Chandran1, Himanshi Lohchab3,
Seshanuradha Chava3, Asit Kadayan4, Sunil Bajpai4, Kurtis Heimerl2,
Richard Anderson2, Satya Lokam1

1 Microsoft Research India

2 University of Washington
4 Telecom Regulatory Authority of India, Government of India

3 Tanla Platforms Limited

2
2
0
2

y
a
M
4
2

]

Y
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
0
5
3
2
1
.
5
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

ABSTRACT
The use of blockchain in regulatory ecosystems is a promising
approach to address challenges of compliance among mutually un-
trusted entities. In this work, we consider applications of blockchain
technologies in telecom regulations. In particular, we address grow-
ing concerns around Unsolicited Commercial Communication (UCC
aka. spam) sent through text messages (SMS) and phone calls in In-
dia. Despite several regulatory measures taken to curb the menace
of spam it continues to be a nuisance to subscribers while posing
challenges to telecom operators and regulators alike.

In this paper, we present a consortium blockchain based ar-
chitecture to address the problem of UCC in India. Our solution
improves subscriber experiences, improves the efficiency of regula-
tory processes while also positively impacting all stakeholders in
the telecom ecosystem. Unlike previous approaches to the problem
of UCC, which are all ex-post, our approach to adherence to the
regulations is ex-ante. The proposal described in this paper is a
primary contributor to the revision of regulations concerning UCC
and spam by the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI). The
new regulations published in July 2018 were first of a kind in the
world and amended the 2010 Telecom Commercial Communication
Customer Preference Regulation (TCCCPR), through mandating the
use of a blockchain/distributed ledgers in addressing the UCC prob-
lem. In this paper, we provide a holistic account of of the projects’
evolution from (1) its design and strategy, to (2) regulatory and
policy action, (3) country wide implementation and deployment,
and (4) evaluation and impact of the work. While the scope of the
work presented in this paper is in the context of the UCC prob-
lem in India, we believe that the approach can be generalized to
adopt blockchain based solutions to improve regulatory processes
in other contexts and countries. We hope this account will serve as
a useful case study for the stakeholders of the telecommunications
ecosystem and regulators, and motivate countries across the world
facing similar challenges to consider the viability of the technology,
be convinced to establish it, continue efforts at addressing active
research challenges, and scale the technology from our experiences.

† Sudheesh Singanamalla was a Research Fellow at Microsoft Research India dur-
ing a significant part of this effort and continued it as a graduate student at the
University of Washington. Corresponding Authors: sudheesh@cs.washington.edu, sunil-
bajpai@gmail.com, satya@microsoft.com .

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
COMPASS ’22, June 29-July 1, 2022, Seattle, WA, USA
© 2022 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-9347-8/22/06.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3530190.3534820

CCS CONCEPTS
• Applied computing → Computing in government; • Social and
professional topics → Governmental regulations; Computing
/ technology policy.

ACM Reference Format:
Sudheesh Singanamalla†,1,2, Apurv Mehra1, Nishanth Chandran1, Himan-
shi Lohchab3,, Seshanuradha Chava3, Asit Kadayan4, Sunil Bajpai4, Kurtis
Heimerl2,, Richard Anderson2, Satya Lokam1 . 2022. Telechain: Bridging
Telecom Policy and Blockchain Practice. In ACM SIGCAS/SIGCHI Confer-
ence on Computing and Sustainable Societies (COMPASS) (COMPASS ’22),
June 29-July 1, 2022, Seattle, WA, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 20 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3530190.3534820

1 INTRODUCTION
Despite several efforts by telecom operators, Internet businesses, op-
erating system and application developers, regulators, the problem
of spam in communication networks (Internet and cellular) contin-
ues to be a global challenge. India has seen tremendous growth in
the telecom industry with more than a billion active subscribers
(1197.87 million) making it one of the largest wireless markets in the
world [9, 74]. The low costs for short message service (SMS) (0.085
INR/SMS for bulk advertisers or 0.001 USD/SMS [17]) and calls
has made it one of the most cost effective ways to reach potential
customers and sell services and products using telemarketing.

More than 30 billion SMSs are sent in India every month which
contributes a monthly gross revenue of approximately 2 billion
dollars for all the telecom operators in the country. There are 12639
legally active and authorized telemarketing organizations in India
with some large telemarketers sending up to a billion SMSs on
certain days. While the cost effectiveness of the scale has made
it easy for businesses to reach out to their target audience, tele-
marketing has brought with it a serious invasion of privacy and
has become a major irritant to mobile subscribers in addition to
possible frauds [59]. The issue is rampant across the world with the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC) in the United States
of America mentioning that more than half the calls received by
subscribers in 2019 are spam [28, 66]. Research efforts have shown
that the growth of legitimate bulk messaging traffic in the recent
years degraded the performance of spam detectors resulting in in-
creasing number of spam messages passing through the established
content based filters [61]. Prior research in Pakistan has indicated
the growing role of SMS messaging for financial inclusion but high-
lighted and attempted to address the growing concern of fraudulent
SMS [58]. A growing body of work has studied the role of security
in global development, and the various factors influencing security
and privacy of people in developing regions, while identifying the

 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPASS ’22, June 29-July 1, 2022, Seattle, WA, USA

Singanamalla et al.

important role that national and international policy could play in
influencing and improving the security practices [2, 83].

“The SMSs appear like regular text messages sent by banks. How-
ever, they are sent by fraudsters and contain a link which installs a
malware allowing access to the phone” - Cybercrime investigation
officer [59]

To curb the menace of Unsolicited Commercial Communica-
tion (UCC), the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI)
introduced a regulation in 2010 allowing mobile subscribers to
register themselves to a National Do Not Disturb (NDND) reg-
istry [13, 69]. The NDND registry behaves as a preference portal
where the subscribers can block all communication or selectively
block communication from a predefined set of seven preference
categories (Banking, Real estate, Education, Health etc..,). Currently,
the NDND registry, since its inception in 2010, holds preference in-
formation of more than 230 million subscribers who have exercised
their choice and opted out from receiving promotional content.
Additionally, the government mandated that each telecom service
provider (TSP)/carrier in the country implement a common proce-
dure for complaint registration and resolution in their networks.
So far, more than 2 million complaints have been registered which
resulted in the active block-list of 460000 numbers and disconnec-
tion of approximately 1.4 million phone numbers for violations
and instances of consumer courts levying fines on telecom service
providers [23].

Despite the introduction of monetary dis-incentives, preference
registration, and complaint resolution and tracking facilities by
TRAI there have been new efforts taken by violators to gather
phone numbers of potential subscribers from various data leaks in
the country [18, 19, 22], and reach customers using unauthorized
commercial communication channels without regard for the cus-
tomers’ preferences. The implementation of the NDND registry
came with its own set of challenges. The first involved all the tele-
com service providers to "sync" their operational databases with
the central database hosted by TRAI. This considerably slowed
down the process and resulted in a customer’s preference being
acknowledged and effective only seven days after the registration.
Additionally, complaint resolution processes currently take up to
seven days from their registration because of the heavy need for
collaboration among telecom service providers who are generally
reluctant to share subscriber information or telemarketer activity.
Motivated by the economic importance of telemarketing, keep-
ing in mind the problems faced by subscribers and the need to im-
prove collaboration, transparency, and accountability in the entire
process, this paper describes an architecture that uses consortium
blockchains to record customer preferences and extends it to cap-
turing subscriber consent. The solution tackles challenges around
data sharing between telecom service providers and processes to
improve operational efficiency of current business processes. These
suggestions have been incorporated in the latest release of the regu-
lations for unsolicited commercial communication in India by TRAI
in July 2018. In addition to detailing the design of the system, we
present the journey towards the realization of the design, its coun-
try wide deployment, and challenges faced. Finally, we evaluate
the success of the proposal with one year of real world data since
the usage of the implemented system from telecommunications
operations in India.

We make the following contributions: (1) detail key business
processes, operational practices, and challenges faced by the Indian
telecommunications ecosystem [§3], (2) engage with regulatory
bodies and stakeholders; design, propose [§4], and implement a
viable solution addressing performance, security, and privacy chal-
lenges with minimal operational impact [§5] resulting in the TC-
CCPR’18 regulatory amendment, (3) identify practical challenges
during deployment [§6], (4) evaluate the impact of the deployed
system [§7], (5) lay out practical challenges, and limitations of the
currently deployed system [§8], and (6) present a discussion [§9]
and detail potential future efforts [§10].

2 BACKGROUND & RELATED WORK
Previous efforts to tackle spam or forms of unsolicited communi-
cation fall under two categories, 1) regulatory initiatives taken by
the governments to manage spam and 2) technological initiatives
and tools built to handle and manage spam. Below, we look at these
initiatives & solutions proposed in the past.

2.1 Regulatory Initiatives
The first major regulatory initiative to curb spam was enacted by
the United States Congress as the Telephone Consumer Protection
Act of 1991 (TCPA 1991), and Telemarketing and Consumer Fraud
and Abuse Prevention Act (TCFAPA 1994) which regulate the use
of automatic dialers, robocalls (prerecorded calls) & introduces the
national do not call lists [65]. Additionally the TCPA’91 mandates
that written consent be taken from the customers and that the
customer can only be reached out to if they meet a strict opt-in
requirement. This meant that the customers are by default opted
out of any commercial communication until an explicit consent is
provided. Different states in the United States have laws that affect
SMS messaging and sales communication which on violation result
in serious fines.

In Europe, the Privacy and Electronic Communications Direc-
tive 2002 known as the ePrivacy Directive (ePD) established an
opt-in approach where any commercial email can only be sent to
an individual with a prior agreement or consent [12]. In the United
States, the CAN-SPAM Act of 2003 mandates that all commercial
messages sent to a cell phone need to be disclosed as an adver-
tisement and must provide a way to opt-out from receiving future
messages while ensuring that they comply with the national do
not call list [81]. Similarly, in the United Kingdom, Schedule 2 of
the Data Protection Act of 1998 introduces mandatory opt-in for
any commercial communication and allows consumers to sue for
compensation for receiving spam messages [54].

Compared to the CAN-SPAM act, TCPA, and TCFAPA in the
United States aimed towards email and spam in telecommunica-
tion networks, EU General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), and
Canada’s Anti Spam Law (CASL) include laws with much heavier
monetary penalties ranging between 1 million dollars (CASL) per
violation to 22 million dollars (20 Million EUR). Despite the long
term existence of spam prevention regulations, it has only been re-
cent for businesses in the telecom industry to face extremely heavy
penalties. The EU GDPR, since its adoption, has penalized telecom-
munications operators with 69 penalties across different countries

Telechain: Bridging Telecom Policy and Blockchain Practice

COMPASS ’22, June 29-July 1, 2022, Seattle, WA, USA

in the EU with companies like Telecom Italia and Vodafone Italia
facing the largest fines totaling over 30 Million EUR [41, 42, 57].

each sender using the settings without the need for any third party
applications [3].

The first regulation to tackle unsolicited commercial communica-
tion in India was released in 2007 introducing the implementation
of the national do not call/disturb (DND) register [13], mandating
every telemarketer to respect the preference of the subscribers and
introducing a mobile identifier code for telemarketers [70]. As a de-
fault setting all subscribers were opted in to receiving commercial
communication unless explicitly opted out by adding their infor-
mation to the DND register. The regulation also mandated the reg-
istration of telemarketers and introduced monetary dis-incentives
to curb the problem of spam in the country.

Current regulations mandated worldwide only provided eco-
nomic dis-incentives for the telemarketers and resulted in banning
telemarketers for continued violations [33]. These acts and regula-
tions have been criticized for increasing the amount of spam by hav-
ing merely provided guidelines for spammers to spam legally [46,
68]. The CAN-SPAM Act was poorly enforced and the economic
dis-incentives were not strong enough a deterrent for spammers
resulting in increasing email spam [33]. For example, in India and
many other countries, violators gamed the system of consent by
using fine-print on raffle or lucky draw coupons and additionally
used leaked phone numbers from databases. Another reason for
higher levels of spam could be the default “opt-in” approach taken
for advertising in India compared to the default “opt-out” in Eu-
rope and the US. However, the voice call based spam continues to
be a global nuisance. This brings in a need for a system that can
capture unique consents and map the consent of the customer with
the required business entity while ensuring the ability to revoke
them as needed. Suggestions were made to revise the act to include
long prison sentences [30]. In a response to similar regulations in
Malaysia, researchers have prescribed self-help, opt-in & opt-out as
strategies to address the spam problem which are now adopted by
various governments as do not call lists & mandatory requirement
of consent [29]. However, our experience presented in this paper
supports the statement by prior research efforts that legislation
alone will not be able to eliminate spam [46].

2.2 Technological Initiatives
There are a variety of mobile apps available for smartphones which
help manage and filter spam from the SMS inbox [44, 78]. Many of
these systems use rule based filters which categorize the message
based on their promotional nature of text and flag them for review
by the user. The usage of mobile identifier codes for telemarketers
ensures that the promotional messages can be filtered by using
a rule based approach. Other approaches like SMSAssassin use a
combination of crowd-sourcing and bayesian learning which can
be trained over time to identify spam [87].

Additionally there are many third party applications on the
Google play store for android which allow users to maintain block-
lists and ban specific SMS senders. Narayan et al. studied the top
twelve SMS spam filtering apps and conclude that most of these apps
are ineffective and propose a new 2 level stacked classifier approach
to detect and classify spam [47]. Apple’s default SMS application
(iMessage) and Google messages both provide the option to block

Previous work by Jiang et al. tries to analyze SMS spam in large
cellular networks and indicate spatial correlations using text clus-
tering tools over reported spam SMS data [25]. Similarly other tech-
niques focus on identifying SMS spam during possibly legitimate
bulk messaging by senders [61]. Systems like Greystar leverage
the fact that SMS spammers target random phone numbers and
employ statistical models based on their footprints through a grey
space (e.g. data only numbers) essentially behaving as honeypots
to detect spammers and block them out of the networks [24]. Such
systems have been implemented and used by the telecom operators
in India to detect and fine violators using a random set of regularly
changing honeypot phone numbers.

Unfortunately, none of the existing technology solutions by
themselves have been effective in completely curbing spam. As
long as the cost of sending an SMS remains low, there is huge mo-
tivation from the spammer to get around the filters and find new
ways to continue to reach the consumer. To avoid such a problem,
in this paper we propose a proactive approach to prevent spam by
bringing together infrastructures to record consent, and preferences
of the customer, rather than reactive approaches to spam taken by
default messaging applications today. The technological approaches
described address the “user end”, or target a specific stakeholder of
the ecosystem, in an effort to solve the problem of spam but does
not address the overall challenge it poses at the ecosystem level.
In our work, we attempt to address the challenges throughout the
ecosystem with existing individual solutions complementing our
efforts.

2.3 Use of Blockchain in Government
A blockchain allows a set of participants to create a shared and
tamper resistant ledger of transactions that are validated by a con-
sensus mechanism among them. Such a network decentralizes trust
among mutually untrusting participants by creating transparency
and accountability through collective verifiability [56]. A permis-
sioned blockchain is one in which the write privileges are granted
to a consortium of entities. These entities govern the policies of the
blockchain and are responsible to propagate and verify transactions
in a network. Such a blockchain could have a public read privilege or
maybe granted only to auditing agencies. Hyperledger Fabric [1] &
Ethereum consortium [15, 86] are some popular blockchain frame-
works that enable creation of consortium blockchains.

Smart contracts are protocols which make contractual clauses
partially or fully self executing and self enforceable. Governments
have begun to experiment with blockchain for the various strategic,
organizational, economic, informational and technological benefits
it brings [51, 56]. For example storing land records in distributed
ledgers prevents manipulation and reduces corruption [32]. The
government of Estonia, has implemented an X-Road system using
blockchain transparently and easily allowing citizens to access their
data and control data access [76].

To effectively leverage the advantages of blockchains they need
to be guided by governance. In this paper, we describe an approach
where the regulatory bodies embraced blockchain as a technology
to combat the problem of unsolicited commercial communication

COMPASS ’22, June 29-July 1, 2022, Seattle, WA, USA

Singanamalla et al.

but eventually saw possibilities to govern other areas with the same
technology.

We believe that UCC has unfortunately acquired a negative con-
notation as spam but instead can be viewed as a problem of bridg-
ing the divergence between ex-ante expectations of regulators and
telemarketers and the ex-post perceptions by the recipients (sub-
scribers). Spam is therefore very subjective since its a nuisance
for those who explicitly choose to exercise their option to not be
disturbed but could also take shape of graySMS. GraySMS, like
graymail is a situation where an originally interested consumer
who opted into receiving the messages, eventually is no longer
interested and marks the same message as spam.

3 UNDERSTANDING OPERATIONAL
PRACTICES IN INDIAN TELECOM
INDUSTRY

India is the world’s second largest telecommunications market with
over a Billion active subscribers and has the lowest call, message,
and Internet data pricing in the world enabled by nation scale hyper-
giant telecom operators. In this section, we present the detailed
view of the telecom ecosystem prior to our intervention, and the
operational practices put in place then for addressing the challenges
of UCC.

3.1 Stakeholders in the Telecom Ecosystem
The telecom ecosystem essentially comprises of the following enti-
ties:

(1) Telecom operators are telecom service providers who provide

telephony and access to data services.

(2) Telemarketers are marketing agencies or personnel who so-
licit customers through phone calls, SMSs & auto-dialers
either directly or on behalf of an organization which shares
their (potential) customer details with the telemarketing
organization.

(3) Principal entities are organizations which generate content
and leverage telemarketers to reach out to potential cus-
tomers. These are businesses which use telecommunication
services to interact with subscribers.

(4) Subscribers are the mobile consumers who use the network
services provided by telecom operators and are potential
customers to the principal entities.

(5) Regulatory authorities are typically government entities that
make policies and enforce incentive structures that ensure
fairness among participants.

3.2 History of Regulatory Amendments to

UCC in India

Since the effect of the Telecom Commercial Communications Cus-
tomer Preference Regulations (TCCCPR) in 2010, TRAI in the 6th
amendment introduced a SMS header format (AB-XXXXXX) where
AB corresponds to the telecom provider and region and XXXXXX
corresponds to the alpha numeric code for the business entity send-
ing the promotional SMS. The amendment to the regulation clearly
defined promotional & transactional messages in addition to demar-
cating special phone number sequences which begin with +91-140

for telemarketers to use during promotional phone calls [71]. A
promotional SMS is used to send offers, discounts or promotions
to new or existing customers which may have not been solicited
by the recipients and can only be sent between 9AM and 9PM. A
transactional SMS is used to send one time passwords, informa-
tional messages, booking information or order alerts to registered
customers and should not be intended for marketing.

The 2010 regulatory mandate also involved an online registration
process for telemarketers starting 15th January 2011 by paying 1000
INR (approx. 13.5 USD), and 9000 INR (approx. 120 USD) as customer
education fee. Once validated, the telemarketers are immediately
assigned a telemarketer ID, and issued a registration certificate for
beginning operations [50]. Malicious telemarketers found ways to
register small fraudulent entities and paid the low registration cost
of 10000 INR (approx. 133.5 USD) to access and obtain numbers from
the national registry. The malicious telemarketers then use personal
phone numbers to send promotional SMS content mimicking the
standard peer to peer (P2P) messages which are treated differently
than business messages (Note that business messages or bulk ads
are 8 times more expensive than P2P SMS). These operations are
extremely hard to detect without privacy invasive checks on all
customer communications and the telecom operators therefore re-
sort to reactive approaches such as investigation procedures when
affected subscribers file complaints with the operator or with the
regulatory body. These telemarketers are classified as unregistered
telemarketers. In response to increasing cases of fraud and telemar-
keting from unregistered telemarketers, TRAI capped the number
of SMSs that can be sent in a day to 100 per day and limited to 3000
per month for mobile subscribers which was later amended to 200
per day. In the 10th amendment of the regulation, TRAI mandated
the usage of signature solutions by telecom operators to detect bulk
messages having similar string or their variants, specifically those
without any specific information of the subscriber. Additional im-
provements in the amendment included guidelines for block-listing
or throttling specific numbers, introducing higher tariffs for bulk
messaging, and a web based complaint registration system. In the
13th amendment, the regulation introduced financial disincentives
to telecom operators and telemarketers for complaints registered
about violations of users’ preferences and increased the security
deposit needed to be made by the telemarketers to be registered.
A recent summary by Tu et al. identifies the various techniques
currently in use to curb UCC due to robocalls in the United States
and similar systems implemented and adopted across the world by
various telecom operators [79].

Despite incessant measures taken to mandate the use of the
NDND registry and regulating the usage of specific number series
and SMS header, customer dis-satisfaction continued, indicating
the increasing challenges faced by the ecosystem, hinting towards
the possible need for revising the regulatory framework.

3.3 Regulatory Processes and Authors

Engagement

The main responsibility of the regulators at Telecom Regulatory
Authority of India (TRAI) is to help market function. The regulatory
change process starts with the initiation of an open consultation to
address an identified problem in areas over which the regulators

Telechain: Bridging Telecom Policy and Blockchain Practice

COMPASS ’22, June 29-July 1, 2022, Seattle, WA, USA

have jurisdiction. The problems are identified through stakeholder
feedback, audits, complaints, and active efforts at problem identifi-
cation. The process starts with a clear presentation of the problem
and defines specific issues on which the authority democratically
invites comments from the public.

The responses could be made by stakeholders mentioned in
§3.1 including active engagement from organizations providing
services to the stakeholders, and individual citizens. The responses
obtained are openly published in the first stage and an opportunity
is given for anyone to submit counter comments. Thereafter, the
authority almost invariably chooses to hold one or more open house
discussions to hear all points of view in person. The inputs received
are summarised, and considered while deciding upon the nature
of intervention. This may be a regulation, a recommendation to
the government, a direction to the licensees, or a combination of
these measures [72, 73, 75]. The regulations are accompanied by an
explanatory memorandum that sets out the reasoning behind the
rules.

The authors in this work engaged with TRAI’s initial call for con-
sultation to evaluate the potential feasibility, need, and analyzing
the impact of blockchain technologies in the formulated problem
setting of spam. These collaborations continued in the public pro-
cess where inputs were obtained from various stakeholders during
the multiple rounds of public comments (and counter comments),
and open house events, with the pilot solutions and their feasibility
demonstrated publicly [4, 5, 7, 8, 10, 11, 16, 20, 21, 27, 31, 34, 35,
39, 40, 55, 60, 62–64, 82, 84, 85]. The draft regulation for TCCCPR
2018 was published and invited for a second round of consulta-
tion after which some changes were made based on stakeholder
input resulting in the updated version of the regulation and an
explanatory memorandum was issued addressing the concerns of
the stakeholders.

3.4 Current Workflows
The telecom ecosystem comprises of back and forth communica-
tion between the various stakeholders. Principal entities (e.g. online
shopping platforms, ride hailing services, restaurants etc..,) partner
with a telemarketer with whose help they create a promotional
campaign. The telemarketer is responsible for the registration of a
sender ID for the principal entity which is used in the header format
that is displayed to the recipient on their mobile device. Sender
IDs allow principal entities to set a recognizable name which helps
recipients recognize the brand instantly. Sender IDs/Headers which
are equivalent to the domain names in the SMS world need to be
registered by the partnering telemarketer who would be running
a promotional campaign on the principal entity’s behalf. TRAI
regulations mandate that the SMS headers for business entities in
the countries be of 9 alpha numeric characters of the format AB-
XXXXXX where A corresponds to the letter assigned to the telecom
operator, B corresponds to the telecom operators’ regional circle
followed by a - (hyphen). It is mandatory to register a 6 character
alpha numeric SMS header. While similar to Internet domain-name
registrations, the current process for header registration involves
verification of the documentation of the business entity and regis-
tering a unique header ID for the same. These registrations need to
be shared across all telecom operators and resulted in operational

Figure 1: Current Interactions between Principal Entities,
Telemarketers, and Telecom operators

latencies of a few days before the registered header was assigned
and made usable to the business entity.

Today, The principal entity provides the telemarketer with a list
of phone numbers who are the target of the promotion either as a
file or via an API provided by the telemarketer. The telemarketer
then removes the numbers registered with the DND service from
the original list in a process known as scrubbing and proceeds
to send the final list and promotional message to the a partner
telecom operator to be sent under a specific sender ID or a generic
sender ID for promotional SMSs registered to the telemarketer. The
telecom operator who receives the task, known as the Originating
Service Provider (OSP), further splits the list provided into regional
circles based on the registration of the phone numbers and delegates
the task of sending the SMS to the telecom operator at a given
circle, known as the Terminating Service Provider (TSP), who then
sends the required promotional SMS. The TSPs optionally scrub the
phone numbers again before sending the SMS. We present these
interactions in Figure 1.

To register or update preferences, a subscriber logs into a cen-
tralized web based portal provided by TRAI or a portal provided
by their respective telecom operators. In the current system, the
preferences are sent daily as an update from each telecom operator
to the national do not disturb registry. The registry updates are
then periodically synced by the respective telecom operators and
the telemarketers. The existing system takes more than 24 hours to
register the preferences of the user and requires up to seven days
to enforce the revised preferences at the TSPs [74].

A complaint can be registered for an unsolicited commercial
communication by a mobile subscriber using the mobile apps pro-
vided by TRAI or via their respective telecom operators’ web, IVR
or SMS based systems. Once a complaint is registered by the sub-
scriber, the TSP verifies the registration status of the complainant in
the National DND registry and compares the information provided
using semi-automated procedures in the logs to identify the OSP,
and telemarketer who have initiated the process. The parties in-
volved along with TRAI verify the complaint and present required
proofs of SMS being sent and the content in a specific promotion.
On confirmation of UCC, the telecom operator and the telemarketer
are levied fines. The total turn around time for a complaint to be
addressed in the current process is close to 7 working days and
involves heavy coordination between the telemarketer, and the tele-
com service providers (TSPs, OSPs) involved in SMS message flow.
The problem further intensifies due to customer data privacy and

Scrub and Send List of phone numbers and message content, sender IDTelemarketerSend  Phone Numbers and messagePrincipal EntityPeriodic SyncNDNDValidate and  send messagesDelivery noticesTelecomOperatorCOMPASS ’22, June 29-July 1, 2022, Seattle, WA, USA

Singanamalla et al.

can only be addressed by nodal officers of the respective telecom
operators from each circle.

3.5 Challenges with Current Workflows
The problem of UCC has continuously been a challenge for regula-
tors, mobile subscribers and telecom operators alike. The National
DND registry which consists of all the phone numbers of the cus-
tomers and their corresponding preferences is stored in plain text
and can be accessed by all registered telemarketers who create
periodic local copies for scrubbing purposes. TRAI amended the
UCC regulations in India and moved from a binary mode of setting
customer preferences i.e. full block of promotional content, and no
restrictions on promotional content, to enabling partial blocks. Using
the partial block features, the subscriber can partially block content
from seven predefined set of categories which are as follows: 1)
Banking, insurance & financial products, 2) Real estate, 3) Education,
4) Health, 5) Consumer goods & automobiles, 6) Communication,
broadcasting & entertainment & 7) Tourism. The introduction of
this resulted in the need for telemarketers to classify the principal
entities under one or more of the respective categories. Mobile sub-
scribers blocking a specific category due to the UCC generated by a
specific principal entity also end up blocking principal entities who
they would have otherwise been interested in. This opens up a need
for nesting the categories to multiple levels of sub-categorization.
A major problem for unsolicited commercial communication
is due to possible collusion between malicious and unregistered
telemarketers. The availability of all phone numbers for a small
registration fee and security deposit to TRAI allows malicious tele-
marketers to leak phone numbers and collude with unregistered
telemarketers or entities to violate the guidelines set of telemarket-
ing and send out SMS or make calls from phone numbers which are
registered for personal use. Therefore there is a need for storing the
numbers in the DND registry in a privacy preserving format which
the telemarketers can then scrub their phone number lists across
the DND service protecting user privacy, instead of periodically
downloading the data present in the NDND registry for scrubbing.
The current registration of the SMS headers/sender IDs for the
principal entities opens up tremendous opportunities to spoof cus-
tomers with sender IDs which sound and look very similar. For
example, a leading bank in India, the State Bank of India (SBI) might
be registered as STABAN. However, another malicious entity under
the name of SBI Banquets can register themselves as SBIBAN and
send out fraudulent SMSs posing as the bank. Additionally, many
principal entities might not have a 6 character name for e.g. Ola,
Uber (popular ride sharing services) which makes telemarketers
register them with additional characters such as OLACAB, UBERCA.
Similar issues exist with principal entities whose names are much
longer and cannot be abbreviated to six characters. Many of the
large organizations in India have multiple businesses in different
sectors which makes it hard to establish a brand identity with a
flexibility of six characters. Additionally business entities use mul-
tiple telemarketers and SMS gateway APIs as a fallback in case of
failure thereby making it hard for the user to associate the mes-
sage with the brand. For example, SMSs from the bank stated above
might be received on the subscribers’ mobile phone as VM-STABAN,
AD-STABAN etc.., which appear under different SMS inboxes for

the mobile subscriber making it difficult to keep track of all the
SMSs from a specific principal entity in a common place. These
challenges provide us with an opportunity to implement national
header registration features similar to domain name systems and
their registrations for the web [45]. Being able to track and ver-
ify the message flows between principal entities, telemarketers,
and telecom partners, it becomes possible to enable mobile sub-
scribers to efficiently manage their SMS inboxes through improved
flexibility in display of the sender ID.

The current processes for a subscriber to register their prefer-
ences and for them to come into effect can take up to seven working
days due to synchronization delays. Similarly, a registered com-
plaint can take up to 7 days to be resolved and needs to be resolved
manually in most cases with extensive collaboration between the
different telemarketers, telecom operators, and subscribers. This
opens up the need to simplify the operations and automate the way
in which data is shared and used by the respective stakeholders.
During complaint resolution it also becomes very difficult for the
principal entities and telemarketers to prove acquisition of con-
sent. In many cases these proofs are presented as paper documents,
screenshots with insufficient information or database entries made
across a subscribers’ record with no way to verify the validity of
the claim. This brings in a need for a verifiable and digital way
of acquiring, storing and using consent from the customers while
giving the customers an accessible way to revoke it.

Since the introduction of the complaint registration procedure
over 2 million complaints have been registered by consumers with
an average of 40000 per month. As a result, telecom services to
more than 1.4 million phone numbers have been disconnected
and 460000 numbers have been blocked so far. Despite so many
disconnections, levy of huge fines and blocklists of unregistered
telemarketers & violators, the UCC problem is still not fully under
control. Motivated by these challenges (summarized in Table 1), we
propose a blockchain based solution aimed at addressing various
privacy, security, and operational challenges.

3.6 Design Goals
With the understanding of the current workflows in the telecom
ecosystem described in §3.4 and the various challenges they pose
described in §3.5, we outline below the design goals, summarized
by the grouped categories shown in Table 1. We set out to achieve
our goals with the proposed solution in §4.

(1) Real time or Near Real time operations: Subscribers, and
principal entities both face significant challenges due to the
long operational times involved in critical operations. Sub-
scribers face lengthy times for the registration of their pref-
erences (1-7 days), and for them to take effect. This is due to
synchronization challenges between the telecom operators,
and the TRAI operated NDND preference registry. Principal
entities face similar challenges with the registration of head-
ers to send promotional messages. We aim to reduce these
multi-day latencies to real time, or near-real time latencies
when operating at scale.

(2) Improving Security and Privacy: Telemarketers and tele-
com operators periodically obtain the plain text information
of subscribers in the NDND registry and their preferences

Telechain: Bridging Telecom Policy and Blockchain Practice

COMPASS ’22, June 29-July 1, 2022, Seattle, WA, USA

Table 1: Challenges faced by different stakeholders grouped by design goals and deployment status.
(

: Completely deployed,

: Partial deployment)

(cid:71)(cid:35)

Challenges

Subscribers
Subscribers
Telemarketers
Operators & Telemarketers Quick update and maintenance of user preferences
Operators

Lengthy time for preference registration to take effect. (7 days)
Lengthy time for complaint resolution. (7-14 days)
Ensuring the usage of the latest data for scrubbing phone numbers

Coordination with telemarketers

Unavailability of fine grained control of preferences
Registration of longer/shorter SMS Header/Sender ID
Brand identification irrespective of mediating links

Avoiding usage of plain text phone number sharing
Ensuring data privacy and protecting consumer data
Prevent access of phone number data by unregistered telemarketers
Prevent unregistered telemarketers from sending promotional SMS/calls
Protection from spoofing attacks due to similar sounding sender IDs

Validating complaint registrations & root cause analysis
Avoiding inbox clutter due to multiple sender IDs
Consent request & acquisition is unverifiable

Addressed by

[§4.1.1, §4.1.7]
[§4.1.1, §4.1.7]
[§4.1.1, §4.1.3, §4.1.7]
[§4.1.1, §4.1.7]
[§4.1.1, §4.1.3, §4.1.7]

[§4.1.5]
[§4.1.1, §4.1.7]
[§4.1.1, §4.1.4, §4.1.6]

(cid:32)
(cid:71)(cid:35)
(cid:32)
(cid:32)
(cid:32)

(cid:71)(cid:35)
(cid:71)(cid:35)
(cid:32)

[§4.1.2]
[§4.1.2, §4.1.3]
[§4.1.2]
[§4.1.8]
[§4.1.1, §4.1.7]

(cid:32)
(cid:32)
(cid:71)(cid:35)
(cid:71)(cid:35)
(cid:32)

[§4.1.1, §4.1.4, §4.1.7]
[§4.1.8]
[§4.1.1, §4.1.4, §4.1.6, §4.1.7]

(cid:71)(cid:35)
(cid:71)(cid:35)
(cid:71)(cid:35)

Stakeholder

Subscribers
Principal entities
Principal entities

(cid:32)
#
Real time
R1
R2
R3
R4
R5
Flexibility
F1
F2
F3
Security & Privacy
Telemarketers
S1
Operators
S2
Subscribers
S3
Operators
S4
S5
Principal entities
Automation & Usability
A1 Operators
A2
A3 Auditors & Regulators

Subscribers

for promotions. Malicious telemarketers obtain the informa-
tion of these subscribers and use personal devices to perform
telemarketing operations. We aim to prevent the usage, and
sharing of plaintext phone numbers, and prevent risks from
malicious attackers compromising and leaking the subscriber
phone numbers, and preferences in the NDND registry.
(3) Improved Compliance and Flexibility: Subscribers reg-
ister complaints for UCC through various means such as
through the official mobile app managed by TRAI [48, 49],
with the telecom operator providing them the services through
a web portal, IVR, customer complaint ticket. The registered
complaints are usually addressed within 7-14 working days.
We aim to reduce these latencies, improve the compliance of
telemarketers to adhere to subscriber preferences. Successful
intervention of the proposed system would result in a re-
duced number of complaints from registered telemarketers.
We aim to design the solution to be easily extensible allow-
ing future fine grained preferences for customers, improved
header registrations, and protect brand reputation through
fraud prevention.

4 PROPOSED SOLUTION - TELECHAIN
The most common approach today in India, and other countries,
to the problem of UCC, is to investigate spam after a violation is
detected or a complaint is filed by the subscriber. In contrast, our
solution helps establish ex-ante compliance for each message or
call sent to the mobile subscriber – thus effectively ensuring that all
the promotional messages sent to a particular user are consistent
with preferences and recorded consent of that user.

Our choice of a consortium blockchain in the design of Telechain
is motivated by our goals described in §3.6 to have secure and

near real time exchange of data between the various stakeholders.
In addition, the pro-active approach to policy enforcement and
transparency based on collective verifiability and smart contracts
enabled by blockchain makes it a compelling design choice.

4.1 Components of the proposed system
4.1.1 Blockchain network. A consortium blockchain network
is created between the participating entities i.e. telemarketers con-
tributing physical nodes in the blockchain, telecom operators, third
party service providers and a regulatory authority. Any update of
the customers’ preferences in the NDND registry via the mobile
app, web portal or via telecom operators customer care systems
(described in §4.1.8) is encoded as a transaction in the system. Each
one of the participants in the network maintains a copy of the
blockchain state including the DND register which gets updated in
the servers of the participating entities thus making each update
of preferences by the subscribers near-real time and reduces the
time from almost seven days to a matter of minutes. The usage of
blockchains and establishing the network addresses the current
latency challenges and issues due of data staleness (R1-R5), im-
proves policy adherence by ensuring strong accountability and
transparency addressing the S5, A1, A3 challenges, facilitates the
necessary registrations of headers, templates, and consent (F2, F3)
presented in Table 1.

Improving privacy of NDND Registry. To improve pri-
4.1.2
vacy and security, subscriber information shared on the chain is
always hashed and cryptographically signed by the respective nodes
originating the update. The use of blockchain changes the mainte-
nance of the DND registry from a centralized setting to a decentral-
ized and replicated setting. While standard access control measures

COMPASS ’22, June 29-July 1, 2022, Seattle, WA, USA

Singanamalla et al.

prevent leakage of information to unauthorized telemarketers, the
existence of hashed information prevents a malicious telemarketer
from leaking actual phone numbers to an unregistered telemarketer
who carries out advertising through personal cellular devices or a
telecom operator poaching subscribers addressing the challenges
S1, S2, and S3, presented in Table 1. Each number present in the
DND registry is mapped to the name of the telecom operator and
relevant metadata.

While this approach allows large telemarketers to make their
operations more efficient in sending promotional SMS, it makes
it harder for smaller telemarketers who cannot afford to dedicate
a server on their behalf to participate in the network. Previously,
smaller telemarketers filtered the list of customers from the do not
disturb registry by downloading the entire data of the registry and
possibly manually checking the customer preferences for each pro-
motional campaign. However, this approach would no longer work
with the new solution since the hashed information provided to
the telemarketers is not usable with their current operations. To re-
solve this problem, we introduce scrubbing nodes on the blockchain
network providing scrubbing services for a minimal fee. Larger tele-
marketers, telecom operators and infrastructure operators provide
scrubbing services to smaller telemarketers.

4.1.3 Scrubbing Nodes. The scrubbing nodes have read only
privileges to the blockchain network and are responsible for pro-
viding scrubbing services for a small fee. The result of the scrub-
bing would be a token that’s furnished to the telemarketer and
the proposal of a transaction to the blockchain while following a
specification that’s agreed upon by the participants in the network.
The telemarketer can submit this token along with the promotional
SMS, registered header, and template IDs, directly to the telecom op-
erator who can retrieve the scrubbed file and send the promotional
SMSs to the list of valid subscribers. The design decision to return a
token instead of the scrubbed result 𝑆 = L−C, where L corresponds
to the set of subscriber identities and C corresponds to the set of
subscribers in the NDND registry, is intentional to prevent probing
attacks where telemarketers aim to identify subscriber preferences
by sending one request at a time. The scrubbed result at its sim-
plest binary preference level is represented by the set difference 𝑆.
The scrubbing nodes coupled with the blockchain network ensure
the recency of the data being operated upon, easy interoperability
with existing telecom operators, prevent unauthorized access to
the subscribers’ consent and preferences and protects their privacy
addressing the challenges R3, R5, and S2, presented in Table 1.

4.1.4 Header & Content Template Registry. The blockchain
network handles the registration of headers (sender IDs) and main-
tains the ownership mapping between the principal entities and the
headers registered by the entity. The telemarketer operating the
promotional campaign on behalf of a principal entity is required
to register the content of the message(s) used as a part of the cam-
paign. The content registration is also allowed on the system as
templates which are message strings that have placeholders and
can be replaced by specific information related to the subscriber
when the SMS is sent. Here is a sample content template.

“Dear <%..%> Head to the nearest <%..%> store and avail a flat

<%..%>% off using coupon code <%..%>.”

The registration of headers and templates by the principal en-
tities however need manual verification by the telecom operators
for business compliance. Once verified and registered into the
blockchain, it provides principal entities ownership of their brand
header and verification to operators and telemarketers after the
correct scrubbing process about the correctness of the message
delivery addressing F3, enabling easier complaint tracking (A1),
and establishing auditability of the actions (A3).

4.1.5 Preference Registry. A challenge in the existing system
was the long duration needed for a customer preference to take
effect. With the introduction of the blockchain, a mobile subscriber
can login via their respective telecom operators self-help portals or
the mobile apps to update their preferences and either block/unblock
specific promotional categories and sub-categories. The changes
are proposed as a transaction by the telecom operator, or TRAI
enabling the dashboards after successful user authentication. The
transaction on successful validation is used to update the database
records of each of the participants with the new preference infor-
mation set by the customer effectively reducing the time needed
for the preferences to be in effect improve from seven days to a few
minutes. Additionally, the flexibility of the scrubbing services and
its integration into the blockchain enables the preference registry
to support fine grained preferences addressing the challenge F1,
and enabling fine grained preference control.

4.1.6 Consent Registration & Acquisition. To overcome the
problem of unsolicited commercial communication by telemar-
keters to potential customers, it becomes highly important to have
an electronic registration of consent of the customer. This process is
made in two independent phases, the first phase involves the regis-
tration of a consent template by the principal entities which maps it
to their registered headers. The registered message will contain the
link to privacy policy, terms and conditions, message frequency and
request the customer for approval before being contacted for any
promotional purposes. The second phase is the consent acquisition
phase where the registered consent template is sent over SMS to
the mobile subscriber along with a one time password or a custom
web link. The subscriber can read the conditions and choose to
either provide the principal entity with the OTP or click on the
link and go through the necessary steps to provide consent to the
principal entity. This provides a digital trail of actions (addressing
A3) and SMS interactions that resulted in the verifiable informed
consent being acquired by the principal entity (addressing F3) for
their customers.

“Thank you for shopping with <%..%>. Please click on the following
<%link%> if you’d like to receive updates regarding offers & promo-
tions. Terms & privacy can be found here. You may receive up to 4
sms/month. Your consent OTP: <%..%>” - sample consent template.
While consent reflects on an explicit preference, the exercise
of preferences does not imply consent. For example, a subscriber
consenting to receive promotional offers from a restaurant is only
restricted to that specific restaurant and not to the overall prefer-
ence for receiving promotional offers from any restaurant.

4.1.7 Smart contracts & agreements. Smart contracts are pro-
grammatic expressions of business workflow conditions which help
in pro-active policy enforcement without the need for a third party.

Telechain: Bridging Telecom Policy and Blockchain Practice

COMPASS ’22, June 29-July 1, 2022, Seattle, WA, USA

The developed contracts are audited by the participants of the net-
work and across a correctness test suite which implements the
various conditions described above such as the header, content &
consent registrations, scrubbing requests and are validated by the
participants of the network. These are programmatic encoding of
business logic which are critical and facilitate the operations on the
blockchain network.

4.1.8 End user applications. Each of the participating nodes
(telecom operators, telemarketers, scrubbing nodes) in the blockchain
network expose interfaces for their existing business processing sys-
tems to interact with the blockchain infrastructure. These include
web portals, mobile apps, Unstructured Supplementary Service Data
(USSD), and SMS services provided by telecom operators where
a mobile subscriber can register complaints, update preferences,
and in addition can see a detailed list of consents provided by the
customer. Similarly, there are supporting applications provided for
smaller telemarketers where the promotion campaign can be regis-
tered on behalf of a principal entity which allows the telemarketers
to obtain a token to be furnished to the telecom operator in addition
to also providing them an easy way to request a telecom operator to
run the promotional campaign. End user applications such as mes-
saging apps can continue to implement local spam and aggregation
filters to avoid inbox clutter addressing A2 while applications like
TrueCaller installed on client mobile devices can block unregistered
telemarketer SMS and calls.

Figure 2: Figure showing the new workflow among stake-
holders involving generation of a scrubbing token and the
usage of scrubbing services. The solid red lines indicate the
scrubbing service workflow. The scrubbing operations can
be performed through any registered blockchain participant
providing the scrubbing services. The solid blue lines indi-
cate the post-scrubbing workflow which is modified from
the workflow presented in Figure 1 for final message deliv-
ery.

4.2 Decentralized Workflows
Keeping in mind the business workflows detailed in §3.4, and the
desire to create minimal disruptions to existing business processes,
we design a new decentralized workflow leveraging the components
presented in §4.1 to tackle the challenges summarized in Table 1
and §3.5. The registration / on-boarding of each of the components
involved in the workflows are as follows:

4.2.1 Telemarketer Registration. Telemarketers register with
TRAI using the existing application process, pay the required one

time fee and a security deposit after which they receive a telemar-
keter ID. The telemarketer ID along with the payment information
is stored in a database provided by TRAI to which the read-only
credentials are shared over the network. Telemarketers willing to
participate in the blockchain network can create a server and re-
quest to connect to the blockchain network by furnishing their a
self signed cryptographic identity along with the telemarketer ID
and payment receipt numbers as a transaction. The information
corresponding to the telemarketer ID is verified by each of the
participants according to the policy of the network. On successfully
validating the information on the network and ascertaining the
identity and signature, the server node is added to the network
as a participant in the blockchain. The telemarketer node then re-
constructs the blockchain by fetching information from the peers
in the network and validates them before finally reaching a state
consistent global state matching the other participants in the net-
work after which the added node can participate in the network by
issuing new transactions.

Telemarketers who do not participate in the network as direct
participants delegate their registration to the network via any third
party services, detailed later in the paper, which create a local
authentication system for the telemarketer, maintain their crypto-
graphic credentials and register them by creating a transaction in
the network.

4.2.2 Principal Entity, Header & Content Registration. Prin-
cipal entities are registered along with the header registration pro-
cesses via third party services or telemarketers offering header &
content registration services. Similar to domain name registration,
a principal entity registers the headers of their choice which ap-
pear as sender ID to the mobile subscribers. The registration of
the principal entities is done using their business name while map-
ping it to the chosen header(s) as a transaction on the blockchain.
These entities are granted access to their information using the
authentication on the third party services.

The principal entities after confirmation of their header registra-
tions delegate/configure the ownership or access of their registered
headers to any of the registered telemarketers by using the telemar-
keter ID or searching for the same via the web interface provided
by the third party service for the same. This allows the partner reg-
istered telemarketers to create campaigns on behalf of the principal
entity. The access delegation of a header to the telemarketers by the
principal entities is recorded as a transaction over the blockchain.
Once delegated, the telemarketers can register promotional con-
tent templates or the complete content of the promotion against
the header of the principal entity by signing the one way hash
of the templated content and the header used as the message. A
transaction is issued on the blockchain by the principal entity with
ownership of a specific header proxied through a blockchain par-
ticipant offering content registration services. A content token is
provided to the telemarketer which is furnished to the partnering
telecom operator along with the template and the scrubbing token
for message delivery as shown in Figure 2.

4.2.3 Customer & Consent Acquisition. During customer ac-
quisition and storing the contact information of the customer (for
eg. at the point of sale counter), principal entities can use the APIs
provided by their partner telemarketer or the services offered by

1. Upload phone number and campaign information4. Furnish TokenTelemarketerSend  Phone Numbers and messagePrincipal Entity6. Query  Scrubbed files and decrypt content7. Validate and send messagesTelecomOperator2. Write to  blockchain after scrubbing3. Return TokenScrubbingService5. Verify TokenCOMPASS ’22, June 29-July 1, 2022, Seattle, WA, USA

Singanamalla et al.

third party consent registration and maintenance services to trigger
a one time password (OTP) along with mandatory information as
described previously in §4.1.6. The trigger of the consent acquisi-
tion SMS based on a registered consent template as described in
§4.2.2 is recorded as a transaction on the blockchain. Similarly, the
grant of the consent either based on OTP or a provided web link to
the customer is recorded on the blockchain as a transaction which
on successfully being validated adds the consent mapped to the
header and the customer for future promotional campaigns by the
principal entity.

4.2.4 Third Party Services. Third party services are value added
services offered by nodes participating in the network which can
offer any of the following services. The services include 1) registra-
tion of telemarketers, principal entities and headers, content and
consent, 2) authentication to third party services, scrubbing as a
service using preferences and consent for principal entities, and 3)
execution of promotional campaigns and forwarding the requests
to the telecom operators. The third party service providers cre-
ate and register identities for the telemarketers and provide them
an authentication system for further usage of the system. These
nodes behave as proxy nodes for their users to interact with the
blockchain and provides the necessary web applications or API
services.

Scrubbing is a mandatory business process for sending out any
promotional SMSs with failures to comply with the mandate result-
ing in heavy penalties including ban of operations. The scrubbing
process can be performed by the telemarketer nodes participating in
the blockchain on their respective server machines. Telemarketers
not actively participating in the network can use third party scrub-
bing services which are participants on the network. The scrubbing
operation takes in an input list of phone numbers, the telemarketer
ID, content template ID and the header of the principal entity. After
validating the ownership of the telemarketer ID with the header ID,
and the content ID with the header ID, the service creates a one way
hash of each number and validates the preferences and the consents
listed across the entry of the particular phone number from the
current global state of the blockchain. If the user has either con-
sented to receiving promotional content from the principal entity
or has the category of promotion as a valid preference, the number
of the user is stored in multiple files of valid phone numbers where
each file contains the numbers corresponding to a specific telecom
operator. Similarly, the rest are stored in corresponding invalid files.
Each one of these files based on the telecom operator are en-
crypted using the public key of the telecom operator and the cor-
responding links to the file locations for each telecom operator is
provided along with a signed digest of the respective files thereby
proving immutability and allowing access to only the intended
parties. In addition the transaction includes a signed token and
current hash of the global state which is issued to the blockchain
network. The participants of the network validate the contents of
the transaction by verifying the digests of the encrypted files and
corresponding signatures. The telecom operators after validation
take the corresponding token issued in the transaction and queue
it to the pipeline of promotional campaigns to run. The token and
the transaction ID proposed by the scrubbing node is presented to
the telemarketer who requests the telecom operator(s) to begin the

campaign by furnishing the token and signing it with their crypto-
graphic identity. The request to initiate the campaign is recorded on
the blockchain and the promotional campaign takes effect with each
telecom operator changing the status of the promotional campaign
to completed.

The business workflows post registration of the telemarketers,
principal entities are illustrated in Figure 2 where the process starts
with the principal entity partnering with a telemarketer. Similar
to the current process, the principal entity sends a list of phone
numbers and the message content, and a registered template ID to
the telemarketer who scrubs the data across a third party scrubbing
service or on their own while initiating a corresponding transac-
tion on the blockchain. The generated token from the scrubbing
process is furnished to the telecom operator directly or via third
party services. The telecom operator validates the token, reads
the corresponding list of phone numbers to send the promotional
SMS and validates the transaction status by optionally re-scrubbing
them locally before sending out the promotional SMSs to the mobile
subscribers in their network. The telecom operator(s) involved in
the message delivery then eventually attach a delivery report to the
telemarketer initiating the campaign indicating the total number
of successful messages delivered which can be used for subsequent
billing purposes.

4.3 Challenges addressed
With the implementation of the proposed system using the com-
ponents introduced in §4.1, we addresses many of the challenges
posed in Table 1.

By hashing the information available in the centralized NDND
registry [13], replicating, and decentralizing it using blockchain,
we ensure that the preference registration and any updates are
instantly in effect across all the participants in the network remov-
ing the periodic synchronization in favor of distributed consensus
protocols which are critical to blockchains [6, 67]. This reduces
the complex and time consuming process in the current approach
where the data is periodically downloaded and synchronized by
various stakeholders. The proposed system and format of hashed
data storage protects sensitive and personally identifiable consumer
data (phone number) from being leaked. Malicious telemarketers
and colluding unregistered telemarketers can no longer make sense
of the downloaded hashed format.

The usage of the blockchain is ideal for the given problem as it
automates the coordination between various stakeholders and their
corresponding cryptographic identities on the system. The manda-
tory need for scrubbing ensures that the telemarketers do not ever
know a filtered list of phone numbers which could help malicious
entities collude with unregistered telemarketers. The segregation
of the files by the scrubbing operations into respective files for
telecom operators greatly simplify the operations and the need for
the partner telecom operator to share data with other telecom op-
erators for executing the promotional campaign. Throughout the
entire process, the phone numbers and other sensitive information
is shared in a hashed manner thereby protecting the privacy of the
subscribers.

The availability of all the registered entities, their categories of
operation and recursive sub-categories are now available to each

Telechain: Bridging Telecom Policy and Blockchain Practice

COMPASS ’22, June 29-July 1, 2022, Seattle, WA, USA

of the nodes participating in the network. This information enables
scrubbing service providers and preference registry systems to give
users much more fine grained control of their preferences than the
coarse categorisation into seven categories. It also allows any mobile
subscriber to clearly view, manage and revoke the consents granted
by them to various entities from a single location. Principal entities
because of the new header registration process and the removal
of the six character limit can now clearly establish their brand
identities. Apps installed by mobile subscribers on their devices
now can organize their message inboxes by the name of the business
entity making it cleaner and easier to look for SMSs and avoiding
clutter. The digital trace and availability of the consent makes it
easier for auditors to identify and penalize violations based on
complaints registered by the user.

5 IMPLEMENTATION
5.1 Implementation of the Blockchain Network
To test the feasibility of our proposal, a pilot implementation of the
consortium blockchain network is built using Hyperledger Fabric,
an open source consortium blockchain framework under the Hy-
perledger umbrella of the Linux Foundation [1]. Individual nodes of
the telecom operators, a large telemarketer node, scrubbing service
node and an observer node for the regulator (TRAI) form the per-
missioned blockchain network. Endorsement policies of the network
are policies through which designated system administrators spec-
ify conditions for various types of transactions to be endorsed. It is
also possible to specify custom endorsement policies, for example,
a transaction to register a principal entity and their corresponding
headers need to be endorsed by each of the telemarketer nodes on
the network, the observer node and at least one of the telecom oper-
ators. Figure 3 shows the modules and implementation architecture
at each physical node in the network.

In our implementation a majority of the participants on the net-
work must endorse a transaction initiated by a client. During the
endorsement, the designated peers according to the endorsement
policy execute the transactions and share the output as the endorse-
ment. The result of the endorsement is a cryptographically signed
read-write set which includes the sequence of operations to per-
form on an underlying key-value database (CouchDB/LevelDB) to
commit the transaction. This is indicated as the Endorser in Figure 3.
The read-write sets are then ordered by an ordering service
which is a part of the Fabric framework. The consensus protocol
which runs between the orderers of the network order the en-
dorsed transactions and group them together into a block which
is broadcast to all the participants of the network who then deter-
ministically validate the endorsements & the read-write sets. On
successful validation a block is appended to the local ledger of each
of the participants in the network and chained to the hash of the
previous block. The corresponding key-value pairs indicated in the
read-write sets are modified accordingly to achieve a new global
state. This is indicated as the Committer in Figure 3.

5.2 Integrating Existing Identity Systems
The organizations participating in the network have their own cen-
tralized identity systems such as Azure Active Directory, OpenL-
DAP, Apache directory, IBM Tivoli, or similar. The credentials for

Figure 3: Blockchain participant node architecture indicat-
ing the web based application layer which includes an au-
thenticated service proxying the requests made by the ap-
plication users as a blockchain client. The database layer in-
cludes event driven approaches to replicate the global state
of the blockchain, especially used by scrubbers for high per-
formance tasks, layered over Hyperledger Fabric infrastruc-
ture. The blue arrows indicate the sequence of events in the
blockchain.

each stakeholder in the system is maintained by the respective
identity systems. A successful registration of a principal entity or
telemarketer via a participant node on the network creates a cryp-
tographic identity using standard public key infrastructure (PKI)
methods and grants authentication to the network using digital
signatures. Each node participating in the network stores their
credentials and publishes the necessary public key information to
other identity server nodes establishing a relationship between the
identities of different organizations and the corresponding crypto-
graphic keys needed for validation of transactions initiated over
the network. This is indicated as the membership service in Figure 3.

5.3 Implementation of the Scrubbing Services
Scrubbing is a mandatory operation that needs to be performed on
an input list of promotional phone numbers and other mandatory
information as described in §4.2.4. These services are democratic
and can be offered by anyone who willingly participates in the
blockchain network after regulatory approval. The regulatory ap-
proval for the participants in the network is obtained after success-
fully scrubbing a standardized suite of test cases put together by the
consortium and audit of the software system being used. The scrub-
bing operation reads the value associated with each key i.e. (hash
of the phone number) from the consent and preference registries
which are locally maintained in each participating nodes’ key value
data store as indicated in Figure 3. The scrubbing implementation
can connect to the same database and filter the numbers from the

ReadOrdererEndorsementEndorserCommitteronSuccessfulAuthentication()Membership Services  (Identity Services)onTransaction() onBlock()Event Listener APIsREADWRITEKey-Value data store of  blockchainLedgerInitiate TransactionBlockchain ClientValidateAuthenticate and Propose TransactionMVC Based Web Application or API services interacting with the DatabaseUpdateDatabaseControllerHighPerformance Global State ReplicaBroadcast and  ConsensusFabricDatabaseApplicationCOMPASS ’22, June 29-July 1, 2022, Seattle, WA, USA

Singanamalla et al.

input list provided and create the output files and encrypt them
using the corresponding public keys of each of the telemarketers
which can be obtained from the membership service.

To improve the speed of filtering through this data, we use the
event listeners provided by the committer to listen to the completion
events of block & transaction confirmation and mirror the updates
to fabric’s key value stores in a flexible format and re-indexing
the data to optimize any queries over an open source in-memory
database like redis with efficient and fast set difference implementa-
tions (SDIFF) compared to performing the same within document
stores [53]. This enables extremely quick scrubbing results and
the service is metered. Prior to this system, scrubbing was a time
consuming operation as it involved the download of the entire data
from NDND registry and reconciling the updates with their local
databases before continuing to perform the telemarketing activities.
Each scrub performed by the telemarketers was considered valid
for a week thereby making it difficult for subscriber preferences to
take immediate effect. The new system prevents this and enables
immediate effect on subscriber preferences.

5.4 Integrating Existing End User Applications
End user applications like complaint registration systems, header,
consent and content registration systems which need to interact
with the blockchain system can continue to be built for users as
traditional web applications by developers by reading the default
key value data store provided by fabric or using a more performant
mirror database for the global state of the blockchain. These end
user applications can additionally also provide REST APIs or SDKs
for their clients to interact with the blockchain using their node
as a proxy. Self help portals provided by telecom operators can
expose necessary APIs for their phone based and SMS based cus-
tomer service systems to record complaints & register customer
preferences.

The democratization of the scrubbing service operation on the
network prevents any vendor lock-in for smaller telemarketers and
allows potential organizations to experiment with various pricing
models based on the quality of service provided therefore creating
a healthy, fair and auditable ecosystem. A key goal for the introduc-
tion of scrubbing service providers is to decouple trust placed in
the service. The ecosystem of scrubbing providers, and auditors on
the network can verify the operations thereby incentivizing, and
creating an ecosystem for provable operational compliance.

5.5 Automated complaint redressal & tracking
The availability of customer preferences and consents at any given
snapshot, the content of the message sent, the customer phone num-
ber and the name of their telecom operator can be used to identify
a transaction proposed by the telemarketer on behalf of a principal
entity along with the proof of a scrubbing with the scrubbing token.
This information can be replayed by observer/auditor nodes who
register the complaint for validity. Using this approach, it becomes
easy to find the participants who behaved maliciously and trace
their actions which will be followed by a legal scrutiny. However, in
a majority honest blockchain system such a situation would never
arise because the encoded smart contract takes into effect these
situations. If the situation still arises, it is due to a bug in the smart

contract code and an updated policy with the contract can be issued
to the blockchain for further usage by all the participants in the
network with such a change being formally recorded.

However, Complaints against unregistered telemarketers making
promotional calls without consent using previously leaked phone
number data sets results in a complaint being registered with the
maintenance of the watch list i.e. number of complaints registered
against a specific number. On reaching a threshold number of vi-
olations, the observer nodes tracking the complaints can issue a
special transaction requesting the telecom operators to provide
the specific user degraded service. The telecom operators can then
limit the total number of incoming or outgoing phone calls, SMS
and access to mobile data of the violating subscriber behaving as
an unregistered telemarketer and decide to terminate the phone
number.

6 DEPLOYMENT CHALLENGES
With the regulation draft finalized after the demonstrated feasi-
bility of the systems and released on 18 July 2018, the regulators
set out with the ambitious goal to enforce the new requirements
starting Late December 2018 - Early January 2019. However, this
received a lot of push back from the Cellular Operators Associa-
tion of India (COAI) seeking the regulators pay attention to cost of
implementation in the already financially-stressed telecom ecosys-
tem indicating the technological overhaul to the current systems
in place which become necessary due to the new mandate [8, 26].
Additionally the COAI rebut the proposed regulation indicating
potential migration of users to over the top (OTT) services like
WhatsApp, making the solution redundant after significant invest-
ments [26]. However, COAI eventually realized that (1) they could
not block the regulation through legal challenges, (2) the telecom
operators could work together to reduce costs, and (3) the inclusion
of a small scrubbing charge could defray the expenses.

The adoption of new technological architecture posed significant
risk of service disruption to the telecommunications operators in
India who eventually decided for a phased roll out of the infrastruc-
ture and developed a “code of practice” (CoP). The CoP describes
how existing business operations would be transformed due to
the new blockchain architecture, and helped establish a common
procedure to be encoded into a smart contract for programmatic
enforcement, essentially mandating all telecommunications op-
erators to coordinate. In addition, the adoption of these systems
faced 6 legal challenges since 2020 with cases filed in the Delhi
and Karnataka High Courts, as well as the Supreme Court of India,
by various telemarketers, and principal entities. A Public Interest
Litigation (PIL) filed by advocate Reepak Kansal in the Supreme
Court of India (Kansal v. The Union of India) incorrectly argued
to scrap the TCCCPR regulations on account of violating citizens’
fundamental right to privacy due to the system creating a “price-
less, mega database of commercial relationships” of over a billion
individuals [36]. A 3 judge bench of the supreme court after re-
viewing the request refused to entertain the PIL request on 28th
September 2020. Additional cases filed by a large mobile wallet
and banking provider (One97 Communications, parent company of
PayTM) used the updated TCCCPR’18 regulation to sue Telecom
operators for failing to curb fraud of their registered header due to

Telechain: Bridging Telecom Policy and Blockchain Practice

COMPASS ’22, June 29-July 1, 2022, Seattle, WA, USA

the similar deceptive headers, supporting the need for enforcement
of the updated regulation. Smaller telemarketers filed legal cases
claiming the new regulation hurt small businesses citing scrubbing
enforcement resulting in over 80% drop in their message volume
(Shivtel Communications v. The Union of India [Writ Petition (Civil)
3519/2021] at the Delhi High Court).

Eventually, the TCCCPR’18 regulation went into regulatory ef-
fect on 28th February 2019. This was followed by the enforcement
of header registrations over the established blockchain network
and scrubbing in September 2020, and soon followed by the need
for registered templates and its inclusion in the scrubbing process
on 8th March 2021.

The regulatory mandate was eventually adopted and put to prac-
tice adhering to the telecom operators’ code of practice and included
header, and content template registrations for the principal entities
consuming SMS services. In §7 we present, various results from a
longitudinal study of spam and SMS messaging in India, and argue
the effectiveness of the implemented solution to operate at the
scale of a growing telecom market like India, improved compliance
of registered telemarketers reducing spam, while improving the
security and privacy of subscribers across the country who benefit
from the large scale deployment of the system.

Despite the efforts and quantifiable evidence presented in this
paper from a longitudinal study of spam and complaints in the
Indian telecom ecosystem, the problem of spam has not yet fully
been addressed with increasing spam being reported from phone
numbers outside the regulated advertising ecosystem. We detail
the challenges faced and outline research challenges in future work
presented in §8, and §9.

7 SYSTEM EVALUATION
The deployment of the infrastructure complying to the TCCCPR’18
regulation opened up new opportunities for businesses to enter
the telecom ecosystem and provide services to existing telecom
operators and telemarketers. While the ecosystem through their
code of practice and deliberations agreed to scrub both transac-
tional (header + template scrubbing), and promotional (transac-
tional + preferences + consent) messages, continue using Hyper-
ledger Fabric in their production deployment, various services like
header, template, consent, scrubbing services were implemented
directly by telecom operators, or other companies providing ser-
vices to the telecom operators. As of today, the blockchain network
consists of 7 Fabric orderer nodes run by the individual telecom
operators (Vodafone-Idea Limited [VIL], Bharat Sanchar Nigam
Limited [BSNL], Mahanagar Telephone Nigam Limited [MTNL],
Airtel, Reliance Jio, Quadrant Televentures Limited [QTL], and Tata
telecommunications). The network uses the Hyperledger Fabric v2
running RAFT consensus protocol in its deployment [1, 52] with
each operator running their own certificate authority (Fabric CA)
in the blockchain network [1]. We present our results below from
one large scrubbing service provider in the ecosystem, and present
evidence of reducing complaints, and increased adherence to the
regulation in India.

7.1 Boostrapping: Header & Template

Registrations from Principal Entities
By January 2020, the TCCCPR’18 regulation was very well known
and the intent understood within the telecom operators. However,
the fragmented ecosystem of principal entities relied on API part-
ners providing them SMS services or telemarketers. Many of these
stakeholders were unaware of the nuances of the new approach and
how it could possibly disrupt their businesses. Many of them also
did not pay attention to the notices from the telecom operators to
register themselves again. Despite the readiness of the blockchain
network in September 2019, the lack of engagement from busi-
nesses resulted in the slow on-boarding of principal entities and
their registered headers into the new architecture.

This can be seen in Figure 4 with the solid red line denoting the
registration of businesses. The spike in registrations seen between
April 2020 to August 2020 was due to the issuance of multiple
sunset date warnings and notifications to non-compliant businesses
about the strict scrubbing operations to be in-effect in the future
resulting in a possible drop in their SMS messaging traffic. This
resulted in increased awareness among some businesses about the
new regulations and anticipating future requirements for content
template scrubbing also registered their content templates used
for messaging obtaining a registered template ID. This is shown
in Figure 4 with the solid gold line indicating an increase in the
number of template registrations between April 2020 and October
2020. The proactive measures taken to prevent lookalike headers
during the registration phase resulted in over 23890 headers being
rejected during registration. Post enforcement of header scrubbing,
over a year in operation, not even a single complaint citing fraud
was registered against any registered headers.

7.2 Effectiveness of Scrubbing Services
As the number of registrations of principal entities reached their
previously registered quantities effectively signifying the transi-
tion of businesses towards the new architecture, the registered
header scrubbing rules were enforced. The enforcement of these
rules on 1st September 2020 (indicated by the dotted vertical or-
ange line), meant that only the registered telemarketers could send
promotional messages through the official established advertising
channel.

We define successful scrubbing as the percentage of phone num-
bers from the submitted list of numbers, to which a successful
message has been delivered. For example, a marketing campaign
with 10000 phone numbers has a 99% scrubbing success rate, if 9900
phone numbers provided by the telemarketers are in compliance
and receive messages. The high scrubbing success rates could be
for two reasons, (1) the default opt-in model of promotional mes-
sages in the country could indicate majority numbers who have
not exercised their DND preferences, and (2) the telemarketers
have slowly become compliant and only send messages to phone
numbers who have expressed an explicit preference, or are default
opt-in subscribers.

The new architecture and scrubbing requirements proved effec-
tive with an average over 95% success rate in scrubbing on the first
day gradually improving to over 98% with compliant telemarketers
removing the phone numbers from campaigns pro-actively. This

COMPASS ’22, June 29-July 1, 2022, Seattle, WA, USA

Singanamalla et al.

The number of scrubbing operations to perform also increased
over time with the scrubbing system currently handling 50% more
operations than it originally did when the system came into effect
in September 2020, now handling over 30 Billion SMS scrubbing
operations. The Figure 5(a) shows the increasing trend of scrubbing
operations issued to the scrubber due to the increasing number
of active SMSs being sent in the country (shown in Figure 5(b)).
However, it is important to note that the measurement in Figure 5(b)
only represents a partial view from one large operator and not the
entire ecosystem. The overall ecosystem sends about a Billion SMS
messages a day [37].

On 8th March 2021, the template scrubbing enforcement came
into effect updating the scrubbing services to not only scrub verified
headers and subscriber numbers but also validate the template of
the message being sent. This resulted in an outage and a large drop
in SMS delivery across the country with many critical banking,
authentication, COVID-19 Vaccine registration information, and
payment transaction messages being dropped resulting in only
49.2% of messages being delivered after scrubbing [38]. In addition
to incorrect usage of template IDs in 41% of the cases, and 5% text
mismatches between the registered templates, the major reason
for the failure (54%) was the lack of registration of templates by
businesses due to possible miscommunication, or negligence. The
disruptive nudge due to the drop of message traffic resulted in a
spike in registrations as indicated by the orange line on March 2021
in Figure 4. With the intervention of the regulator, the scrubbing
process was relaxed for a week and eventually put into effect on
2nd April 2021 causing a minor disruption with drop in scrubbing
success to 90% before being returning to over 95% success rate
within a week.

The green bands show consistent successful scrubbing opera-
tions between 92%-98%. The overall mean success rate for scrubbing
during the lifetime of the operations presented is 𝜇=97.5%, stan-
dard deviation 𝜎=3.01%, and Median 𝑀=97.8% indicating proactive
efforts to curb spam, and improved operational practices by the
telemarketers.

7.3 Effect on Complaints Registered by

Subscribers

We use public records of the complaints registered by subscribers to
TRAI through the app [48, 49], or through their telecom operators
and classify them into complaints against registered telemarketers
(RTM) and unregistered telemarketers (UTM) based on the com-
plaint against a specific registered header or against a valid 10 digit
personal phone number through which unregistered telemarketing
messaging has been carried out.

We present our results in Figure 6 and present the pre-blockchain
and post-blockchain trends. The missing information between mid
2019 (development of the blockchain system), to mid 2020 (enforce-
ment of mandates) is due to missing logs, and telemetry failures,
resulting in data inaccuracies during the transition of systems. His-
torical data from 2017 to mid 2019 show an increasing number of
complaints per million SMSs sent being registered. After the im-
plementation of the blockchain based architecture and mandatory
scrubbing, we notice a strong reducing trend (𝑅2=0.69, indicated by
the solid blue line) in the number of complaints against RTM with

Figure 4: The figure shows the timeline of header (red) and
template (yellow) registrations before the enforcement of
the various phases of the regulations. The solid blue line
indicates the scrubbing success rate and highlight various
events resulting in a drop in the success rate. The green band
shows the percentage success scrubbing events between 93
and 98% respectively. The grey vertical band indicates the
temporary relaxation of scrubbing constraints after a coun-
try wide drop in SMS traffic.

(a) The plot shows the increasing num-
ber of scrubbing operations being per-
formed by one large scrubbing service
provider managing the scrubbing opera-
tions for over 60% of the registered busi-
nesses in the ecosystem

(b) The plot indicates the total number
of SMS messages being sent by one sin-
gle provider and indicates an increasing
trend and usage of SMS messages across
the country.

Figure 5: Volume of Scrubbing requests and SMS Messages
Across India

is presented in Figure 4 as the solid blue line indicating the high
number of successful scrubbing operations between September
2020 and November 2020. On 19th November 2020 (indicated by the
dotted vertical green line), the operators updated their scrubbing
requirements and operational workflows causing some message
failures and degraded performance of the scrubbing system reduc-
ing the success rate to 85%. However, this error was transient and
was quickly addressed within a day resulting in over 95% success
rate. These results indicate the effectiveness of the scrubbing sys-
tem in successfully identifying the 200M users in an ecosystem
of a Billion exercising their preferences, and correctly preventing
message delivery.

2020-012020-042020-072020-102021-012021-042021-072021-10Date020406080100Avg. Scrubbing Success Rate (%)Enforcement of Header ScrubbingMinor change to scrubbing requirementsTemplate Scrubbing EnforcementTemplate Scrubbing Enforcement (Reintroduced)Avg. Scrubbing Success Rate (%)Template RegistrationHeader Registration0100000200000300000400000500000# Header/Template Registrations2020-092020-112021-012021-032021-052021-072021-092021-11Time051015202530# Scrubbing Operations (Billion)R2 = 0.60201620172018201920202021Time46810121416SMS Message Traffic (Billions)R2 = 0.86Government Lockdown for COVID19Telechain: Bridging Telecom Policy and Blockchain Practice

COMPASS ’22, June 29-July 1, 2022, Seattle, WA, USA

8.1 Addressing Spam Calls and Unregistered

Telemarketing Actions

Despite its ambitious inclusion in the TCCCPR’18 regulation to
use the same technology proposal to address voice calls and com-
pletely curb UTM spam, the risk posed due to nation wide service
outages and possible privacy violations resulted in the currently
deployed solution completely detached from addressing robocalls
(with automated voice, or human agent). While it is theoretically
possible to perform content registration as spoken script templates
in the current system, performing real-time checks of live calls is
extremely difficult. It is also extremely hard to validate a complaint
registered against a spam call without having access to the record-
ings of the conversations. Most telecom operators do not maintain
this information but have provisions to explicitly target and do so
for future calls to aid law enforcement actions when presented with
a legal warrant. Performing these operations on every call is similar
to wiretapping and severely compromises the privacy of subscriber
communications since every phone call might potentially need to
be monitored for identifying unregistered telemarketing calls initi-
ated from malicious subscriber devices. The risks involved due to
the voice data being biometric, and the severe impacts on privacy
(intercepted SMS/voice information), implications on democracy,
make this an extremely hard problem to tackle and open up oppor-
tunities for research on privacy preserving approaches to achieve
these goals.

8.2 Challenges with Delegations and Trust

Relationships

The current deployment of the blockchain system in practice aims
to have minimal disruption to principal entities carrying out their
operations. Ideally, the principal entities would need to manage
their cryptographic key identities and issue transactions (sending
SMS / scrubbing) through the telemarketers. However, this would
prevent various small businesses relying on SMS based marketing
to gain experience and manage their keys. To simplify usage, the
telemarketers act as delegated entities to the businesses and man-
age their keys, issue operations on their behalf. While the approach
is a practical way to achieve the goals, it puts telemarketers at
possible risk due to attacks from malicious adversaries wanting to
compromise their systems and issue malicious transactions mas-
querading as the telemarketer affecting both the brand reputation
of the principal entities and the telemarketers. The principal entities
also in the process, continue to trust the telemarketers with plain-
text phone numbers to send messages to which could be leaked to
competing businesses by the telemarketer despite the telemarketer
operating on hashed information when operating on the blockchain
network. Scrubbing nodes are trusted not to misuse the phone num-
bers they receive from telemarketers in today’s operations with
active roadmap by the ecosystem to move towards reducing the
trust placed in the service.

8.3 Complexity, and Usability of Consent
The current blockchain system and scrubbing systems continue
to enforce the seven high level categories and do not extend to
the fine grained preferences and consent management allowing

Figure 6: The plot shows a timeline of number of complaints
against registered and unregistered telemarketers over time.
The introduction of the blockchain system shows a decrease
in the number of complaints against registered telemar-
keters while the number of complaints against unregistered
telemarketers, and total complaints registered continue to
rise.

complaints down to 1.13 registered complaints per million SMS
messages sent indicating the effectiveness of the system in reduc-
ing the mean complaints against RTM from 2.39 during mid 2019
indicating over 50% improvement in the ecosystem, and increasing
the marketers regulatory compliance. During the same phase, the
number of complaints against UTM increased to 4.82 registered
complaints per million messages sent (indicated by the solid orange
line) making it easier for law enforcement authorities to identify
spammers, fraudsters, and businesses violating subscriber consent.
However, the blockchain deployment phase, saw an increasing
awareness among the subscribers who continued to report more
complaints than in previous years. A majority (>75%) of these com-
plaints registered were against unregistered telemarketers resulting
in such accounts used being banned, throttled, or blocked by the
telecom operators. The reduction in the number of complaints
against RTM despite the increasing number of overall registered
complaints demonstrates the efficacy of the deployed system, and
its role in delivering the intended impact.

8 LIMITATIONS
While the development, deployment, of the proposed solution, a
year into its operation has shown promising results as shown in §7,
the practical deployment of the blockchain system deviated slightly
from its original proposal, and did not yet address its promise of
curbing spam now increasing through unregistered telemarketing
channels or due to voice calls. We outline some of the current
limitations in our work below.

201720182019202020212022Time12345678Complaints per Million SMS messagesRegistered Tele-Marketers (RTM)Unregistered Tele-Marketers (UTM)Missing DataPre: RTM R2=0.48Pre: UTM R2=0.73Post: RTM R2=0.69Post: UTM R2=0.25COMPASS ’22, June 29-July 1, 2022, Seattle, WA, USA

Singanamalla et al.

subscribers to exercise their explicit choices. Additionally, the work-
flows for recording digital consent, using them is incomplete and
not standardized. Enabling fine grained preferences and clearly
enabling subscribers to exercise their consent has user experience
challenges and needs changes to various portals implemented by
TRAI, Telecom operators, and mobile applications to be updated.
However, the current system in place is highly extensible and can
support these needs in the future. Additionally, the extension of the
header registrations to full business names instead of 6 character
alphanumeric codes has not yet been implemented.

8.4 Translation of Code of Practices to Smart

Contracts

The code of practices established by the telecom operators identify
various ways in which the telecom operators can inter-operate with
other participants on the blockchain. However, the combined effort
at translating the operational business logic into programmatic
enforcements on the blockchain as smart contracts comes with the
challenge of long deliberations among the participants before any
changes are made which could impact business flow. Additionally,
these smart contracts are agreed upon by the participants and have
not yet received an audit for correctness of operations.

9 DISCUSSION
The proposed solution in this paper stems from the idea of allow-
ing mobile subscribers complete control and transparency of their
preferences. The solution introduces a procedure to manage and
acquire consent digitally which can be used in more cases in the
future such as granting consent to insurance companies to view
health records, employers to access educational records etc.., The
role of blockchain in Telechain is the first formal experiment with
blockchain in the Indian government (also the first in the tele-
com industry worldwide), and is highly motivated with the idea
of avoiding spam altogether by being compliant ex-ante instead
of validating a complaint ex-post and holding an organization or
entity to blame. The usage of blockchain in telecommunications in
India which is rapidly growing is a chance for regulators to estab-
lish the potential of the technology to perform at scale and explore
new areas where such technology could create a significant impact
and avoid single points of corruptibility.

9.1 Strengthening Credibility, Collaboration &

Standardization

The usage of a blockchain while ensuring that the information
can be accessed and read by anyone is a move to establish trans-
parency which results in trust. By using blockchain and adopting
the newly proposed systems the telecom operators in the telecom
ecosystem can establish credibility by instantly taking into effect
the subscriber preferences. The collaboration of the telecom opera-
tors of the country enabled via the network proves the ability of
the technology to bring together mutually untrusted competitors,
share necessary information and co-exist while still maintaining
their business advantages. The usage of blockchains brings in the
need for standardization and establishment of a common code of
practice and cooperation between the entities.

9.2 Cost and Benefits of the New Model
While the creation of the blockchain network and securing it takes
an investment of time and money, it also opens up new business
opportunities. For example, We witnessed the growth of third party
services monetizing services such as registration of headers, content
and consent management, and providing scrubbing services. The
ability to perform targeted reach to customers improves economic
efficacy of telemarketers. The decentralized infrastructure improves
adherence to regulations, makes participants responsible for each
others’ correct operations, and therefore prevents heavy penalties
on the telecom operators and telemarketers while reducing the need
for active regulatory oversight. The telecom operators and partici-
pants on the blockchain need to delegate dedicated infrastructure
towards the network. We believe the costs of the infrastructure will
be offset by the new business opportunities provided by improved
quality of service and targeted reach.

9.3 Ever growing data sizes & Data storage
The tamper proof and immutable nature of the blockchain means
that the data continuously grows with time. The usage of data
storage containers outside the blockchain to store paths to the
previously scrubbed results results in increasing data storage costs
due to space requirements. This information serves as valuable
archival evidence for any future issues but can never be deleted
without destroying the integrity of the blockchain.

9.4 Practical Security of Blockchain Systems
Blockchains enable mutually untrusted parties to collaborate and
work together in a similar fashion. Blockchains if implemented cor-
rectly result in secure systems but there are various points where
data leaks on the system can turn into security challenges. Any leak
of keys stored in the membership services will result in malicious
entities proposing faulty transactions. Similarly, colluding partici-
pants who can establish a majority in the network can tamper data
and force the honest participants out of the network. While this
can be counteracted with a policy stating that every single partic-
ipant should validate the same content, it has an adverse impact
on the performance and throughput of the system. The greatest
risk to the consortium blockchain is posed by malicious system
administrators who have privileges to the network and modify the
network settings or tamper the keys maintained on the machine.
However, these can be avoided by establishing an automated, veri-
fiable and auditable release process. Consortium blockchains prove
to be efficient in cases where mutually untrusted participants come
together with a neutral regulatory oversight or auditor.

9.5 Extensibility to Spam Calls, and Mobile

Number Portability

While the current proposed system focuses on curbing the issues
due to unsolicited text messages, the same components on the
blockchain can be used for tackling unsolicited phone calls. The TC-
CCPR’18 regulation takes into account the usage of the same archi-
tecture to curb spam phone calls. To avoid providing the scrubbed
phone numbers to telemarketers, the scrubbing services provide
aliased phone numbers which can be accessed via API interfaces
on the blockchain enabling call based marketers to initiate calls

Telechain: Bridging Telecom Policy and Blockchain Practice

COMPASS ’22, June 29-July 1, 2022, Seattle, WA, USA

to scrubbed numbers. This is done by initiating a Voice over IP
(VoIP) based session with the telecom operator and providing the
necessary scrubbing tokens received during scrubbing with authen-
tication. The telecom operator validates and initiates the phone call
to the actual number of the subscriber from the aliased value in the
scrubbed list. Enabling such a solution would involve the 400-500
registered telemarketers in the country making phone calls to es-
tablish VoIP based SIP trunks with their partner telecom operators,
update software to look up and initiate a connection than using
an aliased phone number. By integrating such an approach, the
drawback however is that the telemarketing agent initiating the
call would not be able to look up the necessary information of the
person being called without reconfirming their phone number and
authenticating its match to the aliased number using APIs provided
by the blockchain services. Implementing this process might extend
the duration of the telemarketing call but help curb the problem of
automated dialing calls or robocalls in the country.

9.6 Learning from Deployment
While the implementation of the proposed system, with the support
of the ecosystem and driven by regulatory mandate resulted in
partially achieving the goals we ambitiously set out with, it becomes
evident that the adoption of the technology improves various high
latency business operations involving synchronization and bring
them towards real-time or near real-time latencies. Updates to
subscriber consent now happens within minutes, and are used for
scrubbing operations essentially reducing the time for consumer
preferences to be in effect from 7-14 days in the past to within an
hour and more ambitiously within minutes indicating an order of
magnitude improvement in national scale operations. Additionally
various fears from telecom operators about the loss of potential
business posed by strict scrubbing requirements to over the top app
channels such as WhatsApp, Telegram, etc.., remain unfounded due
to the increasing volume of SMS as shown in Figure 5(b).

The usage of the blockchain as a shared ledger allowed for more
efficient tracking of complaints, with better information sharing
established between telecom operators to identify the reasons for
fraud and take immediate corrective action. This has resulted in un-
covering fraudulent registrations by a few businesses with different
telecom operators. With data sharing practices enabled through
the blockchain, the different telecom operators could identify busi-
nesses registered under different names and carry out fraudulent
activities. While the results presented indicate that the problem of
spam is reducing through official advertising channels (Application
to Person messaging), it is slowly moving towards a peer to peer
model and being carried out by telemarketers masquerading as
regular phone subscribers. The movement of spam to peer to peer
channels makes it extremely difficult to identify the originator with
current techniques without breaching the privacy and reading all
the messages being sent by the subscribers. A recent survey by Lo-
calCircles indicated that 74% of the respondents continue to receive
unwanted SMSs despite being registered on the NDND registry
with 26% of them claiming these messages originate from service
providers, or offers to earn more money [77]. Future efforts at pri-
vacy preserving techniques to identify spam need to be extensively
tested, deployed, and improved through iteration.

The changes to the NDND registry and hashing the necessary
information resulted in malicious actors either performing rainbow
table attacks or performing a brute force sweep of phone numbers
given known telecom operator and regional prefixes but can eas-
ily be avoided by using keyed hashes [80]. It becomes necessary
to deploy honeypot solutions which detect such attackers, and fil-
ter them pro-actively amongst billions of legitimate subscribers
without infringing on the privacy of the subscriber.

10 CONCLUSIONS & FUTURE WORK
In this paper we look into the history of regulatory and techno-
logical initiatives taken to combat the problem of unsolicited com-
mercial communication in the telecommunication industry. We
detail the challenges in the current business processes adopted
by stakeholders in the ecosystem and propose a new consortium
blockchain based architecture intended to address the problem of
unsolicited commercial communication. We propose a solution us-
ing blockchain architecture that improves subscriber experiences,
regulatory compliance and also creates a vibrant ecosystem with
economic opportunities for potential enterprises to operate in the
telecom industry. The proposed solution has been incorporated
into the latest regulation for UCC (TCCCPR’18) in India announced
on 19 July 2018.

The solution has proven to be effective and operational at the
scale of India, the second largest telecom market in the world with
over a Billion active subscribers and with a message flow of over a
Billion daily SMSs. The solution adequately met the design goals
improving the speed, and efficiency of telecom operations, in addi-
tion to security, and privacy by preventing the sharing of plaintext
subscriber information over the network. The implementation and
enforcement of various suggestions in the proposal have signifi-
cantly resulted in reduction of spam from organized advertising
channels but see the flip effect of spam moving towards unorga-
nized and peer to peer unregistered telemarketing practices needing
further innovations. The establishment of the blockchain network
enables new use cases such as mobile number portability and could
also be applied to several other telecom services.

While present in the regulatory mandate, the current work does
not yet establish a national consent registry allowing subscribers
to exercise their ability to provide, and retract consent for adver-
tising. However, the realtime nature of the new infrastructure will
ensure that the consent options when introduced will take imme-
diate effect. Alternate efforts such as the focus on STIR/SHAKEN
protocols improve identity and authenticity of users in telecom net-
works and could complement the efforts taken in this work towards
identifying unregistered telemarketers masquerading as individual
subscribers [14, 43, 88]. We leave this as future work for subsequent
versions of Telechain. The use of consortium blockchains with reg-
ulatory oversight is a promising way for governments to approach
operational challenges involving mutually untrusted participants
and enable cooperation to simplify and streamline their business
operations while ensuring regulatory compliance. The effectivness
of the solution described in this work inspired other countries such
as the United Arab Emirates (UAE) to adopt the same blockchain
based approach to curb spam in the UAE.

COMPASS ’22, June 29-July 1, 2022, Seattle, WA, USA

Singanamalla et al.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are incredibly grateful to the deep commitment and efforts put in
by various individuals who made this work possible, including tele-
com operators, individuals, organizations, and various stakeholders
who engaged actively with the consultation papers. We thank all
the stakeholders for their active feedback during the design, devel-
opment, deployment of the infrastructure and Telecom Regulatory
Authority of India for enabling these discussions. We’d like to thank
various teams from Microsoft Research India, Microsoft Global De-
livery, TechMahindra, and Baohua Yang from the Linux Foundation
Hyperledger for their support during the development of proto-
types. We’d like to acknowledge the valuable feedback provided on
the paper by the anonymous reviewers, Waylon Brunette, Matthew
Johnson, Miranda Wei, Ananditha Raghunath, and members of the
ICTD Lab at the University of Washington.

REFERENCES
[1] Elli Androulaki, Artem Barger, Vita Bortnikov, Christian Cachin, Konstanti-
nos Christidis, Angelo De Caro, David Enyeart, Christopher Ferris, Gennady
Laventman, Yacov Manevich, Srinivasan Muralidharan, Chet Murthy, Binh
Nguyen, Manish Sethi, Gari Singh, Keith Smith, Alessandro Sorniotti, Chrysoula
Stathakopoulou, Marko Vukolić, Sharon Weed Cocco, and Jason Yellick. 2018. Hy-
perledger Fabric: A Distributed Operating System for Permissioned Blockchains.
In Proceedings of the Thirteenth EuroSys Conference (EuroSys ’18). ACM, New York,
NY, USA, Article 30, 15 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3190508.3190538

[2] Yahel Ben-David, Shaddi Hasan, Joyojeet Pal, Matthias Vallentin, Saurabh Pan-
jwani, Philipp Gutheim, Jay Chen, and Eric A. Brewer. 2011. Computing Security
in the Developing World: A Case for Multidisciplinary Research. In Proceed-
ings of the 5th ACM Workshop on Networked Systems for Developing Regions
(NSDR ’11). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 39–44.
https://doi.org/10.1145/1999927.1999939

[3] Ben Patterson, PC World. 2014. How to stop SMS spam on your Android or iOS

phone. https://www.pcworld.com/article/2848988/. Online.

[4] Broadband India Forum. 2018. Final BIFResponse to TRAI draft Regulations the
Telecom Commercial Communications Customer Preference Regulations, 2018.
https://trai.gov.in/sites/default/files/BroadbandIndiaForum28062018.pdf. Online.
[5] Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited (BSNL). 2018. Draft Telecom Commercial Com-
munications Customer Preference Regulations 2018. https://trai.gov.in/sites/
default/files/BharatSancharNigamLtd28062018.pdf. Online.

[6] Miguel Castro and Barbara Liskov. 1999. Practical Byzantine Fault Tolerance. In
Proceedings of the Third Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implemen-
tation (OSDI ’99). USENIX Association, USA, 173–186.

[7] Idea Cellular. 2018. Idea Cellular Response to Draft Telecom Commercial Commu-
nications Customer Preference Regulations 2018. https://trai.gov.in/sites/default/
files/Idea28062018.pdf. Online.

[8] Cellular Operators Association of India (COAI). 2018. COAI Response to Draft
Telecom Commercial Communications Customer Preference Regulations 2018.
https://trai.gov.in/sites/default/files/COAI28062018.pdf. Online.

[9] COAI. 2019. Cellular Operators Association of India. https://www.coai.com/.

Online.

[10] Consumer Education and Research Centre.

CERC Com-
ments on the Draft Telecom Commercial Communication Consumer
Preference Regulations,
https://trai.gov.in/sites/default/files/
2018.
ConsumerEducationandResearchCentre28062018.pdf. Online.

2018.

[11] Consumer Protection Association. 2018. Comments on Telecom Commercial
Communication Consumer Preference Regulations, 2018. https://trai.gov.in/sites/
default/files/ConsumerProtectionAssociation28062018.pdf. Online.
[12] Council of European Union. 2002. Council regulation (EU) no 58/2002.

https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/ALL/?uri=celex:32002L0058.
[13] Shefali S. Dash and I. P. S. Sethi. 2009. National Do Not Call Registry in India: A
Step towards Restricting Unsolicited Telemarketing Calls. In Proceedings of the 3rd
International Conference on Theory and Practice of Electronic Governance (ICEGOV
’09). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 335–340. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/1693042.1693112

[14] Gregory W. Edwards, Michael J. Gonzales, and Marc A. Sullivan. 2020. Robocalling:
STIRRED AND SHAKEN! - An Investigation of Calling Displays on Trust and
Answer Rates. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–12.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3313831.3376679

[15] Enterprise Ethereum Alliance. 2018. Enterprise Ethereum Client Specification
V2. https://entethalliance.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/11/EEA_Enterprise_
Ethereum_Client_Specification_V2.pdf. Online.

[16] Federation of Consumer and Service Organizations. 2018.

Forward-
ing our view on Telecom Commercial Communication Consumer
Preference Regulations,
https://trai.gov.in/sites/default/files/
2018.
FedrationConsumernServiceOrganisation28062018.pdf. Online.

[17] Bulk SMS Gateway. 2022. Bulk SMS Services Pricing India, Bulk SMS Price
List, Bulk SMS Rates in Hyderabad, India. https://www.bulksmsgateway.in/sms-
pricing. (Accessed on 02/25/2022).

[18] Gopal Sathe, Huffington Post India. 2018.

India’s Latest Data Leak: People’s
Aadhaar Number And Bank Account Are Just One Google Search Away.
https://www.huffingtonpost.in/2018/07/11/indias-latest-data-leak-is-so-basic-
that-peoples-aadhaar-number-bank-account-and-fathers-name-are-just-one-
google-search-away_a_23479694/. Online.

[19] Hindustan Times. 2017. McDonald’s India app ’leaks’ 2.2mn addresses, phone
numbers; card details safe. https://www.hindustantimes.com/tech/mcdonald-
s-india-app-leaks-customer-data-for-more-than-2-2-million-users/story-
1EBCFinC4NItlfpyfj43VM.html. Online.

[20] Indian Cellular Association. 2018. Response to the Draft Telecom Commercial
Communication Consumer Preference Regulations, 2018. https://trai.gov.in/sites/
default/files/IndianCellularAssociation28062018.pdf. Online.

[21] ITU-APT Foundation of India. 2018.

ITU-APT Comments in relation
to Draft Telecom Commercial Communication Consumer Preference Reg-
ulations, 2018 released by TRAI.
https://trai.gov.in/sites/default/files/
ITUAPTFoundationofIndia28062018.pdf. Online.

[22] Javed Anwer, India Today. 2016. Dear Indians, have mercy on others and STOP us-
ing Truecaller. https://www.indiatoday.in/technology/talking-points/story/dear-
indians-have-mercy-on-others-and-stop-using-truecaller-360275-2016-12-30.
Online.

[23] Jehangir B Gai. 2015. Telecom service providers liable for violation of ’DND’ facil-
ity. https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/patna/Telecom-service-providers-
liable-for-violation-of-DND-facility/articleshow/48841277.cms. Online.
[24] Nan Jiang, Yu Jin, Ann Skudlark, and Zhi-Li Zhang. 2013. Greystar: Fast and
Accurate Detection of SMS Spam Numbers in Large Cellular Networks Us-
ing Gray Phone Space. In 22nd USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security
13). USENIX Association, Washington, D.C., 1–16. https://www.usenix.org/
conference/usenixsecurity13/technical-sessions/presentation/jiang

[25] Nan Jiang, Yu Jin, Ann Skudlark, and Zhi-Li Zhang. 2013. Understanding SMS
spam in a large cellular network. ACM SIGMETRICS Performance Evaluation
Review 41, 1 (2013), 381–382.

[26] Rishi Ranjan Kala. 2018. COAI to Trai: Keep norms on spam calls on hold for
now. https://www.financialexpress.com/industry/coai-to-trai-keep-norms-on-
spam-calls-on-hold-for-now/1248705/. (Accessed on 03/02/2022).

[27] Shirsendu Troy Karmakar. 2018. My response to the draft Telecom Commercial
Communications Customer Preference Regulations 2018. https://trai.gov.in/sites/
default/files/ShirsenduTroyKarmakar28062018.pdf. Online.

[28] Katie Bernard. 2019. FCC: Nearly half the calls you receive this year will be
spam. https://www.cnn.com/2019/02/14/politics/fcc-robocalls-report/index.html.
Online.

[29] Dennis WK Khong. 2004. The problem of spam law: A comment on the Malaysian
Communications and Multimedia Commission’s discussion paper on regulating
unsolicited commercial messages. Computer Law & Security Review 20, 3 (2004),
206–212.

[30] Alex C. Kigerl. 2016.

CAN SPAM Act on Email Spam Rates.
view 27, 8 (2016), 791–811.
arXiv:https://doi.org/10.1177/0887403414562604

Deterring Spammers: Impact Assessment of the
Criminal Justice Policy Re-
https://doi.org/10.1177/0887403414562604

[31] KOAN Advisory Group. 2018. Response to Draft Telecom Commercial Commu-
nication Consumer Preference Regulations, 2018. https://trai.gov.in/sites/default/
files/KoanAdvisoryGroup28062018.pdf. Online.

[32] Nir Kshetri. 2017. Will blockchain emerge as a tool

poverty chain in the Global South?
(2017),
arXiv:https://doi.org/10.1080/01436597.2017.1298438

1710–1732.

to break the
Third World Quarterly 38, 8
https://doi.org/10.1080/01436597.2017.1298438

[33] Younghwa Lee. 2005. The CAN-SPAM Act: a silver bullet solution? Commun.

ACM 48, 6 (2005), 131–132.

[34] Quadrant Televentures Limited. 2018. Comments on Draft Telecom Commercial
Communications Customer Preference Regulations 2018. https://trai.gov.in/sites/
default/files/QuadrantTeleventuresLtd28062018.pdf. Online.

[35] Reliance JIO Infocomm Limited. 2018. Comments on Draft Telecom Commercial
Communications Customer Preference Regulations 2018. https://trai.gov.in/sites/
default/files/RelianceJioInfocommLtd28062018.pdf. Online.

[36] Himanshi Lohchab. 2020. PIL in SC seeks scrapping of Trai’s new regulation on
checking pesky calls/SMSes. https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/industry/
telecom/telecom-news/pil-in-sc-seeks-scrapping-of-trais-new-regulation-
on-checking-pesky-calls/smses/articleshow/78037732.cms.
03/02/2022).

(Accessed on

[37] Himanshi Lohchab. 2021. SMS traffic back to nearly 1 billion per day under
new system to check pesky messages. https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/
industry/telecom/telecom-news/sms-traffic-back-to-nearly-1-billion-per-

Telechain: Bridging Telecom Policy and Blockchain Practice

COMPASS ’22, June 29-July 1, 2022, Seattle, WA, USA

day-under-new-system-to-check-pesky-messages/articleshow/82211826.cms?
from=mdr. (Accessed on 02/27/2022).

[38] Himanshi Lohchab and Devina Sengupta. 2021. trai: After OTP and SMS services
disruption, Trai asks telcos to switch off new filter for 7 days - The Economic
Times. https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/industry/telecom/telecom-news/
telcos-told-to-switch-off-sms-filter-for-7-days/articleshow/81421300.cms. (Ac-
cessed on 02/27/2022).

[39] Bharti Airtel Ltd. 2018. Response to Draft Telecom Commercial Communications
Customer Preference Regulations 2018. https://trai.gov.in/sites/default/files/
BhartiAirtelLtd28062018.pdf. Online.

[40] Ujwal Makhija and Phonon Communications Private Limited. 2018. Com-
https://trai.gov.in/sites/default/files/

ments on the Consultation Paper.
PhononCommunicationsPvtLtd28062018.pdf. Online.

[41] Data Privacy Manager. 2020.

Italian DPA issued a €12.25 million GDPR
fine to Vodafone for aggressive telemarketing. https://dataprivacymanager.
net/italian-dpa-issued-e12-25-million-gdpr-fine-to-vodafone-for-aggresive-
telemarketing/. (Accessed on 02/28/2022).

[42] Data Privacy Manager. 2020.

€27,8 million GDPR fine for Italian Tele-
com -TIM. https://dataprivacymanager.net/e278-million-gdpr-fine-for-italian-
telecom-tim/. (Accessed on 02/28/2022).

[43] Jim McEachern and Eric Burger. 2019. How to shut down robocallers: The
STIR/SHAKEN protocol will stop scammers from exploiting a caller ID loophole.
IEEE Spectrum 56, 12 (2019), 46–52.

[44] Microsoft. 2017. SMS Organizer - an Android app. https://www.microsoft.com/en-

us/garage/profiles/sms-organizer/. Online.

[45] P. Mockapetris and K. J. Dunlap. 1988. Development of the Domain Name
System. In Symposium Proceedings on Communications Architectures and Protocols
(SIGCOMM ’88). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
123–133. https://doi.org/10.1145/52324.52338

[46] Evangelos Moustakas, Chandrasekaran Ranganathan, and Penny Duquenoy.
2005. Combating Spam through Legislation: A Comparative Analysis of US
and European Approaches.. In Proceedings of the Fifth Conference on Email and
Anti-Spam (CEAS). CEAS, Mountain View, CA, USA, 1–8.

[47] Akshay Narayan and Prateek Saxena. 2013. The Curse of 140 Characters: Evalu-
ating the Efficacy of SMS Spam Detection on Android. In Proceedings of the Third
ACM Workshop on Security and Privacy in Smartphones &#38; Mobile Devices (SPSM
’13). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 33–42. https://doi.org/10.1145/2516760.2516772
[48] Telecom Regulatory Authority of India. 2022. TRAI DND 3.0(Do Not Disturb).
https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=trai.gov.in.dnd&hl=en-gb.
(Ac-
cessed on 03/01/2022).

[49] Telecom Regulatory Authority of India. 2022. TRAI DND iOS Application. https:
//apps.apple.com/in/app/trai-dnd-do-not-disturb/id1443781196?ls=1. (Accessed
on 03/01/2022).

[50] Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI). 2011. Press Release on Telmar-
keter Registration. https://www.trai.gov.in/sites/default/files/pr14jan11cndiv.pdf.
(Accessed on 02/28/2022).

[51] Svein Ølnes, Jolien Ubacht, and Marijn Janssen. 2017. Blockchain in govern-
ment: Benefits and implications of distributed ledger technology for infor-
mation sharing. Government Information Quarterly 34, 3 (2017), 355 – 364.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.giq.2017.09.007
[52] Diego Ongaro and John Ousterhout. 2014.

In Search of an Understandable
Consensus Algorithm. In 2014 USENIX Annual Technical Conference (USENIX ATC
14). USENIX Association, Philadelphia, PA, 305–319. https://www.usenix.org/
conference/atc14/technical-sessions/presentation/ongaro

[53] Panoply. 2017. Redis Vs MongoDB. https://blog.panoply.io/redis-vs-mongodb.

Online.

[54] Parliament of the United Kingdom. 1998. Data Protection Act 1998. https:

//www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1998/29/pdfs/ukpga_19980029_en.pdf.

[55] Bhavesh H. Patel. 2018. Views on draft UCC regulations released by TRAI on
29th May 2018. https://trai.gov.in/sites/default/files/BhaveshPatel28062018.pdf.
Online.

[56] Morgen E Peck. 2017. Blockchains: How they work and why they’ll change the

world. IEEE spectrum 54, 10 (2017), 26–35.

[57] GPDP Garante per la protezione dei dati personali. 2020. Corrective and sanc-
tioning measure against TIM SpA. https://www.garanteprivacy.it/web/guest/
home/docweb/-/docweb-display/docweb/9256486. (Accessed on 02/28/2022).

[58] Fahad Pervaiz, Rai Shah Nawaz, Muhammad Umer Ramzan, Maryem Zafar Us-
mani, Shrirang Mare, Kurtis Heimerl, Faisal Kamiran, Richard Anderson, and
Lubna Razaq. 2019. An Assessment of SMS Fraud in Pakistan. In Proceedings of
the 2nd ACM SIGCAS Conference on Computing and Sustainable Societies (COM-
PASS ’19). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 195–205.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3314344.3332500

[59] Petlee Peter. 2018.
smartphones.
fraud-conmen-use-malware-to-steal-info-from-smartphones-siphon-off-
money/articleshow/63753485.cms. Online.

SMS fraud: Conmen use malware to steal info from
https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/bengaluru/sms-

[60] Vivekdeep Gupta | R3. 2018. Feedback on draft UCC regulations released by TRAI
on 29th May 2018. https://trai.gov.in/sites/default/files/VivekdeepGupta28062018.

pdf. Online.

[61] Bradley Reaves, Logan Blue, Dave Tian, Patrick Traynor, and Kevin R.B. Butler.
2016. Detecting SMS Spam in the Age of Legitimate Bulk Messaging. In Pro-
ceedings of the 9th ACM Conference on Security & Privacy in Wireless and Mobile
Networks (WiSec ’16). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
165–170. https://doi.org/10.1145/2939918.2939937

[62] Sandeep Kumar, Torsha Sarkar, Swaraj Barooah, Gurshabad Grover. 2018. Com-
ments on the Telecom Commercial Communicaons Customer Preference Regula-
tions 2018 | Center for Internet and Society. https://trai.gov.in/sites/default/files/
TheCentreforInternetandSociety28062018.pdf. Online.

[63] Sudhakar Sharma and Syniverse. 2018. Comments on the Telecom Commercial
Communicaons Customer Preference Regulations 2018. https://trai.gov.in/sites/
default/files/SudhakarSharma28062018.pdf. Online.

[64] Prashant Shukla and Microsoft. 2018. Response to the Draft Telecom Commercial
Communication Consumer Preference Regulations, 2018. https://trai.gov.in/sites/
default/files/MicrosoftIndia28062018.pdf. Online.

[65] David E Sorkin. 1997. Unsolicited commercial e-mail and the telephone consumer

protection act of 1991. Buff. L. Rev. 45 (1997), 1001.

[66] Stephanie Mlot. 2019. John Oliver Robocalls FCC to Prove Point About Robo-
calls. https://www.geek.com/tech/john-oliver-robocalls-fcc-to-prove-point-
about-robocalls-1778084/. Online.

[67] Harish Sukhwani, José M. Martínez, Xiaolin Chang, Kishor S. Trivedi, and
Andy Rindos. 2017. Performance Modeling of PBFT Consensus Process for
Permissioned Blockchain Network (Hyperledger Fabric). In 2017 IEEE 36th
Symposium on Reliable Distributed Systems (SRDS). IEEE, Hong Kong, 253–255.
https://doi.org/10.1109/SRDS.2017.36

[68] Jeffrey D Sullivan and Michael B De Leeuw. 2003. Spam after Can-Spam: How
Inconsistent Thinking Has Made a Hash out of Unsolicted Commercial E-Mail
Policy. Santa Clara Computer & High Tech. LJ 20 (2003), 887.

[69] Telecom Regulatory Authority of India. 2018. Do Not Disturb 2.0. https://main.

trai.gov.in/portals-apps/trai-apps. Online.

[70] Telecom Regulatory Authority of India - Government of India. 2007. The Telecom
Unsolicited Commericial Communications Regulations, 2007. https://main.trai.
gov.in/sites/default/files/201204190608149960110Regulation5june07.pdf. Online.
[71] Telecom Regulatory Authority of India - Government of India. 2010. The Telecom
Commercial Communications Customer Preference Regulations, 2010. http:
//www.nccptrai.gov.in/nccpregistry/regulation1diccndiv.pdf. Online.

[72] Telecom Regulatory Authority of India - Government of India. 2017. Direction un-
der Section 13 regarding unsolicited bulk SMSs related to investment in securities
market. https://trai.gov.in/sites/default/files/Direction_10082017.pdf. Online.

[73] Telecom Regulatory Authority of India - Government of India. 2019. Direction
under Section 13 regarding submission of Performance Monitoring Report to the
Authority. https://trai.gov.in/sites/default/files/Direction_19062020.pdf. Online.
[74] Telecom Regulatory Authority of India - Government of India. 2019. Press Release
on Telecom Subscription Data as on 31st December, 2018. https://main.trai.gov.
in/sites/default/files/PR_No.13of2019.pdf. Online.

[75] Telecom Regulatory Authority of India - Government of India. 2020. Di-
rection under Section 13 regarding implementation of Telecom Commercial
Communications Customer Preference Regulations (TCCCPR) 2018. https:
//trai.gov.in/sites/default/files/Direction_19062020.pdf. Online.

[76] The Economist. 2017. Governments may be big backers of the blockchain.

https://www.economist.com/business/2017/06/01/governments-may-be-big-
backers-of-the-blockchain. Online.

[77] The Economic Times. 2021. 74% respondents getting pesky messages despite
https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/

being in Trai’s DND list: Survey.
industry/telecom/telecom-news/74-respondents-getting-pesky-messages-
despite-being-in-trais-dnd-list-survey/articleshow/84334262.cms. Online.
[78] True Caller. 2017. SMS Categorizer. https://support.truecaller.com/hc/en-us/

articles/360000767197-What-is-SMS-Categorizer-. Online.

[79] Huahong Tu, Adam Doupé, Ziming Zhao, and Gail-Joon Ahn. 2016. SoK: Everyone
Hates Robocalls: A Survey of Techniques Against Telephone Spam. In 2016 IEEE
Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP). IEEE, San Jose, CA, USA, 320–338.
https://doi.org/10.1109/SP.2016.27

[80] James M Turner. 2008. The keyed-hash message authentication code (hmac).

Federal Information Processing Standards Publication 198, 1 (2008), 1–13.

[81] United States Congress. 2003. Public Law 108-187-Dec16, 2003 - Controlling the
Assault of Non Solicited Pornography and Marketing Act. https://www.govinfo.
gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-117/pdf/STATUTE-117-Pg2699.pdf. Online.
[82] Value First Digital Media Pvt Ltd. 2018. Comments on the Telecom Commercial
Communicaons Customer Preference Regulations 2018. https://trai.gov.in/sites/
default/files/ValueFirstDigitalMediaPvtLtd28062018.pdf. Online.

[83] Aditya Vashistha, Richard Anderson, and Shrirang Mare. 2018. Examining Se-
curity and Privacy Research in Developing Regions. In Proceedings of the 1st
ACM SIGCAS Conference on Computing and Sustainable Societies (COMPASS ’18).
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 25, 14 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3209811.3209818

[84] Gaurav Verma and Times Internet. 2018. Times Internet Limited’s comments and
observations on the Telecom Commercial Communicaons Customer Preference

COMPASS ’22, June 29-July 1, 2022, Seattle, WA, USA

Singanamalla et al.

Regulations 2018. https://trai.gov.in/sites/default/files/TimesInternetLtd28062018.
pdf. Online.

[85] Vodafone. 2018. Vodafone Comments to the TRAI’s Draft Telecom Commercial
Communications Customer Preference Regulations 2018. https://trai.gov.in/sites/
default/files/VodafoneIndia28062018.pdf. Online.

[86] Gavin Wood. 2014. Ethereum: A secure decentralised generalised transaction

ledger. Ethereum project yellow paper 151 (2014), 1–32.

[87] Kuldeep Yadav, Ponnurangam Kumaraguru, Atul Goyal, Ashish Gupta, and
Vinayak Naik. 2011. SMSAssassin: Crowdsourcing Driven Mobile-based System

for SMS Spam Filtering. In Proceedings of the 12th Workshop on Mobile Comput-
ing Systems and Applications (HotMobile ’11). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1–6.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2184489.2184491

[88] James Yu. 2021. An Analysis of Applying STIR/SHAKEN to Prevent Robocalls.
In Advances in Security, Networks, and Internet of Things, Kevin Daimi, Hamid R.
Arabnia, Leonidas Deligiannidis, Min-Shiang Hwang, and Fernando G. Tinetti
(Eds.). Springer International Publishing, Cham, 277–290.

