2
2
0
2

y
a
M
8

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
2
2
8
3
0
.
5
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Challenges and Opportunities of Blockchain for
Cyber Threat Intelligence Sharing

Kealan Dunnett1, Shantanu Pal1, and Zahra Jadidi2

1 School of Computer Science, Queensland University of Technology,
Brisbane, QLD 4000, Australia
2 School of Information and Communication Technology, Griﬃth University,
Gold Coast Campus, QLD 4222, Australia
kealan.dunnett@connect.qut.edu.au, shantanu.pal@qut.edu.au,
z.jadidi@griffith.edu.au

Abstract. The emergence of the Internet of Things (IoT) technology
has caused a powerful transition in the cyber threat landscape. As a re-
sult, organisations have had to ﬁnd new ways to better manage the risks
associated with their infrastructure. In response, a signiﬁcant amount
of research has focused on developing eﬃcient Cyber Threat Intelli-
gence (CTI) sharing platforms. However, most existing solutions are
highly centralised and do not provide a way to exchange information
in a distributed way. In this chapter, we subsequently seek to evaluate
how blockchain technology can be used to address a number of limita-
tions present in existing CTI sharing platforms. To determine the role
of blockchain-based sharing moving forward, we present a number of
general CTI sharing challenges, and discuss how blockchain can bring
opportunities to address these challenges in a secure and eﬃcient man-
ner. Finally, we discuss a list of relevant works and note some unique
future research questions.

Keywords: Blockchain · Cyber threat intelligence · Security · Informa-
tion sharing.

1

Introduction

Each year the threat landscape continues to evolve in both the types of cyber-
attacks and the methods used to commit them [1]. Organisations have sub-
sequently had to ﬁnd ways to manage the increased risk associated with the
infrastructure they depend on to operate. As a result, several Cyber Security
Risk Management (CSRM) frameworks have been developed to deﬁne a more
concrete framework to better manage this risk [2]. However, with the emer-
gence of the Internet of Things (IoT) technology [3], smart portable sensors and
their resource-constrained nature, the threat landscape has recently grown at
a rate that makes the traditional CSRM task challenging [4] [5]. To minimise
cyber threats, organisations continue to develop methods focused on gathering
threat-based information speciﬁc to them. Towards this, Cyber Threat Intelli-
gence (CTI) is a concept that describes the collection and analysis of threat

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

K. Dunnett et al.

information by an organisation. The emergence of CTI in recent years has seen
its integration into traditional CSRM frameworks become a eﬀective threat mit-
igation strategy [6].

The SANS institute is a US based organisation that conducts a yearly CTI
survey across industry. The primary aim of this survey is to understand the
current state of CTI use within industry. In their 2021 survey, a signiﬁcant mile-
stone was reported, 100% of surveyed organisations indicated that they either
currently do or have plans to use CTI in some way [7]. When this ﬁgure is con-
trasted with the 75% reported only four year earlier in 2017, it is clear that CTI
will continue to play a critical role in threat mitigation within industry moving
forward.

Sharing CTI cooperatively between organisations can be highlighted as a
mutually beneﬁcial process for all participating organisations [8]. However, in
practise CTI sharing is challenging due to the variety of ways threats can aﬀect
the components that make up an organisations infrastructure (e.g., Storage, Net-
works and Communication). For example, the man-in-the-middle attack, eaves-
dropping attack, phishing and spear-phishing attacks, etc [9].

In recent years Vendor-created/Open-source threat intelligence sharing plat-
forms, have become a popular choice within industry. These platforms provide
organisations with an environment where they can share and consume CTI in
either a fully or semi automated way. During their 2021 survey the SANS in-
stitute noted that these types of sharing platforms saw a 3% increase in use
compared to 2020 [7]. Moreover, it was also reported that more traditional shar-
ing mechanisms (e.g., emails and briefs) saw a 7.8% decrease in use compared
to 2020.

We argue that while this trend towards either fully or semi automated threat
intelligence sharing is positive, a number of key challenges (e.g., Produce Con-
sumer Imbalance, Data Validity) are currently prevalent in this space, as high-
lighted by existing literature [10]. Furthermore, we also seek to provide a unique
insight into how privacy, trust and accountability deﬁne a seemingly paradoxical
relationship. As well as discussing several general CTI sharing challenges, we
also seek to demonstrate that using a decentralised platform for CTI sharing
between organisations in a trustless manner has tremendous promise.

Towards this, blockchain is a promising technology. Blockchain is a tamper-
proof, decentralised, and immutable storage of digital information that is im-
possible to change [11]. Therefore, blockchain can provide a strong and eﬀective
solution for securing CTI in networked ledgers, a series of blocks that are cryp-
tographically linked, and facilitates secure dissemination between organisations.
However, blockchain-based CTI sharing solutions are lacking in the present liter-
ature. A few proposals, e.g., [12] [13] [14], integrate blockchain for CTI sharing,
but a comprehensive solution which addresses all of the discussed challenges is
currently lacking.

In this chapter, we evaluate a number of present CTI sharing challenges
and discuss how blockchain can bring opportunities to address these challenges.
Thus, the major contribution of this chapter is to provide a list of challenges

Blockchain for Cyber Threat Intelligence Sharing

3

associated with CTI sharing and deliver a list of opportunities present within
the blockchain space for future research.

The remainder of the Chapter is organised as follows. In Section 2, we present
a brief overview of blockchain and CTI. In Section 3, we present a simpliﬁed
blockchain-based CTI sharing model from the current literature to demonstrate
how blockchain can facilitate sharing. In Section 4, we discuss the a number
of challenges associated with CTI sharing. In Section 5, we present a number
of opportunities that highlight the applicability of blockchain-based models in
the CTI sharing space based on current ideas presented in the literature. In
Section 6, we present a brief discussion the related work within the literature.
To concluded, in Section 7 we summarise the work presented in this Chapter
and discuss future research directions.

2 Overview of Blockchain and CTI

Before discussing blockchain-based CTI sharing in detail, we present a brief
overview of blockchain and CTI in this section.

2.1 Blockchain

Blockchain is a distributed digital ledger for storing electronic records [11]. In
other words, blockchain can be seen as a network of computers that store trans-
actions (and therefore the data) across multiple computers. These computers are
considered a node in the blockchain. The data entered in a particular interval in
the chain is known as a block. Each block is identiﬁed using a unique identiﬁer
is called a hash. Each block contains the hash of the previous block. A hash is
the output of a unique cryptographic function that takes as input a arbitrary
amount amount of data and generates a ﬁxed-size output, the hash. Signiﬁcantly,
this is a one-way function and it is impossible to reserve the computation [15].
In blockchain, when a transaction is ﬁrst equested, it is authenticated us-
ing cryptographic keys (public and private keys). Then a block containing that
transaction is created and sent to the entire network. Once the transaction is
agreed between the nodes in the network, it is approved (i.e., authorised) before
the block is added to the chain. This is done by a mechanism called consen-
sus, where the majority of nodes agree with the transaction. Note that nodes
must perform a complex mathematical problem to validate a transaction. This
is known as mining, and the participanting nodes are referred to as the miners.
Commonly, the mining task in called Proof of Work (PoW). A cryptocurrency
reward is given to the miner who ﬁrst solves the mathematical problem (i.e., the
PoW) and validates a block. After this, the block is added to the existing chain,
and all the nodes in the network are updated with this information [16].

Therefore, blockchain provides a framework in which nodes can maintain an
immutable ledger of data. In Fig. 1, we illustrate how immutability is created
in blockchain by linking successive blocks together using cryptographic hash-
ing functions. Currently PoW is the most widely used mechanism for mining.

4

K. Dunnett et al.

However, PoW requires a substantial computing power and therefore uses con-
siderable amounts of energy, a notable drawbacks of PoW. To solve this issue,
another mining mechanism, Proof-of-Stake (PoS) is becoming popular. PoS pro-
vides faster transactions and uses less energy during mining [17]. Some signiﬁcant
properties of blockchain are outlined as follows [18]:

Fig. 1: An illustration of blockchain immutability created by hashing

– Decentralised: Does not require a single central authority to validate trans-
actions rather a consensus algorithm is used. As a result, Blockchain does
not suﬀer from a single point of failure.

– Immutability: Once a block is added to the chain it is almost impossible to

delete or change the data. This provides security to the stored data.

– Anonymity: Provides nodes with the ability to participate without disclosing

their identity.

– Trustless: Nodes also do not have to have pre-established trust with each
other to transact, with all transactions documented on the ledger to ensure
transparency.

– Auditability: At any point in time an existing transaction on the chain can
be validated. To ensure a transaction has not been changed or altered the
proceeding blocks hashes can be checked.

– Transparency: Every transaction that takes place is stored on the blockchain

and therefore is visible to the every node in the network.

– Use of Smart Contracts: Transaction in the blockchain can be automated
with smart contracts. It is a computer code that facilitates and veriﬁes the
nodes’ agreements and therefore increases the computational eﬃciencies.

Prev. HashNonceT0Tn...TransactionsMeta DataMerkle TreeHashPrev. HashNonceT0Tn...TransactionsMeta DataMerkle TreeHashT0T1Tn-1TnH(T0)H(T1)H(Tn-1)H(Tn)H(01)H(n-1 n)Merkle Root...NonceGenesis InformationMeta DataHashMerkle TreeTnFrom: 1JFlbTo: hVJd4Amount: 15.0Fee: 0.001From: 2mKlqTo: 1R2a4Amount: 5.00Fee: 0.0001...T0Genesis BlockBlock 1Block 2Blockchain for Cyber Threat Intelligence Sharing

5

2.2 CTI

Cyber Threat Intelligence refers to a collection of evidence-based knowledge
about cyber threats. This knowledge can be compromised of a variety of infor-
mation including Indicators of Compromise (IoC), attackers’ motivations, inten-
tions, characteristics, attack vectors, as well as their Techniques, Tactics, and
Procedures (TTPs) [19]. CTI can also consist of actionable advice to detect,
prevent, and mitigate the impact of attacks. It can also be obtained from a vari-
ety of sources, including anti-virus programs, open-source intelligence (OSINT),
Intrusion Detection Systems (IDSs), human intelligence, malware analysis, code
repositories, and CTI sharing platforms. CTI can be categorised into following
four types: (i) strategic, (ii) operational, (iii) tactical, and (iv) technical. A brief
description for each type follows:

– Strategic CTI provides a high-level overview of the threat landscape in terms
of past, current, and future trends. This type of CTI is often presented
in plain language and is focused on improving situational awareness and
presenting business risks. The intended audience is senior, lay-person decision
makers in an organisation.

– Operational CTI refers to information about the nature and motivations
of potential upcoming attacks against an organisation, that can be used to
formulate targeted prevention strategies and prevent future incidents.

– Tactical CTI relates to TTPs and IoCs, that are useful to identify speciﬁc
attack vectors and vulnerabilities for the purposes of proactively updating
signature-based defences against known threats.

– Technical CTI consists of technical information often found on threat intelli-
gence feeds about malware and adversarial campaigns, including information
about an attacker’s assets, attack vectors employed, Command and Control
domains used, and types of vulnerabilities exploited.

CTI deals with the collection and analysis of evidence-based knowledge about
existing or potential threats that can be used to inform decision making. The
aim of CTI is to aggregate a number of unstructured data sources (e.g., network
logs and software signatures) and create structured intelligence that details a
threat [6].

As noted in Section 1, traditional CTI sharing systems lack the ability to
share this intelligence eﬀectively. Several of the major challenges that these sys-
tems have yet to overcome are – the producer consumer imbalance, data validity,
legal and regulatory factors, and sharing intelligent intelligence. Consequently, a
number of recently proposed CTI sharing platforms have integrated blockchain
into their design to try and provide novel solutions to these challenges.

3 Blockchain-Based CTI Sharing

Signiﬁcant diversity exists in the blockchain-based CTI sharing space. These
models utilise speciﬁc blockchain characteristics and cryptographic constructs

6

K. Dunnett et al.

in a variety of ways to facilitate sharing. In Fig. 2, we illustrate a simple sharing
framework which exempliﬁes how blockchain can be applied to CTI sharing [20].
This model is composed of the following components.

– Consumers: Users who consume shared CTI information. Make decisions
about which intelligence they consume based on the relevance to their phys-
ical infrastructure or business case.

– Producers: Users who produce CTI based on internal information that can
be linked to an existing or new threat. This CTI is then shared with an
individual, group or publicly, based on sensitivity of the intelligence using
blockchain.

– Veriﬁers: Users who validate shared CTI to ensure it meets sharing stan-
dards (e.g., Complies with STIX format), is not duplicated intelligence that
has already been shared, and or maliciously contains fake information. The
results of this user’s analysis either directly impacts the addition of CTI to
the blockchain or is added with the given CTI as a report to inform consumer
decisions.

– Authority: Users who verify the identity of other users before they participate
in sharing. This authentication creates trust between users who produce and
consume intelligence as they can be sure that only authenticated users are
able to do so.

– Blockchain: It is used to provide a distributed ledger of CTI information

(e.g., Hyperledger, Ethereum, EOS, etc).

– CTI Smart Contract: Self managed code that is executed by the blockchain
to manage the veriﬁcation of shared CTI. This contract is made up of a Inter
Planetary File System reference to the shared CTI and a veriﬁcation status.

Note: Users can be any combination of the above roles and subsequently are

not restricted to one role.

As shown in Fig. 2, the process of communication among the various com-

ponents of the framework follows these steps.

– Step 1: All stakeholders prove their identity to a trusted Authority. Proof-of-
identity can consist of the exchange of information like government creden-
tials (e.g., drivers licence or passport), ownership of third party certiﬁcates
or industry accreditation.

– Step 2: Producer generates CTI and adds it to the blockchain for veriﬁcation.
– Step 3: Veriﬁer determines the credibility of the CTI based on a set of stan-

dards agreed upon by the network.

– Step 4: CTI that is determined to be valid in Step 3, is added to the

blockchain.

– Step 5: Consumers access CTI that has been added to the blockchain.

The simpliﬁed sharing model presented in Fig. 2 demonstrates how blockchain
can be used to facilitate CTI sharing at a basic level. Moreover, when the prop-
erties of blockchain discussed in Section 2.1 are considered in the context of
CTI sharing, the advantages that blockchain-based sharing models have over
traditional centralised approaches can be highlighted.

Blockchain for Cyber Threat Intelligence Sharing

7

Fig. 2: A typical blockchain-based CTI sharing framework.

4 Challenges

Traditional CTI sharing frameworks (e.g., MISP, OpenCTI and ISACs) have a
wide range of challenges that are documented in the literature [10] [21]. In this
section, we focus on a subset of these general CTI sharing challenges (cf. Fig. 3).

4.1 Producer Consumer Imbalance

Stakeholder who participate in CTI sharing as either a producer or consumer
(cf. Section 3) must consider the risks and beneﬁts associated with doing so. In
the case where a producer shares intelligence, a number of reputational and or
monetary risks are prevalent. For example, sharing intelligence that indicates
an organisation has been the victim of a ransomware attack, could cause stock
prices to fall or new customers to choose a competitor. Some of the potential
risks are listed below [10] [21];

– Consumer Distrust: Potential consumers might feel that a reported cyber
incident means that the organisation is vulnerable. As a result, existing cus-
tomers may decide to use the services of a competitor that has not reported
an incident.

BlockchainAuthorityProducerConsumer1CTI235Verifier1418

K. Dunnett et al.

Fig. 3: General CTI sharing challenges.

– Competitor Advantage: Competitors become aware of potential vulnerabili-
ties that might aﬀect them without being directly aﬀected by it. This allows
them to implement mitigation strategies for the same vulnerability at a re-
duced resource cost.

– Revealing Trade Secretes: Information about hardware, software or services

an organisation use might be revealed.

Apart from being able to consume CTI themselves, producers do not gain
any direct beneﬁts from sharing. As a consequence, without implementation of
a reward-based system as part of a sharing platform, the process of sharing CTI
can be considered a common good service. On the other hand, consumers assume
almost no risk when consuming CTI. Even in the case where the consumption
of speciﬁc CTI is attributable to an organisation, this action alone is not likely
to result in the same reputational or monetary consequences associated with
sharing. Given that organisations that consume CTI can implement mitigation
strategies against vulnerabilities before they can be acted on, we propose that
the following beneﬁts that could be gained;

– Increased Service Quality: Increase service up time provides existing cus-
tomers with a better service quality. This could result in a higher customer
retention rate. As a result of providing existing customers with a more con-
sistent service, an organisation might gain a reputation for providing services
with low downtime.

Producer Consumer Imbalance-Reputational, legal and disclosure risks when sharing-No sharing risk as a consumerLegal and Regulatory Obligations-Mandatory Reporting-Classification of personal data based on jurisdiction Intelligent Intelligence-Types of CTI-Currently IoC are shared over TTP -Needle in a hay stackPrivacy, Trust and Accountability-Reputational damage-Consumer trust-Governance over false sharingTextChallengesData Validity-Deliberately false sharing-Denial-Of-Intelligence-Authenticity of CTIBlockchain for Cyber Threat Intelligence Sharing

9

– Reduced Negative Publicity: In the case where an organisation successfully
implements a mitigation strategy to ﬁx a shared vulnerability, the potential
for negative publicity due to a successful attack is removed.

– New Customers: In the case where an organisation has suﬀered from a num-
ber of cyber incidents (e.g., DDoS Attacks, Privacy Leak), it could be pre-
dicted that dissatisﬁed customers could seek an alternative service. More-
over, if a competing organisation providing and analogous service that has
not suﬀered from these same incidents due to the consumption of CTI, it
could be predicted that this organisation could gain additional customers.

From the above discussion it is clear that the risks and beneﬁts associated
with the producer and consumer role are not equal. This inequity, consequently
creates an imbalance. If this imbalance is not addressed as part of a sharing
platforms design, organisations can be observed to exhibit free-riding behavior
[10]. In this case, free-riding behavior can be deﬁned as a deliberate lack of
participation by organisations who could share valuable CTI, however choose
not to. If a large portion of organisations deliberately behave in this way, the
productivity of a sharing platform is aﬀected in two major ways [22];

1. Not sharing removes the ability of other organisations to mitigate against
the same incident. When CTI is shared, it is possible for other organisations
to put in place mitigation strategies (e.g., Firewall rules) to ensure they
are not susceptible to attacks which have a similar proﬁle or share common
characteristics. In the case of free-riding, this is not possible.

2. Non-free-riding organisations might stop or reduce the amount of intelligence
they share due to a lack of consumable CTI from others. As noted above, pro-
ducers assume a number of risks when they participate in sharing. However,
if part of a productive platform where a large volume of valuable intelligence
is shared, this risk compared to the beneﬁt gained by consuming other in-
telligence makes sharing more attractive. Consequently, a large portion of
free-riding organisations has the potential to impact the sharing behaviours
of others.

4.2 Legal and Regulatory Obligations

Organisations who participate in sharing have to follow the legal and regulatory
obligations associated with the jurisdiction they are from. Survey [10], high-
lights a number of legal and regulatory obligations that organisation in certain
countries must meet.

For example, in Germany Internet Protocol (IP) addresses are considered
personal information and therefore any disclosure of CTI containing them must
comply with German privacy laws [23]. However, in the UK IP addresses are
not considered personal information and therefore can be freely shared. In terms
of CTI sharing, IP addresses are likely to be shared as an IoC and therefore
organisations based in these diﬀerent jurisdictions have to ensure they comply
with the applicable laws. Moreover, countries like Belgium and Slovenia have

10

K. Dunnett et al.

mandatory sharing legislation [10]. This legislation requires organisations from
these two countries to report any cyber incidents to a speciﬁc authority when
they occur. If these organisations were also to participate in CTI sharing on
top of this, in some cases the resources consumed to facilitate both of these
independent sharing requirements could exceed those which are available.

The above examples highlight that while theoretically CTI sharing is ubiqui-
tous across the world, legal and regulatory obligations can pose a signiﬁcant bar-
rier. Given that legal and regulatory obligations are signiﬁcantly diverse across
the world, sharing platforms must ensure CTI can be shared in a pliable way.

4.3 Data Validity

Threat hunting is deﬁned by [24] and [25] as the proactive approach of seeking
anomalous or malicious activity within an organisations cyber terrain. The pro-
cess of performing this task, which if successful can result in the production of
CTI, can be highly variable in nature. At the most basic level, threat hunting can
simply consist of manual analysis of network or Windows logs. In contrast, [26]
proposes a sophisticated threat hunting model which utilises machine learning
to automatically generate threat intelligence based on data from a variety of
sources.

While these examples vary in their sophistication, they both share the com-
mon feature that the process of generating CTI is solely completed by the sharing
organisation. As a result, it is possible for malicious organisations or individuals
to intentionally generate and share false intelligence. We note that sharing false
CTI has the potential to be utilised in several ways to either gain additional at-
tack surfaces or to bury real CTI amongst fake intelligence going forward. Two
examples of this are discussed below.

Automatic Attack Feed Exploitation: Recent trends in CTI sharing have
seen many notable developments towards automation, both in its generation (as
discussed above) as well as in its consumption. For example, technologies such
as Structured Threat Information Expression (STIX) and Trusted Automated
eXchange of Intelligence Information (TAXII), has allowed many organisations
to easily share and consume CTI in an automated way [10]. As CTI consumption
becomes more automated, it could be feasible for threat actors to utilize this to
create new attack surfaces. For example, intelligence structured using STIX can
contain SNORT rules that consumers can automatically feed into their intrusion
detection systems (IDS) [21]. Given certain conditions, we theorise that it could
be plausible for an attacker to construct seemingly legitimate intelligence that
causes a consuming organisations IDS to ﬂag legitimate activity as malicious.
This technique could be used in conjunction with an actual attack, to disguise
malicious activity amongst legitimate traﬃc that is falsely ﬂagged as suspicious.

Denial-of-Intelligence: As sharing platforms become more and more eﬀective
at allowing organisations to mitigate against threats, they themselves could be-
come targets. Denial-of-Service (DoS) attacks have been around since the origin

Blockchain for Cyber Threat Intelligence Sharing

11

of the internet yet still remain highly eﬀective in the present day. The main
goal of a DoS attack is to simply make a particular computing resource unavail-
able [27]. The most common way that these types of attacks are committed, is by
overwhelming a service with a large volume of bogus requests. We observe that a
‘Denial-of-X’ style attack could be constructed to target CTI sharing platforms
speciﬁcally.

In this case, threat actors could develop Denial-of-Intelligence (DoI) attacks.
This type of attack would seek to overwhelm a platform with a large amount of
bogus intelligence. By ﬂooding a sharing platform with a large amount volume
of fake intelligence, threat actors could exploit a common vulnerability across
multiple targets. The result of this would mean that while valid intelligence de-
tailing the attack could be shared by the initial victim, it is buried amongst an
overwhelmingly large volume of the false information.

Both the above examples highlight that the ability to accurately determine
the validity of shared CTI is a critical challenge that platforms must ﬁnd novel
ways overcome. Moreover, these examples also indicate that as the process of
sharing becomes more automatic and widely used, data validity becomes more
critical.

4.4 Intelligent Intelligence

In Section 2.2, we discussed what CTI is and highlighted that it can be cat-
egorised into four main types: (i) strategic, (ii) operational, (iii) tactical, and
(iv) technical. Each of these types of intelligence convey a narrative about a
threat, however do so in diverse range of ways, speciﬁc to their intended recipi-
ents. For example, Technical CTI is made up of data that describes the physical
attributes of an observed attack (e.g., IP address, MAC address, Malware Hash,
etc), intended to be consumed by technical resources [21].

It is important to understand that these types of intelligence are highly vari-
able in their sophistication. In this case, sophistication refers not just to the
quality of the CTI itself, but how consumers are able to use it. Proposal [19]
makes an important distinction between data, information, and intelligence, that
highlights this variability. They are as follows:

– Data: Simple facts that can be made available in large volumes such as IP

addresses, logs, hashes.

– Information: A collection of raw data together that shows suspicious activity.
– Intelligence: The process of analyzing and drawing meaningful conclusions
that can be used by security professionals to deﬁne an intelligence-lead ap-
proach to decision making.

If the above criteria are applied to the categories of CTI discussed in Section
2.2, tactical, operational and strategic CTI could be classed as intelligent intelli-
gence. On the other hand, technical intelligence (e.g. IoC) can only be classiﬁed

12

K. Dunnett et al.

as data/information intelligence, and subsequently cannot directly inform deci-
sion making. As a result, intelligence types can be grossly deﬁned into high-level
intelligence (e.g., TTP) and low-level intelligence (e.g. IoC).

Currently, the majority of exchanged CTI can be classiﬁed as low-level intel-
ligence [28] [6] [29]. Survey [21], notes that over 250 million IoC are shared cumu-
latively across CTI sharing platforms every day, with this ﬁgure likely increasing
in recent years. From the outset, this trend of sharing large volumes of technical
intelligence may appear positive. However, when framed from the perspective
of a consuming organisation, the quantity of available intelligence becomes an
interpretability challenge analogous to the needle in a haystack problem.

4.5 Privacy, Trust, and Accountability

Privacy, Trust and Accountability, are three factors that any CTI sharing plat-
form must balance to facilitate an environment conducive to share and consume
CTI [10] [30] [31]. The relationship between each of these factors and CTI sharing
are discussed below;

Privacy can be deﬁned as the ability or inability for a consuming organisations
to associate some shared intelligence with the sharing organisations real identity.
The literature consistently highlights reputational damage as a signiﬁcant barrier
that stops organisations from participating in CTI sharing [21] [10] [28]. Given
that reputational damage can result from sharing intelligence in an identiﬁable
way, a degree of anonymity is required when sharing.

Trust can be deﬁned as a consumers ability to trust the intelligence which they
receive [29]. Subsequently, a trust relationship between CTI producers and con-
sumers is present in any sharing platform. In contrast to privacy, the parameters
used to deﬁne the trust relationship between producers and consumers often
require some link to the producer’s real identity. By linking at some level a pro-
ducers real identity to the CTI they share, consumers have greater assurance
that shared intelligence comes from an authoritative source [32].

Accountability can be deﬁned as the ability for a sharing platform to provide
governance shared CTI. In this case, Governance refers to a sharing platforms
ability to hold users who participate in false sharing responsible. Subsequently,
the ability to hold users accountable for their actions insures that the integrity
of shared intelligence can be maintained. Like trust, accountability is also de-
pendent on being able to reveal a producers real identity given that they have
made a malicious contribution [33] [34].

From the above discussion, it can be hypothesised that privacy, trust, and
accountability form a paradoxical relationship. Producers of intelligence want to
be completely anonymous when sharing. However, it is the preference of CTI

Blockchain for Cyber Threat Intelligence Sharing

13

consumers to have proof that the intelligence they consume originates from a
reputable source [35]. Moreover, the group of users who make up a sharing
platform should have governance over the information shared, and consequently
be able to hold users who share false information accountable. As a result, the
way in which CTI sharing platforms manage privacy, trust, and accountability
is an important challenge.

5 Opportunities

In this section, we discuss a list of opportunities (cf. Fig. 4) for blockchain-based
CTI sharing. These opportunities aim to highlight how the characteristics of
blockchain can be leveraged to provide novel solutions to the challenges discussed
in Section 4.

Fig. 4: Blockchain-based CTI sharing opportunities.

5.1 Incentivised Sharing

To help alleviate the producer consumer imbalance discussed in Section 4.1,
several incentive schemes can be implemented. In this section we will discuss
two examples that illustrate how incentivised sharing can be achieved using
blockchain.

Deposits-Complete or partial refunds of deposits -Disincentivizes false sharingAccess Control-Traffic light protocol-Ciphertext-Policy Attribute-Based EncryptionIncentivised Sharing -Subscription concessions -Consumption fees-Reward producers with financial benefits TextOpportunitiesReputational System-Users associated with reputation score -Indicates the perceided trust of a given UserIntelligence Mining-Intelligence Mining using ML/AI-Enhanced representations of STIX (e.g. SWRL, OWL)14

K. Dunnett et al.

Concessions: Some blockchain-based sharing platform, such as [20], use sub-
scription fees to create permissioned sharing groups. Consequently, users are
required to pay an authority a subscription fee to participate, consume and or
share CTI, for a given time period. To incentivise users to share CTI and not
just consume it, concessions can be given to users who contribute intelligence.
As a users contributions are stored using blockchain (e.g. In a Smart Contract
or directly on-chain), an auditable and immutable record of these transactions
is maintained. This record can thereafter be used by an authority to determine
a users subscription fee once their previous subscription has expired. In the case
were a users record shows that they have shared valuable intelligence, the price
of their next subscription can be lowered to incentives them to continue making
valuable contributions going forward.

An example of a sharing model that implements concession based incentives
is [20]. In this model, the authors use subscription discounts to reward CTI
producers for their contributions. As part of their implementation, proposal [20]
provides a CTI producer with a discount each time they share intelligence that
is considered high-quality by a set of veriﬁers. This design therefore allows users
who continually share high-quality CTI to signiﬁcantly reduce their subscription
fees. To achieve this, CTI sharing is completed using the following steps;

1. CTI producer adds CTI to the blockchain.
2. Three random veriﬁers are selected from a trusted group.
3. Veriﬁers rate the CTI’s quality using pre-determined metrics.
4. If the majority of veriﬁers rate the given CTI as high-quality then both the

producer and veriﬁers are given a discount on their next subscription.

5. If the majority of veriﬁers rate the given CTI as low-quality then only the

veriﬁers are given a discount on their next subscription.

Fees: Another example of how blockchain can be used to combat free riding
behavior within CTI sharing is consumption fees. Unlike subscription conces-
sions, consumption fees require consumers to pay producers to access CTI that
they have shared [36] [37]. In essence, consumption fees aim to create a market
place where CTI can be exchanged between organisations for currency. Due to
the trustless properties of blockchain, CTI can be exchanged between two or-
ganisations without the need to pre-establish trust or use a third party. Instead,
self manged Smart Contract can be used to facilitate the exchange of CTI and
cryptocurrency between two organisations. By creating a blockchain-based CTI
marketplace, producers who actively share valuable CTI have the ability to proﬁt
signiﬁcantly from doing so.

Two main approaches can be used to implement consumption fees within

blockchain-based architectures.

1. Standard fee: A predeﬁned fee is payed to producers when other organisa-

tions consume their CTI [36].

2. User deﬁned fee: Producers specify a consumption fee which is payed
each time a user access it [37]. Can be implemented as a producer deﬁned
parameter in a Smart Contract.

Blockchain for Cyber Threat Intelligence Sharing

15

Decentralised incEntives for threAt inteLligEnce Reporting and exchange
(DEALER), is an example of a blockchain-based CTI sharing platform that
implements a user deﬁned consumption fee to incentivise CTI sharing [37]. The
below steps summarise how DEALER implementes user deﬁned consumption
fees.

1. CTI producer adds CTI to the blockchain. During this process, the producer
can deﬁne a sale price. If a producer does specify a sale price, they also have
to pay a veriﬁcation fee.

2. In the case where a sale price is speciﬁed, three trusted veriﬁers review the

associated intelligence using pre-determined metrics.

3. The results of each veriﬁers analysis are added to the blockchain to indicate
to buyers the quality of the given intelligence. Moreover, each veriﬁer is given
a proportion of the veriﬁcation fee.

4. When a buyer purchases some intelligence they are required to pay the as-

sociated consumption fee, if speciﬁed by the producer.

As discussed in Section 4.1, an imbalance between the producer and con-
sumers roles exists within CTI sharing. Consequently, it is critical that sharing
platforms seek to address this imbalance by providing producers with more direct
beneﬁts. In this section we highlighted a number of way in which blockchain-
based sharing platforms can implement diﬀerent incentive schemes to combat
the eﬀects of the producer consumer imbalance.

5.2 Deposits

In Section 4.3 the issue of false sharing was discussed. To disincentivise CTI
producers from participating in this behaviour negative ﬁnancial punishments
can be used. In the case of blockchain-based platforms, existing technologies that
support the exchange of cryptocurrency can be utilised for this purposes (e.g.
Ethereum). Moreover, many of these platforms also allow self managed Smart
Contracts to exchange cryptocurrency autonomously, thus removing the need
for a trusted third party [38]. As a result, Smart Contracts can be utilised to im-
plement conditionally refundable deposits in a trustless, auditable and veriﬁable
manner.

Conditionally refundable deposits can be utilised by blockchain-based CTI
sharing platforms to introduce negative ﬁnancial punishments for CTI producers
that participate in false sharing. In this case, when a producer shares some intelli-
gence they could be required to pay a deposit, some amount of cryptocurrnecy, to
a Smart Contract. Once payed, a consensus algorithm deﬁned within the Smart
Contract can be used to verify the integrity of the shared intelligence [14]. Given
that this veriﬁcation process occurs on-chain, the results are immutable and
transparent to both the original producer as well as future consumers. Further-
more, the autonomous and deterministic nature of Smart Contracts allows them
to hold cryptocurrency in escrow without the need for pre-established trust.

16

K. Dunnett et al.

In the case where shared intelligence is found to be credible, the initial deposit
can be payed back either in full or partially to the original producer automati-
cally by the Smart Contract. On the other hand, when false sharing is found to
have occurred this deposit can either be held by the Smart Contract, burned or
distributed to users involved in the veriﬁcation process [38]. By punishing users
who participate in false sharing, persistent eﬀorts to do so on a large scale are
deterred due to the associated ﬁnancial cost.

BLOCIS: In [14], the authors use conditionally refundable deposit to disincen-
tivise stakeholders from deliberately sharing false/incorrect CTI. When a reg-
istered BLOCIS user shares CTI, they use a pre-deﬁned Data Report Contract
(DRC). This contract takes as input the given CTI as well as a deposit. Once
added to a speciﬁc feed, an evaluation function (π) is used to assess the validity
of the reported intelligence. The novelty that BLOCIS proposes is that π takes
as input both the reputational score of the producer as well as their deposit. If
the output of π indicates the given CTI is false, the deposit is not refunded back
to the producer. When simulated in a test environment, the BLOCIS model was
found to successfully disincentivise users who made malicious contributions. Fig.
5 in [14] demonstrates both the ﬁnancial and reputational damage that users who
participated in false sharing suﬀered over an extended period of time.

Considerations: While deposit-based disincentive schemes are focused on
punishing malicious producers, considerations must also be made to ensure hon-
est producers are not deterred from sharing. Although the self managed nature
of Smart Contracts can provide producers with a trustless way to exchange
cryptocurrency, factors such as the amount of currency and consensus used to
determine if a contribution is false must be considered. For example, if pro-
ducers are required to pay a constant amount of cryptocurrency, the extremely
volatile nature of currency markets could cause producers not to share at par-
ticular times [39]. Moreover, if consensus methods are dependent on validation
of intelligence from a set of validators, then they themselves could become by
subject to malicious attacks. Given cryptocurrency is at stake, we argue that
malicious attacks could seek to compromise a subset of validators to deny the
authentication of any intelligence. Lastly, if validators are directly incentivised
through partial payment of deposits from intelligence deemed malicious, then
validators might be more likely to classify honest contributions as malicious. All
of these factors need to be considered carefully when designing a deposit-based
disincentive scheme as they have the potential to aﬀect honest producers as well.
Aside from considerations related to how deposit-based Smart Contracts are
designed, the method used to validate intelligence is another important factor.
Fundamental to the success of conditionally refundable deposits is the ability
of a veriﬁer or group of veriﬁers to determine the credibility of CTI. However,
currently a method that deterministically classiﬁes CTI as false is considered
an open challenge [14]. Consequently, platforms that implement disincentive

Blockchain for Cyber Threat Intelligence Sharing

17

schemes are likely to encounter cases where CTI is wrongly considered mali-
cious and an honest producer is punished.

5.3 Reputational System

Another way blockchain-based solutions can mitigate against false sharing is use
of reputational systems. Unlike deposits, reputational systems do not punish
malicious users monetarily. Instead, they associate each user with a reputation
score (e.g. 1-100) that represents their perceived trustworthiness.

In the context of CTI sharing, a users reputational score can be used to
directly aﬀect their ability to consume and or share intelligence within a group
[40] [14]. For example, if a CTI producer shares some CTI, their associated
reputational score could be used to indicate to validators and or consumers the
level to which they should trust it [14]. As a result, intelligence shared by a
users with a relatively low reptuational score might be subject to more thorough
inspection by validators. In the opposite case, users who have a relatively high
reputational score, may be subject to less thorough inspection by validators.
Furthermore, these highly trusted users might be able to consume more sensitive
intelligence that might otherwise have been unavailable to them.

A successful reputational system has the potential to stop a user or group of
users from continually false sharing [14]. Given that a users reputational score is
tightly coupled with their perceived trust, eﬀorts to continually false share can
be predicted to become harder over time.

Proof-of-Reputation (PoR) is a blockchain-based consensus algorithm that
was proposed by [40] speciﬁcally for CTI sharing. In their model, each node in the
network has an associated reputational score between 1 and 100. Fundamentally,
this score seeks to capture how trustworthy a user is based on the creditably of
their previous contributions. Importantly, all of the actions taken by a node (e.g.
Voting, Sharing CTI) inﬂuence its reputational score over time.

When an organisation shares CTI, other nodes on the network calculate a
reputation value which is used to judge if it should be added to the blockchain.
The results of this reputation-based consensus are used alongside more tradi-
tional validation methods to try and mitigate against false sharing. Moreover,
a contributing nodes reputational score is adjusted over time based on the re-
sults of this process. Critical to the integrity of this process is a predeﬁned trust
threshold. This trust threshold deﬁnes the point at which a node is considered
trustworthy. As a result, if a nodes score drops below this threshold, then it is
considered untrustworthy and cannot participate further.

The above PoR consensus algorithm exempliﬁes how the inherent properties
of blockchain discussed in Section 2.1, can be utilised to facilitate reputational
systems without the need for a trusted third party. In particular the immutable,
transparent and auditable properties of blockchain allow each node to calcu-
late the reputational scores of others, thus removing the need for a centralised

18

K. Dunnett et al.

authority. Similar to [40], the BLOCIS architecture proposed by [14] manages
reputational scores with self managed Smart Contracts. Like deposits, these
Smart Contracts contain a predeﬁned consensus algorithm that can be used to
manage the reputational scores of each user over time in a trustless way.

As mentioned in the in Section 5.2, the ability to deterministically validate
CTI is still an open challenge. Given that reputational systems require a veriﬁer
or group of veriﬁers to determine the credibility of CTI, their success is dependent
on the accuracy of the validation method used.

5.4 Access Control

Blockchain-based sharing platforms can use several methods to provide produc-
ers with control over who has access to the intelligence they share. Access control
in this case, refers not just to the ability of CTI producers to control who has
access to their intelligence, but also in what way [41] [42] [43]. For example, a
particular producer might want to share CTI with a small trusted group. How-
ever, they only want to disclose the speciﬁc attribute values (e.g., IP addresses)
associated with it to one of the organisations.

While access control can be implemented by centralised architecture, blockchain

is able to facilitate the ﬁne grained access control required for CTI sharing in a
trustless way. The following list outlines how a number of the key properties of
blockchain can be leveraged to provide access control in a trustless way [44].

– Decentralised: As a single authority does not control access based on a pro-
ducers request, greater integrity is achieved. This means that producers have
greater conﬁdence that the control policy they deﬁne will be followed given
its execution is not dependent on a centralised system.

– Immutability: CTI producers can be conﬁdent that the access control pa-
rameters they deﬁne cannot be altered by another user for their beneﬁt.
– Smart Contracts: Provides a framework to allow stakeholders to deﬁne the
access control for the intelligence they share. Moreover, the self managed na-
ture of Smart Contracts ensure that these access control policies are executed
autonomously.

Traﬃc Light Protocol (TLP) is an example of an access control method
that can be implemented as part of a blockchain-based sharing platform [20].
TLP deﬁnes a robust access control structure that gives producers the ability
to specify who CTI is shared with. This is achieved by allowing producers to
specify a sharing level from a predeﬁned list. Each of these predeﬁned sharing
levels is simply a control policy that speciﬁes which users can access the CTI.
Table 1 is an example of how a TLP policy could be structured.

Ciphertext-Policy Attribute-Based Encryption (CP-ABE) is another
method that can be used to give producers with ﬁne grained access control [45].
In the case of CP-ABE, when a producer shares CTI, they encrypt it using

Blockchain for Cyber Threat Intelligence Sharing

19

Table 1: Example of a TLP implementation by [20] [13]

Channel

Red

Orange

Green

Description

Private channel between two stakeholders only

Disclosure to only a certain group of stakeholders
deﬁned by the CTI producer.

Disclosure to an entire group of stakeholders. In the
case of private blockchain this is restricted to anyone
who has access to it.

White

Public disclosure which is accessible to anyone.

attribute-based encryption methods [46]. The ciphertext that results from this
process is then added to the blockchain. When a user access this ciphertext they
are able to decrypt parts of it based on their own attributes. As a result, users
can deﬁne highly speciﬁc ﬁne grained access control policies using CP-ABE.

For example, a CP-ABE policy might require that an organisation is a ICS-
ISAC member to view a subset of the CTI. Furthermore, it might also specify
that only a speciﬁc subset of these organisations can access the speciﬁc details of
the hardware aﬀected by a ransomware attack. This example demonstrates how
CP-ABE can be used to construct ﬁne grained access control policies speciﬁc to
a producers needs.

Both TLP and CP-ABE are examples of access control methods that can
be implemented using blockchain. Importantly, these methods provide CTI pro-
ducers with better control over who consumes the intelligence they share in a
trustless way. In Section 4.5, the issue of privacy was discussed. During this dis-
cussion, it was highlighted that fear of reputational damage was a signiﬁcant
barrier that stopped some organisations from sharing. While greater access con-
trol does not provide a complete solution to this problem, we argue it has the
potential to cause more organisations to share within closed groups given their
privacy-preserving nature. Moreover, if key regulatory bodies are incorporated
into sharing platforms, these frameworks can further help organisations meet
their legal and regulatory obligations without having to use secondary sharing
mechanisms [20].

5.5 Intelligence Mining

In Section 4.4, it is noted that not all types of CTI are equivalent in their ability
to describe threats and subsequently be used to implement mitigation strategies
against them. Given that the process of generating CTI is dependent on the
capabilities of the sharing organisation, it cannot be expected that all organi-
sations are capable of generating high-level intelligence. As a result, strategies
to create high-level intelligence from aggregated sources of low-level intelligence

20

K. Dunnett et al.

have the potential to shift sharing towards more intelligent intelligence. Further-
more, this process also allows organisations which do not have the resources to
generate high-level intelligence themselves to still contribute.

Intelligence mining can be deﬁned as the process of deriving high-level in-
telligence from low-level intelligence already stored on the blockchain [21]. The
immutable and auditable properties of blockchain are able to facilitate mining in
a trustless way. Given that low-level intelligence used as part of the mining pro-
cess is immutable and accessible by each organisation on the network, high-level
intelligence that is derived from it can be validated by other organisations. As
a result, the ability to mine high-level intelligence in a trustless way has the po-
tential to allow blockchain-based CTI sharing platforms to provide participating
organisations with more advanced threat mitigation.

Proposal [36] provides an example of how STIX, Semantic Rule Language
(SWRL) and Web Ontology Language (OWL) can be combined to create more
meaningful and interpretable representations of CTI. The use of these tools
together has great potential in the area of intelligence mining, as CTI represented
in this way allows semantic reasoners to infer new knowledge [36]. Furthermore,
extending traditional representations of CTI could also pave the way for Machine
Learning (ML)/Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) approaches to intelligence mining. In
[47], it was demonstrated that ML algorithms were able to generate CTI from a
single organisations network logs stored using blockchain. Therefore, it could be
possible to extend this approach further to generate more intelligent intelligence,
from large amounts of aggregated CTI expressed using STIX, SWRL and OWL.

6 Related Work and Discussion

In this section, we present some related works on CTI sharing and the integration
of blockchain platforms for CTI sharing and provide a discussion on the ﬁndings
of this chapter. Several studies discuss the importance of CTI sharing in infor-
mation security and general computing systems [10] [21] [6] [48]. However, most
of them discuss CTI sharing from the lens of traditional centralised computing
approaches. Subsequently, few publications considering how blockchain-based
approaches can overcome existing challenges are present in the literature. In this
section, we aim to discuss the contributions of several publications that outline
challenges associated with CTI sharing.

Proposal [10], provides a comprehensive insight into what CTI sharing is
and how it is commonly performed. Furthermore, it also discusses a number
of important CTI sharing concepts including – what CTI is, how it can be
shared, and most notably what beneﬁts and risks are associated with sharing. Of
particular note, the authors highlight the importance of privacy and anonymity
in CTI sharing. However unlike [10], in this chapter, we extended these ideas to
consider the relationship between privacy, trust, and accountability.

In [21], a survey on technical threat intelligence was conducted. Like [10], [21]
provides a good insight into the key concepts which deﬁne CTI sharing. This
paper speciﬁcally seeks to provide a clear deﬁnition of what threat intelligence is

Blockchain for Cyber Threat Intelligence Sharing

21

and what some of the associated challenges in this space are. An important chal-
lenge highlighted by [21], is intelligent intelligence. Moreover, their suggestion
that big data analysis could be applied to threat intelligence was extended by our
work to focus on how these concepts can be applied to blockchain speciﬁcally.

Proposal [29] provides a comprehensive study into the current challenges
associated with CTI sharing platforms (e.g. MISP). As part of their research,
they investigate twenty two sharing platforms and derived a list of eight key
ﬁndings. A number of which are discussed in Section 4. While their research was
mostly focused on centralised architectures, their insights into existing challenges
allowed us to highlight how blockchain-based architectures can provide novel
solutions to them.

In [28], the authors perform a comprehensive literature review into the cur-
rent use CTI. As part of their ﬁndings, they outline four main challenges of which
three were discussed in this chapter. However, unlike our approach, this research
does not explore how blockchain-based solutions can provide novel solutions to
these challenges.

Recently, a diverse range of blockchain-based CTI sharing models have been
published. In this chapter, we discussed a number of novel features present within
a subset of these models which we feel represent the current state-of-the-art.

We argue that [36] currently presents the most comprehensive blockchain-
based CTI sharing platform, as it addresses a number of the challenges pre-
sented in this chapter. As part of their model, the authors integrate a number
of features which address the producer consumer imbalance, intelligence intelli-
gence, and legal and regulatory factors. However, it must be noted that while
this model does provide trust and accountability, it is achieved at the cost of
privacy-preserving anonymity.

DEALER is a blockchain-based CTI sharing platform presented by [37],
which like [36], presents novel solutions to a number of the challenges discussed
in this chapter. The DEALER proposal provides solutions to the producer con-
sumer imbalance and legal and regulatory factors. Moreover, this proposal also
integrates a quality assurance method which provides a heuristic approach to
solving the challenge of data validity. It must be noted, however, that while a
heuristic approach to the issue of data validity has the potential to be eﬀective,
it does not completely mitigate against false sharing.

Few models present in the current literature provide a robust framework
that balances privacy, trust, and accountability, as deﬁned in Section 4.5. We
argue that [30] presents the most comprehensive approach to balancing these
factors. The authors of this platform propose a framework which allows CTI
producers to share intelligence semi-anonymously while still facilitating trust
and accountability. However, the major limitation of this framework is that a
single trusted authority has the ability to reveal the identity of any CTI producer,
subsequently creating a single point of failure.

We ﬁnd there are various challenges in CTI sharing, and blockchain is a
promising solution to gain opportunities in most cases. However, there is still a

22

K. Dunnett et al.

list of open research questions that need to be resolved. We list a few of them
as follows:

– How the properties of blockchain and other cryptographic constructs be used
to create a blockchain-based CTI sharing model that provides a balance
between privacy, trust, and accountability?

– How can shared CTI be deterministically validated to ensure false sharing

is not possible?

– How can ML/AI be utilised along side current approaches (e.g. STIX, SWRL,

OWL) to facilitate the sharing of more intelligent intelligence?

7 Conclusion

The drastic evolution of the threat landscape, brought about by the emergence
of Internet of Things (IoT) technology, has caused organisations to ﬁnd new
ways to better manage their cyber risks. This appetite for tools that better
mitigate against potential threats has driven the development for a number of
Cyber Threat Intelligence (CTI) sharing platforms (e.g., MISP). In this chap-
ter, we deﬁned a number of general CTI sharing challenges including the pro-
ducer consumer imbalance, legal and regulator factors, intelligent intelligence,
data validity, and privacy, trust and accountability. These general CTI sharing
challenges were then used to deliver a list of opportunities present within the
blockchain-based space. These opportunities included deposits, access control,
reputational systems, intelligence mining and incentivised sharing. Finally, we
explored several existing proposals and determine a list of unique future research
questions for eﬃcient and secure CTI sharing using blockchain.

References

1. A. Lamssaggad, N. Benamar, A. Haﬁd, and M. Msahli, “A survey on the current
security landscape of intelligent transportation systems,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp.
9180–9208, 2021.

2. H. Kure, S. Islam, and H. Mouratidis, “An integrated cyber security risk man-
agement framework and risk predication for the critical infrastructure protection,”
Neural Computing and Applications, pp. 1–31, 2022.

3. A. Corallo, M. Lazoi, M. Lezzi, and A. Luperto, “Cybersecurity awareness in the
context of the industrial internet of things: A systematic literature review,” Com-
puters in Industry, vol. 137, 2022.

4. T. Rabehaja, S. Pal, and M. Hitchens, “Design and implementation of a secure
and ﬂexible access-right delegation for resource constrained environments,” Future
Generation Computer Systems, vol. 99, pp. 593–608, 2019.

5. S. Pal, M. Hitchens, and V. Varadharajan, “On the design of security mechanisms
for the internet of things,” in Eleventh International Conference on Sensing Tech-
nology (ICST), IEEE, pp. 1–6, 2017.

6. H. Kure and S. Islam, “Cyber threat intelligence for improving cybersecurity and
risk management in critical infrastructure,” JUCS-Journal of Universal Computer
Science, vol. 25, 2019.

Blockchain for Cyber Threat Intelligence Sharing

23

7. R. Brown and R. Lee, “2021 sans cyber threat intelligence (cti) survey,” in Tech.

Rep, SANS Institute, 2021.

8. C. Johnson, L. Badger, D. Waltermire, J. Snyder, C. Skorupka et al., “Guide to
cyber threat information sharing,” NIST special publication, vol. 800, no. 150, 2016.
9. S. Pal, M. Hitchens, T. Rabehaja, and S. Mukhopadhyay, “Security requirements
for the internet of things: A systematic approach,” Sensors, vol. 20, no. 20, 2020.
10. T. Wagner, K. Mahbub, E. Palomar, and A. Abdallah, “Cyber threat intelligence
sharing: Survey and research directions,” Computers & Security, vol. 87, 2019.
11. S. Nakamoto, “Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system,” Decentralized Busi-

ness Review, 2008.

12. S. Badsha, I. Vakilinia, and S. Sengupta, “Blocynfo-share: Blockchain based cy-
bersecurity information sharing with ﬁne grained access control,” in 10th Annual
Computing and Communication Workshop and Conference (CCWC), IEEE, pp.
0317–0323, 2020.

13. D. Homan, I. Shiel, and C. Thorpe, “A new network model for cyber threat intelli-
gence sharing using blockchain technology,” in 10th IFIP International Conference
on New Technologies, Mobility and Security (NTMS), IEEE, pp. 1–6, 2019.
14. S. Gong and C. Lee, “Blocis: blockchain-based cyber threat intelligence sharing

framework for sybil-resistance,” Electronics, vol. 9, no. 3, 2020.

15. M. Wang, M. Duan, and J. Zhu, “Research on the security criteria of hash functions
in the blockchain,” in Proceedings of the 2nd ACM Workshop on Blockchains,
Cryptocurrencies, and Contracts, pp. 47–55, 2018.

16. W. Wang, D. Hoang, P. Hu, Z. Xiong, D. Niyato, P. Wang, Y. Wen, and D. Kim, “A
survey on consensus mechanisms and mining strategy management in blockchain
networks,” Ieee Access, vol. 7, pp. 22328–22370, 2019.

17. C. Lepore, M. Ceria, A. Visconti, U. Rao, K. Shah, and L. Zanolini, “A survey on
blockchain consensus with a performance comparison of pow, pos and pure pos,”
Mathematics, vol. 8, no. 10, 2020.

18. H.-N. Dai, Z. Zheng, and Y. Zhang, “Blockchain for internet of things: A survey,”

IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 8076–8094, 2019.

19. J. Moubarak, C. Bassil, and J. Antoun, “On the dissemination of cyber threat
intelligence through hyperledger,” in 17th International Conference on the Design
of Reliable Communication Networks (DRCN), IEEE, pp. 1–6, 2021.

20. K. Nguyen, S. Pal, Z. Jadidi, A. Dorri, and R. Jurdak, “A blockchain-enabled incen-
tivised framework for cyber threat intelligence sharing in ics,” PerCom Blockchain
theoRy and ApplicatIoNs, 2022.

21. W. Tounsi and H. Rais, “A survey on technical threat intelligence in the age of
sophisticated cyber attacks,” Computers & security, vol. 72, pp. 212–233, 2018.
22. T. Ring, “Threat intelligence: why people don’t share,” Computer Fraud & Secu-

rity, vol. 2014, no. 3, pp. 5–9, 2014.

23. L. Nweke and S. Wolthusen, “Legal issues related to cyber threat information
sharing among private entities for critical infrastructure protection,” in 12th In-
ternational Conference on Cyber Conﬂict, vol. 1300, IEEE, pp. 63–78, 2020.
24. J. Bynum, “Cyber threat hunting,” Ph.D. dissertation, Utica College, 2019.
25. Z. Jadidi and Y. Lu, “A threat hunting framework for industrial control systems,”

IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 164118–164130, 2021.

26. M. Arafune, S. Rajalakshmi, L. Jaldon, Z. Jadidi, S. Pal, E. Foo, and N. Venkat-
achalam, “Design and development of automated threat hunting in industrial con-
trol systems,” PerCom Security, Privacy, and Trust for IoT, 2022.

27. E. Chou, Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS), 1st ed, O’Reilly Media, Inc., 2018.

24

K. Dunnett et al.

28. M. Abu, S. Selamat, A. Ariﬃn, and R. Yusof, “Cyber threat intelligence–issue and
challenges,” Indonesian Journal of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science,
vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 371–379, 2018.

29. C. Sauerwein, C. Sillaber, A. Mussmann, and R. Breu, “Threat intelligence sharing
platforms: An exploratory study of software vendors and research perspectives,”
2017.

30. Y. Allouche, N. Tapas, F. Longo, A. Shabtai, and Y. Wolfsthal, “Trade: Trusted
anonymous data exchange: Threat sharing using blockchain technology,” arXiv
Preprint, 2021.

31. S. Pal, “Extending mobile cloud platforms using opportunistic networks: Survey,
classiﬁcation and open issues,” Journal of Universal Computer Science, vol. 21,
no. 12, pp. 1594–1634, 2015.

32. T. Schaberreiter, V. Kupfersberger, K. Rantos, A. Spyros, A. Papanikolaou, C. Il-
ioudis, and G. Quirchmayr, “A quantitative evaluation of trust in the quality of
cyber threat intelligence sources,” in 14th International Conference on Availability,
Reliability and Security, pp. 1–10., 2019

33. B. Shin and P. Lowry, “A review and theoretical explanation of the ‘cyberthreat-
intelligence (cti) capability’that needs to be fostered in information security prac-
titioners and how this can be accomplished,” Computers & Security, vol. 92, 2020.
34. W. Lueks, M. Everts, and J. Hoepman, “Revocable privacy: Principles, use cases,

and technologies,” in Annual Privacy Forum, Springer, pp. 124–143, 2015.

35. S. Murdoch and N. Leaver, “Anonymity vs. trust in cyber-security collaboration,”
in Proceedings of the 2nd ACM Workshop on Information Sharing and Collabora-
tive Security, pp. 27–29, 2015.

36. R. Riesco, X. Novo, and V. Villagr´a, “Cybersecurity threat intelligence knowledge
exchange based on blockchain,” Telecommunication Systems, vol. 73, no. 2, pp.
259–288, 2020.

37. F. Menges, B. Putz, and G. Pernul, “Dealer: decentralized incentives for threat in-
telligence reporting and exchange,” International Journal of Information Security,
vol. 20, no. 5, pp. 741–761, 2021.

38. M. Swan, Blockchain: Blueprint for a new economy. ” O’Reilly Media, Inc.”, 2015.
39. R. Sams, “A note on cryptocurrency stabilisation: Seigniorage shares,” Brave New

Coin, pp. 1–8, 2015.

40. Z. Xiaohui and M. Xianghua, “A reputation-based approach using consortium

blockchain for cyber threat intelligence sharing,” arXiv Preprint, 2021.

41. S. Pal, M. Hitchens, and V. Varadharajan, “Access control

for internet of
things—enabled assistive technologies: An architecture, challenges and require-
ments,” in Assistive technology for the elderly. Elsevier, pp. 1–43, 2020.

42. S. Pal, M. Hitchens, V. Varadharajan, and T. Rabehaja, “Fine-grained access
control for smart healthcare systems in the internet of things,” Transactions on
Industrial Networks and Intelligent Systems, vol. 4, no. 13, 2018.

43. S. Pal, M. Hitchens, V. Varadharajan, and T. Rabehaja, “Policy-based access
control for constrained healthcare resources,” in 19th International Symposium
on” A World of Wireless, Mobile and Multimedia Networks”(WoWMoM), IEEE,
pp. 588–599, 2018.

44. S. Pal, Internet of Things and Access Control: Sensing, Monitoring and Controlling

Access in IoT-Enabled Healthcare Systems, Springer Nature, vol. 37, 2021.

45. D. Preuveneers, W. Joosen, J. Bernabe, and A. Skarmeta, “Distributed security
framework for reliable threat intelligence sharing,” Security and Communication
Networks, vol. 2020, 2020.

Blockchain for Cyber Threat Intelligence Sharing

25

46. J. Bethencourt, A. Sahai, and B. Waters, “Ciphertext-policy attribute-based en-
cryption,” in Symposium on security and privacy, IEEE, pp. 321–334, 2007.
47. Z. Jadidi, A. Dorri, R. Jurdak, and C. Fidge, “Securing manufacturing using
blockchain,” in 19th International Conference on Trust, Security and Privacy in
Computing and Communications (TrustCom), IEEE, pp. 1920–1925, 2020.

48. N. Gong, “Barriers and impacts to adopting interoperability standards for cyber
threat intelligence sharing: A mixed methods study,” Ph.D. dissertation, Robert
Morris University, 2017.

