A Secure File Sharing System Based on IPFS and 
Blockchain 

Hsiao-Shan Huang 
 Department of Electronics 
Engineering, National Chiao-Tung 
University 
Telecommunication Laboratories, 
Chunghwa Telecom Co., Ltd. 
Hsinchu, Taiwan 
phm@cht.com.tw 

Tian-Sheuan Chang
 Department of Electronics 
Engineering, National Chiao Tung 
University 
Hsinchu, Taiwan 
tschang@mail.nctu.edu.tw 

Jhih-Yi Wu 
 Telecommunication Laboratories, 
Chunghwa Telecom Co., Ltd. 
Taoyuan, Taiwan 
 ian_wu@cht.com.tw 

ABSTRACT
There  is  a  great  interest  in  many  approaches  towards  blockchain 
in  providing  a  solution  to  record  transactions  in  a  decentralized 
way. However, there are some limitations when storing large files 
or documents on the blockchain. In order to meet the requirements 
of storing relatively large data, a decentralized storage medium is 
produced.  IPFS  is  a  distributed  file  system  which  is  content-
addressable.  It  works  very  similar  to  the  blockchain  network. 
There are some attempts which take advantage of the blockchain 
concept and IPFS to design new approaches. Unfortunately, there 
are  some  inefficiencies  in  sharing  data  using  the  combination  of 
IPFS  and  blockchain.  In  this  paper,  we  proposed  a  secure  file 
sharing system that brings a distributed access control and group 
key  management  by  the  adoption  of  the  IPFS  proxy.  The  IPFS 
proxy  which  plays  an  important  role  in  the  design  is  adopted  to 
take responsibility for the control policies. The combination of the 
IPFS server and the blockchain network with the adoption of the 
IPFS proxy make a secure file sharing system which the members 
on  the  system  can  create  new  groups  or  join different  groups by 
their own choice. Although there is no access control mechanism 
in  IPFS  server  and  blockchain  network,  the  secure  file  sharing 
system manages the access control policies. The members access 
files only belong to the group they authorized. 

Keywords
Blockchain,  file  sharing,  Inter-Planetary  File  System(IPFS), 
access control, group key management 

1. INTRODUCTION
In  recent  years,  blockchain  has  become  one  of  the  most  popular 
innovations. It first came to light in 2008 and is generally known 
as  Bitcoin[1].  Blockchain  brings  a  new  perspective  on  making  a 
trusted  transaction  between  two  entities  without  a  third  party 
being  participated  in.  The  main  advantage  of  blockchain  is  to 
reduce  risk  of  tampering  due  to its  immutable  nature.  It  also has 

Hsiao-Shan Huang, Tian-Sheuan Chang, and Jhih-Yi Wu. 2020. 
A Secure File Sharing System Based on IPFS and Blockchain. In 
Proceedings of the 2020 2nd International Electronics 
Communication Conference (IECC 2020). Association for 
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 96–100. https://
doi.org/10.1145/3409934.3409948

several other advantages. Decentralization means no single entity 
controls the system. Trackability  and incorruptibility indicate the 
transaction  results  are  linked  together  by  utilizing  cryptographic 
mechanism so that the results on the chain are undeniable. 

In  addition  to  blockchain,  Interplanetary  File  System(IPFS)[2]  is 
another  attractive  design  which  is  a  peer-to-peer  distributed  file 
system. It combines several past successful systems and provides 
a content-addressed block storage model. The propose of IPFS is 
to  improve  HTTP,  which  is  one  of  the  most  dominant  file 
distributed system nowadays. 

There  are  several  attempts  to  take  advantage  of  the  blockchain 
concept  and  IPFS  to  design  new  approaches.  [3]  proposed  a 
blockchain-based storage system for sharing IoT data. It adopts a 
re-encryption  token[4]  to  manage  the  keys  so  that  the  data 
encryption  key  is  updated  to  avoid  further  access  to  the  system 
when an authorized user is revoked. However, the key encryption 
and  update  processes  are  all  handled  by  the  data  owner,  which 
significantly  increases  the  computation  overheads  of  the  data 
owner. [5] proposed a scalable and trustworthy file sharing system. 
It uses another re-encryption technique[6] and provides a scalable 
key  management  scheme  to  support  the  accessibility  of  multiple 
users. The encryption key is stored in a distributed way which can 
resist collusion attacks by revoked users. Since the one sub key of 
the encryption key is sent to the authorized user, the key must be 
managed by the user which increases the security risks. 

The above schemes have some insufficiencies and limitations. For 
improving  the  computation  overheads  and  security  risks,  this 
paper  introduces  a  secure  file  sharing  system  based  on  IPFS  and 
blockchain.  In  which,  we  adopt  a  IPFS  proxy  for  the  distributed 
access  control  policies  and  group  key  management.  The  files 
encrypted by the IPFS proxy can be stored on the IPFS server by 
taking  advantage  of  the  decentralized  file  distributing  system  of 
IPFS servers. Besides, we use blockchain as a trackable server to 
record  the  file  uploading  information  in  the  network  and  thus 
avoid information corruption. The combination of the IPFS server 
and the blockchain network  with the adoption of the IPFS proxy 
make  a  secure  file  sharing  system  so  that  the  members  on  the 
system  can  create  new  groups  or  join  different  groups  by  their 
own  choices  and  only  group  members  can  access  the  authorized 
files. 

The  rest  of  the  paper  is  organized  as  follows.  In  Section  II,  the 
background  of  blockchain  and  IPFS  technologies  are  discussed. 
Section  III  presents  the  proposed  secure  file  sharing  system  and 
describes  how  to  combine  the  blockchain  and  IPFS  to  take 
advantage  of  their  benefits.  Finally,  the  conclusion  and  future 
work are presented in Section IV. 

2. BACKGROUND
In this section, some technologies related to the proposed scheme 
are described below.  
2.1  Blockchain 
A  blockchain  is  regarded  as  a  distributed  ledger  that  the  records 
on  the  chain  are  maintained  by  the  participating  peers.  The 
transaction  results  are  validated  by  the  peers  and  are  linked 
together by utilizing cryptographic mechanism. 

The  first  example  of  a  blockchain  implementation  is  Bitcoin[1]. 
Bitcoin is a digital cryptocurrency. The main idea of Bitcoin is to 
offer a decentralized banking system. Users exchange their assets 
and  trust  the  transaction  results  which  are  recorded  on  the 
distributed ledger. The results are trusted since they are validated 
by  the  participants.  After  the  validation,  the  transactions  are 
transmitted to the blockchain which cannot be tampered with. The 
participants, known as the  miners in the blockchain network, are 
rewarded with cryptocurrency for their computational work. This 
is so-call an incentive mechanism to validate transactions and thus 
make  a  consensus  in  the  network.  Since  the  miners  are  all 
anonymous  peers,  any  single  miner  cannot  be  trusted  to  prevent 
the transactions results are dominated by the minority. Therefore, 
a  consensus  mechanism  called  proof-of-work  is  introduced  to 
reach  an  agreement  in  the  blockchain  network.  Generally,  a  new 
block  contains  a  set  of  new  transactions,  information  required  to 
keep  track  of  the  history  of  transactions  and  the  result  of  a 
mathematical  puzzle.  The  miners  do  the  computational  work  to 
find  the  answer  of  the  puzzle.  After  solving  the  problem,  the 
answer is recorded in the block and the new block is considered as 
a valid block. Anyone in the blockchain network  can answer the 
puzzle by taking the computational work to earn transaction fees. 
This is described as the proof-of-work mechanism.  

As described above, Bitcoin is an open blockchain which means it 
is permission-less. Any user can easily participate in the network 
to create transactions or take part in the consensus process. They 
can be a miner or a client. Ethereum[7] is also an open blockchain. 
Another  rather  different  chain  is  consortium  blockchain.  It  is 
controlled by a set of authorized nodes. These nodes dominate the 
validation process. Since the nodes are authorized in the network, 
it  is  called  permissioned  blockchain.  Hyperledger[8]  is  the  most 
popular case. It is different from permission-less blockchain since 
a trusted central party is required to validate the nodes who want 
to join the network. 

As mentioned before, a blockchain is a distributed ledger and the 
records  on  the  chain  contains  a  set  of  new  transactions, 
information  required  to  keep  track  of  the  history  of  transactions 
etc. However, there are some limitations when storing large files 
or  documents  on  the  blockchain.  It  is  essentially  an  expensive 
database for storing large amounts of data since the size of data in 
a  block  is  limited.  In  order  to  meet  the  requirements  of  storing 
relatively large data, a decentralized storage medium is introduced 
such as IPFS [2], Filecoin[9], and Swarm[10]. Among them, IPFS 
is a distributed file system which is content-addressable. It works 
very similar to the blockchain network. Therefore, it is introduced 
below since the proposed method is related to IPFS. 
2.2  IPFS 
IPFS  is  a  decentralized  file  distributing  system.  It  is  based  on  a 
peer-to-peer protocol.  Each  stored  file  is  allocated  a  unique hash 
according  to  the  content  of  the  file.  The  designated  hash  is 
regarded as the corresponding file address when user requests the 
file.  The  deduplication  mechanism  is  adopted  to  implement  the 

decentralized  concept  in  IPFS.  The  stored  files  are  permanent  in 
the system as long as there are some duplicate copies of the files. 

There  are  some  main  properties  which  IPFS  combines.  First, 
Distributed Hash Tables(DHT) in IPFS is a data structure that the 
data is efficiently coordinated in order to quickly search between 
nodes.  With  DHT,  the  data  can  be  shared  without  central 
coordination due to advantages of decentralization and scalability. 
Second,  a  peer-to-peer  file  sharing  system  called  BitSwap  is 
implemented  in  IPFS.  It  is  similar  to  BitTorrent  but  different. 
BitSwap  operates  as  a  marketplace  where  the  blocks  can  be 
acquired  by  nodes.  The  blocks  that  are  part  of  a  file  may  come 
from  unrelated  files  in  the  filesystem.  A  Merkle  directed  acyclic 
graph(DAG) is another important feature of IPFS. It links between 
data  blocks  which  are  cryptographic  hashes  of  the  target.  The 
Merkle  DAG  ensures  the  identification,  and  tamper  resistance  of 
the  stored  data.  Along  with  Merkle  DAG,  Version  Control 
Systems(VCS)  is  another  feature  of  IPFS  that  allows  users  to 
easily management files. It allows users to edit different versions 
of  a  file  and  distribute  multiple  versions  efficiently.  Finally,  the 
Self-Certifying  File  System  (SFS)  is  the  last  concept  of  IPFS.  It 
creates the Interplanetary Name Space (IPNS) which is an SFS to 
allows  users  verifying  objects  published  on  the  network.  The 
objects can be signed by the publishers with their private keys and 
therefore can be verified using the publisher’s public key. 

3. PROPOSED SCHEME
We propose a secure file sharing system based on permission-less 
blockchain and IPFS. The permission-less blockchain allows any 
user  who  wants  to  participate  in  the  blockchain  network.  Since 
there is no trusted central party to validate users, the file sharing 
mechanism  in  the  system  may  have  permissions  issue.  The 
proposed design brings a distributed access control and group key 
management by the adoption of the IPFS proxy. 
3.1  Motivation 
Blockchain  is  regarded  as  a  distributed  ledger  which  provides  a 
solution  to  record  transactions  in  a  decentralized  way.  However, 
nodes in the blockchain network have memory limitation and only 
the transaction records rather than a complete file can be stored on 
the  blockchain.  Therefore,  IPFS  is  introduced  to  meet  the 
requirements  of  storing  relatively  large  data.  On  the  other  hand, 
computation overheads and security risks are not considered in the 
IPFS and blockchain. Consequently, we have gained motivation to 
improve  the  above  issues.  A  secure  file  sharing  scheme  is 
proposed  in  this  paper  to  manage  the  access  control  policies  by 
utilizing the IPFS proxy. 

3.2  System Model 
Figure  1  shows  the  system  model  that  consists  of  the  following 
entities: owner, user, IPFS proxy, IPFS server and blockchain.  

3.2.1  Owner 
The owner is the one who creates a new group in the system. It is 
the first member in the group and has the rights to share files in a 
group. It also manages the access policies. 

3.2.2  User 
When  the  user  becomes  a  group  member,  it  has  the  rights  to 
access the files which shared by the members in the group. 

3.2.3  IPFS Proxy 
A  group  key  pair  is  generated  in  the  IPFS  proxy  when  a  new 
group is created. Then the group key encrypts the file in order to 
preserve privacy of the file uploaded by the group member. The  

IPFS  proxy  to  the  owner  as  shown  in  the  Step  5,  the  uploading 
process  is  completed.  The  sequence  diagram  for  file  uploading 
process is shown in Figure 2. 

IPFS  proxy  controls  the  mapping  table  that  are  key  lists  of  the 
members in the group. When authorized member makes a request 
for a file, it encrypts the group key with the member’s public key 
and sends the encrypted key to the authorized member. 

3.2.4  IPFS Server 
After  encrypted  by  IPFS  proxy,  the  encrypted  files  are  stored  in 
the  IPFS  server.  When  authorized  member  requests  a  file,  the 
IPFS server returns the encrypted file to the member. 

3.2.5  Blockchain 
According  to  the  characteristic  of  blockchain  that  is  considered 
incorruptible,  the  file  uploading  information  can  be  recorded  on 
the blockchain. Along with  the identification  and hash value,  the 
blockchain is regarded as a trackable server so that the ownership 
and integrity of a file is undeniable. 

Figure 2. Sequence diagram for file uploading process 

When a user wants to access the files belonging to a group_id, the 
user  first  generates  a  key  pair  and  upload  the  public  key  along 
with  user_id  and  the  designated  group_id  to  the  IPFS  proxy,  as 
shown in Step 6. A new user needs to receive permission by the 
group owner. If the user is authorized to access files in the group, 
the IPFS proxy updates the user’s public key to the mapping table 
and the user registration process is completed. 

In the Step 7, the authorized user queries  transaction data on the 
blockchain  according  to  trans_id.  After  successful  receive  of  the 
designated  transaction  data  which  including  group_id,  user_id, 
the file_hash and the IPFS_hash, the user signs the request to the 
IPFS  proxy  with  group_id,  user_id  and  IPFS_hash,  as  shown  in 
the Step 8. The IPFS proxy verifies the identity of the request, and 
queries  the  IPFS  server  according  to  the  IPFS_hash. Finally,  the 
IPFS  server  send  the  designated  encrypted  file  to  the  user,  as 
shown in the Step 9. 

Now  the  user  cannot  access  the  encrypted  file  since  the  file  is 
encrypted  by  the  group  key  generated  by  the  IPFS  proxy.  We 
propose a key  wrapping technique which encrypts one key using 
another  key.  To  decrypt  the  file  that  the  user  received,  the  IPFS 
proxy  sends  a  key  wrapping  key  to  the  user.  The  key  wrapping 
key encrypts the group key by the user’s public key. The user then 
decrypts the key wrapping key and receives the group key. After 
that, the encrypted file can be decrypted by using the group key, 
as  shown  in  the  Step  10.  Finally,  the  user  hashes  the  file  and 
compares  the  result  with  the  file_hash  downloaded  from  the 
blockchain to verify the integrity of the file. After the comparison, 
the  sharing  process  is  completed.  The  sequence  diagram  for  file 
downloading process is shown in Figure 3. 

3.4  Access Control 
The proposed IPFS proxy plays an important role in the system. It 
provides a registration and validation platform to whom wants to 
attach to the secure file sharing system.  

After  the  registration,  the  user’s  public  key  is  recorded  in  a 
mapping  table  stored  in  the  IPFS  proxy.  The  IPFS  proxy  first 
generates  a  new  group  key  when  a  new  owner  requests  for 
registration in the system. The group key is a symmetric key, e.g., 
AES-CBC,  since  a  symmetric  cryptosystem  is  faster.  The  group 

Figure 1. Overview of the proposed secure file sharing system 

3.3  Work Flow 

The following is a detailed description on the work flow of the 

proposed scheme.  

In the first step, the owner who wants to create a new group in 
the secure file sharing system needs to register at the IPFS proxy. 
The  owner  uploads  the  public  key  generated  by  himself  along 
with  the  user  identification  user_id.  After  the  registration,  the 
IPFS proxy returns a group identification  group_id to the owner. 
The  IPFS  proxy  owns  a  mapping  table  of  the  group_id  mapping 
that are key lists generated by whom registered to the system.  

In the step 2, the registered owner signs his file that is ready to be 
uploaded. The IPFS proxy verifies the correctness of the signature. 
After checking the signature properly, the IPFS proxy hashes the 
file and generates a file_hash to verify the integrity of the file. It 
also  encrypts  the  file  with  a  group  key  generated  by  the  proxy. 
The  group  key  is  stored  in  the  proxy  and  the  encrypted  file  is 
uploaded  to  the  IPFS  Server.  The  IPFS  Server  returns  a 
IPFS_hash after storing the encrypted file, as shown in the Step 3. 
Upon  receiving  the  IPFS_hash,  the  IPFS  proxy  stores  the 
combined  value  of  group_id,  user_id  and  the  file_qhash  on  the 
blockchain,  as  shown  in  the  Step  4.  The  blockchain  then 
broadcasts  a  transaction  and  returns  a  transaction  identification 
trans_id  to  the  IPFS  proxy.  After  returning  trans_id  from  the 

key is stored in the mapping  table along with the owner’s public 
key, as shown in Figure 4. When another user wants to access to 
the  same  group,  the  user’s  public  key  is  attached  to  the  same 
mapping  table  after  the  validation  is  completed.  The  different 
groups  have  their  own  mapping  tables  that  become  the  access 
control polices of the IPFS proxy. 

3.7  Security 
In  our  system,  the  IPFS  proxy  is  trusted.  The  owners  and  users 
who want to join in the secure file sharing system are regarded as 
trusted  after  completing  the  registration  process.  However,  the 
IPFS  server  and  Blockchain  are  unreliable  since  their  data is 
accessible  to  anyone  on  the  internet.  Despite  the  unauthorized 
users  are  available  to  access  files  from  the  IPFS  server  and 
Blockchain,  the  encrypted  files  downloaded  from  IPFS  server 
cannot  be  decrypted  without  the  group  key.  The  IPFS  proxy 
manages the access control polices to ensure the group security in 
the secure file sharing system. 

Figure 3. Sequence diagram for file downloading process 

3.5  Revocation 
All the sharing files in the same group are encrypted by the same 
group key. If there is someone in a group being revoked, then the 
IPFS proxy generates a new group key to replace the old one. All 
the  encrypted  files  in  the  IPFS  server  that  belong  to  the  group 
require to re-encrypt by the new group key. The IPFS_hash of the 
new  encrypted  files  are  stored  to  the  blockchain  as  a  new 
transaction. All the users excluding the revoked user  will receive 
the new group key encrypted by the public key of the authorized 
users.  To prevent  the  revoked user  to  access  any  future data,  the 
new  sharing  files  are  encrypted  by  the  new  group  key.  Given  n 
users in a group, the revocation process requires a communication 
overhead in the order of O(n). 

3.6  Group Management 
Any  user  in  the  system  can  join  more  than  one  group.  For 
example,  Alice,  Bob  and  Carol  belong  to  group  1,  and  Bob  and 
Charlie are in group 2, as shown in Figure. 4. Bob belongs to both 
group 1 and group 2. When Bob wants to access files in the group 
1, he requests the IPFS proxy for the group 1 key encrypted by his 
public  key.  Then  Bob  can  decrypt  the  file  downloaded  from  the 
IPFS server by group 1 key. In the same case, Bob can access the 
files  belonging  to  group  2  by  requesting  the  IPFS  proxy  for  the 
group 2 key. Bob is the only person who can both access the files 
in group 1 and group 2.  

Since  Alice  and  Bob  are  in  the  same  group,  Alice  only  has  the 
right to access the files in the group 1. In a similar  way, Charlie 
only has permission to access the files in group 2 while Bob in the 
same  group  is  authorized  to  access  both  groups.  The  group 
management  classifies  the  members  in  the  system  according  to 
group  it  belongs,  regardless  of  how  many  groups  a  member 
belongs to. 

Figure  4.  Group  key  management  and  the  mapping  table  in 
the IPFS proxy 

4. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In  this  paper,  we  present  a  secure  file  sharing  system  based  on 
permission-less blockchain and IPFS. The IPFS proxy is adopted 
to bring a distributed access control and group key  management. 
The  combination  of  the  IPFS  server  and  the  blockchain  network 
with  the  adoption  of  the  IPFS  proxy  make  a  secure  file  sharing 
system.  In  which  the  members  on  the  system  can  create  new 
groups  or  join  different  groups  by  their  own  choice.  Although 
there  is  no  access  control  mechanism  in  the  IPFS  server  and 
blockchain  network,  the  secure  file  sharing  system  manages  the 
access control policies. The members access files only belonging 
to the group they  are authorized. We are currently in the process 
of  finishing  a  implementation  of  our  design.  As  for  the  future 
work, we will apply the design and show the detailed performance 
to prove our work. 

5. REFERENCES
[1] Nakamoto, Satoshi, and A. Bitcoin. "A peer-to-peer

electronic cash system." Bitcoin.–URL: https://bitcoin.
org/bitcoin. pdf (2008).

[2] Benet, Juan. "Ipfs-content addressed, versioned, p2p file
system." arXiv preprint arXiv:1407.3561 (2014).

[3] Shafagh, Hossein, et al. "Towards blockchain-based

auditable storage and sharing of IoT data." Proceedings of
the 2017 on Cloud Computing Security Workshop. 2017.

[4] Ateniese, Giuseppe, et al. "Improved proxy re-encryption

schemes with applications to secure distributed
storage." ACM Transactions on Information and System
Security (TISSEC) 9.1 (2006): 1-30.

[5] Cui, Shujie, Muhammad Rizwan Asghar, and Giovanni
Russello. "Towards blockchain-based scalable and
trustworthy file sharing." 2018 27th International Conference

on Computer Communication and Networks (ICCCN). IEEE, 
2018. 

[6] Dong, Changyu, Giovanni Russello, and Naranker Dulay.
"Shared and searchable encrypted data for untrusted
servers." Journal of Computer Security 19.3 (2011): 367-397.

[7] Ethereum White-Paper. Online:

https://github.com/ethereum/wiki/wiki/ White-Paper, 2019.

[8] Cachin, Christian. "Architecture of the hyperledger
blockchain fabric." Workshop on distributed
cryptocurrencies and consensus ledgers. Vol. 310. 2016.

[9] Protocol Labs. Filecoin: A Decentralized Storage Network.

Online: https://filecoin.io/filecoin.pdf, 2017.

[10] Hartman, John H., Ian Murdock, and Tammo Spalink. "The

Swarm scalable storage system." Proceedings. 19th IEEE
International Conference on Distributed Computing Systems
(Cat. No. 99CB37003). IEEE, 1999.

