Scalable and Privacy-Focused Company-Centric
Supply Chain Management

Eric Wagner∗,†, Roman Matzutt†, Jan Pennekamp†, Lennart Bader∗,
Irakli Bajelidze†, Klaus Wehrle†,∗, and Martin Henze‡,∗
∗Cyber Analysis & Defense, Fraunhofer FKIE · {ﬁrstname.lastname}@fkie.fraunhofer.de
†Communication and Distributed Systems, RWTH Aachen University · {lastname}@comsys.rwth-aachen.de
‡Security and Privacy in Industrial Cooperation, RWTH Aachen University · henze@cs.rwth-aachen.de

2
2
0
2

y
a
M
2
2

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
1
6
9
0
1
.
5
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Blockchain technology promises to overcome trust
and privacy concerns inherent to centralized information shar-
ing. However, current decentralized supply chain management
systems do either not meet privacy and scalability requirements
or require a trustworthy consortium, which is challenging for
increasingly dynamic supply chains with constantly changing
participants. In this paper, we propose CCChain, a scalable
and privacy-aware supply chain management system that stores
all information locally to give companies complete sovereignty
over who accesses their data. Still, tamper protection of all
data through a permissionless blockchain enables on-demand
tracking and tracing of products as well as reliable information
sharing while affording the detection of data inconsistencies. Our
evaluation conﬁrms that CCChain offers superior scalability in
comparison to alternatives while also enabling near real-time
tracking and tracing for many, less complex products.

Index Terms—supply chain management; blockchain; permis-

sionless; deployment; tracing and tracking; privacy

I. INTRODUCTION

In 2012, the Food Safety Authority of Ireland detected
signiﬁcant unlabeled traces of horse meat DNA in food
products [1]. What became known as the Horsemeat Scandal
resulted in a lasting reduction of sales numbers and customer
trust [1]. Reliable information sharing can preemptively detect
issues and their underlying cause leading to such events within
food and manufacturing supply chains [2]. Even during normal
operation, such information sharing enables e.g., the anticipa-
tion of bottlenecks in supply and demand [3] or the sharing
of product-speciﬁc information for further processing [4] and
with end-customers [5]. However, supply chain management
(SCM) systems with the capability for such reliable informa-
tion sharing are still not in widespread use, mostly due to trust
and privacy concerns [2].

Consequently, recent research efforts focus on realizing
decentralized SCM systems that alleviate trust and privacy
issues inherent to centralized information management [6].
Lately, these efforts have concentrated on using blockchain
technology as promising backbone for such decentralized
SCM architectures. The resulting proposals for SCM can be
broadly grouped into two categories: (i) systems built on top of
permissionless blockchains [7]–[11], which address trust but
not privacy concerns and suffer from scalability issues, and
(ii) systems realized on top of permissioned blockchains [5],

Author manuscript.

[12]–[16], which require massive planning among collabora-
tors to establish a trusted consortium to operate the blockchain.

While some prototypical or even production-ready decen-
tralized SCM systems are already deployed, those deploy-
ments are restricted to small-scale operation with only a
select few partners [2]. In practice, we identify two major
concerns arising from these architectures. First, large numbers
of (international) collaborators make it exponentially harder to
establish a consortium trusted by collaborators and customers.
More importantly, related work mostly ignores the dynamics
of entities seamlessly joining and leaving a SCM system.
This oversight is particularly limiting when SCM systems
incrementally grow their user base as they gain popularity.

In this paper, we propose CCChain as an incrementally
deployable, scalable, and privacy-aware SCM system. CC-
Chain gives each company control over its own data and by
default hides data from externals. Notably, the integrity of
locally stored data is still ensured by regularly publishing a
cryptographic witness over all recent events to a public ledger.
Thus, no data can be retrospectively altered. Whenever an
external entity needs access to particular information, e.g., to
identify the reason for a faulty product, exactly the information
relevant to the product’s manufacturing steps can be shared,
without providing access to any additional data.

II. SUPPLY CHAIN MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS

Although information sharing along supply chains offers
manifold beneﬁts [3]–[5], [17], companies are still hesitant to
engage in such efforts due to privacy and trust concerns [2],
[17]–[20]. Meanwhile, data authenticity and privacy in scal-
able SCM systems is still challenging [2], [21], as centralized
solutions lead to information asymmetry that primarily beneﬁts
the powerful entities in the supply chain [14]. Here, blockchain
technology shows major potential to improve the status quo
by realizing decentralized SCM that mitigates many of the
concerns of centralized deployments. In the following, we
outline still open challenges of SCM that surface when either
relying on permissionless or permissioned blockchains.

Permissionless Blockchain-based SCM. Publicly avail-
able permissionless blockchains (e.g., Ethereum [22]) provide
a ready-to-use trusted infrastructure that offers signiﬁcant

©2022 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including
reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or
reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.

 
 
 
 
 
 
advantages for SCM systems over centralized and/or dedi-
cated alternatives. Initially, such systems only stored integrity-
protected information for individual products [7], [8], before
several proposals tokenized not only ﬁnal products but also
intermediate products to enable the tracing of a product’s
entire manufacturing process over multiple hops [9]–[11].
These approaches link physical goods to a unique digital
representation (e.g., via RFID chips), which is immutably
stored on the blockchain. This digital representation is then
enriched with information as the product traverses the supply
chain. Although permissionless blockchains offer a high level
of trust, they also suffer from scalability and privacy issues,
as storing data becomes costly and all transactions are public.

Permissioned Blockchain-based SCM. Scalability and
privacy issues of permissionless blockchains can partially
be mitigated by permissioned blockchains, i.e., blockchains
operated by a set of authenticated users. Utilizing such a
dedicated blockchain for the information sharing along a
supply chain promises faster and better scaling networks [5],
[12]–[16]. While such fragmentation limits the interoperability
across supply chains and dynamic partnerships, they promise
to solve privacy and scalability issues. In permissioned sys-
tems, privacy can be achieved by segmenting information
and encrypting each part separately, e.g., via attribute-based
encryption [12], [13]. Combined with an entity that enforces
access control [12]–[14], data availability and privacy concerns
can be further improved. Still,
it remains challenging for
SCM systems based on permissioned blockchains to deﬁne
and achieve transparency and being ﬂexible w.r.t. participating
companies, i.e., the joining and leaving of companies.

III. CCCHAIN: A DEPLOYABLE SCM SYSTEM

Current SCM systems are either not scalable and privacy-
preserving or are designed for a static setup of entities that
comprise a single supply chain. The lack of support for incre-
mental deployability of scalable systems, which is necessary
for today’s dynamic economy, thus limits current systems’
applicability in the real world. Therefore, we present our novel
Company-Centric supply Chain management system that ad-
dresses these limitations. CCChain orients itself on designs
built on permissionless blockchains while heavily restricting
the amount of published data to ensure scalability and privacy.
In the following, we present CCChain’s architecture in detail.

A. Immutable and Traceable Data Records

We ﬁrst describe how CCChain represents the supply
chain’s production graph with data records that are stored
locally by the entity responsible for the respective production
step. Data records represent actions that describe transforma-
tions or ownership transfers of the referenced products. Hence,
the gradual transformation and transfer of raw materials to
the ﬁnal product via actions form the ﬁnal production graph.
As we show in Figure 1, every action consists of a unique
action identiﬁer (a hash value computed over all its ﬁelds), an
action type, and a timestamp. Additionally, actions reference

Fig. 1. CCChain maintains product records with a set of actions, and links
them such that ﬁne-granular data access to individual products is possible.

(potentially multiple) product identiﬁers as inputs and product
records as outputs, depending on the action type.

Similarly, product records have a unique product identiﬁer
(the hash value over all of its ﬁelds), and they contain a
descriptive product name, a list of related details such as
produced quantities, and a nonce. Crucially, actions only
indicate the identiﬁer of output product records to protect the
conﬁdentiality of non-relevant information when publishing
an action. Furthermore, the nonce prevents outsiders from
guessing product records. In contrast, an input product
is
represented by a reference to a previous output product. Each
output product can only be consumed once, which has to be
respected by companies since any misbehavior is retrospec-
tively detectable during product tracing or third-party audits.
In total, CCChain supports six action types. First, companies
can create new products that do not require previous inputs,
e.g., gaining resources from excavation. A company can fur-
ther produce a product by consuming one or multiple input
products. Next, one company can export products, which
other companies then can import to represent an ownership
transfer (cf. Section III-C). Correspondingly, companies can
buy or sell components or products to external parties, i.e.,
trade partners that still fail to support CCChain. Overall, these
six action types can represent a product’s full life cycle along
the supply chain, enriched with supplementary collected data.

B. Ensuring the Correctness of Locally Stored Information

CCChain ensures the conﬁdentiality of their product records
by only storing them locally by default. However, CCChain
has to ensure the integrity and consistency of product records
to prevent fraud and to add value over existing SCM systems.
Thus, these records must be immutable once they are refer-
enced by an action. We consider potential problems stemming
from generating fraudulent product records orthogonal to our
work; corresponding approaches engulf, for instance, tamper-
resistant sensor [21], [23], regular consistency checks [24],
or detailed (lab) analyses of random product samples [25].
CCChain can easily integrate corresponding advancements
and, conversely, also improve related auditing processes: For
example,
through the management of access rights to a
company’s product records, auditors can gain retroactive data
access such that potential misbehavior is always detectable.

To ensure that locally stored data records cannot be altered,
companies are required to periodically (e.g., once a day)
upload a cryptographic witness covering all recent products
and actions to a permissionless blockchain. These witnesses
consist of the Merkle roots obtained from the Merkle tree [26]
over all actions generated by one company within the last
period. Only after a witness is published, i.e., being immutable,

actionaction id.timestampindex(crypto. witness)action identifierproduct identifierprod. id.“product name”detailsnonceproduct id.inputsoutputscan other companies rely on its information. The existence of
an action is then validated via exchanged Merkle proofs.

C. Transferring Products Across Company Borders

The export and import actions are unique as they connect
the production graphs across two companies. These actions
always occur in pairs (cf. Section III-C), yet, fraudulent and
incorrect data must always be attributable to a single entity.

Ideally, companies create and share their export actions
right before shipping goods to the receiving company and
prove they have been recorded on the blockchain. This way,
the receiving company learns a veriﬁable and retroactively
publishable claim that the goods have been shipped, and it
can create and publish the corresponding import action when
receiving the goods. Hence, both trading companies agree
that the shipment has concluded successfully and that the
respective actions are properly persisted for later audits. How-
ever, this protocol enables malicious companies to misbehave,
motivating a fallback protocol to resolve potential disputes.

If the exporting company receives no corresponding import
action within a reasonable time, it ﬁles a complaint on the
blockchain. The complaint includes identiﬁers of the blinded
importing company, the affected products, and an indicator of
whether the export action should be retracted entirely, e.g., in
case of problems with the shipping process, or converted into
a sell action because goods were received but not registered
in CCChain. The blinding is based on a secret previously
established between both companies to protect the accused
company’s privacy during the dispute resolution.

After recognizing a complaint, the accused company has
two options. First, it can choose not to respond, which we
interpret as an agreement to the accusation and to reverting
the previous export operation. In this case,
the exporting
company can overwrite the export action by consuming the
corresponding product identiﬁers twice. Second, the accused
company can publish a Merkle proof showing that the com-
pany previously published an import action that matches the
accusing company’s export action,
the complaint was
unwarranted. If a product is shipped without a published or
transmitted export action, the importing company can employ
a similar protocol: It ﬁrst announces the (blinded) company
identiﬁer and the relevant product identiﬁers. Without any
response, it uses a buy action instead of an import action
even if both parties use CCChain. If further questioned,
the company can refer to the unanswered complaint on the
blockchain. Otherwise, the exporting company publishes the
proof of the export action to resolve the dispute. Consequently,
both companies involved in a product transfer always own
a shareable proof (for future use) about the existence of the
counterpart of their respective import or export action.

i.e.,

D. Tracing and Tracking Product Lifecycles with CCChain

Fig. 2.
In CCChain, the basic tracing and tracking operation works by
iteratively requesting product-related information from its creator. This process
ensures companies keep the sovereignty of their data.

tracing [30]. The tracking and tracing functionality in CCChain
is an interactive process, where each company can decide
on a case-by-case basis if it wants to share the requested
information. While information can be technically withheld,
without a valid reason such an approach damages a company’s
reputation. Similarly, companies can be required by law to
share their data with regulators, for which the legal frameworks
are currently extended, by e.g., the German Act on Corporate
Due Diligence in Supply Chains from 2021 [31].

Figure 2 illustrates the data retrieval process for an end-
customer tracing a product in CCChain. The customer ﬁrst
has to retrieve the relevant companies’ Merkle roots from
the public blockchain. Then, a product’s tracing information
can be requested in an iterative manner, starting from the
entity the product was brought from. The company from the
supply chain can answer these requests with product-related
information and the Merkle proof verifying its authenticity.
By iteratively tracing a product back to its raw materials, its
sources and entire lifecycle can thus be veriﬁed, while the
protocol presented in Section III-C ensures that the correct
supply chain predecessors are shared with the customer.

While the need for entities to remain responsive could be
considered a drawback, we argue that CCChain’s dynamic
data access signiﬁcantly outweighs this aspect, as companies
never lose control over their data. In the end, we believe that
this additional control over one’s data is crucial for any SCM
system to be accepted by a large community.

IV. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION

We have introduced CCChain as an incrementally deploy-
able supply chain management system by design and discussed
its security guarantees. In the following, we underline CC-
Chain’s excellent performance and scalability.

Experimental Setup. Our Go-based prototypical imple-
mentation covers all relevant entities and relies on MongoDB
as a database. We further realize the event-based smart contract
in Solidity and interface via geth with a local Ethereum
instance. We run our evaluation on a single server (Intel Xeon
Silver 4116 CPU, 196 GB of RAM) by deploying all entities
in individual docker containers, with each container having
access to a single core.

As companies and end-customers increasingly care about
products’ sustainable, ethical, and conﬂict-free sourcing and
manufacturing [27]–[29], a critical feature of modern SCM
systems is the ability to perform multi-hop tracking and

A. CCChain’s Low Local Processing and Storage Overheads

Before discussing the performance on a global scale, we re-
port on the low processing and storage overhead for a company
that utilizes CCChain. Looking at CCChain’s performance in

dataproofcompany rootscompany A: […,0xaaa2]company B: […,0xbbb1]customerheadercompany rootscompany A: […,0xaaa2]company B: […,0xbbb2]headercompany rootscompany A: […,0xaaa2]company B: […,0xbbb2]headersubscribeproofpublishMerklerootdatapublishMerklerootFig. 3. CCChain is even more efﬁcient in terms of data storage requirements
than SCM systems built on top of private blockchains.

Fig. 4. CCChain allows the quick tracking and tracing of even complex
products composed over thousands of manufacturing steps.

terms of processed actions per second, we observe that the
create and buy actions can be handled at an average rate
of 79 and 61 thousand actions per second, respectively. The
sell and produce actions, on the other hand, require a
backward reference to the input products but still achieve
a more than sufﬁcient throughput of 1.6 and 1.4 thousand
actions per second. As expected, the export and import
actions achieve the least throughput at 240 actions per second,
each. This reduced performance follows from the need to
generate and verify Merkle trees, as well as the required inter-
actions between two CCChain instances. Assuming an equal
distribution of action types, with each action only carrying
200 B of data, CCChain achieves a per-company throughput of
over 35 Mbit/s. Consequently, even our prototypical CCChain
client demonstrates excellent performance on a company level.

B. Operational Cost of a CCChain Deployment

Besides the local CCChain client, additional costs arise
from CCChain’s interaction with a public blockchain. On
March 3, 2022, the recommended gas costs [32] for a Merkle
root upload thus equals 0.0011 ETH or 3.18 USD. For larger
businesses, the resulting annual price constitutes 1160.7 USD.
Consequently, these funds are manageable even with high
transaction costs, as currently observed in Ethereum. Alter-
natively, multiple companies could also register as a group
and combine their individual Merkle roots, thereby sharing the
cost of a single upload. With a threshold cryptography scheme
for account management, such an approach does not impair
their individual privacy. Overall, the fair operational costs of
CCChain are easily manageable by most businesses, making
its design optimal to achieve widespread real-world adoption.

C. Scalability Analysis of CCChain

To look at CCChain’s scalability of an entire supply chain,
we now compare CCChain to abstract SCM systems that
either operate fully on a permissionless or on a permissioned
blockchain. In the permissionless setting, we assume that all
information is stored on a public ledger and thus a copy of all
data must be stored by each entity. In the permissioned setting,
we expect that entities only store a copy of the blockchains
corresponding to supply chains they are directly involved in.
In our context, we make a conservative estimate that each
company is part of supply chains with 100 collaborators.

For comparability, we assume that each entity using the
network stores one 200 B action per second, which corre-
sponds to 5.9 GB of annual data per entity. Figure 3 illustrates
how the compulsory inclusion of this data in the different

decentralized SCM architectures affects the required storage
as the number of participating companies grows. On a per-
company level, we notice that a permissioned architecture
adds constant overhead to each company, given that
the
companies only store data from their (multi-hop) collaborators.
Even worse, permissionless architectures handle exponentially
growing amounts of data as every company’s data is stored.
In contrast, CCChain introduces little overhead, and only in
scenarios with vast numbers of participating companies, the
overhead grows as the Merkle Roots of all participants must be
stored. Thus, CCChain’s good scalability even allows smaller
businesses to join without fearing a high ﬁnancial burden.

D. Tracking and Tracing Performance in CCChain

Finally, we look at the tracking and tracing performance
(cf. [13]). For these measurements, we consider a binary
production graph where at each non-leaf node, a new (in-
termediate) product is manufactured by a unique company
and by consuming two previous products. In Figure 4, we
report on the time and network trafﬁc to track and trace
products for an increasing number of entities. We refrain
from applying additional network latency as many of the
requests can be parallelized. As expected, tracing produces
more overhead as it requires the revelation of the entire
production graph, whereas tracking only reveals one path from
one node up to the ﬁnal product. We observe a similar trend
in the amount of exchanged data for the requests, information
sharing, and authenticity proofs. In our setting, CCChain thus
traces products with 64 or less manufacturing steps in less than
1 s, while exchanging less than 1 MB of data. Hence, CCChain
could even be used to request veriﬁed provenance information
in real-time while shopping for food in a supermarket.

V. CONCLUSION

Information sharing along the supply chain tackles the antic-
ipation of issues and answers the customers’ and regulators’
demands for proof of the sustainable, ethical, and conﬂict-
free sourcing and manufacturing of products. Blockchain
technology now gives rise to the opportunity of designing
decentralized alternatives that mitigate trust and privacy con-
cerns of centralized systems. However, current decentralized
SCM systems lack ﬂexibility and scalability. We addressed
this issue by proposing CCChain as an alternative system:
CCChain supports dynamic and ﬁne-granular data access
policies, which, coupled with its scalability and incrementally

102103104105106ParticipatingCompanies01021041061081010Data[GB]permissionlesspercompanypermissionedglobalCChain101102103104Collaborators10−2100102ProcessingTime[s]10−2100102Data[MB]trackingtimetracingtimetrackingdatatracingdatadeployability to support organic growth, make it an attractive
alternative for today’s sophisticated and ever-changing SCM.

Acknowledgments. Funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemein-
schaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) under Germany’s Excel-
lence Strategy – EXC-2023 Internet of Production – 390621612.

REFERENCES

[1] L. Agnoli, R. Capitello, M. De Salvo, A. Longo, and M. Boeri, “Food
fraud and consumers’ choices in the wake of the horsemeat scandal,”
British Food Journal, vol. 118, no. 8, pp. 1898–1913, 2016.

[2] P. Gonczol, P. Katsikouli, L. Herskind, and N. Dragoni, “Blockchain
Implementations and Use Cases for Supply Chains-A Survey,” IEEE
Access, vol. 8, pp. 11 856–11 871, 2020.

[3] P. Fiala, “Information sharing in supply chains,” Omega, vol. 33, no. 5,

pp. 419–423, 2005.

[4] B. B. Flynn, B. Huo, and X. Zhao, “The impact of supply chain
integration on performance: A contingency and conﬁguration approach,”
Journal of Operations Management, vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 58–71, 2010.
[5] S. Malik, S. S. Kanhere, and R. Jurdak, “ProductChain: Scalable
Blockchain Framework to Support Provenance in Supply Chains,” in
Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE 17th International Symposium on Network
Computing and Applications (NCA ’18).

IEEE, 2018.

[6] S. van Engelenburg, M. Janssen, and B. Klievink, “A Blockchain
Architecture for Reducing the Bullwhip Effect,” in Proceedings of the
8th International Symposium on Business Modeling and Software Design
(BMSD ’18), vol. 319. Springer, 2018, pp. 69–82.

[7] F. Tian, “An agri-food supply chain traceability system for China based
on RFID & blockchain technology,” in Proceedings of the 2016 13th
International Conference on Service Systems and Service Management
(ICSSSM ’16).

IEEE, 2016.

[8] H. M. Kim and M. Laskowski, “Toward an ontology-driven blockchain
design for supply-chain provenance,” Intelligent Systems in Accounting,
Finance and Management, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 18–27, 2018.

[9] M. Westerkamp, F. Victor, and A. K¨upper, “Blockchain-Based Supply
Chain Traceability: Token Recipes Model Manufacturing Processes,” in
Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE International Conference on Internet
of Things (iThings) and IEEE Green Computing and Communications
(GreenCom) and IEEE Cyber, Physical and Social Computing (CP-
SCom) and IEEE Smart Data (SmartData). IEEE, 2018, pp. 1595–1602,
Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE International Conference on Blockchain
(Blockchain ’18).

[10] S. Wang, D. Li, Y. Zhang, and J. Chen, “Smart Contract-Based Product
Traceability System in the Supply Chain Scenario,” IEEE Access, vol. 7,
pp. 115 122–115 133, 2019.

[11] M. Westerkamp, F. Victor, and A. K¨upper, “Tracing manufacturing
processes using blockchain-based token compositions,” Digital Commu-
nications and Networks, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 167–176, 2020.

[12] J. Pennekamp, L. Bader, R. Matzutt, P. Niemietz, D. Trauth, M. Henze,
T. Bergs, and K. Wehrle, “Private Multi-Hop Accountability for Supply
Chains,” in Proceedings of the 2020 IEEE International Conference
on Communications Workshops (ICC Workshops ’20).
IEEE, 2020,
Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Blockchain for IoT and Cyber-
Physical Systems (BIoTCPS ’20).

[13] L. Bader, J. Pennekamp, R. Matzutt, D. Hedderich, M. Kowalski,
V. L¨ucken, and K. Wehrle, “Blockchain-Based Privacy Preservation for
Supply Chains Supporting Lightweight Multi-Hop Information Account-
ability,” Information Processing & Management, vol. 58, no. 3, 2021.

[14] S. A. Abeyratne and R. Monfared, “Blockchain ready manufacturing
supply chain using distributed ledger,” International Journal of Research
in Engineering and Technology, vol. 5, no. 9, 2016.

[15] S. Malik, V. Dedeoglu, S. Kanhere, and R. Jurdak, “PrivChain: Prove-
nance and Privacy Preservation in Blockchain enabled Supply Chains,”
arXiv:2104.13964, 2021.

[16] S. Malik, N. Gupta, V. Dedeoglu, S. Kanhere, and R. Jurdak,
“TradeChain: Decoupling Traceability and Identity in Blockchain en-
abled Supply Chains,” arXiv:2105.11217, 2021.

[17] J. Pennekamp, M. Henze, S. Schmidt, P. Niemietz, M. Fey, D. Trauth,
T. Bergs, C. Brecher, and K. Wehrle, “Dataﬂow Challenges in an Internet
of Production: A Security & Privacy Perspective,” in Proceedings of the
ACM Workshop on Cyber-Physical Systems Security & Privacy (CPS-
SPC ’19). ACM, 2019, pp. 27–38.

[18] Y. Wang, M. Singgih, J. Wang, and M. Rit, “Making sense of blockchain
technology: How will it transform supply chains?” International Journal
of Production Economics, vol. 211, pp. 221–236, 2019.

[19] Y. Wang, J. H. Han, and P. Beynon-Davies, “Understanding blockchain
technology for future supply chains: a systematic literature review and
research agenda,” Supply Chain Management, vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 62–84,
2019.

[20] J. Pennekamp, R. Glebke, M. Henze, T. Meisen, C. Quix, R. Hai,
L. Gleim, P. Niemietz, M. Rudack, S. Knape, A. Epple, D. Trauth,
U. Vroomen, T. Bergs, C. Brecher, A. B¨uhrig-Polaczek, M. Jarke,
and K. Wehrle, “Towards an Infrastructure Enabling the Internet of
Production,” in Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE International Conference
on Industrial Cyber Physical Systems (ICPS ’19).
IEEE, 2019, pp.
31–37.

[21] J. Pennekamp, F. Alder, R. Matzutt, J. T. M¨uhlberg, F. Piessens,
and K. Wehrle, “Secure End-to-End Sensing in Supply Chains,” in
Proceedings of the 2020 IEEE Conference on Communications and
Network Security (CNS ’20).
IEEE, 2020, Proceedings of the 5th
International Workshop on Cyber-Physical Systems Security (CPS-Sec
’20).

[22] G. Wood, “Ethereum: A Secure Decentralised Generalised Transaction

Ledger,” Yellow Paper, 2014.

[23] L. Bader, J. C. B¨urger, R. Matzutt, and K. Wehrle, “Smart Contract-
the 2018 IEEE

Based Car Insurance Policies,” in Proceedings of
Globecom Workshops (GC Wkshps ’18).

IEEE, 2018.

[24] S. Malik, V. Dedeoglu, S. S. Kanhere, and R. Jurdak, “TrustChain:
Trust Management in Blockchain and IoT supported Supply Chains,” in
Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE International Conference on Blockchain
(Blockchain ’19).

IEEE, 2019, pp. 184–193.
[25] B. D¨udder and O. Ross, “Timber Tracking: Reducing Complexity of Due
Diligence by using Blockchain Technology (Position Paper),” in Joint
Proceedings of the BIR 2017 pre-BIR Forum, Workshops and Doctoral
Consortium (BIR-WS ’17), vol. 1898. CEUR Workshop Proceedings,
2017.

[26] R. C. Merkle, “A Digital Signature Based on a Conventional Encryption
Function,” in Proceedings of the 7th Conference on the Theory and
Applications of Cryptographic Techniques (CRYPTO ’87), vol. 293.
Springer, 1987, pp. 369–378.
´O. Gonz´alez-Benito, P. A. Mu˜noz-Gallego, and E. Garc´ıa-Zamora, “Role
of collaboration in innovation success: differences for large and small
businesses,” Journal of Business Economics and Management, vol. 17,
no. 4, pp. 645–662, 2016.

[27]

[28] M. De Angelis, F. Adıg¨uzel, and C. Amatulli, “The role of design simi-
larity in consumers’ evaluation of new green products: An investigation
of luxury fashion brands,” Journal of Cleaner Production, vol. 141, pp.
1515–1527, 2017.

[29] J. Cross, S. van der Wal, and E. d. Haan, “Rough Cut: Sustainability
Issues in the Coloured Gemstone Industry,” SOMO, Tech. Rep., 2010.
[30] S. E. Chang and Y. Chen, “When Blockchain Meets Supply Chain:
A Systematic Literature Review on Current Development and Potential
Applications,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 62 478–62 494, 2020.

[31] Bundestag, “Act on Corporate Due Diligence Obligations in Supply

Chains,” Federal Republic of Germany, Tech. Rep., 2021.

[32] ETHGasStation, “ETHGasStation,” https://ethgasstation.info, 2017.

