2
2
0
2

y
a
M
2
2

]

Y
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
3
1
9
0
1
.
5
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

IMPROVED HEALTHCARE ACCESS IN LOW-RESOURCE REGIONS:
A REVIEW OF TECHNOLOGICAL SOLUTIONS

A PREPRINT

Bishal Lamichhane
Rice University
Houston, Texas, USA
lamichhane.bishal@gmail.com

Navaraj Neupane
ASML
Eindhoven, The Netherlands
info2navaraj@gmail.com

May 24, 2022

ABSTRACT

Technological advancements have led to signiﬁcant improvements in healthcare for prevention,
diagnosis, treatments, and care. While resourceful regions can capitalize on state-of-the-art healthcare
technologies, there might be barriers and delays in technology-enabled healthcare availability for
a low-resource region. Unique innovations guided by the constraints of low-resource regions are
required to truly make healthcare technologies ubiquitous and achieve the goal of "healthcare for
all". In this review, we identiﬁed several research and development works that have investigated
technology-based healthcare innovations targeted at low-resource regions. We found three main
pillars of work towards this end: low-cost hardware for the affordability of medical devices, use of
information and communication technology (ICT) tools for scalability and operational efﬁciencies in
healthcare services, and mobile health solutions. Several emerging technologies are also promising
for healthcare in low-resource regions, such as artiﬁcial intelligence, the Internet of Things (IoT), and
blockchain technology. We discuss these emerging technologies too in this review.

Keywords Healthcare technology · Low-resource · Developing Countries · Low-Cost Healthcare · Health Technology

1

Introduction

The healthcare burden has been rising globally with increased incidences of sickness and poor health [1]. We have
observed the situation get further dire in the past years due to the global pandemic of COVID-19. While the healthcare
needs have only been increasing, the skilled human resources required to meet the associated increasing needs have not
been growing proportionally [2]. Technological advancements could help to reduce the burden in the healthcare system,
for example by automating diagnosis and improving operational efﬁciencies. The need to improve diagnosis, treat
new diseases and provide care for more people has meant that the state-of-the-art healthcare infrastructure is getting
more complex. This increasing complexity has also meant rising costs. The standard healthcare infrastructure of today
could be cost-prohibitive in many low-resource regions. Since many people still live in areas that can be categorized as
being low-resource regions [3], efforts toward making healthcare accessible and affordable in low-resource regions
should also be a priority. This will help to fully realize the global goals of healthcare for all such as the sustainable
development goals of good health and well-being [4].

Low-resource regions, also referred broadly to as low and middle-income countries (LMICs), are the geographical
regions with a smaller economy and poor access to basic infrastructures [5]. While healthcare has several general
challenges such as identifying treatments for new diseases, there are some challenges speciﬁc to the low-resource
settings. Standard healthcare infrastructures being highly cost-prohibitive in low-resource settings is one of such
challenges. Even in terms of human resources, the low-resource regions tend to have a smaller health professional
to patient ratio [6]. Skilled healthcare professionals often chose to live in resourceful regions for better facilities and
remuneration [7]. Hence, it is not uncommon in low-resource regions that personnel without appropriate training for a
healthcare role still ﬁll in that role due to the lack of available trained professionals. An example is the non-physician

 
 
 
 
 
 
A PREPRINT - MAY 24, 2022

clinicians commonly seen in low-resource regions [8]. This unavailability of adequate skilled health professionals has
implications on the quality of healthcare. Besides healthcare professionals, the patients themselves are also a factor in
the quality of healthcare delivery. Generally speaking, people living in the low-resource regions might have had lesser
access to quality education [9]. Thus, they might have less awareness about health, good practices, and seeking care
which has implications for the effectiveness of the healthcare that they receive. Similarly, there might be impediments
due to cultural and religious barriers which impact health services and delivery in low-resource regions [10].

Technology can play a vital role in addressing some of the healthcare challenges in low-resource regions. New devices
for diagnosis and treatment could be helpful to streamline healthcare where adequate healthcare professionals are not
available. For example, a device for automated respiration rate monitoring could relieve nurses from having to manually
estimate respiration rate [11] and enable them to triage more patients in a given time. New technological designs
and manufacturing improvements geared for cost reduction can make healthcare devices affordable for low-resource
regions. However, there are also open questions regarding the impact of cost reduction on the quality and reliability
of the devices (solutions). Information Technology (IT) and automation can also help make healthcare solutions
cheaper by scaling existing healthcare solutions and simplifying workﬂows in healthcare delivery. Similarly, automated
clinical decision-making to aid healthcare professionals can increase the efﬁciency of health processes and reduce
associated costs. An important platform for pervasive and affordable healthcare solutions could be the currently
ubiquitous smartphones and mobile networks which are getting more accessible in low-resource regions [12]. Some of
the upcoming technologies will also likely contribute to improving healthcare in low-resource regions. For example,
advanced machine learning and artiﬁcial intelligence have already shown promises for improving and democratizing
healthcare [13]. Other emerging technologies like the Internet of (Medical) Things (IoT/IoMT) and blockchain are also
poised to revolutionize healthcare [14] and likely lead to the advancement of healthcare in low-resource regions [15].

In this paper, we review some representative works on healthcare technologies for low-resource regions. In Section 2, we
present works on low cost medical devices. Then the use of IT solutions to scale and democratize healthcare resources
is presented in Section 3. Smartphone applications geared towards healthcare that could be relevant for healthcare in
low-resource regions are presented in Section 4. In Section 5, we present some of the emerging technologies that could
improve healthcare in low-resource regions. Based upon the reviewed works, we discuss the current state and outlook
of healthcare technologies for low-resource regions in Section 6.

2 Low Cost Medical Devices and Equipment

Medical devices are an important component in the healthcare delivery chain used across diagnosis, treatment, and care.
For example, diagnostic devices like vital sign sensors and patient monitors, life-critical support devices like ventilators
and pacemakers, among others, are required in general and specialized healthcare services. Effective healthcare delivery
requires supporting medical devices. However, the cost of medical devices in a particular care setting can be high. The
costs are alarmingly high in higher acuity care settings like ICU (Intensive Care Unit) or OR (operating room) and still
relatively high in lower acuity care settings like GW (General Ward). These high costs, both the capital expenditure and
operating costs, can in themselves be a big impediment to the wider reach of quality healthcare services in low-resource
regions [16].

Cost reduction of the medical devices can be achieved by several means such as:

• Re-design the existing devices to reduce components or use low-cost component alternatives

• Use alternate modalities to achieve similar functionalities as the standard medical devices

• Innovative operating model to maximize the utilization of costly devices

In this section, we review some works on low-cost medical device development. The works are categorized based on
the approach toward lowering the costs.

2.1 Low-cost medical devices with reducing component costs

The overall cost of electronic components goes down every year [17]. The bill of materials for standard medical devices
would thus lower too and possibly result in devices being affordable for use in low-resource regions. This, for example,
has been presented to be a case by [18] for home-based glucose monitoring devices. Glucose monitoring is essential
for monitoring chronic conditions like diabetes, a disease of growing worldwide concern and of increasing concern in
low-resource regions too [19, 20, 21]. According to the authors in [18], the glucose monitoring devices for home use
are getting affordable due to the general trend of lowering prices for semiconductor technologies. Standard electronic
components such as microcontrollers, real-time clocks, ﬂash memories, etc. have increased functionality while getting

2

A PREPRINT - MAY 24, 2022

cheaper. This proliferation of semiconductor technologies will further help reduce the overall costs of medical devices
and thus barriers to entry of medical devices in low-resource regions.

2.2 Add-ons to smartphone

Another approach to reducing the cost of medical devices is to use the ubiquitously available smartphone as an add-on
or replacement for some components of the medical devices. The authors in [22] proposed a low-cost blood pressure
measurement device for low-resource settings. The authors suggested the use of smartphones for interfacing with a
simple sensory front-end comprising a pressure sensor. With all the signal processing and visualization done in the
smartphone, with the power supply too coming from the smartphone itself, the cost of the blood pressure measurement
device could be signiﬁcantly lower than a standard measurement device. Further, the smartphone as an interface helps to
provide customized measurement guidance based on a person’s medical training, preferred language, etc. Similarly, the
authors in [23] presented an approach to using a low-cost device add-on, acoustically coupled to a standard smartphone,
for realizing a digital stethoscope. This approach reduced the cost by 150 to 400 times in mass production. The digital
stethoscope can be used for various care conditions like the remote assessment of heart sounds from a cardiac patient
or elderly patient monitoring at home. A digital stethoscope in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic to diagnose
lung pathologies in the low-resource setting has been proposed by the authors in [24]. The applicability of digital
stethoscopes in various application areas is still being actively investigated in several other works too [25, 26, 27, 28].

2.3 Alternate modalities of measurement

The price of standard medical devices can also be reduced by developing alternate modalities for diagnosis and treatment,
which are comparatively cheaper. The authors in [29] developed an intermittent fetal heart rate monitoring device
using Doppler ultrasound. It provided a comparative diagnostic value to that of a standard reference device such as
the Cardiotocograph, at a much lower cost. The proposed device could operate with alternate power sources such as
wind and solar power which made it further suitable for low-resource regions. The authors in [30] proposed the use
of wood-lamp technology, a technology for UV light generation, to detect various skin infections. Early detection of
skin infections could be crucial in the diagnosis of medical conditions like HIV/AIDS. The authors outlined various
challenges related to technology, business model, etc. for the use of the proposed device. Nonetheless, the proposed
diagnosis tool could provide a low-cost (pre-) diagnosis solution, suitable for use in low-resource settings when properly
designed for easy use. The authors in [31] reviewed various technologies for cancer diagnosis, treatment, and care in
low resource settings. The authors found, for example, low-cost and portable commercial ultrasound solutions to be
suitable in low-resource settings as a powerful diagnostic imaging tool.

Low-cost solutions for advanced state-of-the-art technologies have been discussed in several previous works. The
authors in [32] presented a gyroscope-based gait monitoring system that can be employed for use in a non-clinical setting
also. Gait monitoring has applications in the detection of the onset of neurodegenerative diseases, among others. IMU
(Inertial Measurement Unit) like gyroscopes and accelerometers provide a cheaper alternative to standard references
like optical marker-based motion capture technology or force plate sensors. The authors in [32] indeed found that
cheaper alternative methods like gyroscope-based monitoring provided comparable accuracy to other standard reference
methods. Similarly, the authors in [33] found inertial sensors to be a suitable tool to monitor physical functioning tasks
in low-resource settings.

A smartphone could also provide an alternative to diagnostic devices for certain medical conditions. The authors in [34]
presented a smartphone-based tool for mental health assessment that could be deployed in low resource settings. The
developed application uses contextual data like actigraphy and light, along with the available vital sign measurements
from third-party devices and validated clinical questionnaires, to assess and track an individual’s mental health. As the
proposed solution does not require the use of any other diagnostic devices and can be deployed in a scalable way, it
is well suited as a pre-diagnostic alternative for use in low-resource settings. Smartphone-based mobile sensing data
have been shown to be promising in other mental health applications like schizophrenia [35], depression [36], bipolar
disorder [37], etc.

2.4 Commodity hardware and software to improve efﬁciency

Technological solutions could also improve workﬂow and reduce clinicians’ burden where the patient to clinician ratio
is commonly high. The authors in [38] discussed the Humanitarian Technology Challenge (HTC) on using technology
to solve the challenges of healthcare service delivery in low-resource settings. RFID technology is proposed to identify
and link different healthcare service interactions, e.g., at a clinic or from a mobile health worker, with a central database
of a healthcare resource center. Robust identiﬁcation of healthcare service interactions and linking to electronic health
records is aimed at reducing errors in medical decision-making and enabling proper care planning.

3

A PREPRINT - MAY 24, 2022

The authors in [39] proposed machine learning techniques for the automatic identiﬁcation of clinical conditions like
pneumonia using heart rate, respiration rate, and other clinical information. Such automatic (pre-)diagnosis will lead
to signiﬁcant workﬂow improvements and medical error reduction. These will then reduce the costs in healthcare
delivery. With the commodiﬁcation of health devices (e.g., smartwatches consisting of several health sensors), the
availability of trained personnel for data interpretation and diagnosis can still be an impediment to effective healthcare
services in low-resource settings. Automatic data analysis and (pre-)diagnosis, such as those proposed by [39], can
improve the usefulness of available health data in low-resource settings. Other works such as [40] also discussed the
use of smartphone applications to support patient diagnosis in low-resource settings, especially where workﬂow can
be burdened by the low doctor-patient ratio. The authors also proposed a machine learning-based tool for automated
diagnosis of disease. In a similar approach, the authors in [41] presented a mobile telecardiology system suitable for a
low-resource setting. In the proposed solution, the ECG strip recorded by an ECG technician is captured as images
using a mobile camera and sent to a remote server where it is automatically processed to extract key ECG features.
Recommendations, and further referral to a trained doctor if required, are provided based on the ECG parameters and
associated automatic assessments of cardiovascular conditions.

In the overall landscape of medical devices, the cost associated with infrastructure maintenance cannot be overlooked.
In [42], the authors discussed the costs associated with healthcare infrastructure maintenance in a low-resource setting.
The infrastructure in this context encompassed not only the medical devices but also the related support structures like
the buildings, energy management, waste management support, etc. High costs were found to be mostly associated with
the operating costs. The capital expenditure could be less in principle, thanks to the various international aid and support
provided to low-resource regions. The authors suggested that the design and planning of infrastructure should be done
according to the local circumstances of deployment areas. For example, the availability of components for repair, the
possibility of training maintenance personnel, the availability of energy sources like solar plants, and the available
monitoring unit for proper aid deployment should be taken into consideration. The authors in [43] discussed some
challenges in maintaining computer-based infrastructure in low-resource settings. The authors also note that the cost of
required trained professionals to sustain and maintain such infrastructure is the most signiﬁcant. The authors proposed
a centralized technological support model for cost-effectiveness that could be relevant for healthcare infrastructure
deployments in low-resource regions.

2.5 Considerations for low-cost devices

Multiple issues need to be taken care of in the effort toward affordable medical devices for low-resource settings.
Proper considerations of the underlying technology (suitability/reliability), business and cost models (sustainabil-
ity/affordability), associated quality and usage factors, etc. need to be made. The authors in [44] advocated the need to
approach medical device development for low-resource settings differently from a mere technology transfer process.
A sustainable approach to the introduction of new technology is suggested by considering different factors such as
customer needs in low-resource regions, the context of device/application usage, viable business models, etc. The
authors in [45] raised various issues that could arise in low-cost medical device development. The authors suggested
that many of the proposed low-cost devices could be bogus and lack adequate safety designs. Therefore, proper scrutiny
of propositions to ensure patient safety and quality care is recommended. The authors also remarked that actual device
development costs might not be properly accounted for in many low-cost medical device propositions. Many low-cost
medical device development initiatives are undertaken in the academic research setting, usually supported by an external
grant. Thus, the research expenditure for a new low-cost device might not always be transparent and fully accounted for.
This has implications when new device development projects in low-resource regions are planned.

2.6 Section summary

To summarize, several works have investigated low-cost medical device/solution development for low-resource regions.
Some works have relied on the decreasing cost of semiconductor technology to argue that medical devices are getting
affordable for use in low-resource regions. This is true for many consumer-facing healthcare technologies (e.g.,
smartwatches and home-based health monitoring devices). However, much complex medical equipment is still very
costly [46], and it might be a while before the prices for standard medical devices required in a health care center become
affordable in most low-resource regions. Other works have relied on a smartphone as an add-on for medical devices,
overcoming the need to procure standard devices (e.g., a smartphone-based digital stethoscope in place of a standard
stethoscope). Though this approach is a viable alternative, e.g., using a smartphone display as a medical device display,
the functionality of the proposed solutions must be rigorously validated. For example, it should be ensured that the
functionality of the proposed solution/device works across different smartphone types, network quality, etc. Some works
have investigated alternate modalities for affordable diagnostic and therapeutic solutions in low-resource settings. These
research works should continue as low-cost measurement modalities might replace costlier alternatives. Other advances
we are making in data science and analytics for robust measurements could be helpful. For example, thanks to the

4

A PREPRINT - MAY 24, 2022

Table 1: Summary of works on low-cost medical devices for applications in low-resource settings. Various approaches
have been proposed in the literature for reducing the costs, ranging from using alternative sensing technology to the
usage of a smartphone as an add-on for medical devices.

Approach for low cost medical devices and
healthcare solutions
Reliance on reducing the price of the semiconduc-
tor technologies for
Smartphones as an add-on for medical devices

Low cost alternative for diagnosis and therapy e.g.
using alternate signal for diagnosis

Improvement of workﬂow to bring cost reductions
and reduce burden on clinicians

Example Clinical Applications and Example
Works
Glucose monitoring at home for Diabetes care. e.g.,
[18].
Blood pressure monitoring, Remote cardiac moni-
toring, and Elderly patient monitoring. e.g., [22],
[23].
Fetal Heart rate monitoring, Skin infection diag-
nosis, Cancer diagnosis, Gait monitoring, Mental
health assessment. e.g., [29], [30], [31], [32], [34]
Automated Electronic health record, Automated
Diagnosis, Mobile telecardiography. e.g., [38],
[39], [40], [41]

advances in data science, photoplethysmography (PPG) from consumer devices can potentially be used for arrhythmia
detection [47, 48] and consumer cameras can be used as a vital sign monitoring device [49, 50]. Technological solutions
have also been proposed to improve healthcare workﬂows and improve efﬁciency. This reduces the overall healthcare
costs and thus needs further exploration of their applicability in low-resource settings. Finally, a holistic view of the
cost of medical device deployment considers the cost of infrastructure in low-resource settings. This has been discussed
in some previous works and must be a part of any proposed general healthcare solution targeted at low-resource regions.
Overall, no matter what approach (or a combination thereof) is used towards low-cost medical devices, one must ensure
that the quality and patient safety aspects are kept as the priority.

A summary of our observations from the literature regarding low-cost medical devices for low resource regions is
provided in Table 1.

3

ICT Tools to Scale Healthcare Solutions

The use of information and communication technologies (ICT) in health services has been termed eHealth by the World
Health Organization (WHO) [51]. Cost-effectiveness and security are important aspects of eHealth propositions [52].
Healthcare outreach, especially in low-resource regions, could be improved with ICT to scale and democratize care. For
example, ICT could help the rapid dissemination of clinically relevant information such as a new diagnostic procedure
or matters of public health. In this section, we review some works that have proposed the use of ICT tools for affordable
healthcare in low-resource settings.

3.1

ICT for Electronic Health Records (EHR)

Proper management of health-related data is crucial in overall healthcare delivery. Electronic health records (EHR)
and other healthcare information systems provide the required infrastructure for data management and information
ﬂow. However, proprietary healthcare information systems might be cost-prohibitive for low-resource regions; the
burden of software license costs can sometimes be very high. The proliferation of affordable ICT solutions with the
ongoing open-source movement could prove a boon for healthcare ICT infrastructure in rural areas. Several works have
identiﬁed how ICT advancements can be used for better data management and information ﬂow for healthcare services
in low-resource settings.

In [53], the authors discussed the use of free and open-source software like Care2x [54] and OpenEHR [55] to build
hospital information systems, in the context of healthcare services for low-resource regions in Tanzania. The authors
in [56] proposed an open-source health information system called DataPall for rural healthcare solutions in Africa. The
DataPall system for keeping patient care records could run on a PC without internet access. The authors highlighted the
role of healthcare information systems such as DataPall in providing evidence-based healthcare improvements. The
authors in [57] also proposed an open-source cloud-based system named Eucalyptus to assist healthcare in low-resource
regions. Eucalyptus could support both the information management needs as well as the elastic computational needs.
The information management solution within Eucalyptus, for example, is obtained by integrating an open-source
hospital management system such as Care2x. The reliance of low-resource regions on open-source solutions for EHR
system implementations was also discussed in [58]. In particular, the following open-source EHR/EMR (Electronic

5

A PREPRINT - MAY 24, 2022

Medical Records) systems were reported to be commonly used: HOSxp [59], OpenEMR [60], and OpenVista [61]. The
authors in [62] identiﬁed 8 different data collection systems used for maternal and neonatal care in the low-resource
region of which four were free and open-source systems, highlighting the importance and prevalence of open-source
healthcare data management solutions in low-resource settings. The authors in [63] qualitatively compared ﬁve popular
open EHR systems: OSHERA VistA, GNU Health, OpenMRS, OpenEMR, and OpenEHR. The OpenEMR was
found to be the most promising open-source EMR solution in comparison. It is generally beneﬁcial to have multiple
open-source projects for an application. A hospital or clinic in low-resource settings could choose from multiple options
of open-source EMR/EHR depending upon the ﬁt to their current needs. In the meantime, open-source EHR should be
continually improved to be user-friendly, reliable, and effective, given the increasing usage of these EHRs for critical
healthcare services in low-resource regions, among other places.

It is preferable if most of the (software) components proposed in a healthcare information system, e.g., within a proposed
EHR, are open-source. For example, the authors in [64] proposed Intelehealth system for telehealth access in rural
India. Intelehealth is an open-source platform enabled by cloud-based electronic health records. The platform allows
proper information ﬂow between different healthcare professionals and clinical centers. MySQL database, available at
no cost, is used as a component of Intelehealth which makes the proposition suitable for low-resource regions. In [65],
the authors discussed a teleconsultation system designed for low-resource regions of Bangladesh which allows the
physicians to remotely access patients’ records and provide appropriate consultations. The system was built using
PHP and MYSQL server components which are both freely available IT tools. Similarly, in [66], the authors proposed
using open-source connectivity and database system for connecting different healthcare centers and professionals in
low-resource regions of Indonesia. Internet radio packet was used for connectivity and PostgresSQL for database
management. The free/low-cost software components make the proposition suitable for use in low-resource settings. On
the other hand, the authors in [67] proposed to use an off-the-shelf database like Filemaker [68] to build an EHR/EMR
solution for low-resource settings. However, the Filemaker solution is not free and the added cost of the database has
to be assessed in the trade-off of costs versus better functionality or usage beneﬁts that a commercial database could
provide.

3.2

ICT to improve secondary healthcare functions

ICT tools could help in making secondary healthcare functions like knowledge management, information dissemination,
and policymaking affordable and accessible. These secondary functions are especially important for healthcare
operations in low-resource regions where the availability of trained personnel is limited. Several studies have discussed
the role of ICT in knowledge management, information dissemination, and policymaking in the context of healthcare.
Similarly, the role of ICT to improve logistics in healthcare has also been highlighted by earlier studies. Improved
logistics in healthcare leads to improved accessibility.

The authors in [69] discussed how health information tools have beneﬁted healthcare services in low-resource regions
of Kenya. The improved data availability for local bodies helped to better assess the current healthcare systems, identify
their bottlenecks, and propose improvements. ICT tools helping improve policy by monitoring the healthcare system
are highlighted. In [70], the authors discussed the role played by ICT in the maintenance and operations of healthcare
infrastructure deployments in Mozambique. As these examples depict, information assimilation enabled by ICT helps
in policy and decision-making at a regional/national level. The authors in [71] also reported how ICT is important
for improved healthcare outreach and efﬁciency in low-resource regions of Peru and Nicaragua. They also identiﬁed
the need for increased access to communication infrastructure, information sharing, and continuous training of health
professionals; ICT will have an important role in fulﬁlling these needs too. Interesting examples are shared by the
authors on how ICT could relieve the burden on healthcare professionals. A healthcare center head, who otherwise
would have needed to travel and thus created delays in the health services, could avoid the travel when facilities for
emails and communications are easily available in a low-resource region. Similarly, many healthcare professionals
could beneﬁt from ICT-enabled solutions that reduce errors arising from manual paper works in healthcare. In [72],
the authors also discussed the role of telehealth systems built using (open-source) ICT tools to improve healthcare in
low-resource regions of Zambia. The proposed solution provided improved access to medical specialists, increased
opportunities for education, and logistic improvements like decreased travel needs for both the healthcare professionals
and patients. Though the examples discussed in this section are sometimes from a work of more than a decade ago,
some analogous technology-based assistance for improved logistics would still exist today.

3.3 Network and server resources for healthcare solutions

The increasing availability of ICT hardware, services, and infrastructures like telecommunication is a prerequisite for
improved healthcare availability in low-resource regions. Several previous works have reported how the availability of
servers and telecommunications is improving e-health and telehealth services for low-resource regions. The authors in

6

A PREPRINT - MAY 24, 2022

[52] discussed the role of telecommunication infrastructure and internet access devices in the context of health services
in Africa. The authors highlighted how a basic network infrastructure enabled by telecommunication technologies like
GPRS, WiMAX, and VSAT provides a backbone on top of which healthcare services and information delivery can
be deployed. ICT’s role was identiﬁed to be crucial in various areas such as health system performance monitoring,
resource planning, dissemination of health knowledge, policy-making, etc. The authors in [73] discussed the issue
of communication infrastructure affordability. A combination of a Wi-Fi and WiMAX network was proposed as an
affordable network solution for low-resource regions. Such an affordable yet modern wireless communication system
can enable telemedicine service to bring worldwide clinical expertise to the point of care in low-resource regions.
The authors in [74] discussed the role of ICT in the context of their EHAS (Hispano-American Health Link) program.
The burden on healthcare professionals arising due to the lack of ICT tools was highlighted in this work too. The
authors discussed the deployment of custom email servers, working over the Very High Frequency (VHF) band for
communication, to help healthcare establishments in low-resource regions of Peru. The recent roll-outs of advanced
telecommunication technologies such as 5G, if available in low-resource regions, can signiﬁcantly enhance healthcare
service delivery in those regions [75, 76].

Some speciﬁc features of ICT software advancements e.g. features in the database have also been advantageously
applied in some works. In [77], the authors discussed their software tool Health Agent which is useful to automate
telemedicine in rural areas. The functionalities of a relational database system, e.g. SQL triggers, are utilized for
case-based alarming in the proposed solution. The data model for proper storage and access to health information is also
discussed. These data model development utilizes relevant advances from the larger internet technology developments.

3.4

ICT for healthcare knowledge and language tools

The role of ICT tools in knowledge management and training of health professionals has also been a subject of
discussion in some previous works. Proper knowledge management and affordable training are important for healthcare
in low-resource regions because of the general lack of trained professionals and knowledge resources. In [78], the
authors proposed a digital library solution to assist healthcare in low-resource regions. The library consists of reading
materials on healthcare physiology, tools maintenance, operations, etc. This information is made available in the local
language using an automatic language translation service. The authors in [79] presented an open learning platform called
Openlearn to provide free training materials on healthcare management. A free training platform could in particular
be beneﬁcial for personnel in low-resource healthcare settings who cannot afford or access training with high costs.
In [80], the authors presented different ICT innovations to support primary healthcare in India (relevant for low-resource
regions also). Replacing manual healthcare information management with automated (ICT) solutions for efﬁciency is
highlighted. Similarly, software-as-a-service deployments and mobile applications for improved connectivity of mobile
midwives are presented to make the maternity healthcare system more efﬁcient. For any innovation, the availability of
multi-language tools, e.g., owing to open-source tools and technologies for language translation [81], is considered
important. In general, the need for healthcare information and user interface tools in local languages is identiﬁed as
very crucial for healthcare services in low-resource regions where English might not be the primary language of the
majority. These intuitive user interfaces and language translation tools are directly linked to ICT innovations. In [82],
the authors discussed the role of an ICT-based knowledge management system for improved healthcare access in
low-resource regions of Srilanka. The need for a knowledge management system for making healthcare pervasive in
low-resource regions is made clear. Still, some problems like the skeptical attitude of some clinical professionals in
using ICT resources, general unavailability of good systems and software, etc. were raised. New propositions should
consider user-centric ICT propositions that are adapted to local needs to improve the trust and usability of developed
propositions.

3.5 Section summary

To summarize, several propositions have used ICT advancements for improving healthcare access and affordability in
low-resource regions. The open-source software tools, increasing access to network/communication infrastructure, easy
access to health information library, etc., are all ICT advancements also helping healthcare in low-resource regions.

Some studies have shown the direct relation between ICT advancements and feasible healthcare innovations. In [83],
the authors studied the quantitative relationship between IT infrastructure and telemedicine readiness in the context
of healthcare systems in Libya. A positive correlation of 0.44 was obtained, highlighting the direct impact of ICT
infrastructure on enabling new healthcare innovations in low-resource regions. Besides the general availability of
ICT infrastructures, the authors also highlighted the need for associated trained professionals for its operation and
maintenance. In [84], the authors interviewed several healthcare professionals working in low-resource regions of the
Philippines. A need for proper access to clinical practice guidelines, health news, and events, health education policies,

7

Table 2: Some example smartphone applications developed for health monitoring and diagnosis. These applications are
low-cost and could be useful to aid healthcare services in low-resource regions.

A PREPRINT - MAY 24, 2022

Name
iASHA [87]

mBody Health [86]
Mobile Stethoscope [23]
Cardiax Mobile ECG [88]

Runtastic Heart rate [89]
Heart rate monitor [90]
Blood pressure watch [91]
Finger blood pressure [92]
Finger Print Thermometer [93]
Body temperature [94]
iOximeter [95]
Eye care plus [96]
Test your hearing [97]
uHear [98]

Target Complication
Pregnancy (A decision support system to enable health workers
to provide maternity healthcare services efﬁciently and transpar-
ently.
Diagnose disabilities
Monitor Heart rate to diagnose heart disease
12 channel personal ECG system to diagnose and monitor heart
condition
Measures heart rate on a real-time basis
Checks heart rate on a real-time basis
Collects, tracks, analyzes, and shares blood pressure data
Measures blood pressure based on imaging of ﬁngertip
Determines body temperature based on contact at ﬁngerpoint
Keep track of body temperature and identify severity
Pulse rate calculator
Test and monitor vision
Test hearing
Self-assessment of hearing

etc. were identiﬁed from the interviews. This information is made accessible with ICT infrastructures, and thus the role
of ICT for healthcare in low-resource regions is highlighted.

4 Mobile Health

Mobile Health (mHealth) refers to the practice of health solutions and services supported by mobile devices such as
mobile phones, tablets, PDAs, and wearable devices. The mHealth ﬁeld has emerged as a sub-segment of eHealth. The
services generally considered under mHealth include the use of mobile devices in collecting community and clinical
health data, delivery of healthcare information to practitioners, researchers, and patients, real-time monitoring of the
patient, and direct provision of care (via mobile telemedicine).

mHealth has emerged in recent years to be suitable for developing countries, resulting from the rapid rise of mobile
phone penetration in the low-resource regions also. It can enable wider healthcare access to a larger segment of the
population in low-resource regions by improving the capacity of health systems. Here we discuss some works that have
focused on mHealth. We also list several health-related mobile applications that could be relevant for deployment in
low-resource regions or regions with limited access to conventional healthcare services.

The authors in [23] highlight how mobile devices can be used as medical devices. The use of the available capacity of
smartphones, e.g., the onboard sensors, web connectivity, and powerful processing unit, has made these mobile devices
not just a medium of communication but also a medical device. Providing proof of concept with a digital stethoscope,
the importance of available infrastructure to cope with critical diseases related to heart patients has been discussed. In
the low-resource settings, mHealth could be the only way to offer services that would otherwise be unavailable [85].
Mobile phones with affordable network connectivity could be a vector for enhancing the continuity of care before the
diagnosis and after the hospitalization for a continuous follow-up. mHealth applications allowing networking and video
conferencing could help to increase efﬁciency (better logistics, more contact, etc.), quality of patient care (e.g., due to
more follow-up even if remote), and patient satisfaction. There might be some constraints on mHealth applications
when considering their usage in low-resource settings. The authors in [86], for example, investigated the effectiveness
of mobile apps in rural areas with low literacy. Visual-based apps were recommended for better meeting the needs in
low-resource regions.

We list some example mobile/smartphone applications (mobile apps) in Table 2,3 and 4 that could be relevant for
healthcare in low-resource settings. We categorized the applications based on the target complications they address.
Furthermore, we classiﬁed the apps based on their feature type. These apps can be used either directly by the patients
and families, or by midwives and doctors.

8

A PREPRINT - MAY 24, 2022

Table 3: Some example smartphone applications for healthcare record-keeping. Measurement and tracking of health
through record keeping are crucial aspects of healthcare delivery.

Name
iASHA [87]
mBody Health [86]
Mobile Stethoscope [23]
Health assistant [99]
Asthma tracker and log [100]
Diabetes Diagnostics [101]

Target Complication
Pregnancy
Monitor disabilities
Monitor heart disease
Monitor BP, weight, water, temp, glucose, etc
Asthma tracker
Diagnose diabetes subtypes

Table 4: Example smartphone applications related to lifestyle and healthy behaviors. The concept of healthcare is
a continuum that includes the day-to-day life of an individual and thus applications helping in lifestyle and healthy
behaviors are relevant for improving healthcare overall, including in the low-resource regions.

Target Complication
BP, weight, water, temp, glucose, etc.
Reminds user to drink water
Reminds user of medication times

Name
Health assistant [99]
Water Your body [102]
Medisafe Meds & Pill Re-
minder [103]
Dosecast indication Reminder [104] Drug management
MyFitnessPal [105]
SleepCycle [106]
FitBit [107]

Keep track of food habits
Keep record of sleep time
Track daily goal and progress over time for steps, distance, calo-
ries burned and more.

5 Emerging Technologies

Some of the emerging technologies like artiﬁcial intelligence (AI), Internet of Things (IoT), Blockchain, etc., have
already shown great promise for healthcare. The technologies also have a role in making healthcare inclusive and
affordable. In this section, we review some works where emerging technologies for healthcare have been discussed.
Though not always explicitly stated, these works have the potential translation of their usage for increasing the outreach
of healthcare in low-resource settings.

5.1 AI for Healthcare

AI has shown its potential in a broad set of use cases. Much of this success is due to the availability of data, easily
available computing power, and an improved understanding of different AI algorithms. Machine learning, which is
concerned with learning from data, is one of the enablers of AI. Many advancements in healthcare due to AI have
been brought by machine learning advances. In recent years, deep-learning, a type of machine learning based on
multi-layered neural network architectures, has provided even clinician-grade solutions, e.g., to analyze medical images
and physiological signals. For the healthcare application, AI has a role in several areas like automated diagnosis, clinical
decision support, clinical workﬂow optimization, resource utility maximization, etc.

The use of AI for diagnosis has been one of the most explored application areas. The typical data ﬂow for such a solution
is shown in Figure 5.1. Data from a (multi-) sensor front-end is consumed by an AI application to produce diagnosis
and decision support outputs. Based on a usage area, AI for diagnosis can be categorized into: (i). Inside-hospital
application and (ii). Outside-hospital application.

5.1.1 Inside-hospital applications

The inside-hospital applications use AI for aiding diagnosis for day-to-day clinical workﬂows. Several innovations in
this area are, for example, in the ﬁeld of radiology. An example application is tumor/nodule detection in the lung CT
scan [108]. In [109], the authors identify several application areas where AI could assist in radiology-based diagnosis.
Some of those areas are thoracic imaging for lung nodule detection, abdominal and pelvic imaging for liver lesions
detection, colonoscopy for colonic polyps detection, brain imaging for brain tumors detection, etc. While the radiology
equipment might be a signiﬁcant cost burden for low-resource settings, at least the automation of (pre-)diagnosis
could offset the cost required for well-trained radiologists. Besides radiology, other application areas of AI in clinical

9

A PREPRINT - MAY 24, 2022

Figure 1: Generic data ﬂow for AI-enabled healthcare diagnosis and decision support applications. The data collected
from a sensor front-end, or retrospective data from electronic health records, are sent to a computing platform running
an AI application. This computing platform could be a smartphone, cloud, edge device, or any other computing device.
AI application in the computing platform takes the input data and provides diagnosis and decision support as output.
The output is provided either to the user (e.g., for smartphone applications) or to the clinician and caregiver. The output
can also be linked to the patient’s/user’s Electronic Health Records to keep track of his/her health.

diagnosis and decision making include for example hospital discharge or readmission prediction [110, 111, 112] using
available clinical data, or arrhythmia detection using ECG (Electrocardiograph) signal [113, 114, 115].

5.1.2 Outside-hospital applications

The outside-hospital application categories are concerned with taking the (early/pre-) diagnosis to the ambulatory
settings of free-living. A representative work is presented by the authors in [116]. The authors propose a camera-based
system to provide a clinical-grade diagnosis of skin cancer. A motivation for such a system is the possibility to extend
the reach of dermatologists outside of the traditional setting and enable low-cost healthcare on top of ubiquitously
available smartphones. The authors of [117] describe a deep-learning-based atrial ﬁbrillation detection solution using
photoplethysmography (PPG) signals in an ambulatory setting. These example applications show how the power of AI
can help take the clinical diagnosis to ambulatory settings. Such a step is crucial to bringing quality diagnosis solutions
to low-resource areas. We refer to the review works in [118, 119, 120, 121, 122] for the application of AI/machine
learning in healthcare areas.

Besides diagnosis and clinical decisions, AI could be advantageous in other aspects of the healthcare delivery chain.
Any AI-based solution to improve the healthcare delivery chain can translate to a direct beneﬁt towards healthcare for
low-resource settings. The beneﬁts can be cost reduction, improved efﬁciency, the requirement of lesser resources
and manpower, etc. An example discussing the use of AI to improve the entire healthcare delivery chain is the work
of [123]. The authors discuss how AI can be used for the diagnosis and treatment of Tuberculosis (TB) by improving
all the aspects of the healthcare chain. AI technologies can help assure medication adherence using automated gesture
detection technologies (e.g., from video surveillance). AI can be useful for the whole program management of TB
containment and treatment in an area e.g., in the context of resource planning and monitoring. For an application
like TB, raising awareness of the patients and population is also very important. For this purpose, using AI for the
automated generation of educational audio-visual materials can be helpful. Other works have also outlined how AI and
optimization can be helpful in aspects other than core clinical tasks like diagnosis and treatment. The authors in [124]
have proposed optimized planning for scheduling the work of Community Health workers where AI can play a role in
the optimized scheduling. AI can be used in different health resource planning works like referrals, management of
immunization programs, and several population/public health initiatives. Such efﬁcient planning can be crucial when it
comes to reducing the cost of healthcare in low-resource settings and improving throughput/efﬁciency. The authors
in [125] also discuss how AI can have a role in healthcare in low-resource settings for various functions like diagnosis,
administration, resource planning, monitoring, etc. Speciﬁc example deployments like AI-based chat-bots to support
medication has been presented. The challenge concerning the cost of AI-based solutions is raised but it has also been
noted that overall cost reduction can be expected, justifying the ﬁt of AI-based systems for healthcare in low-resource
settings. An advantage for AI deployment in low-resource settings could be the relative policy-level ease of deployment.
The example of clinical drone usage in Rwanda has been presented to show this point.

To summarize, the growth and increasing adoption of AI can prove to be very helpful for increasing the outreach of
healthcare in low-resource settings. AI as a technology is being widely investigated to improve clinical diagnosis and
decision making, either inside the hospital or outside. Besides diagnosis, AI can also assist in reducing costs and
improving efﬁciency for other aspects of the healthcare chain. Though the initial cost factor and required technological
knowledge for solution deployment can seem like a hindrance to getting AI technologies to the low-resource settings,
AI provides several other beneﬁts which could pay off overall.

10

A PREPRINT - MAY 24, 2022

5.2

Internet of Things (IoT) for healthcare

Connectivity and computational power are getting cheaper and more ubiquitous. This has led to a myriad of devices
around us being more intelligent and inter-connected. The connectedness of everyday items and devices around us,
which also get smart and intelligent, is referred to as the Internet of Things (IoT). Think of an automatic watering unit
for the plant enamored by environmental sensors that we can monitor and control using a mobile application. Or a
refrigerator that has an inbuilt camera to detect missing groceries and update the shopping list on our smartphone. IoT
is already a reality today, and only growing in terms of scale and usage.

Healthcare is one of the areas where IoT can enable new solutions. Most of the research work on IoT for healthcare
has mHealth or a wireless body area network (WBAN) application deployment scenarios. Wearable physiological
sensors connected to the cloud and made available for remote access by the clinician is a typical application scenario.
This, for example, has been discussed by [126, 127, 128, 129, 130, 131, 132, 133, 134]. Innovative deployments have
been discussed in works like that of [135] where the authors present a health-kiosk available for healthcare in remote
regions of India. These kiosks consist of multiple physiological sensors which can make the data available for remote
access through cloud services. The authors in [136] discuss the possibility of an intelligent edge device within an IoT
deployment of personal physiological sensors in low-resource settings. The edge device can provide various useful
functionalities like smart data ﬁltering to only forward relevant information to the clinicians in a remote location. It
can also automatically detect any health criticality among the monitored population. Such deployments increase the
(virtual) outreach of clinicians. An interesting extension of this smart edge-based IoT deployment is the possibility to
monitor the entire (sub) population in the region, leading to population health analytics solutions. Besides personal
physiological sensors monitoring the health of individuals, other devices can be a part of the IoT like a visitor counter
device at the local health center, an EMR server of the health center, etc.

A review of IoT for healthcare, though not speciﬁc to low-resource settings, has been presented in the work of [137].
The authors discuss various IoT use-cases for healthcare applications. The potential of large-scale IoT for applications in
community health monitoring discusses concepts like interactions between multiple body area networks. An interesting
use case is IoT’s use for emergency healthcare services during a disaster. In low-resource settings where the reach
of standard healthcare services is limited, connectivity of devices could help monitor and plan resource utilization,
casualties mapping, etc. One other use case discussed is the possibility to track population-level information on
adverse drug reactions. This can immediately be extended to applications speciﬁc to low-resource settings e.g., tracking
outbreaks and the spread of speciﬁc diseases related to low-quality water supply, for example. IoT can also be applied
for awareness campaigns by providing a platform for easy dissemination of information.

5.3 Blockchain technology for healthcare

One of the recent technological advancements with huge potential in the healthcare sector, positively impacting the
increase of the outreach in low-resource settings, is blockchain technology. Blockchain technology enables a way to
keep a record of the transaction without a need for an intermediary. This mechanism opens up various applications
in healthcare that would otherwise have been difﬁcult to deploy. As blockchain provides a trust mechanism between
multiple parties, one of the most explored applications of blockchain in healthcare is the sharing of data. This application
is very relevant for low-resource settings for two reasons. First, as healthcare services and providers are not resourceful,
sharing data between different entities is difﬁcult. E.g., healthcare facilities might not have enough software and
resources to open up their data to third parties without incurring a major security and privacy threat. Second, the new
applications that can be enabled with easy data sharing would be crucial in low-resource settings to enable applications
like automated diagnosis, telemedicine, or any general mHealth applications.

The authors in [138] discuss how blockchain could provide privacy, traceability, value-management, and trust mediation
for enabling mHealth applications in South Africa where the requirements for healthcare access extends to some deep
rural settings also. In [139], the authors propose the use of blockchain to manage distributed information in EMR,
providing the security and trust mechanism for sharing information. This is discussed in the context of managing EMR
for cancer patients. Given the lack of inter-connectivity or secure direct connectivity between different data/information
nodes, blockchain can provide a secure gluing layer. The beneﬁt of decentralization to improve healthcare in low-
resource countries has been discussed in [140]. Though not explicitly mentioned, blockchain can be the technology upon
which a distributed healthcare infrastructure is built. The use of blockchain for data sharing providing functionalities
like patient pseudo-anonymity, workﬂow automation, data integrity, accountability, etc. has been presented in the paper
of [141]. Similarly, the authors of [142] present how the blockchain technology in a mHealth application provides the
solution for the right data ownership, security of the shared data, convenience of sharing, etc. The authors in [143] uses
blockchain and smart contracts as a mediator to enable data-sharing across the providers (ensuring interoperability) to
make healthcare more cost-effective and sustainable. In the MedicalChain whitepaper [144], the use of blockchain and

11

A PREPRINT - MAY 24, 2022

smart contract platform enabled by blockchain for data exchange for solutions like telemedicine is discussed. The use
of blockchain in healthcare, in general, has been reviewed in several works [145, 146, 147, 148, 149].

As more works are pursued on the usage of blockchain in various aspects of healthcare like diagnosis, treatment, clinical
workﬂow, logistics, prescription management, logistics management, etc., it would become clearer what promises this
new technology will bear for healthcare in low-resource settings. From what we have already started to see, blockchain
technology has the potential to bring positive changes to healthcare in a low-resource setting also.

6 Discussion

Quality healthcare access should be available for all. However, due to higher costs associated with healthcare resources
and infrastructures, we are yet to reach the utopian dream of getting everyone on the radar of good healthcare access.
In this work, we reviewed various works that have been geared towards making healthcare widely accessible in
low-resource settings.

A major effort to control healthcare costs concerns reducing the price of costly healthcare devices. This is becoming
feasible due to the reducing cost of semiconductors, the pricing reduction possible with improved mass manufacturing,
and the investigation of new designs with the cost factor taken into consideration. We found that several efforts have
been focused on building an add-on for the smartphone, so that the smartphone itself can act as a healthcare device,
for example for early diagnosis. These works rely on the wider availability of smartphones in a low-resource setting.
The reach of smartphones has been growing very rapidly even in the rural and low-resource settings [12] and thus the
smartphone as an add-on could be transformative. The end-to-end healthcare delivery chain requires several devices.
Therefore, reducing the costs of these devices is a major step, and a crucial one, towards universal healthcare access.
However, the pressure of cost reduction should not compromise the device quality. The quality reduction might lead to
an adverse outcome for the patient. The concern of quality is especially relevant for low-resource settings because these
areas generally lack good regulations for devices and/or are lacking in trained personnel to enforce quality guidelines
or maintenance [150, 151]. Another point to be noted is the overall representation of the device cost in the ﬁnancial
equation of the healthcare delivery. It might as well be that the device costs represent only a small portion of the overall
healthcare costs, in a given care setting. Also, the device costs might be only a one-time capital expenditure which is
overshadowed by the recurring operational costs. Therefore, all efforts toward affordability of the healthcare device
have to take the following factors into account in further investigations: What fraction of the healthcare delivery cost is
represented by the device costs?, Can the cost reduction be done without reducing quality?, How is the distribution of
the capital expenditure and operation cost of the device? And how does new low-cost design impact these two factors?.

A development for increased healthcare access in a low-resource setting is also the parallel development, or rather an
explosion, of IT tools and technologies. Software-based services and telecommunication infrastructure can provide a
carrier for innovations in healthcare targeted at low-resource settings. If we think of novel healthcare offerings like
telehealth, these offerings have a good landing spot in the context of healthcare for low-resource settings. Several
studies have already investigated how the availability of a new generation of telecommunication technology is going to
help revolutionize healthcare [152, 153, 154, 155]. A bit of that revolution will be shared by healthcare for low-resource
settings. Another development is in the ﬁeld of open-source IT tools. An example is OpenEMR which has been
positioned to provide a reliable EMR solution. Open-source solutions such as OpenEMR could ﬁll the void created
when the healthcare organizations in the low-resource settings cannot afford proprietary EMR solutions. Needless to
say, when it comes to the use of open-source software and tools for healthcare, utmost care should still be provided to
various aspects like quality, privacy, etc. It would be unfortunate if the cost factor of a software tool is used to overlook
any impending harms like compromised patient privacy or even patient safety. The efforts of healthcare for low-resource
settings should embrace developments in the open-source world but with caution due to the criticality of the healthcare
sector in general. Even though some recent studies have found the privacy and security concern to be of less signiﬁcance
to eHealth users in low-resource settings [156], this might only reﬂect the notion that having the resources/infrastructure
is of the highest signiﬁcance in regions where these are missing. Some studies have, however, found that patients in
low-resource regions are concerned by the unauthorized secondary use of their protected health information [157].
Greater awareness about the implications of security and privacy breaches on one’s health information will likely
increase the concern of patients on these factors.

A major carrier for increased healthcare access in low-resource could be smartphones. The smartphone revolution will
likely usher changes in healthcare delivery, with a positive impact on cost reduction and affordability for people in
low-resource settings. In section 4, we reviewed several healthcare-related smartphone applications. Various aspects
like diagnosis, record-keeping, improving lifestyle towards a healthier life, etc., are covered by existing and upcoming
applications. The smartphone has inbuilt sensors like cameras and microphones that could work as health sensors,
something which has been receiving a lot of attention lately. For example, cameras could extract heart rate variability

12

A PREPRINT - MAY 24, 2022

and other physical health parameters [158]. Similarly, the microphone can be used in speech-related applications, for
example, to assess sociability for depression severity estimation [159]. The smartphone-based applications that we
reviewed in Section 4 covered a wide range of clinical conditions for cardiac care, optical care, pregnancy monitoring,
thermal monitoring, and many more. The smartphone revolution can thus have a wide impact on healthcare. Though the
concept of a simple application to diagnose a disease at home sounds lucrative, it is important to ensure the accuracy of
such applications by validating with current standard devices. Similarly, most of the applications will be customer-facing.
Therefore it is also important to think about how the accessibility is not impeded by factors like the literacy level of
people in a particular region. Just like the mature technologies such as smartphones and telecommunications which
have been helping improve healthcare access in low-resource settings, one can also remain upbeat with many upcoming
technologies. In Section 5, we identiﬁed some technologies like IoT, Blockchain, and Artiﬁcial Intelligence which will
all bring in another wave of revolution in healthcare. We reviewed different literature where the authors are investigating
how new technologies will change healthcare services. It might not be too early to speculate that these new technologies
will further help improve healthcare access in low-resource settings. Some recent works concur, for example with the
potential of blockchain technology to reduce health disparities and improve global health [160].

References

[1] Ageing and health, world health organization (who). https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/

detail/ageing-and-health, 2018. Last accessed: 2022-05-14.

[2] John W. Rowe, Terry Fulmer, and Linda Fried. Preparing for better health and health care for an aging population.

JAMA, 316:1643–1644, Oct 2016.

[3] Shailvi Gupta, MDa, Reinou Groen, MDb, Patrick Kyamanywac, Emmanuel Ameh, MDd, Mohamed Labib,
MDe, Damian Clarke, MDf, Peter Donkor, MDg, Miliard Derbew, MDh, Rachid Sani, MDi, Thaim Kamara,
MDj, and Adam Kushner. Surgical care needs of low-resource populations: an estimate of the prevalence of
surgically treatable conditions and avoidable deaths in 48 countries. The Lancet, 385, April 2015.

[4] Transforming our world : the 2030 agenda for sustainable development a/res/70/1. https://www.refworld.

org/docid/57b6e3e44.html, 2015. Last accessed: 2022-05-14.

[5] WHO. Prevention and control of ncds: Guidelines for primary health care in low-resource settings, 2012.

[6] The 2022 update, global health workforce statistics, world health organization, geneva. https://www.who.

int/data/gho/data/themes/topics/health-workforce, 2022. Last accessed: 2022-05-14.

[7] Mustafa Al-Shamsi. Addressing the physicians’ shortage in developing countries by accelerating and reforming
the medical education: Is it possible? Journal of advances in medical education & professionalism, 5:210–219,
Oct 2017.

[8] Fitzhugh Mullan and Seble Frehywot. Non-physician clinicians in 47 sub-saharan african countries. Lancet

(London, England), 370:2158–63, Dec 2007.

[9] Kamran Siddiqi and James N. Newell. Putting evidence into practice in low-resource settings. In Bulletin of the

World Health Organization, volume 83, page 882, Switzerland, Dec 2005.

[10] D. Heigener, C. Knapp, R. Viola, Uzochukwu Uzoma Aniebue, and Tonia Chinyelu Onyeka. Ethical, socioeco-
nomic, and cultural considerations in gynecologic cancer care in developing countries. International Journal of
Palliative Care, 2014:141627, 2014.

[11] Aaltje Camielle Noordam, Yolanda Barberá Laínez, Salim Sadruddin, Pabla Maria van Heck, Alex Opio Chono,
Geoffrey Larry Acaye, Victor Lara, Agnes Nanyonjo, Charles Ocan, and Karin Källander. The use of counting
beads to improve the classiﬁcation of fast breathing in low-resource settings: a multi-country review. Health
Policy and Planning, 30(6):696–704, 2015.

[12] M Karlsson. Accelerating affordable smartphone ownership in emerging markets. walbrook: Gsma., 2018.

[13] Brian Wahl, Aline Cossy-Gantner, Stefan Germann, and Nina R Schwalbe. Artiﬁcial intelligence (ai) and global
health: how can ai contribute to health in resource-poor settings? BMJ global health, 3(4):e000798, 2018.

[14] Satya Prakash Dash. The impact of iot in healthcare: Global technological change & the roadmap to a networked

architecture in india. Journal of the Indian Institute of Science, pages 1–13, 2020.

[15] Pranita Upadhyaya, Sanjib Kumar Upadhyay, Bishikha Subedi, Bhawana Subedi, and Asmita Gaire. Revolution-
izing healthcare systems of a developing country using blockchain. In 2018 IEEE International Conference on
Computational Intelligence and Computing Research (ICCIC), pages 1–6. IEEE, 2018.

13

A PREPRINT - MAY 24, 2022

[16] Bruce Compton, David M Barash, Jennifer Farrington, Cynthia Hall, Dale Herzog, Vikas Meka, Ellen Raf-
ferty, Katherine Taylor, and Asha Varghese. Access to medical devices in low-income countries: addressing
sustainability challenges in medical device donations. NAM Perspectives, 2018.

[17] David M. Byrne, Stephen D. Oliner, and Daniel E. Sichel. How Fast are Semiconductor Prices Falling? Finance
and Economics Discussion Series 2017-005, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (U.S.), January
2017.

[18] B. J. Guthrie. Low cost blood glucose meters as an appropriate healthcare technology for developing countries.
In 7th International Conference on Appropriate Healthcare Technologies for Developing Countries, pages 1–3,
2012.

[19] Viswanathan Mohan, Kamlesh Khunti, Siew P Chan, F Fadlo Filho, Nam Q Tran, Kaushik Ramaiya, Shashank
Joshi, Ambrish Mithal, Maïmouna N Mbaye, Nemencio A Nicodemus, et al. Management of type 2 diabetes in
developing countries: balancing optimal glycaemic control and outcomes with affordability and accessibility to
treatment. Diabetes Therapy, 11(1):15–35, 2020.

[20] NH1 Cho, JE Shaw, Suvi Karuranga, Y da Huang, JD da Rocha Fernandes, AW Ohlrogge, and B Malanda. Idf
diabetes atlas: Global estimates of diabetes prevalence for 2017 and projections for 2045. Diabetes research and
clinical practice, 138:271–281, 2018.

[21] Nazaneen Nikpour Hernandez, Samiha Ismail, Hen Heang, Maurits van Pelt, Miles D Witham, and Justine I
Davies. An innovative model for management of cardiovascular disease risk factors in the low resource setting
of cambodia. Health Policy and Planning, 36(4):397–406, 2021.

[22] M. A. F. Pimentel, M. D. Santos, M. A. Maraci, C. Arteta, J. S. Domingos, D. A. Clifton, and G. D. Clifford. A
$5 smart blood pressure system. In Appropriate Healthcare Technologies for Low Resource Settings (AHT 2014),
pages 1–4, 2014.

[23] A. Sinharay, D. Ghosh, P. Deshpande, S. Alam, R. Banerjee, and A. Pal. Smartphone based digital stethoscope
for connected health – a direct acoustic coupling technique. In 2016 IEEE First International Conference on
Connected Health: Applications, Systems and Engineering Technologies (CHASE), pages 193–198, 2016.

[24] Agam Jain, Roshan Sahu, Arohi Jain, Thomas Gaumnitz, Prayas Sethi, and Rakesh Lodha. Development and

validation of a low-cost electronic stethoscope: Diy digital stethoscope. BMJ Innovations, 7(4), 2021.

[25] John S Chorba, Avi M Shapiro, Le Le, John Maidens, John Prince, Steve Pham, Mia M Kanzawa, Daniel N
Barbosa, Caroline Currie, Catherine Brooks, et al. Deep learning algorithm for automated cardiac murmur
detection via a digital stethoscope platform. Journal of the American Heart Association, 10(9):e019905, 2021.

[26] Fatima Ali, Babar Hasan, Huzaifa Ahmad, Zahra Hoodbhoy, Zainab Bhuriwala, Muhammad Hanif, Shahab U
Ansari, and Devyani Chowdhury. Protocol: Detection of subclinical rheumatic heart disease in children using a
deep learning algorithm on digital stethoscope: a study protocol. BMJ Open, 11(8), 2021.

[27] Ethan Grooby, Chiranjibi Sitaula, Kenneth Tan, Lindsay Zhou, Arrabella King, Ashwin Ramanathan, Atul
Malhotra, Guy A Dumont, and Faezeh Marzbanrad. Prediction of neonatal respiratory distress in term babies at
birth from digital stethoscope recorded chest sounds. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.10105, 2022.

[28] Yuhan Chen, Michael D Wilkins, Jeffrey Barahona, Alan J Rosenbaum, Michael Daniele, and Edgar Lobaton.
Toward automated analysis of fetal phonocardiograms: Comparing heartbeat detection from fetal doppler and
digital stethoscope signals. In 2021 43rd Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine
& Biology Society (EMBC), pages 975–979. IEEE, 2021.

[29] J. Lawn, J. Wyatt, D. Woods, H. Bezuidenhout, J. Lawn, J. Wyatt, D. Woods, and H. Bezuidenhout. Does fetal
heart rate count? developing a low cost, alternative powered doppler fetal heart monitor for use in low resource
high mortality settings. In 2006 The 4th Institution of Engineering and Technology Seminar on Appropriate
Healthcare Technologies for Developing Countries, pages 155–161, 2006.

[30] H. Cardillo, J. Kohler, E. Kriner, and K. Mehta. Applications of wood’s lamp technology to detect skin infections
in resource-constrained settings. In IEEE Global Humanitarian Technology Conference (GHTC 2014), pages
548–554, 2014.

[31] K. Haney, P. Tandon, R. Divi, M. R. Ossandon, H. Baker, and P. C. Pearlman. The role of affordable, point-of-care
technologies for cancer care in low- and middle-income countries: A review and commentary. IEEE Journal of
Translational Engineering in Health and Medicine, 5:1–14, 2017.

[32] D. Gouwanda, A. A. Gopalai, and B. H. Khoo. A low cost alternative to monitor human gait temporal parameters-

wearable wireless gyroscope. IEEE Sensors Journal, 16(24):9029–9035, 2016.

14

A PREPRINT - MAY 24, 2022

[33] Dylan Powell, Mina Nouredanesh, Samuel Stuart, and Alan Godfrey.

Investigating the ax6 inertial-based
wearable for instrumented physical capability assessment of young adults in a low-resource setting. Smart Health,
22:100220, 2021.

[34] N. Palmius, M. Osipov, A. C. Bilderbeck, G. M. Goodwin, K. Saunders, A. Tsanas, and G. D. Clifford. A
multi-sensor monitoring system for objective mental health management in resource constrained environments.
In Appropriate Healthcare Technologies for Low Resource Settings (AHT 2014), pages 1–4, 2014.

[35] Bishal Lamichhane, Dror Ben-Zeev, Andrew Campbell, Tanzeem Choudhury, Marta Hauser, John Kane, Mikio
Obuchi, Emily Scherer, Megan Walsh, Rui Wang, et al. Patient-independent schizophrenia relapse prediction
using mobile sensor based daily behavioral rhythm changes. In International Conference on Wireless Mobile
Communication and Healthcare, pages 18–33. Springer, 2020.

[36] Ravi Prasad Thati, Abhishek Singh Dhadwal, Praveen Kumar, et al. A novel multi-modal depression detection
approach based on mobile crowd sensing and task-based mechanisms. Multimedia Tools and Applications, pages
1–34, 2022.

[37] Maria Faurholt-Jepsen, Jonas Busk, Maj Vinberg, Ellen Margrethe Christensen, Mads Frost, Jakob E Bardram,
Lars Vedel Kessing, et al. Daily mobility patterns in patients with bipolar disorder and healthy individuals.
Journal of Affective Disorders, 278:413–422, 2021.

[38] A. Zalzala, S. Chia, L. Zalzala, and A. Karimi. Healthcare technologies in developing countries. In 2011 IEEE

GCC Conference and Exhibition (GCC), pages 629–632, 2011.

[39] E. Naydenova, A. Tsanas, C. Casals-Pascual, and M. De Vos. Smart diagnostic algorithms for automated detection
of childhood pneumonia in resource-constrained settings. In 2015 IEEE Global Humanitarian Technology
Conference (GHTC), pages 377–384, 2015.

[40] S. Shamiluulu, M. M. Boukar, and Z. Yussupova. Medical tool for assisting patients in kazakhstan polyclinics.
In 2017 13th International Conference on Electronics, Computer and Computation (ICECCO), pages 1–5, 2017.
[41] S. Mitra, M. Mitra, and B. B. Chaudhuri. Rural cardiac healthcare system-a scheme for developing countries. In

TENCON 2008 - 2008 IEEE Region 10 Conference, pages 1–5, 2008.

[42] B. Ring. Healthcare infrastructure for developing countries. In IEE Seminar on Appropriate Medical Technology

for Developing Countries (Ref. No. 2000/014), pages 18/1–18/4, 2004.

[43] R. Nabiev, S. Eshonkhojaeva, N. Rakhimi, R. Blom, I. Munabi, E. Mukooyo, and L. Smedman. Framework for
low-cost maintenance of computer infrastructure applicable in low and middle income countries. In The 12th
IEEE International Conference on e-Health Networking, Applications and Services, pages 143–147, 2008.
[44] I. Cordero. Innovation for medical devices for low resource settings- how limiting the scope of work to creating
low cost attention grabbing designs is not enough. In Appropriate Healthcare Technologies for Low Resource
Settings (AHT 2014), pages 1–3, 2014.

[45] R. Neighbour and R. Eltringham. The reality of designing appropriate ’low cost’ medical products for developing
countries and their unintended consequences. In Appropriate Healthcare Technologies for Low Resource Settings
(AHT 2014), pages 1–4, 2014.

[46] Aditya Vasan and James Friend. Medical devices for low-and middle-income countries: A review and directions

for development. Journal of medical devices, 14(1), 2020.

[47] Neeraj Paradkar and Shubhajit Roy Chowdhury. Cardiac arrhythmia detection using photoplethysmography. In
2017 39th Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC),
pages 113–116. IEEE, 2017.

[48] Po-Cheng Chang, Ming-Shien Wen, Chung-Chuan Chou, Chun-Chieh Wang, and Kuo-Chun Hung. Atrial
ﬁbrillation detection using ambulatory smartwatch photoplethysmography and validation with simultaneous
holter recording. American Heart Journal, 247:55–62, 2022.

[49] Christoph Hoog Antink, Simon Lyra, Michael Paul, Xinchi Yu, and Steffen Leonhardt. A broader look:
Camera-based vital sign estimation across the spectrum. Yearbook of medical informatics, 28(1):102, 2019.
[50] Sean Bae, Silviu Borac, Yunus Emre, Jonathan Wang, Jiang Wu, Mehr Kashyap, Si-Hyuck Kang, Liwen Chen,
Melissa Moran, Julie Cannon, et al. Prospective validation of smartphone-based heart rate and respiratory rate
measurement algorithms. Communications Medicine, 2(1):1–10, 2022.

[51] Who | ehealth at who. http://www.emro.who.int/health-topics/ehealth/. Last accessed: 2022-05-14.
[52] A. Iluyemi, J. Briggs, and R. A. Burger. Health service delivery in developing countries through ehealth: Making
the case for low-cost wireless infrastructures. In 2008 5th IET Seminar on Appropriate Healthcare Technologies
for Developing Countries, pages 1–6, 2008.

15

A PREPRINT - MAY 24, 2022

[53] Z. Omary, D. Lupiana, F. Mtenzi, and B. Wu. Challenges to e-healthcare adoption in developing countries:
A case study of tanzania. In 2009 First International Conference on Networked Digital Technologies, pages
201–209, 2009.

[54] Care2x. http://www.care2x.org/. Last accessed: 2022-05-14.

[55] OpenEHR. https://www.openehr.org/. Last accessed: 2022-05-14.

[56] Kamal Shah, Tara Slough, Ping Yeh, Suave Gombwa, Athanase Kiromera, Maria Oden, and Rebecca Kortum.
Novel open-source electronic medical records system for palliative care in low-resource settings. BMC palliative
care, 12:31, August 2013.

[57] M. D. Lakshmi and J. P. M. Dhas. An open source private cloud solution for rural healthcare.

In 2011
International Conference on Signal Processing, Communication, Computing and Networking Technologies,
pages 670–674, 2011.

[58] I. de la Torre, B. Martínez, and M. López-Coronado. Analyzing open-source and commercial ehr solutions from
an international perspective. In 2013 IEEE 15th International Conference on e-Health Networking, Applications
and Services (Healthcom 2013), pages 399–403, 2013.

[59] HOSxP. https://sourceforge.net/projects/hosxp/. Last accessed: 2022-05-14.

[60] OpenEMR. https://www.open-emr.org/. Last accessed: 2022-05-14.

[61] OpenVista. https://sourceforge.net/projects/openvista/. Last accessed: 2022-05-14.

[62] Mabel Berrueta, Agustin Ciapponi, Ariel Bardach, Federico Rodriguez Cairoli, Fabricio J Castellano, Xu Xiong,
Andy Stergachis, Sabra Zaraa, Ajoke Sobanjo-ter Meulen, and Pierre Buekens. Maternal and neonatal data
collection systems in low-and middle-income countries for maternal vaccines active safety surveillance systems:
A scoping review. BMC pregnancy and childbirth, 21(1):1–19, 2021.

[63] Saptarshi Purkayastha, Roshini Allam, Pallavi Maity, and Judy W Gichoya. Comparison of open-source
electronic health record systems based on functional and user performance criteria. Healthcare informatics
research, 25(2):89–98, 2019.

[64] N. A. Goel, A. A. Alam, E. M. R. Eggert, and S. Acharya. Design and development of a customizable
telemedicine platform for improving access to healthcare for underserved populations. In 2017 39th Annual
International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC), pages 2658–2661,
2017.

[65] S. N. Sharwardy, Z. Rahman, S. Parveen, H. Sarwar, and A. M. Hossain. A cost-effective web-based telecon-
sultation system. In 2013 8th International Conference on Information Technology in Asia (CITA), pages 1–4,
2013.

[66] I. T. Pambudi, T. Hayasaka, T. Tsubota, S. Wada, and T. Yamaguchi. Sustainable patient information network
(spain) for primary care health center in indonesia. In Proceedings of the 25th Annual International Conference of
the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (IEEE Cat. No.03CH37439), volume 2, pages 1421–1424
Vol.2, 2004.

[67] W. Chen and M. Akay. Developing emrs in developing countries. IEEE Transactions on Information Technology

in Biomedicine, 15(1):62–65, 2011.

[68] Filemaker. https://www.claris.com/filemaker/. Last accessed: 2022-05-14.

[69] A. Manya, S. Sahay, J. Braa, and B. Shisia. Understanding the effects of decentralization on health information
systems in developing countries: A case of devolution in kenya. In 2018 IST-Africa Week Conference (IST-Africa),
pages Page 1 of 11–Page 11 of 11, 2018.

[70] E. Nunziata, M. Sumalgy, P. Chongo, and H. Sitoi. Healthcare technology information system: the case study
of mozambique with an eye on global approach for developing and in-transition countries. In IEE Seminar on
Appropriate Medical Technology for Developing Countries (Ref. No. 2002/057), pages 2/1–2/11, 2002.

[71] Andrés Martínez, Valentín Villarroel Ortega, Joaquín Pascual, and Francisco Del Pozo Guerrero. Analysis of
information and communication needs in rural primary healthcare in developing countries. IEEE transactions on
information technology in biomedicine : a publication of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society,
9:66–72, April 2005.

[72] N. Chaamwe. Telehealth services in the context of zambia, a developing country. In 2010 Second International

Conference on Information Technology and Computer Science, pages 470–473, 2010.

16

A PREPRINT - MAY 24, 2022

[73] P. Grainger, D. Kane, D. Bowles, J. Mahady, P. Pentony, J. G. Mahady, P. Grainger, D. Kane, D. Bowles,
J. Mahady, P. Pentony, and J. G. Mahady. Wireless communication and its application in the healthcare systems
of developing countries. In 2006 The 4th Institution of Engineering and Technology Seminar on Appropriate
Healthcare Technologies for Developing Countries, pages 97–104, 2006.

[74] A. Martinez, V. Villarroel, J. Seoane, and F. del Pozo. Ehas program: rural telemedicine systems for primary
healthcare in developing countries. In IEEE 2002 International Symposium on Technology and Society (ISTAS’02).
Social Implications of Information and Communication Technology. Proceedings (Cat. No.02CH37293), pages
31–36, 2002.

[75] Naercio Magaia, Igor de L Ribeiro, André WO de Aguiar, Ramon Fonseca, Khan Muhammad, and Victor
Hugo C de Albuquerque. An artiﬁcial intelligence application for drone-assisted 5g remote e-health. IEEE
Internet of Things Magazine, 4(4):30–35, 2021.

[76] Ruth M Shaylor, Ian T Chao, Jeremy S Young, and Jasamine M Coles-Black. A tale of three countries: Three-
dimensional printing for procedural simulation in the digital era. Anaesthesia and intensive care, 49(2):140–143,
2021.

[77] J. Puustjärvi and L. Puustjärvi. Automating remote monitoring and information therapy: An opportunity to

practice telemedicine in developing countries. In 2011 IST-Africa Conference Proceedings, pages 1–9, 2011.

[78] D. A. Emmerling, R. Sridhara, and R. A. Malkin. An open-source bmet library: results on access and value. In

Appropriate Healthcare Technologies for Low Resource Settings (AHT 2014), pages 1–3, 2014.

[79] P. de Ruijter, G. Ferreira, and R. Parsons. Using educational technology to reach a wider audience for healthcare
technology management. In 2008 5th IET Seminar on Appropriate Healthcare Technologies for Developing
Countries, pages 1–4, 2008.

[80] N. Bondale, S. Kimbahune, and A. K. Pande. mhealthphc: An ict tool for primary healthcare in india. IEEE

Technology and Society Magazine, 32(3):31–38, 2013.

[81] Guillaume Klein, Yoon Kim, Yuntian Deng, Jean Senellart, and Alexander Rush. OpenNMT: Open-source
toolkit for neural machine translation. In Proceedings of ACL 2017, System Demonstrations, pages 67–72,
Vancouver, Canada, July 2017. Association for Computational Linguistics.

[82] J. L. Amararachchi, H. S. C. Perera, and K. Pulasinghe. Knowledge management framework for achieving quality
of healthcare in the developing countries. In 2013 International Conference on Computer Medical Applications
(ICCMA), pages 1–6, 2013.

[83] Abdullrahim Ali. e-Health systems adoption and telemedicine readiness: practitioner perspective from Libyan

healthcare sector. PhD thesis, Brunel University London, 2019.

[84] J. M. Montalban and A. B. Marcelo. Information and communications technology needs assessment of philippine
rural health physicians. In HealthCom 2008 - 10th International Conference on e-health Networking, Applications
and Services, pages 130–133, 2008.

[85] S. Brown and K. Rudahinduka. Use of mobile devices for medical services in resource-limited settings: case
study in rwanda. In Appropriate Healthcare Technologies for Low Resource Settings (AHT 2014), pages 1–4,
2014.

[86] E. Hebert, W. Ferguson, S. McCullough, M. Chan, A. Drobakha, S. Ritter, and K. Mehta. mbody health:
Digitizing disabilities in sierra leone. In 2016 IEEE Global Humanitarian Technology Conference (GHTC),
pages 717–724, 2016.

[87] C. Mukherjee, K. Gupta, and R. Nallusamy. A system to provide primary maternity healthcare services in

developing countries. In Annual SRII Global Conference, pages 243–249, 2012.

[88] Cardiax Mobile ECG. https://www.cardiax.eu/t-en/mobil-app. Last accessed: 2022-05-14.

[89] Runtastic Heart Rate. https://www.runtastic.com/. Last accessed: 2022-05-14.

[90] Heart Rate Monitor. https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.repsi.heartrate. Last

accessed: 2022-05-14.

[91] Blood Pressure Watch.

https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.boxeelab.

healthlete.bpwatch. Last accessed: 2022-05-14.

[92] Instant Blood Pressure. https://www.instantbloodpressure.com/. Last accessed: 2022-05-14.

[93] Finger Print Thermometer.

https://fingerprint-thermometer.en.uptodown.com/android/

download. Last accessed: 2022-05-14.

17

A PREPRINT - MAY 24, 2022

[94] Body temperature fever thermometer diary. https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.

interactivespecializedsoftware.bodytemperature. Last accessed: 2022-05-14.

[95] iOximeter. http://safeheartus.com/ioximeter. Last accessed: 2022-05-14.

[96] Eye care plus. https://eye-care-plus.en.uptodown.com/android. Last accessed: 2022-05-14.

[97] Test Your Hearing. https://www.mimi.io. Last accessed: 2022-05-14.

[98] uHear. https://apps.apple.com/us/app/uhear/id309811822. Last accessed: 2022-05-14.

[99] Health Assistant. https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.wsmrs.hassi. Last ac-

cessed: 2022-05-14.

[100] Asthma Tracker: PEFLog. https://www.tekemo.fi/peflog. Last accessed: 2022-05-14.

[101] Diabetes Diagnostics. https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.szyk.diabetes. Last

accessed: 2022-05-14.

[102] Water your body. http://www.foware.com/. Last accessed: 2022-05-14.

[103] Medisafe Meds & Pill Reminder. https://www.medisafeapp.com/. Last accessed: 2022-05-14.

[104] Dosecast Indication Reminder. http://www.montunosoftware.com/. Last accessed: 2022-05-14.

[105] My ﬁtness pal. https://www.myfitnesspal.com/. Last accessed: 2022-05-14.

[106] Sleep Cycle. https://www.sleepcycle.com/. Last accessed: 2022-05-14.

[107] Fitbit. https://fitbit.com/. Last accessed: 2022-05-14.

[108] Geoffrey D Rubin, Justus E Roos, Martin Tall, Brian Harrawood, Sukantadev Bag, Donald L Ly, Danielle M
Seaman, Lynne M Hurwitz, Sandy Napel, and Kingshuk Roy Choudhury. Characterizing search, recognition, and
decision in the detection of lung nodules on ct scans: elucidation with eye tracking. Radiology, 274(1):276–286,
2015.

[109] Ahmed Hosny, Chintan Parmar, John Quackenbush, Lawrence H. Schwartz, and Hugo J. W. L. Aerts. Artiﬁcial

intelligence in radiology. Nature reviews. Cancer, 18(29777175):500–510, August 2018.

[110] Anand Avati, Stephen Pfohl, Chris Lin, Thao Nguyen, Meng Zhang, Philip Hwang, Jessica Wetstone, Kenneth
Jung, Andrew Ng, and Nigam Shah. Predicting Inpatient Discharge Prioritization With Electronic Health
Records. December 2018.

[111] Imjin Ahn, Hansle Gwon, Heejun Kang, Yunha Kim, Hyeram Seo, Heejung Choi, Ha Na Cho, Minkyoung Kim,
Tae Joon Jun, Young-Hak Kim, et al. Machine learning–based hospital discharge prediction for patients with
cardiovascular diseases: Development and usability study. JMIR Medical Informatics, 9(11):e32662, 2021.

[112] Talen Chen, Samaneh Madanian, David Airehrour, and Marianne Cherrington. Machine learning methods for
hospital readmission prediction: systematic analysis of literature. Journal of Reliable Intelligent Environments,
pages 1–18, 2022.

[113] Awni Y. Hannun, Pranav Rajpurkar, Masoumeh Haghpanahi, Geoffrey H. Tison, Codie Bourn, Mintu P. Turakhia,
and Andrew Y. Ng. Cardiologist-level arrhythmia detection and classiﬁcation in ambulatory electrocardiograms
using a deep neural network. Nature Medicine, 25(1):65–69, January 2019.

[114] Yong-Yeon Jo, Joon-myoung Kwon, Ki-Hyun Jeon, Yong-Hyeon Cho, Jae-Hyun Shin, Yoon-Ji Lee, Min-Seung
Jung, Jang-Hyeon Ban, Kyung-Hee Kim, Soo Youn Lee, et al. Detection and classiﬁcation of arrhythmia using
an explainable deep learning model. Journal of Electrocardiology, 67:124–132, 2021.

[115] Ahmet Çınar and Seda Arslan Tuncer. Classiﬁcation of normal sinus rhythm, abnormal arrhythmia and congestive
heart failure ecg signals using lstm and hybrid cnn-svm deep neural networks. Computer methods in biomechanics
and biomedical engineering, 24(2):203–214, 2021.

[116] Andre Esteva, Brett Kuprel, Roberto Novoa, Justin Ko, Susan Swetter, Helen Blau, and Sebastian Thrun.
Dermatologist-level classiﬁcation of skin cancer with deep neural networks. Nature, 542, January 2017.
[117] Maxime Voisin, Yichen Shen, Alireza Aliamiri, Anand Avati, Awni Hannun, and Andrew Ng. Ambulatory Atrial
Fibrillation Monitoring Using Wearable Photoplethysmography with Deep Learning. November 2018.
[118] Fei Jiang, Yong Jiang, Hui Zhi, Yi Dong, Hao Li, Sufeng Ma, Yilong Wang, Qiang Dong, Haipeng Shen, and
Yongjun Wang. Artiﬁcial intelligence in healthcare: past, present and future. Stroke and vascular neurology,
2(4), 2017.

[119] Kun-Hsing Yu, Andrew L Beam, and Isaac S Kohane. Artiﬁcial intelligence in healthcare. Nature biomedical

engineering, 2(10):719–731, 2018.

18

A PREPRINT - MAY 24, 2022

[120] Sandeep Reddy, John Fox, and Maulik P Purohit. Artiﬁcial intelligence-enabled healthcare delivery. Journal of

the Royal Society of Medicine, 112(1):22–28, 2019.

[121] Antti Väänänen, Keijo Haataja, Katri Vehviläinen-Julkunen, and Pekka Toivanen. Ai in healthcare: A narrative

review. F1000Research, 10(6):6, 2021.

[122] Mohammed Yousef Shaheen. Applications of artiﬁcial intelligence (ai) in healthcare: A review. ScienceOpen

Preprints, 2021.

[123] Riddhi Doshi, Dennis Falzon, Bruce V. Thomas, Zelalem Temesgen, Lal Sadasivan, Giovanni Battista Migliori,
and Mario Raviglione. Tuberculosis control, and the where and why of artiﬁcial intelligence. ERJ open research,
3(28656130):00056–2017, June 2017.

[124] Emma Brunskill and Neal Lesh. Routing for Rural Health: Optimizing Community Health Worker Visit Schedules.

January 2010.

[125] Bertalan Meskó, Gergely Hetényi, and Zsuzsanna Gy˝orffy. Will artiﬁcial intelligence solve the human resource

crisis in healthcare? BMC health services research, 18(1):1–4, 2018.

[126] B. Krishnan, S. Babu, S. P. Shaji, A. S. R. Tamanampudi, and S. S. S. Sanagapati. Software based gateway with
distributed ﬂow environment for medical iot in rural areas. In 2016 IEEE International Conference on Advanced
Networks and Telecommunications Systems (ANTS), pages 1–5, 2016.

[127] G. R. D. Ganesh, K. Jaidurgamohan, V. Srinu, C. R. Kancharla, and S. V. S. Suresh. Design of a low cost smart
chair for telemedicine and iot based health monitoring: An open source technology to facilitate better healthcare.
In 2016 11th International Conference on Industrial and Information Systems (ICIIS), pages 89–94, 2016.
[128] C. Raj, C. Jain, and W. Arif. Heman: Health monitoring and nous: An iot based e-health care system for remote
telemedicine. In 2017 International Conference on Wireless Communications, Signal Processing and Networking
(WiSPNET), pages 2115–2119, 2017.

[129] S. Divakaran, L. Manukonda, N. Sravya, M. M. Morais, and P. Janani. Iot clinic-internet based patient monitoring
and diagnosis system. In 2017 IEEE International Conference on Power, Control, Signals and Instrumentation
Engineering (ICPCSI), pages 2858–2862, 2017.

[130] K. Prakashan, A. S. Karthika, R. Ankayarkanni, and J. B. Jose. Transformation of health care system using
internet of things in villages. In 2017 IEEE International Conference on Industrial Engineering and Engineering
Management (IEEM), pages 914–918, 2017.

[131] K. A. Zilani, R. Yeasmin, K. A. Zubair, M. R. Sammir, and S. Sabrin. R3hms, an iot based approach for patient
health monitoring. In 2018 International Conference on Computer, Communication, Chemical, Material and
Electronic Engineering (IC4ME2), pages 1–4, 2018.

[132] Dennis Ryu, Dong Hyun Kim, Joan T Price, Jong Yoon Lee, Ha Uk Chung, Emily Allen, Jessica R Walter,
Hyoyoung Jeong, Jingyue Cao, Elena Kulikova, et al. Comprehensive pregnancy monitoring with a network
of wireless, soft, and ﬂexible sensors in high-and low-resource health settings. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 118(20), 2021.

[133] Natarajan Sriraam, Prabhu Ravikala Vittal, Uma Arun, Karthik Angadi, Arjun Halli, and Priyanka Chakravarthy.
Wearable wireless multiparameter monitoring systems (wemums) for resource constrained settings. In 2021 3rd
International Conference on Electrical, Control and Instrumentation Engineering (ICECIE), pages 1–4. IEEE,
2021.

[134] Kokeb Dese, Gelan Ayana, and Gizeaddis Lamesgin Simegn. Low cost, non-invasive, and continuous vital signs
monitoring device for pregnant women in low resource settings (lvital device). HardwareX, 11:e00276, 2022.
[135] S. Sarkar and R. Saha. A futuristic iot based approach for providing healthcare support through e-diagnostic
In 2017 Second International Conference on Electrical, Computer and Communication

system in india.
Technologies (ICECCT), pages 1–7, 2017.

[136] R. K. Pathinarupothi, P. Durga, and E. S. Rangan. Iot-based smart edge for global health: Remote monitoring
with severity detection and alerts transmission. IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 6(2):2449–2462, 2018.
[137] S. M. R. Islam, D. Kwak, M. H. Kabir, M. Hossain, and K. Kwak. The internet of things for health care: A

comprehensive survey. IEEE Access, 3:678–708, 2015.

[138] Martin Weiss, Adèle Botha, Marlien Herselman, and Glaudina Loots. Blockchain as an enabler for public

mhealth solutions in south africa. In 2017 IST-Africa Week Conference (IST-Africa), pages 1–8. IEEE, 2017.

[139] Gabriel Kamau, Caroline Boore, Elizaphan Maina, and Stephen Njenga. Blockchain technology: Is this the
solution to emr interoperability and security issues in developing countries? In 2018 IST-Africa Week Conference
(IST-Africa), pages Page–1. IEEE, 2018.

19

A PREPRINT - MAY 24, 2022

[140] Rana Mubashar Ayub and Nadeem Javaid. A blockchain-based incentive mechanism for patient-driven data

collection in the healthcare.

[141] Anastasia Theodouli, Stelios Arakliotis, Konstantinos Moschou, Konstantinos Votis, and Dimitrios Tzovaras. On
the design of a blockchain-based system to facilitate healthcare data sharing. In 2018 17th IEEE International
Conference On Trust, Security And Privacy In Computing And Communications/12th IEEE International
Conference On Big Data Science And Engineering (TrustCom/BigDataSE), pages 1374–1379. IEEE, 2018.

[142] Xueping Liang, Juan Zhao, Sachin Shetty, Jihong Liu, and Danyi Li. Integrating blockchain for data sharing and
collaboration in mobile healthcare applications. In 2017 IEEE 28th annual international symposium on personal,
indoor, and mobile radio communications (PIMRC), pages 1–5. IEEE, 2017.

[143] Soﬁa Alexaki, George Alexandris, Vasilis Katos, and Nikolaos E Petroulakis. Blockchain-based electronic
patient records for regulated circular healthcare jurisdictions. In 2018 IEEE 23rd International Workshop on
Computer Aided Modeling and Design of Communication Links and Networks (CAMAD), pages 1–6. IEEE,
2018.

[144] MedicalChain.

Whitepaper

2

- medicalchain.

https://medicalchain.com/

Medicalchain-Whitepaper-EN.pdf. Last accessed: 2022-05-14.

[145] Gajendra J Katuwal, Sandip Pandey, Mark Hennessey, and Bishal Lamichhane. Applications of blockchain in

healthcare: current landscape & challenges. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.02776, 2018.

[146] Marko Hölbl, Marko Kompara, Aida Kamišali´c, and Lili Nemec Zlatolas. A systematic review of the use of

blockchain in healthcare. Symmetry, 10(10):470, 2018.

[147] Thomas McGhin, Kim-Kwang Raymond Choo, Charles Zhechao Liu, and Debiao He. Blockchain in healthcare
applications: Research challenges and opportunities. Journal of Network and Computer Applications, 135:62–75,
2019.

[148] Mohsen Attaran. Blockchain technology in healthcare: Challenges and opportunities. International Journal of

Healthcare Management, 15(1):70–83, 2022.

[149] Mehdi Sookhak, Mohammad Reza Jabbarpour, Nader Sohrabi Safa, and F Richard Yu. Blockchain and smart
contract for access control in healthcare: a survey, issues and challenges, and open issues. Journal of Network
and Computer Applications, 178:102950, 2021.

[150] Gopal Panta, Ann K Richardson, Ian C Shaw, and Patricia A Coope. Compliance of primary and secondary care
public hospitals with standard practices for reprocessing and steam sterilization of reusable medical devices in
nepal: ﬁndings from nation-wide multicenter clustered audits. BMC health services research, 20(1):1–13, 2020.
[151] Rita Thapa, Alison Yih, Ashish Chauhan, Salomi Poudel, Sagar Singh, Suresh Shrestha, Suresh Tamang, Rishav
Shrestha, and Ruma Rajbhandari. Effect of deploying biomedical equipment technician on the functionality of
medical equipment in the government hospitals of rural nepal. Human resources for health, 20(1):1–8, 2022.

[152] Gurfarmaan Singh, Robert Casson, and WengOnn Chan. The potential impact of 5g telecommunication

technology on ophthalmology. Eye, 35(7):1859–1868, 2021.

[153] Saurabh Kumar, Ankush Sharma, and Priyanka Rishi. Importance and uses of telemedicine in physiotherapeutic

healthcare system: A scoping systemic review. Data Engineering for Smart Systems, pages 411–422, 2022.

[154] Giuseppe Minervini, Diana Russo, Alan Scott Herford, Francesca Gorassini, Aida Meto, Cesare D’Amico,
Gabriele Cervino, Marco Cicciù, and Luca Fiorillo. Teledentistry in the management of patients with dental and
temporomandibular disorders. BioMed Research International, 2022, 2022.

[155] Dina M El-Sherif, Mohamed Abouzid, Mohamed Tarek Elzarif, Alhassan Ali Ahmed, Ashwag Albakri, and
Mohammed M Alshehri. Telehealth and artiﬁcial intelligence insights into healthcare during the covid-19
pandemic. In Healthcare, volume 10, page 385. MDPI, 2022.

[156] Norman Archer, Cynthia Lokker, Maryam Ghasemaghaei, Deborah DiLiberto, et al. ehealth implementation
issues in low-resource countries: model, survey, and analysis of user experience. Journal of medical Internet
research, 23(6):e23715, 2021.

[157] Ernest K Adu, Nelly Todorova, and Annette Mills. Do individuals in developing countries care about personal

health information privacy? an empirical investigation. In CONF-IRM, page 16, 2019.

[158] Zahid Hasan, Sreenivasan Ramasamy Ramamurthy, and Nirmalya Roy. Camsense: A camera-based contact-less

heart activity monitoring. Smart Health, 23:100240, 2022.

[159] Bishal Lamichhane, Nidal Moukaddam, Ankit B Patel, and Ashutosh Sabharwal. Econet: Estimating everyday
conversational network from free-living audio for mental health applications. IEEE Pervasive Computing,
(01):1–9, 2022.

20

[160] Jane Thomason, Sonja Bernhardt, Tia Kansara, and Nichola Cooper. Blockchain for universal health coverage.
In Research Anthology on Blockchain Technology in Business, Healthcare, Education, and Government, pages
488–502. IGI Global, 2021.

A PREPRINT - MAY 24, 2022

21

