Integration of Blockchain and Edge Computing in
Internet of Things: A Survey

He Xue, Dajiang Chen, Member, IEEE, Ning Zhang, Senior Member, IEEE, Hong-Ning Dai, Senior
Member, IEEE, and Keping Yu, Member, IEEE

1

2
2
0
2

y
a
M
6
2

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
0
6
1
3
1
.
5
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—As an important technology to ensure data security,
consistency, traceability, etc., blockchain has been increasingly
used in Internet of Things (IoT) applications. The integration
of blockchain and edge computing can further improve the
resource utilization in terms of network, computing, storage,
and security. This paper aims to present a survey on the
integration of blockchain and edge computing. In particular,
we ﬁrst give an overview of blockchain and edge computing.
We then present a general architecture of an integration of
blockchain and edge computing system. We next study how to
utilize blockchain to beneﬁt edge computing, as well as how to use
edge computing to beneﬁt blockchain. We also discuss the issues
brought by the integration of blockchain and edge computing
system and solutions from perspectives of resource management,
joint optimization, data management, computation ofﬂoading
and security mechanism. Finally, we analyze and summarize the
existing challenges posed by the integration of blockchain and
edge computing system and the potential solutions in the future.

Index Terms—Blockchain, Edge Computing,

Internet of
Things, Resource Management, Security and Privacy, Data Man-
agement

I. INTRODUCTION

Traditional cloud computing has been used to achieve
on-demand resource sharing because of its high ﬂexibility
and scalability. With the rapid development of Internet of
Things (IoT) in recent years, however, the explosive growth
of data has higher real-time requirements for data storage,
data processing, and data exchange, which are far beyond the
carrying capacity of traditional cloud computing. Speciﬁcally,
in many IoT application scenarios, e.g., Smart Grid and
Internet of Vehicles (IoV), due to large scale data transmission
between billions of devices and the data centres, high latency
and bandwidth pressure limit the development of traditional
cloud computing in IoT. According to the Telecommunications
Industry Association (TIA), the number of connected devices
on global network by 2022 will be 29 billion, and roughly 18
billion of them will be related to the IoT [1].

As an important complement to cloud computing, a new
computing paradigm, named edge computing, has been pro-
posed to expand both computing and storage capabilities from
remote clouds to the edge of IoT. In this way, the resources of
edge devices can be effectively used to alleviate computing,
storage, and bandwidth burdens of traditional cloud comput-
ing. Edge computing can essentially offer distributed and low-
latency computing services to smart cities, smart grid, smart
healthcare, and other IoT scenarios [2]. Edge computing can
ofﬂoad computing tasks to edge devices, which are closer to

data sources, thereby ensuring privacy preservation and data
security [3]–[5]. However, due to the limited resources of
edge devices, heterogeneity of networks, and highly dynamic
environment, many existing data-security techniques cannot be
fully utilized in the edge computing architecture [6].

As an alternative solution to improve the security level and
efﬁciency of edge computing, blockchain has attracted enough
attentions recently [7], [8]. Blockchain can be regarded as a
decentralized ledger, which utilizes the technologies of peer-
to-peer (P2P), cryptography, distributed storage, etc. to achieve
the following properties: decentralization, transparency, trace-
ability, security and immutability [9]. In essence, blockchain
can enhance the security of edge nodes in edge comput-
ing by storing critical data at blockchain [10]. Moreover,
blockchain can enable edge computing to implement security
mechanisms, such as access control, authentication and privacy
preservation, by using well-designed smart contracts [11]–
[15]. Furthermore, blockchain can enable edge computing to
orchestrate various edge resources through smart contract-
based algorithms of resource allocation, task ofﬂoading and
in turn, can
resource pricing [16], [17]. Edge computing,
support blockchain by providing enough computing resources
for the mining tasks. For instance, when edge devices can
provide idle resources as edge servers do, the resources will
be allocated in the way of bidding and trading for blockchain.
The integration of blockchain and edge computing (IBEC)
is a promising paradigm since both the two technologies can
be complementary to construct frameworks to solve problems
in several ﬁelds. For instance, in IoV and smart transportation,
there exist challenges of insufﬁcient on-board resources of
most vehicles to support task processing and data storage,
and difﬁculties in resources allocation brought by the mobility
of vehicles [18]. To this end, the IBEC can serve IoV with
collaborative management of computing and communication
resources [19]–[22], data sharing and data management for
automatic driving [23]–[25], collaborative identity authenti-
cation during consensus mechanism [26]–[29], etc. In Smart
Grid, the IBEC is mainly applied to aspects of pricing and
framework designing of energy trading [30]–[33], and trading
security ensuring [34]–[36]. The IBEC can also beneﬁt the
other IoT scenarios, such as, Industrial Internet of Things
(IIoT) [37]–[44], smart healthcare [45]–[52], edge intelligence
and artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) [53]–[57], supply chain [58],
[59], smart city [60]–[62], etc.

Moreover, other technologies (e.g., cloud computing [63],
fog computing [64], Software Deﬁned Network (SDN) [65]–
[67], Network Function Virtualization (NFV) [68]–[70], AI

 
 
 
 
 
 
[71]–[73]), are usually utilized in the architecture of IBEC,
either to accomplish speciﬁc tasks like video stream processing
and model training, or to design adaptable general frameworks
for more practical and complicated networks and topologies.
These studies aim to improve the processing performance of
various tasks,
to increase the resources utilization, and to
enhance both network and data security in a more general
and realistic environment.

This paper ﬁrst discusses existing studies

including
blockchain-enabled edge computing, edge computing-enabled
blockchain, and IBEC. Then the challenges and solutions
including performance scalability, resource management, se-
curity and privacy computing, are summarized and discussed.
Different from other similar studies which view the IBEC
as a system [74] or pay attention to the solutions for edge
intelligence and blockchain [75], this paper regards blockchain
and edge computing as two complementary technologies and
focuses on their integrations from the angle of existing issues.
The other corresponding technologies are also discussed in
this paper only if they contribute to the architecture design
and problem solution of IBEC.

The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. In
Section II, preliminaries of blockchain, edge computing and
IBEC are ﬁrst reviewed. Then, the issues brought by edge
computing and blockchain-enabled solutions are discussed
in Section III. Section IV next discusses the challenges of
blockchain and the solutions brought by edge computing. After
that, the general issues of the IBEC are studied in Section V.
Finally, the challenges and solutions for IBEC are presented
in Section VI, and the paper is concluded in Section VII.

II. AN OVERVIEW OF BLOCKCHAIN AND EDGE
COMPUTING

This section presents an overview on blockchain and edge
computing technologies in Section II-A and Section II-B,
respectively. We then discuss the opportunities brought by the
IBEC in Section II-C.

A. Blockchain

Blockchain is a kind of chained data structure where data
blocks are connected cryptographically and chronologically
in sequence for immutability and unforgeability [76]. As
shown in Fig. 1, each data block has block header and
block body. The hash value of the previous block, timestamp
of the block generating, version, etc. are recorded in the
block header. Meanwhile, the transaction list is stored in the
block body. Thus, blockchain can be seen as a distributed
ledger [77]. Blockchain is able to carry valuable digital assets
(e.g., currency, copyrights, contracts, and notarization), and
can be used to store or transfer the values of these assets
by recording and backtracking because of its immutability
and unforgeability. In other words, blockchain can deliver
values. Public blockchains and private blockchains are two
main types of blockchain systems [78]. A public blockchain
allows any participant in the network to interact with the
records on the chain, while a private blockchain requires only

2

Fig. 1. Structure of Blockchain

authorized participants to perform corresponding operations.
The characteristics of blockchain are summarized as follows.
• Decentralization: In blockchain, no organization or in-
dividual can control global data, and any node that
stops working will not affect the overall operation of the
system. This decentralized network will greatly improve
data security [79], [80].

• Tamper-prooﬁng: In blockchain, the encryption technolo-
gies are leveraged to protect data and distributed consen-
sus algorithms are utilized to provide the consistency of
data on chain. Moreover, it requires a large number of
nodes (named miners) to participate in verifying trans-
actions and generating blocks, and modifying any block
of the chain requires changing at least half of nodes’
subsequent blocks [81]; this is nearly impossible for a
large scale blockchain network.

• Transparency and Traceable: The content in the block will
be backed up to each node. All record information is
public, and anyone can query the block data through the
public interface. Each transaction is solidiﬁed into the
block data through chain storage. All transaction records
of all blocks are superimposed in form of hash digests
through cryptographic algorithms, which can be traced
back to any transaction history [82]–[84].

Blockchain is not a brand-new technology, yet a combined
innovation that integrates multiple existing technologies as
follows.

• Consensus Mechanism: The goals of consensus mech-
anism are to build trust among distrusted nodes and
obtain rights of generating new blocks. It enables all
honest nodes to maintain a consistent view of
the
blockchain while satisfying properties of consistency and
effectiveness. Consistency means that the preﬁx part of
the blockchain kept by all honest nodes is exactly the
same. Effectiveness means the information released by
an honest node will eventually be recorded in its own
blockchain by all other honest nodes. The commonly-
used consensus mechanisms mainly include Proof of
Work (PoW), Proof of Stake (PoS), Delegated Proof

of Stake (DPoS), Practical Byzantine Fault Tolerance
(PBFT), etc.

• Cryptography: Cryptography [85] is one of the key
technologies used in blockchains. Many classic modern
cryptography algorithms are used in current blockchain
applications,
including hashing algorithms, symmetric
encryption, asymmetric encryption, digital signatures, etc.
• Distributed Storage: Blockchain is a distributed ledger on
P2P network [86]. Each participant will independently
store and write block data. Different from traditional
centralized storage, distributed storage has the following
two advantages: each node backs up data information to
avoid data loss due to single point of failure (SPoF);
and data on each node is stored independently to avoid
malicious tampering with historical data.

• Smart Contract: As a digital protocol to be executed on
blockchain, smart contract allows traceable, irreversible
and reliable trusted transactions with no third party inter-
vention. It is essentially a code snippet that includes ex-
plicit functions and can be executed automatically when
the conditions are met. Smart contract can be essentially
used to enhance transaction security and reduce trans-
action costs, thereby improving end-to-end cooperation
efﬁciency [87], [88].

B. Edge Computing

Cloud computing is struggling to deal with the data gen-
erated by massive devices in IoT due to high latency and
bandwidth cost. Edge computing provides a nearby service
computing paradigm that is close to objects or data sources,
which can quickly respond to a variety of services and meet
the basic requirements of the industry in real-time business,
application intelligence, and security as well as privacy preser-
vation [89], [90]. The characteristics of edge computing are
summarized as follows.

• Low Latency: Edge computing provides computation
resources close to the terminals physically and logically.
Therefore, data generation, data processing and data
usage all occur within a very close range from the data
source, and the latency in receiving and responding to
terminal requests is extremely low [91], [92].

• Self-organization and High Reliability: When network in-
terruptions occur, edge severs can achieve local autonomy
and self-recovery. With the assistance of edge severs, the
central cloud only needs to perform dynamic computation
ofﬂoading and schedule tasks to speciﬁc edge severs.
• Heterogeneous and Scalability: To fulﬁll the rising de-
mands for IoT, there are a large number of heterogeneous
and scalable edge devices [93]. Moreover, as a supple-
ment of cloud computing, edge servers in edge computing
environment can provide these nearby heterogeneous
edge devices more efﬁcient computing, storage and com-
munication services; this means that the resources are
moved down from cloud infrastructure to edge side, thus
relieving the pressures of all aspects on the cloud layer.
• Low Data Exposure: Because edge devices can collect
and process data locally, it is not necessary to transmit

3

Fig. 2. Architecture of Edge Computing

data to remote clouds. Therefore, most information, espe-
cially sensitive information, does not need to go through
the network, thereby improving security to some extent.
As shown in Fig. 2, the entire framework of edge computing
can be abstracted as a three-level hierarchical architecture
as follows [7], [94]. From the edge to core are the device
layer, edge layer and core infrastructure with the increased
computing capability and storage capacity. The device layer
is composed of large numbers of heterogeneous resource-
limited IoT devices with low computing power, e.g., sensors,
Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation (RFID) tags, cameras, vehicles,
roadside units, etc., which are used to achieve the functions
of collecting, transmitting and uploading raw data. As the
servers from the perspectives of computation, edge layer
provides storage, computing and network resources to edge
devices. Due to the dynamics of edge server resources and
network topology, the computation ofﬂoading strategies of
tasks and orchestration of corresponding resources are critical
to the edge layer. The core infrastructure generally indicates
the cloud layer, whose conﬁgurations are similar to cloud
computing. The tasks that cannot be processed by the edge
layer need to be completed in the cloud layer. Moreover,
the cloud layer can also dynamically adjust the deployment
strategies of the edge layer based on the dynamic allocation
of edge resources.

C. IBEC

The frameworks that integrate blockchain and edge com-
puting have been applied to many IoT scenarios, such as
IoV, Smart Grid, and IIoT [74], [95]–[97]. When blockchain
meets edge computing, the privacy preservation, immutability
and traceability of blockchain can be leveraged to improve
the security of edge computing in IoT. On the other hand,

4

Fig. 3. Architecture of IBEC

edge computing can be utilized to provide large amount of
resources for the high-performance operation of blockchain.
The motivations for combining these two technologies are
elaborated as follows.

• Resource Enrichment: The applications of blockchain
in many IoT scenarios (e.g., data sharing and resource
management) require devices deployed on the IoT to
perform consensus algorithms, broadcast or verify trans-
actions, and record historical transactions on blockchain.
It is a challenge for IoT devices with limited resources.
Edge computing can provide rich storage, computing
and communication resources for edge devices in these
scenarios. For instance, the deployed edge servers can
help the edge devices to process computation-intensive
tasks [98]. Meanwhile,
the storage capacity of edge
servers can be used to maintain the blockchain for data
sharing. Edge computing can also provide more powerful
network support for edge devices.

• Security and Privacy Assurance: In edge computing, the

dynamic topology of networks, and the mobility and
heterogeneity of edge devices lead to security challenges
[99], [100]. The blockchain can be used to ensure data
consistency, traceability and tamper-prooﬁng, and protect
data privacy [101]. For example, with the effect of the
consensus mechanism in blockchain, the participants can
jointly maintain data security. Moreover, its decentralized
architecture based on the P2P network ﬁts the edge
computing architecture in IoT.

• Scalability Enhancement: The IBEC enables resource-
limited edge devices to participate in through certain
design mechanisms, although edge servers can be used
to assist for processing efﬁcient tasks and maintaining
blockchain. Actually, even resource-constrained edge de-
vices can participate in mining tasks. For instance, the
resource-constrained edge devices can share the collected
data to obtain returns with an effective incentive mecha-
nism in blockchain. Accordingly, the IBEC improves the
scalability and ﬂexibility of the entire system.

The architecture of IBEC is shown in Fig. 3. In this archi-
tecture, a variety of resource-limited edge devices connect to
the edge network through various access ways, e.g., 5G, Wi-Fi,
and Bluetooth. The edge servers generally serve as blockchain
nodes and miners, because the maintenance of blockchains
requires sufﬁcient storage, computing and network resources.
For instance, in energy trading scenario of Smart Grid, edge
servers are responsible for executing smart contracts for energy
trading requesters. In data sharing scenario, edge servers train
AI models in a distributed manner and ﬁnally update the
AI models among all nodes through federated learning (FL)
paradigm. On the top of the architecture is the cloud, which
is used to deal with some highly complex tasks, which edge
nodes cannot complete. For example, some raw data with
high storage overhead (e.g., X-ray image in healthcare) can
be stored in the cloud, while their metadata is stored in
blockchain.

III. BLOCKCHAIN-ENABLED EDGE COMPUTING

In this section, we will review the related studies of
blockchain-enabled edge computing. We roughly categorize
these studies into blockchain-based resource management for
edge computing in Section III-A, blockchain-based security
layer in Section III-B, blockchain-based data management for
edge computing in Section III-C, and lightweight blockchain
for resource-limited edge devices in Section III-D.

A. Blockchain-based Resource Management for Edge Com-
puting

Resource management aims to integrate, allocate and utilize
the resources (e.g., computing, network and storage) in a
rational, secure and efﬁcient manner. An appropriate resource
management architecture can largely improve the system per-
formance, thereby enhancing the quality of service (QoS) and
quality of experience (QoE) of users. With respect to edge
computing, edge servers offer services for nearby resource-
limited edge devices, which involve resource management
issues such as resource allocation and computation ofﬂoading.
Blockchain can enable edge computing to develop efﬁcient
resource management architectures, in which smart contracts
can be used to implement speciﬁc functions, such as resource
allocation, reputation establishment and resource trading.

There are several studies on blockchain-based resource man-
agement for edge computing. In [102], a resource management
scheme, named BCEdge, is proposed, in which three smart
contracts are designed to realize the functions of request
submission, request response and optimal facility selection of
tasks, respectively. Speciﬁcally, a proof-of-performance (PoP)
consensus mechanism is presented in BCEdge to support the
facility (i.e., edge device) selection for a task. Based on the
historical token exchange transaction and the contributions
that a facility invested to the system, an optimal facility
can be selected to process tasks in order to relieve the
load of edge servers. Similarly, a blockchain-enabled device-
to-device (D2D) edge computing and networks (D2D-ECN)
framework is presented in [103] with a set of smart contracts
for resource trading and task assignment. For low resource and

5

energy consumption, a proof-of-reputation (PoR) consensus
mechanism is proposed in [119]. Moreover, in [104], a fully
decentralized resource trading market is designed, in which
three smart contracts are designed to trade the fog / edge
computing resources in a secure and efﬁcient way.

To address the problem of spectrum contention access and
utilize the idle spectrum in Cyber-Physical-Social-Systems
(CPSSs), a blockchain and smart contract-based license-free
spectrum resource management framework is proposed in
[105] for processing non-real time data in edge / fog-enabled
IoT network. In this framework, the mining-based and auction-
based access mechanisms are designed to obtain the access
license of spectrum. Moreover,
in order to achieve better
performance of the spectrum access, a key-micro blockchain
is developed to
protocol, named blockchain-KM protocol,
generate two types of blocks. The key blocks are generated
by PoS-after-PoW mechanism and used for recording data
of spectrum owners, while micro blocks are generated by
lower-PoW mechanism and used for recording transactions.
Two kinds of blocks are connected into a multi-ring structure
private blockchain using hash values to ensure that the data
on the chain would not be tampered with.

Computation ofﬂoading algorithms can be implemented by
smart contracts as well. Aiming at the coordination problem
of computation ofﬂoading in mobile edge computing (MEC)-
enabled ultra-dense wireless networks, a task-VM (i.e., virtual
machine) matching algorithm is introduced in [106] to match
mobile users with suitable edge servers and implemented as a
smart contract on blockchain to be performed automatically
without trusted third parties. Considering both coverage of
edge services and auditability during task ofﬂoading process,
a private blockchain-based task ofﬂoading architecture is de-
signed in [107] for drone-assisted MEC. In this proposed
method, smart contracts with ofﬂoading policies are used to
select MEC servers for task processing, in which both the
process data and execution results are recorded in blockchain
for auditing. To enhance the task ofﬂoading cooperation
among edge servers, a blockchain-based decentralized plat-
form in cooperative edge computing, named CoopEdge, is
implemented in [108], where a reputation system based on
historic task-processing performance of the edge servers is
introduced to provide a trustworthy basis for the trustless task
ofﬂoading environment. In CoopEdge, the incentive mecha-
nism is employed to motivate more edge servers to participate
in processing the peer-ofﬂoaded tasks, and a proof-of-edge-
reputation (PoER) consensus mechanism is utilized such that
the edge server with the highest reputation would be selected
as a miner to add new blocks on blockchain. For the similar
purpose, another blockchain-enabled incentive scheme for task
sharing among edge servers in MEC environment is proposed
in [109].

The above-mentioned studies on blockchain-based resource
management for edge computing are summarized in Table I.

B. Blockchain-based Security Layer for Edge Computing

It is essential to ensure security and traceability in record-
ing status data of resource management in a good resource

Table I
Blockchain-based Resource Management for Edge Computing

Refs.

Applications

Purposes

Contributions

6

Other
Supporting
Technologies

[102]

[103]

[104]

[105]

[106]

[107]

[108]

[109]

Resource
Management

Improving utilization of computa-
tional resources and reducing its
consumption.

Proposing a blockchain-based resource management
framework named BCEdge and a PoP consensus mech-
anism.

Resource
Management

Improving execution performance
of time sensitive IoT applications.

Proposing a blockchain-enabled D2D-ECN framework
and a PoR consensus mechanism.

Resource
Management

Avoiding issues introduced by cen-
tralized paradigm.

Implementing a fully decentralized marketplace of fog
/ edge computing resources based on public blockchain
network with functionalities realized by smart contracts.

Resource
Management

Effectively managing the license-
free spectrum resources in CPSSs.

Proposing a smart contract-based license-free spectrum
resource management framework.

No

No

No

No

Computation
Ofﬂoading

Addressing the coordination oper-
ations among mobile devices and
edge servers in a decentralized and
trusted manner.

Computation
Ofﬂoading

Achieving high-coverage and audi-
bility of MEC services.

Computation
Ofﬂoading

Enhancing
edge servers in task ofﬂoading.

cooperation

among

Designing a blockchain-enabled computation ofﬂoading
scheme by developing a smart contract-based task-
virtual machine algorithm.

Deferred-
acceptance
algorithm

Proposing a private blockchain-based task ofﬂoading
architecture and three smart contract-based ofﬂoading
policies.

Implementing a blockchain-based task processing plat-
form with a reputation system and a PoER consensus
mechanism.

Computation
Ofﬂoading

Realizing secure task sharing in
MEC.

Proposing a permissioned blockchain-based task shar-
ing framework.

No

No

No

management architecture. Blockchain can be used in such
architecture to provide a trustworthy environment and ensure
data security. In [110], a blockchain-based management ar-
chitecture is proposed to realize the systematically uniﬁed
resource management and decentralized ecosystem construc-
tion during development and operations (DevOps) process, in
which blockchain and smart contracts are deployed to provide
trusted services without third party. Blockchain is also applied
in [111] to guarantee the data integrity and traceability by
recording the hash values of conﬁdential data and providing
the services of tracking data.

In order to help generating real-time optimal strategy to
resist the uncertainties caused by resource conﬂict, service
failure and performance degradation in the procedure of work-
ﬂow scheduling in edge computing, a private blockchain is
introduced in [112] to record and synchronize the data of
real-time strategies and status data of edge nodes, thereby
achieving secure and efﬁcient strategies scheduling. Moreover,
a non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm III (NSGA-III)-
based method is designed to solve the formulated multi-
objective optimization problem considering completion time
and energy consumption. In [113], a blockchain-based ap-
proach is designed to ensure connectivity, availability, and
survivability, which are fundamental in achieving ultra-reliable
and low-latency communication in MEC.

Smart contracts in blockchain can also be used in edge
computing to enhance its security [114]–[118]. In [114],
a blockchain-powered trusted collaborative edge computing
(CEC) service framework, named BlockEdge, is presented
to enhance trustworthiness in CEC. In BlockEdge, a trust
reputation system is constructed based on the deposit balances

and veriﬁcation results on-chain. In [115], a new blockchain,
namely TrustChain, is proposed to establish a trust evaluation
mechanism and realize privacy preservation for trust manage-
ment and data security. Aiming to prevent attacks of selﬁsh
edge server and fake service record, a blockchain-based trust
mechanism for ofﬂoading task processing in MEC is presented
[116], where a blockchain is deployed to record and manage
the trust information, and the consensus protocol combining
PoW and PoS is developed. Two versions of edge server
central processing unit (CPU) allocation and trust evaluation
algorithms are designed by using reinforcement learning (RL)
and deep reinforcement learning (DRL). Both the versions are
used to reduce the computational consumption of edge servers
by optimizing the number of CPUs and to evaluate the service
reputation of edge servers using Bayesian inference. Moreover,
the latter could further improve the computational performance
by introducing modiﬁed Boltzmann distribution in achieving
the optimal number of CPUs and applying convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) to compress the state space. In
[117], a consortium blockchain-enabled access control scheme
in edge computing-based generic IoT environment (CBACS-
EIoT) is proposed, which includes the access control phases
between devices and gateway nodes as well as those between
gateway nodes and edge servers, and the key management
phase between edge servers and cloud servers. In [118], a
security scheme for data storage and access is designed in a
fully-decentralized architecture by combining blockchain and
edge computing to resist the identity-revealing attack, session
hijacking attack, relay attack and man-in-the-middle attack.

The above-mentioned studies on blockchain-based security

layer for edge computing are summarized in Table II.

7

Table II
Blockchain-based Security Layer for Edge Computing

Refs.

Applications

Purposes

Contributions

[110]

Resource
Management

Realizing a self-organizational, se-
cure and rational Cloud / Edge
ecosystem.

Analysing challenges, introducing ALLSTAR approach
including four subsystems and designing business
model to motivate the participants.

[111]

Resource
Management

Facilitating deployment and man-
agement of IoT applications and
monitoring resource in IoT.

Proposing a framework of integrating heterogeneous
IoT-based systems to fog / cloud named FogBus with
detailed modules and services and studying a use case
of sleep apnea analysis.

[112]

Resource
Management

[113]

Caching
Management

Solving the uncertainties caused
by resource conﬂict, service failure
and perform degradation in cloud
computing.

Proposing a blockchain and edge computing-based
resource provisioning method modelled by a multi-
objective optimization problem and solved by NSGA-
III for uncertainty-awareness in the workﬂow.

Achieving ultra-reliability commu-
nications in MEC in terms of avail-
ability, connectivity, and surviv-
ability.

Using a neural network for a blockchain-based intelli-
gent content transport mechanism and smart contracts
for unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) caching function-
alities.

[114]

Trust
Mechanism

Guaranteeing trustworthiness
in
collaborative edge computing pro-
cess.

Presenting a blockchain-enabled collaborative edge
computing called BlockEdge with functionalities of
distributed ledger,
incentive scheme and reputation
mechanism.

[115]

Trust
Mechanism

Optimizing security issues, system
delay and resource consumption of
traditional blockchain.

Presenting an edge computing-enabled privacy preser-
vation permissioned blockchain named Trustchain for
decentralized security concerns.

[116]

Trust
Mechanism

High processing performance and
data security in MEC.

Formulating a blockchain-based trust mechanism to
resist selﬁsh edge attacks and faked service record
attacks, and applying DRL for computational resource
allocation decision.

[117]

Access
Control

Achieving secure communication
among various entities in edge-
based IoT network.

Designing a consortium blockchain-based access con-
trol scheme to offer mutual authentication between
different layers in edge-based IoT environment.

[118]

Authentication

Realizing privacy preservation and
data security in edge computing.

Proposing a decentralized security scheme named Dec-
Chain for user authentication, data storage and data
access.

Other
Supporting
Technologies

Machine
Learning
(ML),Cloud
Computing

Cloud
Computing,
Fog
Computing

NSGA-III

Neural
Network,
UAV

No

No

DRL

No

No

C. Blockchain-based Data Management for Edge Computing

In edge computing, the operations of massive edge devices
will generate a large amount of data, which can be further
used for subsequent data analysis and data processing. The
generated data needs to be stored and sometimes shared
securely. The decentralization, immutability, and traceability
of blockchain can enable edge computing to achieve secure
data management. In [120], a blockchain-based trusted data
management scheme in edge computing, named BlockTDM,
is proposed. BlockTDM supports a range of functions, in-
cluding mutual authentication for membership management
and responsibility tracing, and multi-signature-based PBFT
consensus and matrix-based multi-channel data segment for
data privacy preservation. Moreover, user-deﬁned sensitive
data encryption, conditional access and decryption query of
protected transactions are implemented in form of smart
contracts.

Training by AI models, data can be transferred into valuable
knowledge and data trading is equivalent to knowledge sharing
to some extent. Knowledge sharing in edge computing can be
enabled by blockchain [121]–[123].

In [121], a user-centric blockchain (UCB) framework is

presented to deal with the security problems of weak copyright
protection, untrusted accounting at edge and inefﬁcient con-
sensus in knowledge sharing. In UCB, a proof-of-popularity
(PoP) consensus mechanism is proposed, which includes user-
centric proposal value ranking and electing algorithm and
security-aware block generating algorithm.

In [122], a blockchain-based knowledge trading market in
edge-AI-enabled IoT is presented,
in which a consortium
blockchain is used to construct the market platform and smart
contracts of both knowledge management and knowledge
trading are designed to ensure the decentralization, tamper-
prooﬁng and conﬁdentiality. Moreover, a proof-of-trading
(PoT) consensus mechanism is proposed by combining PoW
and PoS to reduce energy consumption. Moreover, optimal
knowledge pricing strategy is derived as incentive mechanism
through Karush-Kuhn-Tucker (KKT) condition that is based
on game theory.

Similarly, in order to motivate content sharing in MEC,
a blockchain-based solution is proposed [123], where base
stations serve as edge servers and allocate computing power
to run mining tasks to reward cache-enabled sharing mobile
devices. By considering linear and nonlinear relationships

Table III
Blockchain-based Data Management for Edge Computing

Refs.

Applications

Purposes

Contributions

[120]

Data
Management

Solving the data security and pri-
vacy problems in edge computing
environment.

[121]

Data Sharing

Solving resource limitations prob-
lems and guaranteeing data secu-
rity of data sharing process in in-
telligent edge.

[122]

Data Sharing

Achieving data trading among het-
erogeneous edge-AI devices in IoT.

A blockchain-based data management scheme with
the functionalities of data isolation by multi-channel,
on-chain data encryption and access control by smart
contract.

Designing an appropriate user-centric blockchain-
enabled knowledge sharing framework with a PoP
consensus for low energy and low latency.

Implementing a knowledge trading market with a con-
sortium blockchain as a ledger for secure and efﬁcient
transactions management, designing of digital coin and
PoT consensus and noncooperative game-based pricing
strategy.

[123]

Incentive
Mechanism

content

Encouraging
sharing
among mobile devices in D2D
network.

Developing two kinds of caching placement schemes
considering relationships between allocated computing
power and shared data size.

[124]

Communication

Guaranteeing the reliability of data
transmission in the IoT.

Proposing a data transmission mechanism in edge
computing environment based on an optimized
blockchain where the edge servers maintain and up-
date the full blockchain, and the general lightweight
nodes utilize the data on the chain and the consensus
mechanism is redesigned as PoR.

8

Other
Supporting
Technologies

No

AI

AI

No

No

of computing power and shared data size, optimal caching
schemes are developed to maximize total proﬁt and solved
respectively by KKT conditions-based solution and difference
of convex (DC) programming algorithm.

In [124], a blockchain-based data transmission scheme is
developed for D2D communication in edge computing, where
a proof-of-reliability (PoR) consensus mechanism is designed
such that the users with enough credit and supporters would
be allowed to transmit data. The blockchain is introduced
to ensure the tamper-prooﬁng and traceability of data (e.g.,
messages and behaviour data) in the IoT.

The above-mentioned studies on blockchain-based data
management for edge computing are summarized in Table III.

D. Lightweight Blockchain for Resource-limited Edge Devices

When blockchain is used for resource management in edge
computing, it requires a large amount of computation resources
for consensus algorithms and enough storage resources for
storing full blockchain. Thus, how to support the development
of blockchain in edge computing is the priority issue in
blockchain-based resource management.

There are a number of studies on redesigning lightweight
blockchains [125]–[128]. In [125], a lightweight blockchain
named LiTiChain is proposed to adapt to the edge-enabled
IoT system. In LiTiChain, both transactions and blocks that
have a time-limited characteristic are stored in the form of
Endtime Ordering Graph (EOG, a data structure of tree in
blockchain). The EOG is based on the order of the end time
and an expired block would be deleted to save the storage
resources on the edge nodes. Speciﬁc algorithms of k-height
insertion and deletion / renewal of a block are designed to
adjust the structure of EOG to maintain the order of blocks.

In [126], a novel blockchain is redesigned to suit the edge
computing environment, in which the optimal blocks storage
allocation and recent blocks caching strategies are presented
to achieve fair storage and quick efﬁcient access of blocks.
Moreover, an improved PoS consensus mechanism is designed
for battery-limited edge devices to motivate the nodes to own
more tokens and store more data.

An efﬁcient consensus method is proposed in [127] to solve
the mathematical puzzle of PoW consensus by using expec-
tation maximization algorithm and polynomial matrix factor-
ization. In [128], a proof-of-authentication (PoAh) consensus
algorithm is presented, in which blocks could be packaging
by all the nodes and signed by their private keys. In this
proposed algorithm, the selected trusted nodes are responsible
for verifying block validation by checking the Media Access
Control (MAC) values with the corresponding public key.

The above-mentioned studies on lightweight blockchain for

resource-limited edge devices are summarized in Table IV.

IV. EDGE COMPUTING-ENABLED BLOCKCHAIN

In this section, we will discuss how to use edge computing

to beneﬁt blockchain.

As a new computing paradigm, edge computing can pro-
vide sufﬁcient resources for resource-limited edge devices to
support blockchain. In other words, edge computing can be
regarded as a resource enabler for blockchain. In [129], a
MEC-enabled blockchain framework is proposed for IoT, in
which mining as a service (MaaS) is designed for IoT devices
to purchase computational resources in clouds. In [130], a
blockchain-based resource allocation scheme is proposed in
UAV-enabled edge computing environment, where the re-
sources are allocated between edge computing stations (ECSs)

Table IV
Lightweight Blockchain for Resource-limited Edge Devices

Refs.

Applications

Purposes

Contributions

[125]

[126]

[127]

[128]

Blockchain
structure
redesign

Blockchain
structure
redesign

Consensus
Mechanism
optimization

Consensus
Mechanism
optimization

Designing appropriate blockchain
for edge-based IoT.

Proposing a lightweight blockchain called LiTiChain
using graphs and two algorithms of inserting a block
and deleting / renewing a block.

Designing appropriate blockchain
and consensus mechanism for edge
computing.

Proposing a redesigned blockchain with an improved
PoS mechanism and a recent block storage allocation
strategy.

Achieving an efﬁcient solution for
PoW.

Designing an expectation maximization algorithm and
polynomial matrix factorization-based approach for
PoW.

Designing appropriate consensus
resource-limited
mechanism for
edge devices.

Proposing a novel consensus algorithm called PoAh.

No

9

Other
Supporting
Technologies

No

No

Cloud
Computing,
Fog
Computing

and UAVs, and all data related to the process of resource
trading would be recorded in blockchain to achieve tamper-
prooﬁng and traceability. The Multi-leader Multi-follower
game is utilized to formulate the interactions between ECSs
and UAVs in resource trading process. The Lagrangian-based
solution is designed to solve the proﬁt-maximization problem
of ECSs to obtain the optimal resource pricing, and the
Bellman dynamic programming-based solutions under open
loop situation and feedback situation are employed to address
the differential game-based resource demands optimization
problem.

Edge computing can be used to derive an optimal resource
allocation scheme for blockchain mining tasks. In [131], a
hierarchical Edge-Cloud computation ofﬂoading scheme is
presented to obtain optimal resource pricing strategies by using
game theory and RL technique. In [132], the Multi-leader
Multi-follower game is used to formulate the interactions
between miners and cloud / edge providers, and an Alter-
nating Direction Method of Multipliers (ADMM) algorithm
is adopted to cope with the standard Equilibrium Problem
with Equilibrium Constraints (EPEC) challenge caused by the
high dimensionality of each miner’s strategy space, thereby
obtaining the maximum proﬁts of providers in consideration of
utilities of miners. Moreover, a combinatorial double auction-
based resource allocation scheme and a pricing strategy are
designed to achieve budget balance, individual rationality and
truthfulness in the auction process [133].

Non-mining-devices in IoT can also be considered as re-
source providers. In [134], a collaborative mining network
(CMN) is constructed to realize collaborative mining between
miners and idle IoT devices or between miners and resource-
sufﬁcient edge servers. The optimization problem between
miners and non-mining-devices within a CMN is formulated
as a double auction game to calculate the optimal auction price
in order to maximize the whole utility of the two sides. The
computation ofﬂoading model between edge servers and CMN
nodes is formulated into a Stackelberg game to maximize
the proﬁts of edge servers, miners and idle IoT devices. In
[135], two mining schemes: immediate reporting (IR) after

successfully computing and strategically reporting (SR) after
successfully computing are considered in order to obtain
optimal proﬁts of both miners and edge service providers in
IR and SR schemes.

In [136], an edge computing-based parallel process-
ing framework is designed to improve the scalability of
blockchain, where the blockchain is deployed as a decentral-
ized database to synchronize and store the activity data of
IoT devices, and the edge nodes are conﬁgured to provide the
validator service to perform the parallel processing algorithm.
The above-mentioned studies on edge computing-enabled

blockchain are summarized in Table V.

V. EXISTING ISSUES AND THE CORRESPONDING
SOLUTIONS IN IBEC

This section discusses research issues brought by the IBEC.

A. Resource Management for IBEC

is the key for

The resource management

integrating
blockchain and edge computing to provide diversiﬁed ser-
vices with high quality. In [137], a blockchain-based resource
trading system is proposed for video transcoding and is
delivered to satisfy various requirements of users in MEC.
In this system, small base stations (SBSs) with MEC servers
are regard as miners to generate and verify new blocks.
Meanwhile, the video providers work on remote cloud net-
works and are responsible for video transcoding. Moreover,
mobile users should pay for the services of transmission
and transcoding to edge servers / SBSs and video providers.
The whole resource trading process is self-organized by a
series of smart contracts and is modelled into a three-stage
Stackelberg game, and a resource allocation iteration algorithm
is designed to solve the optimization problem. To improve the
efﬁciency of video stream transcoding, a MEC and blockchain-
enabled transcoding framework is proposed in [138], where the
transcoding tasks are divided and ofﬂoaded to the nearby D2D
nodes or small-cell base stations (SBSs). For the purpose of
achieving maximum average proﬁt of transcoding service, the
ADMM-based solution is proposed in form of smart contracts

Table V
Edge Computing-enabled Blockchain

Refs.

Applications

Purposes

Contributions

Other Supporting
Technologies

10

[129]

[130]

[131]

[132]

Resource
Allocation

Resource
Allocation

Resource
Pricing

Solving PoW puzzles on edge nodes.

Optimal
resource allocation between
UAVs and edge computing servers for
blockchain applications.

Maximizing proﬁts of both edge service
providers and miners in the process of
computation ofﬂoading.

Resource
Pricing

Achieving optimal utilities of miners
and proﬁts of resource providers.

Ofﬂoading mining tasks to edge nodes.

Reviewing MEC architectures and proposing an edge
computing-enabled blockchain framework.

No

Proposing a resources pricing and trading scheme by
using Stackelberg game.

Game Theory

Proposing a two-layer computational ofﬂoading
paradigm and investigating two practical scenarios.

Game Theory

Designing a resource trading scheme by formulating
a Multi-leader Multi-follower-based problem and uti-
lizing an ADMM algorithm to solve the problem.

Proposing a double auction-based resource allocation
scheme for mining tasks and solving it by the step /
smooth greedy algorithm-based solution.

Game Theory,
ADMM algorithm

No

Utilizing idle communication and com-
putational
resources on both non-
mining-devices and edge clouds for
mining tasks.

Proposing a resource trading scheme including dou-
ble auction game-based task ofﬂoading to non-
mining-devices and Stackelberg game-based task of-
ﬂoading to edge cloud operators.

Resource
Pricing

Achieving optimal proﬁts for both min-
ers and edge service providers.

Proposing autoﬁt strategies including IR and SR to
obtain the maximum proﬁt of the resource pricing
problem based on the two-stage Stackelberg game.

Game Theory

Game Theory

Data
Processing

Improving scalability of blockchain and
data security in edge computing-based
IoT network.

Implementing an edge computing-based parallel data
processing architecture for blockchain mining tasks
where blockchain ensures data security.

No

[135]

[136]

[133]

Computation
Ofﬂoading

[134]

Computation
Ofﬂoading

to obtain the optimal block size, ofﬂoading scheduling, and
computation and spectrum resource allocation. To maximize
the system efﬁciency of multi-task resource allocation with the
constraints of individual rationality, truthfulness and budget
balance, two smart contract-based incentive mechanisms are
designed in the IBEC system [139]. Speciﬁcally, a double
auction mechanism based on breakeven (DAMB) is proposed
to satisfy constraints of all sellers and buyers, and a breakeven-
free double auction mechanism (BFDA) is presented to handle
more tasks for system efﬁciency further improvement with less
buyers’ truthfulness.

In [140], a MEC-based blockchain-as-a-service (BaaS) sys-
tem is proposed to realize efﬁcient resource management and
long-term reward in IoT networks, where UAVs are deployed
as aerial base stations (BSs) and work with other terrestrial
the interactions
BSs in the MEC model. In this system,
between BSs and blockchain nodes are formulated into a
stochastic Stackelberg game with multi leaders / BSs and
multi followers / blockchain nodes. The follower’s action
is regarded as partially observable Markov Decision Process
(POMDP) and the leader’s random state is modelled as a
Markov Decision Process (MDP) according to the optimal
responses from followers. An unsupervised polynomial-time
Bayesian deep learning (BDL) algorithm is developed for
followers to achieve optimal strategies and an unsupervised
polynomial-time deep Q-learning (DQL) algorithm is designed
correspondingly for leaders to maximize the expected long-
term rewards. Another related work is [141], in which the
resource management of both general computing tasks and
mining tasks in IoT applications is studied in order to achieve

both the optimal response strategies of miners and the optimal
prices of service providers.

Besides computation resource, the allocation of caching and
network resources is the key for high-quality services in the
IBEC. In [142], a blockchain-based trustworthy edge caching
scheme is proposed, in which smart contracts are used to
record and maintain the transactions and payment information
among edge nodes and mobile users. In this scheme, a pricing
mechanism based on historical demands of mobile users for
edge nodes, a gradient descent-based optimal caching demand
seeking algorithm for mobile users, and a max-min-based fair
caching resource allocation algorithm are designed as a trusted
and efﬁcient resource allocation solution to improve the QoE
in mobile cyber-physical system (MCPS).

With the purpose of raising caching hit rate in edge comput-
ing environment, a blockchain-assisted compression algorithm
of FL for content caching named CREAT is proposed in
[143], which includes the FL-based proactive content caching
algorithm (FPCC) and compression algorithm. The FPCC
algorithm is designed for edge nodes to train the models
using local data and predict caching contents according to the
popularity and the trained models. The compression algorithm
is applied in FPCC to improve communication efﬁciency of FL
by compressing the uploaded gradients. Moreover, four smart
contracts are designed to interact with the deployed blockchain
to ensure data security. Based on Hyperledger Fabric, a multi-
domain edge network resource management framework is
implemented in [144], where service-level agreements (SLAs)
are written in smart contracts and stored on blockchain. The
transaction number and domain
data of escrow accounts,

11

Table VI
Resource Management for IBEC

Refs.

Applications

Purposes

Contributions

[137]

Resource
Management

Realizing a secure and efﬁcient video
transcoding and delivery approach in
distributed environment.

Presenting a smart contract-based MEC network archi-
tecture and video transcoding and delivery approach and
designing an iteration algorithm as a systematic solution.

[138]

Resource
Management

Efﬁcient and high-yield video stream
transcoding service.

[139]

Resource
Management

Efﬁcient and appropriate incentives for
resource allocation.

[140]

Resource
Management

Adaptive and efﬁcient communication
in blockchain-
resource management
enabled MEC.

Proposing a blockchain and MEC-enabled transcoding
framework with an ADMM algorithm-based optimal re-
source allocation solution.

Proposing a multi-task cross-server resource allocation
framework using IBEC and designing DAMB and BFDA
to maximize the system efﬁciency.

Proposing a service resource trading framework using
blockchain and MEC, and respectively designing a hierar-
chical RL-based solution and an unsupervised hierarchi-
cal deep learning (DL) algorithm for complexity reducing
and uncertainties prediction.

[141]

Resource
Management

Adaptive and efﬁcient computational
resource management
in blockchain-
enabled MEC.

Developing a computational resource trading framework
using blockchain and MEC, and designing a hierarchical
RL-based interaction decision making approach.

[142]

Caching
Management

Secure
and efﬁcient
scheme for mobile edge users.

edge

caching

[143]

Resource
Management

Improving cache hit rate in edge com-
puting.

Proposing a blockchain-based edge caching scheme uti-
lizing smart contracts to record and maintain transactions
and designing a pricing mechanism for edge nodes, a
gradient descent-based demands seeking algorithm and
an optimal caching allocation algorithm for mobile users.

Designing a blockchain-enabled compressed algorithm of
FL named CREAT for training model on decentralized
edge nodes and reducing communication load in FL by
compressing gradients.

Other
Supporting
Technologies

Game
Theory

ADMM
algorithm

Game
Theory

DL, RL,
Game
Theory

DL, RL,
Game
Theory

Gradient
Decent
algorithm

FL

[144]

Network
Management

Jointly satisfying the trusted and trans-
parent requirements of QoS and opti-
mizing network by resource allocation.

Implementing a Hyperledger Fabric-based multi-domain
network management framework with end-to-end net-
work slicing and service-level assurance providing.

5G, Network
Slicing

[145]

Resource
Management

Realizing trusted and transparent rela-
tionships, and seamless and dynamic
resource exchange in current / future
decentralized wireless network.

Foreseeing the integration of blockchain, edge computing
and SDN for wireless network virtualization and present-
ing a corresponding architecture with the resistance of
double spending attack without the usage of high-speed
backhaul links.

SDN

[146]

Resource
Management

Improving resource utilization and sys-
tem ﬂexibility and maintaining low la-
tency.

Proposing a SDN-enabled IoT network architecture to
integrate blockchain and edge computing with a task of-
ﬂoading algorithm to ofﬂoad tasks to OpenFlow switches.

SDN, Fog
Computing

edge orchestrator (DEO) ID is received by multi-domain edge
orchestrator (MDEO) and recorded on blockchain, which not
only supports network slicing resources provisioning algorithm
to perform in a trustworthy and transparent manner, but also
satisﬁes the SLAs, thus improving the QoS.

In [145], an architecture of fusion of blockchain, edge com-
puting and SDN is presented to make a foreseeing on wireless
network virtualization, where blockchain and edge computing
are designed to resist the double-spending attack without the
usage of the high-speed backhaul links. The architecture can
be used to realize trusted yet transparent relationships, and
resource exchange in current / future decentralized wireless
network seamlessly and dynamically. In [146], edge / fog
computing and SDN are introduced into the IoT network
to develop a high ﬂexible framework of IoT system, and
blockchain is employed to ensure the reliability, availability
and scalability of the overall system.

The above-mentioned studies on resource management for

IBEC are summarized in Table VI.

B. Joint Optimization for IBEC

If the IBEC is regarded as an overall system and they are
regarded as two subsystems, there exist joint optimizations
for both subsystems. In [147], an allocation framework of
radio spectrum and computational resources is proposed based
on blockchain and MEC. The constraints of user association,
data rate allocation, CPU-cycle frequencies of both ofﬂoading
tasks and blockchain system, and block producer scheduling
are jointly considered to obtain an optimal balance between
the energy consumption of MEC and the delay / time to
ﬁnality (DTF) of blockchain. The above optimization problem
is formulated into a mixed-integer nonlinear programming
(MINLP) problem. In [148], a resource allocation approach
for wireless networks in blockchain-enabled mobile edge
computing (B-MEC) framework is proposed, in which the
consensus mechanism basing on PBFT is deployed. In this
approach, by considering spectrum allocation, block size and
the number of consecutive producing blocks per producer, a
joint optimization problem is formulated as a MDP to simul-

12

Table VII
Joint Optimization for IBEC

Refs.

Applications

Purposes

Contributions

[147]

Resource
Management

Achieving optimal performance bal-
ancing between blockchain system
and MEC system.

[148]

Resource
Management

Intelligent and secure resource man-
agement in future wireless network.

[149]

Resource
Management

Efﬁcient integration of ML into edge
computing-based IoT.

[150]

Communication

Maintaining data transmission in a se-
cure and reliable manner in damaged
M2M communication networks.

[151]

Resource
Management

Satisfying requirements of processing
power, security and performance for
delay-tolerant data in M2M commu-
nication networks.

[152]

Incentive
Mechanism

Motivating users to participate in idle
resource sharing.

[153]

Computation
Ofﬂoading

and efﬁcient

Secure
computation
ofﬂoading and resource allocation
schemes in MEC.

Formulating an optimization framework with IBEC by
jointly considering user association, data rate allocation,
block producer scheduling and CPU-cycle frequencies and
designing corresponding algorithms for minimization of
both energy consumption and delay / time.

Proposing an integrated framework of blockchain and edge
computing with PBFT and PoS-based consensus mecha-
nisms and DRL-based solution for the optimization problem
of system performance by jointly considering spectrum
allocation, block size and the number of consecutive blocks.

A collective learning approach by integrating DQL and
blockchain and an improved consensus mechanism of PoL
are jointly employed on solving resource allocation prob-
lems in networking integrated cloud-edge-end architecture.

Proposing a blockchain and edge computing-enabled M2M
communication framework using UAVs for communication
connectivity and designing a dueling DQN-based optimiz-
ing algorithm to improve data computation capacity and
throughput of the blockchain.

Introducing a blockchain and edge computing-based system
performance joint optimization framework and selecting
dueling DQN as the solution of the formulated optimiza-
tion problem by considering caching, computation and
blockchain security.

Constructing a smart contract-based D2D cache and deliv-
ery market with pPBFT as the consensus approach and
blockchain as the decentralized ledger and designing a
DRL-based solution for caching placement and smart con-
tract performing nodes selection.

Proposing a blockchain-enabled resource managing joint
optimizing framework with an asynchronous advantage
actor-critic RL algorithm as the solution for maximizing
computation rate of MEC system and transaction throughput
of blockchain system.

Other
Supporting
Technologies

No

Double-
dueling
DQN

DQL

Dueling
DQN

Dueling
DQN

DRL

DRL, RL

taneously obtain the optimal performance of both MEC and
blockchain. The performance measurement indexes include
average execution delay of MEC and the throughput and time
to ﬁnality / conﬁrmation latency of blockchain. A DRL-based
algorithm is designed by using double-dueling deep Q-network
(DQN) to solve the above-mentioned problem.

to ensure data security and privacy, and the MEC is used
to improve computing power. The optimization problem of
resource allocation is formulated and solved by dueling DQN
to achieve the optimal strategy including data transmission
request, computing node selection, block size decision and
block interval decision.

To solve the joint optimization problem of integrated net-
working and computing resource allocation, a blockchain-
enabled DQL approach, named collective Q-learning (CQL),
is proposed in [149]. In this approach, parts of the learning
models are trained by the decentralized IoT nodes locally, and
blockchain is used to record and share learning results in a
secure, reliable and auditable manner. Instead of PoW, the
designed proof-of-learning (PoL) consensus mechanism allows
the nodes (who train the Deep Neural Network, namely DNN,
with minimum reduced percentage of learning loss function)
to generate the new blocks and even to trade these if they
want. Utilizing the similar technologies, in [150], a resource
allocation scheme is proposed for data transmission process
in UAV-assisted machine-to-machine (M2M) communications
to maximize the data computation capacity and throughput
the blockchain is utilized
of blockchain. In this scheme,

In [151], a blockchain and edge computing-enabled resource
joint optimization framework is presented for delay-tolerant
data in M2M communications, in which the data is transmitted
periodically and can tolerate a relatively long latency. In order
to solve the time-varying problem, the DQN-based approach is
designed and the optimal selections and decisions on caching
servers, computing servers and blockchain system are obtained
to further satisfy the requirements of system rewards. Other
related studies include cooperative computation ofﬂoading and
resource allocation [153], and the D2D and MEC caching
[152], in which DRL is used to develop solutions for the corre-
sponding joint optimization problems. Moreover, in [152], the
partial Practical Byzantine Fault Tolerance (pPBFT) consensus
mechanism is proposed for smart contract execution nodes to
decide whether or not to execute and push one transaction,
and the integrated DPoS and aBFT mechanism is proposed to

reach the block producing consensus.

The above-mentioned studies on joint optimization for IBEC

are summarized in Table VII.

C. Data Management Framework for IBEC

Different from resource management, data management
focuses on the secure and efﬁcient access, sharing, and tracing
the data generated from edge computing-enabled IoT envi-
ronment. Blockchain can provide a decentralized and third-
party-free environment in edge computing based on the char-
acteristics of the underlying P2P network. Accordingly, the
decentralization and self-organization of a data management
system can be guaranteed by using blockchain. In [154], a
blockchain and AI-enabled edge computing platform, named
Edgence, is proposed for intelligent management of massive
decentralized applications (dApps) in IoT. In Edgence, a
three-tier veriﬁcation including smart contract veriﬁcation is
designed to provide different ways for various demands of
IoT-based dApps. Moreover, decentralized crowdsourcing and
decentralized AI training are integrated to realize intelligent
management without data transmission to cloud to reduce
latency and protect data privacy. To manage data generated
by IoT devices, a three-layer data management architecture
(i.e., the device layer, fog layer and cloud layer) is proposed
in [155], which combines blockchain, edge computing, SDN
and NFV. The smart contract-based access management algo-
rithm and orchestration management algorithm are designed to
automatically handle requests from IoT devices without any
third party, and the combination of NFV and SDN are used
to optimize the performance of resource allocation.

Since a large amount of sensitive data is required to store
in the IBEC system securely, secure storage is a key issue
in data management. In [156], edge servers integrated with
blockchain are utilized to provide large storage securely, in
which the issues of integrity, adaptability and anonymity are
addressed separately by Data Integrity Service (DIS), off-
chain state channels (provided by Lightning networks or
Raiden networks) and a hybrid cryptographic mechanism with
linkable ring signature and zerocash techniques. In [157], a
secure data storage scheme in edge computing is proposed
by using blockchain and regeneration code to cope with the
challenges brought by resource-limitations of sensors and data
diversities. Speciﬁcally, based on the general three-tier edge
computing architecture, a global blockchain is deployed at
the cloud layer to store all the data, and regenerative code
technology is integrated to provide data redundancy so as
to improve data reliability. Moreover, a local
lightweight
blockchain is maintained by edge servers at the edge layer
and is deployed on the IoT layer. The data transmission
mechanisms between IoT devices and the local blockchain are
designed to periodically synchronize data in order to ensure
data integrity.

In the IBEC, blockchain can be used for data trading or
sharing in a decentralized manner. This is mainly because
the incentive mechanism in blockchain can motivate data
producers to share high-quality data [158]–[160]. For instance,
is
a four-layer data trading architecture, named EdgeBoT,

13

introduced in [158] for the IoT system by combining edge
computing and Ethereum blockchain. In this architecture,
edge gateways are designed to run AI algorithms, blockchain
and smart contracts. Due to the built-in security mechanisms
of blockchain, the architecture can be used to realize data
processing and decision making locally,
thereby reducing
the bandwidth consumption of data uploading. In [160], a
blockchain-enabled secure data aggregation strategy (BSDA)
is proposed for edge computing-based IoT. In this method,
a new block generation algorithm is designed to improve
the throughput and reduce transaction latency. The labels of
security level and task completion requirements are put into
the block header to restrain the task receivers, e.g., mobile
data collectors (MDCs). Moreover,
integrated with MDCs
partition, sensitive task decomposition is adopted to preserve
the privacy and to resist the collusion attack simultaneously.
Besides, with the higher MDC conﬁgurations of security level
and task completion conditions than those recorded in block
header, a DRL-based self-adaptive double bootstrapped deep
deterministic policy gradient (IDDPG) method is developed to
achieve data aggregation with energy-efﬁciency.

The above-mentioned studies on data management frame-

work for the IBEC are summarized in Table VIII.

D. Computation Ofﬂoading for IBEC

Computation ofﬂoading refers to transferring the entire or
part of a task to nearby edge servers to execute for resource-
constrained edge devices. During the transferring process, data
about the tasks is vulnerable to be attacked in the sophisticated
environment. In this regard, blockchain can be used as a ledger
to ensure data consistency and integrity by recording the status
data of resource allocation and task ofﬂoading on-chain.

In [161], a blockchain-enabled edge computing system,
named DeTEC, is designed by utilizing the idle computing
resources for task ofﬂoading in a decentralized and trusted
manner. Taking capacity and fairness of the edge servers into
consideration, the optimal task allocation problem is proposed
in order to minimize the total latency, and is solved by the
heuristic allocation (Heu-Alloc) algorithm. Speciﬁcally, when
the task requests from IoT devices are collected, the Heu-Alloc
algorithm is run to generate a scheduling scheme, which is
sent to the smart domain name server (DNS). The appropriate
edge server is selected to process the corresponding tasks and
return the results to IoT devices. Moreover, two veriﬁcation
schemes are designed to improve the veriﬁcation speed. In
DeTEC, blockchain serves as a distributed ledger to record
the contributions of edge servers so as to reward them for
their computations.

In [162], a blockchain-enabled computation ofﬂoading
scheme named BeCome is proposed for IoT in MEC to
obtain the optimal ofﬂoading scheme. In this scheme, VM
instances are used for provisioning physical resources in IoT,
and a VM allocation ledger updating algorithm is presented
to monitor resource utilization. Considering the modelled total
time consumption, total energy consumption and the level
of load balance, a candidate computation ofﬂoading strategy
generating algorithm is designed using NSGA-III. Moreover, a

Table VIII
Data Management Framework for IBEC

Refs.

Applications

Purposes

Contributions

14

Other
Supporting
Technologies

[154]

[155]

Data and
Resource
Management

Efﬁcient,
intelligent and cost-cutting
management of heterogeneous decen-
tralized applications in IoT jointly using
edge clouds and blockchain.

Proposing a dApps management platform with three-tier
validation for better demand satisfaction and AI training
based on blockchain and edge computing.

DL

Data and
Resource
Management

Convenient and efﬁcient access, manag-
ing and processing mass IoT data and
secure resource management.

Proposing a hybrid architecture using blockchain, edge
computing, cloud computing, SDN and NFV together and
designing the corresponding algorithms.

SDN, NFV

[156]

Data
Management

Achieving a secure and practical decen-
tralized data storage solution in edge
computing.

Data
Management

Solving security of data stored in edge
computing environment.

Proposing a solution framework for anonymity, integrity and
adaptability of data storage by reviewing the challenges
and requirements of deployment of blockchain and edge
computing in IoT systems and implementing a system
prototype utilizing Ethereum’s JavaScript API.

Proposing a storage architecture with global blockchain de-
ployed on the cloud layer and local lightweight blockchain
running on IoT devices for storage of data hashes.

Data
Management

Secure and efﬁcient data trading envi-
ronment in IoT.

Presenting a data trading platform using Ethereum with
consensus of proof-of-concept (PoC).

[157]

[158]

No

No

No

[159]

Data
Management

Security and privacy-assured data man-
agement framework for privacy-critical
systems.

[160]

Data
Management

Secure and efﬁcient data sharing in
edge-enabled IoT.

Implementing a private Ethereum blockchain-based edge
computing architecture using AI for data analysis on edge
nodes locally and the learned data is shared by smart
contracts.

Developing a blockchain-based data aggregation strategy
and designing a DRL-based self-adaptive double boot-
strapped deep deterministic policy gradient solution.

Ethereum,
AI

DRL

simple additive weighting method and a multi-criteria decision
making method are employed to calculate the highest utility
value of the strategies;
this means obtaining the optimal
scheme among the candidates. Blockchain is used in this
scheme as a dynamic VM allocation ledger to record the
resource utilization data of edge devices and the unoccupied
VM instances in order to provide the integrity of data. For
edge computing in 5G environment, the same problem is also
raised and solved with a blockchain-based solution in the same
way [163].

To minimize the total cost of the mobile equipment (ME)
in edge computing, a blockchain-based joint computation
ofﬂoading and coin loaning system is proposed in [164]. In
this system, the problem that the ME either chooses to loan
from banks and pay for task ofﬂoading to edge servers, or
chooses to compute locally is formulated as a noncooperative
game. The developed smart contracts on computing resource
trading and coin loaning are deployed and run in an on-chain
manner. Subsequently, the performance and QoE of users are
improved by a series of optimizations as mentioned in [165],
which include a consortium blockchain-based edge computing
system with a group-agent strategy for trust computing, a
task sorting mechanism for resource allocation improvement,
and a content search model based on popularity for search
optimization.

In [166], a MEC-enabled PoW task ofﬂoading scheme
is proposed by redesigning a micro-blockchain for high of-
ﬂoading performance. In this scheme, only the block headers
are stored an on-chain way, and a lightweight account tree
structure is illustrated and put into the block header to record

and update account balances of mobile users. Moreover, a
DL-based block data ofﬂoading (BDO) algorithm is designed
to achieve optimal ofﬂoading schedule in order to maximize
the adopted neural net-
the utility of users. Furthermore,
work model is trained to optimize its weights and biases by
minimizing a loss function. In [167], an online DRL-based
computation ofﬂoading approach is designed to achieve policy
self-adjustment and system long-term performance in a highly
dynamic and complexity environment of blockchain-enabled
MEC. In this approach, the computation ofﬂoading problem
is formulated as a MDP to obtain the optimal strategy for
executing the mining and computational tasks. Moreover, the
adaptive genetic algorithm (AGA) is applied in the proposed
approach to avoid useless exploration and improve conver-
gence speed.

The above-mentioned studies on computation ofﬂoading for

IBEC are summarized in Table IX.

E. Security Strategies for IBEC

Besides the characteristics of transparency, traceability and
tamper-prooﬁng of blockchain, the functions of access control
and identity authentication can be implemented in form of
smart contracts to achieve security and privacy in the IBEC
system.

In [168], a trust management architecture is proposed by
using smart contracts and smart oracles to provide security
services across the Edge-Fog-Cloud computing continuum
to support development and operation of smart applications.
the smart oracles are used to assess
In this architecture,
and provide speciﬁc metrics for smart contracts, which are

Table IX
Computation Ofﬂoading for IBEC

Refs.

Applications

Purposes

Contributions

[161]

Computation
Ofﬂoading

Secure, efﬁcient and rewarding tasks
allocation system with low latency.

Devising a task allocation platform called DeTEC with
heuristic algorithm be the allocating solution and centralized
/ decentralized veriﬁcation schemes.

[162]

Computation
Ofﬂoading

Reducing time and energy costs and
achieving data integrity of task ofﬂoad-
ing process.

Proposing a blockchain-enabled computation ofﬂoading
method named BeCome and employing NSGA-III
to
achieve optimal ofﬂoading strategy.

[163]

Computation
Ofﬂoading

Guaranteeing integral operating perfor-
mance and data integrity for computa-
tion ofﬂoading.

Designing a computation ofﬂoading method including a
blockchain-based edge computing framework and NSGA-
III enabled optimal ofﬂoading strategy.

15

Other
Supporting
Technologies

Heu-Alloc
algorithm

NSGA-III

NSGA-III,
5G

[164]

Computation
Ofﬂoading

Optimizing the total cost of all mo-
bile devices and ensuring each device
to participate in computation ofﬂoading
successfully if it needs.

[165]

Computation
Ofﬂoading

Improving system performance and
QoE of users.

[166]

Computation
Ofﬂoading

Improving mining task ofﬂoading per-
formance.

Jointly studying the computation ofﬂoading and coin loan-
ing problems in blockchain-enabled MEC.

Proposing a consortium blockchain-based edge computing
system with a group-agent strategy, a task sorting algorithm
and a content search scheme.

Proposing a MEC-enabled mining task ofﬂoading scheme
for a redesigned lightweight blockchain and designing a DL-
based BDO solution.

No

No

DL

[167]

Computation
Ofﬂoading

Improving comprehensive performance
of computational ofﬂoading in mobile
edge computing.

Proposing an adaptive genetic algorithm-enabled DRL solu-
tion for high performance of online computation ofﬂoading
in blockchain-enabled MEC by taking both mining tasks
and data processing tasks into consideration.

Genetic
algorithm,
DRL

implemented to monitor off-chain data and to select optimal
fog nodes to reduce the cost and to improve QoS of the whole
system.

In order to achieve secure authentication and collabora-
tive sharing, a distributed and trusted authentication system
is developed in [169] by combining blockchain and edge
computing, in which an optimized PBFT consensus algorithm
is proposed to help store authentication data and logs on
blockchain. Moreover, a domain name system (DNS)-based
dynamic name resolution strategy is designed to provide
authentication and data synchronization services for terminals,
and an elliptic curve cryptography (ECC)-based cryptographic
algorithm is designed to ensure anonymity and communication
security between terminals and edge nodes. Furthermore,
content caching strategy based on belief propagation (BP)
algorithm is utilized to improve the downloading efﬁciency
by cooperation.

To preserve network topology privacy, a consortium
blockchain-based trusted MEC multi-domain collaboration ar-
chitecture named BlockTC is proposed in [170], where SDN
controllers of all domains are authenticated to own credible
access identities, and are responsible to perform the routing
veriﬁcation consensus and maintain the blockchain. Speciﬁ-
cally, in order to balance radio resources, optical resources
and edge servers’ resources, a MEC collaboration routing
algorithm is designed in BlockTC for SDN controllers to
calculate the weights of links and servers and to choose the
minimum routing link.

To protect the privacy of cross-domain routing in multi-
domain MEC network, a consortium blockchain-based routing
veriﬁcation scheme, a network-driven collaboration routing

veriﬁcation (ND-CRV) scheme and a cloud-driven CRV (CD-
CRV) scheme, are proposed in [171] by using the bloom-
ing ﬁlter to generate new requests for the subsequent SDN
controllers without exposing topology privacy. Moreover, to
simultaneously achieve conﬁdentiality and transparency, an
ECC-based privacy-enhancement scheme (PES) in the IBEC
environment is developed, which includes public key random
generation and digital signature generation.

In [172], a data anonymous storage and transaction protocol
is proposed by utilizing blockchain and edge computing to
achieve the anonymity during processes of data storing and
trading. In the stage of data anonymous storage, the edge
nodes generate pseudo identities for the collected data from
IoT devices, encrypt the data using symmetric key, then store
the data to the distributed hash table (DHT) and ﬁnally obtain
the addresses. In the stage of data anonymous transactions,
the edge devices ﬁrst register on blockchain and serve as data
sellers; when data buyer requests the transaction and sends
a digital cheque, the seller delivers the encrypted data and a
bank transfers money with the cheque, where the information
of requests and cheques are recorded on blockchain.

For the purpose of achieving secure and efﬁcient messaging
in the IBEC, a messaging model
is developed in [173].
The private blockchain and public blockchain are together
utilized in the messaging model to respectively support the
communications within an edge group and in the whole net-
work. Sequentially, a hybrid messaging method is proposed in
[174] by integrating the Message Queuing Telemetry Transport
(MQTT) and Constrained Application Protocol (CoAP), in
which the less power-consuming CoAP protocol is used for
resource-limited terminals to communicate with their edge

Table X
Security Strategies for IBEC

Refs.

Applications

Purposes

Contributions

[168]

Security and
Privacy

Achieving trust of data,
software
and infrastructure management among
multi-parties in decentralized scenarios
.

Studying vital attributes of trust, introducing a blockchain-
enabled trust management system and implementing PoC.

[169]

[170]

[171]

[172]

[173]

[174]

Security and
Privacy

High-efﬁcient and secure authentication
of IoT data access and data sharing.

Proposing a decentralized and trusted authentication system
based on blockchain and edge computing for IoT data
storing and sharing.

Security and
Privacy

Achieving privacy preservation of net-
work topology in heterogeneous MEC
system.

Designing a blockchain-based MEC system which imple-
ments multiplex mutual trust networking and collaborative
routing veriﬁcation using the blooming ﬁlter.

Security and
Privacy

Simultaneously achieving conﬁdential-
ity and transparency in the IBEC.

Proposing an ECC-based privacy-enhancement scheme
(PES).

Security and
Privacy

Security and
Privacy

Secure data storing and data sharing.

Proposing an anonymous data storage and transaction pro-
tocol, which generates ElGamal cryptosystem-based pseudo
identities and blinding signature-based electronic cheques.

Optimizing security and performance of
M2M communication in IoT environ-
ment.

Establishing a hybrid messaging model where the IoT
devices layer maintains multi-group private blockchains and
edge servers layer maintains a public blockchain.

Security and
Privacy

Designing a messaging protocol that ﬁts
the IBEC.

[175]

Security and
Privacy

Achieving
high-
high-quality
reliability in MEC communication
service.

and

[176]

Security and
Privacy

security

Improving
technology-based
in IoT.

of

LoRa
communication

[177]

Security and
Privacy

Addressing the security and privacy
challenges of resource allocation.

Comparing and analysing the MQTT and CoAP messaging
protocols in IoT network and proposing a novel one by
combining the two protocols.

Proposing a digital twin-enabled edge computing for net-
work optimizing and asynchronous aggregation-based re-
source allocation scheme with blockchain for communica-
tion security and data privacy.

Implementing a prototype LoRa system using edge comput-
ing and blockchain and analysing four security issues.

Reviewing challenges for computation resource lending,
discussing the corresponding security and privacy technolo-
gies and proposing to use unidirectional payment channels
for addressing the challenges.

16

Other
Supporting
Technologies

No

No

5G

No

No

No

No

FL, Digital
Twin

LoRa

No

servers, while the MQTT protocol is utilized for communi-
cation between edge / fog nodes. To be closer to the practical
edge networks with complexities and heterogeneity, the digital
twin technology is introduced in edge networks [175], where
the permissioned blockchain-enabled FL scheme is proposed
to enhance the communication security and data privacy. In
this method, the asynchronous model update and aggregation
algorithm is adopted to reduce the delay of users, and a RL-
based solution is designed to train the digital twin-enabled
policy DNN to ﬁnally optimize user scheduling and bandwidth
allocation.

As one of the low-power wide-area (LPWA) technologies,
long-range (LoRa) has been widely applied in IoT environment
is
to provide energy-efﬁcient communications, although it
challenging to guarantee its security and efﬁciency. In [176],
two blockchain ledgers are deployed in the proposed LoRa
system, where LoRa gateways are responsible for construct-
ing blocks using the Merkle tree and executing root value
generation algorithms to maintain the network ledger. Another
blockchain is regarded as application ledger that could only be
accessed by authorized application servers. The security issues
of application-layer, including denial-of-service (DoS) attack,
SPOF, malicious LoRa gateway and malicious network server,

are analyzed and demonstrated to be mitigated or eliminated
in the proposed LoRa system.

Different from the above software-based security solutions,
a hardware-based solution for the blockchain-enabled edge
computing architecture is proposed in [177] by using Intel
Software Guard Extension (SGX) to realize data privacy, task
and code tamper-prooﬁng, incentive mechanism and execution
in a sandboxed environment.

The above-mentioned studies on security strategies for

IBEC are summarized in Table X.

VI. CHALLENGES AND SOLUTIONS

This section presents the challenges and the potential solu-

tions of the IBEC.

A. Performance Scalability

Performance scalability is one of the biggest challenges
in blockchain application. For instance,
in Bitcoin ledger,
blockchain is explicitly stipulated on its block size, consensus
mechanism, broadcasting algorithm, etc. for its decentraliza-
tion and security. However, when the number of users surges,
these regulations lead to a decrease in Bitcoin’s throughput,

e.g., Bitcoin can only process 3 to 7 transactions per second
simultaneously.

With respect to the IBEC, energy trading or knowledge
trading are two major application scenarios in recent years.
One of the important functions of these two scenarios is to
optimize the performance of public blockchains. For instance,
designing a novel lightweight blockchain or proposing a novel
consensus mechanism to fulﬁll the speciﬁc demands. However,
these solutions do not meet the rapid growth of veriﬁcation
demands for blockchain transactions especially in IoT ap-
plications, which combine blockchain and edge computing.
Moreover, there is an urgent need of intelligent autonomy for
the distributed networks of air-space-ground-sea integration
areas in 6G and beyond context. These emerging domains
require blockchain-based solutions and also pose higher de-
mands for the performance of underlying blockchains. In
other words, large volumes of data and huge numbers of
devices in 6G context will pose a great challenge on existing
blockchain systems in terms of performance scalability. As
a result, the performance scalability of the IBEC remains
to be improved due to the performance scalability issue of
blockchain. Accordingly, how to improve the performance
scalability of blockchain is a challenge, especially for the
IBEC.

The solutions of blockchain expansion are fully summarized
in [178]–[182]. These solutions mainly concentrate on on-
chain expansions, off-chain expansions and the zero’s layer
ones. On-chain expansions refer to the improvements of basic
protocols on the data layer, consensus layer and network
layer. The improvements of protocols including block size
increment,
the delay reduction of block broadcasting and
gaining consensus, etc. Omnilegder [183], Bitcoin-Cash [184],
Spectre [185], PBFT [186] and DPoS [187] are the typical
cases of on-chain expansions.

Off-chain expansions mainly lie in the improvements of
the application layer. These countermeasures include state
channel, side-chain, cross-chain and off-chain computation.
Lightning Network [188], Raiden Network [189], Plasma
[190] and Cosmos [191] are the typical cases of off-chain
expansions.

The zero’s layer expansions improve the performance scal-
ability by optimizing the underlying data transfer protocols
of blockchain, e.g., Blockchain Distribution Network (BDN)
utilized by bloXroute [192]. However, due to the fact that
the IBEC has the massively dispersed and small pieces of
resources, it is challenging to fulﬁll the rising demands of IoT.
In the future, being empowered by AI algorithms, lightweight
and ﬂexible blockchain expansion schemes for the resource-
limited and heterogeneous edge devices should be designed to
improve the performance scalability.

B. Resource Management

In the IBEC, a large number of heterogeneous edge devices
can collaborate with edge servers to serve nearby devices when
they are idle. Moreover, most edge devices are really resource-
limited devices, which need to resort to the resources provided
by edge servers or other devices to complete corresponding

17

tasks. These cases will occur more commonly in 6G and
beyond context, in which the global deep fusion of air, space,
involve much more related
ground and sea networks will
networks, network carrying equipment and heterogeneous ac-
cessing devices. This will inevitably pose a new challenge
for resource management for the IBEC. Furthermore, many
application scenarios of the IBEC focus on data sharing and
knowledge discovery; this requires ML or other technologies
to perform a lot of computation-intensive tasks. In addition,
maintaining the blockchain itself requires huge computational
resources. Therefore, resource management is a key require-
ment in the IBEC.

With the rapid development of Internet of Everything [193],
more devices and facilities will be connected to the network.
The proliferation and heterogeneity of devices, and frequent
online and ofﬂine of IoT devices increase the difﬁculty of
resource integration and management. Therefore, how to opti-
mize resource management and improve the QoS of the IBEC
is the key challenge. An alternative solution is to design a
more reasonable, practical and efﬁcient bidding and pricing
mechanism under a more realistic trading model, which can
encourage devices to participate in the exchange of resources.
Moreover, an AI-based edge intelligent resource management
system with adaptive integration and allocation of resources
should be proposed by utilizing emerging technologies (e.g.,
FL) to cope with the highly dynamic and complexity of the
IBEC.

C. Security

The IBEC brings security challenges, which exhibit in two
aspects: (1) how to realize the security of smart contract; and
(2) how to achieve efﬁcient identiﬁcation of edge devices.

The IBEC puts forth speciﬁc functions, such as resource
allocation, identity authentication and access control, which
are generally implemented in the form of smart contracts.
Despite the merits such as high efﬁciency, customization, ﬂex-
ibility, automation, etc., smart contracts cause large economic
accidents due to their security vulnerabilities, inalterable error
codes, and malicious codes [194]–[196]. Moreover, there is
no effective legal supervision of smart contracts. Therefore,
it is a challenge to ensure that smart contracts are completely
correct and effective, especially in the IBEC. One solution is to
strengthen the security analysis of smart contracts by design-
ing practical privacy preservation encrypted trafﬁc inspection
scheme on blockchains. With this scheme, the abnormal and
suspicious codes of smart contracts can be detected while
preserving the privacy of smart contracts.

The identiﬁcation of edge devices is another key issue to
establish trust among devices or cross systems. Since a large
number of heterogeneous devices need to be authenticated
in order to join various networks to participate in activi-
ties, thereby posing huge computing pressure on the edge
there are diverse authentication standards.
side. Moreover,
Accordingly, it is still a challenge to design a lightweight,
fast and consistent authentication mechanism. The above issue
may be potentially solved by designing a distributed IoT
device identiﬁcation mechanism, as well as promoting the
standardizations of IoT device identiﬁcation protocol.

D. Privacy Computing

Data sharing and knowledge discovery are the basic re-
quirements in many application scenarios (such as, IoV, IIoT,
and smart healthcare) of the IBEC. For example, knowledge
discovery requires a comprehensive analysis of a large number
of patient records. Meanwhile, sharing the GPS positioning
data corrects errors in assisted automatic driving. Especially
in future generation network environment, data generated by
more equipment and devices will be more scattered, and the
increasing number of stakeholders drives the great demand
of data sharing. Privacy preservation of the data in the IBEC
system is important, as a large amount of personally sensitive
data is stored in the system. However, existing works usually
focus on the security of data, which is nevertheless limited by
the underlying security mechanism of blockchains. Moreover,
traditional privacy preservation mechanisms are not suitable
for edge devices due to the complexities. Therefore, how to
protect data privacy in the computing process is the key to
widen the applications of the IBEC.

At this stage, technologies related to data privacy comput-
ing include privacy-enhanced computing (PEC), multi-party
secure computing (MPSC), etc. To apply these technologies
efﬁciently in the IBEC, it is necessary to consider issues
of limited resources on edge devices and huge demands
for computing ofﬂoading. Therefore, lightweight, parallel and
modular optimizations on PEC algorithms, MPSC algorithms
or others that can protect data computing privacy may be new
trends to improve the applicability and scalability of the IBEC
system.

VII. CONCLUSION
As two crucial technologies for IoT, both blockchain and
edge computing have been used to realize secure and efﬁcient
resource management, computation ofﬂoading and data shar-
ing. This survey starts with a brief introduction of blockchain
and edge computing and then presents the architecture of
an IBEC system in IoT application scenarios. We next clas-
sify and discuss the corresponding research issues and exist-
ing solutions, in perspectives of resource management, data
management, computation ofﬂoading, security and privacy,
which have attracted most attentions in the areas of IoV,
Smart Grid, smart healthcare, IIoT, etc. Finally, we summarize
research challenges, which have hindered the further large-
scale deployments. We also discuss performance optimization
for the IBEC, in terms of performance scalability, resource
management, security, and privacy computing.

REFERENCES

[1] https://tiaonline.org/industry-priorities/transforming-infrastructure/

edge-data-centers-cloud/, accessed February, 2020.

[2] I. Sitt´on-Candanedo, “Edge computing: A review of application sce-
narios,” in International Symposium on Distributed Computing and
Artiﬁcial Intelligence. Springer, 2019, pp. 197–200.

[3] D. Chen, N. Zhang, Z. Qin, X. Mao, Z. Qin, X. Shen, and X.-Y.
Li, “S2m: A lightweight acoustic ﬁngerprints-based wireless device
authentication protocol,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 4, no. 1,
pp. 88–100, 2016.

[4] D. Chen, N. Zhang, R. Lu, N. Cheng, K. Zhang, and Z. Qin,
“Channel precoding based message authentication in wireless networks:
Challenges and solutions,” IEEE Network, vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 99–105,
2018.

18

[5] D. Chen, N. Zhang, N. Cheng, K. Zhang, Z. Qin, and X. Shen,
“Physical
layer based message authentication with secure channel
codes,” IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing,
vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 1079–1093, 2018.

[6] Y. Xiao, Y. Jia, C. Liu, X. Cheng, J. Yu, and W. Lv, “Edge computing
security: State of the art and challenges,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol.
107, no. 8, pp. 1608–1631, 2019.

[7] I. Sitt´on-Candanedo, R. S. Alonso, J. M. Corchado, S. Rodr´ıguez-
Gonz´alez, and R. Casado-Vara, “A review of edge computing reference
architectures and a new global edge proposal,” Future Generation
Computer Systems, vol. 99, pp. 278–294, 2019.

[8] Y. Wu, H. N. Dai, and H. Wang, “Convergence of blockchain and
edge computing for secure and scalable iiot critical infrastructures in
industry 4.0,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. PP, no. 99, 2020.
[9] X. Wang, X. Zha, W. Ni, R. P. Liu, Y. J. Guo, X. Niu, and
K. Zheng, “Survey on blockchain for internet of things,” Computer
Communications, vol. 136, pp. 10–29, 2019.

[10] G. Luo, H. Zhou, N. Cheng, Q. Yuan, J. Li, F. Yang, and X. S. Shen,
“Software deﬁned cooperative data sharing in edge computing assisted
5g-vanet,” IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, 2019.

[11] Z. Xiong, Y. Zhang, D. Niyato, P. Wang, and Z. Han, “When mobile
blockchain meets edge computing,” IEEE Communications Magazine,
vol. 56, no. 8, pp. 33–39, 2018.

[12] H. Tan and I. Chung, “Secure authentication and key management with
blockchain in vanets,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 2482–2498, 2019.
[13] S. Guo, X. Hu, Z. Zhou, X. Wang, F. Qi, and L. Gao, “Trust
access authentication in vehicular network based on blockchain,” China
Communications, vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 18–30, 2019.

[14] L. Nkenyereye, B. Adhi Tama, M. K. Shahzad, and Y.-H. Choi,
“Secure and blockchain-based emergency driven message protocol for
5g enabled vehicular edge computing,” Sensors, vol. 20, no. 1, p. 154,
2020.

[15] Y. Xiao, Y. Liu, and T. Li, “Edge computing and blockchain for quick

fake news detection in iov,” Sensors, vol. 20, no. 16, p. 4360, 2020.

[16] J. Liu, X. Zhang, Y. Li, Q. Cui, and X. Tao, “Blockchain-empowered
content cache system for vehicle edge computing networks,” in
International Conference on Blockchain and Trustworthy Systems.
Springer, 2019, pp. 410–421.

[17] S. Wang, X. Huang, R. Yu, Y. Zhang, and E. Hossain, “Permissioned
blockchain for efﬁcient and secure resource sharing in vehicular edge
computing,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.06319, 2019.

[18] K. Xiao, W. Shi, Z. Gao, C. Yao, and X. Qiu, “Daer: A resource pre-
allocation algorithm of edge computing server by using blockchain in
intelligent driving,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 2020.

[19] X. Lin, J. Wu, S. Mumtaz, S. Garg, J. Li, and M. Guizani, “Blockchain-
based on-demand computing resource trading in iov-assisted smart
city,” IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computing, 2020.

[20] S. Wang, D. Ye, X. Huang, R. Yu, Y. Wang, and Y. Zhang, “Consortium
blockchain for secure resource sharing in vehicular edge computing: A
contract-based approach,” IEEE Transactions on Network Science and
Engineering, 2020.

[21] A. Hammoud, H. Sami, A. Mourad, H. Otrok, R. Mizouni, and
J. Bentahar, “Ai, blockchain, and vehicular edge computing for smart
and secure iov: Challenges and directions,” IEEE Internet of Things
Magazine, vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 68–73, 2020.

[22] Y. Dai, D. Xu, K. Zhang, S. Maharjan, and Y. Zhang, “Deep rein-
forcement learning and permissioned blockchain for content caching
in vehicular edge computing and networks,” IEEE Transactions on
Vehicular Technology, vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 4312–4324, 2020.

[23] C. Li, Y. Fu, F. R. Yu, T. H. Luan, and Y. Zhang, “Vehicle position
correction: A vehicular blockchain networks-based gps error sharing
framework,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems,
2020.

[24] G. Singh, A. Singh, M. Singh, S. Sharma, N. Kumar, and K.-K. R.
Choo, “Blocked: Blockchain-based secure data processing framework
in edge envisioned v2x environment,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular
Technology, 2020.

[25] L. Cui, Z. Chen, S. Yang, Z. Ming, Q. Li, Y. Zhou, S. Chen, and
Q. Lu, “A blockchain-based containerized edge computing platform
for the internet of vehicles,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 2020.

[26] F. Ayaz, Z. Sheng, D. Tian, and Y. L. Guan, “A proof-of-quality-factor
(poqf) based blockchain and edge computing for vehicular message
dissemination,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 2020.

[27] C. Lai, R. Lu, D. Zheng, and X. Shen, “Security and privacy challenges
in 5g-enabled vehicular networks,” IEEE Network, vol. 34, no. 2, pp.
37–45, 2020.

[28] A. Yang, J. Weng, K. Yang, C. Huang, and X. Shen, “Delegating
authentication to edge: A decentralized authentication architecture for
vehicular networks,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation
Systems, 2020.

[29] H. Liu, P. Zhang, G. Pu, T. Yang, S. Maharjan, and Y. Zhang,
“Blockchain empowered cooperative authentication with data trace-
ability in vehicular edge computing,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular
Technology, vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 4221–4232, 2020.

[30] Z. Zhou, B. Wang, M. Dong, and K. Ota, “Secure and efﬁcient
vehicle-to-grid energy trading in cyber physical systems: Integration
of blockchain and edge computing,” IEEE Transactions on Systems,
Man, and Cybernetics: Systems, vol. 50, no. 1, pp. 43–57, 2019.
[31] A. Jindal, G. S. Aujla, and N. Kumar, “Survivor: A blockchain based
edge-as-a-service framework for secure energy trading in sdn-enabled
vehicle-to-grid environment,” Computer Networks, vol. 153, pp. 36–48,
2019.

[32] M. St¨ubs, W. Posdorfer, and S. Momeni, “Blockchain-based multi-
tier double auctions for smart energy distribution grids,” in 2020
IEEE International Conference on Communications Workshops (ICC
Workshops).

IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–6.

[33] S. Chen, Y. Bai, Y. Zhang, X. Liu, J. Zhang, T. Gao, Z. Fang, and
Y. Dai, “A framework of decentralized electricity market based on the
collaborative mechanism of blockchain and edge computing,” in 2019
IEEE International Conference on Service Operations and Logistics,
and Informatics (SOLI).

IEEE, 2019, pp. 219–223.

[34] Y. Ren, Q. Zhao, H. Guan, and Z. Lin, “A novel authentication scheme
based on edge computing for blockchain-based distributed energy
trading system,” EURASIP Journal on Wireless Communications and
Networking, vol. 2020, no. 1, pp. 1–15, 2020.

[35] J. Wang, L. Wu, K.-K. R. Choo, and D. He, “Blockchain-based
anonymous authentication with key management for smart grid edge
computing infrastructure,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics,
vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 1984–1992, 2019.

[36] K. Gai, Y. Wu, L. Zhu, L. Xu, and Y. Zhang, “Permissioned blockchain
and edge computing empowered privacy-preserving smart grid net-
works,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 7992–8004,
2019.

[37] K. Zhang, Y. Zhu, S. Maharjan, and Y. Zhang, “Edge intelligence and
blockchain empowered 5g beyond for the industrial internet of things,”
IEEE Network, vol. 33, no. 5, pp. 12–19, 2019.

[38] W. Chen, Z. Zhang, Z. Hong, C. Chen, J. Wu, S. Maharjan, Z. Zheng,
and Y. Zhang, “Cooperative and distributed computation ofﬂoading for
blockchain-empowered industrial internet of things,” IEEE Internet of
Things Journal, vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 8433–8446, 2019.

[39] C. K. Lee, Y. Huo, S. Zhang, and K. Ng, “Design of a smart manu-
facturing system with the application of multi-access edge computing
and blockchain technology,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 28 659–28 667,
2020.

[40] K. Gai, Y. Wu, L. Zhu, Z. Zhang, and M. Qiu, “Differential privacy-
based blockchain for industrial internet-of-things,” IEEE Transactions
on Industrial Informatics, vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 4156–4165, 2019.
[41] Y. Ren, F. Zhu, J. Qi, J. Wang, and A. K. Sangaiah, “Identity manage-
ment and access control based on blockchain under edge computing
for the industrial internet of things,” Applied Sciences, vol. 9, no. 10,
p. 2058, 2019.

[42] J. Xu, S. Wang, B. K. Bhargava, and F. Yang, “A blockchain-enabled
trustless crowd-intelligence ecosystem on mobile edge computing,”
IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 3538–
3547, 2019.

[43] J. P. Queralta, L. Qingqing, Z. Zou, and T. Westerlund, “Enhancing
autonomy with blockchain and multi-access edge computing in dis-
tributed robotic systems,” in 2020 Fifth International Conference on
Fog and Mobile Edge Computing (FMEC).
IEEE, 2020, pp. 180–
187.

[44] Y. Gao, Y. Chen, X. Hu, H. Lin, Y. Liu, and L. Nie, “Blockchain based
iiot data sharing framework for sdn-enabled pervasive edge computing,”
IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 17, no. 7, pp. 5041–
5049, 2020.

[45] A. Srivastava, P. Jain, B. Hazela, P. Asthana, and S. W. A. Rizvi,
“Application of fog computing,
internet of things, and blockchain
technology in healthcare industry,” in Fog Computing for Healthcare
4.0 Environments. Springer, pp. 563–591.

[46] W. Tang, K. Zhang, D. Zhang, J. Ren, Y. Zhang, and X. Shen, “Fog-
enabled smart health: toward cooperative and secure healthcare service
provision,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 42–48,
2019.

19

[47] R. Akkaoui, X. Hei, and W. Cheng, “Edgemedichain: A hybrid edge
blockchain-based framework for health data exchange,” IEEE Access,
vol. 8, pp. 113 467–113 486, 2020.

[48] D. C. Nguyen, P. N. Pathirana, M. Ding, and A. Seneviratne,
“Blockchain and edge computing for decentralized emrs sharing
in federated healthcare,” in GLOBECOM 2020-2020 IEEE Global
Communications Conference.

IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–6.

[49] A. A. Abdellatif, L. Samara, A. Mohamed, A. Erbad, C. F. Chi-
asserini, M. Guizani, M. D. O’Connor, and J. Laughton, “Medge-chain:
Leveraging edge computing and blockchain for efﬁcient medical data
exchange,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 2021.

[50] H. Guo, W. Li, M. Nejad, and C.-C. Shen, “Access control for
electronic health records with hybrid blockchain-edge architecture,”
in 2019 IEEE International Conference on Blockchain (Blockchain).
IEEE, 2019, pp. 44–51.

[51] W. Wang, H. Huang, L. Xue, Q. Li, R. Malekian, and Y. Zhang,
“Blockchain-assisted handover authentication for intelligent telehealth
in multi-server edge computing environment,” Journal of Systems
Architecture, vol. 115, p. 102024, 2021.

[52] A. Islam and S. Y. Shin, “Bhmus: blockchain based secure out-
door health monitoring scheme using uav in smart city,” in 2019
7th International Conference on Information and Communication
IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–6.
Technology (ICoICT).

[53] V. C. Leung, X. Wang, F. R. Yu, D. Niyato, T. Taleb, and S. Pack,
“Guest editorial: Special issue on blockchain and edge computing
techniques for emerging iot applications,” IEEE Internet of Things
Journal, vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 2082–2086, 2021.

[54] D. C. Nguyen, M. Ding, Q.-V. Pham, P. N. Pathirana, L. B. Le,
A. Seneviratne, J. Li, D. Niyato, and H. V. Poor, “Federated learning
meets blockchain in edge computing: Opportunities and challenges,”
IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 2021.

[55] M. H. ur Rehman, K. Salah, E. Damiani, and D. Svetinovic, “To-
wards blockchain-based reputation-aware federated learning,” in IEEE
INFOCOM 2020-IEEE Conference on Computer Communications
Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS).

IEEE, 2020, pp. 183–188.

[56] Q. Wang, Y. Guo, X. Wang, T. Ji, L. Yu, and P. Li, “Ai at the edge:
Blockchain-empowered secure multiparty learning with heterogeneous
models,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 2020.

[57] Y. Zhao, J. Zhao, L. Jiang, R. Tan, D. Niyato, Z. Li, L. Lyu, and
Y. Liu, “Privacy-preserving blockchain-based federated learning for iot
devices,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 2020.

[58] S. Hu, S. Huang, J. Huang, and J. Su, “Blockchain and edge computing
technology enabling organic agricultural supply chain: a framework
solution to trust crisis,” Computers & Industrial Engineering, vol. 153,
p. 107079, 2021.

[59] H. Zhang, S. Li, W. Yan, Z. Jiang, and W. Wei, “A knowledge sharing
framework for green supply chain management based on blockchain
and edge computing,” in International Conference on Sustainable
Design and Manufacturing. Springer, 2019, pp. 413–420.

[60] A. Fitwi, Y. Chen, and S. Zhu, “A lightweight blockchain-based
privacy protection for smart surveillance at the edge,” in 2019 IEEE
International Conference on Blockchain (Blockchain).
IEEE, 2019,
pp. 552–555.

[61] R. Xu, S. Y. Nikouei, Y. Chen, E. Blasch, and A. Aved, “Blendmas: A
blockchain-enabled decentralized microservices architecture for smart
public safety,” in 2019 IEEE International Conference on Blockchain
(Blockchain).

IEEE, 2019, pp. 564–571.

[62] V. Hassija, V. Chamola, D. N. G. Krishna, N. Kumar, and M. Guizani,
“A blockchain and edge computing-based secure framework for gov-
ernment tender allocation,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 2020.

[63] M. Armbrust, A. Fox, R. Grifﬁth, A. D. Joseph, R. Katz, A. Konwinski,
G. Lee, D. Patterson, A. Rabkin, I. Stoica et al., “A view of cloud
computing,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 50–58,
2010.

[64] R. Mahmud, R. Kotagiri, and R. Buyya, “Fog computing: A taxonomy,
survey and future directions,” in Internet of everything. Springer, 2018,
pp. 103–130.

[65] N. Zhang, N. Lu, N. Cheng, J. W. Mark, and X. S. Shen, “Cooperative
spectrum access towards secure information transfer for crns,” IEEE
Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 31, no. 11, pp.
2453–2464, 2013.

[66] N. Zhang, N. Cheng, N. Lu, H. Zhou, J. W. Mark, and X. S. Shen,
“Risk-aware cooperative spectrum access for multi-channel cognitive
radio networks,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications,
vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 516–527, 2014.

[67] N. Cheng, N. Zhang, N. Lu, X. Shen, J. W. Mark, and F. Liu, “Op-
portunistic spectrum access for cr-vanets: A game-theoretic approach,”

IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 63, no. 1, pp. 237–
251, 2013.

[68] N. Zhang, P. Yang, J. Ren, D. Chen, L. Yu, and X. Shen, “Synergy
of big data and 5g wireless networks: opportunities, approaches, and
challenges,” IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 12–18,
2018.

[69] J. Ren, Y. Zhang, N. Zhang, D. Zhang, and X. Shen, “Dynamic channel
access to improve energy efﬁciency in cognitive radio sensor networks,”
IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 15, no. 5, pp.
3143–3156, 2016.

[70] N. Zhang, H. Liang, N. Cheng, Y. Tang, J. W. Mark, and X. S. Shen,
“Dynamic spectrum access in multi-channel cognitive radio networks,”
IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 32, no. 11,
pp. 2053–2064, 2014.

[71] D. Chen, Z. Zhao, X. Qin, Y. Luo, M. Cao, H. Xu, and A. Liu,
“Magleak: A learning-based side-channel attack for password recogni-
tion with multiple sensors in iiot environment,” IEEE Transactions on
Industrial Informatics, 2020.

[72] L. Ale, N. Zhang, H. Wu, D. Chen, and T. Han, “Online proactive
caching in mobile edge computing using bidirectional deep recurrent
neural network,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 6, no. 3, pp.
5520–5530, 2019.

[73] Y. Ding, G. Wu, D. Chen, N. Zhang, L. Gong, M. Cao, and Z. Qin,
“Deepedn: a deep-learning-based image encryption and decryption
network for internet of medical
things,” IEEE Internet of Things
Journal, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 1504–1518, 2020.

[74] R. Yang, F. R. Yu, P. Si, Z. Yang, and Y. Zhang, “Integrated blockchain
and edge computing systems: A survey, some research issues and
challenges,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 21, no. 2,
pp. 1508–1532, 2019.

H.

Ren,

Xiong,

Qiu,
of

Z.
Edge

X.
Leung,

[75] X. Wang,

C.
“Synergy

Yao,
and
[Online]. Avail-
https://www.techrxiv.org/articles/preprint/Synergy of Edge

and V. C.
Blockchain: A Comprehensive Survey,” 6 2021.
able:
Intelligence and Blockchain A Comprehensive Survey/14724360
[76] Y. Zhang, C. Xu, H. Li, H. Yang, and X. Shen, “Chronos: Secure and
accurate time-stamping scheme for digital ﬁles via blockchain,” in ICC
2019-2019 IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC).
IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–6.

Intelligence

[77] D. Liu, J. Ni, C. Huang, X. Lin, and X. S. Shen, “Secure and efﬁcient
distributed network provenance for iot: A blockchain-based approach,”
IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 7, no. 8, pp. 7564–7574, 2020.
[78] Y. Zhang, C. Xu, X. Lin, and X. S. Shen, “Blockchain-based public
integrity veriﬁcation for cloud storage against procrastinating auditors,”
IEEE Transactions on Cloud Computing, 2019.

[79] Y. Dai, D. Xu, S. Maharjan, Z. Chen, Q. He, and Y. Zhang, “Blockchain
and deep reinforcement learning empowered intelligent 5g beyond,”
IEEE Network, vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 10–17, 2019.

[80] R. Yang, F. R. Yu, P. Si, Z. Yang, and Y. Zhang, “Integrated Blockchain
and Edge Computing Systems: A Survey, Some Research Issues and
Challenges,” IEEE Communications Surveys and Tutorials, vol. 21,
no. 2, pp. 1508–1532, 2019.

[81] D. Liu, A. Alahmadi, J. Ni, X. Lin, and X. Shen, “Anonymous rep-
utation system for iiot-enabled retail marketing atop pos blockchain,”
IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 3527–
3537, 2019.

[82] D. Liu, J. Ni, X. Lin, and X. Shen, “Transparent and accountable
vehicular local advertising with practical blockchain designs,” IEEE
Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 69, no. 12, pp. 15 694–
15 705, 2020.

[83] M. He, J. Ni, D. Liu, H. Yang, and X. Shen, “Private, fair, and veriﬁable
aggregate statistics for mobile crowdsensing in blockchain era,” in
2020 IEEE/CIC International Conference on Communications in China
(ICCC).

IEEE, 2020, pp. 160–165.

[84] Y. Zhang, C. Xu, J. Ni, H. Li, and X. S. Shen, “Blockchain-assisted
public-key encryption with keyword search against keyword guessing
attacks for cloud storage,” IEEE Transactions on Cloud Computing,
2019.

[85] D. Liu, C. Huang, J. Ni, X. Lin, and X. S. Shen, “Blockchain-
based smart advertising network with privacy-preserving accountabil-
ity,” IEEE Transactions on Network Science and Engineering, 2020.

[86] Z. Guan, X. Lu, N. Wang, J. Wu, X. Du, and M. Guizani, “Towards
secure and efﬁcient energy trading in iiot-enabled energy internet: A
blockchain approach,” Future Generation Computer Systems, vol. 110,
pp. 686–695, 2020.

[87] Y. Lu, “The blockchain: State-of-the-art and research challenges,”
Journal of Industrial Information Integration, vol. 15, pp. 80–90, 2019.

20

[88] A. Miglani, N. Kumar, V. Chamola, and S. Zeadally, “Blockchain for
internet of energy management: Review, solutions, and challenges,”
Computer Communications, vol. 151, pp. 395–418, 2020.

[89] J. Ni, X. Lin, and X. S. Shen, “Toward edge-assisted internet of things:
From security and efﬁciency perspectives,” IEEE Network, vol. 33,
no. 2, pp. 50–57, 2019.

[90] W. Z. Khan, E. Ahmed, S. Hakak, I. Yaqoob, and A. Ahmed, “Edge
computing: A survey,” Future Generation Computer Systems, vol. 97,
pp. 219–235, 2019.

[91] W. Shi, J. Cao, Q. Zhang, Y. Li, and L. Xu, “Edge computing: Vision
and challenges,” IEEE internet of things journal, vol. 3, no. 5, pp.
637–646, 2016.

[92] X. Ma, S. Wang, S. Zhang, P. Yang, C. Lin, and X. S. Shen, “Cost-
efﬁcient resource provisioning for dynamic requests in cloud assisted
mobile edge computing,” IEEE Transactions on Cloud Computing, pp.
1–1, 2019.

[93] Y. Chen, Y. Zhang, Y. Wu, L. Qi, and X. Shen, “Joint task scheduling
and energy management for heterogeneous mobile edge computing
with hybrid energy supply,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. PP,
no. 99, pp. 1–1, 2020.

[94] J. Zhang, B. Chen, Y. Zhao, X. Cheng, and F. Hu, “Data security
and privacy-preserving in edge computing paradigm: Survey and open
issues,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 18 209–18 237, 2018.

[95] T. M. Fern´andez-Caram´es and P. Fraga-Lamas, “Towards next gen-
eration teaching, learning, and context-aware applications for higher
iot, fog and edge computing
education: A review on blockchain,
enabled smart campuses and universities,” Applied Sciences, vol. 9,
no. 21, p. 4479, 2019.

[96] C. Luo, L. Xu, D. Li, and W. Wu, “Edge computing integrated
with blockchain technologies,” in Complexity and Approximation.
Springer, 2020, pp. 268–288.

[97] S. Desai and S. Padhi, “Measuring performance of blockchain enabled

iot over edge computing system.”

[98] I. Sitt´on-Candanedo, “A new approach: Edge computing and
blockchain for industry 4.0,” in International Symposium on Distributed
Computing and Artiﬁcial Intelligence. Springer, 2019, pp. 201–204.
[99] D. Wang, J. Ren, C. Xu, J. Liu, and X. Shen, “Privstream: Enabling
privacy-preserving inferences on iot data stream at the edge,” in 2019
IEEE 21st International Conference on High Performance Computing
and Communications; IEEE 17th International Conference on Smart
City; IEEE 5th International Conference on Data Science and Systems
(HPCC/SmartCity/DSS), 2019.

[100] Y. Dai, D. Xu, S. Maharjan, Z. Chen, Q. He, and Y. Zhang, “Blockchain
and deep reinforcement learning empowered intelligent 5g beyond,”
IEEE Network, vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 10–17, 2019.

[101] M. A. Ferrag, M. Derdour, M. Mukherjee, A. Derhab, L. Maglaras,
and H. Janicke, “Blockchain technologies for the internet of things:
Research issues and challenges,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal,
vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 2188–2204, 2018.

[102] A. Zhou, Q. Sun, and J. Li, “Bcedge: Blockchain-based resource man-
agement in d2d-assisted mobile edge computing,” Software: Practice
and Experience, 2019.

[103] G. Qiao, S. Leng, H. Chai, A. Asadi, and Y. Zhang, “Blockchain
empowered resource trading in mobile edge computing and networks,”
in ICC 2019-2019 IEEE International Conference on Communications
(ICC).

IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–6.

[104] M. Pincheira, M. Vecchio, and R. Giaffreda, “Rationale and prac-
tical assessment of a fully distributed blockchain-based marketplace
of fog/edge computing resources,” in 2020 Seventh International
Conference on Software Deﬁned Systems (SDS).
IEEE, 2020, pp.
165–170.

[105] X. Fan and Y. Huo, “Blockchain based dynamic spectrum access of
non-real-time data in cyber-physical-social systems,” IEEE Access,
vol. 8, pp. 64 486–64 498, 2020.

[106] S. Seng, C. Luo, X. Li, H. Zhang, and H. Ji, “User matching on
blockchain for computation ofﬂoading in ultra-dense wireless net-
works,” IEEE Transactions on Network Science and Engineering, 2020.
[107] S. Luo, H. Li, Z. Wen, B. Qian, G. Morgan, A. Longo, O. Rana, and
R. Ranjan, “Blockchain-based task ofﬂoading in drone-aided mobile
edge computing,” IEEE Network, vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 124–129, 2021.

[108] L. Yuan, Q. He, S. Tan, B. Li, J. Yu, F. Chen, H. Jin, and Y. Yang,
“Coopedge: A decentralized blockchain-based platform for cooperative
edge computing,” in Proceedings of the Web Conference 2021, 2021,
pp. 2245–2257.

[109] A. V. Rivera, A. Refaey, and E. Hossain, “A blockchain framework for
secure task sharing in multi-access edge computing,” IEEE Network,
2020.

[110] H. Zhou, X. Ouyang, and Z. Zhao, “Allstar: a blockchain based
decentralized ecosystem for cloud and edge computing,” in 2020 IEEE
IEEE, 2020, pp.
International Conference on Joint Cloud Computing.
55–62.

[111] S. Tuli, R. Mahmud, S. Tuli, and R. Buyya, “Fogbus: A blockchain-
based lightweight framework for edge and fog computing,” Journal of
Systems and Software, vol. 154, pp. 22–36, 2019.

[112] X. Xu, Q. Geng, H. Cao, R. Mo, S. Wan, L. Qi,

and
H. Wang, “Blockchain-powered service migration for uncertainty-
aware workﬂows in edge computing,” in International Conference
on Dependability in Sensor, Cloud, and Big Data Systems and
Applications. Springer, 2019, pp. 217–230.

[113] V. Sharma, I. You, D. N. K. Jayakody, D. G. Reina, and K.-K. R.
Choo, “Neural-blockchain-based ultrareliable caching for edge-enabled
uav networks,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 15,
no. 10, pp. 5723–5736, 2019.

[114] B. Wu, K. Xu, Q. Li, S. Ren, Z. Liu, and Z. Zhang, “Toward
blockchain-powered trusted collaborative services for edge-centric net-
works,” IEEE Network, vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 30–36, 2020.

[115] U. Jayasinghe, G. M. Lee,

´A. MacDermott, and W. S. Rhee,
“Trustchain: a privacy preserving blockchain with edge computing,”
Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing, vol. 2019, 2019.

[116] L. Xiao, Y. Ding, D. Jiang, J. Huang, D. Wang, J. Li, and H. V. Poor,
“A reinforcement learning and blockchain-based trust mechanism for
edge networks,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, 2020.
[117] S. Saha, D. Chattaraj, B. Bera, and A. Kumar Das, “Consortium
blockchain-enabled access control mechanism in edge computing based
generic internet of things environment,” Transactions on Emerging
Telecommunications Technologies, p. e3995, 2020.

[118] E. Bonnah and J. Shiguang, “Decchain: A decentralized security
approach in edge computing based on blockchain,” Future Generation
Computer Systems, vol. 113, pp. 363–379, 2020.

[119] F. Gai, B. Wang, W. Deng, and W. Peng, “Proof of reputation:
A reputation-based consensus protocol
for peer-to-peer network,”
in International Conference on Database Systems for Advanced
Applications. Springer, 2018, pp. 666–681.

[120] M. Zhaofeng, W. Xiaochang, D. K. Jain, H. Khan, G. Hongmin, and
W. Zhen, “A blockchain-based trusted data management scheme in
edge computing,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 16,
no. 3, pp. 2013–2021, 2019.

[121] G. Li, M. Dong, L. T. Yang, K. Ota, J. Wu, and J. Li, “Preserving edge
knowledge sharing among iot services: A blockchain-based approach,”
IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computational Intelligence,
vol. 4, no. 5, pp. 653–665, 2020.

[122] X. Lin, J. Li, J. Wu, H. Liang, and W. Yang, “Making knowledge
tradable in edge-ai enabled iot: A consortium blockchain-based efﬁcient
and incentive approach,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics,
vol. 15, no. 12, pp. 6367–6378, 2019.

[123] H. Cui, Z. Chen, N. Liu, and B. Xia, “Blockchain-driven contents
sharing strategy for wireless cache-enabled d2d networks,” in 2019
IEEE International Conference on Communications Workshops (ICC
Workshops).

IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–5.

[124] P. Zhang, X. Pang, N. Kumar, G. S. Aujla, and H. Cao, “A reliable
data-transmission mechanism using blockchain in edge computing
scenarios,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 2020.

[125] C. K. Pyoung and S. J. Baek, “Blockchain of ﬁnite-lifetime blocks
with applications to edge-based iot,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal,
vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 2102–2116, 2019.

[126] Y. Huang, J. Zhang, J. Duan, B. Xiao, F. Ye, and Y. Yang, “Resource
allocation and consensus on edge blockchain in pervasive edge com-
puting environments,” in 2019 IEEE 39th International Conference on
Distributed Computing Systems (ICDCS).
IEEE, 2019, pp. 1476–
1486.

[127] G. Kumar, R. Saha, M. K. Rai, R. Thomas, and T.-H. Kim, “Proof-of-
work consensus approach in blockchain technology for cloud and fog
computing using maximization-factorization statistics,” IEEE Internet
of Things Journal, vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 6835–6842, 2019.

[128] D. Puthal, S. P. Mohanty, P. Nanda, E. Kougianos, and G. Das, “Proof-
of-authentication for scalable blockchain in resource-constrained dis-
tributed systems,” in 2019 IEEE International Conference on Consumer
Electronics (ICCE).

IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–5.
[129] P. Bhattacharya, S. Tanwar, R. Shah, and A. Ladha, “Mobile edge
computing-enabled blockchain framework—a survey,” in Proceedings
of ICRIC 2019. Springer, 2020, pp. 797–809.

[130] H. Xu, W. Huang, Y. Zhou, D. Yang, M. Li, and Z. Han, “Edge
computing resource allocation for unmanned aerial vehicle assisted

21

mobile network with blockchain applications,” IEEE Transactions on
Wireless Communications, vol. 20, no. 5, pp. 3107–3121, 2021.
[131] S. Jiang, X. Li, and J. Wu, “Hierarchical edge-cloud computing for
mobile blockchain mining game,” in 2019 IEEE 39th International
Conference on Distributed Computing Systems (ICDCS).
IEEE, 2019,
pp. 1327–1336.

[132] Z. Xiong, J. Kang, D. Niyato, P. Wang, and H. V. Poor, “Cloud/edge
computing service management in blockchain networks: Multi-leader
multi-follower game-based admm for pricing,” IEEE Transactions on
Services Computing, vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 356–367, 2019.

[133] X. Liu, J. Wu, L. Chen, and C. Xia, “Efﬁcient auction mechanism
for edge computing resource allocation in mobile blockchain,” in 2019
IEEE 21st International Conference on High Performance Computing
and Communications; IEEE 17th International Conference on Smart
City; IEEE 5th International Conference on Data Science and Systems
(HPCC/SmartCity/DSS).

IEEE, 2019, pp. 871–876.

[134] S. Guo, Y. Dai, S. Guo, X. Qiu, and F. Qi, “Blockchain meets edge
computing: Stackelberg game and double auction based task ofﬂoading
for mobile blockchain,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology,
vol. 69, no. 5, pp. 5549–5561, 2020.

[135] Z. Chang, W. Guo, X. Guo, Z. Zhou, and T. Ristaniemi, “Incentive
mechanism for edge computing-based blockchain,” IEEE Transactions
on Industrial Informatics, 2020.

[136] A. O. G. Rivera, D. K. Tosh, and L. Njilla, “Scalable blockchain im-
plementation for edge-based internet of things platform,” in MILCOM
2019-2019 IEEE Military Communications Conference (MILCOM).
IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–6.

[137] Y. Liu, F. R. Yu, X. Li, H. Ji, and V. C. Leung, “Decentralized
resource allocation for video transcoding and delivery in blockchain-
based system with mobile edge computing,” IEEE Transactions on
Vehicular Technology, vol. 68, no. 11, pp. 11 169–11 185, 2019.
[138] M. Liu, Y. Teng, F. R. Yu, V. C. Leung, and M. Song, “A mobile edge
computing (mec)-enabled transcoding framework for blockchain-based
video streaming,” IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 27, no. 2, pp.
81–87, 2020.

[139] W. Sun, J. Liu, Y. Yue, and P. Wang, “Joint resource allocation and
incentive design for blockchain-based mobile edge computing,” IEEE
Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 19, no. 9, pp. 6050–
6064, 2020.

[140] A. Asheralieva and D. Niyato, “Distributed dynamic resource manage-
ment and pricing in the iot systems with blockchain-as-a-service and
uav-enabled mobile edge computing,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal,
vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 1974–1993, 2019.

[141] ——, “Learning-based mobile edge computing resource management
to support public blockchain networks,” IEEE Transactions on Mobile
Computing, 2019.

[142] Q. Xu, Z. Su, and Q. Yang, “Blockchain-based trustworthy edge
caching scheme for mobile cyber-physical system,” IEEE Internet of
Things Journal, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 1098–1110, 2019.

[143] L. Cui, X. Su, Z. Ming, Z. Chen, S. Yang, Y. Zhou, and W. Xiao,
“Creat: Blockchain-assisted compression algorithm of federated learn-
ing for content caching in edge computing,” IEEE Internet of Things
Journal, 2020.

[144] V. K. Rathi, V. Chaudhary, N. K. Rajput, B. Ahuja, A. K. Jaiswal,
D. Gupta, M. Elhoseny, and M. Hammoudeh, “A blockchain-enabled
multi domain edge computing orchestrator,” IEEE Internet of Things
Magazine, vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 30–36, 2020.

[145] D. B. Rawat, “Fusion of software deﬁned networking, edge computing,
and blockchain technology for wireless network virtualization,” IEEE
Communications Magazine, vol. 57, no. 10, pp. 50–55, 2019.
[146] A. Muthanna, A. A Ateya, A. Khakimov, I. Gudkova, A. Abuar-
qoub, K. Samouylov, and A. Koucheryavy, “Secure and reliable iot
networks using fog computing with software-deﬁned networking and
blockchain,” Journal of Sensor and Actuator Networks, vol. 8, no. 1,
p. 15, 2019.

[147] J. Feng, F. R. Yu, Q. Pei, J. Du, and L. Zhu, “Joint optimization of
radio and computational resources allocation in blockchain-enabled
mobile edge computing systems,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless
Communications, 2020.

[148] F. Guo, F. R. Yu, H. Zhang, H. Ji, M. Liu, and V. C. Le-
ung, “Adaptive resource allocation in future wireless networks with
blockchain and mobile edge computing,” IEEE Transactions on
Wireless Communications, vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 1689–1703, 2019.
[149] C. Qiu, X. Wang, H. Yao, J. Du, F. R. Yu, and S. Guo, “Networking
integrated cloud-edge-end in iot: A blockchain-assisted collective q-
learning approach,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 2020.

[150] M. Li, F. R. Yu, P. Si, R. Yang, Z. Wang, and Y. Zhang, “Uav-assisted
data transmission in blockchain-enabled m2m communications with
mobile edge computing,” IEEE Network, 2020.

[171] B. Ernest and J. Shiguang, “Privacy enhancement scheme (pes) in a
blockchain-edge computing environment,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp.
25 863–25 876, 2020.

22

[151] M. Li, F. R. Yu, P. Si, W. Wu, and Y. Zhang, “Resource optimization
for delay-tolerant data in blockchain-enabled iot with edge computing:
A deep reinforcement learning approach,” IEEE Internet of Things
Journal, vol. 7, no. 10, pp. 9399–9412, 2020.

[152] R. Zhang, F. R. Yu, J. Liu, T. Huang, and Y. Liu, “Deep rein-
forcement learning (drl)-based device-to-device (d2d) caching with
blockchain and mobile edge computing,” IEEE Transactions on
Wireless Communications, vol. 19, no. 10, pp. 6469–6485, 2020.
[153] J. Feng, F. R. Yu, Q. Pei, X. Chu, J. Du, and L. Zhu, “Cooperative
computation ofﬂoading and resource allocation for blockchain-enabled
mobile edge computing: A deep reinforcement learning approach,”
IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 2019.

[154] J. Xu, S. Wang, A. Zhou, and F. Yang, “Edgence: A blockchain-
iot-based dapps,”

enabled edge-computing platform for intelligent
China Communications, vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 78–87, 2020.

[155] S. El Kafhali, C. Chahir, M. Hanini, and K. Salah, “Architecture to
manage internet of things data using blockchain and fog computing,”
in Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Big Data and
Internet of Things, 2019, pp. 1–8.

[156] B. W. Nyamtiga, J. C. S. Sicato, S. Rathore, Y. Sung, and J. H. Park,
“Blockchain-based secure storage management with edge computing
for iot,” Electronics, vol. 8, no. 8, p. 828, 2019.

[157] Y. Ren, Y. Leng, Y. Cheng, and J. Wang, “Secure data storage based on
blockchain and coding in edge computing,” Math. Biosci. Eng, vol. 16,
no. 4, pp. 1874–1892, 2019.

[158] A. Nawaz, J. Pe˜na Queralta, J. Guan, M. Awais, T. N. Gia, A. K.
Bashir, H. Kan, and T. Westerlund, “Edge computing to secure iot data
ownership and trade with the ethereum blockchain,” Sensors, vol. 20,
no. 14, p. 3965, 2020.

[159] A. Nawaz, T. N. Gia, J. P. Queralta, and T. Westerlund, “Edge ai and
blockchain for privacy-critical and data-sensitive applications,” in 2019
Twelfth International Conference on Mobile Computing and Ubiquitous
Network (ICMU).

IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–2.
[160] X. Wang, S. Garg, H. Lin, G. Kaddoum, J. Hu, and M. S. Hossain,
“A secure data aggregation strategy in edge computing and blockchain
empowered internet of things,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 2020.
[161] L. Cui, S. Yang, Z. Chen, Y. Pan, Z. Ming, and M. Xu, “A decentralized
and trusted edge computing platform for internet of things,” IEEE
Internet of Things Journal, vol. 7, no. 5, pp. 3910–3922, 2019.
[162] X. Xu, X. Zhang, H. Gao, Y. Xue, L. Qi, and W. Dou, “Become:
Blockchain-enabled computation ofﬂoading for iot
in mobile edge
computing,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 16, no. 6,
pp. 4187–4195, 2019.

[163] X. Xu, Y. Chen, X. Zhang, Q. Liu, X. Liu, and L. Qi, “A blockchain-
based computation ofﬂoading method for edge computing in 5g net-
works,” Software: Practice and Experience, 2019.

[164] Z. Zhang, Z. Hong, W. Chen, Z. Zheng, and X. Chen, “Joint compu-
tation ofﬂoading and coin loaning for blockchain-empowered mobile-
edge computing,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 6, no. 6, pp.
9934–9950, 2019.

[165] L. Zhang, Y. Zou, W. Wang, Z. Jin, Y. Su, and H. Chen, “Resource
allocation and trust computing for blockchain-enabled edge computing
system,” Computers & Security, vol. 105, p. 102249, 2021.

[166] C.-H. Chu, “Task ofﬂoading based on deep learning for blockchain in
mobile edge computing,” Wireless Networks, vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 117–
127, 2021.

[167] X. Qiu, L. Liu, W. Chen, Z. Hong, and Z. Zheng, “Online deep
reinforcement
learning for computation ofﬂoading in blockchain-
empowered mobile edge computing,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular
Technology, vol. 68, no. 8, pp. 8050–8062, 2019.

[168] P. Kochovski, S. Gec, V. Stankovski, M. Bajec, and P. D. Drobintsev,
“Trust management in a blockchain based fog computing platform with
trustless smart oracles,” Future Generation Computer Systems, vol. 101,
pp. 747–759, 2019.

[169] S. Guo, X. Hu, S. Guo, X. Qiu, and F. Qi, “Blockchain meets edge
computing: A distributed and trusted authentication system,” IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 1972–1983,
2019.

[172] Z. Qiao, C. Zhu, Z. Wang, and N. Yang, “Anonymous iot data storage
and transaction protocol based on blockchain and edge computing,”
in International Conference on Science of Cyber Security. Springer,
2019, pp. 181–189.

[173] Y. Jiang, H. Bai, and H. Yang, “The messaging model design based
blockchain and edge computing for the internet of things,” in 2019
IEEE 10th International Conference on Software Engineering and
Service Science (ICSESS).

IEEE, 2019, pp. 604–608.

[174] H. Bai, Y. Jiang, H. Yang, and G. Xia, “The messaging protocols
analysis of integrating blockchain and edge computing for iot,” in
2019 IEEE 10th International Conference on Software Engineering and
Service Science (ICSESS).

IEEE, 2019, pp. 99–102.

[175] Y. Lu, X. Huang, K. Zhang, S. Maharjan, and Y. Zhang,
“Communication-efﬁcient
permissioned
federated
blockchain for digital twin edge networks,” IEEE Internet of Things
Journal, 2020.

learning

and

[176] L. Hou, K. Zheng, Z. Liu, X. Xu, and T. Wu, “Design and proto-
type implementation of a blockchain-enabled lora system with edge
computing,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 2020.

[177] P. Mendki, “Blockchain enabled iot edge computing: Addressing
privacy, security and other challenges,” in Proceedings of the 2020
The 2nd International Conference on Blockchain Technology, 2020,
pp. 63–67.

[178] A. I. Sanka and R. C. Cheung, “A systematic review of blockchain
scalability: Issues, solutions, analysis and future research,” Journal of
Network and Computer Applications, p. 103232, 2021.

[179] D. Khan, L. T. Jung, and M. A. Hashmani, “Systematic literature review
of challenges in blockchain scalability,” Applied Sciences, vol. 11,
no. 20, p. 9372, 2021.

[180] Q. Zhou, H. Huang, Z. Zheng, and J. Bian, “Solutions to scalability of
blockchain: A survey,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 16 440–16 455, 2020.
[181] G. Kaur and C. Gandhi, “Scalability in blockchain: Challenges and
solutions,” in Handbook of Research on Blockchain Technology. El-
sevier, 2020, pp. 373–406.

[182] L. Yang, M. Jinbao, Y. Han, W. Sining, and F. Jingang, “Overview of
blockchain capacity expansion technology,” Electric Power Information
and Communication Technology, vol. 18, pp. 1–9, 2020.

[183] E. Kokoris-Kogias, P. Jovanovic, L. Gasser, N. Gailly, E. Syta, and
B. Ford, “Omniledger: A secure, scale-out, decentralized ledger via
sharding,” in 2018 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP).
IEEE, 2018, pp. 583–598.

[184] Y. Kwon, H. Kim, J. Shin, and Y. Kim, “Bitcoin vs. bitcoin cash:
Coexistence or downfall of bitcoin cash?” in 2019 IEEE Symposium
on Security and Privacy (SP).

IEEE, 2019, pp. 935–951.

[185] Y. Sompolinsky, Y. Lewenberg, and A. Zohar, “Spectre: a fast and
scalable cryptocurrency protocol.” IACR Cryptol. ePrint Arch., vol.
2016, no. 1159, 2016.

[186] W. Li, C. Feng, L. Zhang, H. Xu, B. Cao, and M. A. Imran, “A
scalable multi-layer pbft consensus for blockchain,” IEEE Transactions
on Parallel and Distributed Systems, vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 1146–1160,
2020.

[187] Z. Zheng, S. Xie, H. Dai, X. Chen, and H. Wang, “An overview of
blockchain technology: Architecture, consensus, and future trends,”
in 2017 IEEE international congress on big data (BigData congress).
IEEE, 2017, pp. 557–564.

[188] J. Poon and T. Dryja, “The bitcoin lightning network: Scalable off-

chain instant payments,” 2016.

[189] H. Hees, “Raiden network: Off-chain state network for fast dapps,” in

Devcon Two. Ethereum Foundation, 2016.

[190] J. Poon and V. Buterin, “Plasma: Scalable autonomous smart contracts,”

White paper, pp. 1–47, 2017.

[191] J. Kwon and E. Buchman, “Cosmos whitepaper,” 2019.
[192] U. Klarman, S. Basu, A. Kuzmanovic, and E. G. Sirer, “bloxroute: A
scalable trustless blockchain distribution network whitepaper,” IEEE
Internet of Things Journal, 2018.

[193] Y. Liu, H. N. Dai, Q. Wang, M. K. Shukla, and M. Imran, “Unmanned
aerial vehicle for internet of everything: Opportunities and challenges,”
Computer Communications, vol. 155, pp. 66–83, 2020.

[170] H. Yang, Y. Liang, J. Yuan, Q. Yao, A. Yu, and J. Zhang, “Distributed
blockchain-based trusted multi-domain collaboration for mobile edge
computing in 5g and beyond,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial
Informatics, 2020.

[194] A. Vacca, A. Di Sorbo, C. A. Visaggio, and G. Canfora, “A systematic
literature review of blockchain and smart contract development: Tech-
niques, tools, and open challenges,” Journal of Systems and Software,
vol. 174, p. 110891, 2021.

[195] P. Tolmach, Y. Li, S.-W. Lin, Y. Liu, and Z. Li, “A survey of
smart contract formal speciﬁcation and veriﬁcation,” ACM Computing
Surveys (CSUR), vol. 54, no. 7, pp. 1–38, 2021.

[196] Z. Zheng, S. Xie, H. N. Dai, W. Chen, X. Chen, J. Weng, and M. Imran,
“An overview on smart contracts: Challenges, advances and platforms,”
2019.

23

