2
2
0
2

y
a
M
8
1

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
7
9
0
9
0
.
5
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

The security strength of Blockchain
technology : A Survey Report

Md Arquam1, Ashish Patel2, and Parma Nand1

Abstract The advent of blockchain technology by the Nakamoto group in
2008 has created a new trend on how to deal with various security issues and
vulnerabilities. Blockchain systems have gained momentum in various spheres
of technology deployment in business organizations. This paper presents a
critical literature survey on the security strength of blockchains and security
issues associated with blockchain technology deployment. Numerous studies
have experimented with the various technical features of blockchain systems
across various transaction domains. Findings obtained from literature sur-
vey and thematic content analysis of the existing research studies indicate
that blockchain systems provide unique capabilities that support processes
and transactions across various sectors with a high level of integrity, trans-
parency, conﬁdentiality, and privacy. However, some loopholes and limitations
associated with deployment and use of blockchains have been highlighted in
various studies. The present study cross-examined the security issues of the
underlying scientiﬁc research evidence.

Key words: Blockchain, Bloackchain based Application, Security, Contract

1 Introduction

Blockchain technology is one of the disrupting technologies applied in manag-
ing various business processes. It was introduced in 2008 by a group/person

Depatment of Computer Science & Engineering,
Sharda University, Greater Noida
Uttar Pardesh, India
Email: mohd.arquam@sharda.ac.in, parma.nand@sharda.ac.in
· Depatment of Computer Science & Engineering,
Galgotias University, Greater Noida
Uttar Pardesh, India
Email: ashishp.it.21@nitj.ac.in

v

 
 
 
 
 
 
vi

Md Arquam, Ashish Patel , Parma Nand

called Satoshi Nakamoto to avoid double-spending and solve the challenge of
failure to maintain the order of transactions [1]. The breakthrough of the ﬁrst
Bitcoin blockchain has inspired the widespread popularity of blockchain tech-
nology across the world. The technology is being used in various applications
including e-commerce, supply chain management, data management, educa-
tion, business, and industrial applications, healthcare management, privacy
and security, electronic voting, currency markets, public service, and gover-
nance [2], [3] [4]). This has made blockchain technology a subject of scientiﬁc
research in industrial practitioners, developers, and researchers because of the
security and trust features associated with its applications and deployments.
Despite the growing popularity of blockchain technology, some scholars be-
lieve that its security weaknesses have had a lasting impact on the world [5],
[6]. According to Dorri et al. [7] blockchain technology has facilitated the in-
crease in ﬁnancially motivated cyber-attacks such as the denial of services and
ransomware against various organizations and retailers. It has also enabled
illicit dark online marketplaces. Today, the adoption and use of blockchain
technology are way beyond its initial objective of facilitating the prolifera-
tion of decentralized cryptocurrency. Many industries are looking up to its
decentralized trustless ledger enriched with a high level of immutability to
run business processes such as smart contracts, logistics operations, cyberse-
curity, banking, and pharmaceutical operations [8].

Therefore, the blockchain breakthroughs have caused rigorous changes and
disruptions in the ancient business processes especially those that involve
transactions and applications that require the veriﬁcation of trusted third
parties and centralized architectures. The blockchain architecture possesses
unique characteristics that resonate with unique features such as security,
suitability, robustness, and transparency [9]. According to Zahadat et. al [1]
a blockchain is a distributed database system with a sequence of immutable
and committed blocks, which makes them ideal for deployment in the bank-
ing sector where customer transactions across various banks can be han-
dled using the same blockchain. This facilitates easy auditing and promotes
transparency. Banking corporations are investing in the use of blockchains
to decentralize their architectures and reduce transaction costs as they be-
come faster, transparent, and inherently safer than independent architec-
tures. Beyond facilitating cryptocurrency payments, blockchain technology
enables coordination of decentralized applications in absence of third parties
and intermediaries, a unique facilitating the proliferation of modern internet
security systems.

As blockchain continues to shape business processes and ﬁnancial transac-
tions, it is imperative to examine its eﬀectiveness in promoting cybersecurity
and customer protection against emerging security threats. It is necessary to
identify relevant scholarly works and papers on blockchain technology and
cybersecurity strength. In this research, we critically review the existing lit-
erature on the capacity and security strength of blockchains in supporting
applications that necessitate a high level of cyber-security, accountability, in-

The security strength of Blockchain technology : A Survey Report

vii

tegrity, transparency, and privacy. The interplay between cybersecurity and
blockchain technology provides insights on the future implementation of ap-
plications that utilize its security features.

2 Background study

Blockchains are decentralized and well-distributed time-stamped data struc-
tures logically organized to form a distributed peer-to-peer network in which
non-trusted members can interact with each other without the authority and
veriﬁcation of a trusted third party [9]. Blockchain technology utilizes multi-
ple interconnected mechanisms that provide diﬀerent feature features to the
system infrastructure. The infrastructure has peer-to-peer transactions at the
lower end, which demonstrate the consent between two customers conduct-
ing business. When one actor signs a transaction, it is widely distributed to
the neighbors. The blockchain has entities that connect to it called nodes,
which verify its rules. Full nodes arrange transactions into the blocks and
determine the validity of the transaction, after which the invalid transactions
are discarded when nodes reach a consensus on the valid transactions that
should be kept in the chain to ensure that the system has no divergences and
corrupt branches [10].

According to Mingxiao et al. [11] diﬀerent types of blockchains have diﬀer-
ent consensus mechanisms. These include proof of stake (PoS), proof-of-work
(POW), and Byzantine Fault Tolerance (BFT). PoS protocols proportionally
segment stake blocks depending on the current wealth of the participants to
prevent the richest miner from dominating the network [12] . Proof of work
protocols splits the blocks proportionally according to the mining power of
the participants. The system traces those hashes with speciﬁc identical pat-
terns to ensure the veriﬁability and authentication of transactions. Initially,
Ethereum blockchains applied POW protocols but they have also shifted to
the proof of stake (PoS) protocols because of their improved scalability and
the potential decrease in power consumption [13]. The third consensus layer
called the computing interface enables blockchains to store the system user
transactions and compute user balances.

According to Zahadat et al [1], advanced computations require the storage
of complex states that can be dynamically updated using distributed mecha-
nisms of computing; especially those states that change from one state to an-
other after particular criteria are achieved. The fourth layer of the blockchain
called the governance layer expands the capabilities of the blockchain infras-
tructure to manage physical human interactions across the world. Despite all
the deﬁned protocols, blockchains are aﬀected by user inputs from diﬀerent
people who have diﬀerent intentions hence necessitating the integration of
advanced methods to improve the system capabilities. The four layers nec-
essary for the eﬀective functioning of the blockchain handle oﬀ-chain social

viii

Md Arquam, Ashish Patel , Parma Nand

processes. However, the governance layer manages the interactions of various
actors to enable them to produce, change, or maintain inputs that buildup
the blockchain infrastructure.

Some studies have categorized blockchain networks in various ways accord-
ing to the network’s permissions and management protocols [12, 14]. Accord-
ing to Kravchenko [15], private blockchains fall in the permission category
in which authorized uses are deﬁned with speciﬁc permissions and charac-
teristics over the operations of the network while public blockchains do not
involve the use of permissions because everyone is allowed to join as a new
node miner or a new user and perform transactions and operations of his
choice. Public blockchain features are implemented in most of the existing
cryptocurrencies such as Ethereum, Litecoin, and Bitcoin [16]. One of the
advantages of using public blockchains is that the network can maintain and
sustain itself hence reducing infrastructure management costs. Meanwhile,
private blockchain designs have been implemented in performance-oriented
systems such as auditing and database management [12]. Besides, feder-
ated blockchains combine some features of private blockchains and public
blockchains [12]. They share similar privacy protection protocols and scala-
bility levels as private blockchains although they have a diﬀerent set of nodes
called the leading nodes. A combination of the leader nodes is used to verify
and validate the transaction processes taking place in the system, instead of
using a single entity to perform transaction veriﬁcation. This feature facili-
tates the eﬀective implementation of a decentralized system design in which
the leader nodes can verify and permit other node miners. Some studies have
improved the state of the art of the blockchain network by incorporating more
classical features such as information management and ownership, anonymity,
and transaction approval time using advanced consensus and security mech-
anisms of the blockchain.

3 Literature survey

The present literature survey analyzes 20 research studies published between
2015 and 2020 to provide evidence-based insights on the research trends shap-
ing the application of blockchain security features. Various multidisciplinary
approaches have been used in modern scientiﬁc literature to explain the se-
curity strength and eﬀectiveness of blockchain technology.

3.1 Datasets: Pros and cons

We extracted data from papers that meet the criteria for quality assessment.
The completeness of data was assessed to determine the accuracy of recorded

The security strength of Blockchain technology : A Survey Report

ix

information. We compile data from both qualitative and quantitative research
studies and conduct a meta-analysis. Initial search held with key words such
as ‘blockchain’, ‘security’, and ‘bitcoin’ yielded 713 papers. After application
of exclusion and inclusion criteria, 131 papers remained but only 20 papers
were included for this analysis. Data is extracted from papers that contain
empirical evidenced on the use of blockchain technology for security and other
applications. The research papers utilized also contain empirical data on the
performance of blockchain architectures and distributed ledger technologies.
Most of the papers are peer reviewed published in a journal or conference
proceedings. Primary studies present relevant quantitative and qualitative
data. Each paper is focused on classiﬁcation of the blockchain security appli-
cations, security issues, and technology solutions to address these challenges.
Some of the common themes include encrypted data storage, virtual network
management, data sharing, bitcon cryptography, cyber security, public key
infrastructure, electronic health records, centralized control, data privacy,
conﬁdentiality, mining authentication, domain name system, multi-media se-
curity, IoT, Big-data, and peer-to-peer sharing. Most of the studies present
the various limitations associated with blockchain implementation, propose
solutions but the eﬀectiveness of those solution remains theoretical since they
lack comprehensive evaluations.

3.1.1 Key ﬁndings from the literature survey

Authors

Pinno et al (2017)

Types of Secu-
rity Applications
IoT

Banerjee et al

IoT

Quantitative/Qualitative Data

Reported
Presents a design of a “ControlChain
system”. This is a blockchain based so-
lution for IoT device access control us-
ing the bitcon principles. Found that
multiple blockchains can be utilized to
manage various aspects of the IoT con-
trols.
The paper presents the increasing im-
portance of
implementing blockchain
technology in healthcare, battleﬁeld,
and IoT homes. Postulates how IoT can
install a robust-secure ﬁrmware using
blockchains for ﬁrmware updates.

x

Md Arquam, Ashish Patel , Parma Nand

Casino, Dasaklis, &
Patsakis (2019)

Gu et al (2018)

and
Classiﬁcation
main
characteris-
tics of blockchain
and
networks
Taxonomy
of
blockchain-based
applications
Android Malware

Bhowmik and Feng
(2017)

Multimedia
rity

secu-

Shi, He, Li, Ku-
mar, Khan & Choo,
(2020)

Electronic
record (EHR)

health

E-commerce,
supply chain manage-
ment, data management, education,
business, and industrial applications,
healthcare management, privacy and
security, electronic voting, currency
markets, public service, and governance

Explains the working of blockchain in
detecting android malware. Utilizes a
set of blockchains where the intrusion
detection system has speciﬁed N mem-
bers to detect hashed malware on An-
droid devices.
The paper presents the application
of blockchain technology in multime-
dia watermarking. The authors present
a blockchain framework for multime-
dia watermarking to address the un-
derlying issues. Water mark informa-
tion contains an image hash preserv-
ing the original media content and the
cryptographic hash containing trans-
action histories (transaction log). Af-
ter extraction, the watermark extract
is passed to a distributed ledger to re-
trieve the transaction log and the latter
segment is applied to identify the tam-
pered/edited regions.
Presents a systematic analysis of the
blockchain models applied in Electronic
health record systems (EHRS). Empha-
sis is placed on data privacy and secu-
rity aspects; background knowledge re-
lating to blockchain and EHR systems;
applications of blockchain in EHR sys-
tems; Research challenges and opportu-
nities.

The security strength of Blockchain technology : A Survey Report

xi

Laskowski and Kim
(2016)

Big Data, IoT

Xun et al. (2017)

IoT

The paper presents the blockchain ar-
chitecture; how it can be used in
provenance tracking. The study applies
blockchain ontologies on knowledge
traceability, knowledge provenance, and
food provenance. Such ontologies can
be applied in designing a blockchain
system. The authors analyze the con-
tribution of traceability ontology and
how it can be applied smart contracts to
enforce traceability constraints and ex-
ecute a provenance trace in Ethereum
blockchain platforms.
The study investigates various secu-
rity attacks; and how they aﬀect phys-
ical processes, and then propose eﬀec-
tive blockchain-based detection mecha-
nisms. We depict two diﬀerent types of
command disaggregation attack modes:
disaggregated sub-commands are allo-
cated to wrong actuators and the com-
mand sequence is disordered. Three
models to implement command disag-
gregation attack modes. The designed
framework use the relationships in the
two-tier command sequences, including
sub-commands from the input of actua-
tors and commands from the output of
central controller to detect attacks be-
fore disruptions occur.

xii

Md Arquam, Ashish Patel , Parma Nand

Zolanvari, Erbad,
Jain, & Samaka,
(2018)

Centralized
trollers

con-

Arquam, Singh &
Sharma (2018)

Security in Online
Social Network

Alvarenga, Rebello,
& Duarte (2018)

Virtual
Management

Network

list,

Presents a survey of
the various
technology solutions designed using
blockchain models to provide security
services such as include conﬁdential-
ity, authentication, privacy and access
control
integrity assurance, data
and resource provenance. The paper
examines the use of blockchain secu-
rity services for modern business ap-
plications. Highlights challenges asso-
ciated with using blockchain-based se-
curity services Highlight the state of
the art techniques utilized to provide
these services, their challenges, explain
the modern use of blockchain technol-
ogy can resolve these challenges. Com-
pares diﬀerent blockchain-based tech-
niques and frameworks providing secu-
rity services.
Proposes a blockchain based model for
sharing the information securely at the
peer level. In the proposed model, a
chain is created by combining blocks of
information generated by nodes. Each
node in the network propagates the
information based on its credibility
against its peer nodes. The credibility of
a node varies according to their respec-
tive information. Trust is calculated be-
tween sender and receiver using either
of two ways, Local trust and Global
trust.
Presents the blockchain enabled se-
curity of virtual networks and man-
agement of data centers. A consen-
sus blockchain technology solution is
proposed to apply a PBFT consen-
sus mechanism. The experimental write
speed for PBFT system are 10–20 times
higher than the normal write speeds ob-
tained using bitcoin and ethereum plat-
forms.

The security strength of Blockchain technology : A Survey Report

xiii

Khan & Salah,
(2018)

IoT

Yli-Huumo et al.,
(2016)

IoT

Devetsikiotis
Christidis (2016)

and

IoT/Smart
tracts

Con-

Suhaliana
(2018)

et

al

N/A

the

The study examines IoT security chal-
lenges; how blockchain technology solu-
tions can meet such challenges and re-
duce security threats. Ethereum is uti-
lized as target platform for smart con-
tracts.
security strength of
Discusses
blockchain technology in enhancing IoT
security. Presents the security bene-
ﬁts for supply chain systems. Explore
various technology issues and the fu-
ture direction of blockchain technol-
ogy. Many proposed technology solu-
tions lack comprehensive evaluation for
eﬀective deployment. Blockchain tech-
nology presents issues in terms of la-
tency, scalability, and throughput.
The paper examines
the operation
of blockchain mechanisms focusing on
smart contract-script
for multi-step
process automation. The study also
extends to IoT domains and exam-
ines the possibilities for integration of
blockchain technology in IoT for vari-
ous purposes such as cryptographic au-
tomation, and sharing of resources and
services between devices.
The paper presents the various tech-
nology applications of where blockchain
can be integrated including security,
media, and ﬁnance. Discusses the se-
curity issues and proposes theoretical
security solutions to address the high-
lighted issues. The paper gives a future
direction for research in the security as-
pects of blockchain.

Xu et al, (2017) Web Applications Proposes

the use of a Distributed
Ledger Based Access Control
(DL-
BAC) for navigation and management
of web applications. Distributed ledger
is constructed in the generic blockchain
architecture similar that of a bitcoin.

xiv

Md Arquam, Ashish Patel , Parma Nand

Cai, C., Yuan, X.,
& Wang, C. (2017)

Encrypted
Data
Storage & Search-
ing

Moinet, Darties, &
Baril (2017)

Public Key Infras-
tructure

Blockchain based distribution of hashed
search indices to allow for keyword
searching of encrypted data. Integrity
maintained by obtaining value deposit
from a joining user and if they act ma-
liciously, this deposit is shared to the
rest of the nodes.
Proposes a blockchain model to facili-
tate the management of public key in-
frastructure. Node mining is enhanced
through data payloads that are labelled
revoke, approve, ban, blame, and renew
and auth. These payloads build trust
across nodes.

Table 1: Important research in Blockchain Technology

Across various research studies, blockchain systems are decentralized and
truly distributed systems developed to provide solutions to various related
problems. Some of the practical security solutions provided in the primary
studies demonstrate innovative approaches to solving contemporary chal-
lenges associated with user authentication, immutability, and data secu-
rity [17]. These technology solutions depend on the changes in the network
infrastructure introduced by blockchain technology compared to the tradi-
tional use of one centralized server. Because of the costs and labor associated
with moving or changing a working system, some of the practical security con-
cepts cannot be easily experimented with within a particular limit of time to
determine the security strength of blockchain applications.

Robinson [18] experimented with various blockchain consensus mecha-
nisms using the IoT chain design. They used an Ethereum platform for
experimental and developmental analysis. The authors deduced that the
most ready-to-deploy and practical security solutions are those experimented
on Ethereum platforms. Blockchains provide unique capabilities for busi-
ness transactions to proceed with minimal cybersecurity issues. According
to Casino et al. [4], blockchains support the inherent organizational strate-
gies to secure their information/data, communications, and networks. They
utilize hashing and encryption algorithms to store large size of immutable
records and provide security/protection against intrusion.

According to Taylor et al [19], most of the security measures deployed in
various organizations depend on one trusted source to store the encrypted
data and verify the information. Consequently, such systems are susceptible
to intruders and malicious attackers who target them cause a lot of damages
through data extortion, injection of malicious information, blackmail, infor-
mation theft, and denial of service attacks. Fortunately, blockchain technolo-
gies provide decentralized security solutions to such system weaknesses. Its

The security strength of Blockchain technology : A Survey Report

xv

solutions do not need the trust or authority of any member of the network or
transaction group. Each member of the network or each node connected to
the system has a full copy of the historic records hence requires the consensus
of the majority nodes to add more data into the chain of previous records.

According to Taylor et al [19], Consensus-based veriﬁcation is achieved in
various ways although there is a bottom line. Group members with accessi-
bility to the same information can secure their group better than compared
to the group composed of a host of members and one leader who depend on
their leader for information access in presence of malware that comes into
the system as leaders or group members. Some scholars have discussed how
the capabilities of blockchain technology can be leveraged to improve cyber-
security in various applications such as data sharing, data storage, internet of
things and, World Wide Web navigation, private user data management, and
network security. According to Pinno et al [20], many IoT applications use
private blockchain structures to manage controlled access for network nodes,
prevent malicious intrusion, and securely track data management. Besides,
Banerjee et al [21] found that blockchain systems can facilitate the propa-
gation of updates from one node to another hence enhancing the security
of ﬁrmware deployment. This simpliﬁes the authentication and identiﬁcation
of IoT devices and facilitates seamless data transfers across the system. Gu
et al [22] have also experimented and conﬁrmed the same ﬁndings on the
eﬀectiveness of blockchain technology in detecting malicious behavior and
securing historic IoT sessions and connections. In these research studies, the
authors suggest conventional architecture in which blockchain protocols exist
between the transport and application layers hence utilize/treat rewards as
units of the voting power.

One of the potential capabilities of blockchains is its support for integrity
veriﬁcation. The eﬀectiveness and capabilities of blockchain technology have
been studied in various studies [23], [24]. The study conducted by Bhowmik
et al [24] on the integrity veriﬁcation capabilities of blockchains found that
applications that involve blockchain integrity veriﬁcation such as intellectual
property management, insurance, counterfeit, and provenance systems can
store transactions and information related to the lifetime and creation of ser-
vices or products. According to DeLaRosa et al [25], blockchain applications
that can accept integrity veriﬁcation are those that are based on IP protec-
tion. Technology solutions such as Mediachain and Ascribe use blockchain
technology to connect digital content to their innovator. For ascribe, bitcoin
blockchains are used to transfer the loan and the ownership of loaned digital
assets. Meanwhile, Mediachain uses blockchain technology to store metadata
for easy media querying and recovery.

Besides, some of the modern monetization techniques such as monegraphs
allow revenue sharing across the media value chain for image reals, video
clips, online broadcasts, and more sponsored content when all the veriﬁca-
tions are done by the blockchain technology [26]. Some blockchain solutions
such as Factom provide validation and storage of digital assets [27]. Mean-

xvi

Md Arquam, Ashish Patel , Parma Nand

while, Kodakcoin blockchains are facilitating payments for the acquisition of
image rights and photo licenses via KodakOne blockchain –enabled platform
that stores all the content for its registered photographers [28]. In informa-
tion service, Silent Notary is an example of a blockchain-enabled service for
conﬁrmation of the existence of events that are digitally recorded and content
stored in digital formats such as on e-mail, video ﬁle, and image ﬁle [4].

Despite the proliferation of these blockchain-enabled solutions, Herbaut
et al [29] insist that there should be a user-centered technology shaping the
inherent ecosystem for content delivery. The study conducted by Laskowski
et al [30] explains the philosophical perspectives of storing and interpret-
ing data automatically to preserve data integrity and provenance. Authors
emphasize that such Smart contracts have related ontologies of data storage
and interpretation that can be adopted to use blockchain technologies. Today,
technology solutions such as BlockVerify and Everledger use a combination
of smart contracts and blockchains to avoid counterfeits and bank fraud for
insurances and banks as well as promoting supply chain transparency [31]. In
the same accord, Xun et al. [32] emphasize data integrity in their study which
implemented blockchain protocols in their prototype system aimed at demon-
strating a blockchain technology framework for promoting data integrity in
service delivery. Besides, Jaag et al. [33] also demonstrate the possibilities of
using blockchains in device management, identity services, and supply chain
management in business organizations.

Blockchain technology has gained more popularity for the insurance sector
in various data integrity services such as asset transfers, premium payments,
claims processing, customer onboarding, underwriting, sales management,
and reinsurance [34]. The recent launch of the B3i-blockchain initiative for
the insurance sector by European-based insurers exempliﬁes how the increas-
ing deployment of blockchain technology in developing standards and pro-
cesses for the insurance sector to increase eﬃciency in service delivery [35].
Blockchain smart contracts lead to process automation in the insurance ser-
vice delivery thus increasing processing speed, eﬃciency, and reduced costs.
The adoption of blockchain technology has been largely witnessed in the
health insurance sector where the need for high-level data security for well-
ness and medical information is highly cherished.

Concerning data sharing and storage, blockchain ledgers especially pri-
vate and public blockchains are being used to eliminate circumstances such
as ”single failed source” within the data storage ecosystem by securing data
integrity [36]. According to Casino et al [4], Blockchains protects the in-
tegrity of data stored in the cloud by ensuring its resistance against unau-
thorized changes. They also facilitate the use of hash lists that enable secure
data searching and veriﬁed data exchange as data structures remain stored
and maintained securely. The capability of blockchain technology to create a
decentralized network improves data sharing security and data storage espe-
cially in those networks that utilize client-based encryptions where the owners
of information have full access control over their information [17]. Blockchain

The security strength of Blockchain technology : A Survey Report

xvii

technologies are also being in securing the utilization and navigation of the
World Wide Web by improving the veriﬁcation and validity of wireless in-
ternet access points that are linked to the distributed decentralized network.
The technology utilizes hash algorithms programmed to monitor and store
access control information local ledgers [37]. In World Wide Web naviga-
tion, blockchains identify the correct web pages and help the user to navi-
gate through correct domain server records, safely communicate with other
web users through encrypted/secure methods, and safely utilize web applica-
tions [4]. This technology solution employs consortium blockchains where the
consensus processes are controlled by predetermined sets of network nodes
connected on the distributed network.

The eﬀectiveness of blockchain technology on promoting network security
has also been studied in software-deﬁned networks [38]. In these research stud-
ies, SDN controllers inbuilt with blockchain technology use cluster structures
to facilitate peer to peer communications. Private and public blockchains
are used to facilitate node communications in the SDN controllers and the
distributed network hence the network system is enriched with capabilities
to handle the underlying network security issues. Containers are used for
critical data authentication for the decentralized data stores. Blockchain so-
lutions are also enriched with capabilities to manage network security without
cryptocurrency tokens. Several research studies agree that token incentiviza-
tion for all node miners is a robust technique for achieving the longest chain
consensus [39]. Currency Tokens allow receiver nodes to have more voting
powers yet the voting power depends on the contribution of nodes to mining.
According to Patr´ıcio & Ferreira [40], it is possible for each IoT device to au-
tomatically charge a currency token to other devices for inﬂuencing ﬁrmware
upgrades. To address this challenge, Taylor, et al [19] suggests the use of
many blockchain layers to check the authentication and trust veriﬁcation of
transactions between various hierarchical layers.

3.2 Security issues faced in the implementation of

blockchain technologies

Despite the aforementioned security capabilities and application of blockchain
technologies in the context of data storage, cybersecurity, and private data
management, several studies have highlighted several security weaknesses
and limitations of using blockchain technologies [41], [37]; According to Yli-
Huumo et al [41], maintaining user conﬁdentiality and privacy remains a
key challenge in blockchain-based systems because the information being ac-
cessed is stored as a public ledger. This requires advanced encryption and
anonymization mechanisms to protect the privacy and conﬁdentiality of the
stored information on the public ledger. Unfortunately, such mechanisms de-
pend on the system implementation contexts and may necessitate additional

xviii

Md Arquam, Ashish Patel , Parma Nand

requirements for the networks to operate eﬀectively. According to Devetsikio-
tis and Christidis [9], secure protocols should be used to perform network ﬁle
sharing and prevent unveriﬁed information disclosure. Other mechanisms to
promote data conﬁdentiality suggested by scientiﬁc research studies include
direct use of a peer-to-peer ﬁle system that is content-addressed to facilitate
advanced veriﬁcations [42].

According to Suhaliana et al., (2018), blockchains have weaknesses in
maintaining transaction privacy. Many system users and businesses expressed
concerns about the traceability of Smart contract operations and transactions
propagating across the decentralized distributed networks. In the same agree-
ment, Kosba et al. [43] noted that the use of pseudonyms in blockchain sys-
tems as a security measure cannot suﬃciently guarantee transaction privacy.
As an alternative, Meiklejohn et al [44], suggest the use of deanonymisation
techniques that examine the transactional structures of the ﬂowing cryptocur-
rencies. According to Goldfeder et al [45], the transactions made with bitcoin
blockchains can relinquish more sensitive information; hence compromising
the privacy and conﬁdentiality of the transaction. Besides, Smart contracts
usually contain errors because they resemble the implementation programs
hence causing heavy losses to the customers. For example, the Parity wal-
let bug that happened in 2017 made users lose about 280 million pounds
while the DAO attack generated a loss of about 47 million pounds. Recently,
Pearson technologies discovered thousands of vulnerable Smart contracts [46]
(Siegel, 2016; Pearson, 2018). The complex nature of smart contracts makes
it diﬃcult for technicians to understand their operations. According to Barto-
letti et al [47], smart contracts are diﬀerent from conventional programming
environments, which make it possible for them to hide illicit transaction be-
haviors such as Ponzi scams. Ponzi scams have been criticized for disguis-
ing as serious investment opportunities promising high business returns yet
they compromise private hashes and keys and fail to return funds to the
subscribers after failing to meet their business goals [47]. According to Dan-
nen [13], the most promising approach to counter most of the smart contract
abuses and vulnerabilities is the one that limits the expressiveness of the in-
trinsic programming language. Some security solutions utilize Smart contract
checkers to implement a framework for verifying the fairness and correctness
of the smart contracts hence they can trace underlying threats and vulnera-
bilities [48].

The deployment of blockchain technology on distributed networks is also
limited by throughput issues. Koteska, Karaﬁloski, & Mishev [49] explain
the various limitations and challenges associated with blockchain technology
features in which he highlights several throughput issues. The current bitcoin
networks process a maximum of three to twenty transactions per second. Such
a limitation cannot allow the use of bitcoins in systems where the number of
user requests exceeds the system’s throughput. Instead, users can resort to
alternative networks such as the Twitter network which has a throughput of
5000 transactions per second, or VISA transaction networks that can process

The security strength of Blockchain technology : A Survey Report

xix

more than 5000 transactions per second. Blockchain network operations are
also limited by latency issues. Users expect their requests to be processed
immediately over the internet yet there is a universal acceptance obstacle. The
amount of time required to complete a transaction within the bitcoin block
is approximately ten minutes. Such delays are attributed to security checks
and veriﬁcations associated with the transaction (Beck et al. 2016). Larger
transactions can spend almost one hour before they are processed, which
subjects them to double spending attacks yet other possible alternatives such
as Visa transactions can take a maximum of seconds [41]. The bandwidth and
the size of the blockchain have also been questioned in some research studies.
According to Yli et al, the current size of the bitcoin INS 1Megabites and
it takes ten minutes to create a new block. This implies that one block can
handle an average of 500 transactions in 24hours. Therefore, the blockchain
cannot handle more transactions than its size hence it cannot be deployed in
applications whose transactions exceed its capacity.

Blockchain systems have also been criticized for having scalability issues.
Appropriate and secure implementation of blockchains to provide security
requires blockchains with multiple full nodes such that the technology im-
plementation may not result in a less decentralized distributed system [50].
The scalability limitations of the blockchain systems are associated with the
data size on the blockchain, the latency of data transmission, and the trans-
action processing rate. Bitcoin latency between transaction conﬁrmation and
transaction submission is approximately one hour while Ethereum takes ap-
proximately three hours to conﬁrm a transaction [36]. Blockchains systems
are also criticized for increased cost issues associated with system decentral-
ization and deployment [49]. The users of these systems pay for computational
power and transaction charges. Unfortunately, the systems do not alert users
of the associated charges since prices remain hidden. Another issue aﬀect-
ing/limiting the implementation or deployment of blockchain technologies
is data malleability. According to Beck et al [51], blockchain data security
signatures do not guarantee the bitcoin ownership for a given bitcoin trans-
fer with a transaction. This implies that a malicious attacker can alter and
rebroadcast the transaction and cause diﬃculties in the transaction conﬁr-
mation [41]. Authentication challenges have also been highlighted in various
studies. Transaction authentication remains a key security concern regarding
the implementation of blockchains [49]. Customers/users are not secure from
malicious attackers who compromise customer private keys and steal the in-
formation or alter the transactions. Privacy issues have been highlighted in
various scholarly sources. Blockchain systems allow users to create multiple
addresses and cluster these user addresses [52]. The purpose of clustering
user addresses is to identify the movements and behaviors of the same sys-
tem users by identifying all the addresses created in the system by the same
user [53]. Koshy et al [54] examined the eﬀectiveness of bitcoin systems in
handling multiple addresses and found that it is possible to map some of

xx

Md Arquam, Ashish Patel , Parma Nand

the bitcoin addresses to the IP addresses by monitoring and examining the
associated transaction traﬃc.

The susceptibility of blockchain systems to double-spending attacks lim-
its its holistic implementation in various applications. According to Casino,
Dasaklis, & Patsakis [4], a double-spending attack in bitcoin systems happens
when an intruder hoards his bitcoin as he receives services that are yet to be
re-spent. For example, when an intruder credits a particular account, he/she
receives the goods or services from the owner of the account. Thereafter,
he/she will revert the transaction crediting the account to recognize the as-
sociated ledger. However, some studies have shown that bitcoin systems can
control or prevent the occurrence of double-spending attacks using rigorous
models that reframe the honest users and the attacker to appear as competi-
tors performing random movements in one direction each with probabilistic
steps ahead of the other. Nevertheless, Garay et al [55] emphasize that the
decentralized nature of blockchain systems makes it easier for an attacker to
disagree with honest node miners.

The increased dependence of blockchain systems on distributed public
ledgers has raised some security concerns. According to Xu et al [36], Public
distributed ledgers have speculative issues associated with the compromise
between decentralization and network dimensions. The probability of intru-
sion in bitcoin blockchain ledgers is approximately 51% because a single node
miner can easily gain full control of the biggest size of the network resources
thus holding other users at ransom. Several studies have conﬁrmed various
security compromises and currency scams associated with the implementa-
tion of bitcoin blockchains [56]. These include account hacking using viruses
and Trojan horses from online adverts and distributed denial of service at-
tacks. This leaves many bitcoin miners susceptible to scams from malicious
attackers. Besides, the proof of work protocols inherent in bitcoin chains has
been criticized for resource wastage [41]. The work done by the node miner
determines his/her possibility for mining a block. Besides, small nodes are
at higher risk of being attacked by malicious intruders. It is also diﬃcult to
combine various segments of blockchains for versioning and administrative
purposes.

Some issues have also been noted in the blockchain quantum computing
capabilities. The blockchain core utilizes public key encryptions and hashes
as cryptographic primitives used to verify and authenticate transactions.
Initial blockchain infrastructures utilized quantum computing; but several
technology breakthroughs led to the introduction of SHA-256, which is a
hash algorithm used to perform quantum computing. To crack this tech-
nology using the Grover algorithm, an intruder needs around 2128 opera-
tions. The resilience of SHA-256 against quantum attacks does not apply in
those blockchains that utilize public key encryption algorithms. According
to Casino, Dasaklis, & Patsakis [4], an intruder can break the ECDSA al-
gorithm using a big quantum computer hence increasing the vulnerability of
blockchains. As quantum computing resilience becomes a major issue, there

The security strength of Blockchain technology : A Survey Report

xxi

is a need to standardize blockchain systems such that they can perform post-
quantum cryptographic analysis. Recent studies such as Kiktenko et al [57]
have developed quantum secure blockchain systems that utilize public key
distribution across the optical ﬁber network for secure authentication. Mean-
while, Visser and Rajan [58] proposed blockchain encoding into a temporary
state of non-existent photons so that the entire blockchain system can be
perceived as a quantum interconnected machine.

4 Conclusions

This study has surveyed a wide range of multidisciplinary studies on the
security strengths and eﬀectiveness of blockchain deployments in various ap-
plications. Unquestionably, blockchains have proven their capability of im-
proving and transforming the daily business processes and transactions in
various businesses and organizations. The technology has gained widespread
adoption in many countries across the world. Its beneﬁts are far beyond the
security issues associated with the use of centralized database systems. De-
spite the increased deployment and use of blockchains, several studies have
has highlighted various security issues and other limitations that need to
be properly addressed if blockchain technology is to thrive in the drasti-
cally changing and competitive tech market. By addressing the above issues,
blockchains will increasingly become more eﬃcient and scalable for both the
users and the organizations deploying them. Currently, blockchains possess
numerous mechanisms that make them the best choice for use in various
applications in several industries and business sectors. The future presents
more bright opportunities for blockchains to penetrate various business do-
mains and industries although the compromise and trade-oﬀ lie between the
use of blockchains and conventional centralized databases systems. Some of
the highlighted security issues also cut across traditional database systems,
which makes it diﬃcult for some organizations to shift to the implementa-
tion and use of blockchain systems. Besides, each application domain requires
unique security characteristics and system behaviors to provide security ca-
pabilities tailored to the needs of the application, which does not guarantee
system interoperability. There is a need for more innovations in the ﬁeld of
blockchain research and development to reduce energy consumption and in-
crease transaction speed. Protocols should be globally accepted so that the
system can easily verify the identities of various individuals at the same time.

What makes blockchain systems outstanding is the ontology that data/information

is not owned by one company or individual. Each node minder has access
to his/her entire transaction records, which creates a diﬀerence between
blockchain systems and the traditional database management systems used
by various institutions, government agencies, and corporations to store and
maintain private records. In traditional database systems, the business orga-

xxii

Md Arquam, Ashish Patel , Parma Nand

nization has full control and access to the records of the clients, customers,
and internal operations. In contrast, blockchain technologies record transac-
tions in cryptal formats hence each user shares the same transaction lists
that are periodically updated to ensure the transaction ledger is kept cur-
rent. For every new transaction taking place in the system, the transaction
ledgers are reconciled, which minimizes the risk of transaction loss. This im-
plies that that blockchains can maintain the integrity of transaction history
because of their distributed P2P network. An attacker or an intruder needs
to ﬁrst change most of the hash values and data blocks within the system
to alter the transaction history, which necessitates him/her to compromise
many computers of system users across the world.

Blockchain systems support the existing technical eﬀorts to protect data
integrity, secure communications, and networks. Using hashing and encryp-
tion, blockchains can store immutable transaction records. The weakness of
the traditional database system lies in its features such as utilizing only one
trusted authority to store encrypted data and verify information, which sub-
jects the users to the risk of malicious attacks. Many intruders and illicit
system users can combine their eﬀorts against the single authority to inject
malicious information, commit denial of service attacks, and compromise data
integrity through blackmail or theft. However, blockchains do not require the
use of a trusted individual or authority because they are decentralized to the
user. There no need for the trust since each member of the network (node)
has a full copy of his transaction history available. The system only needs
to ﬁrst achieve the majority nodes’ consensus to allow more addition of data
to the blockchain of the already existing information. This capability has
increased the popularity of blockchain and facilitated its deployment in var-
ious security-oriented applications such as data sharing and storage, private
user data management, network security, and cyber security in the internet
of things. Its immutable decentralized database beneﬁts both businesses and
consumers. As beneﬁts beneﬁt from minimized costs associated with infor-
mation storage and maintenance, customers will maintain ownership of their
transaction records. The self-monitoring and automatic activity recording
promote record availability, integrity, conﬁdentiality, and transparency. Cus-
tomers using blockchain-enabled systems have less fear over the theft of their
data from malicious attacks. Besides, blockchains are providing solutions that
address the increasing cyber-attacks by ensuring data/information availabil-
ity through redundancy, conﬁdentiality through cryptography, and integrity
through self-validation.

References

1. N Zahadat and W Partridge. Blockchain: A critical component to ensuring data

security. Journal of Forensic Sciences & Criminal Investigation, 10(1), 2018.

2. Mayra Samaniego, Uurtsaikh Jamsrandorj, and Ralph Deters. Blockchain as a service
for iot. In 2016 IEEE international conference on internet of things (iThings) and
IEEE green computing and communications (GreenCom) and IEEE cyber, physical

The security strength of Blockchain technology : A Survey Report

xxiii

and social computing (CPSCom) and IEEE smart data (SmartData), pages 433–436.
IEEE, 2016.

3. Md Arquam, Anurag Singh, and Rajesh Sharma. A blockchain based secure and
arXiv

trusted framework for information propagation on online social networks.
preprint arXiv:1812.10508, 2018.

4. Fran Casino, Thomas K Dasaklis, and Constantinos Patsakis. A systematic literature
review of blockchain-based applications: current status, classiﬁcation and open issues.
Telematics and informatics, 36:55–81, 2019.

5. Kim-Kwang Raymond Choo. Cryptocurrency and virtual currency: Corruption and
money laundering/terrorism ﬁnancing risks? In Handbook of digital currency, pages
283–307. Elsevier, 2015.

6. Shi Chen, Cathy Yi-Hsuan Chen, Wolfgang Karl H¨ardle, Teik Ming Lee, and Bobby
Ong. Econometric analysis of a cryptocurrency index for portfolio investment.
In
Handbook of Blockchain, Digital Finance, and Inclusion, Volume 1, pages 175–206.
Elsevier, 2018.

7. Ali Dorri, Salil S Kanhere, and Raja Jurdak. Blockchain in internet of things: chal-

lenges and solutions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1608.05187, 2016.

8. Cheng Li and Liang-Jie Zhang. A blockchain based new secure multi-layer network
In 2017 IEEE International congress on Internet of

model for internet of things.
Things (ICIOT), pages 33–41. IEEE, 2017.

9. Konstantinos Christidis and Michael Devetsikiotis. Blockchains and smart contracts

for the internet of things. Ieee Access, 4:2292–2303, 2016.

10. Marko Vukoli´c. The quest for scalable blockchain fabric: Proof-of-work vs. bft replica-
tion. In International workshop on open problems in network security, pages 112–125.
Springer, 2015.

11. Du Mingxiao, Ma Xiaofeng, Zhang Zhe, Wang Xiangwei, and Chen Qijun. A review on
consensus algorithm of blockchain. In 2017 IEEE international conference on systems,
man, and cybernetics (SMC), pages 2567–2572. IEEE, 2017.

12. Zibin Zheng, Shaoan Xie, Hong-Ning Dai, Xiangping Chen, and Huaimin Wang.
International Journal of Web

Blockchain challenges and opportunities: A survey.
and Grid Services, 14(4):352–375, 2018.

13. Chris Dannen. Introducing ethereum and solidity, 2019.
14. Gavin Wood et al. Ethereum: A secure decentralised generalised transaction ledger.

Ethereum project yellow paper, 151(2014):1–32, 2014.

15. Pavel Kravchenko. Ok, i need a blockchain, but which one. Medium Corporation,

2016.

16. Martin Haferkorn and Josu´e Manuel Quintana Diaz. Seasonality and interconnectivity
within cryptocurrencies-an analysis on the basis of bitcoin, litecoin and namecoin.
In International Workshop on Enterprise Applications and Services in the Finance
Industry, pages 106–120. Springer, 2014.

17. Shuyun Shi, Debiao He, Li Li, Neeraj Kumar, Muhammad Khurram Khan, and Kim-
Kwang Raymond Choo. Applications of blockchain in ensuring the security and privacy
of electronic health record systems: A survey. Computers & Security, page 101966,
2020.

18. Peter Robinson. Requirements for ethereum private sidechains.

arXiv preprint

arXiv:1806.09834, 2018.

19. Paul J Taylor, Tooska Dargahi, Ali Dehghantanha, Reza M Parizi, and Kim-
Kwang Raymond Choo. A systematic literature review of blockchain cyber security.
Digital Communications and Networks, 6(2):147–156, 2020.

20. Otto Julio Ahlert Pinno, Andre Ricardo Abed Gregio, and Luis CE De Bona. Con-
trolchain: Blockchain as a central enabler for access control authorizations in the iot. In
GLOBECOM 2017-2017 IEEE Global Communications Conference, pages 1–6. IEEE,
2017.

xxiv

Md Arquam, Ashish Patel , Parma Nand

21. Mandrita Banerjee, Junghee Lee, and Kim-Kwang Raymond Choo. A blockchain
future for internet of things security: a position paper. Digital Communications and
Networks, 4(3):149–160, 2018.

22. Jingjing Gu, Binglin Sun, Xiaojiang Du, Jun Wang, Yi Zhuang, and Ziwang Wang.
IEEE Access,

Consortium blockchain-based malware detection in mobile devices.
6:12118–12128, 2018.

23. Igor Zikratov, Alexander Kuzmin, Vladislav Akimenko, Viktor Niculichev, and Lucas
Yalansky. Ensuring data integrity using blockchain technology. In 2017 20th Confer-
ence of Open Innovations Association (FRUCT), pages 534–539. IEEE, 2017.

24. Deepayan Bhowmik and Tian Feng. The multimedia blockchain: A distributed and
tamper-proof media transaction framework. In 2017 22nd International Conference
on Digital Signal Processing (DSP), pages 1–5. IEEE, 2017.

25. Josep Lluis De La Rosa, Victor Torres-Padrosa, Andr´es El-Fakdi, Denisa Gibovic,
O Horny´ak, Lutz Maicher, and Francesc Miralles. A survey of blockchain technolo-
gies for open innovation. In Proceedings of the 4th Annual World Open Innovation
Conference, pages 14–15, 2017.

26. Monegraph uses bitcoin tech so internet artists can establish “original” copies of their

work. In https://techcrunch.com/2014/05/09/monegraph/. Monegraph, 2014.

27. Paul Snow, Brian Deery, Peter Kirby, and David Johnston. Factom ledger by consen-

sus, 2015.

28. Shaen Corbet, Charles Larkin, Brian Lucey, and Larisa Yarovaya. Kodakcoin: a
blockchain revolution or exploiting a potential cryptocurrency bubble? Applied Eco-
nomics Letters, 27(7):518–524, 2020.

29. Nicolas Herbaut and Nicolas Negru. A model for collaborative blockchain-based video
delivery relying on advanced network services chains. IEEE Communications Maga-
zine, 55(9):70–76, 2017.

30. Henry M Kim and Marek Laskowski. Toward an ontology-driven blockchain design
for supply-chain provenance. Intelligent Systems in Accounting, Finance and Man-
agement, 25(1):18–27, 2018.

31. Natasha Lomas. Everledger is using blockchain to combat fraud, starting with dia-

monds. Tech Crunch, 29, 2015.

32. Peng Xun, Pei-Dong Zhu, Yi-Fan Hu, Peng-Shuai Cui, and Yan Zhang. Com-
mand disaggregation attack and mitigation in industrial internet of things. Sensors,
17(10):2408, 2017.

33. Christian Jaag and Christian Bach. Blockchain technology and cryptocurrencies: Op-
portunities for postal ﬁnancial services. In The changing postal and delivery sector,
pages 205–221. Springer, 2017.

34. KPMG International.

Blockchain

accelerates

insurance

transformation.

https://assets.kpmg/content/dam/kpmg/xx/pdf/2017/01/blockchain-accelerates-
insurance-transformation-fs.pdf, 2017.

35. Blockchain Cognizant. A potential game-changer for life insurance, 2017.
36. Lei Xu, Lin Chen, Nolan Shah, Zhimin Gao, Yang Lu, and Weidong Shi. Dl-bac:
Distributed ledger based access control for web applications.
In Proceedings of the
26th International Conference on World Wide Web Companion, pages 1445–1450,
2017.

37. Tara Salman, Maede Zolanvari, Aiman Erbad, Raj Jain, and Mohammed Samaka.
Security services using blockchains: A state of the art survey. IEEE Communications
Surveys & Tutorials, 21(1):858–880, 2018.

38. Igor D Alvarenga, Gabriel AF Rebello, and Otto Carlos MB Duarte. Securing con-
ﬁguration management and migration of virtual network functions using blockchain.
In NOMS 2018-2018 IEEE/IFIP Network Operations and Management Symposium,
pages 1–9. IEEE, 2018.

39. Minhaj Ahmad Khan and Khaled Salah. Iot security: Review, blockchain solutions,

and open challenges. Future Generation Computer Systems, 82:395–411, 2018.

The security strength of Blockchain technology : A Survey Report

xxv

40. Lurdes D Patr´ıcio and Jo˜ao J Ferreira. Blockchain security research: theorizing through
bibliographic-coupling analysis. Journal of Advances in Management Research, 2020.
41. Jesse Yli-Huumo, Deokyoon Ko, Sujin Choi, Sooyong Park, and Kari Smolander.
Where is current research on blockchain technology?—a systematic review. PloS one,
11(10):e0163477, 2016.

42. Steve Huckle, Rituparna Bhattacharya, Martin White, and Natalia Beloﬀ. Internet
of things, blockchain and shared economy applications. Procedia computer science,
98:461–466, 2016.

43. Ahmed Kosba, Andrew Miller, Elaine Shi, Zikai Wen, and Charalampos Papamanthou.
Hawk: The blockchain model of cryptography and privacy-preserving smart contracts.
In 2016 IEEE symposium on security and privacy (SP), pages 839–858. IEEE, 2016.
44. Sarah Meiklejohn, Marjori Pomarole, Grant Jordan, Kirill Levchenko, Damon McCoy,
Geoﬀrey M Voelker, and Stefan Savage. A ﬁstful of bitcoins: characterizing payments
among men with no names. In Proceedings of the 2013 conference on Internet mea-
surement conference, pages 127–140, 2013.

45. Steven Goldfeder, Harry Kalodner, Dillon Reisman, and Arvind Narayanan. When
the cookie meets the blockchain: Privacy risks of web payments via cryptocurrencies.
Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies, 2018(4):179–199, 2018.
46. David Siegel. Understanding the dao attack. Retrieved June, 13:2018, 2016.
47. Massimo Bartoletti, Salvatore Carta, Tiziana Cimoli, and Roberto Saia. Dissecting
ponzi schemes on ethereum: identiﬁcation, analysis, and impact. Future Generation
Computer Systems, 102:259–277, 2020.

48. Ivica Nikoli´c, Aashish Kolluri, Ilya Sergey, Prateek Saxena, and Aquinas Hobor. Find-
ing the greedy, prodigal, and suicidal contracts at scale. In Proceedings of the 34th
Annual Computer Security Applications Conference, pages 653–663, 2018.

49. Bojana Koteska, Elena Karaﬁloski, and Anastas Mishev. Blockchain implementation
quality challenges: a literature. In SQAMIA 2017: 6th Workshop of Software Quality,
Analysis, Monitoring, Improvement, and Applications, pages 11–13, 2017.

50. Chengjun Cai, Xingliang Yuan, and Cong Wang. Hardening distributed and encrypted
keyword search via blockchain. In 2017 IEEE Symposium on Privacy-Aware Comput-
ing (PAC), pages 119–128. IEEE, 2017.

51. Roman Beck, Jacob Stenum Czepluch, Nikolaj Lollike, and Simon Malone. Blockchain–
the gateway to trust-free cryptographic transactions. ECIS 2016 Proceedings at AIS
Electronic Library (AISeL), 2016.

52. Jordi Herrera-Joancomart´ı and Cristina P´erez-Sol`a. Privacy in bitcoin transactions:
new challenges from blockchain scalability solutions. In International Conference on
Modeling Decisions for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, pages 26–44. Springer, 2016.

53. Fergal Reid and Martin Harrigan. An analysis of anonymity in the bitcoin system. In

Security and privacy in social networks, pages 197–223. Springer, 2013.

54. Philip Koshy, Diana Koshy, and Patrick McDaniel. An analysis of anonymity in bitcoin
using p2p network traﬃc. In International Conference on Financial Cryptography and
Data Security, pages 469–485. Springer, 2014.

55. Juan Garay, Aggelos Kiayias, and Nikos Leonardos. The bitcoin backbone protocol:
In Annual international conference on the theory and

Analysis and applications.
applications of cryptographic techniques, pages 281–310. Springer, 2015.

56. Il-Kwon Lim, Young-Hyuk Kim, Jae-Gwang Lee, Jae-Pil Lee, Hyun Nam-Gung, and
Jae-Kwang Lee. The analysis and countermeasures on security breach of bitcoin. In
International conference on computational science and its applications, pages 720–732.
Springer, 2014.

57. Evgeniy O Kiktenko, Nikolay O Pozhar, Maxim N Anufriev, Anton S Trushechkin,
Ruslan R Yunusov, Yuri V Kurochkin, AI Lvovsky, and AK Fedorov. Quantum-
secured blockchain. Quantum Science and Technology, 3(3):035004, 2018.

58. Del Rajan and Matt Visser. Quantum blockchain using entanglement in time. Quan-

tum Reports, 1(1):3–11, 2019.

