Date of publication xxxx 00, 0000, date of current version xxxx 00, 0000.

Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/ACCESS.2017.DOI

Distributed Ledger Technology based
Integrated Healthcare Solution for
Bangladesh

MD. ARIFUL ISLAM1 (Member, IEEE), MD. ANTONIN ISLAM2, MD. AMZAD HOSSAIN
JACKY2, MD. AL-AMIN2, M. SAEF ULLAH MIAH3 (MEMBER, IEEE), MD MUHIDUL ISLAM
KHAN4 AND MD. IQBAL HOSSAIN5
1Brain Station 23 Ltd., Dhaka, Bangladesh
2American International University-Bangladesh, Dhaka, Bangladesh
3Faculty of Computing, College of Computing and Applied Sciences, Universiti Malaysia Pahang, Pekan 26600, Malaysia
4Department of Electronics and Computer Science, University of Stavanger, Stavanger, Norway
5Department of Paediatrics, Chakaria Unique Hospital, Chattogram, Bangladesh

Corresponding author: Md. Ariful Islam (e-mail: fahim.arif0373@outlook.com).

2
2
0
2

y
a
M
0
3

]

R

I
.
s
c
[

1
v
6
1
4
5
1
.
5
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

ABSTRACT
Healthcare data is sensitive and requires great protection. Encrypted electronic health records (EHRs) con-
tain personal and sensitive data such as names and addresses. Having access to patient data beneﬁts all of
them. This paper proposes a blockchain-based distributed healthcare application platform for Bangladeshi
public and private healthcare providers. Using data immutability and smart contracts, the suggested
application framework allows users to create safe digital agreements for commerce or collaboration. Thus,
all enterprises may securely collaborate using the same blockchain network, gaining data openness and
read/write capacity. The proposed application consists of various application interfaces for various system
users. For data integrity, privacy, permission and service availability, the proposed solution leverages
Hyperledger fabric and Blockchain as a Service. Everyone will also have their own proﬁle in the portal.
A unique identity for each person and the installation of digital information centres across the country have
greatly eased the process. It will collect systematic health data from each person which will be beneﬁcial
for research institutes and health-related organisations. A national data warehouse in Bangladesh is feasible
for this application and It is also possible to keep a clean health sector by analysing data stored in this
warehouse and conducting various puriﬁcation algorithms using technologies like Data Science. Given that
Bangladesh has both public and private health care, a straightforward digital strategy for all organisations is
essential.

INDEX TERMS Distributed ledger technology, Integrated healthcare, Blockchain, Smart contract, hyper-
ledger fabric, blockchain in healthcare.

I. INTRODUCTION

T HE healthcare industry is an important part of a coun-

try’s economy that includes many medical products and
services that are also basic necessities of life. This sector
includes an extensive chain of services to which the govern-
ment contributes in a big way. For example, the government
of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh has at least 104,659
human resources for health services [1] for which the gov-
ernment budgeted $2,174 million [1] in 2007, and the budget
is increasing day by day according to the public demand.
The People’s Republic of Bangladesh offers a comprehen-

sive Essential Health Service Package (ESP), which includes
many free medicines of various generic drugs and also offers
many low cost medical tests which are presented in Table 1.
However, as these services are provided in an area of 148,460
sq km, densely populated with 163 million people (2019,
World Bank), many accuse the country of mismanagement,
imbalance and lack of service distribution. As a result, the
national public health service cannot properly meet public
satisfaction [2].

To address all these shortcomings, the government is try-
ing to ﬁnd technology-based solutions, and many third-party

VOLUME 4, 2016

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
Ariful et.al, et al.: Distributed Ledger Technology based Integrated Healthcare Solution for Bangladesh

companies are trying to solve these problems on behalf of the
government. However, since it is a nationwide service with a
large number of administrators, the government should move
the entire administrative system to a digital platform where
every action (only the ofﬁcial one) of each health ofﬁcial
is counted as data, and all data can be authenticated, stored
and analyzed for monitoring and management. In this way,
Bangladesh can take another step towards digitization.

But with this great philosophy of digitizing a nation comes
with a responsibility for digital security (data, identity, assets)
and cybersecurity (information and IT infrastructure). After
all, when an organization or institution deals with physical
documents, many security measures can be taken. The global
monetary system is a good example of this. These can have so
many factual printing patterns that they can be easily distin-
guished from other counterfeit copies. But when it comes to
digital data, tampering can be done from the central database
without a trace. This can lead to a national or international
threat. The Kaseya Ransomware attack [3] is a good example
of this. It affected over 1500 companies and over 1 million
locked computers. So as the world moves towards a world
war III that will not be a war of arms but primarily a cyber-
war, it is a major concern for decision-makers in ministries
and organizations to approve most ofﬁcial functions online.

At the same time, the ongoing trial is fraught with so many
allegations. Some are aimed directly at ofﬁcials for lack of
proper oversight and system gaps, and most are due to an
attempt to serve a populous nation with traditional monolithic
management.

Adopting a digital platform in the ministerial ofﬁce envi-
ronment is not a new challenge for Bangladesh. Central and
state-owned banks are good example. They work with global
banking systems and at the same time with local managed
ﬁle transfer (MFT) and payment gateway services. However,
the issue is that of security, traceability and immutability of
digital data. Therefore, the importance of the new cutting-
edge technology known as Blockchain cannot be overlooked.
In order to introduce this emerging technology at a national
level, we need to promote it at an early stage. Therefore, the
solution proposed in this article can be a breakthrough in
the movement of the world’s fourth industrial revolution [4].
The proposed solution is mainly about proposing a digital
information management system that ensures the status of
the public health service, transparency of information and
security.

More speciﬁcally, the project is a complete solution de-
signed to provide a single service to the general population of
Bangladesh. The back-end will be protected with blockchain-
based decentralized ledger technology. So, there will be no
dependence on third party for digital healthcare. Due to
technical limitations, no public or private medical complex or
hospital will be left behind in service delivery . All healthcare
providers will be connected as peers to a single digital health
service at the national level. So competition between different
medical facilities for good services will continue, but the
population will access these services from a single source

through their citizen health portal. In addition to solving all
these current problems of civilian service, our project can be
an important tool in the near future to improve civilian life in
more diverse ways.

A decentralized blockchain service might be the best
choice with several governmental and non-governmental or-
ganizations involved in clinical / biomedical research. Using
this technology, different organizations can collaborate with
other institutions/organizations to share and analyze data
without relinquishing control. Each institution can main-
tain full control over its own computing resources while
collaborating with other institutions. In this way, a robust
dataset can be formed for each clinical trial [5]. Fig. 1
provides an overview of this idea of secure collaboration.
Patient-generated data becomes available to researchers. As
a result, a decent environment ,as shown in Fig. 1 can
be created where academia, healthcare industry and health-
care professionals can collaborate. In case of security and
privacy, private blockchain can be an excellent option to
control transparency, security ,and immutability of data. If
anonymized and then tracked in the research process with a
timestamp, this secondary data source would enable millions
of individuals, healthcare providers, healthcare institutions,
and medical researchers to share vast amounts of genetic,
nutritional, lifestyle, environmental, and health data with
guaranteed security and privacy [5].

II. RELATED WORK
When our proposed solution becomes operational, it will deal
with highly sensitive data that must be managed in a secure
manner. Since the electronic health record (EHR) [7] is a part
of this system, it will contain a lot of personal data, most of
which is considered sensitive data. This is because , from
names, addresses, ID card numbers, insurance numbers to
medical history, all these data will be stored here. Moreover,
this medical data will be updated and shared on a regular
basis, provided the patient has given consent.

Almost all ﬁrst-world countries operate their health ser-
vices through various types of digital platforms. Currently,
there are several approaches where EHR systems are en-
hanced with blockchain-based services. Various tech giants
are also offering different cloud-based Software As A Ser-
vice (SaaS) solutions. But here privacy-protecting, Gen-
eral Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) [8] and perfor-
mance/scalability are the real concern. Comparing some
related work in this area, we can see that each service
has had to compromise in some cases. Table 2 presents a
comparison based on different features of different existing
systems. The Distributed Personal Health Record System
(PHR) [9] proposed by Roehrs et al. is a decentralized system
that functions like a centralized system among participating
devices. To describe the concept in more detail, we can use
the term ’peer-to-peer’. The way the author has presented the
architecture in detail, scalability can be a plus point for this
system. But when it comes to the concept of PHR system,
it should be controlled by the patients. But the author has

2

VOLUME 4, 2016

Ariful et.al, et al.: Distributed Ledger Technology based Integrated Healthcare Solution for Bangladesh

Community Clinic

Union Health and Family Welfare Centre

Upazila Health Complex

Maternal and Child Welfare Centre

District Hospital

General Surgery

Obstetric Fistula

CEmONC

Severe cases

BEmONC

CEmONC

BEmONC

Trauma Care

Ophthalm. Surgery

General Surgery

Obstetric Fistula

CEmONC

Severe cases

BEmONC

Normal Newborn

Normal Newborn

Normal Newborn

Pre-term NB

Normal Newborn

N.V. Deliveries

N.V. Deliveries

N.V. Deliveries

Newborn Sepsis

N.V. Deliveries

NCD Screening

NCD Screening

NCD Screening

Normal Newborn

NCD Screening

SBCC

EPI/IMCI

SBCC

EPI/IMCI

SBCC

EPI/IMCI

FP Short Acting

FP Short Acting

FP Short Acting

N.V. Deliveries

SBCC

EPI/IMCI

SBCC

EPI/IMCI

FP Short Acting

Growth Monitoring

GM, SAM mngmt

GM, SAM mngmt

GM, SAM mngmt

GM, SAM mngmt

ANC/PNC

ANC/PNC

ANC/PNC

FP all methods

ANC/PNC

Lim. curative care

Lim. curative care

Lim. curative care

ANC/PNC

Lim. curative care

Minimum Standards by facility level

Extra Services

TABLE 1: Minimum Standards and Extra Services by facility level which are provided by the government of the peoples republic
of Bangladesh [6]

also mentioned that different organizations can adopt this
system for the practice. This raises concern about security
and privacy. Also, in some cases, it violates the GDPR.
Bocek et al. [10] have proposed an Ethereum network-based
proof-of-concept (PoC) on the pharmaceutical supply chain.
However, it is mentioned here that various IoT devices can be
used to communicate directly with a blockchain node server
via an HTTP protocol and store this data in PostgreSQL
databases. At this point, the lack of decentralization is noted.
This is because if this single node’s database is breached by
attackers or another cyberattack occurs, data privacy may be
compromised. Since there is a risk of data being exposed,
most of the requirements of the GDPR are not met. The solu-
tion of Liang et el. [11] is based on Hyperledger Fabric. This
has good control over data transparency and can store data in
immutable ledger. But in the architecture, end user-privacy
is not the main concern. While reviewing this paper, some

gaps were found in the technical details. The paper makes
extensive use of many wearable devices. But how these third-
party components share data with their blockchain network
has not been properly described. So, there are many questions
left unanswered for GDPR guidelines. On the other hand,
this solution was developed on Hyperledger Fabric version
0.5 where the private data collection feature was unavailable,
and the authors did not propose any custom solutions. So
this is a disadvantage for privacy protection. However, since
the whole system is cloud-based, there is an advantage for
scalability. MediBchain, proposed by Omar et el. [12], is
an Ethereum-based solution built on a cloud-based server
infrastructure. This is the plus point for the scalability of the
system. The cloud infrastructure does provide some scalabil-
ity, but since the data of the stakeholders is encrypted, new
collaborations and linking of different organizations can be
a problem. Security and proper control of data transparency

VOLUME 4, 2016

3

Ariful et.al, et al.: Distributed Ledger Technology based Integrated Healthcare Solution for Bangladesh

Reference

Framework

Type

Privacy-Preserving

GDPR

Performance/Scalability

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[5]

[13]

[14]

Peer-to-peer

Private

Ethereum

Private

Hyperledger Fabric

Private

Ethereum

Private

Hyperledger Fabric

Private

Ethereum

Ethereum

Public

Public

Proposed solution

Hyperledger Fabric

Private

(cid:55)

(cid:55)

(cid:55)

(cid:55)

(cid:55)

(cid:55)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:55)

(cid:55)

(cid:55)

(cid:55)

(cid:51)

(cid:55)

(cid:55)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:55)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:55)

(cid:55)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

TABLE 2: Comparison of related works.

are required for proper authority. A permissioned blockchain
solution that collects health data from mobile devices was
proposed by Ichikawa et al. [5]. This solution is also based
on an older version of Hyperledger Fabric, which faces the
same problem of private data collection. This thwarts some
privacy standards. Moreover, this solution relies on the PBFT
algorithm for the consensus mechanism. Thus, with Hyper-
ledger, if an attacker manages to attack the principal of the
blockchain network for more than (N-1)/3 at a time, there is
a possibility that the entire blockchain service can be disabled
[15]. MedRec by Azaria et al. [13] is an Ethereum-based
solution for decentralized EHR management. This solution
has some scalability issues. MedRec does not take care of the
security of individual databases, which a local administrator
must manage. It also does not solve the problem of digital
rights management. Since it is an open-source project, the
author would like others to contribute to its further devel-
opment and help solve the current problems. The work of
Nchinda et.al, [14] is a follow-up to Azaria et.al, [13]. Both
projects are from the same maintainers and have the same
name (MedRec). This work [14] is mainly about an EHR
management system from MIT. The earlier work [13] is
mainly about improving medical record tracking. Scalability
issues are solved here. Although patients have more control
over their information even if the network type is public. But
proof-of-work is used as the consensus algorithm, which has
already been identiﬁed as an energy inefﬁcient process. So
the cost rate is high ,and as a service it is also dependent on
third-party miners. Another problem is that personal data is
stored outside the chain. Therefore, some users might have a
problem with the authenticity of the data. This also violates

the basic data protection regulation in some cases.

In our proposed solution, in order to perform any kind
of task in blockchain, it needs to execute the logic from a
smart contract. In order to access it, each user needs to use
a health card for authentication. These health cards contain
the user’s identity. Each user can only perform the tasks they
are authorized for. This way we can maintain the privacy
and access of the user. European General Data Protection
Regulation (GDPR) consists of seven principles described
in article 5.1-2 of the general data protection regulation [8].
The primary scopes based on these principles are as follows:
When a system automatically or manually processes data, it
should be for legitimate purposes, and our proposed solution
works speciﬁcally for the healthcare domain and aims to
advance both healthcare research and service. Data process-
ing must be lawful, fair, and transparent to the data subject
in accordance with GDPR. As we design this blockchain-
based solution, maintaining transparency based on the type
of organization is the forte of this cutting-edge technology.
In the case of Data Minimization and Accuracy, our system
collects only a citizen’s medical data, and due to its design, it
dynamically updates all user data, thus adhering to the GDPR
principles. The proposed system is an excellent solution for
the GDPR’s integrity and conﬁdentiality principles. Because
the entire system runs on a private blockchain network,
its administration and governance mechanisms are well-
established. All the information blocks contain encrypted
data at the same time. This also meets the Healthcare Se-
curity Regulations (HIPAA) requirements for administrative
safeguards [16].

4

VOLUME 4, 2016

Ariful et.al, et al.: Distributed Ledger Technology based Integrated Healthcare Solution for Bangladesh

III. PROBLEM STATEMENT
Keeping documents and their preservation for administration
is not a new thing in human civilization. For this reason,
in the past, we can observe the trend of data storage from
cave walls to papers, and in modern times, it is the servers in
digital form. However, nowadays the main focus is on digital
data because of increasing dependencies and reliability on
digital platforms. When stored data is in physical form, any
tampering can be detected on that copy of the data. Even
on the printed surface, many security measures can be taken
to detect the validity of the document, like passports and
currencies for example. Both have so many factual printing
patterns that they can be easily distinguished from other
counterfeit copies. But in case of digital data, this is where
the biggest challenge lies. Because they can be altered or
deleted without a trace. If an intruder can manipulate the
data from the central database, this application will print a
new copy with fake data for other users. In this way, any
national/international threat can arise.

In Bangladesh, the government has a precise administra-
tive structure and chain of command for maintaining public
medical care and health services. The central administration
also allocates an estimated budget every year for maintaining
this system. But like all other sectors, this sector also has its
downsides. Sometimes there are various allegations against
some of the system’s ofﬁcials, leading to public suffering
in the medical industry. The department has its own quality
assurance policy. But since the department is so big and
various organizations are working here. Many consumers
cannot even approach the higher authority with their com-
plaints. There is a massive communication gap between the
higher authority and the consumers. Most consumers do not
even know that the services they want are among their rights
already granted by the department. Nevertheless, when the
authority receives a complaint, sometimes no legal action
can be taken because proper documents and evidence are not
available. As a result, some unethical individuals take advan-
tage of these beneﬁts to earn more money in an unethical
manner. Following problems are identiﬁed by observing the
scenarios.

• Doctors inﬂuenced by private drug distributors.
• Medications provided for free by the government are

being sold.

• Medical records are not properly kept. In addition, the

records that are kept are difﬁcult to ﬁnd.

• The procedures for feedback and complaints are very

critical.

• As the medical staff does not care about the quality
assurance of the services, the consumers often have to
suffer a lot in the hospitals.

• Due to the lack of monitoring, some unauthorized doc-

tors take advantage of the beneﬁts.

• Anyone can easily falsify their qualiﬁcation status to

increase their value.

• Most patients have no knowledge of their own medical
records. As a result, doctors cannot properly investigate

their illnesses.

• Most importantly, the consumer’s interaction with the
service provider and its authority is very unpleasant, so
most people switch to private services and those who
cannot afford it have to endure countless suffering in the
public service.

IV. PROPOSED SOLUTION
The government is already familiar with keeping and of
working with ledgers in paper form. Distributed Ledger
Technology (DLT) [17] can be a great solution that can easily
be adopted in this sector as a digital service. Conventional
technology may be enough to do normal ofﬁce work. But we
have described the scale of this sector and other problems
in above sections. It is clear that this sector requires much
smarter transparency, correctness, validity, authenticity, and
reliability. Most importantly, this service needs to be more
secure at the national level to prevent any kind of information
manipulation. For this reason, it can be claimed that this
sector should be introduced with a brand new technology
commonly known as blockchain [18], a form of DLT. This
technology can be recommended because blockchain has
gained the most attention among other new solutions in the
industry, government and academia [19]. It has some speciﬁc
development standards and strict set of rules by which it can
ensure its security from the beginning ,and after its functional
operation it generates and maintains a series of blocks by
which it can form a ledger with these successive blocks [19].
Although our paper contains some examples on ﬁnancial
topics and blockchain has been introduced in our proposed
solution. We would like to clarify that our proposed solution
does not cover the service of a payment system and any
kind of cryptocurrency [20] issues are not discussed. Our
main concern in this research project is to propose a digital
information management system that ensures public health
service status, information transparency and security.

The solution we have proposed corresponds directly to the
national demand in Bangladesh. More speciﬁcally, the gov-
ernment of Bangladesh has already published the "National
Blockchain Strategy" in which the need of the health applica-
tion area has been speciﬁed [21]. There, the limitations of the
current system have been mentioned by the government itself
[21]. The importance and demand for a privacy-friendly sys-
tem is cited as a perfect solution in this area. The collection,
storage and retrieval of health data while maintaining privacy
is the key point of the demand raised by the government [21].
In our solution, we provide the same elements and in our pro-
totype, these features are also functional with the blockchain
solution. Most importantly, Bangladesh has a well speciﬁed
and strict law under the "Bangladesh Digital Security Act"
due to which the government of Bangladesh cannot subscribe
to public cloud services of blockchain. Though these public
cloud services of blockchain are easy to manage, but it is not
suitable to store sensitive national data in such third-party
services. For this reason, Bangladesh is already convinced of
the importance of a "National blockchain Platform" hosted

VOLUME 4, 2016

5

Ariful et.al, et al.: Distributed Ledger Technology based Integrated Healthcare Solution for Bangladesh

by the relevant agency of the Government of Bangladesh
[21]. So, we have developed a prototype as a Proof of Con-
cept (PoC) employing a reputed framework "Hyperledger
Fabric", hosted on our own server and globally redirected
through a domain of our own DNS server [22] and followed
by the use case Health Application Domain. We anticipate
that our proposed solution can be a potential step towards
the adoption of blockchain technology for the nation. As our
proposed system can be set up on our own local server, and
it can be hosted globally with a domain name. So this system
can be set up in the national data center.

FIGURE 1: The key component types from Electronic Health
Record (EHR) Service which can be kept inside a secure
Blockchain Network to exhilarate the research in Medical
Science and Computer Science

With several government and non-government organiza-
tions involved in clinical / biomedical research, a decentral-
ized blockchain service may be the best choice in terms of se-
cure and traceable collaboration with resource management
features. With the help of this technology, various organiza-
tions can collaborate with other institutions/organizations to
share and analyze data without relinquishing control. Each
institution can maintain full control over its own computing
resources while collaborating with other institutions. In this
way, a solid data set can be formed for each clinical trial
[16]. Fig 1 represents the overview of this idea of secure
collaboration.

In this way, patient-generated data becomes available to
researchers. As a result, a decent environment as shown in
Fig 1 can be created where academia, healthcare industry and
healthcare professionals can collaborate.

In case of security and privacy, private blockchain can
be a good option to control transparency, security and im-
mutability of data. If anonymized and then tracked in the
research process with a timestamp, this secondary data source
would enable millions of individuals, healthcare providers,
healthcare institutions, and medical researchers to share vast

amounts of genetic, nutritional, lifestyle, environmental, and
health data with guaranteed security and privacy [16]

V. SYSTEM DESIGN
Private blockchain network is suitable to develop such robust
system. This is also known as Permissioned Ledger Technol-
ogy [19]. To demonstrate the proof of concept of the pro-
posed solution, a prototype is developed with the renowned
blockchain framework “Hyperledger Fabric” which is well
suited to the scenario of the proposed solution [23].

A. WHY PRIVATE LEDGER?
The proposed system is a kind of administrative system
that includes the services of the administration, the infor-
mation of the health ofﬁcials, the list of approved drugs,
and the medical history of the patients. So there is a need
to keep all these data. For this reason, data protection is
very important here. Especially when this system is working
with the data of government ofﬁcials, controlling the data
transparency is a big challenge. However, with a private
blockchain network, the service can be maintained easily
and the stated data transparency and control related problems
can be solved without any complex procedure. Because here
every user is identiﬁed precisely. Each user is registered
by a particular administration and belongs to a particular
organization. So, no anonymous or unknown user or bad
actor can enter the network to make an attack on the system.
On the other hand, public ledger is a kind of open network
that anyone can join or leave. The transparency is very clear
to everyone. Therefore, there are privacy concerns in some
scenarios like this system mention in this paper [19]. On the
other hand, most public ledger technologies depend on third
party vendors such as miners. So for organizations like the
government, relying on third party dependencies is not a good
practice. Here, the services and information are transparent to
everyone, while maintaining the privacy with top priority.

B. WHY HYPERLEDGER FABRIC?
Compared to other frameworks, Hyperledger Fabric is a
fully permissioned blockchain network that is well suited
for operations involving sensitive and conﬁdential data and
is also the most comprehensive solution for healthcare ap-
plications [23]. It was founded under the Linux Foundation
and also received contributions from IBM, Intel and SAP
Ariba to support the joint development of a blockchain-
based DLT. It was developed with an enterprise-grade per-
missioned distributed ledger technology (DLT) to ensure that
various government agencies and business organizations can
take advantage of a DLT system in various use cases [19].
This permissioned ledger technology is primarily known as
immune ledger technology [24]. So, after explaining the
pipeline approach of our technical plans, the most common
question about blockchain technology is. "Are we making the
government’s operational process dependent on third-party
miners?" To explain this, the term consensus mechanism
comes up as we mentioned that proposed system utilized the

6

VOLUME 4, 2016

Ariful et.al, et al.: Distributed Ledger Technology based Integrated Healthcare Solution for Bangladesh

Hyperledger Fabric framework. This framework also holds
a record of 3000 transactions per second, so the traditional
notion of blockchain’s slow speed and long processing time
will now be dispelled [23].

C. CONSENSUS MECHANISM
While we can see that the mining concept is widely used
in blockchain technology (mostly a public network), where
miners play the role of validating transactions. But in our
case, since we are developing a private blockchain network
with Fabric, having a proven alternative concept. This is
"Ordering Peer." Since the government organization itself is
a national authority, this concept can ﬁt well into our system.
This is because the ordering peers are not random peers in the
network. These peers are constantly selected to execute the
consensus mechanism to neutrally validate each transaction.
These peers can be one or more in a single channel. In our
system, the ministry can be the direct owner and authority
of the system. From the system user perspective, the repre-
sentative of the ministry can operate as governance. And as
this system is developed with Hyperledger Fabric the concept
of ‘Peers’ is a fundamental element of a private blockchain
network. Here each peer can represent an organization that
is responsible to host its related copies of ledgers and smart
contracts. As Hyperledger Fabric forms its network with
multiple peers that is where Docker comes in this topic.
To host all these peers as a service Docker is a very good
option for OS-level virtualization. These docker containers
can reduce the cost of the Blockchain Architecture required
infrastructures and make the whole system more manageable,
scalable, and efﬁcient. In these containers, different services
are hosted from a dedicated port.

D. CONSENSUS ALGORITHM
Now that we have clariﬁed the responsibilities for validation
in our system, it is important to know how validation is done.
For this Raft [25] is used, which is a distributed consensus
algorithm. This algorithm not only validates transactions,
but is also known for its fault tolerance and fast exception
handling. If there are multiple ordering peers in the network,
Raft elects one of them as the leader peer. If the leader peer
does not respond in time, Raft elects a new ordering peer as
the new leader to validate the transaction.

E. DATA STORAGE
Since our entire system is based on distributed ledger tech-
nology, we created a special mapping for data storage. In
Fig: 12a and 12b, we show the existence of blocks where
the data is stored. These blocks contain only transaction data
speciﬁed in actual bytes (1024 is 1KB). These blocks have a
size of 1 megabyte (MB), in which any transmitted change
is also stored, and the genesis block contains only the hash
and signatures or keys [26]. This data is called on-chain data,
which has the highest level of security.

In addition to this, our system also has to deal with
large amount of data. For example, user’s picture, doctor’s

certiﬁcate (PDF ﬁles) and other scanned documents. These
types of non-transactional data are called off-chain data.
Fig 2 represents the off-chain data. We cannot keep this
data in block for efﬁciency reasons. However, since medical
applications can run 24/7, this can also pose a threat to load
balancing. So for our prototype, we keep our off-chain data
in our Node.js-based centralised web application. But at the
production level, these off-chain data can be managed with
Inter Planetary File System (IPFS) [27]. While the transac-
tions are collected inside the clocks, we use CouchDB [28]
as our World State, which contains the current values of a
ledger. This helps the system to invoke chain code/smart
contracts with API to execute get, put, and delete requests
faster for better and faster user experience.

FIGURE 2: Example of Off-Chain data [26]

F. SMART CONTRACT
A smart contract, also known as chain code, is an executable
script that is triggered when it meets its conditions [18]. This
is the ﬁle that contains the business logic of the system.
It runs as a script during the execution phase [24].This
also controls the capability of information read and write.
More speciﬁcally, this ﬁle allows to write any logic and
set conditions in the computer code according to the sys-
tem requirements and speciﬁcations. In Hyperledger Fabric,
various SDKs are provided that allows to write chain code
or smart contract in JavaScript. This chain code can have
different logic and conditions depending on the role of the
organization and each supporting peer of that organization
has the same chain code and it is depicted in the Fig 12a.
When a request appears to these peers, the chain code checks
the condition of this request and if the conditions are met,
the execution will make a change in the world state (DB) and
respond with a signature. Steps 2 and 3 of Fig 9 references to
this operation. In Fig: 6 a brief overview of the chain code or
smart contract is depicted.
Our blockchain service is fully functional as a backend
service and the smart contract plays an important role here.
Many autonomous triggers are managed here for better

VOLUME 4, 2016

7

Ariful et.al, et al.: Distributed Ledger Technology based Integrated Healthcare Solution for Bangladesh

user experience and faster service. Since chain code/smart
contract programming in Hyperledger Fabric provides sup-
port for various programming languages like Java, Go and
JavaScript [23] we used the JavaScript SDK to write smart
contracts. We also created a web portal using the Express.js
framework [29], which provides various APIs that can be
used to communicate with other medical or IoT devices. The
proposed system is ﬂexible and scalable. So in the future, if
the healthcare sector adopts IoT devices on a large scale and
global technology provides so much transparency in terms of
privacy, this sensor data can be easily captured by creating
more APIs and methods in our smart contracts / chain codes.

G. STAKEHOLDERS
Our solution as a product will be available on three different
platforms. There will be a web portal, desktop application
and a mobile application. These platforms are divided by user
type. Our users are:

• Central Authority (In the prototype, BMDC is playing

this role.)

• Doctors
• Citizen/ Patient (In our prototype this type of user is

known as “Nagorik”)

1) Central Authority
Among these three types of user The Central Authority can
be any organization or ministry of the central government.
For example, “Ministry of Health and Family Welfare”. This
type of user can perform the following tasks from the web
portal.

• Authorize Doctors, Medicines.
• Analyze Health data with privacy (Anonymous).
• Review complains submitted by the patients.
• Can verify and approve the update of any doctor’s

information.

• Can check government authorized medicine / drug list.
• Can store data of medicine distribution for future inves-

tigation.

• Can store data to analyze Doctors’ drug prescribing

tendency for the future.

• See ofﬁcial news feed for every veriﬁed health news to

keep the user updated.

2) Doctors
The Doctors must be authorized by the central authority user
of this system. Authorized physicians will be provided with
desktop application. This software can work both online and
ofﬂine. With this software, the system can keep all the data to
help the doctor in case study of the patients. As the software
keeps all the data, the activity of any doctor who is a health
care provider can also be analyzed. In general operation,
using the software the doctors can perform the following
tasks.

• Create / print prescription and automatic assistance for

suggesting proper Medicine.

• Alert notiﬁcation if any drug/medicine can be a threat

for current patient.

• Store every general information efﬁciently to assist the

doctor during poor network connection.

• Get fast identiﬁcation of the patient through his/her NID

card or Birth Certiﬁcate.

• Doctor can update their educational / experience status
from the software and after verifying the validity of that
information it will get published.

3) Nagorik
Nagorik user are the general people of Bangladesh. They are
the patients who will seek medical services from our system.
They can be easily identiﬁed by the national identity number.
Each identiﬁed user has an account in the web portal through
which they can access national health services online. The
services are:

• Patient / citizen can login and logout to his / her own

“Nagorik Portal”.

• Can see all his / her medical records (Medical Test/

Prescription) online with full privacy.

• Can check the authorized medicine / drug list and also

about the free medicines and tests.

• Can place complain easily if he / she is not satisﬁed with

any government medical service.

• Can check his complain priority status whenever he /

she wants.

• Can ﬁnd a speciﬁc Specialist Doctor according to pa-

tient’s problem. ( Veriﬁed Specialty )

• Can get easy appointment from home. So the doctor and

patient both can maintain a well timing.

So, as we can see, this proposed solution covers most of
the needs of healthcare and medical services. It can collect
all the data related to this service. So, if needed, this data
can be used as evidence to investigate complaints against
a service provider. By keeping the data neutral, all parties
involved can be sure when they are fulﬁlling their duties. No
user can exploit this system to make false accusations against
a service provider.

H. ARCHITECTURE
If we generalize the architecture of our proposed blockchain
application, we can simply split it into two parts. The "SDK"
part and the "Decentralize Ledger Technology". The "SDK"
part is the point that connects the user directly to the DLT
solution. The availability of developer resources for Node.js
and the "Hyperledger Fabric" framework is sufﬁcient, so
we prefer the "Express JS" framework in the "SDK" part.
As these two frameworks and languages are popular in
Bangladesh, a well-maintained interactive service can be
developed to connect people with this new technology. So
we get the ﬂexibility of rapid development to enable the
"Human Computer Interaction" (HCI). Fig 5 represents the
architecture in three parts to illustrate the approach.

In Fig 3a we can see a sequence diagram of our system.
First the doctor applies for registration in order to use the

8

VOLUME 4, 2016

Ariful et.al, et al.: Distributed Ledger Technology based Integrated Healthcare Solution for Bangladesh

(a) A detail overview of the system where different types of user will be operating with their dedicated user platform to perform their operations in the
Blockchain environment

(b) A sequence diagram of Doctor’s Desktop application communicating with three different types of peers of Blockchain Network through SDK based
application

FIGURE 3: Platform overview and Doctor’s application sequence diagram

VOLUME 4, 2016

9

Ariful et.al, et al.: Distributed Ledger Technology based Integrated Healthcare Solution for Bangladesh

system. The request will be sent to the Blockchain and
the Central Authority will validate the registration and sent
back the conﬁrmation to the Doctor. After that the doctor
can login into the system if given access by the Desktop
Software. Nagorik can log into the system if given access
my web portal. After successfully logging in a Nagorik can
request for doctor appointment. The request will be sent to
Blockchain and it will sent back the doctor appointment data
back to requester. Then Nogorik can conﬁrm the appointment
and this will be updated at Blockchain. Doctor can request
for patient’s information and medical history in Desktop
Software if given consent by the patient. The information will
be taken from Blockchain and will be sent back to doctor
through Desktop Software. Doctor can request for medicine
validity. The request will be sent to Blockchain and if its valid
then permission will be given for market supply to the doctor.
Doctor can prescribe medicine for patient. The prescription
information will be sent to Blockchain and the Blockchain
will be updated. Nagorik can also complain using Web Portal
and the complains will be sent to Blockchain and if valid,
they will be added to the Blockchain.

The architecture of the proposed system currently has three
user types, namely doctor, nagorik and central authority. And
two platforms from where services are provided: Web portal
and Desktop application. In Fig 3b, the data ﬂow of a simple
process can be seen. Here, the doctor ﬁrst installs the desktop
software and the software asks for credentials. Then the
doctor enters his credentials and this request is sent by the
client SDK to the endorser peer. If the request is invalid, the
invalid request message is sent back to the client SDK, and
if it is valid, the world state is sent back to the client SDK
for matching. After that, the matching result is sent to the
desktop software. If the result matches, the doctor is logged
into the system, otherwise the request is rejected.

As we can see in the Fig 4, there is a Genesis block at
the beginning. And after it goes through all the approval
and governing processes, a new block is added to the chain.
The hash value of the current block is added with the newly
added data, the value is merged with a new block number,
and the header of the new block is created. The same process
is performed for the next new block. From this we can see
that each block is actually linked to a chain of sequences in
the blockchain. So, no information can be manipulated from
any point of the chain. For this reason, blockchain is deﬁned
as an immutable ledger.

1) Client Web Portal
A public website developed using conventional web technol-
ogy and identiﬁed by a public domain name so that anyone
can easily ﬁnd it on the internet. For general visitors, the front
end of this website behaves like a normal website. But for
the people of Bangladesh with national identiﬁcation number
(NID), the backend of this website contains a mechanism to
open a portal for a national online health service secured with
DLT technology. This portal is developed with Node.js and
Express.js Framework.

2) Digital Health Card
The solution we propose is a private DLT. So, any user/citizen
cannot join or leave without proper permission. Therefore,
at the the DLT end, there will be a special organization that
will verify each citizen with the NID and an administrator
of this organization will register them once as user in this
organization so that users can access the DLT services. This
registration process includes the digital signature of this
organization and creates a digital health card for registered
users. This health card is similar to the wallet concept of other
private DLTs.

3) DLT - blockchain as a Service
After successful registration, a registered user sends a request
through the SDK portal using the health card. Here, each re-
quest from the user maintains a proper protocol and a speciﬁc
structure with many authentic parameters. For each request,
ﬁrst the user is veriﬁed and then if the request is valid as per
the smart contract then the request is executed and sends a
response to the SDK. After each successful execution, the
information is archived with its present and past form in
all distributed ledgers. In this way, the information is kept
in a sequential form of blocks, which represents the term
blockchain. Fig 6 represents the overview of this operation.

The proposed solution has a well-structured chain of com-
mand to maintain its governance. In the Fig: 7, the basic
infrastructure is shown as an example. Fig 7, is considered
as a virtual machine environment. Here, it can be seen that
multiple peers hold different ports of a system. There is an
"orderer" with two nodes (port: 7050, 8050) that run the
consensus mechanism (RAFT) to generate a valid block in
the blockchain sequence. In the Fig 7, there are three different
organizations (port: 7051, 9051, and 5051) that will govern
the individual user activity of the system. Each user type can
have its own organization for its governance. These three
organizations, the ﬁrst peer (Port: 7051, 9051 and 5051),
are called the "Anchor Peer". This is the address to which
all user/client requests are sent. It holds the chain code and
executes it on request [24]. The other peers can be used as a
’Gossip Peer’ holding the ports 8051, 10051, 6051 to verify
the integrity of the system node through peer-to-peer block
gossip [24]. These three Anchor Peered organizations each
have their own administrator responsible for registering new
users. These administrators are able to add new users under
their organization in the network, for which the system cre-
ates a health card for each registered user. Fig 8 represents the
user adding procedure to the network. Only these registered
users can enter the DLT service and perform their actions
in the organizations they belong to. All the actions of these
users will be veriﬁed each time with their health card, and
if the veriﬁcation is successful, the ordering peer will verify
it with its consensus mechanism. This is the basic structure
of our governance property and all these organizations are
identiﬁed by MSP.

MSP stands for "Membership Service Provider" and is a
service that maintains its operation using ’CA Servers’. In

10

VOLUME 4, 2016

Ariful et.al, et al.: Distributed Ledger Technology based Integrated Healthcare Solution for Bangladesh

FIGURE 4: Generic Blockchain Architecture [30]

FIGURE 5: The Bridge of User and DLT where user can gain
access in the Blockchain environment with his / her dedicated
health-card which will be stored at SDK based application
server.

the Fig: 7 there are some nodes which contain ports 9054,
7054, 8054, 5054. Among these ports, we see that there is
a dedicated CA server for each of the organizations. The
orderer also has its own CA server. All these servers can
perform the identiﬁcation process which is managed by the
MSP. Tools for key management and node registration are
also part of the MSP [24].

In the Fig: 9, the entire data ﬂow and governance are
visually represented. This Fig exhibits the ’Endorser’ and
’Committing Peer’ differently to make the idea clearer. But
in our implementation, the ’Endorser’ and ’Committer’ will
be the same peer for each organization.

1) The ﬁrst step in the Fig: 9 is the client application send-

FIGURE 6: A visual
representation of national scale
Blockchain service where every public / private medical in-
stitutions are acting as Blockchain Nodes

ing a request to the anchor peer of the corresponding
organisation. This will act as the endorser.

2) In this step, the endorser ﬁrst starts the MSP operation
to check user validation. If the request is from a valid
user, the endorser executes the chain code and the
world state is updated.

VOLUME 4, 2016

11

Ariful et.al, et al.: Distributed Ledger Technology based Integrated Healthcare Solution for Bangladesh

FIGURE 7: Base servers of the system which will run on different ports at Docker Containers

tem. So that Raft can elect any orderer to be the leader
in any situation to complete the task.

5) After a successful consensus mechanism, a new up-

dated block is created.

6) When the ordering peer conﬁrms the new block, all

binding peers add the block to their blockchain.

I. GOVERNANCE
From the explanation of the architecture, we can see that the
proposed solution maintains a well-governed body. For each
process in this system, each node has its own governance
role. Any administrator of an organization can control the
process of user registration and creation of user’s health card
with the digital signature distributed by CA server (MSP).
The conﬁrming peers validate the user’s identiﬁcation (MSP)
and the operation requested by the user (chain code). If
these two checks are successful, the orderer authorizes the
data and generates a new block. After all this, there is a
dedicated peer component in each peer of the DLT for the
commitment of the block. In the Fig: 12a and 12b, it can
be seen that each peer and orderer holds the block which
is always up to date. From the Fig: 8, it can also be seen
that each user is added to each organization in the private
DLT through strict governance under its own structure. In
this way, our decentralized ledger technology works with a
strong governance body that is technically automated and
trustworthy as all the control is neutral.

J. PRIVACY AND ACCESS
Blockchain-based healthcare services could remove barriers
to patients acquiring copies of their health records or transfer-
ring them to another healthcare service provider. Records can
be veriﬁed after they are signed by the source and added to
the blockchain. This service can guarantee the immutability
of patient records using the key pair concept of the asymmet-
ric key algorithm. Encrypted data in the blockchain can only
be read using the patient’s private key, which allows patients
to control access to their sensitive data. This is in line with the

FIGURE 8: User Enrollment process presented as a ﬂowchart

3) Then, the endorser sends a response to the client-
side application to conﬁrm that the digital signature is
true/valid.

4) In this step, the change/ invoke operation performed
over the chain code is sent to the ordering peer. The
ordering peer will execute the consensus mechanism.
To perform this operation, the ordering peer can be
conﬁgured with any consensus algorithm. Such as
PBFT [31], Raft, Proof of Work (POW) [32], Proof
of Stake (POS) [32], etc. In the proposed system Raft
is used as the consensus mechanism. For this reason,
there are multiple ordering peers in the proposed sys-

12

VOLUME 4, 2016

Ariful et.al, et al.: Distributed Ledger Technology based Integrated Healthcare Solution for Bangladesh

FIGURE 9: Step by step process of Data ﬂow and Governance with three different peer types inside the Blockchain Network

European General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) [33],
Bangladesh Digital Security Act [21] and other healthcare
security regulations (HIPAA) [16].

VI. IMPLEMENTATION
This section describes the implementation of the proposed
system.

also has a feature to monitor and to protect the server from
denial of service (DDoS) attacks [38]. If abnormal trafﬁc is
detected during trafﬁc monitoring, "Under Attack Mode" is
enabled to protect the web server from DDoS attacks. When
"Under Attack Mode" is enabled, all API services become
unavailable and Web clients must pass a CAPTCHA [39] test
to visit the website.

A. INFRASTRUCTURE
To develop the physical infrastructure, our setup requires
some simple components. To set up the proposed system, a
stable Internet connection, an optical network unit (ONU), a
Wi-Fi router (2.4 GHz), and a generic desktop computer for
the hosting server is required. The minimum conﬁguration
required for the hosting server is as follows.

• 16 GB RAM
• 256 GB SSD
• Intel Core i7 Processor (7th generation, 4 Cores pro-
cessor with 8 threads, 3.90GHz Frequency with 8MB
Cache)

• 650W Power Supply
Since this prototype has a limited number of users and
trafﬁc, no additional cooling system is required for the
physical devices. However, considering the production level
deployment, the proposed system includes some safeguards
for the security of the hardware, which are explained in
section VI-B titled "Security".

B. SECURITY
A public IP is assigned to our router for hosting this ser-
vice. And the router was conﬁgured for port forwarding. In
the conﬁguration, external port is 80 for hosting the whole
service. To hide the public IP and port number from the
internet, Cloudﬂare is used as a CDN service [34], [35]. This
CDN service protects the public IP and redirects a domain
name to the hosting server. Cloudﬂare also fulﬁlls some of
the security requirements. For example, the SSL security
protocol [36], [37]. This establishes an encrypted connection
between the web server and the client browser. In Fig 10, the
use of Cloudﬂare is visible at the top level. This CDN service

C. NETWORK SETUP
To set up the personal server, two things need to be conﬁg-
ured. One is a router network conﬁguration and the other is a
virtual box network conﬁguration. Multiple virtual machines
need to be able to connect to physical and virtual networks
through their virtual network adapters in the Virtual Box
GUI. In this process, Virtual Box connects the network
through various processes. Virtual Box provides many dif-
ferent types of networking modes, as follows:

• NAT Network [40]
• Bridged Adapter [41], [42]
• Internal Network
• Host-Only Adapter
• Generic driver

Here Bridge Adapter is used to conﬁgure the network for
application access.

1) Bridge Adapter
This mode is used to connect the virtual network adapter of
a VM to a physical network to which a physical network
adapter of the VirtualBox host machine is connected. The
host machine is used to connect to the WIFI network. The
following steps describe the process to enable the bridge
network.

1) First need to select the settings option from the selected

VM.

2) Then select the network option from the GUI.
3) After that, attached to the adapter option of the bridge

adapter network mode.

4) Then the wireless network adapter option needs to be

selected through bridge adapter option.

VOLUME 4, 2016

13

Ariful et.al, et al.: Distributed Ledger Technology based Integrated Healthcare Solution for Bangladesh

FIGURE 10: System Architecture (DLT represented with Docker Containers)

As a result, the guest computer has an IP address that is
the same as the host computer. This IP address is assigned
via the router conﬁguration. The router is connected to the
public IP like 103.96.37.122. Now the router has assigned
multiple private IP addresses to multiple machines . Here
the IP 192.168.0.109 with port 80 is assigned to the guest
machine (Linux) through the bridge adapter in network
mode. However, no one can access the application with
the public IP. NAT (Network Address Translation) is not
conﬁgured in the router to reach the virtual machine.

To conﬁgure the router, it needs to access the router’s inter-
face. This interface is accessed via the IP 192.168.0.1. After
passing the login page, the GUI of the router conﬁguration
appears infront of the user. Then, select the NAT forwarding
option. Next, select Virtual Server and specify the external
port and the internal port with the private IP of the guest
machine. This completes the port forwarding mechanism.
Now the personal server setup is complete and the application
is open to be accessed globally using the public IP.

14

VOLUME 4, 2016

Ariful et.al, et al.: Distributed Ledger Technology based Integrated Healthcare Solution for Bangladesh

D. APPLICATION LAYER
In the top level of Fig 10, three different platforms are
mentioned, namely mobile, desktop and web applications.
This system supports cross-platform capability by using SDK
and API gateway. As mentioned earlier, the proposed system
uses Hyperledger Fabric Framework and JavaScript SDK
while maintaining Object Oriented Programming (OOP)
inheritance is largely used here for adopting
standards.
SDK components into our NodeJS environment. "fabric-
contract-api" [43], "fabric-ca-client" [44] and "fabric-
network" [45] these three modules of Hyperledger Fabric
are mostly used in the implementation of the prototype
system.

1) fabric-contract-api
This module is used when a smart contract needs to be
installed in a peer or for initializing the smart contract / chain
code.

2) fabric-network
This is one of the most important modules that connects the
digital healthcard (known as a wallet in Fabric) to the appli-
cation layer of the proposed system. The Fig 5 represents the
overview of this module . From logging a user into the private
blockchain network to creating a healthcard for that user, this
module is widely used. It is also responsible for verifying
the healthcard. Fig 8 represents the complete workﬂow of
this user registration operation. This module also has another
object called gateway. This object connects a user to the
blockchain network which returns a contract object. It helps
the client / user to perform its read and write operations in
the smart contract. The authentication process for user login
is also controlled from here. Fig 11 exhibits this process step
by step for better understanding.

3) fabric-ca-client
This module is responsible for establishing communication
with the CA server. Whenever fabric-network is used over
the healthcard, the module fabric-ca-client is called each
time to authenticate the user and his request.

All these processes are managed by the Node.js environ-
ment running on internal port 3000. In the Node.js envi-
ronment, the main web application that actually works with
the SDK is developed using the Express framework, which
is actually an MVC-based web application framework. This
web application acts as a portal between client applications
and blockchain service. This web application has its own
client interface and also an API service. This is the actual
web service that is redirected by the router to the external
port 80. For patient ﬂexibility, a mobile application for our
blockchain service is also developed for Android and iOS
platforms. For this purpose, ﬂutter [46] is used. This mobile
application uses the API services provided by the Express
web application [47]. The physicians’ software is developed
using C#, a Windows-based desktop application software that

uses the same API services provided by the Express-based
web application to access the blockchain services.

E. BLOCKCHAIN AS A SERVICE
This section describes the architecture and implementation of
the blockchain As A Service part of the proposed system. Fig
10 presents the overview of the proposed system.

1) Framework
For robust privacy and security features with support for
granular access control, private channels, and good docu-
mentation, we chose Hyperledger Fabric to implement this
system [23]. The framework version v2.1.0 is utilized for the
system development.

This framework has pre-built docker images [48] to sup-
port the development process and ensure all blockchain
standards. Pre-built docker images are read-only template
that creates docker containers with different conﬁguration
already implemented on those containers . Fig 10 shows
the architecture of the Fabric framework, which contains the
entire blockchain service with many Docker containers.

2) Virtual Machine Environment
To run the blockchain application, it is easier to use a Linux-
based operating system. The Hyperledger framework is also
conﬁgured based on Linux OS. So the ﬁrst task is to create
a Linux-based environment. A virtual machine environment
is required to run a Linux-based guest operating system
from windows based host operating system. In the proposed
system, Oracle Virtual box [49] virtual machine platform is
used to set up the Linux operating system on the Windows-
based machine. Then, all the required applications such as
Docker and Hyperledger Fabric Framework are set up on the
Linux-based OS residing in the virtual machine environment.
It is true that all these clients have their own domain
name. However, since this implementation is a prototype, the
individual domain names are identical only in the Docker
environment. All of these blockchain peers are virtually
decentralized on a single physical machine and the entire
blockchain service is hosted live under a single domain name,
using the router’s external port 80.

Fig 10 shows that the entire "blockchain As A Service"

part is implemented in a VM environment.

3) Docker Container
Within the VM, Docker is used to automate the deployment
of the application as a lightweight container, allowing the
application to work efﬁciently in different environments. It
provides a variety of processes with virtualization system
architecture. This makes it easy to deploy an application in
a decentralized architecture in a prototype-level blockchain
service.

4) CA Server
In this permission-based private blockchain network, CA
server or Certiﬁcate Authority Server is the most important

VOLUME 4, 2016

15

Ariful et.al, et al.: Distributed Ledger Technology based Integrated Healthcare Solution for Bangladesh

part. This particular service is responsible for identifying and
certifying each orderer, organization and also each user. For
the implementation of this system, these services are also
hosted in different Docker containers on a single physical
machine. In Fig 10, we can see that there are four containers
hosting these servers in four different ports (9054, 7054,
8054, 5054). It can be seen that there is a dedicated CA server
(port: 9054) for certifying the orderder peers and the other
three organizations also have their own CA server. Each peer
admin and user has to get certiﬁed and veriﬁed through the
dedicated CA server they belong to.

5) World State
In the Fig 10, the Docker containers highlighted in yellow are
the World State of the proposed system. These World states
also run on different Docker containers running on different
ports (5984, 7984, 9984) identiﬁed as Org1, Org2 and Org3.
Only the organization peers have their own World State for
fast queries and client support.

6) Orderer
In the case of Orderer in our private blockchain network, an
’N’ number of Orderer can be created. Because after each
transaction in one of the peer orderers is the actual Private
blockchain authority that automates the veriﬁcation process
in the system. In this system implementation, we have created
only 2 (two) orderers inside our system. In Fig 10, these are
marked with orange color (Orderer 1 and Orderer 2). These
two orderers run on port 7050 and 8050.

7) User Enrollment Process
The implementation process in registering new clients is a
very interesting part. Because with a private blockchain net-
work, it is very important to prevent bad actors and keep all
actors/visitors identical. To ensure these standards, processes
depicted in Fig 8 is followed in the implementation. Here,
CA server acts as a "Membership Service Provider" (MSP).
Each organization that is part of this blockchain service has a
Default Admin. This role, known as Admin, is responsible
for authorizing a new user in the corresponding organization.
And when a user is added, he/she must have a special Digital
Health Card for continued existence in the system. An admin
can register both an user and an admin user in the system.
But an user can only perform its general operations in the
system. From Fig 8, it can be seen that the X organization has
an Admin that signs up a new User, with CA Server serving
as MSP. This collaboration has created a new healthcard for
a new user. This mechanism implies that an actor cannot gain
access to or leave a private blockchain network of its own
volition.

8) Login Authentication Process
User login authentication is the phase where the whole im-
plementation process took a new turn. although the Hyper-
ledger Fabric has very good documentation. But in merg-
ing an MVC framework with a completely new technology

(blockchain) for a better integration experience, there were
so many difﬁculties faced in the development process. In
the absence of proper documentation, this area was mostly
developed by ourselves. The whole process of login and
authentication is described in Fig 11 with a ﬂowchart.

1) Start
2) Get credentials (identity and password) from user as

inputs.

3) check if identity exists in health card if NO then print

"Invalid Identity"
else
get password from World-state using identity.

4) check if password matches if YES then grant access

otherwise print "Invalid Password"

5) end

This whole operation is managed using the SDK, where
Health Card is the key to access the blockchain network.

FIGURE 11: User Authentication Process Diagram (SDK)

VII. DISCUSSION
The National ID Card of Bangladesh is a perfect example to
prove that we are ready to adopt private blockchain appli-
cation in national level. As we have seen, the whole nation
already has a unique identity. At least those who do not have
their NID can be uniquely identiﬁed by their birth certiﬁcate.

16

VOLUME 4, 2016

Ariful et.al, et al.: Distributed Ledger Technology based Integrated Healthcare Solution for Bangladesh

Bangladesh can build its own DLT-based healthcare service
that can be set up and maintained in the fourth-tier national
data center, which can be a step towards the cloud-based
national blockchain platform program [21] of Bangladesh.
In the "Why our solution" section of this paper, this point
is explained in detail.

The proposed blockchain application is tested using a
load testing approach. The testing and analysis followed the
APDEX (Application Performance Index), an open standard
developed by an alliance of companies to measure the per-
formance of software applications in the computing domain.
Its purpose is to transform measurements into user satisfac-
tion insights. This is achieved by establishing a consistent
method for analyzing and reporting on the extent to which
measured performance meets user expectations, based on
the number of satisﬁed, tolerant, and frustrated users. The
blockchain application is hosted on a server with limited
hardware resources. We used a virtual environment with 8
GB of RAM and 2 processor cores. The tests are performed
using JMeter tool, the number of concurrent users is set to
100 (threads), the ramp-up time is 10 and the user types are
BMDC (superadmin of the system) and Nagorik (citizen).
The ramp up time speciﬁes how long JMeter takes to ramp up
or activate speciﬁc users (threads) for testing. In this scenario,
after 10 seconds, all 100 users will be active in our blockchain
environment.

The graph shown in Figure 13 shows the result of sum-
marizing the requests, whether they are in order or not. The
graph shows that the results are overwhelmingly positive,
with a percentage of 96.34% positive requests and only
3.66% negative requests.

FIGURE 13: Performance Test Request Summary

The graph in Figure 14 shows the granularity of 10 seconds
of total user transactions per second. We can also see that
there are only two points in a second where the number
of transaction failures is highest. However, the number of
failures does not exceed 41 transactions, while the successful
transaction rate is 142 per second. So the failure rate of the
overall result is very low compared to the success rate.

The diagram in Figure 15 illustrates the overview of the
response times of the requests generated by the users. It can
be seen that the majority of the requests have a response time

(a) Block location in orderer structure

(b) Block location in peer structure

FIGURE 12: Location of a Block inside the hyper ledger fabric
framework in the orderer and peer structure.

And as a practical example, all banks in Bangladesh are
already working with their customers with one of these two
documents. The government provides its web services to
verify these documents online for the ﬁnancial institutions.
In some cases, APIs are also provided by the government
for these services. So, we can say that one of the major
challenges in implementing permissioned blockchain has
already been solved. On the bright side, we no longer need to
invest to register every citizen in our system. Simply working
with the "National Identity Wing" can save both investment
and time. In this way, we will be able to include not only
health ofﬁcials, but the whole nation in our health network.

At the moment, there is no competitor to our proposed so-
lution in Bangladesh. But as the demand for DLT is increas-
ing day by day, the ministry may need this kind of technology
for its ofﬁce work in future. So if the ministry considers the
proposed solution as an underdeveloped product and waits
for a well-known third party company to provide a standard
enterprise service, it could be a competition for us. But
that could be a risk, a breach of our national data security
policy. Because then all the information of government health
ofﬁcials and citizens’ medical records will end up in the
hands of third-party vendors. But our proposed solution and
PoC is not about competition and Business. It is about the
national demand to advance the technology for humanity.
By applying more R&D to this PoC, the government of

VOLUME 4, 2016

17

Ariful et.al, et al.: Distributed Ledger Technology based Integrated Healthcare Solution for Bangladesh

Human Resource for Maintenance

Working days in a week: 5 | Yearly Bonus: 2

Resource

Person

Experience

Salary

Total Cost

Type

Count

Level

(BDT/mon)

(BDT)

FIGURE 14: Success and Failure rate of Total Transactions
Per Second in granularity of 10 seconds

of less than 500 ms, namely 17020 out of 25,509 requests,
4987 requests have a response time of more than 500 ms and
less than 1500 ms, 2568 requests have a response time of
more than 1500 ms and very few requests failed, namely 934
out of a total of 25,509 requests. Overall, the result looks very
positive

It should be noted that these analyses should be considered
hypothetical, as our blockchain application is developed and
installed on our own conﬁgured server. It is therefore subject
to hardware and network limitations.

HR Executive

Business

Administration

Digital Marketer

Graphics Designer

Project Manager

Software Engineer

Software Developer

SQA Engineer

DevOPs Engineer

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

2

1

1

Total human resource

12

Mid

50,000

50,000

Senior

65,000

65,000

Mid

Mid

Mid

35,000

35,000

40,000

40,000

120,000

120,000

Senior

150,000

150,000

Mid

Mid

73,000

73,000

70,000

70,000

70,000

Associate

35,000

Mid

55,000

55,000

Senior

170,000

170,000

Total

Monthly Cost

898,000

Human Resource For converting prototype level to Production level work

Sprint: 20 | Working days in a week: 5

TABLE 4: Human resource and cost required for the mainte-
nance phase.

Resource

Person

Experience

Salary

Contact

Total Cost

Type

Count

Level

(BDT/mon)

Duration

(BDT)

HR Executive

Project Manager

UI/UX Designer

Software Engineer

Software Developer

SQA Engineer

Automation

QA Engineer

DevOPs Engineer

1

1

1

1

2

2

5

1

2

1

1

1

Mid

50,000

Senior

150,000

Mid

50,000

Senior

150,000

Mid

Mid

73,000

55,000

Associate

35,000

Senior

70,000

Associate

35,000

Mid

55,000

Senior

170,000

Associate

35,000

9

9

3

9

9

9

9

9

4

4

4

4

450,000

1,350,000

150,000

1,350,000

1,314,000

990,000

1,575,000

630,000

280,000

220,000

680,000

140,000

Total human resource

19

Total Sprint Cost

9,129,000

TABLE 3: Human resource and cost required for the initial
development phase.

As stated in this article, we have developed a blockchain-
based application for our proposed solution that is fully
functional. Which ensures all requirements and standards for
a Blockchain application. Therefore, in Table 3, blockchain

infrastructure is not emphasized separately. Here, we believe
it is prudent to invest primarily in client-side applications.
This is due to the fact that, despite the fact that the entirety
of the research in this article is devoted to blockchain, no de-
tailed work has been conducted on all the necessary features
of its user organizations, including the user experience of its
users. Therefore, if action is required at the production level,
it will be in each of these sectors. Therefore, Blockchain
Expert is not allocated a speciﬁc budget in our future cost
plan.

The Table 3 is for the initial approach to the development
of the project at the production level. Therefore, there is no
permanent position listed in this table. This table depicts an
estimate of a 20-sprint project plan in which various human
resources will be added at varying intervals. For example,
UI/UX designer, Who will be added to the sprint from the
very beginning in order to create an accurate visualization of
the features and a demo of their user experience. However,
he or she will focus on the sprint for the initial three months.
In contrast, a DevOps engineer will be added to the sprint
for the last four months if we takes, it into account. As they
are primarily responsible for server-side work and project de-
ployment. For the duration of the sprint, however, there will
be a dedicated management team, developer team, and testing
team. As these teams are available for the duration of the
sprint, it is simple to select any Software Development Life

18

VOLUME 4, 2016

Ariful et.al, et al.: Distributed Ledger Technology based Integrated Healthcare Solution for Bangladesh

FIGURE 15: Response Time Overview

Cycle (SDLC) Model for the development of this project.

After the proposed solution has been implemented on
the production server, a full-time technical team is required
which is presented in Table 4 with proper cost estimation.
Here, we have scaled the technical team’s budget to business
criteria. Such as Business Administrator, Digital Marketer,
and Graphic Designer for the design of content to attract a
large audience to this system.

FIGURE 16: Cloud Service Packages

As previously stated, we cannot use a third-party cloud
service for hosting if the service was developed speciﬁcally
for government use. The National Data Center (NDC) will
provide this service [50]. The Figure 16 shows the package
information which is the best ﬁt for our service. As this
service is intended for use on a national scale, we will use the
X.Large package. Which service is an Elastic Cloud (ECS).
ECS is an excellent private blockchain package. With the aid
of ECS, we can add any number of new organizations to
our network at any time and scale them in 5 or 6 minutes

from the server-side. And after purchasing a single Public
IP, we can subnet mask these IPs and scale any number
of organization peers in the ECS environment using private
IPs. In this package, the Load Balancing service is also very
inexpensive.

The entire cost estimate was based on the Bangladeshi

Taka in May 2022, when 1 USD was worth 86.07 BDT.

VIII. CONCLUSION
Health care in Bangladesh is a sector in which both gov-
ernmental and nongovernmental organizations collaborate.
Although the quality of services in the private sector is im-
proving day by day and a competitive environment has been
created to deliver good services, public hospitals are slowing
down for a number of reasons. In many cases, corruption
is responsible. Although the government takes various ini-
tiatives every year to provide various health services to the
people of the country, there is no way to ensure that they
reach the people. Because our health care system operates
on a national level, the ministry still monitors them in a
traditional way. As a result, many wrongdoers get through
here easily and without any irregularities. On the other hand,
the complaints of the harmed people do not reach the policy
makers. Therefore, this study develops a healthcare appli-
cation framework based on distributed ledger technology
that can eliminate corruption and establish a proper health-
care providing and monitoring system for the citizens of
Bangladesh. The proposed system is a simple and reliable
digital process for all organizations where all agreements and
information are guaranteed to be immutable.

VOLUME 4, 2016

19

Ariful et.al, et al.: Distributed Ledger Technology based Integrated Healthcare Solution for Bangladesh

REFERENCES

[1] Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, “Government of the People’s
Republic of Bangladesh Ministry of Health and Family Welfare Human
Resources Development Unit HRD Data Sheet-2011 B,” pp. 2005–2008,
2011.

[2] T. Joarder, T. Z. Chaudhury, and I. Mannan, “Universal Health Coverage in
Bangladesh: Activities, Challenges, and Suggestions,” Advances in Public
Health, vol. 2019, pp. 1–12, 2019.

[3] O. Analytica, “Kaseya ransomware attack underlines supply chain risks,”

Emerald Expert Brieﬁngs, no. oxan-es.

[4] M. S. U. Miah, M. S. Tahsin, S. Azad, G. Rabby, M. S. Islam, S. Uddin,
and M. Masuduzzaman, “A geofencing-based recent trends identiﬁcation
from twitter data,” in IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and
Engineering, vol. 769, no. 1.

IOP Publishing, 2020, p. 012008.

[5] D. Ichikawa, M. Kashiyama, and T. Ueno, “Tamper-resistant mobile health
using blockchain technology,” JMIR mHealth and uHealth, vol. 5, no. 7,
p. e7938, 2017.

[6] Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MOHFW), “BANGLADESH
ESSENTIAL HEALTH SERVICE PACKAGE ( ESP ) Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare Government of the People ’ s Republic of Bangladesh
BANGLADESH ESSENTIAL HEALTH SERVICE PACKAGE ( ESP ),”
2016.

[7] T. Heart, O. Ben-Assuli, and I. Shabtai, “A review of phr, emr and ehr
integration: A more personalized healthcare and public health policy,”
Health Policy and Technology, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 20–25, 2017.
[8] “GDPR Archives.” [Online]. Available: https://gdpr.eu/tag/gdpr/
[9] A. Roehrs, C. A. Da Costa, and R. da Rosa Righi, “Omniphr: A dis-
tributed architecture model to integrate personal health records,” Journal
of biomedical informatics, vol. 71, pp. 70–81, 2017.

[10] T. Bocek, B. B. Rodrigues, T. Strasser, and B. Stiller, “Blockchains
everywhere-a use-case of blockchains in the pharma supply-chain,” in
2017 IFIP/IEEE symposium on integrated network and service manage-
ment (IM).

IEEE, 2017, pp. 772–777.

[11] X. Liang, J. Zhao, S. Shetty, J. Liu, and D. Li, “Integrating blockchain
for data sharing and collaboration in mobile healthcare applications,” in
2017 IEEE 28th annual international symposium on personal, indoor, and
mobile radio communications (PIMRC).

IEEE, 2017, pp. 1–5.

[12] A. Al Omar, M. S. Rahman, A. Basu, and S. Kiyomoto, “Medibchain: A
blockchain based privacy preserving platform for healthcare data,” in In-
ternational conference on security, privacy and anonymity in computation,
communication and storage. Springer, 2017, pp. 534–543.

[13] A. Azaria, A. Ekblaw, T. Vieira, and A. Lippman, “Medrec: Using
blockchain for medical data access and permission management,” in 2016
2nd international conference on open and big data (OBD).
IEEE, 2016,
pp. 25–30.

[14] N. Nchinda, A. Cameron, K. Retzepi, and A. Lippman, “Medrec: A
network for personal information distribution,” in 2019 International Con-
ference on Computing, Networking and Communications (ICNC).
IEEE,
2019, pp. 637–641.

[15] M. Swan, Blockchain: Blueprint for a new economy.

" O’Reilly Media,

Inc.", 2015.

[16] N. G. Badr, “Blockchain or distributed ledger technology what is in it for

the healthcare industry?” in KMIS, 2019, pp. 277–284.

[17] A. Sunyaev, “Distributed ledger technology,” in Internet Computing.

Springer, 2020, pp. 265–299.

[18] M. S. U. Miah, M. Rahman, M. S. Hosain, and A. A. Ahsan,
“Introduction to Blockchain,” in Blockchain in Data Analytics, 1st ed.
Cambridge Scholars Publishing, 2020, pp. 1–23. [Online]. Available:
https://www.cambridgescholars.com/product/978-1-5275-4429-1
[19] M. J. M. Chowdhury, M. S. Ferdous, K. Biswas, N. Chowdhury, A. Kayes,
M. Alazab, and P. Watters, “A comparative analysis of distributed ledger
technology platforms,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 167 930–167 943, 2019.

[20] A. Narayanan, J. Bonneau, E. Felten, A. Miller, and S. Goldfeder, Bitcoin
and cryptocurrency technologies: a comprehensive introduction. Prince-
ton University Press, 2016.

[21] I. . C. T. Division, “National Blockchain Strategy : Bangladesh Informa-
tion and Communication Technology Division,” no. March, 2020.
[22] Facebook, Twitter, and LinkedIn, “What You Need to Know About
Network DNS Servers.” [Online]. Available: https://www.lifewire.com/
what-is-a-dns-server-2625854

[23] M. Q. Agbo CC, “Comparison of blockchain frameworks for healthcare

applications,” in Internet Technology Letters, 2019.

[24] E. Androulaki, A. Barger, V. Bortnikov, C. Cachin, K. Christidis,
A. De Caro, D. Enyeart, C. Ferris, G. Laventman, Y. Manevich et al.,
“Hyperledger fabric: a distributed operating system for permissioned
blockchains,” in Proceedings of the thirteenth EuroSys conference, 2018,
pp. 1–15.

[25] J. Hu and K. Liu, “Raft consensus mechanism and the applications,” in
IOP Publishing,

Journal of Physics: Conference Series, vol. 1544, no. 1.
2020, p. 012079.

[26] International Business Machines Corporation, “Why new off-chain storage

is required for blockchains,” p. 11, 2018.

[27] R. Norvill, B. B. F. Pontiveros, R. State, and A. Cullen, “Ipfs for reduction
of chain size in ethereum,” in 2018 IEEE International Conference on
Internet of Things (iThings) and IEEE Green Computing and Commu-
nications (GreenCom) and IEEE Cyber, Physical and Social Computing
(CPSCom) and IEEE Smart Data (SmartData).
IEEE, 2018, pp. 1121–
1128.

[28] “Overview — Apache CouchDB® 3.2 Documentation.” [Online].

Available: https://docs.couchdb.org/en/stable/

[29] “Express

js.”
installing.html

[Online]. Available:

https://expressjs.com/en/starter/

[30] M. S. U. Miah, M. Rahman, M. S. Hossain, and A. A. Ahsan, “Introduction
Cambridge Scholars

to blockchain,” in Blockchain in Data Analytics.
Publishing, 2020, pp. 1–24.

[31] M. Castro, B. Liskov et al., “Practical byzantine fault tolerance,” in OSDI,

vol. 99, no. 1999, 1999, pp. 173–186.

[32] M. T. Özsu, “Distributed Databases,” in Encyclopedia of Information
Systems, H. Bidgoli, Ed. New York: Elsevier, Jan. 2003, pp. 673–
682. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/B0122272404000460

[33] P. Voigt and A. Von dem Bussche, “The eu general data protection reg-
ulation (gdpr),” A Practical Guide, 1st Ed., Cham: Springer International
Publishing, vol. 10, p. 3152676, 2017.

[34] E. J. Dewi, U. Rusydi, and R. Imam, “Implementation of cloudﬂare hosting
for speeds and protection on the website,” Ph.D. dissertation, Universitas
Ahmad Dahlan, 2019.

[35] M. Siduzzaman, M. M. Hossan, R. Alom, T. B. Sarwar, and M. S. U.
Miah, “Performance comparison of http/2 for common e-commerce web
frameworks with traditional http,” in Journal of Physics: Conference
Series, vol. 1529, no. 5.

IOP Publishing, 2020, p. 052023.

[36] K. Kant, R. Iyer, and P. Mohapatra, “Architectural impact of secure socket
layer on internet servers,” in Proceedings 2000 International Conference
on Computer Design.

IEEE, 2000, pp. 7–14.
[37] M. A. U. Rahman, M. S. U. Miah, M. A. Fahad, and D. Karmaker,
“Shimpg: Simple human interaction with machine using physical gesture,”
in 2014 13th International Conference on Control Automation Robotics &
Vision (ICARCV).

IEEE, 2014, pp. 301–305.
[38] F. Lau, S. H. Rubin, M. H. Smith, and L. Trajkovic, “Distributed denial of
service attacks,” in Smc 2000 conference proceedings. 2000 ieee interna-
tional conference on systems, man and cybernetics.’cybernetics evolving
to systems, humans, organizations, and their complex interactions’(cat. no.
0, vol. 3.

IEEE, 2000, pp. 2275–2280.

[39] L. Von Ahn, M. Blum, N. J. Hopper, and J. Langford, “Captcha: Using
hard ai problems for security,” in International conference on the theory
and applications of cryptographic techniques.
Springer, 2003, pp. 294–
311.

[40] A. Bhowmik, M. S. U. Miah et al., “Iot (internet of things)-based smart
garbage management system,” AIUB Journal of Science and Engineering
(AJSE), vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 33–40, 2020.

[41] I. Ali and N. Meghanathan, “Virtual machines and networks-installation,
performance study, advantages and virtualization options,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1105.0061, 2011.

[42] M. S. U. Miah, A. Bhowmik, and R. T. Anannya, “Location, context and
device aware framework (lcdf) a uniﬁed framework for mobile data man-
agement,” in Proceedings of the International Conference on Computing
Advancements, 2020, pp. 1–5.

[43] “Fabric Contract APIs and Application APIs — hyperledger-fabricdocs
main documentation.” [Online]. Available: https://hyperledger-fabric.
readthedocs.io/en/latest/sdk_chaincode.html

[44] “Fabric-CA Commands — hyperledger-fabricdocs main documentation.”
[Online]. Available: https://hyperledger-fabric.readthedocs.io/en/latest/
commands/fabric-ca-commands.html

[45] “How Fabric networks

structured — hyperledger-fabricdocs
main documentation.” [Online]. Available: https://hyperledger-fabric.
readthedocs.io/en/latest/network/network.html

are

20

VOLUME 4, 2016

Ariful et.al, et al.: Distributed Ledger Technology based Integrated Healthcare Solution for Bangladesh

[46] “Flutter documentation.” [Online]. Available: https://docs.ﬂutter.dev/
[47] E. Brown, Web development with node and express: leveraging the

JavaScript stack. O’Reilly Media, 2019.

[48] “Docker Hub.” [Online]. Available: https://hub.docker.com/search?type=

image

[49] “Documentation – Oracle VM VirtualBox.” [Online]. Available: https:

//www.virtualbox.org/wiki/Documentation

[50] “National data center bangladesh, cloud based service packages.”

[Online]. Available: https://ndc.bcc.gov.bd/?page_id=902

VOLUME 4, 2016

21

Ariful et.al, et al.: Distributed Ledger Technology based Integrated Healthcare Solution for Bangladesh

MD. ARIFUL ISLAM received his Bachelor de-
gree in Software Engineering from American
International University-Bangladesh (AIUB) in
2021. After three months of internship at EXIM
Bank’s IT Division he started his professional
career with "Robust Research And Development"
(RRAD) for Bangladesh Customs and Vat mobile
application project (Contract). He also volunteered
at one of the international client meeting of "Data-
soft Manufacturing and Assembly Inc Limited" as
a consultant of Private-Blockchain Technology. In February 2021 he was
among the top 40 National Finalist at "Blockchain Olympiad Bangladesh"
(BCOLBD) and in its order he was among the top 12 (twelve) of the National
Teams of Bangladesh at "International Blockchain Olympiad 2021" (IBCOL
2021). There he have secured the "Merit Award" on behalf of Bangladesh.
After publishing his ﬁrst work at google play store he got the opportunity
from RRAD to design and develop an entire Import Entitlement System for
"Bangladesh Customs Bond Commissionerate". Currently he is continuing
his career at "Brain Station 23 Ltd" as an Associate Automation Engineer.

MD. AL-AMIN currently working as a lecturer
in the Computer Science Department, American
International University-Bangladesh (AIUB). Be-
sides his teaching profession, he is actively doing
R&D projects on freelance platforms for differ-
ent clients across the globe. He is also supervis-
ing research & development teams & providing
technical consultancy. He received his Bachelor’s
in Software Engineering and Master’s degree in
Computer Science and Engineering (CSE) from
American International University-Bangladesh(AIUB), Dhaka, Bangladesh
in 2015 and 2017 respectively. During his Master’s degree, he was awarded
the academic distinction Magna Cum Laude(Silver Medal) award for his
academic results. He achieved two times ICT Fellowship Awards for years
2015-16 & 2016-17 from the Ministry of ICT, Government of Bangladesh.
He has also served as a registration committee member in the International
Conference on Computing Advancements (ICCA 2020). He is a member
of Bangladesh’s computer society. His research interest primarily focuses
on Distributed Ledger Technology (DLT), Blockchain Technology, Web
3.0, Distributed Computing, Web of Things, Information Security, Web
Assembly, and Knowledge base System.

MD. ANTONIN ISLAM received his Bachelor
degree in Software Engineering from American
International University-Bangladesh (AIUB) in
2021. After several contract work with domestic
and foreign clients he started his professional ca-
reer with "Robust Research And Development"
(RRAD). Before that he also volunteered at one
of the international client meeting of "Data- soft
Manufacturing and Assembly Inc Limited" as a
consultant of Private-Blockchain Technology. In
February 2021 his team was among the Top 40 National Finalist at
"Blockchain Olympiad Bangladesh" (BCOLBD). He also received the
"Merit Award" at "International Blockchain Olympiad 2021" (IBCOL 2021)
where his team represented his country as one of Top 12 National Teams of
Bangladesh. His ﬁrst paper "An automated monitoring and environmental
control system for laboratory-scale cultivation of oyster mushrooms using
the Internet of Agricultural Thing (IoAT)" was presented at the International
Conference on Computing Advancement (ICCA 2022). Also, his research
interests are in the area of Blockchain, Internet of Things and Cloud
Computing.

MD. AMZAD HOSSAIN JACKY
received
his Bachelor’s degree in Software Engineering
(SE)
from American International University-
Bangladesh (AIUB), Dhaka, Bangladesh in 2021.
He is currently working as a software engi-
neer in Star IT Ltd. He was among the top
40 National Finalist at "Blockchain Olympiad
Bangladesh"(BCOLBD) 2021. After that he was
merit awarded in the "International Blockchain
Olympiad 2021". There he worked extensively on
server and network conﬁguration and administration. He has done research
in the ﬁeld of Human Computer Interaction (HCI) named “Ball Game
Controller: A Tangible User Interface”. Also, His research interests lie in
the area of Blockchain Technology, Web 3.0, and Cloud Computing.

M. SAEF ULLAH MIAH is a PhD candidate at
University Malaysia Pahang (UMP) and is cur-
rently working as a Graduate Research Assistant
at the Faculty of Computing, UMP. He was an
assistant professor in the Department of Com-
puter Science, American International University-
Bangladesh (AIUB). He is currently engaged in
research and teaching activities and has practical
experience in software development and project
management. He earned his Master of Science and
Bachelor of Science degrees from AIUB. In addition to his professional
activities, he is passionate about working on various open source projects.
His main research interests are data and text mining, natural language pro-
cessing, machine learning, material informatics and blockchain applications.

MD MUHIDUL ISLAM KHAN received his Bach-
elor degree in Computer Science and Engineer-
ing from Khulna University of Engineering and
Technology (KUET) in 2007. In 2009 he received
his Masters degree from Bangladesh University
of Engineering and Technology (BUET). He has
participated in the "eLINK"-project at Corvinus
University of Budapest, Hungary, from Septem-
ber 2009 until July 2010 (funded by the Euro-
pean Union). His specialization lies in the ﬁelds
of Wireless Sensor Networks, Networked Embedded Systems, Pervasive
Computing, and Machine learning/AI-based resource allocation in Wireless
Networks, blockchain-based technologies. He completed his PhD in 2014
under the Erasmus Mundus Grant from the European Commission working
at Klagenfurt University, Austria, and University of Genova, Italy. He joined
as an Assistant Professor at BRAC University, Bangladesh, and served there
for one year. After that, he completed his one-year postdoc from the Hebei
University of Technology, Tianjin, China. He worked as a Research Scientist
in the Electronics Department at Tallinn University of Technology, Estonia.
He worked as a senior lecturer in the School of Information Technologies,
Tallinn University of Technology, Tallinn, Estonia. Currently, he is working
as an Associate Researcher at the University of Stavanger, Norway.

22

VOLUME 4, 2016

Ariful et.al, et al.: Distributed Ledger Technology based Integrated Healthcare Solution for Bangladesh

MD. IQBAL HOSSAIN , a Freedom Fighter of the
Bangladesh Liberation War (1971) & after the war
a Doctor who earned his MBBS degree from Chit-
tagong Medical College under Chittagong Univer-
sity on 1981. He start his career at Rural Health
complex from 1983 to 1989 as a medical ofﬁcer.
From that time he was working for the health
of poor Rural people of Bangladesh. Also took
part in the EPI program. On 1994 he received his
Post-graduation degree on Pediatric from IPGMR,
Dhaka and Bangladesh College of Physician and Surgeon. From 1995 he
start his work as consultant Pediatrics at Rangamati General Hospital till
1999. On 1999 he join at Mymensing Medical College as Asst. Professor
on Pediatric. And worked there till 2000. After that he went Saudi Arabia
and worked in Al-Jouf Maternity and Children Hospital till 2005. On 2005
he return Back to Bangladesh and join at Faridpur Medical College as Asst.
Professor. During this time he gave consultancy Service and teaching on
pediatrics to the Undergraduate Medical Student. He worked there till 2010
and then he left Bangladesh again and served Maldives health service till
2015 as pediatrician. He is currently serving the people of his own country
in this pandemic situation (COVID-19) at a private hospital in Chakaria,
Cox’s Bazar district, Bangladesh.

VOLUME 4, 2016

23

