2
2
0
2

r
p
A
9
2

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
3
5
7
2
0
.
5
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Encrypted, Anonymized System for Protected Health
Information Veriﬁcation Built via Proof of Stake

Houjun Liu
The Nueva School
131 E. 28th Ave.,
San Mateo, CA 94403
houliu@nuevaschool.org

Abstract

Digital Health Passes (DHP), systems of digitally validating quarantine and vaccina-
tion status such as the New York IBM Excelsior Pass, demonstrate a lawful means to
approach some beneﬁts offered by “true elimination” treatment strategies—which
focus on the complete elimination of cases instead of investing more in controlling
the progression of the disease—of COVID-19. Current implementations of DHPs
require region-based control and central storage of Protected Health Information
(PHI)—creating a challenge to widespread use across different jurisdictions with
incompatible data management systems and a lack of standardized patient privacy
controls. In this work, a mechanism for decentralized PHI storage and validation is
proposed through a novel two-stage handshaking mechanism update to blockchain
proof-of-stake consensus. The proposed mechanism, when used to support a DHP,
allows individuals to validate their quarantine and testing universally with any
jurisdiction while allowing their right of independent movement and the protection
of their PHI. Implementational details on the protocol are given, and the proto-
col is shown to withstand a 1% disturbance attack at only 923 participants via a
Monte-Carlo simulation—further validating its stability.

1

Introduction

When correctly implemented [4], “elimination” based COVID-19 treatment remains one of the most
optimal strategies to rapidly preventing pandemic diseases [1]. Throughout 2021, countries that
continually implemented an elimination-ﬁrst COVID-19 prevention tactic such as China, Australia,
and New Zealand have shown more frequent and rapid returns to “normalcy” compared to those that
leveraged a strategy of mitigation [8].

Elimination-based COVID treatment strategies have been shown, if implemented in the United
States, to support higher degrees of community well-being [6]. Yet, because non-pharmaceutical
COVID-19 elimination interventions (NPIs) typically involves the creation of a continuously operating
surveillance scheme with demographic-based targeting and testing, the legal and social challenges to
implementing COVID Elimination [9] renders it nearly being impossible in terms of policy.

Digital Health Passes (DHP), systems of digitally validating quarantine and vaccination status such as
the New York IBM Excelsior Pass, demonstrates a lawful means to approach some beneﬁts offered by
true elimination strategies [3]. Nevertheless, current implementations of DHPs required region-based
centralized control and storage of PHI—creating a challenge to widespread implementation.

In this work, a mechanism for decentralized PHI storage and validation is proposed through the
implementation of a novel two-stage handshaking mechanism to the blockchain proof-of-stake
consensus mechanism. The proposed mechanism, when used to support a DHP, allows individuals
testing, vaccination, etc.) in an
(“agents”) to validate their ﬁtness for societal interaction (e.g.

 
 
 
 
 
 
elimination-based quarantine while allowing their right of independent movement and the protection
of their PHI.

2 Background

2.1 COVID-19 “Elimination” Based Strategies

Based on the work of Baker, et.al.[1], the overall goal of covid “elimination” based strategies is to
control a pandemic in a community with a goal of zero in-community transmission or infection.

Acceptance
Goal Accepting and proﬁling
novel community members of
unknown health status into
community using elimination-
based protocol.
NPIs Land borders, quarantine
facilities, supervised isolation,
travel restrictions.
OxCGRT* Max Value 5

Surveillance
Goal Surveying the commu-
nity to appropriately target
protected and infected popula-
tions, and to “provide reason-
able certainty” to case count.
NPIs Multi-modal
and
high-volume testing, ques-
tionnaires,
rapid reporting
tools.
OxCGRT* Max Value 7

Removal
Goal Positive results detected
from surveillance are removed
from the community to pre-
vent further spread.
NPIs Mandatory and self-
isolation, school and facil-
ity closures, gathering restric-
tions.
OxCGRT* Max Value 14

* The Oxford COVID-19 Government Response Tracker (OxCGRT) [5] is a survey metric of
government response tools to the COVID pandemic

2.2

(Digital) Health Passes

In the three-pronged model to “elimination”-based COVID treatment shown above, individually-
issued health passes serve as the central registry to keep record of one’s progression through the
scheme.

In some jurisdictions (e.g. Australia) each stage issues their own certiﬁcation—making the “health
pass” consist of a collection of documents certifying one’s status. In others, the “health pass” (e.g.
New York and California) is fully centrally managed—leading to them having a single point of failure
and, as in the case of CDPH Digital Vaccine Record, sometimes containing faulty information.

To make an elimination-based strategy successful, however, a robust health pass system must be
in place to clarify and direct the status of an individual in the system. Therefore, building such a
Health Pass—adapted to the unique sociopolitical climate in the United States—is critical for an
elimination-based policy to be adopted in the US.

3 A Blockchain Digital Health Pass

3.1 Failure of Classical DHPs

Traditional DHP solutions employ locale-speciﬁc validators who take the responsibility of managing
the actual PHI supporting their issued DHP. This approach, however, leads to an inaccessibility
of information: each jurisdiction has to perform their independent cataloging and, because of the
sensitive nature of the PHI typically contained in DHP, have no convenient means by which DHP
can be shared between justiﬁcations (which are often only the size of a State or even a County in the
United States).

A corollary of the above renders current implementations of DHPs in the United States unreliable. If
the “ultimate” database of trust for a DHP under a jurisdiction has a cataloging mistake (i.e. similar
to that aforementioned in California) or—perhaps worse yet—fails to stay online, the DHP looses its
function: failing the near-constant stability requirement of true elimination-based COVID prevention
strategies.

2

3.2 Leveraging Blockchain to Support DHP

These challenges in stability, distribution, and privacy reﬂect very similarly to the design goals of
blockchain. Blockchain-based solutions have previously been shown to support function such as
identity veriﬁcation [7]. State-machine based blockchain implementations such as Ethereum offers
a shared, mutually-consensual state between all participants (“nodes”) from which information is
stored.

This state is guaranteed to be the same across all nodes and is viewable by all nodes. Nodes affect
change to the global, shared state by executing “smart contracts” which is “validated” by special
nodes guaranteeing the integrity of the shared state through a “consensus algorithm” [2].

3.3 Building a Blockchain DHP

State-machine blockchains—as shown in ﬁgure 1—can easily represent the claims to support a DHP:
each node’s requisite information (e.g. COVID testing status, Vaccination status, etc.) can be stored a
part of the shared state, permanent and viewable by all other participants signed by a private key. A
user (“agent”), when prompted to represent their identity, can simply leverage the same key to verify
their identity.

On the other hand, the process of verifying the
purported claims before they are logged in the
blockchain to support a DHP—especially given the
amount of PHI involved in the process—is a much
more complex one. Instead of simply evaluating the
mathematical validity of an algorithmic contract as
in the case for Ethereum, DHP Blockchain validators
have to review documents supporting a state-update
claim and ensure their authenticity.

Figure 1: generic state-machine blockchain
implementation

The proposed DHP Blockchain protocol therefore
forsakes the traditional Proof-of-Work and Stake algorithms for consensus and presents a new multi-
stage human-in-the-loop validation and consensus mechanism that provides a means to verify DHP
claims’ supporting documentation while still guaranteeing practical anonymity at scale.

3.4 Considerations of Deploying Blockchain DHP

Blockchain DHPs provide a decentralized and stable solution to problems presented by Classic DHPs
by foregoing the need for a central controlling server/party. Although Blockchain DHPs solve many
of such issues, they also provide a differing set of challenges. Veriﬁcation of Blockchain DHPs are
done by multiple untrusted partners (as opposed to the one central point-of-trust by Classic DHPs)
which means that they are—like all other Blockchain applications—at risk of disturbance.

The necessity for multiple machines to network and validate identity/health claims in conjunction
renders the proposed solution susceptible to multiple, collaborating disturbance agents which in con-
junction overwhelm the factual veriﬁcation capabilities of the network. The risk of such disturbance
attacks, along with the necessary agent population needed to prevent the veriﬁcation claims made by
disturbance agents from being successful, is quantiﬁed in the section below with a probability model.

4

Implementation Details

Figure 2 on 4 illustrates the entirely of the proposed veriﬁcation cycle. Futher implementation details
are here examined.

4.1 Validators, Attestors, and Stake

The system that upholds the integrity of claim making in the proposed algorithm works in the same
manner as that in traditional proof-of-stake. A ﬁat currency is circulated throughout nodes wishing to
participate in validating; to be eligible for validation, a validator/attestor must “stake” a certain unit
of the currency.

3

Figure 2: proposed protocol

The “validator”, scaled by the proportion of their stake, is selected randomly based on a pseudo-
random global seed by the current state. Four other “attestors”, scaled also by their stake, are selected
to form a “committee” to validate each block of transactions.

4.2 Claims and Claim Ticketing

Each non-validator node, primarily, operate by proposing new “claims”. Claims are unveriﬁed
statements (such as updated COVID testing status) lodged by nodes and are represented by a string
ID corresponding to a claim whose string criteria are previously placed in the publicly viewable
global state.

To make a claim, the proposing node has to ﬁrst “ticket” the claim. This is a process by which the
node takes a claim and appends to it base64 encoded artifacts (such as lab reports) to support it. The
whole package (claim + artifacts) is then hashed in order to check for tampering later.

4.3 Ticket Stamping

Ticketed claims are then “stamped”: the base64 supporting information to each claim is encrypted
using the public keys to the validator and attestors. As the blockchain mechanism itself grantees
global state concordance, the proposing node can simply use the same randomness seed in the global
state—making its choices deﬁnitively agree with that of any other participant of the chain. The
encrypted results, along with the proposed claim, is published to all peers.

4.4 Ticket Validation

The chosen validators and attestors will, upon receipt, decode the claim and decrypt the supporting
information. Human evaluators will here make a judgment of whether the documents support the
claim being made.

The chosen “validator” node, upon successful human evaluation, will mint a new signed “block”
containing the claims made and the corresponding nodes that made the claims. Before the block
is accepted, however, the attestors will ensure that the majority of their judgments of validity is
equivalent to that of the validator. If this is indeed true, the block is accepted. If not, the validator
would—as with traditional proof-of-stake—loose their stake value and right to validate.

4

4.5 Reference Implementation

All encryption was performed through AES-256 PGP; inter-peer communication was implemented
through tcp using ZeroMQ. The codebase is written using Clojure (v1.10.1), running the Java SE 14
(HotSpot) Virtual Machine. Risk modeling was performed using SageMath 9.4 upon Python 3.10.1.

5 Risk of Disturbance

The 4-attestor model of the proposed algorithm exhibits the same weakness towards attacks than
that of the traditional Proof-of-Stake model employed by the Ethereum blockchain veriﬁcation [2].
Hence, the model proposed must be veriﬁed with the same means of quantifying risk to identity a
minimally-viable population.

Take some N , population sample, Rv, proportion of population to validator/attestor pool, and Rd,
rate of “disturbance” upon the validator/attestor pool, a compound probability Pnd can be derived
representing the probability of the block randomly sampling dependently 0, 1, or 2 of the disturbance
agents (and therefore rendering the faulty agents’ attestation of no effect.) The chance of disturbance,
Pd, is therefore the inverse of Pnd.

Relative risk is controlled < 0.01 at large N > 923 at Ry = Rd = 0.1. According to the risk model
aforementioned, the P d ∝ N . Therefore, at N > 923, P d < 0.01. At smaller values of N , the
risk model indicates the need for a higher validator election ratio from the agent pool to control the
chance of disturbance at < 0.01. Figure 3 highlights the relative risk as well as the necessary chance
of validator election at various N .

A cumulative disturbance probability at N = 100 of chance of dis-
turbance as a variable of validation and disturbance populations. B
chance of disturbance given Ry = Rd = 0.1 at various N . C Ry
required for Rd < 0.01 at various N .

Figure 3: chance of disturbance as modeled by various parameters.

6 Conclusion and Discussion

In this work, a novel mechanism introducing asymmetrically-encrypted veriﬁcation artifacts built atop
the existing proof-of-stake scheme for blockchain is proposed to enable blockchain-based Protected
Health Information (PHI) veriﬁcation.

In the proposed scheme, 4 attestors and 1 validator are selected based on stake which performs
the block minting and result attestation of PHI claims. PHI is made available only to the selected
validation panel, and the encrypted artifacts are never stored on the chain. Similar to the proof-of-
stake “validation panel” design, this scheme reduces the possibility of noise and is self-correcting

5

of outlying errors. The duplicity and decentralization of Blockchain also allows for widespread
distribution of the veriﬁed health information in a serverless manner that does not require a central
point of trust and stability.

As is standard on Blockchain applications, veriﬁed user information (“claims”) are also kept in
identity-less hashed key ﬁngerprints much like “wallets” in traditional cryptocurrency applications.
Hence, the private signing key of the user submitting claims acts naturally as a Digital Health Pass
(DHP)—selectively identifying and de-anonymizing only the speciﬁc claims made by the user holding
the private key when they wish.

Like all other trustless, consensus-paged algorithms, the scheme proposed—when deployed on a live
blokchain—is susceptible to overwhelming disturbance. As such, a probabilistic model is created to
quantify the chance of the scheme creating a false assurance. According to the modeled result, the
chance of the scheme being disturbed is < 1% when user count exceeds just 923 active participants
under a 10% validation pool. At smaller user counts of around 200, the disturbance chance can still
be controlled at < 1% if the validation pool is increased to a large minority of the user population at
around 40%.

This model indicates that the proposed algorithm can sufﬁciently serve as a stable and distributed
alternative to centralized PHI veriﬁcation: creating a safe alternative that addressed the accessibility,
privacy, and stability issues with conventional DHPs currently deployed. Therefore, with the reference
implementation serving as the core of the service, and the necessary regulatory approval, it is possible
to bring this service to use as a DHP in localities in the short-term future.

As the COVID pandemic eases, this service can also aid in the rapid, stable, and large-scale anonymous
validation of health conditions such as allergies, diabetes, or other PHI-based facts: creating numerous
applications in infrastructure, enterprise, education, and industry.

Acknowledgments

The author acknowledges Mr. Wesley Chao of The Nueva School and Dr. Xin Liu at the University
of California, Davis for their technical and implementation guidance in the protocol. The author
would further like to acknowledge Dr. John Feland of CableLabs, inc., Dr. Mark Hurwitz of The
Nueva School, and Mr. Sean Cheong at the University of California, Berkeley for their feedback on
the protocol and disturbance calculations.

References

[1] Michael G Baker, Nick Wilson, and Tony Blakely. “Elimination could be the optimal re-
sponse strategy for covid-19 and other emerging pandemic diseases”. In: BMJ (Dec. 22, 2020),
p. m4907. ISSN: 1756-1833. DOI: 10.1136/bmj.m4907. URL: https://www.bmj.com/
lookup/doi/10.1136/bmj.m4907 (visited on 02/23/2022).

[2] Vitalik Buterin. “Ethereum: A Next-Generation Smart Contract and Decentralized Application

Platform.” In: (), p. 36.

[3] Lawrence O. Gostin, I. Glenn Cohen, and Jana Shaw. “Digital Health Passes in the Age of
COVID-19: Are “Vaccine Passports” Lawful and Ethical?” In: JAMA 325.19 (May 18, 2021),
p. 1933. ISSN: 0098-7484. DOI: 10.1001/jama.2021.5283. URL: https://jamanetwork.
com/journals/jama/fullarticle/2778526 (visited on 02/23/2022).

[4] Leah Grout et al. “Failures of quarantine systems for preventing COVID-19 outbreaks in
Australia and New Zealand”. In: Medical Journal of Australia 215.7 (Oct. 4, 2021), pp. 320–324.
ISSN: 0025-729X, 1326-5377. DOI: 10.5694/mja2.51240. URL: https://onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/10.5694/mja2.51240 (visited on 02/23/2022).

[5] Thomas Hale et al. “A global panel database of pandemic policies (Oxford COVID-19 Govern-
ment Response Tracker)”. In: Nature Human Behaviour 5.4 (Apr. 2021), pp. 529–538. ISSN:
2397-3374. DOI: 10 . 1038 / s41562 - 021 - 01079 - 8. URL: http : / / www . nature . com /
articles/s41562-021-01079-8 (visited on 02/23/2022).
John F. Helliwell et al. “Well-being Analysis Favours a Virus-Elimination Strategy for COVID-
19”. Cambridge, MA, July 2021. URL: https://www.nber.org/papers/w29092 (visited on
02/23/2022).

[6]

6

[7] Arshad Jamal et al. “Blockchain-Based Identity Veriﬁcation System”. In: 2019 IEEE 9th Interna-
tional Conference on System Engineering and Technology (ICSET). 2019 IEEE 9th International
Conference on System Engineering and Technology (ICSET). Shah Alam, Malaysia: IEEE, Oct.
2019, pp. 253–257. ISBN: 978-1-72810-758-5. DOI: 10.1109/ICSEngT.2019.8906403. URL:
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8906403/ (visited on 02/23/2022).

[8] Guangyu Lu et al. “COVID-19 in Germany and China: mitigation versus elimination strategy”.
In: Global Health Action 14.1 (Jan. 1, 2021), p. 1875601. ISSN: 1654-9716, 1654-9880. DOI:
10.1080/16549716.2021.1875601. URL: https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/
10.1080/16549716.2021.1875601 (visited on 02/23/2022).

[9] Wendy E. Parmet and Michael S. Sinha. “Covid-19 — The Law and Limits of Quarantine”. In:
New England Journal of Medicine 382.15 (Apr. 9, 2020), e28. ISSN: 0028-4793, 1533-4406. DOI:
10.1056/NEJMp2004211. URL: http://www.nejm.org/doi/10.1056/NEJMp2004211
(visited on 02/23/2022).

7

