Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

2
2
0
2

n
u
J

7

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
3
0
8
4
0
.
6
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Detecting Anomalous Cryptocurrency
Transactions: an AML/CFT Application of
Machine Learning-based Forensics

Nadia Pocher1,3*, Mirko Zichichi2,3, Fabio
Merizzi3, Muhammad Zohaib Shaﬁq3 and Stefano Ferretti4

1 Institute of Law and Technology, Faculty of Law, Universitat
Aut`onoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra, 08193, Spain .
2 Ontology Engineering Group, Universidad Polit´ecnica de
Madrid, ETSIINF, Boadilla del Monte (MD), 28660, Spain .
3 Department of Computer Science and Engineering and
Department of Legal Studies, University of Bologna, Bologna,
40126, Italy .
4 Dipartimento di Scienze Pure e Applicate, University of Urbino
“Carlo Bo”, Piazza della Repubblica, 13, Urbino, 61029, Italy .

*Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): nadia.pocher@uab.cat;
Contributing authors: mirko.zichichi@upm.es;
fabio.merizzi@studio.unibo.it;
muhammad.shaﬁq6@studio.unibo.it; stefano.ferretti@uniurb.it;

Abstract

The rise of blockchain and distributed ledger technologies (DLTs) in the
ﬁnancial sector has generated a socio-economic shift that triggered legal
concerns and regulatory initiatives. While the anonymity of DLTs may
safeguard the right to privacy, data protection and other civil liberties,
lack of identiﬁcation hinders accountability, investigation and enforce-
ment. The resulting challenges extend to the rules to combat money
laundering and the ﬁnancing of terrorism and proliferation (AML/CFT).
As law enforcement agencies and analytics companies have begun to suc-
cessfully apply forensics to track currency across blockchain ecosystems,
in this paper we focus on the increasing relevance of these techniques.
In particular, we oﬀer insights into the application to the Internet of

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

2

Detecting Anomalous Cryptocurrency Transactions

Money (IoM) of machine learning, network and transaction graph analy-
sis. After providing some background on the notion of anonymity in the
IoM and on the interplay between AML/CFT and blockchain forensics,
we focus on anomaly detection approaches leading to our experiments.
Namely, we analyzed a real-world dataset of Bitcoin transactions
represented as a directed graph network through various machine
learning techniques. Our claim is
the AML/CFT domain
could beneﬁt from novel graph analysis methods in machine learn-
ing. Indeed, our ﬁndings show that the Graph Convolutional Net-
works (GCN) and Graph Attention Networks (GAT) neural net-
work types represent a promising solution for AML/CFT compliance.

that

Keywords: blockchain technology, ﬁnancial technology, network forensics,
graph analysis, AML/CFT

1 Introduction

Over the last 15 years, the application of blockchain and distributed ledger
technologies (DLTs) to the ﬁnancial domain has been surrounded by an
enthusiastic hype. Building on years of research in distributed systems and
cryptography, the launch of Bitcoin (Nakamoto, 2008) ﬁnally allowed to record
information in the form of transactions and agree on their order without the
need to rely on a trusted third-party. This revolution opened the way to
peer-to-peer value transfers, thus enabling citizens and businesses to partic-
ipate directly in a new digital global economy. The advent of a token-based
“Internet of Value” (IoV) (Tapscott & Euchner, 2019) and of the “Internet
of Money” (IoM) (Antonopoulos, 2017) led to a socio-economic transforma-
tion that triggered legal concerns and spurred regulatory initiatives. Chieﬂy,
disintermediation and the perceived anonymity of these transactions vis-´a-vis
blockchain’s transparency deﬁed schemes of accountability and generated fears
of exploitation for large-scale illicit purposes. Indeed, challenges arose as to
the application of the rules to combat money laundering and the ﬁnancing
of terrorism and proliferation (AML/CFT)1, where identiﬁcation is a crucial
concept, e.g., know your customer.

The AML framework consists of a set of laws, regulations and procedures,
preventive and repressive, that aim to protect the integrity of the ﬁnancial sys-
tem by hampering the concealment of the origin of illicit proﬁts to hinder their
enjoyment (Authors blinded for review, n.d.) . To this end, compliance duties
are thrust on speciﬁc entities, ranging from ﬁnancial institutions to profession-
als (e.g., lawyers, notaries) to art galleries. The international AML action is
overseen by the Financial Action Task Force (FATF), an intergovernmental,
policy making, monitoring, enforcement and standard-setting body that pro-
vides guidance through its Recommendations (FATF, 2022). Although they

1For brevity, in the remaining paper AML refers to both AML/CFT.

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

Detecting Anomalous Cryptocurrency Transactions

3

are soft-law instruments, not directly binding on individuals and organizations,
FATF’s members committed to transposing them into domestic law. In the
EU, they are implemented through a series of “AML Directives”, while a recent
legislative initiative dubbed “AML Package” proposes the establishment of a
EU-wide single rulebook on AML (European Commission, 2021).

In this context, the link between cryptocurrencies and anonymity was
emphasized not only by their (debated) cyberlibertarian imprint, but also by
scandals that reached the headlines in the ﬁrst years of the IoM, including the
shutdown of darknet markets such as the Silk Road in 2013 and AlphaBay
and Hansa Market in 2017. In facilitating the exchange of illicit products and
services, these platforms were leveraging Bitcoin’s (perceived) anonymity to
avoid regulation and law enforcement (Goforth, 2020). The related risk per-
ception was conﬁrmed by several exchange hacking incidents – e.g., Mt Gox
in 2014, later Bitﬁnex, Coincheck and Bitgrail, with a combined loss of more
than USD 1.2 billion (Johnstone, 2021). Meanwhile, in 2021 crypto-related
laundering amounted to USD 8.6 billion, with a value of at least USD 10 bil-
lion currently held by illicit addresses, while it appears heavily concentrated:
most value originating from illicit addresses is seemingly sent to few services,
often built for criminal purposes (Chainalysis Team, 2022).

Thus, the picture of the IoM as a realm of untraceable transfers and
individual freedom from governmental control warrants a two-fold interpre-
tation: while anonymity can safeguard the right to privacy, data protection
and other civil liberties, lack of identiﬁcation hampers investigation, enforce-
ment and accountability. Two sets of mutually inﬂuencing events emerged in
this context. On the one hand, investigative authorities and law enforcement
agencies started developing forensic techniques to “follow the money” across
blockchain ecosystems (Bartoletti, Carta, Cimoli, & Saia, 2020; Biryukov &
Tikhomirov, 2019; Chen, Zheng, Ngai, Zheng, & Zhou, 2019; Lischke & Fabian,
2016; Meiklejohn et al., 2016; Moreno-Sanchez, Zafar, & Kate, 2016; Neudecker
& Hartenstein, 2017; Phan, 2021; Yin, Langenheldt, Harlev, Mukkamala, &
Vatrapu, 2019). On the other hand, the unveiled insuﬃciency in Bitcoin’s
anonymity spurred altcoin projects such as Monero and ZCash to implement an
advanced set of cryptographic methods that require a variety of new advanced
analytical tools.

Against this backdrop, in this paper we focus on the increasing value of
intelligence techniques to provide insights into IoM ecosystems, with speciﬁc
regard to techniques of machine learning, network and transaction graph anal-
ysis (Fleder, Kester, & Pillai, 2015; Ober, Katzenbeisser, & Hamacher, 2013;
Weber et al., 2019; Y. Wu et al., 2021) . Notably, we ﬁrst provide some back-
ground on the notion of anonymity in the IoM landscape and on the interplay
between AML and blockchain forensics. Consequently, we focus on the anomaly
detection approaches that led to the experiments that we performed on a real
world transactions dataset. In particular, a real Bitcoin transactions dataset
represented as a directed graph network was analyzed through several machine
learning techniques. Our main hypothesis was that, since money laundering

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

4

Detecting Anomalous Cryptocurrency Transactions

involves transactions ﬂow relationships between entities creating a graph struc-
ture, then AML analytics could beneﬁt from novel graph analysis techniques in
machine learning, namely Graph Convolutional Networks (GCN) and Graph
Attention Networks (GAT). Moreover, in developing this work we heed the
following assumptions:
• while techniques of cryptocurrency forensics are manifold, our work does

not aim to review them comprehensively;

• cryptocurrency transactional data is often analyzed through a combination
of on-chain and oﬀ-chain forensic techniques, thus including information not
recorded on blockchain or recorded on a diﬀerent blockchain; however, in
this work we focus on on-chain data;

• the IoM is neither a legal nor a technical deﬁnition; in this paper, the term
broadly refers to the entire set of cryptocurrency ecosystems, thus including
the part of the Internet of Value that relates to payment tokens;

• research into explainability and interpretability of artiﬁcial intelligence and
machine learning applications, as well as relevant legal impacts, is vast
and detailed; in light of the scope of this work, we perform inevitable
simpliﬁcations.

The results of our experiments show that GCN and GAT neural network
typologies represents a promising solution for AML. This is in opposition to
a state of the art work in which a baseline supervised learning algorithm,
i.e., non-graph-based, such as the Random Forest provided the best per-
formances (Weber et al., 2019). In this context, we underline the value of
experimenting with techniques based on machine learning and transaction
graph analysis, and with their possible combinations. We contextualize our
argument considering the signiﬁcant amount and complexity of transaction
data to be processed in the IoM, and the speciﬁcs of the rules-based anomaly
indicators provided by the AML framework. We do so by taking into account
the need to mitigate the shortcomings of rules-based regimes, explainability
aspects and the need to engage into research that deploys an interdisciplinary
methodology.

The remainder is structured as follows. Section II provides a concep-
tual background on Bitcoin’s pseudonymity, and insights into the relationship
between forensic techniques and the AML regulatory framework. Section III
explores related work. Section IV takes a context-speciﬁc approach to outline
anomaly detection techniques. In Sections V and VI, respectively, we present
and discuss our study on the use of machine learning-based classiﬁcation
methods for AML purposes. Section VI concludes the paper.

2 Background

2.1 Pseudonymity and De-Anonymization

While untraceable payments are a perfect ﬁt for cyberlibertarian dreams (Fil-
ippi & Wright, 2018), the IoM is populated by manifold socio-technical

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

Detecting Anomalous Cryptocurrency Transactions

5

notions of anonymity and related concepts such as transparency, privacy
and auditability (Authors blinded for review, n.d.) . Surveying the relevant
research (Amarasinghe, Boyen, & McKague, 2019) falls outside our work’s
scope. Thus, we heed a domain-speciﬁc understanding that anonymity in
the IoM “means being able to conduct a ﬁnancial transaction without any-
one besides the sender and the receiver being able to identify the parties
involved” (Edmunds, 2020). In this respect, it is a common blockchain goal
to combine user anonymity and transparency of operations, and a public
blockchain is structurally designed to enable anonymous peer-to-peer trans-
fers (Quiniou, 2019). However, blockchain types feature diﬀerent approaches to
identiﬁcation: in public permissionless ledgers, with no centralized authority,
nodes operate with no association to a speciﬁc identity, while in permis-
sioned ledgers a centralized entity/consortium identiﬁes nodes whose key-pair
is usually associated with a real-world identity (Wang & De Filippi, 2020)

The deﬁnition of Bitcoin as anonymous has been challenged extensively and
it is widely agreed that the correct label for it, as well as for other cryptocur-
rencies, is pseudonymous (Berg, 2019; Biryukov & Tikhomirov, 2019; Y. Li et
al., 2019). Pseudonymity refers to the use of pseudonyms as identiﬁers, and a
pseudonym is a subject’s identiﬁer other than the subject’s real names (Pﬁtz-
mann & Hansen, 2010). In most blockchain systems, public-private key pairs
are the identiﬁers that uniquely identify the holder of the wallet (Wang &
De Filippi, 2020). From this perspective, in a cryptocurrency transaction,
addresses (i.e., public keys) perform a “username” function. Hence, senders
and recipients are pseudonymous, and not anonymous, when they are iden-
tiﬁed by their address. In a public ledger such as Bitcoin’s, the transaction
history is transparent but the network’s participants are linked to addresses,
not to speciﬁc identities (Amarasinghe et al., 2019). In particular, a trans-
action references previous transaction “outputs” as new transaction “inputs”
and it is validated whenever the address indicated in the previous outputs
digitally signs the new transaction, i.e., demonstrate the ownership of those
Bitcoin values.

In principle, a currency scheme aims to avoid that the transaction history
of a speciﬁc unit can be retraced. If it is technically possible to associate a coin
with its past exchanges, the currency’s fungibility is threatened and the nom-
inal value of the given unit is aﬀected. Insofar as unit traceability generates a
credibility loss, the property of anonymity emerges as paramount. Because Bit-
coin’s features seemed insuﬃcient, new techniques have been embedded into
anonymity enhanced currencies (AECs), also known as privacy coins, lever-
aging Privacy Enhancing Technologies (PETs) and notably Zero-Knowledge
Proofs. Besides fungibility, AECs’ developers aim for user unaccountability
and privacy, striving to bypass regulatory constraints but also governmen-
tal surveillance. The state of privacy pursued by privacy coins, however, is
almost always anonymity, the pillar of most AEC whitepapers (Harvey &
Branco-Illodo, 2020). The advent of complex anonymity-oriented models was

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

6

Detecting Anomalous Cryptocurrency Transactions

accompanied by the increasing interest of institutional and corporate stake-
holders in the IoM, with stablecoin projects and central bank digital currencies
(Authors blinded for review, n.d.) . In this context, the array of privacy and
data protection concerns grew wider as to the possible exploitation of ﬁnancial
data by a broader range of actors.

As Bitcoin became popular and privacy coins were developed, experts and
law enforcement professionals devised strategies to trace cryptocurrency trans-
fers. In this context, the end goal of intelligence methods is to match users,
deﬁnitively or statistically, to transactions performed by crypto-addresses –
i.e., to connect pseudonyms to real-world identities – leveraging unique iden-
tiﬁers. These techniques started to be deployed under the label of “blockchain
forensics”, as they were informed by the speciﬁcities of blockchain technol-
ogy. Accordingly, they were deﬁned as the use of science and technology for
the sake of investigation and fact-establishment in a court of law, primarily
dealing with recovering and analyzing evidence on blockchain ledgers resulting
from transaction activities (Phan, 2021). Later, analytic solutions started to
be requested by regulated entities. Although they have been mostly tested on
the Bitcoin network, data-exploitation strategies have been deployed on the
Ethereum blockchain (Bartoletti et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2019; Y. Li et al.,
2021; Moreno-Sanchez et al., 2016) , and on non-blockchain DLTs (Ince, Liu,
& Zhang, 2018; Tennant, 2017).

Since identiﬁers (i.e., addresses/public keys) can be leveraged to connect
transactions to their history, Bitcoin’s pseudonymity generates an inherent
tension between anonymity and accountability (Yin et al., 2019). Unless they
are associated with additional data, however, identiﬁers do not reveal personal
identifying information (Wang & De Filippi, 2020). Hence, pseudonymity does
not imply identiﬁability, which is subjective: a pseudonymous subject is identi-
ﬁable only if for a speciﬁc actor it is possible to discover its real-world identity.
This concept is crucial in the IoM, as two forces oppose each other: there
are actors, such as authorities and exchange/forensic service providers, that
seek to achieve identiﬁcation, while many strategies are employed at various
levels to avert it, e.g., advanced cryptography and virtual private networks.
Indeed, technology can both foster new pathways to accountability and dis-
rupt data retrievability. In the IoM, anonymity enhancements are linked to
forensics, which inﬂuences the overall anonymity level vis-`a-vis users’ strategies
to limit fund traceability. An example of these anonymity-enhancing methods
is the use of “self-hosted/unhosted” wallets, also known as “non-custodial”,
where users hold their private keys directly as opposed to “hosted/custodial”
wallets where storage and custody are oﬀered as a service by a third party
(Authors blinded for review, n.d.) , usually an AML regulated entity. In this
context, the transparent nature of (public) blockchains makes them vulnerable
to insuﬃcient data privacy, de-anonymization attacks and possible application
of surveillance techniques. While de-anonymization is often perceived nega-
tively, it can be applied for investigative purposes and to comply with rules
that aim to mitigate speciﬁc risks.

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

Detecting Anomalous Cryptocurrency Transactions

7

2.2 AML/CFT and Blockchain Forensics

The ﬁrst concerns of cryptocurrency misuse originated from events where their
(purported) anonymity was linked to illicit transactions on the dark web. While
a range of technologies aid darknet operations, cryptocurrencies, mostly Bit-
coin and Monero, play a key role by facilitating payments (Akhgar, Gercke,
Vrochidis, & Gibson, 2021). While Bitcoin is still the major player, used by
93% of darknet markets, the adoption of Monero is increasing: 67% of plat-
forms supported it in 2021 vis-`a-vis 45% in 2020, and some support it on an
exclusive basis (Chainalysis Team, 2022). Nonetheless, forensic experts argue
the public perception of cryptocurrency-related laundering is inﬂated. Indeed,
between 2019 and 2020 crypto-crime seemingly decreased by 57%, from USD
4.5 billions to 1.9 billions, with criminal activities being 160 times more likely
to involve ﬁat currencies (CipherTrace, 2021; Goforth, 2020). Accordingly, even
if the value of illicit crypto-transactions reached an all-time high in 2021, up
79% from 2020, data show an all-time low in terms of crypto-activity share.
Indeed, the total transaction volume grew by 567% between 2020 and 2021,
reaching USD 15.8 trillion, with criminal usage representing only 0.15%.

Despite the decrease in their number, in 2021 darnet markets’ revenue set a
record of USD 2.1 billion (Chainalysis Team, 2022). Since AML obligations are
informed by the risk-based approach, regulated entities must tune compliance
eﬀorts to the principle of proportionality: stricter measures if risk factors are
higher, and consistent internal procedures. They must consider risk factors
predeﬁned by the FATF, the EU, national law, sector-speciﬁc supervisors,
known as “risk/red ﬂag/anomaly indicators”. The end-goal is to draw the
authorities’ attention when suspicions of illicit activities arise. The submission
of suspicious transaction reports is the core duty that orients other measures
such as licensing regimes, customer due diligence obligations such as know your
customer and ongoing monitoring (e.g., transaction scrutiny). A suspicious
transaction report must be submitted when the entity knows, suspects, or has
reasonable ground to suspect, the given funds are the proceeds of a criminal
activity, or are related to terrorist ﬁnancing (Directive (EU) 2018/843, 2018;
FATF, 2022).

Generally, AML duties apply to crypto-transactions, and a set of related
service providers are regulated. In the EU, the 5th AML Directive (Directive
(EU) 2018/843, 2018) ﬁrst targeted these activities, and the regime is evolving
with the AML Package (European Commission, 2021). Even if some blockchain
features mitigate the risk of fraudulent behaviour, anomalies are not detected
automatically and the technology is vulnerable to unpredictable exploitation
methods (Shayegan, Sabor, Uddin, & Chen, 2022; Xu, 2016), which drove the
development of speciﬁc techniques of anomaly detection. In this respect, the
IoM’s opaque reputation appears paradoxical, since it provides a huge amount
of open-source intelligence – e.g., it is possible to extract data from a given
transaction and retrieve the history of an address, while methods using net-
works created by transactions (i.e., “transaction ﬂow analysis”) can deﬁne

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

8

Detecting Anomalous Cryptocurrency Transactions

patterns to pinpoint suspected addresses (Y. Wu et al., 2021). Diﬀerent ana-
lytic techniques have been reﬁned over time (Yin et al., 2019), and mostly
rely on statistical approaches – e.g., the re-use of the same account for more
transactions or the co-use of more accounts for a single transaction can lead
to match more accounts to the same user (Y. Li et al., 2021).

In 2020 a surge of ransomware attacks showed framework deﬁciencies vis-`a-
vis the complexity of the global development of the IoM, increasingly populated
by privacy coins, mixers, decentralized platforms, unhosted wallets, other prod-
ucts and services enabling and/or allowing reduced transparency and increased
obfuscation, and also innovative models like initial coin oﬀerings (Custers &
Overwater, 2019), featuring fraud and money laundering risks. Accordingly, in
September 2020 the FATF published virtual-asset-speciﬁc red ﬂag indicators,
with a section on anonymity risks (FATF, 2020).2 From this perspective, it
was argued AML provisions display an understanding of anonymity that does
not distinguish between “anonymization” and “strong pseudonymization”, and
refers to both the (near) impossibility of linking data on a ledger with (an) iden-
tiﬁed person(s), and a situation in which the linking capacity is signiﬁcantly
hampered (Karasek-wojciechowicz, 2021).

Although a transaction’s anonymity level is not suﬃcient to suggest the
transfer is suspicious, the FATF underlined inherent issues of PETs imple-
mented by privacy coins, such as Zero-Knowledge Proofs (FATF, 2020),
while a range of
institutions highlighted the risks caused by privacy-
enhanced/unhosted wallets (Europol, 2020). Against this backdrop, the appli-
cation of forensic techniques appears pivotal at diﬀerent levels: law enforcement
agencies and authorities deploy them for investigative and enforcement pur-
poses, and analytic companies develop RegTech3 solutions for regulated
entities to comply with AML requirements such as risk assessments, identi-
ﬁcation, traceability. Overall, intelligence methods provide a wide range of
information on IoM ecosystems that can be used to various ends. Notably,
they are crucial when confronting the technological problems encountered by
service providers to comply with the debated “crypto travel rule”, pursuant
to which they have to ensure identiﬁability of originators and recipients of
crypto-transfers.

The term “crypto travel rule” dubs the expansion to the IoM of infor-
mation sharing measures previously applicable only to wire transfers, as per
FATF Recommendation 16 and Regulation (EU) 2015/847 (Fund Transfers
Regulation). These rules require ﬁnancial institutions to ensure traceability
throughout the payment chain. Accordingly to an update of the FATF Stan-
dards, the AML Package (European Commission, 2021) proposes to recast
the Fund Transfers Regulation, expanding its scope and adjusting it to cryp-
tocurrency features. Although the application of AML rules to the IoM has
long shown its weaknesses, the “crypto travel rule” exacerbates the tension

2The report targets six types of indicators, relating to (i) transactions, (ii) transaction patterns,

(iii) anonymity, (iv) senders/recipients, (v) funding/wealth at source, (vi) geographic risks.

3The term “RegTech”, short for “regulatory technology”, refers to the use of new technologies

to aid regulatory and compliance processes, mostly through FinTech software applications.

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

Detecting Anomalous Cryptocurrency Transactions

9

between the evolution of these ecosystems and an intermediary-based frame-
work. For instance, ongoing debates concern transfers between self-hosted and
hosted wallets, and the challenge of linking IoM activity to real-world identities
(identiﬁcation of originators and beneﬁciaries)
(Authors blinded for review,
n.d.) . Meanwhile, the industry denounces the absence of global standards and
technical solutions to underpin eﬀective and aﬀordable compliance.

3 Related Work

In this section we will describe some works that provide the application of
many concepts introduced in the previous section regarding blockchain de-
anonymization and forensics.

In blockchain analytics, various methods aim to link (pools of) addresses
and transactions to speciﬁc users and rely on the concepts of “address clus-
ters” (Ince et al., 2018; Neudecker & Hartenstein, 2017) and “transaction
graphs” (Al Jawaheri, Al Sabah, Boshmaf, & Erbad, 2020; Fleder et al., 2015;
Ober et al., 2013; Weber et al., 2019). They usually involve visualization ana-
lytics and pursue the clustering of addresses owned by the same user (Y. Wu
et al., 2021), the identiﬁcation of “idioms of use” in the network that can erode
anonymity (Meiklejohn et al., 2016), while some approaches screen transac-
tions to/from crypto-wallets to classify each transaction as licit or illicit (Weber
et al., 2019). These tools do not (try to) de-anonymize addresses and trans-
actions, linking them to real-world identities, but in case one of them is
de-anonymized (in other ways) they allow to de-anonymize the whole cluster,
as the cluster database allows fast correlation. Likewise, the goal is normally
not to identify and analyze transaction patterns, but to allow that, if a clus-
ter’s address is suspected, other addresses likely owned by the same user/group
can be suspected as well (Y. Wu et al., 2021).

These methodologies

are based on “clustering heuristics” mod-
els (Androulaki, Karame, Roeschlin, Scherer, & Capkun, 2013; Lischke &
Fabian, 2016; Meiklejohn et al., 2016; Reid & Harrigan, 2013), such as: if two/-
more addresses are inputs to the same transaction, they are controlled by the
same user (Meiklejohn et al., 2016). The heuristics are applied by “wallet-
closure analysis” to establish a unique many-one mapping between addresses
and an identity (Al Jawaheri et al., 2020), which ultimately allows to infer
several links between the user and hidden services to be identiﬁed.

Relatedly, “behaviour-based clustering” (Yin et al., 2019) groups addresses
based on patterns such as transaction values (Amarasinghe et al., 2019). A
study performed by (Androulaki et al., 2013) showed this technique can unveil
the proﬁles of 40% of Bitcoin users despite privacy measures. On the appli-
cation level, analytic techniques can exploit information that leaks when it
is possible to establish correlations between transactions and users’ proﬁles
on social networks. Frequently users post their addresses (e.g., to receive
donations, oﬀer services) but also reveal personal information (e.g., contact
information, age, gender, location) (Al Jawaheri et al., 2020). In this respect,

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

10

Detecting Anomalous Cryptocurrency Transactions

“transaction ﬁngerprinting” methods can leverage “publicly available” or “oﬀ-
network” information (Reid & Harrigan, 2013), which is also the context of
application of techniques involving web-scraping and Open Source Intelligence
tools. The authors in (Fleder et al., 2015) annotated the transaction graph
by linking user pseudonyms to online identities collected from social networks,
and developed a graph-analysis framework to summarize and cluster users’
activity to link identities and transactions.

Speciﬁc methods target “mixing” services (J. Wu et al., 2020), i.e., the
ones that shuﬄe cryptocurrency funds with others by sending them to diﬀer-
ent addresses, to obfuscate a ﬂow that would otherwise allow to retrace the
original owner. Although third-party services act as centralization points for
traceability purposes, new disintermediated methods, such as the peer-to-peer
protocol CoinJoin (Al Jawaheri et al., 2020), pursue shuﬄing goals through
more sophisticated approaches. In this context, an important role is played by
peer-to-peer transactions between cryptoassets on diﬀerent blockchains, and
a rather new subset of analytic eﬀorts target cross-currency transactions and
their traceability through exchanges such as ShapeShift (Al Jawaheri et al.,
2020). The authors in (Harrigan & Fretter, 2016) clustered the addresses of
the whole Bitcoin’s blockchain to show the methodology is still suitable despite
mixed transactions.

On the other hand, we ﬁnd works that focus less on the use of networks
analytics, and instead apply machine learning-based forensics (we will discuss
some methods in detail in section 4).

The authors in (Yin et al., 2019) presented a supervised learning-based
approach to de-anonymize the Bitcoin blockchain to predict the type of entities
yet not identiﬁed. They built classiﬁers with respect to 12 categories and con-
cluded it is possible to predict the type of an unidentiﬁed entity. To do so, they
collaborated with the analytic company Chainalysis, the data provider, which
had previously clustered, identiﬁed, and categorized a considerable number of
addresses manually or through clustering techniques. They show two exam-
ples, one where they predict on a set of 22 clusters suspected to be related to
criminal activities, and another where they classify 153,293 clusters to provide
an estimation of Bitcoin activity. On top of this, they concluded it is possi-
ble to predict if a cluster belongs to predeﬁned categories such as exchange,
gambling, hosted wallet, merchant services, mining pool, mixing, ransomware,
scam, tor market.

Machine learning solutions can beneﬁt from constructing multiple graph
types from blockchain data, e.g., a blockchain account is a node and a single
transaction between two accounts is an edge, or a group of accounts is a node
and the edges are deﬁned as the aggregate transaction volume over a period of
time. The latter is the predominant forensic method for cryptocurrency activ-
ity seen in Section 2.2 (Weber et al., 2018). Relatedly, the authors in (Weber
et al., 2019) benchmarked GCN against various supervised methods, while the
authors in (Eddin et al., 2021) extended their work with the aim to reduce false
alerts through supervised machine learning methods in a non-IoM context.

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

Detecting Anomalous Cryptocurrency Transactions

11

They call the machine learning component the “triage model”, tasked to pro-
cess the rule-generated alerts: the score produced by the system enables alert
suppression or alert prioritization. The GuiltyWalker (Oliveira et al., 2021)
leverages random walks on a cryptocurrency graph to characterize distances to
previous suspicious activity. Other works propose graph-based suspiciousness
scores based on a detection system incorporating business knowledge about
money ﬂows, without the use of learning algorithms (X. Li et al., 2020; Sun et
al., 2021).

4 Anomaly Detection Approaches

The process of “anomaly” or “outlier” detection involves the processing of data
to detect behaviour patterns that may indicate a change in system operations,
thus singling out rare or suspicious (i.e., signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the data-
set) events/items (Kamiˇsali´c, Kramberger, & Fister, 2021). In this respect,
“collective” anomaly detection methods target groups of data points that dif-
fer from the majority of the data, while “point” anomaly detection techniques
consider also single data points (Z. Li, Xiang, Gong, & Wang, 2022; Shayegan
et al., 2022). AML regulated entities, especially in the banking industry, deploy
RegTech solutions to screen their operations and detect anomalous activities
in an automated way, thus grounding their transaction monitoring procedures
on these tools. Red ﬂag indicators are usually provided by regulatory frame-
works in a rules-based format, i.e., templates of sequences of actions that
suggest a suspicion, in a way that is self-explainable, as required for auditing
purposes. Hence, the preliminary review of a ﬂagged account relies on “suspi-
ciousness heuristics” (e.g., political exposure, geographic location, transaction
type, users’ behaviour) (Weber et al., 2018), such as FATF’s anomaly indi-
cators related to virtual assets (VAs), developed from analyzing 100+ case
studies from 2017 to 2020 (FATF, 2020).

Rules-based red ﬂags can pertain to transaction patterns, such as “incoming
transactions from many unrelated wallets in relatively small amounts (accu-
mulation of funds) with subsequent transfer to another wallet or full exchange
for ﬁat currency”, or to anonymity, such as “moving a VA that operates on a
public, transparent blockchain, such as Bitcoin, to a centralised exchange and
then immediately trading it for an AEC or privacy coin” (FATF, 2020). In this
context, a lot of time and resources are needed to investigate alerts generated
by rule-matching processes, to decide whether to submit a suspicious trans-
action reports (see sub-section 2.2). Because an alert can be a true or a false
positive, arguably rules-based systems have the advantage of interpretability,
but their simplicity produces too many false positives, estimated at around
95–98% (Eddin et al., 2021).

Indeed, classifying entities and discovering patterns in massive time-series
transaction datasets that are dynamic, high dimensional, combinatorially com-
plex, non-linear, often fragmented, inaccurate, incomplete or inconsistent is

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

12

Detecting Anomalous Cryptocurrency Transactions

not a trivial task. Moreover, the diﬃculty of automating the synthesis of infor-
mation from multi-modal data streams thrusts the task onto human analysts.
In this case, there is a vicious circle of a compliance approach that stimu-
lates over-reporting because of the cost asymmetry between false positives
and false negatives, and overburdens law enforcement agencies (Weber et al.,
2018). Hence, the automation of an increasing array of processes has been
suggested (Oad et al., 2021).

Against this backdrop, this section lays out the theoretical background
on anomaly detection methods applied in our research and elaborates on the
methodologies that relate to our experiments. Hence, we focus on machine
learning and graph analysis, taking an on-chain data analytic perspective.
Nonetheless, we acknowledge the signiﬁcant role played in the AML context by
other tools that target oﬀ-chain data, such as Natural Language Processing,
sentiment analysis, that also leverage graph methods (Weber et al., 2018).

4.1 Machine Learning

Machine learning is a part of artiﬁcial intelligence that exploits data and algo-
rithms to imitate human learning processes, with gradual accuracy improve-
ments. This helps us ﬁnd solutions to problems in many ﬁelds, e.g., vision,
speech recognition, robotics (Alpaydin, 2020). In the most diverse contexts, it
provides tools that can learn and improve automatically leveraging the vast
amount of data available in our age (Kamiˇsali´c et al., 2021). In the com-
pliance domain, advances in these algorithms show great promise and their
deployment in AML RegTech solutions can improve the eﬃciency of these
applications (Weber et al., 2019). For instance, they can mitigate the short-
comings of rules-based systems and infer patterns from historical data, thus
increasing detection rates and decreasing the number of false positives (Lorenz,
2021). In other cases, a more proactive approach is deployed to map and predict
illicit transactions (Koshy, Koshy, & McDaniel, 2014; Weber et al., 2019). One
of the main distinctions in machine learning is between “unsupervised” meth-
ods, where the model works on its own to discover patterns and information
previously undetected, and “supervised” techniques, where labeled datasets
are used to train algorithms. While it is possible to apply both methods for
anomaly detection, most systems deploy unsupervised techniques due to a lack
of relevant real-world labeled datasets.

In the AML sphere, this scarcity chieﬂy derives from diﬃculties in labeling
real cases timely and comprehensively. Indeed, manual labels are costly eﬀort-
and time-wise, and the nature of the entities involved is complex and ever-
evolving (Lorenz, 2021). In this context, the business line of analytic companies
play a crucial role in labelling cryptocurrency transaction data. To address the
overall lack of data, various strategies have been proposed (Eddin et al., 2021):
generate a fully synthetic dataset, simulate only unusual accounts within a
real-world dataset, localize rare events within a peer group. However, better
validations of the systems were obtained using analyst feedback or real labeled

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

Detecting Anomalous Cryptocurrency Transactions

13

data. Parallelly, the shortage of real-life datasets has driven the deployment of
unsupervised and active learning (i.e., few labels) (Lorenz, 2021).

4.1.1 Supervised Baseline Techniques

Supervised Learning techniques are leveraged for their labeled training data.
Some instances of their use include the classiﬁcation of anomalies based on
association rules to detect suspicious events (Luo, 2014), and, in the context
of AML, the label of each transaction could indicate whether it was identiﬁed
as money laundering or not (Lorenz, 2021). Recent RegTech tools make use of
widespread Supervised Learning methods to perform anomaly detection (Yin
et al., 2019):
• Decision Tree - It is one of the base algorithms being used in machine
learning, with a name derived from a hierarchical model formed visually as
a tree, in which nodes are decisions with a certain criteria. Following the
diﬀerent tree’s branches, the training data is then subdivided in diﬀerent
subsets. The decision criteria in the nodes are determined variables that
can be deﬁned explanatory and the learning algorithm tries to apply the
most signiﬁcant feature to perform the best division among the training
data. The best division can be measured by the information gain which is
mathematically derived from a decrease in entropy (Alpaydin, 2020).

• Random Forests - Consists of an extension of decision trees in which an
algorithm approaches the classiﬁcation task by constructing a multitude of
trees. Introduced by Breiman (Breiman, 2001), it is an ensemble method that
is applied to sample random subsets of the training data for each Decision
Tree. It aims to improve predictive accuracy of a classiﬁer by combining
multiple individual weak learners, i.e. trees.

• Boosting Algorithms - They are another type of ensemble methods that
ﬁt sequences of weak learners. A boosting algorithm tries to boost a Decision
Tree by recursively selecting a subset of the training data. AdaBoost (Adap-
tive Boosting) assigns weights to the samples of data, based on the ability of
the weak learners, in order to predict the individual training sample. Thus,
for each iteration, the sample weights are individually computed and the
successive learner is applied to the new data subset (Yin et al., 2019).
• Logistic Regression - It is a multiple regression suitable for binary clas-
siﬁcation, which assesses the relationship between the binary dependent
variable (target) and a set of independent categorical or continuous variables
(predictors) (Hilbe, 2009). In principle, the logistic regression can be seen
as the measurement of the probability of an event happening. This proba-
bility consists of the ratio between the probability that an event will occur
and the probability that the event will not occur.

• Support Vector Classiﬁcation (SVC) - Given a set of data for training,
each labelled with the class to which it belongs among the two possible
classes, a training algorithm for Support Vector Machines builds a model

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

14

Detecting Anomalous Cryptocurrency Transactions

that assigns the new data to one of the two classes, thus obtaining a non-
probabilistic binary linear classiﬁer. This model uses a representation of
data as points in space, mapped in such a way that data belonging to the
two diﬀerent categories are clearly separated by as large a space as possible.
New data are then mapped in the same space and the prediction of the
category to which they belong is made on the basis of the side in which they
fall (Alpaydin, 2020).

• k-Nearest Neighbours (k-NN) - It is a supervised learning algorithm
used in pattern recognition for the classiﬁcation of objects based on the
characteristics of the objects close to the considered one. Also in this case
the model uses a representation of data as points in space, i.e. the feature
space. Given a notion of distance between data objects, the input is the k
nearest training data in the feature space. The underlying idea is that the
more similar the instances, the more likely it is that they belong to the same
class (Alpaydin, 2020).

4.1.2 Graph Analysis

In recent years, for some areas of machine learning there has been a focus on
real-world datasets that come in the form of graphs or networks, e.g., social net-
works, knowledge graphs, etc., in order to generalize of learning models to such
structured datasets. For AML graph analytics is emerging as an increasingly
important tool because money laundering involves transactions ﬂow relation-
ships between entities, thus creating a graph structure. Some approaches have
been provided for supervised learning on graph-structured data that is based
on a variant of neural networks which operate directly on graphs, i.e. Graph
Neural Network (Jiaxuan You, 2020; Kipf & Welling, 2016). Convolutional
neural networks, for instance, oﬀer an eﬃcient architecture to extract highly
meaningful statistical patterns in large-scale and high-dimensional datasets
and can be generalized to graphs (Deﬀerrard, Bresson, & Vandergheynst, 2016;
Kipf & Welling, 2016).
• Graph Convolutional Networks (GCN) - The objective of a GCN
model is to learn a function of signals/features on a data set structured as a
graph. The model takes as input (i) a graph with nodes and edges between
nodes, and (ii) a feature description for each node. The key idea is that each
node receives and aggregates features from its neighbours in order to repre-
sent and compute its local state. The GCN then usually produces an output
feature matrix at the node level (Kipf & Welling, 2016).

• Graph Attention Networks (GAT) - While the GCN model averages
the node states from source nodes to the target node, the GAT model instead
ﬁrstly applies normalized attention scores to each source node state and then
operates on the basis of these (Veliˇckovi´c et al., 2017). Put in other words,
according to a GAT model, given a node diﬀerent importance to each edge
is given, through the introduction of attention coeﬃcients.

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

Detecting Anomalous Cryptocurrency Transactions

15

5 Experimenting With Machine Learning

We already mentioned that AML analytics could beneﬁt from analysis tech-
niques that use machine learning to classify transactions. In view of this claim,
this section outlines the experimental setup of the study we performed and
the results obtained. After describing the dataset used in the experiments, the
evaluation method and the implementations of the anomaly detection methods
are considered. Subsequently, we compare results of our experiments, where
state of the art machine learning techniques and graph based neural networks
are employed in this AML context.

5.1 Methodology

The starting point for our experimentation was a seminal work available in
the state of the art (Weber et al., 2019). Starting from that work, in this
section we report on a general classiﬁcation comparison with a set of bench-
mark classiﬁcation methods, i.e., Decision Trees, Logistic Regression, k-NN,
SVC, AdaBoost, Random Forests, Graph Convolutional Networks (GCN) and
Graph Attention Networks (GAT). These two types of neural networks take
into account the graph nature of our dataset. As the evaluation will show, the
adoption of a novel implementation of GCN improves the performance of such
classiﬁcation scheme.

The dataset is the publicly available Elliptic transactions dataset (Weber et
al., 2019), containing real Bitcoin transactions represented as a directed graph
network. In such a graph, transactions are nodes, whereas the directed edges
between these transactions represent payments ﬂow from the source address
to the destination address.

The dataset contains a total of 203769 transactions nodes connected by
234355 edges. For each transaction, 167 features are available, of which the ﬁrst
94 are relative to the transaction itself and thus extracted from the blockchain
directly. An example would be for instance the number of inputs of a trans-
action or the number of outputs. The following 73 features are relative to the
graph network itself and are extracted from the neighbouring transactions of a
node. Using GCN it is possible to get a more detailed picture of what informa-
tion the model has learnt about the nodes and their neighbourhoods, i.e., an
embedding of the node into a latent vector space that captures that informa-
tion and that comes in the form of a look-up table mapping node to a vector
of numbers. Tests were carried out both with the transaction features (tx),
as well as with transaction features plus aggregated features (tx + agg). Such
aggregated features are obtained by aggregating transaction information one-
hop backward/forward from the center transaction node. This means obtaining
the features of the nodes that share an edge with that transaction node.

Each transaction in the dataset is then labeled as illicit, licit or unknown:
4,545 are labeled as illicit, 42,019 are labeled as licit and the remaining 157205
are unknown. The transactions also contain temporal information. In partic-
ular these are grouped in 49 distinct time steps, evenly spaced in the interval

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

16

Detecting Anomalous Cryptocurrency Transactions

of two weeks. Each time step contains a connected graph containing all the
transactions veriﬁed on the blockchain in the span of 3 hours (Weber et al.,
2019).

We performed a preprocessing on the dataset that can be summarized as

follows:
• merge the features with the classes;
• rename class values to integer values;
• swap transaction identiﬁers for a sorted index;
• select only the part of the dataset labeled licit or illicit;
• remove all the edges between unknown transactions.

After the preprocessing, our cleaned dataset was composed of 46564 transac-
tions and 36624 edges.

5.2 Transaction Graph Analysis

Transactions are linked by nature, since money spent in a transaction
originates from previous transfers. This allows the creation of a graph of
transactions that can be of help in the classiﬁcation process. In fact, given
a transaction t, it is possible to collect all the connected transactions, and
recursively search for other ones up to a certain depth level. Given such con-
nected graph centered at t, inspection of the neighbouring transactions and
their classiﬁed value can aid the classiﬁcation of t.

An example of this procedure is reported in Figure 1, where a connected
component, i.e., a subgraph in which each pair of nodes is connected with each
other via a path, is obtained from an initial transaction (Figure 1, top). In
the Figure the red nodes represent transaction labeled as illicit in the starting
dataset, green ones the licit transaction and the grey ones the unknowns. In
order to show the output of a machine learning classiﬁcation problem, the
bottom part of Figure 1 shows the output of the process employing a speciﬁc
classiﬁcation algorithm, i.e., in this case Random Forest. In essence, the idea
is that knowing the labels of certain transactions aids the classiﬁcation of the
remaining unknown ones.

The majority of the exploited machine techniques do not deserve a detailed
explanation, since their use was standard and their speciﬁcs are covered by
a wide literature. Among them, however, two speciﬁc models deserve close
attention in this context, for diﬀerent reasons. In particular, on the one hand
we provide a description of the speciﬁc implementation of our GCN model
since, as detailed in the results, our implementation allows to obtain results
that outperform other approaches and improve the state of the art. On the
other hand, we describe also the GAT model since the experiment described
in this work is, to the best of our knowledge, the ﬁrst attempt to use this
technique in the AML context.

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

Detecting Anomalous Cryptocurrency Transactions

17

Fig. 1 Connected graph of a considered transaction before and after classiﬁcation

Table 1 GCN model architecture. Total parameters = 18,774, Trainable parameters =
17,756, Non-Trainable = 1,018.

Layer (type)
preprocess (Sequental)
convolution 1 (GraphConvLayer)
convolution 2 (GraphConvLayer)
postprocess (Sequental)
logits (Dense)

Output Shape Num. parameters

(46564, 32)
multiple
multiple
(46564, 32)
multiple

4564
5888
5888
2368
66

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

18

Detecting Anomalous Cryptocurrency Transactions

5.2.1 Graph Convolutional Network Model Architecture

GCN have been developed using the Keras framework, following the recom-
mendations introduced in (Jiaxuan You, 2020). The general structure of our
graph convolution layer is made of three steps. First, the input node repre-
sentations are processed using a Feed Forward Network (FFN) to produce a
message. Second, the messages of the neighbours of each node are aggregated
using a permutation invariant pooling unsorted segment sum operation. Third,
the node representations and aggregated messages are combined and processed
to produce the new state of the node representations (node embeddings), via
concatenation and FFN processing.

Our network architecture consists of a sequential workﬂow of the model is

summarized as follows (see Table 1):

1. Apply pre-processing using FFN to the node features to generate initial

node representations;

2. Apply two graph convolutional layers, with skip connections, to the node

representation to produce node embeddings;

3. Apply post-processing using FFN to the node embeddings to generate the

ﬁnal node embeddings;

4. Feed the node embeddings in a Softmax layer to predict the node class.

Table 2 GAT model architecture. Total parameters = 59,952, Trainable parameters =
59,952, Non-Trainable = 0.

Layer (type)
dense 9 (Dense)
dropout 6 (Dropout)
graph attention (MultiHeadGraphAttention)
dense 10 (Dense)
dropout 7 (Dropout)
dense 11 (Dense)

Output Shape Num. parameters

multiple
multiple
multiple
multiple
multiple
multiple

10340
0
12320
36630
0
662

5.2.2 Graph Attention Network Model Architecture

In GAT model, we use an attention mechanism to aggregate information from
neighboring nodes. In other words, instead of simply averaging/summing node
states from source nodes to the target node, as we do in the GCN model, GAT
instead ﬁrstly applies normalized attention scores to each source node state
and then sums (Veliˇckovi´c et al., 2017).

Our model is built using the Keras framework, through a graph atten-
tion layer that computes pairwise attention scores, aggregates and applies the
scores to the node’s neighbours. A multi head attention layer concatenates
multiple graph attention layer outputs. Our design choice is to use a single
attention layer with multiple heads, making the network able to jointly attend
multiple positions (Liyuan Liu, 2021). The multi-head layer is then inserted
into a general model that implements dense pre-processing/post-processing

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

Detecting Anomalous Cryptocurrency Transactions

19

layers with dropout regularization, as shown in Table 2. The training proved
to be subjected to overﬁtting and heavy regularization was necessary, which
was achieved by dropout layers and with the use of RMSprop optimizer with
momentum (Philipp, Song, & Carbonell, 2017).

Table 3 Table showing the results for the F1-score, Micro Average F1-score, Precision
and Recall metrics for all models

Model
Random Forest Classiﬁer (tx)
Random Forest Classiﬁer (tx + agg)
Logistic Regression (tx)
Logistic Regression (tx + agg)
MLP (tx)
MLP (tx + agg)
k-NN Classiﬁer (tx)
k-NN Classiﬁer (tx + agg)
SVC (tx)
SVC (tx + agg)
Decision Tree Classiﬁer (tx)
Decision Tree Classiﬁer (tx + agg)
AdaBoost Classiﬁer (tx)
AdaBoost Classiﬁer (tx + agg)
GCN (tx)
GAT (tx)

Precision Recall F1 Score M.A. F1

0.909
0.981
0.515
0.456
0.897
0.817
0.762
0.730
0.842
0.862
0.986
0.986
0.793
0.945
0.906
0.897

0.648
0.651
0.646
0.630
0.593
0.623
0.629
0.576
0.604
0.588
0.573
0.573
0.615
0.567
0.790
0.605

0.757
0.782
0.573
0.529
0.714
0.707
0.689
0.644
0.703
0.699
0.725
0.725
0.693
0.708
0.844
0.723

0.974
0.977
0.939
0.929
0.970
0.968
0.964
0.960
0.968
0.968
0.973
0.973
0.966
0.971
0.973
0.971

5.3 Results

While we considered both licit and illicit classes, for the sake of readability
and conciseness in this Section we focus speciﬁcally on F1-score for the illicit
class. F1-score is a metrics obtained from Precision and Recall. Precision is
the number of true positives over the amount of identiﬁed (true and false)
positives and the Recall is the number of true positives over the sum of true
positives and false positives. The F1-score represents the harmonic mean of
Recall and Precision and is thus calculated as:

F1 = 2 ×

Precision × Recall
Precision + Recall

We also use the Micro Average F1-score for evaluating the methods. It

measures the F1-score of the aggregated contributions of all classes.

The ﬁnal performance results are reported in Figure 2. It is possible to
observe how GCN outperforms other approaches. In particular, the GCN
approach provides the best results in terms of recall, i.e., 0.790, and F1-score,
i.e., 0.844. In terms of precision, it slightly deviates from the Decision Tree
(0.986) and Random Forest (0.981) approaches, but still provides better per-
formances than all the rests, i.e., 0.906. For what concerns the Micro Average
F1-score, all approaches ﬁt in the range of 0.960 to 0.977. These results are in

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

20

Detecting Anomalous Cryptocurrency Transactions

Fig. 2 Barplot aggregating F1-score, Micro Average F1-score, Precision and Recall for all
the approaches experimented.

contrast with the results in (Weber et al., 2019), where Random Forests pro-
vided best performance. The motivation behind such improvement might be
due to the diﬀerent architecture we exploited to build the neural network.

Furthermore, the comparison with the other graph-based approach, i.e.,
GAT, also sees the GCN outperforming. GAT performs better than simple
dense network but it is not able to reach the results of GCN and Random
Forest classiﬁers. The motivation is probably due to a naive structure of the
neural network and its optimization is currently under investigation.

6 Discussion

The experiment described in this paper is, to the best of our knowledge, the
ﬁrst attempt at implementing GAT models to detect anomalies on Bitcoin
for AML purposes. The ﬁnal results are on par with the state of the art of
GCN networks, with GAT being marginally worse than GCN. This could be
explained by the “simpler” implementation of GAT, the possibility that the

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

Detecting Anomalous Cryptocurrency Transactions

21

dataset responds better to non-spectral methods. Nonetheless, we argue that
the novelty of this application could be useful for general research on GAT
anomaly detection techniques. In addition, the results show that the GCN
neural network typology is also a promising solution for AML, as it performs
better than other approaches.

One has to consider that GCN and GAT classiﬁers only have access to
transaction features, which means that all information about aggregated nodes
comes from the graph structure itself. Considering that the performance of
GCN is in line with Random Forest (with aggregated features) we can claim
that our graph networks are able to obtain the same amount of information
as the creator of the dataset (Weber et al., 2019).

The choice of one method over another, however, carries additional impli-
cations to consider. For example, Random Forests’ performance falls slightly
behind GCN’s results, yet because the detectors are derived from Random
Forests’ rules, there is no sacriﬁce in explainability. (Eddin et al., 2021). Given
the size and dynamism of real-world information, results’ explainability is dif-
ﬁcult to provide, both in this context and in the broader ﬁeld of artiﬁcial
intelligence. Even in our case, which is a narrow instance, i.e., with transac-
tion graphs that model illicit activity over time, it is diﬃcult to apply methods
that are eﬃcient and whose results can be understood by humans. Although
this appears to be a crucial aspect, the literature is still lacking some research
in the area of the application of explainable artiﬁcial intelligence techniques
to the domain of AML detection (Kute, Pradhan, Shukla, & Alamri, 2021).

Meanwhile, the deployed forensic approaches must be considered against
the backdrop of a substantial evolution of the IoM, which warrants for the
application of increasingly sophisticated, yet explainable, compliance and
investigation techniques. In this respect, as reported above the “crypto travel
rule” has stimulated the industry to denounce the lack of global standards
and technical solutions to underpin eﬀective and aﬀordable AML compliance.
As mentioned in the previous sections , the great quantity and complexity of
transaction data to be processed, today and even more in the future, suggests
that machine learning techniques will continue to be a paramount part of the
solution. Hence, even marginal performance diﬀerences may bear a signiﬁcant
weight, especially when considered under the lens of possible combinations
between diﬀerent approaches.

Meanwhile, the lack of readily available “travel rule” compliance solutions
goes beyond the speciﬁc “travel rule” context, and displays how regulation is
still largely targeting a centralized exchange (CEX) model and has yet to con-
ceive an approach that suits peer-to-peer transfers and decentralized exchanges
(DEXes). Even if one assumes DEXes (or a subset of them) fall within the scope
of AML frameworks – which is per se debatable –, after launch they are usually
operated automatically by the protocol and governance tokens holders. Hence,
it is a problem to identify an entity on which to impose compliance, while a
CEX-centric AML approach keeps shifting liquidity to DEXes. Indeed, rising
DEX misuse was detected in terms of an increase in laundering-related DeFi

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

22

Detecting Anomalous Cryptocurrency Transactions

protocols’ usage of 1.964% between 2020 and 2021. In 2021, CEXes received
47% of funds originating from illicit addresses and DeFi protocols 17%, vis-
`a-vis 2% in 2020. Likewise, in 2021 funds derived from cryptocurrency thefts
were increasingly sent to DeFi platforms (51%) or risky services (25%), while
only 15% went to CEXes, possibly due to AML (Chainalysis Team, 2022).

Concurrently, standardization loopholes arise on a regular basis due to
emerging IoM-related obfuscation techniques or increase in their use (e.g.,
chain-hopping and dusting, atomic swapping exchanges, privacy wallet-based
transfers combining multiple transactions into a single one, such as Coin-
Join) (FATF, 2021a, 2021b). This type of environmental developments are far
from being unprecedented. Indeed, the ﬁrst AML focus on cryptocurrencies
considered only “on and oﬀ ramps” to the traditional (regulated) ﬁnancial
system (i.e., ﬁat-to-crypto exchanges). Later, however, the international focus
broadened to include virtual-to-virtual schemes (FATF, 2019).

Given the evolution towards enhanced disintermediation, regulated enti-
ties and law enforcement agencies will have an increasing need of analyzing
a large amount of transactions not only subject to sophisticated obfuscation
techniques, but also without the assistance of regulated entities as counter-
parties – e.g., investigations or customer due diligence (see sub-section 2.2) on
transactions originating from or destined to self-hosted wallets or processed by
DEXes. For this reason, beside highlighting the value of researching innova-
tive applications of forensic methods based on machine learning, we argue the
adoption of an interdisciplinary approach is crucial to devise compliance tools
that take into account the way regulatory regimes are conceived and enforced.
In this regard, our work performs a contextualization of forensic methods
into the speciﬁcs of the rules-based anomaly indicators provided by the AML
framework (e.g., FATF’s VA-related red ﬂags). In this context, we consider
the role of machine learning in mitigating the shortcomings of rules-based sys-
tems, while advocating for the development of cross-disciplinary models to aid
compliance and reduce over-reporting.

7 Conclusions

While blockchain technology became popular in the wake of Bitcoin’s launch,
experts and law enforcement professionals devised intelligence strategies to
trace cryptocurrency transfers. Blockchain forensics techniques started to
be deployed to connect blockchain addresses and transactions to real-world
identities in order to combat money laundering and the ﬁnancing of terror-
ism and proliferation (AML/CFT). Cryptocurrency misuse on the darknet
prompted an extension of the scope of application of the AML framework,
internationally overseen by the FATF, to include IoM’s transactions. Likewise,
relevant anomaly indicators were drafted to help regulated entities to identify
suspicious transfers. In this context, investigating authorities and law enforce-
ment agencies began to successfully apply forensic methods to track currency

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

Detecting Anomalous Cryptocurrency Transactions

23

across blockchain ecosystems, while regulated entities were oﬀered innovative
RegTech solutions that detect anomalous activities in an automated way.

In this paper, our focus has been on the growing relevance of such tech-
niques and in particular on machine learning and graph analysis approaches,
taking an on-chain data analytic perspective. In the compliance domain,
advances in these algorithms show great promise and their use in RegTech
AML solutions can improve the eﬃciency of these applications. We have per-
formed an experimentation that, as far as we know, is the ﬁrst one involving the
use of Graph Attention Networks (GAT) models on AML anomaly detection
in Bitcoin. This type of neural network stems from a recent focus on exploiting
the fact that many real-world datasets come in the form of graphs or networks.
Thus, Graph Convolutional Networks (GCN) and GAT were born with the idea
of creating generalized learning models for such structured datasets. Indeed,
the data we analyzed consist of a real-world dataset of Bitcoin transactions
represented as a directed graph network.

The ﬁnal results show that these graph-based approaches perform bet-
ter than the baseline approaches, e.g., GCN performs better than Random
Forests, with GAT being marginally worse than GCN. This suggests that the
use of GCN neural networks is also a promising solution for AML, and that
the novelty of our approach could be useful for further research into GAT
anomaly detection techniques. We therefore conclude that experiments in dif-
ferent applications of the widest range of forensic tools, possibly leveraging the
added value of transaction graphs, are crucial to boost relevant research and
engage diﬀerent community stakeholders in a constructive dialogue.

Acknowledgements

The contribution of Nadia Pocher and Mirko Zichichi received funding from the
EU H2020 research and innovation programme under the MSCA ITN Euro-
pean Joint Doctorate grant agreement No 814177 Law Science and Technology
Joint Doctorate - Rights of the Internet of Everything.

References

Akhgar, B., Gercke, M., Vrochidis, S., Gibson, H.

(2021). Dark Web

Investigation. Springer. 10.1080/09546553.2021.2000216

Al Jawaheri, H., Al Sabah, M., Boshmaf, Y., Erbad, A. (2020). Deanonymiz-
ing Tor hidden service users through Bitcoin transactions analysis.
Computers and Security, 89 . https://arxiv.org/abs/1801.07501

10.1016/j.cose.2019.101684

Alpaydin, E. (2020). Introduction to machine learning. MIT press.

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

24

Detecting Anomalous Cryptocurrency Transactions

Amarasinghe, N., Boyen, X., McKague, M. (2019). A Survey of Anonymity of
Cryptocurrencies. Acm international conference proceeding series. Syd-
ney: Association for Computing Machinery. 10.1145/3290688.3290693

Androulaki, E., Karame, G.O., Roeschlin, M., Scherer, T., Capkun, S. (2013).
Evaluating user privacy in Bitcoin. Lecture Notes in Computer Science
(including subseries Lecture Notes in Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Lecture
Notes in Bioinformatics), 7859 , 34–51.

10.1007/978-3-642-39884-1 4

Antonopoulos, A.M. (2017). The internet of money - volume two. Merkle

Boom LLC.

Authors blinded for review (n.d.). Published work.

Bartoletti, M., Carta, S., Cimoli, T., Saia, R. (2020). Dissecting Ponzi schemes
on Ethereum: Identiﬁcation, analysis, and impact. Future Generation
Computer Systems, 102 , 259–277. https://arxiv.org/abs/1703.03779

10.1016/j.future.2019.08.014

Berg, A. (2019). The Identity, Fungibility and Anonymity of Money. Economic
Papers(November), 1–16. Retrieved from https://ssrn.com/abstract=
3211011

10.1111/1759-3441.12273

Biryukov, A., & Tikhomirov, S. (2019). Deanonymization and linkability of
cryptocurrency transactions based on network analysis. Proceedings -
4th IEEE European Symposium on Security and Privacy, EURO S and
P 2019 , 172–184.

10.1109/EuroSP.2019.00022

Breiman, L. (2001). Random forests. Machine learning, 45 (1), 5–32.

Chainalysis Team (2022). The 2022 Crypto Crime Report. (February).

Chen, W., Zheng, Z., Ngai, E.C., Zheng, P., Zhou, Y.

(2019).
Exploiting Blockchain Data to Detect Smart Ponzi Schemes on
Ethereum.
Retrieved from
IEEE Access, 7 (c), 37575–37586.
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/331853833 Exploiting
Blockchain Data to Detect Smart Ponzi Schemes on Ethereum

10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2905769

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

Detecting Anomalous Cryptocurrency Transactions

25

CipherTrace

(2021). Cryptocurrency Crime and Anti-Money Laundering

Report (Tech. Rep. No. February).

Custers, B., & Overwater, L.

(2019). Regulating Initial Coin Oﬀerings
and Cryptocurrencies: A Comparison of Diﬀerent Approaches in Nine
Jurisdictions Worldwide. European Journal of Law and Technology,
10 (3).

Deﬀerrard, M., Bresson, X., Vandergheynst, P. (2016). Convolutional neural
networks on graphs with fast localized spectral ﬁltering. Advances in
neural information processing systems, 29 .

Directive (EU) 2018/843

(2018). Directive (EU) 2018/843 of the Euro-
pean Parliament and of the Council of 30 May 2018 amending Directive
(EU) 2015/849 on the prevention of the use of the ﬁnancial system for
the purposes of money laundering or terrorist ﬁnancing, and amending
Directives 2009/138/EC and 2013/36/EU.

Eddin, A.N., Bono, J., Apar´ıcio, D., Polido, D., Ascens˜ao, J.T., Bizarro,
Anti-money laundering alert optimiza-
arXiv. Retrieved from

P., Ribeiro, P.
tion using machine learning with graphs.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.07508

10.48550/ARXIV.2112.07508

(2021).

Edmunds, J.C.

(2020). Rogue Money and the Underground Economy. An
Encyclopedia of Alternative and Cryptocurrencies. Greenwood, ABC-
CLIO.

European Commission

(2021).

Anti-money laundering and counter-
ing the ﬁnancing of terrorism legislative package. Retrieved from
https://ec.europa.eu/info/publications/210720-anti-money-laundering
-countering-ﬁnancing-terrorism en

Europol (2020, oct). Internet Organised Crime Threat Assessment 2020 (Tech.

Rep.). Retrieved from https://www.europol.europa.eu/

FATF (2019). Guidance for a risk-based approach: virtual assets and virtual
asset service providers (Tech. Rep. No. June). Paris: Author. Retrieved
from www.fatf-gaﬁ.org/

FATF (2020). Virtual Assets Red Flag Indicators of Money Laundering and
Terrorist Financing (Tech. Rep. No. September). Retrieved from http://
www.fatf-gaﬁ.org/

FATF (2021a). Second 12-Month Review of the Revised Fatf Standards on Vir-
tual Assets and Virtual Asset Service Providers. (July). Retrieved from

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

26

Detecting Anomalous Cryptocurrency Transactions

https://www.fatf-gaﬁ.org/media/fatf/documents/recommendations/
Second-12-Month-Review-Revised-FATF-Standards-Virtual-Assets
-VASPS.pdf

FATF (2021b). Virtual Assets and Virtual Asset Service Providers - Updated
Guidance for a Risk-Based Approach. (October). Retrieved from
https://www.fatf-gaﬁ.org/media/fatf/documents/recommendations/
Updated-Guidance-VA-VASP.pdf

FATF

(2022, mar).
and
Laundering
the FATF Recommendations
https://www.fatf-gaﬁ.org/media/fatf/documents/recommendations/
pdfs/FATFRecommendations2012.pdf

International Standards on Combating Money
of Terrorism & Proliferation:
Retrieved from

the Financing

(Tech. Rep.).

Filippi, P.D., & Wright, A. (2018). Blockchain and the law: The rule of code.
Harvard University Press. Retrieved from http://www.jstor.org/stable/
j.ctv2867sp

Fleder, M., Kester, M.S., Pillai, S. (2015). Bitcoin Transaction Graph Analysis.
, 1–8. Retrieved from http://arxiv.org/abs/1502.01657 https://arxiv
.org/abs/1502.01657

Goforth, C.R. (2020). Crypto Assets : A Fintech Forecast. (September), 5–25.

Harrigan, M., & Fretter, C.

(2016). The unreasonable eﬀectiveness of
address clustering. 2016 intl ieee conferences on ubiquitous intelligence
& computing, advanced and trusted computing, scalable computing and
communications, cloud and big data computing, internet of people, and
smart world congress (uic/atc/scalcom/cbdcom/iop/smartworld) (pp.
368–373). IEEE.

Harvey, J., & Branco-Illodo, I. (2020). Why Cryptocurrencies Want Privacy:
A Review of Political Motivations and Branding Expressed in “Privacy
Coin” Whitepapers. Journal of Political Marketing, 19 (1-2), 107–136.
Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.1080/15377857.2019.1652223

10.1080/15377857.2019.1652223

Hilbe, J.M. (2009). Logistic regression models. Chapman and hall/CRC.

Ince, P., Liu, J.K., Zhang, P.

(2018). Adding conﬁdential transactions to
cryptocurrency IOTA with bulletproofs (Vol. 11058 LNCS). Springer
International Publishing. Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

Detecting Anomalous Cryptocurrency Transactions

27

978-3-030-02744-5 3

10.1007/978-3-030-02744-5 3

Jiaxuan You, J.L., Rex Ying (2020). Design space for graph neural networks.

arXiv:2011.08843 .

https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2011.08843

Johnstone, S. (2021). Rethinking the Regulation of Cryptoassets. Cryptographic

Consensus Technology and the New Prospect. Elgar.

Kamiˇsali´c, A., Kramberger, R., Fister, I. (2021). Synergy of blockchain technol-
ogy and data mining techniques for anomaly detection. Applied Sciences
(Switzerland), 11 (17).

10.3390/app11177987

Karasek-wojciechowicz, I.

(2021). Reconciliation of anti-money laundering
instruments and European data protection requirements in permission-
less blockchain spaces. Journal of Cybersecurity, 1–28.

10.1093/cybsec/tyab004

Kipf, T.N., & Welling, M. (2016). Semi-supervised classiﬁcation with graph

convolutional networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.02907 .

Koshy, P., Koshy, D., McDaniel, P.

(2014). An Analysis of Anonymity in
Bitcoin Using P2P Network Traﬃc. International ﬁnancial cryptography
association 2014 (Vol. 8437, pp. 469–485).
10.1007/978-3-662-45472
-530

Kute, D.V., Pradhan, B., Shukla, N., Alamri, A. (2021). Deep learning and
explainable artiﬁcial intelligence techniques applied for detecting money
laundering–a critical review. IEEE Access.

Li, X., Liu, S., Li, Z., Han, X., Shi, C., Hooi, B., . . . Cheng, X.

(2020).
Flowscope: Spotting money laundering based on graphs. Proceedings of
the aaai conference on artiﬁcial intelligence (Vol. 34, pp. 4731–4738).

Li, Y., Susilo, W., Yang, G., Yu, Y., Du, X., Liu, D., Guizani, N.

(2019).
Toward privacy and regulation in blockchain-based cryptocurrencies.
IEEE Network , 33 (5), 111–117.

10.1109/MNET.2019.1800271

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

28

Detecting Anomalous Cryptocurrency Transactions

Li, Y., Yang, G., Susilo, W., Yu, Y., Au, M.H., Liu, D. (2021). Traceable Mon-
ero: Anonymous Cryptocurrency with Enhanced Accountability. IEEE
Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing, 18 (2), 679–691.

10.1109/TDSC.2019.2910058

Li, Z., Xiang, Z., Gong, W., Wang, H. (2022). Uniﬁed model for collective and
point anomaly detection using stacked temporal convolution networks.
Applied Intelligence, 52 (3), 3118–3131. Retrieved from https://doi.org/
10.1007/s10489-021-02559-0

10.1007/s10489-021-02559-0

Lischke, M., & Fabian, B. (2016). Analyzing the bitcoin network: The First

Four Years. Future Internet, 8 (1).

10.3390/ﬁ8010007

Liyuan Liu, J.H., Jialu Liu (2021). Multi-head or single-head? an empirical

comparison for transformer training. arXiv:2106.09650 .

https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2106.09650

Lorenz, J.S. (2021). Machine learning methods to detect money laundering
in the bitcoin blockchain in the presence of label scarcity (Unpublished
doctoral dissertation).

Luo, X. (2014). Suspicious transaction detection for anti-money laundering.

International Journal of Security and Its Applications, 8 (2), 157–166.

Meiklejohn, S., Pomarole, M., Jordan, G., Levchenko, K., McCoy, D., Voelker,
G.M., Savage, S. (2016). A ﬁstful of Bitcoins: Characterizing payments
among men with no names. Communications of the ACM , 59 (4), 86–93.

10.1145/2896384

Moreno-Sanchez, P., Zafar, M., Kate, A. (2016, 02). Listening to whispers
of ripple: Linking wallets and deanonymizing transactions in the ripple
network. Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies, 2016 .

10.1515/popets-2016-0049

Nakamoto, S.

(2008). Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System.

www.bitcoin.org.

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

Detecting Anomalous Cryptocurrency Transactions

29

Neudecker, T., & Hartenstein, H. (2017). Could network information facili-
tate address clustering in bitcoin? Lecture Notes in Computer Science
(including subseries Lecture Notes in Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Lecture
Notes in Bioinformatics), 10323 LNCS , 155–169.

10.1007/978-3-319-70278-0 9

Oad, A., Razaque, A., Tolemyssov, A., Alotaibi, M., Alotaibi, B., Zhao, C.
(2021). Blockchain-enabled transaction scanning method for money
laundering detection. Electronics, 10 (15). Retrieved from https://
www.mdpi.com/2079-9292/10/15/1766

10.3390/electronics10151766

Ober, M., Katzenbeisser, S., Hamacher, K. (2013). Structure and anonymity
of the bitcoin transaction graph. Future Internet, 5 (2), 237–250.

10.3390/ﬁ5020237

Oliveira, C., Torres, J., Silva, M.I., Apar´ıcio, D., Ascens˜ao, J.T., Bizarro, P.
(2021). Guiltywalker: Distance to illicit nodes in the bitcoin network.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.05373 .

Pﬁtzmann, A., & Hansen, M. (2010). A terminology for talking about pri-
vacy by data minimization: Anonymity, Unlinkability, Undetectability,
Unobservability, Pseudonymity, and Identity Management. Technical
University Dresden, 1–98.

10.1.1.154.635

Phan, T. (2021). Exploring Blockchain Forensics.

Philipp, G., Song, D., Carbonell, J.G. (2017, December). The exploding gradi-
ent problem demystiﬁed - deﬁnition, prevalence, impact, origin, tradeoﬀs,
and solutions.

https://arxiv.org/abs/1712.05577 [cs.LG]

Quiniou, M. (2019). Blockchain: the advent of disintermediation. ISTE Ltd.

Reid, F., & Harrigan, M. (2013). An analysis of anonymity in the bitcoin
system. Security and Privacy in Social Networks, 197–223. https://
arxiv.org/abs/1107.4524

10.1007/978-1-4614-4139-7 10

Shayegan, M.J., Sabor, H.R., Uddin, M., Chen, C.-L. (2022). A collective
anomaly detection technique to detect crypto wallet frauds on bitcoin

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

30

Detecting Anomalous Cryptocurrency Transactions

network. Symmetry, 14 (2). Retrieved from https://www.mdpi.com/
2073-8994/14/2/328

10.3390/sym14020328

Sun, X., Zhang, J., Zhao, Q., Liu, S., Chen, J., Zhuang, R., . . . Cheng, X.
(2021). Cubeﬂow: Money laundering detection with coupled tensors.
Paciﬁc-asia conference on knowledge discovery and data mining (pp.
78–90).

Tapscott, D., & Euchner, J. (2019). Blockchain and the Internet of Value:
An Interview with Don Tapscott Don Tapscott talks with Jim Euchner
about blockchain, the Internet of value, and the next Internet revolu-
tion. Research Technology Management, 62 (1), 12–19. Retrieved from
https://doi.org/10.1080/08956308.2019.1541711

10.1080/08956308.2019.1541711

Tennant, L. (2017). Improving the Anonymity of the IOTA Cryptocurrency.
, 1–20. Retrieved from https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/490d/https://
laurencetennant.com/papers/anonymity-iota.pdf.pdf

Veliˇckovi´c, P., Cucurull, G., Casanova, A., Romero, A., Lio, P., Bengio, Y.

(2017). Graph attention networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.10903 .

Wang, F., & De Filippi, P. (2020). Self-Sovereign Identity in a Globalized
World: Credentials-Based Identity Systems as a Driver for Economic
Inclusion. Frontiers in Blockchain, 2 (January), 1–22.

10.3389/fbloc.2019.00028

Weber, M., Chen, J., Suzumura, T., Pareja, A., Ma, T., Kanezashi, H., . . .
Schardl, T.B. (2018). Scalable Graph Learning for Anti-Money Laun-
dering: A First Look. (1970). Retrieved from http://arxiv.org/abs/
1812.00076 https://arxiv.org/abs/1812.00076

Weber, M., Domeniconi, G., Chen, J., Weidele, D.K.I., Bellei, C., Robinson, T.,
Leiserson, C.E. (2019). Anti-Money Laundering in Bitcoin: Experiment-
ing with Graph Convolutional Networks for Financial Forensics. (10).
Retrieved from http://arxiv.org/abs/1908.02591 https://arxiv.org/abs/
1908.02591

Wu, J., Liu, J., Chen, W., Huang, H., Zheng, Z., Zhang, Y.

(2020, jan).
Detecting Mixing Services via Mining Bitcoin Transaction Network with
Hybrid Motifs. Journal of Latex Class Files, 14 (8). Retrieved from

Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template

Detecting Anomalous Cryptocurrency Transactions

31

http://arxiv.org/abs/2001.05233 https://arxiv.org/abs/2001.05233

Wu, Y., Tao, F., Liu, L., Gu, J., Panneerselvam, J., Zhu, R., Shahzad,
M.N. (2021). A bitcoin transaction network analytic method for future
blockchain forensic investigation. IEEE Transactions on Network Science
and Engineering, 8 (2), 1230–1241.

10.1109/TNSE.2020.2970113

Xu, J.J. (2016). Are blockchains immune to all malicious attacks? Financial
Innovation, 2 (1), 25. Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.1186/s40854
-016-0046-5

10.1186/s40854-016-0046-5

Yin, H.H.S., Langenheldt, K., Harlev, M., Mukkamala, R.R., Vatrapu, R.
(2019, jan). Regulating Cryptocurrencies: A Supervised Machine Learn-
ing Approach to De-Anonymizing the Bitcoin Blockchain. Journal of
Management Information Systems, 36 (1), 37–73.

10.1080/07421222.2018.1550550

