2
2
0
2

n
u
J

6
2

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
2
2
9
2
1
.
6
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Visualizing Non-Fungible Token Ethics: A Case Study On CryptoPunks

Yufan Zhang*
Duke Kunshan University
SciEcon CIC

Zichao Chen†
Duke Kunshan University
SciEcon CIC

Luyao Zhang‡
Duke Kunshan University
SciEcon CIC

Xin Tong§
Duke Kunshan University

ABSTRACT

As a blockchain-based application, Non-Fungible Token (NFT) has
received worldwide attention over the past few years. Digital artwork
is the main form of NFT that can be stored on different blockchains.
Although the NFT market is rapidly developing, we observed poten-
tial ethical and racial fairness issues in the design of NFT artworks
due to a lack of ethical guidelines or censorship. Therefore, we inves-
tigated CryptoPunks, the most famous collection in the NFT market,
to explore and visualize its potential ethical issues. We explored the
ethical issues from three aspects: design, trading transactions, and
related topics on Twitter. We scraped data from Twitter and Dune
Analytics using python libraries, Twitter crawler, and sentiment anal-
ysis tools. Our ﬁve visualizations implied that 1.6 times more male
punks were created in the initial design process than the female ones.
And the male ones have a higher average selling price than females;
lighter-skinned punks tend to sell for higher prices. The results of
our study and visualizations provide a preliminary exploration of
CryptoPunks and further inspire future ethical-related investigation
and research in the NFT domain.

2 METHODOLOGY

2.1 Data Source

The data are from two data sources: blockchain transaction records
of CryptoPunks token from DuneAnalytics [2] ranging from the
launch date of CryptoPunks, June 23, 2017, to May 7, 2022, and
the Twitter threads with at least ﬁve likes from Twitter [15] with
related topic keywords including “NFT,” “CryptoPunk(s),” “ethic,”
“informed consent,” “transparency,” “accountability,” “privacy,” “fair-
ness”, “trust,” “gender,” “ethnicity,” “skin tone,” and “skin color.”

2.2 Data Processing

2.2.1 Construct databases

Using the Python Pandas [12] and Numpy [11] libraries, we con-
struct four databases:
transaction database (16,823 transaction
records), token database (10,000 punks), trader database (5,911
addresses), and tweet database (83,568 tweets), whose primary keys
are the transaction ID, CryptoPunks ID, Ethereum address, Twitter
thread ID respectively.

1 INTRODUCTION

2.2.2 Extract visualization data

Non-fungible token (NFT) is a unit of data stored on the blockchain
that certiﬁes a digital asset to be unique [14]. The NFT market
achieved more than 2 billion dollars in transactions in the ﬁrst quarter
of 2021 — which is 2000% higher than the fourth quarter of 2020
[10]. Besides, many famous artists and companies have joined
the NFT market [9, 13]. Numerous NFT digital avatar collections
are created based on attributes like the avatar’s gender, skin color,
and accessories. CryptoPunks [1] is one of the most popular NFT
collections that offers more than 10,000 unique collectible character
images, selling on every mainstream NFT marketplace.

However, potential ethical problems arise in the ﬂedgling NFT
market without a regulatory mechanism and central government. For
example, CryptoPunks with different genders and skin colors have
signiﬁcantly different price trends [8]. Moreover, the algorithmic or
manual generation processes of NFT usually remain unrevealed. Al-
though CryptoPunks creators claimed that each artwork is generated
algorithmically, the punks showed imbalance attributes in gender
and race [1].

Therefore, our research questions of this project are:

• What potential gender and racial ethical concerns exist in NFT
artwork collections in the generation and trading process, such
as CryptoPunks?

• What are Twitter users’ perceptions of NFT ethical problems?

*e-mail: yz605@duke.edu
†e-mail: zc142@duke.edu
‡e-mail: lz183@duke.edu
§e-mail: xin.tong@dukekunshan.edu.cn

To depict the distribution of CryptoPunks with different attributes,
we group the CryptoPunks tokens with their attributes. Speciﬁcally,
the attributes of CryptoPunks are categorized into four levels: the
type (e.g., human), the gender (e.g., male), the skin tone (e.g., dark),
and the number of attributes (e.g., 3 attributes). Furthermore, the
transaction database is merged with the token database to add the
CryptoPunks ethics-related attributes (i.e., gender and skin tone) into
each transaction record. Using the Python NetworkX [4] library, we
build the CryptoPunks transaction network for each year from 2017
to 2022 with the addresses as the nodes and the transaction as the
edges.

2.2.3 Conduct sentiment analysis

Using the Python ﬂairNLP [7] library, we conducted sentiment
analysis on the tweet content in the tweet database. Unlike the
rule-based sentiment analysis toolkit, such as Textblob [6], ﬂairNLP
processes the texts via the deep neural network, which generally
yields better model performance in Natural Language Processing
(NLP) tasks such as sentiment analysis. Speciﬁcally, all the tweets
are classiﬁed into positive, neutral, or negative sentiments.

2.3 Data Visualizations

We construct ﬁve visualizations using the Python Plotly library [3].
First, we create an interactive Sankey diagram to illustrate the distri-
bution of CryptoPunks with different attributes. Second, we apply
the Time River design idiom to visualize the price change of dif-
ferent combinations of attributes. Third, we create a scatter plot to
depict the price disparity of skin tone. Fourth, we create a circular
network visualization based on the undirected graph of the transac-
tion network by year. Last, we create the bar chart and word cloud
ﬁgures using Python WordCloud [5] package to visualize Twitter
users’ sentiment towards NFT-related ethical topics. A detailed in-
troduction to the visualization results will be shown in the results
section.

 
 
 
 
 
 
3 RESULTS
3.1 CryptoPunks Generating Distribution

The scatter plot visualizes the CryptoPunks transaction records
and its skin tone. Each circle represents a transaction, and its color
refers to the punk’s skin tone. Through interaction, users can see the
CryptoPunks details and data for each transaction. In general, the
dark spots were generally below the light ones, which implied that
the price of dark Punk is generally lower than that of light Punk.

3.4 CryptoPunks Transaction Network (by Year)

Figure 1: Sankey Diagram of the Attributes Distribution

Knowing the initial amount of CryptoPunks provides insights of
the design team’s opinions of equality. Figure 1 reveals intuitively
that the number of genders in the original set of CryptoPunks is quite
different. There are 6,039 male Punks, but only 3,840 female Punks.
There were also differences in the number of punks with different
skin colors, with dark skin having the lowest number.

3.2 Price Trend of Punks in Different Skin Colors and

Genders

Figure 2: Time River Chart of the Price Trend

In this section, we analyzed the price changes of eight types of
Punks in the market and the differences between them, as shown
in Figure 2 (from top to bottom are ”Male Albino”, ”Male Light”,
”Male Medium”, ”Male Dark”, ”Female Albino”, ”Female Light”,
”Female Medium”, ”Female Dark”). Figure 2 indicates that the
average transaction prices of male and light-skinned punks was
higher than that of female and dark-skinned punks of the same
period at most time from year 2017 to now. However, the price gaps
among these groups were not very huge.

3.3 Transaction Prices Sorted by Skin Color Type

Figure 3: Scatter Plot of the Transaction Record

Figure 4: Circular Network Graph of the Transaction

The circular network visualizes the transaction network of Cryp-
toPunks by year, which explores CryptoPunks’ current trading mar-
ket and trading network. Each node refers to a trader who has
participated in at least one transaction of CryptoPunks, and each
edge refers to a transaction with the color representing the punk skin
tone of the transaction. In this graph, the right side of the transaction
line is the most dense, which means that prices in the CryptoPunks
market are likely to be dominated by a few big business merchants
or high frequency collectors.

3.5 Twitter Analysis with Bar Chart & Word Cloud

Figure 5: Bar Chart of the Word Cloud and Sentiment Analysis

The bar chart and the word cloud visualizations in Figure 5 re-
ﬂected the sentiments of Twitter users’ attitudes about NFT ethics.
We did not identify many participants who are aware of gender and
ethical inequities in NFT, which means that the ethical training and
management of the NFT market is urgently needed and necessary.

4 DISCUSSIONS AND CONCLUSION

NFT is a scorching and popular market where the numbers of players
are growing rapidly. In our project, we successfully collected and vi-
sualized data about the market transactions of CryptoPunks, an NFT
artwork collection and tweets. Our ﬁve interactive visualizations
demonstrated that different levels of gender and racial inequality
have emerged both during the creation and trading processes of
CryptoPunks. Our project, as a pioneer in this ﬁeld, will resonate
with the community and more players and inspire more researchers
to study the ethical issues of blockchain.

REFERENCES

[1] Cryptopunks: All attributes.
[2] Dune.
[3] Modern analytic apps for the enterprise - plotly.
[4] Networkx — networkx documentation.
[5] Wordcloud for python documentation — wordcloud 1.8.1 documenta-

tion.

[6] Textblob: Simpliﬁed text processing — textblob 0.15.2 documentation,

2018.

[7] ﬂairnlp/ﬂair, 09 2020.
[8] M. Egkolfopoulou and A. Gardner. Even in the metaverse, not all

identities are created equal. Bloomberg.com, 12 2021.

[9] R. Farrington. Why big brands are spending millions on nfts.
[10] R. Frank. Nft sales top $2 billion in ﬁrst quarter, with twice as many

buyers as sellers, 04 2021.
[11] Numpy. Numpy — numpy, 2009.
[12] Pandas. Python data analysis library — pandas: Python data analysis

library, 2018.

[13] M. Swant. As coca-cola auctions its ﬁrst nft, more brands are entering

the metaverse.

[14] V. Tabora. Looking beyond nft from million dollar jpeg energy hogs to

its value proposition, 04 2021.

[15] Twitter. Twitter. it’s what’s happening., 2000.

