     

1 

Blockchain based Secure Energy Marketplace Scheme to 
Motivate P2P Microgrids 

Muhammad Awais1, Qamar Abbas2, Shehbaz Tariq3, Sayyaf Haider Warraich4 
1,3Electronics and Information Convergence Engineering, Kyung Hee University, South Korea 
2,4National University of Sciences and Technology, Pakistan 

Keywords: 

Blockchain 
microgrids  
smart contracts 
shielded execution 
decentralization 

  ABSTRACT 

In the past years trend of microgrids is increasing very fast to reduce peak-
hour  costs.  However,  in  these  systems,  third  parties  are  still  involved  in 
selling surplus energy. This results in increased cost of energy and there are 
many operational and security barriers in such systems. These issues can be 
solved  by  the  decentralized  distributed  system  of  microgrids  where  a 
consumer  can  locally  sell  their  surplus  energy  to  another  consumer.  To 
deploy such a system, one must consider security barriers for the transaction 
of  energy.  This  paper  proposes  a  solution  to  these  problems  by  devising  a 
scheme as a marketplace where users interact with each other to buy and sell 
energy  at  better  rates  and  get  energy-generating  resources  on  lease  so  that 
users  do  not  have  to  worry  about  capital  investment.  Agreement  between 
owner  of  resources  and  consumer  is  recorded  on  blockchain  based  smart 
contracts.  In  this  paper,  a  survey  is  performed  for  existing  well  known, 
decentralized  energy  solutions.  This  paper  also  proposes  an  extra  layer  of 
security to leverage a shielded execution environment so that information of 
energy generated, utilized, and shared cannot be changed by consumers and 
third parties even if the system is compromised. 

Corresponding Author: 

Muhammad Awais, 
Electronics and Information Convergence Engineering, Kyung Hee University, 
Yongin, South Korea. 
Email: mawais@khu.ac.kr 

1. 

INTRODUCTION AND MOTIVATION 

Microgrids  are  distributed  energy  sources  with  clearly  defined  boundaries  concerning  grids  which 
were  introduced  to  fulfil  local  areas  demands  and  to  increase  the  efficiency  and  flexibility  of  distributed 
energy resources [1] [2]. From the start, our energy distribution systems were designed on a large scale by 
considering the problems of macro-scale distributions, e.g., demand, abruptions. However, with time use of 
microgrids  increased,  which  allowed  the  consumers  to  generate  their  energy  to  decrease  peak  hour  load 
charges while increasing renewable energy resources [3]. Currently, the use of low-voltage energy services 
like  electric  vehicles,  smart  appliances,  photovoltaic  panels,  and  battery-based  storage  systems  is  being 
increased, and optimised use of microgrids can improve reliability, reduce cost, and integrate more efficiently 
with the grid; that is why regulation and some policies have been introduced [4] Prosumers who have surplus 
energy require to sell extra energy, but current systems require third parties to involve in selling and buying 
such energy. The involvement of third parties has increased the cost of this energy, due to which consumers 
have to pay more, and prosumers get less by selling their extra energy. In conventional systems, consumers 
cannot identify the energy source they consume, nor can they buy from specific prosumers. Integrating such 
new  features  is  very  challenging  in  conventional  systems.  Due  to  this,  both  parties  rely  on  the  third  party, 
which consumers and prosumers do not desire. 

Since the Bitcoin white paper [5] publication by an anonymous person named Satoshi Nakamoto, a 
new technology blockchain has been introduced whose purpose was mainly to create decentralised currency 
to mitigate monopolies by banks. Blockchain ledger uses a decentralised peer to peer mechanism in which 
every  node  is  connected  to  one  or  multiple  other nodes  in  a network.  Whenever  a  new  block  is  created  or 
transaction  is  performed,  then  randomly  selected  nodes  perform  cryptographic  calculations  to  validate  the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 

  

transaction  and  whenever  a  new  transaction  is  validated,  then  nodes  broadcast  this  information  to  other 
connected nodes. Different consensus protocols can solve and validate such canonical ledger of blockchain, 
and there is a possibility of multiple segmentations of the ledger, but only then the longest chain is used as an 
official ledger which is trusted and shared by the majority of nodes [6] [7]. 

Due  to  the  considerable  promise  of  decentralisation  and  security,  now  blockchain  technology  is 
being  applied  in  many  other  countless  applications,  e.g.,  supply-chain  management,  health  care  industries, 
cryptocurrencies, decentralised cloud data, notary services, music industry, voting system [8] and many other 
applications in which automatic implementation according to set of rules are required using smart contracts. 
Similarly, blockchain technology can completely decentralised microgrids where a prosumer can sell surplus 
energy  to  consumers  without  any  third-party  involvement.  Such  a  system  can  results  in  high  profit  for 
prosumers as they do not have to pay third parties to sell their extra energy, and consumers can buy energy at 
fewer  rates  as  they  also  do  not  require  to  pay  third  parties  for  their  services.  In  our  proposed  system, 
consumers  can  decide  the  amount  of  energy,  source  of  energy  generation,  and  microgrid  from  which  they 
want to buy. In the modern age, pollution is one of the major problems of human society due to that most of 
the  consumers  would prefer  to  buy  renewable  energy [9]  at  the  cheapest  rate from  prosumers.  Our  system 
scheme creates fair competition between prosumers to sell energy at a fair price and promote the generation 
of more renewable energy.  

The  use  of  blockchain  technology  in  microgrids  can  provide  more  secure,  reliable,  and  efficient 
ways  with  less  cost  to  sharing  energy  sources.  Blockchain  technology  can  develop  new  energy  trading 
systems  at  better  rates  while  ensuring  transparency  and  quick  provision  to  transactions  [10].  As  currently, 
most users do not trust blockchain technology despite being highly secure, we propose leveraging shielded 
execution-based hardware security for the marketplace. This way, users will be able to verify running code in 
the  server  using  a  certificate  provided  by  public/private  keys  infrastructure.  Shielded  execution  concept  is 
also itself new and depends on the hardware being under usage like Intel-SGX [11] must be used for Intel-
based  server  and  Trusted-Zone  [12]  for  ARM-based  server.  Also,  intelligent  meters  provided  to  users 
shielded  execution  can  provide  an  extra  layer  of  security  besides  blockchain.  Leveraging  the  scheme  can 
provide a way to dynamically integrate microgrids with the grid to enable intelligent grids, making a base for 
smart cities. Blockchain-based smart microgrids are very useful in remote areas where the distributed system 
would  be  very  costly  due  to  a  frequent  line  breaks  and  high  line  loss,  and  high  capital  cost.  In  under 
developing countries, such system installation is more convenient than in developed countries, and it can be 
very beneficial to the community to have access to renewable and cheap energy. Our main contributions of 
this paper can be summarised as follows: 

•  We  proposed  an  energy  marketplace  in  which  flexible  features  can  be  introduced  with  mutual 
agreement of consumer, prosumer, and resource owner, which provide a fair trade of energy and an 
investment opportunity. 

•  We provided a survey of prominent decentralised companies and compared their focus and scope of 

business. 

•  To  enhance  the  security  of  the  proposed  scheme,  we  provided  a  solution  by  leveraging  shielded 
execution-based marketplace servers and intelligent meter devices to provide authentication of valid 
code to the users. 

The rest of the paper is organised as follows: Section II covers a literature review for decentralised solutions 
in energy. In section III, we compare solutions discussed in previous section II. The complete system scheme 
is described in Section IV. Finally, we conclude the paper in Section V. 

2.  LITERATURE REVIEW 

The decentralized nature of blockchain is the best option for decentralized microgrid systems. Many 
projects  are  using  blockchain  in  microgrids,  but  most  of  the  projects  are  under  the  development  phase. 
Currently,  it  is  hard  to  setup  a  new  system  where  already  excellent  distribution  systems  are  installed. 
However,  in  underdeveloped  countries,  it  is  easier  to  deploy  blockchain  based  smart  microgrids  as  new 
energy  sources  are  in  demand.  Blockchain  technology  based  decentralized  microgrids  could  promote 
renewable energy resources by using smart contracts so that the energy source is verified, and the prosumer 
cannot  change  it  later.  This  gives  the  consumer  to  select  renewable  energy  sources  so  that  such  energy 
generation  and  selling  is  more  environmentally  friendly.  Some  exiting  solutions  are  discussed  in  the 
following subsections. 

      
 
 
 
 

3 

2.1. SolarCoin 

SolarCoin  aims  to  promote  renewable  solar  energy  culture  around  the  globe  by  encouraging 
consumers  to  invest  in  solar  energy.  Due  to  long  payback  time,  prosumers  invest  less  in  solar  energy. 
However, the company promote solar energy by giving prosumer one SolarCoin token for generating 1 MW 
energy  from  renewable  solar  source  for  which  certified  metered  are  also  installed  by  the  company  [13]. 
SolarCoin company has a token system based on blockchain for giving rewards and buying energy. 

2.2. TheSunExchange 

This project targets underdeveloped countries where corruption is a big problem. TheSunExchange 
provides a platform where users can buy solar panels and lease solar panels  to earn passion income. Solar 
panels  owner  earns  money  for  giving  his  solar  panels  on  rent  for  20  years  in  the  form  of  Bitcoin  or  local 
currency as per the preference of the owner [14]. The company installs these solar panels in a suitable place 
for which rent is given to the owner, this way the owner does not need to worry about the maintenance of 
solar panels, and he can earn remotely from anywhere from the globe. 

2.3. Electron 

Electron  company  [15]  develops  an  Ethereum  based  solution  of  energy  alongside  the  currently 
deployed  system.  They  provide  collaborative  trading  comparable  to  peer-to-peer  trading.  They  have  many 
tools  on  open  source  to  make  their  smart  meter  more  productive  and  secure.  Currently,  Electron  projects 
include RecorDER to create a shared asset register for energy. Artemis for flexible energy trading and Helios, 
a funded project for multilateral transaction platform development to have demand-side response actions. 

2.4. PowerLedger 

Based on blockchain PowerLedger provide a clearing mechanism and trading of energy. Customers 
can  buy  or  sell  a  surplus  amount  of  energy  from  renewable  energy  sources  within  microgrids  or  over 
distribution networks in real-time. Energy could be sold directly, or if a consumer has batteries, he can store 
energy and sell at another time for more revenue by selling at peak hour time. Buyers can see direct sellers on 
the platform and can get the best price. Distribution network systems also get revenue for energy trading as 
infrastructure is provided by distribution networks [16]. 

2.5. LO3-Energy 

LO3-Energy is based on software and hardware, which provides its customers to sell and buy from 
each other using blockchain technology based on smart contracts in a securely and automatically mechanism. 
LO3-Energy  platform  is  based  on  Ethereum  cryptocurrency  and  blockchain  smart  contracts  to  reshape  the 
future of energy by innovations in energy buying, selling, using, storing and generation at the local level [17]. 
LO3-Energy  has  the vision  to  create  intelligent  microgrid  systems  based  on  blockchain which  can  provide 
information  regarding  energy  production,  energy  consumption,  peer  to  peer  transactions  and  demand 
response. LO3-Energy allows its customers a free choice to buy from multiple renewable energy sources; a 
customer  with  surplus  energy  can  sell  the  energy  they  produce.  Communities  can  choose  to  keep  energy 
resources local to increase decentralized energy sharing efficiency. 

2.6. Share&Charge 

Share&Charge  is  promoting  green  mobility  seamlessly  and  smartly  for  the  future.  As  with  the 
increase in the tread of electric vehicles, Share&Charge company has made a network of charging stations 
for electric vehicles. This way, users with surplus energy can buy a particular module from share and charge 
and set their tariffs for charging [18]. Persons those required to charge their electric vehicles will have to use 
wallets  for  a  transaction.  Share&Charge  provides  an  easy  way  to  charge  electric  vehicles  even  in  remote 
areas  where  seller  and  buyer  both  get  benefits.  Share&Charge  company  handles  billing  and  storing  such 
information in the user’s wallet. 

2.7. GridSingularity 

GridSingularity has created an open-source decentralized energy data exchange platform. Like other 
platforms, GridSingularity does not only focus on electricity trading as energy; it also focuses on gas, heating 
and  water  in  the  decentralized  mechanism.  GridSingularity  has  the  software  developed  as  an  agent-based 
model,  to  optimize  energy  devices  operations.  This  decentralized  autonomous  area  agent  harnesses  the 
potential  of  smart  grid,  decentralized  energy  sharing  and  renewable  energy  sources  by  data  analytics  and 
optimization [19]. 

 Blockchain based Secure Energy Marketplace Scheme to Motivate P2P Microgrids (Muhammad Awais) 

 
 
 
4 

  

2.8. WePower  

WePower helps customers directly connect to green energy sellers at a cheap rate with good power 
purchase  agreements.  WePower  [20]  enables  its  customers  to  procure  and  trade  green  energy  in  their 
platform easily. Power purchase agreement helps customers buy electricity at stable rates, which are ensured 
by  blockchain  based  smart  contracts  that  automatically  execute  according  to  rules  set.  WePower  also 
provides a platform to proper monitor, review contracts and find renewable electricity producers, best fit for 
buyers. 

2.9. Alliander 

Alliander  provides  a  peer-to-peer  innovative  energy  marketplace  where  customers  can  consume, 
produce,  and  share  renewable  energy.  Alliander  has  good  financial  support  and  currently  working  on  a 
project to make energy affordable, more accessible, and reliable in local energy networks [21]. Initially, the 
company was built in 2009, but decentralized projects were started in 2017. Alliander provides energy tokens 
to its customers; these could be used in more energy requirement times or consumers can sell these tokens to 
generate revenue. 

2.10.  Energy Web Foundation 

Energy  Web  Foundation  (EWF)  [22]  was  started  as  a  non-profit  organization  by  world-leading 
energy sector companies to use blockchain technology potential in the energy sector. EWF is one of the top 
enterprise-grade platforms which use blockchain in energy regulation, operations and solving market energy 
need problems. EWF is built to handle a large number of transactions with high speed and scalability. 

2.11.  NRGcoin  

NRGcoin  was  started  as  an  industry-academia  linked  project,  which  was  latterly  scaled  up  to  an 
industrial context [23]. NRGcoin uses smart contracts to promote green energy by providing benefits in smart 
grid for energy producers, consumers, government, and energy distribution network providers. In NRGcoin 
scheme,  energy  producers  can  sell  extra  energy  to  earn  NRGcoins  and  incentives  to  produce  renewable 
energy, and consumers get cheap energy using NRGcoin, the government gets tax and DSO gets a margin by 
providing the infrastructure which encourages customers to use the NRGcoin platform [24]. 

3.  COMPARISON OF P2P ENERGY SHARING INDUSTRIES 

In  table  1,  a  brief  comparison  of  early  mentioned  industrial  power  sector  projects  based  on 
blockchain  is  provided.  In  some  previous  papers  like  [25]  [26]  and  [27],  comparisons  having  some 
similarities  are  provided,  and  we  have  also  considered  their  provided  information  for  comparing  these 
industrial projects. There are a lot of non-industrial projects that also exist for example [28][29] [30] but we 
are not considering those in our survey. We have not considered all the industries in our comparison as too 
many industries are being established day by day in this market. In the time of availability of this research to 
readers, many other new industries may be established. 

Table 1. Technical review of different blockchain based microgrid industries 

Projects 

Short Description 

Blockchain 
Ledger 

Type of 
Blockchain 

Consensus 
Mechanism 

Open 
Source 

Foundation 
Year 

SolarCoin 

Promoting  solar  energy  culture 
by giving Solar-Coin one token 
for generating 1-MW 

TheSunExchange  Buy  and  lease  solar  cells  to 
earn  passive  income  from  the 
globe 

Electron 

PowerLedger 

Collaborative  energy 
trading 
provides  asset  register  records 
for energy 

Platform to buy and sell energy 
at  best  rates,  reduce  peak  hour 
time  charges  and  provide 
revenue for DSO too. 

SolarCoin 

Public 

PoS 

Yes 

2014 

SolarCoin 

Public 

PoS 

No 

2015 

Ethereum 

Public 

PoW 

Yes 

2016 

Ethereum, 
EcoChain 

Public, 
Private, 

PoW, PoS 

Yes 

2016 

      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LO3 Energy 

Share&Charge 

GridSingularity 

WePower 

Alliander 

Energy Web 
Foundation 

NRGcoin 

on 

decentralized 
Working 
future  of  energy  to  buy,  sell, 
store  and  generate  at  a  local 
on 
level.  Also  working 
intelligent  data 
in 
microgrids. 
Promoting 
seamlessly  and  smartly 
electric vehicles 

green  mobility 
for 

system 

Decentralized  energy  sharing 
open-source  plat-form  which 
also  focuses  on  gas,  heating 
and  water  sharing.  Developed 
software 
for  analytics  and 
optimization of energy sharing 
purchase 
power 
Provide 
agreements for long term stable 
and good rates. Also, provide a 
platform  for  the  management 
of trades 
P2P  energy  trade  marketplace 
to buy, sell and share energy 

operations 

in  energy 
Use  blockchain 
regulation, 
and 
solving problems. EWF is built 
to  handle  a  large  number  of 
transactions 
Started as an industry-academia 
project  to  sell  energy  in  a 
decentralized way 

Ethereum 

Public 

PoW 

No 

2017 

 

5 

Ethereum 

Public 

PoS 

Yes 

2017 

Ethereum, 
EWF 

Public 

PoW, PoA 

Yes 

2016 

Ethereum 

Public 

PoW 

Yes 

2016 

Ethereum 

Public 

PoS 

No 

2017 (build 
2009) 

Ethereum 

Public 

PoA 

Yes 

2017 

Ethereum, 
NRGcoin 

Public 

PoW, PoS, 
PoA 

Yes 

2014 

4.  PROPOSED SYSTEM MODEL 

4.1.   Problem 

Companies that want to provide a marketplace for buy, sell, and share energy generated will have to 
make  sure  all  problems  related  to  blockchain-based  microgrids  are  solved  related  to  the  accuracy  of  data, 
traceability of the origin of energy, privacy  at individual level of users and security of the blockchain. For 
this purpose, good quality smart digital meters are essential so that other customers are satisfied with this new 
technology. There has been much work already done for P2P energy trading, not just to make it decentralised 
but also to make it cheaper and easily accessible. Most of the projects promote renewable solar energy, but 
with  a  change  in  the  environment,  only  one  renewable  energy  source  is  not  enough;  therefore,  one  should 
utilise  multiple  resources  for  effective  energy  harvesting  from  available  energy  sources.  This  is  also  very 
important because in different locations different environment exists so there is a high chance that if in one 
location  solar  panels  are  an  effective  way  to  harvest  solar  energy  then  in  other  location  it  might  be  wind 
energy as first choice and solar panels may not work effectively. Also, in areas where there is a possibility to 
harvest multiple renewable energy sources than in such locations, users should be encouraged to use different 
renewable  energy  sources  instead  of  only  one.  This  way,  if  one  energy  source  is  not  available,  then  other 
energy  sources  will  not  be  affected.  It  could  be  used  to  provide  more  reliable,  balanced,  and  continuous 
renewable energy to users. There can also be cases where there is environment is not suitable for renewable 
energy sources or renewable energy sources lacks the demand from consumers in those areas other energy 
sources must exploit and by using those sources in a shared manner can reduce the burden on one consumer 
and even one prosumer can earn revenue by sharing energy. Another issue can be raised when a consumer 
does  not  have  the  resources  to  generate  his  energy.  Then  in  such  cases,  an  investment  is  required  from 
another  person  with  mutual  benefits.  Power  energy  distribution  worldwide  works  better  because  energy  is 
being generated not just for one user but for average society demand, which enabled efficient utilisation of 
energy  generation.  For  solving  these  issues,  a  decentralised  energy  sharing  system  is  required  to  develop, 
which  can  be  leveraged  to  solve  consumer  demand  and  mitigate  any  possible  conflict  between  investors, 
prosumers, and consumers. Such a system also needs to provide security guarantees of information provided 
to  the  marketplace  to  increase  the  trust  factor of users.  To  work  on  such  a  system,  we  need  to give  a  free 
token  to  prosumers  to  promote  renewable  energy.  This  quantity  of  free  tokens  should  be  adjusted  so  that 

 Blockchain based Secure Energy Marketplace Scheme to Motivate P2P Microgrids (Muhammad Awais) 

 
 
 
 
6 

  

prosumers are encouraged to use different energy sources instead of only one energy source when available. 
These free tokens given to customers could be redeemed in the form of money or to buy electricity. 

4.2.   System Model 

In the proposed system scheme, there can be multiple types of agreements between users, which they 
can  get  from  public  records  of  the  centralised  marketplace.  Agreements  can  include  rent  cost,  time  of  the 
agreement,  ownership  of  resources  after  an  agreement,  selling  of  energy,  between  the  owner  of  energy 
resources,  prosumers,  or  consumers,  even  with  the  flexibility  to  add  a  grid  or  third  parties  in  agreement. 
Proper  agreements  will  be  made  between  users  for  energy  rates  and  percentage  rent  to  be  paid  in  our 
marketplace.  To  ensure  automatically  contract  running  blockchain  based  smart  contracts  are  to  be  made 
between users on agreed terms recorded in the smart contract. 

Figure. 1. Caption: The architecture of the system scheme 

In  the  proposed  scheme,  there  are  mainly  three  types  of  users  are  present,  consumers  who  consume 
electrical  energy,  prosumers  who  consume  as  well  as  sell  electrical  energy  as  they  have  more  than  their 
required energy by installing energy harvesting resources and owners who want to invest in buying resources 
and  giving  to  users  on  rent  and  sell  energy  at  a  cheap  rate  to  them.  Whenever  an  owner  installs  energy 
harvesting resources to its building, then it also becomes a prosumer. In the marketplace, users can also be 
some other third parties and even government agencies. Third parties and government agencies can act as any 
other three types of users too. Most utilisation of grid to transfer energy from prosumer to consumer will also 
result  in  giving  rent  to  grid  provider,  and  this  will  highly  depend  on  the  country  in  which  microgrid  is 
installed and their policies. That is why we proposed a scheme as shown in figure 1 with high flexibility in its 
agreements (smart contracts). 

In  an  agreement,  one  (owner)  can  buy  a  renewable  energy  harvesting  system  and  can  lease  it  to 
consumers  who  have  space  to  install  this  system.  In  this  scheme,  the owner  invests  in a  renewable  energy 
harvesting system to earn revenue by selling energy to the consumers. In the scheme, the energy system will 
be installed on-premises for consumer, and the consumer will pay for energy utilisation, and a percentage of 
those charges will be returned to the consumer as rent money for  premises underuse. This is useful for the 
owner  and  the  consumer  as  the  owner  will  get  revenue by  selling  energy,  and  the  owner  does  not need  to 
install an energy system on his premises. A consumer can benefit by purchasing energy at better rates and 
getting  discounts  due  to  providing  his  premises  space  for  the  energy  system.  If  the  energy  system  is 
generating  more  energy  than  the  consumer’s  requirement,  then  by  selling  surplus  energy  to  nearby  other 
consumers,  owner  and  consumer  both  can  get  benefit  by  sharing  revenue  on  the  agreed  terms  of  smart 
contracts. This agreement is helpful for consumers living in remote areas where energy is not provided, and 
consumer cannot afford to buy their own renewable energy systems to generate energy. This agreement can 
be  subdivided  into  two  types of  categories  of  smart  contracts,  one  in  which  the  owner will  sell  the  energy 
system to the consumer in a specified period hence owner does not have to pay rent; instead, he gets a fixed 
amount  from  consumers  in  instalment  to  sell  his  energy  harvesting  system  and  till  that  time  owner  gets 
revenue for selling energy to the consumer. In another type of smart contract consumer only pays for energy 

      
 
 
  
 
 

7 

used and get a discount for providing a place to install the system. In this scheme, the owner will get back his 
energy system from the consumer after the specified time in a smart contract, generally taken as 10-15 years, 
for which consumers pay energy utilisation charges to the owner. 

Our marketplace will be providing information about different owners with their capital investment in 
energy  systems  and  consumers  interested  in  installing  such  energy  systems  on  their  premises.  Owners  and 
consumers will interact with each other in our marketplace. They will set terms and conditions that will be 
saved in our marketplace’s database and in a backend blockchain ledger to ensure smart contracts’ automatic 
execution in a later stage, which could be used as legal proof if any party breaks set rules. In marketplace 
information  of  owners,  type  of  energy  harvesting  system  they  own,  capacity  of  energy  system,  location 
preferences,  information  of  consumers,  size  of  premises  to  install  energy  system,  energy  system  type 
preference of consumers, consumer’s location and any other additional information will be provided. In the 
marketplace,  a  rating  system  is  to  be  introduced  to  interact  with  more  trusted  users,  which  will  encourage 
them  to  build  trust  in  our  marketplace.  Our  marketplace  will  be  in  synchronous  mode  with  a  blockchain 
ledger to achieve better security and reliability. As the energy resources will be installed in different areas, 
security and data integrity are very important so that consumers cannot modify any informative data related 
to  energy  harvested  and  utilised.  For  the  security  of  such  data,  we  provide  solutions  based  on  shielded 
execution and due to shielded execution-based hardware (smart meter, reading sensors etc.), consumers will 
be unable to modify any data, which is a crucial requirement as a consumer can be living in a remote place 
and physical monitoring will not be feasible. This security feature will also secure third parties’ invasion of 
the  system  in  a  compromised  environment.  Just  like  securing  consumer  side  shielded  execution-based 
hardware security will be leveraged in the marketplace’s server to provide data integrity and confidentiality 
which can increase the trust of users in the marketplace. 

5.  CONCLUSION 

The  use  of  new  blockchain  technology  as  a  smart  contract  of  energy  sharing  is  very  useful  and 
efficient as no third parties are involved, and a better energy sharing rate could be achieved. In the proposed 
model, the owners can rent their energy generating resources to consumers having a place to install, which is 
greatly  useful  for  prosumers  as  well  as  for  consumers  to  get  revenue  and  better  rates  of  electricity 
respectively,  while  promoting  utilization  of  renewable  energy  sources.  In  under  developed  countries,  it  is 
easy to deploy decentralized schemes as a less changing requirement with current infrastructure, and if new 
infrastructure  is  required  to  be  installed,  then  it  can  be  made  capable  of  handling  decentralized  energy 
sharing. Also, currently, as blockchain technology is still emerging and has its vulnerabilities at commercial 
levels, that’s why customers are not yet relying on it. As it is hard to motivate people due to lack of trust in 
new technologies so added security by shielded execution and incentives of generating renewable energy can 
motivate more people to use decentralized renewable energy systems. 

REFERENCES 

[1]  D. G. Photovoltaics and E. Storage, “IEEE guide for design, operation, and integration of distributed resource 

island systems with electric power systems,” IEEE, 2011. 

[2]  S.  Kim,  “Application  and  operation  of  micro  grid  technology,”  Journal  of  the  Electric  World/Monthly 

Magazine, pp. 37–44, 2014. 

[3]  E.  M¨unsing,  J.  Mather,  and  S.  Moura,  “Blockchains  for  decentralized  optimization  of  energy  resources  in 
microgrid  networks,”  in  Control  Technology  and  Applications  (CCTA),  2017  IEEE  Conference  on.  IEEE, 
2017, pp. 2164–2171. 

[4]  N. C. C. E. T. Center, “Net metering policy map,” DSIRE, July 2016. 
[5]  S.  Nakamoto,  “Bitcoin:  A  peer-to-peer  electronic  cash  system,”  Decentralized  Business  Review,  p.  21260, 

2008. 

[6]  F. Imbault, M. Swiatek, R. de Beaufort, and R. Plana, “The green blockchain: Managing decentralized energy 
production  and  consumption,”  in  2017  IEEE  International  Conference  on  Environment  and  Electrical 
Engineering and 2017 IEEE Industrial and Commercial Power Systems Europe (EEEIC / I CPS Europe), June 
2017, pp. 1–5. 

[7]  N.  Arvind,  B.  Joseph,  F.  Edward,  A.  Miller,  and  G.  Steven,  Bitcoin  and  Cryptocurrency  Technologies. 

Princeton, 2017. 

[8]  “Seven Industries That Blockchain Will Disrupt in 2017,” http://www.nasdaq.com/article/seven-industries-that-

blockchain-willdisrupt-in-2017-cm734366,[Online; accessed May-2020]. 

[9]  V.  Buterin, 

“A 

next-generation 

smart 

contract 

and 

decentralized 

application 

platform,” 

http://aiweb.techfak.unibielefeld.de/content/bworld-robot-control-software, [Online; accessed May-2020]. 

 Blockchain based Secure Energy Marketplace Scheme to Motivate P2P Microgrids (Muhammad Awais) 

 
 
 
 
 
8 

  

[10] M. Mihaylov, S. Jurado, K. Van Moffaert, N. Avellana, and A. Nowe, “NRG-X-change a novel mechanism for 
trading of renewable energy in smart grids,” Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Smart Grids 
and Green IT Systems, pp. 101–106, 01 2014. 

[11] V.  Costan  and  S.  Devadas,  “Intel  sgx  explained.”  IACR  Cryptol.  ePrint  Arch.,  vol.  2016, no.  86, pp.  1–118, 

2016. 

[12] S.  Pinto  and  N.  Santos,  “Demystifying  arm  trustzone:  A  comprehensive  survey,”  ACM  Computing  Surveys 

(CSUR), vol. 51, no. 6, pp. 1–36, 2019. 

[13] “A  next-generation  smart  contract  and  decentralized  application  platform,”  https://solarcoin.org,  [Online; 

accessed May-2020]. 

[14] “The Silicon Based Economy - financing solar cells with Bitcoin,” https://thesunexchange.com/silicon-based-

economy-financing-solarcells-bitcoin,[Online; accessed December-2020]. 

[15] “Electron  —  Blockchain  Systems  for  The  Energy  Sector,”  http://www.electron.org.uk/,  [Online;  accessed 

December-2020]. 

[16] P. Ledger, “Power Ledger - A New Decentralised Energy Marketplace,” https://powerledger.io/, 2014, [Online; 

accessed December-2020]. 

[17] “LO3-Energy - local energy solutions,” http://lo3energy.com, 2017, [Online; accessed March-2021]. 
[18] “Share&Charge 

-  easily  charge  your  electric  car  with 

reliable  charging 

station  providers,” 

https://shareandcharge.com/en/faqs-2/, [Online; accessed December-2020]. 

[19] “Gridsingularity  -  Open  source  energy  solution,”  https://gridsingularity.com,  2016,  [Online;  accessed  March-

2021]. 

[20] “WePower - Platform to connect users,” https://wepower.network, 2016, [Online; accessed March-2021]. 
[21] “Alliander  -  develops  and  create  energy  networks,”  https://www.alliander.com/en,  2017,  [Online;  accessed 

March-2021]. 

[22] “Energy-Web - connects any user to any energy source,” https://www.energyweb.org/, 2017, [Online; accessed 

March-2021]. 

[23] A. Marke, Transforming climate finance and green investment with blockchains. Academic Press, 2018. 
[24] M.  Mihaylov,  S.  Jurado,  N.  Avellana,  K.  V.  Moffaert,  I.  M.  de  Abril,  and  A.  Now´e,  “Nrgcoin:  Virtual 
currency  for  trading  of  renewable  energy  in  smart  grids,”  in  11th  International  Conference  on  the  European 
Energy Market (EEM14), May 2014, pp. 1–6. 

[25] A.  Goranovi´c,  M.  Meisel,  L.  Fotiadis,  S.  Wilker,  A.  Treytl,  and  T.  Sauter,  “Blockchain  applications  in 
microgrids  an  overview  of  current  projects  and  concepts,”  in  IECON  2017-43rd  Annual  Conference  of  the 
IEEE Industrial Electronics Society. IEEE, 2017, pp. 6153–6158. 

[26] A. S. Musleh, G. Yao, and S. Muyeen, “Blockchain applications in smart grid–review and frameworks,” Ieee 

Access, vol. 7, pp. 86 746–86 757, 2019. 

[27] C. Zhang, J. Wu, C. Long, and M. Cheng, “Review of existing peer-to-peer energy trading projects,” Energy 

Procedia, vol. 105, pp. 2563–2568, 2017. 

[28] K. Brousmiche, P. Menegazzi, O. Boudeville, and E. Fantino, “Peer-to-peer energy market place powered by 
blockchain and vehicle-to-grid technology,” in 2020 2nd Conference on Blockchain Research & Applications 
for Innovative Networks and Services (BRAINS). IEEE, 2020, pp. 53–54. 

[29] B.  Perk,  C.  Bayraktaro˘glu,  E.  D.  Do˘gu,  F.  S.  Ali,  and  ¨O.  ¨Okasap,  “Joulin:  Blockchain-based  p2p  energy 
trading using smart contracts,” in 2020 IEEE Symposium on Computers and Communications (ISCC). IEEE, 
2020, pp. 1–6. 

[30] S. Bradai, A. Gassara, A. B. Ali, P. Genestier, and M. Giordani, “A generic blockchain-based exchange place,” 

in  2020  2nd  Conference  on  Blockchain  Research  &  Applications  for  Innovative  Networks  and  Services 

(BRAINS). IEEE, 2020, pp. 40–44. 

      
 
 
