2
2
0
2

n
u
J

0
1

]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

1
v
1
8
0
5
0
.
6
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

The Evolution Of Centralisation on Cryptocurrency
Platforms
Carlo Campajola1,2, Raffaele Cristodaro1, Francesco Maria De Collibus1, Tao Yan1,
Nicol `o Vallarano1,2, and Claudio J. Tessone1,2,*

1University of Zurich, Blockchain & Distributed Ledger Technologies, Department of Informatics, Z ¨urich, Switzerland
2UZH Blockchain Center, Z ¨urich, Switzerland
*claudio.tessone@uzh.ch

ABSTRACT

More than ten years ago the blockchain was acclaimed as the solution to overcome centralised trusted third parties for online
payments. Through the years the crypto-movement changed and evolved, although decentralisation remained the core ideology
and the necessary feature every new crypto-project should provide. In this paper we study the concept of centralisation in
cryptocurrencies using a wide array of methodologies from the complex systems literature, on a comparative collection of
blockchains, in order to deﬁne the many different levels a blockchain system may display (de-)centralisation and to question
whether the present state of cryptocurrencies is, in a technological and economical sense, actually decentralised.

Introduction

In the wake of the 2008 Great Financial Crisis, the whitepaper “Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System”1 was published
by the pseudonymous Satoshi Nakamoto. The paper began with a direct attack to the state of electronic payments on the
internet: a critique on the central role of third parties to provide trust among users and the complete absence of non-reversible
payments online. After describing the problem the paper proceeds to present Nakamoto’s solution, a relatively old2 and up
to then fringe technology: the blockchain, a distributed and decentralised ledger where information is maintained consistent
across the network by a peer-to-peer consensus protocol and secured via cryptography. Bitcoin was the ﬁrst and thus far most
successful platform of what have become commonly known as “cryptocurrencies”, digital assets that rely on cryptographic
security to solve the double-spending problem, typically through a decentralised ledger rather than a centralised authoritative
server.

Following Bitcoin’s success, many more cryptocurrency projects started, each one with its own speciﬁc quirk yet charac-
terised by the same common goal: to build a decentralised payment system, available to anyone without the need of reciprocal
trust (or a third party providing it). For this reason the proponents of Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies typically call it a “truly
democratic” form of money3, as opposed to the “tyrannical money” issued by governments.

The main purpose of our study is to question whether the initial aspirations behind the creation of Bitcoin have been fulﬁlled.
As pointed out by Taleb4, Bitcoin and the likes suffer from design problems that lead to intrinsic fragilities, which in turn can
compromise their utility. In our work we investigate these fragilities: we perform a large scale comparative analysis of multiple
cryptocurrency platforms, sourcing the data directly from the respective blockchains, and adopt methods from network and
complex systems science to deﬁne and investigate the concept of decentralisation in cryptocurrencies systems.

The blockchains we analyse are Bitcoin, Ethereum, Bitcoin Cash, Litecoin, Dogecoin, Monacoin and Feathercoin. We
analyse data ranging from the systems inceptions until December 2020, adopting state of the art methodologies5 to transform
the raw blockchain data into a meaningful dataset of economic transactions between “entities”. Entities are intended to be the
closest possible representation of distinct economic agents on the blockchain: they can correspond to individuals, groups of
individuals or businesses that operate in the system, coping with the pseudonymous nature of cryptocurrencies.

The entities on the blockchain interact through transactions, i.e. by sending tokens to one another to exchange value. This
interaction mechanism is naturally suitable for a network representation, which has been widely adopted in the literature6,
where entities are mapped to nodes and directed links are established following the transactions ﬂow. This provides a new
perspective to study a cryptocurrency as an interconnected system of agents7 of which we are able to quantitatively deﬁne and
measure the centralisation. As an example, the emergence of a giant connected component8 in the transaction networks of all
the cryptocurrencies under study signals how all the users participate to the same economic community. Another interesting
point is the detection of a core component9 of the network, a subset of highly inter-linked nodes which keep the network
together, taking a middle-men positioning in the networks. Moreover we are able to measure the wealth of entities and relate it

 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. (a) Total number of addresses appeared on blockchain as function of total number of identiﬁed entities. Each plot
point corresponds to the totals measured on the same block, with weekly frequency. Axes are logarithmic and the dashed line is
reference for y = x. (b) Average number of addresses per entity over time.

to their position in the transaction networks. Similar analyses have been performed in the past for the “cumulative” network, i.e.
the network containing all transactions that happened up to a given point in history6: we go beyond by splitting the time-frame
in weekly time-windows, thus reducing the reciprocal impact of transactions spread far apart in time. It is indeed not particularly
reasonable to consider in the same static network transactions which happened over 10 years apart. A similar approach in
this respect has been recently taken for Bitcoin10, 11, and we generalise their analysis to six more platforms, providing an
unprecedented quantitative overview of the crypto market.

In the following section we describe the impact that the identiﬁcation of entities has on the structure of the blockchain data
and of transaction networks. We then focus on the networks and their global properties, such as the distribution of degrees
and the identiﬁcation of the network core, and then tackle the problem of mining power concentration and how it affects the
distribution of wealths in the system. We conclude by discussing the results. For readability purposes the technical details
about the data and methods are reported in the Materials and Methods section, following the discussion.

Results

Clustering matters. We begin by analysing the effect of applying address clustering on UTXO-based blockchain data. Figure
1a shows the relation between the number of entities, identiﬁed by adopting the heuristic address clustering logic described in
the Materials and Methods section, and the number of addresses that have appeared on the blockchain. Each data point refers
to the totals observed up to a given block, with weekly frequency, and time “ﬂows” from the bottom left to the top right of
the panel. The results show strong similarities across the six platforms considered: this consistency is expected, as all these
platforms share the same architecture in the address management protocols. New addresses are continuously generated with
each transaction, and more active entities will accumulate more addresses on average. It is interesting to notice that there are
several “regimes” in Figure 1a, with the slope of the curve changing over time. We plot this slope, i.e. the average number of
addresses per entity, as a function of time in Figure 1b. Three regimes can be identiﬁed in the history of these cryptocurrencies:
an early stage where the average grows, a relatively stable period between 2014 and 2017, followed by a decline after 2018.
Interestingly, the transition from one regime to the other is marked by two of the well-known “crypto bubbles”, in 2013 and
2017, that were possibly the drivers of these shifts12. The ﬁrst saw the creation of multiple so-called “alt-coins”, alternative
cryptocurrencies running on their own blockchains which aimed to capitalise on the large inﬂux of funds in the ecosystem, a
class which includes all non-BTC assets in our analysis. In the period between the bubbles the average number of addresses
owned by entities stayed at a relatively high value: relatively few new participants were entering the system since public
interest had declined after the bubble burst, which means that transactions (and thus address creation) were primarily involving

2/14

Figure 2. Size of the largest Strongly Connected Component in UTXO-based cryptocurrencies.

pre-existing entities. The picture changed after the 2017-18 bubble, when cryptocurrencies entered the mainstream of ﬁnancial
assets, receiving serious consideration by markets and institutions and leading to the consolidation of major service providers
like leading exchanges Coinbase, Binance, etc. Since then public attention for the crypto ecosystem has stayed high and a large
number of new entities entered the system, most of the times controlling just one or two addresses since they wouldn’t use the
blockchain to operate many transactions anymore. Indeed after 2018 blockchains started to experience congestion problems13,
i.e. blocks reached capacity and thus adding new transactions to the blockchain became more costly. This created incentives
to operate off-chain, mostly through service providers or so-called “layer 2” technologies like the Lightning Network14, thus
reducing the average number of addresses per entity.

We can then consider the effect that address clustering has on the structure of transaction networks. We measure the size of
the largest Strongly Connected Component (SCC) in the address networks and compare it to the one in the entity networks,
shown in Fig. 2 for the six cryptocurrencies of our analysis. Such a metric is essential to measure the fragmentation of the
economy: if many nodes don’t belong to the largest SCC it is a signiﬁcant sign of decentralisation, as it means that there are no
bridges across different communities; on the other hand if the vast majority of nodes belongs to the largest SCC it signals that
such bridges exist and that a token can travel from one side of the network to the other. It is clear the address networks do not
show the so-called “giant component” (i.e. a SCC that spans the whole network), which would suggest that these economies
are highly fragmented and decentralised; however the illusion becomes apparent as soon as one looks at entity networks, where
the largest SCC spans almost the entire network for most of the time. We should stress out the emergence of a Giant Connected
Component is a necessary yet not sufﬁcient condition for the economy to be centralised: a disconnected economy composed of
isolated communities which keep money from ﬂowing around cannot be centralised as a whole. A notable outlier in this is
Dogecoin, where the largest SCC seems to be of about the same size in both representations, spanning approximately half the
network. This observation then provides evidence that address clustering is a necessary step to take to get meaningful results
about the economic structure of cryptocurrencies, as the obfuscation of identities through multiple addresses signiﬁcantly
affects the observations. In the following we will only present results on the entity networks for UTXO-based cryptocurrencies,
unless speciﬁed otherwise.

Degree distributions. The degree of a node represents the number of counterparts that entity exchanges tokens with, and is
typically considered a measure of importance within the network. What is particularly relevant is to consider the distribution
of degrees, as its shape is a direct consequence of the way in which the networks form. The degree distribution has been

3/14

BTC LTC DOGE BCH FTC MONA ETH
1.50
1.47
1.74
Minimum
3.42
9.89
Maximum 10.99
1.68
2.28
2.42
1. Quartile
1.81
2.94
2.93
3. Quartile
1.76
2.65
2.69
Median
0.03
0.04
0.03
Median
0.43
0.37
0.35
Median

1.31
5.84
2.43
3.08
2.71
0.05
0.41

1.45
3.83
2.45
3.09
2.88
0.05
0.42

1.49
7.69
2.46
3.21
2.72
0.10
0.41

1.60
4.81
2.33
3.18
2.68
0.08
0.37

α

DPar
DBin

Table 1. Summary statistics on exponents of power-law ﬁt of degree distribution on the weekly transaction networks.

Figure 3. Assortativity coefﬁcient for weekly transaction networks.

shown to be strongly skewed, akin to a power-law Pareto type distribution, for many traditional economic and ﬁnancial systems
such as interbank markets15, corporate payments16 and in experiments17. This has also been observed in several analyses of
cryptocurrency networks of transactions that represent the whole history6, 18, and our results broadly agree with the literature on
the much shorter weekly timescale we select. We estimate the maximum likelihood parameters of a Pareto distribution and a
binomial distribution for the degrees, which would be consistent with the null hypothesis of a Barabasi-Albert-type network or
an Erdos-Renyi random network respectively, and ﬁnd that the former is a much better description of the data than the latter in
all of our samples. While we do not ﬁnd that either distribution properly ﬁts the data - indeed a Kolmogorov-Smirnov test
rejects both null hypotheses at the 20% level in the vast majority of weeks - we still ﬁnd that the Kolmogorov-Smirnov distance
is much lower for a Pareto-type distribution (DPar in Table 1) rather than a binomial (DBin), hinting to the presence of fat tails.
In Table 1 we report the statistics for the exponent α of a Pareto ﬁt of the degree distribution, averaged over the whole sample.
We ﬁnd that in general the power-law exponent is between 2.5 and 3 for the UTXO-based cryptocurrencies - for which heuristic
address clustering is available - and around 1.76 for Ether. This stark similarity across platforms points towards a scale-free
structure of these transaction networks, with few hubs and large amounts of lowly connected nodes. This is further conﬁrmed
by computing the assortativity coefﬁcient, which we report in Fig. 3. This is typically negative, with a tendency for smaller
platforms like Monacoin and Feathercoin to show stronger disassortativity. This simple analysis is itself consistent with a
strong centralisation in the ﬂow of tokens, where the vast majority of transactions happens between low-degree nodes and large
intermediaries like exchanges, custodians and service providers. Our observations largely agree with the evidence presented
by11 on the Bitcoin transaction network, where the authors ﬁnd that most of on-chain transactions (excluding self-transactions,
which we also exclude) involve exchanges.

Core-periphery structure. Economic and ﬁnancial networks often exhibit the so-called “core-periphery structure”9, 19, 20.
This is a macroscopic property of the network, that presents a split between a minority of nodes (the “core”) with a strong
connectivity between themselves and the remaining nodes of the network (the “periphery”) that are mostly connected to core
nodes and have relatively few links to other peripheral nodes. We apply the core-periphery classiﬁcation algorithm from21 on
the weekly transaction networks time-series and then consider the size of the core group as a fraction of the total size of the

4/14

Figure 4. Fraction of nodes in the network core as a function of time.

network. We report this quantity for each weekly transaction network in Figure 4. We ﬁnd that the relative size of the core has
consistently decreased over time in all the analysed cryptocurrencies before 2018, and since then it has stabilised, excluding the
particular cases of Monacoin and Feathercoin. The fact that the relative size of the core of these networks has been shrinking is
further evidence that the cryptocurrency economy has been shifting towards a centralised model, becoming much closer to the
traditional ﬁnancial system that it criticised heavily in its early days. A marked core-periphery structure points towards the
transformation of the blockchain ledger into a kind of “interbank market”, where few large intermediaries move funds on behalf
of their many clients much like bank transfers and brokerage happen in traditional banking. Indeed a shrinking core corresponds
to a bigger periphery, i.e. the vast majority of entities (up to 99.99% in the case of Bitcoin and Ethereum) is loosely connected
to the rest of the network and relies on a small minority to intermediate transactions. This structure has been consolidating since
2018, consistent with our observations about the SCC and the amount of addresses per entity that we previously discussed.

The exception here, represented by Monacoin and Feathercoin, is mostly due to the drop in popularity these two platforms
have experienced after the burst of the 2018 crypto bubble. Monacoin has also suffered from attacks on its mining protocol22,
and the market capitalisation of both coins has not recovered to its 2018 peak. The size of the core of both cryptocurrencies
is extremely small (less than 5 nodes from 2018 onwards) but the total size of the network is also relatively small, with few
hundreds of active entities, thus leading to the observed results.

Mining concentration. An analysis of centralisation on cryptocurrency platforms would not be complete without reporting
measures of mining power concentration. All blockchains in this study are based on the Proof-of-Work (PoW) consensus
mechanism, where the right to add a new block to the blockchain is granted to whoever ﬁnds the solution to a cryptographic
puzzle. These entities are typically called “miners”, and have an incentive to operate given by a coinbase transaction that mints
new tokens attributed directly to the miner. The consistency of blockchain data relies on the assumption that mining power
is distributed and decentralised: if at any point in time a single miner (or a pool of miners) holds more than 50% of the total
computational power devoted to solving the PoW puzzle, the blockchain can be subjected to a so-called “51% attack” where
the majority miner writes false information on the blocks (e.g. double spending transactions) without anybody being able to
counteract, since the majority miner will always produce the longest chain with no opposition. A short-term “51% attack“ may
lead to a huge decrease of conﬁdence in a blockchain’s content; the persistence of such an attack could mean the end of a
blockchain project.

The Nakamoto index provides us with a measure of the system’s distance from a 51% attack: named after the pseudonymous
author of the Bitcoin whitepaper, it is deﬁned as the minimum number of miners that need to coordinate at any point in time to
run a 51% attack. There have been several reports of hashing power centralisation on Bitcoin11, 23: based on blockchain data
alone, we are able to estimate this index for all the analysed cryptocurrencies, and we show the result in Figure 5. We estimate
the hashing power of miners by measuring the fraction of blocks they mine in a week, and then calculate the Nakamoto index
over that same week. Miners are identiﬁed as the entities receiving the coinbase transaction: differently from other parts of
this work, in Figure 5 we show results that are obtained using only the multiple inputs heuristic method for address clustering,
in order to avoid merging too many pools and miners together. We report similar results for the combined heuristics in the
Supplementary Information.

5/14

Figure 5. Nakamoto index estimated weekly for the analysed cryptocurrencies.

The majority of analysed platforms shows worrying results. The most striking case is Ethereum, with a Nakamoto index
that is almost never above 3 and in some weeks drops to 2: this is particularly concerning since Ethereum is used as the base
protocol for many decentralised applications, including decentralised exchanges and other decentralised ﬁnance instruments
which could introduce additional incentives for miners to coordinate in a 51% attack24, 25. The picture looks marginally better
for Bitcoin and Litecoin, where the mining power appears relatively less centralised (although it still is very concentrated
at times), while on Dogecoin, Feathercoin, Monacoin and Bitcoin Cash (after it forked from Bitcoin in August 2017) the
Nakamoto index is always low, and at times even goes to 1, meaning a single miner could have (and maybe has) successfully
run a 51% attack on some weeks. Our evidence qualitatively agrees with previously presented models23 and evidence for
Bitcoin11, where in the latter the authors had additional information available from deanonymisation services speciﬁc to Bitcoin,
which we don’t have access to.

Wealth inequality and spatial distribution. Our ﬁnal analysis concerns the distribution of tokens among entities. We deﬁne
as wealth the balance held by an entity (address or cluster of addresses) at a given point in time, representing the funds that they
are entitled to spend according to the blockchain ledger. To avoid considering inactive wallets, our statistics only consider
addresses or entities with non-zero balance. Clearly, if cryptocurrencies were used simply as a peer-to-peer payment system as
implied by the Bitcoin whitepaper1 (and many other whitepapers), the level of centralisation and inequality of wealths should
not be very different from what is measured in traditional economic systems26. This is very far from what can be measured
on the system we analyse. In Figure 6a we show the Gini coefﬁcient of wealths, measured weekly on each cryptocurrency
throughout our sample. This coefﬁcient is a standard measure of economic inequality and is related to the area between the
Lorenz curve - which plots the cumulative share of wealth as a function of the fraction of population owning that share - and the
equality line - i.e. the straight 45 degrees Lorenz curve. A Gini coefﬁcient of 0 means perfect equality, i.e. each individual has
the same wealth, whereas a Gini coefﬁcient of 1 means total inequality, with one individual owning everything. Remarkably,
only Bitcoin in its early years has a Gini coefﬁcient that is lower than the world average wealth inequality Gini coefﬁcient
(which is around 0.9, according to26). After 2012, for all the cryptocurrencies in our analysis the Gini index is basically
indistinguishable from 1, meaning that the distribution of wealth is extremely unequal across active wallets. We want to stress
that this is not due to having many zero-wealth entities in the sample, as we remove these before calculating the Gini coefﬁcient.
Finally, we characterise the spatial distribution of wealth on our transaction networks. To this end we calculate, for
each weekly transaction network, the minimum distance that each node has from a miner. Miners are special entities in
cryptocurrencies because they are the ones that generate new tokens, as every time they successfully solve the Proof of Work
validation puzzle they are entitled to a reward that is created by the protocol. This means that all tokens start their “life” in a
miner’s wallet and then diffuse from there into the rest of the economy, which is why they are a meaningful reference node to

6/14

Figure 6. Wealth inequality and spatial distribution. (a) Evolution of the Gini index of wealths in analysed cryptocurrencies.
(b) Distribution of tokens as a function of distance from the miner. Plot points identify the mean fraction of wealth, averaged
over time, that is held by nodes at a given distance from the nearest miner. Error bars give the 90% conﬁdence band, i.e. in 90%
of weeks the fraction of tokens held at a given distance is within the error bars.

consider in transaction networks. We then proceed to calculate the amount of wealth that is held by nodes at the same distance
from a miner, normalised by the total amount of cryptocurrency circulating, and then consider this quantity across all weeks in
our sample. We plot the result in Figure 6b. The plot points represent the average wealth share owned by entities at a given
distance from a miner, while the error bars show the 90% conﬁdence band, i.e. the range of values within which the wealth
share lies in 90% of weeks in our sample. We ﬁnd remarkable similarities between the analysed cryptocurrencies: the average
wealth share is a decreasing function of distance from miners, with a behaviour that is close to an exponential, and miners
(at distance 0) are almost always the wealthiest nodes. The only platform where this doesn’t happen is Ethereum, where the
largest wealth share is at a distance of 2 from miners. This is likely due to the difference in the accounting protocol between
UTXO-based systems and Ethereum’s account-based system, but we lack conclusive evidence about this. What appears clear
from our analysis though is that the largest fraction of wealth is held by relatively few entities - as summarised by the Gini
coefﬁcient - that are in the immediate vicinity of miners, with a tail that is quickly vanishing as distance grows.

Discussion

In this paper we have presented multiple evidences of the centralised nature of major cryptocurrencies, despite their statutory
technological decentralisation. We described how the protocol of Bitcoin and similar UTXO-based blockchains works to
preserve anonymity and how this can be partially reverse-engineered to cluster addresses that are likely belonging to the
same entity, and how switching from a raw address-based description to an entity-based description radically changes the
observations. In particular we found interesting dynamics in the evolution of the average number of addresses per entity,
which is remarkably similar across platforms and experiences breakpoints in conjunction with large price movements. A ﬁrst
circumstantial evidence of the centralisation process comes from these dynamics, namely the decrease of the average number
of addresses per entity after 2018, together with the consolidation of cryptocurrencies as popular speculative assets and the
growth of large intermediaries. The result is consistent with a shift in the platforms usage, with new entities entering the system
through centralised access points rather than independently.

The introduction of weekly transaction networks allowed us to analyse the structural properties of cryptocurrency economies.
We found further evidence of the importance of address clustering by measuring the size of the largest Strongly Connected
Component (LSCC) of the networks: while on address networks the LSCC contains less than half of active addresses, when
considering entities the LSCC includes almost all the nodes of the networks. We take this as a further sign that there are entities
which control multiple addresses, acting as “bridges” between different sub-components of the economy. The networks we
studied exhibit a fat-tailed degree distribution, with few entities participating in a large number of transactions each week
while the vast majority only performs very few, and a negative assortativity coefﬁcient, which constitutes further evidence
of the existence of large intermediaries that centralise the ﬂow of tokens27. Furthermore these networks exhibit a marked

7/14

Blockchain
Height
Date of collection

BTC
661386
14.12.2020

ETH
12950000
03.08.2021

BCH
664161
02.12.2020

LTC
1969743
23.12.2020

DOGE
3927743
07.10.2021

MONA
2212711
07.01.2021

FTC
3491853
07.01.2021

Table 2. Summary information on data collection from public blockchains.

core-periphery structure, much like other trading networks from traditional economic and ﬁnancial systems, and as time goes
on the cores become increasingly smaller compared to the total size of the network.

Finally we focused our analysis on the role of miners, which are particularly important actors in these systems as they hold
the responsibility of keeping the ledger consistent. We ﬁnd that in all the studied platforms the mining power, namely the
estimated share of hashing rate that each miner holds, is worryingly concentrated in the hands of few entities to the point that
the Nakamoto index often drops to few units, implying a high risk of a successful 51% attack on the blockchain. We also found
that miners are typically the wealthiest entities in the system, and that the stark inequality in wealths is incompatible with the
typical narrative of a decentralised, peer-to-peer payments system.

Overall we argue that these economies have grown into something that is very different from what they were originally
designed to be. The popular narratives, also seen in some mainstream media, that cryptocurrencies are a decentralised solution
for payments where ﬁnancial institutions hold no power over money creation and distribution, are largely false. Similar
processes have been reported in second-layer solutions, such as the Lightning Network14, 28. As a matter of fact, we see that
miners and intermediaries hold a huge power in these systems, both technically and economically speaking, which turns them
into an unregulated ﬁnancial sector, a new “shadow banking” system29. This unchecked concentration of power is potentially
dangerous for the many retail investors that have holdings in cryptocurrency, and proper regulation regarding the activities and
products that service providers can offer is overdue.

Materials and Methods

Data. Blockchain data for the seven cryptocurrencies of our analysis is sourced directly from the respective networks by
running consensus nodes, collecting data at block heights reported in Table 2. The ﬁgures presented in the paper show results
until the last date that is available for all blockchains, December 2, 2020.

The blockchain protocols analysed in this study belong to two different families when it comes to their accounting standard:
the Unspent Transaction Output (UTXO) standard and the account-based standard, the latter being speciﬁc of Ethereum alone
in our sample, while all others belong to the former. In UTXO blockchains transactions are recorded as transfers of access
rights to a certain amount of tokens, stored on an address: this is done by referencing one or more addresses currently owned by
the transaction sender, and directing the related tokens to one or more addresses owned by the transaction receiver. Typically
the ﬁrst set of addresses is called the “input” of the transaction, while the second is its “output”. Outputs can only be used
(“spent”) once as inputs to a transaction, hence the name of Unspent Transaction Output accounting. Ownership of addresses
is proven by public-private key cryptography: in order to access funds from an address, the private key is needed to sign the
transaction in a way that any other user can verify via the public key. The same entity can own any number of addresses, thus
making tracing of transactions between entities more challenging, as there is no guarantee that a transaction involves addresses
from one, two or many different entities. Multiple heuristic algorithms have been developed over the years to exploit common
patterns in transactions input-output structures to cluster together addresses that are likely to belong to the same entity. We
adopt multiple combinations of these algorithms in our analysis, and report the details below.

In contrast to the UTXO model described above, the account-based blockchains use a different and perhaps more intuitive
mechanism for exchanging amounts of cryptocurrencies and other cryptoassets. Instead of holding the private key that can
unlock the unspent output for a new transaction where it will be used as input, account-based blockchains have their public key
directly transformed as an address, and that address has a speciﬁc balance associated. There is then a reduced need to apply
address clustering to account-based blockchains, since new addresses are not often created within the same wallet. The ﬁrst and
up to the time of writing most successful example of account-based blockchains is Ethereum, with its native cryptocurrency
Ether30.

Address clustering in UTXO blockchains. The entities, i.e. clusters of addresses, have been generated using the C++ library
BlockSci, which is an open-source software package for blockchain analysis31. We combined multiple heuristic algorithms that
are provided within the library to produce our own heuristic methods; we brieﬂy summarise them below and direct the reader to
BlockSci’s documentation1 for further details. Most of the methods rely on the identiﬁcation of change addresses, i.e. outputs

1https://citp.github.io/BlockSci/

8/14

Figure 7. Schematic representation of transaction networks construction. On the left, an archetypal UTXO blockchain block
is represented, with coloured transaction input/outputs identifying clusters according to common heuristics. This is parsed
through BlockSci into the middle representation, the transaction network at the addresses level, which is then further reduced to
the entity network on the right when multiple addresses/nodes belonging to the same entity are merged.

of a transaction that belong to the sender, to which excess input is directed. Indeed the protocol design imposes that the input
value of a transaction exactly matches the output value plus the fee, which makes change addresses very common.

The heuristic methods we adopted are the following:

• Multiple inputs - if multiple addresses appear as inputs to the same transaction, they are likely to belong to the same

entity that had to sign them all to create the transaction;

• Reuse of an address - if an address appears as an input but also as an output, the address has been reused as change;

• Optimal change: if the transaction has multiple inputs and the value of exactly one output is lower than any of the inputs,
then it is likely the change. This is based on the argument that if a bigger output was the change, then one or more inputs
would have not been needed to transfer the same amount to another wallet;

• Creation of a new address - in case an output address is appearing for the ﬁrst time on the blockchain, that address has

likely been generated to be the change address;

• Peeling chains - a transaction is considered a potential peeling chain if it includes one input and two outputs, and the
chain is identiﬁed if one of the outputs is used as input to a future transaction with the same structure. In that case, the
output that continues the chain is the change address. These chains are commonly seen when addresses with large UTXO
values are spent in many smaller value transactions.

Our main clustering methodology combines the above heuristics through logical operators that aim to reduce the chance
that a false positive occurs. In particular we identify a change address only if all heuristics identify the same address as potential
change, except for peeling chains which can never be compatible with other patterns by design. Hence a change address is
identiﬁed if it is the only one that respects one of the following conditions: i) it is a reused input address; ii) it is a new address
with a value smaller than any of the inputs; iii) it is the continuation of a peeling chain. If a change is identiﬁed, it is added to
the same cluster to which the input addresses belong. A robustness analysis adopting a more conservative choice of clustering
strategy is presented in the Supplementary Information.

Transaction networks. We construct transaction networks to obtain a general representation of different blockchains. We
choose a weekly aggregation to remove intraweek seasonalities, as we notice that the number of active entities and transactions
is lower during weekends. We then consider all transactions between entities - i.e. removing self-transactions like change
outputs - happening in a given week, adding the involved entities as nodes and connecting them through directed links from
inputs to outputs. This process is summarised by Figure 7. Differently from previous literature on cryptocurrency transaction
networks6, 18, we consider non-cumulative network representations, meaning that links represent only the transactions happening
on that speciﬁc week, similarly to what is done in11 at monthly aggregation. This allows us to obtain a more representative
structure for the state of the economy, avoiding considering in the same way connections that may have happened years apart
from each other.

9/14

Ox480.1Ox623Ox225Ox612.1Ox110.5Ox225Ox899.5Ox215#block25/03/1401:36Ox493Ox215Ox482Ox324.5Ox883Ox330.2Ox899.5Ox319Ox871.2x48x49x21x62x61x22x89x11x88x87x33x31x32BlockchainAddressNetworkEntityNetworkParsingClusteringAcknowledgments

C.C. acknowledges support from the Swiss National Science Foundation grant #200021 182659. N.V. acknowledges support
from the IOTA foundation.

References

1. Nakamoto, S. Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system. Decentralized Bus. Rev. 21260 (2008).

2. Chaum, D. L. Computer Systems established, maintained and trusted by mutually suspicious groups (Electronics Research

Laboratory, University of California, 1979).

3. Bollier, D. & Conaty, P. Democratic money and capital for the commons. In Commons Strategies Group Workshop Report,

Berlin, Germany, 8–10 (2015).

4. Nicholas Taleb, N. Bitcoin, currencies, and fragility. Quant. Finance 21, 1249–1255 (2021).

5. Fischer, J. A., Palechor, A., Dell’Aglio, D., Bernstein, A. & Tessone, C. J. The complex community structure of the bitcoin

address correspondence network. Front. Phys. 9, 363 (2021).

6. Kondor, D., P´osfai, M., Csabai, I. & Vattay, G. Do the rich get richer? an empirical analysis of the bitcoin transaction

network. PloS one 9, e86197 (2014).

7. Newman, M. E., Barab´asi, A.-L. E. & Watts, D. J. The structure and dynamics of networks. (Princeton university press,

2006).

8. Newman, M. E. Assortative mixing in networks. Phys. review letters 89, 208701 (2002).

9. Barucca, P. & Lillo, F. Disentangling bipartite and core-periphery structure in ﬁnancial networks. Chaos, Solitons &

Fractals 88, 244–253 (2016).

10. Bovet, A. et al. The evolving liaisons between the transaction networks of bitcoin and its price dynamics. arXiv preprint

arXiv:1907.03577 (2019).

11. Makarov, I. & Schoar, A. Blockchain analysis of the bitcoin market. Tech. Rep., National Bureau of Economic Research

(2021).

12. Huber, T. A. & Sornette, D. Boom, bust, and bitcoin: Bitcoin-bubbles as innovation accelerators. J. Econ. Issues 56,

113–136 (2022).

13. Brown, C., Chiu, J. & Koeppl, T. V. What drives bitcoin fees? using segwit to assess bitcoin’s long-run sustainability. J.

Financial Mark. Infrastructures 9 (2021).

14. Lin, J.-H., Marchese, E., Tessone, C. J. & Squartini, T. The weighted bitcoin lightning network. arXiv preprint

arXiv:2111.13494 (2021).

15. Bargigli, L., Di Iasio, G., Infante, L., Lillo, F. & Pierobon, F. The multiplex structure of interbank networks. Quant.

Finance 15, 673–691 (2015).

16. Sugiyama, K., Honda, O., Ohsaki, H. & Imase, M. Application of network analysis techniques for japanese corporate
transaction network. In 6th Asia-Paciﬁc Symposium on Information and Telecommunication Technologies, 387–392 (IEEE,
2005).

17. Tseng, J.-J., Li, S.-P. & Wang, S.-C. Experimental evidence for the interplay between individual wealth and transaction

network. The Eur. Phys. J. B 73, 69–74 (2010).

18. De Collibus, F. M., Partida, A., Piˇskorec, M. & Tessone, C. J. Heterogeneous preferential attachment in key ethereum-based

cryptoassets. Front. Phys. 568 (2021).

19. Borgatti, S. P. & Everett, M. G. Models of core/periphery structures. Soc. networks 21, 375–395 (2000).

20. Bardoscia, M., Battiston, S., Caccioli, F. & Caldarelli, G. Pathways towards instability in ﬁnancial networks. Nat.

communications 8, 1–7 (2017).

21. Lip, S. Z. A fast algorithm for the discrete core/periphery bipartitioning problem. arXiv preprint arXiv:1102.5511 (2011).

22. Saad, M., Njilla, L., Kamhoua, C. & Mohaisen, A. Countering selﬁsh mining in blockchains. In 2019 International

Conference on Computing, Networking and Communications (ICNC), 360–364 (IEEE, 2019).

23. Alsabah, H. & Capponi, A. Pitfalls of bitcoin’s proof-of-work: R&d arms race and mining centralization. Available at

SSRN 3273982 (2020).

10/14

24. Daian, P. et al. Flash boys 2.0: Frontrunning in decentralized exchanges, miner extractable value, and consensus instability.

In 2020 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP), 910–927 (IEEE, 2020).

25. Piet, J., Fairoze, J. & Weaver, N. Extracting godl [sic] from the salt mines: Ethereum miners extracting value. arXiv

preprint arXiv:2203.15930 (2022).

26. Davies, J., Shorrocks, A. et al. Comparing global inequality of income and wealth. Inequal. Dev. World 49–73 (2018).

27. Campajola, C., D’Errico, M. & Tessone, C. J. Microvelocity: rethinking the velocity of money for digital currencies. arXiv

preprint arXiv:2201.13416 (2022).

28. Lin, J.-H., Primicerio, K., Squartini, T., Decker, C. & Tessone, C. J. Lightning network: a second path towards centralisation

of the bitcoin economy. New J. Phys. 22, 083022, DOI: 10.1088/1367-2630/aba062 (2020).

29. Aramonte, S., Huang, W. & Schrimpf, A. Deﬁ risks and the decentralisation illusion. BIS Q. Rev. (2021).

30. Buterin, V. Ethereum white paper (2013). https://ethereum.org/en/whitepaper/. Online. Accessed 2022-05-12.

31. Kalodner, H. et al. Blocksci: Design and applications of a blockchain analysis platform. In 29th USENIX Security

Symposium (USENIX Security 20), 2721–2738 (USENIX Association, 2020).

11/14

Supplementary Information: Robustness to address clustering

In this document we present additional results that complement the main text, changing the address clustering algorithm to an
alternative strategy that tends to aggregate less. These results provide a robustness check against the relatively arbitrary choice
of heuristic algorithms that are used to identify entities, and in particular to the potential critical point that our results in the
main text are tainted by excessive aggregation of addresses under the Combined Heuristics (CH) strategy.

For this reason we choose to present here the results adopting only the “Multiple Inputs” (MI) heuristic described in the
main text, which follows the logic that if multiple addresses appear as inputs to the same transaction, they are likely to belong
to the same entity that had to sign them all to create the transaction.

In summary, our results are mostly qualitatively unchanged when changing the address clustering strategy. Here we
highlight the key similarities and differences by referencing the tables and results from the main text in comparison to the ones
presented in this Supplementary Information.

• in Figure S1 we show the comparison between the size of the largest Strongly Connected Component of the Addresses
network and the Entities network under the MI heuristic. We see that it is qualitatively similar to Figure 2 of the main
text for all coins with the notable exceptions of Bitcoin and Bitcoin Cash. Here the SCC of the MI Entities network does
not span the entire set of nodes, whereas the CH Entities did;

• in Table S1 we report the equivalent of Table 1 in the main text for the MI Entities networks (except for ETH which
is the same). We ﬁnd that the ﬁtted Pareto exponents are typically smaller and the ﬁtted Pareto distributions are closer
to the empirical ones according to the Kolmogorov-Smirnov distance, while the ﬁtted binomials are typically worse
ﬁts, suggesting that degree distributions are even more fat-tailed in the case of MI Entities. Figure S2 shows the degree
assortativity coefﬁcient which we ﬁnd to be slightly closer to 0 than what we see for the CH Entities, although it still is
always negative;

• The core size shown in Figure S3 is remarkably similar to the one shown in Figure 4 of the main text;

• The Nakamoto index, which in the main text is shown for Entities identiﬁed through the MI heuristic, is much smaller in
the case of CH Entities as shown in Figure S4. We chose to report the “safer” ﬁgure in the main text as the CH Entities
might be subject to over-aggregation, which in this particular case would depict a more troublesome situation than the
already worrying picture of Figure 5 in the main text.

12/14

Figure S1. Size of the largest Strongly Connected Component in UTXO-based cryptocurrencies.

Minimum 1.64
Maximum 4.93
2.04
1. Quartile
2.46
3. Quartile
2.25
Median
0.03
Median
0.35
Median

BTC LTC DOGE BCH FTC MONA ETH
1.50
1.58
3.42
4.93
1.68
1.96
1.81
2.43
1.76
2.19
0.03
0.03
0.43
0.37

1.31
3.66
1.87
2.52
2.07
0.05
0.41

1.64
3.36
1.86
2.33
1.97
0.04
0.49

1.52
5.67
1.93
2.76
2.26
0.07
0.44

1.66
3.97
1.97
2.21
2.09
0.06
0.41

α

DPar
DBin

Table S1. Summary statistics on exponents of power-law ﬁt of degree distribution on the weekly transaction networks.

Figure S2. Assortativity coefﬁcient for weekly transaction networks.

13/14

Figure S3. Fraction of nodes in the network core as a function of time.

Figure S4. Nakamoto index estimated weekly for the analysed cryptocurrencies.

14/14

