Role of Blockchain in Revolutionizing Online Transactional Security | 1

Role of Blockchain in Revolutionizing Online 
Transactional Security 

Rishav Kumar 
<Rishav.Kumar@asu.edu> 

Attribution under NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International (CC BY-NC-SA 4.0) 
(https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Role of Blockchain in Revolutionizing Online Transactional Security | 2

Abstract 

This paper highlights the necessity to use modern 
blockchain technology in traditional banking 
sector to reduce frauds and enable high-security 
transactions on a permanent blockchain ledger. 
Reviewing different channels through which the 
traditional banking servers could integrate 
blockchain use, it is signified how a huge anti-
fraud stand can be taken against bank servers 
allowing fraudulent transactions daily. Usage of 
a blockchain-based ledger is highly impactful in 
terms of security of a banking organization. 
Blockchain-based currency tokens, also referred 
to as “Cryptocurrencies” are not regulated by the 
government, highly volatile, and anonymous to 
use. Furthermore, there is no security for any 
funds invested in a cryptocurrency market. 
However, the integration of a blockchain ledger in 
a traditional banking organization would 
strengthen the security to provide more stability 
and confidence to its customers and at the same 
time, make blockchain a more reliable method to 
consider due to being trusted by large financial 
organizations. 

Keywords 

Blockchain, Banking Sector, Transactional 
Security, Cryptocurrency, FinTech 

1.  Introduction 

Almost all of us know about Blockchain, 
or even read a thing or two about it. However, it 
is an important thing for the world to realize the 
high level of security that blockchain can provide 
us with currently, if it is integrated with current 
software that is used for everyday banking and 
can prevent millions of scams, card thefts, and 
identity thefts. Almost every one of us has faced 
the problem of being scammed, or money being 
charged to our account with us having no clue 
about what it is. This is a problem that needs to 
be addressed as soon as possible as it causes 
billions of dollars theft every year due to 
ignorance towards modern technology that can 
help limit this problem to a huge extent.  
Blockchain is decentralized, but it can be used for 
other online transactions that take place on a 
regular bank’s ledger that has all the details of 
the transaction being made by a person.  

Integrating blockchain into this kind of a 

network would increase the security of banks 

several folds while making all the records on the 
blockchain permanently appear with no way to 
erase them out of the ledger once they have been 
recorded. The security and encryption that 
blockchain uses today is one of the highest levels 
of information security that is available to the 
world. Blockchain has been brought to life by 
thousands of computers working together with 
each other to produce an insane amount of power 
to regulate all these transactions in seconds to 
verify them and stamp them as complete. It is a 
highly efficient technology that has been in use in 
several industries for years but has never been 
used very commonly in traditional banks that are 
regulated by the government. Recently, some 
banks have been testing to integrate some 
blockchain features that would help their 
customers transfer money, but it has still not 
come to the attention of the public eye about the 
wonders that blockchain security can bring to the 
world and save millions of dollars. 

2.  Statistics 

One of the biggest problems that we face 

today in the financial world is the huge rise in 
fraudulent transactions being reported to 
financial institutions. From 2019 to 2020 alone, 
credit cards in the U.S. saw a massive increase in 
scam rates at about 44.7%. It is a huge number 
considering how much money is being dealt with. 
This is something to be thought about in a 
serious discussion among the authorities to bring 
about a change in how we transact and 
incorporate blockchain technologies into the 
economy officially. Currently, the resistance that 
is being drawn by the government doesn’t lie in 
blockchain, instead, it lies in monetary tokens 
that are built on blockchain referred to as 
“cryptocurrency”.  

However, people have generalized this 

issue to be related to resistance to blockchain and 
have shown immense hesitation to incorporate 
the newer technologies like blockchain to function 
within the country’s economy. According to a 
source, approximately 0.7% of the world’s 
population uses blockchain. This makes 
education about it scarce and often non-existent. 
The only thing that exists is fear for execution of 
a blockchain ledger. However, the general 
population on the other hand has yet to 
understand the difference between a currency 
based on a blockchain, and a ledger based on a 
blockchain. For the normal citizen, blockchain is 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Role of Blockchain in Revolutionizing Online Transactional Security | 3

an unsafe zone which they should not invest in, 
making the idea of integration for better systems 
to use blockchain non-existent.  

Blockchain has been around for quite a 

long time. Implementation of it into financial 
technology has become a significant driver for its 
growth and especially, Bitcoin’s growth. 
Cryptocurrency is such an example of an 
encrypted token hosted over a blockchain 
network server that incorporates the highest 
level of encryption and security that is available 
to the world today. These technologies prevent 
thousands of people from being scammed and 
provide a safe, anonymous way of transferring 
and storing money. However, the implementation 
of this within the systems of banks operating 
with fiat currency, the normal currency that is 
backed by the government, is something that we 
need to take care of. This has been considered by 
many people around the globe that incorporating 
blockchain technology into regular banking 
backed by the national government of the country 
is an essential step that could lead to thousands 
of security risks being cut down that are being 
faced by today’s citizens due to the number of 
scammers increasing all over the world. Bitcoin’s 
original white paper mentions how it is the trust-
based model that is being followed by today’s 
citizens to transact on the web and try to send 
money to peers since this is not reversible. 
Irreversible transactions are among one of the 
things that is not present in today’s modern 
banking systems that are backed by the 
government. Blockchain tokens or electronic coins 
are basically a chain of electronic signatures that 
are verified at each point of delivery and receipt. 
This makes the transactions highly secure and 
accessible to everyone who wants to be a part of 
it. Injecting blockchain technology into today’s 
national banks would be an idea that would stop 
scams and online transactional frauds to a great 
extent making transacting online a safer place 
and a more preferred way to do so than 
traditional cash. 

3.  Problems seen in today’s 

Traditional Banking Systems 

The problem that is currently being 

faced by many people are the millions of credit 
card scams that take place throughout the world. 
The number of these kinds of scams have 
increased to a very high level of success rate and 
have been successful in scamming billions of 

dollars out of people. This problem can be solved 
by the use and implementation of blockchain 
technology and data encryption that can help 
extend the level of security that traditional banks 
cannot provide to us today. There are scam 
centers present in countries who call up people to 
steal their credit card information and the money 
is gone before you even know it. Sometimes, if the 
banks are not able to recover the money back into 
the customers’ account, they must provide re-
imbursement to the customer thus making the 
bank lose millions of dollars every year. Insertion 
of a lot of code bases into the current banking 
system for the past few decades has made the 
systems of today’s banks high-power consuming 
and inefficient, but most importantly these 
machines have become vulnerable to security 
threats. As a common man, if we look at today’s 
banking systems, we’ll understand that it is 
highly protected and secure. However, if a person 
whose intention is to get into a bank or 
participate in credit card scams investigates the 
systems, these are easy to break into with the 
only security being of funds clearing out later. 
However, when some funds do get cleared very 
soon and the scammer takes out the cash directly, 
the bank cannot do anything. Since it must 
return the promised money to the person who got 
scammed, the bank has to stand at a loss. These 
costs banks millions of dollars every year and 
causes a lot of stress to the bank customers 
during the period when they have not received 
their money back yet. 

The integration of Blockchain into 

traditional banking systems can be done, but it 
will take some time to come into effect due to the 
banks databases containing billions of records 
and concerning trillions of dollars. There is 
absolutely no mistake to make in the migration of 
all these data to the other part and integrate it 
into a Blockchain environment. The billions of 
records that need to be migrated over to a 
blockchain framework first need to be backed up 
and then can be easily transferred over to a 
blockchain and use a more secure method of 
transaction which is better and anonymized for 
everyone. The issue currently that is being faced 
by the traditional systems of banking is that 
since the time technology started to grow, the bad 
side of technology has also been growing at the 
same rate making scams more and more common 
and easier as people figure out more ways to 
crack the algorithm and break into the databases 
of huge financial companies. These kinds of 
technologies have been growing at a fast rate, but 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Role of Blockchain in Revolutionizing Online Transactional Security | 4

important for this problem to be solved and 
millions of dollars to be saved from the hands of 
scammers.  

5.  Conclusion and Future 

As per what we saw in this study, usage 

of a blockchain environment in a traditional 
banking sector would largely impact the 
customers’ security and trust towards a company, 
also saving millions of dollars’ worth of scam. 
Integration of blockchain into an already existing 
bank is a difficult procedure, but not impossible 
to attain. It is strongly encouraged for banks to 
integrate blockchain environments into their 
existing systems to ensure a safe transactional 
experience. As per the future, blockchain has 
proven itself to be one of the most highly 
regarded security inventions of this century. 
Continuing the trajectory, thousands of 
cryptocurrency tokens have also come into 
circulation since the first inception of Bitcoin. 
Networks like Ethereum have also come up, 
making it a huge platform with multiple features 
implemented outside of its native token known as 
“Ether”. Standardization of blockchain into the 
current networks is what we need to look at in 
terms of a banking organization, which will 
completely revolutionize online transactional 
security. 

the traditional banking system has not been able 
to cope up with such movements in the scamming 
industry. Hence, the problem stands at billions of 
dollars’ worth of risk for customers, banks, and 
the government altogether. This problem has 
been the key source of a lot of elderly people 
avoiding online transactions and still, to this 
date, relying on cash measures to live. 

4.  Government Intervention and 
Resistance to Blockchain 

We have seen news saying the 

government is about to ban blockchain and 
cryptocurrencies. This has become the number 
one reason for all of us to trust in these news 
articles and inside our brain, it has created a 
pathway that these are fraudulent methods of 
communication and transfer of money that led to 
scams. The news articles also have broadly 
mentioned blockchain is going to be banned by 
the government. The significant thing that we 
don’t realize is that blockchain is not 
cryptocurrency, although they are related. To be 
specific, cryptocurrency is a type of financial 
token built on a blockchain. All cryptocurrencies 
are blockchain, but not all blockchain 
technologies are used to build cryptocurrencies. 
This means that blockchain can be used not only 
in the financial sector, but also can be used in the 
healthcare sector to store confidential 
information about patients’ healthcare records. 
Blockchain has a varied amount of interest fields 
that it can be deployed in and is not a fraudulent 
technology that can be banned by the 
government. The only reason cryptocurrency has 
been such a controversial topic among all 
government agencies and the citizens of the world 
is that it is being used as a means of transferring 
huge amounts of money anonymously thus 
escaping the eyes of the government. This is 
being done sometimes for evading tax, or some 
other activities that are illegal and are not to be 
shown to the government. 

As presented by the facts above, it is a 

strong case for the government and financial 
institutions to promote and implement the usage 
of newer and more efficient technologies into the 
current financial system for everyone to be safe 
and transact in a better way. We have had tons of 
improvements to all sectors in the world with 
technology. However, the financial system has 
been the same for centuries and has not seen any 
significant update to the basics. Thus, it is very 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Role of Blockchain in Revolutionizing Online Transactional Security | 5

References 

[1] Guo, Y., Liang, C. Blockchain application and 
outlook in the banking industry. Financ Innov 2, 
24 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1186/s40854-016-
0034-9 

[2] Daly, L. (2020). Identity Theft and Credit 
Card Fraud Statistics for 2020. [online] The 
Ascent. Available at: https://www.fool.com/the-
ascent/research/identity-theft-credit-card-fraud-
statistics/. 

[3] Gandal, Neil and Halaburda, Hanna, 
Competition in the Cryptocurrency Market 
(September 29, 2014). CESifo Working Paper 
Series No. 4980, Available at SSRN: 
https://ssrn.com/abstract=2506577 

[4] Cocco, Luisanna, et al. “Banking on 
Blockchain: Costs Savings Thanks to the 
Blockchain Technology.” Future Internet, vol. 9, 
no. 3, June 2017, p. 25. Crossref, 
https://doi.org/10.3390/fi9030025. 

[5] Gencer A.E., Basu S., Eyal I., van Renesse R., 
Sirer E.G. (2018) Decentralization in Bitcoin and 
Ethereum Networks. In: Meiklejohn S., Sako K. 
(eds) Financial Cryptography and Data Security. 
FC 2018. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol 
10957. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-58387-6_24 

[6] Corbet, Shaen and Lucey, Brian M. and 
Yarovaya, Larisa, The Financial Market Effects 
of Cryptocurrency Energy Usage (June 29, 2019). 
Available at 
http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3412194 

[7] J. Abou Jaoude and R. George Saade, 
"Blockchain Applications – Usage in Different 
Domains," in IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 45360-
45381, 2019, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2902501. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
