2
2
0
2

n
u
J

7

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
9
1
4
3
0
.
6
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

A Secure and Trusted Mechanism for Industrial
IoT Network using Blockchain

Geetanjali Rathee, Farhan Ahmad, Member, IEEE, Naveen Jaglan, and
Charalambos Konstantinou, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract— Industrial Internet-of-Things (IIoT) is a powerful IoT application which remodels the growth of industries by ensuring
transparent communication among various entities such as hubs, manufacturing places and packaging units. Introducing data science
techniques within the IIoT improves the ability to analyze the collected data in a more efﬁcient manner, which current IIoT architectures lack
due to their distributed nature. From a security perspective, network anomalies/attackers pose high security risk in IIoT. In this paper, we
have addressed this problem, where a coordinator IoT device is elected to compute the trust of IoT devices to prevent the malicious devices
to be part of network. Further, the transparency of the data is ensured by integrating a blockchain-based data model. The performance
of the proposed framework is validated extensively and rigorously via MATLAB against various security metrics such as attack strength,
message alteration, and probability of false authentication. The simulation results suggest that the proposed solution increases IIoT network
security by efﬁciently detecting malicious attacks in the network.

Keywords—Industrial Internet-of-Things (IIoT), Blockchain, Security, Secure IoT Devices, Trust Management.

(cid:70)

1 INTRODUCTION

Today the performance and productivity of an organization
entirely depends on the way it analyses and collects its
business data. The onset of smart systems along with various
other developments in the ﬁeld of data science continue to
provide new frontiers for the expansion of this technology.
According to the recent statistics, the number of devices
with online connectivity stand at 6 billion which collectively
generate approximately 2.5 Quintilian bytes of data [1].

In conventional scenarios, collecting and analysing static
data from devices in real-time was inefﬁcient. Today, these
devices communicate with each other, thanks to the novel
Internet-of-Things (IoT) paradigm, resulting in generation of
information without any human intervention [2]. Further,
intelligent and smart objects/sensors working mutually are
steadily becoming more expansive and venture to accomplish
users’ demands. In order to extract and address meaningful
information from the data, a new ﬁeld, namely, data science
that uses scientiﬁc approaches, algorithms, procedures and
systems for analysis and collection of huge data has been
proposed recently. Data science in IoT (DS-IoT) is a tech-
nique that improves the online collection and analysis of
information in a more scientiﬁc, realistic and efﬁcient way

(Corresponding Authors: Geetanjali Rathee and Farhan Ahmad)

•
• G. Rathee is with the Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Netaji Subhas University of Technology, Dwarka Sector-3, New Delhi,
India. (e-mail: geetanjali.rathee123@gmail.com)
F. Ahmad is with the Systems Security Group, Centre for Future Transport
and Cities, Coventry University, Warwickshire CV1 5FB, United Kingdom
(e-mail: ad5899@coventry.ac.uk)

•

• N. Jaglan is with the Department of Electronics and Communication
Engineering, Jaypee University of Technology, Waknaghat-173234, India.
(e-mail: naveenjaglan1@gmail.com)

• Charalambos Konstantinou is with the Computer, Electrical and Math-
ematical Sciences and Engineering (CEMSE) Division, King Abdullah
University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Thuwal 23955-6900,
Saudi Arabia. (e-mail: charalambos.konstantinou@kaust.edu.sa)

[3]. DS-IoT integrates a diverse range of smart devices with
commercial objects that export manufacturing information
through sensors worn in the ﬁeld of medicine, cyber physical
systems and transportation and to retain the records [4].

Nowadays, DS-IoT is considered as an important tech-
nique within industries to increases their growth, effective-
ness and overall efﬁciency [5], [6]. Further, a wide range
of IoT-based applications such as smart cities, e-healthcare,
intelligent transportation and Industrial IoT (IIoT) have been
pioneer to aid intelligent verdict making by concerning a
series of physical objects vital to the experimental escalation
in an efﬁcient and effective manner [7]. Amongst a variety
of use cases offered by IoT technology, IIoT is considered
as an important application of IoT that controls and traces
every activity of the industry for its growth [8]. IIoT refers to
the network where data is collected from numerous sensors,
actuators, and machines within an industrial environment
and is accessed through the Internet [9], [10].

1.1 Motivation

Despite of various advantages DS-IoT technique offers, or-
ganizations are still reluctant to use IoT devices due to
several security concerns [11]. From the security perspec-
tive, a malicious device within the industry premises can
degrade the network performance by limiting the legitimate
IoT devices from sharing trusted and true information or
alter the communication data. Even though a few open-
source ciphers are still liable to bugs and exploits, they are
persistently scrutinised by numerous users and turn less
effective to malevolent modiﬁcations from centralised entities
or third parties [12]. In conventional industrial applications,
all the smart devices are often assumed to be cooperative
and trusted. However, in practice and reality, IoT devices
are prone to mischievous activities of the malicious devices
(MD). Thus, the potential challenge is to distinguish the ideal

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

orchestration of security concerns with the aim to detect
and resolve the threats caused by an intruder. To do so,
we have computed the trust factor (TF) of all the devices
using an elected Coordinator IoT Device (CID). The CID is
the controlling unit of IoT environment that is responsible
for verifying the legitimacy of the IoT devices present in
the network. Further, in order to prevent future alteration of
stored information in the local database, a private blockchain
is introduced within IIoT environment to keep track of all the
recorded information stored in the database. Therefore, the
potential contributions of this paper are as follows:

• A novel security orchestration for IIoT using trust to
gather and maintain huge amount of data generated by
IoT devices has been proposed.

• A mathematical model has been derived to identify the
probability of error generated in IIoT by exploiting the
concept of probability of false IoT authentication and
non-detection.

• A novel data security model using blockchain in IIoT to
prevent the intruders from altering the stored informa-
tion in a local database has been proposed.

• The performance of the proposed framework has been
rigorously evaluated against probabilistic hypothetical
scenarios for both small and large IIoT networks using a
simulation model.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section
2 is dedicated to the related work in IIoT and the use of
blockchain in IIoT. Section 3 provides details of our proposed
solution using blockchain to secure IIoT networks. Next,
Section 4 provides the details of the simulation model and the
results. Lastly, Section 5 concludes and directs the prospect of
the paper.

2 RELATED WORK
Various studies have been carried out to secure IIoT networks
using data science and blockchain. For instance, Yan et al. [18]
explored the issues of data processing for industrial big data
by proposing novel structural multi source information for
heterogeneous environments. This framework is validated by
analyzing the heterogeneous data of industries. Even though
the authors have discussed the use of smart devices for data
driven mechanisms in industries by focusing on storage,
processing and utilization schemes, they did not consider the
ways through which stored data can be maintained and can
further be compromised by various intruders. Further, Wang
et al. [19] proposed a novel industrial data processing mech-
anism to apprehend various industrial functions including
distributed access, storage, stream and batch data process-
ing, and real time controlling. Compared to traditional data
processing schemes, [19] have illustrated various features
of analyzing, correlating and integrating huge amount of
data in IIoT. However, the generation of such huge data
may further lead to various complexity concerns such as
data storage, communication through intermediate nodes
and transmission cost. Therefore, secure data transmission
through legitimate intermediate nodes is still a lingering
question for researchers.

Recently, the most promising technique which adds de-
centralization, trust, privacy and security to diverse IIoT
ﬁelds is blockchain. To ensure secure information delivery

Fig. 1: DS-IoT Blockchain in Industrial IoT

DS-IoT devices from the malicious ones in order to establish
a legitimate communication environment [13]. In addition,
transparency plays an imperative role in increasing trust
and security among the authorities so that any alteration
in data can be immediately recognized by the owners [14].
Moreover, to prevent future modiﬁcations of data captured
by smart devices, recently, blockchain has been proposed,
where a network maintains a chain of blocks consisting of
the data recorded by the IoT devices in IIoT environment
while manufacturing and shipping the products as depicted
in Fig. 1.

Blockchain provides an efﬁcient and transparent mecha-
nism for analyzing and controlling the data. Any alteration
in the data by any user can be identiﬁed via Blockchain. In
order for concurrent handling of events for brisk responses
and secluded monitoring, the evolution of IIoT generates the
possibility of connecting automated systems. Further, data
science approaches also ensure effective data gathering and
processing mechanisms and techniques for IIoTs. Although
DS-IoT in industries has various beneﬁts, many organisations
and businesses are still reluctant to use it. The exploitation
of this IoT scheme is still steep due to the high cost of
allied centralized clouds and servers [15]–[17]. To the best of
author’s knowledge, the DS-IoT security through blockchain
is unexploited for IIoT in the reported literature. IoT devices
in the IIoT environment transmit very sensitive information,
such as the temperature of the boiler, product manufacturing
record, document or product shipping records etc. Therefore,
it must be a paramount necessity that security by design
is provided to the IIoT network. Further the presence of
malicious nodes may have severe impact on the IIoT network
as they have the ability to tamper the data generated by
IoT devices. Therefore, this leads to the question about how
to provide a secure networking paradigm for enabling the
devices to share data in an attack-free environment.

1.2 Contributions of the paper

In order to analyze real-time data in IIoT while manufac-
turing and shipping the products, we have introduced an

Traditional SecuritySchemes for data scienceRecent DS-IoT Securityusing BlockchainApplication LayerInteractionAlgorithmsCodingEncryptionLayer 1Layer 2Sensing LayerData StorageManagement LayerBlockchainDistributed NetworkData Science using BlockchainusersApplication LayerSecurity Proceduresvia IoT devices, S. Yu et al. [20] proposed a blockchain-based
mechanism to transmit the data with minimum cost and eco-
nomic transfer value. Various techniques such as distributed
network architecture, consent algorithm and mapping of
intelligent devices were used to identify the decentralized
autonomy of smart devices. Furthermore, Y. Yu et al. [21]
addressed the issue of security and privacy concerns in IoT
objects and proposed a blockchain-IoT framework. Authenti-
cated scalability, decentralized schemes and assertion of data
transfer for the payments are the several facilities offered
with the blockchain facilitated IoT infrastructure. Further,
the proposed phenomenon is validated by illustrating cer-
tain solutions using Ethereum by presenting the embedding
of blockchain within IoT. However, the type of blockchain
(public/private) through which intruders may further com-
promise intermediate IoT devices is not mentioned in this
study.

Oh et al. [22] have proposed a data trading mechanism
to ensure the privacy among business stakeholders for IoT
markets. The authors have used Nash equilibrium to measure
the feasibility and maximized the proﬁts of market stake-
holders. Hasan et al. [23] have proposed an interplanetary
ﬁle system mechanism while streaming and storing the data
generated by IoT devices. The authors have ensured the
security of the proposed mechanism using blockchain by
generating the smart contracts, algorithms and diagrams
with their complete implementation process. The authors
have showed the novelty and effectiveness of the proposed
system as compare to traditional scheme. Lam et al. [24]
have proposed a decentralized automatic orchestration and
conﬁguration mechanism based upon semantic policies. The
proposed approach was deployed and veriﬁed while sending
the information during planning and production in IIoT
environment while transmitting over cloud.

Though various studies have proposed a wide range of
techniques to ensure a decentralized, transparent and secure
mechanism in IIoT networks, very few of them pointed the
number of attacking strategies of the intruders aiming to
disrupt or consume the network resources. Further, none
of the authors relied on trust-based mechanisms to detect
the nodes’ legitimacy, data storage or processing techniques
through blockchain speciﬁcally for IIoT networks.In sum-
mary, data science techniques within IoT were focused on
various studies due to the advantages it offer as mentioned
earlier. Further, few studies also focused on blockchain to
provide security in IIoT. However, introducing both data
science and blockchain within IIoT network can increase net-
work efﬁciency in terms of efﬁcient industrial data analytic
in a secure environment. Therefore, this study provides a
novel and secure framework for IIoT by integrating both data
science and blockchain to identify possible threats within
the network. In the next section, we provide details of our
proposed framework.

3 PROPOSED INDUSTRIAL BLOCKCHAIN FRAME-
WORK

In order to describe our proposed solution, we considered
an IIoT network, including both legitimate and malicious
devices. Next, a system model is developed to validate the
proposed framework. Further, a blockchain is integrated

3

within the IIoT network to ensure secure data analysis in
the proposed DS-IIoT environment. Finally, a mathematical
model is derived to evaluate the performance of the network.
The blockchain technique is able to build control systems
and data sharing system for CU in order to address the
challenges of decentralized information circulation, internal
information controlling access and privacy while sharing the
data among various entities. Figure 2 depicts the data sharing
mechanism through blockchain where each record of every
individual entity is stored on a blockchain that can be further
traced and analyzed by all the users. The malicious data
record or alteration in stored information can be immediately
identiﬁed by all the entities though blockchain technique.

Fig. 2: Data Model of DS-IIoT using Blockchain

Further, Figure 2 highlights the blockchain-based data
in IIoT networks, suggesting that various phases
model
such as generation, manufacturing, processing, monitoring,
and anomaly detection in data can easily be resolved by
maintaining separate blockchain of every phase. Moreover,
by scheduling every transaction on blockchain further en-
hances the overall processing capabilities by maintaining a
transparent relationship among the IoT devices.

3.1 System Model

Traditionally, the role of IoT devices in IIoT networks has
been to monitor or control the product manufacturing, doc-
umentation, record and share it with the back-end server. In
case of an attack, the intruders may breach the security of the
network to steal conﬁdential data such as industry records,
employees’ information and business statistical data which
might affect the overall trade of the industry. Hence, in prac-
tice, IIoT networks are susceptible to attackers who tend to
perform malicious activities in the IoT environment. Further,
malicious devices behave intelligently in a random manner
to remain undetected in order to bypass the monitoring
phase of the network. Furthermore, the stored information
about workers’ location, activity processing, in-out time and
product manufacturing record may also be stolen by the
intruders for their personal usage. To tackle these sensitive
issues, a novel framework has been introduced in this study,
which integrates a trust-based solution and blockchain within
IIoT.

The system model of the proposed framework consists
of ‘n’ IoT devices which are assumed to be trusted initially.
Among n IoT devices, the responsible to verify the legitimacy
of the IoT devices is elected on the basis of two criteria, i.e., (1)
energy level and (2) monitoring capability (MC). The energy

level indicates that the IoT device has sufﬁcient energy to
monitor and coordinate the activities and communication
between neighbouring devices. The monitoring capability
of the device, on the other hand, identiﬁes the malicious
behavior within the network. In this proposal, any IoT device
with high energy level and monitoring capability is chosen
as CID. Energy of the IoT devices and CID is calculated via
Equation 1.

Ei =

n
(cid:88)

p=1

| X(i,p) |2=

(cid:40)

Ei ≥ γ presence of IoT device,
Ei ≤ γ absence of IoT device.

(1)
Where X(i,p) is the pth sample of the ith IoT device, γ
is a predeﬁned threshold value to monitor and n is the
total number of IoT devices. Further, MC of IoT devices is
computed as Equation 2.

M Ci = N DGi =

n
(cid:88)

i=1

(P DRi + Ei + Activenessi)

(2)

Where M Ci is measured in terms of N DGi (Network
Development Goal) that detects the status and health of
the network. The node’s status and health is categorized
into three colors, i.e., (1) black where nodes are identiﬁed
as malevolent, (2) green for legitimate nodes, and (3) grey
to indicate alert messages upon entry of a new node or
extensive transmission of existing node in the network. DG is
further dependent upon certain parameters. Packet Delivery
Ratio (P DRi) deﬁnes the number of packets forwarded by
a particular node. Ei is the energy consumed by a node to
transmit or forward the incoming packets and is calculated
using Equation 1. Finally Activenessi shows how much time
a node remains active in the network.

The MC of the CID further depends on the survival time
(ST) of the device within the IIoT network. The device having
sufﬁcient energy level along with oldest survival time (OST)
would be elected as the coordinator of radio environment
consisting of table including CID identity, IoT device identity,
CID address, ID address, TF and ST of each device. The
oldest survival time of IoT device is deﬁned as the total time
period of the IoT device to remain alive in the network. The CID
computes the trust factor of each IoT device by using various
characteristics such as monitoring capability, communication
among the users and actions of all the devices.

Depending on the nature of the IoT device, the potential

response of CID falls into following two categories:

3.1.1 CASE 1: When existing IoT device is identiﬁed as MD

Whenever, the IoT device starts behaving maliciously, then
two possibilities exist, i.e., either the IoT device is MD or it is
disrupted. In both the cases, a random IoT device is forged
and compromised by the intruders. In our proposed system,
initial device is identiﬁed via Equation 3.

4

MD, then the device is identiﬁed as legitimate, otherwise, it is
assumed to be compromised. Next, the TF of each IoT device
is computed if the device is either compromised or transmits
very large number of messages in the network. To achieve
this, various parameters including previous history, MC and
communication behavior (CB) are taken into account. CB is
deﬁned specially for malicious IoT devices which transmit
huge number of false messages towards legitimate devices.
MC and CB of any node satisfying predeﬁned thresholds, TF
is considered as 1. Otherwise, it is 0.

3.1.2 CASE 2: When new IoT device is identiﬁed as MD

In the case where a new IoT device (NID) is identiﬁed in
the environment, the possibility of cases can be raised as
either legitimate or malicious. In both scenarios, as the ST of
NID is very less as compared to that of existing IoT devices,
therefore, initially CID allows at least ﬁve communication
transmissions to the NID. TF of a legitimate NID is 1, and for
malicious NID, TF would always be below the predeﬁned
threshold range. Each node is assigned an initial trust value
ranging from 0.7- 0.95 (as assumed) with 1 as the highest
trust value. This trust is increased or decreased by checking
the social rank of each node by using predeﬁned threshold
values. The main reason behind this value is that the thresh-
old will be around 30% of the maximum value, so taking
initial value range will help in the further calculation instead
of taking every value as simply 1. There is a disadvantage of
taking this scenario as few nodes tend to lose the trust early
as compared to the other nodes. CID keeps all the records
and information of the IoT devices in its table. After speciﬁed
number of transmissions, TF of the NID would be checked
by CID and corresponding action would be taken according
to the Equation 4.

N ID =

(cid:40)

T F == 1,
T F == 0,

then legitimate ID,
then malicious device.

(4)

If TF of NID is 1, then ID is identiﬁed as trusted and
allowed further transmissions, else all of its further transmis-
sions would be blocked by considering it as an MD.

3.2 Alteration of stored information

The presence of the intruders with the intention to hack or
compromise the network cannot be ignored as IIoT networks
contain very sensitive information. Therefore, the proposed
solution integrates blockchain in the back-end to ensure
transparency in the network. The stored records are kept
on blockchain so that any alteration or deletion of any in-
formation inside the IIoT network can be traced easily. The
Algorithm 1 represents complete execution of the proposed
framework. Further, Algorithms 2 and 3 show the high level
algorithms to calculate the resulting functions TF() and MC()
within the main algorithm.

IoT Device =

(cid:40)

LID : STID >STM D with transmission T
M D : STID <STM D no transmission T

(3)
Where, LID and MD are legitimate and malicious devices
respectively. If the ST of the IoT device is higher than that of

3.3 Mathematical Model of the Proposed Approach

In order to validate the proposed framework, MDs are de-
ployed randomly in the IIoT network with the following two
aims: (1) to forge the identity of a legitimate device, and (2) to
consume the network resources by generating false messages

Algorithm 1: Execution of Proposed IIoT Framework

Algorithm 3: Calculation of MC()

5

Assumption: Countthreshold = 50%
Input: (1) Network with ‘n’ IDs, (2) Among them one
CID is elected, and (3) ‘m’ number of MD’s
Output: ID identiﬁed as either legitimate or malicious
The CID selection is based on ST, energy level and
MC.
CID maintains a table having ID id, ID address,
routing information, CID id, ST and TF of each ID to
identify MD. Upon the emergence, the NID is
identiﬁed as MD else legitimate.
if (ID is NID) then

CID allows ﬁrst ﬁve assumptions and;
Compute TF();
Compute MC();
Blockchain record ();
The information of each record corresponding to
ID is stored in the database with its current and
previous hashes.

else

ID is elected as MD

end

intentionally. This leads to a low value of the resulting TF
computed by the CID. Moreover, every NID added to the
network must prove its authenticity to CID. NID is only
allowed to be a part of IIoT network, once it satisﬁes the CID
by sending authentic messages. Further, if NID is malicious,
then the MC would be signiﬁcantly higher as it will transmit
high number of messages and contact every neighbouring
node to attract their attention. This results in the minimum
values of DDR which affect the network throughput due
to the fact that MD jeopardises and consumes most of the
network resources.

Further, based on the computed TF, following four sce-
narios exist for both LID and MD within IIoT network. (1)
Hx0 signiﬁes the absence of both LID and MD suggesting
that neither LID nor MD approached CID to prove their
legitimacy. (2) Hx1 denotes the case when LID switches
from active to the idle channel, hence requiring to prove its
legitimacy to the CID. (3) Hx2 represents a scenario, where
MD tries to replicate LID in order to degrade the network
performance, and ﬁnally (4) Hx3 scenario exist, when both

Algorithm 2: Calculation of TF()

Input: The number of transactions/communications
done by each IoT device are recorded to compute
their TF
if (ID’s previous history and MC() satisﬁes predeﬁned
threshold value ) then
Set TF=1 to ID;
return 1;

else

Set TF=0;
Mark ID as MD;
return 0;

end

Input: The number of interactions or communications
among IoT devices
if (ID trace wrong information and store incorrect data )
then

Set C = C+1 ;
if (Set C > Cthreshold) then

ID is MD;
return 0;

else

IoT device is legitimate and trusted

end

else

IoT device is malicious

end

LID and MD prove their legitimacy to the CID as depicted in
the Equation 5.


Hx0 = neither LID nor MD,

Hx1 = LID only,
Hx2 = MD only,

Hx3 = LID and MD both.

(5)

The presence and absence of MD is indicated by M on
and M of f respectively. Therefore, the probability of each
hypothesis ‘Hsk’ is denoted by ‘µk’ as shown in Equation
6.

µ0 = P r(Hx0) = P r(H0), M of f = P r(M of f /H0)P rH0,
µ1 = P r(Hx1) = P r(H1), M of f = P r(M of f /H1)P rH1,
µ2 = P r(Hx2) = P r(H0), M on = P r(M on/H0)P rH0,
µ3 = P r(Hx3) = P r(H1), M on = P r(M on/H1)P rH1






(6)
Furthermore, the attacking strategies are deﬁned for the
presence and absence of the IoT device using the attack pa-
rameters α and β which are determined as: α=Pr(M on/H1)
and β=Pr(M on/H0). Therefore, previous equation can be
extended to equation 7 in the following manner.


µ0 = (1 − β)P r(H0),

µ1 = (1 − α)P r(H1),
µ2 = βP r(H0),

µ3 = αP r(H1).

(7)

Now let Wf a and Wm denote the probability of false
authentication and non-detection of MD at CID respectively,
which are determined as: Wf a= P r(Don/M of f ) and Wm=
P r(Dof f /M on), where Don and Dof f represents the CID’s
decision of MD’s presence and absence respectively. The
system will be in error if CID fails to decide correctly between
the presence and absence of MD in the network. Therefore,
we deﬁne the probability of error (We) to represent this
behaviour, which is determined according to the equation 8:

We = P r(M on, Dof f ) + P r(M of f , Don)
Don
M of f )P r(M of f )

Dof f
M on ) + P r(

= P r(

= WmP (M on) + Wf aP r(M of f .)

(8)

SN RLID and SN RM D are the the signal-to-noise ratio
of LID and MD respectively. Further, to identify the impact
of the MD, we have deﬁned attack strength parameter as
ρ=SN RM D/(1 + SN RLID). To detect the compromised IoT
devices within the network, we have considered the hypoth-
esis that Hx1 and Hx3 will conﬁrm the presence of NID
with their respective probabilities µ1 and µ2. Therefore, the
compromised IoT device (RN ID) can be identiﬁed according
to equation 9.

RN ID = µ1.log2(1 + SN RLID+

µ3.log2(1 +

SN RLID
1 + SN RM D

)

(9)

4 PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS AND SIMULATION RE-
SULTS

Till now, literature in the ﬁeld has not projected a probabilistic
hypothetical way to compute the trust of IoT devices for
analyzing their legitimacy within IIoT networks. Probabilistic
is the probability to identify the legitimacy
hypothetical
of IoT devices based on certain assumed hypothesis as in
Equation 5. In this paper, we have formulated a mathematical
model to identify the malicious IoT devices by assuming
the probability of each hypothesis. Therefore, in order to
evaluate our proposal, the system is validated initially on
a small network by constructing a simulation area of 400m ×
400m within MATLAB simulator and inserted 25 IoT devices
initially. These devices are identiﬁed using unique numbers,
which are assigned during the initialization phase in the
system.

Whenever, a NID enters within the respective area, it is
required to register and authenticate itself with the CID ﬁrst.
Based on the previous history and monitoring capability of
the IoT device, CID either authenticates it or rejects it from
the system by assigning different values of TF (either accept
or reject).

We evaluated our proposed model using three distinct
criteria: (1) probability of false authentication versus proba-
bility of error, (2) the compromised IoT device versus attack
strength (α) whose probability is between 0-1, and (3) and the
number of compromised IoT devices versus SNR caused by
malicious IoT devices. Further, important simulation details
are highlighted in Table 1.

TABLE 1: Simulation Parameters

Parameters

Simulation Time
Simulated Area
Total IoT devices (small network)
Total IoT devices (large network)
IoT device Transmission Range
Pr(Mon)
Pr(Mof f )
β
α

Details

80 sec
400m × 400m
(25, 45)
up to 100
120m (Approx.)
0.8
0.2
0.8
0.2

6

increasing relationship with Wf a, where the probability of
error increases when the authentication probability increases
during the hand-off phase. In the ideal situation, the network
only contains legitimate IoT devices, implying that (Wm)=1.
This shows that the probability of the IoT devices to detect
errors is high, as depicted in the Fig. 3. However, as soon as
the network is polluted with MD, the ability of the nodes
to detect error decreases. This is due to the fact that the
proposed approach identiﬁes the legitimacy of IoT devices by
computing their TF. The devices with less TF are considered
as MD that would not be involved during the communication
process.

Fig. 3: Probability of false authentication (Wf a) on the prob-
ability of error (We)

Fig. 4 depicts the impact of the attack strength on the
newly added IoT devices in the network. It can be seen
that for a low attack strength, less number of IoT devices
are affected. This compromise increases as soon as the attack
strength of the MD increases. However, our proposed solu-
tion enables the network to detect MD with high impact due
to the fact that the CID only allows a device to be part of
the network, if it satisﬁes the required TF level. Moreover,
the small values of α provide enhanced throughput which
decreases with increase in the value of α.

Fig. 4: Compromised IoT device affected by the attack
strength

4.1 Simulation Results
The effect of probability of false authentication (Wf a) on the
probability of error (We) for the proposed system is illus-
trated in the Figure 3. It is apparent that We shows linearly

The relationship between the noise generation (RN ID)
and SNR at compromised IoT receiver (SN RM D) due to the
addition of new IoT devices within the network is presented
in Fig. 5. As the presence of the compromised devices in-
creases in the network, the noise generation by intruders at

00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.8Probability of False Authentication During Handoff0.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91Probability of Error DetectionWe=0.4We=0.6We=0.8We=1051015Attack Strength01234567Compromized IoT devicesAlpha=0.2Alpha=0.4Alpha=0.6Alpha=0.8lower SNR is less as compared to higher SNR. The higher
the SNR, the higher would be the probability of disruption
caused by the intruders in the compromised network.

Fig. 5: SNR at compromised IoT receiver due to ID

As the proposed phenomenon analyzes each and every
activity of the devices at each phase such as product manu-
facturing, storage recording and data delivery, the proposed
approach computes the legitimacy of every node before its
communication/transmission process.

4.2 Impact of Blockchain on the IIoT Network

This paper integrates a private blockchain mechanism [25],
[26] at its back-end due to the fact that the data included
in IIoT networks is mostly very sensitive. Further, this data
must be kept private as the companies need to compete
with rival industry. Therefore, the data within IIoT network
must be kept private and secure, which can be achieved
with the help of private blockchain. A private blockchain
mechanism is the one where accessing and storing records
is maintained at different levels in the network and hence it
cannot be shared without the consent of administrator (CCU)
permission. In this paper, separate blockchain is maintained
for different process such as product manufacturing, storing
records and delivering products, to name a few. All these
blockchains are monitored by CCU and data is modiﬁed in
the blockchain only with the consent of the administrator.
Further, to encourage the cognitive users (CUs) of the net-
work to provide positive data, CCU provides incentives in
form of extra credits.

Further to analyze the integration of blockchain within
IIoT networks, we relied on Java where different components
(creation, validation and insertion) of blockchain is imple-
mented. Further we validated the proposal against malevo-
lent nodes from security aspects via MATLAB. Initially, 25
nodes are created that may further operate as IoT devices.
The blockchain network contains blockchain creation module
that is responsible to create blocks along with their previous
and current hashes. Further, during the data insertion process
of blockchain process, these devices have the ability to add
various records in the blockchain. In this paper, we have
inserted a single unit data (such as product manufacturing)
to analyze it efﬁciently.

Finally, the newly added blocks by the miners need to be
veriﬁed and validated. If the miners are successfully able to
verify the block then they are considered as valid and stock is

7

successfully added, otherwise block is rejected. We have eval-
uated our proposal in presence of intruders for both small
and large IIoT networks. A blockchain network of initially
5 ledgers is implemented using Ethereum where each block
contains the product information with its respective hash.
This ledger grows further as soon as the devices generate
data to be stored within the database. Further, we equipped
malicious devices in the blockchain network with the ability
to alter and delete the recorded data. Simulation results
depicted that our proposed solution performs efﬁciently in
presence of these malicious devices.

We have evaluated our proposal in presence of intruders
for both small and large IIoT network as depicted in Fig. 6.
A blockchain network of initially 5 ledgers is implemented
using Ethereum where each block contains the product infor-
mation with its respective hash. This ledger grows further
as soon as the devices generate data to be stored within
the database. Further, we equipped MDs in the blockchain
network with the ability to alter and delete the recorded
data as shown in Fig 7. We considered two scenarios, (1)
Conventional scenario: where no blockchain is considered, and
(2) Proposed scenario includes blockchain at the back-end. Fig.
6 shows that in the absence of blockchain in the conventional
method, the network is affected more as the intruders can
alter or delete the data. However, in our proposal, the impact
of intrusion is limited as the devices will be unable to delete
or alter the data. This is due to the fact that our proposed
approach is based on blockchain in the back-end which
provides transparency among all the IoT devices and users
so that a single change would reﬂect in all others’ database
and would become easily traceable.

4.3 Impact of Trust on the IIoT Network

Fig. 7 depicts the impact of the compromised IoT devices
on the legitimate devices in the network. Conventionally,
without applying the trust based mechanism, it becomes very
easy to compromise IoT devices by the intruders. However,
the current proposal integrates a trust-based mechanism,
which only allows the devices to be part of the network
after they have been authenticated by the CID. This limits
the impact caused by the compromised IoT devices.

However, the proposed phenomenon provides better re-
sults as CID computes TF based on their internal behaviour.
Similarly, in Figure 7, the proposed phenomenon performs
better in terms of compromised miners where during initial
establishment of the network, intruders can easily alter the
miners, however, miners are selected based on their TF which
prevents this scenario. Further, the limitation of this paper
is as follows 1) ﬁrstly, the proposed scheme is unable to
provide a proper veriﬁcation by comparing the security met-
rics against any existing method that uses the data sharing
process using blockchain mechanism in IIoT networks. None
of the authors to the best of our knowledge have worked
on datascience mechanisms using blockchain in IIoT while
manufacturing or shipping the information, and 2) secondly,
the proposed scheme is unable to judge an accurate decision
while transmitting the information in real time scenarios as
the block veriﬁcation process may further delay the valida-
tion and enhance the changes of other security threats inside
the network.

51015202530354045Compromized IoT devices0123456789Noise generation by intrudersSNR(ID)=15 dbSNR(ID)=20 dbSNR(ID)=25 dbSNR(ID)=30 db8

(b)

(b)

Fig. 6: Message Alteration for (a) Small Network (b) Large Network

(a)

(a)

Fig. 7: Compromised IoT deivces for (a) Small Network (b) Large Network

5 CONCLUSION

This paper has proposed a secure framework based on trust
management and blockchain to deal with the issues caused
by MDs at various levels in IIoT networks. The proposed
model identiﬁes the legitimacy of each IoT device by com-
puting its Trust Factor (TF) through an elected Coordina-
tor IoT Device (CID). In order to prevent changes in the
information of the local database, a data model based on
blockchain is maintained at the back-end to keep track of
all the transactions within the industry. The approach is
validated extensively for different network sizes and eval-
uation criteria. Simulation results suggest that our proposed
framework achieves 91% success rate against the network
without a blockchain.

REFERENCES

[1] A. Karpatne, G. Atluri, J. H. Faghmous, M. Steinbach, A. Banerjee,
A. Ganguly, S. Shekhar, N. Samatova, and V. Kumar, “Theory-
guided data science: A new paradigm for scientiﬁc discovery from
data,” IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, vol. 29,
no. 10, pp. 2318–2331, 2017. doi:10.1109/TKDE.2017.2720168.
[2] Y. Mehmood, F. Ahmad, I. Yaqoob, A. Adnane, M. Imran, and
S. Guizani, “Internet-of-Things Based Smart Cities: Recent Ad-
vances and Challenges,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 55,
no. 9, pp. 16–24, 2017. doi: 10.1109/MCOM.2017.1600514.

[3] H. Oh, S. Park, G. M. Lee, H. Heo, and J. K. Choi,
“Personal data trading scheme for data brokers in iot data
marketplaces,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 40120–40132, 2019.
doi:10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2904248.

[4] P. A. Merolla, J. V. Arthur, R. Alvarez-Icaza, A. S. Cassidy, J. Sawada,
F. Akopyan, B. L. Jackson, N. Imam, C. Guo, Y. Nakamura, et al., “A
million spiking-neuron integrated circuit with a scalable communi-
cation network and interface,” Science, vol. 345, no. 6197, pp. 668–
673, 2014. doi:10.1126/science.1254642.

[5] C.-X. Wang, F. Haider, X. Gao, X.-H. You, Y. Yang, D. Yuan,
H. M. Aggoune, H. Haas, S. Fletcher, and E. Hepsaydir, “Cellular
architecture and key technologies for 5g wireless communication
networks,” IEEE communications magazine, vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 122–
130, 2014. doi:10.1109/MCOM.2014.6736752.

[6] E. Bertino and N. Islam, “Botnets and internet of things security,”

Computer, no. 2, pp. 76–79, 2017. doi:10.1109/MC.2017.62.

[7] L. Zhou, D. Wu, J. Chen, and Z. Dong, “When computation
hugs intelligence: Content-aware data processing for industrial iot,”
IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 1657–1666, 2017.
doi:10.1109/JIOT.2017.2785624.
J. Huang, L. Kong, G. Chen, M.-Y. Wu, X. Liu, and P. Zeng,
“Towards secure industrial iot: Blockchain system with credit-based
consensus mechanism,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics,
2019. doi:10.1109/TII.2019.2903342.

[8]

[9] F. Al-Turjman and S. Alturjman, “Context-sensitive access in indus-
trial internet of things (iiot) healthcare applications,” IEEE Trans-
actions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 14, no. 6, pp. 2736–2744, 2018.
doi:10.1109/TII.2018.2808190.

[10] J. Wan, J. Li, M. Imran, and D. Li, “A blockchain-based solution
for enhancing security and privacy in smart factory,” IEEE Trans-
actions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 15, pp. 3652–3660, June 2019.
doi:10.1109/TII.2019.2894573.

[11] J. A. Shamsi and M. A. Khojaye, “Understanding privacy violations
in big data systems,” IT Professional, vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 73–81, 2018.
doi:10.1109/MITP.2018.032501750.

[12] X. Li, Q. Wang, X. Lan, X. Chen, N. Zhang, and D. Chen, “Enhancing
cloud-based iot security through trustworthy cloud service: An in-
tegration of security and reputation approach,” IEEE Access, vol. 7,
pp. 9368–9383, 2019. doi:10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2890432.

5101520253035Network Size012345678910Message Alteration (%)ConventionalProposed020406080100Network Size051015202530Message Alteration (%)ConventionalProposed5101520253035IoT devices02468101214161820Compromized IoT devicesConventionalProposed5101520253035404550556065707580859095100IoT devices05101520253035404550Compromized IoT devicesConventionalProposed9

[13] H. Moosavi and F. M. Bui, “Delay-aware optimization of physical
layer security in multi-hop wireless body area networks,” IEEE
Transactions on Information Forensics and Security, vol. 11, no. 9,
pp. 1928–1939, 2016. doi:10.1109/TIFS.2016.2566446.

[14] Z. Chen, W. Dong, H. Li, P. Zhang, X. Chen, and J. Cao, “Col-
laborative network security in multi-tenant data center for cloud
computing,” Tsinghua Science and Technology, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 82–
94, 2014. doi:10.1109/TST.2014.6733211.

[15] P. Danzi, A. E. Kalør, ˇC. Stefanovi´c, and P. Popovski, “Delay and
communication tradeoffs for blockchain systems with lightweight
iot clients,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 2354–
2365, 2019. doi:10.1109/JIOT.2019.2906615.

[16] X. Liu, W. Wang, D. Niyato, N. Zhao, and P. Wang, “Evolutionary
game for mining pool selection in blockchain networks,” IEEE
Wireless Communications Letters, vol. 7, no. 5, pp. 760–763, 2018.
doi:10.1109/LWC.2018.2820009.

[17] Y. Sun, L. Zhang, G. Feng, B. Yang, B. Cao, and M. A. Imran,
“Blockchain-enabled wireless internet of things: Performance anal-
ysis and optimal communication node deployment,” IEEE Internet
of Things Journal, 2019. doi:10.1109/JIOT.2019.2905743.

[18] J. Yan, Y. Meng, L. Lu, and L. Li, “Industrial big data in an
industry 4.0 environment: Challenges, schemes, and applications
for predictive maintenance,” IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp. 23484–23491,
2017. doi:10.1109/ACCESS.2017.2765544.

[19] W. Wang, L. Fan, P. Huang, and H. Li, “A new data pro-
cessing architecture for multi-scenario applications in aviation
manufacturing,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 83637–83650, 2019.
doi:10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2925114.

[20] S. Yu, K. Lv, Z. Shao, Y. Guo, J. Zou, and B. Zhang, “A high perfor-
mance blockchain platform for intelligent devices,” in 2018 1st IEEE
international conference on hot information-centric networking (HotICN),
pp. 260–261, IEEE, 2018. doi:10.1109/HOTICN.2018.8606017.

[21] Y. Yu, Y. Li,

J. Tian, and J. Liu, “Blockchain-based solu-
tions to security and privacy issues in the internet of things,”
IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 25, no. 6, pp. 12–18, 2018.
doi:10.1109/MWC.2017.1800116.

[22] H. Oh, S. Park, G. M. Lee, J. K. Choi, and S. Noh, “Competitive data
trading model with privacy valuation for multiple stakeholders
in iot data markets,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 7, no. 4,
pp. 3623–3639, 2020.

[23] H. R. Hasan, K. Salah, I. Yaqoob, R. Jayaraman, S. Pesic, and
M. Omar, “Trustworthy iot data streaming using blockchain and
ipfs,” IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 17707–17721, 2022.

[24] A. N. Lam, Ø. Haugen, and J. Delsing, “Dynamical orchestration
and conﬁguration services in industrial iot systems: An autonomic
approach,” IEEE Open Journal of the Industrial Electronics Society,
vol. 3, pp. 128–145, 2022.

[25] S. Zhao, S. Li, and Y. Yao, “Blockchain enabled indus-
internet of things technology,” IEEE Transactions on Com-
trial
putational Social Systems, vol. 6, pp. 1442–1453, Dec 2019.
doi:10.1109/TCSS.2019.2924054.

[26] D. Liu, A. Alahmadi, J. Ni, X. Lin, and X. Shen, “Anonymous repu-
tation system for iiot-enabled retail marketing atop pos blockchain,”
IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 15, pp. 3527–3537,
June 2019. doi:10.1109/TII.2019.2898900.

