Towards Blockchain-Based Secure Data
Management for Remote Patient Monitoring

Md Jobair Hossain Faruk∗, Hossain Shahriar†, Maria Valero†, Sweta Sneha‡,
Sheikh I. Ahamed§ and Mohammad Rahman¶

∗Software Engineering Department, Kennesaw State University
†Information Technology Department, Kennesaw State University
‡Information Systems Department, Kennesaw State University
§Computer Science Department, Marquette University
¶ Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, Florida International University

Abstract—Traditional data collection, storage and processing of
Electronic Health Records (EHR) utilize centralized techniques
that pose several risks of single point of failure and lean the
systems to a number of internal and external data breaches
that compromise their reliability and availability. Blockchain is
an emerging distributed technology that can solve these issues
due to its immutability and architectural nature that prevent
records manipulation or alterations. In this paper, we discuss
the progress and opportunities of remote patient monitoring
using futuristic blockchain technologies and its two primary
frameworks: Ethereum and Hyperledger Fabric. We also discuss
the possible blockchain use cases in software engineering for
systematic, disciplined, and quantiﬁable application development.
The study extends by introducing a system architecture for EHR
data management using Ethereum as a model. We discuss the
challenges and limitations along with the initial evaluation results
of the proposed system and draw future research directions in
this promising area.

Index

Terms—Electronic Health Records, Blockchain,

Ethereum, Hyperledger Fabric

I. INTRODUCTION

Health can be deﬁned as “a state of physical, mental, and
social prosperity and not merely the absence of disease or
inﬁrmity.” Having proper healthcare is a demand of human
beings in the modern world [1]. Good quality of care and
better access to healthcare facilities are paramount importance
for society and elderly population. Statistics indicate that from
1980 to 2016, the average life expectancy at birth increased
from 73.7 to 78.6 years [2]. As a result,
the healthcare
industry is an important sector that seems to emerge as one
of the essential part of human lives. The current scene of
computerized wellbeing is not only technological, but also
social, cognitive, and political; the ultimate goal is to cooperate
with participatory health, a partnership with digital devices
collecting data and generating insights, adopt new models
of care, evolving through collaborations between clinicians,
patients, and carers [3].

The term of health informatics is the study and implemen-
tation of methods to enhance the administration of patient
information, clinical knowledge, demographic data, and other
information related to patient care and community health [4].

Health informatics encompasses not just the use of comput-
ers, but also the complete management of information in
healthcare, including the creation and evaluation of methods
and systems for acquiring, processing, and interpreting patient
data [5]. According to a study by Hassan Aziz [6], health
informatics is a wide-ranging science that encompasses the
complex mixture of people, organizations, illnesses, patient
care, and treatment all of which are intertwined with modern
information technology, particularly in computing and com-
munication.

Health records used to be recorded on paper, kept in folders
divided into categories based on the type of note, and there was
only one copy available. Such changes appeared in the 1960s
and 1970s when new computer technologies were developed
to support Electronic Medical Record (EMR) [7]. EMRs,
grew in popularity because of it’s ability to rapidly gather
and manage sets of information, monitor changes in patient
outcomes after installation of a new practice or treatment,
and determine whether patients are due for physical exams,
procedures, immunizations [8]. Correspondingly, EHRs have
revolutionized the format of health records, transforming the
health-care industry and making patients’ medical records
easier to read and access from virtually anywhere on the globe
[7]. However, all the records in the conventional computing
approach can be manipulated or altered easily, which creates
concerns in terms of security and privacy of patients [9].
This is where an approach called “blockchain” emerged to
introduce a revolutionary computer protocol used for the
digital recording and storing of information in a decentralized
and distributed ledger [10, 11].

A solution was crucial because data in existing telehealth
and telemedicine systems are stored and processed centrally,
which increases the danger of a single point of failure and
exposes the systems to a number of external and internal
threats [12]. However, data should never be stored as writing
in pencil that could deface anytime rather storing in an im-
mutable format that will protect data transaction transparently,
emphasizes by the author H. Jobair. In order to reform the
traditional healthcare practices, blockchain technology can be

a model that helps to address such crucial problems [12, 13].
Blockchain is potentially a solution due to its immutability
and architectural nature, where every block has a particular
summary of the preceding block that is arranged using a
secure hash value, string order, timing, content, and order of
trades that can not be manipulated or altered. [14]. The key
contributions of this study are listed below:

• We discuss existing progress and the prospective oppor-
tunities for Remote Patient Monitoring using Blockchain
technology.

• We provide a thorough overview of blockchain technol-
ogy and its two widely frameworks, (i) Ethereum and (ii)
Hyperledger Fabric.

• We contribute by imparting an adequate overview of the
concept of blockchain technology in software engineering
and its inter alia interaction.

• We propose a system architecture for data management
of remote patient monitoring using Ethereum as a model

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: we
present a synopsis of blockchain technology and its associated
frameworks in Section II followed by reviewing the relevant
literature and proposed systems in Section III. Section IV
presents an ethereum-based prototype for remote patient mon-
itoring. We draw a discussion on architectural challenges and
limitations in Section V. Finally, Section VI provides some
concluding comments and future research directions. 1mm
vertical space

II. BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY
The application of blockchain in healthcare is a recent
addition in trusted sharing of sensitive healthcare information.
It is deﬁned as a distributed, incorruptible database of records
or digital events which is executed, validated, and maintained
by a network of computers instead of a single central net-
work among participating parties around the world [15, 16].
Blockchain, according to the Organization for Economic Co-
operation and Development (OECD) [17], is a combination of
currently existing technologies that can be used to establish
networks using distributed ledger technology (DLT). These
networks can store data between a group of users that are
authenticated by cryptographic tools and agreed upon through
predeﬁned network protocols, usually without the control of
a central authority. The concept of blockchain is completely
opposite to traditional methods; while the conventional ap-
proach stores data in a centralized database, blockchain stores
data in a decentralized way. Blockchain records a timestamp
to avoid tempering the stored data. This novel approach was
ﬁrst devised to run Bitcoin cryptocurrency, but it is now being
advocated by different industries including healthcare due to
its enhanced authentication, conﬁdentiality, transparency, and
unique data sharing characteristics veriﬁed by consensus. In
Fig. 1, proposed by Seyednima Khezr et al. [18] depicts a
workﬂow of blockchain-based healthcare applications.

Blockchain technology allows the creation of a tamper-
evident, shared, and trusted ledger that sequentially appends

Fig. 1.
including raw data, and stakeholders [18]

represents blockchain-based workﬂow consists of primary layers

cryptographically secure data transactions. The ledger would
only be accessible to trusted parties. The cryptographic tech-
niques used to record information to a blockchain guarantee
it
that once a transaction has been added to the ledger,
cannot be modiﬁed; thereby assuring participants that they are
working with data transactions that are up-to-date, accurate,
and nearly impossible to manipulate. The blockchain thus
functions as the sole source of truth.

By narrowing the focus of the research to immutable data
storing, implementation of telehealth and 21st-century patient
data management, blockchain technology is crucial. And the
immutable nature of said technology could lead to reduced cost
of regulatory compliance with greater transparency, improved
traceability, increased speed, and efﬁciency.

Multiple blockchain infrastructures have emerged, (i) per-
missionless blockchain that focuses on “trustless” networks
used by any individuals. Bitcoin is an example of this kind
since it is wide-open, permissionless, and anyone can buy
bitcoins. (ii) permissioned blockchains where only pre-veriﬁed
users shall have access which is vital for some enterprise-
based systems in order to protect the business affairs [19, 20].
Ethereum and Hyperledger Fabric framework are two widely
known blockchain-based approaches, where Hyperledger is a
fully permissioned network designed for operations involving
sensitive and conﬁdential data, whereas Ethereum is a public
network that enables permissioned networks [21].

A. Ethereum

Ethereum was introduced as a platform in 2013 as a project
which attempts to build a generalized blockchain technology
in where all transaction-based state machine concepts can be
built, with the goal of providing a tightly integrated end-to-end
system to the end-developer. This allows building software on
a hitherto unexplored compute paradigm in the mainstream: a
trustful object messaging compute framework [22]. Ethereum
represents a blockchain with built-in decentralized transac-
tions and a turing-complete execution environment where the
system can perform any computations. However, all nodes
must have access to the whole records in blockchain. A
Merkle Patricia Tree (MPT) is being used to improve the

state. MPT is a special type of data structure that may store
cryptographically authenticated data as keys and values [23].
Fig. 2 depicts the block structure of Ethereum and its Merkle
Tree in which the hash of the root node (the tree’s initial node)
is dependent on the hashes of all sub-nodes.

Fig. 2. Ethereum’s Block structure and Merkle Root [18]

Fig. 2 also illustrates the block header containing the block
version that validate block rules; the hash of the “previous
block” represents the value of the previous block and the
”timestamp” represents the creation time of the current block.
”Body Root Hash” is the root value of the Merkle tree created
by transactions in the body of the block, and whereas the
“Target Hash” is the hash value threshold of a new valid
block. On the other hand, ”Block Body” contains veriﬁed
transactions and all valid transactions are stored in a “Merkle
Tree”. When the network is created, the ”Genesis Block” is
automatically assigned with hash default values, and further
blocks are added to the ledger after the genesis block. [24]. In
addition, the “Ethereum State” is one of the most important
aspects of the network consists of accounts, which have a
20-byte address and state transitions that are assigned to a
single account [25]. The “World State” is liable for mapping
addresses to account states, whereas the Ethereum network’s
”Consensus” is based on a modiﬁed version of the Greedy
Heaviest Observed Subtree (GHOST) protocol.

B. Hyperledger Fabric

Hyperledger [26] is a consensus-based distributed peer-to-
peer ledger that combines blockchain with a system for ”smart
contract” application and other assistive technologies that
can be utilized to develop a new generation of transactional
applications that focus trust, accountability, and transparency
at their core, while streamlining business processes and le-
gitimate limitations. Hyperledger promotes a collaborative
approach to developing blockchain applications throughout

intellectual property rights and the acceptance of essential
standards. [27]. It also embraces the full spectrum of use cases
that are crucial for enterprise-based systems. On the same
venue, healthcare industry must concentrate on the issue of pa-
tient privacy and security of medical records and Hyperledger
Fabric includes novel security features such as private data
collections, which allow only certain authorized users to access
certain data [19, 28]. Unlike open permissionless systems that
allow anybody to enroll through a trusted Membership Service
Provider in order to participate in the network (MSP). MSP is
the technique that allows the remainder of the network to trust
and recognize an identity without releasing the member’s pri-
vate key [26]. On another venue, the Hyperledger framework
allows the execution of up to 3,500 transactions per second
while Ethereum can execute 15 transactions only.

Consensus is an essential component of Hyperledger Fabric
which characterizes as a distributed procedure in which a
network of nodes ensures that transactions are processed in a
guaranteed unique order and veriﬁes transaction blocks [29].
It enables to foreordain the varieties of channels, peers and
consensus procedures needed for implementing and testing
the proposed approach. These features provide another layer
of security, ensuring that resources can only be accessed by
network members and network transactions. Therefore, the
administrator controls who can join the network and what roles
they can play, as well as the ability to delete nodes if necessary.

C. Analogy Between Hyperledger Fabric and Ethereum

The Linux Foundation hosts Hyperledger Fabric, one of
the most prominent blockchain frameworks. It provides plug-
and-play components, such as consensus and membership
services, as the basis for a solution with a modular architecture.
Ethereum, on the other hand, is a decentralized platform that
allows smart contracts and apps to execute without the risk of
downtime, censorship, fraud, or third-party interference [30].
Hyperledger Fabric intends to provide a Business-to-Business
(B2B) platform with a modular and extendable architecture
that can be used in a variety of industries, ranging from
banking and healthcare to supply chains. However, Ethereum
is mostly Business-to-Commerce (B2C) that advertises itself
as agnostic to any given ﬁeld of application [31]. An analogical
summary is given in Table II-C.

Both Ethereum and Hyperledger come with their unique
advantages for different business scenarios and challenges.
However, based on our extensive investigation, we conclude
that Ethereum serves well for public applications; Hyper-
ledger’s capabilities seem more appealing in enterprise-based
blockchain development. Therefore, Hyperledger Fabric shall
be adopt for healthcare-based applications due to its suitability
for managing health records compared to Ethereum. Hyper-
ledger provides highly ﬂexible, scalable and conﬁdential in-
frastructure solutions with explicit anonymity and transaction
privacy [20].

TABLE I
ANALOGICAL ILLUSTRATION BETWEEN HYPERLEDGER FABRIC AND
ETHEREUM

Category
Purpose
and Conﬁ-
dentiality

Modularity
and
Ex-
tendibility

Cost-
Effective

Scalability

Plug and
Play API

Consensus

Security
and
Privacy

Transaction
Speed

Blockchain

Hyperledger Fabric
Hyperledger Fabric is de-
signed for B2B businesses
with Conﬁdential
transac-
tions
Hyperledger Fabric is a
ﬂexible and extendable ar-
chitecture that may be used
in a variety of enterprise
settings
Hyperledger Fabric is a
native platform that en-
ables the creation of a self-
contained private
ledger
and contract management
without the use of fees.
Hyperledger Fabric allows
more scalability when or-
ganizations are added or re-
moved from a channel

Hyperledger Fabric pro-
vides SDKs in Node.js and
Go that can be used to in-
teract with the blockchain
efﬁciently
Hyperledger Fabric con-
sists of different phases of
checking consensus and all
peers on the network do
not have to come to some
agreement before a transac-
tion is successful
Fabric is a permission net-
work, all nodes participat-
ing in the Modular Mem-
bership Provider provides
an identity to everyone in
the network (MSP)
Hyperledger Fabric’s trans-
action speed capacity vary
from 3000 transactions per
second to 20000 which is
impressive

Ethereum
Ethereum is designed for
B2C businesses and gen-
eralized applications with
transparent transaction
and
For
Extendibility,
different
approaches need to be
adopted for Ethereum

Modularity

based
Ethereum
blockchains
network
require a fee for each
transaction

Ethereum’s scalability bot-
tleneck is notable since
each node in the network
has to process each trans-
action
Ethereum’s plug-and-play
modularity allows you to
customize privacy and per-
missions on a single plat-
form
Proof-of-work (PoW) is a
consensus protocol that al-
lows
the Ethereum net-
work’s nodes to agree on
the state of all information
recorded on the Ethereum
blockchain
Although Ethereum em-
ploys transparency as part
of
there are
concerns about data vulner-
ability

its security,

Ethereum network can only
support approximately 30
transactions
second
which are quite narrow as
of today

per

D. Blockchain in Software Engineering

Blockchain is growing at a staggering rate with intrinsic
potential in the domain of software application. However, the
ad hoc approach to adopting blockchain can lead to situations
and results that will not be better, but worse, and shall
bring serious disappointment [32]. For instance, blockchain
is high on energy consumption along with scalability, lack
of interoperability, stand-alone projects, difﬁculty integrating
with legacy systems, and complexity issues [33]. To over-
come such issues, systematic frameworks have been proposed
by inheriting the software engineering approach which is a
systematic, disciplined, and quantiﬁed approach to software
development, operation, and maintenance method; that is, the
application of engineering in software [34]. These frameworks
are using practices of a newly developed approach called
Blockchain-Oriented Software (BOS) engineering, which is

relatively new [35].

A signiﬁcant example of inheritance of the concept of soft-
ware engineering in blockchain reﬂects in “Smart Contract”
where Ethereum is typically written using “Solidity”. Solidity
is an object-oriented language having data structures, public
and private functions, and the ability to inherit notions like
events and modiﬁers from other contracts [? ]. M. Marchesi et
al. [35] demonstrates an Agile Software Engineering technique
for designing Blockchain applications in 3.

Fig. 3. Proposed Blockchain-Oriented Software development process [35]

Software Engineering provides absolute guidelines at every
stage of the software development life cycle, not only for
conventional software development but also shall be extended
to blockchain-based applications. Challenges in the imple-
mentation of such concepts into blockchain shall be broad
due to the emergence of new technologies; however, adopting
the domain including requirements, process, testing, security,
maintenance, conﬁguration management, and veriﬁcation and
validation is a new demand for the blockchain-based software
application. Research efforts may be encouraged to provide
additional prototypes and proofs-of-concept as a result of
research work committed to this issue in order to improve
knowledge of blockchain-oriented SE applications [36].

E. Blockchain in Healthcare

Blockchain was initially used primarily in the ﬁnancial
industry to allow Bitcoin to function; however, efforts have
been made to adapt the technology for a variety of industries,
including healthcare, insurance, pharmacy, manufacturing, e-
voting, energy, and many more [37]. The healthcare industry
is particularly challenge as it has a complex mechanism with
various inﬂuential stakeholders and a need to disrupt through

innovative solutions. Blockchain has applications that can
potentially address healthcare issues including public health
management, remote monitoring, electronic health records
(EHR), medical data management, data security, and drug
development. Remarkably, blockchain can mitigate concerns
about data ownership and share by allowing patients to keep
their data and choose who they share it with [38]. Gaynor,
Mark et al. [39] graphically displays several blockchain oppor-
tunities for transferring health care data in Fig. 4, where these
applications could assist the health care industry to better data
exchange across all industry activities, including exchange,
storage, and record keeping.

Fig. 4. Data (electronic health record) exchange tree [39]

Blockchain has the ability for addressing signiﬁcant health-
care concerns while also providing unique chances to leverage
the power of other emerging technologies. Despite interoper-
ability challenges including the lack of an existing standard for
developing blockchain-based healthcare application, enabling
blockchain to solve many complex problems found in today’s
healthcare industry that shall allow a transformation with
the help of researchers and practitioners from different ﬁelds
towards improving and innovating methods for viewing the
health care industry [39, 40].

F. ONC’s Requirements

The Ofﬁce of the National Coordinator for Health Informa-
tion Technology (ONC) introduced the “Cures Act”, also re-
ferred to as “21st-century cures act” to offer patients and their
caregivers seamless and access to conﬁdential information,
exchange, and use of electronic health information. Its goal
is to promote an ecosystem of new applications to increase
innovation and competition in the healthcare industry, giving
patients more options [41, 42]. ONC act provides not only the
right to electronically access the entirety of their electronic
health information and records (EHI, EHR), structured and/or
potentially unstructured, at no expense, but also ensure that
physicians use technology to offer and exchange electronic
health information with patients efﬁciently [43]. The new
provisions certify the third party to access health information
in a fair and consistent manner with the permission of the
respective stakeholder(s). The applicability of ONC’s rules
shall be in effect by 2023 as illustrated in Fig. 5; it shall
comply by caregivers, IT developers (health), and related
stakeholders.

One of the primary purposes of ONC is to create a set
of necessary guidelines for health IT developers that need to

Fig. 5. The Cures Act Final Rule Highlighted Regulatory Dates [39]

be followed for establishing secure standards [44]. The new
standards and implementation require IT professionals to be
certiﬁed as health IT developers in order to adequate the newly
established technical requirements to provide better connection
and user experience of next-generation health modules for
providers, as well as facilitate a patient’s access to their
electronic health record’s primary data, IT experts must be
qualiﬁed as health IT developers.

III. RELATED WORK
According to a report of the Health System Tracker [2], the
number of aging/older adults is set to augment by 69% (from
56M to 94.7M) in the next 35 years. Hence, improving quality
of care and better access to healthcare facilities is important for
the society and more so for the elderly population. Especially
in pandemic times, when normal lifestyle is disrupted, and
the population is expected to stay home, the need for remote
patient monitoring has increased and the necessity is larger
than ever before. Towards solving the existing problem in
healthcare, researchers from different ﬁelds proposed different
schemes by adopting blockchain technology. After reviewing
several studies and systems of blockchain and smart con-
tracts, we identify two frameworks, Ethereum and Hyperledger
Fabric. We ﬁrst carried out a “Search Process” to identify
potential studies related to our research using the keywords
Blockchain, Telehealth, and Remote Patient Monitoring in
order to construct the search string. We used three digital
database sources including (i) IEEE Xplore (ii) Research Gate
and (iii) Springer Link.

We ﬁltered a speciﬁc time period to search studies published
between 2016 to 2021 as well as publication topics including
health care, and blockchains for IEEE access and computer
science discipline (Springer Link). A total of 1,384 studies
were found during the initial search. In order to apply the
inclusion and exclusion criteria stated in Table, we examine
the title, abstract, and conclusion of a research study II - III.

A. Applications

• Gem Health Network:

In collaboration with Philips
Blockchain Lab, a company named “Gem” devel-
ops enterprise health care applications networks using

TABLE II
GENERALIZED TABLE FOR SEARCH CRITERIA

Database

Initial Search

Total Inclusion

IEEE Xplore

Research Gate

Springer Link

Total

120

25

35

180

10

2

8

20

TABLE III
OVERVIEW OF EXCLUSION AND INCLUSION

Condition of Exclusion and Inclusion

Category
Type

Approach

Condition (Inclusion)
Blockchain, Healthcare, and
telehealth based
Studies or Systems that that

Similarity Research and System pro-

Language

vide similar aspects
Studies that are available in
English

Condition (Exclusion)
Based on framework other
than said approaches
that do not discuss or pro-
pose approaches
Studies that does not depict
expected aspects
Any other
English

languages than

blockchain technology [45, 46]. The network includes
wellness apps and global patient ID programs that create
a healthcare ecosystem using the Ethereum approach.
In order to address the trade-off between patient-centric
treatment and operational efﬁciency,
the applications
would be connected to a universal data infrastructure [47].
As a result, different healthcare operators can access the
same information using the Gem Health network that
shall include identity schemes, data storage, and smart
the systems solve important
contracts. In conclusion,
operational problems in healthcare industries.

• MedRec: MedRec is a decentralized record management
system for electronic medical records (EMRs) developed
by Ariel Ekblaw and Asaph Azaria using blockchain
technology. [48, 49]. The system was developed using
Go-Ethereum (Geth) and Solidity; however, it was not
built on the live Ethereum network, instead, it creates
a small-scale private blockchain with extensive, speciﬁc
APIs [50]. MedRec makes it simple for patients to access
their medical records across providers and treatment
venues [49].

• Carechain: A Swedish startup company Carechain, led by
IT pioneers Johan Sellstr¨om and Stefan Farestam initiated
a blockchain-based personal healthcare data management
system that intends to focus on protocol level and create
a new infrastructure that no one owns, but everyone
can control [51]. The Carechain adopted the Ethereum
approach with the aim of creating a national blockchain
for health data where the system allows individuals
ownership and control over their own health information
[52]. The system shall assign a universal digital ID
owned and controlled by the individual in order to put
the individual at
the center. The system shall ensure
integrated information integrity, built-in policy guarantees

with traceability.

• Dovetail: Dovetail is a blockchain-based digital consent
application using Hyperledger Fabric approach that al-
lows the sharing of patient data to improve systems
related to healthcare, it’s products, and services [53].
The system provides a fully audited medical data ex-
change ledger and harnesses certain speciﬁc properties
of distributed ledger technology to validate identiﬁcation,
store consent, and establish tamper-proof audit records
[19]. Dovetail system stores old medical records and
adds new using traditional high-encryption channels with
sophisticated data interpolation to transmit patient data
and store patient consent for data sharing, and to make
sure that that consent is respected by everyone in the
process.

• Axuall: Axuall introduces a blockchain-based national
digital network powered by the Sorvin Network and
Hyperledger Indy to verify identity, credentials, and au-
thenticity in real-time. The system will empower clin-
icians, medical care, and essential source organizations
to share and oversee authenticated credentials, all while
adhering to regulatory requirements [54]. The platform
automatically aggregates and veriﬁes credentials that can
be shared between clinicians and organizations in real-
time by ensuring the highest standards of compliance
and security. The physicians will be able to provide
a fully compliant set of certiﬁcates, while healthcare
organizations will be able to conﬁrm the legitimacy of
a doctor’s qualiﬁcations [55].

• MedHypChain: MedHypChain is a privacy-preserving,
interoperable, patient-centric, hyper-ledger-based medical
and data sharing application, that uses an Identity-based
broadcast group signcryption mechanism to secure each
transaction [56]. The system allows secure implementa-
tion of patient-centered interoperability (PCI) data ex-
change between the patient and medical server remote
diagnosis of a patient, interoperability, and malicious par-
ticipant tracing. The technology achieves great secrecy,
anonymity, traceability, and unforgeability, according to
the demonstration.

IV. SYSTEM OVERVIEW

We propose research into the establishment of a decentral-
ized, peer-to-peer network of participants wherein transactions
are recorded on a shared distributed ledger for the purpose of
patient data management and secure accessibility. Participants
in the network would govern and agree by consensus on the
updates to the records in the ledger. Also, every record would
contain a timestamp and unique cryptographic signature. As a
result, the ledger becomes an auditable, immutable record of
all network transactions to ensure data security and integrity,
while allowing the choice for patients and providers to access
the data anytime and anywhere.

derstanding of the design of the proposed system where we
present the overall ﬂow of the application consists of four
entities. The data shall be collected from the residents either
remotely or home healthcare and shall be stored in a decen-
tralized blockchain database. Each data shall be linked with a
unique and unchangeable hash and timestamp and shall allow
the assigned stakeholders in the retrieval and transmission
of stored data using the designed API. An overview of the
proposed system illustrates on Fig. 7 while Fig. 8 shows an
overview of the interfaces to be provided.

A. System Architecture

Our primary goal is to demonstrate the structure of both
blockchain-based frameworks for telehealth and healthcare
based application. As part of our scratch, we initially develop
a demo prototype to furnish a clear visualization of the
proposed blockchain-oriented healthcare application. We adopt
Ethereum framework towards a better understanding of how
the system mechanism shall function within a Ethereum-based
blockchain environment. The developed prototype comprises
of (i) a secure Application Programming Interface (API) that
meets with the criteria of Ofﬁce of the National Coordinator
for Health Information Technology’s (ONC) requirements for
facilitating easy access, sharing, and use of patient Electronic
Health Records, and (ii) Ethereum based data repository. For
demonstration purposes, we focus on Electronic Health Record
(EMR) that shall be created in a secure data repository to
enable secure upload, store, analyze, retrieve, and transmit
patient data according to the patient’s instructions, or distribute
it when and where it is needed.

Fig. 7. A low-level architecture of proposed application

Fig. 8. An overview of metadata

Fig. 6. UML Use Case for Blockchain-Based Health Application

We followed a variety of guidelines from different organi-
zations and approaches– ONC and the concept of software
engineering is included. In accordance to SE, we analyze
the existing problem, elicit the requirements and identify the
research questions by adopting the most suitable standards
Agile methodology in blockchain. We develop an UML use
case (80%) to scratch down the sequence of actions towards
identifying objects and constituting a complete task or trans-
action in proposed application during requirements analysis or
creation process for current research. The use case initializes as
a way to capture the main functional goals, and the motivation
of laying the architectural foundation for a system, as a result,
facilitating requirement coverage [57]. We display four types
of stakeholders including (i) Hospital and (ii) Patients in the
use case depicted in Fig. 6. The use case also illustrates scores
of functions; for instance, patient monitoring and anomaly alert
which shall extend in continuous research.

We carried out a low-level architecture for a better un-

Users engage with the proposed platform using a simple
online interface in which the metadata has been segregated
yet tied together by a unique identiﬁer, resulting in a metadata
duple being considered an experiment with a name and an
identity. The system will validate metadata by the consensus
algorithm that operates among peers within the consortium.
Once the metadata is veriﬁed by consensus, the metadata
is merged into one block and attached to the screwless
ledger, which consists of block-shaped metadata entries.. The
metadata shall be stored as an object with a timestamp. The
peers within a consortium shall allow to search and retrieve
the metadata and only be allowed to access that user has
permissions. Each block of the proposed system is chained
together in an append-only structure using a cryptographic
hash function. As a result, altering and erasing recently af-
ﬁrmed data is impossible resulting in new data being appended
in the form of additional blocks chained with earlier blocks.
Meaning that, updating data of one of the transacted blocks
shall generate a different hash value and different link relation
towards accomplishing immutability and security.

The proposed system consists of two major modules, or-
ganizational and patients. The organizational section enables
access to the permissioned stakeholders for adding, updating,
retrieving, and monitoring EHR data information while second
modules allow patient and assigned representative to access
and update certain EHR records. The system was initially
developed as a web application that may be extended to mobile
applications in future research.

B. System Entities

• Blockchain Network: Blockchain network is one of the
primary components of the proposed framework intended
to store Electronic Health Records (EHR) in a secure
decentralized location. Stored EHR data with timestamp
and hash shall be generated in the network. The network
consists of two types of primary stakeholders responsible
to add, update, retrieve data in a blockchain network.
• Cloud Database: We utilize a cloud-based platform
named Etherscan, which is a decentralized smart contracts
platform suitable for Ethereum. Etherscan allows the
users to look up, conﬁrm and validate transaction histories
including token transfer and contract execution on the
Ethereum decentralized smart contracts platform. Stored
data on cloud can be remotely accessed by permissioned
stakeholders from anywhere using internet.

• Healthcare Stakeholders: Blockchain can facilitate health-
care stakeholders including physicians, nurses, and pa-
tients in different forms. The proposed system enables
said authorized stakeholders to access the network that
can help to reduce the complexity and security issues.

C. System Implementation

We adopt Etherscan which is a block explorer for the
proposed platform for discovering, verifying, and approving
transactions that occur on the Ethereum blockchain. We utilize
the API service of Etherscan for developing decentralised
network. Etherscan store data as hash (TxHash) into the
block along with the timestamp of real-time based conﬁrmed
transaction and its fees.

D. System Evaluation

After contriving an initial prototype, we generally vali-
date through experimental simulation approaches. The test
transaction characteristics,
environment, observation points,
important factors to
workloads, and network size are all
consider when creating a blockchain evaluation. These features
should be included in the evaluation ﬁndings since revealing
them makes it easier to evaluate performance across platforms.

In Fig. 9, an API is depicted where stakeholders can create
new patients proﬁle by ﬁlling the preset form. Once submitted,
the EMR data shall transact to the blockchain storage, details
show in Fig. 11. Each EMR data consists of a unique hash
and timestamp and the stored data is accessible using the
authorized API, in Fig. 10.

Fig. 9. Depicts a form to create patient data

Fig. 10. An interface for accessing stored data using API

Fig. 11. Stored data saved in Ethereum-Based Blockchain Network

V. DISCUSSION

The outbreak reveals the dire need to invest and improve
health infrastructure to better monitor and address the health
records of patients. We can see a tendency of ﬂuctuation
between the centralization and subsequent decentralization
of computing power, storage, infrastructure, protocols, and
code if we look back over the last half-century of computer
technologies and architectures. Muneeb Ali asserts that We
are currently witnessing the shift from centralized computing,
storage, and processing to decentralized architectures and sys-
tems, which allow us to provide end-users explicit ownership
over digital assets while eliminating the need to trust third-

party servers and infrastructure. [58]. The frameworks offer
different aspects and methodology for every application and
choosing the right framework shall depend on requirements
speciﬁcation. Unlike many other applications, healthcare sys-
tems’ requirements are speciﬁc and the primary fundamental
is to secure the EMR records in order to prevent manipulation;
therefore, the application must embody a rich set of privacy
features [59]. The demonstration indicates a positive result in
Ethereum based healthcare and telehealth data management.
Future research shall continue to facilitate and evaluate Hy-
perledger Fabric within practical boundaries.

Blockchain technology in software engineering is an emerg-
ing ﬁeld and inheriting the concept of SE into Blockchain is
indeed as of today’s demand. In this study, we elaborate on
some basic inter alia interaction between the aforementioned
domain. The perusal indicates the importance of SE in the
development of emerging blockchain technology in order to
ensure proper guidelines, overcome conventional and security
challenges along with the systematic framework for futuristic
systems. Such illustrative study encourages researchers to
contribute to enhancing the inheritance of software engineering
into Blockchain.

VI. CONCLUSION

Blockchain is emerged to solve issues people are going
through for conventional databases and related existing prob-
lems. In this study, we successfully discuss the progress of
Blockchain along with an overview of the aspects of Software
Engineering. An Ethereum-based system is introduced that has
competency in storing Electronic Health Data within a secure
and immutable blockchain network. System demonstration
indicates that the prototype allows the permissioned stake-
holders to add, update, and retrieve EHR data on a RESTful
API environment. We recognize possible directions for future
research, thus, the concerns revealed in our analysis, we will
outline a framework for further empirical research that will be
done extensively.

VII. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

This work was supported in part by research computing
resources and technical expertise via a partnership between
Kennesaw State University’s Ofﬁce of the Vice President for
Research and the Ofﬁce of the CIO and Vice President for
Information Technology [60].

REFERENCES
[1] W. H. Organization, “General health care,” World Report-WHO,

[2] R.

vol. 3, 2011.
ex-
life
u.s.
Kamal.
pectancy compare
[Online]. Avail-
able: https://www.healthsystemtracker.org/chart-collection/u-s-
life-expectancy-compare-countries/

does
countries?

to other

(2019)

How

[3] H. G. K. Aickelin Uwe, Chapman Wendy W, “Health infor-
matics—ambitions and purpose,” Frontiers in Digital Health,
vol. 3, 2019.

[4] J. C. Wyatt and J. L. Y. Liu, “Basic concepts in medical
informatics,” Journal of Epidemiology & Community Health,

vol. 56, no. 11, pp. 808–812, 2002.
https://jech.bmj.com/content/56/11/808

[Online]. Available:

[5] M. Imhoff, A. Webb, and A. Goldschmidt, “Health informatics,”

Intensive care medicine, vol. 27, pp. 179–86, 02 2001.

[6] H. Aziz, “Health informatics – introduction,” Clinical Labora-

tory Science, vol. 28, pp. 238–239, 10 2015.

[7] E. R. S., “Electronic health records: Then, now, and in the

future,” Yearbook of medical informatics, 2016.

[8] P. Mcmullen, W. Howie, N. Philipsen, V. Bryant, P. Setlow,
M. Calhoun, and Z. Green, “Electronic medical records and
electronic health records: Overview for nurse practitioners,” The
Journal for Nurse Practitioners, vol. 10, p. 660–665, 10 2014.
[9] C. Camara, P. Peris-Lopez, and J. E. Tapiador, “Security and
privacy issues in implantable medical devices: A comprehensive
survey,” Journal of Biomedical Informatics, vol. 55, pp. 272–
289, 2015. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S153204641500074X

[10] T. Kitsantas, A. Vazakidis, and E. Chytis, “A review of
blockchain technology and its applications in the business
environment,” 07 2019.

[11] Z. Zheng, S. Xie, H.-N. Dai, X. Chen, and H. Wang, “An
overview of blockchain technology: Architecture, consensus,
and future trends,” 06 2017.

[12] R. Ahmad, K. Salah, R. Jayaraman, I. Yaqoob, S. Ellahham, and
M. Omar, “The role of blockchain technology in telehealth and
telemedicine,” International Journal of Medical Informatics,
vol. 148, p. 104399, 01 2021.

[13] A. A. Siyal, A. Z. Junejo, M. Zawish, K. Ahmed, A. Khalil, and
G. Soursou, “Applications of blockchain technology in medicine
and healthcare: Challenges and future perspectives,” Cryptogr,
vol. 3, p. 3, 2019.
Neelam.

tamper-
.
using
Avail-
technology.
https://www.cisin.com/coffee-break/technology/how-to-

[14] S.
ing
able:
avoid-data-tampering-using-blockchain-technology.html
[15] J. Peral, E. Gallego, D. Gil, M. Tanniru, and P. Khambekar,
“Using visualization to build transparency in a healthcare
blockchain application,” Sustainability, vol. 12, p. 6768, 08
2020.

data
[Online].

blockchain

avoid

How

to

[16] P. P. S. V. V. K. Michael Crosby, Nachiappan, “Blockchain
technologybeyond bitcoin,” Sutardja Center for Entrepreneur-
ship
Technology Technical Report, year=2015, url =
scet.berkeley.edu/wp-content/uploads/BlockchainPaper.pdf,.

[17] O.

primer,” Organisation

for Economic Co-operation and Development, “Oecd
Economic Co-
blockchain
operation and Development, year=, volume=, pages=, url =
https://www.oecd.org/ﬁnance/OECD-Blockchain-Primer.pdf,.
[18] S. Khezr, M. Moniruzzaman, A. Yassine, and R. Benlamri,
“Blockchain technology in healthcare: A comprehensive review
and directions for future research,” Applied Sciences, vol. 9,
no. 9, 2019.

for

[20] Hyperledger. An

[19] G. Leeming, J. Cunningham, and J. Ainsworth, “A ledger
of me: Personalizing healthcare using blockchain technology,”
Frontiers in Medicine, vol. 6, 2019.
to

[Online].
https://www.hyperledger.org/wp-content/uploads/

Available:
2018/07/HL Whitepaper IntroductiontoHyperledger.pdf
[21] A.-S. Kleinaki, P. Mytis-Gkometh, G. Drosatos, P. Efraimidis,
and E. Kaldoudi, “A blockchain-based notarization service for
biomedical knowledge retrieval,” Computational and Structural
Biotechnology Journal, vol. 16, 08 2018.

hyperledger.

introduction

[22] D. Wood, “Ethereum: A secure decentralised generalised trans-

action ledger,” 2014.

[23] A.

I. Sebasti´an E. Peyrott, “An introduction to ethereum
and smart contracts,” Ethereum, 2017. [Online]. Available:
https://ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/smart-contracts/
[24] S. Shi, D. He, L. Li, N. Kumar, K. Khan, and K.-K. R. Choo,

“Applications of blockchain in ensuring the security and privacy
of electronic health record systems: A survey,” Computers
Security, vol. 97, p. 101966, 07 2020.

of electronic health information. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.healthit.gov/curesrule/download

[43] A. Squires. What does the 21st century cures act mean for

[25] D. Vujiˇci´c, D. Jagodic, and S. Rani´c, “Blockchain technology,

you? [Online]. Available: https://www.healthit.gov/curesrule/

bitcoin, and ethereum: A brief overview,” 03 2018, pp. 1–6.

“Hyperledger

[26] Hyperledger,
Hyperledger,
https://buildmedia.readthedocs.org/media/pdf/hyperledger-
fabric/latest/hyperledger-fabric.pdf

docs
[Online].

documentation,”
Available:

fabric

2021.

[27] ——.

(2020) A blockchain platform for

the enterprise.
[Online]. Available: https://hyperledger-fabric.readthedocs.io/
en/release-2.2/

[28] E. L. . D. Cerchiaro. (2021) Combing iot and dlt to ensure
the safety of the world’s vaccine supply chains. [Online].
Available: https://www.hyperledger.org/tag/healthcare

[29] Hyperledger.
performance
https://www.hyperledger.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/10/
HL Whitepaper Metrics PDF V1.01.pdf

Hyperledger
[Online].

(2018)
metrics.

blockchain
Available:

[30] A. Aswin and B. Kuriakose, An Analogical Study of Hyper-

ledger Fabric and Ethereum, 01 2020, pp. 412–420.

[31] P.

Sandner.

ethereum,
hyperledger
[Online].
Available: https://philippsandner.medium.com/comparison-of-
ethereum-hyperledger-fabric-and-corda-21c1bb9442f6

Comparison
and

(2017)
fabric

corda.

of

[32] L. Chung, “Blockchain: A software engineering perspective,”
in 2019 IEEE International Conference on Big Data, Cloud
Computing, Data Science Engineering (BCD), 2019, pp. 3–3.
blockchain
Avail-
solutions.
https://www.ﬁnextra.com/blogposting/18496/remaining-

[33] Finextra.
adoption
able:
challenges-of-blockchain-adoption-and-possible-solutions
[34] “Ieee standard glossary of software engineering terminology,”

(2020) Remaining
and

of
[Online].

challenges

possible

IEEE Std 610.12-1990, pp. 1–84, 1990.

[35] M. Marchesi, L. Marchesi, and R. Tonelli, “An agile software
engineering method to design blockchain applications,” ArXiv,
vol. abs/1809.09596, 2018.

[36] S. Demi, R. Colomo-Palacios, and M. S´anchez-Gord´on,
“Software engineering applications enabled by blockchain
technology: A systematic mapping study,” Applied sciences,
[Online]. Available: doi:10.3390/
vol. 11, no. 7, 2021.
app11072960

[37] M. Sadiku, K. Eze, and S. Musa, “Blockchain technology
in healthcare,” International Journal of Advances in Scientiﬁc
Research and Engineering, vol. 4, pp. 154–159, 01 2018.

[38] A. Tandon, A. Dhir, A. N.

Islam, and M. M¨antym¨aki,
“Blockchain in healthcare: A systematic literature review,
research
agenda,”
and
synthesizing
Computers
2020.
p.
vol.
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
[Online]. Available:
article/pii/S0166361520305248

framework
Industry,

future
122,

103290,

in

[39] P. J. P. A. T. C. Gaynor M, Tuttle-Newhall J, “Adoption of
blockchain in health care,” Journal of medical Internet research,
2020.

[40] C. Agbo, Q. Mahmoud, and J. Eklund, “Blockchain technology
in healthcare: A systematic review,” Healthcare, vol. 7, p. 56,
04 2019.

[41] H. ONC, “Information blocking and the onc health it
certiﬁcation program: Extension of compliance dates and time
frames in response to the covid-19 public health emergency,”
Health and Human Services Department, 2020.
[Online].
https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2020/
Available:
11/04/2020-24376/information-blocking-and-the-onc-health-it-
certiﬁcation-program-extension-of-compliance-dates-and

[42] O. of

the National Coordinator

for Health Information
Technology (ONC).
rule
(2020) Onc’s
supports seamless and secure access, exchange, and use

act ﬁnal

cures

[44] E. S. Anthony. (2020) The cures act ﬁnal rule: Interoperability-
focused policies that empower patients and support providers.
[Online]. Available: https://www.healthit.gov/buzz-blog/21st-
century-cures-act/the-cures-ﬁnal-rule

[45] S. Yaqoob, M. M. Khan, R. Talib, A. Butt, S. Saleem, F. Arif,
and A. Nadeem, “Use of blockchain in healthcare: A systematic
literature review,” International Journal of Advanced Computer
Science and Applications, vol. 10, 01 2019.

(2018)

[46] Deloitte.
blockchains
in
[Online]. Available:
life
https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/us/Documents/
life-sciences-health-care/us-lshc-tech-trends2-blockchain.pdf

Blockchain
health

sciences

care.

and

to

[47] G. Prisco.

(2016) The blockchain for healthcare: Gem
launches gem health network with philips blockchain lab.
[Online]. Available: https://bitcoinmagazine.com/business/the-
blockchain-for-heathcare-gem-launches-gem-health-network-
with-philips-blockchain-lab-1461674938

[48] J. M. A. L. Ariel Ekblaw, AsaphAzaria, “Medrec: A
case study for blockchain in healthcare — mit digital
currency initiative,” International Conference on Open Big
Data, 0 2016. [Online]. Available: https://dci.mit.edu/research/
blockchain-medical-records

[49] A. Azaria, A. Ekblaw, T. Vieira, and A. Lippman, “Medrec:
Using blockchain for medical data access and permission man-
agement,” 08 2016, pp. 25–30.

[50] M. T. Website. Medrec technical paper. [Online]. Available:

https://medrec.media.mit.edu/technical/

[52] J.

[51] B. E. G. N. Team. (2018) Carechain: Blockchain personal
system? [Online]. Available:

healthcare data management
https://bitcoinexchangeguide.com/carechain/
“Care
sortium,” CareChain
able:
Infrastructure Consortium
Lab. Dovetail

con-
[Online]. Avail-
https://www.academia.edu/36347853/Care Chain The

[Online]. Available:

chain
0

the
2018.

infrastructure

Sellstr¨om,

[53] D.

https:

AB,

lab.

//www.cbinsights.com/company/dovetail-lab

[54] UHhospitals.

(2019) University hospitals and axuall pilot
blockchain and digital credentials to streamline and improve
clinical
Available:
deployment.
https://ventures.uhhospitals.org/2020/05/19/university-
hospitals-and-axuall-pilot-blockchain-and-digital-credentials-
to-streamline-and-improve-clinical-workforce-deployment/

workforce

[Online].

[55] Hyperledger.

(2020) Five healthcare projects powered by
hyperledger you may not know about. [Online]. Available:
https://www.hyperledger.org/blog/2020/01/29/ﬁve-healthcare-
projects-powered-by-hyperledger-you-may-not-know-about
[56] M. Kumar and S. Chand, “Medhypchain: A patient-centered
interoperability hyperledger-based medical healthcare system:
Regulation in covid-19 pandemic,” Journal of Network and
Computer Applications, vol. 179, p. 102975, 01 2021.

[57] B. Dobing and J. Parsons, “Understanding the role of use cases
in uml: A review and research agenda,” J. Database Manag.,
vol. 11, pp. 28–36, 01 2000.

[58] M. Ali.

(2017)

computing.
[Online]. Available: https://medium.com/@muneeb/the-next-
wave-of-computing-743295b4bc73

next wave

The

of

[59] C. Agbo and Q. Mahmoud, “Comparison of blockchain frame-
works for healthcare applications,” Internet Technology Letters,
vol. 2, p. e122, 07 2019.

[60] T. Boyle and R. Aygun, “Kennesaw state university hpc
[Online]. Available: https:

facilities and resources,” 2021.
//digitalcommons.kennesaw.edu/training/10

