DLT Compliance Reporting  

Research in progress 

Henrik Axelsen 

Johannes Rude Jensen 

Omri Ross 

University of Copenhagen 

University of Copenhagen 

University of Copenhagen 

heax@di.ku.dk 

eToroX Labs 

eToroX Labs 

johannesrudejensen@gmail.com 

Omri@di.ku.dk 

Abstract 

The  IS  discourse  on  the  potential  of  distributed  ledger  technology  (DLT)  in  the  financial  services  has  grown  at  a 

tremendous  pace  in  recent  years.  Yet,  little  has  been  said  about  the  related  implications  for  the  costly  and  highly 

regulated  process  of  compliance  reporting.  Working  with a  group  of  representatives  from  industry  and  regulatory 

authorities, we employ the design science research methodology (DSR) in the design, development, and evaluation of 

an artefact, enabling the automated collection and enrichment of transactional data. Our findings indicate that DLT 

may facilitate the automation of key compliance processes through the implementation of a ‘pull-model’, in which 

regulators  can  access  compliance  data  in  near  real-time  to  stage  aggregate  exposures  at  the  supranational  level. 

Generalizing our preliminary results, we present four propositions on the implications of DLT in compliance. The 

findings contribute new practical insights on the topic of compliance to the growing IS discourse on DLT. 

Introduction 

All  public  and  private  companies  operating  in  developed  economies  are  subject  to  some  level  of  regulatory 

compliance,  either  in  the business  reporting  context,  or  through  requirements  for  financial  accounting.  Due  to  the 

systemic  importance  of  large  financial  institutions  in  the  global  economy,  banks  are  amongst  the  most  heavily 

regulated organizations and subject to strict compliance reporting requirements, ranging from data gathered for the 

compilation of macroeconomic statistics all the way down to microeconomic supervisory needs. Since the financial 

crisis in 2008, regulatory reporting requirements within the EU has grown by more than 40 pieces of legislation. This 

has generated a significant number of new and granular reporting requirements imposing additional pressure on both 

authorities’ and financial institutions’ reporting systems (Baudino et al. 2020). 

Reporting obligations are specified at the global level through supranational bodies such as the Bank for International 

Settlement (BIS) and the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) and transposed to the European level in 

a  variety of  legal frameworks.  Frameworks  span  from  the macro-level mandated  the  European  System  of  Central 

Banks’ Integrated Reporting Framework, down to the micro-level supervision tasks mandated by EU directives and 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
regulations  that  are  interpreted  by  the  European  Banking  Authority  (EBA).    These  international  bodies  mandate 

prudential risk reporting through Implementing Technical Standards (ITS), the compliance reporting obligation we 

focus on in this short paper, that require local supervisors to collect aggregated risk data from banks. Not counting 

significant  ad  hoc  requirements,  the  ITS  risk  reporting  comprises  more  than  500  complex  reporting  obligations, 

incorporating thousands of tables and containing tens of thousands of data fields, the combination of which is used to 

produce different kinds of reports submitted to regulators on a monthly, quarterly, semi-annual or annual basis.  The 

annual cost of ITS risk reporting is estimated at up to €12bn annually for the population of  around 5,000 banks in the 

EEA, equivalent to approximately one third of banks’ total cost of compliance (Eba 2021;  EBA 2021a; European 

Commission 2021b). In practice, it is the banks that collect data from their internal systems, map this operational data 

to the data elements needed to populate regulatory reports (so-called ‘input data’), transforming reporting data based 

on  reporting  instructions  and  subsequently  submitting  reports  to  the  competent  authorities.  Because  banks  are 

responsible for submitting this data themselves, this model is known as the push model. European banks have made 

moderate progress in improving data management in the push model since facing strict obligations to do so since 2013. 

Yet, material challenges remain unsolved across markets, mainly due to a lack of alignment between new IT solutions 

and legacy systems (BCBS 2020). These technical challenges are exacerbated by an increasingly complex regulatory 

environment in which regulators frequently introduce changes to reporting frameworks and require multiple different 

data models for different ITS reporting requirements. As a result, banks often take up to 90 days to produce compliance 

reports,  even  under  stressed  conditions.  This  can  have  highly  detrimental  implications  to  regulators  ability  to 

understand systemic and structural risks to the European economies.  

Working  with  a  group  of  eight  stakeholders  representing perspectives  from  banking,  central  banking,  supervisory 

authorities, and banking regulators within the European context, we examine how the DLT-based solutions emerging 

between institutions and governmental bodies could reduce the reporting burden, by facilitating a so-called pull-model 

for compliance data, enabling regulatory bodies to pull any the necessary data as it is produced in real time. We address 

the research question: To what extent could the adoption of DLT based solutions optimize ITS compliance reporting 

for banks and organizations in the EEA? We present ongoing work towards the design of a DLT agnostic artefact 

designed to collect and enrich transaction data with ITS reporting  compliance data. While the IS discourse on the 

efficacy and potential of DLT in financial processes has grown at a tremendous pace in recent years, little has been 

said about the implications that the adoption of DLT will introduce for compliance reporting. By employing the DSR 

methodology in the design and evaluation of a conceptual artefact with a large group of stakeholders at international 

and governmental institutions, we seek to contribute new practical and actionable insights on the topic of compliance 
to the growing DLT discourse in IS.   

Compliance Reporting and Distributed Ledger Technology (DLT) in IS 

In  the  ‘push-model’  for  compliance  reporting  (Figure  1.),  local  banks  push  data  to  local  authorities,  which 

subsequently consolidate banking group reports and push these to the supranational level. The nationally competent 

authorities  (NCA)  for  supervision,  resolution  (NRA)  and  central  banking  (NCB)  are  subsequently  responsible  for 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
pushing the data forward to the respective targets at the European Banking Authority (EBA), the European Central 

Bank (ECB) and the Single Resolution Board (SRB) at the European level. The resolution authorities are included in 

the flow as they cooperate with the other institutions and the reporting obligations are used to assess whether a bank 

is failing or likely to fail and how to resolve it. 

Figure 1: Illustration of the Current 3-tier push-model for ITS compliance reporting  

Practically, reporting is initiated by the local banks, that submit a pre-defined XML-report or create it manually and 

submit  to  the  local  authorities,  often  through  a  jointly  operated  portal  by  the  NCB  and  NCA.    As  the  reporting 

obligations include sensitive data related to privacy, banking regulatory secrecy and competitive status, data is masked 

for analytical purposes and further truncated, so that sensitive data is not easily identifiable. The data is subsequently 

processed to create supervisory or statistical reporting, which is pushed to the European authority level as stipulated 

by  the  supranational  bodies  policy  mandates.  Traditionally,  data  security  is  managed  via  identity  and  access 

management  controls,  network  segmentation,  strong  communication  protocols  supported  by  firewalls,  data 

segregation, monitoring, and process controls to avoid leakage and abuse. Figure 2 shows the steps of the compliance 

reporting process (EBA 2021b). 

Figure 2: Compliance reporting process  

Distributed Ledger Technology (DLT) denotes a distributed transactional database that is replicated across multiple 

peers in a network with a shared communication protocol, facilitating a tamper-proof record of   transactions (Beck 

and Müller-bloch 2018; Glaser 2017). In recent years, IS scholars have demonstrated how DLT may (I) enable atomic 

settlement of transactions (Ross et al. 2019; Wüst and Gervais 2017) and automate the execution of OTC derivatives 

(Jensen and Ross 2020); (II) increase resiliency (no ‘single point of failure’) while reducing ambiguity in transactions 

by providing full disclosure of a ’single truth’ for all network participants (Nærland et al. 2018); (III) Simplify and 

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
automate collection, sharing, reconciliation and reporting processes for sensitive data (Moyano and Ross 2017) while 

increasing transparency and reducing operational risk (Cerchiaro et al. 2021); (IV) fully interoperable and scalable 

(Eklund and Beck 2019); (V) Promote General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) compliance (Precht et al. 2021) 

and (VI) ultimately enable embedded supervision in key business processes (Auer 2019). 

Because of these unique features, the use of DLT  has been studied extensively in central banking, mainly on the topic 

of Central Bank Digital Currencies (CBDC), Payments clearing and Settlement, Asset transfer and ownership, Audit 

trail and Regulatory market compliance (Dashkevich et al. 2020), but some authors also focus on supervision, and 

how  to  improve  automation of  regulatory reporting using  smart  contracts  (Auer  2019).  IS  research  in  compliance 

received  attention  following  the  financial  crisis  in  2008  (Abdullah  et  al.  2009),  however,  with  the  influx  of  new 

regulations, companies’ focus shifted towards meeting regulatory deadlines at the expense of developing a strategic, 

enterprise-wide  connected  approach  to  compliance  (Gozman  and  Currie  2015).While  the  open-source  approach 

associated with public blockchains was initially opposed by the prevailing thinking in traditional financial services, 

major institutions on all continents are now experimenting with the technology in view of its attractive characteristics. 

As a result, banks now represent more than 30 pct of DLT use cases (Rauchs and Hileman 2018), further exacerbated 

by the evolution of research within machine-readable regulation (McLaughlin and Stover 2021) and business process 

compliance (López et al. 2020). Yet, in spite of the extensive empirical and theoretical exploration of DLT in the 

financial settings few concrete results have materialized.  

Methodology and Artefact Requirements 

We apply the Design Science Research (DSR) method in an iterative design, develop and evaluation process (Gregor 

and  Hevner 2013).  The  artefact  is  conceptualized  through  a  6-step process:  1)  Problem identification, 2)  Solution 

objective, 3) Design, 4) Demonstration, 5) Evaluation and 6) Communication (Ken Peffers et al. 2007). The artefact 

evaluation process is conducted ex-ante, through expert interviews (Venable et al. 2016), emphasizing the mitigation 

of development risk through continuous feedback loops (vom Brocke et al. 2020). 

Figure 3: DSR framework applied to the project’s search process 

Our  search  process  was  initiated  by  a  2-day  workshop  with  several  of  the  stakeholders.  Here,  we  identified  and 

motivated the problem and defined the key objectives for the artefact. We subsequently conducted interviews with  

4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
stakeholders1 in the period between January to April 2022. 

Role in the design search process 
Domain expertise 
Domain expertise, guidance, and support 

Role in host-organization  
CEO, Banking Technology Company 
Deputy Director General, Supervisory 
authority 
Digital Expert, Central Bank 
Head of Innovation, Central Bank 
Solution Architect, Central Bank 
Supervisory Data Team, Supervisory authority  Reporting burden expertise, evaluation of artefact  
Reporting burden expertise, evaluation of artefact  
Head of Reporting, Regulator  
Domain expertise, guidance and support 
Director, Regulator 
Evaluation of artefact, guidance  
Head of Blockchain, Trading platform 

Non-technical evaluation of artefact requirements 
Non-technical evaluation of artefact requirements 
Technical evaluation of artefact requirements 

S1 
S2 

S3 
S3 
S4 
S5 
S6 
S7 
S8 

Table 1: Stakeholder categories and role in the design search process 

The  interviews  were  open-ended  and  semi-structured,  lasting  60  minutes  on  average.  Early  in  the  design-search 

process, we conducted stakeholder interviews without prior briefing. In the evaluation phase, we briefed stakeholders 

prior to the interviews, keeping them up to date on the latest iteration of the artefact design. The interviews were 

conducted ensuring proper consent and confidentiality and using a tailored interview guide (Iyamu 2018), covering 

(1)  Introductions;  (2)  Presentation  of  the  compliance  reporting  process  challenge;  (3)  Motivation  for  DLT  based 

compliance reporting; (4) Requirements; (5) Evaluation of artefact and (6) Closing. Thus far, the total interview time 

with stakeholders comprised 840 minutes, generating 149 pages of interview notes. The project is open-ended, and all 
stakeholders have agreed to commit time to participate in evaluations for subsequent iterations of the artefact.  

While our data sampling strategy aligned with our preconceptions about the feasibility of and challenges within DLT 

for compliance reporting, we remained open to new theoretical insights and without any preformulated hypothesis 

(Urquhart  et  al.  2010).  Through  the  interviews,  it  became  clear  how  lack  of  alignment  in  stakeholder  incentives 

amplified  the  existing  complexity  in  the  identification  and  motivation  of  a  narrow  problem  scope,  leading  to  an 

emphasis on the need for flexibility and modularity in the artefact design. The design-search process is producing an 

evolving set of requirements for the artefact. In this short paper, we have summarized the technical and governance 

related set to  six requirements in three general categories (Baskerville and Pries-Heje 2010). 

Requirement 

Description 

Data sources and 

The artefact must demonstrate the reporting flow from reporters to authorities using 

interoperability 

a  pull-model  system  that  is  interoperable  with  multiple  other  non-integrated  data 

sources (synthetic reporting data)  

MRER  

The system must create machine-executable versions of reporting requirements, that 

are expressed in a logical and consistent sequence that can be used by a deterministic 

computing system 

a
t
a
D

1  To  preserve  the  anonymity  of  the  authors,  the  organizations  in  which  the  stakeholders  are  employed  have  been 
described superficially in this submission.  

5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Security and Privacy 

The system must ensure compliance with data privacy regulation such as GDPR, and 

regulation as relates confidentiality, while also allowing read and write authority as 

per delegated governance mandate. 

Delegation  

Risk and obligations must be delegated to system participants, implying the use of 

one entry point, a simple legally enforceable framework, and smart contract logic 

with role-based access and identity management, but also institutional involvement. 

Data pull vs push 

The system must allow the public authorities to pull the required information directly 

via the reporting agents for real-time analysis, supervisory review and evaluation and 

statistical modelling. 

Relevance and 

The  system  must  feature  strong  incentivizes  for  participation,  with  "opt-in" 

Incentivization 

mechanisms  allowing  phased  entry  for  participating  banks  by  reducing  cost-of-

compliance for local banks and institutions.  

Table 2: Artefact requirements for the presented iteration 

s
t
h
g
i
r
n
o
i
s
i
c
e
D

y
t
i
l
i

b
a
t
n
u
o
c
c
A

Artefact description 

This early iteration of the artefact design comprises a general database architecture in which transaction events are 

parsed and enriched with ITS data and subsequently stored for modular ITS report aggregation. The enriched data 

comprising the fields that make up ITS reports can be pulled by regulators from a data warehouse as data is consumed 

from the DLT environment and enriched, in near real-time. The architecture is rooted in an active node for the targeted 

DLT  environment.  The  DLT  node  is  running  and  on-chain  event  API  that  listens  to  native  transaction  and  smart 

contract events. The on-chain event API is consumed by the ‘Composer’, a program which observes state changes on 

the targeted network and records events associated with addresses registered with participating institutions.  

Figure 4: Artefact illustration – DLT system of systems for compliance reporting 

The Composer queries a DB referred to as the ‘ITS Datastore’ to enrich the on-chain event data with ITS data and 

subsequently stores the fields in a data warehouse. The ITS datastore contains relevant information on the institutions 

operating  on  the  DLT  solution,  which  is  used  by  the  Composer  in  the  calculation  of  leverage  and  capital  ratios, 

liquidity  requirements,  credit  exposures,  trading  flows  and  more.  By  consuming  on-chain  events,  the  Composer 

6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
maintains logs of activities on the ledger related to participating institutions, which is used in providing a picture of 

the bank’s assets under management.  

Regulatory and international bodies can query the data warehouse to pull ITS data as required. The data 

warehousing is designed such that if enough institutions across jurisdictions would use DLT based solutions, the ITS 

data can be fed into a nested data hierarchy to compile macro risk assessments and systemic risk analysis in real 

time, as demonstrated in Table 3. 

Local Reporting 

National Reporting  

Supranational Reporting 

ITS modular reporting,  

Predictive local macro, Key Risk 

Predictive local macro,  

MI reporting, 

Indicators (KRI), Supervision, 

Key Risk Indicators (KRI), 

Idiosyncratic Risk management, 

Systemic country risk, Local 

Policy action,  

Compliance, Strategic direction, 

financial stability, Prescriptive 

Systemic regional risk, Financial 

Supervision and Evaluation 

feedback, Secondary template 

stability 

reporting  

Table 3: Embedded Data Hierarchy for Real-time ITS Reporting Aggregation 

The ITS supervisory reporting regime requires modular reporting obligations at the primary level – from local banks 

to national authorities, and further consolidated template reporting obligations in the secondary level – from national 

authorities to supranational ditto, where the consolidated templates are prepared by the authorities and subject to 

comprehensive data quality checks to comply with EBA’s data point model. As explained earlier, this process is 

very complicated, expensive and often subject to considerable processing time, which prevents the authorities from 

dealing precisely with critical matters of financial stability in whole countries in real-time, hence any improvement 

to the status quo is but important and required, which is also the motivation for EBA’s ongoing work and the recent 

EU supervisory data strategy objectives “to modernize EU supervisory reporting and put in place a system that 

delivers accurate, consistent, and timely data to supervisory authorities at EU and national level, while minimizing 

the aggregate reporting burden for all relevant parties” (European Commission 2021b). 

Evaluation 

While the choice of working with a broad selection of representatives from industry and regulatory backgrounds has 

infused the requirements elicitation process with a heterogeneous perspective on compliance and regulation, working 

in a complex environment with a ’big tent’ always introduces discrepancies of opinion and priorities. As a result, the 

evaluation summary (Table 4) portrays multiple latent discrepancies, as can be expected at this stage in the design-

search process. 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Requirement 
Data sources and 
interoperability 

Evaluation summary 
The artefact conceptually demonstrates the reporting flow at the local reporting level, 

but allows also secondary reporting from national authorities to supranational ones; it 

demonstrates how interoperability and enrichment with multiple synthetic reporting 
data sources will be executed,  

MRER  

To the extent that regulatory documents and other formal and informal legal documents 

are enhanced with extensive metadata fields that tell machines and human readers of the 

types of impacts the document will have, and that the document pertains to, and how 

restrictive a given document is, the artefact  
may incorporate machine-readable and executable reporting requirements. 

Security and 
Privacy 

The artefact is designed with the capabilities of DLT as demonstrated by IS scholars 

above, including compliance with privacy regulation and secure access rights per 

delegated authority. For security risk, the artefact is intended to comply with prevailing 

security standards such as ISO 31000/31022 and ISO/IEC 27005, but further work is 

required to assess the artefact in respect of evolving European cyber security technical 
standards and resilience testing.  

Delegation  

A comprehensive regulatory framework does not currently exist for DLT based 

compliance reporting as outlined, but conditional to the artefact being deployed in a 

permissioned environment with regulated, identified participants, it will be possible to 

meet the requirements, assuming tokenized representations are deemed legally 
enforceable by regulators 

Data pull vs 
push 

The artefact demonstrates the feasibility of a “pull” approach, which can hypothetically 

reduce the time requires for report processing from up to T+90 days towards T+0 days. 

It is noted that senior management regimes prescribe that management cannot relieve 

their responsibilities for compliance, regardless of whether a “single source of truth” 

system is operational. Further work is needed to investigate how this liability regime 

can be adopted to a DLT system, and how to decide how regulatory breaches are 

investigated and managed, to avoid triggering undue penalties for wrong calculations or 

other mistakes in processing the desired outcomes. 

Relevance 

The artefact governance may allow the incentivization of distributed ownership, 

n
o
i
t
a
d
n
u
o
F

s
t
h
g
i
r
n
o
i
s
i
c
e
D

y
t
i
l
i
b
a
t
n
u
o
c
c
A

delivering single source of truth, that can be utilized at different hierarchical levels. It 

may also allow increased sharing and standardization of data transformation methods, 

but further work is required to detail which elements of the ITS is suitable for 

automation, hence the actual incentive design and regulatory process adaption of DLT 
technology remains to be completed. 

Table 4: Artefact requirements for the presented iteration 

8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The artefact is designed to allow real-time supervisory pull access to consolidated and/or granular data, which is very 

transformational  to  the  current  practices.  To  achieve  continued  balance  in  the  supervisory  review  and  evaluation 

process in a system, where supervisors may gain increased level of knowledge of systemic and idiosyncratic risk due 

the transparent nature of DLT, safeguards may potentially be required to ensure, that bank governance meets other 

obligations,  for  example  as  relates  market  disclosure.  Further,  as  this  is  new  technology  that  changes  established 

practices in sensitive areas, it is important to conduct trials in different kinds of settings and with different prototypes 

prior to production (Lindman et al. 2017).  

Discussion 

In this short paper we report ongoing progress on the design of an artefact, with a group of industrial and regulatory 

stakeholders. The artefact demonstrates the feasibility of implementing a pull-model for compliance data, through 

which  regulators  can  query  transaction  level  reporting  data  and  ultimately  stage  aggregated  financial  exposures 

without  disclosing  underlying  individual  transactions.  From  a  supervisory  perspective,  pulling  data  directly  from 

banks’ ledgers may be perceived not only radical, but counter to tradition because supervision, as it is practiced today, 

is based on consolidated data, with the intent of understanding the banks’ own view of their data. Traditionally, local 

bank managers interpret data themselves in view of their risk appetite and tolerance, allowing for a lot of flexibility in 

the  calculation  of  fair  value or  risk  positions.  As  a  result,  a  pull-model  may  be  challenging  to operationalize  in  a 

secretive industry, where internal control processes are commonly practiced through the ’3-lines-of-defence’ model, 

which  heavily  emphasises  the  banks’  own  fiduciary  responsibilities  (IIA  2020).  However,  EBA  through  its 

consultative process already concluded, that some level of ‘pull’ is possible, and, as we aim to demonstrate in this 

short paper, the roll-out and adoption DLT based solutions in the financial services simply advances this principle. To 

this end, we concur with the existing consensus in the IS  literature on DLT and blockchain technologies that is a 

suitable infrastructure to deliver significant benefits and reduce the compliance reporting burden, while also enabling 

faster reports processing and decision making. By extrapolating the preliminary findings presented in this paper, we 

offer the following propositions on the impact of DLT in compliance reporting: 

P1:  DLT  based  compliance  reporting  introduces  a  new  level  of  precision  in  supervision:  The  increased  level  of 

transparency  enables  more  effective  and  focused  supervision  and  more  precise  and  faster  data  sharing  across  the 

regulated entities, reducing idiosyncratic and systemic risk. Issues around loss of control, cost of maintaining platform 

and the risk of intrusive supervision appear more perceived than real (Gozman et al. 2020). 

P2: Automation through DLT will reduce cost of compliance reporting and improve processing time significantly: 

The  standardization  of  data  taxonomies  will  lead  to  increased  levels  of  automation  and  result  in  faster  and  more 

efficient compliance reporting, reducing cost significantly and eventually paving the way for embedded supervision 

(Auer 2019).  

9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P3: DLT based compliance reporting incentivizes more accurate  reporting requirements: As authorities are tasked 

with creating their own view of banks’ data there is a clear incentive for improving the reporting requirements and 

embrace machine readable regulation (McLaughlin and Stover 2021).  

P4:  DLT  will  transform how  compliance  is  undertaken: Moving  towards  a  ‘pull’  model  will  challenge  prevailing 

control practices such as the ‘3-lines-of-defence’ model, that is widely used for compliance across industries. With 

increased levels of automation and smarter and more precise reporting requirements, it may not be required to operate 

what may sometimes in banking behave as a ‘5-lines-of-defence’ model, where the external auditors and authorities 

are the remaining lines, but with overlaps in between them. Rather, inscription will evolve as the organizing principle, 

where the existing practices are inscribed in technological artefacts and control is dynamically negotiated (Andersen 

and Bogusz 2019). 

Conclusions 

In  this  paper  we  have  investigated  the  complexities  of  prudential  compliance  reporting  and  the  implications  and 

potential benefits of using DLT infrastructure for compliance reporting, using the example of the EBA’s ITS regime 

and banking. While DLT applications and the proposed shift to a ‘pull’ model may present significant change and 

challenge  the  prevailing  internal  control  practices,  the  risks  associated  with  this  change  are  manageable  and  the 

benefits clear, as not only will DLT applications pave the way for faster and better reporting at much less cost, DLT 

will also enable better supervision while incentivizing further automation in a critical, but very expensive, industry. 

Eventually we predict that as DLT evolves and replaces any firm’s legacy technology infrastructure, the reporting 

burden  will  not  only  be  possible  to  reduce  significantly,  but  control  activities  as  such  will  be  optimized  via  new 

governance models. 

References 

Abdullah, S., Hikmi, S. N., Indulska, M., and Sadiq, S. 2009. “A Study of Compliance Management in Information 

Systems Research,” 17th European Conference on Information Systems, ECIS 2009. 

Andersen, J. V., and Bogusz, C. I. 2019. “Self-Organizing in Blockchain Infrastructures: Generativity through 

Shifting Objectives and Forking,” Journal of the Association for Information Systems (20:9), pp. 1242–1273.  

Auer, R. 2019. “Embedded Supervision: How to Build Regulation into Blockchain Finance,” Federal Reserve Bank 

of Dallas, Globalization Institute Working Papers (2019:371).  

Baskerville, R., and Pries-Heje, J. 2010. “Explanatory Design Theory,” Business & Information Systems 

Engineering (2:5), pp. 271–282. 

Baudino, P., Richardson, T., and Walters, R. 2020. “FSI Insights on Policy Implementation Cooperation and 

Information-From Data Reporting to Data-Sharing: How Far Can Suptech and Other Innovations Challenge 

the Status Quo of Regulatory Reporting?,” Financ. Stab. Inst. (29). 

BCBS. 2020. Progress in Adopting the Principles for Effective Risk Data Aggregation and Risk Reporting - April 

2020, (April), pp. 1–27. (https://www.bis.org/bcbs/publ/d501.htm). 

10 

 
 
 
 
 
Beck, R., and Müller-bloch, C. 2018. “Governance in the Blockchain Economy: A Framework and Research 

Agenda,” JOURNAL OF THE ASSOCIATION FOR INFORMATION SYSTEMS (March). 

vom Brocke, J., Hevner, A., and Maedche, A. 2020. Introduction to Design Science Research, (November), pp. 1–

13.  

Cerchiaro, D., Sabrina, L., Landriault, E., and De Vega, P. 2021. “DLT to Boost Efficiency for Financial 

Intermediaries. An Application in ESG Reporting Activities,” Technology Analysis and Strategic 

Management. 

Dashkevich, N., Counsell, S., and Destefanis, G. 2020. “Blockchain Application for Central Banks: A Systematic 

Mapping Study,” IEEE Access (8), pp. 139918–139952.  

Eba. 2021. “FINAL REPORT ON A FEASIBILITY STUDY OF AN INTEGRATED REPORTING SYSTEM EBA 

REPORT ON A FEASIBILITY STUDY OF AN INTEGRATED REPORTING SYSTEM UNDER 

ARTICLE 430C CRR Contents.” 

EBA. 2021a. STUDY OF THE COST OF COMPLIANCE WITH SUPERVISORY REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.  

EBA. 2021b. “EBA Discussion Paper 2021/01 on a Feasibility Study of an Integrated Reporting System,” 

Environmental Design Research (March), pp. 415–417.  

European Commission. 2021b. “Strategy on Supervisory Data in EU Financial Services,” Strategy on Supervisory 

Data in EU Financial Services, Https://eur-lex.Europa.eu/legal-Content/EN/TXT/PDF. 

Glaser, F. 2017. “Pervasive Decentralisation of Digital Infrastructures: A Framework for Blockchain Enabled 

System and Use Case Analysis,” Proceedings of the 50th Hawaii International Conference on System 

Sciences (HICSS-50), pp. 1543–1552.  

Gozman, D., and Currie, W. 2015. “Managing Governance, Risk, and Compliance for Post-Crisis Regulatory 

Change: A Model of IS Capabilities for Financial Organizations,” Proceedings of the Annual Hawaii 

International Conference on System Sciences (2015-March:Cad Iv), pp. 4661–4670.  

Gregor, S., and Hevner, A. R. 2013. “Positioning and Presenting Design Science Research for Maximum Impact,” 

MIS Quarterly (37:2), pp. 337–356. 

IIA. 2020. THE IIA ’ S THREE LINES MODEL An Update of the Three Lines of Defense Table of Contents, p. 13. 

Iyamu, T. 2018. “Collecting Qualitative Data for Information Systems Studies: The Reality in Practice,” Education 

and Information Technologies (23:5), Education and Information Technologies. 

Jensen, J. R., and Ross, O. 2020. “Settlement with Distributed Ledger Technology,” in Forty-First International 

Conference on Information Systems. 

Ken Peffers, Tuure Tuunanen, Marcus A. Rothenberger, and Samir Chatterjee. 2007. “A Design Science Research 

Methodology for Information Systems Research,” Journal of Management Information Systems (24:3), pp. 

45–77.  

Lindman, J., Rossi, M., and Tuunainen, V. K. 2017. “Opportunities and Risks of Blockchain Technologies in 

Payments - A Research Agenda,” Proceedings of the Annual Hawaii International Conference on System 

Sciences (2017-January), pp. 1533–1542. 

López, H. A., Debois, S., Slaats, T., and Hildebrandt, T. T. 2020. “Business Process Compliance Using Reference 

11 

 
 
 
 
Models of Law,” Lecture Notes in Computer Science (Including Subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial 

Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics) (Vol. 12076 LNCS), Springer  

McLaughlin, P. A., and Stover, W. 2021. Drafting X2RL: A Semantic Regulatory Machine-Readable Format. 

(https://law.mit.edu/pub/draftingx2rl/release/2). 

Moyano, J. P., and Ross, O. 2017. “KYC Optimization Using Distributed Ledger Technology,” Business & 

Information Systems Engineering (59:6), Springer, pp. 411–423. 

Nærland, K., Beck, R., Müller-Bloch, C., and Palmund, S. 2018. “Blockchain to Rule the Waves - Nascent Design 

Principles for Reducing Risk and Uncertainty in Decentralized Environments,” in ICIS 2017: Transforming 

Society with Digital Innovation. 

Precht, H., Ossietzky, C. Von, Oldenburg, U., Gómez, J. M., Precht, H., and Gómez, J. M. 2021. Association for 

Information Systems AIS Electronic Library ( AISeL ) Towards GDPR Enforcing Blockchain Systems. 

Rauchs, M., and Hileman, G. 2018. “2017 Global Blockchain Benchmarking Study,” SSRN Electronic Jou. 

Ross, O., Jensen, J., and Asheim, T. 2019. “Assets under Tokenization: Can Blockchain Technology Improve Post-

Trade Processing?,” in Fortieth International Conference on Information Systems, Munich 2019. 

Urquhart, C., Lehmann, H., and Myers, M. D. 2010. “Putting the ‘theory’ Back into Grounded Theory: Guidelines 

for Grounded Theory Studies in Information Systems,” Information Systems Journal  

Venable, J., Pries-Heje, J., and Baskerville, R. 2016. “FEDS: A Framework for Evaluation in Design Science 

Research,” European Journal of Information Systems (25:1), pp. 77–89.  

Wüst, K., and Gervais, A. 2017. “Do You Need a Blockchain?,” IACR Cryptology EPrint Archive (i), p. 375. 

12 

 
 
 
 
