2
2
0
2

n
u
J

7
1

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
5
6
5
8
0
.
6
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Identifying Counterfeit Products using Blockchain
Technology in Supply Chain System

Naﬁsa Anjum
Department of Electronics and
Telecommunication Engineering
Chittagong University of
Engineering and Technology
Chittagong, Bangladesh
naﬁsaanjum94@gmail.com

Pramit Dutta
Department of Electronics and
Telecommunication Engineering
Chittagong University of
Engineering and Technology
Chittagong, Bangladesh
pramitduttaanik@gmail.com

Abstract—With the advent of globalization and the ever-
growing rate of technology, the volume of production as well as
ease of procuring counterfeit goods has become unprecedented.
Be it food, drug or luxury items, all kinds of industrial manufac-
turers and distributors are now seeking greater transparency in
supply chain operations with a view to deter counterfeiting. This
paper introduces a decentralized Blockchain based application
system (DApp) with a view to identifying counterfeit products
in the supply chain system. With the rapid rise of Blockchain
it has become known that data recorded within
technology,
Blockchain is immutable and secure. Hence, the proposed project
here uses this concept to handle the transfer of ownership of
products. A consumer can verify the product distribution and
ownership information scanning a Quick Response (QR) code
generated by the DApp for each product linked to the Blockchain.

Index

Terms—counterfeit,

supply

chain,

Blockchain,

Ethereum, QR code

I. INTRODUCTION

Over the years, the identiﬁcation of counterfeit goods in
market has always posed a challenge for all supply chain
stakeholders. As per the latest assessment of EU Intellectual
Property Ofﬁce (EUIPO) and the Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development (OECD), the global sales of
counterfeit and pirated goods have increased alarmingly to
460 billion euros which is about 3.3% of the global trade
[1]. The sales and proﬁts of companies around the world
have been affected by this phenomenon. The clothing and
pharmaceutical sectors experienced sales losses of about 26.3
billion euros and 10.2 billion euros respectively [2]. Moreover,
with the advent of recent technologies and E-commerce, the
market of counterfeit goods have exploded on social media
platforms. The anonymity, reach and segmenting tools of
Ecommerce and social media have smoothed the pavement
for counterfeiters. Hence, counterfeiting as in producing twins
or fakes of real products pose great threat to innovation and
economic growth.

978-1-6654-2678-7/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE

Blockchain technology has been receiving much attention
over the past decade and its numerous applications are being
developed. Blockchain is a decentralized system of shared,
immutable ledger. It facilitates the process of recording,
trading and tracking assets over a business network thus
reducing risks and cutting costs for all involved. Hence, any
application using Blockchain as its base technology ensures
that the data are tamper resistant.

In this paper, a decentralized application system (DApp)
has been introduced that uses Ethereum blockchain technology
in its architecture. The DApp simulates a real world supply
chain and ensures the ownership of product is transferred
and recorded in the blockchain network. Besides, the system
proposed here can also be implemented in Ecommerce and
retail sites that can considerably bring transparency in the
virtual platforms for all consumers. Though Radio Frequency
Identiﬁcation (RFID) has been used for research in this sector
previously, it has posed security and privacy risks which can
be efﬁciently dealt with using blockchain.

II. RELATED WORK

Various researchers have proposed different methods for
establishing a blockchain-based supply chain management
system. One of them presented a counterfeit product iden-
tiﬁcation system using android application where a product
can be searched in the Blockchain network [3]. Another paper
displayed a fake product detection system using blockchain
where SHA-256 Algorithm was used to identify a product [4].
A fully functional anti-product forgery system was designed
by a group of researchers that uses digital signature for veri-
ﬁcation [5]. In one of the papers, a blockchain-based Product
Ownership Management System was proposed. It displayed
the use of blockchain-based system over traditional RFID-
based system [6]. Another paper presented a food traceability
system using IoT and blockchain collectively. In this model,
they used fuzzy logic to evaluate the food quality [7]. A paper
displayed a system where blockchain was used with RFID to
remove the limitation in post supply chain [8]. To improve

 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1. System Diagram

the current supply chain method a paper used blockchain
combined with IoT to track product origin [9].

III. METHODOLOGY

The system proposed here uses MetaMask cryptocurrency
wallet for transactions and and the smart contract here has
been deployed in the Rinkeby Test Network of the Ethereum
Blockchain. The DApp is based on three major stakeholders,
the Manufacturer, the Seller and the Consumer.

A. System Diagram

Fig. 1 depicts the system diagram of the proposed DApp.
Every user of the DApp has to be authenticated before logging
in. This authentication system has been implemented using
Firebase which is a platform provided by Google for develop-
ing interactive mobile and web applications. After successful
authentication, the manufacturer can add their company to
the DApp and enroll products of the company. The contract
address of the company is provided to the manufacturer and all
the company data as well as manufacturer’s account address
are stored in the blockchain network. After a product has
been included in the blockchain, it is assigned a QR code for
veriﬁcation. The sellers can buy products from manufacturer
after registration. The ownership transfer of the product can
be tracked through the QR code.

B. Manufacturer

The manufacturer’s functions include adding the company
to the blockchain by providing company name and setting the
minimum registration fee to become a seller or retailer for
the company. The manufacturer solely preserves the rights
to enroll products in the network. The manufacturer can

Fig. 2. Manufacturer’s Working Process

also control the distribution status of products and transfer
ownership after a seller has bought the product stock.

The manufacturer performs two major functions namely
adding and distributing products in this system. For adding
a product Algorithm 1 is used.

Algorithm 1 Create Product

Input: Product Name, Product Price, Product Stock
Output: Added Product

if msg.sender is not manufacturer then

throw;
end

else

insert product in product array

end if

For distribution of product Algorithm 2 is used. The product

and order status in the blockchain is changed through this.

Algorithm 2 Distribute Product

Input: Product ID
Output: Changed Product Status

Algorithm 4 Buy Product

Input: Product ID, Seller Name, Amount to buy
Output: Set Current Owner of product as msg.Sender

if msg.sender is not registered seller then

throw;
end

if msg.sender is not manufacturer then

else if msg.value is less that required amount then

throw;
end

else

throw;
end

else

change product status to ’Shipped’ and set order status

set product owner name as seller name and store account

as complete
end if

C. Seller

A seller can pay the minimum fee set by the manufacturer
and register for the company. After registering once, the seller
can buy any product as well as track its distribution. A
product status is set from ‘Ready To Go’ to ‘Shipped’ after
the manufacturer ships it out to the seller.

Fig. 3. Seller’s Working Process

Algorithm 3 here is used to make sure a seller pays the

minimum registration fee set by the manufacturer.

Algorithm 3 Seller Registration

Input: Minimum amount of registration fee set by man-

ufacturer

Output: Registered Seller

if msg.sender is registered seller or fee is less than
requirement then

throw;
end

else

map msg.sender is true

end if

Algorithm 4 here is used by the seller to buy or book
products from the manufacturer. It records the seller’s data
in the blockchain.

address of seller
end if

D. Consumer

A consumer can scan the QR code provided with each
product and verify the transfer of ownership of product from
manufacturer to seller. The consumer can also verify the name
of the current owner of the product and check its distribution
status.

E. Blockchain

Blockchain technology provides promising opportunities in
the supply chain management paradigm. Blockchain data is
stored on nodes where each node has a complete copy of
the blockchain database. Orders, payments, accounts, price
of products etc. can be tracked, shared and secured using a
blockchain network. Some important features of blockchain
technology in supply chain management includes:

1) Security and Privacy: Blockchain uses public key en-
cryption method of cryptography for data security. Users have
public and private key pair which are used to validate trans-
actions and these transactions are immutable and permanent.
2) Decentralization: As blockchain is a distributed ledger
technology, it doesn’t rely on third party or any centralized
authority.

3) Transparency: Data stored in Blockchain is public and
anyone can enquire on their transactions. The transactions can
be governed by a set of rules known as the smart contract.
The system proposed here uses MetaMask cryptocurrency
wallet for transactions and and the smart contract here has
been deployed in the Rinkeby Test Network of the Ethereum
Blockchain. The DApp is based on three major stakeholders,
The Manufacturer, the seller and the consumer.

F. Ethereum DApp Architecture

Fig. 4 here depicts the base architecture of the system. The
user interface (UI) here has been developed using ReactJS. If
the user wants to interact with the smart contract, the DApp
will use Web3.js which communicates with MetaMask through
its provider. MetaMask creates a transaction and signs it with
the user’s private key. This transaction is then sent to Ethereum
network. The transaction is processed, veriﬁed and added to a
block in the network. The private keys of the user are never

Fig. 4. Ethereum DApp Architecture

recorded in the process so user can safely interact with the
network.

IV. RESULT ANALYSIS

Sending data to the Blockchain comes with some cost
referred to as transaction cost. Miners tend to prioritize trans-
actions with higher costs. Transaction cost is measured in gas
and gas fees are paid in Ethereum’s native currency ether
(ETH). The table indicates the transaction cost and gas fees
required for the proposed system.

TABLE I
COST CALCULATION

Sl No.

1

2

3
4
5
6

Function
Description
Deploy Contract
of our system
Adding
New Company
Seller Registration
Product Enrollment
Buying Product
Product Distribution

Transaction
Cost (gas)

Gas
Fee (ETH)

133405

0.001333

1068597

45755
208571
41581
55578

0.001069

0.000046
0.000209
0.000042
0.000056

Total=0.002755 ETH/ $8.56
Deploy= $4.14

Here CoinMarketCap [10] was used to convert Ether to US
dollars. Remix which is a web browser IDE for developing
DApp was used determine the gas needs. MetaMask was used
for contract interaction and determining the costings. The cost
for deploying our contract in the Rinkeby Test Network is
0.001333 ETH which is equivalent to 4.14 US dollars. The

overall costing for the system is less than 10 US dollars
which proves the cost effectiveness of the proposed model. The
product ownership transfer as well product quality assurance
costs are also reduced here compared to current market trends
to verify product authenticity. A consumer can scan the QR
code and verify the ownership transfer of the product. The
manufacturer’s account address, the seller’s account address
and name as well as the status of product is recorded in the QR
code. If the product status is ‘Shipped’, the product transfer is
genuine and the order is set to ‘complete’ in the blockchain.
The QR code is provided with copy-sensitive digital image
pattern.

V. CONCLUSION

Ownership tracking system is being reshaped through dis-
tributed ledgers of Blockchain technology. Due to rapid
changes in the Ecommerce and business sectors, the current
trends of supply chain are being affected. The DApp devel-
oped here ensures greater transparency in the supply chain
management and can also be entrusted for use in Ecommerce.
As such, administrative costs and complicated procedures are
eliminated by this process. Besides, the cost for enrolling each
product in the proposed model is only 0.000209 ether which
is equivalent to 0.65 US dollars that can sufﬁciently reduce
costs for large chain stores. The model also ensures end-
user veriﬁcation system through a QR code and transactions
here can be veriﬁed on Etherscan too. As future work of
the proposed model, the functions included can be improved
further to bring reliability in the supply chain management.

REFERENCES

[1] https://phys.org/news/2019-03-counterfeit-pirated-goods-global.html
[2] https://www.statista.com/statistics/1117921/sales-losses-due-to-fake-

good-by-industry-worldwide/

[3] T. J. Sayyad, ”Fake Product Identiﬁcation Using Blockchain Technol-
ogy,” in International Journal of Future Generation Communication and
Networking, vol. 14, pp. 780-785, 2021, ISSN: 2233-7857 IJFGCN
[4] T. Tambe, S. Chitalkar, M. Khurud, M. Varpe, S. Y. Raut, ”Fake Product
Detection Using Blockchain Technology,” in International Journal of
Advance Research, Ideas and INNOVATIONS in Technology, vol. 7,
pp. 314-319, 2021, IJARIIE-ISSN(O)-2395-4396

[5] J. Ma, S. Lin, X. Chen, H. Sun, Y. Chen and H. Wang, ”A
Blockchain-Based Application System for Product Anti-Counterfeiting,”
in IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 77642-77652, 2020, doi: 10.1109/AC-
CESS.2020.2972026.

[6] K. Toyoda, P. T. Mathiopoulos, I. Sasase and T. Ohtsuki, ”A Novel
Blockchain-Based Product Ownership Management System (POMS) for
Anti-Counterfeits in the Post Supply Chain,” in IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp.
17465-17477, 2017, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2017.2720760.

[7] Y. P. Tsang, K. L. Choy, C. H. Wu, G. T. S. Ho and H. Y. Lam,
”Blockchain-Driven IoT for Food Traceability With an Integrated Con-
sensus Mechanism,” in IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 129000-129017, 2019,
doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2940227.

[8] S. Anandhi, R. Anitha and S. Venkatasamy, ”RFID Based Veri-
ﬁable Ownership Transfer Protocol Using Blockchain Technology,”
2018 IEEE International Conference on Internet of Things (iThings)
and IEEE Green Computing and Communications (GreenCom) and
IEEE Cyber, Physical and Social Computing (CPSCom) and IEEE
Smart Data (SmartData), 2018, pp. 1616-1621, doi: 10.1109/Cybermat-
ics 2018.2018.00270.

[9] S. Rahmadika, B. J. Kweka, C. N. Z. Latt and K. Rhee, ”A Preliminary
Approach of Blockchain Technology in Supply Chain System,” 2018
IEEE International Conference on Data Mining Workshops (ICDMW),
2018, pp. 156-160, doi: 10.1109/ICDMW.2018.00029.

[10] https://coinmarketcap.com/converter/eth/usd/

