2
2
0
2

n
u
J

3
2

]

Y
C
.
s
c
[

3
v
1
2
2
3
0
.
6
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

To incentivize or not: Impact of blockchain-based
cryptoeconomic tokens on human information
sharing behavior

Mark C. Ballandies
Computational Social Science
ETH Zurich
Zurich, Switzerland
bcmark@protonmail.com

in

the

incentives

Abstract—Cryptoeconomic

form of
blockchain-based tokens are seen as an enabler of the sharing
economy that could shift society towards greater sustainability.
Nevertheless, knowledge of the impact of these tokens on human
sharing behavior is still limited and this poses a challenge to
the design of effective cryptoeconomic incentives. This study
applies the theory of self-determination to investigate the impact
of such tokens on human behavior in an information-sharing
scenario. By utilizing an experimental methodology in the
form of a randomized control trial with a 2x2 factorial design
involving 132 participants, the effects of two token incentives on
human information-sharing behavior are analyzed. Individuals
obtain these tokens in exchange for their shared information.
Based on the collected tokens, individuals receive a monetary
payment and build reputation. Besides investigating the effect
of these incentives on the quantity of shared information, the
study includes quality characteristics of the information, such
as accuracy and contextualization. The focus on quantity while
excluding quality has been identiﬁed as a limitation in previous
work. In addition to conﬁrming previously known effects such
as a crowding-out of intrinsic motivation by incentives, which
also exists for blockchain-based tokens, the ﬁndings of this
paper point to a hitherto unreported interaction effect between
multiple tokens when applied simultaneously. The ﬁndings are
critically discussed and put into the context of recent work
and ethical considerations. The theory-based-empirical study is
of interest to those investigating the effect of cryptoeconomic
tokens or digital currencies on human behavior and supports
the community in the design of effective personalized incentives
for sharing economies.

I. INTRODUCTION

Cryptoeconomic incentives in the form of blockchain-based
tokens are seen as an enabler of the sharing economy [1, 2]
that could shift society toward greater sustainability [3, 4].
One of the resources that is shared in these economies is
information [5, 6, 7], which due to its growing utilization
in data-intensive technologies [8] is becoming increasingly
important [9, 10]. This has resulted in the collection of large
data sets by organizations [11]. Nevertheless, in this age of vast
data quantities, obtaining high-quality information is a chal-
lenge [11, 12] (e.g. the accuracy of the collected data is low).
Moreover, because organizations collect massive amounts of
unstructured data, such as customer behavior (product choices
and sleeping patterns), opinions (e.g. Facebook likes), medical

health records, or IoT data,
the amount of data collected
exceeds the processing power available to analyze it [13],
possibly resulting in sampling biases. Furthermore, these ”Big
Data” approaches often involve the danger of collapsing the
complexity of entire human personalities into assumptions
constructed from simple data (e.g. website clicks) and usually
miss the unique domain-speciﬁc knowledge users have [14].
Thus, it has been suggested that information providers should
structure their input in a contextualized way when sharing
their data, utilizing semantic web technologies [15], such as
linked data and ontologies [16, 17], and evaluate the quality
of information shared by other providers [18]. Nevertheless,
as this would require additional effort on the part of the infor-
mation providers [18], incentives such as gamiﬁcation [19],
reputation [20], money [21], or auctions [22] are suggested
to motivate the data providers and thus improve the char-
acteristics of the collected information. However, previous
work on the incentivization of information sharing focuses on
the quantity of collected information while excluding quality
characteristics such as accuracy or contextualization [23].

Increasingly, cyrptoeconomic incentives in the form of
blockchain-based tokens are proposed to be awarded to partici-
pants of information-sharing communities [24, 25, 26, 27, 28].
In these studies, the performance of the applied incentives is
investigated using simulations [29], game-theoretical method-
ologies [30], and case studies [31]. Nonetheless, behavioral
data of users in comparison with treatment groups with and
without incentivization have not been collected, which limits
these approaches as the utilized models cannot be calibrated
with real-world data [32]. Controlled experiments are therefore
required that investigate the impact of these cryptoeconomic
incentives on humans information-sharing behavior. In partic-
ular, such an empirical approach could assess and validate
the accuracy of the utilized theoretical models [1]. Likewise,
although the application of multiple token incentives has
been proposed to improve the maintenance and sharing of
a common resource [31, 33] and has been investigated in
games [30] and simulations [34], the impact of simultaneously
applying these incentives has not been investigated empirically
in a controlled experiment.

 
 
 
 
 
 
This paper addresses these identiﬁed gaps with the following

II. RELATED WORK IN INFORMATION SHARING

research question:

”What is the effect of multiple blockchain-based tokens on
human information-sharing behavior measured in the quantity,
accuracy, and contextualization of the shared information?”

By testing hypotheses

that are informed from self-
determination theory [35, 36] with an experimental methodol-
ogy in the form of a randomized control trial utilizing a 2x2
factorial design, the impact of two types of cryptoeconomic
incentives in the form of blockchain-based tokens on the
information-sharing behavior of humans is investigated.

The contributions of this paper can be summarized as

follows:

• A conceptual impact model (Figure 1) links cryptoeco-
nomic incentives to human motivation and information-
sharing behavior in consideration of self-determination
theory [35, 36].

• The living lab experimental methodology [37] is aug-
mented with a 2x2 factorial design to investigate the
impacts of blockchain-based cryptoeconomic incentives
on human information-sharing behavior.

• Four effects of cryptoeconomic tokens on human be-
havior are identiﬁed: i) a hitherto unreported interac-
tion effect between two types of cryptoeconomic tokens
when applied simultaneously; ii) an internalization ef-
fect of cryptoeconomic tokens in the form of improved
information-sharing behavior even after the incentiviza-
tion period has ended; iii) a crowding-out effect on intrin-
sic motivation when cryptoeconomic tokens are applied;
iv) a time effect resulting in a variation of the impact of
cryptoeconomic incentivization over time.

• A novel high-quality dataset illustrates user information-
sharing behavior under multiple token incentives that
facilitates causal inferences about human behavior under
cryptoeconomic incentivization.

• The work demonstrates how self determination theory can
be applied in the formulation of hypotheses and testing
in Token Engineering and Token Economics.

• The implications of the ﬁndings for the design and
engineering of one-dimensional and multi-dimensional
token systems are discussed critically, taking into account
ethical impacts.

Since these contributions inform an improved construction
of blockchain-based incentives, they are of relevance for the
community, which is increasingly utilizing and investigating
such incentives in various application domains [38, 39, 40].

This paper is structured as follows: In Section II, re-
lated work in information sharing is discussed. The research
methodology is introduced in Section III, while Section IV
presents the evaluation. Section V summarizes the ﬁndings
and discusses their implications. Finally, Section VI draws the
conclusion and provides an outlook for future work.

A. Self-determination theory and incentives

Humans are intrinsically and extrinsically motivated to share
information [41]. Intrinsic motivation refers to when people
perform a task such as information sharing out of the pleasure
they derive from the task itself, whereas extrinsic motivation
stems from incentives, such as monetary payments, reputation
gains, or punishments. When compared to extrinsic motivation
intrinsic motivation leads to enhanced
for a speciﬁc task,
performance, persistence, creativity,
learning capacity, and
endurance in humans [36] and may therefore be more im-
portant than extrinsic motivation for speciﬁc scenarios such as
contributing computer code [42] or sharing information [43].
Introduced by Deci and Ryan [35, 44], self-determination
theory illustrates the conditions under which humans are
intrinsically motivated to work on a task: Three innate psy-
chological needs must be satisﬁed: ”competence”, ”autonomy”
and ”relatedness”. In particular, a feeling of competence does
not enhance intrinsic motivation unless accompanied by a
sense of autonomy [36, 45]. In this context, applying mis-
aligned incentives may infringe on the perceived autonomy
of humans and thereby reduce their intrinsic motivation [46];
this is referred to as crowding-out effect [41]. However,
competence-enhancing incentives may support intrinsic mo-
tivation [35, 46] and this is referred to as internalization [35].
Figure 1 illustrates ﬁndings from literature about the de-
the two
pendencies between different
types of motivation, and their impact on characteristics of
information. Extrinsic and intrinsic motivation are not separate
systems, but inﬂuence each other [46]. Extrinsic motivation
can be integrated to become intrinsic motivation (Arrow I in
Figure 1) [35]. People are extrinsically motivated to share
a higher quantity of information by money [37, 47],
the
access to the collected information [47, 48], reputation [47],
and their intrinsic motivation [47] (Arrows II and VII in
Figure 1). In particular, the strongest increase in quantity is
observed for money, followed by the access to information,
reputation, and then intrinsic motivation [47]. In contrast to
quantity,
the quality of shared
information remains unaffected under monetary incentives
when mesasuring it in terms of the prediction accuracy of
stock recommendations [49] or is even worse than before
incentivization when meassured by a word count index [50], or
useability (helpfulness of reviews) [50], or quality of produced
images [51] (Arrow III in Figure 1).

it has been observed that

types of incentives,

It has been found that monetary incentives decrease intrin-
sic motivation (Arrow IV in Figure 1), while they increase
extrinsic motivation (Arrow V in Figure 1) [45, 52, 53],
which might explain the impact of monetary incentives on
quality: As intrinsic motivation has been observed to predict
quality (Arrow VI in Figure 1 ) [42, 54] and only to a
lesser extent quantity (Arrow VII in Figure 1) [47], whereas
extrinsic motivation predicts the quantity of shared information
(Arrow VIII in Figure 1) [54], the use of monetary incentives
would result in an increased extrinsic motivation and decreased

Fig. 1: Impact of incentives (money/ access/ reputation) on motivation (intrinsic/ extrinsic) and information-sharing behavior
(quality/ quantity). Impacts (arrows) are derived from related work (in parentheses).

intrinsic motivation, thereby leading to a higher quantity but
lower quality of shared information.

In contrast to monetary incentives, because they may en-
hance an individuals feeling of competence [35, 46], reputation
systems impact extrinsic motivation positively [55], while also
having a positive impact on intrinsic motivation [56] (Arrows
IX and X in Figure 1).

Moreover,

it has been found that

rewarding each
information-sharing action is more effective than summarized
payments [57], and that small subgroups have shown moderate
to strong aversion to incentives [58], which has been conﬁrmed
by Pournaras et al. [37].

B. Tokens for information sharing

Cryptoeconomic incentives in the form of blockchain-
based tokens span a multi-dimensional incentive system [33]
enabling a differentiated pricing of a broader spectrum of
externalities
[33, 63]. This can result in the improved self-
organization of society when compared to one-dimensional in-
centive systems such as the current monetary system [64, 65].
These tokens are deﬁned as a ”a unit of value issued within
a DLT system [or blockchain system] and which can be used

as a medium of exchange or unit of account” [66] and are
increasingly utilized in communities to encourage the sharing
of information.

Table I illustrates related work that utilizes blockchain-
based tokens in information-sharing scenarios. All of these
works contribute a conceptual framework about blockchain
and tokens and how they can be applied to improve the
information sharing in a community (Column Fram. in Table
I). Four of these frameworks are implemented in a software
artifact (Column Impl. in Table I): Naz et al. [28] implement
a software artifact that integrates IPFS1 with a blockchain to
improve the quality of shared data by incentivizing stakehold-
ers with tokens to review the shared information. Similarly,
Hunhevicz et al. [31] use tokens to incentivize high-quality
datasets in a construction process by awarding those that
provide complete and accurate information. Zhang et al. [61]
use tokens in their prototype to incentivize the provision
of credit data. Finally, Jaiman et al. [62] utilize tokens as
representations of ownership and access rights to data sets.

1Inter Plenatary File System, a peer-to-peer protocol for exchanging ﬁles:

https://ipfs.io/ (last accessed 2022-02-07)

ID Paper

Artifact

Fram.

Impl.

Evaluation

Token
Sim. Anly. Work. Exp. Mult. Des.

Imp.

Ethics

1
Pazaitis et al. [1]
2
Shrestha and Vassileva [24]
H¨ulsemann and Tumasjan [59]
3
4
Naz et al. [28]
5
Imanimehr et. al [31]
6
Manoj et al. [60]
7
Hunhevicz et al. [31]
Zhang et al. [61]
8
9 Wittek et al. [32]
Jaiman et al. [62]
10
11
Jung et al. [27]
12 This paper

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

x
x
x

x
x

x

x
x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

TABLE I: Related work that studies blockchain technology and tokens to improve information sharing. Frame: Famework;
Impl.: Implemenation; Sim.: Simulation; Anly.: Analytical; Exp.: Experiment; Mult.: Multiple; Des.: Design; Imp.: Implication

Two of these implementations are evaluated in simulations
(ID 4 and 10 in Table I). Moreover, three of the proposed
concepts that are not
implemented in a software artifact
are tested in simulations (Column Sim.; ID 3, 5 and 11
in Table I). H¨ulsemann and Tumasjan [59] apply an agent-
based modeling approach to investigate three different types
of tokens. Likewise, ImaniMehr and DehghanTakhtFooladi
[30] investigate with a simulation the application of multiple
tokens to incentivize the optimal utilization of video stream
layers. Moreover, they analytically investigate their scenario
with methods from game theory (Column Anly. in Table I).
Similarly, Jung et al. [27] utilize both methods from game
theory/ mechanism design as well as simulations to evaluate
their framework that improves the provision and maintenance
of patient health records. Hunhevicz et al. [31] evaluate
their framework and implementation with stakeholders in a
workshop (Column Work.; ID 7 in Table I). Three frameworks
are not evaluated (ID 1, 2 and 6 in Table I).

By utilizing tokens in their frameworks and implementa-
tions, only two of the contributions investigate the implications
of introduced tokens on system properties (Column Imp.; ID
3 and 5 in Table I). Moreover, only one of the contributions
illustrates the token design (Column Des.; ID 10 in Table I):
The token is a modiﬁed ERC-721 token that has a source
of value of ownership/access rights to data,
its supply is
uncapped and the token is transferable. Nevertheless, a stan-
dard illustration as utilized by Dobler et al. [67], Ballandies
et al. [68] that would make different designs comparable has
not been applied. Moreover, the impact of a speciﬁc token
design on user information-sharing behavior is not rigorously
investigated with a controlled experiment (Column Exp. in
Table I). Assumptions thus have to be utilized in the above-
mentioned simulations and analysis that limit the applicability
of the ﬁndings to real-world scenarios. Two of the works
utilize multiple tokens in their application scenario (Column

Mult.; ID 1 and 5 in Table I): Pazaitis et al. [1] enable
the setup of multiple tokens to capture the value created
in different decentralised communities, and ImaniMehr and
DehghanTakhtFooladi [30] use multiple tokens for optimal
sharing of bandwidth. Finally, despite touching on sensitive
applications domains such as health or credit data, only
one of the works discusses the ethical implications of their
contributions and ﬁndings (Column Ethics; ID 1 in Table II).
This paper (ID 12 in Table I) addresses these limitations by
evaluating the impact of two cryptoeconomic incentives on hu-
man information-sharing behavior in a controlled experiment
involving 132 participants over four days (Section IV). The
utilized token designs are illustrated (Section III-A3) and the
(ethical) implications (Section V) of this work are discussed.

III. RESEARCH METHODOLOGY

The impact of two token incentives on human information-
sharing behavior is investigated with an experimental method-
ology. The conducted experiment is explained below (Section
III-A), followed by the measured variables (Section III-B),
tested hypotheses (Section III-C) and the analysis methods
(Section III-D).

A. Experiment

The experiment has been conducted by modifying the
mixed-mode ”living lab” [37] experimental methodology such
that the randomized control trial is augmented with a 2x2
factorial pre-test/ post-test design that utilizes two token in-
centives (Figure 8).

The experiment consists of three phases (Figure 8): The
entry and exit phase is facilitated by the ETH Decision
Science Laboratory2 (DeSciL) of ETH Zurich, using their

2ETH Decision Science Laboratory provides infrastructures and services
for researchers to perform human subject trials in the intersecting areas of
Decision and Behavioral Sciences: https://www.descil.ethz.ch/ (last accessed:
2022-03-11)

Fig. 2: Experiment scenario: Participants share information
with a library institution and obtain blockchain-based tokens
in return. Tokens collected by other users can be discovered
in interactions.

Fig. 3: Treatment groups in the 2x2 factorial design experiment
vary according to the received token incentive: N = no token
incentives; C = context token incentive; M = money token
incentive; B = both token incentives.

infrastructure and staff. The core phase is facilitated by the
research team and a blockchain-based Web 3.0 application
(Section III-A4). In the entry phase, participants provide their
consent to the study and are instructed on the application of
the software used in the core phase. Before the core phase, the
participants answer an entry survey consisting of demographic
questions. The core phase of the experiment consists of four
to
days in which participants utilize the software artifact
share information. On the second and third day of the core
phase, in exchange for their shared information participants
obtain token rewards. In the exit phase, participants answer
an exit survey and receive their ﬁnancial compensation. The
conducted experiment was granted an ethical approval by the
Decision Science Laboratory (DeSciL) as well as the Ethics
Commission of ETH Zurich.

In the following, Section III-A1 illustrates the real-world
information-sharing scenario of the core phase, followed by
Section III-A2, where the model of the collected data is intro-
duced. Section III-A3 illustrates the applied incentives and the
treatment groups. Then, Section III-A4 provides the technical
speciﬁcations of the utilized software artifact. Finally, Section
III-A5 provides an overview of the recruitment process and
the compensation paid to the participants.

1) Scenario: The scenario of the experiment has been
illustrated by Ballandies et al. [15]. A summary is given
in the following and depicted in Figure 2: Participants of
the experiment share solicited information via their personal
devices (e.g. laptop or mobile phone) with an organization,
using a Web 3.0 application (Section III-A4). In order to
facilitate a realistic setup of the experiment and to comply with
the anti-deception policy of DeSciL2, the shared information
is received by a real-world library organization that has an
interest in obtaining feedback from customers and unaware-

customers3 of their services. Furthermore, in order to study
user behavior in a realistic setting, participants can choose the
time of feedback provision such that it is best integrated into
their daily routines. As an incentive for sharing information
with the library organization, participants receive units of two
types of blockchain-based tokens (Section III-A3). The amount
of token units collected by other users and a subset of their
shared information can be discovered in interactions.

The model of the shared information is illustrated in Section

III-A2.

2) Data Model: Figure 4 illustrates the ecosystem of the
collected information as an ontology [69]. The library for-
mulated 274 survey questions, which they wanted to ask
customers and unaware-customers of their services. These
questions are of one of the following types: single-choice,
multiple-choice, Likert scale, open text, or a combination
of thereof. In the experiment, participants take the role of
customers and share information with the library in the
form of answers to the given questions. Participants have
the option to enrich their answer to a question with three
types of contextualizations (Figure 6). They can state from
their perspective how important the question is for the library
to improve their services (Likert scale), how satisﬁed they
are with the answer options to the question (Likert scale),
and provide a comment (open text ﬁeld). As an incentive to
share information, participants obtain units of two types of
cryptoeconomic incentives: Money token and Context token,
which are illustrated in greater detail in Section III-A3.

3) Incentives and treatment groups: Two types of cryptoe-
conomic incentives are utilized in this paper: The money token
is a stable coin [70] that resembles the Swiss ﬁat currency. It

3Unaware-customers are deﬁned by the library as customers who are
not aware that they are customers of the library. For instance, researchers
accessing closed-access journals via their university credentials for which the
library pays

Fig. 4: Data model of the experiment that visualizes the stakeholders (library organization and its customers), collected
information, survey questions, and token incentives.

Fig. 5: Statistics view of the utilized software artifact. It depicts the amount of context token and money token units collected
by a user (above). Moreover, the software artifact shows the leaderboard that compares users based on the collected context
token units (below).

is a capped, pre-mined, transferable, and non-burnable ERC-
20 token whose units are pegged to the Swiss franc at an
exchange rate of 1:0.2 CHF. Users obtain a unit of this token
whenever they provide an answer to a survey question (Figure
4).

The context token is a utility token [66] and models reputa-
tion in the system: It is a ERC-20 token that is uncapped,
transferable, burnable, and not pre-mined. A token unit is
created whenever a contextualization (Figure 4) is performed
in the system and is awarded to the user who provided that

information. The amount of context token units collected is
visible to others on a leaderboard during the experiment (Fig-
ure 5) and thus constructs users’ reputation, which functions
as a source of value to this token. In particular, reputation is
a widely adopted incentive mechanism that has been utilized
to improve the quality of shared data [21]. Additionally, the
context token can be utilized to access a privileged service in
the form of voting actions [15], which further provides value
to the token [21].

Figure 3 illustrates the 2x2 factorial design of the study,
whereby the two token types awarded to experiment partici-
pants are varied: Group N is the control group that receives no
token incentives; Group C obtains the context token; Group
M obtains the money token; Group B obtains both, the money
and the context token.

4) Technical infrastructure: This research applies the cus-
tomer feedback system developed by Ballandies et al. [15] to
enable users to share information with a library organization
and to receive two cryptoeconomic incentives (Section III-A3)
in exchange. The software artifact is a Web 3.0 app that
utilizes the Finance 4.0 infrastructure [64] and the Ethereum4
(ETH) blockchain. It enables the collection of solicited and
unsolicited feedback from users of an organization. Figure
6 illustrates how users can provide solicited feedback by
answering questions posed by an organization. This feedback
can be contextualized by i) stating the importance of the
question to improve the organization’s service (bottom left in
Figure 6), or ii) stating the satisfaction with the answer options
to the question (bottom center in Figure 6), or iii) providing
further feedback via a comment ﬁeld (bottom right in Figure
6). Figure 7 depicts how users can contextualize an answer
with their satisfaction regarding the answer options. Figure 5
shows how reputation is facilitated in the system by comparing
users based on the amount of collected context token units.
Moreover, this view gives users an overview of their collected
money and context token units.

5) Recruitment, compensation, and ethical approval: The
participants were recruited by the ETH Decision Science
Laboratory2 (DeSciL), who, following their protocols and
ethical standards, were guaranteed fair compensation, and
information regarding participants’ identity was separated
from the experiment data, thereby enabling anonymity for the
participants. 150 participants were recruited, 132 of which
completed the exit phase (88 % completion rate), which is
a reasonable number that balances resources (compensation/
infrastructure), rigor, and control of the experimental pro-
cess [37]. In particular, the mixed-mode experimental process
preserves the realism of the scenario by involving a real-
world organization that obtains the shared information, while
facilitating controlled experimental conditions that result in a
novel high-quality dataset to allow (causal) inferences about
human behavior under cryptoeconomic incentivization.

Participants were recruited from the full UAST5 pool (no

4https://ethereum.org/en/ (last accessed: 2022-03-21)
5https://www.uast.uzh.ch/ (last accessed: 2021-12-01)

criterion was applied), which mainly consists of students and
researchers of ETH Zurich and the University of Zurich, and
thus is subject to sampling biases when making inferences
about the behavior of the general population. Nevertheless, as
these are exactly the customers and unaware-customers of the
real-world library organization around which the use case of
information collection in this experiment was constructed, the
participants’ proﬁles match well to the experimental scenario.
Consequently,
the ﬁndings may be transferable to similar
scenarios, where customers share information with an orga-
nization. Four recruitment sessions were performed within the
period from May 17, 2021 to June 11, 2021.

The DeSciL requires the fair minimum and avarage com-
pensation of experiment participants. This is satisﬁed by com-
pensating each participant i of a treatment group (N, C, M, B
in Figure 3) Swiss francs via one of the following payout
formulas p:

p(Mi) = min(cid:0)60 CHF, MT(Mi) × 0.2 CHF(cid:1)
p(Bi) = min(cid:0)60 CHF, MT(Bi) × 0.2 CHF(cid:1)
p(Ni) = max(cid:0)20 CHF,

(cid:1)

(1)

T − P
N (C) + N (B)
T − P
N (C) + N (B)

(cid:1)

p(Ci) = max(cid:0)20 CHF,

where,

MT(i) : amount of collected money token units of participant i,

T = N × 40 CHF; total available payout

P =

N (M )
(cid:88)

i

p(Mi) +

N (B)
(cid:88)

i

p(Bi); total received payout

by groups M and B

N : number of participants

N (j) : number of participants in treatment group j

(2)
This results in a minimum compensation of 20 CHF and
an average compensation of 40 CHF (0.5 CHF/min) for the
participants. The payout for participants of treatment groups
that received the money token (groups M and B in Figure
3) depends on the amount of money token units collected.
This amount is multiplied by 0.20 CHF and then awarded
to the participants. The total payout is capped at 60 CHF per
participant resulting in a maximum of 150 questions for which
a user can be rewarded per day. The payout for participants
of the other treatment groups (groups N and C in Figure 3)
depend on the payout of the treatment groups that receive
the money token (groups M and B in Figure 3), such that
the average compensation over all experiment participants is
40 CHF.

B. Variables and measures

Figure 8 illustrates the measured variables of this paper in
the three phases of the experiment. The participants answered
demographic questions in the entry phase and another survey
in the exit phase. Two extrinsic incentives, the money token,

Fig. 6: Answer view of the utilized software artifact: Users
can answer questions posed by the library and contextualize it
with three contextualization options (importance, satisfaction,
and comment).

Fig. 7: View of the satisfaction contextualization (Figure 6).
Users can specify how satisﬁed they are with the answer
options provided for a question.

Fig. 8: Measured variables in the three phases of the experiment and the applied analysis methods.

and the context token (Section III-A3) are manipulated as

independent variables on the second and third day of the

core phase. Several dependent variables are measured each
day: The quantity of shared information is measured by
the number of replies to survey questions. Moreover, two
quality characteristics are measured: i) Contextualization is
the number of contextualization actions performed by partici-
pants in response survey questions (via the bottom buttons in
Figure 6 as shown in Section III-A4). This is the amount of
”metadata” that a user provides with an answer that contributes
to the usability of information and is considered a quality
dimension of information [11]. Further, ii) accuracy is a quality
element of information that contributes to the reliability of
information [11]. Applying the methodology of estimating
choice variability [71, 72], accuracy is operationalized in this
paper as follows: With equal probability, survey questions are
displayed more than once to participants. The average accuracy
with which a participant answers a speciﬁc question is then
calculated by taking the Jaccard similarity [73] between the
answers provided to that question. The ﬁnal accuracy for a
user is then obtained by taking the average similarity over all
questions and days.

C. Hypotheses

The hypotheses of this paper test ﬁve assumptions regarding
the utilized token incentives (Section III-A3) and treatment
group assembly. They are formulated by connecting these
assumptions to the introduced conceptual impact model (Fig-
ure 1). In the following, the ﬁve assumptions are ﬁrst illus-
trated (Section III-C1) before the hypotheses are introduced
(Section III-C2).

1) Assumptions:
Assumption 1: The money token (stable coin) is perceived
as a monetary incentive and thus has a similar impact on the
human information-sharing behavior as money.
The money token utilized in the experiment is a stable coin that
has a ﬁxed exchange rate with the Swiss franc (Section III-A3)
and thus resembles ﬁat money. The impact of ﬁat money
on human behavior has been studied in information-sharing
scenarios of related work (Section II). Due to this resemblance,
it is hypothesized that the money token has a similar impact
on human motivation and information-sharing behavior as
monetary incentives. In particular, the money token impacts
the extrinsic motivation positively and the intrinsic motivation
negatively such that the quantity of shared information is in-
creased and the quality is decreased, as illustrated in Figure 1.
Assumption 2: The context token impacts intrinsic motiva-

tion positively.
The context token is a utility token that has reputation as its
source of value (Section III-A3) and it is thus hypothesized
that it is perceived as a competence-enhancing incentive [46]
that increases the intrinsic motivation of individuals.

Assumption 3: The context token impacts extrinsic motiva-

tion positively.
token shares some characteristics with
Since the context
money (it is transferable and collectible), it is hypothesized
that it has a positive impact on extrinsic motivation, albeit to
a lower extend when compared to the money token.

Assumption 4: No interaction exists between the money and

the context token.
It is assumed that no interaction between the money and
context token exists when they are applied simultaneously.

Assumption 5: No bias exists in the assembly of the treat-

ment groups.
It is assumed that each treatment group consists of a similar
participant structure.

These assumptions are the basis for the hypotheses that are

formulated in the following.

2) Hyptoheses formulation: In order to formulate the hy-
potheses, the assumptions (Section III-C1) are linked to the
conceptual impact model (Figure 1):

Under the assumption of no biases in the assembly of
the treatment groups (Assumption 5), it is hypothesized on
Day 1 of the experiment that no difference in behavior among
the treatment groups measured in quantity of answers or
contextualizations are observed, because no token incentives
are applied on that day:
Hypothesis 1: Day 1:

quantity(M) = quantity(C) = quantity(N) = quantity(B)

Hypothesis 2: Day 1:

context(C) = context(N) = context(M) = context(B)

Due to the impact on extrinsic motivation (Assumptions 1
and 3), it is hypothesized from the arguments above that the
M group (money token incentives) shares a greater quantity
of information during incentivization days when compared to
to the C group (context token incentive), which in turn shares
more information than the N group (control group). More-
over, under the assumption of no interactions (Assumption 4)
and because both tokens contribute to extrinsic motivation
(Assumptions 1 and 3), it is hypothesized that the B group
(both token incentives) shares more information than the M
group. Thus for Days 2 and 3, when incentives are applied,
the following hypothesis is posed:
Hypothesis 3: Days 2 & 3:

quantity(B) > quantity(M) > quantity(C) > quantity(N)

Also, it is hypothesized that because of the competence-
enhancing effect of the context token that would increase the
intrinsic motivation of individuals (Assumption 2), the C group
shares information with greater quality characteristics such as
contextualization or accuracy when compared to the N group.
Moreover, because of the negative impact of the money token
on intrinsic motivation (Assumptions 1), the M groups quality
characteristics are hypothesized to be worse than those of
the N group. Finally, because i) the context token offsets the
negative impact of the money token on intrinsic motivation
(Assumptions 1 and 2), and ii) there is no interaction effect
between the tokens (Assumption 4), it is hypothesized that the
B group shares information with equal quality when compared
to the N group, but less than the C group. Thus for Day 2 and
3, when incentives are applied, the following hypotheses are
stated:

Hypothesis 4: Days 2 & 3:

context(C) > context(B) = context(N) > context(M)

Since no incentives are applied on the fourth day of the
experiment, only the intrinsic motivation of individuals affects
the characteristics of shared information on that day (Figure 1).
Thus, because it is assumed that the money token decreased
(Assumption 1) while the context token incentive increased
(Assumption 2) the intrinsic motivation, it is hypothesized that
for the quality characteristics the C group outperforms the N
group, which in turn outperforms the M group. Moreover, the
N group and B group share an equal number of contextual-
izations:

Hypothesis 5: Day 4:

context(C) > context(N) = context(B) > context(M)

In contrast, because intrinsic motivation only plays a minor
role for the quantity of shared information (Figure 1), it is
hypothesized that the number of answers given on Day 4 does
not differ signiﬁcantly between the groups:

Hypothesis 6: Day 4:

quantity(M) = quantity(C) = quantity(N) = quantity(B)

The accuracy is measured over all four days. Consequently,
a hypothesis about the daily differences among the groups
cannot be drawn. Accuracy is a quality characteristic (Section
III-B). Quality has been found to be positively impacted by
intrinsic motivation (Section II). Thus, it is hypothesized that
the averaged accuracy score of the C group is higher than
that of N group, which in turn has a higher score than the
M group. Moreover, because the context token offsets the
negative impact of the money token on intrinsic motivation,
the N and B groups have a similar accuracy:

Hypothesis 7: All days:

accuracy(C) > accuracy (N) = accuracy(B) > accuracy (M)

D. Analysis methods

IV. RESULTS

A. Demographics/ Proﬁles of the participants

150 candidates were invited to participate in the study, 132
of which completed all three phases (entry, core, and exit phase
in Figure 8). The average age of the participants was 23.2
years. 62 were male, 68 were female and 2 did not specify
their gender. 36 users had used blockchain/crypto apps before
the experiment (50% 1-6 month, 16.6% 6-12 month, 16.6%
1-2 years, 16.6 % > 2 years). 65 participants were bachelor
students, 56 were master students, and 11 were ”other”. 54.5 %
of the participants stated that they were active users of the
services of the library that functioned as a use case for the
living lab experiment methodology.

B. Treatment groups biases, experiment validation, and de-
pendent variable distribution

Table II depicts the results of the chi-squared (χ2) test
for the demographic questions and the treatment/wave per
treatment group/recruitment wave. Neither in the treatment
group construction nor in the recruitment waves are biases
identiﬁed.

On average, the participants found the rewards fair (2.6/4)6
and the onboarding materials useful (2.8/4). In particular, it has
been identiﬁed in earlier work that learning how to utilize the
web application is perceived as easy by the participants [15].
Thus,
the chosen compensation fulﬁlled the requirements
of DeSciL2 and the chosen technology in the form of a
blockchain-based Web application did not restrict users in
participating in information sharing.

Table III

illustrates the distributions of

the dependent
variables utilized in the analysis. In the majority of cases,
these variables are non-normally distributed, thus requiring the
Kruskal-Wallis test that does not assume normally distributed
variables to analyze the distribution [79].

Figure 8 illustrates the methods that are applied to evaluate
the hypotheses. The demographic information from the entry
survey in the entry phase is utilized to illustrate the proﬁles
of participants. Moreover, this information is applied in chi-
squared (χ2) tests [74] to validate that no treatment group
biases are present. In particular, the test is employed to test the
null hypothesis that no relationship exists on the demographic
variables among the treatment groups. Survey responses from
the exit survey are used to validate the experimental setup
such as the rewards obtained by the participants. Histograms,
qqplots, the Shapiro-Wilk test [75, 76] and the D’Agostiono &
Pearson test [77, 78] are used to investigate the distribution of
the dependent variables. In order to analyze treatment group
differences, the Kruskal-Wallis one-way analysis of variance
by ranks for independent samples (H-test) is utilized [79] and,
for a post-hoc pairwise comparisons test of mean rank sums,
the Conover-Iman [80] and the Dunn [81] methods are applied.
Furthermore, CDF plots are utilized to investigate differences
in group behavior. The treatment effect of the applied in-
centives and the interaction effect among the incentives are
analyzed via interaction plots.

C. Group differences and interaction effects

Table V depicts the results of the Kruskal-Wallis test applied
to the distributions of the dependent variables for each day/
over all days of the four treatment groups. Moreover, Table
VI and VII illustrate the post-hoc analysis that applies the
Conover-Iman test for those days which exhibit signiﬁcant
differences in the Kruskal-Wallis analysis. Moreover, Figure
9 depicts the cumulative distribution for each treatment group
and Figure 10 shows the interactions among the treatments for
the analyzed dependent variables.

In the following, the observations for each dependent vari-

able are illustrated in detail.

1) Quantity: The treatment group behaviors for the quantity
variable are signiﬁcantly different for Day 2 and Day 3
(Table V). Considering the post-hoc analysis (Table VI), it is
possible to determine that for both days, all treatment group
pairs are signiﬁcantly different, except for the B-M (both
token incentives-money token incentive) pair. The CDF plot
illustrates this observation (Figure 9): The M and B groups

6Evaluated on a 5-point likert scale

ID Question

Treat. Group
p val.
T. stat.

Rec. Wave

T. stat.

p val.

n

1 What is your gender?
How old are you?
2
How long do you use a mobile smart phone?
3
How long do you use blockchain/ crypto apps?
4
5 Which of the following groups do you belong to?
6 What is your role or function at [..] your institution [..]?
7 What ﬁeld/subject do you mainly work/study in?
8
9
10

Do you use the res. and services provided by [..] library?
Recruitment Wave
Treatment Group

1.5
49.5
8.9
7.2
32.3
18.1
26.1
6
2.1
396

0.69
0.42
0.45
0.84
0.22
0.26
0.35
0.11
0.99
0

2
54.7
5.5
27.6
22.1
7.8
25.6
0
396
2.1

0.57
0.23
0.79
0.01
0.73
0.93
0.37
1
0
0.99

3
48
9
12
27
15
24
3
9
9

TABLE II: Results of the chi-squared (χ2) test for the eight demographic questions and the treatment/ wave grouping per
treatment group/ recruitment wave illustrating that no bias is identiﬁed in the construction of the groups or the recruitment
waves.

Day Treatment

1

2

3

4

All

No
Context
Money
Both
No
Context
Money
Both
No
Context
Money
Both
No
Context
Money
Both
No
Context
Money
Both

p-value
Cont.

0
0.002
0
0
0.222*
0.001
0
0
0.05*
0.04
0
0
0
0.01
0
0
0.231*
0.002
0
0.007

Answ.

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.762*
0.251*
0.001
0
0.003
0.16*
0
0
0.001
0.217*
0.528*
0

Accu.

-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0
0
0.005
0.026

TABLE III: p-values obtained from the normality test of
dependent variables per day/ over all days and treatment group.
p-values ≥ 0.05 indicate normal distributions (marked with an
asterisk).

have a similar higher probability to provide more answers
when compared to the C (context token incentive) and N
(control group) groups (in this order). Moreover, M and B
distributions show two peaks, one around 60 answers and one
around 150 answers, the latter being the maximum number
of answers for which a payment is received on a given day

(Section III-A3). These peaks are more clear visible on Day
3 and are stronger for the B group when compared to the
M group. Moreover, the CDF plot for Day 3 (Figure 9c)
indicates a tendency for money token receivers to answer a
higher number of questions.

The plots in Figure 10 illustrate the median interaction
effects. Similarily to the Kruskal-Wallis test, on Day 1 and
Day 4 no effect of the incentives are identiﬁed (Figure 10a
and 10d). On days 2 and 3 (Figure 10b and 10c), both
incentives result in an increase of questions answered when
compared to the control group, whereby the money token leads
to a considerably stronger increase than the context token.
Moreover, at Day 3 an interaction is observed: When compared
to the money group, the context token dampens the effect of
the money token in the B group resulting in fewer questions
answered.

2) Contextualization: In contrast to quantity, the treatment
group behaviors are signiﬁcantly different for all four days
(Table VI). The interaction plot on Day 1 (Figure 10e)
illustrates how the context token treatment resulted in a higher
number of contextualizations. The CDF plot on Day 1 (Figure
9e) depicts a similar distribution of the treatment groups
with a higher tendency of the context group to provide more
contextualizations. On Day 2, all groups except the M-N pair
are signiﬁcantly different (Table VI). Nevertheless, on Day 3
no differences between the B-N and B-M pairs are observed
any longer. An opposing trend is observed in the M-N and
B-C pairs where the p-values become smaller over the two
days (Table VI).

The CDF plots for Day 2 and 3 (Figure 9f and 9g) illustrate
these trends: On Day 2, the B group distribution is close to the
C distribution. Nevertheless, on Day 3 it more closely resem-
bles the M group distribution, where most individuals provide
few contextualizations and few individuals many. Moreover,
the difference between the M and N groups becomes stronger
for individuals that provide few contextualizations.

(a) Day 1

(b) Day 2

(c) Day 3

(d) Day 4

(e) Day 1

(f) Day 2

(g) Day 3

(h) Day 4

Fig. 9: Cumulative density plots for the treatments of the dependent variables over the four days/all days. The plot illustrates
the cumulative percentage of users who reach an equal or lower value of the variable.

(i) All Days

The interaction plots for Day 2 and day 3 (Figure 10f
and 10g) illustrate an interaction effect between the money
and context token resulting in fewer contextualizations when
compared to the context token alone. In contrast to the money
token, no trend in the interaction is observed over the four
days.

After removing the incentives on Day 4, the pairs B-C and
C-M and M-N show a signiﬁcantly different behavior (Table
VI). This is in contrast to the observation for the quantity
variable, where no distinct behavior on Day 4 is identiﬁed.
No signiﬁcant difference between treatments with the context
token and the control group is identiﬁed. The CDF plot for
Day 4 (Figure 9h) illustrates the similarity between the B-
M groups, and respectively between the C-N groups and the

difference between each of these pairs. The interaction plot
(Figure 10h) illustrates how the C group provides the most
contextualizations on Day 4, followed by the control group
and then the other two groups.

3) Accuracy: A signiﬁcant difference among the group
behaviors for the accuracy is identiﬁed over all four days
(Table V). Table VII indicates that this difference originates
from the pairs B-N and M-N. Nevertheless, the p-values of
the pairs B-C and M-C are also almost signiﬁcant (p-value
= 0.052). These differences are illustrated in the CDF-plot
(Figure 9i) which depicts higher probabilities for the C and
N group to reach higher accuracy values when compared to
the other two groups. Figure 10i shows that the control group
reaches the highest accuracy in their answers, followed by the

 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 0 50 100 150 200 250ProbabilityAnswersNoContextBothMoney 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 0 50 100 150 200 250ProbabilityAnswersNoContextBothMoney 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 0 50 100 150 200 250ProbabilityAnswersNoContextBothMoney 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 0 50 100 150 200 250ProbabilityAnswersNoContextBothMoney 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 0 50 100 150 200ProbabilityContextualizationsNoContextBothMoney 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 0 50 100 150 200ProbabilityContextualizationsNoContextBothMoney 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 0 50 100 150 200ProbabilityContextualizationsNoContextBothMoney 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 0 50 100 150 200ProbabilityContextualizationsNoContextBothMoney 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1ProbabilityAccuracyNoContextBothMoney(a) Day 1

(b) Day 2

(c) Day 3

(d) Day 4

(e) Day 1

(f) Day 2

(g) Day 3

(h) Day 4

(i) All Days

Fig. 10: Interaction plots among the treatments for the dependent variables over the four days/ all days. The minus indicates
that the token has not been applied, whereas the plus indicates an utilization of tokens. Thus, the dashed line connects the
treatment groups that utilized the context token (left: treatment with context token; right: treatment with both tokens). The
solid line connects the treatment groups that did not utilize the context token (left: treatment with no tokens (control group);
right: treatment with money token).

context, both and money groups.

V. DISCUSSION

A. Results

Table IV illustrates the ﬁndings from the Kruskal-Wallis
and post-hoc analysis with regard to the hypotheses (Sec-
tion III-C2). The results inform an adjustment to the assump-
tions (Section III-C1) that were utilized in the formulation of
these hypotheses:

I) It was assumed that the context token has a positive im-
pact on both the intrinsic and extrinsic motivation (Assumption

2 and 3 in Section III-C). Yet, the ﬁndings provide evidence
that this token has overall only a small positive or negligible
impact on intrinsic motivation. This would explain the parity
of the C group and N group for the context characteristic
on Day 4 (ID 8/Column b in Table IV): No incentives are
applied on that day, thus the extrinsic motivation is equally
zero for both groups and only the intrinsic motivation deﬁnes
the contextualization behavior. However, the median number
of contextualizations on Day 4 (Figure 10h) is higher for
the C group when compared to the N group indicating a
is also illustrated by the CDF
small positive impact

that

 0 20 40 60 80 100-+Median QuantityMoney TokenContext Token - Context Token + 0 20 40 60 80 100-+Median QuantityMoney TokenContext Token - Context Token + 0 20 40 60 80 100-+Median QuantityMoney TokenContext Token - Context Token + 0 20 40 60 80 100-+Median QuantityMoney TokenContext Token - Context Token + 0 10 20 30 40 50 60-+Median ContextualizationsMoney TokenContext Token - Context Token + 0 10 20 30 40 50 60-+Median ContextualizationsMoney TokenContext Token - Context Token + 0 10 20 30 40 50 60-+Median ContextualizationsMoney TokenContext Token - Context Token + 0 10 20 30 40 50 60-+Median ContextualizationsMoney TokenContext Token - Context Token + 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1-+Average AccuracyMoney TokenContext Token - Context Token +ID Character. Hyp. Day

Finding

a

b

c

d

e

f

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

Quantity
Quantity
Quantity
Quantity
Context
Context
Context
Context
Accuracy

H1
H3
H3
H6
H2
H4
H4
H5
H7

B = N
C = N M = N
1 M = C
B > N
C > N M > N
2 M > C
B > N
C > N M > N
3 M > C
B = N
C = N M = N
4 M = C
B = N
C = N M = N
1 M < C
2 M < C C > N ii M = N ii
B > N ii
3 M < C C > N ii M = N ii B = M i,iii B < C B = N i,iii
4 M < C C = N i M < N
all M = C C = N i M < N

B = M
B = C
B = M iii B > C
B = M iii B > C
B = C
B = M
B = C
B = M
B < C
B > M

B = M i
B = M i

B = N
B < N i

B < C
B = C

TABLE IV: Findings from the Kruskal-Wallis and Conover-Iman posthoc analysis. Light green are those entries marked that
accept the hypotheses stated in Section III-C. The following deviations can be explained by adjusting the assumptions of the
hypotheses: i - Context token has a negligible effect on intrinsic motivation; ii - Extrinsic motivation has a considerable impact
on contextualization; iii - Interaction effects between the tokens are present.

plot (Figure 9h). The neglible impact is also illustrated in
the parity between the B and M group on Day 4 (ID 8/
Column d in Table IV). The money token reduced the intrinsic
motivation in both groups and because the context token did
not offset this negative impact, it is the same for both groups
on Day 4. Moreover, the parity of these pairs for the accuracy
characteristic (ID 9/Column b and d in Table IV) can be
explained thus: Since accuracy is mainly impacted by intrinsic
motivation, which following the previous considerations is
equally pronounced between the M and B groups, the group
behaviors are equal. It also explains the inequality between
the B and N group (ID 9/ Column f in Table IV): Since
the intrinsic motivation is reduced in the B group due to the
money token, and the context token does not have a signiﬁcant
positive impact on intrinsic motivation, the intrinsic motivation
in the B group is lower than in the N group and thus the shared
information is of lesser accuracy.

it

II) Extrinsic motivation has a considerable impact on the
context characteristic.
i) This explains the parity between
the M and N group for Days 2 and 3 (ID 6,7/Column c
in Table IV). Although the intrinsic motivation is reduced
due to the money token,
is replaced by the extrinsic
motivation stemming from this incentive resulting in a similar
contextualization-sharing behavior. Consequently at Day 4,
when the incentive is removed, the M group shares fewer
contextualizations (ID 8/Column c in Table IV). ii) It also
explains the inequality between the B and N group on Day 2
(ID 6/Column f in Table IV). In contrast to the comparison
between the M and N group, the context token in the B
group adds to the extrinsic motivation such that the decrease
in intrinsic motivation is exceeded resulting in a greater
motivation to share contextualizations when compared to the
N group. iii) Moreover, following the same arguments, it also
explains the inequality between the B and M group on Day 2
(ID 6/Column d in Table IV). iv) Finally, it also explains the
inequality between the C and N group on Days 2 and 3 (ID

6,7/Column b in Table IV).

III) In contrast to Assumption 4, interactions between the
money and context token incentive are observed. i) For Day 2,
the B group shares more contextualizations than the monetary
group (ID 6 Column d in Table IV). Nevertheless, on Day
3 no difference is observed (ID 7 Column d in Table IV),
which indicates that over time the two tokens interact with
each other,
thereby decreasing their impact on the users’
motivation. ii) This might also explain the parity between
these groups for the quantity of information shared on Day
2 and 3 (ID 2,3/ Column d in Table IV): Both tokens interfere
such that their combined impact on users’ motivation does
not differ from a single token incentive. Furthermore, the
interaction plot (Figure 10) even indicates a lower positive
impact of the combined incentives when compared to the
single money token incentive. In addition, the plot indicates
this interaction becomes stronger over the four days,
that
which is also illustrated by the CDF plot. iii) This interaction
also explains the shift from inequality to equality for the B
and N group on Days 2 and 3 (ID 6,7 Column f in Table IV).
The ﬁndings further provide evidence that the money token
crowds out intrinsic motivation. The interaction plots and CDF
plots for the accuracy indicate a crowding-out of intrinsic
motivation by the context token. Nevertheless, according to
the Kruskal-Wallis test and its post-hoc analysis, these latter
differences are not signiﬁcant. In particular, for the number
of contextualizations the context token even has a positive
impact after incentivization ends, which might be explained
by an internalization of the incentive (Section II-A) for this
information dimension. Finally, a time effect is present in both,
single- and multiple-token scenarios, which indicates that the
behavioral change can vary over time.

B. Implications

1) One-dimensional token systems: The internalization ef-
fect of the context
token on contextualization actions af-
ter incentivization ends illustrates a potential advantage of

blockchain-based cryptoeconomic incentives when compared
to traditional approaches utilizing monetary incentives. The
intrinsic motivation of users might be impacted positively by
internalizing these incentives (Section II-A), thus resulting
in an improvement of performance measured in the amount
of contextualizations provided, even after the incentivization
period ends. However, the ﬁndings also indicate that this utility
token induces a worse performance in the accuracy of shared
data when compared to the control group (Figure 9i and 10i).
Therefore, the identiﬁed internalization might be limited to
information dimensions that are directly incentivized by a
utility token.

Moreover, the ﬁndings indicate that stable coins such as the
utilized money token crowd out intrinsic motivation, which
resulted in this work in a reduction of information quality
measured in accuracy and contextualization.

In order to design effective incentives, future work should
evaluate the token designs and scenarios under which in-
ternalization or crowding-out are observed. In particular, as
internalization or crowding-out can vary between different
performance measures (e.g. contextualization and accuracy),
one is advised to carefully evaluate all impacts a token might
have before using it in real-world applications.

2) Multi-dimensional token systems: The ﬁndings provide
evidence that applying multiple token-based incentives simul-
taneously can result in a combined improvement of several
information characteristics (e.g., as shown for quantity and
contextualization) and could therefore improve system perfor-
mance when compared to a scenario where a single token is
utilized. Nevertheless, the identiﬁed interaction effect between
the two tokens of this paper indicates that designing multi-
token systems is a non-trivial task that has implications for sys-
tems in which the application of multiple tokens is considered.
In particular, positive and negative impacts of tokens on human
behavior may not simply add up. The ﬁndings also show that
these effects may only become apparent over time. Thus, it is
necessary to carefully analyze the interdependencies between
combinations of tokens in longitudinal studies before they
are utilized in real-world systems. The results of simulations
and formal analyses of multi-dimensional token systems are
limited if they do not consider these token interactions.

3) (Ethical) risks: Considering the observation, that the
current big data paradigm is not challenged by a lack of
data [13], but contextualized and accurate information, the
ﬁndings of this paper raise the question if incentives in the
form of blockchain-based tokens should be applied at all
to motivate individuals of communities to share information.
Such incentives may result in a further increase in quantity
of collected information while reducing its quality (e.g. accu-
racy).

However, incentives might work differently in data-sharing
scenarios where the quality of shared data under different
incentivizations is determined by decisions users take a priori,
which are then posteriori executed by an artiﬁcial intelligence,
as studied by Pournaras et al. [82], Asikis and Pournaras
[83] with a computational methodology for privacy-utility

decisions. Yet, neither the user acceptance of these decisions
nor the impact they have on the trust of users for decision-
support systems have been studied. Therefore, unknown effects
could be present in these scenarios that bias users’ behavior
and which limit the generalizability of ﬁndings from such sim-
ulations to real-world situations. Furthermore, because users
have to perform decisions a priori in these scenarios, such
approaches might fail to capture the unique situational domain
knowledge users possess or their creativity and intuition which
is required for some application domains such as the customer
feedback provision analyzed in this paper.

Increasingly, token incentives are applied in various applica-
tion domains of society such as construction [31], health [27],
Covid-19 prevention measures [60], electricity production and
consumption [32], car sharing [84, 85], alleviating trafﬁc
congestion [86], book-keeping [38], decentralized access-
control systems [40], or waste reduction [34]. Nevertheless,
behavioral traits stemming from intrinsic motivation, such as
creativity, joy, self-determination, purpose, and endurance may
be important for some of those application domains which
could be crowded out by these cryptoeconomic incentives
and thus would result in reduced performance. For instance,
endurance [87] and creativity [88] have been identiﬁed as
important factors for addressing climate change.

Moreover, this increasing tokenization of areas of life that
have not been tokenized before could reduce social relations
and human interactions to transactions within a market-driven
economy [1]. This might be in opposition to values that
stakeholders in these systems hold [1]. In addition, it has been
found that the measurement act itself, which is required in to-
kenization for the quantifying and proving of actions [64], can
reduce intrinsic motivation and thus creativity and endurance
in individuals [89].
In addition,

the identiﬁed effects of this work question
the assumptions of controversial token systems in the form
of social credit systems [90, 91], which are also discussed
in Western democracies as tools for managing society [92]:
Centrally designing and introducing token incentives may fail
due to unkown, crowding-out or interdependent effects that
may cascade over time. Considering the large and complex
design space of DLT systems [66], an iterative, local, and
community-driven approach utilizing the wisdom of crowds
and self-organization for token designs as illustrated in Dapp
et al. [64] might be the way to proceed in designing stable
token systems. In particular, these principles have been found
to enable communities to mitigate the tragedy of the commons
and successfully share and maintain a common resource [93].
Thus, before applying token incentives in an application
scenario, this author suggests rigorously considering the values
of all stakeholders in the system construction process and
analyzing whether applying such incentives could crowd out
intrinsic motivation in the scenario under consideration. Only
then should the system be iteratively constructed in scenarios
that are locally bound. For this,
the methodology of this
paper in combination with value-sensitive design [94, 95] and
iterative design science research [96, 97] methodologies can be

indicate that designing multi-token systems is a non-trivial
task: The impact of individual token incentives on human
behavior are not independent from each other and a token
design might not be sufﬁciently robust, with the impact of
the token possibly differing from the intended effect. These
impacts have to be considered when implementing, simulating
or mathematically analysing token economies as presented
in the Discussion (Section V-B5). In particular, they inform
the assumptions taken in theoretical models, validate their
accuracy, and may thus facilitate their improved connection
with reality. Therefore, the methodology of this paper and
the identiﬁed effects might be of use for organizations and
communities that intend to apply (multiple) token incentives.
The results point to various avenues for future research.
i) Since information quality is a multi-dimensional concept
(Section III-B) and the impact of token incentives can vary
between those dimensions (Section V-B1),
the impact of
the chosen token incentives on other operationalizations of
quality than accuracy or contextualization can be evaluated
to further quantify the impact of these tokens on human
information-sharing behavior. ii) In general, considering the
broad design space of tokens and blockchain systems, the
impact of further instances of cryptoeconomic token incentives
should be evaluated in experiments to identify conditions and
scenarios that are impaired or beneﬁt from the introduction
of cryptoeconomic incentives. iii) Due to the identiﬁed inter-
action effect and the complexity of potential system layouts,
evaluating all these combinations in experimental setups might
not be feasible. Thus, simulations should be employed to
identify areas of interest in the design space, which, in a
second step, are investigated in experiments. Modeling the
determined effects of this work as emergent phenomena of
a complex system could be a promising approach for these
simulations. Finally, machine learning methods such as k-
means or hierarchical clustering could be utilized to identify
hidden patterns in the data that may impact human sharing
behavior under incentivization.

Thus, to conclude, further research by the cryptoeconomics
community is required to identify why, how, and in which
situations cryptoeconomic incentives should be applied.

applied, as demonstrated for token-based blockchain systems
by Ballandies et al. [15, 68].

4) Limitations: The experiment facilitates realism while
enabling the laboratory-like testing of hypotheses [37]. Due to
the realism sought, not all inﬂuences on users’ information-
sharing behavior could be controlled for, which may reduce
the quality of the measurements and ﬁndings. In particular,
the questions asked are formulated by the library organization
which had a real business interest in the answers. Thus, the
questions are not standardized and hence, some of the ques-
tions might be more difﬁcult to answer. This could introduce
bias to quality characteristics such as accuracy and may have
resulted in the lower differentiation between treatment groups
in this characteristic (ID 9 in Table IV). Furthermore, the
accuracy was summarized over the four days. As a result,
there is a lack of a granular daily view on the impact of token
incentives on this characteristic.

5) Impact: The realistic setup of the experiment illustrates
and underlines the importance of the ﬁndings of this paper for
real-world organizations and communities. The identiﬁcation
of signiﬁcant positive and negative effects of both token
incentives on human sharing behavior and their observed
interactions provide evidence that such effects are present in
real-world sharing scenarios and should therefore be analyzed
and evaluated by organizations and communities before they
are applied in their use cases. In particular, a token design
may not be robust, with use of the token having a different
impact than intended [98]. The methodology of this paper can
be applied to analyze such effects in real-world systems.

The identiﬁed effects (interaction, internalization, time, and
crowding-out) inform the Token Engineering and Token Eco-
nomics community in the design of stable cryptoeconomies.
Currently, methodologies in these ﬁelds mainly rely on game
theory, mechanism design, and simulations [39, 99, 100, 101,
102, 103]. Nevertheless, none of these approaches considers
the identiﬁed effects of this work on human behavior in
their assumptions. Consequently, including these effects could
improve the correspondence of ﬁndings from these methodolo-
gies with reality. Thus, this paper demonstrates the importance
of behavioral experiments in the ﬁeld of Token Engineering
and Token Economics.

In addition,

this work illustrates the usability of self-
determination theory to test hypotheses of token designs on
human behavior.

VI. CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK

This work evaluates the combined impact of multiple
cryptoeconomic incentives in the form of blockchain-based
tokens on human information-sharing behavior. By utilizing a
rigorous experimental methodology with a 2x2 factorial design
involving 132 participants, the impact is evaluated in a real-
world information-sharing scenario involving a major Swiss
organization and its customers. The identiﬁed interaction effect
between the tokens and the potential crowding-out of intrinsic
motivation by these cryptoeconomic incentives are important
for researchers and practitioners to consider because they

y
c
a
r
u
c
c
A

e
u

l
a
v
-
p

.
t
x
e
t
n
o
C

y
t
i
t
n
a
u
Q

y
a
D

-

-

-

-

*
1
2
0
.
0

*
9
2
0
.
0

*
*
*
0

*
*
*
0

*
*
*
0

*
*
*
0

7
5
9
.
0

*
*
*
0

*
*
*
0

5
9
7
.
0

*
*
*
0

1

2

3

4

l
l

A

s
e
v
i
t
n
e
c
n
i

o
N

:
4

y
a
D

s
e
v
i
t
n
e
c
n
i

n
e
k
o
T

:
3

y
a
D

s
e
v
i
t
n
e
c
n

i

n
e
k
o
T

:
2

y
a
D

s
e
v
i
t
n
e
c
n
i

o
N

:
1

y
a
D

g
n
i
y
f
i
t
n
e
d
i

s
l
e
v
e
L

.
s
e
l
b
a
i
r
a
v

t
n
e
d
n
e
p
e
d

e
v
ﬁ

e
h
t

r
o
f

s
p
u
o
r
g

t
n
e
m
t
a
e
r
t

t
n
e
r
e
f
f
i
d

e
h
t

g
n
i
r
a
p
m
o
c

n
e
h
w

t
s
e
t

s
i
l
l
a

W

-
l
a
k
s
u
r
K

e
h
t

m
o
r
f

d
e
n
i
a
t
b
o

s
e
u
l
a
v
-
p

:

V

E
L
B
A
T

.
*

5
.
0
≤

,
*
*

1
0
.
0
≤

,
*
*
*

1
0
0
.
0
≤

:
s
n
o
i
t
u
b
i
r
t
s
i
d

s
p
u
o
r
g

t
n
e
m
t
a
e
r
t

e
h
t

g
n
o
m
a

s
e
c
n
e
r
e
f
f
i
d

t
n
a
c
ﬁ
i
n
g
i
s

N

-

-

-

-

M

-

-

-

-

C

-

-

-

-

9
8
2
0

.

7
2
2
0

.

1
4
0
0

.

9
8
2

.

0

7
0
0
0

.

0

1

1

0

1

1
4
0

.

0

7
2
2

.

0

B

-

-

-

-

1

7
0
0
0

.

9
8
2
0

.

9
8
2
0

.

N

0

5
0
0
0

.

0

1

8
4

.

0

1
0
0
0

.

1

0

0

5
9
3
0

.

0

1

3
9
3

.

0

8
9
0
0

.

1

5
9
3
0

.

5
0
0
.
0

1

1
0
0
.
0

5
0
0
.
0

1
0
0
.
0

1

0

0

M

C

B

1

5
0
0
.
0

8
4
.
0

0

1

1
0
0
.
0

8
9
0
.
0

3
9
3
.
0

N

0

1
0
0
.
0

0

1

2
0
.
0

0

6
2
9
.
0

M

3
8
6
.
0

0

1

0

2
0
.
0

0

1

1

6
2
9
.
0

C

0

1

0

1
0
0
.
0

9
4
0
.
0

1

0

0

B

1

0

3
8
6
.
0

0

1

9
4
0
.
0

2
0
.
0

2
0
.
0

N

-

-

-

-

M

-

-

-

-

C

-

-

-

-

4
4
6
.
0

2
1
7
.
0

1
8
1
.
0

2
1
7
.
0

5
3
0
.
0

1

1

1
8
1
.
0

4
0
2

.

0

1

5
3
0
0

.

2
1
7
0

.

B

-

-

-

-

1

4
0
2
0

.

2
1
7
0

.

4
4
6
0

.

.
t
a
e
r
T

B

C

M

N

B

C

M

N

y
t
i
t
n
a
u
Q

.
t
x
e
t
n
o
C

n
o
i
t
a
z
i
l
a
u
t
x
e
t
n
o
c

d
n
a

y
t
i
t
n
a
u
q

e
h
t

r
o
f

)

V
e
l
b
a
T
(

t
s
e
t

s
i
l
l
a

W

-
l
a
k
s
u
r
K
e
h
t

f
o

s
e
u
l
a
v

t
n
a
c
ﬁ

i
n
g
i
s

e
h
t

r
o
f

s
i
s
y
l
a
n
a

c
o
h
-
t
s
o
p

n
a
m

I
-
r
e
v
o
n
o
C

f
o

s
e
u
l
a
v
-
p

y
l
i
a
D

:
I

V
E
L
B
A
T

.
s
e
l
b
a
i
r
a
v

N

M

C

y
c
a
c
r
u
c
c
A

4
0
0

.

0

3
0
6

.

0

4
0
0

.

0

7
5
9
.
0

2
5
0
.
0

1

1

4
0
0
.
0

2
5
0
.
0

1

2
5
0
.
0

3
0
6
.
0

B

1

2
5
0
.
0

7
5
9
.
0

4
0
0
.
0

.
t
a
e
r
T

B

C

M

N

s
y
a
d

l
l
a

r
e
v
O

.
s
y
a
d

l
l
a

r
e
v
o

e
l
b
a
i
r
a
v

y
c
a
r
u
c
c
a

e
h
t

r
o
f

)

V
e
l
b
a
T
(

t
s
e
t

s
i
l
l
a

W

-
l
a
k
s
u
r
K
e
h
t

f
o

s
e
u
l
a
v

t
n
a
c
ﬁ
i
n
g
i
s

e
h
t

r
o
f

s
i
s
y
l
a
n
a

c
o
h
-
t
s
o
p

n
a
m

I
-
r
e
v
o
n
o
C

f
o

s
e
u
l
a
v
-
p

:
I
I

V
E
L
B
A
T

ETHICAL APPROVAL

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

I thank Evangelos Pournaras, Dirk Helbing, Claudio Tes-
sone and Carina I. Hausladen for their valuable comments.
Moreover, I would like to thank Stefan Wehrli and the rest of
the ETH DeSciL staff members for their support in conducting
the experiment. Furthermore, I thank Maximiliane Okonnek
and the ETH library lab team for providing the ﬁnancial
support of the experiment, the access to their infrastructure,
and their valuable feedback. Finally, I thank Lewis J. Dale for
his assistance in the proofreading of this paper.

REFERENCES

[1] Alex Pazaitis, Primavera De Filippi, and Vasilis
Kostakis. Blockchain and value systems in the sharing
economy: The illustrative case of backfeed. Techno-
logical Forecasting and Social Change, 125:105–115,
2017.

[2] Pietro Ferraro, Christopher King, and Robert Shorten.
Distributed ledger technology for smart cities, the shar-
Ieee Access, 6:
ing economy, and social compliance.
62728–62746, 2018.

[3] Harald Heinrichs. Sharing economy: a potential new
pathway to sustainability. Gaia, 22(4):228, 2013.
[4] Farzam Fanitabasi. Self-organizing Multi-agent Systems
for Digitally-assisted, Collaborative Decision-making.
PhD thesis, ETH Zurich, 2021.

[5] Heiko Richter and Peter R Slowinski. The data sharing
economy: on the emergence of new intermediaries.
IIC-International Review of Intellectual Property and
Competition Law, 50(1):4–29, 2019.

[6] Morrakot Raweewan and William G Ferrell Jr. Informa-
tion sharing in supply chain collaboration. Computers
& Industrial Engineering, 126:269–281, 2018.

[7] Ikujiro Nonaka. A dynamic theory of organizational
knowledge creation. Organization science, 5(1):14–37,
1994.

[8] Stefano Bennati. Machine learning for autonomous
privacy preservation in participatory sensing and smart
cities. PhD thesis, ETH Zurich, 2018.

[9] Dirk Helbing and Carina Ines Hausladen.

Socio-
economic implications of the digital revolution. Hel-
bing. D. and Hausladen, C.(2022), Socio-Economic
Implications of the Digital Revolution, in: Chen, P.,
Elsner, W. and Pyka, A.(eds.), Handbook of Complexity
Economics, Routledge, London, New York, 2022.
[10] The Economist. The world’s most valuable resource is
no longer oil, but data. The Economist: New York, NY,
USA, 2017.

[11] Li Cai and Yangyong Zhu. The challenges of data
quality and data quality assessment in the big data era.
Data science journal, 14, 2015.

In 2016 IEEE symposium on service-
and needs.
oriented system engineering (SOSE), pages 433–441.
IEEE, 2016.

[13] Dirk Helbing. What the digital revolution means for
In Thinking Ahead-Essays on Big Data, Digital
us.
Revolution, and Participatory Market Society, pages
177–187. Springer, 2015.

[14] Roman Lukyanenko, Jeffrey Parsons, and Yolanda
Wiersma. Citizen science 2.0: Data management princi-
ples to harness the power of the crowd. In International
Conference on Design Science Research in Information
Systems, pages 465–473. Springer, 2011.

[15] Mark C Ballandies, Valentin Holzwarth, Barry Sun-
derland, Evangelos Pournaras, and Jan vom Brocke.
Improving customer
feedback to organisations –
blockchain-based incentives, contextualised information
under
and value-oriented design science research.
submission, 2022.

[16] Tim Berners-Lee, James Hendler, and Ora Lassila. The
semantic web. Scientiﬁc american, 284(5):34–43, 2001.

[17] W3 Consortium et al. Semantic web, 2004.
[18] Heiko Paulheim. Knowledge graph reﬁnement: A
survey of approaches and evaluation methods. Semantic
web, 8(3):489–508, 2017.

[19] Gloria Re Calegari, Andrea Fiano, and Irene Celino. A
framework to build games with a purpose for linked data
reﬁnement. In International Semantic Web Conference,
pages 154–169. Springer, 2018.

[20] Xiaochi Zhou, Mei Qi Lim, and Markus Kraft. A
smart contract-based agent marketplace for the j-park
simulator-a knowledge graph for the process indus-
try. Computers & Chemical Engineering, 139:106896,
2020.

[21] Tie Luo, Jianwei Huang, Salil S Kanhere, Jie Zhang,
and Sajal K Das. Improving iot data quality in mobile
IEEE
crowd sensing: A cross validation approach.
Internet of Things Journal, 6(3):5651–5664, 2019.
[22] Wuhui Chen, Yufei Chen, Xu Chen, and Zibin Zheng.
Toward secure data sharing for the iov: a quality-
driven incentive mechanism with on-chain and off-chain
IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 7(3):
guarantees.
1625–1640, 2019.

[23] Francesco Restuccia, Sajal K Das, and Jamie Payton.
Incentive mechanisms for participatory sensing: Survey
and research challenges. ACM Transactions on Sensor
Networks (TOSN), 12(2):1–40, 2016.

[24] Ajay Kumar Shrestha and Julita Vassileva. Blockchain-
based research data sharing framework for incentiviz-
In International Conference on
ing the data owners.
Blockchain, pages 259–266. Springer, 2018.

[25] Shihong Zou, Jinwen Xi, Siyuan Wang, Yueming Lu,
and Guosheng Xu. Reportcoin: A novel blockchain-
IEEE
based incentive anonymous reporting system.
Access, 7:65544–65559, 2019.

[12] Jerry Gao, Chunli Xie, and Chuanqi Tao. Big data
validation and quality assurance–issuses, challenges,

[26] Imran Makhdoom, Ian Zhou, Mehran Abolhasan, Justin
Privysharing: A blockchain-

Lipman, and Wei Ni.

based framework for privacy-preserving and secure data
sharing in smart cities. Computers & Security, 88:
101653, 2020.

[27] Se Young Jung, Taehyun Kim, Hyung Ju Hwang, and
Kyungpyo Hong. Mechanism design of health care
blockchain system token economy: Development study
Journal of
based on simulated real-world scenarios.
Medical Internet Research, 23(9):e26802, 2021.
[28] Muqaddas Naz, Fahad A Al-zahrani, Rabiya Khalid,
Nadeem Javaid, Ali Mustafa Qamar, Muhammad Khalil
Afzal, and Muhammad Shaﬁq. A secure data sharing
platform using blockchain and interplanetary ﬁle sys-
tem. Sustainability, 11(24):7054, 2019.

[29] Vahid Heidaripour Lakhani.

Token-based incentive
schemes in decentralized p2p storage networks.
In
Proceedings of the 22nd International Middleware Con-
ference: Doctoral Symposium, pages 23–24, 2021.
[30] Zahra ImaniMehr and Mehdi DehghanTakhtFooladi.
Token-based incentive mechanism for peer-to-peer
video streaming networks. The Journal of Supercom-
puting, 75(10):6612–6631, 2019.

[31] Jens J Hunhevicz, Tobias Schraner, and Daniel M
Hall. Incentivizing high-quality data sets in construction
using blockchain: A feasibility study in the swiss indus-
In ISARC. Proceedings of the International Sym-
try.
posium on Automation and Robotics in Construction,
volume 37, pages 1291–1298. IAARC Publications,
2020.

[32] Kevin Wittek, Sebastian Finke, Nora Schelte, Norbert
Pohlmann, and Semih Severengiz. A crypto-token
based charging incentivization scheme for sustainable
light electric vehicle sharing. In 2021 IEEE European
Technology and Engineering Management Summit (E-
TEMS), pages 136–140. IEEE, 2021.

[33] Kaj-Kolja Kleineberg and Dirk Helbing. A “social
bitcoin” could sustain a democratic digital world.
In
Finance 4.0-Towards a Socio-Ecological Finance Sys-
tem, pages 39–51. Springer, Cham, 2021.

[34] Anabele-Linda Pardi and Mario Paolucci. A chemi-
cal analysis of hybrid economic systems—tokens and
money. Mathematics, 9(20):2607, 2021.

[35] Edward L Deci and Richard M Ryan. A motivational
approach to self: Integration in personality. 1991.

[36] Richard M Ryan and Edward L Deci.

Self-
determination theory and the facilitation of intrinsic mo-
tivation, social development, and well-being. American
psychologist, 55(1):68, 2000.

[37] Evangelos Pournaras, Mark C. Ballandies, Stefano Ben-
nati, Chien-fei Chen, Ramapriya Sridharan, and Dirk
Helbing. Collective privacy recover with decentralized
artiﬁcial intelligence. (under submission).

[38] Tianqi Cai, HJ Cai, Hao Wang, Xiji Cheng, and Linfeng
Wang. Analysis of blockchain system with token-based
IEEE Access, 7:50823–50832,
bookkeeping method.
2019.

Blockchain token economics: A mean-ﬁeld-type game
perspective. IEEE Access, 7:64603–64613, 2019.
[40] Guohua Gan, E Chen, Zhiyuan Zhou, and Yan Zhu.
IEEE Access, 8:54189–

Token-based access control.
54199, 2020.

[41] Margit Osterloh and Bruno S Frey. Motivation, knowl-
edge transfer, and organizational forms. Organization
science, 11(5):538–550, 2000.

[42] Marcus M Dapp. The effects of software patent policy
on the motivation and innovation of
free and open
source software developers. PhD thesis, ETH Zurich,
2009.

[43] Jay Palmisano. A motivational model of knowledge
sharing. In Handbook on Decision Support Systems 1,
pages 355–370. Springer, 2008.

[44] Edward L Deci and Richard M Ryan.

Intrinsic
motivation and self-determination in human behavior.
Springer Science & Business Media, 2013.

[45] Mie Harder. How do rewards and management styles
inﬂuence the motivation to share knowledge? 2008.
[46] Teresa M Amabile. Motivational synergy: Toward new
conceptualizations of intrinsic and extrinsic motivation
in the workplace. Human resource management review,
3(3):185–201, 1993.

[47] Delphine Christin, Christian B¨uchner, and Niklas
Leibecke. What’s the value of your privacy? exploring
factors that inﬂuence privacy-sensitive contributions to
participatory sensing applications. In 38th Annual IEEE
Conference on Local Computer Networks-Workshops,
pages 918–923. IEEE, 2013.

[48] David DeAngelis and Suzanne Barber. Systemic recip-
rocal rewards: Motivating expert participation in online
Inter-
communities with a novel class of incentives.
national Journal of Agent Technologies and Systems
(IJATS), 6(2):30–50, 2014.

[49] Hailiang Chen, Yu Jeffrey Hu, and Shan Huang. Mon-
etary incentive and stock opinions on social media.
Journal of Management Information Systems, 36(2):
391–417, 2019.

[50] Warut Khern-am nuai, Karthik Kannan, and Hossein
Ghasemkhani. Extrinsic versus intrinsic rewards for
contributing reviews in an online platform. Information
Systems Research, 29(4):871–892, 2018.

[51] Katharina Laske and Marina Schroeder. Quantity,
quality and originality: The effects of incentives on
creativity. 2017.

[52] Yan Feng, Shelley Farrar, Matt Sutton, and Ada Ma.
The effect of an increase in the rate of payment on
general practitioners’ intrinsic and extrinsic motivation.
OHE Research Paper, 11(05), 2011.

[53] Iris Vilnai-Yavetz and Olga Levina. Motivating social
sharing of e-business content: Intrinsic motivation, ex-
trinsic motivation, or crowding-out effect? Computers
in Human Behavior, 79:181–191, 2018.

[54] Christopher P Cerasoli,

Jessica M Nicklin, and
Intrinsic motivation and extrinsic

[39] Julian Barreiro-Gomez

and Hamidou Tembine.

Michael T Ford.

incentives jointly predict performance: a 40-year meta-
analysis. Psychological bulletin, 140(4):980, 2014.
[55] Shin-Yuan Hung, Alexandra Durcikova, Hui-Min Lai,
and Wan-Mei Lin.
The inﬂuence of intrinsic and
extrinsic motivation on individuals’ knowledge sharing
International Journal of Human-Computer
behavior.
Studies, 69(6):415–427, 2011.

[56] Ko Kuwabara. Do reputation systems undermine trust?
divergent effects of enforcement type on generalized
trust and trustworthiness. American Journal of Soci-
ology, 120(5):1390–1428, 2015.

[57] Heng-Li Yang and Ted CT Wu. Knowledge sharing in
an organization. Technological Forecasting and Social
Change, 75(8):1128–1156, 2008.

[58] Andrew Sadler, Ling Shi, Susanne Bethge, and Axel
M¨uhlbacher.
Incentives for blood donation: a dis-
crete choice experiment to analyze extrinsic motivation.
Transfusion medicine and hemotherapy, 45(2):116–124,
2018.

[59] Philipp H¨ulsemann and Andranik Tumasjan. Walk this
way! incentive structures of different token designs for
blockchain-based applications. 2019.

[60] Mk Manoj, Gautam Srivastava, Siva Rama Krish-
nan Somayaji, Thippa Reddy Gadekallu, Praveen Ku-
mar Reddy Maddikunta, and Sweta Bhattacharya. An
incentive based approach for covid-19 planning using
blockchain technology. In 2020 IEEE Globecom Work-
shops, pages 1–6. IEEE, 2020.

[61] Jing Zhang, Rong Tan, Chunhua Su, and Wen Si.
Design and application of a personal credit informa-
tion sharing platform based on consortium blockchain.
Journal of Information Security and Applications, 55:
102659, 2020.

[62] Vikas Jaiman, Leonard Pernice, and Visara Urovi. User
incentives for blockchain-based data sharing platforms.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.11348, 2021.

[63] Dirk Helbing. Qualiﬁed money—a better ﬁnancial
system for the future. In Finance 4.0-Towards a Socio-
Ecological Finance System, pages 27–37. Springer,
Cham, 2021.

[64] Marcus M Dapp, Dirk Helbing, and Stefan Klauser. Fi-
nance 4.0-Towards a Socio-Ecological Finance System:
A Participatory Framework to Promote Sustainability.
Springer Nature, 2021.

[65] Marcus M Dapp, Stefan Klauser, and Mark Ballandies.
Finance 4.0 concept (technical report). Technical report,
ETH Zurich, 2018.

[67] Martin Dobler, Mark Ballandies,

[66] Mark C Ballandies, Marcus M Dapp, and Evange-
Decrypting distributed ledger de-
los Pournaras.
sign—taxonomy, classiﬁcation and blockchain commu-
nity evaluation. Cluster Computing, pages 1–22, 2021.
and Valentin
Holzwarth. On the extension of digital ecosystems for
scm and customs with distributed ledger technologies
innovation assessment, and
requirements analysis,
In
prototype design for the lake constance region.

2019 IEEE International Conference on Engineering,
Technology and Innovation (ICE/ITMC), pages 1–8.
IEEE, 2019.

[68] Mark C Ballandies, Marcus M Dapp, Benjamin A
Degenhart, and Dirk Helbing. Finance 4.0: Design
principles for a value-sensitive cryptoecnomic system to
address sustainability. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.11955,
2021.

[69] Mark C Ballandies and Evangelos Pournaras. Mobile
link prediction: Automated creation and crowdsourced
validation of knowledge graphs. Microprocessors and
Microsystems, 87:104335, 2021.

[70] Ingolf GA Pernice, Sebastian Henningsen, Roman
Proskalovich, Martin Florian, Hermann Elendner, and
Bj¨orn Scheuermann.
Monetary stabilization in
cryptocurrencies–design approaches and open ques-
tions. In 2019 Crypto Valley Conference on Blockchain
Technology (CVCBT), pages 47–59. IEEE, 2019.
[71] Jeroen Brus, Helena Aebersold, Marcus Grueschow, and
Rafael Polania. Sources of conﬁdence in value-based
choice. Nature communications, 12(1):1–15, 2021.
[72] Rafael Polan´ıa, Michael Woodford, and Christian C
Ruff. Efﬁcient coding of subjective value. Nature
neuroscience, 22(1):134–142, 2019.

[73] P Jaccard. Bulletin de la soci´et´e vaudoise des sciences
naturelles. Etude comparative de la distribution ﬂorale
dans une portion des Alpes et des Jura, 37:547–579,
1901.

[74] Richard Lowry. Concepts and applications of inferential

statistics. 2014.

[75] Samuel Sanford Shapiro and Martin B Wilk. An anal-
ysis of variance test for normality (complete samples).
Biometrika, 52(3/4):591–611, 1965.

[76] Nornadiah Mohd Razali, Yap Bee Wah, et al. Power
comparisons of shapiro-wilk, kolmogorov-smirnov, lil-
liefors and anderson-darling tests. Journal of statistical
modeling and analytics, 2(1):21–33, 2011.

[77] Ralph B d’Agostino. An omnibus test of normality for
moderate and large size samples. Biometrika, 58(2):
341–348, 1971.

[78] Ralph D’Agostino and Egon S Pearson. Tests for
departure from normality. empirical results for the dis-
tributions of b 2 and b. Biometrika, 60(3):613–622,
1973.

[79] William H Kruskal and W Allen Wallis. Use of ranks in
one-criterion variance analysis. Journal of the American
statistical Association, 47(260):583–621, 1952.

[80] W Jay Conover and Ronald L Iman. Multiple-
informal report. Technical
comparisons procedures.
report, Los Alamos Scientiﬁc Lab., NM (USA), 1979.
[81] Olive Jean Dunn. Multiple comparisons using rank

sums. Technometrics, 6(3):241–252, 1964.

[82] Evangelos Pournaras, Jovan Nikolic, Pablo Vel´asquez,
Marcello Trovati, Nik Bessis, and Dirk Helbing. Self-
regulatory information sharing in participatory social
sensing. EPJ Data Science, 5:1–24, 2016.

accumulation and evolution of design knowledge in
design science research: a journey through time and
the Association for Information
space.
Systems, 21(3):9, 2020.

Journal of

[98] Mark C Ballandies, Marcus M Dapp, Benjamin Aaron
Degenhart, Dirk Helbing, Stefan Klauser, and Anabele-
Linda Pardi. Finance 4.0—a socio-ecological ﬁnance
In Finance 4.0-Towards a Socio-Ecological
system.
Finance System, pages 53–89. Springer, Cham, 2021.

[99] Henry M Kim, Marek Laskowski, Michael Zargham,
Hjalmar Turesson, Matthew Barlin, and Danil Kabanov.
Token economics in real life: Cryptocurrency and in-
centives design for insolar’s blockchain network. Com-
puter, 54(1):70–80, 2021.

[100] Zixuan Zhang. Engineering token economy with system
modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.00899, 2019.

[101] Alim Khamisa. Token economies.

In The Emerald
Handbook of Blockchain for Business. Emerald Pub-
lishing Limited, 2021.

[102] Marek Laskowski, Michael Zargham, Hjalmar Tures-
son, Matt Barlin, Danil Kabanov, and Eden Dhaliwal.
Evidence based decision making in blockchain eco-
nomic systems: From theory to practice. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2001.03020, 2020.

[103] Lisa JY Tan. Economics design and engineering for
robust dlt ecosystems. Available at SSRN 3604815,
2020.

[83] Thomas Asikis and Evangelos Pournaras. Optimization
of privacy-utility trade-offs under informational self-
determination. Future Generation Computer Systems,
109:488–499, 2020.

[84] Shiho Kim. Blockchain for a trust network among
intelligent vehicles. In Advances in Computers, volume
111, pages 43–68. Elsevier, 2018.

[85] Viktor Valaˇst´ın, Kritian Koˇst’´al, Rastislav Bencel, and
Ivan Kotuliak. Blockchain based car-sharing platform.
In 2019 International Symposium ELMAR, pages 5–8.
IEEE, 2019.

[86] Nyothiri Aung, Weidong Zhang, Sahraoui Dhelim, and
Yibo Ai. T-coin: Dynamic trafﬁc congestion pricing
system for the internet of vehicles in smart cities.
Information, 11(3):149, 2020.

[87] Heide Hackmann, Susanne C Moser, and Asuncion Lera
St Clair. The social heart of global environmental
change. Nature Climate Change, 4(8):653–655, 2014.
[88] Philip K Thornton, Polly J Ericksen, Mario Herrero, and
Andrew J Challinor. Climate variability and vulnerabil-
ity to climate change: a review. Global change biology,
20(11):3313–3328, 2014.

[89] Jordan Etkin. The hidden cost of personal quantiﬁ-
cation. Journal of consumer research, 42(6):967–984,
2016.

[90] Rogier Creemers. China’s social credit system: an
Available at SSRN

evolving practice of control.
3175792, 2018.

[91] Fan Liang, Vishnupriya Das, Nadiya Kostyuk, and
Muzammil M Hussain. Constructing a data-driven soci-
ety: China’s social credit system as a state surveillance
infrastructure. Policy & Internet, 10(4):415–453, 2018.
[92] Anna Hornik, Georg Klose, Thomas Stehnken, Flo-
rian Spalthoff, Holger Glockhner, Christian Gr¨unwald,
Daniel Bonin, and Julian Sachs.
Zukunft von
wertvorstellungen der menschen in unserem land. Bun-
desministerium f¨ur Bildung und Forschung, pages 122–
129, 2020.

[93] Ivo Baur and Heinrich H Nax. Measures against the
abandonment of common property summer pastures: ex-
perimental evidence from joint appropriation-provision
games. Ecology and Society, 26(ARTICLE):4, 2021.

[94] Batya Friedman, Peter H Kahn, Alan Borning, and
Alina Huldtgren. Value sensitive design and information
In Early engagement and new technologies:
systems.
Opening up the laboratory, pages 55–95. Springer,
2013.

[95] Jeroen Van den Hoven, Pieter E Vermaas, and Ibo
Van de Poel. Handbook of ethics, values, and techno-
logical design: Sources, theory, values and application
domains. Springer, 2015.

[96] Alan R Hevner, Salvatore T March, Jinsoo Park, and
Sudha Ram. Design science in information systems
research. MIS quarterly, pages 75–105, 2004.

[97] Jan Vom Brocke, Robert Winter, Alan Hevner,
issue editorial–

and Alexander Maedche.

Special

