Is decentralized finance actually decentralized? A social
network analysis of the Aave protocol on the Ethereum
blockchain
ZIQIAO AO†, GERGELY HORVATH∗†, and LUYAO ZHANG∗†‡§

Decentralized finance (DeFi) has the potential to disrupt centralized finance by validating peer-to-peer trans-
actions through tamper-proof smart contracts and thus significantly lowering the transaction cost charged by
financial intermediaries. However, the actual realization of peer-to-peer transactions and the levels and effects
of decentralization are largely unknown. Our research pioneers a blockchain network study that applies social
network analysis to measure the level, dynamics, and impacts of decentralization in DeFi token transactions on
the Ethereum blockchain. First, we find a significant core-periphery structure in the AAVE token transaction
network where the cores include the two largest centralized crypto exchanges. Second, we provide evidence
that multiple network features consistently characterize decentralization dynamics. Finally, we document that
a more decentralized network significantly predicts a higher return and lower volatility of the DeFi tokens.
We point out that our approach is seminal for inspiring future extensions related to the facets of application
scenarios, research questions, and methodologies on the mechanics of blockchain decentralization.

Keywords: Decentralized finance, social network analysis, AAVE, Ethereum, core-periphery, modularity,

giant component ratio

ACM CCS: E.0, G.1, G.3, I.6, J.4, J.6
JEL Code: C15, C22, C23, C58, C63, C81, G17
Acknowledgments: We have benefited from the intellectual conversations at the 29𝑡ℎ Annual Global
Finance Conference featuring Nobel Prize Laureate, Prof. Robert Engle. We Thank Profs. Lin Will Cong and
Claudio J. Tessone for their insightful comments.

2
2
0
2

p
e
S
9
1

]

N
G
.
n
o
c
e
[

2
v
1
0
4
8
0
.
6
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

∗Corresponding authors: Luyao Zhang (email: lz183@duke.edu; institutions: Data Science Research Center and Social Science
Division, Duke Kunshan University) and Gergely Horvath (email:gergely.horvath@dukekunshan.edu.cn; institutions: Social
Science Division, Duke Kunshan University)
†Duke Kunshan University, No. 8 Duke Ave, Kunshan, Suzhou, Jiangsu, China, 215316. Authors are listed in alphabetical
order by last names.
‡Also with SciEcon CIC, London, United Kingdom, WC2H 9JQ
§ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-1183-2254

Authors’ address: Ziqiao Ao; Gergely Horvath; Luyao Zhang.

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

Ziqiao Ao, Gergely Horvath*, and Luyao Zhang*

1 INTRODUCTION
DeFi, short for decentralized finance, is a blockchain-powered peer-to-peer financial system [Werner
et al. 2021]. Harvey et al. [2021] predict that DeFi could disrupt centralized finance by validating peer-
to-peer transactions by tamper-proof smart contracts and thus significantly lower the transaction
cost charged by financial intermediaries. However, the actual realization of peer-to-peer transactions
and the levels of decentralization are largely unknown [Cong et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2022]. Moreover,
how the levels of decentralization would affect the economic performance of the blockchain
platform is broadly unexplored. How can decentralization be measured? The comparative study
of decentralized and centralized financial markets is not new [Canales and Nanda 2012; Miao
2006]. However, before blockchain technology existed, decentralized markets tended to have
worse performance. For example, decentralized over-the-counter markets and the lack of a central
market-maker induce high trading costs and give rise to intermediations between trading partners
[Battiston et al. 2012; Bosma et al. 2017; Yun et al. 2019]. Moreover, Bovet et al. [2019]; Motamed
and Bahrak [2019]; Vallarano et al. [2020] find that network features, a proxy for the market
structure in decentralized markets affect important market outcomes (e.g., liquidity and volatility)
that individual traders, at the hub of the network, make more profit in general [Di Maggio et al.
2017; Hollifield et al. 2017; Li et al. 2019]. Does blockchain live up to its promise of empowering
peer-to-peer transactions in decentralized financial markets? Our research applies social network
analysis [Jackson 2008; Otte and Rousseau 2002; Scott 1988] to blockchain transaction data and
aims to answer the following research questions:

• Realization of decentralization: Are the transactions in decentralized banks on blockchain

indeed decentralized?

• Blockchain network dynamics: How do different network features of blockchain transac-

tions correlate and change over time?

• Counterfactual impact evaluation: How do network features predict and interact with
the economic performance of the blockchain applications under time series momentum at
different horizons?

We pioneer a blockchain network study that applies social network analysis to measure the level,
dynamics, and impacts of decentralization in DeFi token transactions on the Ethereum blockchain.
We analyze our research questions with an application to the transaction network of AAVE, the
native utility token of a top-ranked decentralization finance application on Ethereum. We have
three main findings.

(1) There exists a significant core-periphery structure in the AAVE token transaction network
where the cores include the two largest centralized exchanges and central smart contracts
with specific functions.

(2) Multiple network features including the number of components, the relative size of giant
components, modularity, and standard deviation of degree centrality consistently characterize
decentralization dynamics.

(3) A more decentralized network as represented by the network measures significantly predicts

a higher return and lower volatilities of the DeFi tokens.

1.1 Literature Review
Our research contributes to the literature on the interplay of the financial market, social network
studies, and crypto-economics.

Social network analysis in the financial market and core-periphery structures. The application
1.1.1
of social network analysis (SNA) to financial markets has gained momentum after the 2008-2009

Is decentralized finance actually decentralized?

3

Fig. 1. Contribution Map of this Study
Note: This figure displays the contribution map of our study on the existing literature.

financial crisis. Lending relationships among banks and other financial institutions proved to be
conduits of contagion of liquidity shortages and financial distress [Anand et al. 2013; Blasques et al.
2018,?; Gai et al. 2011; Langfield et al. 2014]. Regulators came to realize that studying the structure
of financial networks is key to identifying sources of systemic risk, for example, in the form of
financial institutions that are ‘too central to fail’, meaning that their failure may generate a cascade
that ruins the whole financial system [Bardoscia et al. 2017; Battiston et al. 2012; Bosma et al. 2017;
Yun et al. 2019]. The decentralized financial market on blockchain in our research thus serves
as a potential solution to the “too central to fail” problem. However, one of the most important
conclusions of this literature was that in many financial markets, transactions are not carried out
in an anonymous market but through stable trading relationships that reduce transaction costs
[Babus and Kondor 2018; Duffie et al. 2005]. The peer-to-peer transactions on the blockchain are
instead anonymous by default and might not benefit from stable exchange relationships like those
observed in the traditional financial market.

A commonly adopted notion in social network analysis is the core-periphery structure, which
presents two qualitatively distinct components: “core” nodes that are densely connected, and
“periphery” nodes that are loosely connected to the core members but not necessarily to each
other [Gallagher et al. 2021]. The core-periphery structure enables us to compare and analyze
the properties of the two types of nodes more accurately and efficiently under different contexts
structurally and functionally [Csermely et al. 2013]. SNA has already been widely applied to
study financial networks. For example, Sui et al. [2019] compares the resilience between core-
peripheral networks and complete networks by analyzing the financial contagion of interbank
networks. Barucca and Lillo [2016] proposes methods to identify different network architectures
including bipartite and the core-periphery structure in the case of the interbank network. In
the cryptocurrency market, the core-periphery structure of stable assets based on liquidity and

4

Ziqiao Ao, Gergely Horvath*, and Luyao Zhang*

capital inferred by a network feature has been examined to study the market impact and evolution
[Polovnikov et al. 2020].

A variety of algorithms have been developed by scholars for extracting the core-periphery
structure [Malliaros et al. 2019], which differ typologically based on their definitions of the nature
of the network and the way in which core and peripheral nodes are connected. The most popular is
the Borgatti-Everett (BE) algorithm, which partitions the network into a central hub with interlacing
nodes and a periphery radiating outward from the hub [Borgatti and Everett 2000]. Cucuringu et al.
[2016] detected the core-periphery structure through spectral methods and geodesic paths based on
the transportation networks. In addition to the classical two-block methods, there exist algorithms
that build a continuous spectrum between a core and a periphery which have been applied in
examples related to collaboration, voting, transportation, etc. [Boyd et al. 2010; Rombach et al. 2017;
Rossa et al. 2013]. The continuous structure enables the exploration of network components and
features that are not apparently categorized as core or periphery [Rombach et al. 2017]. Considering
that there may be more than one core-periphery pair in the network, Kojaku and Masuda [2017,
2018a,b] propose scalable algorithms to detect multiple core-periphery groups in a network and
demonstrate their application in networks of political blogs and airports.

Given the diverse core-periphery structures defined by algorithms, we apply the Borgatti-Everett
(BE) algorithm [Borgatti and Everett 2000] to our AAVE transfer network while examining algo-
rithms of multiple pairs [Kojaku and Masuda 2018a] along with SNA to test the level of decen-
tralization comprehensively. Details of algorithms and packages utilized will be given in the data
section to provide reliable network inference and methodology for further studies.

1.1.2 Crypto tokens and decentralized banking. Crypto tokens are digital assets that utilize blockchain
and cryptography technology to ensure security [Halaburda et al. 2022]. As of Jan. 20, 2022, the
market value of crypto tokens was beyond 1.9 trillion U.S. dollars. Cong and Xiao [2021] categorize
cryptocurrencies into general security, utility (general payment and platform), and product tokens
based on their functions. Bitcoin, the first cryptocurrency, was designed as a transaction mechanism
and classified as utility (general payments) tokens. Although Bitcoin dominated the market be-
tween 2009 and 2016, other alternatives emerged later on [Härdle et al. 2020]. Ethereum blockchain
proved revolutionary in its support for smart contracts that allow automatic transactions and the
issuance of Ethereum Request for Comments (ERC) tokens [Lehar and Parlour 2021; Liang et al.
2018]. Our research studies the transaction network of AAVE, an ERC-20 token that is the native
utility (platform) token of Aave, a top-ranked decentralized finance application on Ethereum. The
market value of AAVE was beyond 2.9 billion U.S. dollars as of Jan. 20, 2022 [coinmarketcap 2022].
Aave is a decentralized bank that allows users to lend and borrow crypto assets and earn interest
on assets supplied to the protocol [Whitepaper.io 2020]. In general, decentralized banks differ
from centralized banks in two aspects: 1) they replace centralized credit assessments with coded
collateral evaluation [Gudgeon et al. 2020], and 2) they employ smart contracts to execute asset
management automatically [Bartoletti 2020]. The open-source codes of the decentralized bank,
Aave, and the transparent trading data of the AAVE token enable us to reproduce the historical
network dynamics.

1.1.3 Network studies in cryptoeconomics. An extensive body of literature explores the key features
of trading networks and the way in which they relate to the price dynamics of cryptocurrencies.
Liang et al. [2018] show that both Bitcoin and Ethereum trading networks display fluctuations in
growth rates. For example, the clustering coefficient1 of Bitcoin was initially 0.15, qualifying it as
a small-world network, and decreased to approximately 0.05 later [Baumann et al. 2014; Kondor

1The clustering coefficient describes the extent to which a network is aggregated [Baumann et al. 2014].

Is decentralized finance actually decentralized?

5

et al. 2014]; in contrast, the clustering coefficient of Ethereum has fluctuated between 0.15 and 0.2
over time and has never been identified as a small word2 [Ferretti and D’Angelo 2019]. Motamed
and Bahrak [2019] built both monthly and accumulative networks of Ethereum. They found that
the number of components3 is approximately ten and increases over time; however, similar to that
of the Bitcoin trading network, the network density4 of Ethereum decreases over time [Vallarano
et al. 2020]. Liang et al. [2018] also found that the largest components of Bitcoin and Ethereum
have large sizes in terms of both their diameters (approximately 100 for Bitcoin and gradually
increasing for Ethereum) and percentages (40-60%). The network structures differ significantly
across blockchains. For instance, Chang and Svetinovic [2016] found that the Bitcoin network
has grown denser over time, with more nodes tending to be connected with each other, leading
to a strong community while Namecoin has shown a decrease in density, resulting in an unclear
community structure. [De Collibus et al. 2021] hints that the growth and concentration indexes
can be measured by network calculations via analyzing the aggregated transaction networks of
Ethereum-based crypto assets, and conclude that wealth is much more concentrated than in-degree
and out-degree. Polovnikov et al. [2020] demonstrate a core-periphery structure [Gallagher et al.
2021] in cryptocurrency exchange networks.

The literature has also found an effect of network features on economic variables such as price
and volatilities. Motamed and Bahrak [2019] found that the price of Bitcoin, Ethereum and Litecoin
is positively correlated with the size of the graph and the number of nodes and edges. Vallarano
et al. [2020] showed that the price of Bitcoin is negatively correlated with the average outdegree.
Cong et al. [2022] discovered that the current Ethereum is more and more centralized in block
rewards, ownership, and transactions. Bovet et al. [2019], using a Granger causality test, found that
the past degree distributions, especially the outdegree5 of the Bitcoin trading network can predict
future price increases [Bovet et al. 2019]. Several studies have also used network features. Li et al.
[2019] built an ARIMA time-series model to forecast price anomalies using network features.

Our research extends network studies on Bitcoin and Ethereum to DeFi tokens. Moreover, we aim
to conduct a comprehensive analysis of the blockchain network and the core-periphery structure
by comparing a variety of network features including the numbers of nodes and edges, the mean
and standard deviation of degree., top 10 degrees mean ratio, relative degree, modularity, the
count of components, the count of core, and giant component ratio, etc. Furthermore, we conduct
counterfactual analysis to simulate the effect of removing cores on AAVE network dynamics. Finally,
to evaluate economic performance, in addition to price and volatility, we include total value locked
(TVL) [George 2022], a feature unique to the DeFi market.

2 CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK
The computer science literature has defined three types of communication networks since [Baran
1964], these are depicted in Figure 2, borrowed from [Barabási 2016]. In a centralized network,
one central node connects all other nodes, and the degree distribution is unequal since one node
has N-1 links while all other nodes have only 1 link. In a decentralized network, there are several
hubs that connect to peripheral nodes and to each other. In this network, the degree distribution is
equal to that in the centralized network but there are hubs that have considerably more links than
the peripheral nodes. The third type of network is the distributed network in which there are no

2A small-world network refers to a network in which most nodes are not neighbors of each other, but most nodes can be
reached from other nodes by a small number of steps [Baumann et al. 2014].
3Components are parts of the network that are disconnected from each other [Vallarano et al. 2020].
4Network density describes the portion of the potential connections in the network that are actual connections [Vallarano
et al. 2020].
5Outdegree is the number of edges that are directed out of a node in the directed network graph [Vallarano et al. 2020].

6

Ziqiao Ao, Gergely Horvath*, and Luyao Zhang*

hubs and all nodes have approximately the same number of neighbors. We regard the network on
the left as the most centralized and the network on the right as the most decentralized network
structure. Ideally, DeFi aims to be completely decentralized, facilitating peer-to-peer transactions,
which corresponds to the distributed network in the computer science literature.

Fig. 2. Different types of network structures
Note: This figure illustrates three types of communication networks (borrowed from [Barabási 2016]).

[Campajola et al. 2022] in their paper presents a wide array of indexes to display the different
levels of decentralization of Bitcoin, including clustering index, degree distribution, core-periphery
structure, etc. In our study, we introduce various network measures to capture the differences
between these network features in the token networks of Aave. The first thing to note is that in
Figure 2, the network consists of only one component, that is, all nodes are connected by direct
or indirect paths. In our transaction data, however, the network consists of many disconnected
components. In an ideally centralized market, all nodes should be connected to a single hub; thus
the number of components should be one. In a very fragmented market, in contrast, we may
observe many components. This argument leads to our first measure of centralization: the number
of components (disconnected parts in the network) shows how centralized or fragmented the
network is. We compute this measure for every day observed in the data.

The second related measure is the relative size of the largest (giant) component. If the
network is more centralized, we expect the largest component to cover a high fraction of nodes,
in a fragmented network we observe many small components. We calculate the size of the giant
component divided by the total number of nodes in the daily transaction network; the larger this
value is, the more centralized the network.

A related measure is the modularity score (formally defined in Table 1) which measures the
strength of division of a network into small groups (Newman 2006). A market structure with
lower modularity is more centralized, which means that there are no separate communities in the
transaction network. This measure can be applied to both connected and disconnected graphs.

Fourth, we capture the characteristics of the structures in Figure 2 by computing the standard
deviation of the number of neighbors (degree) in the network. In a centralized network, we
have the largest disparity in degree, while in the distributed case, the degree distribution is equal.
Last but not least, we use the concept of core-periphery networks to measure the degree of
centralization. In a core-periphery network, a limited number of core members constitute a densely
connected hub that are connected to each other and to the peripheral nodes. The peripheral nodes

Is decentralized finance actually decentralized?

7

Table 1. Major Network Features

Name

Definition

num_nodes
num_edges
Components_cnt

giant_com_ratio

DCstd

Modularity

cp_test_pvalue
cp_significance
core_cnt

avg_core_neighbor

Number of unique addresses in the daily transaction network.
Number of transactions in the daily transaction network.
The various disconnected parts of the network, where there is no path
that can connect from a node in one component to a node in another
component. Components_cnt here refers to the number of components
in the daily transaction network
Size of the giant component divided by the total number of nodes in the
daily transaction network.
Standard deviation of degree centrality. Degree centrality measures the
number of neighbors one node has: the higher the number, the more
central the node is.
Measure of the strength of a network divided into modules. A network
with a high degree of modularity has dense connections between nodes
within a module but sparse connections between nodes in different mod-
ules.
P value of the significance test of the core-periphery structure.
1 if cp_test_pvalue is less than 0.05 and, else 0 otherwise.
Number of nodes in the core based on the BE core-periphery structure
algorithm in the daily transaction network.
the Average number of neighbors (degree) of the core nodes detected by
the core-periphery structure algorithm in the daily transaction network.

Note: This table gives the general definitions of the network features included in our study with an explanation and equation.

are not connected to each other, only the core members. Note that the centralized structure in the
left panel of Figure 2 corresponds to a core-periphery structure with one core member, and the
decentralized structure to a core-periphery network with multiple core members. The distributed
network in the right panel is not a core-periphery network.

Based on these arguments, we run statistical tests to detect the core-periphery structure in the
data, comparing it to a random network with the same degree distribution [KOJAKU 2022]. Our
first measure of decentralization is the significance level of this test, which we convert to a binary
measure. This measure is equal to 1 when the p value of the test is less than 0.05, which indicates
the presence of core-periphery structure. In the other case, when the p-value is larger than 0.05,
the measure takes the value 0, which indicates that the presence of a core-periphery structure can
be rejected.

In addition, for the days when a core-periphery structure describes the data well, we measure the
number and degree of core members in the network. In a more centralized network, the number of
core members is lower and each core member has a larger degree.

Table 1 summarizes the network measures that we use to capture market centralization in the

data.

Turning to the economic variables of the market, we focus on two common outcomes of interest:
price and 30 day volatility 6. We expect market centralization to affect these outcome variables.
Table 2 summarizes the economic variables and our predictions.

6We also present the definition and regression results on the total value locked (TVL) in USD in Appendix B and C

8

Ziqiao Ao, Gergely Horvath*, and Luyao Zhang*

Table 2. Major Economic Variables

Name

Definition

PriceUSD
VtyDayRet30d Volatility over 30 days, measured as the standard deviation of the natural log

Fixed closing price of the asset in USD.

of daily returns over the past 30 days.

Note: This table gives the general definitions of the economic variables used as dependent variables in regressions.

3 DATA

3.1 Data source
Our data are from three open sources: general economic variables of the AAVE token from Coin-
metrics [Coinmetrics 2022], TVL in Aave from DeFi Pulse [Pulse 2022], and blockchain transaction
records of AAVE token from Bigquery public datasets on the Ethereum blockchain [Bigquery 2022],
ranging from Oct. 10, 2020, to Oct. 9, 2021. Our processed datasets for analysis are at a daily level.
We include a detailed datasets overview and dictionary for each dataset in Appendix A.

3.2 Data processing
3.2.1 Calculate network features. Using the Python NetworkX package [Hagberg et al. 2008], we
build daily transaction network graphs using from_address, to_address as nodes and the values
as weights. We consider an undirected network between the addresses with weights equal to the
total value of transactions between the accounts. This means that we add the transaction values
between two duplicate accounts without considering the direction before network building. Based
on the daily network, we calculate 24 network features using the NetworkX algorithms [Hagberg
et al. 2008], given in Appendix A. We keep only the network features listed in Table 1 to answer
the research questions of this paper but open source the rest for future research.

3.2.2 Extract the core-periphery structure. To extract the core-periphery structure, we utilize the
Python cpnet package [KOJAKU 2022], which contains algorithms implemented in Python for
detecting core-periphery structures in networks. cpnet.BE [KOJAKU 2022] is the algorithm used
for the Borgatti-Everett (BE) algorithm, which, identifies nodes either as either core or periphery in
a single group [Borgatti and Everett 2000]. cpnet.KM_config [KOJAKU 2022] is used for examining
multiple pairs of core-periphery nodes, which can return the coreness and pair of each node.
This package also allows us to conduct significance testing via the q-s test on the core-periphery
structure of the daily network to assess the fitness of this algorithm for our data, where we use 0.05
as the significance level. The core-periphery structure detected for the input network is considered
significant if it is stronger than those detected in randomized networks [Kojaku and Masuda 2018b].
We calculate the number of cores and the average number of neighbors of the core nodes to further
investigate the levels of decentralization given the core-periphery structure. Additionally, based on
the daily networks constructed using the core-periphery algorithm, we record all core addresses
that appear during the period and the number of days that they become core. The type (contract or
address) and information links of those cores are extracted from Etherscan.io [etherscan.io 2019]
and recorded for further comparison.

3.2.3 Analyze interactions with economic variables. Among the economic metrics queried as shown
in Appendix B, the price in USD PriceUSD, 30-day volatility VtyDayRet30d and total value locked
(TVL) in USD tvlUSD are chosen as the dependent variables in our regression models since they
are significant and commonly used economic metrics in market valuation. Specifically, the price

Is decentralized finance actually decentralized?

9

intuitively reflects the market value of the AAVE token, which is perfectly correlated with the
market capitalization for the Aave protocol7 during the time range of our data. The 30-day volatility
can reflect the degree of volatility in the token market over the past month and the potential
existence of risks or tendencies [Coinmetrics 2022]. The total value locked, which is the overall
value of crypto assets deposited in the Aave protocol in USD [George 2022], is a unique economic
metric in the context of the cryptocurrency market. Furthermore, before regression, we need
to ensure stationarity of time-series data-that is, that the mean, variance, and autocorrelation
structure remain constant over time [Brownlee 2017], and the values give an approximately normal
distribution. We transform the variables using methods including differencing the data and taking
the logarithm difference, or percentage change based on the Dickey-Fuller test results to ensure
that they become stationary. After that, we scale all the stationary variables between 0 and 1 for
scale comparison and test the correlation for all the independent variables (after transformation) to
avoid high correlation in the regressions.

4 METHODS AND RESULTS

4.1 The realization of decentralization (the core-periphery structure)
4.1.1 Construct core-periphery structures. As introduced and discussed in the previous sections,
we apply the Borgatti-Everett (BE) algorithm [Borgatti and Everett 2000] and the multiple-pairs
core-periphery structure algorithm [Kojaku and Masuda 2018b] to the AAVE transaction network to
investigate whether the daily graphs can be separated into dense transactions between some active
addresses (defined as the core) and some other loose transactions between some small addresses
(defined as the periphery) in either a single pair or multiple pairs. In this section, we connect the
properties of the core-periphery structure in the AAVE transaction network with the real functions
and types of the specific addresses (some typical addresses) to further explore the question of
centralization vs. decentralization.

We test the significance of all 365 observations. The results indicate that the AAVE daily transac-
tion network is insignificant in the multiple-pair core-periphery structure, but partially significant
in the one-pair structure with 232 significant (64%) and 133 insignificant (36%) days. Comparing the
distribution (displayed in Figure 3) of the number of nodes in the core and the average number of
degrees of the core nodes (described in Table 1) in the significant and nonsignificant daily graphs
that we tested, we find that the number of nodes in the core in the significant graph is much
smaller. The average number of average neighbors of the core nodes is more prominent in those
significant graphs and vice versa. By interpretation, when the transaction network significantly fits
the core-periphery structure, it can be divided into small groups of denser and looser connections.
The transaction difference between nodes is larger; thus, the degree of centralization is greater. In
this case, a few addresses are likely to dominate most transactions.

To depict the structure and comparison in a more intuitive and explainable way, we pick two
representative days of the significant and nonsignificant graph to visualize the network, as displayed
in Figure 4. It shows the core-periphery network graphs of transactions among the identified core
accounts based on the cpnet.BE algorithms in a spiral layout on 2020-10-12 (left panel) and 2021-02-
22 (right panel), where the dark dots represent the core nodes and the light dots are the periphery
nodes. The two panels clearly illustrate that on a significant core-periphery graph (left panel), all
core nodes are closely linked, and each core node forms an aggregation group with periphery
nodes (each with a high degree) so that any two nodes can connect in a few steps. The overall
network structure of the transactions among the identified core accounts is very compact and

7Rather than matching a lender to a borrower, lenders deposit funds into the Aave liquidity pools, ensuring a continuous
supply of funds, which leads to market capitalization perfectly correlated with price [Whitepaper.io 2020].

10

Ziqiao Ao, Gergely Horvath*, and Luyao Zhang*

Fig. 3. Core-periphery structure features distribution box plots
Note: This figure plots the distribution of the number of core nodes (left panel) and the average number of neighbors of core
nodes (right panel) on days with significant (p value smaller than 0.05) and insignificant core-periphery test results.

cohesive, resulting in a significant core-periphery structure, which is also more centralized in
the transaction since the core nodes are dominant. In contrast, the right panel shows a looser
overall connection. Each identified core node has a smaller degree, with many scattered periphery
nodes; some nodes require a long step size to connect to other nodes, which prevents the structure
from being significantly certified as core-periphery and adds to the level of decentralization in the
transaction network.

Fig. 4. Network graphs on 2020-10-12 (left panel) and 2021-02-22 (right panel)
Note: This figure shows the core-periphery network graphs of transactions among the identified core accounts based on the
cpnet.BE algorithms in a spiral layout on 2020-10-12 (left panel) and 2021-02-22 (right panel), where the dark dots represent
the core nodes and the light dots are the periphery nodes. The left panel returns a. significant p-value in the significance
test, while the right panel is nonsignificant.

Is decentralized finance actually decentralized?

11

4.1.2 Compare the core-periphery structure for externally owned and contract account. Furthermore,
we investigate addresses/accounts that were once identified as core members in the graphs. There
are two types of accounts defined on Ethereum: externally owned accounts (EOAs) and contract
accounts (CAs, also called smart contracts) [Hu et al. 2021]. EOAs are created and owned by users
with a private key set and can be utilized to deposit and transfer assets and call smart contracts [Hu
et al. 2021]. The CAs are execution programs composed of smart contract code, which also possesses
asset balance and will be automatically executed if the trigger condition in met [Szabo 1997]. We
record the accounts that appear to be identified as core nodes during the period and the number of
days that they become core, based on the daily networks constructed by the Borgatti-Everett (BE)
algorithm [Borgatti and Everett 2000]. We extract the type of account (EOA or CA) according to
Etherscan.io [etherscan.io 2019].

Figure 5 plots the distribution of the number of core days for EOAs and CAs. From the graph, the
range of day counts is generally larger for the contract accounts, where the extreme value is much
larger than its counterpart for externally owned accounts. The four outliers identified (two for CA
and two for EOA) appear to be in the core for many of the days, resulting in a centralized transaction
that could significantly affect the level of decentralization. We investigate the detailed account
information of these four accounts by Etherscan.io [etherscan.io 2019] for further explanation.

Fig. 5. Core day count distribution box plots
Note: This figure plots the distribution of the number of core days for EOAs and CAs, where the y axis is the number of
days in which the node is in the core.

The two outliers among EOAs are Binance and Coinbase, which are the two top centralized
exchanges in the cryptocurrency market. A centralized exchange is a significant online platform
for users to buy and sell cryptocurrencies, offering security and monitoring for the individual to
complete the transaction in a trustworthy environment [Reiff 2019]. Due to the popularity of these
two centralized exchanges, a tremendously large number of transfers occur through these two
accounts daily between the same and different types of cryptocurrencies by many EOAs. Given the

12

Ziqiao Ao, Gergely Horvath*, and Luyao Zhang*

results of the core-periphery structure, the centralized exchange exerts a significant influence on
the AAVE daily transaction network and brings a high level of “centralization” to it.

The two outliers among CAs are decentralized exchanges, we find that one of them is an
automated market maker on Uniswap, a decentralized exchange for transactions between AAVE
and Ether. Automated market makers (AMMs), first introduced by Hanson’s logarithmic market
scoring rule (LMSR) [Hanson 2003], are contracts that allow liquidity to be automatically provided to
the crypto market automatically [Fritsch and Zürich 2021]. Based on the AMM, this contract is built
on Uniswap, which allows agents to trade between AAVE and Ether at the price and rates specified
by the pricing function, and the price is kept enormous centered transaction network around this
account, which greatly influences the core-periphery structure and increases the centralization of
the AAVE transaction graph. Another is the smart contract of Stated AAVE, which performs the
functions in the Aave decentralized bank of staking (moving assets to long-term saving account),
redeeming (getting collateral back), getting rewards (claiming interest rates), etc. [Whitepaper.io
2020].

On the one hand, the two outliers of centralized exchanges put the promise of blockchain
decentralization in doubt; on the other hand, the two outliers of decentralized exchanges evidence
that blockchain can mitigate the dependence on trusted centralized entities.

4.2 Blockchain network dynamics and correlations
In addition to the core-periphery structure, we use other network properties to capture market
centralization. We find that all the intertemporal network features indicate consistent dynamics
whereby the AAVE token transaction network first becomes more decentralized and then reverts
to being more centralized.

4.2.1 Numbers of components. When the market is more centralized, we expect to have fewer
components in the network since most transactions go through a central node that connects most
nodes indirectly, forming a network component. The left upper panel of Figure 6 plots the number
of components over time. The graph suggests that the AAVE market first became increasingly
decentralized, as indicated by the increase in the number of components up to February 2021,
and then showed a tendency to centralize as the number of components increased. The network
structure of the market converged to approximately 100 components after July 2021.

4.2.2 Giant component size ratio. A related network property is the relative size of the giant
component. In a centralized market, the giant component covers a large fraction of the nodes, while
in a decentralized market, the giant component is relatively small. The lower right panel of Figure 6
shows that the relative size of the giant component first decreased and then increased. This again
suggests that the market was initially decentralized and then became more centralized.

4.2.3 Modularity score. The modularity score is small when the market is centralized, meaning
that there are no separate communities in the network. In contrast, in a decentralized market,
many communities are not or are only weakly connected to each other, implying a high modularity
score. The right upper panel of Figure 6 shows the evolution of modularity. The modularity score
increased first, indicating a tendency to decentralize, and then it started to decrease, suggesting
centralization.

4.2.4 The standard deviation of degree centrality. The standard deviation of degree centrality is
large (small) when the market is centralized (decentralized) since, in a centralized market, a few
hubs have a high degree while the other nodes have only a few connections. In the right middle
panel of Figure 6, we see that the standard deviation of degree centrality first decreased and then

Is decentralized finance actually decentralized?

13

Fig. 6. Time-series plots of network features
Note: This figure gives time-series plots of network features included in our study, with the feature name in the title of each
panel.

increased, suggesting that the market first showed a tendency toward decentralization and then
toward centralization.

4.2.5 P value of core-periphery structure test. We plot the significance level of the core-periphery
model test and the number of cores returned by the BE algorithm. The transaction network is
more centralized if the core-periphery test gives a significant result (p<0.05) or the number of cores
is lower. We observe in the two lowest panels of Figure 6 that, according to these measures, the
AAVE transaction network first decentralized around the middle of the sample period and then
centralized toward the end of the sample period.

4.2.6 More on the core-periphery structure. Finally, we compute the correlations between the
different network features that we use as measures of centralization to confirm that they move to-
gether as expected by our explanation. Centralization implies the significance of the core-periphery
structure statistical tests (low p-value), a low number of components, a low modularity score, the
large size of the giant component, and a high standard deviation of degree centrality. This implies
that the sign of the correlations between these network features should be as indicated in Figure 7,

14

Ziqiao Ao, Gergely Horvath*, and Luyao Zhang*

where we also show the empirical values of these correlations. We can observe that the signs of the
correlations are as expected based on our network-based measures of centralization.

Fig. 7. Correlation heatmap of network features
Note: This figure plots the correlation between network features, red represents a positive correlation while blue represents
a negative correlation. The depth of the color is proportional to the correlation coefficient value.

4.3 Counterfactual impact evaluation
4.3.1 Background and Methods. Liu and Tsyvinski [2018]’s study demonstrated that there is strong
evidence of time-series momentum at various time horizons of the cryptocurrency network features;
this evidence could potentially indicate a momentum effect of the network on DeFi economic metrics.
In addition, considering that the economic metrics of DeFi tokens are volatile at a daily level, the
technique indicators may not have predictive power for them. To assess this, we conduct OLS
regression to predict the effect of the cumulative future economic variables’ change at different
time horizons on the network structure variation. We utilize Python smf.ols for the OLS regressions
with return (ROI), total value locked, and volatility as the dependent variables. Each dependent
variable is regressed on each of the seven measures of changes in the token transfer network and
each of the two measures of changes in economic metrics 8. To avoid the issues of heterogeneity
and autocorrelation, we generalize the regressions with Newey-West estimators [Liu and Tsyvinski
2018]. We predict the cumulative future economic variables’ growth at one-day, one-week to
eight-week and ninety-day horizons using the 7-day moving average of network features [Liu and
Tsyvinski 2018] to compare the effect of momentum on the regressions.

4.3.2 Results on market returns. Figure 8 presents the results of the token market returns (USD)
using the 7-day moving average of network variables (The regression table is given in Table 5 in Ap-
pendix). Considering token market returns, we find evidence that the level of market centralization
predicts token returns in the long run; namely, in a more decentralized market, the token returns

87-days moving average is not applied to cp_significance considering the meaning and explain-ability of the binary variable.

Is decentralized finance actually decentralized?

15

Fig. 8. Results of the token market returns (USD)
Note: This figure reports the results of predicting the token market returns (USD) using the 7-day moving average of
network variables (except cp significance).

will be higher. 9 All our regressions based on network features point in this direction. A higher num-
ber of components implies a decentralized market and it is significantly and positively correlated
with token returns after 14 days. A higher value of modularity also suggests a decentralized market
and is significantly and positively correlated with market returns after 21 days. Conversely, low
values of the standard deviation of degree centrality and the relative size of the giant component
imply decentralization. Both of these measures are significantly and negatively correlated with
market returns in the long run. In addition, the significance of the core-periphery test structure,
which indicates the property of a centralized core-periphery network, is negatively correlated with
market returns for most time horizons beyond 7 days. We note that considering the short run, the
market returns are very volatile and, hence, our network measures are not significantly correlated
with it. This is also reflected in the R-squared value in our regressions: it is very close to zero for
the short-run regressions and increases with the time horizon. 10

4.3.3 Results of the principal-component analysis of market returns. We further confirm our results
by principal-component analysis. We determine the optimal number of factors by maximizing the
explained variance of the five network features that we use as measures of centralization. This

9The prediction results are consistent with stakeholders’ expectations of blockchain to be decentralized, i.e., if the transaction
network of DeFi tokens is more decentralized, stakeholders would be more optimistic about the future returns, which leads
to a self-confirming equilibrium of higher returns.
10The result that short-term returns of crypto tokens is less likely to be predictable by other features is consistent with [Liu
and Zhang 2022]

16

Ziqiao Ao, Gergely Horvath*, and Luyao Zhang*

gives us three factors that together explain 97% of the variance. The factor loadings are depicted in
Figure 9. Factor 1 explains most of the variance at 84% and can be interpreted as a measurement of
decentralization since it is positively correlated with the number of components and the modularity
score, and negatively correlated with the size of the giant component, the standard deviation
of degree centrality and the significance of the core-periphery test. Factors 2-3 are also highly
correlated with the network features but capture much less of the variance. We use these factors in
the regressions of market returns at different horizons; the results are shown in Table 5. Focusing on
Factor 1, which measures decentralization, we find that it is significantly and positively correlated
with market returns. This means that a higher degree of decentralization is associated with higher
market returns, which is consistent with our findings considering the individual network measures
discussed above.

Fig. 9. Interpretation of PCA
Note: This figure depicts the correlation coefficient between the original variables and the components. Positive and
negative values in the graph reflect the positive and negative correlation of the variables with the PCs. Red represents a
positive correlation, blue represents a negative correlation, and the depth of the color is proportional to the correlation
coefficient value.

4.3.4 Results on market volatility. Turning to our measure of market volatility, shown in Figure 10
we perform a similar analysis (the regression table is given in Table 6 in Appendix). We find
mixed results regarding the impact of our centrality measures on market volatility. Considering the
number of components, we find that a higher number of components is significantly and positively
correlated with future market volatility in the short run (7-28 days) and is not significant in the
long run. This suggests that a more decentralized market leads to higher volatility. In contrast, the
modularity score is significantly and negatively correlated with market volatility in the medium
run (24-42 days) and is not significant otherwise. This suggests that in a decentralized market
with a higher modularity score, volatility is lower. We also find that the significance of the core-
periphery network structural test is negatively correlated with market volatility. This means that for
centralized core-periphery networks, the volatility is lower. In addition, the relative size of the giant
component and the standard deviation of the degree centrality is not significantly correlated with
market volatility at any time horizon. Our mixed results on the impact of centralization on market
volatility can be rationalized on the grounds of the complex relationship between centralization

Is decentralized finance actually decentralized?

17

and volatility. On the one hand, a more decentralized market should have lower volatility since
the impact of shocks is more distributed in a decentralized market. In contrast, in a centralized
market, shocks in central hubs are easily transmitted to all participants. On the other hand, higher
volatility is correlated with higher returns and we have seen that decentralization leads to higher
returns which may also be correlated with higher volatility. Our different network measures may
capture different parts of these effects.

Fig. 10. Results of the 30-day volatility growth rate
Note: This figure reports the results of predicting the 30-day volatility growth rate using the 7-day moving average of
network variables (except cp significance).

4.3.5 Results of the principal component analysis of volatility. We also use the factors from the
principal component analysis in the regression of volatility, and the results are shown in Table 6.
Considering Factor 1, which measures the degree of decentralization, we find that a higher degree
of decentralization is associated with higher volatility. Our combined measure of decentralization
thus supports the view that in a decentralized transaction network, market volatility is higher.

For the total value locked, we do not obtain too many significant results in this study; more
variables representing network decentralization could be added as independent variables in the
future to refine the model. The regression result table is in Appendix B.

5 CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION

5.1 Extensions in three facets
Our study shows that social network analysis is instrumental in characterizing the level, dynamics,
and impacts of decentralization in DeFi token transactions. Our research is also seminal in terms

18

Ziqiao Ao, Gergely Horvath*, and Luyao Zhang*

of inspiring future research on the three facets of application scenarios, research questions, and
methodology.

(1) Application Scenarios. Our methods can be generally applied to transaction tokens issued
by other DeFi protocols, such as decentralized payment, exchange, assets, derivatives and
even non-financial applications on blockchains. 11

(2) Research Questions. We can extend our analysis to study the interplay of other network
features and economic variables. For example, one straightforward follow-up research is to
extend the analysis to include other network features for which we have provided open-source
data as defined in Appendix A.

(3) Methodology. We can further explore the interplay of network dynamics and token eco-
nomics by causal inference through advanced econometrics and prediction algorithms in
machine learning [Athey 2015].

5.2 On the mechanics of blockchain decentralization
Is decentralized finance actually decentralized? The answer from our pioneering blockchain network
study is intriguing. We found that the current research on decentralization tends to neglect two
important aspects of the mechanics of blockchain decentralization:

(1) How do incentives affect agents’ behavior in transaction network formations?
(2) How do incentives affect the final realizations of network decentralization?

These two gaps neglections in the literature leave a door for future research to improve the
mechanism to support a truly decentralized economy. Why? The blockchain infrastructure only
provides the possibility for peer-to-peer transactions. However, the actually realized decentralization
of blockchain transaction networks depends on the behavior of stakeholders, who are affected by
incentives. If we can better understand the incentives that govern the stakeholders’ behavior and
the formation of transaction networks, we can design incentives schemes to support desired levels
of decentralization. 12 Future research can experiment with other scientific methods of theoretical
modeling and simulations. For example, we can further apply network game theory [Azouvi and
Hicks 2020] to distributed systems to study how incentives affect agents’ strategic behaviors and the
transaction network formations on the blockchain. We can also apply agent-based modeling [Iori
and Porter 2012] to simulate the transaction networks on blockchain to systematically evaluate the
effect of incentive design changes.

REFERENCES
Kartik Anand, Prasanna Gai, Sujit Kapadia, Simon Brennan, and Matthew Willison. 2013. A network model of financial system
resilience. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 85 (01 2013), 219–235. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jebo.2012.04.006
Susan Athey. 2015. Machine learning and causal inference for policy evaluation. In Proceedings of the 21th ACM SIGKDD

international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining. 5–6.

Sarah Azouvi and Alexander Hicks. 2020. SoK: Tools for Game Theoretic Models of Security for Cryptocurrencies.

arXiv:1905.08595 [cs] (02 2020). https://arxiv.org/abs/1905.08595

Ana Babus and Péter Kondor. 2018. Trading and Information Diffusion in Over-the-Counter Markets. Econometrica 86

(2018), 1727–1769. https://doi.org/10.3982/ecta12043

Albert-László Barabási. 2016. Network Science. Cambridge University Press. http://networksciencebook.com/
Paul Baran. 1964. ON DISTRIBUTED COMMUNICATIONS: I. INTRODUCTION TO DISTRIBUTED COMMUNICATIONS

NETWORKS,. https://apps.dtic.mil/sti/citations/AD0444830

Marco Bardoscia, Stefano Battiston, Fabio Caccioli, and Guido Caldarelli. 2017. Pathways towards instability in financial

networks. Nature Communications 8 (02 2017). https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms14416

11Refer to [Zhang et al. 2022] and the references therein.
12Our results resonate with those of Zhang et al. [2022], but with a unique perspective from social network analysis.

Is decentralized finance actually decentralized?

19

Massimo Bartoletti. 2020. Smart Contracts Contracts. Frontiers in Blockchain 3 (06 2020). https://doi.org/10.3389/fbloc.2020.

00027

Paolo Barucca and Fabrizio Lillo. 2016. Disentangling bipartite and core-periphery structure in financial networks. Chaos,

Solitons & Fractals 88 (07 2016), 244–253. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chaos.2016.02.004

Stefano Battiston, Michelangelo Puliga, Rahul Kaushik, Paolo Tasca, and Guido Caldarelli. 2012. DebtRank: Too Central to
Fail? Financial Networks, the FED and Systemic Risk. Scientific Reports 2 (08 2012). https://doi.org/10.1038/srep00541
Annika Baumann, Benjamin Fabian, and Matthias Lischke. 2014. Exploring the Bitcoin Network. https://doi.org/10.5220/

0004937303690374

Google Bigquery. 2022. BigQuery public datasets. https://cloud.google.com/bigquery/public-data
Francisco Blasques, Falk Bräuning, and Iman van Lelyveld. 2018. A dynamic network model of the unsecured interbank
lending market. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 90 (05 2018), 310–342. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jedc.2018.03.015
Stephen P Borgatti and Martin G Everett. 2000. Models of core/periphery structures. Social Networks 21 (10 2000), 375–395.

https://doi.org/10.1016/s0378-8733(99)00019-2

Jakob J. Bosma, Michael Koetter, and Michael Wedow. 2017. Too Connected to Fail? Inferring Network Ties From Price Co-
Movements. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 37 (05 2017), 67–80. https://doi.org/10.1080/07350015.2016.1272459
Alexandre Bovet, Carlo Campajola, Francesco Mottes, Valerio Restocchi, Nicolò Vallarano, Tiziano Squartini, and Claudio J.
Tessone. 2019. The evolving liaisons between the transaction networks of Bitcoin and its price dynamics. arXiv:1907.03577
[physics, q-fin] (07 2019). https://arxiv.org/abs/1907.03577

John P. Boyd, William J. Fitzgerald, Matthew C. Mahutga, and David A. Smith. 2010. Computing continuous core/periphery
structures for social relations data with MINRES/SVD. Social Networks 32 (05 2010), 125–137. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
socnet.2009.09.003

Jason Brownlee. 2017. A Gentle Introduction to Autocorrelation and Partial Autocorrelation. https://machinelearningmastery.

com/gentle-introduction-autocorrelation-partial-autocorrelation/

Carlo Campajola, Raffaele Cristodaro, Francesco Maria De Collibus, Tao Yan, Nicolo’ Vallarano, and Claudio J. Tessone.
2022. The Evolution Of Centralisation on Cryptocurrency Platforms. arXiv:2206.05081 [physics, q-fin] (06 2022).
https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.05081

Rodrigo Canales and Ramana Nanda. 2012. A darker side to decentralized banks: Market power and credit rationing in SME

lending. Journal of Financial Economics 105 (08 2012), 353–366. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2012.03.006

Tao-Hung Chang and Davor Svetinovic. 2016. Data Analysis of Digital Currency Networks: Namecoin Case Study.

,

122–125 pages. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICECCS.2016.023

coinmarketcap. 2022. Aave price today, AAVE to USD live, marketcap and chart. https://coinmarketcap.com/currencies/aave/
Coinmetrics. 2022. GitHub - coinmetrics/data: Archives of data produced by coinmetrics.io. https://github.com/coinmetrics/

data

Lin William Cong, Ke Tang, Yanxin Wang, and Xi Zhao. 2022. Inclusion and Democratization Through Web3 and DeFi?

Initial Evidence from the Ethereum Ecosystem. https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=4162966

Lin William Cong and Yizhou Xiao. 2021. Categories and Functions of Crypto-Tokens. , 267–284 pages. https://link.springer.

com/chapter/10.1007%2F978-3-030-66433-6_12

P. Csermely, A. London, L.-Y. Wu, and B. Uzzi. 2013. Structure and dynamics of core/periphery networks. Journal of Complex

Networks 1 (10 2013), 93–123. https://doi.org/10.1093/comnet/cnt016

Mihai Cucuringu, Puck Rombach, Sang Hoon Lee, and Mason A. Porter. 2016. Detection of core–periphery structure in
networks using spectral methods and geodesic paths. European Journal of Applied Mathematics 27 (12 2016), 846–887.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S095679251600022X

Francesco Maria De Collibus, Alberto Partida, Matija Piškorec, and Claudio J. Tessone. 2021. Heterogeneous Preferential
Attachment in Key Ethereum-Based Cryptoassets. Frontiers in Physics 9 (10 2021). https://doi.org/10.3389/fphy.2021.720708
Marco Di Maggio, Amir Kermani, and Zhaogang Song. 2017. The value of trading relations in turbulent times. Journal of
Financial Economics 124 (2017), 266–284. https://econpapers.repec.org/article/eeejfinec/v_3a124_3ay_3a2017_3ai_3a2_
3ap_3a266-284.htm

Darrell Duffie, Nicolae Garleanu, and Lasse Heje Pedersen. 2005. Over-the-Counter Markets. Econometrica 73 (11 2005),

1815–1847. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-0262.2005.00639.x

etherscan.io. 2019. Ethereum (ETH) Blockchain Explorer. https://etherscan.io/
Stefano Ferretti and Gabriele D’Angelo. 2019. On the Ethereum blockchain structure: A complex networks theory perspective.

Concurrency and Computation: Practice and Experience 32 (08 2019). https://doi.org/10.1002/cpe.5493

Robin Fritsch and Eth Zürich. 2021. Concentrated Liquidity in Automated Market Makers. https://arxiv.org/pdf/2110.01368.

pdf

Prasanna Gai, Andrew Haldane, and Sujit Kapadia. 2011. Complexity, concentration and contagion. Journal of Monetary
Economics 58 (2011), 453–470. https://econpapers.repec.org/article/eeemoneco/v_3a58_3ay_3a2011_3ai_3a5_3ap_3a453-
470.htm

20

Ziqiao Ao, Gergely Horvath*, and Luyao Zhang*

Ryan J. Gallagher, Jean-Gabriel Young, and Brooke Foucault Welles. 2021. A clarified typology of core-periphery structure

in networks. Science Advances 7 (03 2021), eabc9800. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.abc9800

Benedict George. 2022. Why TVL Matters in DeFi: Total Value Locked Explained. https://www.coindesk.com/learn/why-

tvl-matters-in-defi-total-value-locked-explained/

Lewis Gudgeon, Sam M. Werner, Daniel Perez, and William J. Knottenbelt. 2020. DeFi Protocols for Loanable Funds: Interest

Rates, Liquidity and Market Efficiency. arXiv:2006.13922 [cs, q-fin] (10 2020). https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.13922

Aric A Hagberg, Daniel A Schult, and Pieter J Swart. 2008. Exploring Network Structure, Dynamics, and Function using

NetworkX. http://conference.scipy.org/proceedings/SciPy2008/paper_2/full_text.pdf

Hanna Halaburda, Guillaume Haeringer, Joshua S. Gans, and Neil Gandal. 2022. The Microeconomics of Cryptocurrencies.

Journal of Economic Literature (forthcoming) (2022). https://works.bepress.com/halaburda/48/

Robin Hanson. 2003. Combinatorial Information Market Design. Information Systems Frontiers 5 (2003), 107–119. https:

//doi.org/10.1023/a:1022058209073

Campbell R. Harvey, Ashwin Ramachandran, and Joey Santoro. 2021. DeFi and the Future of Finance. https://papers.ssrn.

com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3711777

Burton Hollifield, Artem Neklyudov, and Chester Spatt. 2017. Bid-Ask Spreads, Trading Networks, and the Pricing of

Securitizations. The Review of Financial Studies 30 (05 2017), 3048–3085. https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhx027

Teng Hu, Xiaolei Liu, Ting Chen, Xiaosong Zhang, Xiaoming Huang, Weina Niu, Jiazhong Lu, Kun Zhou, and Yuan Liu.
2021. Transaction-based classification and detection approach for Ethereum smart contract. Information Processing &
Management 58 (03 2021), 102462. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ipm.2020.102462

Wolfgang Karl Härdle, Campbell R Harvey, and Raphael C G Reule. 2020. Understanding Cryptocurrencies*. Journal of

Financial Econometrics 18 (2020), 181–208. https://doi.org/10.1093/jjfinec/nbz033

G. Iori and J. Porter. 2012. Agent-Based Modelling for Financial Markets. https://openaccess.city.ac.uk/id/eprint/1744/
Matthew O Jackson. 2008. Social and Economic Networks 1. https://web.stanford.edu/~jacksonm/netbook.pdf
SADAMORI KOJAKU. 2022. A Python package for detecting core-periphery structure in networks. https://github.com/

skojaku/core-periphery-detection/blob/master/cpnet/BE.py

Sadamori Kojaku and Naoki Masuda. 2017. Finding multiple core-periphery pairs in networks. Physical Review E 96 (11

2017). https://doi.org/10.1103/physreve.96.052313

Sadamori Kojaku and Naoki Masuda. 2018a. Core-periphery structure requires something else in the network. New Journal

of Physics 20 (04 2018), 043012. https://doi.org/10.1088/1367-2630/aab547

Sadamori Kojaku and Naoki Masuda. 2018b. A generalised significance test for individual communities in networks. Scientific

Reports 8 (05 2018). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-25560-z

Dániel Kondor, Márton Pósfai, István Csabai, and Gábor Vattay. 2014. Do the Rich Get Richer? An Empirical Analysis of the

Bitcoin Transaction Network. PLoS ONE 9 (02 2014), e86197. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0086197

Sam Langfield, Zijun Liu, and Tomohiro Ota. 2014. Mapping the UK interbank system. Journal of Banking & Finance 45

(2014), 288–303. https://econpapers.repec.org/article/eeejbfina/v_3a45_3ay_3a2014_3ai_3ac_3ap_3a288-303.htm

Alfred Lehar and Christine Parlour. 2021. Decentralized Exchanges. https://www.snb.ch/n/mmr/reference/sem_2021_05_

20_lehar/source/sem_2021_05_20_lehar.n.pdf

Yitao Li, Umar Islambekov, Cuneyt Akcora, Ekaterina Smirnova, Yulia Gel, and Murat Kantarcioglu. 2019. Dissecting
Ethereum Blockchain Analytics: What We Learn from Topology and Geometry of Ethereum Graph. https://arxiv.org/
pdf/1912.10105.pdf

Jiaqi Liang, Linjing Li, and Daniel Zeng. 2018. Evolutionary dynamics of cryptocurrency transaction networks: An empirical

study. PLOS ONE 13 (08 2018), e0202202. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0202202

Yukun Liu and Aleh Tsyvinski. 2018. Risks and Returns of Cryptocurrency. https://www.nber.org/papers/w24877
Yulin Liu and Luyao Zhang. 2022. Cryptocurrency valuation: An explainable ai approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.12893

(2022).

Fragkiskos D. Malliaros, C. Giatsidis, A. Papadopoulos, and M. Vazirgiannis. 2019. The core decomposition of networks:

theory, algorithms and applications. The VLDB Journal (2019). https://doi.org/10.1007/s00778-019-00587-4

Jianjun Miao. 2006. A search model of centralized and decentralized trade. Review of Economic Dynamics 9 (01 2006), 68–92.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.red.2005.10.003

Amir Pasha Motamed and Behnam Bahrak. 2019. Quantitative analysis of cryptocurrencies transaction graph. Applied

Network Science 4 (12 2019). https://doi.org/10.1007/s41109-019-0249-6

Evelien Otte and Ronald Rousseau. 2002. Social network analysis: a powerful strategy, also for the information sciences.

Journal of Information Science 28 (12 2002), 441–453. https://doi.org/10.1177/016555150202800601

Kirill Polovnikov, Vlad Kazakov, and Sergey Syntulsky. 2020. Core–periphery organization of the cryptocurrency market
inferred by the modularity operator. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 540 (02 2020), 123075. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.physa.2019.123075

Is decentralized finance actually decentralized?

21

DeFi Pulse. 2022. DeFi Pulse - The Decentralized Finance Leaderboard | Stats, Charts and Guides | DeFi Pulse. https:

//www.defipulse.com/

Nathan Reiff. 2019. What Are Centralized Cryptocurrency Exchanges? https://www.investopedia.com/tech/what-are-

centralized-cryptocurrency-exchanges/

Puck Rombach, Mason A. Porter, James H. Fowler, and Peter J. Mucha. 2017. Core-Periphery Structure in Networks

(Revisited). SIAM Rev. 59 (01 2017), 619–646. https://doi.org/10.1137/17m1130046

Fabio Della Rossa, Fabio Dercole, and Carlo Piccardi. 2013. Profiling core-periphery network structure by random walkers.

Scientific Reports 3 (03 2013). https://doi.org/10.1038/srep01467

John Scott. 1988. Social Network Analysis. Sociology 22 (02 1988), 109–127. https://doi.org/10.1177/0038038588022001007
Peng Sui, Sailesh Tanna, and Dandan Zhou. 2019. Financial contagion in a core-periphery interbank network. The European

Journal of Finance (06 2019), 1–20. https://doi.org/10.1080/1351847x.2019.1630460

Nick Szabo. 1997. Nick Szabo – The Idea of Smart Contracts. https://www.fon.hum.uva.nl/rob/Courses/InformationInSpeech/

CDROM/Literature/LOTwinterschool2006/szabo.best.vwh.net/idea.html

Nicoló Vallarano, Claudio J. Tessone, and Tiziano Squartini. 2020. Bitcoin Transaction Networks: An Overview of Recent

Results. Frontiers in Physics 8 (12 2020). https://doi.org/10.3389/fphy.2020.00286

Sam M. Werner, Daniel Perez, Lewis Gudgeon, Ariah Klages-Mundt, Dominik Harz, and William J. Knottenbelt. 2021. SoK:

Decentralized Finance (DeFi). https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2021arXiv210108778W/abstract

Whitepaper.io. 2020. Aave whitepaper - whitepaper.io. https://whitepaper.io/document/533/aave-whitepaper
Tae-Sub Yun, Deokjong Jeong, and Sunyoung Park. 2019. “Too central to fail” systemic risk measure using PageRank
algorithm. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 162 (06 2019), 251–272. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jebo.2018.12.021
Luyao Zhang, Xinshi Ma, and Yulin Liu. 2022. SoK: Blockchain Decentralization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.04256 (2022).

https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.04256

A NETWORK FEATURES
Table 3 contains 24 daily network features calculated from the AAVE transaction data we calculated
using the NetworkX package, which can be used as a reference for further network studies.

B ECONOMIC VARIABLES
Table 4 contains 3 economic variables for the AAVE transaction data, which can be used for further
studying the interaction between network features and economic variables.

C SUPPLEMENTARY REGRESSION TABLE
Table 5 gives the regression result table of the token market returns (USD).

Table 6 gives the regression result table of the 30-day volatility growth rate.
Table 7 gives the regression result table of total value locked.

22

Ziqiao Ao, Gergely Horvath*, and Luyao Zhang*

Table 3. Network Features

Name

Definition

num_nodes
num_edges
Degree mean
Degree std
Top10Degree mean

Top10Degree std

Number of unique addresses in daily transaction network.
Number of transactions in daily transaction network.
The number of edges a node has, an average of nodes.
The number of edges a node has the standard deviation of nodes.
Average degree of the addresses with top 10 highest degree values
during the whole period.
Standard deviation of the degree of the addresses with the top 10
highest degree values during the whole period.

Top10 Degree mean ratio Top 10 addresses’ degree mean divided by the general degree

Relative degree

DCmean
DCstd
Cluster_mean

Cluster_std

Modularity

Transitivity

eig_mean

eig_std

closeness_mean
closeness_std

giant_com_ratio

Components_cnt

cp_test_pvalue
cp_significance
core_cnt

avg_core_neighbor

mean.
Network density. The portion of the potential connections in a
network is actual connections.
The average value of degree centrality.
The standard deviation of degree centrality.
Mean of clustering coefficient. The degree to which nodes in a
graph tend to cluster together.
Standard deviation of clustering coefficient. The degree to which
nodes in a graph tend to cluster together.
Modularity is a way to measure the strength of a network divided
into modules. A network with a high degree of modularity has
dense connections between nodes within a module, but sparse
connections between nodes in different modules.
Transitivity is the overall probability for the network to have
adjacent nodes interconnected, thus revealing the existence of
tightly connected communities.
Mean of eigenvector centrality. Measures the degree to which the
division of a network into communities.
Standard deviation of eigenvector centrality. Measures the degree
to which the division of a network into communities.
Mean of closeness centrality. The reciprocal of the farness.
Standard deviation of closeness centrality. The reciprocal of the
farness.
Size of the giant component divided by the total number of nodes
in the daily transaction network.
The components of the network are the various disconnected
parts, where there is no path that can connect from a node in one
component to a node in another component. Components_cnt
here refers to the number of components in the daily transaction
network
P-value of the significant test of the core-periphery structure.
1 if cp_test_pvalue is less than 0.05, else 0.
Number of nodes in the core based on the BE core-periphery
structure algorithm in the daily transaction network.
the Average number of neighbors (degree) of the core nodes de-
tected by the core-periphery structure algorithm in daily transac-
tion network.

Note: This table gives the general definitions of all network features calculated in our study with the explanation.

Is decentralized finance actually decentralized?

23

Table 4. Major Economic Variables

Name

Definition

PriceUSD
VtyDayRet30d The volatility over 30 days, measured as the standard deviation of the natural

The fixed closing price of the asset in USD.

tvlUSD

log of daily returns over the past 30 days.
The total amount locked in that particular token in USD.
Note: This table gives the general definitions of the economic variables used as dependent variables in regressions.

Table 5. Results of the token market returns (USD)

Time horizon

△ component cnt
𝑅2
Residual Std. Error
△ giant com ratio
𝑅2
Residual Std. Error
△ log(modularity)
𝑅2
Residual Std. Error
△ log(DCstd)
𝑅2
Residual Std. Error
cp significance
R2
Residual Std. Error
PCA component1
PCA component2
PCA component3
𝑅2
Residual Std. Error

t, t+1
(1)

-0.015
0
(0.129)
0.024
0
(0.129)
0.011
0
(0.129)
0.018
0
(0.129)
-0.014
0.007
(0.080)
0.024
-0.015
0.056
0.011
(0.129)

t, t+7
(2)

t, t+14
(3)

t, t+21
(4)

t, t+28
(5)

t, t+35
(6)

t, t+42
(7)

0.113
0.007
(0.132)
-0.028
0.001
(0.132)
0.059
0.003
(0.132)
0.005
0
(0.132)
-0.090**
0.031
(0.242)
0.047*
-0.117
0.228***
0.107
(0.126)

0.281**
0.029
(0.163)
-0.086
0.003
(0.165)
0.089
0.004
(0.165)
-0.082
0.004
(0.165)
-0.163***
0.039
(0.391)
0.063*
-0.196
0.400***
0.194
(0.149)

0.423***
0.047
(0.192)
-0.188*
0.012
(0.195)
0.278***
0.027
(0.194)
-0.217***
0.021
(0.195)
-0.278***
0.061
(0.528)
0.092***
-0.401***
0.575***
0.3
(0.165)

0.342***
0.037
(0.178)
-0.212*
0.017
(0.180)
0.288***
0.034
(0.179)
-0.268***
0.037
(0.178)
-0.322***
0.046
(0.718)
0.076**
-0.332***
0.487***
0.252
(0.158)

0.318***
0.033
(0.177)
-0.144
0.008
(0.179)
0.212**
0.019
(0.178)
-0.220***
0.026
(0.178)
-0.324**
0.028
(0.931)
0.059*
-0.279***
0.438***
0.202
(0.161)

0.261**
0.021
(0.185)
-0.176
0.011
(0.186)
0.239**
0.023
(0.185)
-0.220***
0.025
(0.185)
-0.314*
0.018
(1.138)
0.045
-0.266***
0.435***
0.177
(0.170)

t, t+49
(8)

0.293**
0.025
(0.192)
-0.377**
0.049
(0.190)
0.351***
0.046
(0.190)
-0.267**
0.034
(0.191)
-0.188
0.005
(1.269)
0.018
-0.249**
0.459***
0.172
(0.178)

t, t+56
(9)

t, t+90
(10)

0.320**
0.025
(0.213)
-0.442***
0.056
(0.209)
0.368**
0.041
(0.211)
-0.257*
0.026
(0.212)
0.056
0
(1.351)
-0.033
-0.256**
0.469***
0.146
(0.200)

0.258**
0.017
(0.221)
-0.332***
0.032
(0.219)
0.592***
0.108
(0.211)
-0.337***
0.046
(0.218)
1.834***
0.124
(2.432)
-0.236***
-0.651***
0.561***
0.42
(0.170)

Note: This table reports the results of predicting the future market return (USD) using the 7-day moving average of network
variables (except cp significance). Columns (1)-(10) represent one day, one week to eight weeks, and 90 days respectively. *,
**, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels. The data frequency is daily. The residual standard errors are
reported in parentheses.

24

Ziqiao Ao, Gergely Horvath*, and Luyao Zhang*

Table 6. Results of the 30-day volatility growth rate

Time horizon

t, t+1
(1)

t, t+7
(2)

t, t+14
(3)

t, t+21
(4)

t, t+28
(5)

t, t+35
(6)

t, t+42
(7)

t, t+49
(8)

t, t+56
(9)

t, t+90
(10)

0.062
0.005
(0.085)
-0.022
0.001
(0.085)
-0.013
0
(0.085)
-0.041
0.004
(0.085)
-0.002
0.001
(0.043)
0.007
0.035
0.025
0.008
(0.085)

0.300***
0.04
(0.151)
-0.041
0.001
(0.154)
-0.036
0.001
(0.151)
-0.162*
0.018
(0.152)
-0.028
0.01
(0.137)
0.03
-0.004
0.132*
0.031
(0.152)

△ component cnt
-0.279**
𝑅2
0.022
Residual Std. Error
(0.219)
△ giant com ratio
0.049
𝑅2
0.001
Residual Std. Error
(0.221)
△ log(modularity)
-0.082
𝑅2
0.003
Residual Std. Error
(0.221)
△ log(DCstd)
0.2
𝑅2
0.017
Residual Std. Error
(0.219)
cp significance
-0.431***
R2
0.191
Residual Std. Error
(0.444)
PCA component1
0.307***
PCA component2
0.441***
PCA component3
-0.831***
𝑅2
0.508
Residual Std. Error
(0.156)
Note: This table reports the results of predicting the 30-day volatility growth rate using the 7-days moving average of
network variables (except cp significance). Columns(1)-(10) represent one day, one week to eight weeks, and 90 days
respectively. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels. The data frequency is daily. The residual
standard errors are reported in parentheses.

0.155
0.005
(0.237)
-0.106
0.003
(0.237)
-0.137
0.006
(0.237)
-0.036
0
(0.237)
-0.412***
0.152
(0.485)
0.252***
-0.019
-0.468***
0.257
(0.205)

0.045
0
(0.246)
-0.079
0.001
(0.246)
-0.131
0.005
(0.245)
-0.022
0
(0.246)
-0.425***
0.152
(0.500)
0.267***
0.009
-0.573***
0.299
(0.207)

0.223
0.008
(0.264)
-0.034
0
(0.265)
-0.338**
0.027
(0.262)
0.232
0.013
(0.263)
-0.294***
0.103
(0.432)
0.191***
-0.280*
-0.109
0.124
(0.249)

0.348**
0.021
(0.253)
-0.043
0
(0.255)
-0.280*
0.02
(0.253)
0.16
0.007
(0.254)
-0.210***
0.068
(0.384)
0.136***
-0.286
0.066
0.076
(0.246)

0.164
0.005
(0.237)
-0.061
0.001
(0.238)
-0.249**
0.018
(0.238)
0.153
0.007
(0.237)
-0.364***
0.131
(0.467)
0.217***
-0.141
-0.291**
0.184
(0.215)

0.349**
0.025
(0.226)
0.01
0
(0.229)
-0.277**
0.024
(0.226)
0.128
0.005
(0.228)
-0.122***
0.035
(0.315)
0.072*
-0.271
0.201*
0.05
(0.224)

0.294**
0.026
(0.185)
-0.017
0
(0.187)
-0.128
0.008
(0.187)
0.016
0
(0.187)
-0.068**
0.02
(0.233)
0.036
-0.196
0.220**
0.044
(0.184)

Table 7. Results of the total value locked change (USD) using the 7-days moving average of network variables

Time horizon

△ component cnt
𝑅2
Residual Std. Error
△ giant com ratio
𝑅2
Residual Std. Error
△ log(modularity)
𝑅2
Residual Std. Error
△ log(DCstd)
𝑅2
Residual Std. Error
cp significance
R2
Residual Std. Error
PCA component1
PCA component2
PCA component3
𝑅2
Residual Std. Error

t, t+1
(1)

0.038
0.001
(0.101)
0.029
0.001
(0.101)
-0.02
0
(0.101)
0.039
0.002
(0.101)
-0.052
0.002
(0.558)
0.001
0.011
-0.005
0.002
(0.101)

t, t+7
(2)

t, t+14
(3)

t, t+21
(4)

t, t+28
(5)

t, t+35
(6)

t, t+42
(7)

t, t+49
(8)

t, t+56
(9)

t, t+90
(10)

-0.032
0.001
(0.132)
0.081
0.005
(0.132)
-0.091*
0.006
(0.132)
0.193***
0.035
(0.130)
-0.290*
0.012
(1.254)
0.076*
-0.007
-0.055
0.022
(0.131)

0.128
0.008
(0.144)
0.036
0.001
(0.144)
-0.098*
0.006
(0.144)
0.061
0.003
(0.144)
-0.700***
0.042
(1.618)
0.092**
0.025
-0.054
0.054
(0.141)

0.192**
0.015
(0.158)
-0.018
0
(0.159)
-0.039
0.001
(0.159)
-0.026
0
(0.159)
-1.161***
0.078
(1.938)
0.048
0.087**
-0.128*
0.082
(0.153)

0.149
0.007
(0.187)
-0.038
0.001
(0.187)
-0.141**
0.008
(0.187)
-0.043
0.001
(0.187)
-1.283***
0.082
(2.090)
0.108
0.073
-0.200**
0.097
(0.179)

0.123
0.005
(0.180)
0.003
0
(0.181)
-0.049
0.001
(0.181)
-0.027
0
(0.181)
-1.412***
0.078
(2.367)
0.132*
0.051
-0.199***
0.101
(0.172)

0.083
0.002
(0.185)
-0.017
0
(0.203)
-0.1
0.003
(0.202)
0.019
0
(0.203)
-1.656***
0.09
(2.570)
0.231***
0.015
-0.285***
0.143
(0.188)

0.095
0.002
(0.202)
-0.097
0.003
(0.214)
0.008
0
(0.215)
-0.005
0
(0.215)
-1.740***
0.093
(2.664)
0.273***
0.001
-0.297***
0.155
(0.198)

0.021
0
(0.200)
-0.126
0.005
(0.199)
-0.032
0
(0.200)
0.013
0
(0.200)
-1.599***
0.084
(2.605)
0.311***
-0.042
-0.289***
0.173
(0.182)

-0.349**
0.037
(0.198)
0.177
0.011
(0.201)
-0.107
0.004
(0.202)
0.073
0.003
(0.202)
-1.528***
0.175
(1.657)
0.126*
0.158***
0.205**
0.227
(0.178)

Note: This table reports the results of predicting the total value locked change using the 7-days moving average of network
variables (except the cp significant). (1) - (10) represents one day, one week to eight weeks, and 90 days respectively. *, **,
and *** denote significance levels at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels. The data frequency is daily. The residual standard errors are
reported in parentheses.

