Applications of Blockchain for the Governance of Integrated Project 
Delivery: A Crypto Commons Approach 
Jens  J.  Hunhevicz1*,  Pierre-Antoine  Brasey1,2,  Marcella  M.  M.  Bonanomi1,3,  Daniel  M.  Hall1,  Martin 
Fischer4 

1  ETH  Zurich,  Institute  of  Construction  and  Infrastructure  Management,  Chair  of  Innovative  and 
Industrial Construction, Zurich, Switzerland 

2 INGPHI Ltd, Concepteurs d’ouvrages d’art, Lausanne, Switzerland 

3 Polis Lombardia, Milan, Italy 

4 Stanford University, Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Stanford, United States  

* Corresponding author: hunhevicz@ibi.baug.ethz.ch 

Abstract 
This  paper  outlines  why  and  how  blockchain  can  digitally  support  and  evolve  the  governance  of 
collaborative project deliveries, such as integrated project deliveries (IPDs), to provide the foundation 
for novel and disruptive forms of organizational collaboration in the construction industry. Previous 
work has conceptualized IPDs as a common pool resource (CPR) scenario, where shared resources are 
collectively governed. Through the use of blockchain and smart contracts for trustworthy peer-to-peer 
transactions  and  execution  logic,  Ostrom’s  design  principles  can  be  digitally  encoded  to  scale  CPR 
scenarios. Building on the identified connections, the paper 1) synthesizes fourteen blockchain-based 
mechanisms  to  govern  CPRs,  2)  identifies  twenty-two  applications  of  these  mechanisms  to  govern 
IPDs,  and  3)  introduces  a  conceptualization  of  the  above  relationships  towards  a  holistic 
understanding  of  collaborative  project  deliveries  on  the  crypto  commons  for  novel  collective 
organization of construction project delivery between both humans and machines. 

Keywords: Integrated Project Delivery (IPD), Common Pool Resource (CPR), Ostrom Principles, Blockchain, Distributed Ledger 
Technology (DLT), Smart Contracts, Decentralized Autonomous Organization (DAO), Construction Automation 

Introduction 

1. 
Construction project delivery models (PDMs) describe how the multiple parties involved in a project 
are  organized  and  managed  to  create  and  capture  value  (Davies  et  al.  2019).  Even  though  the 
construction industry has been slow in adopting digitalization, new digital technologies and processes 
slowly make their way into the construction industry (Singh 2019). Digital information is changing how 
projects are delivered (Whyte 2019); it can motivate the development of novel collaborative PDMs 
with new incentive structures, procurement methods, and approaches to communication. 

Meanwhile,  digital information technologies in  the  construction  industry  are also  rapidly changing. 
One  technology that is increasingly researched  for the  construction  industry  is blockchain (Li  et  al. 
2019;  Li  and  Kassem  2021;  Nawari  and  Ravindran  2019a;  Perera  et  al.  2020;  Wang  et  al.  2017). 
Blockchain is a particular design option of distributed ledger technology (DLT) (Ballandies et al. 2021; 
Tasca  and Tessone  2019) that  enables  direct  peer-to-peer  transactions of value  without relying on 
trusted facilitators. 

The  first  ever  blockchain  created  is  Bitcoin  (Nakamoto  2008).  Since  then,  many  new  blockchains 
iterated on the approach of Bitcoin to enable new features and infrastructure (Spychiger et al. 2021a). 
Most notable, the Ethereum blockchain (Buterin 2014) made it possible that Turing-complete code 
pieces termed smart contracts could be executed on a blockchain. Smart contracts allow for the coding 
of interaction rules with blockchain transactions for digital workflows to coordinate economic activity 

Page 1 of 31 

 
of actors in a decentralized and borderless way. In addition, smart contracts can encode containers of 
value,  so-called tokens,  such  as  currencies,  securities, or  utilities  (Ballandies  et al. 2021; Mougayar 
2017). Tokens can then be transferred among blockchain users. 

Blockchain has been repeatedly theorized as promising to improve construction project management 
practices  (Sonmez  et  al.  2021),  especially  to  support  financial  management,  automatic  contract 
administration, and tracing and securing data along the supply chain (Hewavitharana et al. 2019; Kim 
et al. 2020). This also aligns well with the most often explored use cases for the construction sector 
(Hunhevicz and Hall 2020; Li et al. 2019; Li and Kassem 2021; Perera et al. 2020; Scott et al. 2021). 

However,  scholarship  also  suggests  that  the  impact  of  blockchain  is  highly  disruptive  to  the 
coordination  of  existing  economic  systems  (Davidson  et  al.  2018;  Miscione  et  al.  2019).  Smart 
contracts  can  create  new  organizational  systems,  incentivizing  individual  actors  towards  intended 
collective behaviour (Voshmgir and Zargham 2019). Therefore, blockchain can be an opportunity for 
new organizational designs governing the upcoming digital reality of PDMs (Hunhevicz et al. 2022a; 
Sreckovic and Windsperger 2020). Since construction PDMs are already transforming due to increasing 
digital information (Whyte 2019), there is need to investigate further the impact of the potentially 
disruptive impact of blockchain. 

In  this  paper,  we  conceptualize  why  and  how  blockchain  can  digitally  support  and  evolve  the 
governance  of  PDMs.  To  build  this  conceptualization,  we  specifically  make  use  of  ideas  about 
governance of common pool resource (CPR) scenarios (i.e., the “commons”) (Ostrom 2015a). Scholars 
argue that blockchain-based mechanisms can scale CPR scenario governance (Fritsch et al. 2021; Rozas 
et  al.  2021b;  a).  Such  “crypto  commons“  (Maples  2018)  build  digital  governance  structures  for 
commons  by  leveraging  blockchain-based  market  mechanisms  and  economic  incentives  to  reward 
contributions to the common good (Crypto Commons Association 2021). 

This is interesting because there is strong theoretical alignment between Integrated Project Delivery 
(IPD) and the management of CPR scenarios (Hall and Bonanomi 2021). IPD is a new collaborative PDM 
that uses a relational contracting approach to manage large and complex construction projects. One 
driver for  the  development of  IPD was the  need  for more  flexible  and  collaborative organizational 
structures to gain benefit from digital building information modelling (Hall and Scott 2019). To do this, 
IPD  uses  a  financial  pool  to  share  risk  and  reward  among  project  participants  depending  on  the 
outcome  of  the  project.  IPD  also  emphasizes  decentralized,  agile,  and  self-organized  project 
governance arranged by the project participants. Collaborative PDMs such as IPD can better deal with 
the  complexity  and  ever-changing  nature  of  modern  construction  projects  (Levitt  2011;  Luo  et  al. 
2017). 

The strong alignment of the collective nature of blockchain and collaborative approach of IPD has not 
escaped  the  attention  of  researchers.  Nawari  and  Ravindran  (2019b)  theorize  blockchain  as  a 
“evidence  of  trust”  for  IPD.  Elghaish  et  al.  (2020)  and  Rahimian  et  al.  (2021)  have  developed  a 
blockchain prototype for the IPD financial risk-and-reward system. However, these works mainly apply 
blockchain to improve existing financial processes. As stated above, blockchain has the potential to 
lead to new forms of organization and governance (Davidson et al. 2018; Jacobo-Romero and Freitas 
2021;  Miscione  et  al.  2019),  but  no  work  yet  has explained  how  this might  occur  for  construction 
PDMs. 

Therefore, this paper now explores how the relationships of blockchain, CPR theory, and IPD can be 
used as a theoretical foundation to inform which specific blockchain applications can be developed to 
evolve and redesign PDMs. This is achieved through systematically exploring the connections between 

Page 2 of 31 

 
blockchain, CPRs, and IPD. The results of this work can help to conceive the opportunity of blockchain 
for  IPDs to evolve, or  even  enable  the  formulation of  new digitally  supported  PDMs on  the  crypto 
commons. 

2.  Methodology and Structure of the Paper 
An overview of the research approach and contribution is presented in Figure 1. The methodology 
contained three main steps: 1) We outlined established connections between CPRs, the Ostrom design 
principles (OPs), and IPDs to manage construction resources; 2) we conducted a state-of-the art review 
of all papers and articles that propose to use blockchain to manage CPR and identify the proposed 
mechanisms  for  the  respective  OPs;  3)  we  identified  applications  of  those  mechanisms  for 
collaborative construction projects through using the link between IPDs and the OPs. Each of these 
steps is now described in more detail. 

In the departure section 3, we introduce relevant established concepts between CPR theory and IPD 
that  act  as  basis  for  our  research.  First,  we  introduce  Ostrom’s  design  principles  (OPs)  for  the 
management  of  CPR  scenarios  (Section  3.1).  Second,  we  explain  the  high-level  concepts  of  IPD  to 
manage  construction  project  resources  (Section  3.2).  Finally,  we  outline  the  recently  established 
connection between the OPs and IPD practices (Section 3.3). 

To verify the  link between  blockchain  and  CPR theory  (Section 4),  we  conducted  a  comprehensive 
literature review of all papers and articles that proposed blockchain for the management of CPRs. We 
identify four journal papers (Fritsch et al. 2021; Pazaitis et al. 2017; Rozas et al. 2021b) and five articles 
(Dao 2018; Decoodt 2019; Emmett 2019a; de la Rouviere 2018; Schadeck 2019) proposing to govern 
real-world  commons  with  blockchain-based  mechanisms.  Building  on  these  works,  we  cluster  and 
categorize  fourteen  blockchain  governance  mechanisms  encoding  the  OPs  for  the  governance  of 
crypto commons. 

We  then  use  abductive  analysis  (Timmermans  and  Tavory  2012)  to  theorize  how  blockchain 
governance mechanisms can be transferred to the governance of IPDs. Abduction is making a probable 
conclusion  from  what  is  known  by  systematically  interpreting,  matching,  or  re-contextualizing 
phenomena  within  a  contextual  framework,  from  the  perspective  of  a  new  conceptual  framework 
(Dubois and Gadde 2002b; Kovács and Spens 2005). An abductive approach is fruitful if the objective 
is to develop the understanding of a “new” phenomenon or new insights about existing phenomena 
by examining these from a new perspective (Dubois and Gadde 2002b; Kovács and Spens 2005). 

To do this, we first synthesized applications based on observed alignment between the blockchain 
mechanisms for the OPs and IPD practices in line with the OPs (Hall and Bonanomi 2021). We then 
refined and complemented applications based on supporting blockchain research both from within 
and outside the construction industry. In total, we identified 22 blockchain applications that can be 
used to build IPD governance on the crypto commons (Section 5). 

A holistic overview of the proposed conceptualization of IPD on the crypto commons demonstrates 
the cohesiveness between the relationships of the OPs, the blockchain governance mechanisms, and 
the specific blockchain applications to build novel governance mechanisms for IPDs (Section 6). 

The paper ends with a discussion of the opportunities for blockchain to be applied to IPD and other 
future  forms  of  project  delivery,  as  well  as  the  challenges  for  governance  design  and  for  industry 
implementations to facilitate next research steps (Section 7). 

Page 3 of 31 

 
Figure 1: Schematic representation of the research approach and contribution. CPR related boxes are pictured in white, the 
IPD  related  boxes  in  grey.  The  paper  builds  on  the  existing  conceptualization  between  CPR,  OPs,  and  IPD  (see  “Point  of 
Departure”, Section 3.1 – 3.3. Afterwards, the paper comprehensively reviews literature proposing blockchain for CPRs and 
the  OPs  and  summarizes  the  proposed  mechanisms  (Section  4).  Finally,  the  paper  identifies  applications  of  blockchain 
governance mechanisms for IPD (Section 5) towards a holistic conceptualization of IPD on the crypto commons (Section 6) 
through abductive reasoning using the connection between the mechanisms, OPs, and IPD practices (see red arrow). 

3.  Point of Departure 

3.1.  Governing CPR Scenarios 
CPRs  are  natural  resources,  which  are  freely  shared  among  many  users  (Ostrom  1990).  Examples 
include forests, pastures, fishing grounds, parking lots or wiki libraries. In a CPR scenario, users might 
appropriate resources at a higher than optimal rate, resulting in a downward spiral of total resource 
availability (Hardin 1968). This is known as the tragedy of the commons. For decades, scholars argued 
that  centralized  control  was  the  only  way  to  coordinate  optimal  resource  appropriation  in  CPR 
scenarios. 

However, more recent work pioneered by economist Elinor Ostrom (Ostrom 2010, 2015a; Ostrom et 
al.  1994)  and  others  (Gardner  et  al.  1990)  overturned  these  beliefs.  Ostrom  used  case  studies  to 
demonstrate that local actors are often successful at self-organizing to better sustain CPR scenarios 
when compared to centralized interventions. Ostrom identified eight design principles – the OPs – 
that can guide effective governance of CPR scenarios (Table 1). The OPs explain necessary conditions 
that  should  be  achieved,  to  facilitate  trust  and  reciprocity  and  to  sustain  collective  action  in  long-
lasting CPR scenarios (Cox et al. 2010). 

3.2.  IPD Governance of Construction Projects 
IPD is a project delivery model that formally multiple, independent firms to collectively share financial 
risk and reward among themselves and with the project sponsor during the design and construction 
of a facility (Lahdenperä 2012). IPD governance today can be best described as the combination of 
multiple  formal  and  informal  practices  (Bygballe  et  al.  2015;  Hall  and  Scott  2019).  Such  practices 
include early involvement of key stakeholders, risk and reward mechanisms, joint project control, and 
target value design (Cheng et al. 2016; Hall et al. 2018). 

IPD departs from the traditional model of project delivery in three notable ways (Hall and Bonanomi 
2021). First, the multiparty contract of the IPD model creates a shared financial resource pool for the 
project.  The  project  resources  become  contractually  available  for  free  use  by  any  of  the  project 
signatory  parties.  Second,  the  participants  of  IPD  projects  share  decision-making  rights  over  the 
project governance structures. Decision-making is no longer centralized (Tillmann et al. 2014). Third, 
the  project  team  shares  the  financial  risks  and  rewards  of  the  project. Positive  outcomes  are  split 

Page 4 of 31 

 
 
among participants. The project teams must self-organize (Bertelsen 2003) and determine who has 
access to the shared pools and who is allowed to withdraw from this pool.  

3.3.  Governing IPD using CPR Design Principles 
Recent work has proposed a conceptualization bridging the governance of IPD projects and the OPs 
(Table 1) (Hall and Bonanomi 2021), suggesting that the IPD project environment resembles a CPR 
scenario (Hall and Bonanomi 2021). Project resources are “pooled” together through a multi-party 
contract which shares risk and reward (Darrington and Lichtig 2010; Thomsen et al. 2009).  

Similar as CPR scenarios must avoid the tragedy of the commons, IPD projects must then avoid the 
tragedy of the project – where the project budget and schedule can be subject to over-appropriation 
by  the  project  stakeholders  to  the  long-term  detriment  of  the  project  resource  system  (Hall  and 
Bonanomi  2021).  To  avoid  the  tragedy  of  the  project,  project  managers  create  effective  self-
governance  structures  manifesting  in  specific  management  practices  for  IPDs,  which  demonstrate 
many shared characteristics to the OPs. Additional work has validated this connection with examples 
from IPD project practices (Bonanomi et al. 2019, 2020). Table 1 lists such example practices for IPDs 
aligned with the OPs for CPRs. 

Page 5 of 31 

 
 
Table 1: The eight Ostrom principles and their connection with IPD practices (Source: Hall and Bonanomi (2021)). 

Ostrom Principle (OP) 

1 

Clearly 
Defined 
Boundaries  

2 

Ensure 
congruence 

a) For the users 

b) For the 
resources 
a) With local 
conditions 
b) Between 
appropriation & 
provision rules 

Description of OP (Cox et al. 2010; Ostrom 2015b) 
The boundaries between legitimate and non-users who have right to withdraw 
resource units from the CPR must be clearly defined. 
Resource boundaries of the system must be clearly defined and separated from 
the larger socio-economic system. 
CPR scenarios should ensure congruence with local conditions of appropriation 
rules restricting time, place, technology, and/or quantity of resource units. 
The benefits obtained by users from a CPR, as determined by appropriation rules, 
should  be  proportional to the amount of inputs required  in the  form of labor, 
material, or money, as determined by provision rules. 

3  Collective-choice arrangements 

Most individuals affected by the operational rules can participate in modifying 
the operational rules. 

4 

Monitoring 
of the users 
and the 
resources 

a) Presence 

Monitors are present to actively audit CPR conditions and appropriator behavior 
of the users to ensure that all parties are adhering to agreed-upon tasks. 

b) 
Accountability 

Monitors are accountable to or are the appropriators. 

5  Graduated sanctions 

6  Conflict-resolution mechanisms 

7 

Minimal recognition of rights to 
organize 

8  Nested enterprises 

Appropriators  who  violate  operational  rules  are  assessed  graduated  sanctions 
(depending  on  the  seriousness  and  context  of  the  offense)  by  other 
appropriators, officials accountable to these appropriators, or both. 
Appropriators and officials have rapid access to low-cost local arenas to resolve 
conflicts among appropriators or between appropriators and officials. 
The rights of appropriators to devise their own institutions are not challenged by 
external governmental authorities. 
Appropriation,  provision,  monitoring,  enforcement,  conflict  resolution,  and 
governance activities are organized in multiple layers of nested enterprises. 

Example Practice(s) for IPD (Hall and Bonanomi 2021) 
The participating firms collectively determine who is a risk and reward “partner” and who 
is not in the multiparty contract. 
The project sponsor and project team collectively define which specific aspects of project 
scope and budget are open to all and which are not. 
Trade contractors are engaged early in the project, because they have knowledge of local 
conditions, such as availability of labor, material, work routines, and other resources. 
The level of participation in the risk/reward pool is weighted according to a firm’s individual 
cost structure or accounting practices, its period of involvement, and/or influence on the 
outcomes. 
Firms that have signed the multiparty contract are entitled to participate in management 
group  functions  and  to  vote  on  decisions  that  directly  concern  their  work  and  area  of 
expertise. 
Participants  share  information  on  resources,  costs,  profit,  and  performance  openly  and 
transparently.  Teams  also  create  cost  targets  and  then  track  the  weekly  withdrawals  of 
resource units, monitoring for deviations (Target Value Design). 
Participants  make  commitments  about  the  work  to  be  completed.  The  Planned  Percent 
Completed  (PPC)  metric  tracks  the  percentage  of  items  promised  last  week  that  were 
completed and is publicly reported to all team members. 
Sanctions can increase due to continuous non-conformance or underperformance of PPC, 
leading to the removal of individual participants and/or firms if necessary. 

Project  participants  craft  conflict  resolution  mechanisms  that  include  clear  dispute 
resolution strategies intended to avoid costly litigation proceedings. 
Conflict resolution mechanisms allow participants to make collective decisions, including 
procedures for the team to override the wishes of the project sponsor. 
Governance activities of IPD projects are organized into multiple layers of hierarchy using 
a nested enterprise design. 

Page 6 of 31 

 
4.  Blockchain and the Crypto Commons: a Review 

4.1.  Blockchain as an Institutional Innovation 
The  dominant  narrative  for  economic  coordination  through  the  blockchain  argues  that  blockchain 
enables increased productivity of existing processes by lowering transaction costs through costless 
verification and without the need for costly intermediation (Catalini and Gans 2020). However, some 
scholars  argue  the  true  potential  of  blockchain  is  the  development  of  new  types  of  institutional 
organization with the potential to disrupt and substitute existing economic coordination (Davidson et 
al. 2018; Jacobo-Romero and Freitas 2021; Miscione et al. 2019). Blockchain is a new way to reach 
consensus  about  a  shared  truth  without  requiring  centralized  trust  (Davidson  et  al.  2018).  The 
innovation  of  blockchain  is  the  consensus  protocols  using  cryptoeconomic  mechanisms  to  reward 
honest parties to reach consensus on network transactions, e.g. in Bitcoin with proof-of-work (Gervais 
et  al.  2016;  Nakamoto  2008).  Blockchain  disintermediates  transactions  with  a  new  form  of 
organizational design, and as a consequence can lower transaction costs (Davidson et al. 2018). 

As  a  consequence,  applications  can  leverage  the  innovation  of  cryptoeconomic  mechanisms  of 
blockchains for trust-minimized social coordination to build new forms of economic activity on top of 
blockchains. Such cryptoeconomic systems can provide an institutional infrastructure that facilitates 
a wide range of socio-economic interactions to influence participants in their behavior (Voshmgir and 
Zargham 2019). There is ongoing exploration of what forms of organization and governance can be 
supported or replaced through blockchain. Within this paper, we focus on blockchain as a possibility 
to scale CPR scenarios on the crypto commons. 

4.2.  The Connection of Blockchain and CPR Governance 
The OPs describe how commons-based communities can create effective bottom-up governance rules 
(Cox et al. 2010). However, a major limitation is scaling community governance to large and global 
systems (Ostrom et al. 1999). 

Recent scholars point out that blockchains can be assessed through the lens of CPR theory and the 
OPs.  This  can  enable  the  creation  of  effective  bottom-up  governance  rules  for  decentralized  peer 
production of the network without any centralized coordination (Red 2019; Shackelford and Myers 
2016;  Werbach  2020).  There  is  growing  recognition  that  the  underlying  system  governance 
mechanisms are the key to long-term success of blockchain networks (Beck et al. 2018; Machart and 
Samadi 2020; Red 2019; Werbach 2020). CPR theory and the OPs are a repeatedly mentioned concept 
to guide the development of blockchain governance (Shackelford and Myers 2016; Werbach 2020). 

Fritsch et al. (2021) find now that blockchain and other DLTs can enable scaling of a new generation 
of  commons-oriented  economies,  both  for  digital  and  physical  commons.  On  the  one  hand, 
cryptoeconomic  mechanisms  decrease  the  cost  of  information  exchange  through  minimizing 
opportunism  and  uncertainty  trough  transparency  and  cryptographic  enforcement  (Machart  and 
Samadi  2020;  Schmidt  and  Wagner  2019).  On  the  other  hand,  blockchain  provides  reliable 
organizational means to equitably produce and distribute resources in accordance with the shared 
values of productive communities (Fritsch et al. 2021). The transparent decision-making procedures 
and decentralized cryptoeconomic incentive systems help avoid the tragedy of the commons (Bollier 
2015). The idea is to craft blockchain-based governance mechanisms by encoding the OPs (Rozas et 
al. 2021b; a). Blockchain could create networked governance to scale real-world commons, similar to 
how the stock market enabled corporations to scale (Maples 2018). Such crypto commons could allow 
new types of value creation with crypto assets rather than shares of stock, contributors rather than 
employees, and decentralized collaboration rather than centralized ownership (Maples 2018). 

Page 7 of 31 

 
4.3.  Blockchain Governance Mechanisms for the Commons 
As a basis to later investigate potential applications of blockchain mechanisms for IPD, we reviewed 
blockchain governance mechanisms proposed for CPRs (see also Section 2). Most notably, Rozas et al. 
(Rozas et al. 2021a) assesses the relationship between blockchain affordances and the eight OPs to 
support peer production of real-world commons. Rozas et al. (2021b) explore then how those can be 
applied to scale-up CPR governance of global software commons to address limitations identified by 
Stern (2011). Even though IPD can be characterized as a real world common, it hardly falls into the 
same category of global real world commons. Therefore, we clustered proposed mechanisms from all 
identified articles into 14 high level mechanisms for the eight OPs (Table 2), instead of just relying on 
the categorization of Rozas et al. (2021a). 

Table 2: Clustered blockchain governance mechanisms based on reviewed literature. 

Blockchain Governance Mechanisms 
M1: Identity, ownership, and access rights based on 
addresses and tokens 

OP 
1a 

M2: Tokenization of the resources 

M3:  Decentralized  markets  to  match  supply  and 
demand of local needs and conditions 
M4:  Formalizing  appropriation  and  provision  rules 
with smart contracts 

M5: Decentralized proposal and voting platforms 

M6: Decentralized prediction markets 
M7:  Transparent  record  and  automation  of 
transactions 
M8:  Digital 
commitments 
M9: Decentralized peer-review mechanisms 
M10: Reputation tokens 

tamper-proof 

signatures 

for 

M11: Transparent and self-enforcing sanctions 

M12: Decentralized jurisdiction systems 

1b 

2a 

2b 

3 

3 
4a 

4b 

4b 
4b 
5 

6 

M13: Ensure decisions are made by affected parties  7 
8 
M14:  Bottom-up 
hierarchical levels 

interaction  among  multiple 

4.3.1.  OP1 – Clearly Defined Boundaries 

a)  For the Users 

Sources 

(Dao 2018; Rozas et al. 2021b; a; Schadeck 2019) 

(Decoodt 2019; Emmett 2019a; Fritsch et al. 2021; 
de la Rouviere 2018) 

(Schadeck 2019) 

(Dao 2018; Rozas et al. 2021b; a) 

(Dao  2018;  Emmett  2019a;  Rozas  et  al.  2021b;  a; 
Schadeck 2019) 
(Dao 2018) 
(Emmett  2019a;  Rozas  et  al.  2021b;  a;  Schadeck 
2019) 

(Dao 2018; Rozas et al. 2021b; a) 

(Pazaitis et al. 2017; Rozas et al. 2021b) 
(Pazaitis et al. 2017; Schadeck 2019) 
(Dao  2018;  Emmett  2019a;  Rozas  et  al.  2021b;  a; 
Schadeck 2019) 
(Dao  2018;  Emmett  2019a;  Rozas  et  al.  2021b;  a; 
Schadeck 2019) 
(Rozas et al. 2021b; a) 
(Dao  2018;  Emmett  2019a;  Rozas  et  al.  2021b;  a; 
Schadeck 2019) 

According to OP 1a, the boundaries between legitimate and non-users who have right to withdraw 
resource  units  from  the  CPR  must  be  clearly  defined  (Cox  et  al.  2010;  Ostrom  2015b).  The  main 
identified blockchain mechanism for OP 1a is to govern CPR boundaries through blockchain addresses 
and tokens to control identity, ownership, and access rights (Table 2, M1). Blockchain identifies users 
with a blockchain address, so there is no need to know the human or machine controlling the address. 
Access rights and ownership can be assigned to addresses either through smart contract logic that 
defines  roles  with  specific  permissions,  or  through  membership  or  utility  tokens  that  can  be 
transferred between users (Dao 2018; Rozas et al. 2021b; a; Schadeck 2019). While the second allows 
to trade these rights with other addresses by transferring the token, the address based roles stays 

Page 8 of 31 

 
 
with that address until revoked. In both cases, blockchain controlled ownership and access rights can 
be more easily and granularly defined, propagated, and revoked (Rozas et al. 2021b). 

b)  For the Resources 

OP 1b states that resource boundaries of the system must be clearly defined and separated from the 
larger  socio-economic  system  (Cox  et  al.  2010;  Ostrom  2015b).  Within  the  context  of  CPRs, 
tokenization of the resources (Table 2, M2) can help to achieve clearly defined resource boundaries 
on the crypto commons. Once resources are tokenized, cryptoeconomic mechanisms through smart 
contracts can facilitate a wide range of interaction patterns. Tokenization can be in the form of asset-
backed currencies or commodity tokens representing the resource, good, or service in the commons 
(Fritsch et al. 2021). New mechanisms such as bonding curves (Balasanov 2018; Titcomb 2019) can 
incentivize  early  protectors of  CPR scenarios (Decoodt 2019;  Emmett 2019a; de  la Rouviere 2018). 
Bonding curves allow investors to buy a resource token by locking up their investment. Investors can 
later sell back these tokens according to the new price determined by the bonding curve. The bonding 
curve increases price with issued supply, and therefore rewards early investors. Bonding curves have 
been proposed for “continuous organizations”, where the underlying tokens represent rights to future 
revenues  (Favre  2019).  Augmented  bonding  curves  introduce  additional  functionalities  to  create  a 
more robust system that is less subjective to speculation and manipulation (Titcomb 2019). They act 
simultaneously as means of  funding,  liquidity  provider  and  market maker,  while the  issued  tokens 
represent access or voting rights to the resource (Zargham et al. 2020). Therefore, augmented bonding 
curves  combine  access  rights  through  tokens  (M1)  with  the  idea  of  tokenizing  the  resource.  The 
interplay between the interests of token holders to sell when token price rises and buy as price drops 
to claim additional governance power over a growing treasury, creates a negative feedback loop that 
leverages speculative  behavior  into  a continuous  source of  income  for  the commons  (Fritsch et al. 
2021).  The  Commons  Stack  implemented  such  an  augmented  bonding curve  based  on  research  of 
Zhargam et al. (2020). 

4.3.2.  OP2 – Ensure Congruence 
a)  With Local Conditions 

OP 2a states that CPR scenarios should ensure congruence with local conditions of appropriation rules 
restricting time, place, technology, and/or quantity of resource units (Cox et al. 2010; Ostrom 2015b). 
Decentralized markets to match supply and demand of local needs and conditions (Table 2, M3) are 
proposed as a blockchain mechanism (Schadeck 2019). Smart contracts encode the rules to trade with 
other  actors  not  controlled  by  any  intermediary,  so  the  community  using  the  decentralized 
marketplace can benefit from unrestricted mutual trading. At the same time, the market place can be 
tailored to comply with the formalized appropriation rules. 

b)  Between Appropriation & Provision Rules 

According to OP 2b, the benefits obtained by users from a CPR, as determined by appropriation rules, 
should be proportional to the amount of inputs required in the form of labor, material, or money, as 
determined  by  provision  rules  (Cox  et  al.  2010;  Ostrom  2015b).  Formalizing  appropriation  and 
provision rules (Table 2, M4) with smart contracts can make sure these agreements get obeyed (Dao 
2018; Rozas et al. 2021b; a). The transparency of rules also promotes an active discussion of the notion 
of value in the community (Rozas et al. 2021a). The community can then collectively decide which 
contributions to recognize, as well as suited local appropriation rules (Rozas et al. 2021b). 

4.3.3.  OP3 – Collective Choice Arrangements 
OP  3  states  that  individuals  affected  by  the  operational  rules  can  participate  in  modifying  the 
operational rules (Cox et al. 2010; Ostrom 2015b). Decentralized decision making and voting are often 

Page 9 of 31 

 
discussed  topics  to  govern  blockchain  networks  and  decentralized  applications.  It  is  therefore  not 
surprising that smart contract based decentralized proposal and voting platforms (Table 2, M5) are 
suggested to govern real world commons (Dao 2018; Emmett 2019a). Tokens could grant rights for 
decision making, either to ensure equal power distribution by design (Rozas et al. 2021b; a), or based 
on the contribution and reputation of parties (Emmett 2019a; Schadeck 2019). 

Furthermore, decentralized prediction markets (Table 2, M6) are proposed as a way to establish a 
trusted  knowledge  base  (Dao  2018).  Prediction  markets  were  introduced  by  Hanson  (2013)  to 
establish  a  more  representative  picture  of  a  future  outcome  by  using  a  betting  platform.  The 
underlying idea is that predictions made by people willing to risk a loss are more likely to be well-
informed. 

4.3.4.  OP4 – Monitoring 

a)  Presence 

OP  4a  states  that  monitors  should  be  present  to  actively  audit  CPR  conditions  and  appropriator 
behavior of the users to ensure that all parties are adhering to agreed-upon tasks (Cox et al. 2010; 
Ostrom 2015b). Blockchain allows a transparent record and automation of transactions (Table 2, M7) 
through  smart  contracts  of  user  behavior  and  participation  in  the  commons  observable  by  all 
community members (Emmett 2019a; Rozas et al. 2021b; a; Schadeck 2019). 

b)  Accountability 

OP 4b states monitors are accountable to or are the appropriators of a CPR (Cox et al. 2010; Ostrom 
2015b).  Multiple  blockchain  mechanisms  are  proposed  to  help  ensure  accountability  within  CPR 
scenarios. Every blockchain transaction is signed by a valid private key creating digital signatures for 
tamperproof commitments (Table 2, M8). The immutability and censorship resistance of blockchain 
ensures that  decisions  and  transactions  are  accountable  since  all  transactions  are  transparent and 
verifiable on the blockchain (Dao 2018; Rozas et al. 2021b; a). 

In  cases  were  no  automatic  checking  of  work  and  contributions  to  the  commons  is  possible, 
decentralized peer-review mechanisms (Table 2, M9) facilitated by smart contracts allow to review 
the status of work or the perceived value of contributions (Pazaitis et al. 2017; Rozas et al. 2021b).  

Pazaitis et al. (2017) proposed then reputation tokens (Table 2, M10) to represent the perceived value 
of contributions in the blockchain system. They can be earned by users through complying with the 
CPR rules and are hence a measure of accountability (Schadeck 2019). 

4.3.5.  OP5 – Graduated Sanctions 
According  to  OP  5,  appropriators  who  violate  operational  rules  are  assessed  graduated  sanctions 
depending on the seriousness and context of the offense (Cox et al. 2010; Ostrom 2015b). Blockchain 
allows  for  transparent  and  self-enforcing  sanctions  (Table  2,  M11).  Sanctions  can  be  made 
transparent to the whole community (Schadeck 2019), while smart contracts can self-enforce token-
based sanctions (Dao 2018; Emmett 2019a; Rozas et al. 2021b; a; Schadeck 2019) through the loss of 
either financial or reputation tokens (Dao 2018; Emmett 2019a; Schadeck 2019), or a value-decrease 
of tokens (Schadeck 2019). 

4.3.6.  OP6 – Conflict Resolution Mechanisms 
OP 6 states that appropriators and their officials should have rapid access to low-cost local arenas to 
resolve conflicts among appropriators or between appropriators and officials (Cox et al. 2010; Ostrom 
2015b). Blockchain offers the possibility for faster conflict resolutions with decentralized jurisdiction 
systems (Table 2, M12) (Dao 2018; Emmett 2019a; Rozas et al. 2021b; a). Tokens ensure skin in the 

Page 10 of 31 

 
game in disputes, as well as incentivize game theoretic proofs (Schadeck 2019). Such protocols must 
integrate with existing legal and regulatory systems (Emmett 2019a; Schadeck 2019).  

4.3.7.  OP7 – Minimal Recognition of Rights to Organize 
OP 7 states that the rights of appropriators to devise their own institutions should not be challenged 
by external governmental authorities (Cox et al. 2010; Ostrom 2015b). Within crypto commons, smart 
contract mechanisms were proposed to ensure decisions are made by affected parties (Table 2, M13) 
(Rozas et al. 2021b; a), e.g. local community rules can only be enforced locally. 

4.3.8.  OP8 – Multiple Layers of Nested Enterprises 
OP 8 states that the rules for appropriation, provision, monitoring, enforcement, conflict resolution, 
and governance activities should be organized in multiple layers of nested enterprises (Cox et al. 2010; 
Ostrom 2015b). Smart contracts can facilitate coordination across nested enterprises (Table 2, M14) 
between various hierarchical levels of participants to realize shared objectives in the best interest of 
the commons (Dao 2018; Emmett 2019a; Rozas et al. 2021b; a; Schadeck 2019). 

5.  Applications of Blockchain Governance Mechanisms for IPD 
Based  on  the  14  blockchain  mechanisms  for  CPR  scenarios  (Table  3),  we  identified  22  potential 
applications of blockchain mechanisms for IPDs (Table 3) to govern IPDs as a CPR scenario (Hall and 
Bonanomi 2021). The methodological approach is explained in Section 2. 

We discuss here for each of the 22 identified applications the potential to improve or extend the IPD 
practices, either based on already existing practices or for potentially new mechanisms not yet applied 
within IPD. Moreover, we collate the applications with existing blockchain research in the construction 
industry to indicate their novelty, or if already realized, their alignment.

Page 11 of 31 

 
Table 3: The 22 identified IPD applications based on the blockchain governance mechanisms. Some were already explored in existing construction blockchain literature. 

IPD Application of Blockchain Mechanism 

Mecha-
nism 

Ostrom 
Principle 

Excerpt of Related Blockchain Research in the Construction Industry  

M1-1: Scalable management of user identities and rights 

M1-2: Machine participation 
M2-1: Representation and ownership of project resources 
M2-2: Decentralized funding and investment mechanisms 
M3-1: Non-rent seeking and unrestricted matching of project needs with local 
conditions 
M4-1: Transparent logic for the appropriation and access to resources 
M4-2: Scalable and self-enforcing shared risk and rewards 

M4-3: New incentive structures 

M5-1: Scaling of collective choices 
M5-2: Definition of voting rights for intended power distributions 
M6-1: Gamified and scalable sourcing of local actors’ knowledge 
M7-1: More trust because of transparent user actions and resource flows, as well as 
predictive automation with smart contracts 

M1 

M1 
M2 
M2 

M3 

M4 
M4 

M4 

M5 
M5 
M6 

M7 

1a 

1a 
1b 
1b 

2a 

2b 
2b 

2b 

3 
3 
3 

4a 

M7-2: Transaction history enables reaction to events and learning from past decisions  M7 

4a 

M8-1: Smart legal contracts 

M8 

M9-1: Reputation tokens for special rights or for credentials 
M9 
M10-1: Peer-review for project progress, quality, and cost 
M10 
M11-1: Token-based sanctioning 
M11 
M11 
M11-2: Social sanctioning through transparent action 
M12-1: Smart contract based “mini courts” for fast and transparent conflict resolution  M12 
M12-2: Token-based dispute participation to ensure “skin in the game” 
M12 
M13-1: Smart contracts ensure that powerful parties cannot solely enforce collective 
choices and conflict resolution 
M14-1: Smart contracts coordinate decision making among organizational tiers 

M14 

M13 

4b 

4b 
4b 
5 
5 
6 
6 

7 

8 

Page 12 of 31 

Current research uses address-based rights as a prerequisite for blockchain applications. 
None investigate token-based rights. 
Robot participation (Lee et al. 2021); Self-owning house (Hunhevicz et al. 2021). 
Project bank accounts (Li et al. 2019; Tezel et al. 2021). 
Tokenized investment mechanisms (Tezel et al. 2021; Tian et al. 2020). 
Reverse auction-based tendering (Tezel et al. 2021); Decentralized design competition 
(Dounas et al. 2020; Lombardi et al. 2020a). 
Financial mechanisms for IPD projects (Elghaish et al. 2020; Rahimian et al. 2021). 
- 
Token-based incentives for data records (Hunhevicz et al. 2020; Mathews et al. 2017); 
performance-based life cycle incentives (Hunhevicz et al. 2022b; O’Reilly and Mathews 2019) 
- 
- 
- 
Blockchain increases trust in supply chains through data tracking, contracting, and 
transferring resources (Qian and Papadonikolaki 2020). Many papers focus on these aspects. 
Many papers focus on triggering financial transactions based on events, e.g. as in (Elghaish et 
al. 2020; Hamledari and Fischer 2021a). None focus on learning aspect based on transaction 
history. 
Theoretical investigation of intelligent contracts (Mason 2017; McNamara and Sepasgozar 
2020, 2021). Performance based smart contracts (Hunhevicz et al. 2022b). 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Blockchain-based dispute resolution platform (Saygili et al. 2021). 
- 

- 

- 

 
5.1.  M1 – Identity, ownership, and access rights based on addresses and tokens (for OP1a) 
IPD projects need clearly defined rights for each actor based on their role in the project (Cheng et al. 
2016). 

Blockchain allows scalable management of user identities and rights (Table 3, M1-1) through address-
based  identity  and/or  transferable  tokens.  Control of  access  and  rights  is  the  foundation  for  most 
blockchain applications proposed for the construction industry, as well as all of the other blockchain-
based governance mechanisms, such as access to resources (M2-1), access to decentralized markets 
(M3-1), access to resources (M4-1) as well as shared risk and rewards (M4-2), access to proposal or 
voting  platforms  (M5-2),  tracking  of  user  and  resource  actions  (M7-1),  participation  in  smart  legal 
contracts  (M8-1),  peer-review  mechanisms  (M10-1),  jurisdiction  systems  (M13-1),  or  coordination 
among organizational tiers (M14-1). Smart contract logic ensures that only allowed participants can 
perform certain actions based on their addresses or token-ownership, providing a scalable approach 
to define user boundaries in IPD multi-party contracts. Research should investigate whether addresses 
in IPD projects should be controlled at an individual level or by organizational entities. This depends 
on  many  aspects,  e.g.  how  profit,  liability  and  risk  should  be  distributed,  or  whether  an  incentive 
system targets individual actors or firms. 

Moreover, blockchain only identifies actors through their addresses, therefore allowing for machine 
participation (Table 3, M1-2), e.g. to tender (M3-1) and sign (M8-1) work packages, as well as giving 
them  access  to  resources  (M3-1)  and  compensating  them  for  their  work  (M4-2).  We  see  already 
example of this in research of Lee et al. (2021) where robots get incremental payments for performed 
work, as well as in the case of no1s1, a self-owning house that can receive funds for provided services, 
as well as spend funds for maintenance and operations (Hunhevicz et al. 2021). For now, we assume 
that decision making for IPD will be still human-based, so collective choice mechanisms (M5-1), peer-
review  mechanisms  (M10-1),  conflict  resolution  mechanisms  (M12-1),  and  coordination  among 
organizational tiers (M14-1) does not involve machine participation. 

5.2.   M2 – Tokenization of the resources (for OP1b) 
IPD projects require clearly-defined boundaries for the resources, i.e. which specific aspects of project 
scope and budget are open to all, and which are not (Hall and Bonanomi 2021). 

With tokenized project resources, e.g. the project budget, representation and ownership of project 
resources (Table 3, M2-1) can be clearly defined, also allowing monitoring of resources (M7-1). We 
are so far not aware of any research that proposes tokenization of physical resources in a construction 
industry context. Some research goes in this direction by exploring how crypto assets can integrate 
the  physical and  financial supply chains (Hamledari and  Fischer 2021b),  or suggesting non-fungible 
tokens  (NFTs)  to  represent  building  components  (Dounas  et  al.  2020).  Inspiration  how  and  which 
physical resources to tokenize could also come from the asset-backed tokenization of “Holochain’s 
Commons  Engine” or the commodity tokens of  the “Economic Space  Agency” (Fritsch et al. 2021). 
Tokenization  of  the  resource  would  allow  to  manage  digitally  one  or  multiple  resource  pools  with 
distinct  appropriation  and  payoff  functions.  Related  to  the  project  budget,  this  relates  to  the 
suggestion of blockchain-based project bank accounts for construction projects (Li et al. 2019; Tezel 
et al. 2021). 

In  addition,  decentralized  funding  and  investment  mechanisms  (Table  3,  M2-2)  leveraging 
cryptoeconomics can be explored to extend incentive structures (M4-3). Augmented bonding curves 
could  be  one  such  mechanism  to  extend  current  risk/reward  structures  (M7-1)  in  IPD  by  yielding 
additional  profit  for  invested  stakeholders.  Having  said  that,  even  though  tokenized  investment 
mechanisms  for  construction  projects  were  already  proposed  (Tezel  et  al.  2021;  Tian  et  al.  2020), 

Page 13 of 31 

 
normally  a  client  pays  for  the  project  and  there  is  no  need  to  raise  funds.  Moreover,  the  power 
distribution to manage the resources is usually determined by the respective project roles, and not 
dependent on their point in time when they invest and support the project. Nevertheless, future PDMs 
might benefit from such new funding and investment mechanisms. 

5.3.  M3 – Decentralized markets to match resources to local needs and conditions (for OP2a) 
Within IPD, key stakeholders often have experience with local conditions, such as availability of labor, 
material, work routines and other resources. Their early involvement provides the rest of the project 
team with a holistic understanding of the project conditions (Hall and Bonanomi 2021).  

Decentralized  markets  could  improve  and  extend  this  with  non-rent  seeking  and  unrestricted 
matching of project needs with local conditions (Table 3, M3-1). Projects can find local resources and 
knowledge  important  for  the  success  of  the  project  without  middleman  profiting  from  facilitating 
these  marketplaces,  improving  profitability  of  both  the  project  and  contributors.  Decentralized 
marketplaces also allow users of the marketplace, e.g. the IPD stakeholders, project suppliers, and 
local  residents,  to  collectively  define  rules.  Furthermore,  blockchain-based  marketplaces  can 
introduce new decentralized market mechanisms, only requiring a blockchain address and/or holding 
credentials such as reputation tokens. This could lead to more inclusive markets, potentially not only 
restricted  to  humans  but  also  machines.  We  are  not  aware  of  any  implemented  decentralized 
marketplaces in the construction industry. Along these lines, Tezel et al. (2021) investigated a reverse 
auction-based  tendering  mechanism  facilitated  by  smart  contracts,  and  Dounas  et  al.  (2020)  and 
Lombardi et al. (2020b) analyze a decentralized design competition. 

5.4.   M4 – Formalizing appropriation and provision rules with smart contracts (for OP2b) 
In IPD, the risk/reward pool is the main instrument to balance a firm’s required participation with the 
potential reward according to their individual cost structure or accounting practices, their period of 
involvement in the project and/or their influence on the project’s outcome (Cheng et al. 2016). 

Smart  contracts  encode  selection  criteria  and  market  mechanics  visible  to  everyone  and  allow  to 
forecast expected behavior according to the formalized rules. Transparent logic for the appropriation 
and access to resources (Table 3, M4-1) can be collectively ensured, especially if the resources are 
represented in the system through tokens (M2-1). This has been acknowledged for mechanisms of 
monetary  resources  in  IPD  projects  (Elghaish  et  al.  2020;  Rahimian  et  al.  2021).  Moreover,  smart 
contracts  can  ensure  scalable,  self-enforcing,  and  stakeholder  specific  rules  for  shared  risk  and 
rewards (Table 3, M4-2), hereby clearly defining provision rules of the system that confirm with the 
defined  appropriation rules. However,  this replicates  existing IPD  allocation  rules  at  the  firm  level. 
New incentive structures (Table 3, M4-3) for IPDs only possible with blockchain mechanisms can be 
created. For example, blockchain could be used to issue non-monetary reputation tokens or access-
tokens for decentralized markets (M3-1), decision making processes (M5-2), and to ensure “skin in the 
game” in legal disputes (M12-2). It is also possible to create new ways of token-based rewards (M4-2) 
and sanctioning (M11-1) at the individual or at the firm level. 

Token-based incentives are to date rarely proposed in construction industry literature. Mathews et al. 
(2017)  propose  a  token  to  reward  parties  for maintaining  and  improving  BIM  databases.  Similarly, 
Hunhevicz  et  al.  (2020)  explore  smart  contracts  and  tokens  to  ensure  high-quality  data  sets  in  a 
construction project. Although not token-based, O’Reilly and Mathews (2019) and Hunhevicz et al. 
(2022b) explored performance-based incentives across life-cycle phases to design and build for the 
best  possible  energy  performance  across  phases.  Inspiration  could  come  also  from  outside  of  the 
construction  industry,  e.g.  from  the  Finance  4.0  initiative  that  explored  token-based  incentives  to 
address sustainability (Ballandies et al. 2021; Dapp 2019). 

Page 14 of 31 

 
5.5.  M5 – Decentralized proposal and voting platforms (for OP3) 
In  an  IPD  context,  firms  that  have  signed  the  multi-party  contract  are  entitled  to  participate  in 
management group functions and to vote on decisions that concern their work and area of expertise 
(Ashcraft 2011; Perlberg 2009). 

Scaling of collective choices (Table 3, M5-1) in IPD could be achieved via decentralized proposal and 
voting  platforms.  First,  stakeholders  can  gather  opinions  and  proposals  on  project  spending  and 
execution. Afterwards, they allow for trusted voting on proposals to reach fast decisions even among 
organizational  tiers  (M14-1).  Finally,  they  could  collectively  decide,  e.g.  through  peer-review 
mechanisms (M10-1),  on  the  appropriation  and  provision  rules  of  the  resources  (M4-1)  or  how  to 
incentivize  project  stakeholders  (M4-3).  If  the  project  uses  a  tokenized  resource  pool  or  rewards, 
approved funds or resources could be automatically released upon approval (M2-1). 

Although there are not yet examples in the construction industry, we can find multiple examples of 
implemented  blockchain  based  decision  making  mechanisms.  Token  Curated  Registries  (TCR) 
(Asgaonkar and Krishnamachari 2018; Wang and Krishnamachari 2019) can be used to manage the 
validity and functionality of tokens (de la Rouviere 2018). With a TCR users can collectively decide and 
entries to lists, e.g. to decide on new tokens or changes to existing tokens. Within IPD, a TCR could 
allow trustworthy and fast collective change processes after the initial project definition to existing 
tokens or propose new tokens as the IPD participants see fit. Another example for a decentralized 
governance  platform  is  Politeia1  for  the  Decred2  blockchain,  where  stakeholders  owning  the 
cryptocurrency can upload proposals for network changes and treasury spending and then vote on it. 
Also, the Aragon project implemented a token based voting platform called Aragon Voice3. IPDs could 
use similar decentralized applications to manage decision making. 

Address  or  token-based  access  control  allows  fine-grained  definition  of  voting rights  for  intended 
power distributions (Table 3, M5-2) among organizational tiers (M14-1), while maintaining scalability 
of the system. Suited voting forms and decision-making mechanisms would need to be explored in an 
IPD context. In the blockchain space, various voting mechanisms are proposed that could inspire new 
ways of voting within IPD. In Decred for example, holders have 1 vote per token (although pooled into 
larger amounts and locked for an uncertain time period). This approach is anonymous, whereas in 1 
vote per person as often used in existing democratic systems, voters need to be identifiable. Another 
proposed voting mechanism for CPR governance (Dao 2018; Emmett 2019a) includes quadratic coin 
lock voting (Buterin 2016) as a token-based variant of quadratic voting (Weyl and Lalley 2017). The 
weight  of  votes  is  discounted  by  an  exponential  function  to  more  prominently  value  the  vote  of 
minority opinions (Fritsch et al. 2021). Finally, in conviction voting stakeholders continuously allocate 
votes in form of tokens to different options that slowly decay if not renewed (Emmett 2019b). This 
allows to sense user preferences over long time periods and prevent last minute vote swings by large 
token holders (Fritsch et al. 2021). 

5.6.  M6 – Decentralized prediction markets (for OP3) 
To make well informed decisions, decentralized prediction markets could be used for gamified and 
scalable  sourcing  of  local  actors’  knowledge  (Table  3,  M6-1),  maybe  in  combination  with 
decentralized  markets  for  local  actors  (M3-1)  and  to  extend  present  incentive  structures  towards 
external  actors  (M4-3).  Augur4  is  likely  the  most  common  implementation  of  a  blockchain  based 

1 https://proposals.decred.org/, accessed 09.12.2021. 
2 https://decred.org/, accessed 09.12.2021. 
3 https://aragon.org/aragon-voice, accessed 09.12.2021 
4 https://www.augur.net/, accessed 09.12.2021. 

Page 15 of 31 

 
                                                           
prediction market. To our knowledge there are so far no similar mechanisms within IPD. Nevertheless, 
research  can  explore  if  decentralized  prediction  markets  can  be  useful  in  cases  where  actors  are 
unknown or should remain anonymous, e.g. a betting platform to gauge expected costs of the project. 

5.7.   M7 – Transparent record and automation of transactions (for OP4a) 
IPD  projects  make  use  of  monitoring  practices  such  as  “open-book  finances”  to  track  financial 
resources  or  “Big  Room”  to  collocate  stakeholders  to  commit  publicly  to  work  packages  and 
continuously report their progress to the rest of the team (Hall and Bonanomi 2021). 

Blockchain creates more trust because of transparent user actions and resource flows, as well as 
predictive  automation  with  smart  contracts  (Table  3,  M7-1).  IPD  stakeholders  can  be  identified 
through  address-based  access  control  and  their  transactions  tracked  visibly  to  all  stakeholders, 
creating  an  inherent  incentive  to  behave  trustworthy  since  the  other  stakeholders  can  recognize 
malicious  behavior  (M11-2).  Because  of  transparent  financial  transactions,  open-book  finances  is 
inherently  ensured.  Furthermore,  with  resource  tokenization  implemented,  resource  flows  and 
appropriation are observable. For example, a blockchain could help monitor the weekly withdrawals 
of resource units and alert participants to deviations from the cost targets initially estimated with the 
target  value  design  process.  In  addition,  smart  contract  automation  gives  more  certainty  in  the 
expected  transaction  logic.  Overall,  transparency  and  smart  contract  automation  creates  trust  in 
defined  explicit  incentive  structures  (M4-3),  in  collective  choices  (M5-1),  in  conflict  resolution 
mechanisms  (M12-1),  and  for  coordination  among  organizational  tiers  (M14-1).  The  available 
transaction history enables reaction to events and learning from past decisions (Table 3, M7-2) for 
the management of user identities and rights (M1-1), ownership of resources (M2-1), decentralized 
market  logic  (M3-1),  logic  for  the  appropriation  and  access  to  resources  (M4-1),  refining  incentive 
structures (M4-3), the definition of voting rights (M5-2), and the execution of smart legal contracts 
(M8-1), peer-review mechanisms (M10-1), and decentralized jurisdiction systems (M12-1). 

Blockchain  increases  trust  in  supply  chains  through  data  tracking,  contracting,  and  transferring 
resources  (Qian  and  Papadonikolaki  2020).  Many  papers  in  a  construction  context  focus  on 
transparent and traceable records, e.g. of design data (Erri Pradeep et al. 2021) or construction related 
quality data (Sheng et al. 2020; Wu et al. 2021). Literature also investigates how to ensure traceability 
of built asset product information along the construction value chain in various contexts (Kifokeris and 
Koch 2020; Li et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2020; Watson et al. 2019). Automated and traceable financial 
transactions  are  often  suggested  to  enhance  financial  processes  within  construction  projects 
(Ahmadisheykhsarmast and Sonmez 2020; Chong and Diamantopoulos 2020; Das et al. 2020; Elghaish 
et al. 2020; Di Giuda et al. 2020; Hamledari and Fischer 2021a; Nanayakkara et al. 2021; Ye and König 
2021). 

5.8.   M8 – Digital signatures for tamper-proof commitments (for OP4b) 
To  improve  accountability  within  IPD,  stakeholders  can  commit  to  work  packages  by  signing  a 
blockchain  transaction.  This  enables  smart  legal  contracts  (Table  3,  M8-1)  when  linked  to  terms 
encoded  in  smart  contracts  for  trackable  and  automatic  execution.  Construction  literature 
theoretically  suggested  smart  legal  contracts  (Maciel  and  Garbutt  2020;  Shojaei  et  al.  2020),  also 
termed intelligent contracts (Mason 2017; McNamara and Sepasgozar 2020, 2021). Based on agreed 
terms about committed work or performance data (Hunhevicz et al. 2022b), progress and completion 
can be tracked and confirmed (M7) to ensure accountability. Because machines can hold access rights, 
they also could commit to work packages and participate in smart legal contracts. 

Page 16 of 31 

 
5.9.  M9 – Reputation tokens (for OP4b) 
The  concept of reputation tokens  for special  rights or  for credentials  (Table 3, M9-1)  presents an 
interesting  approach  to  reward  or  punish  IPD  participants  (M4-3).  Instead  of  monetary  incentives, 
reputation  tokens  based  on  stakeholder  accountability  could  give  access  to  extended  governance 
functions (M5-2) or could be used for credentials in decentralized markets for later projects (M3-1). 

5.10.  M10 – Decentralized peer-review mechanisms (for OP4b) 
Decentralized  peer-review  for  project  progress,  quality,  and  cost  (Table  3,  M10-1)  can  be 
implemented with blockchain. For example, the Covee protocol realized a smart contract based peer 
review mechanism to determine fair profit distribution for decentralized collaborative teams (Dietsch 
et al. 2018). Anonymous work contributors get rewarded with cryptocurreny according to their peer-
review  score.  A  combination  of  blockchain-signed  work  packages,  reputation  tokens,  and 
decentralized peer-review mechanisms could create a digital “big room platform” to ensure presence 
and accountability within IPD, and to evaluate appropriate rewards (M4-3) and sanctions (M11-1). 

5.11.  M11 – Transparent and self-enforcing sanctions (for OP5) 
Graduated sanctions are often not explicitly implemented in IPDs (Hall and Bonanomi 2021). At most, 
the weekly public reporting of “Planned Percent Complete” (PPC) (Thomsen et al. 2009) acts as an 
early stage of social sanctioning (Kenig et al. 2010). In the case of continuous non-conformance or 
underperformance, the removal of individual participants and/or firms can be necessary (Cheng et al. 
2016).  

Blockchain  can  be  an  opportunity  to  reimagine  and  improve  upon  graduated  sanctioning  for  IPD 
projects through decentralized and self-enforcing token-based sanctioning (Table 3, M11-1), e.g. loss 
of  access  tokens, 
in  value  of  monetary  tokens. 
Underperformance  is  also  visible  to  everyone  leading  to  social  sanctioning  through  transparent 
action (Table 3, M11-2). In many cases this might be enough to ensure accountability but could be 
gradually combined with loss of tokens e.g. for access to the financial project rewards or even the 
project itself.  

loss  of  reputation  tokens,  or  decrease 

5.12.  M12 – Decentralized jurisdiction systems (for OP6) 
IPD projects craft conflict resolution mechanisms such as project decision protocols (Ashcraft 2011) or 
liability waivers (Sive and Hays 2009) that include clear dispute resolution strategies intended to avoid 
costly litigation proceedings. 

Blockchain enables smart contract based “mini-courts” for fast and transparent conflict resolution 
(Table 3, M12-1) in IPDs. An exemplary decentralized jurisdiction system is already implemented in 
the Aragon Court5 to resolve subjective disputes that cannot be resolved by smart contracts alone. A 
global  network  of  guardians  helps  intervene  and  arbitrate  disputes.  Saygili  et  al.  (2021)  already 
propose a decentralized blockchain-based online dispute resolution platform to resolve construction 
disputes.  To  incentivize  compliance  and  accountability  in  a  decentralized  jurisdiction,  token-based 
dispute  participation  to  ensure  “skin  in  the  game” (Table  3, M12-2)  is  suggested.  In  case  of  non-
compliance with the rules or the verdict, tokens at stake can be sanctioned. 

5.13.  M13 – Ensure decisions are made by affected parties (for OP7) 
In IPD projects, project sponsors trade decision-making autonomy for consensus mechanisms among 
project team members (Hall and Bonanomi 2021). In other words, authority is given by the project 
owner to the project participants to self-organize and self-govern the project. Blockchain transparency 

5 https://court.aragon.org/, accessed 09.12.2021. 

Page 17 of 31 

 
                                                           
and  censorship  resistance  enables  smart  contracts  to  ensure  that  powerful  parties  cannot  solely 
enforce collective choice and conflict resolution (Table 3, M13-1) in IPDs (M5-2, M12-1, and M14-1). 
Ideally, decisions should be only possible to be made and challenged by actors that are also affected. 

5.14.  M14 – Coordination rules across nested enterprises (for OP8) 
Large IPD projects have multiple nested management levels, including senior management team for 
executive 
leadership,  a  cross-functional  project  management  team  to  coordinate  project 
management activities, and functional teams that handle the direct work execution and organization 
(Ashcraft  2011;  Laurent  and  Leicht  2019).  Therefore,  it  will  be  important  that  smart  contracts 
coordinate decision making among organizational tiers (Table 3, M14-1). This is either according to 
existing  nested  management  levels  of  IPD  or  for  new  forms  of  organization  better  suited  for  fast 
information  propagation  and  reactions  to  local  events  enabled  by  blockchain-based  project 
governance. 

 IPD on the Crypto Commons: An Overview of the Conceptualization 

6. 
Figure  2  summarizes  the  overall  conceptualization,  visualizing  the  OPs  (Table  1),  the  14  identified 
blockchain governance mechanisms (Table 2), and the 22 proposed applications for IPDs (Table 3). 

The interaction arrows indicate then graphically the described connections in Section 5 between the 
different IPD blockchain applications. The arrows are either outgoing, meaning they are a prerequisite 
or  support  other  applications,  or  incoming,  meaning  they  are  supported  or  enabled  by  other 
applications.  The  width  of  the  arrows  and/or  number  of  incoming  connections  can  give  an 
approximate  indication  of  the  importance  of  applications  (outgoing)  or  prerequisites  to  build 
applications (incoming) within the overall conceptualization. 

Applications that stand out regarding important prerequisite for IPD on the crypto commons are: M1-
1 defining boundaries for the users through addresses and tokens, and M7-2 monitoring the presence 
of  users  and  resources  for  fast  system  reaction  and  learning  based  on  transparent  record  of 
automation and transactions. Applications that depend on many interactions of other applications in 
the  system  are  in  decreasing order of  incoming connections: M4-3 for new  incentive structures to 
influence the system participants towards collective action, M3-1 decentralized market structures to 
match  project  needs  with  local  conditions,  M5-2  for  definition  of  voting  rights  to  create  intended 
power distributions, and M14-1 coordination among organizational tiers. 

It is likely that not all connections have been identified and the interactions need to be updated when 
more research investigates individual applications and/or the interaction between them. 

Page 18 of 31 

 
Figure 2: Overview of the conceptualization of IPD on the crypto commons: the 12 blockchain governance mechanisms for 
the eight OPs as identified in Section 4, and the 22 identified applications for IPD and their interactions outlined in Section 5. 

7.  Discussion 

7.1.   Impact  
The  novel  proposition  of  this  paper  is  to  create  blockchain-based  governance  structures  for  IPD 
construction  projects  using  the  OPs  as  design  guidelines.  Trusted  digital  processes  together  with 
cryptoeconomic incentive mechanisms can align stakeholders, both human and machine, to better 
collaborate  towards  the  overall  project  success.  We  see  two  main  scenarios  for  the  application  of 
blockchain-based governance mechanisms as introduced in this paper. 

Page 19 of 31 

 
 
First,  blockchain  based  governance  could  address  tradeoffs  of  current  relational  contracting 
approaches to improve IPDs. Relational contracting is well-suited to deal with contractual hazards of 
“displaced  agency”  (Henisz  et  al.  2012)  found  in  the  fragmented  (Fergusson  and  Teicholz  1996; 
Howard  et  al.  1989;  Levitt  and  Sheffer  2011)  and  loosely  coupled  (Dubois  and  Gadde  2002a) 
construction project structures. However, relational contracts also comes at various costs (Henisz et 
al.  2012)  that  could  be  improved  through  blockchain-based  governance mechanisms,  e.g.  reduced 
competition with scalable decentralized market structures, or lengthier processes for decision-making 
with decentralized decision-making platforms. 

Second, the introduced blockchain mechanisms could be used to build new forms of project delivery 
coordinated  on  the  crypto  commons.  Construction  projects  can  be  characterized  by  complexity 
(Bertelsen  2003;  Dubois  and  Gadde  2002a;  Gidado  1996).  Research  suggests  that  bottom-up 
management  and  self-organization  are  better  suited  than  hierarchical  approaches  to  manage 
complexity (Bertelsen and Koskela 2004; Helbing and Lämmer 2008). The OPs introduce guidelines to 
achieve this for CPR scenarios. Since IPD can be described as a CPR scenario, blockchain governance 
mechanisms  could  improve  IPD-like  project  deliveries  by  creating  better  bottom-up  and  self-
organizing project structures, while still allowing for scalable coordination mechanisms.  

This  is  aligned  with  the  emerging organizational  form of  a  decentralized  autonomous  organization 
(DAO), which is a blockchain-based system that enables people to coordinate and govern themselves 
mediated by a set of self-executing rules deployed on a public blockchain, and whose governance is 
decentralized (Hassan and De Filippi 2021). 

Sreckovic  and  Windsperger  (2020)  already  proposed  the  evolution  of  the  construction  industry 
organization towards DAOs. Lombardi et al. (2020b) and Dounas et al. (2020) even prototyped a DAO 
for decentralized coordination of the design finding process through smart contracts. Their research 
suggests that construction project governance as a DAO is at least in a prototyping context technically 
feasible.  Other  ongoing  research  explores  how  decision  making  of  a  self-owning  house  can  be 
coordinated through a DAO (Hunhevicz et al. 2021). 

Emerging examples of DAO frameworks (Faqir-Rhazoui et al. 2021) resemble many of the identified 
governance  mechanisms.  The  introduced  research  directions  based  on  Ostrom’s  design  principles 
might help to design governance building blocks towards project delivery coordinated through DAOs. 

7.2.   Design Challenges 
Designing new  blockchain  based  governance systems is  challenging.  Cila et  al. (2020) identified  six 
design challenges (see Table 4) that are further discussed below in the context of IPDs on the crypto 
commons. 

7.2.1. Tracking 
While  transparent  monitoring  is  essential  to  manage  commons,  it  could  lead  to  privacy  concerns 
regarding  the  community-based  data  (Cila  et  al.  2020).  Especially  in  public  blockchain  systems, 
traditional data privacy solutions are hard or even impossible to implement. It needs to be carefully 
evaluated what data needs to be transparently stored to enable IPD governance, how construction 
stakeholders perceive implications of sharing this data, and potential measures to maintain a suited 
level of privacy without hindering the monitoring. 

7.2.2. Coding 
A major challenge is decide, represent, and encode values in artificial commons (Cila et al. 2020). It 
tends to be easier to focus on economic and quantifiable values in a blockchain system (e.g. monetary 
values  through  market  pricing  mechanisms)  than  social  and  qualified  values  (e.g.  reputation 

Page 20 of 31 

 
mechanisms). However, in commons non-monetary values often play an important role (Fritsch et al. 
2021).  Also,  in  IPDs,  both  quantitative  and  informal  systems  are  used.  Future  research  should 
investigate  value  flows  in  IPD,  as  well  as  how  to  encode  them  into  tokens  and  incentive  systems 
without suppressing creativity and teamwork with too rigid and inflexible smart contract structures. 

Furthermore, incentives give people a sense of agency, yet at the same time they can have downsides 
of forced conformity with collectively set rules (Cila et al. 2020). At some point earning rewards might 
become a duty to not be excluded from the system and rewards cause efforts to shift towards the 
actions that will be rewarded, causing potentially unforeseen negative secondary effects (Cila et al. 
2020). This needs to be subject of further study when designing project delivery mechanisms. 

Artificial commons needs to find a balance between so trading individual gains for the greater good of 
the  community  (Cila  et  al.  2020).  IPDs  have  differences  to  natural  commons  that  need  to  be 
considered. For example, resources in IPDs are consumed intentionally over time, whereas in natural 
commons they are renewable. Natural commons also have an infinite lifetime (if the community is 
able to sustain them), while IPDs only last for the duration of a project (although this could be several 
years). And the product is owned by the project sponsor, whereas natural commons are not owned 
by any of the involved parties. 

Overall, there is a need for more research to thoroughly understand current and new IPD mechanisms, 
how  they  contribute  to  the  success  of  IPDs,  and  how  they  need  to  be  set  up  in  different  project 
settings. Methods used to design and test such mechanisms should be able to reflect the complex 
nature of construction  projects (Bertelsen 2003; Dubois and  Gadde  2002a; Gidado 1996). Previous 
research used game theory for the evaluation of profit distribution (Teng et al. 2019) and target value 
design (Jung et al. 2012), agent based simulations to assess the evolution of collaboration (Son and 
Rojas 2011), or mechanism design to investigate new incentive structures (Han et al. 2019). 

7.2.3. Negotiation 
The last dilemma concerns how to preserve human reasoning and debate in a system of formalized 
and algorithmic logic (Cila et al. 2020). Also for IPD, there are major risks involved in ex-ante designs 
of smart contract, where system engineers need to account from the beginning for all expected cases. 
Therefore, the governance system should be able to adjust over time to exceptions and design errors 
through community input. But even with such governance processes embedded, the process will likely 
only  start  after  the  first  failure  already  happened.  A  stepwise  and  careful  adaption  with  extensive 
testing of these systems will be desirable. 

Table 4: Design challenges for crypto commons (Based on the identified blockchain governance design challenges by Cila et 
al. (2020)). 

Design Challenge 

Transparency vs. Privacy 

Economic vs. Social Values 
Quantified vs. Qualified Values 

Type 

Tracking 

Coding 

Incentivisation vs. Manipulation 

Coding 

Private vs. Collective Interests 

Coding 

Human vs. Algorithmic Governance 

Negotiation 

Description 
Crypto Commons must be monitored, but transparent tracking 
could lead to privacy concerns. 
Values  of  the  Crypto  Commons  must  be  encoded  in  a 
representative way. This can be especially challenging for social 
or qualified values. 
Crypto  Commons  must  encode  incentives  without  causing 
unjustified manipulation and exclusion of stakeholders. 
Encoding  rules  for  Crypto  Commons  must  weigh  individual 
gains  of  stakeholders  against  the  greater  good  of  the 
community. 
Crypto commons must preserve human reasoning and debate 
in a system of formalized and algorithmic logic. 

Page 21 of 31 

 
7.3.   Challenges related to the construction industry context 
While technical and system design challenges towards a blockchain governed project delivery can be 
proactively addressed, there are many inherent construction industry barriers. Other scholars have 
already investigated barriers and socio-technical challenges for blockchain in the construction industry 
(Li et al. 2019). The provided frameworks likely apply also for the proposed system. Below we highlight 
some of the key challenges. 

The level of digitalization in the construction industry is still low (Agarwal et al. 2016; Barbosa et al. 
2017). Blockchain-governed PDM require an extensive digital base-line of project related data. As long 
as this data is not available, the proposed mechanisms cannot make use of it to govern construction 
projects. 

Moreover, the fragmented construction industry structure poses major challenges in the adoption of 
systemic innovations (Hall et al. 2018), e.g. as in the case of BIM (Papadonikolaki 2018). Blockchain 
based governance for construction PDMs likely falls into the same category of systemic innovations, 
since  value  of  the  solution  only  comes  at  scale.  At  the  same  time,  cryptoeconomic  governance 
promises  to  reduce  implications  of  fragmentation  through  incentives  across  phases  and  trades 
(Hunhevicz et al. 2022a). Nevertheless, it will be challenging to organically grow adoption. 

Finally, there are major legal implications with such new solutions. Research needs to investigate how 
smart contract code can conform with law and regulations (De Filippi and Hassan 2016). 

7.4.  Limitations 
For  blockchain  based  governance  processes,  the  underlying  blockchain  infrastructure  is  a  key 
component to success. For simplicity, this paper only refers to blockchain, but there are many kinds 
of DLTs suitable for different types of use cases. The choice of the right type is not part of this work, 
but  should  be  considered  once  a  use  case  will  be  implemented  (Hunhevicz  and  Hall  2020).  Many 
parameters such as security, throughput, privacy, approaches to smart contracts, and others need to 
be assessed. The still early technological state and the many different available solutions (Ballandies 
et al. 2021; Spychiger et al. 2021b) make this challenging. The paper assesses blockchain for CPR and 
IPD based on the assumption of public permissionless blockchains, since they align with the promise 
to  govern  decentralized  economic  coordination.  When  using  other  DLT  options,  the  affected 
properties need to be adjusted. Future research should assess suited technical infrastructure to realize 
the proposed blockchain governance mechanisms in an IPD context. 

Furthermore,  the  paper  acts  only  as  a  starting  point  to  conceptualize  the  connections  between 
blockchain,  CPR  theory,  and  IPD.  As  a  next  step,  further  research  is  needed  to  validate  the 
conceptualization. This includes validation of both the individual mechanisms and applications as well 
as their interaction. The contribution of this paper is limited as a proposed conceptualization, meant 
to underpin future research efforts that can validate and extend the conceptualization. 

8.  Conclusion 
The paper extends the thinking around blockchain as an institutional innovation for the delivery of 
construction projects. It exploits the theoretical connection between both blockchain and IPDs as a 
CPR scenario  to offer  a systematic  starting point how blockchain can  support and  evolve PDMs  by 
creating novel governance mechanisms. 

For  that the  paper  introduces a conceptualization of blockchain-based  governance  applications for 
IPDs  on  the  crypto  commons.  Twenty-two  applications  for  IPD  were  identified  based  on  fourteen 
mechanisms of blockchain for the governance of CPR scenarios proposed to encode the eight OPs. The 
conceptualization is useful to think more structured and modular about blockchain building blocks to 

Page 22 of 31 

 
the  “crypto  commons”.  Furthermore, 

govern  construction  projects  collectively  on 
the 
conceptualization  can  support  the  thinking  around  how  blockchain  could  improve  current  IPD 
concepts,  potentially  lead  to  the  next  generation  of  PDMs,  or  ultimately  end  in  novel  project 
coordination through DAOs. On the one hand, blockchain-based governance mechanisms promise to 
facilitate  trusted,  scalable  and  efficient  bottom-up  coordination  mechanisms  that  cope  with 
complexity  and  displaced  agency  in  construction  projects.  On  the  other  hand,  blockchain-based 
project delivery offers exciting new opportunities for machine participation. 

Even though the paper introduced a coherent  conceptualization for blockchain-based governance of 
PDMs, it requires further validation through proof of concepts investigating the feasibility of individual 
and  combined  mechanisms.  For  that  the  paper  discusses  challenges  related  to  the  early  state  of 
blockchain  technology,  the  difficulties  in  designing  blockchain-based  governance  systems,  and  the 
industry-related challenges to overcome. 

The  paper  primarily  targets  the  construction  industry,  but  the  identified  blockchain  governance 
mechanisms and applications could eventually be transferred to other cases of real-world commons. 

9.  Funding 
This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or 
not-for-profit sectors. 

10. References 
Agarwal,  R.,  Chandrasekaran,  S.,  and  Sridhar,  M.  (2016).  Imagining  construction’s  digital  future. 

McKinsey & Company. 

Ahmadisheykhsarmast, S., and Sonmez, R. (2020). “A smart contract system for security of payment 

of construction contracts.” Automation in Construction, Elsevier, 120(October 2019), 103401. 

Asgaonkar,  A.,  and  Krishnamachari,  B.  (2018).  “Token  Curated  Registries  -  A  Game  Theoretic 

Approach.” 

Ashcraft, H. W. J. (2011). “Negotiating an Integrated Project Delivery Agreement.” The Construction 

Lawyer, 31(3), 17-34,49-50. 

Balasanov, 

S. 

(2018). 

“Bonding  Curves 

In  Depth : 

Intuition  & 

Parametrization.” 

<https://blog.relevant.community/bonding-curves-in-depth-intuition-parametrization-
d3905a681e0a>. 

Ballandies,  M.  C.,  Dapp,  M.  M.,  and  Pournaras,  E.  (2021).  “Decrypting  distributed  ledger  design—
taxonomy, classification and blockchain community evaluation.” Cluster Computing, Springer, 1–
22. 

Barbosa, F., Woetzel, J., Mischke, J., Ribeirinho, M. J., Sridhar, M., Parsons, M., Bertram, N., and Brown, 
S. (2017). “Reinventing Construction: A route to higher productivity.” McKinsey & Company. 

Beck, R., Müller-Bloch, C., and King, J. L. (2018). “Governance in the blockchain economy: A framework 

and research agenda.” Journal of the Association for Information Systems, 19(10), 1020–1034. 

Bertelsen,  S. (2003). “Complexity  -  A  new way  of  Understanding Construction.” Proceedings  of  the 
Thirteen Annual Conference of the International Group for Lean Construction, IGLC-13, 1–13. 

Bertelsen, S., and Koskela, L. (2004). “Construction beyond lean: a new understanding of construction 

management.” … the International Group for Lean Construction, 1–11. 

Bollier,  D.  (2015).  “The  Blockchain:  A  Promising  New  Infrastructure  for  Online  Commons.” 
<http://www.bollier.org/blog/blockchain-promising-new-infrastructure-online-commons> 
(Sep. 22, 2020). 

Bonanomi, M., Fischer, S., and Hall, D. M. (2019). “Identifying Project Management Practices for the 

Page 23 of 31 

 
Multi-Party Construction Commons.” 17th Annual Engineering Porject Organization Conference 
(EPOC), Vail, CO. 

Bonanomi, M. M., Hall, D. M., and Staub-french, S. (2020). “Governing Integrated Project Delivery as 
a  Common  Pool  Resource  Scenario:  What  Management  Practices  and  Impact  on  Project 
Participants?” 18th Annual Engineering Project Organization Conference (EPOC). 

Buterin,  V.  (2014).  “Ethereum:  A  Next-Generation  Smart  Contract  and  Decentralized  Application 
Platform.”  White  Paper,  <https://github.com/ethereum/wiki/wiki/White-Paper>  (Aug.  27, 
2018). 

Buterin, V. (2016). “On Coin-lock voting, Futarchy and Optimal Decentralized Governance : Ethereum.” 
<https://www.reddit.com/r/ethereum/comments/4rtpmm/on_coinlock_voting_futarchy_and_
optimal/> (Mar. 10, 2020). 

Bygballe,  L.  E.,  Dewulf,  G.,  and  Levitt,  R.  E.  (2015).  “The  interplay  between  formal  and  informal 
contracting in integrated project delivery.” Engineering Project Organization Journal, 5(1), 22–
35. 

Catalini, C., and Gans, J. S. (2020). “Some simple economics of the blockchain.” Communications of the 

ACM, Association for Computing Machinery. 

Cheng,  R.,  Allison,  M.,  Sturts-Dossick,  C.,  Monson,  C.,  Staub-French,  S.,  and  Poirier,  E.  (2016). 
Motivation and Means: How and Why IPD and Lean Lead to Success. University of Minnesota; 
University of Washington; University of British Columbia; Scan Consulting. 

Chong, H.-Y. Y., and Diamantopoulos, A. (2020). “Integrating advanced technologies to uphold security 
of payment: Data flow diagram.” Automation in Construction, Elsevier B.V., 114, 103158. 

Cila, N., Ferri, G., de Waal, M., Gloerich, I., and Karpinski, T. (2020). “The Blockchain and the Commons: 
Dilemmas in the Design of Local Platforms.” Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems, ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1–14. 

Cox, M., Arnold, G., and Villamayor Tomás, S. (2010). “A Review of Design Principles for Community-

based Natural Resource Management.” Ecology and Society, 15(4), art38. 

Crypto Commons Association. (2021). “Crypto Commons.” <https://www.crypto-commons.org/> (Jan. 

12, 2022). 

Dao,  D.  (2018).  “Decentralized  Sustainability.”  <https://medium.com/@daviddao/decentralized-

sustainability-9a53223d3001>. 

Dapp, M. M. (2019). “Toward a Sustainable Circular Economy Powered by Community-Based Incentive 
Systems.” Business Transformation through Blockchain, H. Treiblmaier and R. Beck, eds., Springer 
International Publishing, Cham, 153–181. 

Darrington, J. W. J., and Lichtig, W. A. W. (2010). “Rethinking the G in GMP: Why Estimated Maximum 

Price Contracts Make Sense on Collaborative Projects.” The Construction Lawyer, 30(2), 1–12. 

Das,  M.,  Luo,  H.,  and  Cheng,  J.  C.  P.  (2020).  “Securing  interim  payments  in  construction  projects 
through  a  blockchain-based  framework.”  Automation  in  Construction,  Elsevier,  118(May), 
103284. 

Davidson,  S.,  De  Filippi,  P.,  and  Potts,  J.  (2018).  “Blockchains  and  the  economic  institutions  of 

capitalism.” Journal of Institutional Economics, 14(4), 639–658. 

Davies,  A.,  MacAulay,  S.  C.,  and  Brady,  T.  (2019).  “Delivery  Model  Innovation:  Insights  From 
Infrastructure Projects.” Project Management Journal, SAGE PublicationsSage CA: Los Angeles, 
CA, 50(2), 119–127. 

Decoodt,  K.  (2019).  “The  Commons  Stack:  Scaling  the  Commons  to  Re-Prioritize  People  and  the 
<https://medium.com/giveth/the-commons-stack-scaling-the-commons-to-re-

Planet.” 
prioritize-people-and-the-planet-fdc076aec4eb> (Mar. 3, 2020). 

Page 24 of 31 

 
Dietsch, M., Krause, J., Nax, H. H., Omeru, J., Schoettler, R., and Seuken, S. (2018). “Covee Protocol.” 

White Paper, <https://covee.network/assets/covee-whitepaper.pdf> (Aug. 8, 2019). 

Dounas, T., Lombardi, D., and Jabi, W. (2020). “Framework for decentralised architectural design BIM 

and Blockchain integration.” International Journal of Architectural Computing. 

Dubois,  A.,  and  Gadde,  L.-E.  (2002a).  “The  construction  industry  as  a  loosely  coupled  system: 
implications for productivity and innovation.” Construction Management and Economics, Taylor 
& Francis Group, 20(7), 621–631. 

Dubois, A., and Gadde, L. E. (2002b). “Systematic combining: An abductive approach to case research.” 

Journal of Business Research, Elsevier, 55(7), 553–560. 

Elghaish, F., Abrishami, S., and Hosseini, M. R. (2020). “Integrated project delivery with blockchain: An 
automated  financial  system.”  Automation  in  Construction,  Elsevier,  114(November  2019), 
103182. 

Emmett, 

J. 

(2019a). 

Ostrom 
<https://medium.com/commonsstack/automating-ostrom-for-effective-dao-management-
cfe7a7aea138> (Mar. 3, 2020). 

“Automating 

Effective 

DAO  Management.” 

for 

Emmett,  J.  (2019b).  “Conviction  Voting:  A  Novel  Continuous  Decision  Making  Alternative  to 
<https://medium.com/commonsstack/conviction-voting-a-novel-continuous-

Governance.” 
decision-making-alternative-to-governance-62e215ad2b3d>. 

Erri Pradeep, A. S., Yiu, T. W., Zou, Y., and Amor, R. (2021). “Blockchain-aided information exchange 
records for design liability control and improved security.” Automation in Construction, Elsevier 
B.V., 126, 103667. 

Faqir-Rhazoui,  Y.,  Arroyo,  J.,  and  Hassan,  S.  (2021).  “A  comparative  analysis  of  the  platforms  for 
decentralized  autonomous  organizations  in  the  Ethereum  blockchain.”  Journal  of  Internet 
Services and Applications, Springer Science and Business Media Deutschland GmbH, 12(1), 9. 

Favre, T. (2019). “Continuous Organizations.” <https://github.com/c-org/whitepaper>. 

Fergusson, K. J., and Teicholz, P. M. (1996). “Achieving Industrial Facility Quality: Integration Is Key.” 

Journal of Management in Engineering, 12, 49–56. 

De Filippi, P., and Hassan, S. (2016). “Blockchain technology as a regulatory technology: From code is 

law to law is code.” First Monday, 21(12). 

Fritsch,  F.,  Emmett,  J.,  Friedman,  E.,  Kranjc,  R.,  Manski,  S.,  Zargham, M.,  and  Bauwens,  M.  (2021). 
“Challenges and Approaches to Scaling the Global Commons.” Frontiers in Blockchain, 4(April), 
1–16. 

Gardner, R., Ostrom, E., Walker, J. M., and Wilson, D. B. (1990). “The nature of common-pool resource 

problems.” Rationality and Society, Sage Publications, 2(3), 335–358. 

Gervais, A., Karame, G. O., Wüst, K., Glykantzis, V., Ritzdorf, H., and Capkun, S. (2016). “On the Security 
and  Performance  of  Proof  of  Work  Blockchains.”  Proceedings  of  the  2016  ACM  SIGSAC 
Conference on Computer and Communications Security, ACM, New York, NY, USA, 3–16. 

Gidado,  K.  I.  (1996).  “Project  complexity:  The  focal  point  of  construction  production  planning.” 

Construction Management and Economics, Taylor & Francis Group, 14(3), 213–225. 

Di Giuda, G. M., Giana, P. E., and Pattini, G. (2020). “The Shortening and the Automation of Payments: 
The Potentiality of Smart Contract in the AECO Sector.” Proceedings of International Structural 
Engineering and Construction, ISEC Press, 7(2). 

Hall,  D.  M.,  Algiers,  A.,  and  Levitt,  R.  E.  (2018).  “Identifying  the  Role  of  Supply  Chain  Integration 
Practices  in  the  Adoption  of  Systemic  Innovations.”  Journal  of  Management  in  Engineering, 
34(6), 04018030. 

Hall, D. M., and Bonanomi, M. M. (2021). “Governing Collaborative Project Delivery as a Common-
Page 25 of 31 

 
Pool Resource Scenario.” Project Management Journal. 

Hall,  D.  M.,  and  Scott,  W.  R.  (2019).  “Early  Stages  in  the  Institutionalization  of  Integrated  Project 

Delivery.” Project Management Journal, 50(2), 875697281881991. 

Hamledari, H., and Fischer, M. (2021a). “Role of Blockchain-Enabled Smart Contracts in Automating 
Construction Progress Payments.” Journal of Legal Affairs and Dispute Resolution in Engineering 
and Construction, 13(1), 04520038. 

Hamledari,  H.,  and  Fischer,  M.  (2021b).  “The  application  of  blockchain-based  crypto  assets  for 
integrating the physical and financial supply chains in the construction & engineering industry.” 
Automation in Construction, Elsevier B.V., 127, 103711. 

Han, J., Rapoport, A., and Fong, P. S. W. (2019). “Incentive structures in multi-partner project teams.” 
Engineering, Construction and Architectural Management, Emerald Group Publishing Ltd., 27(1), 
49–65. 

Hanson, R. (2013). “Shall we vote on values, but bet on beliefs?” Journal of Political Philosophy, 21(2), 

151–178. 

Hardin, G. (1968). “The Tragedy of the Commons.” Science, 162(3859), 1243–1248. 

Hassan, S., and De Filippi, P. (2021). “Decentralized Autonomous Organization.” Internet Policy Review, 

10(2). 

Helbing, D., and Lämmer, S. (2008). “Managing complexity: An introduction.” Understanding Complex 

Systems, 2008, 1–16. 

Henisz, W. J., Levitt, R. E., and Scott, W. R. (2012). “Toward a unified theory of project governance: 
economic,  sociological  and  psychological  supports  for  relational  contracting.”  Engineering 
Project Organization Journal, 2(January 2015), 37–55. 

Hewavitharana,  T.,  Nanayakkara,  S.,  and  Perera,  S.  (2019).  “Blockchain  as  a  project  management 

platform.” DOI, 137–146. 

Howard, H. C., Levitt, R. E., Paulson, B. C., Pohl, J. G., and Tatum, C. B. (1989). “Computer Integration: 
Reducing Fragmentation in AEC Industry.” Journal of Computing in Civil Engineering, 3(1), 18–32. 

Hunhevicz, J., Dounas, T., and Hall, D. M. (2022a). “The Promise of Blockchain for the Construction 

Industry: A Governance Lens.” Blockchain in Construction, Springer. 

Hunhevicz, J. J., and Hall, D. M. (2020). “Do you need a blockchain in construction? Use case categories 
and  decision  framework  for  DLT  design  options.”  Advanced  Engineering  Informatics,  Elsevier, 
45(February), 101094. 

Hunhevicz,  J.  J.,  Motie,  M.,  and  Hall,  D.  M.  (2022b).  “Digital  building  twins  and  blockchain  for 
performance-based (smart) contracts.” Automation in Construction, Elsevier, 133, 103981. 

Hunhevicz,  J.  J.,  Schraner,  T.,  and  Hall,  D.  M.  (2020).  “Incentivizing  High-Quality  Data  Sets  in 
Construction Using Blockchain: A Feasibility Study in the Swiss Industry.” Proceedings of the 37th 
International Symposium on Automation and Robotics in Construction (ISARC), “Furuya Hiroshi” 
“Tateyama  Kazuyoshi”  “Osumi  Hisashi,”  ed.,  International  Association  for  Automation  and 
Robotics in Construction (IAARC), Japan (Online), 1291–1298. 

Hunhevicz, J. J., Wang, H., Hess, L., and Hall, D. M. (2021). “no1s1 - a blockchain-based DAO prototype 
for  autonomous  space.”  Proceedings  of  the  2021  European  Conference  on  Computing  in 
Construction, University College Dublin, 27–33. 

Jacobo-Romero,  M.,  and  Freitas,  A.  (2021).  “Microeconomic  foundations  of  decentralised 
organisations.”  Proceedings  of  the  ACM  Symposium  on  Applied  Computing,  Association  for 
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 282–290. 

Jung, W.,  Ballard,  G., Kim, Y.-W.,  and  Han,  S. H. (2012). “Understanding  of  Target  Value Design  for 
Integrated Project Delivery with the Context of Game Theory.” Construction Research Congress 

Page 26 of 31 

 
2012, American Society of Civil Engineers, Reston, VA, 556–563. 

Kenig, M., Allison, M., Black, B., Burdi, L., Colella, C., Davis, H., and Williams, M. (2010). Integrated 
Project  Delivery  for  Public  and  Private  Owners.  National  Association  of  State  Facilities 
Administrators,  Construction  Owners  Association  of  America,  The  Association  of  Higher 
Education  Facilities  Officers,  Associated  General  Contractors  of  America  and  The  American 
Institute of Architects. 

Kifokeris,  D.,  and  Koch,  C.  (2020).  “A  conceptual  digital  business  model  for  construction  logistics 
consultants, featuring a sociomaterial blockchain solution for integrated economic, material and 
information flows.” Journal of Information Technology in Construction, International Council for 
Research and Innovation in Building and Construction, 25(29), 500–521. 

Kim,  K.,  Lee,  G.,  and  Kim,  S.  (2020).  “A  Study  on  the  Application  of  Blockchain  Technology  in  the 
Construction Industry.” KSCE Journal of Civil Engineering, Springer Verlag, 24(9), 2561–2571. 

Kovács, G., and Spens, K. M. (2005). “Abductive reasoning in logistics research.” International Journal 

of Physical Distribution and Logistics Management, Emerald Group Publishing Limited. 

de  la  Rouviere,  S.  (2018).  “Saving  The  Planet:  Making  It  Profitable  To  Protect  The  Commons.” 
<https://medium.com/@simondlr/saving-the-planet-making-it-profitable-to-protect-the-
commons-50393906fe22>. 

Lahdenperä,  P.  (2012).  “Making  sense  of  the  multi-party  contractual  arrangements  of  project 
partnering, project alliancing and integrated project delivery.” Construction Management and 
Economics, 30(1), 57–79. 

Laurent, J., and Leicht, R. M. (2019). “Practices for Designing Cross-Functional Teams for Integrated 
Project Delivery.” Journal of Construction Engineering and Management, 145(3), 05019001. 

Lee,  D.,  Lee,  S.  H.,  Masoud,  N.,  Krishnan,  M.  S.,  and  Li,  V.  C.  (2021).  “Integrated  digital  twin  and 
blockchain  framework  to  support  accountable  information  sharing  in  construction  projects.” 
Automation in Construction, Elsevier, 127, 103688. 

Levitt,  R.  E.  (2011).  “Towards  project  management  2.0.”  Engineering  Project  Organization  Journal, 

Engineering Project Organization Society, 1(3), 197–210. 

Levitt,  R.  E.,  and  Sheffer,  D.  A.  (2011).  “Innovation  in  Modular  Industries:  Implementing  Energy-
Efficient  Innovations  in  {US}  Buildings1.”  Proceedings  of  Conference  on  Energy,  Organizations 
and Society, UC Davis, 1–29. 

Li, J., Greenwood, D., and Kassem, M. (2019). “Blockchain in the built environment and construction 
industry:  A  systematic  review,  conceptual  models  and  practical  use  cases.”  Automation  in 
Construction, Elsevier, 102, 288–307. 

Li,  J.,  and  Kassem, M.  (2021).  “Applications of  distributed  ledger  technology  (DLT)  and  Blockchain-

enabled smart contracts in construction.” Automation in Construction, Elsevier B.V. 

Li, X., Wu, L., Zhao, R., Lu, W., and Xue, F. (2021). “Two-layer Adaptive Blockchain-based Supervision 
model  for  off-site  modular  housing  production.”  Computers  in  Industry,  Elsevier  B.V.,  128, 
103437. 

Lombardi, D., Dounas, T., Cheung, L. H., and Jabi, W. (2020a). “Blockchain Grammars for Validating the 

Design Process.” Blucher Design Proceedings, Editora Blucher, São Paulo, 406–411. 

Lombardi, D., Dounas, T., Cheung, L. H., and Jabi, W. (2020b). “Blockchain Grammars for Validating 

the Design Process.” Blucher Design Proceedings, Editora Blucher, São Paulo, 406–411. 

Luo, L., He, Q., Jaselskis, E. J., and Xie, J. (2017). “Construction Project Complexity: Research Trends 
and Implications.” Journal of Construction Engineering and Management, American Society of 
Civil Engineers (ASCE), 143(7), 04017019. 

Machart, F., and Samadi, J. (2020). The state of blockchain governance. 

Page 27 of 31 

 
Maciel,  A.,  and  Garbutt, L. (2020). “The  emergence of  BIM SLCs.” <https://aecmag.com/comment-

mainmenu-36/1951-the-emergence-of-bim-slcs>. 

Maples,  M. 

J. 

(2018).  “Crypto  Commons.”  <https://blog.usejournal.com/crypto-commons-

da602fb98138>. 

Mason, J. (2017). “Intelligent Contracts and the Construction Industry.” Journal of Legal Affairs and 

Dispute Resolution in Engineering and Construction, 9(3), 04517012. 

Mathews, M., Robles, D., and Bowe, B. (2017). “BIM+Blockchain: A Solution to the Trust Problem in 

Collaboration?” CITA BIM Gathering. 

McNamara, A. J., and Sepasgozar, S. M. E. (2020). “Developing a theoretical framework for intelligent 
contract acceptance.” Construction Innovation, Emerald Group Publishing Ltd., 20(3), 421–445. 

McNamara, A. J., and Sepasgozar, S. M. E. (2021). “Intelligent contract adoption in the construction 
industry: Concept development.” Automation in Construction, Elsevier B.V., 122, 103452. 

Miscione,  G.,  Goerke, T.,  Klein,  S.,  Schwabe,  G.,  and  Ziolkowski, R.  (2019). “Hanseatic  Governance: 

Understanding Blockchain as Organizational Technology.” 

Mougayar,  W.  (2017).  “Tokenomics  —  A  Business  Guide  to  Token  Usage,  Utility  and  Value.” 
<https://medium.com/@wmougayar/tokenomics-a-business-guide-to-token-usage-utility-and-
value-b19242053416>. 

Nakamoto, S. (2008). “Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System.” www.bitcoin.org. 

Nanayakkara,  S.,  Perera,  S.,  Senaratne,  S.,  Weerasuriya,  G.  T.,  and  Bandara,  H.  M.  N.  D.  (2021). 
“Blockchain and Smart Contracts: A Solution for Payment Issues in Construction Supply Chains.” 
Informatics, MDPI AG, 8(2), 36. 

Nawari,  N.  O.,  and  Ravindran,  S.  (2019a).  “Blockchain  and  the  built  environment:  Potentials  and 

limitations.” Journal of Building Engineering, Elsevier, 25, 100832. 

Nawari,  N.  O.,  and  Ravindran,  S.  (2019b).  “Blockchain  and  the  built  environment:  Potentials  and 

limitations.” Journal of Building Engineering, Elsevier, 25, 100832. 

O’Reilly,  A.,  and  Mathews,  M.  (2019). “Incentivising Multidisciplinary  Teams with  New Methods  of 

Procurement using BIM + Blockchain.” CITA BIM Gathering 2019. 

Ostrom,  E.  (1990).  Governing  the  commons:  The  evolution  of  institutions  for  collective  action. 

Cambridge university press. 

Ostrom,  E.  (2010).  “Beyond  Markets  and  States:  Polycentric  Governance  of  Complex  Economic 

Systems.” American Economic Review, 100(3), 641–672. 

Ostrom, E. (2015a). Governing the Commons. Canto Classics, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 

Ostrom, E. (2015b). Governing the Commons. Canto Classics, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 

Ostrom, E., Burger, J., Field, C. B., Norgaard, R. B., and Policansky, D. (1999). “Revisiting the commons: 
Local lessons, global challenges.” Science, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 

Ostrom, E., Gardner, R., Walker, J., Walker, J., and Walker, J. (1994). Rules, games, and common-pool 

resources. University of Michigan Press. 

Papadonikolaki,  E.  (2018).  “Loosely  Coupled  Systems  of  Innovation:  Aligning  BIM  Adoption  with 
Implementation  in  Dutch  Construction.”  Journal  of  Management  in  Engineering,  American 
Society of Civil Engineers, 34(6), 05018009. 

Pazaitis,  A.,  De  Filippi,  P.,  and  Kostakis,  V.  (2017).  “Blockchain  and  value  systems  in  the  sharing 
economy:  The  illustrative  case  of  Backfeed.”  Technological  Forecasting  and  Social  Change, 
Elsevier, 125(June), 105–115. 

Perera,  S.,  Nanayakkara,  S.,  Rodrigo,  M.  N.  N.,  Senaratne,  S.,  and  Weinand,  R.  (2020).  “Blockchain 

Page 28 of 31 

 
technology:  Is  it  hype  or  real  in  the  construction  industry?”  Journal  of  Industrial  Information 
Integration, Elsevier, 17(August 2019), 100125. 

Perlberg,  B.  M.  (2009).  “Contracting  for  Integrated  Project  Delivery:  ConsensusDOCS.”  The  48th 

Annual Meeting of Invited Attorneys, Victor O. Schinnerer &. Company, Inc. 

Qian, X. (Alice), and Papadonikolaki, E. (2020). “Shifting trust in construction supply chains through 
blockchain  technology.”  Engineering,  Construction  and  Architectural  Management,  ahead-of-
p(ahead-of-print). 

Rahimian,  F.  P.,  Goulding,  J.  S.,  Abrishami,  S.,  Seyedzadeh,  S.,  and  Elghaish,  F.  (2021).  “Blockchain 
integrated  project  delivery.”  Industry  4.0  Solutions  for  Building  Design  and  Construction, 
Routledge, London, 381–409. 

Red, R. (2019). Peer Production on the Crypto Commons. 

Rozas,  D.,  Tenorio-Fornés,  A.,  Díaz-Molina,  S.,  and  Hassan,  S.  (2021a).  “When  Ostrom  Meets 
Blockchain: Exploring the Potentials of Blockchain for Commons Governance.” SAGE Open, SAGE 
Publications Inc., 11(1), 215824402110025. 

Rozas, D., Tenorio-Fornés, A., and Hassan, S. (2021b). “Analysis of the Potentials of Blockchain for the 
Governance of Global Digital Commons.” Frontiers in Blockchain, Frontiers Media SA, 4, 15. 

Saygili, M., Mert, I. E., and Tokdemir, O. B. (2021). “A decentralized structure to reduce and resolve 
construction  disputes  in  a  hybrid  blockchain  network.”  Automation  in  Construction,  Elsevier, 
104056. 

Schadeck,  W.  X. 

(2019). 

“8  Nobel-Prize  Winning  Rules 

for  Governance  Design.” 

<https://medium.com/@wen_xs/crypto-manifesto-682df071d2>. 

Schmidt, C. G., and Wagner, S. M. (2019). “Blockchain and supply chain relations: A transaction cost 
theory perspective.” Journal of Purchasing and Supply Management, Elsevier Ltd, 25(4), 100552. 

Scott,  D.  J.,  Broyd,  T.,  and  Ma,  L.  (2021).  “Exploratory  literature  review  of  blockchain  in  the 

construction industry.” Automation in Construction, Elsevier, 132, 103914. 

Shackelford, S., and Myers, S. (2016). “Block-by-Block: Leveraging the Power of Blockchain Technology 

to Build Trust and Promote Cyber Peace.” SSRN Electronic Journal, 334, 334–388. 

Sheng,  D.,  Ding,  L.,  Zhong,  B.,  Love,  P.  E.  D.,  Luo,  H.,  and  Chen,  J.  (2020).  “Construction  quality 
information  management  with  blockchains.”  Automation  in  Construction,  Elsevier  B.V.,  120, 
103373. 

Shojaei,  A.,  Flood,  I., Moud,  H.  I.,  Hatami,  M.,  and  Zhang,  X.  (2020). “An  Implementation  of  Smart 

Contracts by Integrating BIM and Blockchain.” Springer, Cham, 519–527. 

Singh, V. (2019). “Digitalization, BIM ecosystem, and the future of built environment.” Engineering, 
Construction and Architectural Management, Emerald Publishing Limited, ahead-of-p(ahead-of-
print), ECAM-01-2018-0004. 

Sive, T., and Hays, M. (2009). “Integrated Project Delivery : Reality and Promise A Strategist’s Guide to 

Understanding and Marketing IPD.” Marketing Research, (800), 1–34. 

Son, J., and Rojas, E. M. (2011). “Evolution of Collaboration in Temporary Project Teams: An Agent-
Based  Modeling  and  Simulation  Approach.”  Journal  of  Construction  Engineering  and 
Management, 137(8), 619–628. 

Sonmez, R., Sönmez, F. Ö., and Ahmadisheykhsarmast, S. (2021). “Blockchain in project management: 
a  systematic  review  of  use  cases  and  a  design  decision  framework.”  Journal  of  Ambient 
Intelligence and Humanized Computing, Springer, 1, 3. 

Spychiger, F., Tasca, P., and Tessone, C. J. (2021a). “Unveiling the Importance and Evolution of Design 
Components Through the ‘Tree of Blockchain.’” Frontiers in Blockchain, Frontiers Media SA, 3, 
613476. 

Page 29 of 31 

 
Spychiger, F., Tasca, P., and Tessone, C. J. (2021b). “Unveiling the Importance and Evolution of Design 
Components Through the ‘Tree of Blockchain.’” Frontiers in Blockchain, Frontiers Media SA, 3, 
613476. 

Sreckovic, M., and  Windsperger, J. (2020). “Decentralized  Autonomous Organizations  and  Network 

Design in AEC: A Conceptual Framework.” SSRN Electronic Journal, Elsevier BV. 

Stern,  P.  C.  (2011).  “Design  principles  for  global  commons:  Natural  resources  and  emerging 
technologies.”  International  Journal  of  the  Commons,  Igitur,  Utrecht  Publishing  and  Archiving 
Services, 5(2), 213–232. 

Tasca,  P.,  and  Tessone,  C.  J.  (2019).  “A  Taxonomy  of  Blockchain  Technologies:  Principles  of 
Identification and Classification.” Ledger, University Library System, University of Pittsburgh, 4. 

Teng,  Y.,  Li,  X.,  Wu,  P.,  and  Wang,  X.  (2019).  “Using  cooperative  game  theory  to  determine  profit 
distribution  in  IPD  projects.”  International  Journal  of  Construction  Management,  Taylor  & 
Francis, 19(1), 32–45. 

Tezel,  A.,  Febrero,  P.,  Papadonikolaki,  E.,  and  Yitmen,  I.  (2021).  “Insights  into  Blockchain 
in  Construction:  Models  for  Supply  Chain  Management.”  Journal  of 
Implementation 
Management in Engineering, American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE), 37(4), (ASCE)ME.1943-
5479.0000939. 

Thomsen, C., Darrington, J., Dunne, D., and Lichtig, W. (2009). Managing Integrated Project Delivery. 

Construction Management Association of America, McLean, Virginia, USA. 

Tian, Y., Lu, Z., Adriaens, P., Minchin, R. E., Caithness, A., and Woo, J. (2020). “Finance infrastructure 
through  blockchain-based  tokenization.”  Frontiers  of  Engineering  Management,  Springer 
Science and Business Media LLC, 7(4), 485–499. 

Tillmann, P., Berghede, K., Ballard, G., and Tommelein, I. D. (2014). “Developing a Production System 

on IPD: Considerations for a Pluralistic Environment.” 

Timmermans,  S., and  Tavory,  I.  (2012). “Theory  Construction  in  Qualitative  Research.”  Sociological 

Theory, SAGE PublicationsSage CA: Los Angeles, CA, 30(3), 167–186. 

Titcomb,  A.  (2019).  “Deep  Dive:  Augmented  Bonding  Curves.”  <https://medium.com/giveth/deep-

dive-augmented-bonding-curves-3f1f7c1fa751>. 

Voshmgir, B. S., and Zargham, M. (2019). “Foundations of Cryptoeconomic Systems.” 1–18. 

Wang,  J.,  Wu,  P.,  Wang,  X.,  and  Shou,  W.  (2017).  “The  outlook  of  blockchain  technology  for 
construction  engineering  management.”  Frontiers  of  Engineering  Management,  Editorial 
Department of Engineering Sciences, 4(1), 67. 

Wang, Y. L., and Krishnamachari, B. (2019). “Enhancing Engagement in Token-Curated Registries via 
an  Inflationary  Mechanism.”  ICBC  2019  -  IEEE  International  Conference  on  Blockchain  and 
Cryptocurrency, Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc., 188–191. 

Wang, Z., Wang, T., Hu, H., Gong, J., Ren, X., and Xiao, Q. (2020). “Blockchain-based framework for 
in  precast  construction.” 

information  sharing 

improving  supply  chain  traceability  and 
Automation in Construction, Elsevier B.V., 111, 103063. 

Watson,  R.,  Kassem, M., and  Li,  J.  (2019). “Traceability  for Built Assets: Proposed  Framework for  a 

Digital Record.” 

Werbach,  K.  (2020).  “The  Siren  Song:  Algorithmic  Governance  by  Blockchain.”  After  the  Digital 

Tornado: Networks, Algorithms, Humanity, c(2016). 

Weyl, E. G., and Lalley, S. P. (2017). “Quadratic Voting.” Social Science Research Network, (December), 

1–5. 

Whyte, J. (2019). “How Digital Information Transforms Project Delivery Models.” Project Management 

Journal, SAGE Publications Inc., 50(2), 177–194. 

Page 30 of 31 

 
Wu, H., Zhong, B., Li, H., Guo, J., and Wang, Y. (2021). “On-Site Construction Quality Inspection Using 
Blockchain and Smart Contracts.” Journal of Management in Engineering, American Society of 
Civil Engineers (ASCE), 37(6), 04021065. 

Ye, X., and König, M. (2021). “Framework for Automated Billing in the Construction Industry Using BIM 

and Smart Contracts.” Lecture Notes in Civil Engineering, 98(January), 824–838. 

Zargham, M., Shorish, J., and Paruch, K. (2020). “From Curved Bonding to Configuration Spaces.” 1–3. 

Page 31 of 31 

 
 
