IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS

1

The Conﬂuence of Blockchain and 6G

Network: Scenarios Analysis and Performance

Assessment

Bo Li, Shuiguang Deng, Senior Member, IEEE, Xueqiang Yan, and Schahram

Dustdar, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract

Emerging advanced applications, such as smart cities, healthcare, and virtual reality, demand more

challenging requirements on sixth-generation (6G) mobile networks, including the need for improved

secrecy, greater integrity, non-repudiation, authentication, and access control. While blockchain, with

its intrinsic features, is generally regarded as one of the most disruptive technological enablers for

6G functional standards, there is no comprehensive study of whether, when, and how blockchain

will be used in 6G scenarios. Existing research lacks performance assessment methodology for the

use of blockchain in 6G scenarios. Therefore, we abstract seven ﬁne-grained 6G possibilities from

the application layer and investigate the why, what, and when issues for 6G scenarios in this work.

Moreover, we provide a methodology for evaluating the performance and scalability of blockchain-based

6G scenarios. In conclusion, we undertake comprehensive experimental to assess the performance of

the Quorum blockchain and 6G scenarios. The experimental results show that a consortium blockchain

with the proper settings may satisfy the performance and scalability requirements of a 6G network.

B. Li and S. Deng are with the College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China.

E-mail: {bol, dengsg}@zju.edu.cn.

X. Yan is with 2012 Lab, Huawei Technologies, Shenzhen 201206, China. E-mail: yanxueqiang1@huawei.com.

S. Dustdar is with Distributed Systems Group, TU Wien, 1040 Vienna, Austria. E-mail: dustdar@dsg.tuwien.ac.at.

This work was partially supported by the National Science Foundation of China (NSFC) under Grants U20A20173 and

62125206. Schahram Dustdar’s work is also supported by the Zhejiang University Deqing Institute of Advanced Technology

and Industrialization (ZDATI).

(Corresponding author: Shuiguang Deng)

2
2
0
2

l
u
J

1
1

]

C
D
.
s
c
[

1
v
4
4
7
4
0
.
7
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

 
 
 
 
 
 
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS

2

Blockchain, Distributed Ledger Technology(DLT), 6G, Performance Assessment.

Index Terms

I. INTRODUCTION

With the emergence of 5G networks, we have entered a new age of digital society in which

various smart applications, including industrial automation, intelligent transportation, and remote

healthcare, are thriving [8]. The enormous rise of mobile trafﬁc, which is projected to reach

607 EB by 2025 and 5,016 Exabyte/month by 2030 [9], renders 5G incapable of meeting the

new needs of future signiﬁcant applications. Moreover, the fast growth of data-centric intelligent

systems reveals new latency constraints of 5G networks [10]. Thus, several research programs

are transitioning towards the next generation of mobile networks, etc., 6G, with the goal of

satisfying increasingly severe requirements such as latency, connection, scalability, and reliability

by combining diverse networks spanning space, air, and ground [11], [12].

Compared to its 5G predecessor, 6G is anticipated to be an ubiquitous integrated network

with faster transmission speed, lower communication latency, improved dependability, and larger

coverage. Despite the fact that the emergence of advanced technologies, such as edge intelligence,

TeraHertz (THz) communication, wireless optical technology, and large-scale satellite constella-

tion, promotes the implementation of 6G, there are still a number of obstacles to overcome prior

to the actual landing. Generally speaking, the issues encountered by 6G may be divided into two

categories based on the application needs [11]. The ﬁrst category includes scalability, latency,

throughput, and synchronization, which are performance requirements resulting from future

systems’ vast interconnectedness. The second category includes security-related requirements

such as conﬁdentiality, integrity, non-repudiation, authentication, and access control. The ﬁrst

group permits widespread communication, whilst the second group ensures the security of entities

and data transferred.

Recently, blockchain has attracted a great deal of interest from industrial and academic

organizations throughout the world. Blockchain is a distributed ledger system that uses consensus

algorithms to store chain-structured data consistently and smart contracts to automate operations.

Xu et al. [13] have shown that by incorporating the trustless and automated capabilities of

blockchain, resource management and sharing in 6G networks can be made more performance-

effective. Thus, blockchain offers a viable option for addressing the second group of challenges

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS

3

described above. In addition, blockchain is lauded for its intrinsic properties, such as decentral-

ization, traceability, anonymity, immutability, and security [14]. It is not difﬁcult to deduce that

the second set of obstacles may also be addressed by establishing a communication network

using blockchain as its underlying technology. Consequently, blockchain is generally regarded

as one of the essential 6G enabling technologies.

Despite the above-mentioned capabilities, scalability is a signiﬁcant hurdle to the widespread

use of blockchain from the standpoint of storage and distribution [15]. The maintenance of

network consistency necessitates that each blockchain node keep a copy of the whole ledger

locally, and the blockchain’s trustworthiness is maintained by verifying each transaction and

block, at the sacriﬁce of transaction performance. Moreover, blockchain implementation must

contend with the Impossible Trinity, i.e. security, decentralization, and scalability. Any two

attributes that are realized must come at the price of the third. Therefore, if the blockchain

is included into 6G in an irresponsible manner, not only will it not provide any advantages, but

it may also pose certain problems. This concern makes it crucial to verify the requirement

and efﬁcacy of the integration architecture by conducting a comprehensive analysis of the

performance and possible bottlenecks in the blockchain-enabled 6G network. Several studies are

currently investigating blockchain integration for 6G, with the majority focusing on addressing

speciﬁc issues, such as spectrum sharing, service-level agreement (SLA) management, and mobile

user privacy protection [13], [16], [17]. Although these works have conﬁrmed the advantages

blockchain may bring in, a problem-speciﬁc integration architecture cannot provide a general

guideline for blockchain deployment as a fundamental component of the 6G network. To the best

of our knowledge, there are currently few publications addressing the rationale for the integration

of blockchain in 6G in terms of foreseen 6G scenarios. Detailed performance evaluations to

forecast possible integration architectural constraints are also lacking. To ﬁll this gap, we present a

comprehensive perspective by studying and assessing the role of blockchain in seven plausible 6G

scenarios. In addition, we propose a methodology for evaluating the performance and scalability

of blockchain-based 6G scenarios . Finally, we implement it in a real - life environment to

undertake a thorough assessment of its performance. This paper is intended to serve as an

enlightening guideline to spur interest and further investigations for subsequent research on

blockchain-empowered 6G systems. The main contributions are summarized as follows:

• We extract seven ﬁne-grained scenarios from the foreseeable 6G application layer to analyze

whether, when, and how to integrate blockchain into 6G network architecture.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS

4

• In addition, we propose a methodology for assessing the scalability and performance of

blockchains in 6G scenarios.

• We conducted performance evaluations on a real network environment consisting of multi-

site data centers, on which a consortium blockchain (Quorum) has been implemented.

Several conﬁgurations, including the number of nodes, compute capacity, and consensus

procedure, are used to evaluate the performance of Quorum. Besides, we conducted a more

extensive performance experiment based on the Poisson distribution’s transaction arrival

model. The solid experimental results indicate that blockchain can be integrated into 6G

networks with the proper setups.

The remainder of this paper is organized by the following order: Section II presents a review of

related works. Analyses on detailed 6G scenarios are presented in Section III. The methodology

is described in Section IV. In Section V, we illustrate the extensive experimental evaluation.

Finally, we conclude the work in Section VI.

II. RELATED WORK

Since massive data connectivity is essential for the ever-increasingly intelligent, automated,

and ubiquitous digital world [18], 6G is gradually developing towards a marginal and distributed

structure. However, the huge risks of attacks and threats occurring in a distributed system make

it a tough challenge to achieve a high degree of security and privacy in 6G networks. Moreover,

how to perform efﬁcient and reliable data management in the 6G data systems such as vehicular

data sharing, medical data storage, and access control is a critical but troublesome issue.

Blockchain is a decentralized, immutable, and autonomous database that supports the estab-

lishment of trust relationships between untrusted subjects in distributed environments. Many

superior characteristics of blockchain, including decentralization, traceability, anonymity, and

immutability, make it a promising candidate for integration into the security and data management

provisions of the 5G/6G system [11].

Blockchain technology offers some key opportunities in 5G networks, such as Infrastructure for

Crowdsourcing, Infrastructure Sharing, International Roaming, Network Slicing, Management,

and Authentication [30]. But, 5G considers the issue of smooth interoperability between different

blockchain platforms. These several limitations can be mitigated in 6G by using consensus

algorithms, applying novel blockchain architecture and sharing techniques, and increasing the

block size of the network [31].

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS

5

Regarding security issues arising from heterogeneous standard integration and access delega-

tions in 6G environments, Manogaran et al. [19] introduced a blockchain-based integrated security

measure for providing secure access control and privacy preservation for resources and users.

Although the performance of the proposed solution is veriﬁed by several metrics, the latency

caused by block validation in the blockchain has not been studied, nor has the evaluation of the

data leakage probability. Deb et al. [20] integrated blockchain into fog nodes and centralized

servers to establish a secure model-sharing platform in a 6G-based industrial Internet of Things

(IIoT). Besides, some works dove deeper into the ﬁeld of blockchain-enabled resource sharing

and spectrum management in 6G and veriﬁed that the integration between wireless networks

and the blockchain would allow the network to monitor and manage spectrum and resource

utilization in a more efﬁcient manner [13], [21], [23]. These efforts envision blockchain-based

resource management, spectrum sharing, and energy trading as drivers for future 6G use cases.

Although these studies have highlighted the integration of blockchain for 6G, most of them

deal with speciﬁc issues such as data management [19], [24], spectrum sharing [21], [23], and

privacy protection [17], [25], [26]. The exact scope of requirements may vary in different 6G

application scenarios due to the diverse nature of involved entities, such as wearable devices,

edge servers, and base stations. Therefore, a comprehensive view of blockchain integration in

foreseeable 6G scenarios is of great importance. Besides, the inherent scalability-related issues

in blockchain, such as throughput and storage bottlenecks, may become potential threats that

hinder the efﬁcient operation of 6G systems [13]. Thus, deep performance evaluation is vital for

further exploration of incorporating blockchain in 6G networks.

To explicitly highlight the unique features and technical requirements of 6G, some surveys

present representative applications and shed light on fundamental technologies that are expected

to empower future 6G networks [10], [15], [27]. However, they focused on how blockchain

can beneﬁt these applications without delving into integration details such as whether to use

blockchain, how to deﬁne a transaction, and when to generate a transaction.

To the best of our knowledge, no work has been done to investigate in detail how to integrate

blockchain into 6G networks from a general scenario perspective, and there are no methods to

review the performance and scalability of blockchain-based 6G scenarios. This paper intends to

ﬁll this gap and serve as an enlightening guideline to spur deeper investigations for subsequent

research on blockchain-empowered 6G networks.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS

6

III. SCENARIOS ANALYSIS OF INTEGRATING BLOCKCHAIN IN 6G NETWORK ARCHITECTURE

In this section, we extract seven ﬁne-grained scenarios from emerging 6G applications to

conduct a detailed analysis on whether, why, and how to integrate blockchain technology into

6G network architecture. The scenario analysis reﬂects the actual requirements since it reﬂects

the actual needs of 6G applications, based on which we can judge the performance demands of

the blockchain and adjust integration schemes.

A. Public Key Management

In the 6G era, a huge number of devices are connected for data interaction. Public key

encryption schemes inherently need to prevent malicious attacks on devices and exchanged data,

such as man-in-the-middle attacks and eavesdropping. Key management is the foundation of all

security mechanisms. They do everything from data encryption and decryption to authentication,

authorization, and access control. Any compromise of cryptographic keys can lead to compromise

for the entire security infrastructure, allowing attackers to decrypt sensitive data, authenticate

themselves as privileged users or give themselves access to unauthorized information. Therefore,

proper management of public keys is an integral part of the 6G network. As a distributed platform,

blockchain has been one of the most viable solutions for storing user keys, and the tamper-proof

nature of blocks can be leveraged to build a chain of trust for public keys. There are two use cases

for public key management in 6G, public key management for users and public key management

for network devices.

• The public key management of users is for individual users, for example, users need to

add or delete public key information in the blockchain when they register or cancel their

devices. When using a public key to encrypt personal information, it not only prevents

conﬁdential information from being stolen, but also well meets the requirements of GDPR.

At the same time, user authentication and access control are of great signiﬁcance to ensure

a secure network cooperation environment.

• The public keys of network devices can be mutually authenticated in multiple network

devices, not only to prevent pseudo base stations but also to establish a shared network by

different operators.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS

7

B. ID Management

One of the major challenges facing 6G network operators is bringing all parties together and

coordinating their efforts to provide economically viable and seamless connectivity to users. For

each new participant, the demand for interfaces with secure authentication and authorization

mechanisms will increase, along with the complexity and operational costs of the ID infrastruc-

ture required for the associated identity management. While today’s centralized ID infrastructures

have proven to be technically feasible in limited and trusted spaces, once centralized identity

providers must be avoided and due to limited cross-domain interoperability or national data

protection legislation and certiﬁcation, they are unable to provide the required security for

country-dependent institutions typically cannot be trusted, for example, geopolitical reasons [7].

A blockchain-based 6G network enables secure mutual authentication across networks with

different trust domains. It also allows the network to be independent of trusted third parties while

improving the auditability and transparency of IDs. Better management of IDs in multiple trust

domains. two use cases for ID management in 6G networks are Pseudo-name management and

decentralized ID management.

Pseudonyms, as a data protection method strongly recommended by GDPR, emerge to prevent

real information leakage. Using real public keys to create pseudonyms and recording the mapping

relationship between pseudonyms and real public keys in the blockchain ensures both the leakage

of real public key information and the authenticity of public keys and the auditability of related

user behavior.

C. Authorization, Authentication, and Access Control

In 6G networks, the total number of devices is growing at an increasing rate, which poses new

security risks and challenges to the system. Failure to protect network devices from unauthorized

access can often lead to serious data breaches, as these devices often contain large amounts of

valuable and sensitive data. As for traditional access control technology, centralized management

can lead to data leakage, as well as the difﬁculty of coordinating multiple parties as multiple

organizations are involved. Therefore, it is not applicable to 6G networks. Therefore, it is not ap-

plicable to 6G networks. Authentication, Authorization, and Access Control(AAA) can be ported

to blockchain networks and, in particular, be implemented as a smart contract on a decentralized

blockchain with no downtime, no fraud, and no third-party intervention. It also enables secure

authentication, authorization, and access control in mutually untrusted administrations.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS

8

D. Context information management

With the objective of providing high quality of service (QoS), 6G system will need to be

context-aware i.e., use context information in a real-time mode depends on network, devices,

applications, and the environment of users [28]. There are several beneﬁts to using blockchain

to preserve context information. First, it enables easy access. Because different kinds of context

information are kept in the blockchain, there is no need to go through a third-party plat-

form.Secondly, all the modiﬁcation and deletion records of the context information can be

audited, thus enhancing the security of the information. We propose two use cases for context

information as follows:

• Personal context information is indexed by the user’s identity and contains personal in-

formation. For example, the cached information such as ID and public key generated by

individual users. Putting the personal context information into the blockchain can facilitate

the base station to access the cached information quickly and also ensure the auditable

record of information usage, thus protecting the privacy of individual users.

• Location information is very important context information, which can ensure that operators

can better serve their customers. By storing location information in the blockchain, it

can facilitate fast access by different operators. However, location information is private

information, it needs to be placed in the blockchain by encryption, and access to location

information needs to be approved by the owner.

E. Data Management and Data Trading

As digitization accelerates, every element of society is generating large amounts of data all

the time, and in turn, beneﬁts from the proliferation of data [2]. As a result, data management

and further data transactions have become one of the key technical building blocks of the 6G

architecture. Considering that 6G is envisioned to assume an important role in enabling large-

scale IoT devices to seamlessly collaborate to meet highly diverse business needs and to realize

the vision of ubiquitous AI. In this paper, we mainly consider subscription data, AI model

data, IOT data, and sensing data. all of which contain a large amount of private information

and These data contain a large amount of private information and are of high commercial

value. Therefore, there is an urgent need for secure systems that support data management

and transactions. Blockchain is a distributed database maintained by multiple parties, and it is

transparent, traceable, collaboratively maintained, and supports the ﬂow of data and transactions

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS

9

without security issues. With these advantages, blockchain has emerged as one of the potential

solutions for data management and transactions.

We use both on-chain and off-chain architectures to manage data, as shown in 1. The hash

address of the original data is stored on the blockchain, while the original data is stored off-

chain after encryption. For data deletion and update, the data activity should be recorded on

the blockchain. The on-chain/off-chain architecture ensures the ”right to forget” as required by

GDPR and also ensures the expansion of the blockchain ledger due to excessive data size.

Fig. 1. DLT+DHT architecture

F. Resource Sharing

To achieve the goals of 6G, wireless resources such as spectrum, compute, storage, and

infrastructure plays a critical role, and the cost of sharing these resources will be signiﬁcant.

Traditional studies rely on a centralized third party to validate each shared transaction, which is

vulnerable to many security threats, including single points of failure, denial of service attacks,

etc [4]. Moreover, they focus only on resource management and ignore privacy and security

issues that are critical to resource sharing.

Resource sharing is a typical use case where blockchain can be used to efﬁciently exchange

assets between multiple stakeholders without the need for a centralized third party to provide

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS

10

trust. In a blockchain, all resource sharing and transactions are transparent and secure. Not only

that, in resource sharing, all shared executions can be consistent through smart contracts without

human intervention.

In 6G networks, there are several resources that can be shared, such as spectrum, computing

resources, and networks.

G. Trading and Settlement

Traditional asset transactions require the involvement of intermediaries, such as brokers or

paying agents, to facilitate the clearing and settlement of transactions, making the settlement

process very time-consuming and costly. Blockchain can be used to exchange assets between

multiple stakeholders in a de-trusted environment. as it provides a decentralized infrastructure

and enables more ﬂexible settlement cycles to speed up settlements. Through smart contracts,

we can automate transactions and settlements without human intervention to ensure the security

of assets and ease of transactions.

At the same time, due to the in-mutability of the blockchain, all transaction and settlement

information can be accessed through the blockchain, which can also facilitate future inquiries

and audits. In 6G, we propose two use cases that require the use of blockchain.

• In the wireless telecommunications environment, there is interconnection settlement, roam-

ing settlement, and billing between different operators. The existing settlement methods

take a long time and the results are not clear and ambiguous. With the introduction of

blockchain, different stakeholders can transact and settle faster, more transparently, more

accurately, and more securely.

• Call Detail Records (CDRs) are used to charge customers for using transportation network

services at the end of the billing period. To make billing information auditable, CDRs can

be periodically recorded on the blockchain or stored in an on-chain/off-chain architecture

(Figure 1). When settlement and transactions are encountered, the CDRs are queried via

smart contracts to automatically perform billing and roaming tasks.

At the end of this section, we analyze the seven 6G scenarios in more detail. In Table I, Table

II, we analyze the why, what, and when questions for each scenario use case which gives a

clearer and more intuitive presentation of each scenario.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS

11

6G SCENARIO ANALYSIS BASED ON BLOCKCHAIN:SCENARIO 1-4 (W FOR WRITE TRANSACTION)(R FOR READ

TRANSACTION)

TABLE I

Use cases

Why on-chain? Beneﬁts?

chain? i.e. transaction

transaction

What is recorded on

When is the

deﬁnition

generated/query?

• Decentralization, i.e. avoid

centralized PKI;

• Transaction content:

• When an end user

• Tamper-proof ensures the

{Hash(ID) : Public key}

subscribes to the

authenticity of public key;

• Transaction is digitally

network provider.(W)

• Provide public key to 3rd

signed by operator’s

• User query, operator

party to authenticate the

private key

query. (R)

Subscribers’

public key

management

Network

equipment’s

public key

management

Pseudo-name

management

user.

• Decentralization, i.e. avoid

centralized PKI;

• Tamper-proof ensures the

authenticity of public key;

• Provide public key to 3rd

party to authenticate the

user.

• User’s public key is

endorsed by the central

authority - authenticity.

• Auditable users’ behavior

Decentralized ID

(DID)

• publicly accessible,

Transparent.

• Trusted attestation.

Authentication

Authorization

1 Public key

management

2 ID management

3 Authentication,

Authorization,

and Access

control

• Transaction content:

{Hash(NEID) : Public

key}

• Transaction is digitally

signed by operator’s

private key

• Transaction content:

• When network

equipment is onboard.(W)

• operator query. (R)

{pseudo-name: public

• When the pseudo-name

key}

is created by central

• Transaction is digitally

authority. (W)

signed by central

• When the pseudo-name

authority who creates

is queried.(R)

the pseudo-name

• When the DID is created

• identiﬁers and use

by central authority. (W)

schemas

• when the identiﬁer is

veriﬁed. (R)

• The data activity of

inquiring the

• When a service request

subscriber’s data

is initiated. (R & W)

(subscriptions, proﬁles)

• The data activity of

inquiring the

subscription proﬁle.

• When a speciﬁc service

request. (R & W)

• Traceable & auditable records

• The data activity of

• When a 3rd party or a

Access Control

of user’s subscription data access

inquiring the user data

network function

activities as required by GDPR

which is not include in

access to the user’s

or PIPL

subscription proﬁle.

data. (R & W)

4 Context

personal context

information context

Location

information

• The data activity of

• When a network

inquiring the

function access to

subscription proﬁle

user’s subscription

and updating/deleting

data, or update/delete the

the context.

context. (R & W)

• Location information

access log.

• When a 3rd party or a

network function access

to the user’s data(R & W)

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS

12

6G SCENARIO ANALYSIS BASED ON BLOCKCHAIN:SCENARIO 5-7

TABLE II

Subscription data

• GDPR/PIPL, including

‘forgettable/erasable

5 Data

management &

data trading

AI Model data

IoT data

• Tamper-proof

• Defend poison attack

• Eliminate SPOF (e.g. the

aggregator), mitigate the

DDoS attacks (targets at

centralized aggregator)

• Privacy preserving,

traceable, auditable

• Avoid the problem of ‘BC

bloat’

• Auditability

Sensing data

• Data sharing (automatic

Data

trading/sharing

Spectrum

trading)

• Automatic trading (SC)

• Trusted data source

• Data cooperation

• Automatic settlement (via SC)

• Automatic auction (via SC)

6 Resource sharing

Computing

resource

Network sharing

(RAN, CN. . . )

Precise, near-real-time (record),

trusted automatic settlement (via

SC)

• Auditable

• Tamper-proof

• Hash/address of the

off-chain stored

subscription proﬁle

• For removing data: The

action of removing the

off-chain data

• For update: The action

of updating the offchain

data

• The hash of the model

data (on-chain/offchain)

• Encrypted model data

(on-chain store AI

model data)

• Hash of raw data

• Hash of the sensing

data

• User subscribes to the

service provided by

network provider. (R & W)

• User change his/her

subscription. (R & W)

• User de-register his/her

service from the. (R & W)

network provider.

• User update his/her

subscription. (W)

• When the model

training is completed.(W)

• When the gradient

update is completed. (W)

• Retrieve the

model/gradient. (R)

• Periodically store the

streaming/time series

data.(W)

• Audit and

trading/sharing (R)

• Periodically store the

streaming/time series

data. (W)

• Data package

• Data is shared or

exchanged between

exchanged when the

data owner and data

trading occurs. (R&W)

requester.

• Spectrum resource

status

• Geographic

information is included

• Computing resource

status

• Geographic

information is included

• Per device/NF/MEC/DC

Hash of the following

information needs to

be recorded on-chain

• User’s network usage

• NE’s resource provision

status

• Interconnection trafﬁc

• Audit (R)

• When available

spectrum is published. (W)

• Trade deal(W)

• Revoke (W)

• Audit (R)

• When available

computational resource

is published. (W)

• Trade deal (W)

• Revoke (W)

• Audit (R)

• When settlement

occurs (W)

• batch Log information

(W)

• Audit (R)

Interconnection

settlement

• Auditable usage

volume/usage (per

• Periodic (W)

• Automatic settlement(via

hour)

• Per-hour/Perday/month (W)

SC)

• Settlement (per

• Audit (R)

7 Trading &

Settlement

Roaming

settlement

month)

• CDR (periodically

• Auditable usage

record on the chain in

• Periodic settlement (W)

• Automatic settlement(via

a batch)

• Per-hour/Perday/month (W)

SC)

• Settlement (per-user)

• Audit(R)

• Per-day/month

• CDR (periodically

• Per-hour/Perday/month (W)

Billing

• Auditable usage

record on the chain in

• Periodic settlement(R)

a batch)

• Audit(R)

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS

13

IV. METHODOLOGY OF PERFORMANCE EVALUATION

In this section, we introduce a methodology which can evaluate the performance and scalability

of blockchain-based 6G scenarios. We divide transactions in the blockchain into ”read” and

”write”, and analyze when ”read” and ”write” are required in seven scenarios. Based on above,

we propose an abstract model for the sending rate as poisson distribution. Finally, we calculate

the transaction arrival rates of scenarios.

Fig. 2. methodology ﬂow

A. Methodology

From related work, it can be concluded that there is no common evaluation method for

blockchain-based 6G scenarios. In this section, we propose a methodology that can evaluate

whether the blockchain performance meets the 6G scenario.

To simplify the evaluation process, we provide the ﬂowchart in ﬁgure 2. When you ﬁnd a

new 6G scenario, ﬁrst you need to understand why the scenario needs to use blockchain and the

beneﬁts of using blockchain. If there is no beneﬁt to using blockchain in this scenario, or if the

performance and usefulness of the entire scenario are not greatly improved by using blockchain,

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS

14

then the scenario cannot be combined with blockchain. After determining why you want to use

blockchain, you should know how to use blockchain in this scenario and what should be recorded

on the blockchain. After that, you need to know when to use blockchain. Here, you need to

distinguish between ”read” and ”write” transactions, and you need to know when to ”read” and

when to ”write ”.

Next, after determining when to use the blockchain, you need to determine the read and write

transaction arrival rate model. Examples include Poisson Distribution Model, Pareto Distribution

Process, Weibull Distribution Process, etc. After determining the transaction arrival rate, you

need to input the model into the blockchain for performance evaluation and get the ”read” and

”write” performance of the blockchain.

In Table I-II, we analyze the why, what, and when of the seven scenarios using blockchain.

Usually, most 6G scenarios are upgrades of 5G scenarios, so when we consider 6G scenarios, we

can extend them by considering some of the 5G scenarios. We were inspired by 5G to calculate

the ”write” and ”read” speeds for such scenarios in 6G.

Finally, you need to compare the calculated ”read” and ”write” transaction speeds with the

maximum ”read” and ”write” transaction speed of the blockchain. ”transactions. If the ”read”

and ”write” performance of the blockchain system meets the scenario, then the scenario can be

considered for the blockchain.

B. Transaction arrival model

With our methodology, in Table I-II, we ﬁrst analyze what and when to use blockchain in

seven scenarios. Different scenarios and different times require different transaction types, so we

divide blockchain transactions into ”reads” and ”writes”.

• For the sake of brevity, the transaction query operation is referred to as ’read’ while the

operation of originating and recording.

• For write operations, we need to change the state of the blockchain and wait for multiple

nodes to reach consensus. so write transactions can only be done sequentially.

Next we need to pick a model for the transaction arrival rate, before that we need to clarify

the following concepts.

• η - The number of concurrent events (CCE) refers to the total number of events that simul-

taneously occur. Different scenario or use case has different CCE. CCE can be calculated

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS

15

based on some assumptions or can be observed through trafﬁc monitoring on the real

network.

• α - The number of ”read” transactions - the number of blockchain transaction query

operations performed to complete an event in a given scenario.

• β - The number of ”write” transactions - the number of operations to record transactions

on the blockchain for completing an event in a given scenario.

In our case, trafﬁc refers to blockchain transactions proposed or generated by the programs of

the different scenarios we analyzed in Section III. For all scenarios and use cases, the Poisson

model is a good choice. In this model, the interarrival times have the following characteristics.

1) They are independent.

2) They are exponentially distributed, i. e., probability density function.

We can assume that the seven scenarios listed satisfy the above two characteristics [32].

Therefore the inter-arrival times are exponentially distributed with a rate parameter λ:

p {An ≤ λ} = 1 − exp(−λt)

(1)

The rate parameter λ is determined by the number of the ‘read’ or ‘write’ transactions

performed on the blockchain in a speciﬁc scenario or use case and the number of CCE.

λwrite transaction = η × β = λβ

λread transaction = η × α = λα

(2)

(3)

C. Case study of transaction arrival analysis

In this section, we focus on the transaction arrival rate of the 6G scenario. Assuming a total

number of 30 million subscriptions, we can obtain λβ and λα by using the equations 3 and

2. Since the β data comes from existing 5G network operators, here we focus on how many

read and write transactions are available for each scenario CCE. Finally, we have selected two

typical scenarios to calculate their transaction arrival rates. Due to space reasons, the speciﬁc

calculations for the remaining scenarios are not given.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS

16

1) The transaction arrival rate of Public Key Management: The read operation in public key

management is used in the AAA scenario, and the write transaction is mainly described here.

The write transaction is mainly when the user opens an account or when a new device goes

online (such as a new base station). There is one write transaction per public key managed CCE.

(The ﬁgure of 0.0015 is from the operator)

λβ = η × β = 0.0115 × 1 = 0.0115

(4)

2) The transaction arrival rate of AAA: Authentication is mainly about verifying the au-

thenticity of the identity. Usually, a query on the chain is sufﬁcient for authentication, so this

scenario is a ”read” transaction only. Each authentication requires the user to submit a signature

for veriﬁcation, so only one ”read” transaction is required. Authorization is the granting of

certain information or rights to another person. It is often necessary to update their authorization

information in the blockchain. Therefore, in each Authorization, one ”write” transaction is

required to change the authorization information, and two read transactions are required to

verify the information of the authorized person.

Complete access control requires authorization and authentication. Complete access control

requires authorization and authentication. The number of authorizations and authentications

required varies from one access control to another, so we refer to the FairAccess framework

for evaluation [29].In FairAccess, the complete process requires three authentications and one

authorization. (The ﬁgure of 8333 is from the operator)

λβ = η × β = 8333 × 1 = 8333

λα = η × α = 8333 × (1 × 3 + 2 × 1) = 41665

V. EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION

(5)

(6)

1) Consensus Quorum: Quorum provides uniﬁed control for infrastructure management and

blockchain network governance. Quorum is compatible with Ether-related components, so we

can get better results in our experiments. As shown in Figures 3-8, we also performed a more

comprehensive performance and storage evaluation of Quorum and obtained more desirable

results.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS

17

Fig. 3.

transaction arrival rate vs tps, CPU utilization and average latency(4 nodes write)

In Quorum, we chose the BFT-like consensus algorithm IBFT. We measured the size of empty

blocks in Quorum and also compared the block time and storage relationship. In Figures 3-6, we

measured the performance of write transactions in 4 nodes and compared the number of nodes

with the performance of write transactions.

2) Cloud Setup:

In each experiment, N consensus nodes are deployed in Cloud virtual

machine. Each virtual machine is equipped with a 4-core 8-thread 2.6GHz CPU, 16GB RAM,

and 100GB storage. The round-trip latency between any two virtual machines is about 30ms.

These cloud servers are deployed in Shanghai, Beijing, Guangzhou, Guiyang, and Ulanchabu

respectively.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS

18

Fig. 4.

transaction arrival rate vs tps, CPU utilization and average latency(5 nodes write)

A. Performance Metrics

In the literature, we are mainly concerned with the latency, performance, and resource costs of

the system. At the same time, we will separate ”read” and ”write” and measure their performance

separately. We divided into two groups of experiments, namely ”read” and ”write” performance

evaluations.

• Latency: Mainly refers to the average time of each transaction from when it is sent to when

it is completed.

• Throughput: This indicates two metrics, namely a) read transaction throughput and b)write

transaction throughput.

• resource Costs: Our main consideration is memory consumption and computational con-

sumption.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS

19

Fig. 5.

transaction arrival rate vs tps, CPU utilization and average latency(6 nodes write)

B. Performance Assessment

We use caliper to generate read and write transactions, and simulate transaction generation of

read and write transactions for the system respectively.

1) Quorum Basic Performance Assessment: First, as shown in Figures 3-6, we evaluated the

write performance of the blockchain with 4, 5, 6, and 7 nodes. From Figures 3-6 we ﬁnd that

the TPS of the system grows linearly until the transaction arrival rate reaches the maximum.

But as the transaction rate reaches its peak, the system starts to lose steady-state (we deﬁne

steady-state as the transaction arrival rate of the system = system throughput rate) and the TPS

starts to gradually decline. At the same time, CPU usage and latency begin to grow as the arrival

rate increases. we ﬁnd that the maximum TPS becomes smaller and smaller as the number of

nodes grows. This is the result caused by the BFT algorithm.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS

20

We then evaluated the performance of reading transactions on a blockchain consisting of four

nodes, as shown in Figure 7-8. we measured the TPS, CPU utilization, and average latency of

block queries on single and multiple nodes. we found that the blockchain does not affect the

query rate, but the performance bottleneck of the machine does.

Fig. 6.

transaction arrival rate vs tps, CPU utilization and average latency(7 nodes write)

2) Performance evaluation with Poisson distributed transaction arrival rate model: We se-

lected four nodes for the evaluation of this experiment. We divided the ”read” and ”write” into

two main groups of experiments. Each large group of experiments is divided into multiple groups

of experiments, and the value of λ is different for different groups. We measure 5 times in each

group of experiments. In each experiment, we send a Poisson distribution as the value of λ

to inject transactions into the system for ten minutes. And get the corresponding average TPS,

latency, and resource usage.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS

21

Fig. 7.

transaction arrival rate vs TPS, CPU utilization and average latency(4 single read)

As shown in Figure 9, the system reaches maximum throughput when λα = 20, 500 for the

query transaction. When the read transactions for four nodes reach λα > 20,500, the system

performance begins to decline precipitously.

As shown in Figure 10, the transaction input rate of the system is equal to the system through-

put rate (i.e., reaches steady-state). However, when λβ exceeds 1400, the system’s performance

degrades dramatically. Compared to Figure 3, we observe that the system reaches a steady-state

with a value of λβ slightly smaller than the peak. There is a chance, according to the Poisson

model, that a value greater than λβ will occur, causing the system’s transaction processing rate

to be lower than the transaction arrival rate at some time.

Adopting the methodology provided in Part IV, we analyze whether the performance of the

quorum blockchain meets the criteria of the seven major scenarios. Figures 9 and 10 depict the

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS

22

Fig. 8.

transaction arrival rate vs tps, CPU utilization and average latency(4 multiple read)

Fig. 9. 4 node transaction arrival rate(Use the poisson distribution model) vs 4 node write tps

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS

23

Fig. 10. 4 node transaction arrival rate(Use the poisson distribution model) vs 4 node multiple read tps

maximum read and write transaction throughputs for the quorum blockchain using the Poisson

distribution trafﬁc arrival model with λα = 20,500 and λβ = 1400, respectively. In section IV,

we compare the read and write transaction arrival rates to the maximum throughput for the

seven scenarios and conclude that our system is well-suited. For example, the write transaction

rate for the public key management scenario is λβ = 0.0115, and the Quorum blockchain meets

all performance requirements for this scenario. The write transaction rate for the AAA case,

however, is λβ = 8333 and the read transaction rate is λα = 41665, which surpasses the

maximum throughput of the Quorum blockchain. Consequently, this scenario is not suitable

for the Quorum blockchain. This problem may be remedied in a number of ways, including

by consolidating several transactions into a single one or by scaling the blockchain. We have

thoroughly investigated the remaining scenarios and found that they can be accommodated by the

Quorum blockchain. The aforementioned study indicates that a properly constructed federated

blockchain is able to match the performance requirements of a 6G network scenario.

VI. CONCLUSION

6G blockchain, although still in its early stages, has attracted more and more researchers

and companies to get involved in investigating it. This article analyzes seven use scenarios of

blockchain under 6G and presents a methodology for evaluating the usability of the scenarios

using certain blockchain. Concretely, we start by analyzing three why, how, and when in con-

junction with seven 6G scenarios and blockchain. After that, we propose a methodology. We

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS

24

may evaluate the usefulness of 6G scenarios with the aid of the methodology. It also does a

basic evaluation of the Quorum blockchain’s performance. In addition, Quorum is assessed using

a trafﬁc model with a Poisson distribution for transaction arrival rates. It calculates the arrival

rates for seven scenarios and evaluates the performance of the blockchain system in a real-world

environment to assure the blockchain’s availability in 6G. Finally, The experimental results show

that consortium blockchain with the proper settings may satisfy the performance and scalability

requirements of a 6G network.

In conclusion, We attempted to provide a Methodology and Complete Experiment to spur

interest and further investigations for subsequent research on blockchain-empowered 6G systems.

nevertheless, there are still certain difﬁculties that are not addressed in our study. 1) Although

we have outlined seven 6G possibilities, Other 6G scenarios, such as Telematics and Drones,

may also use blockchain. More 6G application scenarios must be explored, and the usability

of the scenarios under blockchain must be evaluated; 2)This paper focuses on the usability of

blockchain in a single scenario of 6G, but for a real 6G network where all scenarios must

be covered, a complete blockchain architecture is required to meet the needs of the entire 6G

scenario. the communication and interaction across various situations must also be accomplished

inside this framework. Therefore, this effort is crucial for the future.

REFERENCES

[1] B. Chandrasekaran, “Survey of network trafﬁc models,” Waschington University in St. Louis CSE, vol. 567, 2009.

[2] G. Liu, N. Li, J. Deng, Y. Wang, J. Sun, and Y. Huang, “6g mobile network architecture-solids: Driving forces, features,

and functional topology,” Engineering, 2021.

[3] S. Hu, Y.-C. Liang, Z. Xiong, and D. Niyato, “Blockchain and artiﬁcial intelligence for dynamic resource sharing in 6g

and beyond,” IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 145–151, 2021.

[4] Z. Zhou, X. Chen, Y. Zhang, and S. Mumtaz, “Blockchain-empowered secure spectrum sharing for 5g heterogeneous

networks,” IEEE Network, vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 24–31, 2020.

[5] J. Chiu and T. V. Koeppl, “Blockchain-Based Settlement for Asset Trading,” The Review of Financial Studies, vol. 32,

no. 5, pp. 1716–1753, 04 2019. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhy122

[6] S. E. Haddouti and M. D. Ech-Cherif El Kettani, “Analysis of identity management systems using blockchain technology,”

in 2019 International Conference on Advanced Communication Technologies and Networking (CommNet), 2019, pp. 1–7.

[7] S. R. Garzon, H. Yildiz, and A. K¨upper, “Decentralized identiﬁers and self-sovereign identity in 6g,” arXiv preprint

arXiv:2112.09450, 2021.

[8] L. Chettri and R. Bera, “A comprehensive survey on internet of things (iot) toward 5g wireless systems,” IEEE Internet

of Things Journal, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 16–32, 2019.

[9] T. Hewa, G. G¨ur, A. Kalla, M. Ylianttila, A. Bracken, and M. Liyanage, “The role of blockchain in 6g: Challenges,

opportunities and research directions,” in 2020 2nd 6G Wireless Summit (6G SUMMIT).

IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–5.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS

25

[10] D. C. Nguyen, M. Ding, P. N. Pathirana, A. Seneviratne, J. Li, D. Niyato, O. Dobre, and H. V. Poor, “6g internet of things:

A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 2021.

[11] A. H. Khan, N. U. Hassan, C. Yuen, J. Zhao, D. Niyato, Y. Zhang, and H. V. Poor, “Blockchain and 6g: The future of

secure and ubiquitous communication,” IEEE Wireless Communications, 2021.

[12] T. Maksymyuk, J. Gazda, M. Volosin, G. Bugar, D. Horvath, M. Klymash, and M. Dohler, “Blockchain-empowered

framework for decentralized network management in 6g,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 58, no. 9, pp. 86–92,

2020.

[13] H. Xu, P. V. Klaine, O. Onireti, B. Cao, M. Imran, and L. Zhang, “Blockchain-enabled resource management and sharing

for 6g communications,” Digital Communications and Networks, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 261–269, 2020.

[14] G. Cheng, Y. Chen, S. Deng, H. Gao, and J. Yin, “A blockchain-based mutual authentication scheme for collaborative

edge computing,” IEEE Transactions on Computational Social Systems, 2021.

[15] W. Jiang, B. Han, M. A. Habibi, and H. D. Schotten, “The road towards 6g: A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Open Journal

of the Communications Society, vol. 2, pp. 334–366, 2021.

[16] A. Refaey, K. Hammad, S. Magierowski, and E. Hossain, “A blockchain policy and charging control framework for roaming

in cellular networks,” IEEE Network, vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 170–177, 2019.

[17] S. Velliangiri, R. Manoharn, S. Ramachandran, and V. R. Rajasekar, “Blockchain based privacy preserving framework for

emerging 6g wireless communications,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, 2021.

[18] M. Giordani, M. Polese, M. Mezzavilla, S. Rangan, and M. Zorzi, “Toward 6g networks: Use cases and technologies,”

IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 58, no. 3, pp. 55–61, 2020.

[19] G. Manogaran, B. S. Rawal, V. Saravanan, P. M. Kumar, O. S. Mart´ınez, R. G. Crespo, C. E. Montenegro-Marin, and

S. Krishnamoorthy, “Blockchain based integrated security measure for reliable service delegation in 6g communication

environment,” Computer Communications, vol. 161, pp. 248–256, 2020.

[20] P. K. Deb, S. Misra, T. Sarkar, and A. Mukherjee, “Magnum: A distributed framework for enabling transfer learning in

b5g-enabled industrial iot,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 17, no. 10, pp. 7133–7140, 2020.

[21] L. Liu, W. Liang, G. Mang, and Z. Dong, “Blockchain based spectrum sharing over 6g hybrid cloud,” in 2021 International

Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing (IWCMC).

IEEE, 2021, pp. 492–497.

[22] A. A. Okon, O. S. Sholiyi, J. M. Elmirghani, and K. Munasighe, “Blockchain for spectrum management in 6g networks,”

Wireless Blockchain: Principles, Technologies and Applications, pp. 137–159, 2021.

[23] S. Hu, Y.-C. Liang, Z. Xiong, and D. Niyato, “Blockchain and artiﬁcial intelligence for dynamic resource sharing in 6g

and beyond,” IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 145–151, 2021.

[24] A. Asheralieva and D. Niyato, “Distributed dynamic resource management and pricing in the iot systems with blockchain-

as-a-service and uav-enabled mobile edge computing,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 1974–1993,

2019.

[25] T. Nguyen, N. Tran, L. Loven, J. Partala, M.-T. Kechadi, and S. Pirttikangas, “Privacy-aware blockchain innovation for

6g: Challenges and opportunities,” in 2020 2nd 6G Wireless Summit (6G SUMMIT).

IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–5.

[26] Y. Yang, L. Wei, J. Wu, C. Long, and B. Li, “A blockchain-based multi-domain authentication scheme for conditional

privacy preserving in vehicular ad-hoc network,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 2021.

[27] M. Z. Chowdhury, M. Shahjalal, S. Ahmed, and Y. M. Jang, “6g wireless communication systems: Applications,

requirements, technologies, challenges, and research directions,” IEEE Open Journal of the Communications Society,

vol. 1, pp. 957–975, 2020.

[28] M. Alam, D. Yang, K. Huq, F. Saghezchi, S. Mumtaz, and J. Rodriguez, “Towards 5g: Context aware resource allocation

for energy saving,” Journal of Signal Processing Systems, vol. 83, no. 2, pp. 279–291, 2016.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS

26

[29] A. Ouaddah, A. Abou Elkalam, and A. Ait Ouahman, “Fairaccess: a new blockchain-based access control framework for

the internet of things,” Security and communication networks, vol. 9, no. 18, pp. 5943–5964, 2016.

[30] A. Chaer, K. Salah, C. Lima, P. P. Ray, and T. Sheltami, “Blockchain for 5g: Opportunities and challenges,” in 2019 IEEE

Globecom Workshops (GC Wkshps), 2019, pp. 1–6.

[31] M. Z. Chowdhury, M. Shahjalal, S. Ahmed, and Y. M. Jang, “6g wireless communication systems: Applications,

requirements, technologies, challenges, and research directions,” IEEE Open Journal of the Communications Society,

vol. 1, pp. 957–975, 2020.

[32] R. Jain and S. Routhier, “Packet trains–measurements and a new model for computer network trafﬁc,” IEEE journal on

selected areas in Communications, vol. 4, no. 6, pp. 986–995, 1986.

Bo Li received the B.S. degree in 2016 from the College of Computer and Information, Anhui Polytechnic

University. he is currently pursuing the PhD.degree with the College of Computer Science and Technology,

Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China. His research interests include Blockchain, Cryptology, Cloud

Computing and Edge Computing.

Shuiguang Deng is currently a full professor at the College of Computer Science and Technology in

Zhejiang University, China, where he received a BS and PhD degree both in Computer Science in 2002

and 2007, respectively. He previously worked at the MIT in 2014 and Stanford University in 2015 as a

visiting scholar. His research interests include Edge Computing, Service Computing, Cloud Computing, and

Business Process Management. He serves for the journal IEEE Trans. on Services Computing, Knowledge

and Information Systems, Computing, and IET CPS as an Associate Editor. Up to now, he has published

more than 100 papers in journals and refereed conferences. In 2018, he was granted the Rising Star Award by IEEE TCSVC.

He is a fellow of IET and a senior member of IEEE.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS

27

Xueqiang Yan is currently a Technology Expert with Wireless Technology Lab, Huawei Technologies.

He was a Member of Technical Staff with Bell Labs from 2000 to 2004. From 2004 to 2016, he was

the Director of Strategy Department, Alcatel-Lucent Shanghai Bell. His current research interests include

future mobile network architecture, edge AI, data analytics, Blockchain and Internet of Things.

Schahram Dustdar is a Full Professor of Computer Science (Informatics) with a focus on Internet

Technologies heading the Distributed Systems Group at the TU Wien. He is Chairman of the Informatics

Section of the Academia Europaea (since December 9, 2016). He is elevated to IEEE Fellow (since

January 2016). From 2004-2010 he was Honorary Professor of Information Systems at the Department of

Computing Science at the University of Groningen (RuG), The Netherlands. From December 2016 until

January 2017 he was a Visiting Professor at the University of Sevilla, Spain and from January until June

2017 he was a Visiting Professor at UC Berkeley, USA. He is a member of the IEEE Conference Activities Committee (CAC)

(since 2016), of the Section Committee of Informatics of the Academia Europaea (since 2015), a member of the Academia

Europaea: The Academy of Europe, Informatics Section (since 2013). He is recipient of the ACM Distinguished Scientist

award (2009) and the IBM Faculty Award (2012). He is an Associate Editor of IEEE Transactions on Services Computing,

ACM Transactions on the Web, and ACM Transactions on Internet Technology and on the editorial board of IEEE Internet

Computing. He is the Editorin-Chief of Computing (an SCI-ranked journal of Springer).

