Analysis of Polkadot: Architecture, Internals, and
Contradictions

Hanaa Abbas
College of Science and Engineering
Hamad Bin Khalifa University
Doha, Qatar
haab09879@hbku.edu.qa

Maurantonio Caprolu
College of Science and Engineering
Hamad Bin Khalifa University
Doha, Qatar
macaprolu@hbku.edu.qa

Roberto Di Pietro
College of Science and Engineering
Hamad Bin Khalifa University
Doha, Qatar
rdipietro@hbku.edu.qa

2
2
0
2

l
u
J

8
2

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
8
2
1
4
1
.
7
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Polkadot is a network protocol launched in 2020
with the ambition of unlocking the full potential of blockchain
technologies. Its novel multi-chain protocol allows arbitrary data
to be transferred across heterogeneous blockchains, enabling the
implementation of a wide range of novel use cases. The Polka-
dot architecture is based on the principles of sharding, which
promises to solve scalability and interoperability shortcomings
that encumber many existing blockchain-based systems. Lured
by these impressive features, investors immediately appreciated
the Polkadot project, which is now ﬁrmly ranked among the top
10 cryptocurrencies by capitalization (around 20 Billions USD).
However, Polkadot has not received the same level of attention
from academia that other proposals in the crypto domain have
received so far, like Bitcoin, Ethereum, and Algorand, to cite a
few. Polkadot architecture is described and discussed only in the
grey literature, and very little is known about its internals.
In this paper, we provide the ﬁrst systematic study on the Polka-
dot environment, detailing its protocols, governance, and eco-
nomic model. Then, we identify several limitations—supported by
an empirical analysis of its ledger—that could severely affect the
scalability and overall security of the network. Finally, based on
our analysis, we provide future directions to inspire researchers
to investigate further the Polkadot ecosystem and its pitfalls in
terms of performance, security, and network aspects.

Index Terms—blockchain, multi-chain, cryptocurrency, Proof
of Stake, Polkadot, decentralization, scalability, DeFi, governance

I. INTRODUCTION

Interest in cryptocurrencies has been steadily rising ever
since the introduction of Bitcoin and blockchain—the founda-
tion of all existing crypotocurrencies—in 2009. As of April
2022, the global cryptomarket capitalization is estimated at
more than 1.88 trillion US dollars. Not only did blockchain
enable secure ﬁnancial transactions, but it also laid the path for
transforming cooperation over the Internet, allowing “trusted
cooperation between untrusted entities” [1]. As a technology
of promising prospects, blockchain and its applications have
continued to witness rapid growth in terms of development
and public attraction over the years.

This paper focuses on a relatively new cryptocurrency—
Polkadot—whose network was only launched mid-May 2020,
yet had successfully secured a spot amongst
the top 10
cryptocurrencies, owning a market capitalization of around
is developed by the Web3
18 billion USD [2]. Polkadot

Foundation and Parity Technologies, both founded by Dr.
Gavin Wood, who is also known for being a co-founder and
former CTO of Ethereum. In 2016, Dr. Gavin Wood shared
his vision of Polkadot and its technical outline through the
white paper [3]; which was, in his words, creating “the next
version of Ethereum” that would complement the aspects for
which Ethereum 2.0 is less optimal [4].

Polkadot

is a fully “sharded” blockchain whose design
is based on sharding—a database splitting technique—that
enables multiple chains to process their transactions in parallel.
Each blockchain shard is called a “parachain” which connects
to the Relay Chain. The Relay Chain is effectively the heart
of the blockchain, acting as the main hub of the system.
Furthermore, Polkadot serves as an interoperability platform;
i.e.,
it allows cross-communication between heterogeneous
blockchains including external ones, such as Bitcoin and
Ethereum. While the Relay Chain orchestrates and ensures
correct functioning of the entire network, parachains can be
customized as needed, including to host smart contracts and
a myriad of other use cases. Essentially, Polkadot was devel-
oped with the goal to address some shortcomings of existing
blockchain technologies, namely, scalability, interoperability,
and achieving standard security guarantees across differing
trust models. In the rest of this paper, we will test whether
these objectives have been achieved.

Due to the novelty of multi-chains, there is a deﬁnite need
to investigate their design and processes, particularly within an
active ecosystem. As one of the ﬁrst publicly released multi-
chain projects, Polkadot is a perfect case study for evaluating
the security properties of cross-chain communications among
heterogeneous blockchains. However, despite achieving a
good standing and wide consideration in the market, Polkadot
has not received the same level of attention from academia
enjoyed by other proposals, such as Bitcoin, Ethereum, and
Algorand, to cite a few. In fact, although well described in
the grey literature, the Polkadot architecture and its practice
is still little discussed in the scientiﬁc community. To ﬁll this
gap, we shed light on the complex ecosystem of Polkadot
through a preliminary analysis of its architecture, followed
by the identiﬁcation of several contradictions that could limit
the strengths envisaged by its creators. Our main goal is to
propose the ﬁrst systematic study on the Polkadot ecosystem,

This is a personal copy of the authors. Not for redistribution. The ﬁnal version of the paper will be available through the IEEExplore Digital Library, in the
proceedings of the 5th IEEE International Conference on Blockchain, Espoo, Finland, August 22-25 2022.

 
 
 
 
 
 
providing researchers interested in this ﬁeld with a solid
knowledge base to understand the Polkadot network and other
blockchains based on multi-chain protocols. The highlighted
limitations, calling for contributions to mitigate their effects,
and the proposed research directions complete the work.

Contributions. In this paper, we provide several contributions:
• We ﬁrst study and analyze the overall architecture of
Polkadot, ranging from the roles of its network partic-
ipants, consensus schemes, and governance to its eco-
nomic and security models. To the best of our knowledge,
this is the ﬁrst systematic study to investigate Polkadot’s
architecture and protocols.

• Based on our analysis, we highlight the main limita-
tions and contradictions of Polkadot, calling for further
investigations and research to propose viable solutions
addressing the uncovered limitations.

• We validate our assertions by providing an empirical
analysis of the validators’ election data that we collected
starting from the
from the Polkadot blockchain,
introduction of network validators in June 2020 until
April 2022.

Paper Organization. The remainder of the paper is organized
as follows. Section II presents an overview of multi-chain de-
sign approaches existing in the literature and other multi-chain
projects publicly available with a market presence. Section
III extensively reviews Polkadot from different perspectives,
including its architecture, consensus protocol, governance, and
security. Further, in Section IV, we discuss the limitations we
found in the Polkadot ecosystem, validated by an empirical
analysis of the ledger. We then conclude the study in Section
V, providing possible extensions and directions for future
work.

II. RELATED WORK

Despite its promising prospects, blockchain technology has
encountered some fundamental limitations over the course of
its development. Real-world applications demand for secure
inter-communication between heterogeneous blockchain sys-
tems; for instance, for transferring different assets, product
lifecycle management [5], etc.. Several works (e.g., [6], [7])
implemented two-way pegged sidechains that enable bidirec-
tional movement of assets and cross-chain communication
between Proof of Work (PoW) sidechains, without the need
for a trusted third party intermediary. Back et al. (2014)
[6] implemented a two-way peg between Bitcoin and other
sidechains, such that: (a) transfers are atomic; and, (b) there
should be zero risk to the other party. In their implementation,
a transaction is created on the parent chain to lock the assets,
then another transaction on the sidechain generates the new as-
set, given valid proof of possession. Later, Kan et al. (2018) [8]
further developed the two-way peg architecture to enable inter-
blockchain communication between heterogeneous systems.
Besides achieving blockchain interoperability [9], other works
relied on the multi-chain architecture for resolving scalability

Fig. 1. Polkadot Data Structures and Participants

and throughput issues in traditional blockchains, e.g., for uses-
cases in IoT [10] and auditing applications [11].

To the best of our knowledge, there are a few multi-chain
projects that both improve transactions’ scalability and imple-
ment cross-chain communication. The ﬁrst project is Cosmos
[12], which launched in March 2019 but did not approach
the same level of market capitalization as Polkadot did. In
Cosmos, there are multiple independent chains operating in
‘zones’ that enjoy trust-free inter-chain communication via
the main hub chain. The second is the anticipated version
of Ethereum (formerly known as Ethereum 2.0); however,
later
Ethereum 2.0 is still
in 2023. As per Polkadot,
to the best of our knowledge,
there is no work in the literature that analyzes the proposed
architecture, having in mind to check its true abiding to the
principles of scalability, interoperability and decentralization.
In this respect, our contribution is the ﬁrst one to show that
the limitations of the proposed architecture introduce some
tensions with respect to the above discussed objectives.

to be launched, approximately,

III. POLKADOT INTERNALS

Polkadot

is popular

for being a multi-chain (sharded)
blockchain network, speciﬁcally built to support the integra-
tion of heterogeneous blockchains in a trust-free environ-
ment and under common security guarantees. It also enables
secured communication with external sovereign blockchains
(e.g., Bitcoin or Ethereum); thus, laying the foundations for
establishing a truly decentralized web. In addition to inter-
operability, Polkadot’s multi-chain design allows transactions
to be processed in parallel instead of sequentially; leading
to a higher throughput and scalability. All these properties
are provided owing to the Relay Chain. It unites a network
of heterogeneous blockchains (or arbitrary state machines),
operating in parallel, which include parachains, parathreads,
and bridges. The Relay Chain provides shared security to the
entire network through its consensus mechanisms.

Polkadot adopts Proof of Stake (PoS) consensus, namely a
variation of it called the Nominated Proof of Stake (NPoS).
The scheme is referred to as “nominated” because the val-
idators (Relay Chain maintainers: nodes that are responsible

for authoring and verifying new blocks) are backed up by
nominators who lock their DOT — Polkadot’s native currency
— as collateral in exchange for staking rewards. However,
if validators misbehave, their corresponding nominators are
also slashed (i.e., DOT deduction from their accounts). While
validators maintain the Relay Chain, a collator is a node
responsible for maintaining its parachain. All previously de-
scribed structures and roles are shown in Figure 1.

A. Paraobjects

In this subsection, we review the paraobjects supported by

Polkadot, namely: parachains, parathreads, and bridges.

1) Parachains: These are independent chains that operate
in parallel, maintained by collators, and can communicate with
each other via the Cross-Consensus Message Passing (XCMP)
format. Parachains can have customized runtime logic, which
includes project-speciﬁc rules for governance, economics and
incentive mechanisms. The key constraint on parachains is that
their state transition function (STF), which is stored on the
Relay Chain, must be veriﬁable by validators. Proofs of new
state transitions (aka, Proof of Validity or PoV) that occur on a
parachain are produced by collators and then validated against
the registered STF by validators. Polkadot
is designed to
support a maximum of 100 parachain slots, where a slot can be
acquired through governance (for common good parachains)
or via candle auctions.

Common Good Parachains offer functionality that beneﬁts
the network as a whole. Since they are not allocated via
the auctioning process, their slot lease does not expire and
can only be revoked by the governance body. Examples of
public utility chains include: asset transfer (fungible and non-
fungible) chains, smart contract chains, and bridges.

Slot

(Candle) Auctions.

In parachain slot auctions,
parachain accounts lock their DOT as bids to secure a slot on
the network for a speciﬁed lease duration. The lease duration
is in three months increments up to a maximum of 2 years.
Throughout the auction’s ending period, a per-block snapshot
is taken to capture the bids and winners status. From the
snapshots, the ‘ending block’ from which the winners are
announced is randomly selected. This is a security feature to
prevent malicious bidders from ‘sniping’ the auction—waiting
out until the auction is about to terminate to place the highest
bid.

Parachain projects can bid with their own funds or source
them using the crowdloan functionality, which is asking
the community to stake DOT in support of their chain. The
reserved DOT contributes to the security of the system just
as staking does. Since parachain slots are scarce, placing
sufﬁciently high bids and getting support from the community
ensures that honest projects get connected.

Parachain Consensus. Parachain consensus is the process of
ensuring that only valid candidate blocks get stored on the
Relay Chain. Figure 2 lists the phases of parachain consensus.
The ﬁrst process, collation, is performed on the parachain
by collators, where they produce parachain blocks and send

Fig. 2. Stages of Parachain Consensus

them to the assigned set of para-validators for the next phase,
backing. Backing is the process where the validators conduct
initial validity checks on the submitted parachain blocks,
and if the checks pass, they dispatch “candidate receipts” to
the Relay Chain transactions pool, where further validation
and consensus decide if the candidate would be included in
the Relay Chain block. Availability scheme ensures that the
necessary data is available to all validators so that they are
able to validate the parachain block if needed. In the ﬁnal
stage, validators indicate their approval or disputes about the
block by voting, and the super-majority vote (2/3f + 1) wins.
The four-staged process is explained hereafter:
Collation. Collators aggregate all transactions created on the
parachain and produce a candidate block. Along with the
proposed block, the collator provides PoV block which is a
summary of the parachain’s state transition.
Backing. After a para-validator receives the PoV block, it
validates it against the parachain’s registered STF. If the block
passes the checks, the validator gossips it to the remaining
para-validators who also attest its validity. When majority of
the para-validators agree on the block, they sign the PoV’s
header and prepare a candidate receipt. The candidate receipt
is gossiped to the other Relay Chain validators. After which,
a subset of other validators also validate the PoV block and
submit their attestations of validity. If the veriﬁcation fails at
any stage, the block is immediately rejected.
Availability. In addition,
the availability of the parachain
blocks is checked by Relay Chain validators. The parachain
blob (PoV block and set of outgoing XCMP messages) need
to be available for some time to all validators for the ﬁnality
(see Section III-C3) process. The para-validators construct
erasure coding chunks of the parachain blob and gossip a
piece to each validator. Enough validators must report that
they posses an erasure code piece to pass the availability test.
At least 1/3 + 1 of the code pieces are needed to construct
the full block whenever needed.
Approvals/Disputes. These are collected on the Relay
Chain as part of the block ﬁnalization process (GRANDPA
consensus). If the block fails any of the previous checks, the
corresponding para-validators/offenders are slashed.

2) Parathreads: Unlike parachains, parathreads do not
lease a dedicated slot on the Relay Chain. Instead, they form a
pool together that shares a designated number of slots. In other
words, the only difference between parachains and parathreads
is economic. In order for a parathread to submit its block
candidate to the Relay Chain, it must participate in a block-
by-block auction competing with other parathreads. Collators
signal to the assigned para-validators their bid in DOT, and

the block author selects the candidates with the highest bids
to include on the Relay Chain. This pay-as-you-go model
makes parathreads suitable for applications that do not require
high throughput or run less frequently. Parathreads are also an
alternative for projects that cannot afford to lease a parachain
slot.

3) Bridges: A Polkadot bridge is a specialized parachain,
also maintained by collators, that handles the communication
between the Relay Chain and an external sovereign blockchain
(e.g., Bitcoin). In this respect, bridges offer two-way com-
patibility and interoperability between blockchains; allowing
arbitrary data exchange between two networks.

B. Consensus Roles

In this section, we present the network maintainers, valida-
tors and collators, and nominators—the entities that contribute
to the NPoS consensus. Collators and validators participate
in the network by running a full (highly available) node that
stores the network’s data, however nominators rely on a light
client that retrieves only speciﬁc validator-related data. The
interactions between the roles of Polkadot participants are
depicted in Figure 3, while Table I shows the limitations set
by the protocol on the number of participants/paraobjects.

1) Validators: Polkadot restricts the number of active val-
idators on the network. As the number of connected parachains
increases, the active set will reach the maximum size of 1,000
validators. This limit is the result of a compromise between
security and performance. The larger the number of validators
in the system, the higher its security; however, the throughput
of the system is reduced since more time is needed to reach
consensus between all the nodes.

Validators are backed by self-stake and by nominators who
bond a sufﬁciently large amount of DOT in their favor. This
NPoS model contributes economic security to the network.
Since majority of the actors are assumed to be honest, and at
most a third can be malicious, validators are incentivized to
behave honestly because malicious activities, if detected, are
heavily punished in the form of major slashing of their staked
funds. Since slashing applies to the total stake of a validator, a
validator bonding a large self-stake would communicate higher
conﬁdence and trust to potential nominators.

Validators are the maintainers of the Relay Chain. They
engage in several tasks in parallel that include: proposing
new relay chain blocks, reaching consensus about the ﬁnalized
chain, validating the state transition function of parachains, and
ensuring parachains’ data availability and validity. In exchange
for infrastructure and operational costs involved in running
its node, a validator can set a variable commission rate (0%-
100%) — which is a percentage of the total block rewards
that the validator had earned in a completed era. Era points
are gained when the validator issues validity statements for
a parachain block and generates a valid relay chain block.
The commission is initially deducted from the era rewards
and the remaining rewards are paid to the validator and his
nominators according to their stake distribution. Validators are
also rewarded for authoring new blocks by receiving a portion

Fig. 3.

Interaction between Polkadot roles

(20%) of the transaction fees and 100% of the (optional)
transaction tips.

2) Collators: Collators are responsible for maintaining a
full node on their parachain and a full node on the Relay
Chain. Meaning, they can access all necessary information,
including the Relay Chain’s state transitions, needed to author
new blocks. In summary, the collators tasks are to: (a) maintain
their respective parachain and store its data; (b) exchange
messages with other parachains using XCM format; (c) pro-
duce parachain block candidates; (d) generate parachain state
transition proof, also known as PoV block, which is a bundled
proof/summary of the parachain’s state transitions; and, (e) in
case of a parathread collator, offer a bid in DOT in the block-
by-block auction.

3) Nominators: Nominators can nominate up to 16 (trusted)
validators daily by bonding a part of their DOT as collateral
(aka, staking). In return, nominators receive part of the block
rewards that their active nominations earned in proportion
to the stake they bonded. However, if the active validator
commits a punishable offense (e.g., being unresponsive or
equivocating), the nominator also gets slashed and loses a
portion of his DOT.

Phragm´en Election. Validators are elected into the active
set based on the phragm´en election which implements propor-
tionally justiﬁed representation (a property in voting theory).
Phragm´en’s election has two major goals that are to: (a) select
a subset of validators from a larger set based on stake-weighted
votes; and, (b) spread out the stake backing each validator
equally as much as possible. For further technical details about
how the election algorithm works, refer to the research paper
in [13] and [14].

C. Consensus Mechanisms

Polkadot adopts a hybrid consensus mechanism where block
production and ﬁnality are two isolated processes. The al-
gorithm responsible for handling block production is called
BABE (Section III-C2), and the ﬁnality gadget is GRANDPA
(Section III-C3). We cover these algorithms in more detail later
in this subsection. On the one hand, block production (BABE)
is intended to be probabilistically safe (able to continuously
generate new blocks with a probabilistic assurance that the
generated blocks will be ﬁnalized after some time) [15]. On the

TABLE I
POLKADOT’S LIMITATIONS ON THE NUMBER OF
PARTICIPANTS/PARAOBJECTS

Entity
Validators
Nominators
Parachains
Council

Limit
297 (max. 1000)
22,500
14 (max. 100)
13 (max. 24)

other hand, GRANDPA provides deterministic and provable
ﬁnality (universal agreement on the canonical chain with zero
probability of reversion except by a hard fork) [15]. Provable
ﬁnality is a desirable feature speciﬁcally for achieving secure
interoperability with external blockchains; it provides guaran-
tees that data stored on Polkadot or its parachains are ﬁnal and
have almost no chance of being easily reverted. By combining
these two mechanisms, Polkadot allows block production to
continue rapidly, while the slower ﬁnality mechanism runs
asynchronously without risking slower processing times or
stalling. In what follows, we describe the NPoS and the hybrid
consensus scheme adopted by Polkadot.

1) NPoS (Nominated Proof of Stake):

In NPoS, a large
number of nominators back a limited set of validators. NPoS
is comparable to Delegated Proof of Stake (DPoS); however,
the key difference between them is that in NPoS, nominators
are subject to slashing if their validator is malicious, whereas
delegators (or witnesses) are not. As the nominators share
slashings as well as economic beneﬁts, they are incentivized to
choose honest validators with a record of good performance.
Thus, the NPoS scheme is expected to contribute to the overall
economic security of the network.

i.e., each slot

is 6 seconds long. In Polkadot,

2) BABE (Blind Assignment for Blockchain Extension):
BABE is a slot-based block production algorithm. Time is
represented as epochs (4 hours), each consisting of 2400
slots,
the
target block time is also 6 seconds; meaning that within each
slot, a new block should be produced and appended to the
Relay Chain. BABE is responsible for orchestrating the block
production process, which handles the following mechanisms:
(a) selection of block producers; (b) selection of the canonical
chain; and, (c) adjustment of slot time. We describe these three
processes hereafter.

Selection of Block Producers. In each slot, BABE assigns
primary author(s) and a secondary author to produce a Relay
Chain block. Primary slot leaders are selected randomly based
on a Veriﬁable Random Function (VRF). The inputs of the
VRF are: epoch randomness seed, slot number, and author’s
private VRF key. Because of the randomness in the selection
process, some slots may end up with more than one primary
producer and, sometimes even, a slot may have zero primary
producers. To handle the case of no primary producers, BABE
uses a fall-back round-robin algorithm to assign secondary slot
leaders. In each slot, a secondary producer is selected and
produces a block along with the primary producer(s), if any.
However, if a valid primary block is produced, the secondary
one is ignored.

When multiple validators are primary producers in a given
slot, all of them produce a block and broadcast it in the
network, and the block that reaches most of the network
ﬁrst wins the race. Due to network conditions, forks may
emerge until the ﬁnalization algorithm (GRANDPA) selects
the canonical chain and kills other forks.

At

the beginning of an epoch, each validator evaluates
its VRF for each slot in the entire epoch’s duration. If the
result of the VRF is below a threshold value deﬁned in the
protocol, the validator knows that it is a primary author for
that slot. However, other participants in the network are not
aware of that assignment in advance (hence the name ‘Blind
Assignment’). Not knowing the assignment beforehand adds
to the security of the system; unlike round-robin algorithms,
adversaries cannot launch a coordinated attack against the next
author.

Selection of the Canonical Chain. There are two rules for
selecting the best chain in BABE. First, block producers must
build on the latest block that has been ﬁnalized by GRANDPA.
Second, when there are forks after the ﬁnalized head, BABE
builds on the chain with the most primary blocks.

Adjustment of Slot Time. BABE does not rely on a central-
ized clock authority for time synchronization. Instead, it aligns
slot numbers using a relative time protocol. When a validator
node receives a block, it checks the block’s timestamp and slot
number, compares it to its local time, and forecasts future slot
times. More information about local time synchronization in
BABE is provided in [15] and [16].

3) GRANDPA—Finality Gadget: GRANDPA stands for
GHOST-based Recursive ANcestor Deriving Preﬁx Agree-
ment. It allows a set of nodes to agree on the canonical chain
out of many possible forks. It works under the assumption
of a Byzantine Fault Tolerant system: a partially synchronous
network with at most one third Byzantine (dishonest or un-
responsive) nodes. GRANDPA reaches agreements on chains
rather than blocks; in other words, whenever more than two
thirds of validators vote on a chain containing a certain block,
all blocks up to that one are ﬁnalized at once. For more details
about GRANDPA, refer to [15] and [17].

D. Security Model

The adversarial model of Polkadot assumes that at least
two thirds of the active validators are honest. The model also
assumes that parachains are untrusted clients of the Relay
Chain; and hence, there are no speciﬁc security assumptions
enforced on the parachains or their collators. Nonetheless,
Polkadot assumes that every parachain has one honest and
reachable collator [15].

Security is shared in Polkadot—all connected parachains
automatically beneﬁt from same level of security provided
by the Relay Chain. This is to ensure the validity of the
entire system and that no individual component is corruptible.
Security is independent of the number of parachains; it only
depends on the validators who have a sufﬁciently large amount
of DOT backing them. Nominators and validators contribute
to the security of the network by locking funds, aka, staking.

Nominators share in the rewards, but also the punishment, of
the validators they vote for. Phragm´en’s election process picks
the winners by ﬁnding the combination that leads to having the
most value at stake. In PoS systems, the biggest indicators of
the network’s security are the value at stake and value at risk.
Meaning, the greater the amount of DOT staked by honest
validators and nominators, the higher the amount of DOT an
attacker needs to acquire a validator slot.

The implication of a shared/pooled security is that, in order
to revert a parachain’s block, an attacker would have to revert
the entire Polkadot system, including all other parachains. This
is due to the Relay Chain blocks storing proofs of validity
from parachains, meaning that when the chain is ﬁnalized,
that parachain block is also ﬁnalized. This shared security
provides the necessary guarantees to enable trusted cross-chain
communication between untrusted entities.

E. Economic Model

In this subsection, we describe Polkadot’s economics and

incentive layers.

1) Transaction Fees: Polkadot utilizes weight-based fees
that are charged from the sender’s account before the transac-
tion is dispatched. Transaction fees are the sum of a weight fee
and a length fee. The block weight represents the time it takes
to produce and validate the block. Hence, each transaction
has a base weight that accounts for its inclusion overhead
(e.g., time required to verify sender’s signature) and a dispatch
weight for the execution time. The length fee is the size of the
transaction in bytes multiplied by a per-byte fee. Moreover,
the weight fee is adjustable according to current network
conditions. A portion of the fee (20%) goes to the block
producer and the remainder goes to the treasury. Therefore,
producers are likely to prioritize transactions with the highest
fees for maximum rewards. Users can provide an optional tip
in order to increase the transaction’s priority, especially during
congested periods.

2) Staking: The staking system calculates block rewards for
every era based on the total era points earned by validators.
Points do not have a corresponding DOT value until
the
end of the era. Validators accumulate points based on their
performance, primarily for signing validity statements and
producing valid blocks. Era points are expected to average
out amongst validators, hence rewards are paid out almost
equally (with slight variations) regardless of validators’ total
stake. The slight variations in payouts are due to probabilistic
factors (randomness) in the block production and parachain
validation assignments.

is deducted,

After the commission payment

the staking
rewards are distributed to the validator and nominators in
proportion to their contributed stake. Thereby, the scheme
provides incentives for more nominators to vote for lower-
staked validators. This is because, the lower the validator’s
total stake is, the higher the percentage of the nominator’s
stake, and therefore the higher the rewards the nominator
receives. Note that only the top 256 nominators receive staking
rewards for an oversubscribed validator.

3) Slashing: If a validator misbehaves, punishment will be
enforced on him and his nominators by losing a percentage
of their staked DOT. Slashed DOT are added to the treasury,
rather than being burned, since slashes can be reverted by the
Council by simply returning the DOT from the treasury to the
slashed accounts, given that the slash is protested and found
unreasonable (e.g., a faulty runtime) within 28 days. Generally,
slashing depends on the number of repeated offenses and how
many other validators committed the same offense during the
epoch. Meaning, slashing is super-linear wherein as the num-
ber of offenders increases, the slash percentage also increases.
There are several degrees of offense where the percentage of
stake deduction is decided accordingly. A validator is required
to be available and to prove its availability; every session the
node will send an ”I’m Online” heartbeat. If a validator fails to
produce any block during the epoch and send the heartbeat, it
is declared unresponsive and might receive slashing. Slashing
in the case of unresponsiveness depends on the number of
repeated offenses and how many other validators were ofﬂine
during the same epoch.

A more serious offense is equivocation — providing con-
ﬂicting information to the network. For example, a valida-
tor signs multiple votes in the same GRANDPA round for
different forks that conﬂict with each other, or a validator
produces two or more blocks on the Relay Chain in the
same BABE time slot. Repeated or concurrent equivocation
is unlikely to be accidental, and therefore is severely slashed.
If equivocations are detected from different validators, it is
likely to be a coordinated attack. Offending validators will be
kicked immediately and will lose their nominators.

Some misconduct can be slashed up to 100% of the stake
because they pose a grave security or monetary risk or result
in major collusion. An example would be casting GRANDPA
votes for a chain that conﬂicts with an already ﬁnalized chain.
The behavior is considered a deﬁnite attack because it is trying
to revert ﬁnalized blocks.

4) Inﬂation: Polkadot has no maximum limit for DOT
supply; hence, the network follows an inﬂation model. Block
rewards are maximized when the staking rate (total amount
staked over the total token supply) is at 50% . The remainder
of the rewards due to non-ideal staking rate goes to treasury.
5) Accounts: An account’s address in Polkadot is repre-
sented by the user’s public key which is 32-byte (256-bit)
long. Polkadot uses SS58 address encoding format which
allows account portability among compatible Substrate-based
blockchains. Different chains have a different version preﬁx
that is used to identify whether an account belongs to its
chain or another. Consequently, a user needs only to generate
a keypair once and use it on all chains, given that only the
address’s format would change from one chain to the other.
Although this practice is discouraged for security reasons, it
can be beneﬁcial for speciﬁc use cases, e.g., when setting up
a crowdloan account.

Nominators and validators are recommended to set up two
separate accounts, namely the Stash and Controller accounts.
The controller account acts on behalf of the stash account,

initiating nominating and validating actions. It is used to set
staking preferences and only needs to contain enough DOT
the stash account holds
to pay transaction fees. Whereas,
the actual funds bonded for staking. This keypair separation
ensures higher protection for the accounts.

F. Governance

Polkadot’s governance constitutes of three entities: public
referenda, council, and technical committee. Any DOT holder
in Polkadot has the power to submit or endorse a proposal,
vote on active referenda, nominate for a seat on the council, or
vote for other council candidates. Council members are elected
candidates whose roles include proposing, voting and vetoing
public referenda. The technical committee is composed of
the developer teams who are actively building Polkadot, e.g.,
Parity Technologies and Web3 Foundation. They are given the
power to propose an emergency referendum.

1) Public Referenda Chamber: Any DOT holder in the sys-
tem can bond tokens to create or second a public referendum,
where the voters also deposit an amount equal to the original
bond. Every proposal is compiled and its preimage must be
submitted to the blockchain. There can be a maximum of 100
public proposals in the proposal queue, which is made up
of community proposals and council proposals. Every launch
period (28 days), proposals with the highest bond will be
moved to the referendum timetable.

The referendum to be voted upon alternates between the top
proposal in either of the community or council queues. When
a referendum is selected, the voting period (28 days) starts.
Votes can be either ‘yes’ or ‘no’, or completely abstaining
from voting. After the voting period, the votes are tallied which
decide whether the referendum passed or not.

2) Council: The council

is currently composed of 13
members including Gavin Wood, the founder of Polkadot. In
addition, the network plans to accommodate only a maximum
of 24 seats on the council [13]. Council members have a term
of 7 days after which a new Phragm´en election takes place,
and members are selected based on the stake backing them.
Council members have two main tasks: proposing referenda
and cancelling malicious referenda.

3) Treasury: Any DOT holder in the system can bond
tokens to create a treasury proposal suggesting a spend from
it. If the treasury proposal is declined by the council, 1% of
the tokens that were bonded to create the proposal are burned.
The treasury can release funds only every 24 days.

IV. POLKADOT CONTRADICTIONS

For a long time, Polkadot has maintained a steady position
in terms of coin market capitalization, ranking amongst the top
10, meanwhile its network and architecture are still developing
and not fully mature yet. In addition, even though Polkadot
was introduced as a multi-chain interoperability platform,
parachains were only added in November 2021, a year and
half after the network’s launch, and it is not known yet when
bridges will become available to fulﬁll the interoperability
claims. In the following subsections, we recap from our

perspective numerous contradictions in the architecture and
design of Polkadot, our empirical analysis, and discussion of
the results.

A. Polkadot Limitations

Difﬁculties in becoming a validator. If you want to become
a validator on the Polkadot network, you will have to
overcome some hefty hurdles. The network is built to support
a maximum of 1,000 validators. Currently, only 297 validators
are allowed into the active set per era (day); and, this number
will slowly scale up to 1,000 as the number of connected
parachains
increases. Meaning, validators must compete
against one another to enter the active set on a daily basis,
and only those with the highest stake, i.e., self-stake and
nominators stake combined, win. This competition effectively
forces a high minimum stake requirement on validators,
making it extremely challenging for new joiners to participate
and compete. Also,
the collective stake is locked in the
validator/nominators accounts, i.e., it is not transferable until
an account decides to un-nominate or un-validate. In this
case, the bonded amount remains locked for a further 28 days
until it can be withdrawn. This may create a fertile ground
for only a handful of big corporations who can invest such
large amounts to become a validator, potentially leading to
some level of centralized operation in the future.

Problems with becoming a nominator. Nominators face
even greater obstacles. This is because validators can charge
from 0 - 100% commission and can change the rate at
any time without prior notice to nominators. If a validator
sets his commission to 100%, none of the nominators get
staking rewards for the duration of the session. Consequently,
validators who charge lesser commission are more likely to be
nominated, possibly causing them to become oversubscribed.
However, only the top 256 nominators, for an oversubscribed
validator, receive staking rewards and the rest lose on their
bonded stake. Moreover, if a validator misbehaves or goes
ofﬂine, all nominators who staked him, including those not
eligible for rewards, will be slashed. Whist the block rewards
are equally distributed to all active validators, slashing removes
a percentage of the validators’ total stake. For validators who
set aside the minimal self-stake, the nominators are at greater
risk; that is, they could lose more to slashing than what they
would earn from the staking rewards. And, the slash could go
up to 100%, depending on the type of offence.

Another major scalability concern is related to the val-
idators phragm´en election. When the number of nominators
increased beyond 30,000, a number of problems occurred on
the Polkadot network: the block production time slowed down
and the network suffered high instability. According to the
statement released by Polkadot [18], its runtime crashed on
May 24, 2021, with an out of memory error while trying to
build a block containing the large election mapping results,
due to the sizeable nominators set. At that time, validators
were asked to downgrade their nodes’ runtime version while
Polkadot worked on a quick workaround (increasing the Wasm

memory bounds). To this day, the problem persists, including
on Kusama (Polkadot’s canary network) where the nominators
set was reduced to around 7,300 participants as the number of
validators reached the maximum 1,000.

a

at

temporary

solution—unfortunately,

To address the aforementioned issue, Polkadot’s governance
approved
the
disadvantage of the nominators, as explained in the following.
First, the nominators set is now limited to 22,500 members.
Second,
in order to nominate, nominators must bond at
least 120 DOT, which equates to $2,160 at $18/DOT. These
restrictions come in addition to the original limit of allowing
an account to nominate a maximum of 16 validators at a
time. Yet, phragm´en works in a way that ensures that at most
only one of the validators you voted for will become active,
and only if the stake was high enough; since, validators are
currently prioritized according to their total stake.

Problems with participating in governance. The democracy
and decentralization of the governance system is indeed ques-
tionable. The technical committee consists of Web3 Founda-
tion and Parity Technologies, which are both founded and run
by Gavin Wood, who also happens to be a “prime voter” on
the council. A prime voter is one who decides what the default
vote is for any abstaining voters at the end of the voting period.
In effect, Gavin Wood has direct inﬂuence on governance
decisions; where as a council member, he holds the power
to control the treasury and veto referenda, and in the technical
committee, he provides the ﬁnal say about the implementation
of any referendum, even if it passed. To top that, the council
is restricted to 13 members only. This brings fears that if only
seven members are compromised, the integrity of the entire
governance structure will collapse, such as in the nefarious
Ronin Bridge attack [19], where only ﬁve of nine validator
keys were needed to succeed in a large-scale cryptocurrency
heist worth around 624 millions USD.

the time of writing,

Council members are also elected through phragm´en
like validators; DOT holders back council
method just
candidates with their stake. At
the
minimum stake required to be elected as a council member
is around 9.5 million1 DOT, which is 171 million USD at
$18/DOT. Moreover, monetary punishment and restrictions
make it unfavorable to participate in Polkadot’s ‘democracy’.
For instance, stake deposited by users is burned in such cases
when a proposal is rejected. In addition, the reserved DOT
for creating or endorsing a proposal can never be released
until the proposal is brought to a vote (i.e., tabled), which is
an indeterminate amount of time.

Problems with becoming a parachain. Polkadot will support
only 100 parachain slots in total,
thus imposing a major
limitation on true scalability of the system. Parachain slots
are split between parachains and parathread pools, where a
number of slots are reserved for common good parachains

TABLE II
POLKADOT’S PARACHAIN WINNERS IN ITS FIRST BATCH OF AUCTIONS

Parachain

Role

1

Acala

2 Moonbeam
Astar
3
Parallel Finance
4
Clover Finance
5

Polkadot-native
Stablecoin hub
Smart contracts
Smart contracts
Assets transfer
Smart contracts

Locked Stake
(million DOT)

Locked Stake
(million USD)

32

35
10.3
10.7
9.7

576

630
185
193
175

whose lease never expires, e.g., Statemint and public utility
chains. Nonetheless, the cost to secure a parachain slot in
the candle auctions is, simply put, almost prohibitive. As an
example, the winning parachains of Polkadot’s ﬁrst batch of
auctions2 (concluded on December 17, 2021) and their stakes
are listed in order in Table II.

The funds are reserved in an account created for the
parachain during the entire lease period, up to 2 years. When
the lease expires, the parachain has to enroll again in the
auctions. Since slots are scarce, it is expected that the rising
competition will increase the cost of securing a slot. If the
parachain can no longer secure its slot,
it has to simply
either downgrade to a parathread or retire from the network
altogether. In addition, any number of parathreads can exist
in the parathread pool, but only a limited number can execute
in each block. As a result, as the number of parathreads
increases, smaller parathread projects will eventually not be
able to include their blocks.

Transparency problems with the validators elections.
Polkadot uses a complex (computationally intensive) algorithm
for proportionally justiﬁed representation in its elections. How-
ever, since the election is run by off-chain workers and the
results are submitted later to the chain, the transparency of
the results become questionable. Are the election results being
validated by on-chain validators? What proof do the designated
off-chain workers provide to attest the authenticity of their
computations? The answers to these questions were not clear
in the online documentations [13] nor in the overview paper
[15].

In addition, at the beginning of each era, a pool of 200
para-validators is formed from the larger validator set. It is
said that the pool members are selected at random, and then
groups of ﬁve are again formed randomly. It is not clear
whether said randomness is provable using a VRF like BABE’s
block authoring assignments. By observing Polkadot.js, one
of Polkadot’s block explorers, we believe that these groups
are seemingly rotated in a round-robin fashion, and the group
assignments do not change during the epoch (4 hours). This
brings up several security-related concerns. For example, can
an adversary target a known majority in one of the para-
validator groups to halt the operation of a parachain during
an epoch?

1Data taken from Polkadot.js: https://polkadot.js.org/apps/#/council, Ac-

cessed on April 2022

2Data taken from Subscan: https://polkadot.subscan.io/auction

Fig. 4. Validators Minimum Total Stake

Fig. 5. Validators with 100% Commission Rate

B. Empirical Analysis

NPoS scheme is a crucial component of Polkadot that gov-
erns economic incentives and directly impacts overall security
of the network. Therefore, we resorted to quantitative analysis
to support the previously highlighted substantial limitations
and contradictions. In what follows, we present our ﬁndings,
primarily related to the nomination process, validators selec-
tion, and validator preferences.

First, we had set up a Polkadot full archive node on
an Ubuntu 20.04 LTS virtual environment. We then traced
‘NewSession’ events emitted from June 2020 to April 2022
to obtain the corresponding validators elections data from
the runtime storage. We parsed the data into a MySQL
database (v8.0.28) using a Python (v3.10.2) script that we
developed. From the data, we investigated the claims related to
the validators minimum stake requirement and the validators
commission rate.

As shown in Figure 4, the minimum stake required to enter
the active set varies with the number of active validators (n).
For instance, in the initial stages where n < 197, even though
the size of the validators set was small,
there was much
less competition and traction in becoming a validator; and
therefore, the required stake was negligible. The minimum
stake declined as the number of validators increased. As
of April 2022, the minimum amount required to become a
validator is around 1.8 million DOT, and at approximately $18
per DOT3, that is a total of 32.4 million USD. It is unknown
whether the minimum stake would further decrease as the
number of validators progresses towards 1,000, because there
are other factors affecting stake requirement, e.g., competition.
In terms of validators’ preferences, we ﬁnd an alarming
pattern. That is, the percentage of active validators that set
100% commission is found to be increasing over time, where

3CoinMarketCap: https://coinmarketcap.com/currencies/polkadot-new/, Ac-

cessed April 2022.

currently it has exceeded 60%. Figure 5 depicts the fraction
of active 100%-commissioned validators over time and proves
that a majority has been involved in this behavior. Typically,
the perpetrators put forward the minimum self-stake and
are backed by a few nominator accounts. Our hypothesis
is that the nominator accounts also belong to the validator,
otherwise there is no monetary incentive for backing a 100%-
commissioned validator that has almost no self-stake; risking
painful slashing and also getting no rewards. We also hypoth-
esize that this behavior is done to discourage other nominators
from subscribing to the validator, so that the validator retains
all the rewards for himself.

C. Discussion

Polkadot sets limits on various parameters (as shown in
Table I) to balance between the performance and the security
of the system. These bounds effectively restrict the actual
scalability of the network. Even though the parameters can be
modiﬁed later through governance, we notice that scalability
is advertised as a prominent feature of Polkadot and a distin-
guishing factor from other blockchains. However, enforcing
the mentioned limits, especially at such an early stage of
the network’s lifecycle, becomes a conceivable problem and
makes us question whether the network can expand, as it
continues to grow in size and features.

Polkadot claims that its NPoS economic incentive scheme
provides higher inclusion for network participants than cen-
tralized systems [4]. Nevertheless, the limits induced on the
staking system resulted in the presence of “whales” and market
exchange centers (e.g., Binance)—owners of a large amount
of the network’s tokens, which is a typical phenomenon in
traditional PoS systems. Due to the size of their holdings,
to unfairly inﬂuence the
these whales have the potential
network and destabilize the system. Polkadot also claims that
its NPoS system helps preventing the formation of validator
pools, like what is seen in Bitcoin, since a larger number of

nominators back a limited number of validators. However, this
is not entirely true since majority of the validators charge full
commission and hypothetically they are the ones staking DOT
in their own favor. Validators who own large stake do not
need nominators to back them up and tend to monopolize
the rewards for themselves. In the future, this may lead to
a centralization of power, contradicting with the concept of
decentralization envisioned by Web3 Foundation and described
in Polkadot’s whitepaper [3].

Overall, we ﬁnd that Polkadot is not so different from other
PoS networks in terms of the “rich gets richer” conundrum.
The strict limits enforced on nominators, the prohibitive high
stake required to become a validator,
in addition to the
seemingly not so democratic governance, eventually will lead
to heavy centralization of power amongst the top few who
own the most DOT. We believe that the contradictions and
limitations discussed above call for further investigations and
solutions.

V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we presented the ﬁrst systematic study on the
Polkadot ecosystem. To the best of our knowledge, we are the
ﬁrst ones to discuss the complex architecture behind one of
the most promising projects in the current DeFi landscape,
its protocols, and economic model. We also provided our
preliminary insights about the analyzed architecture, including
various contradictions regarding how Polkadot is presented to
the general public and the way it is implemented. For instance,
according to our results, Polkadot shows several limitations,
at least in its current implementation, that can lead to heavy
centralization of power, excluding regular users from network
maintenance and governance. In fact, the constraints on the
number of validators and nominators, together with the NPoS
consensus in use, restrict the participation in the protocol to a
few entities with considerable funds (around 32 Million USD
to become a validator), leaving no room for ordinary users.

Our results call for a more in-depth analysis of the on-chain
data to further investigate the real potential and functioning
of the multi-chain protocols behind the multi-billion Polkadot
project, as well as its systemic weaknesses.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This publication was made possible by an award [GSRA7-
2-0527-20101] and [NPRP-S-11-0109-180242] from Qatar
National Research Fund (a member of Qatar Foundation). The
contents herein are solely the responsibility of the author.

REFERENCES

[1] D. Guo, J. Dong, and K. Wang, “Graph structure and statistical prop-
erties of ethereum transaction relationships,” Information Sciences, vol.
492, pp. 58–71, 2019.

[2] “Coin market cap,” https://coinmarketcap.com/, accessed: 2022-04-20.
[3] G. Wood, “Polkadot: Vision for a heterogeneous multi-chain frame-

work,” White Paper, vol. 21, pp. 2327–4662, 2016.

[4] “Polkadot network,” https://polkadot.network/, accessed: 2022-01-30.
[5] A. Ismailisuﬁ, T. Popovi´c, N. Gligori´c, S. Radonjic, and S. ˇSandi, “A pri-
vate blockchain implementation using multichain open source platform,”
in 2020 24th International Conference on Information Technology (IT),
2020, pp. 1–4.

[6] A. Back, M. Corallo, L. Dashjr, M. Friedenbach, G. Maxwell,
J. Tim´on,
A. Miller, A. Poelstra,
“Enabling
blockchain innovations with pegged sidechains,” URL: http://www.
opensciencereview.
com/papers/123/enablingblockchain-innovations-
with-pegged-sidechains, vol. 72, 2014.

and P. Wuille,

[7] A. Kiayias and D. Zindros, “Proof-of-work sidechains,” in Financial
Cryptography and Data Security, A. Bracciali, J. Clark, F. Pintore, P. B.
Rønne, and M. Sala, Eds. Cham: Springer International Publishing,
2020, pp. 21–34.

[8] L. Kan, Y. Wei, A. Haﬁz Muhammad, W. Siyuan, L. C. Gao, and H. Kai,
“A multiple blockchains architecture on inter-blockchain communica-
tion,” in 2018 IEEE International Conference on Software Quality,
Reliability and Security Companion (QRS-C), 2018, pp. 139–145.
[9] R. Belchior, A. Vasconcelos, S. Guerreiro, and M. Correia, “A survey
on blockchain interoperability: Past, present, and future trends,” ACM
Computing Surveys (CSUR), vol. 54, no. 8, pp. 1–41, 2021.

[10] A. Alkhodair, S. Mohanty, E. Kougianos, and D. Puthal, “Mcpora:
A multi-chain proof of rapid authentication for post-blockchain based
security in large scale complex cyber-physical systems,” in 2020 IEEE
Computer Society Annual Symposium on VLSI (ISVLSI), 2020, pp. 446–
451.

[11] A. Ahmad, M. Saad, L. Njilla, C. Kamhoua, M. Bassiouni, and A. Mo-
haisen, “Blocktrail: A scalable multichain solution for blockchain-based
audit trails,” in ICC 2019 - 2019 IEEE International Conference on
Communications (ICC), 2019, pp. 1–6.

[12] “Cosmos whitepaper,” https://v1.cosmos.network/resources/whitepaper,

accessed: 2022-04-24.

[13] “Polkadot wiki,” https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/, accessed: 2022-

01-30.

[14] A. Cevallos and A. Stewart, “A veriﬁably secure and proportional
committee election rule,” in Proceedings of the 3rd ACM Conference
on Advances in Financial Technologies, 2021, pp. 29–42.

[15] J. Burdges, A. Cevallos, P. Czaban, R. Habermeier, S. Hosseini, F. Lama,
H. K. Alper, X. Luo, F. Shirazi, A. Stewart et al., “Overview of polkadot
and its design considerations,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.13456, 2020.
https://research.web3.foundation/en/latest/

[16] H. K. Alper,

“Babe,”

polkadot/block-production/Babe.html, accessed: 2022-03-8.

[17] A. Stewart and E. Kokoris-Kogia, “Grandpa: a byzantine ﬁnality gadget,”

arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.01560, 2020.

[18] B. K¨ocher, “A polkadot postmortem - 24.05.2021,” https://polkadot.
network/blog/a-polkadot-postmortem-24-05-2021/, accessed: 2022-03-
12.
[19] “Ronin
too
ronin-attack-shows-cross-chain-crypto-is-a-bridge-too-far/,
2022-04-26.

‘bridge’
https://www.coindesk.com/layer2/2022/04/05/
accessed:

attack
far,”

cross-chain

crypto

shows

is

a

