A Decentralised Real Estate Transfer Verification Based on 
Self-Sovereign Identity and Smart Contracts 

Abubakar-Sadiq Shehu1,2  a, Anto´nio Pinto3  b and Manuel E. Correia1,3  c 
1Department of Computer Science, Faculty of Science, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal. 
2Department of Information Technology, FCSIT, Bayero University Kano, Kano, Nigeria. 
3CRACS & INESC TEC, Porto, Portugal. 

Keywords: 

Self Sovereign Identity (SSI), smart contracts, identity management, real estate and digital deeds validation 

Abstract: 

Since its first introduction in late 90s, the use of marketplaces has continued to grow, today virtually every- 
thing from physical assets to services can be purchased on digital marketplaces, real estate is not an exception. 
Some marketplaces allow acclaimed asset owners to advertise their products, to which the services gets com- 
mission/percentage from proceeds of sale/lease. Despite the success recorded in the use of the marketplaces, 
they are not without limitations which include identity and property fraud, impersonation and the use of cen- 
tralised technology with trusted parties that are prone to single point of failures (SPOF). Being one of the most 
valuable assets, real estate has been a target for marketplace fraud as impersonators take pictures of properties 
they do not own, upload them on marketplace with promising prices that lures innocent or naive buyers. This 
paper addresses these issues by proposing a self sovereign identity (SSI) and smart contract based framework 
for identity verification and verified transaction management on secure digital marketplaces. First, the use of 
SSI technology enable methods for acquiring verified credential (VC) that are verifiable on a  decentralised 
blockchain registry to identify both real estate owner(s) and real estate property. Second, the smart contracts 
are used to negotiate the secure transfer of real estate property deeds on the marketplace. To assess the viability 
of our proposal we define an application scenario and compare our work with other approaches. 

1  INTRODUCTION 

Web 2.0  is  one  of  the  many  advancements  that  the 
Internet has witnessed since its creation. It has  seen 
significant growth, primarily in marketplace and elec- 
tronic transactions where practically anything, includ- 
ing real estate, can be offered for rent, lease, or  sale 
on marketplaces and blogs (Facebook, Airbnb,  Uni- 
places and others) for residential,  commercial or  in- 
dustrial  usage.  Globally,  real  estates  are  considered 
one  of  the  most  valuable  assets  (commonly  used  as 
collateral  for  obtaining  loans  from  both  formal  fi- 
nancial institution such as banks and informal credit 
providers) (Yadav and Kushwaha, 2021), contributing 
a  significant share to Governments  GDP. For  exam- 
ple in 2020 it accounted for about 7.5% of the  Chi- 
nese economy (Pain and Rusticelli, 2022) and 17.5% 
in  the  USA  for  fixed  investment  and  total  housing 
spending  in  2019, real  estate  commercial  properties 
contributed 3.1% (EUR 452 billion) to the  European 

a   https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2894-6434 b    
c 
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5583-5772 
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2348-8075 

economy,  a  value  comparable  to  the  combined  con- 
tribution  of  the  automotive  and  telecommunications 
industries (EPRA, 2020). More  so, real estate is  the 
primary component of agriculture and, as a result, it is 
inextricably related to food security. While properties 
are easily available for buyers choice, determining the 
authenticity  and  correctness  in  real  estate  market- 
places  can  be  a daunting  challenge.  Typically, inter- 
actions with individuals in real estate transaction  re- 
quires proper identification, often with a large amount 
of  paperwork  issued  by  different  institutions,  which 
takes  a  lot  of  time  to  confirm  from  the  issuers.  Ad- 
ditionally,  these  services  are  centralised  and  siloed, 
therefore, any failure on the process can completely 
undermine the progress of an entire transaction. 

To curb the aforementioned issues, Governments, 
businesses and researchers have been working on im- 
proving  the  security  of  digital  commercial  transac- 
tions and associated treatments of personal data. This 
led to the idea of Web 3.0 (Ragnedda and Destefa- nis, 
2019)  which  introduces  fairer  and  more  secure 
communication and data exchange methods, enabling 
users to be sovereign on their own identity, through 
decentralisation and the use of blockchains. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Self-sovereign  identity  (SSI),  smart  contract  and 
distributed storage are among the recent advances in 
secure data exchange and verification. SSI provides  a 
method for data owner sovereignty, in most cases  it 
uses blockchain for secure storage and verification of 
transactions, while smart contract provides an ecosys- 
tem  for  secure  transaction  negotiation,  both  do  not 
need third party verification. This paper proposes an 
SSI, smart contract and distributed storage based real 
estate  verification  framework,  whose  aim  is  to  pre- 
vent fraud in transfer processes, ensure secured iden- 
tity verification and mitigate tax evasion in transac- 
tions. 

Contribution  A  good  number  of  research  works 
some  of  which  are  discussed in  Section 2,  aimed  to 
address  these  issues  have  focused  on  decentralising 
the real estate registration process, while some other 
works focused on identity, fraud and verification is- 
sues. Therefore, we present a framework that ensures 
the secure creation, verification of VC and a trans- fer 
process that manages real estate transaction based on 
smart  contracts  (szabo  and  Nick,  2018).This  works 
was  inspired  by  our  previous  works  (Shehu  et  al., 
2020)(Shehu  et  al.,  2019)  and  is  guided  by  GDPR 
principles in (Voigt and Von dem Bussche,  2017).  To 
our  knowledge  no  work  has  combined  SSI,  smart 
contracts  and  IPFS  peer-to-peer  distributed  file  sys- 
tem (Benet, 2014), to address real estate verification, 
property  transfer  and  associated  secure  data  storage 
issues. 

The contributions of this paper are as follows: 
1.  Review Study: We did an extensive survey of re- 
lated state of the art works on dematerialised real 
estate management that uses blockchain and other 
SSI  components.  We identified  some  limitations 
that we address on the framework for securing real 
estate  transactions  that  we  are  proposing  in  this 
paper. 

2.  System  Framework:  We  propose  an  SSI  and 
smart contract framework for verifying real estate 
transfer  processes.  The  SSI  layer  of  the  frame- 
work is used to define methods and the process of 
acquiring  VCs  (electronic  equivalence  of  our 
physical documents/credentials e.g national cards 
and  others)  (Consortium  et  al.,  2019)  for  actors 
(real  estate,  owner,  buyer  and  marketplace)  that 
are  linked and verifiable on a distributed  ledger. 
While smart contracts are used to implement the 
negotiation, the real estate owner remains in con- 
trol and can deploy those smart contracts at will 
on a marketplace, for intending buyers to engage 
with. We enhance our framework with the IPFS, a 
secure distributed storage system that we use to 

store  a  hash  and  an  encrypted  copy  of  the  com- 
plete real estate description. 

3.  Demonstration  pilot:  To conceptualise  the  pro- 
posed framework, we present an application sce- 
nario  for  verification  of  real  estate  transfer,  and 
analyse the characteristics of each component. 

4.  Evaluation: From a functional point of view we 
elaborated the strengths and possible weaknesses 
of our proposal and propose future work. 

Outline This paper is structured as follows: Section 3 
provides  a  background  study  and  associated  tech- 
nologies.  We discuss  related  works  of  the  proposed 
framework in Section 2. In Section 4 we provide  an 
overview of our proposed solution and discuss it com- 
ponents  and  actors.  Section  5  discusses  application 
scenario of the proposed framework for use of SSI and 
smart  contract  transfer  method.  We discuss  security 
characteristics  and  robustness  of  the  proposed  work 
and the three main components in Section 6. We con- 
clude the paper in Section 7 and discuss future work. 

2  Related works 

While emphasising the need for adopting blockchain 
solution in real estate to enable and facilitate low-cost 
P2P commercial interactions, the authors in (Norta  et 
al., 2018) proposed a B2B crowdfunding platform for 
commercial  real  estate  leveraging  the  Evareium 
digital  real  estate  fund  token  system,  with  quality 
goals such as overall system security, seamless infor- 
mation flow between platform sub-infrastructures. In 
a bid to address fraud in buying, selling and temper- 
ing with real estate records, and eliminate the use of 
centralised land registry method in Saudi Arabia, the 
authors  in  (Ali  et  al.,  2020)  proposed  a  blockchain 
based  framework  using  a  permissioned  hyperledger 
fabric  blockchain,  in  which  users  can  utilize  smart 
contracts  to  buy,  sell,  and  update  property  records. 
The  system  keeps  track  of  all  prior  purchasers  and 
sellers  of  a  property,  which  can  be  validated on  the 
network. The work in (Gupta et al., 2020) proposed a 
real estate investment solution introducing liquid- ity 
using  blockchain  and  a  tokenised  special  purpose 
vehicle  for  investors  to  purchase  ERC  777  standard 
security  tokens  at  their  leisure.  Drawbacks  of  the 
method include complete reliance on third-parties for 
identity  verification  of  investors,  likewise  the  paper 
work can be time consuming and prone to forgery. The 
authors  in  (Kothari  et  al.,  2020)  proposed  a  trans- 
parency  tamper  proof  platform  for  real  estate.  The 
system is composed of an owner, buyer and validator. 

 
 
 
 
A major drawback of this system is the over reliance 
on third party and authenticity of advertised  proper- 
ties  are  not  verified.  To prevent  fraud  in  traditional 
real estate transactions, the work in (Yadav and Kush- 
waha, 2021) proposed a blockchain-based system for 
digitising real estate transactions to reduce the risks of 
fabricating  documents  and  other  fraudulent  behav- 
iors.  In  their  claim,  the  work  employs  a  consensus 
mechanism  that  minimises  multi  casting  node  over- 
head transmissions by 50 %.  The work in (Mendi   et 
al.,  2020)  proposed  a  blockchain  framework  to  re- 
duce the tax evasion in real estate transactions within 
Turkey, using framework used hyperledger and incor- 
porating  all  parties  involved  in  the  transfer  of  own- 
ership; land registry office to monitor the sale,  bank 
for payment of funds, municipality for tax on  buyer 
and  seller.  The  authors  in  (Bhanushali  et  al.,  2020) 
proposed a system to address lost or damaged deeds 
of real estate using a smart contract. To  sell or buy  in 
real  estate,  a  user  fulfills  the  smart  contract’s  re- 
quirements and receive a digital deed, which is  then 
uploaded  as  a  new  block  in  a  blockchain.  A  major 
drawback of this method is the non verification of the 
property with a users identity. Any user who is able to 
present proof of a real estate fulfills the smart contract 
requirement. 

3  Preliminaries 

Self Sovereign Identity:  SSI and smart contract are 
among the advances of Web 3.0 and data decentrali- 
sation.  SSI  provides  a  decentralised  data  structure, 
where  data  owner  can  be  self-reliant  from  services, 
free to create their VC (digital equivalence of physi- 
cal documents), revoke or delegate them at will. De- 
centralised identifiers, VCs, and immutable registers 
(blockchain) have been major drivers of SSI. In SSI, a 
blockchain registry is a distributed ledger that is glob- 
ally accepted by SSI actors as a source of truth, where 
they can easily confirm the validity and authenticity 
of a credential without revealing its content. Since its 
introduction, SSI methods have been implemented in 
a couple of areas to address trust,  privacy, and secu- 
rity issues in IoTs, ehealth, finance, real estate among 
others. With SSI, users are able to limit the practice 
of data extraction and personal information collection 
by services without their consent. 

The  SSI  leverages  on  a  trust  triangle  consisting 
of three actors (issuer,  holder and verifier).  Issuer  is 
an entity that is able to verify identity attributes   of a 
holder  and  issue  a  VC.  A  holder  is  an  identifi- able 
entity  that  receives  credentials  from  issuers,  then 
presents  them  as  proof  of  claim  to  a  verifier.   Veri- 

Verifiable Data Registry 

Figure 1: Self-Sovereign identity trust triangle. 

fiers are service provider (SP), that sets access policy 
for  holders  and  provide  their  services  based  on  the 
policies. The relationship between these actors is de- 
picted in Figure 1. 

Blockchain:  In  2009,  blockchain  attracted 
the 
world’s attention through the first known  real-world 
application  of  bitcoin  cryptocurrency  (Nakamoto, 
2008), as a distributed and decentralised system con- 
sisting of an immutable public database, that are cryp- 
tographically  hashed  in  peer-to-peer  public  transac- 
tions. A block is made up of a series of transactions 
that are not managed by a single centralised organisa- 
tion, but are instead publicly available and  trustwor- 
thy  to  all  network  users.  Traditionally,  blockchains 
are classified either as public and private (Soltani     et 
al., 2021), or as permissioned and permissionless. 

Blockchain shares a consensus algorithm that  al- 
lows immutable transactions to be completed and syn- 
chronised, it also generates an ordered list of  stored 
and associated information through a chain of blocks 
that  usually  contain  the  previous  hash  block,  data 
content,  participant  signature  and  timestamp.  The 
previous  hash  block  causes  the  information  in  the 
blockchain to remain immutable. 

Smart Contract:  The first published work on smart 
contract was by Nick Szabo in 1994 (szabo and Nick, 
2018).  Smart  contracts  are  digital  contracts  that  are 
stored  on  blockchain  they  are  akin  to  physical  con- 
tracts. They inherit the properties of blockchain such 
as  immutability,  distributed  and  trustless  network. 
Typically  smart  contracts  are  used  to  automate  the 
execution  of  an  agreement  that  is  triggered  through 
protocols  and  conditions,  so  that  all  participants  are 
immediately  certain of  the outcome,  without  the  in- 
volvement of an intermediary or the loss of time. 

Interplanetary  File  System  (IPFS):  IPFS  is  an 
open-source set of protocols (Benet, 2014) which in- 
tegrates various existing concepts including peer-to- 
peer (P2P) networking, Linked Data, and other do- 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
User 

Issuer 

Issuer domain 

Distributed external 
storage 

physical presentation and 
proof of physical document 

processing 

Pass phrase0 

Pass phrase0 

local generation and 
storage of passphrase 

Generate hash 
value for key pair and 
passphrase 

Generate a verified 

certificate 

hash conmbination 

Figure 2: A high-level architecture of proposed system 

mains to allow participants share file fragments. Con- 
tent on IPFS is uniquely labeled and addressed using a 
multihash, which is a self-describing datatype that in- 
corporates features from git’s versioning model, cryp- 
tographic hashing, and Merkle Trees to make file re- 
trieval easier. Contents are identified and accessible 
using names rather than location. 

4  A solution for verified real estate 
transaction based on SSI and 
smart contracts 

In this section we analyse the our proposal as follows: 
firstly, the overall architecture is described with all ac- 
tors, then, identity management and verification pro- 
cess  is  analysed,  lastly,  the  ownership  transfer  pro- 
cess and data  storage procedures are  discussed.  The 
generic  overview  of  the  proposed  framework  is  de- 
picted in Figure 2. It is divided into three nodes; iden- 
tity management node, on-chain data processing and 
off-chain external data storage. The identity manage- 
ment node which follows an SSI method. 

On  chain  data  processing  node  consist  of  two 
Ethereum  based  smart  contracts  for  negotiating  the 
transfer  of  real  estate.  While  the  off  chain  external 
storage layer stores a comprehensive digital informa- 
tion  of  the  real  estate  (description,  pictures,  videos) 
and ownership transfer history. 

4.1  Identity management process 

Securely  verifying  the  real  estate  and  users  (market 
place,  owner  and  buyer)  in  a  decentralised  manner 
forms the core of this work. 

User  Identification:  Considering  the  fact  that  the 
asset at hand is a physical property, we initiate the 

Figure 3: Owner registration process 

identification  process  with  a  pre-requisite  physical 
identification of the owner as well as the real  estate. 
In the course of this work we assume the credential 
issuer to be a Government/state office which owns a 
distributed and verifiable data registry that stores dig- 
ital  information  of  residents  and  businesses.  At  the 
state office, a user presents physical documents con- 
taining  personal  attributes  (e.g  name,  date  of  birth, 
address  and  others)  for  identification  on  which  due 
diligence is conducted. For subsequent processes, an 
owner may initiate a registration on the registry’s mo- 
bile or web domain by creating a user name and pri- 
vate key. Either way two postal mails are sent to the 
user’s registered address, first mail contains a public 
and temporary private key that has to be changed. A 
user would then have to access the Government’s do- 
main to register the credentials received and  change 
associated key. Once done, the system automatically 
triggers  the  request  for  the  second  mail  which  con- 
tains a unique and changeable mnemonic passphrase. 
Owner’s  account  is  still  under  verification  until  the 
passphrase is received and changed. Once completed 
owner  is  able  to  request  for physical  and  equivalent 
VC. The VC contains a public key (Pubkowner) that   is 
locally stored on owner’s digital wallet, a private key 
(Prikowner) that unlocks owner’s account and a hash hf 
of the key pair that serves as the identity of the owner 
VCowner=(  hf  (Pubowner,  Priowner),  Priowner,  Pubowner). 
The  hash  value  is  deposited  in  decen-  tralised  the 
registry of the issuer to uniquely identify  owner. On 
the decentralised state mobile or Web do- main, owner 
logs-in  with  their  self  generated  private  key  and 
confirms the already provided attributes dur- ing the 
registration. From the key pair, owner is able to derive 
new  hash credentials for unique identifica- tion that 
will be case specific, and even choose from an array 
of services (public/private) provided, with which they 
want to link their identity to. This process 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
is described shown in Figure 3. 

Ethereum blockchain. 

Real  estate  identification:  Been  a  landed  property, 
real  estates  are  owned  by  private  or  state  entities, 
therefore,  the  identification  process  follows  similar 
approach  of  owner  identification.  We assume  a  real 
estate is newly acquired, therefore the owner needs to 
obtain a VC for it, and bind it to their own VC.  At the 
registry office, the owner presents their VC with proof 
of ownership (such as deed document or certificate of 
ownership) that fully describes the prop- erty, the map 
location,  purchase  receipt  with  preced-  ing  owners 
identities (VC hashes) and a plan for the property if 
any. The land registry office dispatches two address 
verification mail; first to the preceding owner of the 
property  and  second  to  the verified  ad- dress  of  the 
owner, which contains a key pair gener- ated from the 
owner’s  public  key  and  a  changeable  password  for 
access  to  land  registry  domain  to  com-  plete  the 
registration. Once received, the preceding owner has 
to confirm the transfer of property using owned VC. 
Thereafter,  the  owner  is  able  to  link  the  property’s 
public key to VC and locate it on the land registry map 
(description of this property is greyed out and saved 
to a distributed external storage). A hash is generated 
from  the  key  pair,  property  loca-  tion  on  the  map, 
owner’s  VC  and  property  public  key  which  is  then 
pinned to external distributed storage that is publicly 
accessible as shown in Figure 4. 

Propery owner 

Land registry 

Land registry domain 

External storage 

physical presentation, vc and 
cert of ownerhsip 

locate property location on 
map, 

greyed location as ownwed 

generate hash= 
property location+ 
pubk property 
+ vc 

Pin property hash 

Figure 4: Real estate registration process 

4.2  On chain data processing 

We  assume  that  a  buyer/client  and  decentralised 
marketplace  acquire  their  VCs  using  same  process 
with real estate owner. The  proposed  infrastruc- ture 
is  composed  of  two  smart  contracts  that  form  the 
bases  for  real  estate  transfer;  which  are  capabil-  ity 
smart contract SCcapability and transfer smart con- tract 
SCtransfer.  Both  contracts  are  fashioned  on  an 

Algorithm 1 SCcapability creation 

1: procedure Owner verification and contract creation process 
2: 

Input:  cct, AP, B, st rt, end, m nV

e, DR, R′ , V Cproperty,  PFShash, stts 

Read values 

3: 
4: 
5: 
6: 
7: 
8: 
9: 
10: 
11: 
12: 
13: 

if  d, R′ , B, V Cproperty = o ner then 

≥ 

start transfer 
ƒ et me    1 then 
if 
Create instance of SCcapability 
≤ 

ƒ et me    0 then 
Reject creation process 

else if 

else 

Create  cct, AP, 

e, DR, st t s 

while St t s =  ct

e do 

Ret rn ←  PFShash 
Ret rn ← SCcapability 

SCcapability:  This contract is created and owned by the 
real estate owner, it hold’s all necessary informa- tion 
that identifies them. To determine method for proof of 
identity, we define SCcapability properties in relation to 
it’s  attributes  and  enumerate  what  action  (access 
request,  delegation, 
transfer  of  property  and 
revocation) the owner can perform with it. To achieve 
this we define the access control (AC) state and iden- 
tify  its  variables;  AC (A,  P, R),  where  A,  is  a  set  of 
public keys (Pubku...Pubku..n), R (set of all attributes 
on  VC),  P  (set  of  all  possible  permissions).  From 
these variables an owner is able to derive capability 
properties for their smart contract: (AP, R′, Pp′, DR, 
B), where AP ⊆ A × P is access policy, R′ ̸⊂ R is a set 
of extra context awareness attributes, Pp′ ⊆ P × p′ is 
access scope, DR is the delegation relation and B is 
set of binary relations between entities (which could 
be real estate in question or other entities). 

SCtransfer: This contract is deployed by verified market 
place.  Since  the  market  place  is  providing    the 
platform  for  the  transfer  of  real  estate  property,  an 
initial  authentication  and  authorisation  process  is 
required. 

Smart contract creation: To create a SCtransfer, we 
assume  a  marketplace  defines  access  requirements 
through  scope  and  policies,  which  are  achieved  by 
identity verification processes (identification, authen- 
tication  and  authorisation).  To  initiate  these  pro- 
cesses,  an  owner  contacts  the  market  place  and  re- 
quest access to SCtransfer services by sending a request 
that  includes  Reqaccess  SCtransfer:  acct,  hashId  and 
PubKowner where acct is the type of contract the owner 
wants to deploy (sale, lease agreements, or power of 
attorney contract), hashId, is the Id of the owner who 

→ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
wants to deploy a contract, and PubKowner is the pub- 
lic key. We assume that each call to a market place get 
assigned a dedicated function in the smart con- tract 
which serves as the controller who is able to lookup 
owner’s  Id  on  the  distributed  storage.  To  fur-  ther 
verify  the  authenticity  of  the  acclaimed  property, 
owner’s call is responded to with a challenge  policy 
and requests for a VC linking the owner to the prop- 
erty. Once received, owner looks up on their digital 
wallet  to  confirm  if  verified  attributes  are  sufficient 
enough  for  authentication  and  covers  request  poli- 
cies, if yes, owner is required to confirm the release of 
verified  attributes  otherwise  the  process  is  discon- 
tinued  with  an  error  message  that requires  owner  to 
provide more attributes that are not available. Using a 
digital  wallet,  user  manually  wraps  R′  and  B  ,both 
properties are signed with owner’s private key so that 
marketplace controller may decode it with the shared 
public key: Owner  marketplace:  PriKowner(R’, B). We 
assume that this exchange takes place over a se- cured 
end-to-end  communication.  Upon  receipt,  mar- 
ketplace controller confirms identity attributes on the 
ledger, signed claim, device and location binding  to 
the owner that made the initial request, that nonce is 
meant  for  the  specific  transaction  and  timestamp  is 
valid. Once this is confirmed real estate owner is able 
to create SCcapability and an IPFS link as shown in al- 
gorithm 1, while a controller reviews the contract on 
marketplace’s domain and deploys it as SCtransfer, this 
is shown in Figure 5. 

→ 

Figure 5: Transfer contract 

4.3  Off chain data processing 

Despite benefits of blockchain, its not without  some 
limitations  which  include  high  cost  of  transaction 
among others(Hughes et al., 2019), for this reason de- 
centralised storage solutions such as IPFS, SWAMP, 
BitTorrent,  Filecoin  among  others  are  used  to  store 
huge data that can be expensive to store on chain  in 
conjunction with blockchain system to create a decen- 
tralised  database.  Although  ownership  of  real  estate 
can be transferred or structure modified, it remains till 
eternity (atleast the land). The immutability property 
of IPFS serves well for real estate data storage. 

During the contract creation process, a real es- tate 

owner deposits complete identity information/de- 

scription  of  the  property  off  chain  on  an  IPFS  net- 
work,  but  shares  a  hash  value  of  the  storage  on  the 
contract.  A  complete  picture of  the  property  is  pro- 
vided with street view, and map location. To prevent 
unwanted re-use of acquired picture, each document 
downloaded is watermarked with owner’s name, re- 
questors Id and market place ID. 

5  Application Scenario 

Leveraging on data decentralisation and trust less net- 
work, we foresee that the proposed framework can be 
applied for the transfer of dematerialised property that 
posses a VC. However, for clarity we conceptu- alise 
our proposal using a real estate transfer contract. We 
assume  that  a  buyer  wants  to  acquire  a  real  es- tate 
property through a smart contract that is  hosted by a 
market place. The process involves the participa- tion 
of  four  entities;  a  real  estate  owner  that  deploys 
SCcapability  by  calling  the  function  of  a  market  place, 
market place deploys owner’s contract using SCtransfer 
on decentralised owned platform, client/buyer a bid- 
der that expresses interest on advertised property and 
external IPFS storage. As described in Figure 6, the 
components  describe  the  transfer  through  initialisa- 
tion, registration, offer and finalisation. 

Initialisation:  This signifies the commencement of a 
transfer  process  where  a  real  estate  owner cumulate 
already created SCcapability as shown in Algorithm 1, 
and deposits an IPFS link of the property on an IPFS 
network.  A  function  for  SCtransfer  is  then  created  to 
deploy the SCcapability. 

Registration:  As  described  in  Algorithm  1,  to  de- 
ploy  the  functions  of  SCcapability,  the  smart  contract 
checks five conditions which includes; (1) is the con- 
tract deployed by the owner (2) is the property linked 
to the owner on distributed storage (3) is the start  time 
greater  than  current  time  (4)  the  market  place  also 
calculates  commission  and  charges  on  the  trans- 
action with government tax and requests for owner’s 
approval before it is finally published (5) the owner is 
not involved making an offer for transfer process. 

Offers:  Once  all  conditions  are  satisfied  and  the 
marketplace deploys transfer contract, it becomes vis- 
ible to the public. An owner also receives a share ID 
of the contract which gives them upmost control over 
the contract. or make an offer but has upmost con- trol 
to start, stop or suspend the process at will. Once the 
contract is running, a user who has acquired VC 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
n
o

i
t

a
s
a

i
l

a

i
t
i

n

I

n
o

i
t

i

a
r
t
s
g
e
R

approval for  commission 

tax value and commision

Obtain SCcapability,include state 

           SCcapabality bytecodes  

Implement 
SCcapabality  bytecodes 

i

g
n
d
d
B

i

accept or decline offer 

r
e

f
s
n
a
r
T

Figure 6: Real estate transfer process 

through  the  identification  process  described  in  Sec- 
tion 4.1, uses their verified certificate to request par- 
ticipation by making an offer (spending an ether) that 
is equal or higher than current value of the property. 
Once the offer is made, a user receives a user-specific 
access to a full description of the real estate property 
such as videos, picture, maintenance mode, setup and 
every other information that might be deemed useful 
for the transfer process. Generally, buyers are able to 
view current offers of other buyers, likewise the mar- 
ket place. However, only the owner is able to confirm 
the full identity of a buyer. 

Transfer:  The  owner  monitors  the  transfer  process 
until the lifetime elapses (it can also increase the du- 
ration or terminate the entire process when there is a 
suspicion of fraud). A decision is then made to ei- ther 
accept or reject offers. Buyers who wish to opt out of 
the transfer process, before the last minutes are fined 
from the cost paid for the transaction. Once an offer is 
accepted,  a  buyer  is  informed  of  the  process  and  is 
requested  to  proceed  with  payment  before  fur-  ther 
transfer  process  is  made.  To  further  protect  other 
buyers a percentage of their offer is used as a gas fee 
for  the  transaction.  However,  once  a  winner  is  cho- 
sen, buyers are requested to proof their identity once 
again in other to accept a refund for their bids. 

6  Analysis 

From  a  functional  point  of  view,  we  analyse  the 
strengths and weaknesses of the proposed framework. 
We also assess their level of robustness in processing 
personal information. 

Robustness  of  Proposed  framework:  The  pro- 
posed SSI and smart contract based real estate verifi- 
cation framework follows a complete decentralisation 
method.  The  identification,  registration,  verification 
and identity proofing is free from central storage  of 
data. Therefore, there is no means for SPOF. 

Issuance, identity verification process and use  of 
VC prevent a malicious attacker from getting hold-on 
physical documents to claim ownership or steal prop- 
erty. More so, with a trust-less framework, collusion 
is made  difficult as verifier need not to be  aware  of 
the  physical  location of  an  issuer  but  can verify  the 
signature of any document it has issued. 

Robustness  of  Identification  and  Verification: 
These methods are  used to capture full attributes of 
users.  Before  a  real  estate  VC  is  issued,  user’s  VC 
need  to  have  been  acquired,  therefore  linking  these 
documents  prevents  false  claim  and  other  fraud  as 
user proofs ownership of both documents before any 
transaction. 

From verified attributes of a VC, user can gener- 
ate self acclaimed and context based attributes that are 
only linked to the VC and verifiable on the distributed 
register.  Therefore,  to  prevent  profiling  a  user  can 
generate as much context based credentials for trans- 
actions without been traced. 

Robustness of Data Processing:  Data decentralisa- 
tion  is  among  the  core  parts  of  the  proposed  work. 
Although, one of the drawbacks  of  blockchain  is the 
use  of  varying  standards  which  causes  fragmen- 
tation  in  adoption,  hence  interoperability  between 
blockchains  only  occurs  among  technologies  with 
same open source implementation or using a trusted 
party (Bellavista et al., 2021). 

To ensure that  data  processed  for  the  transfer is 
available,  we  used  the  IPFS  open  source  storage 
which is independently available on Web desktop and 
provides sufficient memory space that lasted for upto 
48hrs.  Also,  we  assume  that  a  completed  document 
signifying  the  transfer  of  property  is  processed  off- 
chain and deposited on the IPFS network. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7  Conclusion 

In this paper we presented an SSI and smart contract- 
based real estate transfer framework that can be used 
to verify the identity of a genuine real estate  owner, 
real  estate  property  and  securely  control  the  entire 
transfer process within a digital marketplace. Our so- 
lution uses a decentralised and distributed approach to 
achieve the seamless verification process with data in- 
tegrity and personal data protection. The SSI methods 
ensure that only a verified real estate owner is able to 
claim ownership of a property using VC that are ac- 
quired from an identity verification process and can be 
validated on a distributed ledger. The smart contract 
is used to create the transfer process by the owner and 
is  deployed  on  a  decentralised  marketplace.  A  dis- 
tributed storage is used to store a full description  of 
the property which is accessible using a content iden- 
tifier. We have also defined an application scenario to 
test the validity of our proposal. In addition  we also 
provide  a  robustness  and  security  analysis  of  our 
framework  with  respect  to  some  specific  previously 
identified threats. In the future we plan to fully imple- 
ment the remaining aspects of the framework, includ- 
ing the issuance of VC, smart contract management, 
as well as integration of policy makers to the frame- 
work for the issuance of tax returns . We also hope to 
be able to mitigate the non intended use of sensitive 
documents obtained via the IPFS network. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  This  work 
is  sup- 
ported  by  National  Funds  through  the  Portuguese 
funding  agency,  FCT  -  Fundac¸a˜o  para  a  Cieˆncia  e  a 
Tecnologia, within project LA/P/0063/2020. 

REFERENCES 

Ali, T., Nadeem, A., Alzahrani, A., and Jan, S. (2020). A 
transparent  and  trusted  property  registration  system 
on  permissioned  blockchain.  In  2019  International 
Conference on Advances in the Emerging Computing 
Technologies (AECT), pages 1–6. IEEE. 

Bellavista,  P.,  Esposito,  C.,  Foschini,  L.,  Giannelli,  C., 
Mazzocca, N., and Montanari, R. (2021). Interopera- 
ble blockchains for highly-integrated supply chains in 
collaborative manufacturing. Sensors, 21(15):4955. 

Benet, J. (2014). Ipfs-content addressed, versioned, p2p file 

system. arXiv preprint arXiv:1407.3561. 

Bhanushali,  D.,  Koul,  A.,  Sharma,  S.,  and  Shaikh,  B. 
(2020). dipika. In  2020 International Conference on 
Inventive  Computation  Technologies  (ICICT),  pages 
705–709. IEEE. 

Consortium, W. W. W. et al. (2019). Verifiable credentials 
data model 1.0: Expressing verifiable information on 

the web. https://www. w3. org/TR/vc-data-model/?# 
core-data-model. 

EPRA    (2020). 

Real-estate-in-real-estate-economy. 

https://www.inrev.org/system/files/2021-04/INREV- 
EPRA-Real-Estate-Real-Economy-2020-Report.pdf. 

Gupta, A., Rathod, J., Patel, D., Bothra, J., Shanbhag, S., 
and  Bhalerao,  T. (2020).  Tokenization  of  real  estate 
using blockchain technology. In International Confer- 
ence on Applied Cryptography and Network Security, 
pages 77–90. Springer. 

Hughes,  L.,  Dwivedi,  Y.  K.,  Misra,  S.  K.,  Rana,  N.  P., 
Raghavan, V., and Akella, V. (2019). Blockchain re- 
search,  practice  and  policy:  Applications,  benefits, 
limitations,  emerging  research  themes  and  research 
agenda.  International  Journal  of  Information  Man- 
agement, 49:114–129. 

Kothari, P., Bharambe, A., Motwani, R., and Rathi, 

A.  (2020).  Smart  contract  for  real  estate  using 
blockchain.  In  Proceedings  of  the  3rd  International 
Conference  on  Advances  in  Science  &  Technology 
(ICAST). 

Mendi,  A.  F.,  Sakaklı,  K.  K.,  and  C¸ abuk,  A.  (2020).   A 
blockchain  based  land  registration  system  proposal 
for  turkey.  In  2020  4th  International  Symposium  on 
Multidisciplinary  Studies  and  Innovative  Technolo- 
gies (ISMSIT), pages 1–6. IEEE. 

Nakamoto,  S.  (2008).  Bitcoin:  A  peer-to-peer  electronic 
cash  system.  Decentralized  Business  Review,  page 
21260. 

Norta,  A.,  Fernandez,  C.,  and  Hickmott,  S.  (2018).  Com- 
mercial  property  tokenizing  with  smart  contracts.  In 
2018 International Joint Conference on Neural Net- 
works (IJCNN), pages 1–8. IEEE. 

Pain, N. and Rusticelli, E. (January 14, 2022). A sharp slow- 
down in china’s property markets would damp global 
growth. A sharp slowdown in China’s property mar- 
kets would damp global growth, (3152676):1–4. 
Ragnedda,  G.  and  Destefanis,  G.  (2019).  Blockchain  and 
Web  3.0.  London:  Routledge,  Taylor  and  Francis 
Group. 

Shehu, A., Pinto, A., and Correia, M.  E.  (2019).  Pri- vacy 
preservation and mandate representation in iden-  tity 
management 
Iberian 
Conference on Information Systems and Technologies 
(CISTI), pages 1–6. 

In  2019  14th 

systems. 

Shehu, A.-s., Pinto, A., and Correia, M. E. (2020). Provid- 
ing secured access delegation in identity management 
systems. In ICETE (2), pages 638–644. 

Soltani, R., Nguyen, U. T., and An, A. (2021). A survey of 
self-sovereign identity ecosystem. Security and Com- 
munication Networks, 2021. 

szabo and Nick (2018). Formalizing and securing relation- 

ships on public networks. First Monday. 

Voigt, P. and Von dem Bussche, A. (2017). The eu gen-  eral 
data protection regulation (gdpr).  A Practical Guide, 
1st  Ed.,  Cham:  Springer  International  Pub-  lishing, 
10(3152676):10–5555. 

Yadav,  A.  S.  and  Kushwaha,  D.  S.  (2021).  Blockchain- 
based digitization of land record through trust value- 

 
 
 
based consensus algorithm. Peer-to-Peer networking 
and applications, 14(6):3540–3558. 

 
