GEOS: SCALABILITY ANALYSIS OF A GLOBAL BLOCKCHAIN
FOR IMMUNIZATION RECORDS

2
2
0
2

l
u
J

0
2

]

Y
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
2
1
2
0
1
.
7
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Jorge Medina, Roberto Rojas-Cessa
New Jersey Institute of Technology
Newark, NJ, USA
{jorge.medina, rojas}@njit.edu

Ziqian Dong
New York Institute of Technology
New York, NY, 10023, USA
ziqian.dong@nyit.edu

Vatcharapan Umpaichitra
SUNY Downstate Health Sciences University
Brooklyn, NY, 11203
vatcharapan.umpaichitra@downstate.edu

ABSTRACT

While vaccinations continue to be rolled out to curb the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, their veriﬁca-
tion is becoming a requirement for the re-incorporation of individuals into many social activities or
travel. Blockchain technology has been widely proposed to manage vaccination records and their
veriﬁcation in many politically-bound regions. However, the high contagiousness of COVID-19 calls
for a global vaccination campaign. Therefore, a blockchain for vaccination management must scale
up to support such a campaign and be adaptable to the requirements of different countries. While
there have been many proposals of blockchain frameworks that balance the access and immutability
of vaccination records, their scalability, a critical feature, has not yet been addressed.
In this paper, we propose a scalable and cooperative Global Immunization Information Blockchain-
based System (GEOS) that leverages the global interoperability of immunization information systems.
We model GEOS and describe its requirements, features, and operation. We analyze the communica-
tions and the delays incurred by the national and international consensus processes and blockchain
interoperability in GEOS. Such communications are pivotal in enabling global-scale interoperability
and access to electronic vaccination records for veriﬁcation. We show that GEOS ably keeps up with
the global vaccination rates of COVID-19 as an example of its scalability.

Keywords Blockchain
Information Systems

·

Electronic Vaccination Records

Global Health Security

Health Systems

Immunization

·

·

·

1

Introduction

A global vaccination campaign as an attempt to curb the COVID-19 pandemic is underway. COVID-19, caused by the
severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), has threatened global health and inﬂicted economic
hardship on millions of people in almost every corner of the globe. SARS-CoV-2 has proven to be remarkably infectious
and deadly, and as time passes, it mutates into new strains and that further exacerbates the containment of COVID-19
[1, 2, 3, 4, 5].

At the time of writing this paper, the world has authorized multiple vaccines for their administration to the world
population. These vaccines aim to prevent COVID-19, severe illness, and death [6, 7, 8, 9]. The vaccination rollout is
being sped up to reduce opportunities for the virus to mutate into more infectious and morbid strains than the original
one. For the sake of a fast vaccination campaign, it may be attractive to simplify vaccination management and record
keeping. But loose management of the world’s vaccination against COVID-19 may undermine vaccination effectiveness
and the enforcement of preventive measures that reduce cases and deaths, minimize opportunities for viral mutation and
fully restore normal life [10, 11].

 
 
 
 
 
 
GEOS: SCALABILITY ANALYSIS OF A GLOBAL BLOCKCHAIN FOR IMMUNIZATION RECORDS

Globalization not only empowers the world to become more interconnected but also magniﬁes the population’s exposure
to infectious diseases and renders local-scale campaigns insufﬁcient to prevent recurrences of such a disease in the
long term [12]. COVID-19 is a clear example. Therefore, a coordinated global-scale vaccination campaign is being
sought to bound the spread of COVID-19 [13, 14, 15]. By providing global access to information, electronic records
can play a crucial role in the vaccination process and management of preventive measures. However, they must also
ensure security, privacy, and standardization for global adoption.

Blockchain, an immutable ledger, has been pointed at as the technology of choice to realize accessible and secure
electronic records [16, 17]. The immutability property of blockchain is achieved using a distributed consensus algorithm
where multiple and independent validator nodes in a network, or validators for short, agree on the addition of new data
records. Validators communicate through a peer-to-peer (P2P) network and run the consensus algorithm to keep their
blockchain copies synchronized.

Many blockchain solutions have been recently proposed to record, manage, and enable ubiquitous access to electronic
vaccination records [18, 19, 20, 21]. Such solutions aim to securely support the identiﬁcation of vaccinated individuals
and make them eligible for participating in social activities. Those solutions also aim to empower the implementation
of preventive measures and facilitate international travel during a pandemic by using a reliable vaccination veriﬁcation
process.

While proposals for blockchain-based vaccination record management are abound, in the form of electronic records
or immunization passports, it is unknown whether blockchain is scalable enough for recording the vaccination of the
world’s population. A global blockchain of vaccination records must achieve a transaction rate large enough to sustain
not only the world population but also the daily vaccination rates of the most populous countries. Such rates can be
achieved by achieving short block conﬁrmation times [22]. Equally important, such a global blockchain system must
also enable interoperation of information among countries, where each country’s immunization information system
may operate autonomously [23].

In this paper, we propose a scalable Global Immunization Information Blockchain-based System (GEOS) that leverages
the global interoperability of immunization information records. GEOS enables the interoperability of national
immunization information systems and, more critically, the scalability of a global blockchain-based immunization
information system. We model GEOS’s structured P2P communication network to evaluate its performance in terms of
block conﬁrmation time for recording vaccination transactions. We show that GEOS’s conﬁrmation time can sustain
global-scale vaccination rates to cover the world population and an administration of two doses per person per year, as
currently recommended for many COVID-19 vaccines. Our contributions in this paper are the proposal of a global-scale
blockchain for domestic and international vaccination veriﬁcation, a delay model of the communications performed in a
global-scale blockchain, and extensive evaluations of our model to demonstrate that GEOS scales up with the maximum
possible global demand of vaccinations.

This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 introduces our proposed global blockchain for vaccination and veriﬁcation
management GEOS. Section 3 presents a mathematical model of the conﬁrmation time of GEOS. Section 4 evaluates
the scalability of GEOS for its use as a global electronic immunization record system. Section 5 discusses existing
challenges for a successful adoption of GEOS. Section 6 reviews the existing work in blockchain for immunization
management. Section 7 presents our conclusions.

2 Global Immunization Information Blockchain-based System

GEOS is a blockchain-based vaccination record system that stores vaccination records of individuals and global
vaccination statistics in secure and standardized blockchain ledgers. It enables global access and sharing of immunization
information by using a two-layered system, a lower layer for national vaccination records of a country, and an upper
layer for international interoperability and global vaccination statistics. Fig. 1 shows the components of GEOS and
user accessibility. The lower layer of GEOS comprises National Immunization Blockchains (NIBs) and the upper
layer, a Global Immunization Blockchain (GIB). GIB and NIBs are similar consortium blockchains [24] that serve as
distributed vaccination repositories. GEOS interconnects NIBs and GIB through a permission-based P2P network of
distributed validators.

NIBs keep the vaccination records of the population of a country and keep them accessible for the implementation of
local preventive measures against COVID-19 or other infectious agents. NIBs’ vaccination records support licensed
healthcare providers’ administration of legitimate vaccines and enable worldwide vaccination veriﬁcation. GIB enforces
the compliance of participating NIBs to record vaccination records and report vaccination statistics according to GEOS
policies. It also serves as the global repository of vaccination statistics of NIBs. Vaccine recipients, healthcare providers,
or vaccination veriﬁcation ofﬁcers may be NIB users. International institutions like WHO and UNICEF may be GIB

2

GEOS: SCALABILITY ANALYSIS OF A GLOBAL BLOCKCHAIN FOR IMMUNIZATION RECORDS

Figure 1: Components of the proposed GEOS. It comprises NIBs and a GIB. Each of them is accessible through
applications that use smart contracts, and each NIB and GIB use a consensus algorithm to commit data to a distributed
vaccination repository with blockchain ledgers over a permission-based P2P network.

users. NIBs and GIB record vaccination data using transactions. Validators in NIBs and GIB execute applications that
use smart contracts and a consensus algorithm to verify and record transactions.

2.1 Vaccination Repositories

The vaccination repository of NIBs combines the records of two blockchains: 1) healthcare and 2) pharma blockchains,
and the vaccination records as a vaccination blockchain. The healthcare and pharma blockchains store the data of
authorized healthcare providers and the data of manufactured vaccines, respectively. The stored information in a pharma
blockchain includes the manufacturer Id, serial number, manufacturing and expiration date of vaccines, and others. The
healthcare blockchain keeps the name, Id, and authorization records of the healthcare providers. Validators in NIBs use
a vaccination application to verify, add and query vaccination records. The vaccination repository of GIB comprises a
blockchain that keeps and consolidates the vaccination statistics reported by participating NIBs. Validators in GIB use a
reporting application to query, verify, and add the reported vaccination statistics.

2.1.1 Vaccination Transactions: iRecords and iReports

In NIBs, an authorized healthcare provider issues a transaction, or iRecord, to record a vaccination. An iRecord contains
information such as the name of the vaccine recipient, the healthcare provider who administered the vaccine, vaccine
name and serial number, and vaccine manufacturer. Validators keep iRecords stored in their vaccination blockchains
and provide access to such data to authorized users. Listing 1 shows an example of the contents of an iRecord.

Listing 1: Example of contents in an iRecord.

{

"txId": "<Hash of transaction>",
"timestamp": "<Time of message creation>",
"recipient": {

"Id": "<Vaccine recipient public key>",
"cc": "<Country code>"

},
"vaccine" :{

"vaccode":"<Vaccine code>",
"route": "<Route of administration>",
"timestamp": "<Time of administration>"
"dose": "<Dose’s number>",

},
"manufacturer" :{

"name" :"<Vaccine manufacturer’s Id>",
"cc" :"<Manufacturer’s country code>",
"vacname": "<Vaccine’s name>",
"serialnum" :"<Vaccine’s serial number>",

3

Vaccination  Repository GovernmentsGlobal HealthStakeholders Healthcare  ProvidersRecordsHealthcare App Vaccination App Health-care BlockchainPermission-based P2PNetworkVaccination BlockchainPharma BlockhainPharma  App Pharma RecordsVaccinationRecordsVaccinationProofsConsensusAlgorithmNIB ApplicationsReporting  App HealthCare ProvidersVerifiers Vaccine RecipientsGIB  ApplicationsGIB  Statistical BlockchainNIBs GEOS VaccinationRecordsVaccination Repository VaccinationRecordsGEOS: SCALABILITY ANALYSIS OF A GLOBAL BLOCKCHAIN FOR IMMUNIZATION RECORDS

"batchnum" :"<Vaccine’s batch number>"

},
"healthcare" :{

"name": "<Healthcare provider’s name>",
"location": "<Healthcare provider’s address>",
"cc": "<Country code>"

},
"signerID" :"<The public key of healthcare provider>",
"sig": "<Signature of healthcare provider>"

}

Each NIB sends a transaction of the vaccination statistics, or vaccination report (iReport), to GIB. The reported statistics
may include the total number of administered vaccines, vaccine names, and eligible and anonymous information of
vaccinated individuals. Validators in NIBs issue an iReport to GIB after committing a new block. GIB validators
authenticate the NIB validators, verify the iReports, and commit them to their blockchain. Listing 2 shows an example
of the contents of an iReport.

Listing 2: Example of contents in an iReport.

"txId": "<Hash of transaction>",
"timestamp": "<Time of message creation>",
"cc" :"<NIB’s country code>",
"report": ["<List of administered vaccinations split by vaccine name>"],
"Q": {

"QId": ["<List of signing NIB validators’ membership Ids>"],
"aggSig" :"< Quorum aggregated signature>"

},
"signerId" :"<The public key of the sender NIB validator>",
"sig": "<Signature of sender NIB validator>"

{

}

2.2 P2P Network

The architecture of the permission-based P2P networks in GEOS is structured in two levels: a global level for GIB
and a national level for NIBs, with one P2P network per NIB, as Fig. 2 shows. The global level has GIB validators
distributed across different countries. The national level consists of one P2P network of validators per NIB, distributed
across a country. One or more validators are designated to issue iReports for GIB in such a network.

Figure 2: The architecture of the permission-based P2P network of validators used in GEOS. Validators in an NIB
are distributed across the associated country, and validators in GIB are distributed across different countries. NIBs
designate one or more validators to report vaccination statistics to GIB.

NIBs and GIB P2P networks are structured overlay networks that communicate through the Internet using the Kademlia
protocol [25]. These networks also use the Kademlia protocol to implement the broadcast algorithm proposed in

4

GIB  P2P NetNIB P2P Net1NIB P2P Net2NIB P2P Net3Global LevelNational LevelGIB validatorNIBvalidadorNIB   reportingvalidatorGEOS: SCALABILITY ANALYSIS OF A GLOBAL BLOCKCHAIN FOR IMMUNIZATION RECORDS

[26, 27] for broadcasting transactions, blocks, and messages associated with the consensus process. This broadcast
algorithm reduces message complexity by enabling validators to share broadcast responsibility.

2.3 Consensus Process

NIBs and GIB use the Hotstuff consensus algorithm to agree on adding a new block and consortium membership
management [28]. The complexity of the consensus algorithm is a linear function of the number of validators. GEOS
uses the Boneh-Lynn-Shacham (BLS) cryptographic signature scheme to aggregate the signatures from multiple
validator votes [29]. Such scheme reduces the number of messages exchanged during the consensus process. The
scheme is based on having a leader validator, or leader for short, managing communications for veriﬁcation with the
other validators.

The consensus algorithm operates in four phases: Prepare, Pre-commit, Commit, and Decide, as depicted in Fig. 3. In
every consensus run, the selection of a leader follows a round-robin schedule among all validators. In every phase, the
leader broadcasts a quorum certiﬁcate, Q, to the validators. This certiﬁcate contains a list of the received votes in each
event for each validator to verify. The validators send a vote as a response after veriﬁcation. The consensus process
moves from one phase to the next after the leader receives a quorum size, qs, of 2/3 of validator votes.

Figure 3: Phases of the consensus algorithm that NIBs and GIB use to agree on new vaccination data.

The certiﬁcate summarizes the 2/3 validator votes and includes the Ids of the voting validators, QId, and a BLS
aggregate signature of the voting nodes, Σq. Fig. 4 shows the operations and messages exchanged in a consensus run
between a leader and the validators.

In the Prepare phase, the leader broadcasts Q of the last block added to the blockchain. Used as a synchronization
phase, validators respond with a vote after positive veriﬁcation. Then, the consensus process moves to the Pre-commit
phase, where the leader issues Q and a block that includes the new transactions for veriﬁcation. After verifying the
transactions, validators respond with their votes. After a quorum is reached in the Pre-commit phase, the process moves
to the Commit phase. In the Commit phase, the leader issues and broadcasts a Q with the aggregated signature of the
quorum on the Pre-commit phase for veriﬁcation. After a quorum is reached in the Commit phase, the process moves to
the Decide phase, where the leader issues and broadcast a Q that includes the aggregated signature of the quorum on
the Commit phase for veriﬁcation. The Decide phase ends after a quorum is reached, and the block is added to the NIB
blockchain.

In an NIB, the leader also sends an iReport together with the pre-commit message to the NIB validators. The NIB
validators verify the vaccination statistics of the iReport and send a vote to the leader after its veriﬁcation. The NIB
leader or a designated validator in the NIB sends the iReport with a Q to the GIB validators for veriﬁcation. GIB
validators verify the aggregated signature in the Q and conﬁrm the addition of the iReport to the GIB statistical
blockchain to the NIB validator that sent the initial iReport. Fig. 5 shows the veriﬁcation process of a newly proposed
block in NIBs and GIB. Validators verify the transactions on that block before reaching consensus, as the ﬁgure shows.

2.4 Recording and Accessing Vaccination Records in GEOS

2.4.1 Generation of iRecords and iReports

Fig. 6 shows the steps for adding an iRecord to the NIB blockchain and issuing the iReport to GIB. A certiﬁed healthcare
provider (i.e., a provider certiﬁed by the healthcare blockchain) conﬁrms the identity of the vaccine recipient and
administers the vaccine. After that, the healthcare provider issues an iRecord, which is sent to a validator and, in turn,

5

Quorum of 2/3prepare votesQuorum of 2/3 pre-commit votesQuorum of 2/3 commitvotesQuorum of 2/3 voteson the latestblockchain stateLeaderSelectionCommitBlockValidators verifydecide message andcommit new blockPreparePre-CommitCommitDecideGEOS: SCALABILITY ANALYSIS OF A GLOBAL BLOCKCHAIN FOR IMMUNIZATION RECORDS

Figure 4: Communications and operations are performed between a leader and validators in a consensus run. The
consensus in an NIB includes an iReport proposal and iReport veriﬁcation.

(a)

(b)

Figure 5: Block veriﬁcation ﬂow operation using (a) the vaccination application in an NIB and (b) the reporting
application in GIB.

6

LeaderValidatorsSend sync vote on the latest blockchain stateGet the latestblockchainstateMake a Q of2/3 validatorvotesVerifyaggregatedsignature in QSend prepare msg with Q of sync votesSend prepare vote on Q verification Send pre-commit msg with Q of prepared votes + newblock + iReportVerify aggregatedsignature in Q,new block andiReport  Send pre-commit vote on block and iReport verificationSend commit msg with Q's of block and iReportverificationVerifyaggregatedsignature inboth Q'sSend commit vote on Q's verification Send decide msg with Q on commit votesVerify aggregatedsignature in Q andcommit newblock  Make a Q of2/3 validatorvotesMake two Q'sof 2/3 validatorvotesMake a Q of2/3 validatorvotesPrepare phasePre-commit phaseCommit phaseDecide phaseNew Block More  iRecords?ResultNext iRecordVerify healthcareprovider dataVerify vaccinedataYesNoNew Block More iReports? ResultNext iReportVerify aggregatedsignature in QYesNoGEOS: SCALABILITY ANALYSIS OF A GLOBAL BLOCKCHAIN FOR IMMUNIZATION RECORDS

to the leader. The leader includes the iRecord in a block for the following consensus process. The iRecord is committed
to the vaccination repository once its block is added to the blockchain.

Figure 6: Process of adding an iRecord to NIB blockchain and issuing an iReport to GIB.

2.4.2 Vaccination Veriﬁcation

GEOS provides authorized veriﬁers with fast and ubiquitous access to vaccination records or iRecords. Fig. 7 shows the
vaccination veriﬁcation process of an individual. A veriﬁcation request may be for one or multiple iRecords as proof of
the individual’s vaccination.

Figure 7: Process of vaccination veriﬁcation of individuals in an NIB.

3 GEOS Conﬁrmation Time Model

The communications performed during the consensus process determine the conﬁrmation times of an iRecord and an
iReport and, in turn, the scalability of GEOS. In an NIB, the conﬁrmation time of an iRecord is the elapsed period from
the time when an iRecord is sent by a healthcare provider to the time when the addition of the iRecord to the blockchain
is conﬁrmed. In GIB, the conﬁrmation time of an iReport is the elapsed period from the time an iReport is issued by an
NIB validator to the time when the addition of the iReport to the GIB blockchain is conﬁrmed. Therefore, we modeled
the communications performed during the consensus process of NIB and GIB. Table 1 presents the notations used to
describe the conﬁrmation time of GEOS.

The BLS scheme used in GEOS employs a pairing function or bi-linear mapping e(.) and a hash function, H(.), that
uses the BLS12-381 pairing-friendly elliptic curve for both the mapping and the hash function [30]. A validator v
generates a random private key, skv , and computes its public key, pkv , by multiplying its private key and a generator
point, Cg, on the selected elliptic curve. Validators also aggregate their public keys to create a group public key, pkB , to
verify the aggregated signatures in Q’s (1).

7

VaccineRecipientHealthcareProviderNIBGIBConsensus agreement Vaccination request Vaccination  confirmationiRecord submitiRecord confirmationiReport submitiReport confirmationConsensus agreement AuthorizedClientsNIB  Validator VaccinationAppCaller'sauthentication Vaccination verificationrequest Vaccination verificationresultQuery requestQuery resultInvoke smartcontract tofetch data GEOS: SCALABILITY ANALYSIS OF A GLOBAL BLOCKCHAIN FOR IMMUNIZATION RECORDS

Table 1: Notations used to describe and analyze the conﬁrmation time of GEOS.

Variable Description

skv
pkv
Cg
pkB
Idv
mkv
Q
qs
σv
Σq
QId

pkq

Bl
bi(t)

bh
bmax
Ri(t)
R
|
|
tx
|
|
txij
n
R
|
|
∆ti
∆t
τ
D

Private key of a validator v.
Private key of a validator v.
A generator point in an elliptic curve.
Group public key of validators in a blockchain.
Membership Id of a validator v.
Membership public key of a validator v.
A quorum certiﬁcate.
The quorum size of validator votes.
Signature vote of a validator v.
A BLS aggregate signature from qs validator votes.
A set containing the membership Ids of signing
validators in Q.
An aggregated key from the public keys of a quo-
rum of validators.
Bl
A blockchain ledger with
committed blocks.
|
The ith committed block to Bl that is proposed at
time t.
bh
The block header, with size
|
The largest block size in bytes.
vaccination transactions in bi(t).
The set of
The maximum number of vaccination transactions
in a block.
The size in bytes of a vaccination transaction.
The jth vaccination transaction in Ri(t).
The number of validators in an NIB or GIB.
Average number of vaccination transactions per
block.
Consensus latency of bi(t).
Average consensus latency.
Average transaction throughput.
Average transaction conﬁrmation time.

Ri(t)
|
|

, of a block.

|

|

pkB =

n
(cid:88)

v=1

avpkv

av = H (pkv , pk1 ||

pk2 · · · ||

pkn )

(1)

Before bootstrapping NIBs or GIB, validators generate their Ids and keys. Membership Ids help identify signing
validators in Q during the consensus process. Validators use their membership keys to vote. A validator v generates its
membership key, as in (2).

mkv =

n
(cid:88)

v=1

(av

·

skv )

·

H(pkB , Idv)

(2)

Let m be a message holding the contents and Q of a consensus phase. After verifying Q, a validator signs m using its
private key, the group public key, and its membership key, as in (3), and sends its signature (in a vote) to the leader of
the consensus round.

σv = skv ·

H (pkB , m) + mkv

(3)

8

GEOS: SCALABILITY ANALYSIS OF A GLOBAL BLOCKCHAIN FOR IMMUNIZATION RECORDS

A Q is represented by a two-tuple (QId, Σq), where QId is a set holding the membership Ids of the signing validators
in Q, and Σq is the aggregated signature from the validator votes. A validator veriﬁes Σq in Q using its membership Id,
the group public key, and an aggregated key generated from the public keys of validators in the Q, pkq , as in (4).

e(Cg, Σq) = e (cid:0)pkq , H (pkB , m)(cid:1)



e

pkB ,

·

(cid:88)

v (cid:15) IDqv



H (pkB , IDv)



(4)

NIB and GIB blockchains use a ledger Bl distributed among n validators. Block bi(t), proposed at time t, is the ith
committed block to Bl (5). The subscript i in bi(t) indicates the block’s position in Bl. Block b0(t) is the genesis block
that stores conﬁguration parameters on what the validators agree beforehand. These parameters are the membership
Ids and public keys of all validators, the group public key of the blockchain, the maximum block size, and the smart
contracts.

Bl =

{

b0(t), b1(t),

, bi(t)

}

· · ·

(5)

Here, bi(t) contains a block header, bh, and a set of vaccination transactions, Ri(t). The block header contains metadata
to cryptographically link the block to Bl and a hash of the contents of the block to protect the transaction integrity.
Validators verify every transaction in Ri(t). Here, txij in Ri(t) (6) denotes the jth transaction in bi(t).

Ri(t) =

txi1, txi2,
{

· · ·

, txij

}

(6)

Validators use a memory pool, Mp, to keep incoming vaccination transactions in a First-In-First-Out (FIFO) queue. A
vaccination transaction awaits in the FIFO queue until a leader in a consensus run includes it in a new block. At time t,
queued vaccination transactions. The maximum number of vaccination
the memory pool of a validator has
, and
transactions,
tx
, the size in bytes of a vaccination
|
|
transaction. The number of vaccination transactions a leader of a consensus run includes in a block at time t,
, is
|
determined by the number of transactions in the validator’s memory pool at that time and

, as in (7). bmax is the largest block size indicated in the genesis block and
|

, included in a new block, given the block size in bytes, is deﬁned as a function of bmax,

bh
|
|
Ri(t)

Mp(t)
|

, as in (7).

tx
|

R

R

|

|

|

|

|

|

Ri(t)
|

|

=






R

|

|

if

Mp(t)
|

|

>

R

|

|

Mp(t)
|
|

otherwise

i > 0

(7)

The average number of vaccination transactions per block,

, in Bl with

R

|

|

Bl

|

|

committed blocks, is described as in (8).

(cid:88)

Ri(t)
|
|

=

R
|

|

∀bi(t) (cid:15) Bl
Bl
|

(cid:80)

∆ti

∆t =

bi(t) (cid:15) Bl
Bl

|
The consensus latency of bi(t), ∆ti, is deﬁned as the time it takes for validators to reach consensus on that block. The
average consensus latency, ∆t, over the entire Bl is deﬁned as in (9).

i > 0

(8)

|
The average transaction throughput τ is the ratio of the average number of transactions per block over the average
consensus latency, as in (10).

|

i > 0

(9)

τ = |

R
|
∆t

9

(10)

GEOS: SCALABILITY ANALYSIS OF A GLOBAL BLOCKCHAIN FOR IMMUNIZATION RECORDS

A validator receives a vaccination transaction from a user at time δtr
ij, after reaching
consensus on the block that includes the transaction. We calculate the average transaction conﬁrmation time, D, from
the conﬁrmation times of the transactions committed to Bl, as in (11).

ij and conﬁrms receipt at time δtc

bi(t)

∀

∈
(cid:88)

Bl, txij
(cid:88)
(cid:0)δtc

∈

Ri(t) :

(cid:1)

δtr
ij

ij −

D =

bi(t)

txij
(cid:88)

bi(t)

4 Results

i > 0

(11)

Ri(t)
|

|

We analyze the performance and scalability of GEOS by numerically evaluating the average consensus latency,
transaction throughput, and conﬁrmation time of NIBs and GIB. We consider 184 NIBs, each corresponds to a member
country of the World Health Organization (WHO). The GIB aggregates and summarizes the reports of these NIBs.
Without losing generality, we considered the following assumptions in the evaluation:

• The consensus algorithm uses a partially synchronous communication model and has a bounded communication

delay [31].

• In NIBs, the network bandwidth is 100 Mbps with a validator-to-validator propagation delay of 20 ms [32].

• In GIB, the bandwidth is 50 Mbps and a validator-to-validator propagation delay of 120 ms [33].

• The average transaction rate for each NIB is estimated as the ratio of the number of annual administered
vaccinations of the population for each country and the working hours of a day. Here, we consider 260 working
days per year and 8-hour workdays. Fig. 8 shows the top 10 countries that require the highest vaccination rate
according to their population. In this context, India has the highest demand, or 478 transactions per second
(tps).

Figure 8: Top 10 countries that require the highest vaccination rates.

4.1 Evaluation of NIB

For each NIB, we assume that the generation of iRecords follows a Poisson distribution with an average arrival rate
equal to the NIB’s average transaction rate and that the time to verify an iRecord is 0.1 ms [34]. Fig. 9 shows the
evaluation results of an NIB for India.

10

IndiaChinaUnitedStatesIndonesiaNigeriaPakistanBrazilBangladeshRussiaEthiopiaCountry0100200300400500Transactionspersecond(tps)477.9452.0106.094.988.485.970.057.347.246.5GEOS: SCALABILITY ANALYSIS OF A GLOBAL BLOCKCHAIN FOR IMMUNIZATION RECORDS

(a)

(c)

(b)

(d)

Figure 9: The estimated performance of daily operations of an NIB for India with an expected vaccination transaction
rate of 478 tps: (a) average consensus latency; (b) average transaction throughput; (c) average iRecord conﬁrmation
time for different block sizes; and (d) average iRecord conﬁrmation time for different iRecord veriﬁcation times, each
of them as a function of the number of validators.

4.1.1 Consensus Latency

Fig. 9a shows that the average consensus latency increases as the number of validators and block size increase. The
consensus latency of a blockchain with 128 validators is three times longer than one with 32 validators, using a block
size of 2 MB. As the block size increases to 4 MB, the average consensus latency with 128 validators becomes about
six times longer than one with 32 validators. We also observed that for fewer than 32 validators, the block size has no
effect on the average consensus latency as the consensus latency with a few validators is small.

4.1.2 Transaction Throughput

Fig. 9b shows that the average transaction throughput decreases as the number of validators increases. The average
transaction throughput increases as the block size increases. With the smallest number of validators (i.e., four validators),
the highest achievable average transaction throughput is more than 800 tps. The minimum transaction throughput
observed here is 232 tps with 128 validators and 4-MB blocks.

4.1.3 iRecord Conﬁrmation Time

Fig. 9c shows that the average iRecord conﬁrmation time increases as the number of validators increases. With more
than 32 validators, the iRecord conﬁrmation time grows because iRecords are committed to the vaccination blockchain at

11

48163264128Numberofvalidators0.02.55.07.510.012.515.017.520.0Averageconsensuslatency(s)bmax=1MBbmax=2MBbmax=3MBbmax=4MB48163264128Numberofvalidators200300400500600700800900Averagetransactionthroughput(tps)bmax=1MBbmax=2MBbmax=3MBbmax=4MB48163264128Numberofvalidators0.00.20.40.60.81.01.2AverageiRecordconﬁrmationtime(s)×104bmax=1MBbmax=2MBbmax=3MBbmax=4MB48163264128Numberofvalidators0123456AverageiRecordconﬁrmationtime(s)×104δvf=10.0msδvf=1.0msδvf=0.1msδvf=0.01msGEOS: SCALABILITY ANALYSIS OF A GLOBAL BLOCKCHAIN FOR IMMUNIZATION RECORDS

a rate slower than the arrival rate of iRecords. A block size of 1 MB produces the longest average iRecord conﬁrmation
time. With such a block size, iRecords experience the longest queuing delay in the memory pools of the validators.

As the number of validators increases, the consensus algorithm slows down because the consensus requires more
messages and votes. Implementing an NIB with a large block size may effectively reduce iRecord conﬁrmation time.
For example, the average iRecord conﬁrmation time with 128 validators is longer than 3 hours, but it is reduced to about
1.38 hours when the block size is increased from 1 to 4 MB.

We also analyze the impact of the iRecord veriﬁcation time, δvf , on the conﬁrmation time. We consider different values
of δvf and the number of validators and 4-MB blocks. Fig. 9d shows that the average iRecord conﬁrmation time may
104 seconds) for δvf = 10 ms, regardless of the number of validators. However, the
take longer than 12 hours (4.32
average iRecord conﬁrmation time becomes less than two and three hours with δvf equal to 0.1 and 1 ms, respectively,
and 128 validators. Decreasing δvf beyond 0.01 ms does not signiﬁcantly reduce the iRecord conﬁrmation time.

×

4.2 Evaluation of GIB

The arrival of iReports in GIB follows a Poisson distribution with an average rate equal to the sum of the average
number of committed blocks per second of all NIBs. To support the vaccination rates shown in Fig. 8, we set the number
of validators of each NIB in the range of 4 to 128. Fig. 10 shows the average consensus latency, average transaction
throughput, and average iReport conﬁrmation time of GIB with 184 NIBs, as discussed below.

4.2.1 Consensus Latency

The average consensus latency increases as the number of validators and the block size increase, as Fig. 10a shows.
Consensus in GIB takes longer than that in an NIB because the veriﬁcation process of an iReport takes longer than that
of an iRecord. Increasing the block size allows adding more iReports but also increases consensus latency.

4.2.2 Transaction Throughput

The average transaction throughput decreases as the number of validators increases, but it improves as the block size
increases, as Fig. 10b shows. Increasing the number of validators increases consensus latency, decreasing transaction
throughput. However, the decrease in transaction throughput may be amortized by increasing the block size. For
example, when the block size increases from 1 to 4 MB, the transaction throughput increases about 38 and 29% with 4
and 128 validators, respectively.

4.2.3 iReport Conﬁrmation Time

The average iReport conﬁrmation time increases as the number of validators increases, as Fig. 10c shows. However, it
decreases as the block size increases because a larger block size allows more iReports in a block, and fewer blocks are
queued. For example, the improvement achieved by increasing the block size from 1 to 4 MB is about 23% with 128
validators. Although it is ideal for GIB to record real-time vaccination statistics, having NIBs issuing accumulated
iReports as bursts may signiﬁcantly increase the conﬁrmation time of iReports. Instead, NIBs can conﬁgured to submit
iReports after every γ committed blocks, as Fig. 10d shows. The ﬁgure shows that with 4-MB blocks and 128 validators,
the average iReport conﬁrmation time decreases by more than 60 and 90% when NIBs send iReports every two and ﬁve
committed blocks, respectively.

5 Discussion

In GEOS, NIBs must achieve a high transaction throughput to cope with future increases in the volume of incoming
vaccinations and the number of validators. The evaluation results show that the number of validators, the block size,
and the veriﬁcation time dictate the latency of the consensus process and the iRecord conﬁrmation time. The results
also show that an NIB per country may sufﬁce to provide an iRecord conﬁrmation time within a working day and avoid
transaction queuing. Yet, the scalability of an NIB might be signiﬁcantly improved by splitting it into smaller NIBs
using sharding [35, 36]. GEOS could integrate off-chain storage solutions to reduce the amount of storage in validators
[37, 38, 39]. Such a solution would require validators to ofﬂoad committed blocks to off-chain storage while keeping
hash pointers as references to such on-chain blocks. However, such an approach may also signiﬁcantly increase the
time to verify the pharma and healthcare data of iRecords.

12

GEOS: SCALABILITY ANALYSIS OF A GLOBAL BLOCKCHAIN FOR IMMUNIZATION RECORDS

(a)

(c)

(b)

(d)

Figure 10: The estimated performance of GIB for an entire day of operations. The Figure shows the (a) average
consensus latency, (b) average transaction throughput, (c) average iReport conﬁrmation time, and (d) average iReport
conﬁrmation time with 4-MB blocks and different iReport sending rates, each of them as a function of the number of
validators.

6 Related Work

Blockchain has been increasingly leading as a promising solution to different issues in e-health. Such challenges are
data privacy, integrity, access, and effective and secure sharing of electronic health records; management and supervision
of vaccine production, distribution, and administration [18, 40, 41, 42].

In the pharmaceutical industry, blockchain-based solutions aim to detect and prevent the counterfeiting and cloning of
drugs and are proven effective in tracking the authenticity of drugs [43, 20]. Vaccine manufacturers and government
health agencies may use blockchain to enhance transparency and effectiveness in vaccine production and distribution.
Hu et al. [44] proposed vGuard, a blockchain to supervise the production and manufacturing of vaccines. Lopez et
al. [45] presented a blockchain-based management system to distribute COVID-19 vaccines.

The immutability of data records in blockchain could also ease the building of systems for monitoring and tracking
emerging infectious diseases [46]. For example, Mashamba et al. [47] proposed a low-cost blockchain that is an
AI-coupled mobile-linked system to store individuals’ self-testing results for monitoring and tracking COVID-19 cases.
Eisenstadt et al. [48] proposed a smart-phone application that records digital certiﬁcates of COVID-19 vaccinations. In
a pandemic, blockchain may also contribute as a reliable repository to consolidate information about reported cases and
deaths from different reliable sources to prevent the spread of misinformation [49]. As a global system, blockchain

13

48163264128Numberofvalidators051015202530354045Averageconsensuslatency(s)bmax=1MBbmax=2MBbmax=3MBbmax=4MB48163264128Numberofvalidators20406080100120140160180Averagetransactionthroughput(tps)bmax=1MBbmax=2MBbmax=3MBbmax=4MB48163264128Numberofvalidators0123456AverageiReportconﬁrmationtime(s)×104bmax=1MBbmax=2MBbmax=3MBbmax=4MB48163264128Numberofvalidators0.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.0AverageiReportconﬁrmationtime(s)×104γ=1γ=2γ=3γ=4γ=5GEOS: SCALABILITY ANALYSIS OF A GLOBAL BLOCKCHAIN FOR IMMUNIZATION RECORDS

has been proposed to provide real-time access, data sharing, and data privacy of medical records. The authors [50]
proposed GlobeChain, a blockchain architecture for real-time cross-border medical exchange services of COVID-19
data. However, the implementation and evaluation of the scalability and latency of GlobeChain are not considered, nor
is the consensus algorithm for secure replication of medical records.

7 Conclusions

In this paper, we proposed GEOS, a scalable global immunization information blockchain-based system to reliably and
securely record, track, and access information on vaccinations of the world’s population. GEOS accommodates the
needs of processing the vaccination records of a country and globally. More speciﬁcally, we modeled GEOS and the
required communications in the consensus process that rules the scalability of such a global-scale blockchain. The
presented numerical evaluations of the proposed blockchain model show GEOS is scalable at the country and global
scales for the most demanding scenarios, such as in the case of India and the 184 countries registered in WHO. GEOS
achieves an average transaction throughput larger than 300 transactions per second and an average conﬁrmation time of
up to 2 hours using both 4-MB blocks and 128 validators.

These results show that with vaccination rates similar to those used in the ongoing campaign to control the COVID-19
pandemic, GEOS can scale and provide a secure and reliable repository of vaccination records for the global population.

References

[1] Ben Hu, Hua Guo, Peng Zhou, and Zheng-Li Shi. Characteristics of SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19. Nature

Reviews Microbiology, 19(3):141–154, 2021.

[2] Yinon M Bar-On, Avi Flamholz, Rob Phillips, and Ron Milo. Science forum: SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19) by the

numbers. elife, 9:e57309, 2020.

[3] Salim S Abdool Karim and Tulio de Oliveira. New SARS-CoV-2 variants—clinical, public health, and vaccine

implications. New England Journal of Medicine, 384(19):1866–1868, 2021.

[4] Carmen Elena Gómez, Beatriz Perdiguero, and Mariano Esteban. Emerging SARS-CoV-2 variants and impact in

global vaccination programs against SARS-CoV-2/COVID-19. Vaccines, 9(3):243, 2021.

[5] Qian Wang, Yicheng Guo, Sho Iketani, Zhiteng Li, Hiroshi Mohri, Maple Wang, Jian Yu, Anthony D Bowen,
Jennifer Y Chan, Jayesh G Shah, et al. SARS-CoV-2 omicron ba. 2.12. 1, ba. 4, and ba. 5 subvariants evolved to
extend antibody evasion. bioRxiv, 2022.

[6] Fernando P Polack, Stephen J Thomas, Nicholas Kitchin, Judith Absalon, Alejandra Gurtman, Stephen Lockhart,
John L Perez, Gonzalo Pérez Marc, Edson D Moreira, Cristiano Zerbini, et al. Safety and efﬁcacy of the bnt162b2
mrna Covid-19 vaccine. New England Journal of Medicine, 2020.

[7] Lindsey R Baden, Hana M El Sahly, Brandon Essink, Karen Kotloff, Sharon Frey, Rick Novak, David Diemert,
Stephen A Spector, Nadine Rouphael, C Buddy Creech, et al. Efﬁcacy and safety of the mrna-1273 SARS-CoV-2
vaccine. New England Journal of Medicine, 384(5):403–416, 2021.

[8] Jerald Sadoff, Glenda Gray, An Vandebosch, Vicky Cárdenas, Georgi Shukarev, Beatriz Grinsztejn, Paul A
Goepfert, Carla Truyers, Hein Fennema, Bart Spiessens, et al. Safety and efﬁcacy of single-dose Ad26. COV2.S
vaccine against Covid-19. New England Journal of Medicine, 384(23):2187–2201, 2021.

[9] Merryn Voysey, Sue Ann Costa Clemens, Shabir A Madhi, Lily Y Weckx, Pedro M Folegatti, Parvinder K Aley,
Brian Angus, Vicky L Baillie, Shaun L Barnabas, Qasim E Bhorat, et al. Single-dose administration and the
inﬂuence of the timing of the booster dose on immunogenicity and efﬁcacy of ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 (AZD1222)
vaccine: a pooled analysis of four randomised trials. The Lancet, 397(10277):881–891, 2021.

[10] Jorge Medina, Roberto Rojas-Cessa, and Vatcharapan Umpaichitra. Reducing COVID-19 cases and deaths by
applying blockchain in vaccination rollout management. IEEE Open Journal of Engineering in Medicine and
Biology, 2021.

[11] Peng Jiang, Jiˇrí Jaromír Klemeš, Yee Van Fan, Xiuju Fu, Raymond R Tan, Siming You, and Aoife M Foley.
Energy, environmental, economic and social equity (4E) pressures of COVID-19 vaccination mismanagement: A
global perspective. Energy, 235:121315, 2021.

[12] Rebecca E Bunnell, Zara Ahmed, Megan Ramsden, Karina Rapposelli, Madison Walter-Garcia, Eshita Sharmin,
and Nancy Knight. Global health security: Protecting the united states in an interconnected world. Public Health
Reports, 134(1):3–10, 2019.

14

GEOS: SCALABILITY ANALYSIS OF A GLOBAL BLOCKCHAIN FOR IMMUNIZATION RECORDS

[13] Luca Li Bassi. Allocating COVID-19 vaccines globally: An urgent need. In JAMA Health Forum, volume 2,

pages e210105–e210105. American Medical Association, 2021.

[14] Z Andreadakis, Arun Kumar, Raúl Gómez Román, Stig Tollefsen, Melanie Saville, and Stephen Mayhew. The

COVID-19 vaccine development landscape. Nature reviews. Drug discovery, 19(5):305–306, 2020.

[15] Gavin Yamey, Marco Schäferhoff, Richard Hatchett, Muhammad Pate, Feng Zhao, and Kaci Kennedy McDade.

Ensuring global access to COVID-19 vaccines. The Lancet, 395(10234):1405–1406, 2020.

[16] Michael Crosby, Pradan Pattanayak, Sanjeev Verma, Vignesh Kalyanaraman, et al. Blockchain technology:

Beyond bitcoin. Applied Innovation, 2(6-10):71, 2016.

[17] Bina Ramamurthy. Blockchain in action. Manning Publications, 2020.
[18] Richard Nuetey Nortey, Li Yue, Promise Ricardo Agdedanu, and Michael Adjeisah. Privacy module for distributed
electronic health records (EHRs) using the blockchain. In 2019 IEEE 4th International Conference on Big Data
Analytics (ICBDA), pages 369–374. IEEE, 2019.

[19] Claudia Antal, Tudor Cioara, Marcel Antal, and Ionut Anghel. Blockchain platform for COVID-19 vaccine supply

management. IEEE Open Journal of the Computer Society, 2:164–178, 2021.

[20] Binbin Yong, Jun Shen, Xin Liu, Fucun Li, Huaming Chen, and Qingguo Zhou. An intelligent blockchain-based
system for safe vaccine supply and supervision. International Journal of Information Management, page 102024,
2019.

[21] Abhishek Sharma, Shashi Bahl, Ashok Kumar Bagha, Mohd Javaid, Dinesh Kumar Shukla, and Abid Haleem.
Blockchain technology and its applications to combat COVID-19 pandemic. Research on Biomedical Engineering,
pages 1–8, 2020.

[22] Jeffery A Goad, Michael S Taitel, Leonard E Fensterheim, and Adam E Cannon. Vaccinations administered during
off-clinic hours at a national community pharmacy: implications for increasing patient access and convenience.
The Annals of Family Medicine, 11(5):429–436, 2013.

[23] World Health Organization et al. Strengthening health systems to improve health outcomes. Geneva: WHO, 2007.
[24] Wei Yao, Junyi Ye, Renita Murimi, and Guiling Wang. A survey on consortium blockchain consensus mechanisms.

arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.12058, 2021.

[25] Petar Maymounkov and David Mazieres. Kademlia: A peer-to-peer information system based on the xor metric.

In International Workshop on Peer-to-Peer Systems, pages 53–65. Springer, 2002.

[26] Zoltán Czirkos and Gábor Hosszú. Solution for the broadcasting in the Kademlia peer-to-peer overlay. Computer

Networks, 57(8):1853–1862, 2013.

[27] Elias Rohrer and Florian Tschorsch. Kadcast: A structured approach to broadcast in blockchain networks. In

Proceedings of the 1st ACM Conference on Advances in Financial Technologies, pages 199–213, 2019.

[28] Maofan Yin, Dahlia Malkhi, Michael K Reiter, Guy Golan Gueta, and Ittai Abraham. Hotstuff: Bft consensus
with linearity and responsiveness. In Proceedings of the 2019 ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed
Computing, pages 347–356, 2019.

[29] Dan Boneh, Manu Drijvers, and Gregory Neven. Compact multi-signatures for smaller blockchains. In Inter-
national Conference on the Theory and Application of Cryptology and Information Security, pages 435–464.
Springer, 2018.

[30] Riad S Wahby and Dan Boneh. Fast and simple constant-time hashing to the bls12-381 elliptic curve. IACR

Transactions on Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Systems, pages 154–179, 2019.

[31] Cynthia Dwork, Nancy Lynch, and Larry Stockmeyer. Consensus in the presence of partial synchrony. Journal of

the ACM (JACM), 35(2):288–323, 1988.

[32] Ookla Speedtest. Speedtest global index. https://www.speedtest.net/global-index accessed: 2019-11-

05, (2019).

[33] Adem Efe Gencer, Soumya Basu, Ittay Eyal, Robbert Van Renesse, and Emin Gün Sirer. Decentralization in
bitcoin and ethereum networks. In International Conference on Financial Cryptography and Data Security, pages
439–457. Springer, 2018.

[34] Arthur Gervais, Hubert Ritzdorf, Ghassan O Karame, and Srdjan Capkun. Tampering with the delivery of
blocks and transactions in bitcoin. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and
Communications Security, pages 692–705, 2015.

[35] Gang Wang, Zhijie Jerry Shi, Mark Nixon, and Song Han. Sok: Sharding on blockchain. In Proceedings of the

1st ACM Conference on Advances in Financial Technologies, pages 41–61, 2019.

15

GEOS: SCALABILITY ANALYSIS OF A GLOBAL BLOCKCHAIN FOR IMMUNIZATION RECORDS

[36] Mahdi Zamani, Mahnush Movahedi, and Mariana Raykova. Rapidchain: Scaling blockchain via full sharding. In
Proceedings of the 2018 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security, pages 931–948,
2018.

[37] Jacob Eberhardt and Stefan Tai. On or off the blockchain? insights on off-chaining computation and data. In

European Conference on Service-Oriented and Cloud Computing, pages 3–15. Springer, 2017.

[38] Randhir Kumar, Ningrinla Marchang, and Rakesh Tripathi. Distributed off-chain storage of patient diagnostic
reports in healthcare system using ipfs and blockchain. In 2020 International Conference on COMmunication
Systems & NETworkS (COMSNETS), pages 1–5. IEEE, 2020.

[39] Ken Miyachi and Tim K Mackey. hocbs: A privacy-preserving blockchain framework for healthcare data
leveraging an on-chain and off-chain system design. Information Processing & Management, 58(3):102535, 2021.
[40] Tsung-Ting Kuo, Hyeon-Eui Kim, and Lucila Ohno-Machado. Blockchain distributed ledger technologies for
biomedical and health care applications. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, 24(6):1211–
1220, 2017.

[41] Kevin A Clauson, Elizabeth A Breeden, Cameron Davidson, and Timothy K Mackey. Leveraging blockchain
technology to enhance supply chain management in healthcare: an exploration of challenges and opportunities in
the health supply chain. Blockchain in healthcare today, 1(3):1–12, 2018.

[42] Marko Hölbl, Marko Kompara, Aida Kamišali´c, and Lili Nemec Zlatolas. A systematic review of the use of

blockchain in healthcare. Symmetry, 10(10):470, 2018.

[43] Jen-Hung Tseng, Yen-Chih Liao, Bin Chong, and Shih-wei Liao. Governance on the drug supply chain via gcoin

blockchain. International journal of environmental research and public health, 15(6):1055, 2018.

[44] Xing Hu, Shaoliang Peng, Chengnian Long, Hongbo Jiang, and Lijun Wei. vguard: A spatiotemporal efﬁciency
In 2019 IEEE International

supervision method for vaccine production based on double-level blockchain.
Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine (BIBM), pages 1037–1042. IEEE, 2019.

[45] Leonardo Juan Ramirez Lopez and Nicolas Beltrán Álvarez. Blockchain application in the distribution chain of

the COVID-19 vaccine: a designing understudy. 2020.

[46] Dinh Nguyen, Ming Ding, Pubudu N Pathirana, and Aruna Seneviratne. Blockchain and ai-based solutions to

combat coronavirus (COVID-19)-like epidemics: A survey. 2020.

[47] Tivani P Mashamba-Thompson and Ellen Debra Crayton. Blockchain and artiﬁcial intelligence technology for

novel coronavirus disease-19 self-testing, 2020.

[48] Marc Eisenstadt, Manoharan Ramachandran, Niaz Chowdhury, Allan Third, and John Domingue. COVID-19

antibody test certiﬁcation: There’s an app for that. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.07376, 2020.

[49] Min Cheol Chang and Donghwi Park. How can blockchain help people in the event of pandemics such as the

COVID-19? Journal of Medical Systems, 44:1–2, 2020.

[50] Sujit Biswas, Kashif Sharif, Fan Li, Anupam Kumar Bairagi, Zohaib Latif, and Saraju P Mohanty. Globechain:
An interoperable blockchain for global sharing of healthcare data—a COVID-19 perspective. IEEE Consumer
Electronics Magazine, 10(5):64–69, 2021.

16

