BLOCKCHAIN-BASED TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT FOR ADVANCED AIR 
MOBILITY 
Ítalo Romani de Oliveira, Thiago Matsumoto 
Boeing Research & Technology Brazil 

Euclides Carlos Pinto Neto 
IEEE Member 

* Corresponding author e-mail address: italo.romanideoliveira@boeing.com  

PAPER ID: SIT132 

ABSTRACT 

The large public interest in Advanced Air Mobility (AAM) will soon lead to congested skies 
overhead cities, analogously to what happened with other transportation means, including commercial 
aviation. In the latter case, the combination of large distances and demanded number flights is such 
that  a  system  with  centralized  control,  with  most  of  the  traffic  control  decisions  made  by  human 
operators, is safe. However, for AAM, it is expected a much higher demand for flights, because it 
will be used for people’s daily commutes.  Thus, higher automation levels will become a requirement 
for coordinating this traffic, because of its higher complexity, which might not be effectively managed 
by humans. The establishment of fixed air routes can abate complexity, however at the cost of limiting 
traffic capacity and decreasing flight efficiency. Another alternative is the use of a powerful central 
system based on Artificial Intelligence (AI) and / or other advanced algorithms, which would allow 
flexible  trajectories  and  higher  efficiency.  However,  such  system  would  require  concentrated 
investment,  could  contain  Single-Points-of-Failure  (SPoFs),  would  be  a  highly  sought  target  of 
malicious attacks, and would be subject to periods of unavailability.  

This  work  proposes  a  new  technology  that  solves  the  problem  of  managing  the  high 
complexity of the AAM traffic with a secure distributed approach, without the need for a proprietary 
centralized automation system. This technology enables distributed airspace allocation management 
and  conflict  resolution  by  means  of  trusted  shared  data  structures  and  associated  smart  contracts 
running on a blockchain ecosystem. This way, it greatly reduces the risk of system outages due to 
SPoFs, by allowing peer-to-peer conflict resolution, and being more resilient to failures in the ground 
communication  infrastructure.  Furthermore,  it  provides  priority-based  balancing  mechanisms  that 
help to regulate fairness among participants in the utilization of the airspace. 

Keywords: Advanced Air Mobility (AAM), Blockchain, Smart Contracts, Resiliency, 

Geolocalization. 

 
 
 
 
1.  INTRODUCTION 

1.1. ADVANCED AIR MOBILITY 

Advanced  Air  Mobility  (AAM)  is  an  air 
that  makes 
transportation  system  concept 
intensive use of disruptively new aircraft designs 
and  flight  technologies  in  order  to  enable 
alternative ways of moving goods and people in 
shorter times and more conveniently. It involves 
the so-called Urban Air Mobility (UAM), which 
uses  highly  automated  aircraft  operating  the 
transport  of  passengers  or  cargo  at  lower 
altitudes  within  urban  and  suburban  areas,  and 
extended  application  cases,  such  as  (FAA, 
2022): 
- 
-  Public services; 
-  Private and Recreational uses. 

Innovative Inter-city transportation; 

1.2. TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT IN AAM 

As AAM becomes more usual and popular, high 
volumes  of  traffic  of  the  new  air  vehicles  will 
arise. Currently there is no operating solution for 
high-capacity AAM traffic, despite the existence 
of  several  published  Concept  of  Operations 
documents  (FAA,  2020;  EmbraerX;  Atech; 
Harris,  2020;  UK  Air  Mobility  Consortium, 
2022).  These  documents  claim  that  the  use  of 
airspace  structures  in  this  environment  can 
provide  safety  and  efficiency  benefits  and 
therefore  should  be  one  of  the  fundaments  in 
to  follow 
place.  However, 
circulation  corridors  and/or  to  be  restricted  to 
small cells of airspace decrease the efficiency of 
individual  flights  by  requiring  longer  routes. 
This efficiency loss may be compensated by the 
benefits of avoiding gridlocks and chaotic traffic, 
but fixed corridors also create new bottlenecks. 
By the use of airspace structures, one is  giving 
away efficiency and capacity in order to decrease 
complexity and increase predictability (Sunil, et 
al., 2016; Bauranov & Rakas, 2021).  

the  obligation 

On the other hand, it is possible to think of 
an  airspace  environment  where  trajectories  are 
completely 
free  and  each  aircraft  keeps 
separation from others by its own means, which 
may not be safe when there are several aircraft 
close to each other, as demonstrated in (Romani 
de Oliveira, et  al.,  2021). The patent document 

its  own 

separation 

(United  States  Patente  Nº  US10332405B2, 
2014)  describes  a  technical  solution  for  a  high 
traffic density of air vehicles, where each vehicle 
performs 
completely 
independently,  without  mechanisms  to  enable 
collaborative traffic management and reward fair 
use of the airspace. In spite of that, that solution 
still requires some centralized entities to provide 
authentication  and  maintain  geo-fencing  and 
spatial-fencing databases, which, in the absence 
of  redundancy  schemes,  constitute  Single-
Points-of-Failure (SPoFs). 

The 

papers 

(Romani 

de  Oliveira, 
Matsumoto, Pinto Neto, & Yu, 2021; Romani de 
Oliveira,  et  al.,  2021)  present  an  in-depth 
comparison  between  centralized,  de-centralized 
and  collaborative  traffic  solutions,  identifying 
the  strengths  and  weaknesses  of  each  one.  The 
centralized solution is the most efficient and safe 
one  in  high-density  scenarios,  however  has 
SPoFs  by  definition  and  requires  a  long-term 
fairness  mechanism;  the  fully  decentralized 
solution  is  robust  and  fair  among  equals  but  is 
in  high  density 
less  safe 
inefficient  and 
scenarios; and the collaborative solution brings a 
balance  of 
two  opposite  solutions, 
including the property that it is free of deadlocks, 
to which the strictly decentralized solution is not 
foolproof. 

these 

For  a  more  comprehensive  review  of 
different airspace designs for AAM, considering 
various  aspects  as  interaction  with  the  city  and 
society,  one  can  refer  to  (Bauranov  &  Rakas, 
2021). 

1.3. BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY 

exactly 

to  make 

Recurring to a known analogy, the Internet was 
developed 
network 
communications  more  robust.  Nobody  controls 
the Internet, and it is extremely hard to bring it 
down  in  large  scale,  because  each  cluster  of 
nodes  is  completely  autonomous.  This  was 
intentional since the beginning, because one of 
the most important drivers in its creation was to 
survive to nuclear attacks. The decentralization 
principle  of  the  Internet  was  so  successful  in 
transforming  our  lives  that  it  enabled  many 
associated  collaborative  tools  of  work  and 
leisure, such as the wikis, social media, Git and 
many others. The novel Air Traffic Management 
solution  proposed  in  this  paper  has  a  similar 

2 

 
 
decentralization principle as that of the Internet, 
with  the  goal  of  achieving  robustness  and 
resiliency. 

In  the  realm  of  online  transactions  and 
the  decentralization 
contracts  management, 
principle  gave  rise  to  the  so-called  Distributed 
Ledger Technology  (DLT), which has the  goal 
of ensuring validity of data blocks shared among 
many  users  without  the  need  of  a  trusted  third 
party.  These  data  blocks  can  be  used  for 
transactions,  data  storage  or  for  any  other 
computational  operation,  shared  among  users 
that  do  not  necessarily  trust  each  other,  with 
arbitrarily  high  levels  of  data  integrity.  A 
Blockchain  is  a  type  of  DLT  in  which  all 
validated data blocks are stored in a single line 
of  time,  each  block  referencing  its  predecessor 
and  validated  by  a  hash  field,  as  illustrated  in 
Figure 1. 

Figure 1: the Blockchain concept. 

 Blockchains  became  highly  popular 
because  they  have  the  goal  not  only  of  being 
decentralized  financial  systems,  but  many  of 
them  are  being  used,  appropriately  or  not,  as 
means  of  wealth  accumulation.  The  usefulness 
of Blockchain to the technical solution proposed 
here lies on various of its features: data integrity, 
irrefutability  and  the  possibility  of  running 
complex logic inside it, that is, entire programs, 

also known as Smart Contracts. The consistency 
of these features is still evolving (Sultanik, et al., 
2022),  as  a  high  degree  of  decentralization  is 
difficult 
the 
implementation,  however  we  assume  that  a 
reliable  blockchain  solution  will  be  available, 
being it either one of those existing today, or a 
new one to be developed. 

in  all  aspects  of 

to  attain 

As  it  will  be  shown  in  the  next  sections, 
complex  logic  is  needed  to  be  run  inside  the 
blockchain,  in  order  to  make  collaborative  or 
adversarial  decisions  with  unambiguous  and 
unescapable  rules  in  the  context  of  airspace 
allocation and conflict management. 

2.  THE PROPOSED SOLUTION FOR 
DISTRIBUTED AIR TRAFFIC 
MANAGEMENT 

The  main  objectives  of  the  solution  here 
proposed  is  to  provide  high-capacity,  reliable 
and safe automation for air traffic management, 
without  the  need  for  a  trusted  central  authority 
that maintains complex software, infrastructure, 
and  human  operators.  This  section  describes 
rules and logic that will run on a Blockchain to 
achieve  those  objectives,  and  some  additional 
elements that are needed outside the Blockchain 
in order to complete the solution. For brevity, in 
the  remainder  of  the  paper  we  refer  to  this 
technical  solution  simply  as  “this  system”  or 
“system”. 

Here  we  describe  the  use  case  of  a 
commercial  or  private  air  vehicle  operator,  but 
this use case system can be adapted to all types 
of  airspace  users,  including  public  services 
operation  such  as  medical,  law  enforcement, 
military,  etc.  The  overall  use-case  logic  of  a 
flight is illustrated in Figure 2 and explained in 
the next sections. 

3 

 
 
 
t
h
g
i
l
f
-
e
r
P

t
h
g
i
l
f
-
n
I

t
h
g
i
l
f
-
t
s
o
P

Begin 

Flight operator computes 
OVC and submits to the 
blockchain 

Wait OVC validation 

Valid OVC? 
Yes 

Wait departure time 

No 

Execute flight 

Submit flight report to the 
blockchain 

Wait report validation 

Valid report? 

Yes 

Wait flight evaluation 

No 

Receive rebate 

End 

Figure 2: typical use case of a commercial or 
private flight operator 

2.1. PRE-FLIGHT OPERATIONS 

Let us consider the case of a vehicle operator 
𝑂𝐴, which wants to fly from location 𝐿𝐴0 to 𝐿𝐴1. 
In order to deconflict its trajectory from others, 
the  vehicle  operator  will  compute 
the  4-
dimensional  volume  which  contains  her 
vehicle’s trajectory and additional safety buffers. 
This  volume  is  named  here  Operating  Volume 
Contract, or simply OVC (Hsieh, Sbai, Taylor, & 
Mitra,  2021).  This  OVC,  here  distinguished  as 
OVC𝐴, will be thrown in the blockchain thread of 
unverified  OVCs,  and  a  token  value  will  be 
deposited together with the tentative OVC as for 
maintenance of the blockchain and insurance for 

the case of not fulfilling the OVC. Another entity 
connected to this distributed system, here named 
𝐷𝑛 (𝑛 = 1, … , 𝑁),  will  search  for  conflicts 
between  OVC𝐴  and  other  OVCs  previously 
existing  in  the  blockchain.  If  𝐷𝑛  finds  no 
conflicts with  OVC𝐴, it will proceed to  find the 
computational puzzle typical of a blockchain and 
provide a valid block, with  corresponding hash 
value,  which  endorses  OVC𝐴.  This  block  may 
contain either only OVC𝐴 or bundle it with other 
verified  OVCs.  An  abstract  illustration  of  this 
idea is shown in Figure 3.  

Any node in the blockchain (except the one 
to  which  𝑂𝐴  is  connected,  by  definition)  might 
broadcast  a  validated  block  for  OVC𝐴,  without 
actually verifying its airspace safety. In order to 
prevent  the  bad  consequences  of  this  event,  if 
any other node, let us name it as 𝐷𝑚, further finds 
a conflict with the already validated OVC𝐴, it will 
no  longer  forward  the  incorrect  block,  and 
generate  a  new  block  with  a  conflict 
demonstration,  in  a  separate  thread  of  the 
blockchain, the so-called conflict demonstration 
thread.  

After some time elapsed, either the case 
of demonstrated conflict, or the case of absence 
of  conflict,  reaches  a  consensus  among  the 
blockchain nodes, and the corresponding block, 
let  us  name  it  as  𝐵𝑘,  is  accepted  and  stably 
incorporated  to  the  blockchain,  part  of  the 
deposit initially made by 𝑂𝐴, in the issuance of 
OVCA,  will  be  transferred  to  the  owner  of  the 
node which first  generated  𝐵𝑘, as a transaction 
fee to cover computation and networking costs. 
This incentive scheme works either if all nodes 
are  equally  verifying  conflicts  (analogously  to 
the  Proof-of-Work,  or  PoW,  blockchain 
scheme),  and  only  the  first  to  generate  𝐵𝑘  gets 
rewarded, or a small number of randomly chosen 
nodes are designated to endorse or counter-proof 
the solicited OVC (analogously to the Proof-of-
Stake,  or  PoS,  blockchain  scheme),  and  all  of 
them  get  a  reward.  The  latter  case  seems  to  be 
economically 
environmentally  more 
sustainable. 

and 

4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
𝑂𝐴 

𝑂𝐵 

OVC𝐴 

OVC𝐵 

𝑂𝐶 

OVC𝐶 

𝐷1 
Distributed 
deconfliction  

𝐷2 

𝐷3 

Conflict  
demonstration 

× 

𝐶𝑗 

× 

⋮ 

Deconflicted trajectories 

𝐵𝑘−3 

𝐵𝑘−2 

𝐵𝑘−1 

𝐵𝑘 

… 

Figure 3: Blockchain-based validation of Operation Volume Contracts (OVC). 

So, at any given moment, the blockchain 
thread  of  the  planned  OVCs  would  contain  a 
number of OVCs planned by the various vehicle 
operators, with a guarantee that these OVCs do 
not interfere with each other and, at least in the 
planning  context, 
the  vehicles  are  safely 
separated  from  each  other.  The  blockchain 
consensus scheme prevents that fraudulent users 
or  operators  disseminate  OVCs  that  have  not 
been  validated  by  the  consensus  algorithm, 
unless one succeeds in performing the so-called 
51% attack, which is practically impossible with 
the 
and 
correct 
implementations.  

blockchain 

definitions 

This  system  can  accommodate  flights 
without  a  pre-defined  trajectory,  as  it  may 
happen  for  media  coverage  of  events,  certain 
types of observation flights, leisure flights,  etc. 
In  these  cases,  the  operator  requests  a  low-
priority,  non-exclusive  OVC,  which  might  be 
quite extensive. This volume is flagged as non-
exclusive  and  is  verified  by  other  blockchain 
nodes,  which check if the sum  of simultaneous 
users of that portion of airspace does not exceed 
a  certain  limit  (a  capacity  verification).  The 

requested  volume  might 
include  exclusive 
OVCs,  for  simplifying  computations  of  4D 
airspace volumes, however in that case the low-
priority  requesting  user  must  not  enter  the 
exclusive OVC when it is actually in use.  

The distribution and acquisition of token 
values  to  the  users  is  out  of  the  scope  of  the 
present paper, however, it might be controlled by 
the  airspace  authority,  thus  guaranteeing  its 
authority role. The airspace authority may have 
the power to generate transactions to credit and 
withdraw  token  amounts  from  operators  and 
participating  nodes  based  on  access  rights  and 
compliance to the rules of safe airspace use (e.g. 
to charge fines, etc.). However, most of the token 
transactions  should  be  designed  to  incentivize 
efficient  use  of  the  airspace  and  fund  the 
maintenance  and  technological  progress  of  this 
system.  

2.2. IN-FLIGHT OPERATIONS 

Predictability  is  a  strong  support  to  flight 
efficiency.  Thus, 
allows 
this 
mechanisms to incentivize predictability. On the 

solution 

5 

 
 
 
 
the  most 

one  hand,  air  vehicle  operations  are  subject  to 
many  uncertainty  factors  and  should  not  be 
requirements  of 
stifled  by  unreasonable 
predictability.  One  of 
important 
attractions  of  AAM  is  flexibility,  which  is 
enabled  by  this  system,  but  in  balance  with 
predictability  and  safety.  This  is  achieved  by 
making that operators to recover part of the token 
amount that they deposited to issue a new flight, 
depending  on  an  “assiduity”  or  “compliance” 
measure,  which  will  evaluate  how  much  the 
actual  flight  complies  with  the  planned  flight. 
This  fundamental  idea  seems  simple  but,  in 
practice, requires treatment of exception cases. 
There are factors that are uncontrollable and/or 
unforeseeable  by  the  flight  operator,  that  may 
compromise a flight’s compliance. For example, 
a  vehicle  is  struck  by  a  bird  while  in  flight, 
having  to  do  an  emergency  flight  termination. 
While this is a rare occurrence, this case should 
not be regarded as a lack of assiduity to the OVC. 
But  other  more  common  occurrences  are 
analogous,  such  as  giving  priority  to  a  public 
service vehicle, with higher priority, or deviating 
from  a  blunder  vehicle.  Thus,  after  a  flight 
terminates, the operator will issue a report of the 
flight,  which  will  be  the  key  for  defining  how 
much  she  will  recover  from  the  pre-flight 
deposit.  

If  an  airspace  conflict  is  detected  while  in 
flight,  this  system  has  definitions  that  help 
solving the conflict in a fair and efficient manner. 
Conflicts have three different categories: 

1.  Vehicles  of  different  priority  levels  are 

involved in an encounter; 

2.  Some of the vehicles is out of its OVC; 

3.  Two or more vehicles with non-exclusive 
OVC are involved in an encounter. 

In  the  first  case,  the  vehicle  with  lower 
priority  has  to  perform  a  deviation  maneuver, 
while the vehicle with higher priority should not 
deviate. For example, a commercial vehicle has 
to  deviate  from  a  public  service  vehicle;  or  a 
vehicle with non-exclusive OVC has to deviate 
from a vehicle possessing an OVC and adhering 
to it. 

In a second case, a vehicle requested an OVC 
(exclusive or non-exclusive) and is not adhering 
to it. In this case, it receives the lowest priority 

level and has to perform the deviation maneuvers 
from vehicles that are adhering to the OVC.   

In the third case, the vehicles are in the same 
priority level, and a tiebreaker criterion is used, 
which is to compare the numeric value of hash 
obtained  in  the  approval  of  its  OVC.  This 
criterion  is  also  used  in  other  cases  where  the 
vehicles  are  in  the  same  priority  level  (for 
example, when both vehicles are deviating from 
the OVC).  

This  priority  hierarchy  is  a  fundamental 
aspect  of  this  system,  since  it  guarantees  that 
conflicts  are  solved  in  realistically  feasible 
amounts  of  time,  a  feature  whose  importance 
grows with the number of vehicles involved in a 
conflict:  an  aircraft  has  to  perform  a  maneuver 
that  takes  into  account  only  the  other  aircraft 
with lower priority; and avoids certain situations 
where  repeated  maneuvers  could  continue 
indefinitely (timeout situations). 

2.3. POST-FLIGHT OPERATIONS 

A  flight  report  consists  of  a  series  of  4-
dimensional  points  and,  if  deviations  from  the 
OVC  occurred,  justifications  may  be  included. 
The report has to wait out a challenge period in 
order to obtain validation, according to Figure 4. 
Any  node  in  the  network  can  initiate  a 
challenge to this report and, in order to do that, 
has  to  deposit  a  token  amount  equal  to  that 
deposited  by  the  issuer  of  the  report.  Once  the 
challenge is initiated, it has a period to gather a 
committee  with  a  minimum  number  of  voters 
(e.g., 3); if not  enough  voters are  gathered, the 
amount deposited by the challenger party will be 
returned  to  itself.  On  the  contrary,  if  there  are 
enough voters, the reward outcome would be as 
following. 

If  the  challenging  party  wins,  it  will 
recover  its  deposit,  and  divide  the  amount 
deposited  by  the  report  issuer,  after  deducing 
other  transaction  fees,  with  the  other  voters. 
Otherwise, the challenging party will divide the 
amount  deposited  by  the  challenger  with  the 
other voters. This incentive scheme is aimed at 
promoting  participation  and  truthfulness  in  a 
consensus-based verification of the fulfilment of 
the flight OVCs.  

6 

 
 
 
Figure 4: flight report validation process. 

report. 

If  no  challenges  to  a  report  is  issued 
during  the  challenging  period,  or  if  the  report 
wins the challenges, it is incorporated as a valid 
report to the blockchain, and another consensus 
protocol  is  employed  to  provide  its  evaluation 
measure.  In  the  case  that  the  report  is  refused, 
there  might  be  still  a  playoff  request  with  a 
revised 
  The  evaluation  measure 
calculation  method  must  be  uniform  and 
universally accepted, and the consensus protocol 
should  eliminate  erroneous  calculations  and 
choose  the  prevalent  value,  as  opposing  to 
calculate  a  mean  value.  As  in  other  consensus 
decisions, it may be either be via PoW or PoS, 
with  corresponding  distribution  of  transaction 
fees for the participating nodes, from  the value 
deposited  by  the  report  issuer.  The  balance 
remaining  from  this  deposit,  after  the  various 
transaction  fees,  will  be  the  base  value  to 
calculate  its  rebate.  Good  flight  compliance 

evaluation  measures will result in  high rebates, 
while bad flight compliance evaluation measures 
fill  result  in  low  rebates.  The  balance  that 
remains after all fees and rebates, from the initial 
deposit  by  the  flight  issuer,  after  all  expiration 
deadlines,  returns  to  the  airspace  authority, 
which will choose to redistribute it according to 
its policies of incentives and taxation.  

2.4. PHYSICALLY TRACKING 
AIRCRAFT’S POSITIONS 

Physical  verification of  vehicle location can be 
achieved  by  independent  agents  in  various 
manners, but the one chosen for this system is by 
radio triangulation / multilateration, as illustrated 
by Figure 5. 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5: Multilateration of an aircraft’s position via radio stations (source: Wikipedia). 

Multilateration uses a principle that mirrors 
that  of  the  Global  Navigation  Satellite  System 
(GNSS),  with  position  calculation  performed 
outside the vehicle and belonging to the system 
the  external  sensor  stations 
composed  by 
(S1,…,Sn).  These  stations  may  be  fixed  on 
ground,  on  satellites  or  even  be  dynamically 
composed  by  peer  vehicles.  Using  records  of 
GNSS signals  would not be a reliable solution, 
since  these  signals  can  be  spoofed  (artificially 
generated). Apart from that, assuming that every 
aircraft  can  use  a  4G  or  5G  cellular  device,  a 
report from the cellular telecom provider may be 
used  for  multilateration  and  attest  vehicles’ 
positions,  however  this  might  put  too  much 
power in the hands of the telecom provider, and 
incentivize  it  to  collude  with  certain  vehicle 
operators. Thus, in this solution the aircraft must 
be equipped with a radio device to broadcast an 
encoded message with its identity code, at least, 
in  a non-directional  signal,  similarly to  what  is 
done  with  ADS-B  for  commercial  and  general 
aviation. This device can work in any frequency 
and modulation scheme  that is  appropriate to  a 
low power consumption. Determining the spatial 
position  (latitude,  longitude,  altitude)  of  an 

the 

aircraft 

reported  by 

aircraft requires at least four passive stations, if 
the  stations  are  synchronized,  or  six  passive 
stations if they  are not  synchronized  (Stefanski 
&  Sadowski,  2018).  If  the  aircraft  transmits  its 
altitude  (measured  by  its  own  means),  and  this 
parameter  is  used  as  calculation  input,  one  of 
these  stations  is  no  longer  required.  However, 
this system must be robust to erroneous or false 
(e.g. 
altitudes 
uncalibrated or faulty sensors), thus four or more 
stations  are  needed  to  determine  an  aircraft’s 
position for each broadcast message transmitted. 
If fixed ground stations are used, it is expected 
that  most  of  the  stations  in  the  vicinity  of  an 
aircraft  will  be  positioned  at  similar  altitudes, 
thus the accuracy of the altitude calculation via 
multilateration  will  not  be  very  good  with  4 
stations  only.  However,  by  using  filtering  and 
machine  learning  methods,  it  is  possible  to 
gather data from an arbitrary number of stations 
and  increase  the  accuracy  of  the  position 
determination. Video processing techniques can 
also  be  used  to  help  altitude  and  position 
determination.  Satellite-based  multilateration 
might be advantageous in altitude determination, 
ionospheric  weather  causes 
although 

the 

8 

 
 
 
in 

variability 
consequently, 
determination. 

in 

the 

signal 

and, 
the  accuracy  of  position 

quality 

Passive  receivers  can  be  deployed  and 
maintained  by  independent  users,  which  can 
either  triangulate  the  signals  from  various 
receivers,  or  offer  their  receivers’  signals  to 
pools, which in turn can triangulate the signals. 
The cost of this infrastructure would be funded 
by  the  blockchain  transaction  fees  collected  in 
the challenges and validity votes associated to a 
report and, if no challenges happen, in the final 
the 
incorporation  of 
blockchain.  Various 
type  of  sensory  data 
collected by the air vehicles also could be used 
to help determining other vehicles’ positions. 

the  flight  report 

to 

Besides  broadcasting 

its  position  and 
altitude,  an  aircraft  participating  in  this  system 
should  broadcast 
its  current  OVC  and 
corresponding  hash  value,  provided  by  the 
blockchain. This information is used in conflict 
resolution,  in  the  cases  when  airspace  conflict 
happens with other aircraft while in flight. 

A  Blockchain-based  solution  for  inviolable 
presence  determination  and  registration  of 
mobile entities was presented in (Leal, Pisani, & 
Endler,  2021),  although  it  uses  a  variety  of 
sensors and spatial conditions not comparable to 
the problem of position determination existing in 
the AAM context. 

3. 

FINAL REMARKS 

The system proposed must be implemented in a 
blockchain  capable  of  smart  contracts  or  in-
block  programming,  either  one  of  the  existing 
ones,  or  one  to  be  developed  specifically  with 
this  purpose.  It  would  be  successful  if  a  high 
proportion  of  the  AAM  vehicles  in  a  certain 
region  adhere  to  it.  It  is  not  foolproof  against 
uncooperative  vehicles  (as  any  centralized 
system  is),  however  it  may  be  added  with 
features  to  alert  users  about  the  uncooperative 
drones  and  register  such  occurrences  with 
evidences and a certain level of consensus, in a 
way to discourage such practices. 

Regardless of the implementation choices, if 
such  choices  are  adherent  to  the  definitions  of 
this  paper,  a  highly  distributed  and  redundant 
system is obtained, where failures in one or a few 
nodes  do  not  cause  a  breakdown  of  the  whole 
system.  The  overall  computational  effort 

resulting  from  the  summation  of  redundant 
computations  and  /  or  verifications  will  be 
probably higher than that of a centralized system 
with the same purpose, however the components 
of  the  system  can  be  developed  and  verified 
collaboratively  and  achieve  higher  redundancy 
by  having  diverse  systems  and  algorithms 
performing  verification.  Also,  upgrades  to  the 
system can be seamless as its distributed nature 
allows  that  some  nodes  of  the  system  are 
upgraded while others remain with their current 
versions, so to test updates gradually. 

We  also  consider 

the  possibility  of 
combining some aspects of decentralization and 
blockchain  with  the  presence  of  centralized 
USPs  (Unmanned  Air  Traffic  Management 
Service Providers), either by the USP being fully 
integrated with the decentralized services, or by 
the latter ones working as a secondary solution.   
The  overall  concept  of  blockchain-based 
traffic  management  can  be  applied  to  surface 
(road  and  water)  vehicles  as  well,  however  the 
features  of 
these  systems  may  not  offer 
advantages  for  this  concept  as  large  as  those 
envisioned for air vehicles. 

4. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

We  acknowledge  the  following  authors  for 
conceding  their  artwork  used  in  our  figures, 
obtained from the website flaticon.com: 
• Uniconlabs for the handshake icon in Figure 1; 
• Freepik for the stamp icon in Figure 1; 
• Kosonicon for the drone icon in Figure 3. 

9 

 
 
 
 
5.  REFERENCES 

Abdal, A. (2015). Sobre regiões e desenvolvimento: 
os processos de desenvolvimento regional 
brasileiro no período 1999-2010. São Paulo: 
Tese de Doutorado, Faculdade de Filosofia, 
Letras e Ciências Humanas, Universidade de 
São Paulo. 

ABNT. (2020). NBR 9050:2015 Acessibilidade a 

edifcações, mobiliário, espaços e equipamentos 
urbanos. Rio de Janeiro: Associação Brasileira 
de Normas Técnicas. 

ANAC. (2021, Jul 14). Agência Nacional de 
Aviação Civil. Lista de aeródromos civis 
cadastrados. Retrieved Jun 14, 2022, from 
https://www.gov.br/anac/pt-
br/assuntos/regulados/aerodromos/lista-de-
aerodromos-civis-cadastrados 

Bauranov, A., & Rakas, J. (2021). Designing 

airspace for urban air mobility: A review of 
concepts. Progress in Aerospace Sciences, 
125(100726). Retrieved from 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.paerosci.2021.100726 

Ben-Akiva, M. E., & Lerman, S. R. (1985). Discrete 
choice analysis: theory and application to travel 
demand, (Vols. 9,). Cambridge: MIT Press,. 
EmbraerX; Atech; Harris. (2020). Flight Plan 2030: 
An Air Traffic Management Concept for Urban 
Air Mobility. Retrieved from 
https://daflwcl3bnxyt.cloudfront.net/m/f58fb8ea
648aeb9/original/EmbraerX-White-Paper-
Flight-Plan2030.pdf 

FAA. (2020). Urban Air Mobility - Concept of 

Operations v1.0. Retrieved from 
https://nari.arc.nasa.gov/sites/default/files/attach
ments/UAM_ConOps_v1.0.pdf 

FAA. (2022). Urban Air Mobility and Advanced Air 

Mobility. Retrieved June 2022, from 
https://www.faa.gov/uas/advanced_operations/u
rban_air_mobility 

Farzadnia, S., & Vanani, I. R. (2022). Identification 
of opinion trends using sentiment analysis of 
airlines passengers' reviews. Journal of Air 
Transport Management, 103, 102232. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jairtraman.2022.10
2232 

Hsieh, C., Sbai, H., Taylor, H., & Mitra, S. (2021). 
Unmanned Air-traffic Management (UTM): 
Formalization, a Prototype Implementation, 
Verification and Performance Evaluation. 13th 
NASA Formal Methods Symposium (NFM 
2021). Retrieved from arXiv:2009.04655 
Kopardekar, P. (2014). United States Patent No. 

US10332405B2.  

Leal, M., Pisani, F., & Endler, M. (2021). A 

blockchain-based service for inviolable presence 
registration of mobile entities. Journal of the 
Brazilian Computer Society. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1186/s13173-021-00104-y 

Ortúzar, J. D., & Willumsen, L. G. (2011). 

Modelling transport, (4 ed.). New, Jersey, USA: 
John Wiley & Sons. 

Robinson, S. (2017). A Tutorial on Simulation 

Conceptual Modeling. Proceedings of the 2017 
Winter Simulation Conference (pp. 565-579). 
Las Vegas: Institute of Electrical and 
Electronics Engineers. 

Romani de Oliveira, Í., Matsumoto, T., Pinto Neto, 
E., & Yu, H. (2021). Decentralized Air Traffic 
Management for Advanced Air Mobility. 
Integrated Conference on Communications, 
Navigation and Surveillance (ICNS).  

Romani de Oliveira, I., Pinto Neto, E., Matsumoto, 
T., Yu, H., Bartolome, E., Frontera, G., & 
Mayne, A. (2021). Comparing the Performance 
of Traffic Coordination Methods for Advanced 
Aerial Mobility. 40th IEEE/AIAA Digital 
Avionics Systems Conference (DASC). IEEE. 
doi:10.1109/DASC52595.2021.9594468 
Stefanski, J., & Sadowski, J. (2018). TDOA versus 
ATDOA for wide area multilateration system. 
Journal of Wirelles Communications 
Network(179). 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1186/s13638-018-1191-5 
Sultanik, E., Remie, A., Manzano, F., Brunson, T., 
Moelius, S., Kilmer, E., . . . Schriner, S. (2022, 
June). Are Blockchains Decentralized? Report 
from Trail of Bits commissioned by DARPA. 
Retrieved June 30, 2022, from 
https://t.co/V36rSOmvJc 

Sunil, E., Ellerbroek, J., Hoekstra, J., Vidosavljevic, 
A., Arntzen, M., Bussink, F., & Nieuwenhuisen, 
D. (2016). An Analysis of Decentralized 
Airspace Structure and Capacity Using Fast-
Time Simulations. Journal of Guidance, 
Control and Dynamics. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.2514/1.G000528 
UK Air Mobility Consortium. (2022, March'). 

Urban Air Mobility Concept of Operations for 
the London Area. Retrieved from 
https://eveairmobility.com/wp-
content/uploads/2022/03/UK_Air_Mobility_Co
nsortium_CONOPS.pdf 

10 

 
 
 
 
