Towards Blockchain-based Trust and Reputation
Management for Trustworthy 6G Networks

Guntur Dharma Putra1,2, Volkan Dedeoglu3, Salil S Kanhere1,2 and Raja Jurdak4

1

2

3

4

School of Computer Science and Engineering, UNSW Sydney, Australia
Cyber Security Cooperative Research Centre (CSCRC), Australia
Commonwealth Scientiﬁc and Industrial Research Organisation’s Data61, Pullenvale, Australia
School of Computer Science, Queensland University of Technology (QUT), Brisbane, Australia

2
2
0
2

g
u
A
6
1

]
I

N
.
s
c
[

1
v
2
6
5
7
0
.
8
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

6 G is envisioned to enable futuristic technolo-

gies, which exhibit more complexities than
the previous generations, as it aims to bring
connectivity to a large number of devices, many
of which may not be trustworthy.
Proper au-
thentication can protect the network from unau-
thorized adversaries. However, it cannot guaran-
tee in situ reliability and trustworthiness of au-
thorized network nodes, as they can be compro-
mised post-authentication and impede the relia-
bility and resilience of the network. Trust and
Reputation Management (TRM) is an eﬀective ap-
proach to continuously evaluate the trustworthi-
ness of each participant by collecting and process-
ing evidence of their interactions with other nodes
and the infrastructure.
In this article, we argue
that blockchain-based TRM is critical to build trust-
worthy 6G networks, where blockchain acts as a
decentralized platform for collaboratively manag-
ing and processing interaction evidence with the
end goal of quantifying trust. We present a case
study of resource management in 6G networks,
where blockchain-based TRM quantiﬁes and main-
tains reputation scores by evaluating fulﬁllment
of resource owner’s obligations and facilitating re-
source consumers to provide feedback. We also dis-
cuss inherent challenges and future directions for
the development of blockchain-based TRM for next-
generation 6G networks.

1 Introduction

The future of wireless communication technology, com-
monly known as the sixth generation (6G) communica-
tion network, is envisioned to enable various futuristic
technologies, such as hologram and multi-sensory aug-
mented reality, reliable telemedicine, and large-scale
interconnected autonomous vehicles [1]. These future
technologies are the backbone of the so called Internet

of Everything (IoE), which demands extremely high
communication throughput with signiﬁcantly low la-
tency and support for extensive device heterogeneity.
To achieve this ambitious target, researchers are explor-
ing the possibilities of operating in TeraHertz (THz)
frequency band and utilization of spatial multiplexing
to allow base stations to provide simultaneous access
to thousands, if not millions, of ultra-dense wireless
connections [2].

The salient characteristics of envisioned 6G networks
bring new challenges in providing resilient commu-
nications with more complexities than the previous
generations [3]. 6G will give rise to more distributed
Device-to-device (D2D) applications where there will
be a greater need for participants to directly interact
with other participants, i.e., move away from tradi-
tional client-server interactions where the assumption
is that the server is trusted. In fact, ultra-dense con-
nections would involve large number of interconnected
devices with an absence of pre-established trust be-
tween participants. Incorporation of reliable authen-
tication schemes can protect the network from unau-
thorized adversaries. However, it cannot ascertain in
situ reliability and trustworthiness of authorized net-
work nodes, which may become faulty or compromised
post-authentication. Compromised devices can behave
maliciously, eventually causing severe detrimental ef-
fects, as most critical infrastructures are anticipated to
be connected in the 6G universe [4]. The trustworthi-
ness of network participants, therefore, becomes an
important issue, as the absence of trust may discourage
participants from cooperating in the network.

Trust and Reputation Management (TRM) is an ef-
fective approach to overcome the aforementioned is-
sues, wherein an authority continuously evaluates the
trustworthiness of each participant by collecting and
processing feedback and ratings from other network
participants. TRM calculates the reputation scores
based on collected interaction evidence to quantify the
trustworthiness of the participants. The state-of-the-art

This article has been accepted for publication in the IEEE Network Magazine and is subject to IEEE Copyright.

 
 
 
 
 
 
Towards Blockchain-based Trust and Reputation Management for Trustworthy 6G Networks

TRM approaches for 5G [4], cannot provide reliable
mechanisms for future 6G applications, as they have
poor attack resiliency, suﬀer from ineﬃcient reputation
score calculation, and are unable to scale. In addition,
TRM for 6G-enabled applications should rely on the
coordination between network entities and users to col-
lect evidence of misbehavior, which are not supported
in the conventional TRM.

Blockchain has been projected to support various
aspects of future 6G communications, as predicted by
the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) [3].
Recent work has proposed the notion of blockchain
radio access network (B-RAN) for eﬃcient resource
management and resource sharing [5]. Furthermore,
blockchain has the potential in building more secure
and trustworthy TRM for 6G networks. The decen-
tralized nature of blockchain and its salient features,
including transparency, tamper-resilient, veriﬁability,
and smart contract execution, show promise in resolv-
ing the aforementioned issues. In this article, we argue
that blockchain-based TRM can create resilient and
trustworthy 6G networks. We demonstrate the poten-
tial of blockchain through a case study of a resource
management scheme for 6G networks where we pro-
pose a smart contract-based TRM to provide resilient
and eﬃcient resource sharing for network participants.
We show how our solution can meet 6G requirements
in Figure 2. We also discuss the potential challenges
and future directions of blockchain-based TRM for 6G.
In summary, this article makes the following contribu-
tions:

• We motivate the use of blockchain-based TRM for
enabling secure and trustworthy 6G networks and
discuss the challenges of meeting 6G performance
requirements for TRM.

• We propose a blockchain-based TRM that aligns
with the enabling technologies and performance
requirements of 6G. Speciﬁcally, we design our
TRM to be scalable and resilient against attacks in
trust-based systems, and providing eﬃcient trust
calculation.

• We present a case study of 6G resource sharing to
demonstrate the practicality of blockchain-based
TRM. We show that the TRM can provide higher
resource utilization rate and give distinctive scor-
ing for reliable and unreliable nodes.

2 Background and Motivation

Trust is a subjective property that exhibits an expecta-
tion that a participant would perform actions as pre-
dicted, which is gradually built from repeated interac-
tions [6]. Similarly, reputation implies an aggregated
trust degree from multiple participants that measures
how a participant behaves over a temporal horizon. In
the context of 6G networks, trusting a network partici-
pant means that the participant would perform all pro-

Figure 1: An example of TRM architecture for 6G-supported

VANET.

tocol/system operations, and a high reputation value
indicates that the performance of the participant has
been satisfactory according to several other users over
a period of time. However, future 6G networks are
expected to have a large number of interconnected de-
vices owned by various unknown participants, which
may be untrustworthy. There is no guarantee that
these devices would correctly follow the pre-deﬁned
protocols without acting maliciously.

TRM is an approach that can address trust issues in
6G networks by quantitatively assessing the trustwor-
thiness of network participants from direct experience
or recommendations from other participants. In gen-
eral, the trust and reputation score can be used as a
safeguard to manage the associated risk in interact-
ing with other participants in 6G networks, enabling
a trustworthy communication system. We consider an
example of 6G-enabled Vehicular Networks (VANET),
where there is a greater need to trust other peers or
vehicles (Figure 1). Here, TRM would enhance tradi-
tional security in VANET, e.g., Public Key Infrastructure
(PKI), which is not adequate to provide assurance of
the credibility of exchanged messages, as vehicles may
be malicious or compromised, e.g., due to faulty on-
board sensors. In TRM for 6G VANET, dedicated Road
Side Units (RSU) could collect information from neigh-
boring vehicles to validate the exchanged message and
assign a score to each vehicle and corresponding mes-
sages, using which the TRM can scan for malicious or
faulty vehicles. In addition, each vehicle can query
the RSU to obtain the latest reputation scores of any
vehicle in the proximity.

2.1 State of the art

In this section, we compare our solution against ex-
isting conventional and blockchain-based TRM ap-
proaches, summarized in Table 1.

Page 2 of 9

Regular vehiclesCompromisedvehiclesEdge serverSensor networkCell towerRoad Side UnitSatelliteTowards Blockchain-based Trust and Reputation Management for Trustworthy 6G Networks

Table 1: Comparison of existing work in TRM for mobile networks.

Ref.

Architecture

[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
This article

Conventional (CT)
Conventional (DT)
Blockchain (DC)
Blockchain (DC)
Blockchain (DC)

Transparency
& Veriﬁability
(cid:55)
(cid:55)
(cid:88)
(cid:88)
(cid:88)

Scaling

Resiliency

Unable to scale Moderate
Unable to scale
Moderate
Moderate
Good

Low
Moderate
Good
Good

Interoperable
TRM
(cid:55)
(cid:55)
(cid:55)
(cid:55)
(cid:88)

CT = Centralized, DT = Distributed, DC = Decentralized.

2.1.1 Conventional TRM

Conventional TRM can be broadly classiﬁed into cen-
tralized and distributed TRM. In centralized TRM, a
Trusted Third Party (TTP) is responsible to assess
the trustworthiness of each network participant, af-
ter which the TTP calculates and assigns trust scores
according to collected collaboration evidence, such as
ratings and feedback. For instance, in a centralized
TRM for Smart Driving Vehicles (SDV) [7], edge servers
controlled by a TTP coordinate the reputation manage-
ment by collecting vehicle information and generating
vehicle reputation table. The vehicle reputation scores
are derived from the past history of completing tasks
accurately and on time. The scores are used in select-
ing the relay vehicles for Vehicle-to-Everything (V2X)
communications. However, relying on a TTP for man-
aging a TRM poses serious risks. For instance, when
the TTP is faulty or compromised, there is no guaran-
tee that the underlying trust calculation would remain
intact, as there is no assurance of the integrity and
safety of the data. In addition, other network nodes
cannot verify the trust calculation carried out by the
TTP.

On the other hand, distributed TRM relies on the
collaboration of network nodes, as in a distributed
TRM for VANET [8]. To improve the network eﬃciency
and protect the network from adversaries, each vehi-
cle in the network is assigned a score computed by
its neighboring vehicles as per their interaction experi-
ence. These scores are utilized to assess the veracity
of incoming application messages that may be assess-
ing the road condition, e.g., traﬃc and road events,
and identify misbehaving nodes. However, malicious
vehicles may attempt to gain advantage by spoiling
honest vehicles’ reputation or colluding to improve
their scores, as this scheme has poor transparency. In
addition, it is diﬃcult to scale the approach, especially
when the number of nodes increases exponentially.

2.1.2 Motivation for Blockchain

The risks and challenges in conventional TRM moti-
vate the use of blockchain for TRM. Blockchain shows
promise in resolving the aforementioned issues due to
the following salient features.

Decentralization. The decentralization inherent in

blockchain eliminates the reliance on a TTP. The under-
lying consensus algorithms, e.g., Proof-of-Work (PoW)
and Proof-of-Stake (PoS), protect the blockchain from
adversaries and malicious insertions.

Smart Contracts. Blockchain utilizes smart con-
tracts to automate a trusted and deterministic business
logic execution [11]. In blockchain-based TRM, smart
contracts are employed to enforce trustworthy collec-
tion of collaboration evidence and trust calculation.

Distributed Immutable Ledger.

In blockchain-
based TRM, trust related data is stored on the shared
immutable ledger, maintaining high availability. Here,
each blockchain node with suﬃcient resources, e.g.,
Mobile Network Operator (MNO), can maintain a copy
of the ledger, while nodes with limited resources, e.g.,
UE, may opt to store the block headers and request
other data on demand.

Pseudonymity. Blockchain employs elliptic-curve
cryptography, which uses pseudonyms rather than
real-world identities for identiﬁcation purposes.
In
blockchain-based TRM, each participant is identiﬁable
by its public key, enhancing privacy preservation.

Cryptocurrency. Conventional mechanisms employ
ineﬃcient external processes to manage ﬁnancial trans-
actions. On the other hand, blockchain readily supports
cryptocurrency, which can provide an eﬃcient mech-
anism for actioning incentives and penalties and to
conveniently provide payments.

There have been numerous studies on blockchain-
based TRM in diﬀerent applications, such as supply
chain management, crowdsourcing, and VANET. These
studies investigate how the above mentioned features
of blockchain contribute to the development of a de-
centralized TRM, with the aim of providing end-to-
end trust between nodes in the network. For instance,
in [9] the authors show that VANET can beneﬁt from
blockchain-based TRM, where reputation is used in
PoS consensus to select reliable miners, i.e., RSU. Here,
each vehicle updates the reputation of miners based
on its past experience in interacting with the miners
and recommendations from other vehicles. Only highly
reputed miners are selected to join the PoS consensus
process. The TRM can protect the network from vot-
ing collusion resulting in secure blockchain-enabled
VANET. However, this scheme [9] does not maximize
the use of blockchain, as smart contracts are not uti-
lized. In [10], a smart contract-based TRM is proposed

Page 3 of 9

Towards Blockchain-based Trust and Reputation Management for Trustworthy 6G Networks

Figure 2: 6G Requirements and the improvements of TRMS with the help of blockchain.

to secure and improve spectrum sensing in dynamic
spectrum access for 5G cognitive radio. Here, smart
contracts realize the automation of trust evidence col-
lection, i.e., sensing results, and computation of trust
scores, which are determined from sensing nodes’ per-
formance in cooperative sensing.

However, these approaches cannot fulﬁll the novel
challenges in providing secure blockchain-based TRM
for 6G networks. First, given the wide coverage of
6G which includes both terrestrial and non-terrestrial
networks, the existing TRM approaches cannot be di-
rectly applied as they are unable to scale. Second, 6G
demands massive connectivity which foresees more
than millions of devices in a particular area. As such,
the TRM should incorporate eﬃcient trust model and
calculation, which are overlooked in the existing ap-
proaches. Lastly, the large number of interconnected
untrustworthy devices may make existing protection
approaches against TRM attacks impractical. We aim
to address these challenges in the following section.

3 Our Proposed Solution

In this section, we present a case study and evalu-
ations to demonstrate the beneﬁts of incorporating
blockchain-based TRM in 6G communications. We con-
sider a scenario of dynamic resource sharing, which
is expected to be the one of the core features of 6G
technology. As explained earlier, we argue that proper
re-design of TRM and conﬁguration of blockchain com-
ponents are required to fulﬁll 6G requirements as seen
in Figure 2.

3.1 Dynamic Resource Sharing in 6G

6G applications demand pervasive intelligent services
to bring intelligence closer to the end devices, which
requires extensive utilization of scattered computing
resources [12]. However, there is a ﬁnite amount of

available computing resources in the network, which re-
quires an eﬃcient mechanism to achieve maximum uti-
lization of scarce resources. In 6G networks, resource
management plays an important role in managing the
resource pool by means of dynamic resource allocation,
e.g., allocating idle computing resources. Note that
both nodes that share a resource should agree on pre-
determined obligations and a Service Level Agreement
(SLA). Here, blockchain can act as a trusted interme-
diary to allocate the resources dynamically through
a secure, auditable, and transparent process without
relying on a TTP. For instance, smart contracts can man-
age resource allocation in a veriﬁable manner, while
the ledger can transparently store allocation related
information, e.g., resource allocation, resource lease
mappings, and pre-determined SLA or obligations.

While blockchain can provide assurance of secure
resource allocation, it alone cannot ascertain that the
participants adhere to apportioned resources. There
might be several participants that do not fulﬁll their
obligations and do not conform to the pre-determined
SLA, making the dynamic resource allocation ineﬃ-
cient. We propose a blockchain-based TRM scheme to
build secure and trustworthy resource management
in 6G networks. We show how TRM can facilitate
secure resource management in 6G where trust and
reputation scores play an important role in charac-
terizing reliable, faulty and unreliable resource owners.

3.2 TRM for 6G Networks

Our proposed blockchain-based TRM architecture con-
sists of several distributed entities, such as edge servers,
small cell Base Stations (BS), UE, and IoT devices (Fig-
ure 3). In general these nodes are divided into Re-
source Owners (RO), e.g.„ edge servers and MNO, and
Resource Users (RU), e.g., UE and IoT devices. These
nodes collaboratively form a consortium blockchain,
where all participants should be known in advance but
not necessarily trusted. In this consortium blockchain,

Page 4 of 9

Extremely Broad Coverage:Space, air, ground and remote areasUltra-high Data Rate:up to 1 Tb/sMassive Connectivity:up to 107 Devices/km2Ultra-low Latency:end to end delay < 1 msIntegration of Terrestrial, Airborne, & Satellite NetworksCommunication with Large Intelligent SurfacesConvergence of Comm., Comp., Control, Loc., and SensingTHz communication: Small Cells to Tiny CellsScalable Trust Model:Pluggable & Interoperable Multi-tier Blockchain:Overlay & cross-chain transactionEfficient Score Calculation:Automated and verifiableResilient Trust Model:Maintain integrity and veracitySharding and L2 support:Distributed and off-chain processSmart contract based efficient trust evidence collection, storage and computationEnergy efficient consensus algorithm6G Requirements6G Enabling TechnologiesTRM DesignBlockchain ConfigurationTowards Blockchain-based Trust and Reputation Management for Trustworthy 6G Networks

Figure 3: Illustration of the proposed blockchain-based TRM for resource sharing in 6G networks.

each participant is identiﬁable by a public-key linked
to a cryptocurrency account.

Multiple vision papers note that the 6G requirements
would be driven by novel enabling technologies and
trends, such as Large Intelligent Surfaces (LIS),
incorporation of Non-Terrestrial Networks (NTN), and
Convergence of Communications, Computing, Control,
Localization, and Sensing (3CLS) [13], [14]. We
argue that TRM should also be re-designed to ﬁt with
these new requirements and technologies, wherein
blockchain would play a signiﬁcant supporting role.
We anticipate the need for proper conﬁguration of
the blockchain architecture by selecting appropriate
such as the consensus
underlying components,
algorithm. We show in Figure 2 how our solution can
fulﬁll these novel requirements and addresses the
weaknesses of the previous work.

Scalable Trust Model
6G networks will integrate satellite, airborne and ter-
restrial networks to provide wider coverage area and
In addition, 6G would imple-
massive connectivity.
ment LIS to provide support to traditional massive
MIMO [13], resulting in a network with bigger scale.
6G-enabled TRM, consequently, needs to be designed
with scalability in mind. First, TRM should be de-
signed in a hierarchical way accommodating several
autonomous sub-networks. Note that, these networks
may have their own independent trust models. Sec-
ond, these autonomous TRM should be interoperable,
as nodes may move from one sub-network to another.
TRM can employ a mechanism allowing the transfer
of trust scores between sub-networks. For instance, a
pluggable trust model would allow each sub-network
to implement its own trust model enhancing interoper-
ability.

Here blockchain would enable connections between
sub-networks by employing a hierarchical blockchain
structure, in which sub-networks may have their own
autonomous blockchain. To provide interoperability,
cross-chain transactions may be incorporated which

would guarantee immutability and auditability [15].
In addition, blockchain could employ sharding
mechanism, where the blockchain is partitioned to
distribute the workloads to diﬀerent nodes. As such,
each node only maintains information relevant to
their shard. Oﬀ-chain scaling, referred to as Layer 2
(L2) solution, is another alternative, which works by
building an overlay network or application that runs
on top of the main blockchain (Layer 1), inheriting
security and integrity guarantees of the underlying
blockchain.

Eﬃcient Score Calculation
Tiny cells and communication with LIS in 6G would
result in more connected devices with more complexity,
bringing more challenges to TRM especially in calcu-
lating a large number of trust and reputation scores.
6G-enabled TRM should thus incorporate eﬃcient trust
and reputation score calculation in an automated and
veriﬁable manner. Most conventional trust models re-
calculate the scores by iterating through the full history
of trust evidence and require all nodes in the network
to perform these calculations, which results in unnec-
essary overheads. In 6G-enabled TRM, we optimize
the trust model with a simple recursive computation
to re-calculate the scores. We also fully oﬄoad the col-
lection of trust evidence and calculation of trust scores
to smart contracts, which provide automation and ver-
iﬁability through a single blockchain transaction. In
addition, implementing an eﬃcient score calculation
requires careful selection of consensus algorithms. We
thus recommend incorporating resource eﬃcient PoS
instead of resource consumptive PoW.

We utilize a hierarchical structure of three smart
contracts: (i) TRM, (ii) Resource Manager (RM),
and (iii) Sharing Agreement (SA) contracts. First,
TRM contract is one of the two parent contracts
responsible for keeping track of each participant’s
trust and reputation score, together with the trust
related data such as evidence of malicious behaviors or
feedback from other participants. TRM contract also

Page 5 of 9

Block tBlock t+1Block tPrev HashBlock HashNonceIndexTx root hash...Tx listBlock t+1Prev HashBlock HashNonceIndexTx root hash...Tx list.....................Blockchain/Distributed LedgerVANETSmart contractShared ledgerEnergy GridCloud NetworkCore NetworkCell NetworkTRM ContractRM ContractSA ContractCCCCCCCCCCCCResource sharingCrypto TransferCCUpdate ScoresTowards Blockchain-based Trust and Reputation Management for Trustworthy 6G Networks

maintains the updated trust and reputation scores.
Second, RM contract is another parent contract that
hosts the resource bidding data, which includes the
detail of listing, allocation and release of the available
resources. Lastly, SA contract is a child contract,
which is created every time two participants agree to
share computing resources. SA contract enforces the
pre-determined SLA during resource bidding, which
covers the terms and obligations. SA contract records
any undesirable incidents and reports them to TRM
and RM contracts. SA contract is temporary and is
marked as obsolete upon completion of the resource
sharing.

Resilient Trust Model
Communications with LIS and convergence of 3CLS
would bring new challenges in providing secure connec-
tivity. 6G-enabled TRM should also be designed with
resiliency in mind to ensure robustness against attack
in trust-based systems. With the help of blockchain’s
salient features, such as decentralization and smart
contracts, TRM can be made resilient against these
attacks, as explained below.

• Self-promoting attacks: In this type of attack, ad-
versaries try to illegitimately increase their trust
and reputation scores by providing positive feed-
back to themselves. To overcome this attack, the
trust model should take into account the source
of the rater when calculating the scores. As such,
consecutive feedback would only be regarded as a
single feedback and would not increase the trust
scores. In addition, smart contracts can also de-
tect repetitive transactions coming from the same
address and reject the additional transactions to
prevent this attack.

• Bad-mouthing attacks: As opposed to self-
promoting, adversaries attempt to denounce hon-
est nodes’ trust scores by submitting erroneous
negative feedback. To defend against this attack,
the TRM could require raters to provide trust evi-
dence when submitting feedback.

• Ballot-stuﬃng attacks: In this attack, an adver-
sary colludes with other nodes to illicitly boost its
reputation score. With the blockchain integration,
the TRM can require the raters to provide escrow
fee when submitting feedback, discouraging the
adversaries to launch this attack. In addition, es-
crow fee can also be used during node registration,
which would help discourage Sybil attacks, where
an adversary creates multiple fake identities to
their beneﬁt, e.g., illegitimately increasing their
reputation scores.

• Whitewashing or newcomer attacks: To remove
its malicious track records, an adversary launches
this attack by rejoining the network with a fresh
identity. However, the TRM may detect this attack
during registration, as each node has to provide
real attributes which cannot be easily changed,

Table 2: Simulation details.

Value

Parameter
Number of RO 500
Number of RU 600
Node type
Reliable RO
Trusted RO
Lenient RU
Iteration

[reliable, unreliable, faulty]
[10%, 20%, . . ., 90%]
10%
15%
100

e.g., device ID, hence the registration would fail.
• On-oﬀ attacks: In this attack, adversaries alter-
nate between providing good and bad service to
diﬀerent target nodes, hoping to escape detection
if the bad service is not picked up as being ma-
licious by some nodes. However, our reputation
scores present a global view of each node, mean-
ing bad behavior would be noticed by other nodes
as they can view the public record on-chain. In
addition, the trust model enforces rigorous pun-
ishments against bad behaviors, as a single bad
experience would result in abrupt decline of the
reputation score.

3.3 Experimental Evaluation

We performed two experiments, to measure the evo-
lution of the reputation score and utilization rate for
demonstrating the practical role of blockchain-based
TRM in 6G resource sharing. We consider an edge
computing scenario in a small cell 6G sub-network,
where resource constrained UE and IoT devices, i.e.,
RU, oﬄoad computing tasks to more powerful nodes,
such as edge servers and MNO, i.e., RO. Here, the TRM
continuously evaluates the trustworthiness of each par-
ticipant and calculates reputation scores accordingly.
We consider a blockchain-based setup similar to [6]
and summarize important simulation parameters in
Table 2.

In the ﬁrst evaluation, we consider a scenario of
three RO with diﬀerent characteristics, namely (i) re-
liable, (ii) faulty, i.e., stops functioning at one point,
and (iii) unreliable, i.e., provides unstable service. In
our experiment, we conﬁgure all ROs to provide re-
liable services up to 40 interactions. The faulty and
untrustworthy RO are conﬁgured to become unreliable
and unstable, respectively, after 40 interactions. We
plot the reputation score evolution in Figure 4a. The
results demonstrate that our blockchain-based TRM
could assign distinctive reputation scores to each node
according to how they attain the pre-determined SLA.
The reliable RO can maintain high reputation scores,
while both the faulty and unreliable RO experience
signiﬁcant reputation score drops once they show in-
consistent behavior. In practice, these scores can help

Page 6 of 9

Towards Blockchain-based Trust and Reputation Management for Trustworthy 6G Networks

(a) The evolution of reputation scores for a reliable, faulty, and

(b) Utilization rate of the resource under diﬀerent proportions

unreliable resource owner.

of reliable RO.

Figure 4: Simulation results in resource sharing for edge computing in 6G network.

RU pick reliable RO by looking at the interaction history
manifested in the reputation scores.

In the second evaluation, we investigate the utiliza-
tion rate of available resources, where we vary the
proportion of reliable RO in the network under two
conditions, i.e., with and without a TRM in place. We
plot in Figure 4b the utilization rate and the conver-
gence time (epoch) at which the network achieves max-
imum resource utilization. The results indicate that
the utilization rate of the sub-network without TRM
remains low, approximately around 20%, with stable
convergence rate of around 28 epoch, regardless of
the proportion of reliable RO. The results conﬁrm that
RU are only inclined in oﬄoading computing tasks to
well-known publicly trusted RO and are more reluctant
to oﬄoad computing tasks to RO which they do not
trust. We refer to a RU which is willing to oﬄoad tasks
to untrusted RO as lenient RU, which constitutes only
up to 15% of the total RU (see Table 2). While the con-
vergence time increases for the sub-network with TRM,
the network achieves higher utilization rate as the pro-
portion of reliable RO grows. Here, we argue that TRM
would help RU identify reliable RO in the network. As
more positive and satisfactory interactions happen, RO
gains higher reputation scores, which increases the
trust in RO, resulting in increased utilization rate over
time.

3.4 Summary

The following points summarize our blockchain-based
TRM solution and evaluations:

• In 6G-enabled edge computing, the amount of
available computing resources are limited, which
triggers the need of resource sharing to perform
computing tasks. However, most nodes are reluc-
tant to join this sharing scheme, as 6G does not
guarantee the trustworthiness of the nodes in the
network. Here, blockchain-based TRM is an ef-
fective approach to encourage resource sharing

by assessing the trustworthiness of 6G nodes in a
decentralized and veriﬁable manner.

• However, due to the novel requirements inherent
to 6G, direct adoption of existing TRM approaches
is not feasible, as proper adjustments are required
for both the TRM and the underlying blockchain.
• The experiment results show that our TRM can
apply distinctive scores to reliable and unreliable
nodes and increase the utilization of available re-
sources in the network.

4 Challenges and Future Direc-

tions

In this section, we brieﬂy discuss the challenges and
possible future directions for research in blockchain-
based TRM for 6G networks.

Security and Privacy. Future research should pro-
vide rigorous measures for security and privacy preser-
vation entailing the TRM model and blockchain design.
Unprecedented scale in 6G network would enlarge
the attack surface which may render the conventional
defense strategy for TRM attacks infeasible. While
blockchain oﬀers pseudonymity, the transparent na-
ture of the shared ledger may allow adversaries to
launch de-anonymization attacks, increasing the risk
of privacy infringement. As such, TRM in 6G should
always be designed with security in mind and also with
adequate measures for privacy preservation, which can
be addressed by using privacy-preserving TRM models.
In addition, as the complex nature of smart contracts
has provoked several attacks, special attention to the
security of smart contracts is necessary, for instance
via formal veriﬁcation.

Scalability. Massive scale of 6G network demands
further research in scalability of blockchain-based TRM
in all aspects, which is a non-trivial task. While ad-
vancements in hardware and infrastructure would help
increase the network capacity, research in software-

Page 7 of 9

020406080100Time epoch0.00.20.40.60.81.0Reputationreliablefaultyunreliable102030405060708090Reliable RO (%)020406080100Utilization Rate (%)0285684112140Convergence time (epoch)Utilization           ConvergenceNo TRMWith TRMNo TRMWith TRMTowards Blockchain-based Trust and Reputation Management for Trustworthy 6G Networks

based blockchain design solutions, for instance via
sharding, sidechains, eﬃcient consensus algorithms,
and hierarchical blockchains, should be investigated.
In addition, the scalability of the TRM model can also
be improved, for instance by allowing an aggregated
interaction evidence to be stored instead of redundant
trust information that may overload the network in the
long run.

Interoperability. 6G will provide wider connectivity
by integrating autonomous networks, some of which
may have their own independent TRM. This highlights
the need for reliable interoperability between networks,
which requires further investigation. More research
should be undertaken to investigate how a reliable
and secure reputation score transfer between inde-
pendent TRMs can be realized, which requires rigor-
ous assessment of distinctive trust metrics in diﬀerent
autonomous networks. To help realize this, further
research should provide seamless interoperability be-
tween blockchains, allowing for cross-chain data trans-
fer.

Artiﬁcial Intelligence. As Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI)
is envisioned to be an integral part of 6G, further
research should aim for using AI-enabled 6G to en-
hance TRM with the help of decentralized nature of
blockchain. For instance, future work may explore
novel AI-based reputation models for TRM. AI would
enable robust reputation score calculation from large
and complex node interaction evidence, which would
be more resilient to sophisticated attacks in TRM. Here,
blockchain can be utilized to execute federated learn-
ing for collecting scattered trust evidence in various
autonomous networks in 6G.

Post-quantum cryptography. There is an urgent
need to conduct research on quantum-resistant cryp-
tography to replace current security standards in
blockchain systems, as it is expected that by the time
6G has reached commercial readiness, quantum com-
puters will concurrently be available in the market.
Quantum computers have the potential to decipher
current encryption standards, which is previously un-
feasible. While symmetric cryptography, e.g. hash func-
tions, is not signiﬁcantly aﬀected by quantum compu-
tation, public-key cryptography which is widely used in
current blockchain systems is under signiﬁcant threat.
Thus, there is an urgent need to research post-quantum
cryptography to guarantee security and reliability of
blockchain-based TRM.

5 Conclusion

In this article, we proposed a blockchain-based TRM
to secure and enable eﬃcient utilization of network re-
sources in 6G communications. We ﬁrst discussed the
beneﬁts of incorporating TRM in 6G communications
and motivated the use of blockchain-enabled TRM to re-
move the potential risks of conventional approaches. As
a use case, we introduced an architecture of blockchain-

based TRM for resource management in 6G networks.
We further elaborated on several challenges and future
directions for research in blockchain-enabled TRM for
6G networks.

References

[1] A. H. Khan, N. Ul Hassan, C. Yuen, J. Zhao, D.
Niyato, Y. Zhang, and H. V. Poor, “Blockchain
and 6g: The future of secure and ubiquitous
communication,” IEEE Wireless Communications,
vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 194–201, 2022. doi: 10 .
1109/MWC.001.2100255.

[2] W. Li, Z. Su, R. Li, K. Zhang, and Y. Wang,
“Blockchain-Based Data Security for Artiﬁcial
Intelligence Applications in 6G Networks,” IEEE
Network, vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 31–37, Nov. 2020,
issn: 1558-156X. doi: 10 . 1109 / MNET . 021 .
1900629.

[4]

[3] V.-L. Nguyen, P.-C. Lin, B.-C. Cheng, R.-H.
Hwang, and Y.-D. Lin, “Security and privacy
for 6G: A survey on prospective technologies
and challenges,” IEEE Communications Surveys
Tutorials, pp. 1–1, 2021, issn: 1553-877X. doi:
10.1109/COMST.2021.3108618.
I. Ahmad, K.-L. A. Yau, M. H. Ling, and
S. L. Keoh, “Trust and Reputation Management
for Securing Collaboration in 5G Access Net-
works: The Road Ahead,” IEEE Access, vol. 8,
pp. 62 542–62 560, 2020, issn: 2169-3536. doi:
10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2984318.
J. Wang, X. Ling, Y. Le, Y. Huang, and X. You,
“Blockchain-enabled wireless communications:
A new paradigm towards 6G,” National Science
Review, vol. 8, no. 9, nwab069, Sep. 2021, issn:
2095-5138, 2053-714X. doi: 10 . 1093 / nsr /
nwab069.

[5]

[6] G. D. Putra, V. Dedeoglu, S. S. Kanhere, R. Jur-
dak, and A. Ignjatovic, “Trust-based blockchain
authorization for iot,” IEEE Transactions on Net-
work and Service Management, vol. 18, no. 2,
pp. 1646–1658, 2021. doi: 10 . 1109 / TNSM .
2021.3077276.

[7] S. Pang, N. Wang, M. Wang, S. Qiao, X. Zhai, and
N. Xiong, “A Smart Network Resource Manage-
ment System for High Mobility Edge Computing
in 5G Internet of vehicles,” IEEE Transactions on
Network Science and Engineering, pp. 1–1, 2021,
issn: 2327-4697. doi: 10.1109/ TNSE.2021.
3106955.

[8] S. Chouikhi, L. Khoukhi, S. Ayed, and M.
Lemercier, “An Eﬃcient Reputation Manage-
ment Model based on Game Theory for Vehic-
ular Networks,” in 2020 IEEE 45th Conference
on Local Computer Networks (LCN), Nov. 2020,

Page 8 of 9

Towards Blockchain-based Trust and Reputation Management for Trustworthy 6G Networks

[9]

[10]

pp. 413–416. doi: 10.1109/LCN48667.2020.
9314791.

J. Kang, Z. Xiong, D. Niyato, D. Ye, D. I. Kim, and
J. Zhao, “Toward Secure Blockchain-Enabled In-
ternet of Vehicles: Optimizing Consensus Man-
agement Using Reputation and Contract The-
ory,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology,
vol. 68, no. 3, pp. 2906–2920, Mar. 2019, issn:
1939-9359. doi: 10.1109/TVT.2019.2894944.

J. Ye, X. Kang, Y.-C. Liang, and S. Sun, “A Trust-
Centric Privacy-Preserving Blockchain for Dy-
namic Spectrum Management in IoT Networks,”
IEEE Internet of Things Journal, pp. 1–1, 2022,
issn: 2327-4662. doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2022.
3142989.

[11] S. Wang, L. Ouyang, Y. Yuan, X. Ni, X. Han,
and F.-Y. Wang, “Blockchain-Enabled Smart Con-
tracts: Architecture, Applications, and Future
Trends,” IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and
Cybernetics: Systems, vol. 49, no. 11, pp. 2266–
2277, Nov. 2019, issn: 2168-2216, 2168-2232.
doi: 10.1109/TSMC.2019.2895123.

[12] S. Hu, Y.-C. Liang, Z. Xiong, and D. Niyato,
“Blockchain and Artiﬁcial Intelligence for Dy-
namic Resource Sharing in 6G and Beyond,”
IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 28, no. 4,
pp. 145–151, Aug. 2021, issn: 1558-0687. doi:
10.1109/MWC.001.2000409.

[13] W. Saad, M. Bennis, and M. Chen, “A Vision
of 6G Wireless Systems: Applications, Trends,
Technologies, and Open Research Problems,”
IEEE Network, vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 134–142, May
2020, issn: 1558-156X. doi: 10.1109/MNET.
001.1900287.

[14] Z. Zhang, Y. Xiao, Z. Ma, M. Xiao, Z. Ding, X. Lei,
G. K. Karagiannidis, and P. Fan, “6G Wireless
Networks: Vision, Requirements, Architecture,
and Key Technologies,” IEEE Vehicular Technol-
ogy Magazine, vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 28–41, Sep.
2019, issn: 1556-6080. doi: 10 . 1109 / MVT .
2019.2921208.

[15] P. Robinson, R. Ramesh, and S. Johnson,
“Atomic Crosschain Transactions for Ethereum
Private Sidechains,” Blockchain: Research and
Applications, vol. 3, no. 1, p. 100 030, Mar. 2022,
issn: 2096-7209. doi: 10.1016/j.bcra.2021.
100030.

Acknowledgment

This work was supported by the Cyber Security Re-
search Centre Limited through the Australian Govern-
ment’s Cooperative Research Centres Programme.

Biographies

Guntur Dharma Putra received his

bachelor degree
in Electrical Engineering from Universitas Gadjah
Mada, Indonesia, 2014. He received his master’s
degree in Computing Science from the University of
Groningen, the Netherlands, 2017. He is currently a
Ph.D. candidate at the School of Computer Science
and Engineering, University of New South Wales
(UNSW) Sydney, Australia. His research interest covers
blockchain applications for securing IoT. Guntur is a
student member of the IEEE.

Volkan Dedeoglu is currently a research scientist

in
the Distributed Sensing Systems Group of CSIRO
Data61. His current research focuses on data trust and
blockchain-based IoT security and privacy. Volkan also
holds Adjunct Lecturer positions at UNSW Sydney and
QUT. He completed his PhD in Telecommunications
Engineering from University of South Australia in
2013. He obtained MSc in Electrical and Computer
Engineering from Koc University (2008), BSc in
Electrical and Electronics Engineering from Bogazici
University (2006), and B.A. in Public Administration
from Anadolu University (2008).

Salil S Kanhere received his M.S. degree and Ph.D. degree
from Drexel University in Philadelphia. He is a
Professor of Computer Science and Engineering at
UNSW Sydney, Australia. He is a Senior Member
of the IEEE and ACM, a Humboldt Research Fellow
and an ACM Distinguished Speaker. He serves as the
Editor in Chief of the Ad Hoc Networks journal and
as Associate Editor of IEEE Transactions on Network
and Service Management, Computer Communications
and Pervasive and Mobile Computing. He has served
on the organising committee of many IEEE/ACM
international conferences including PerCom, CPS-IOT
Week, MobiSys, WoWMoM, MSWiM, and ICBC.

Raja Jurdak received the MS degree and the PhD degree
from University of California, Irvine. He is a Profes-
sor of Distributed Systems and Chair in Applied Data
Sciences at Queensland University of Technology, and
Director of the Trusted Networks Lab. He previously
established and led the Distributed Sensing Systems
Group at CSIRO’s Data61. He also spent time as visiting
academic at MIT and Oxford University in 2011 and
2017. His research interests include blockchain, IoT,
trust, mobility and energy-eﬃciency in networks. Prof.
Jurdak has published over 230 peer-reviewed publica-
tions, including two authored books most recently on
blockchain in cyberphysical systems in 2020. His pub-
lications have attracted over 10,800 citations, with an
h-index of 47. He serves on the editorial board of Ad
Hoc Networks, Nature Scientiﬁc Reports, and on the
organising and technical program committees of top in-
ternational conferences, including Percom, ICBC, IPSN,
WoWMoM, and ICDCS. He was TPC co-chair of ICBC in
2021. He is a conjoint professor with the University of
New South Wales, and a senior member of the IEEE.

Page 9 of 9

