Blockchain-enabled tokenization for sustainable and inclusive 
infrastructure investment  

Yifeng Tian1, Chaofeng Wang1, Ashish Asutosh1, Junghoon Woo1, and Peter Adriaens2 

1 College of Design, Construction, and Planning, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32603, 
USA 
2 Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 
48109, USA 

Corresponding author: Yifeng Tian, yifeng.tian@ufl.edu +1(201)716-9955 School of 
Construction Management, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32603, USA 

Abstract 

Infrastructure is critical for enabling society to function and the economy to thrive, but there is an 
increasing mismatch between the need for infrastructure investments and available capital, 
which is in consequence of constraints on public resources and limited capacity to leverage the 
private sector co-financing under the current system. With the emergence of distributed ledger 
technology, such as blockchain-enabled tokenization, there is a significant potential to improve 
investment liquidity, transparency, efficiency and create new economic models to integrate non-
financial values to promote sustainability and inclusiveness. This research analyzed 21 projects 
to investigate how tokenization is implemented in energy infrastructure projects. Exploratory 
case study analyses were conducted, which shows the diversity of tokenization arrangements. 
The state of the art, potential benefits, implications, and obstacles associated with the 
application of tokenization in infrastructure investment and development are discussed. The 
purpose of this research is to understand tokenization within the context of the energy sector but 
also to forecast its application in a broad spectrum of infrastructure projects (e.g., transportation, 
telecommunication, healthcare, education). 

Keywords 

Blockchain-enabled tokenization; Infrastructure investment; Decentralized finance; Sustainability 
and inclusiveness; Fintech; Renewable energy transition 

1. Introduction 

Infrastructure is essential for social development and economic expansion. From power 
generation facilities to transport systems and water networks, infrastructure provides 
foundational services which enable society to function and the economy to thrive. Infrastructure 
plays a vital role in strengthening inclusiveness and sustainability (Gupta & Vegelin, 2016). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Investment in infrastructure is one of the main drivers of generating long-term growth and 
stimulating economies out of recession after a systemic crisis like the COVID-19 pandemic and 
contributes to the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) (Thacker et al., 
2019).  

Despite the fact that infrastructure is at the nexus of economic and social prosperity, there is an 
increasing mismatch between the need for more qualifying infrastructure and available 
financing. According to the World Economic Forum forecast, the world is facing a $15 trillion 
infrastructure gap by 2040 (Davisson & Losavio, 2020). The World Bank estimates that 
developing countries need to triple the current annual spending on infrastructure over the next 
decade (Mapila et al., 2017). The demand for investment in infrastructure will only increase 
along with time to meet the SDGs.  

Under the current financing system, public sector finance through direct grants, subsidies, and 
concessionary loans is subject to public budget constraints and political influence (Gadenne, 
2017). The budgetary constraints caused by the emergent pandemic spending reduction in 
long-term bank loans due to tighter financial regulations (e.g., Basel III) have dwindled the 
traditional public capital sources to fund infrastructure (Humphreys et al., 2018). While private 
investment in infrastructure, typically through project loans, bonds, and private equity, is only 
accessed for certain types of infrastructure and limited to a narrow set of institutional investors 
such as pension funds and insurance companies, thereby leaving a significant amount of capital 
and resources on the sidelines (Yescombe & Farquharson, 2018). The current infrastructure 
financing system also struggles with integrating environmental, social, and governance (ESG) 
factors or effectively offering incentives to promote SDGs (Thacker et al., 2019). Pioneering 
thinking and groundbreaking financing methods are required to ameliorate public sector 
engagement and mobilize private sources to bridge the widening infrastructure gap and realize 
inclusive and sustainable growth to positively impact society, economy, and environment. 

The pace of innovations is accelerating exponentially in the information age. Leveraging new 
technologies, infrastructure financing and operating systems can be more intelligent, efficient, 
and resilient. Since the advent of Bitcoin in 2009, the profile of blockchain – a combination of 
distributed ledger technology (DLT) with a variety of block-based encryption technologies – has 
soared (Nakamoto, 2008). Blockchain is capable of maintaining permanent and tamper-proof 
records of data. With the advancements in the blockchain, a decentralized, immutable, and 
trusted system can be built, bringing improved security and transparency (Swan, 2017). Over 
the last decade, blockchain has gone from a promising concept to the technology billed for the 
future. In its evolution, blockchain technology has inspired the creation of new business models 
and caused major stirs in various industries (Morkunas et al., 2019; Woo et al., 2021). Building 
on the blockchain, tokenization enables the transition of assets with values in conventional 
forms or access rights into cryptographic tokens (Morrow & Zarrebini, 2019; Khan et al., 2020). 
The transition could improve efficiencies by orders of magnitude. Even though the application of 
tokenization in infrastructure development is scarce at present, it has shown great potential to 
serve as an alternative financing vehicle to supplement the current infrastructure development 
and finance system to bridge the gap (Tian et al., 2020).  

Despite the growing attention from media sources and practitioners, potential applications of 
tokenization in infrastructure projects have not attracted comparable academic interest. It lacks 
a deeper grounding in theoretical and empirical analysis. This research explores the 
fundamentals of the emerging blockchain-enabled tokenization phenomenon in general. More 

speciﬁcally, it focuses on how best to employ this new technology in infrastructure investment 
and development, especially in the energy sector. The objective of this research is to 
understand how tokenization is currently applied in energy projects and to forecast its potential 
applications in a broader spectrum of infrastructure projects. In the following sections, relevant 
literature will be reviewed to discuss the critical factors in tokenization. The case study approach 
will be employed to analyze how tokenization is applied in 21 energy infrastructure projects. 
Subsequently, the research ﬁndings will be examined, and conclusions will be drawn. 

2. The conceptual background of tokenization 

Tokenization was used to describe a process when a sensitive data element is substituted with 
a non-sensitive equivalent, referred to as a token, with no extrinsic or exploitable meaning or 
value. In this case, tokenization is similar to encryption (Stapleton & Poore, 2011). With the 
advent of DLT, tokenization got a broader meaning, which describes the process of converting 
assets or access rights into cryptographic tokens on a blockchain (Nassr, 2020). In this case, 
tokenization is similar to securitization. Cryptographic tokens can represent assets as stores of 
value or access rights, such as shares in a company, ownership of a piece of real estate 
property, permissions to a platform, project bonds, or electricity produced by energy plants. In 
theory, any assets or rights can be tokenized and represented on a blockchain. Tokenization 
builds connections between the off-chain world and the on-chain world, where transaction 
efficiency, information recording, and sharing are expected to be improved (Laurent et al., 
2018).  

Cryptographic tokens are governed and executed through smart contracts, which are software 
algorithms integrated into a blockchain with trigger actions based on predefined parameters. 
Smart contracts are self-enforcing and self-executing (Zou et al., 2019). The automation 
reduces the administrative burden and the number of intermediaries required in the process, 
which leads to cost reduction and faster execution. Besides the efficiency gains brought by 
automation and disintermediation, tokenization delivers other benefits, including enhancing 
transparency, improving liquidity for currently illiquid assets (e.g., infrastructure assets), and 
enabling more efficient clearing and settlement (Wang et al., 2018). Cryptographic tokens can 
be classified as follows, payment tokens, utility tokens, and security tokens. Tokens can be 
issued through Initial Coin Offering (ICO), Security Token Offering (STO), IEO (Initial Exchange 
Offering), etc. (Myalo, 2019). 

2.1. Token issuance 

ICO 

ICO is a type of capital-raising activity in the environment of the blockchain (Zetzsche et al., 
2017). Cryptographic tokens are issued to raise capital for the creation of a blockchain or 
funding a blockchain-related venture (e.g., business or platform). With the successful issuance 
of the Ethereum blockchain in 2014, numerous ICOs were launched within a short period of 
time. Most ICOs were unregulated. Navigating securities laws have been critical, particularly for 
genuine utility virtual assets that are not intended to operate as investments but are more akin 
to a pre-paid digital coupon (Deloitte, 2020). Tokens issued through ICOs are often not 

 
 
registered as securities, although many have subsequently been determined to be investment 
products. Securities sold in ICO are illegal unless they meet regulatory requirements. Issuers 
have the flexibility to choose their ICO structure, including the price and quantity of tokens 
offered. Token holders do not necessarily have a claim to any assets of the company. Tokens’ 
value is typically dependent upon the rights represented by the token and the development 
status of any underlying project. The issuer usually prepares a whitepaper detailing the 
business plan, financials, and other information about the project (Fenu et al., 2018). The ease 
with which money was raised also attracted market participants with bad motives who took 
advantage of the unregulated ICO market to scam investors (Momtaz et al., 2019). The value of 
tokens in early ICO projects is highly subject to speculation. 

STO 

STO is a type of public offering for tokenized digital securities, known as security tokens 
(Lambert et al., 2021). Similar to the concept of an Initial Public Offering (IPO), a company can 
raise funds by creating and issuing a security in the digital format to investors. In order to be 
sold as securities to investors, security tokens must meet the requirements under applicable 
securities regulations such as the Securities and Futures Ordinance in Hong Kong or the 
Securities Act of 1933 in the United States (Deloitte, 2020). Security tokens can be digital 
representations of any assets or instruments defined as security, such as stocks, bonds, real 
estate, intellectual property, etc. (Kranz et al., 2019). Issuers of security tokens must factor in 
relevant legal and regulatory requirements, as do brokers and exchanges. Security tokens may 
be listed on token exchanges or conventional stock exchanges and may be restricted only to 
professional or accredited investors. STO brings together the benefits of blockchain for 
financing but in a regulated environment, with the possibility of asset-backed structures 
increasing potential appeal. STOs became popular after the 2017 ICOs mania, which are 
associated with many scams and frauds (Momtaz et al., 2019). However, STOs didn’t 
experience explosive growth like ICOs. Lacking regulatory clarification and supporting 
technological infrastructure of this emerging asset class impedes its adoption. Some security 
tokens are still issued through ICOs to avoid regulation.  

IEO 

IEO is offered by a token exchange on behalf of blockchain ventures to raise funds in token 
sales (Furnari, 2021). IEO is essentially ICO, but token trading platforms step in to fill the role of 
traditional securities distributors and conduct due diligence services on the crypto asset to 
ensure the credibility of the project. One of the biggest advantages of an IEO is token liquidity. 
Once the IEO ends, investors can start trading its tokens instantly on the exchange. The due 
diligence performed by the exchange is intended to provide credibility to the offering by 
mitigating risks (Deloitte, 2020). Nevertheless, not all jurisdictions regulate token exchanges. 
They may not be licensed by local regulators and/or the offering may be unregulated. In an 
unregulated regime, standards of diligence and disclosure may vary and investors’ protection 
under the existing securities laws and regulations may be limited. 

 
  
 
2.2 Public and private blockchain 

A public blockchain network is permissionless, which allows all nodes of the blockchain to have 
equal rights to access, create, and validate new blocks of data (Guegan, 2017). The network 
typically has an incentivizing mechanism to encourage more participants to join the network. 
Public blockchains are decentralized and anonymous. However, they imply little to no privacy 
for transactions (Lai et al., 2018). A private blockchain network requires invitations and must be 
validated by either the network starter or by participants restricted by the starter. It is generally 
set up as a permissioned network (Pongnumkul et al., 2017). Once an entity has joined the 
network, it will play a role in maintaining the blockchain in a decentralized manner (Woo et al., 
2020). On the downside, when it comes to security, private blockchains are more prone to 
security threats and other vulnerabilities because it has fewer nodes; thus, bad actors can gain 
access quickly (Hao et al., 2018). The majority of the current tokenization projects are based on 
Ethereum, Binance, or Solana blockchains, which are public blockchains. While a few private 
blockchain projects have also been launched successfully, such as World Bank’s Bond-i.  

2.3 Centralized and Decentralized token exchanges 

Centralized token exchanges (CEXs) are trusted third parties to facilitate token trades relying on 
a private infrastructure to match supply and demand. Established reputations are leveraged to 
bring investor confidence (Lup et al., 2019). CEXs provide traditional forms of security, some in 
the form of insurance, others in the way of regulatory compliance, such as Know Your Customer 
(KYC) verification and anti-money laundering (AML) provisions. Fiat-to-crypto or crypto-to-crypto 
trading pairs are offered by CEXs. Binance, Coinbase, Kraken, and Huobi Global are top CEXs 
ranked by trading volume (Barbon & Ranaldo, 2021).  

Decentralized exchanges (DEXs) are marketplaces (permissionless) that facilitate the peer-to-
peer exchange of crypto, which do not involve a third party (Luo et al., 2020). DEXs use smart 
contracts and algorithms that self-execute once preset conditions are met. DEXs allow traders 
to execute trades with a certain degree of anonymity (i.e., pseudonymity) (Lin, 2019). The 
barriers to entry in DEXs are very low. Small-scale projects are easier to have their projects 
listed compared to CEXs, but a lack of screening process results in having lower quality projects 
listed. DEXs are in the early development stage. They have struggled for years to create levels 
of liquidity similar to centralized exchanges. Uniswap, Stellar, and PencakeSwap are leading 
DEXs in the market.  

While DEXs represent a new technology that will likely become the standard in the future, CEXs 
are more user-friendly and theoretically safer at present (Victor & Weintraud, 2021). With the 
great influx of institutional investors into the crypto market, especially Bitcoin, it is safe to 
assume that centralized exchanges will stay ahead in the mid-term. However, leaps in 
technology, like decentralized finance (Defi), will keep pushing DEXs forward. Various hybrid 
models and complementary applications are likely to emerge (Chen & Bellavitis, 2020). 

3. Case studies 

This research adopts an exploratory case study approach to investigate how blockchain-
enabled tokenization is applied in energy infrastructure investment and development. Given the 

 
 
fact that the body of tokenization knowledge is in its infancy, a case study approach is 
considered suited as it offers a detailed description of a phenomenon in particular instances, 
typically based on various sources of data. Theoretical propositions and constructs can be 
created by using case-based evidence (Yin, 1981; Yazan, 2015; Aberdeen, 2013). The multiple-
case design enables a comprehensive examination and generalization of the results, which 
provides a holistic view of a phenomenon within its context (Stake, 2013; Maton & Salem, 
1995). An exploratory case study aims at extending the understanding of phenomena in the 
early phase of development (Pan et al., 1999; Ogawa & Malen, 1991; Lam & Lam, 2016). It is 
applied when extensive empirical research has not been dedicated to the topic of interest. The 
use of this approach may be justified when the terrain is little known or stereotyped views are 
imposed. This approach is generally not rigidly structured but not based solely on assumptions. 
The purpose of the exploratory case study is not to generate definitive evidence but to suggest 
hypotheses to be investigated in future works (Flavell et al., 2019; Sali & Marasigan, 2020; Tian 
et al., 2022a).  

Cases examined in this study were retrieved from desk research. Keywords used for searches 
of qualified cases are blockchain tokenization, asset tokenization, infrastructure investment, 
ICO, STO, energy, decentralized finance, renewable transition, transportation, and real asset. 
The criteria to define qualified cases are: (1) tokenization has to be the major technology 
applied in the project, (2) the project has to be in the infrastructure sector, and (3) tokenization 
plays a key role in facilitating the development of infrastructure projects or corporations in this 
sector. ICO/STO rating platforms (e.g., icobench, coindex, icodrops, storating, etc.) and relevant 
project news are the primary databases of this research. Thirty-five projects meet the 
requirement of the criteria. Fourteen projects were excluded due to missing essential 
information. Twenty-one tokenization cases in the context of the energy sector are identified. 
The use of various types of tokenization models in ﬁnancing infrastructure corporations and 
projects across the globe is discussed. Tokenization projects are sampled and analyzed based 
on the types of tokens (payment, utility, and security). Potential and realized efficiency gains 
and obstacles faced in the adoption are discussed. Not only is this study conducted to 
understand the application of tokenization in energy projects but also to forecast its application 
in a broad spectrum of infrastructure projects (e.g., toll roads, airports, waste, 
telecommunication) and different financing mechanisms (e.g., corporate finance and project 
finance). 

Case 1: SolarCoin 

SolarCoin is a payment token designed to facilitate solar photovoltaic facility installation 
deployed on the SolarCoin blockchain (SolarCoin, 2021). It is an open community project run by 
the SolarCoin foundation, a Delaware-based US Public Benefit Corporation. SolarCoin was one 
of the earliest crypto-tokens offered to the public. Its ICO was in 2014. The foundation 
distributes SolarCoin to generators of solar electricity using verified solar facilities at the rate of 
one SolarCoin per one megawatt-hour (MWh) of solar energy produced. SolarCoin serves as a 
direct incentive to reward solar energy producers and encourages the development of solar 
infrastructure facilities and the transition to clean and renewable energy. SolarCoin can be used 
as a means of rewards and payment. SolarCoin has been losing popularity gradually. It was 
delisted from major exchanges in 2018. SolarCoin is now listed on secondary token exchanges 
(e.g., Carbonswap). After seven years of operation, SolarCoin was migrated to the Energy Web 

 
Chain, an Ethereum-based chain, in April 2021. The estimated market capitalization of 
SolarCoin has decreased from its peak of around $100 million at the beginning of 2018 to less 
than $300,000 in December of 2021.  

Case 2: WePower 

Smart Energy Tokens are utility tokens issued by WePower, renewable energy procurement 
and trading platform founded in Lithuania, which aims at facilitating the global shift to renewable 
energy by democratizing the energy procurement process (WePower, 2021). Smart Energy 
Tokens represent fractional ownership rights and obligations obtained under the power 
purchasing agreement (PPA). WPR is another utility token issued by WePower. Both tokens are 
deployed on the Ethereum blockchain. WPR tokens allow access to WePower network 
functions such as donation pools and priority auctions. WPR tokens are listed on secondary 
token exchanges (e.g., Bitbns). The current WePower whitepaper was published in February 
2019, the second version since the initial launch in 2018. WePower ICO raised $40 million in 
2018. The estimated market capitalization of WPR is less than $2 million in December of 2021. 
WPR tokens have lost over 98% of their value at the time of launch.  

Case 3. Cenfura 

Cenfura Tokens (XCF) are utility tokens used as the medium of exchange and settlement for 
energy goods and services on the Cenfura Platform (Cenfura, 2021). Cenfura established the 
platform in 2020, an intelligent energy service company in the United Kingdom that develops 
and operates renewable energy assets. Energy purchasers and producers transact energy by 
using XCF through the platform. Cenfura claims to distribute its tokens to support inclusion and 
sustainability initiatives such as energy poverty programs. Cenfura targets the unbanked as a 
new group of stakeholders of its renewable energy projects. XCF tokens are listed on secondary 
token exchanges (e.g., Liquid). Daily trading volumes usually are less than $1,000 in December 
of 2021.  

Case 4. ZiyenCoin 

ZiyenCoins are equity-based security tokens backed by a fund of energy assets of Ziyen 
Energy, an American company founded in 2019 (Ziyen, 2020). The portfolio includes oil and gas 
reserves, minerals, and renewable energy assets. The rights to the company’s Class A 
securities, incorporation certificates, and bylaws are embedded into each ZiyenCoin. 
ZiyenCoins were issued through security token offering (STO) and deployed on the Ethereum 
blockchain following ERC20 standards. The company was valued at $5 million at the time of 
token issuance. ZiyenCoins are not listed on any token exchanges. The price of each ZiyenCoin 
is at $0.01, arbitrarily determined by the management of the company. 

Case 5. Electric Vehicle Zone 

 
 
 
 
EVZ coins are utility tokens deployed on Ethereum as rewards or alternative means to pay for 
services operating on the EVZ platform (EVZ, 2021). The EVZ platform is an electric vehicle 
charge-sharing infrastructure that connects chargers in idle time and electric vehicle users, 
developed in South Korea in 2018. EVZ coins encourage the transformation of private-use 
charging points into public-use points and the transition to clean energy. EVZ coins are listed on 
secondary token exchanges (e.g., Bithumb). The price of EVZ coins has been gradually 
increasing over time since its issuance. The approximate return on investment if purchased at 
the launch time is about 800% in December of 2021.  

Case 6. Green Life Energy 

Green Life Energy tokens (GNL) are payment tokens deployed on the Binance Smart Chain 
issued by Green Life Energy Global, a British company founded in 2021 (GNL, 2021). The 
company’s goal is to develop green energy projects globally. GNL token and wallet will be used 
in EV car charging port payment systems, purchasing power from renewable energy projects, 
investing in renewable power plants, and providing charitable support for other renewable 
projects. However, the company didn’t reveal detailed plans for how GNL tokens will be applied 
in each scenario and how platforms or devices to be developed to facilitate the implementation 
of its token. GNL tokens are listed on a decentralized secondary token exchange, 
PancakeSwap. The daily trading volumes were around $10,000 in December of 2021. 

Case 7. Impact PPA 

Impact tokens (MPQ) are utility tokens deployed on the Ethereum blockchain issued by Impact 
PPA, an American company founded in 2017 (ImpactPPA, 2018). The Impact PPA platform 
allows energy consumers to “Pre-Pay” for electricity from a mobile device. MPQ tokens are sold 
to fund energy infrastructure projects. MPQ Token holders are granted access to review and 
vote on proposed projects embedded with the tokens. As claimed by the company, its platform 
and MPQ tokens could address issues of the unbanked, developing countries and facilitate the 
transition to renewable energy. However, the social media accounts of Impact PPA have 
remained inactive since 2018, and the proposed platform was not launched. MPQ tokens were 
not listed on any secondary token exchanges.  

Case 8. SUNEX 

SUNEX tokens are utility tokens deployed on the Ethereum blockchain issued by Sun 
Exchange, a South African company founded in 2015 (Sun Exchange, 2018). The SUNEX 
project was launched in 2018. Sun Exchange is a peer-to-peer solar leasing and crowdfunding 
platform. Investors worldwide can purchase solar photovoltaic (PV) cells and build wealth by 
leasing those cells to power businesses and organizations in emerging markets. SUNEX tokens 
are the native network token for the Sun Exchange platform. Funds raised from token sales are 
claimed to be used for pre-financing construction of solar projects, business development, and 
emerging market rural infrastructure project development. SUNEX ICO ended after $1 million 
was raised, which is 4% of the target. There have been few SUNEX updates since 2019. 
SUNEX tokens are not listed on any secondary token exchanges. 

 
 
 
Case 9. NETZ 

NETZ tokens are security tokens backed by renewable energy assets issued by Net Zero 
Enterprises, an American company founded in 1982 (NETZ, 2021). The NETZ project was 
launched in 2021. As claimed by the company, funds raised from NETZ sales will be invested in 
green energy power plants. Renewable energy assets will serve as collaterals of NETZ tokens. 
Revenue generated from the underlying plants will be distributed as dividends on a quarterly 
basis. However, there are no detailed plans of how investments in NETZ will be utilized and how 
financial information will be audited. NETZ STO was in 2021, 38 million tokens were sold, which 
is less than 50% of the target. NETZ tokens are listed on a decentralized secondary token 
exchange, Cointiger.  

Case 10. SolarWind 

SolarWind tokens (SLW) are utility tokens deployed on the Binance Smart Chain issued by 
SolarWind, an American company founded in 2021 (SolarWind, 2021). Funds raised from token 
sales will be used to finance solar projects. Project information will be available on a 
decentralized application (dAPP). The company claims to establish a nonprofit organization, 
Positive Energy, to support charitable missions voted by the SolarWind community. However, 
no information on the dAPP and the nonprofit organization can be found. Many milestones set 
by the company have not been achieved. SolarWind tokens are listed on two exchanges, 
PancakeSwap and Dex-Trade. The average daily trading volume in December of 2021 is less 
than $100.  

Case 11. Solarex 

Solarex tokens (SRX) are utility tokens deployed on the Ethereum blockchain issued by 
Solarex, a Britain company founded in 2017. The target markets of Solarex are in Africa, 
starting from Nigeria. Solarex tokens grant investors access to an ecosystem including Peer-to-
Peer (P2P) energy trading, project financing, and other energy services. The company claims to 
allocate funds raised from token sales to support households without access to the national grid 
to finance solar projects in Africa. However, there is no information related to the recent 
development of the Solarex ecosystem that can be found. Solarex raised about $2 million in its 
ICO in 2019. SRX tokens were not listed on any secondary token exchanges. 

Case 12. Restart Energy MWAT 

MWAT tokens are utility tokens deployed on the Ethereum blockchain issued by Restart Energy, 
a Romanian company founded in 2015 (Restart Energy, 2021). The MWAT project was 
launched in 2017. MWAT Tokens holders are given access to the Restart Energy Democracy 
(RED) Platform to trade up to 1 MWh of energy per month. Tokenized energy traded on the 
RED Platform can be physically delivered at local rates in countries with deregulated energy 
markets, as claimed by the company. The platform is currently in operation. Funds raised from 
token sales are used to expand the platform. MWAT tokens are listed on a secondary token 

 
 
 
 
exchange, Kucoin. MWAT ICO raised $30 million in 2018. The price of one MWAT token was 
set as $0.1 at the time of token offering. It was traded at around $0.01 in December of 2021.  

Case 13. Electrify.Asia 

Electrify. Asia tokens (ELEC) are utility tokens deployed on the Ethereum blockchain issued by 
Electrify, a Singapore company established in 2017 (Electrify, 2021). ELEC Tokens holders are 
given access to Synergy's P2P electricity trading platform. ELEC tokens are used as transaction 
fees paid by energy providers and loyalty rewards for consumers. Synergy Alpha was tested in 
2019. Synergy Beta was viable in 2021. Funds raised from token sales are used to support 
company development. ELEC tokens are listed on secondary token exchanges, Gate.io and 
HitBTC. ELEC ICO raised around $30 million. The price of one MWAT token was set as $0.08 
at the time of token offering. It was traded at around $0.0001 in the December of 2021. It is 
worth mentioning that the price of one ELEC token went up from $0.0005 in January 2021 to 
0.011 in April 2021, which was a 2000% increase in three months. The average market 
capitalization was less than $1 million in 2021. 

Case 14. SunContract 

SunContract Tokens (SNC) are utility tokens deployed on the Ethereum blockchain issued by 
Electrify, a Slovenian company founded in 2002 (SunContract, 2021). The SNC project was 
launched in 2017. SNC Tokens holders are given access to the P2P electricity trading platform, 
SunContract. The platform is currently in operation and has more than 5000 customers within 
Slovenia, as claimed by the company. ELEC tokens are listed on some secondary token 
exchanges, such as Huobi Global, HitBTC, and OKEx. SNC ICO raised around $2 million in 
2017. The estimated market capitalization is around $3 million, and the average daily trading 
volume was about $200,000 in December 2021. The approximate return on investment in the 
December of 2021, if purchased at the time of launch, was about 30%. 

Case 15. Megatech 

Megatech tokens (MGT) are security tokens deployed on the Apollo blockchain issued by MGT 
Solar, a South African company founded in 2021 (Megatech, 2021). MGT Tokens are backed by 
equity shares of the company and the eight solar plants in development. However, the company 
doesn’t reveal many details about the underlying assets and how those assets are linked with 
the tokens. Unaudited profit, 3000% Return on Investment (ROI), is posted on the website for 
marketing purposes. There is no information related to the projected solar plants that can be 
found. Funds raised from token sales will be allocated to develop solar power plants and the 
token system. The price of Megatech tokens is set at $0.01 at the time of offering. MGT tokens 
are listed on the secondary token exchange, BitMart. They were traded at $0.002 in the 
December of 2021. The price of Megatech tokens went up more than 3,000% overnight, traded 
at $0.045 on January 16, 2022. 

Case 16. Enercom 

 
 
 
 
Enercom tokens are security tokens deployed on the Ethereum blockchain issued by Enercom 
AG, a Liechtenstein company founded in 2016 (Enercom, 2021). The Enercom token project 
was launched in 2019. Enercom tokens are backed by equity shares of the company. Funds 
raised from STO, 200,000 tokens at the price of ETH 0.6 or EUR 100, are claimed to be used to 
acquire one telecommunication project and one renewable energy project. The whitepaper of 
the Enercom token is one of very few that explicitly explains risk factors, terms, and conditions 
of the securities and details of the offer/admission to trading. Token holders don’t have voting 
rights but have rights to receive dividends. Enercom tokens are not listed on any secondary 
token exchanges. 

Case 17. Sun Fund 

Sun Fund tokens are security tokens deployed on the Ethereum blockchain issued by Sun 
Fund, an American company founded in 2017 (Sun Fund, 2019). Sun Fund develops, owns, 
and operates renewable energy assets. Sun Fund tokens are backed by revenue-generating 
renewable energy assets of the company. Investors participating in the token ICO also can 
receive preferred equity shares of the company and an additional simple agreement for future 
tokens (SAFT). The company claimed to build a producer-to-investor platform and Internet of 
Things (IoT) solar inverter to blockchain data channel oracle connectivity after ICO. However, 
Sun Fund stopped updating its social media profiles in 2018. No information on the company 
and the token project except ICO can be found. Sun Fund tokens are not listed on any 
secondary token exchange. Sun Fund ICO attracted 325 investors and raised $123,220.  

Case 18. Grid+ 

GRID tokens are utility tokens deployed on the Ethereum blockchain issued by Grid+, an 
American company founded in 2017 (GridPlus, 2021). Grid+ is an eventual energy-sharing 
marketplace and conducting business in commercial electricity retail. Grid+ also manufactures 
hardware, programmable hardware wallet, as part of its business. Each GRID token is a credit 
on the Grid+ platform, redeemable by customers of the Grid+ platform for the right to purchase 
500 kWh of electricity at the wholesale price available to Grid+. Grid+ operates with a two-token 
model. The BOLT token is treated by Grid+ as a stablecoin, redeemable by Grid+ customers for 
$1 worth of energy from Grid+ and backed by USD deposits. Grid+ raised $32 million in its ICO. 
GRID tokens are listed on secondary token exchanges, such as Balancer, Bancor Network, and 
Uniswap. The estimated market capitalization of WPP was over $60 million in December of 
2021, increasing from $6 million earlier time of that year.  

Case 19. WPP 

WPP tokens are utility tokens deployed on the Ethereum blockchain issued by WPP ENERGY 
GmbH, a Swiss company founded in 2009 (WPP, 2021). The WPP project was launched in 
2018 and revised in 2019. The company describes itself as a repository for green energy and 
environmental technologies. WPP tokens serve as payment tokens for the company’s green 
hydrogen and biofuel futures contracts trading platform, HyFi. WPP tokens are designed to 
represent one kilogram of hydrogen gas and are accepted as a payment method to purchase 

 
 
 
convertible preferred equity shares of the company. Sun Fund tokens are listed on secondary 
token exchanges, such as BitMart and Digfinex. Around $60 million was raised in the ICO in 
2018. The estimated market capitalization of WPP was around $20 million in December of 2021, 
while it surpassed $166 million in April of the same year.  

Case 20. Efforce 

EFFORCE tokens (WOZX) are utility tokens deployed on the Ethereum blockchain issued by 
EFFORCE, an Italian company founded in 2018 (Efforce, 2021). The WOZX project was 
launched in December 2020. WOZX tokens function as the medium through which energy 
savings created on the EFFORCE platform are tokenized for use by any participant. Like carbon 
credits, the tokenized energy credits on the platform can be freely traded. It is not clear whether 
the platform has been completed at the time of writing. The company claimed that the WOZX 
token might be equivalent to EFFORCE’s stock shares in the future. WOZX tokens are listed on 
several secondary token exchanges, including a major exchange like Huobi Global. The 
estimated market capitalization of WOZX is around $40 million in December of 2021, while it 
surpassed $160 million in March of the same year. Four hundred fifty million WOZX tokens at 
the price of $0.1 were sold during a private sale in June 2019. WOZX tokens were traded at 
$0.27 at the time of writing in December of 2021. 

Case 21. Powerledger 

POWR tokens are utility tokens deployed on the Ethereum blockchain issued by Powerledger, 
an Australian company founded in 2016 (Powerledger, 2021). The POWR token project was 
launched in 2016. Powerledger platform allows P2P energy trading, enabling participants in 
local areas to sell and distribute solar power to their neighbors. The POWR token allows 
application hosts and participants to use the platform. The whitepaper of POWR tokens was 
revised three times in 2017, 2018, and 2019. The dual token system was developed, including 
Sparkz tokens, priced in local currency and POWR. POWR ICO raised $34 million in 2017. 
POWR tokens are listed on over 20 secondary token exchanges, including several major ones 
like Binance, Coinbase, and Bittrex. The estimated market capitalization of POWR reached 
$360 million in November of 2021. POWR has the largest market capitalization among all token 
projects analyzed in this study.   

4. Cross-case analysis 

Table 1 illustrates fundamental case information, including types of tokens, blockchain 
deployed, listing status, year of token offering, location of the project, price range, and market 
capitalization (cap) range. Information is extracted from crypto-information disclosure platforms, 
such as CoinMartcap and Binance, and websites of projects. Project information from January 
2014 to December 2021 is analyzed. The main purpose of this research is to investigate how 
tokenization is applied in pioneering projects in the infrastructure sector. However, energy is the 
only sector applying tokenization at the current stage. This research analyzes the application of 
tokenization explored by energy projects. Research findings are disseminated to understand 
how tokenization could facilitate energy infrastructure development and how the specific 

 
 
 
experience learned from energy projects can be generalized to a broad spectrum of 
infrastructure projects. 

Table 1. Summary of Cases 

ProjectTikerType of TokenBlockchainActive (Y/N)Token ExchangeLocationYearPrice RangeMarket Cap RangeZiyenN/ASecurityEthereumNN/AUSA2018N/AN/ASolarCoinSLRPaymentEnergy WebNCarbonswapUSA2014$0.003 - $2.4$0.2M - $100MWepowerWPRUltilityEthereumYBitbnsLithuania2018$0.002 - 0.22$1.8 - $75CenfuraXCFUltilityN/AYLiquidUK2020$0.018 - $.018N/APowerledgerPOWRUltilityEthereumYManyAustralia2018$0.03 - $1.8$15M - $650MGreen Life EnergyGNLUltiltyBinanceYPancakeUK2021$0.01 - $0.065N/AImpactPPAMPQUltilityEthereumNN/AUSA2018N/AN/AEfforceWOZXUltilityEthereumYManyItaly2020$0.2 - $3$30M - $160MWPPWPPUltilityEthereumYDigifinex/BitMartSwitzerland2019$0.0005 - $0.055$0.01M - $30MSunexSUNEXUltilityEthereumNN/ASouth Africa2018N/AN/ASunfundN/ASecurityEthereumNN/AUSA2018N/AN/AGrid+GRIDUltilityEthereumYManyUSA2017$0.03 - $3$1M - $120MEnercomN/ASecurityPolymathNN/ALiechtenstein2019N/AN/ANetzNETZSecurityN/AYGateSweden2021N/AN/AMegatechMGTSecurityApolloYBitMartSouth Africa2020N/AN/ASolarwindSLWUltilityBinanceYDex-TradeUSA2021$0.001 - $0.025N/ASolarexSRXUltilityEthereumYN/AUK2019N/AN/AElectric Vehivle ZoneEVZUltilityEthereumYBithumbKorea2018$0.01 - $0.22$5M - $100MRestart Energy MwatMWATUltilityEthereumYN/ARomania2017$0.001 - $0.05N/ASuncontractSNCUltilityEthereumYMultipleSlovenia2017$0.01 - $0.65$1M - $70MElectrify.AsiaELECUltilityEthereumYGate/HitBTCSingapore2017$0.0005 - $0.2$0.2 - $70M 
Among 21 projects included in this research, 20 of them were founded in developed countries 
defined by the UN (UN, 2014). Restart energy in Romania is the only project in developing 
countries. However, Romania is still considered a high-income country. Developing countries 
are lagging in this emerging field even though tokenization could potentially bring great benefits 
(Kshetri & Voas, 2018). There are some projects, like Solarex founded in the UK, that claim to 
target developing countries’ markets. However, no business activities can be tracked. 
Tokenization is only making progress in developed countries at present. The SolarCoin ICO was 
in 2014, which was one of the earliest tokenization projects. Utility token ICOs were launched 
after 2017. Security token STOs were launched after 2018. This timeline reflects the general 
development process of tokenization, starting from cryptocurrencies (payment tokens) to utility 
and security tokens. The estimated market capitalization of these tokenization projects is 
relatively small, ranging from $100,000 to $300 million. The medium is less than $1 million at 
the token price in December of 2021. The tokenization market is rather volatile and the price of 
tokens can inflate a few times or depreciate by over 90% within a few days. 

Cryptographic tokens are grouped into three categories depending on functions and purposes, 
payment, utility, and security (Wu et al., 2018). Solarcoin and Green Life Energy tokens are the 
only two payment tokens included in this study. Ziyencoin, Sun Fund, Enercom, Netz, and 
Megatech are the five security token projects. The rest of the 14 projects issue utility tokens. It is 
worth noting that some projects issue more than one type of token to facilitate transactions or 
simplify the management process (e.g., WePower, PowerLedger, Grid+, and EVZ). The 
categorization of the tokens is not always definitive. Some tokens issued by the project show 
characteristics of both payment and utility (e.g., green life energy token). In some cases, the 
purposes of the tokens evolve with the project. EFFORCE tokens (WOZX) are utility tokens as 
defined in its whitepaper, but they might be equivalent to the company’s stock shares, which are 
securities, in the future.  

4.1. Token models 

Payment 

Payment tokens are decentralized currencies for making and receiving payments on the 
blockchain, such as Bitcoin and Litecoin (Ferrari, 2020). Payment tokens are used as an 
alternative means of exchange and store of value, supplement to fiat currency. Payment tokens 
play an important role in facilitating transactions and reducing currency risks to attract investors. 
Payment tokens facilitate P2P transactions (Toderean et al., 2021). Token holders are able to 
send and receive payments to or from anyone on the network around the world at minimum 
costs and wait time. Due to token holders being able to send and receive tokens with only a 
smartphone or computer, The value of payment tokens is determined by the faith of its users in 
utility across the network (Nalder & Guo, 2020). Payment tokens gain or lose value on the basis 
of demand and supply in the market. The volatility of payment tokens is normally high. The price 
of one Solarcoin reached $2.7 in January of 2018, while it is trading at $ 0.008 in January of 
2022.  

Stablecoins are a class of payment tokens that attempt to offer price stability. Stablecoins have 
gained traction as they attempt to offer the best of both worlds: the instant processing and 
security or privacy of payments of cryptocurrencies and the volatility-free stable valuations of fiat 
currencies (Lipton et al., 2020). In the Grid+ case, BOLT tokens are issued as stablecoins, 

 
redeemable for $1 worth of energy from Grid+ and backed by USD deposits. It is difficult for 
payment tokens directly related to one specific sector to be successful due to the limited 
application scenarios to gain mainstream attention and sufficient users. Once Bitcoin has been 
accepted as the major medium of exchange in the world of crypto, which occupies the most 
share of the market. It is almost impossible for other tokens with a similar function to survive. 
Utility and security tokens can also be used as payment tokens, which further increases the 
difficulty of launching infrastructure-related payment token projects. SolarCoin has been delisted 
from most token exchanges, and it has lost over 99% of its value at the all-time high. Green Life 
Energy tokens are facing the same issues in gaining enough users (token holders) and offering 
valuable services to be alive and reach the goal of the developing team. Payment tokens issued 
within a platform at a smaller scale might be commonly used in future infrastructure tokenization 
projects like the Grid+ project.  

Utility 

Utility tokens grant holders access to use products or services offered by issuers of the tokens. 
They typically represent a contractual bundle of rights (e.g., the right to use a platform) stored 
on a blockchain initiative (Prat et al., 2019). The proceeds are commonly used to develop a 
platform and/or for other capital expenditure needs. Utility tokens are most often issued during a 
crowdsale or through ICOs (Crosser, 2018). Utility tokens are not security or currency. In most 
cases, utility tokens don’t allow investors (holders) to attain power over a company’s (issuer) 
decision-making process. The company’s valuation is normally not associated with the value of 
the token (Pazos, 2018). Utility tokens are built around a community. The tokenization project 
backed by a solid community would contribute to the overall social and economic development 
from many perspectives and bring significant profits for issuers and investors. Due to the 
flexibility and efficiency gains offered by utility tokens, they have been experiencing exponential 
growth after 2015. Most tokens issued in ICOs are unregulated. The exemption from the 
existing security laws and regulations encourages innovations, but it also drastically increases 
the potential for scammers to exploit. Scam token issuers can take advantage of information 
asymmetry to profit through fraudulent means at minimum cost in an unregulated ICO. 

The majority of the cases, 14 out of 21 (67%), analyzed in this research issued utility tokens. 
Those tokens grant holders access to a platform developed by the company, such as energy 
trading (e.g., Powerledger, WPP, WePower, Grid+), payment system (e.g., Electric Vehicle 
Zone), and crowdfunding (Sunnex). It is not necessary that platforms have been established 
before ICOs. Funds raised in ICOs are used to develop platforms or other supporting 
infrastructure. A successful ICO may just need a compiling story (reasonable business plan) 
and a trustworthy management team to convince investors to pitch in investments. It is very 
risky for investors to participate in utility token issuance when available information on the 
project is quite limited, which is very common. Some utility token projects succeeded, like 
Powerledger or Grid+, which bring investors over 1,000% investment returns if tokens were 
purchased at the time of issuance. However, for some projects (e.g., Impact PPA, Sunfund, 
Sunnex, or Enercom), projects failed before any platforms were built or any products or services 
were launched. If the tokens are backed by a failed project or community, investors could lose 
the entire investment.  

 
Utility tokens are the most common among other types of tokens for companies issuing 
cryptographic tokens to raise funds. Lacking regulations could be one of the main contributors 
(Baranes et al., 2021). Without tedious regulations, project developers would face fewer hurdles 
to innovation. Most utility tokens issued in cases included in this research are unregulated, 
including those with the largest market capitalization (e.g., Powerledger). It certainly doesn’t 
mean unregulated projects must be scams, but the risks that investors bear are high. Token 
issuers face minimum-to-zero consequences if their projects fail. The well-developed supporting 
infrastructure is another contributor to the fact that utility tokens are more popular compared to 
other types of tokens. Thousands of projects have issued utility tokens through ICOs since 
2013. Resources around utility tokens issuance and management are ample. For token issuers, 
utility tokens are a more convenient and cost-effective choice at the current stage. Even though 
all tokenization projects studied in this research area are in the energy sector, tokenization 
might bring realizable efficiency gains in other sectors, such as transportation. Utility tokens can 
be backed by tolls to support the finance of projects.  

Security 

Security tokens are investment instruments representing assets of different classes, including 
equity, fixed income, real estate, structured product, investment fund shares, and commodities 
that are traded and held on a blockchain (a distributed ledger) (Mendelson, 2019). The Howey 
Test created by the U.S. Supreme Court, is a well-known test for determining whether an 
investment is a security and thus subject to securities regulations. The Howey Test can be 
applied to differentiate security tokens from payment and utility tokens. For a traditional asset 
that doesn’t exist on a blockchain, security tokens can be created through asset tokenization. 
For assets that already have an on-chain presence, tokens can be created through asset 
origination. These assets are referred to as natively digital securities. They can be created by 
mining or staking, depending on the blockchain (Subramanian, 2019). The value of security 
tokens derives from the underlying asset. Security tokens are issued through a STO instead of 
an ICO. Issuance and transactions of security tokens are subject to security regulations and 
legislation (Rivero, 2018). Issuers of tokens must factor in relevant legal and regulatory 
requirements, as do brokers and exchanges. Security tokens may be listed on an exchange and 
may be restricted only to professional or accredited investors. The additional regulatory 
oversight makes them less vulnerable to fraud and misuse. The blockchain environment 
enhances securities regulatory objectives of disclosure, fairness, and market integrity and 
supports innovation and efficiency through automation enabled by smart contracts (Hines, 
2020).  

Security tokens are not without risk, as with any investment product or structure. Hype cycles 
certainly continue. Although the identity of the investor might be recorded in the smart contract, 
the position on whether virtual assets constitute "property", the definition of ownership, and 
requirements for the assignment of the virtual assets may lack legal clarity or involve 
overlapping and even conflicting laws at present (Nassr, 2020). The valuation of virtual assets 
remains difficult. Without historical performance data, accounting professionals have difficulty 
ascertaining the fair value of the security token (Lambert et al., 2021). And due to the unique 
design and structure of each security token, it is difficult to find a referencing token for valuation. 
Regulatory compliance is a double-edged sword. With greater regulatory protection and 
remedies, the risk of fraud is reduced (Liu & Wang, 2019). However, regulatory hurdles are one 

 
of the reasons that security tokens’ growth and adoption have been rather modest in 
comparison with utility tokens’ exponential growth. It is still not common for major securities 
exchanges to launch an STO or have security tokens listed. 

Five out of 21 cases analyzed in this research issued security tokens. Four out of the five 
projects’ security tokens are backed by the equity shares of the issuing company. Assets are 
held through a special purpose vehicle (SPV). Netz is the only project claiming that its tokens 
are directly backed by green energy assets. In theory, the value of tokens is determined by the 
value of the underlying company or assets. In the case of ZiyenCoin, the company is valued at 
$5 million. Five hundred million ZiyenCoins were issued at the price of $0.01. However, how the 
company or assets are valued remains unclear. None of the security tokens are listed on 
secondary token exchanges except the Megatech token. Security tokens are normally sold in 
private sales. Megatech claims that its tokens are equity tokens backed by the actual company, 
which should be categorized as security tokens. However, in its whitepaper, Megatech tokens 
are defined as utility tokens that are issued through ICO. Security regulatory compliance is not 
mentioned in its whitepaper. Some companies are still in the very early phase of exploring 
tokenization. There has been no uniform definition and classification in this field. Many security 
token projects claimed to be regulated. However, there is no evidence these projects are filed 
and being audited properly. Regulatory compliance is more like a gimmick to attract investors 
sometimes. Most whitepapers emphasize the estimated returns that investors could receive by 
investing in these projects. However, the information on the valuation of the company or assets, 
the business plan of the company, and the auditing and regulatory compliance process are 
limited. At the time of writing, none of the projects included in this research revealed information 
on how milestones set in the whitepaper has been reached. In other words, these companies 
have ceased to operate. According to data of blockchain analytics, very few transactions of 
ZiyenCoins were made after the mid of 2019. Information related to Sunfund and Enercom 
besides their whitepapers is scarce. Netz, as a new project founded in 2021, is struggling to 
reach its STO goals. Megatech is the only project that remains active, and its tokens are actively 
traded on a token exchange. The tokenization models applied in these projects are all corporate 
finance.  

5. Discussion 

5.1 Benefits 

Transparency 

The hallmark of blockchain technology is transparency. Information of transactions, addresses, 
and quantities of tokens are immutably stored on distributed ledgers. If it is a public blockchain, 
all internet users have real-time access to the information (Rizal Batubara et al., 2019). Better 
transparency is mentioned in all whitepapers of the tokenization projects studied in this 
research. Etherscan is a block explorer and analytics platform which allows users to search the 
Ethereum blockchain for activities taking place on chains. Other blockchains have their explorer 
platforms, like Binancescanner and Solscan. Real-time access to immutable data increases the 
confidence of users and simplifies the due diligence process. Suppose integrated with IoT 
devices, such as smart sensors installed on infrastructure facilities, financial or operational data 
can be automatically recorded and stored on a blockchain through an oracle (Reyna et al., 

 
2018). Users, such as governments, project sponsors, project administrators, financial 
practitioners, investors, and surrounding communities, can monitor the financial and 
performance information (if possible) of the project through data stored on the public blockchain. 
Some companies have explored integration. Sunfund claimed to build a producer-to-investor 
platform and IoT solar inverter to blockchain data channel oracle connectivity. The 
unprecedented scope and granularity of data streams could render the financial modeling of the 
project more accurate in predicting asset value. Timely and accurate data supports better 
regulatory compliance and decision-making. Even though on-chain data can be recorded 
immutably and available to be revealed in real-time, not all project information is available on 
the blockchain. The transparency brought by blockchain in these cases is mainly limited to data 
generated through on-chain activities, but off-chain information remains private. 

Efficiency 

Smart contracts allow for bi-directional instant transfer of funds and tokens by removing 
intermediaries without the need for a separate settlement process. The disintermediation 
enabled by smart contracts results in a significant fixed financing cost reduction and improved 
bankability of projects (Schar, 2021). The scale of projects or corporations is no longer a 
determining factor for financing cost efficiency. Small-medium enterprises (SMEs) valued at less 
than $10 million, such as Ziyen, Solarex, and Cenfura, are able to raise funds from the public 
directly to support their business activities and finance future infrastructure projects. It is not 
cost-effective for projects or corporations valued at less than $50 million to go public in the 
conventional financing system. Except for Powerledger and Grid+, all other projects issuing 
tokens to raise funds are under $50 million. Whether tokenization could reduce the cost of 
capital for projects over $100 million and bring enough efficiency gains to institutional investors 
needs further investigation. Smart contracts enhance governance by encoding contractual 
agreements and predefined conditions into programs. Unless conditions were met, the smart 
contract would not be executed, eliminating risks of breach of contract and consequences of 
legal actions. In theory, tokenization could enable the democratization of finance and make 
investments in small-scale infrastructure at the project level possible, greatly expanding 
economic opportunities and market growth of infrastructure.  

Liquidity 

Tokenization could improve the liquidity of investments in infrastructure projects by unlocking 
global markets to capture capital and facilitating trading in secondary markets. By allowing for 
the atomicity of transactions via hash time-locked contracts (HTLC), tokenization solutions 
remove geographical restrictions, which allows global participants, both project developers and 
investors, to be easily involved and make transactions anywhere and anytime (Tian et al., 
2020b). Twenty-one projects in fourteen countries studied in this research are all available to 
international investors. Investors can invest in any projects meeting their investment goals 
without being restricted by their nationalities. Cryptographic tokens listed on secondary markets 
are available to trade twenty-four hours a day and seven days a week. Fifteen out of twenty-one 
projects have their tokens listed on token exchanges, including centralized exchange (e.g., 
Binance, BitMart) or decentralized exchange (e.g., Uniswap, PancakeSwap). Powerledger 
tokens are listed on more than twenty exchanges worldwide. The average daily trading volume 

  
 
in 2021 is over $10 million. It topped at $1.4 billion on November 22, 2021. While the average 
daily trading volume of other tokens with a smaller market capitalization, like Solarwind, can be 
as low as a few hundred dollars. The liquidity of these tokens is still limited even though 
secondary trading is enabled. Secondary trading also gives rise to derivatives building on top of 
tokens, which makes other value-added services to be easily realized. Options and futures 
trading is offered by some exchanges, like Binance and Huobi Global. Regulations of security 
tokens might undermine the liquidity opportunities as fewer investors are qualified to participate. 
In the case of ZiyenCoin, international investors can invest in these tokens pursuant to 
Regulation S. However, in terms of domestic investors, they have to be accredited to invest 
pursuant to SEC Rule 506(c) of Regulation D. 

Sustainability and inclusiveness 

By tokenizing security or utility into digital tokens, which represent a small portion of economic 
benefits or access rights, investing in infrastructure projects with a small amount of money 
becomes financially viable (Giungato et al., 2017). The lowered barriers to entry would attract 
small investors, including retail and SME investors, who were excluded from the infrastructure 
investment under the conventional financing system. The vast majority of investors participating 
in ICOs and STOs of the projects analyzed in this research are small investors. Institutional 
investors merely started to invest in crypto assets in 2021. By enabling investing with a small 
amount of money, surrounding community residents of the project might be offered the 
opportunity to be actively engaged in project financing. They can serve as special shareholders 
to influence the planning and future operations of the project through voting rights (designed by 
regulators and project developers) embedded with the tokens. As claimed by the company, the 
Slovenian SunContract platform has more than 5,000 registered customers within Slovenia 
holding SNC tokens. Local customers can easily trade energy on the platform. Consumerization 
through tokenization thus has the capacity to create a sense of local ownership in the services 
of the public infrastructure facilities and provides a platform to galvanize social acceptance. 
Even though this theory has not been proved in the real world since all projects studied in this 
research are in private hands, it still might be a viable option that could be considered by public 
projects in the future. Blockchain-based tokenization offers a potential solution to provide cost-
efficient digital identity, credit history, and ownership recognition. With blockchain-run digital 
wallets and mobile payments based on smartphones, the blockchain solution can help onboard 
the unbanked to boost financial inclusion and growth. ImpactPPA and Cenfura have mentioned 
that the unbanked are targeted as a new group of stakeholders of their renewable energy 
projects. However, how it can be realized and whether the benefits brought by involving the 
unbanked can offset the extra efforts taken on them remain questionable.   

Promoting sustainability and transition to renewable energy are the main targets of the projects 
studied in this research. These goals have been mentioned by the majority of them. 
Tokenization could create a new economic model and market to enable the conversion of non-
financial values such as positive social and environmental impacts into security or utility tokens, 
which can be monetized and traded. Impact tokens are blockchain tokens backed by 
measurable social and environmental impacts (Uzsoki & Guerdat, 2019). They help stimulate 
the consumption of sustainable services and goods by providing financial incentives to users 
and customers, which improve the profitability and bankability of high-impact projects. However, 
what kinds of impacts are best suited to be converted into tangible economic benefits is still 

 
under exploration. In the SolarCoin case, the foundation distributes SolarCoin to generators of 
solar electricity using verified solar facilities at the rate of one SolarCoin per one megawatt-hour 
(MWh) of solar energy produced. SolarCoin serves as a direct incentive to reward solar energy 
producers. The economic benefits encourage the development of solar infrastructure facilities 
and facilitate the transition to clean and renewable energy. However, the SolarCoin project has 
been inactive since 2020. Investors didn’t get on board and accept the vision of the project 
developers. 

5.2. Challenges 

Regulation 

Most tokenization projects studied in this research are unregulated except for some security 
token projects which claim to be compliant with existing security laws. A potentially unclear 
regulatory and legal status for tokenization is a risk to all market participants, especially retail 
investors. The issue must be addressed by clarity and interpretation of existing or new 
regulations by financial regulatory and supervisory authorities. The unregulated environment 
explains the great number of scams and frauds in the ICOs. The tokenized market needs to 
comply with the regulations to protect investors and promote stability while facilitating healthy 
competition (Savelyev, 2018). It is not expected to raise significant issues in most jurisdictions 
since tokenization merely replaces the conventional electronic book-entries system with DLT-
enabled networks (Nassr, 2020). Nevertheless, it is still uncertain which regulatory asset class 
and reporting structure tokenized assets are classified into. There are gaps between novel asset 
classes and business models created by tokenization and the existing regulatory framework. 
The lack of regulatory clarity for tokenized assets may result in arbitrage opportunities and an 
unsecured investment environment with a negative impact on all participants, thus delaying 
broader adoption of the tokenized markets (Schwerin, 2018). Even though the cross-border 
transfer is touted as a significant tokenization benefit for infrastructure investors, the alignment 
of international and domestic regulations is creating an implementation barrier. The legal status 
of smart contracts remains to be defined, as these are still not considered to be legal contracts 
in most jurisdictions. Although the identity of the investor might be recorded in the smart 
contract, the position on whether virtual assets constitute "property", the definition of ownership, 
and requirements for the assignment of the virtual assets lack legal clarity or involve overlapping 
and even conflicting laws.  

Business models 

Unrealistic expectations (e.g., financial projections and business plans) are frequently found in 
whitepapers of some projects studied in this research. These expectations built by some project 
developers may incentivize them to transition to DLT-based solutions without a proven rationale 
Mokunas et al., 2019). Unlike IPOs, companies have had a working product that’s generating 
revenue before going public. ICOs/STOs only need to publish unproven concepts/ideas in 
whitepapers at the very early stage of project development. Project developers can easily take 
advantage of the “flexibility” to ignore reality and exaggerate outcomes to raise funds quickly 
from investors, especially when the market is highly speculative. However, once investors 
realize a project is unlikely to process, investments are drawn quickly. Liquidity can dry up in a 

 
 
few days. For many projects, there is not a solid business rationale for the application of 
tokenization (e.g., business problems are not clearly defined; major technical challenges are 
ignored; efficiency gains are insufficient to support the transition). Successful projects are more 
likely based on proven business models and moving small steps forward by integrating the 
benefits brought by tokenization with established systems. Revolutionary actions with the target 
of solving multiple and macro-level problems without detailed plans are likely to fail. Revisions in 
whitepapers are very common, which are made to address the technological breakthrough and 
changes in the market. The whitepaper of POWR tokens has been revised three times in 2017, 
2018, and 2019. However, frequent major changes in the business plan may confuse investors 
and make them lose confidence in the project, although the execution is easy.  

Technology 

The adoption of tokenization at a large scale would face a number of challenges related to the 
underlying technology itself. Scalability is still a technological challenge of DLT-enabled 
networks and is relevant to tokenization given the significant throughput that would be required 
for the scale of global financial markets (Collomb & Sok, 2016). Interoperability between 
different networks needs to be secured for connectivity between markets to be allowed. Other 
technological risks include network stability and exposure to cyber risks but also business risks 
related to the migration to a DLT-enabled environment. Connections between on-chain tokens 
and off-chain underlying infrastructure assets are crucial in tokenization. A trusted central 
authority is required to guarantee the connection between the token and the asset, monitor the 
underlying infrastructure assets, and update the status if conditions are changed (Nassr, 2020). 
However, a system to guarantee the connection between the off-chain assets and on-chain 
tokens has yet to be established. Without the guaranteed connection, it is questionable whether 
the tokens are backed by the underlying infrastructure assets, which would significantly disrupt 
the credibility of tokenization markets and the private sector’s participation. 

5.3. Future applications of tokenization in infrastructure 

Twenty-one tokenization projects are all in the energy sector. The applications in other sectors 
of infrastructure have not been found yet. Distributed renewable energy sources being naturally 
matched with the tokenization models explains why the energy sector is leading in applying this 
new financing method. Furthermore, most of the energy infrastructure is owned by the private 
sector, which indicates that the adoption of tokenization in the public sector (e.g., public 
infrastructure) is lagging. Private entities are normally acting faster and have more economic 
incentives to innovate. However, tokenization could be applied in other sectors. Utility tokens 
backed by tolls can be issued to raise funds for transportation projects. Bond-like tokens 
(security tokens backed by debts) can be issued to raise funds for public infrastructure projects. 
Depending on the project, whether it generates revenues, bond-like tokens can be paid back by 
project revenues or availability payments backed by the government in Public-Private 
Partnership (PPP) projects (Tian et al., 2020b). The financing mechanism of all the tokenization 
projects studied in this research can be categorized as corporate finance. Capitals raised from 
token sales are used to support corporate-level activities. In theory, it would face no issues with 
applying tokenization in project finance. An infrastructure project can issue tokens, backed 
project equity (in PPP projects), and project debts, to fund specifically this project. There have 

 
 
been no projects integrating tokenization with project finance at present, but it is a rather 
interesting new market to explore.  

The application of tokenization can be referred to as the process of tokenizing utilities (e.g., 
services or products provided by the facility) or ownership/economic interests of the securities 
(e.g., equity of infrastructure companies or funds, loans, and bonds) on the blockchain. Given 
the increasing transition of infrastructure to intelligent and inclusive systems and the desire to 
unlock efficient financing, tokenization may facilitate establishing alternative financing models to 
overcome some obstacles that can’t be addressed by conventional financing instruments. Table 
2 illustrates the comparison of tokenization with conventional infrastructure financing 
instruments. Evaluations are based on the authors' estimation and analysis. Tokenization shows 
the potential to improve investment liquidity, transparency, and private participation. However, 
due to the absence of regulation, tokenized investment remains risky. 

Table 2. Conventional Infrastructure Financing Instruments and Tokenization 

Host's View/Features 

Direct 
government  
spending 

Municipal and  
sub-sovereign 
bonds 

Commercial  
loan  

Listed 
equity/funds 

Unlisted direct 
equity investment 
and  
co-investment 
platforms 

Pros 

Cons 

Low borrowing 
costs 
High credit 
quality 
Tax-free 

Low return rate 
Default risks 
Country risks 

No payback 
obligation 

Subject to 
political 
uncertainty 
Limited 
availability 

Reliable 
funding source 
Most applied 

Direct access 
to the capital 
market 

Direct ownership 
and management 
Higher return 

Highly 
Fragmented 
Multiple 
intermediaries 
High costs 

Barriers to 
entry 
High upfront 
and fixed fees 

Limited liquidity 
High-expertise 
required 
High upfront 
investment 

Regulation 
uncertainty 
High risks and 
volatilities 

Investment Liquidity 

Transaction Efficiency 

Transparency 

Private participation 

Security 

* 

** 

* 

* 

*** 

*** 

* 

** 

*** 

*** 

* 

** 

* 

* 

** 

*** 

* 

*** 

*** 

** 

* 

** 

* 

* 

** 

Note: ***indicates high applicability; ** indicates medium applicability; * indicates low applicability.

*** 

** 

*** 

*** 

* 

Tokenization 

Expanded 
investor pool 
Lower barriers 
to entry 

 
 
 
6. Conclusions 

This study analyzed 21 projects to investigate how blockchain-enabled tokenization is currently 
implemented in energy infrastructure projects. Through the exploratory multiple case study 
analysis, this research shows the diversity of tokenization arrangements (payment, utility, and 
security). The state of the art, potential benefits, implications, and obstacles associated with the 
application of tokenization in infrastructure investment and development were discussed. The 
purpose of this research is not only to understand tokenization within the context of the energy 
sector but also to forecast its application in a broad spectrum of infrastructure projects (e.g., 
transportation, telecommunication, healthcare, education). It was found that tokenization 
showed the potential to improve investment liquidity, transparency, and efficiency and enable 
new business models to promote sustainability and inclusiveness. Nevertheless, tokenization is 
in its very easy stage of development. Challenges of regulations (e.g., unclear legal statutes, 
cross-border uncertainties, and lack of single point of accountability) and technology (e.g., 
network stability, interoperability, and cyber-risks) are preventing tokenization from realizing 
large-scale adoption.  

To facilitate the adoption of tokenization to reach its full potential, policymakers need to update 
the legal system and regulation to address the changes brought by the emerging technology in 
a transparent and secure environment. Collaboration and education are considered critical 
steppingstones. Collaborations of public and private entities are critical. An open-access toolbox 
complied with case studies, lessons learned, and other educational materials should be 
established. Public infrastructure projects should explore applying tokenization to engage the 
surrounding community. At the same time, private entities should be encouraged to investigate 
how tokenization could be applied in infrastructure projects other than energy under PPP. 
Investments in Financial education for retail investors are necessary since they are included and 
could play an important role in the tokenized market. 

Considering tokenization is in its infancy, there is limited data available for in-depth analysis at 
present. Future research should conduct analysis based on data from operations to explicitly 
examine to what extent and how tokenization can realize the projected efficiencies gains 
(comparing tokenized finance with conventional finance options). The application of tokenization 
in infrastructure projects other than energy should also be studied. The research on how 
tokenization can be integrated with project finance would contribute to the infrastructure finance 
literature significantly.  

Tokenization can play a critical role in revolutionizing infrastructure finance and facilitating 
infrastructure investment to unlock efficiency gains in both the public and private sectors. Once 
the potential risks and challenges are carefully examined and mitigated, tokenization might 
promote economic growth, advance social equity, contribute to the climate agenda, and 
eventually achieve the SDGs in the long term. A coordinated, proactive, and long-term approach 
that builds on existing practices by the public and private sectors is required to maximize the 
potential benefits brought by the emerging blockchain-enabled technology. 

 
 
 
7. References 

Gupta, J., & Vegelin, C. (2016). Sustainable development goals and inclusive development. International 
environmental agreements: politics, law and economics, 16(3), 433-448. 

Thacker, S., Adshead, D., Fay, M., Hallegatte, S., Harvey, M., Meller, H., ... & Hall, J. W. (2019). 
Infrastructure for sustainable development. Nature Sustainability, 2(4), 324-331. 

Davisson,K. & Losavio, J. (2020). How sustainable infrastructure can aid the post-covid recovery. 
https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2020/04/coronavirus-covid-19-sustainable-infrastructure-investments-
aid-recovery/#:~:text=The%20world%20is%20on%2Dtrend,by%201.5%25%20four%20years%20later. 

Mapila, K., Lauridsen, M. & Chastenay, C. (2017). Mobilizing Institutional Investments into Emerging 
Market Infrastructure. International Finance Corporation. https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/25529a56-
643a-4c1a-adcd-
21d9e9c48feb/EMCompass+Note+36+MCPP+FINAL+329.pdf?MOD=AJPERES&CVID=lJDT0aX. 

Gadenne, L. (2017). Tax me, but spend wisely? Sources of public finance and government 
accountability. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 274-314. 

Humphreys, E., van der Kerk, A., & Fonseca, C. (2018). Public finance for water infrastructure 
development and its practical challenges for small towns. Water Policy, 20(S1), 100-111. 

Yescombe, E. R., & Farquharson, E. (2018). Public-private partnerships for infrastructure: Principles of 
policy and finance. Butterworth-Heinemann. 

Thacker, S., Adshead, D., Fay, M., Hallegatte, S., Harvey, M., Meller, H., ... & Hall, J. W. (2019). 
Infrastructure for sustainable development. Nature Sustainability, 2(4), 324-331. 

Nakamoto, S. (2008). Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system. Decentralized Business Review, 
21260. 

Swan, M. (2017). Anticipating the economic benefits of blockchain. Technology innovation management 
review, 7(10), 6-13. 

Morkunas, V. J., Paschen, J., & Boon, E. (2019). How blockchain technologies impact your business 
model. Business Horizons, 62(3), 295-306. 

Morrow, M. J., & Zarrebini, M. (2019). Blockchain and the tokenization of the individual: societal 
implications. Future Internet, 11(10), 220. 

Khan, N., Kchouri, B., Yatoo, N. A., Kräussl, Z., Patel, A., & State, R. (2020). Tokenization of sukuk: 
Ethereum case study. Global Finance Journal, 100539. 

Tian, Y., Lu, Z., Adriaens, P., Minchin, R. E., Caithness, A., & Woo, J. (2020a). Finance infrastructure 
through blockchain-based tokenization. Frontiers of Engineering Management, 7(4), 485-499. 

Stapleton, J., & Poore, R. S. (2011). Tokenization and other methods of security for cardholder 
data. Information Security Journal: A Global Perspective, 20(2), 91-99. 

Nassr, IK. (2020). The tokenisation of assets and potential implications for financial markets. 
https://www.oecd.org/finance/The-Tokenisation-of-Assets-and-Potential-Implications-for-Financial-
Markets.htm. 

Laurent, P., Chollet, T., Burke, M., & Seers, T. (2018). The tokenization of assets is disrupting the 
financial industry. Are you ready. Inside magazine, 19, 62-67. 

Zou, W., Lo, D., Kochhar, P. S., Le, X. B. D., Xia, X., Feng, Y., Chen, Z., & Xu, B. (2019). Smart contract 
development: Challenges and opportunities. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, 47(10), 2084-
2106. 

Wang, S., Yuan, Y., Wang, X., Li, J., Qin, R., & Wang, F. Y. (2018). An overview of smart contract: 
architecture, applications, and future trends. In 2018 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV) (pp. 108-
113). IEEE. 

Myalo, A. S. (2019). Comparative analysis of ICO, DAOICO, IEO and STO. Case study. Финансы: 
теория и практика, 23(6), 6-25. 

Zetzsche, D. A., Buckley, R. P., Arner, D. W., & Föhr, L. (2017). The ICO Gold Rush: It's a scam, it's a 
bubble, it's a super challenge for regulators. University of Luxembourg Law Working Paper, (11), 17-83. 

Deloitte. (2020). Security token offerings: The next phase of financial market evolution? 
https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/cn/Documents/audit/deloitte-cn-audit-security-token-
offering-en-201009.pdf 

Fenu, G., Marchesi, L., Marchesi, M., & Tonelli, R. (2018, March). The ICO phenomenon and its 
relationships with ethereum smart contract environment. In 2018 International Workshop on Blockchain 
Oriented Software Engineering (IWBOSE) (pp. 26-32). IEEE. 

Momtaz, P. P., Rennertseder, K., & Schroeder, H. (2019). Token offerings: a revolution in corporate 
finance? Available at SSRN 3346964. 

Lambert, T., Liebau, D., & Roosenboom, P. (2021). Security token offerings. Small Business Economics, 
1-27. 

Kranz, J., Nagel, E., & Yoo, Y. (2019). Blockchain token sale. Business & Information Systems 
Engineering, 61(6), 745-753. 

Furnari, S. L. (2021). Trough equity crowdfunding evolution and involution: initial coin offering and initial 
exchange offering. Lex Russica, (1 (170)), 101-117. 

Guegan, D. (2017). Public blockchain versus private blockhain. https://halshs.archives-ouvertes.fr/halshs-
01524440/document. 

Lai, R., & Chuen, D. L. K. (2018). Blockchain–from public to private. In Handbook of Blockchain, Digital 
Finance, and Inclusion, Volume 2 (pp. 145-177). Academic Press. 

Pongnumkul, S., Siripanpornchana, C., & Thajchayapong, S. (2017). Performance analysis of private 
blockchain platforms in varying workloads. In 2017 26th International Conference on Computer 
Communication and Networks (ICCCN) (pp. 1-6). IEEE. 

Woo, J., Kibert, C. J., Newman, R., Kachi, A. S. K., Fatima, R., & Tian, Y. (2020). A New Blockchain 
Digital MRV (Measurement, Reporting, and Verification) Architecture for Existing Building Energy 
Performance. In 2020 2nd Conference on Blockchain Research & Applications for Innovative Networks 
and Services (BRAINS) (pp. 222-226). IEEE. 

Hao, Y., Li, Y., Dong, X., Fang, L., & Chen, P. (2018). Performance analysis of consensus algorithm in 
private blockchain. In 2018 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV) (pp. 280-285). IEEE. 

Luo, X., Cai, W., Wang, Z., Li, X., & Leung, C. V. (2019). A payment channel based hybrid decentralized 
ethereum token exchange. In 2019 IEEE International Conference on Blockchain and Cryptocurrency 
(ICBC) (pp. 48-49). IEEE. 

Barbon, A., & Ranaldo, A. (2021). On The Quality Of Cryptocurrency Markets: Centralized Versus 
Decentralized Exchanges. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.07386. 

Luo, X., Wang, Z., Cai, W., Li, X., & Leung, V. C. (2020). Application and evaluation of payment channel 
in hybrid decentralized Ethereum token exchange. Blockchain: Research and Applications, 1(1-2), 
100001. 

Lin, L. X. (2019). Deconstructing decentralized exchanges. Stan. J. Blockchain L. & Pol'y, 2, 1. 

Victor, F., & Weintraud, A. M. (2021). Detecting and quantifying wash trading on decentralized 
cryptocurrency exchanges. In Proceedings of the Web Conference 2021 (pp. 23-32). 

Chen, Y., & Bellavitis, C. (2020). Blockchain disruption and decentralized finance: The rise of 
decentralized business models. Journal of Business Venturing Insights, 13, e00151. 

Yin, R. K. (1981). The case study as a serious research strategy. Knowledge, 3(1), 97-114. 

Yazan, B. (2015). Three approaches to case study methods in education: Yin, Merriam, and Stake. The 
qualitative report, 20(2), 134-152. 

Aberdeen, T. (2013). Yin, RK (2009). Case study research: Design and methods. Thousand Oaks, CA: 
Sage. The Canadian Journal of Action Research, 14(1), 69-71. 

Stake, R. E. (2013). Multiple case study analysis. Guilford press. 

Pan, S. L., & Scarbrough, H. (1999). Knowledge management in practice: An exploratory case 
study. Technology analysis & Strategic management, 11(3), 359-374. 

Ogawa, R. T., & Malen, B. (1991). Towards rigor in reviews of multivocal literatures: Applying the 
exploratory case study method. Review of educational research, 61(3), 265-286. 

Lam, P. T., & Law, A. O. (2016). Crowdfunding for renewable and sustainable energy projects: An 
exploratory case study approach. Renewable and sustainable energy reviews, 60, 11-20. 

Flavell, H., Harris, C., Price, C., Logan, E., & Peterson, S. (2019). Empowering academics to be adaptive 
with eLearning technologies: An exploratory case study. Australasian Journal of Educational 
Technology, 35(1). 

Sali, A. H. A., & Marasigan, A. C. (2020). Madrasah Education Program implementation in the 
Philippines: an exploratory case study. International Journal of Comparative Education and Development. 

Tian, Y., Minchin, R. E., Chung, K., Woo, J., & Adriaens, P. (2022a). Towards Inclusive and Sustainable 
Infrastructure Development through Blockchain-enabled Asset Tokenization: An Exploratory Case Study. 
In IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering (Vol. 1218, No. 1, p. 012040). IOP 
Publishing. 

SolarCoin. (2021). SolarCoin is a cryptocurrency that incentivizes a solar-powered planet. 
https://solarcoin.org/ 

WePower. (2021). Platform connecting energy suppliers, corporate buyers and energy producers for 
easy, direct green energy transactions. https://wepower.com/. 

Cenfura. (2021). Energy Settlement Token. https://xcf-token.io/. 

Ziyen. (2020). ZiyenCoin is an Oil & Energy Security Token Offering (STO). 
https://www.ziyen.com/ziyencoin_future_currency_of_oil_industry/. 

EVZ. (2021). The Future of Electric Vehicle Charge Platform. https://www.evzlife.com/index_en.html. 

GNL. (2021). ONE OF THE WORLD’S BEST DIGITAL ASSETS FOR RENEWABLE ENERGY AND 
RECYCLING. https://www.greenlifeenergyglobal.com/. 

ImpactPPA. (2018). Delivering access to clean renewable energy from a mobile device. Pre-pay 
technology unlocks the vast potential of the emerging markets. https://www.impactppa.com/. 

Sun Exchange. (2018). Solar Cell vs SUNEX Token Purchases. https://medium.com/@alias_73214/solar-
cell-vs-sunex-token-purchases-5bae939b37e0. 

NETZ. (2021). Invest in Pre Defined and Fully Risk Mitigated Green Energy Assets A Real World Asset 
Backed Crypto Currency. https://www.netzcoin.io/. 

SolarWind. (2021). SOLARWIND $SLW Energy is the new currency. SolarWind is leading the charge. 
https://solarwindtoken.net/. 

Restart Energy. (2021). Restart Energy Democracy – MWAT Token. https://restartenergy.ro/en/restart-
energy-democracy-mwat-token/. 

Electrify. (2021). Introducing Synergy. https://www.electrify.asia/. 

SunContract. (2021). SunContract: Electricity Marketplace for P2P energy trading. 
https://suncontract.org/. 

Megatech. (2021). Megatech MGT Solar | Asset Backed Cryptocurrency | Invest in green solar energy in 
South Africa and receive dividends from 8 solar plants. https://mgtsolar.com/. 

Enercom. (2021). Security Token Offering - Enercom AG. https://www.enercom.ag/security-token-
offering/. 

Sun Fund. (2019). Solar Energy – Vertically Integrated. https://www.startengine.com/sun-fund-dc. 

GridPlus. (2021). The new standard for hardware wallets. https://gridplus.io/. 

WPP. (2021). WPP ENERGY GmbH – Green Energy Token. https://wppenergy.io/. 

Efforce. (2021). Energy Efficiency. Reinvented. https://efforce.io/. 

Powerledger. (2021). Powerledger Energy Projects. https://www.powerledger.io/. 

United Nations. (2014). Country classification. 
https://www.un.org/en/development/desa/policy/wesp/wesp_current/2014wesp_country_classification.pdf 

Kshetri, N., & Voas, J. (2018). Blockchain in developing countries. It Professional, 20(2), 11-14. 

Wu, K., Wheatley, S., & Sornette, D. (2018). Classification of cryptocurrency coins and tokens by the 
dynamics of their market capitalizations. Royal Society open science, 5(9), 180381. 

Ferrari, V. (2020). The regulation of crypto-assets in the EU–investment and payment tokens under the 
radar. Maastricht Journal of European and Comparative Law, 27(3), 325-342. 

Toderean, L., Antal, C., Antal, M., Mitrea, D., Cioara, T., Anghel, I., & Salomie, I. (2021). A Lockable 
ERC20 Token for Peer to Peer Energy Trading. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.04467. 

Nadler, P., & Guo, Y. (2020). The fair value of a token: How do markets price 
cryptocurrencies?. Research in International Business and Finance, 52, 101108. 

Lipton, A., Sardon, A., Schär, F., & Schüpbach, C. (2020). 11. Stablecoins, Digital Currency, and the 
Future of Money. In Building the New Economy. PubPub. 

Prat, J., Danos, V., & Marcassa, S. (2019). Fundamental pricing of utility tokens. 

Crosser, N. (2018). Initial coin offerings as investment contracts: Are blockchain utility tokens 
securities. U. Kan. L. Rev., 67, 379. 

Pazos, J. (2018). Valuation of utility tokens based on the quantity theory of money. The Journal of the 
British Blockchain Association, 1(2), 4318. 

Baranes, E., Hege, U., & Kim, J. H. (2021). Utility Tokens Financing, Investment Incentives, and 
Regulation. Investment Incentives, and Regulation. 

Mendelson, M. (2019). From initial coin offerings to security tokens: A US Federal Securities law 
analysis. Stan. Tech. L. Rev., 22, 52. 

Subramanian, H. (2019). Security tokens: architecture, smart contract applications and illustrations using 
SAFE. Managerial Finance. 

Rivero, A. (2018). Distributed Ledger Technology and Token Offering Regulation. Available at SSRN 
3134428. 

Hines, B. (2020). Digital Finance: Security Tokens and Unlocking the Real Potential of Blockchain. John 
Wiley & Sons. 

Lambert, T., Liebau, D., & Roosenboom, P. (2021). Security token offerings. Small Business Economics, 
1-27. 

Liu, C., & Wang, H. (2019). Crypto tokens and token offerings: an introduction. Cryptofinance and 
mechanisms of exchange, 125-144. 

Rizal Batubara, F., Ubacht, J., & Janssen, M. (2019, June). Unraveling transparency and accountability in 
blockchain. In Proceedings of the 20th Annual International Conference on Digital Government 
Research (pp. 204-213). 

Reyna, A., Martín, C., Chen, J., Soler, E., & Díaz, M. (2018). On blockchain and its integration with IoT. 
Challenges and opportunities. Future generation computer systems, 88, 173-190. 

Schär, F. (2021). Decentralized finance: On blockchain-and smart contract-based financial markets. FRB 
of St. Louis Review. 

Tian, Y., Adriaens, P., Minchin, R. E., Chang, C., Lu, Z., & Qi, C. (2020b). Asset Tokenization: A 
blockchain Solution to Financing Infrastructure in Emerging Markets and Developing Economies. Institute 
of Global Finance Working Paper No. Forthcoming. 

Giungato, P., Rana, R., Tarabella, A., & Tricase, C. (2017). Current trends in sustainability of bitcoins and 
related blockchain technology. Sustainability, 9(12), 2214. 

Uzsoki, D., & Guerdat, P. (2019). Impact Tokens: A Blockchainbased Solution for Impact Investing. 
International Institute for Sustainable Development. 

Savelyev, A. (2018). Copyright in the blockchain era: Promises and challenges. Computer law & security 
review, 34(3), 550-561. 

Schwerin, S. (2018). Blockchain and privacy protection in the case of the european general data 
protection regulation (GDPR): a delphi study. The Journal of the British Blockchain Association, 1(1), 
3554. 

Morkunas, V. J., Paschen, J., & Boon, E. (2019). How blockchain technologies impact your business 
model. Business Horizons, 62(3), 295-306. 

Collomb, A., & Sok, K. (2016). Blockchain/distributed ledger technology (DLT): What impact on the 
financial sector?. Digiworld Economic Journal, (103). 

Tian, Y., Minchin, R. E., Petersen, C., Moayed, E., & Adriaens, P. (2022b). Financing Public-Private 
Partnership Infrastructure Projects through Tokenization-enabled Project Finance on Blockchain. In IOP 
Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering (Vol. 1218, No. 1, p. 012027). IOP Publishing. 

 
 
