2
2
0
2

g
u
A
5
2

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
4
7
1
4
1
.
8
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

SEMANTICS AND NON-FUNGIBLE TOKENS FOR COPYRIGHT
MANAGEMENT ON THE METAVERSE AND BEYOND

A PREPRINT

Roberto Garc´ıa∗

Computer Science and Industrial Engineering
Universitat de Lleida
V´ıctor Siurana, 1, 25003 Lleida, Spain
roberto.garcia@udl.cat

Ana Cediel
Department of Public Law
Universitat de Lleida
V´ıctor Siurana, 1, 25003 Lleida, Spain
anna.cs@udl.cat

Merc`e Teixid´o
Computer Science and Industrial Engineering
Universitat de Lleida
V´ıctor Siurana, 1, 25003 Lleida, Spain
merce.teixido@udl.cat

Rosa Gil
Computer Science and Industrial Engineering
Universitat de Lleida
V´ıctor Siurana, 1, 25003 Lleida, Spain
rosamaria.gil@udl.cat

August 31, 2022

ABSTRACT

Recent initiatives related to the Metaverse focus on better visualisation, like augmented or virtual
reality, but also persistent digital objects. To guarantee real ownership of these digital objects, open
systems based on public blockchains and Non-Fungible Tokens (NFTs) are emerging together with
a nascent decentralized and open creator economy. To manage this emerging economy in a more
organised way, and ﬁght the so common NFT plagiarism, we propose CopyrightLY, a decentralized
application for authorship and copyright management. It provides means to claim content author-
ship, including supporting evidence. Content and metadata are stored in decentralized storage and
registered on the blockchain. A token is used to curate these claims, and potential complaints, by
staking it on them. Staking is incentivized by the fact that the token is minted using a bonding
curve. The tokenomics include the resolution of complaints and enabling the monetization of cu-
rated claims. Monetization is achieved through licensing NFTs with metadata enhanced by semantic
technologies. Semantic data makes explicit the reuse conditions transferred with the token while
keeping the connection to the underlying copyright claims to improve the trustability of the NFTs.
Moreover, the semantic metadata is ﬂexible enough to enable licensing not just in the real world.
Licenses can refer to reuses in speciﬁc locations in a metaverse, thus facilitating the emergence of
creative economies in them.

Keywords metaverse, non-fungible token, copyright, social media, blockchain, ontology

1

Introduction

Creative industries have been dealing with profound changes since the introduction of digital technologies and com-
munication networks, which facilitate content creation but also copying and uncontrolled distribution. Blockchain
technologies reintroduce scarcity, so it is possible to manage unique assets and their ownership through Non-Fungible
Tokens (NFTs) Clark (2021), but they do not guarantee authenticity.

Thus, serious problems with fake NFTs and plagiarism have emerged, where a new NFT collection of unique tokens
points to copied pieces of content. Just like a copied painting with a forged certiﬁcate of authenticity, but much easier

∗Corresponding author

 
 
 
 
 
 
Semantics and Non-Fungible Tokens for Copyright Management

A PREPRINT

to fake. And the issue is even more acute in completely digital spaces like metaverses, where emerging creative
economies might be hampered by the lack of some sort of authorship recognition.

Classical copyright law can help here, but it should be integrated and scaled to these emerging digital spaces while
beneﬁtting from the new opportunities offered by these technologies. Our proposal, presented in this paper, is Copy-
rightLY, a decentralized applicationCai et al. (2018) that leverages blockchain Walport (2016) and semantic web Shad-
bolt et al. (2006) technologies to facilitate copyright management. A Proof of Concept (PoC) has been developed
as part of the European Next Generation Internet ONTOCHAIN project 2, whose aim is to create an ecosystem of
blockchain-based knowledge management solutions.

In this context, CopyrightLY contributes a content ownership and a copyright management layer. One of its more
direct usage scenarios, detailed in Section 1.1 is being integrated with existing social media platforms and allowing
content creators to explore ways to exploit their novel media beyond those made possible by those platforms, especially
through NFTs and even across metaverses.

CopyrightLY’s PoC provides a working blockchain-based copyright registry, where creators can make authorship
claims linked to a hash of their content and a timestamp. They can then strengthen their claims by adding supporting
evidence, like pictures of the creative process, witnesses recordings or proofs of previous appearances of the creation
on social media platforms. CopyrightLY also provides the means to curate authorship in a scalable way, through
token-based incentives and the wisdom of the crowds. As a last resort, all accumulated evidence, both for authorship
claims and complaints, can be used in the context of arbitration systems or even in court.

Additionally, CopyrightLY showcases the use of Semantic NFTs. And NFT is a unique and non-interchangeable
token linked to metadata whose ownership is recorded in a blockchain. Blockchain transactions are used to transfer
ownership and metadata usually points to the media the NFT represents. Semantic NFTs have their metadata enriched
using semantics and formal knowledge representation languages based on ontologies. CopyrightLY uses them as the
mechanism to license the reuse of the registered content. This way, a Semantic NFT is linked to an authorship claim
and an unambiguous representation of the terms licensed to the NFT owner. Moreover, the semantic metadata can be
used to automate copyright reasoning and assist users during content reuse. The ontologies being used are ﬂexible
enough to accommodate reasoning in different domains, including licensing in a metaverse.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the state of the art regarding blockchain technolo-
gies for copyright management, including how it might be integrated into a metaverse architecture. Then, Section 3
presents the proposed approach focusing on its architecture. Highlights of CopyrightLY’s implementation are pro-
vided in Section 4, including token-based incentives to curate authorship claims and the use of Semantic NFTs to
unambiguously capture the licensing terms. Finally, Section 5 presents the conclusions and Section 6 the future work.

1.1 Sample Usage Scenario

A typical CopyrightLY usage scenario is depicted in Figure 1 using a use case diagram. In this case, a YouTube video
creator is willing to explore alternative ways to monetize her content. In addition to publishing the video on YouTube,
she registers her authorship claim by uploading the video ﬁle to an immutable data store (off-chain) and registers
its content hash using a blockchain transaction (on-chain). This produces a time-stamped and immutable authorship
claim. The claim links the content through its hash (which can be used to retrieve the content), the blockchain identity
used by the creator (linked to a private key used to sign the claim) and a timestamp.

The creator can then strengthen her claim by linking it to her YouTube video, and the social media proﬁle and reputa-
tion that she might have built there. As shown in Figure 1, ownership of the social media platform version is proofed
by including the authorship claim content hash into the YouTube video description. The presence is then checked
through a blockchain oracle Kochovski et al. (2019), a trusted service that brings data from other information systems
to the blockchain. In this case, the oracle consumes the YouTube API, veriﬁes that it includes the authorship claim
hash and registers on-chain the YouTube video as supporting evidence for the claim. The logic is similar to the one
used to verify that someone has a particular e-mail, sending to it a link that, when followed, is used to prove control
over that e-mail account.

At this point, the content creator can start monetizing her claimed copyright through Non-Fungible Tokens, which are
linked to the authorship claim, YouTube evidence and licensing terms. By following the ERC-721 standard 3, NFTs
can be integrated into existing NFT marketplaces and become tradable right away, so they can be offered for a ﬁxed
price or through different kinds of auctions. They can be also reused in the context of blockchain-powered metaverses,

2https://ontochain.ngi.eu
3https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-721

2

Semantics and Non-Fungible Tokens for Copyright Management

A PREPRINT

for instance, displayed on a virtual gallery. And potential purchasers or users can trace the NFT or YouTube video
back to the underlying copyright claim and reuse terms to verify them.

Figure 1: Typical usage scenario for a YouTube video creator using CopyrightLY as an alternative monetization
mechanism through Non-Fungible Tokens.

2 State of the Art

Blockchain technologies are being applied to almost any conceivable domain, from logistics Dobrovnik et al. (2018)
to renewable energy production management Mengelkamp et al. (2018). In all cases, in addition to the technologies
speciﬁc to the distributed ledger itself, developers face issues related to information management and integration
similar to those faced by Web applications. In this regard, Semantic Web technologies are well-positioned to solve this
kind of issue, and have been even used to model the key concepts in one of the main distributed ledgers, Ethereum’s
EthOn Pfeffer (2018).

However, attempts to apply blockchain technologies for completely decentralized copyright registration and moneti-
zation are quite recent and there is little literature regarding proposals similar to CopyrightLY’s. One similar proposal
Kripa et al. (2021), which also aims to facilitate copyright protection of social media content, proposes a blockchain
framework with smart contracts to protect social media contents using IPFS (InterPlanetary File System), a decen-
tralized and content-addressable peer-to-peer hypermedia storage protocol Benet (2014). Content uploaded to IPFS is
securely stored using a secret sharing scheme. This is combined with a robust hash for images, a method of hashing
images that is resistant to modiﬁcation, rotation, and colour alteration. The objective is to make it possible to detect
near copies and block the registration of images that might be copies of previously registered ones. Unfortunately,

3

ReuserYouTubeOn-ChainOff-ChainCreatorpublish videostore videovideo hashclaim authorship (hash)edit description (hash)video detailshashcheck authorship (hash)copyright claim, evidence & reuse termsretrieve video (hash)purchase, make oﬀer, bid,…registerNFT marketplacecheck same video than YouTube’s verify video ownership (hash, id)oracleget descriptionvideo idlicense (hash, terms)mint NFTSemantics and Non-Fungible Tokens for Copyright Management

A PREPRINT

no further information is provided about the robustness of this algorithm and its implications from a legal standpoint
when infringements are not properly detected or uninfringing content is considered otherwise. Moreover, though the
use of smart contracts is mentioned as the way to ask permission to reuse registered images, no further details are
provided about these smart contracts or the way reuse terms are negotiated and then stored on-chain to provide trust in
those agreements.

Another similar proposal Dobre et al. (2020) is a system to ﬁght intended or accidental image copyright infringement
on social media platforms, mainly when professional images are used to increase the impact of posts. Photographers
can use it to register their photos and re-users can use it to check if the image they want to use is copyright protected or
not. The main result of Dobre et al. (2020) is an algorithm that can extract a signature that is resistant to different levels
of JPEG compression. The signature is stored on the blockchain along with the identiﬁcation data of the copyright
owner. It can be then used to detect copies when someone tries to register the same or a similar image, as determined
by the algorithm. The algorithm can be also used by re-users to check if an image is already registered.
In that
case, the system allows the purchase of the right to use the photo. However, Dobre et al. (2020) does not provide
mechanisms to deal with situations when the registration that is considered a copy is in fact the original one, giving
rise to potential complaints. Moreover, the paper focuses just on the detection mechanism and few details are provided
about how registrations are stored on-chain, or how reuses are negotiated and managed using the smart contracts that
are mentioned. Approaches based on watermarking algorithms that link the copyright information with the content
ﬁle Natgunanathan et al. (2022) experience the same kind of limitations, as there is no prior mechanism to ensure that
the watermark is embedded by the actual creator or rights holder.

As will be detailed in the next section, the main innovation of CopyrightLY, and what distinguishes it most from
blockchain-based copyright management proposals like the previous ones, is that it does not try to enforce what is
an infringing authorship claim. As shown by previous experiences with Digital Rights Management (DRM) systems
Lessig (1999), a rigid and technologically enforced approach might put this kind of systems outside copyright law.
For instance, blocking fair use or categorising as copyright infringement registration attempts that might be done by
the original creator.

Finally, in the yet scarce literature about the metaverse and blockchain technologies, we have been unable to ﬁnd
any previous work directly connected with copyright management. However, a proposal about metaverse architecture
Duan et al. (2021) is a valuable reference that helps us situate CopyrightLY’s contribution in the context of their
proposed three main layers of a metaverse:

• Infrastructure: this is the base layer on top of which the metaverse is deployed. It is based on a computation
and communication infrastructure, including blockchain technologies, in our case Ethereum, and storage, for
CopyrightLY is decentralised storage provided by the InterPlanetary File System (IPFS).

• Interaction: this layer deals with immersive user experiences, and interfaces to shape the metaverse and
digital twins. CopyrightLY does not make any contribution in this regard and, when integrated into an existing
metaverse, it just makes use of its interactive features. For instance, in the implementation example provided
in Section 4.2, Copyright is integrated into the Voxels metaverse4.

• Ecosystem: this is the metaverse layer where CopyrightLY focuses its contributions. The following aspects

are highlighted for the three main components of the Ecosystem layer:

– User Generated Content (UGC): CopyrightLY helps deal with UGC by managing its underlying copy-
right. UGC can be of any kind, from metaverse speciﬁc to social media like YouTube videos. In all cases,
after its registration through curated authorship claims, they can be licensed and integrated as NFTs into
marketplaces and metaverses for their reuse.

– Economics: CopyrightLY’s NFT provide the ownership and trading mechanisms that enable open cre-
ator economies in the metaverse and beyond. Regarding the governance of the economics layer, Copy-
rightLY also features a dedicated token with economic value that drives the incentives for authorship
claims curation, as detailed in Section 4.1.

– Artiﬁcial Intelligence: CopyrightLY provides mechanisms to enrich NFTs with machine actionable
copyright information. They are used to unambiguously state the reuse terms granted through token
ownership, which can be fed into reasoners to assist the user during content reuse. For instance, as
detailed in Section 4.2, the reasoner can determine if content can be displayed in a speciﬁc metaverse
location based on the terms accompanying the corresponding NFT.

4https://www.voxels.com/

4

Semantics and Non-Fungible Tokens for Copyright Management

A PREPRINT

3 Approach

The most distinctive characteristic of the proposed approach is to not rely beforehand on automated mechanisms to
determine infringement, like the algorithms just mentioned in the State of the Art for robust hashing or ﬁngerprinting.
The content hashes used by CopyrightLY are just to permanently link the authorship claim registered on-chain with
the content of the claimed creation stored on decentralised and immutable storage. This way it is possible to track
the content linked to a claim and even retrieve it. Consequently, CopyrightLY just detects exact copies, because they
generate the same content hash when making an authorship claim. Even in that case, as detailed in the following
sections, the potentially original creator can proceed though in this case to ﬁle a complaint. Copyright is a social
construct and, thus, it is difﬁcult or maybe impossible to fully automate it and create an algorithm capable of discerning
between originals and copies.

This approach was already introduced in Garc´ıa et al. (2021), where we depicted just its preliminary architecture that
is fully developed in this paper in Section 3.1. We complement now the proposed approach with an incentives system
to curate the pool of authorship claims and complaints made through CopyrightLY as detailed in Section 4.1. Addi-
tionally, it is important to note that all the accumulated claims, complaints and evidence are registered on-chain and
can be used in case of litigation and admissible as evidence in a judicial proceeding, together with expert assessment,
like in the TikTok vs Baidu case Michalko (2020).

Consequently, the proposal is aligned with copyright law and courts, relying on them as last resort. However, to
improve its scalability, it also integrates incentives and arbitration mechanisms following a blockchain-based decen-
tralized approach. Grounding the system on copyright also helps deal with one of the main issues in NFTs state of the
art, issues derived from their disconnection from the underlying copyrights Schmalfeld (2021). In addition to being
grounded on copyright ownership, NFTs should also clearly state the licensing terms and conditions to become more
than mere transfers of ownership on just a piece of metadata Mezei et al. (2021), as detailed in Section 4.2.

CopyrightLY is based on the combination of a set of Ethereum Antonopoulos and Wood (2018) blockchain smart con-
tracts that manage authorship claims, complaints, evidence and licensing terms. These smart contracts are connected
with decentralized storage, where content and metadata are stored to avoid the prohibitive costs of storing them on-
chain. Moreover, there are a set of blockchain oracles Kochovski et al. (2019) that connect on-chain smart contracts
to off-chain APIs of the main social media platforms, like Twitter, Facebook or YouTube.

There is a web front-end that facilitates users’ interaction with on-chain logic and state. All blockchain read operations
are carried out through an API that provides direct access to a representation of the on-chain state. This way, users
can interact as they will do with any other web applications not based on blockchain technologies. For interactions
modifying blockchain state, end-users use an Ethereum wallet, as a browser extension or on their mobile devices.

The wallet holds the public-private key pair used to sign on-chain transactions. The public key is pseudo-anonymous
but, following a Self-Sovereign Identity approach Preukschat and Reed (2021), users can hold credentials in their wal-
lets that can be presented to requesting parties when stronger identiﬁcation is required. These credentials range from
social media proﬁles, which can be openly disclosed and shown in the creator’s proﬁle, to legal identity credentials
that are kept private and selectively presented. For instance, in case of litigation to better support on-chain evidence in
court.

As previously introduced, NFTs are used as the monetization mechanism through with reuse terms are licensed and
traded. In addition to helping keep track of ownership, NFTs are enhanced with semantic metadata to capture the
terms being transferred and the relationship between the token and the copyright claim. Semantic metadata is based
on existing vocabularies like Schema.org Guha et al. (2016) and the Copyright Ontology Garc´ıa and Gil (2010). A
rights module enhanced with semantic technologies and reasoning capabilities fetches data from NFTs and combines
it with ownership information registered on-chain. It uses it to respond to rights-related issues, like checking if an
intended reuse is authorized by any owned licenses or ﬁnding available licensing NFTs that might provide it. The
following subsection details the architecture developed to implement this approach.

3.1 Architecture Details

The central part of CopyrightLY’s architecture is on-chain and based on a set of smart contracts, as shown at the centre
of Figure 2. The smart contracts take care of registering Manifestations (i.e. authorship claims) and Complaints (to
denounce authorship claims as potentially fraudulent). Authorship claims and complaints are supported with evidence.
The simplest kind of evidence is based on ﬁles uploaded to decentralized storage, managed by the UploadEvidence
smart contract that registers and links them to manifestations and the accounts triggering the transaction. All the
previous smart contracts use decentralized storage based on IPFS to store manifestations, complaints or evidence
content (data, documents or any kind of media can be uploaded).

5

Semantics and Non-Fungible Tokens for Copyright Management

A PREPRINT

Figure 2: Proposed architecture for CopyrightLY, including a layer of smart contracts operating on-chain (centre), a set
of oracles bringing off-chain data on-chain (left) and a front-end and an API interfaces also managing user credentials
(right).

Another way of supporting claims with evidence is through the oracles responsible for asserting on-chain the off-
chain information about ownership of social media content (YouTube, Twitter or Facebook). For each social media
platform, the oracle veriﬁes information about social media assets through the corresponding APIs, like YouTube’s
API to verify that a predeﬁned identiﬁer has been added to a video description. This mechanism allows checking that
an on-chain account has control over the corresponding off-chain social media assets. The oracles infrastructure is
based on ChainLink 5, a decentralized network giving applications access to trusted off-chain computation and data.

Finally, there are a couple of smart contracts dealing with tokens. The License NFT contract implements an ERC-721
Non-Fungible Token, i.e. a kind of token that is unique and not interchangeable. It can be minted by a creator to
monetize her copyright. The NFT metadata, in addition to the standard attributes like name or image, represents the
reuse terms to be transferred to the future owner of the NFT, as further detailed in Section 4.2.

On the other hand, the CopyrightLY token (CLY) implemented by the CLYToken smart contract is an ERC-20 fungi-
ble token, interchangeable like money. This smart contract makes this token particular in the sense that it can just be
minted, in exchange for Ethereum’s native cryptocurrency Ether, to be staked on an existing authorship claim or com-
plaint. If unstaked, it is burned back into Ether. This token implements the incentive mechanism to curate authorship
claims and complaints, as detailed in Section 4.1.

Three off-chain components are interacting with all this on-chain infrastructure. First of all, a Web front-end through
which creators and reusers interact with on-chain logic and state. They do so using Ethereum wallets that link the ac-
counts used to interact with the blockchain with veriﬁable credentials following a decentralized Self-Sovereign Identity
approach Preukschat and Reed (2021). This component stores the credentials issued to users’ on-chain identities in a
private and self-sovereign way. Users can request that third parties issue these credentials after a veriﬁcation process.
In the case of CopyrightLY, the objective is to have both credentials about control of social media proﬁles and legal
identities (required in case of litigation).

Additionally, there is a back-end that monitors blockchain events, keeps track of the on-chain state and provides a
better user experience because it does not require that users connect directly to the blockchain. This component is

5https://chain.link

6

BlockchainCreator IdentitylegalidentityonlineidentitiesSmart Contract Manifestations(authorship claims)Smart Contract UploadEvidencecredentialWalletSmart Contract CLYTokenWebAppFacebook OracleFacebook OracleFacebook OracleTwitter OracleYouTube OracleSmart Contract FacebookEvidenceSmart Contract TwitterEvidenceSmart Contract YouTubeEvidenceFrontendThe Graph NetworkGraphQL APISmart Contract License NFTJohn DoeNFT Marketplace or MetaverseeventsJSON+LDSmart Contract ComplaintstradeNFTOther AppsEthereumChainlinkCeramicRights ModuleSemantic DataAPIReuserReuser IdentitycredentialWallettrade,reuseJSON+LDreuseSemantics and Non-Fungible Tokens for Copyright Management

A PREPRINT

based on The Graph6, an indexing protocol for querying networks like Ethereum. It makes a model of the on-chain
state for a set of smart contracts by monitoring the events they generate, which is then available through a GraphQL
Hartig and P´erez (2018) API.

The last off-chain component is the Rights Module, responsible for NFTs’ semantic data exploitation and providing
reasoning mechanisms based, fundamentally, on the Copyright Ontology. License NFTs can be automatically traded
and integrated into existing NFT marketplaces and metaverses, as shown in Figure 6, as they are based on the ERC-721
standard. The Rights Module monitors minting and ownership change events through the GraphQL API. Moreover,
it retrieves NFTs’ semantic metadata from IPFS by following the token URI also deﬁned by the NFT standard. All
this information is stored in a semantic repository providing the reasoning and semantic query capabilities, available
through a SPARQL DuCharme (2013) API. Through this API, reusers can, for instance, check if an intended reuse is
allowed by the NFTs they own in the context of a speciﬁc metaverse location. Further details about the implementation
of this feature are provided in Section 4.2.

4

Implementation Highlights

The previous architecture has been implemented as a Proof of Concept in the context of the ONTOCHAIN NGI H2020
project. It is possible to follow the development process, get access to the source code and test the current version
of the application from the project’s dashboard7. The dashboard also includes the automated tests used to evaluate
CopyrightLY compliance with the requirements speciﬁcation. The following subsections highlight some of the most
relevant parts of the project, including the incentive mechanisms to curate authorship claims and the implementation
of licensing NFTs based on semantic technologies and ontologies, which enable copyright reasoning on top of NFTs
ownership and tradeability mechanisms.

4.1

Incentives to Curate Authorship Claims

One of the biggest issues detected in the state-of-the-art proposals analyzed in Section 2 is that registering content on-
chain does not provide any guarantee of its validity. It might be just the action of someone with access to a digital copy
of a creation, but not necessarily the original creator. To deal with these false authorship claims, CopyrightLY leverages
two incentive mechanisms. The ﬁrst one is based on the fact that all claims and evidence are recorded on-chain and
can be used in case of litigation. This is possible even in court, like in the TikTok vs. Baidu case Michalko (2020),
and disincentivizes false claims. However, it just works in the longer term and when some identifying information has
been provided to strengthen the claim.

The second incentive mechanism aims to work on the shorter-term, scale thanks to the wisdom of the crowds and
incentive stronger authorship claims and complaints, supported by evidence and some identifying information like
social media accounts linked to the user identity. The approach is based on a Token Curated Registry Kaur and
Visveswaraiah (2021), where a token with economic value, the CLY token, is used as an incentive mechanism Zhou
et al. (2021) to curate the most reliable manifestations for authorship claims and complaints in a decentralized way.

The mechanism requires creators to stake an amount of the CLY token together with their authorship claims, as shown
in the upper left part of Figure 3, which depicts CLY tokenomics. Following the ”skin in the game” heuristic Taleb
and Sandis (2014), creators risk losing their stake when other creators complain about existing claims, as shown in
the upper right part of the same ﬁgure. Like original claimers, they can also provide supporting evidence to convince
other users to support their position with additional stake. In case of conﬂicting claims, stakes cannot be removed till
it is solved and the side with more stake wins the stake of the other side and shares it proportionally to their stake.

Additionally, ﬁling a complaint on an existing authorship claim blocks the ability of its creator to continue monetizing
it until the conﬂict is solved. Creators can start minting NFTs to license their copyright after staking some CLY and
a time has passed without complaints, for instance, one week. On the other hand, to avoid spam complaints that look
to block monetization opportunities, they become blocking just if the amount of CLY staken on the complaint exceeds
that on the challenged manifestation.

To avoid players with big CLY token stakes dominating the game, an appeal mechanism based on an external arbitra-
tion court and decentralized justice Aouidef et al. (2021) is also considered. In this case, any of the sides can appeal
before the deadline to solve a complaint. The appealing side brings the case to a decentralized arbitration system
like Kleros8. A court is opened on-chain with links to all evidence accumulated by both sides plus any identifying

6https://thegraph.com
7https://github.com/rhizomik/copyrightly
8https://kleros.io

7

Semantics and Non-Fungible Tokens for Copyright Management

A PREPRINT

credentials that the parties might provide. Systems like Klerors are open to jurors that are invited to decide on cases.
There is also a token, in the case of Kleros it is called Pinakion (PNK), which jurors have to stake and which is used
to incentive participation and avoid attacks 9.

Finally, to motivate participation in this staking game, the CLY token has an inﬂationary behaviour Wang and Kr-
ishnamachari (2019) tied to its use. The token price, in Ether, follows a bonding curve Zargham et al. (2020) and
grows with the token supply. Consequently, if the CLY token succeeds and is used more, which requires minting it to
increase the token supply, its price also grows. Early adopters can thus beneﬁt from future players entering the game
and unstake and burn their CLY for an amount of Ether bigger than what they originally invested. However, to avoid
mere speculation, it is important to note that CLY can be staked but not held. And stakers should take care of doing so
on trustful claims that do not put them at risk.

Figure 3: Tokenomics of the CLY token to incentive the curation of authorship claims.

4.2 Semantic NFTs and Copyright Reasoning

The main contribution of CopyrightLY is that authorship claims can be monetized using Semantic NFTs, which solve
the main issues identiﬁed in the state-of-the-art Section 2. First of all, NFTs are linked to manifestations and thus
rooted in an authorship claim accompanied by evidence, a commitment in the form of staked CLY and potentially
curated as previously detailed.

Additionally, NFTs’ metadata deﬁne the scope of the licensed rights, which are modelled using standard semantic tech-
nologies, like the Web Ontology Language (OWL) Hitzler et al. (2012), and based on the Copyright Ontology Garc´ıa
and Gil (2010). They provide the necessary and unambiguous building blocks that also make the terms machine-
actionable.

9https://medium.com/kleros/why-kleros-needs-a-native-token-5c6c6e39cdfe

8

Manifestationstake: X CLY > 0Creator 1Content 1ManifestAuthorship ClaimhashEvidenceCreator 2ManifestUser AContent 1hashComplaintstake: Y CLY > 0Creator 2File ComplaintEvidenceCreator 1User BAdd stake1 week deadlineOutcomeWinning side (bigger stake OR winning appeal) gets stake from losing side (shared proportionally)Add stakeAppealArbitration court (appealing side pays court costs)decision1 week no complaintExploitationMint license NFTsY > X: block exploitationNFT tradeSemantics and Non-Fungible Tokens for Copyright Management

A PREPRINT

As shown in the architecture, Figure 2, the License NFT smart contract registers them on-chain and stores their
metadata on decentralized storage based on IPFS. The licensing terms are serialized as semantic data based on the
JSON-LD10 standard and stored on IPFS resulting in a content hash. This hash is used as the NFT token URI, used to
point to the token metadata. The token URI is immutable so it can be veriﬁed that the terms have not changed after
the token is minted.

The JSON-LD serialisation is conﬁgured so the ERC-721 standard metadata ﬁelds (name, description, external link,
image and animation url) are available as plain JSON. This way, Semantic NFTs’ metadata is compatible with ex-
isting NFT marketplaces. For instance, Listing 1 shows the metadata for an NFT with the name ”Reuse license for
’Copyright Blockchain’”, which corresponds to a piece of video art generated by an Artiﬁcial Intelligence, concretely
VQGAN+CLIP Cetinic and She (2022). Then, Figure 6 shows that Semantic NFT in an existing NFT marketplace, so
ERC-721 interoperability with existing metaverses and marketplaces is retained by Semantic NFTs.

The metadata includes a description ﬁeld that describes the licensing terms as plain text for user consumption. The
rest of the metadata is tied to different vocabularies and ontologies to enable an unambiguous and rich representation
of the terms, which makes them machine-actionable. First of all, the Schema.org vocabulary Guha et al. (2016) is used
for the NFT standard ﬁelds that have the same and meaning in Schema.org, i.e. name, description and image. The
rest of the metadata is responsible for capturing the license terms that grant certain uses of the copyrighted work to the
NFT owner.
For the copyright-related part, terms from the Copyright Ontology11 are used. They are tied to the cro preﬁx in the
@context at the beginning of the JSON-LD serialization, Listing 1 line 4. Overall, the Copyright Ontology deﬁnes the
following models:

• Creation Model: the different shapes of copyright creations along their lifecycle, i.e. Manifestation, Perfor-
mance, Recording.... In the case of Semantic NFTs, authorship claims are Manifestations, i.e. expression of
the work into some kind of object (digital or not) that can be used to claim copyright.

– Example: for the sample Semantic NFT in Listing 1, this corresponds to lines 30-33, where it is deﬁned

the manifestation for which actions are granted by the NFT license.

• Actions Model: captures the copyright actions moving creations along their lifecycle (Manifest, Perform,
Communicate...)
together with actions’ dimensions (who, what, when, where...) and other management
actions like Agree or Disagree. The approach is similar to Schema.org Actions Brickley (2014) and many of
the Copyright Ontology terms are aligned or directly reuse Schema.org ones.

– Example: the actions modelled in the Semantic NFT example are Agree and MakeAvailable, lines 11
and 23 respectively. Both are connected with who performs the action. In the ﬁrst case, the creator
granting the license represented as a Decentralized Identiﬁer (DID12) for the Ethereum account used
by the creator as shown in line 19. In the second case, anyone owning the license NFT can make the
associated content available. The NFT is also identiﬁed using a DID, shown in lines 10 and 27. The NFT
metadata also details other conditions for the reuse, including a start and end time (lines 24 and 25), an
instrument (line 36, which points to the Voxels metaverse Web application) or the authorised territories
(lines 39 and 40, Voxels’ neighbourhood ”The Center” and the ”Vibes” island).

• Rights Model: this part of the Copyright Ontology represents the legal constructs regulating what actions
are favoured or restricted. Different legal systems can be represented, from generic ones geared towards
worldwide harmonization like those proposed by the WIPO WIPO (2004) to those in particular legal regimes.
The Semantic NFT does not use any term from the Rights Model because what is licensed are speciﬁc actions
and no rights are transferred.

Based on the semantic data in NFTs, and in the context of the Rights Module introduced as part of the architecture
in Section 3.1, it is possible to make the licensing terms machine-actionable. The rights module fetches the semantic
data from minted NFTs and monitors on-chain events to track ownership. All this information is combined into a
semantic repository with reasoning and semantic query capabilities. Reasoning has been implemented using SPARQL
DuCharme (2013) queries that check if the different dimensions of an intended reuse (who, what, when, where...) do
ﬁt within the licensing terms as illustrated in Figure 4.

Matches can be direct, like that the content or data to be reused has a particular identiﬁer (or content hash), but they
can also be indirect and require some reasoning. For instance, if the territory where the intended action would take

10https://json-ld.org
11https://rhizomik.net/ontologies/copyrightonto
12https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/

9

Semantics and Non-Fungible Tokens for Copyright Management

A PREPRINT

Figure 4: Illustration of how copyright reasoning can assist re-users to determine if and intended reuse is allowed by
the NFT licenses they own.

place is part or not of those where it is authorized. The SPARQL queries implementing copyright reasoning are hidden
inside the Rights Module, which offers an API providing higher-level operations, like checking if an intended reuse
action is allowed by the terms licensed to the user making the request.

Example: An example of a SPARQL query used by the Rights Module is presented in Listing 2. This query is used
to check if a given user is authorised to reuse some speciﬁc content in a speciﬁc metaverse location, in this case, some
speciﬁc coordinates of the Voxels metaverse. Based on the metadata for the NFT in Listing 1, and if the intended
reuser is the owner of the NFT, it will respond afﬁrmatively to the reuse request and include a link to the agreement
the DID of the license NFT. In this particular case, the Voxels metaverse location where the reuse
granting it, i.e.
is intended is coordinates 6510W,100N13, which correspond to Voxels’ parcel 496214 named ”Generative Artworks
Gallery”. Though the NFT metadata explicitly authorises the reuse for Voxel’s The Center15 neighbourhood and the
Vibes island16, the query implements all the reasoning about how territories are organised in Voxels metaverse. All
that information has been captured using Voxels API and modelled as an ontology available online17. When the
license NFT and ownership information is combined with the ontology about Voxels’ territories and their ”part of”
relationships, the Rights Module is capable of determining that coordinates ”6510W,100N”, i.e. (-65.1 1), are located
on parcel 4962 which belongs to the Vibes island, so that is also an authorised location and the user can display the
NFT there.

5 Conclusions

As shown in the previous sections, CopyrightLY contributes a decentralised authorship and rights management layer
that has been evaluated in the context of the ONTOCHAIN NGI H2020 project ecosystem. This decentralized ap-
plication leverages blockchain and semantic web technologies and implements services that allow claiming content
authorship and providing supporting evidence.

13https://www.voxels.com/play?coords=W@6510W,100N
14https://www.voxels.com/parcels/4962
15https://www.voxels.com/neighborhoods/the-center
16https://www.voxels.com/islands/vibes
17https://rhizomer.rhizomik.net/datasets/voxels

10

Yes, because it matches the terms licensed by the NFT you ownCan I display this NFT video where I am at Voxels metaverse?AgreeDisagreeSemantics and Non-Fungible Tokens for Copyright Management

A PREPRINT

To disincentivize false claims, a Token Curated Registry has been implemented based on the staking of the CLY token
on authorship claims. Claims can be challenged through complaints, which also require staking CLY, and conﬂicts are
resolved based on the amount of CLY that each party has been capable of attracting from anyone willing to participate
in this crowdsources process. Participation is incentivized by binding CLY’s price in Ether, the main cryptocurrency
of the Ethereum blockchain, to a bonding curve. Thus, early adopters can experience a capital gain when they burn
CLY back into Ether.

An additional contribution is that CopyrightLY makes it also possible to monetize content using Semantic Non-
Fungible Tokens (NFTs) grounded on copyright claims and stating the licensing terms using semantic metadata based
on the Copyright Ontology. This solves two of the main issues that the NFT market is experiencing, spam NFTs and
lack of clarity regarding what is owned when an NFT is purchased.

License NFTs metadata captures the reuse terms in a machine-actionable way, so it is possible to use automated
reasoning to assist users with intended reuses. Moreover, despite NFT metadata being enriched with semantics, they
are still compatible with existing marketplaces and metaverses. This makes it possible, as shown through an example,
to use reasoning to determine if a license NFT allows displaying the associated content at a particular metaverse
location.
A prototype of the project is available online at18 and deployed on the Rinkeby Ethereum testnet. Figure 5 shows how
an authorship claim looks in CopyrightLY, including a YouTube evidence and a licensing NFT. That NFT points to the
terms and can be traded on NFT marketplaces, for instance OpenSea’s testing marketplace19, as shown in Figure 6.

6 Future Work

Though the tokenomics of the CLY token have been designed for both authorship claims and potential complaints, the
current implementation only captures the authorship claims part. Future work is to complete the complaints’ part and
implement the designed tokenomics mechanisms that settle the incentives to curate the set of authorship claims. This
includes generating complaints when potentially infringing content is discovered and the incentives to do so.

To detect potentially infringing authorship claims, we anticipate using mechanisms beyond content hashes that detect
just exact copies. However, as discussed in the state of the art Section 2, mechanisms capable of detecting near-
duplicates, like ﬁngerprinting, should be used just as an aid for creators to ﬁnd out false claims of their copyright.
Then, they should go through the process of ﬁling a complaint and providing evidence to attract the CLY stake to win
the case. This might facilitate the curation process and, given the incentives, also attract other users to identify weak
authorship claims and potential CLY stake rewards.

Additionally, though CopyrightLY licensing NFTs are tradeable on existing NFT marketplaces as it has been shown,
existing marketplaces or metaverses miss the functionality to exploit the rich semantics captured by CopyrightLY
NFTs metadata. Future work would be to develop NFT marketplaces and metaverse connectors capable of leveraging
the copyright semantic metadata, for instance by reusing the Rights Module included in the project architecture.

Finally, work will continue by targeting potential users and other interested parties. For the moment, the following
user proﬁles have been identiﬁed:

• Social media creators that are willing to explore alternative monetization options, specially NFTs.

• Independent creators, especially those in developing countries lack access to the media industry or markets,

even those unbanked.

• Media companies looking to license small creators to which current approaches do not scale, especially in

developing countries.

• Marketplaces and metaverses looking for more trustful NFTs, linked to copyright claims and clearly stating

the licensing terms.

CopyrightLY’s user experience (UX) will be evaluated through the participation of potential users from previous
proﬁles. Users will be requested to perform certain tasks under the supervision of UX experts that will evaluate the
user experience. Moreover, post-test surveys will be used to evaluate user satisfaction and recommendations about
future CopyrightLY improvements.

18https://copyrightly.rhizomik.net
19https://testnets.opensea.io

11

Semantics and Non-Fungible Tokens for Copyright Management

A PREPRINT

Figure 5: Authorship claim and supporting evidence linked to the Semantic NFT corresponding to the metadata in
Listing 1.

References

Andreas M. Antonopoulos and Gavin Wood. 2018. Mastering Ethereum: Building Smart Contracts and DApps.

O’Reilly Media, Sebastopol, CA.

Yann Aouidef, Federico Ast, and Bruno Deffains. 2021. Decentralized Justice: A Comparative Analysis of Blockchain
Online Dispute Resolution Projects. Frontiers in Blockchain 4 (March 2021), 564551. https://doi.org/10.
3389/fbloc.2021.564551

Juan Benet. 2014. IPFS - Content Addressed, Versioned, P2P File System. arXiv:1407.3561 [cs] (July 2014). http:

//arxiv.org/abs/1407.3561 arXiv: 1407.3561.

Dan Brickley. 2014.

Announcing Schema.org Actions.

http://blog.schema.org/2014/04/

announcing-schemaorg-actions.html

Wei Cai, Zehua Wang, Jason B. Ernst, Zhen Hong, Chen Feng, and Victor C. M. Leung. 2018. Decentralized
https:

IEEE Access 6 (2018), 53019–53033.

Applications: The Blockchain-Empowered Software System.
//doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2870644

Eva Cetinic and James She. 2022. Understanding and Creating Art with AI: Review and Outlook. ACM Transactions
on Multimedia Computing, Communications, and Applications 18, 2 (Feb 2022), 66:1–66:22. https://doi.org/
10.1145/3475799

Mitchell Clark.

2021.

NFTs,

explained.

https://www.theverge.com/22310188/

nft-explainer-what-is-blockchain-crypto-art-faq

12

Semantics and Non-Fungible Tokens for Copyright Management

A PREPRINT

Figure 6: Semantic NFT traded on the OpenSea NFT marketplace, corresponding to the authorship claim shown in
Figure 5.

Robert Alexandru Dobre, Radu Ovidiu Preda, Radu Alexandru Badea, Mihai Stanciu, and Alexandru Brumaru. 2020.
Blockchain-Based Image Copyright Protection System using JPEG Resistant Digital Signature. In 2020 IEEE 26th
International Symposium for Design and Technology in Electronic Packaging (SIITME). IEEE, Pitesti, Romania,
206–210. https://doi.org/10.1109/SIITME50350.2020.9292296

Mario Dobrovnik, David Herold, Elmar F¨urst, and Sebastian Kummer. 2018. Blockchain for and in Logistics: What

to Adopt and Where to Start. Logistics 2, 3 (2018), 18.

Haihan Duan, Jiaye Li, Sizheng Fan, Zhonghao Lin, Xiao Wu, and Wei Cai. 2021. Metaverse for Social Good: A
University Campus Prototype. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 153–161. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3474085.3479238

Bob DuCharme. 2013. Learning SPARQL: querying and updating with SPARQL 1.1 (second edition ed.). O’Reilly

Media, Sebastopol, CA.

Roberto Garc´ıa, Ana Cediel, Merc`e Teixid´o, and Rosa Gil. 2021. CopyrightLY: Blockchain and Semantic Web for
Decentralised Copyright Management. In Economics of Grids, Clouds, Systems, and Services, Konstantinos Tser-
pes, J¨orn Altmann, Jos´e ´Angel Ba˜nares, Orna Agmon Ben-Yehuda, Karim Djemame, Vlado Stankovski, and Bruno
Tufﬁn (Eds.). Vol. 13072. Springer International Publishing, Cham, 199–206.
https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-030-92916-9_18

13

Semantics and Non-Fungible Tokens for Copyright Management

A PREPRINT

Roberto Garc´ıa and Rosa Gil. 2010. Content value chains modelling using a copyright ontology. Information Systems

35, 4 (2010), 483–495. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.is.2008.12.001

R. V. Guha, Dan Brickley, and Steve Macbeth. 2016. Schema.org: Evolution of Structured Data on the Web. Commun.

ACM 59, 2 (2016), 44–51. https://doi.org/10.1145/2844544

Olaf Hartig and Jorge P´erez. 2018. Semantics and Complexity of GraphQL. In Proceedings of the 2018 World Wide
Web Conference on World Wide Web - WWW ’18. ACM Press, Lyon, France, 1155–1164. https://doi.org/10.
1145/3178876.3186014

Pascal Hitzler, Markus Kr¨otzsch, Bijan Parsia, Peter F. Patel-Schneider, and Sebastian Rudolph. 2012. OWL 2 Web

Ontology Language Primer (Second Edition). http://www.w3.org/TR/owl2-primer/

Jaspreet Kaur and B. Visveswaraiah. 2021. A Brief Survey of Token Curated Registries. In Emerging Technologies
in Data Mining and Information Security, Aboul Ella Hassanien, Siddhartha Bhattacharyya, Satyajit Chakrabati,
Abhishek Bhattacharya, and Soumi Dutta (Eds.). Vol. 1286. Springer Singapore, Singapore, 189–202. https:
//doi.org/10.1007/978-981-15-9927-9_19

Petar Kochovski, Sandi Gec, Vlado Stankovski, Marko Bajec, and Pavel D. Drobintsev. 2019. Trust management in a
blockchain based fog computing platform with trustless smart oracles. Future Generation Computer Systems 101
(Dec. 2019), 747–759. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.future.2019.07.030

M. Kripa, A. Nidhin Mahesh, R. Ramaguru, and P. P. Amritha. 2021. Blockchain Framework for Social Media
DRM Based on Secret Sharing. In Information and Communication Technology for Intelligent Systems, Tomonobu
Senjyu, Parikshit N. Mahalle, Thinagaran Perumal, and Amit Joshi (Eds.). Vol. 195. Springer Singapore, Singapore,
451–458. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-15-7078-0_43

Lawrence Lessig. 1999. Code and other laws of cyberspace. Basic Books, New York. OCLC: ocm42860053.
Esther Mengelkamp, Benedikt Notheisen, Carolin Beer, David Dauer, and Christof Weinhardt. 2018. A blockchain-
based smart grid: towards sustainable local energy markets. Computer Science-Research and Development 33, 1-2
(2018), 207–214.

Peter Mezei, Jo˜ao Pedro Quintais, Alexandra Giannopoulou, and Bal´azs Bod´o. 2021. The Rise of Non-Fungible
Tokens (NFTs) and the Role of Copyright Law – Part II. http://copyrightblog.kluweriplaw.com/2021/
04/22/the-rise-of-non-fungible-tokens-nfts-and-the-role-of-copyright-law-part-ii/

Matej Michalko. 2020.

How TikTok Used Blockchain to Defeat Copyright Infringement.

https:

//www.ipwatchdog.com/2020/03/17/tiktok-used-blockchain-defeat-copyright-infringement/
id=119878/

Iynkaran Natgunanathan, Purathani Praitheeshan, Longxiang Gao, Yong Xiang, and Lei Pan. 2022. Blockchain-Based
Audio Watermarking Technique for Multimedia Copyright Protection in Distribution Networks. ACM Transactions
on Multimedia Computing, Communications, and Applications 18, 3 (Mar 2022), 86:1–86:23.
https://doi.
org/10.1145/3492803

Johannes Pfeffer. 2018. EthOn-an Ethereum ontology. Technical Report 0.2. Consensys. https://consensys.

github.io/EthOn/EthOn_spec.html

Alexander Preukschat and Drummond Reed. 2021. Self-Sovereign Identity Decentralized digital identity and ver-
https://www.manning.com/books/

iﬁable credentials. Manning Publications Co., Shelter Island, NY.
self-sovereign-identity

Jonathan Schmalfeld. 2021. How copyright violations can crash your NFT party. https://fortune.com/2021/08/

04/nfts-copyright-violations-penalties-non-fungible-tokens-collectibles-nfttorney-jonathan-schmalfeld/

Nigel Shadbolt, Wendy Hall, and Tim Berners-Lee. 2006. The Semantic Web Revisited. Intelligent Systems 21, 3

(2006), 96–101. https://doi.org/10.1109/MIS.2006.62

Nassim N. Taleb and Constantine Sandis. 2014. The Skin In The Game Heuristic for Protection Against Tail Events.
Review of Behavioral Economics 1, 1-2 (Jan. 2014), 115–135. https://doi.org/10.1561/105.00000006

M Walport. 2016.
ernment Ofﬁce
distributed-ledger-technology-blackett-review

Distributed ledger

for Science.

technology:

pages.

88

Beyond blockchain.

Report 19. UK Gov-
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/

Yi Lucy Wang and Bhaskar Krishnamachari. 2019. Enhancing Engagement in Token-Curated Registries via an In-
ﬂationary Mechanism. In 2019 IEEE International Conference on Blockchain and Cryptocurrency (ICBC). IEEE,
Seoul, Korea (South), 188–191. https://doi.org/10.1109/BLOC.2019.8751443

WIPO. 2004. WIPO Intellectual Property Handbook: Policy, Law and Use. WIPO Publications. http://www.

wipo.int/about-ip/en/iprm

14

Semantics and Non-Fungible Tokens for Copyright Management

A PREPRINT

Michael Zargham, Jamsheed Shorish, and Krzysztof Paruch. 2020. From Curved Bonding to Conﬁguration Spaces.
In 2020 IEEE International Conference on Blockchain and Cryptocurrency (ICBC). IEEE, Toronto, ON, Canada,
1–3. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICBC48266.2020.9169474

Zhili Zhou, Meimin Wang, Ching-Nung Yang, Zhangjie Fu, Xingming Sun, and Q.M. Jonathan Wu. 2021. Blockchain-
based decentralized reputation system in E-commerce environment. Future Generation Computer Systems 124
(Nov. 2021), 155–167. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.future.2021.05.035

A Semantic NFT Example

Listing 1: JSON-LD serialisation of the metadata of a Semantic NFT granting its owner permission to make available
the content registered by an authorship claim

1 {
2

" @context " : {

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

33

34

35

36

37

38

39

40

41

" @vocab " : " https :// schema . org /" ,
" cro " : " https :// rhizomik . net / ontologies / copyrightonto . owl #" ,
" voxels " : " https :// voxels . com /" ,
" external_link " : " https :// opensea . io / metadata / external_link " ,
" animation_url " : " https :// opensea . io / metadata / animation_url " ,
" youtube_url " : " https :// opensea . io / metadata / youtube_url "

} ,
" @id " : " did : eip155 :4: erc721 :0 x8E8B ...3 a97 :3654...8891" ,
" @type " : " cro : Agree " ,
" name " : " Reuse license for ’ Copyright Blockchain ’" ,
" description " : " Grants the owner permission to make ’ Copyright Blockchain ’

available at The Center neighbourhood and Vibes island from Jun 4 , 2022 ,
4:39:31 PM to Jun 4 , 2023 , 4:39:31 PM " ,

" external_link " : " https :// copyrightly . rhizomik . net / manifestations / QmfK ... TRMS " ,
" image " : " ipfs :// QmfKrv7JgGgekjtVM a ... U2 xX gWV ay c A ZW A VY Q p TR M S " ,
" animation_url " : " ipfs :// QmfKrv7JgGge kjtVMa ... U2 x X gW V ay c A ZW A VY Q p TR M S " ,
" cro : when " : " 2022 -06 -04 T14 :39:31.900 Z " ,
" cro : who " : {

" @id " : " did : ethr :0 x4 :0 x4cf0a8976397 ...0 a0846 54 07 0 7d a 87 21 2 e1 7 " ,
" url " : " https :// copyrightly . rhizomik . net / creators /0 x4cf0 ...2 e17 "

} ,
" cro : what " : {

" @type " : " cro : MakeAvailable " ,
" startTime " : " 2022 -06 -04 T14 :39:31.900 Z " ,
" endTime " : " 2023 -06 -04 T14 :39:31.900 Z " ,
" cro : who " : {

" owns " : { " @id " : " did : eip155 :4: erc721 :0 x8E8B ...3 a97 :3654...8891" }

} ,
" cro : what " : {

" @id " : " ipfs :// Qm fK rv7JgGgekjtVM a ... U2 xX gWV ay c A ZW A VY Q p TR M S " ,
" @type " : " cro : Manifestation " ,
" name " : " Copyright Blockchain " ,
" url " : " https :// copyrightly . rhizomik . net / manifestations / QmfK ... TRMS "

} ,
" cro : with " : {

" @id " : " https :// voxels . com / play "

} ,
" cro : where " : [

{ " @id " : " voxels : neighborhoods / the - center " } ,
{ " @id " : " voxels : islands / vibes " }

]

}

42
43 }

15

Semantics and Non-Fungible Tokens for Copyright Management

A PREPRINT

B Copyright Reasoning Example

Listing 2: SPARQL query implementing the reasoning capabilities to respond to reuse requests based on the terms
licensed by CopyrightLY’s NFTs

1 PREFIX
2 PREFIX
3 PREFIX

cro :
voxels : < http s :// voxels . com / >
geof :

< http s :// rhizomik . net / ontologies / copyrightonto . owl # >

<\ protect \ vrule width0pt \ protect \ href { http :// www . opengis . net / def /

function / geosparql /}{ http :// www . opengis . net / def / function / geosparql /} >

4 PREFIX

geos :

<\ protect \ vrule width0pt \ protect \ href { http :// www . opengis . net / ont /

geosparql #}{ http :// www . opengis . net / ont / geosparql #} >

5 PREFIX
6 PREFIX

schema : < http s :// schema . org / >
vcard :

<\ protect \ vrule width0pt \ protect \ href { http :// www . w3 . org /2006/ vcard

/ ns #}{ http :// www . w3 . org /2006/ vcard / ns #} >

7 PREFIX

xsd :

<\ protect \ vrule width0pt \ protect \ href { http :// www . w3 . org /2001/

XMLSchema #}{ http :// www . w3 . org /2001/ XMLSchema #} >

8
9 SELECT DISTINCT
10 WHERE {
11

? isAuthorized ? why

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

33

34

35

36

37

38

39

40

# Inputs
BIND ( < did : ethr :0 x4 :0 xFd9c5fC8FCecF6 ... fB34778E 0b00C4a70f5 > AS ? reuser )
BIND ( < ipfs :// Q mfKrv7 Jg GgekjtVMa ... U 2x Xg WVa yc AZ WAV YQ pT RMS > AS ? what )
BIND ( " POINT (( -65.1 1) ) " ^^ geos : wktLiteral AS ? coords )
# Currently valid licensing NFT
? nft

a
cro : what
cro : when

cro : Agree ;
? term ;
? agreeDate

FILTER ( xsd : dateTime (? agreeDate ) <= now () )
# Licensing NFT owned by reuser
? reuser schema : owns
# Licensing NFT terms allow to make available the intended content now
cro : MakeAvailable ;
? term
? what ;
? start

a
cro : what
schema : startTime

? nft .

FILTER ( now () >= xsd : dateTime (? start ) )
# Get parcel containing coordinates
? parcel vcard : hasGeo ? geometry
FILTER ( geof : sfWithin (? coords , ? geometry ) )
# Licensed parcel or contained in licensed territory
{

? parcel }

cro : where

{ ? term

UNION

{ ? term

cro : where

? territory .

? parcel ( schema : containedIn ) + ? territory

}

}
# Outputs
BIND ( bound (? nft ) AS ? isAuthorized )
BIND (? nft AS ? why )

}

16

