H. Kim et al.: Perpetual Contract NFT as Collateral for DeFi Composability

This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible
publication. Copyright may be transferred without notice,
after which this version may no longer be accessible.

2
2
0
2

g
u
A
9

]
T
G
.
s
c
[

1
v
2
7
4
6
0
.
8
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

VOLUME 4, 2016

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
Date of publication xxxx 00, 0000, date of current version xxxx 00, 0000.

Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/ACCESS.2017.DOI

Perpetual Contract NFT as Collateral for
DeFi Composability

HYOUNGSUNG KIM1, HYUN-SIK KIM1, AND YONG-SUK PARK.1
1Korea Electronics Technology Institute (KETI), South Korea

Corresponding author: Yong-Suk Park (e-mail: yspark@keti.re.kr).

This research was supported by Culture, Sports and Tourism R&D Program through the Korea Creative Content Agency grant funded by
the Ministry of Culture, Sports and Tourism in 2022 (Project Name: Open Metaverse Asset Platform for Digital Copyrights Management,
Project Number: R2022020034, Contribution Rate: 100%)

ABSTRACT
Ethereum and its standardized token interface have formed decentralized ﬁnance (DeFi), an open ﬁnancial
system based on blockchain smart contracts. The DeFi ecosystem has become richer with the introduction
of DeFi composability projects, such as Lido ﬁnance and Curve ﬁnance. DeFi composability denotes the
concatenation of DeFi services in which each DeFi service locks assets as collateral and gives another
asset as liquidity of locked assets to providers. Providers use the tokens given for other concatenated DeFi
services, such as lending, decentralized exchanges (DEXs), and derivatives. The DeFi ecosystem uses ERC-
20 tokens which can represent the value of an asset. ERC-721 non-fungible tokens (NFTs) are not widely
adopted in DeFi, since they represent rights to an asset and are not considered appropriate for valuation.
In this paper, we propose a new concept, perpetual contract NFT, which exploits perpetual future contracts
in the cryptocurrency derivatives market. Unlike futures contracts in a traditional derivatives market, in the
cryptocurrency derivatives market, most futures contracts are perpetual. In addition, the value of futures
contract is backed by collateral. Therefore, if we mint the rights to perpetual contracts as NFT, we can use
the perpetual contract NFT as collateral for DeFi composability. To validate our proposal and its proﬁtability,
we experiment with the position NFT of Uniswap v3. Through validation, we show that our concept works
in real-world scenarios.

INDEX TERMS Blockchain, Ethereum, Uniswap, Non-Fungible token, Decentralized ﬁnance

I. INTRODUCTION

Since Satoshi Nakamoto proposed Bitcoin as a cryptocur-
rency for peer-to-peer (P2P) electronic cash systems [1],
there have been many tries to use cryptocurrency as cash
alternative in payment systems. Nevertheless, these tries were
unsuccessful because of the high ﬂuctuation of cryptocur-
rency prices. However, the advent of Ethereum [2] and its
standardized token interface, such as ERC-20 and ERC-721,
opened the era of decentralized ﬁnance (DeFi). Speciﬁcally,
the standardized token of Ethereum enables diverse DeFi
services, such as lending, decentralized exchanges (DEXs),
derivatives, etc. DeFi services use a standardized token
pegged to a ﬁat currency, such as the US dollar, to deal with
the high ﬂuctuation of cryptocurrency prices; this pegging
token is named stablecoin. Strictly speaking, the term "sta-
blecoin" for the pegging "token" is a misnomer. However, in
the cryptocurrency industry, this term is widely accepted and
used instead of "stable token".

Cryptocurrency lending is one of the notable DeFi services
in which cryptocurrency holders provide their assets to a
lending platform to earn lending fees. Popular lending service
protocols include MakerDAO [3] and Aave [4]. Furthermore,
a provider can collateralize their provided asset for borrowing
up to a max loan to value (LTV). For example, assume the
LTV of the cryptocurrency of Ethereum, Ether, is 80%. Under
this LTV, if Ether is provided to the lending platform, the
lending platform pays back lending fees in return. In addition,
for liquidity of the provided asset, the provider can set the
asset as collateral and get a loan equivalent to 80% price
of the collateral from the lending platform. However, if the
value of the collateral decreases below certain threshold, the
lending platform liquidates the collateral to recover the loan.

In Ethereum, there are two types of standard token inter-
faces: ERC-20 [5] and ERC-721 [6]. ERC-20 tokens repre-
sent the asset value, such as the value of an asset relative to
a ﬁat currency. ERC-721 tokens, also known as non-fungible

2

VOLUME 4, 2016

H. Kim et al.: Perpetual Contract NFT as Collateral for DeFi Composability

tokens (NFTs), represent the rights associated with the asset.
For example, if an artist mints a piece of work as an NFT,
the NFT denotes the work’s digital title deed. ERC-20 tokens
are suitable to be used as collateral to set LTV rates. Hence,
ERC-20 makes lending and liquidating process possible due
to its value representing characteristic.

For example, let us assume the use of wrapped Ether
(WETH) in a DeFi lending service. WETH is an ERC-20
token pegged to Ether, each WETH representing a value
of Ether [7], so a WETH holder can exchange WETH for
Ether at almost the same market rate. Therefore, in a DeFi
lending platform, the WETH holder can borrow assets using
WETH as collateral. The DeFi lending platform sets the
LTV of collateralized WETH to handle the ﬂuctuation of
WETH price. When the WETH price decreases steeply, a
DeFi lending platform liquidates collateralized WETH to
recover costs. On the other hand, ERC-721, which is used
for digital collection NFTs [8], [9], does not have clear
criteria for valuation. If someone paid one WETH for an
NFT representing the rights to a digital collection, there is
no guarantee that it will retain the one WETH value in the
future. Hence, NFTs cannot be used as primary collateral in
DeFi lending platforms. However, in this paper, we present
a new concept to utilize the characteristic of ERC-721 as
collateral by exploiting a perpetual contract of futures in the
cryptocurrency derivatives exchanges.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.
Section II, as background, introduces perpetual contracts,
one of the futures contracts in cryptocurrency derivatives
exchanges, to help understand the perpetual contract NFT.
In addition, we present DeFi composability and its use case.
The use case shows how DeFi composability and perpetual
contract NFT can be used as trading strategies for the futures
market. Section III presents a more speciﬁc use case scenario
with Uniswap v3 [10] to validate proﬁtability. Section IV
summarizes our work and concludes the paper.

II. PERPETUAL CONTRACT NFT AND USE CASE
SCENARIOS
In this section, to help understand the concept of perpetual
contract NFT, we introduce perpetual contracts specialized
in futures trading of cryptocurrency derivatives exchanges.
After the introduction to perpetual contracts, we present
perpetual contract NFTs and demonstrate a use case where
it is used as collateral to maximize proﬁt or hedge liquidation
in futures trading.

A. PERPETUAL CONTRACTS
In a traditional derivatives market, traders agree to buy or
sell some underlying asset, such as gold or oil, at a pre-
determined price and time in the future through ﬁnancial
futures contract. The transaction of the asset must take place
at the set price at the contract expiration date. However, in the
cryptocurrency derivatives market, most futures contracts do
not have a predetermined expiration date; these contracts are
called perpetual contracts. Perpetual contracts allow traders

to deposit cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin, Ether, or stablecoins
as collateral to derivatives exchanges; using these collaterals,
traders make ﬁnancial futures contracts on select cryptocur-
rencies. Furthermore, traders can settle perpetual contracts at
any time to claim proﬁts or avoid liquidation.

For example, in a perpetual contract for a derivative of
increasing Ether price, known as a long position, perpetual
contract holders can claim proﬁt at any time or hold the po-
sition as long as they want because there is no predetermined
contract expiration date. However, if the derivatives price
moves differently from the trader’s prediction, the wrong
prediction reduces the value of the perpetual contract. When
the trader’s collateral is not enough to back the damaged per-
petual contract, the exchange liquidates the trader’s collateral
to recover losses. To avoid losing all collateral, traders must
settle their perpetual contracts before liquidation.

B. PERPETUAL CONTRACT NFT
Collateral backs the value of the perpetual contract, so the
perpetual contract holder can settle the contract to claim
their collateral with proﬁt or loss whenever they want. That
is, each perpetual contract denotes the right to claim the
collateral. Therefore, we can mint the perpetual contract as
an NFT representing the rights to the collateral. For example,
assume a trader makes a perpetual contract using 100 US
dollars stablecoin as collateral for futures, and the market
gives a perpetual contract NFT to the trader. At the time of
making the NFT, the NFT holder can settle the contract to
claim 100 US dollars stablecoin because holding the NFT
denotes that the holder has the right to claim the collateral.
Hence, a perpetual contract NFT can be seen as possessing
the value of the collateral, since it represents the right to
claim the collateral. As a result, the perpetual contract NFT
holder can utilize it as collateral in other DeFi services, such
as lending, DEXs, or derivatives.

In the following subsection, we present use cases of per-
petual contract NFT for DeFi composability in the futures
market. In addition, in the next section, we propose a scenario
to utilize a position NFT of Uniswap v3 [10], a popular DEX,
as collateral.

C. USE CASE
Valuation of ordinary NFTs, such as digital collections, game
items, and lands in virtual worlds, depends on a previous
selling price; namely, there are no objective criteria for valu-
ation. Hence, these NFTs are not recommended to be used as
collateral in DeFi services. However, the value of perpetual
contract NFT is backed by collateral, so it is possible to
exploit the valuation of perpetual contract NFT as collateral
in various DeFi services. In addition, perpetual contract NFT
follows standard interface ERC-721, so it is possible to adopt
it in trading scenarios, such as peer-to-peer (P2P), peer-to-
exchange (P2E), and exchange-to-exchange (E2E). Hence,
perpetual contract NFT can be adopted to DeFi compos-
ability. DeFi composability, also known as DeFi Lego, is
the concatenation of DeFi services to maximize proﬁt by

VOLUME 4, 2016

3

H. Kim et al.: Perpetual Contract NFT as Collateral for DeFi Composability

FIGURE 1. Use case of perpetual contract NFT. (a) denotes Trader A utilizing perpetual NFT as collateral to maximize proﬁt or hedge liquidation. (b) denotes
DeFi lending service requesting liquidation of the collateral by Trader A.

giving liquidity to a locked asset. This subsection presents
additional background details about DeFi composability and
demonstrates a practical use case of DeFi composability and
perpetual contract NFT as strategies to maximize proﬁt and
avoid liquidation in the futures market.

1) DeFi composability
DeFi composability, also called DeFi Lego, is a way to
maximize proﬁt by giving liquidity to a locked asset. Liq-
uidity describes the degree to which an asset can be quickly
converted into ready cash, maintaining its market price value.
For example, Beacon chain [14] is testing a new consensus
algorithm for Ethereum 2.0. To be a miner, who can get
block generation rewards [15] from Beacon chain, they have
to stake 32 Ether as a deposit, and Beacon chain locks this
deposit until Ethereum 2.0 is released. Even though miners
get block generation rewards as incentive for staking, they
lose the liquidity for 32 Ethers. Hence, Lido ﬁnance [13]
released a DeFi staking delegation service. Lido ﬁnance gives
delegators a block generation reward and liquidity for locked
Ether. Speciﬁcally, to give liquidity to delegated Ether, when
Ether holders hand over their Ethers to Lido ﬁnance, Lido
ﬁnance gives the same amount of stETH, a tokenized version
of staked ether, as delegated Ether. Namely, Ether backs
worth of stETH like collateral. As a result, stETH holders can
use it like Ether in other DeFi services, such as Curve ﬁnance
[16], and stETH holders get a block generation fee for staking
to Beacon chain from Lido ﬁnance. Therefore, unlike direct
staking to the Beacon chain, the staking delegation of Lido
ﬁnance provides both liquidity of staked Ethers and block
generation rewards in the Beacon chain.

Delegated Ethers to Lido ﬁnance are locked in the Beacon
chain, so it needs a service to swap stETH to Ether. For
this service, Curve ﬁnance [16] provides the stETH swap.
In Curve ﬁnance, stETH or Ether holders can provide their
assets to a liquidity pool (LP), which helps asset swap; as
rewards for providing liquidity, providers get an LP token and
swap fee. Namely, concatenated DeFi services, such as Lido
ﬁnance and Curve ﬁnance, give Ether holders cumulative
rewards: Beacon chain rewards, swap fees, and LP tokens. In
addition, they can utilize LP tokens for other DeFi services

to get more proﬁt. These concatenated DeFi services for
cumulative rewards are called DeFi composability.

2) Perpetual contract NFT as collateral for futures
Perpetual contract NFT is backed by collateral, so valuation
is possible. As a result, perpetual contract NFT can be
utilized as collateral for DeFi composability like ERC-20
tokens. Uniswap v3 [10] position NFT shows a possibility of
perpetual contract NFT. In Uniswap v3, liquidity providers
concentrate their assets to a spot of LP as liquidity and get a
position NFT representing the right of liquidity in the spot.
There is no predetermined expiration date of liquidity, so
liquidity providers can reduce liquidity in LP whenever they
want. Therefore, the position NFT is a kind of perpetual
contract NFT. If liquidity providers exploit this position NFT
as collateral for DeFi composability, such as a loan, they can
make more proﬁt without rebalancing liquidity. We discuss
in more detail Uniswap v3 and its position NFT in the next
section.

Traders can use perpetual contracts NFT as collateral to
maximize proﬁt in the cryptocurrency futures market. Fig.
1 shows two cases of perpetual contract NFT to exploit
as collateral for loans. Fig. 1 (a) presents the borrowing
process to maximize proﬁt. Trader A makes a perpetual
contract of futures like Ether price position using their asset
as collateral. After making the perpetual contract, the futures
market gives a perpetual contract NFT, representing the rights
of the perpetual contract and collateral. To maximize proﬁt,
Trader A delegates these rights to the DeFi lending service
by giving NFT for a loan; using this loan, Trader A makes
a new perpetual contract. When Trader A wants to close all
perpetual contracts to claim proﬁts and collateral, Trader A
settles the second perpetual contract NFT and repays for the
loan to the DeFi lending service to take back the perpetual
contract NFT. Next, Trader A settles this perpetual contract
NFT to take back their collateral and proﬁts. Delegating the
right of collateral to DeFi lending service denotes that DeFi
lending service can claim collateral of Trader A to futures
market for recovering loan. Fig. 1 (b) shows recovering by
the DeFi lending service. When the value of a perpetual
contract is down, the DeFi lending service request settlement

4

VOLUME 4, 2016

H. Kim et al.: Perpetual Contract NFT as Collateral for DeFi Composability

before the futures market liquidate traders’ collateral and gets
traders’ collateral to recover the loan.

In addition, by using perpetual contract NFT as collateral,
traders can avoid liquidation without rebalancing their po-
sition. In the derivatives market, futures prices do not move
linearly, so even if a trader makes an accurate long-term price
prediction, liquidation may occur due to short-term price
movements. Therefore, traders reserve assets to respond,
such as price movements, or rebalance their contracts to
avoid liquidation. However, perpetual contract NFT helps
to let traders exploit all their assets for trading futures. For
example, assume a trader makes a perpetual contract as a
long position for futures price using all assets, but the short-
term price is decreasing. In this situation, the market will
liquidate the trader’s collateral; if there is a perpetual contract
NFT, the trader exploits it as collateral to borrow assets from
the lending service to make a new position. With this new
position, the trader can make proﬁt for an additional margin
to avoid liquidation without rebalancing the position.

III. PROFITABILITY VALIDATION
In this section, an overview of automated market maker
(AMM) and concentrated liquidity is given as background.
AMM is the underlying protocol of Uniswap [17]. Concen-
trated liquidity is a mechanism which was aggregated to
AMM in the third version release of Uniswap, Uniswap v3
[10]. In addition, we validate the proﬁtability of NFT as
collateral using concentrated liquidity of Uniswap v3.

A. BACKGROUND
Uniswap proposed a simple AMM protocol for DEX, and
Uniswap v3 applied concentrated liquidity to AMM. These
contributions brought forth improvements of other DEXs,
such as Curve ﬁnance [16]. In this subsection, we introduce
the concepts behind AMM and concentrated liquidity in
Uniswap, and we use concentrated liquidity to show prof-
itability of NFT as collateral.

1) Automated market maker
Unlike centralized exchange (CEX) that uses an order book
system for trading, DEX, such as Uniswap, uses AMM for
trading. In the order book trading of CEXs, centralized inter-
mediaries match prices through bid and ask to help trading.
However, in the AMM trading of DEX, a decentralized
automated asset swapping algorithm, known as AMM, makes
trading possible. The AMM adjusts a swap ratio of asset pairs
in a liquidity pool (LP) for automated algorithmic swaps, and
liquidity providers present assets as liquidity to the LP to
get a swap fee. Furthermore, LPs in Uniswap consist of the
liquidity provider’s asset pairs. For example, UNI/WETH LP
consists of two asset pairs: a governance token of Uniswap
(UNI) and wrapped Ether (WETH); the AMM helps traders
swap UNI with WETH and vice versa by adjusting the swap
ratio of this pair. The AMM of Uniswap, known as the
constant product formula (CPF) is:

FIGURE 2. Uniswap AMM curve of WETH-UNI pair and liquidity
distributions

x · y = k

where x and y denote the respective reserves of two assets
X and Y, and k is constant [17]. Fig. 2 (a) shows the AMM
curve of the WETH-UNI pair.

2) Concentrated liquidity of Uniswap v3
Prior to Uniswap v3 release, previous versions of Uniswap
allocated liquidity evenly, forming a uniform distribution. In
Uniswap, swap fee rewards depend on liquidity shares. If
liquidity is distributed evenly, the liquidity provider may miss
out on swap fee rewards.

For example, assume all swaps happen in the band b1 and
that there is a liquidity provider who has enough assets to
dominate liquidity shares of a speciﬁc band of AMM. If the

VOLUME 4, 2016

5

liquidity provider concentrates all assets to a band, as in Fig.
2 (c), the liquidity provider achieves 100% of the liquidity
shares of the band and takes 100% of the collected swap
fees in b1. However, in evenly distributed liquidity, liquidity
is allocated to all bands regardless of the swap’s existence.
As a result, even if the liquidity provider has enough assets
to dominate band b1, the liquidity provider cannot use all
assets to dominate the liquidity share of the band. Instead,
only swap fees for the 20% of liquidity allocated in band b1
can be collected.

Unlike previous versions of Uniswap, in Uniswap v3,
liquidity providers allocate their liquidity manually. Liquidity
providers can concentrate in a speciﬁc band in AMM to
maximize their swap fee rewards as shown in Fig. 2 (c). The
liquidity provider dominates the liquidity shares of the band
and takes all collected swap fees of the band. Concentrated
liquidity can exploit all assets to a band to maximize proﬁt,
but it does not generate proﬁt when the swap ratio changes.
The swap ratio changes when swaps happen more frequently
for one asset than another. Fig. 2 (a) illustrates swap ratio
changes in AMM. If liquidity allocation is uniformly dis-
tributed as in Fig. 2 (b), liquidity providers can receive swap
fee rewards regardless of swap ratio changes. However, if
liquidity allocation is concentrated as in Fig. 2 (c) and swap
ratio changes from band b1 to b2, liquidity providers cannot
receive any swap fee since there are no liquidity shares
allocated in b2.

For concentrated liquidity, Uniswap v3 presents LP with
three types of fee tiers f := {0.05%, 0.30%, 1%} ; additional
fee tiers can be enabled by UNI governance [10]. We can
estimate the expected collected fee rewards of the liquidity
provider j, who concentrates liquidity in the band i with fee
tier x as follows:

Rj

i :=

Lj
i
(cid:80) Li

· Ax

i · fx

(1)

where Lj
i denotes liquidity of the liquidity provider j in
band i, Ax
i denotes accumulated trade volume of band i for
i / (cid:80) Li
24 hours in LP with fee tier fx, and fx ∈ f . Lj
denotes the liquidity shares of j in band i, and Ax
i · fx means
unclaimed fees in LP of fee tier fx for 24 hours. In addition,
for n, m ∈ N, LP of n bands is LP := {L1, L2, ..., Ln}
and liquidity band i consisting of m providers is Li
:=
{L1
i , L2
i }. We use the above deﬁnitions for proﬁtabil-
ity validation.

i , ..., Lm

B. PROFITABILITY OF NFT AS COLLATERAL
The concentrated liquidity of Uniswap v3 allows liquidity
providers to manually allocate liquidity position to maximize
proﬁt. However, manual allocation raises concerns about
rebalancing the position. When the swap ratio is changed,
liquidity providers need to rebalance liquidity distribution to
avoid losses. As a result, concerned liquidity providers prefer
Uniswap v2 over Uniswap v3. They believe that without
optimal position rebalancing, Uniswap v3 gives fewer returns

H. Kim et al.: Perpetual Contract NFT as Collateral for DeFi Composability

FIGURE 3. Liquidity position NFT of WETH-UNI pool in Uniswap v3

than Uniswap v2 [18]. In this subsection, we propose a
method which will motivate liquidity providers to migrate to
Uniswap v3. By using Uniswap position NFT as collateral,
liquidity position becomes the futures contract of the deriva-
tives market.

1) Uniswap position NFT as collateral

Fig. 3 shows the position NFT of the Uniswap v3 of WETH-
UNI with a 0.3% fee tier LP. When liquidity providers
allocate assets to a speciﬁc band of LP as liquidity position,
liquidity providers get a position NFT representing their
rights to the liquidity position in an AMM. We can consider
the position NFT as a perpetual contract NFT because the
position of Uniswap has similar characteristics to the per-
petual contract of the derivatives market. Namely, liquidity
providers can hold their position indeﬁnitely and close their
position to claim assets whenever they want. Furthermore,
reserved assets of liquidity providers back the value of
the position, like collaterals backing the value of perpetual
contracts. Therefore, position NFT holders get rights to the
reserved assets and can claim the assets in that position. In
addition, NFT is a standard interface, so it is possible to trade
the position NFT in an NFT market. The buyer of a position
NFT gets the right to claim the assets bound to the position.
Position NFT holders can make use of DeFi composability
to exploit position NFT as collateral to reduce concerns as-
sociated with position rebalancing. The value of the position
NFT can be assessed by the assets in its position. Based on
this valuation, the position NFT holder can borrow additional
assets from other DeFi lending services with the position
NFT as collateral. Using these assets, holders can make a new
position in Uniswap v3 instead of rebalancing their position,
or they can use the assets for other DeFi services.

6

VOLUME 4, 2016

H. Kim et al.: Perpetual Contract NFT as Collateral for DeFi Composability

2) Proﬁtability validation
In Uniswap AMM, when trade volumes move from bands i
to i + 1, liquidity providers must decide whether to rebal-
ance the position or not. Rebalancing raises concerns about
losing proﬁt. To mitigate the concerns, we propose the use
of position NFT as collateral for DeFi composability, such
as lending service, to borrow additional assets. To estimate
the proﬁtability from borrowing, assume that there is no
additional liquidity except borrowing from provider j, and
fee tier fx is ﬁxed until the provider reduces all liquidity.
Under these assumptions, we can estimate the borrowing
proﬁtability as follows:

·Ax

i ·fx ≤

Lj
i
(cid:80) Li

·Ax

i ·fx+

i+1

Lj
(cid:80) Li+1

Lj
i
(cid:80) Li

and

·Ax

i+1·fx−Lj

i+1·I
(2)

i

i+1 = LT V · Lj
Lj
I denotes daily loan interest rate of lending services, and
LT V denotes loan to value. For example, when the price of a
position NFT is $100 and LTV rate is 80%, the position NFT
holder can borrow up to $80 with position NFT as collateral.
By rearranging inequality (2), we obtain:

(3)

I ≤

i+1

Ax
(cid:80) Li+1

· fx

(4)

Equation (4) shows that proﬁts depend on Ax

i+1. Let us
assume that a liquidity provider j borrows the same amount
of UNI and WETH from AAVE [4] with a variable borrow
rate for short-term from an LP with fee tier fx = 0.30%.
Fig. 4 presents the borrow rate of two assets for 2022 Q1
in AAVE. The average of each asset’s annual variable rate
for 1Q is 0.519% and 0.733%. Therefore, the annual average
borrow rate for the total amount of assets is 0.626% when
a liquidity provider borrows the same volume of each asset.
Since Uniswap gives daily fees to liquidity providers [18],
we can estimate proﬁtability as follows:

0.626
365

≤

i+1

Ax
(cid:80) Li+1

· 0.30

(5)

Therefore,

from the futures contract perspective,

if
provider j expects trade volume in band i + 1 to be more
than 0.5% of liquidity in band i + 1, provider j will use the
position NFT as collateral for a loan to generate more proﬁt.
Since using the position NFT as collateral for a loan gives
more returns than nonrebalancing, it offers new alternatives
for liquidity providers who are still staying in Uniswap v2 to
migrate to Uniswap v3.

C. DISCUSSION
In this section, we used the position NFT to provide an
example of perpetual contract NFT and prove its proﬁtability.
Unlike the traditional ﬁnancial market, most of the future
contracts in the cryptocurrency market do not have a ﬁxed

FIGURE 4. Borrow Annual Percentage Rate (APR) of UNI and WETH in
AAVE for 2022 1Q. AAVE provides loan services based on collateral. For UNI,
only variable borrow rate is available for loan. For WETH, variable and stable
rates are available for loan. Data was extracted from a subgraph in AAVE
https://github.com/aave/protocol-subgraphs.

deadline. Such contracts with no expiration dates are called
perpetual contracts. We introduced a new perspective for
utilizing perpetual contracts through perpetual contract NFT.
Furthermore, we validated proﬁtability in the previous sub-
section which will motivate liquidity provision in Uniswap
v3. In our proﬁtability validation process, only short-term
loans were considered. For long-term loans, additional con-
siderations are necessary to maximize proﬁt. First, there
needs to be a clear understanding that there are many factors
that can inﬂuence borrow annual percentage rate (APR), such
as macroeconomics and serial liquidation in DeFi. Second,
impermanent loss may occur during long-term borrowing due
to cryptocurrency price ﬂuctuation.

IV. CONCLUSION
In this work, we introduced a new perspective for utilizing
perpetual contracts as NFT for DeFi composability, such
as lending, DEX, and derivatives. Speciﬁcally, we proposed
minting a perpetual contract as NFT to exploit it in lending
services as collateral. Using this lending service, perpetual
contract NFT holders can maximize their proﬁt or avoid
liquidations in the futures market. A real-world use case was

VOLUME 4, 2016

7

H. Kim et al.: Perpetual Contract NFT as Collateral for DeFi Composability

provided through concentrated liquidity and position NFTs
used in Uniswap v3. The position NFT in DeFi composability
was used to maximize the liquidity provider’s proﬁt without
rebalancing by considering the liquidity position in the fu-
tures contract.

REFERENCES
[1] S. Nakamoto, "Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system," [Online].

Available: https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf

[2] V. Buterin, "A next-generation smart contract and decentralized applica-
tion platform," [Online]. Available: https://ethereum.org/en/whitepaper/

[3] Maker DAO,
Collateral
https://makerdao.com/en/whitepaper/. Accessed on: June 20, 2022.

Protocol: MakerDAO’s Multi-
Available:

"The Maker
(MCD)

[Online].

System,"

Dai

[4] AAVE,

"AAVE

Protocol

Available:

line].
col/blob/master/docs/Aave_Protocol_Whitepaper_v1_0.pdf.
on: June 20, 2022.

Whitepaper

[On-
https://github.com/aave/aave-proto-
Accessed

V1.0,"

[5] F. Vogelsteller, V. Buterin, “EIP-20: Token Standard,” [Online]. Available:

https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-20.

[6] W. Entriken, D. Shirley, J. Evans, and N. Sachs, “EIP-721: Non-Fungible
Token Standard,” [Online]. Available: https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-
721.

[7] RADAR, "WETH | ERC20 tradable version of ETH," [Online]. Available:

https://WETH.io/. Accessed on: June 20, 2022

[8] A.

Zen,

“CryptoKitties,”

[Online].

Available:

https://www.cryptokitties.co/. Accessed on: June 20, 2022

[9] BAYC.

"bored

[Online].
https://boredapeyachtclub.com. Accessed on: June 20, 2022
"Uniswap

v3 Core",

al., “,

club,"

yacht

ape

et

[10] Hayden

[Online] Available:

Available:

X.
Available:

https://uniswap.org/whitepaper-v3.pdf. Accessed on: June 23, 2022
"Immutable

Whitepaper,"

[11] IMMUTABLE

X

[On-
https://support.immutable.com/hc/en-

line].
us/article_attachments/4408240189583/Immutable_X_Whitepaper.pdf.
Accessed on: June 20, 2022
Team.
Sandbox
Govern.
Own.

[12] The
ate.
https://installers.sandbox.game/The_Sandbox_Whitepaper_2020.pdf.
Accessed on: June 20, 2022

SANDBOX

[Online].

Earn.,"

"The

Play.

Cre-
Available:

[13] Lido,

"Lido: Ethereum Liquid

Staking",

https://lido.ﬁ/static/Lido:Ethereum-Liquid-Staking.pdf. Accessed
June 20, 2022

[Online] Available:
on:

[14] V. Buterin et al., “, "Combining GHOST and Casper," arXiv:2003.03052,

Mar. 2020.

[15] V. Buterin et al., “, "Incentives in Ethereum’s Hybrid Casper Protocol,"

arXiv:1903.04205, Mar. 2019.

[16] Curve.ﬁ, "Curve Documentation Release 1.0.0", [Online] Available:
https://curve.readthedocs.io/_/downloads/en/latest/pdf/. Accessed
on:
June 23, 2022

[17] Hayden

et

al., “,

"Uniswap

v2 Core",

[Online] Available:

https://uniswap.org/whitepaper.pdf. Accessed on: June 23, 2022

[18] A.

and
fees

v3
re-
Adams
turns more
Available:
https://uniswap.org/SuperiorReturnsForLiquidityProviders.pdf. Accessed
on: June 23, 2022

Uniswap
[Online].

Liao,
passive

"When
LPs"

G
for

8

VOLUME 4, 2016

