2
2
0
2

g
u
A
2

]

Y
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
0
5
3
1
0
.
8
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Application of Blockchain Smart Contracts in
E-commerce and Government

Kamal Kishor Singh (kamal.kishor@gmail.com)

24 March 2022

ABSTRACT
With technological advances and the establishment of e-commerce models,
business challenges have shifted to online platforms. The promise of embedding
self-executing and autonomous programs into blockchain technologies has at-
tracted increased interest and its use in niche solutions. The precarious nature
of business transactions and contracts has been brought to light with several
scandals such as money laundering and illicit transactions, resulting in the loss
of billions of moneys globally. The failures to prevent fraud, insecurities, ﬁ-
nancial crimes, and other illegal transactions have hampered the eﬀorts of free
and fair markets. The right solution perceived to foster security, accountabil-
ity, inclusiveness, cost-eﬀectiveness, and transparency involves smart contracts.
Nonetheless, smart contracts are not well-understood due to their immaturity
as an emerging technology. This research paper’s principal aim is to analyze the
implications of blockchain smart contracts on the modern e-commerce business.
Using qualitative interviews, the study sought the opinions of the eleven industry
leaders regarding smart contracts. Findings reveal that the technology is gain-
ing momentum in e-commerce, particularly in ﬁnancial transfer, record-keeping,
real estate and property management, insurance, mortgage, supply chain man-
agement, data storage, authorization of credit, denaturalized intelligence, avi-
ation sector, shipping of products, invoice ﬁnancing and other domains. The
signiﬁcant beneﬁts of widespread adoption and deployment of smart contracts
include their capability to deliver decentralization, eﬃcacy, cost-eﬀectiveness,
transparency, speed, autonomy, transparency, privacy, and security, encouraging
the emergence of novel business models. Albeit these beneﬁts that revolutionize
online transactions, the technology faced multifaceted challenges. Smart tech-
nologies are only a decade old and are not advanced in security, transparency,
cost-eﬀectiveness, and regulatory framework. Furthermore, organizational, and
technical challenges limit their deployment: incompatibility with legacy systems,
scalability, bugs, speed, and lack of talent and understanding regarding smart
contracts. Consequently, policymakers, developers, researchers, practitioners,
and other stakeholders need to invest eﬀort and time to foster the technologies
and address pertinent issues to enable the global adoption of smart contracts
by small and big businesses.

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
1 Introduction

1.1 Background

The global economy is experiencing rapid technological advances and a digital
value chain coupled with process automation. The growing technological sys-
tems are encouraging changes in business aspects. One of the signiﬁcant shifts
experienced involves automation or the digitalization of commerce. Tapscott
(2016) notes that technology facilitates eﬃcient and cost-eﬀective operations
with less human resources and minimizes operational costs. Additionally, it
speeds up the diﬀerent processes and results in a reduction in the overall business
cost. Technology can speed up various processes and brings about outstanding
safety and transparency in business (Tapscott and Tapscott, 2016). Digital-
ization entails the utilization of technologies to transform business models and
oﬀer novel revenue streams and value-generation opportunities in digital busi-
nesses (BarNir, Gallaugher and Auger, 2003). Digitalization oﬀers novel ways
of communicating, collaborating, transacting, interacting online, and processing
work (Zhang, Bian and Zhu, 2013). Many businesses globally are reinventing
and transforming their commercial operations from manual to e-commerce to
increase eﬃciency, security, productivity, cost-eﬀectiveness, and ease of access
to information (Daniel and Wilson, 2002; Ismanto et al., 2019). One of the
technologies that have received widespread attention in the last three years is
blockchain technology, there will be transformational impact of Blockchain Tech-
nologies on strategy and operating process on Industries which includes Pharma,
Mechanical Engineering and Electronics, Healthcare, Insurance tourism, Con-
struction, Public administration. The speculation on blockchain’s rising values
is rampant and is evident with the ﬁrst and most popular application of bitcoin
that grabbed headlines for its volatility and skyrocketing prices. The blockchain
concentration is not surprising, primarily due to the surge of its market value
from below USD 20 billion to over USD 200 billion in 2017 (Katsiampa, 2019).
(Reference: Deloitte’s 2020 Global Blockchain Survey)

However, the blockchain application goes beyond bitcoin as businesses, in-
dustries, and governments now embrace it.
In the World Economic Forum,
bitcoin is an important topic, with research estimating that 10 per cent of the
worldwide GDP will be stored in blockchain by 2027 (Beneki et al., 2019). Re-
cently, many governments and analysts have published several reports regarding
the potential impacts of blockchain (Blockchain: The India Strategy, Land Reg-
istration Blood Bank, Excise Services, Blockchains for Government: Use Cases
and Challenges, OECD Global Blockchain Policy Forum Report). Noteworthy,
large investments are being made on the blockchain, with venture-capital fund-
ing start-ups proliferating to USD 1 billion in 2017 alone (Katsiampa, 2019).
Additionally, the blockchain-based investment model of initial coin oﬀerings
(ICOs) involving the sale of cryptocurrency tokens is rapidly growing. Lead-
ing technological players are also rapidly investing in the technology, with IBM
employing over one thousand staﬀ and investing more than USD 200 million in
blockchain technology (Carson et al., 2018). The limited contact between sell-

2

ers and customers, personal data misuse, escalating fraudulent activities, and
commission fees force businesses to seek better and innovative approaches to
conducting business processes (Ismanto et al., 2019). Canada, Mexico, USA,
and many more countries are using blockchain for various applications. Across
global ﬁnancial services, government supply chains, healthcare, businesses, and
other industries, innovators are examining the feasibility of deploying blockchain
to reinvent and transform conventional business models. (References: Which
Governments Are Using Blockchain Right Now? — ConsenSys, Blockchains
for Government: Use Cases and Challenges, OECD Global Blockchain Policy
Forum Report)

Therefore, blockchain technology has already generated substantial inter-
est in various industries. As the areas of applications increase for blockchain,
the leaders customize the technology to ﬁt their needs (Ream et al., 2016). A
blockchain is described as a decentralized network technology created to fa-
cilitate bitcoin cryptocurrency. Interests in technology have risen from its in-
ception in 2008 and escalated with smart contracts’ reinvention (Singh et al.,
2020). The blockchain-center smart contracts involve self-executing codes on
the blockchain that automatically implement agreements between actors as a
crucial step in streamlining processes presently spread in various databases and
ERP systems (Ream et al., 2016). The promise of embedding self-executing
and autonomous programs into blockchain technologies has attracted increased
interest and its use in niche solutions (Ismanto et al., 2019). The primary rea-
sons for increased interest in the technology involve its capability to deliver
decentralization, enhance security and integrity, and enable the emergence of
novel business models. The industry leaders are already utilizing blockchain
and have achieved outstanding business beneﬁts, including enhanced security,
improved eﬃciency, and greater transparency, speed of transactions, enhanced
traceability, and cost-eﬀectiveness. Smart contracts deploy blockchain technol-
ogy to oﬀer computer protocols that digitally simplify, enforce, and authenticate
contracts’ negotiation and performance. Smart contracts foster credible trans-
actions while eliminating third parties’ roles (Singh et al., 2020). Due to the
decentralization experienced in blockchain among all permitted actors, it does
not require go-betweens or intermediaries. As a result, it minimizes conﬂicts,
saves time, and oﬀers cost-eﬀective, rapid, and more secure options than con-
ventional systems. Consequently, many businesses, governments, and businesses
are embracing smart contracts. Indeed, several business and technical analysts
have claimed that blockchain will or is revolutionizing business and redeﬁning
economies. While such enthusiasm is shared due to its potentiality, businesses
should also worry about the hype. According to Iansiti and Lakhanim (2017),
blockchain not only introduces security problems but faces a myriad of techno-
logical, organizational, societal, and governance barriers. It could be imprudent
to rush into deploying the technology without extensively understanding the
strategies to use to take hold of the technology. While its impacts and beneﬁts
are enormous, it might take decades for the technology to seep into the global
economy, businesses, and social infrastructures. The process of its deployment
will be steady, but not instantaneous or sudden, as the wave of technological

3

innovations and organizational change takes momentum (Iansiti and Lakhani,
2017). The beneﬁts and strategic implications of blockchain contract are exten-
sively examined in this exploration by using case studies of companies currently
deploying the transformative technology.

1.2 Business Problem Statement

The precarious nature of business transactions and contracts has been brought
to light with several scandals such as money laundering and illicit transactions,
resulting in the loss of billions of moneys globally (Notland et al., 2020). Accord-
ing to Edelman (2017), the business world is experiencing a “trust crisis.” The
recent decades have seen debate revolving around discovering and implementing
ideal mechanisms intended to foster a free-market economy with robust secu-
rity, accountability, inclusiveness, and transparency. The failures to prevent
fraud, insecurities, ﬁnancial crimes, and other illegal transactions have ham-
pered the eﬀorts of free and fair markets. With technological advances and the
establishment of e-commerce models, business challenges have shifted to online
platforms (Notland et al., 2020). A major solution perceived to foster secu-
rity, accountability, inclusiveness, cost-eﬀectiveness, and transparency involves
smart contracts. Smart contracts in the commercial ﬁeld are not yet proven, but
various industries believe that permissioned blockchains maintained by a small
group of actors will soon ﬁnd signiﬁcant adoption (Ream et al., 2016). Despite
the hype about blockchain technology, it is still perceived as an immature tech-
nology, and the market is still emerging. Therefore, a straightforward recipe for
its success is yet to emerge (Carson et al., 2018). Unstructured experimentation
on blockchain smart contract solutions without a precise strategic examination
of its value and its feasibility in capturing its values by businesses will limit com-
panies’ ability to realise a return on their investment (Carson et al., 2018). With
that in mind, businesses need to determine whether blockchain technology has
strategic values that justify key investments. This research intends to answer
such questions by investigating smart contracts’ strategic importance and the
value that businesses can capture, including the approaches to utilise the tech-
nology. Industry and business analysis using primary data delivers a detailed
analysis of the e-commerce industry, including the value chains, to determine
smart contracts’ applicability as a solution to emerging challenges. Additionally,
these concepts have been characterised by a comprehensive review of literature.

1.3 Research Aims

This research paper aims to analyze the implications of blockchain smart con-
tracts on the modern e-commerce business. The following objectives guide the
study: • To examine the applicability of blockchain technology in e-commerce.
• Examine the beneﬁts of blockchain and smart contract in e-commerce • Ana-
lyze the challenges that limit businesses from applying blockchain technologies
and oﬀer a recommendation to enhance the technology usage.

4

1.4 Research Questions

I In which areas of e-commerce can blockchain technology and smart con-
tract technology be applied? II What are the beneﬁcial impacts of deploying
blockchain and smart contracts in e-commerce? III How will the blockchain
and smart contract impact the future of e-commerce businesses? IV What chal-
lenges limit the deployment of these technologies in business and what are the
recommendations to overcome these challenges?

1.5 Signiﬁcance of the Study

E-commerce transactions can be costly due to ineﬃciencies in the widely utilised
legacy systems. Many transactions rest in several intermediaries like dealers,
banking services, brokers, and agents, among others. Smart contracts are not
widely utilised in e-commerce since the concept is not well-understood due to
their complexity and novelty. This exploration enhances understanding of smart
contracts, particularly the applicability in e-commerce business models. Conse-
quently, it oﬀers practitioners, businesses, and individual’s much-needed knowl-
edge to foster widespread adoption to minimise transactional costs, chaotic busi-
ness processes, and ineﬃciencies associated with traditional transactions. As a
result, businesses will adopt the more eﬃcient smart contracts as they discard
the ineﬃcient conventional approaches and save millions of funds lost due to
costly procedural and intermediary-dependent transactions. Additionally, the
research informs policy-makers and regulators regarding the right mechanisms
that can be developed or improved to tackle the challenges associated with
smart contracts and the more extensive blockchain technologies. Ultimately,
the study intends to achieve a robust understanding of a better environment for
smart contracts deployment. Besides, the study adds to the pool of literature
on blockchain and speciﬁcally smart contracts that can be insightful to other
scholars and learners intending to understand the subject.

1.6 Outline

This paper is structured into various sections. Chapter 2 presents literature on
blockchain technology and smart contracts and focuses on smart contract ad-
vantages and challenges. Chapter 3 covers the methodology utilized to achieve
the study’s objectives, including procedures and design for data collection and
analysis. Chapter 4 details the ﬁndings obtained from the respondents. Chap-
ter 5 includes a discussion and conclusion section deliberating on ﬁndings and
deductions from the study and recommendations for improving smart contracts.

2 LITERATURE REVIEW

To ﬁnd high-quality and relevant studies addressing smart contracts from online
databases, a search was conducted. The search terms include smart contract,
blockchain technology in business, smart contract, and blockchain technology.

5

Based on these keywords and phrases, the researcher used Boolean operators:
‘OR’ and ‘AND’ to combine the keywords:
‘smart contracts’ OR ‘blockchain
technology’ and ‘smart contract’ AND ‘blockchain’. The databases searched
include ERIC, ScienceDirect, Business Source Premier, Social Science Citation
Index, Google Scholar, Scopus, and IEEE Xplore. The databases yielded rele-
vant studies regarding smart contracts and their use in business.

2.1 Blockchain Technology

Blockchain technology was initially created as an accounting approach for virtual
currency bitcoin (Yaga et al., 2019)). The technology deploys distributed ledger
technology (DLT) and is utilized in various commercial applications. Accord-
ing to Lipton (2018), blockchain is majorly deployed in verifying transactions,
especially in digital currencies, but it possible to digitize various codes and sub-
sequently attach them in any document within blockchain. The process develops
an indelible record that cannot be altered. Moreover, such records’ legitimacy
can be veriﬁed by a whole community deploying blockchain rather than a sin-
gle centralized system (Ryan, 2017). The high level of security exhibited by
public cryptocurrencies has made the world embrace blockchain innovations in
fostering eﬃcacies and other intangible technological returns (Yaga et al., 2019).
A blockchain comprises a block, which involves the current segment recording
some or the whole recent transactions. Every time a block is completed, a novel
one is produced. According to Pan et al. (2020), once a block is completed,
recorded in a permanent database, and numerous blocks within a blockchain
are linked to one another (or chained) in a chronological and linear sequence.
A blockchain comprises a hash for the previous block and complete information
regarding various users’ addresses and their balances (Yaga et al., 2019). A
blockchain transaction goes through initiation, authentication, block creation,
validation of the block, and block chaining. The initiation process involves when
a single party (the sender) creates a transaction and conveys it to a network
(Yaga et al., 2019). Subsequently, the transaction is authenticated through the
nodes (users or computers) of the peer network receiving a message and au-
thenticating the validity by decrypting its digital signature. The next phase
involves creating a block, whereby the pending transactions are assembled in
a ledger known as a block by a node in the network (Ali et al., 2020). Subse-
quently, the validator node of the network will receive the block and undertake
the validation process based on an iterative process which calls for consensus
from the majority network (Ryan, 2017). After the transactions have been
validated, a novel block will be chained into the blockchain and will be broad-
casted to the network. Blockchain consists of sequences of blocks that comprise
a complete list of all transactional records similar to a traditional ledger (Pan
et al., 2020). Every block points to the previous block using a reference known
as a hash value. The previous block is known as the parent block, while the
ﬁrst block within a blockchain is labeled as the genesis block. The maximum
amount of transactions that can be stored on a block relies on the block size
and every transaction’s enormousness. Aitzhan and Svetinovic (2018) indicate

6

that blockchain technology deploys asymmetric cryptography mechanisms for
validating the legitimacy of transactions. As noted earlier, before the documen-
tation of a blockchain transaction in a distributed ledger, the transaction must
be validated through consensus whereby the nodes agree if a given transaction
and block are legitimate or not (Pan et al., 2020). Nodes include the parties
that can vote on the legitimacy of a transaction. It entails a process of agreeing
on some data values required for computation.
In a distributed and decen-
tralised environment, reaching a consensus can be challenging due to various
entities acting based on their interests and the information delivered to them
(T¨onnissen and Teuteberg, 2020). After a transaction has been broadcasted to
the networks, the existing nodes can include the same transaction as a copy in
their ledger or ignore the transaction. If most of the entities within a network
decide a single state are acceptable, they accomplish a consensus. There are
various approaches utilised to reach a consensus: Proof of Work (PoW), Peer-
to-peer consensus, Kraft, and Proof of Stake (PoS) (Ali et al., 2020). Proof
of work involves a protocol to prevent cyber-attacks like distributed denial-of-
service (DDoS) that can exhaust the resources within a network or computer
by sending numerous fake requests. According to Kouhizadeh et al. (2020),
PoW requires that expensive computer calculations are deﬁned also known as
mining that should be undertaken to create a novel group of trustless trans-
actions within a blockchain ledger. The mining process usually validates the
legitimacy of transactions or evades double-spending and creates a novel digital
currency by rewarding users performing mining for completion of a given task.
Transactions veriﬁed through PoW are usually stored in a public blockchain.
Even though PoW minimise frauds, it consumes a signiﬁcant amount of power,
particularly for large networks (Kouhizadeh et al., 2020). For PoS mechanism,
it comes as an alternative to PoW intended to save power. PoS mi9ners need to
prove the ownership of the amount of currency, and it is assumed that people
with massive ownership currency are less prone to attack a network. Pan et al.
(2020) indicate that the selection using users’ account balance unfair since the
single wealthiest individuals take a dominant position in the network. Conse-
quently, most solutions in PoS are proposed with a combination of the stake size
to establish the one that will create the next block. Another validation mecha-
nism is called Kraft and was put forward by Zheng (2016). Kraft the method
ensures that a block is produced at a reasonably stable speed since high speed
can result in compromised security. Thus, Kraft utilises the Greed Heaviest-
Observed Sub-Tree (GHOST) rule to resolve the security challenges (Cole et
al., 2019). Rather than using the longest schemes, the GHOST approach will
weigh the branches, and miners can choose the best follow. To achieve non-
interactive proofs to retrieve the past state snapshots, Chepurnoy and Saxena
(2016) advanced the Peer-to-peer consensus algorithm. The protocol enables
the miners to store the past block headers rather than the entire block.

7

2.2 Smart Contracts

A legal scholar and a cryptographer, Nick Szabo, found in 1994 that decen-
tralised ledger could be deployed in smart contracts (also known as self-executing
contracts, digital or blockchain contracts) (Szabo, 1997). Szabo believed that
contracts would be transformed into computer programs or codes then stored
and replicated on systems as well as supervised by computer networks than run
blockchain. As a result, ledger feedback could be obtained, like when money
is transferred, or products are received. Smart contracts’ emerging role is to
assist businesses, institutions, and individuals to exchange shares, lease of as-
sets, possessions, real estate, property, or other things perceived to have value
in a transparent without conﬂicts. It ensures that the role of the middleman
is avoided. Fries and Paal (2019) deﬁne smart contracts as computer programs
or transaction protocols intended to automate the execution, control, and doc-
umentation of legally relevant undertakings and events in harmony with con-
tractual agreements and terms. Further, Savelyev (2017) note that smart con-
tracts’ goals involve reducing the need for trusted intermediates, enforcement
costs, and arbitrations while reducing or curbing fraudulent losses and acciden-
tal exceptions. Smart contracts are not well understood, especially among legal
practitioners and researchers. This is because these contracts are considered
intelligent and can be achieved automatically (Suliman et al., 2018). Never-
theless, even though smart contracts are achieved automatically, every member
must accomplish their responsibility. The signiﬁcant variations between conven-
tional and smart contracts are the manner they are written, how parties agree
on the terms, and their legal implications. These unique attributes provide the
beneﬁts and drawbacks of the two contracts. However, self-executing contracts
have a long history, such as the “on-demand guarantees” (Salmer´on-Manzano
and Manzano-Agugliaro, 2019). Even though the on-demand does not follow
any speciﬁc or general concepts of a contract, it is an increasingly specialised
institutional context whereby it is probable to codify transactions to achieve
self-executing right. Besides, Smart contracts have a particular and narrow
user context whereby multiplicities implies within a contract can be regulated
(Suliman et al., 2018). There are various areas in which smart contracts can
be applied: ﬁnancial transactions, the Internet of Things (IoT), and prediction
markets. In ﬁnancial transactions, smart contracts are increasingly suitable for
equity crowdfunding, online insurance, and peer-to-peer lending. Conventional
ﬁnancial trade requires to be coordinated by a central entity like a central clear-
ing organisation or exchange but the agility of smart contracts minimises trans-
action costs while enhancing eﬃciency and avoid cumbersome work (Wang et
al., 2018). Also, smart contracts are applicable in prediction markets by oﬀering
better future predictions, speculation and direct hedging mechanisms. This can
be attributed to the distributed consensus veriﬁcation as well as immutability.
Tw major smart contracts include Gnosis and Augur whereby Augur enables
the creation of an accurate prediction tool using blockchain technology (Wang
et al., 2018). Internet of things (IoT) is another area where smart contracts
have found use where the two are combined to foster information sharing be-

8

tween devices and enable individuals to automate time-consuming processes in
a cryptographically veritable way.

2.3 Smart Contracts in E-Commerce

Incorporating smart contracts into electronic commerce (e-commerce) trans-
forms the shopping experience for both businesses and consumers. It delivers
value to the vendors, consumers, and sellers by fostering trust between these
parties and streamlines their processes (Udokwu et al., 2018). E-commerce
oﬀers perfect platforms for developing smart contracts that can interact with
tokens. The token ID is linked to the products that consumers purchase, and
the consumers can interact with their various tokens independently. Conoscenti
et al. (2016) argue that in e-commerce, smart contract development ensures
that blockchain contracts can be executed only when the users meet speciﬁed
requirements of a given deal. For instance, when the consumers check out of
an e-commerce site, the payment they make can be kept in smart contracts.
Subsequently, the merchant advances to authorise a change of ownership of the
products and link the contract to the shipping entity. (Udokwu et al., 2018)
After these requirements are fulﬁlled and acknowledged, a smart contract can re-
lease the money to the sellers. Smart contracts foster electronic payments using
cryptographic proof, which hashes and provides the timestamps of various trans-
actions on a chain. Thus, various buyers and sellers can transact directly while
eliminating a trusted third party (Ryan, 2017). Thus, it streamlines e-commerce
and minimises mistakes, tax evasion, corruption, and fraud as a reliable online
tracking system. With e-commerce exchanges, there is minimal risk that one
party might not fulﬁll her deal since a smart contract executes the payment.
This saves time and cost for the sellers and buyers as they actively fulﬁll their
obligations (Udokwu et al., 2018). The exchanges achieve immutability and im-
mediacy, and they feel like the consumer is using cash. Smart contracts foster
reciprocated trust between the buyers and sellers to minimise the exposure of
sensitive information to a third-party application that users do not have control
over (Conoscenti et al., 2016). Smart contracts also oﬀer a transparent and con-
sistent approach of enabling commodities to cross borders since all the entities
along the supply chain have access to a copy of the same ledger that exhibits the
origins and shipping of products while traveling from the sellers to the buyers
(Tanja, 2018). This considerably minimises errors of unreliable record-keeping.
Consumers can track and check the products they have orders to ensure the
order is in the right phase or place during the delivery process. Distributed
ledger transactions can be stored publicly to enable consumers to easily access
and control their order delivery (Ryan, 2017). Several online or e-commerce
businesses deploy smart contracts, and companies developing and delivering e-
commerce solutions to other businesses. For instance, Elysian entails a platform
that oﬀers assistance for businesses intending to develop e-commerce company
websites using blockchain smart contracts (Tanja, 2018). Elysian intends to
develop and oﬀer revolutionary e-commerce ecosystems built on security, trans-
parency, and trust. Besides, Elysian has delivered various solutions, including

9

virtual reality and augmented intelligence, that enhance shopping experiences.
Another platform includes E-Commerce, a decentralised market whereby the
users are considered the owners of digital assets like brands and stores (Suliman
et al., 2018). E-commerce platform enables users to record the ownership of
their shop through blockchain smart contracts (Tanja, 2018). Subsequently, the
owners can sell or move their digital assets since they have full control over the
store and their assets. For consumers, the use of an E-Commerce platform re-
duces the prices and ensures that constant discounts are available. OpenBazaar
is another platform based on P2P experiences. The platform is free for use
and can be accessed online or even downloaded as an application. OpenBazaar
is equated to the conventional Amazon and eBay platforms, but it provides
greater control to the users over their information and enables consumers to
pay for their products using 50 altcoins. Furthermore, Eligma oﬀers an ideal
platform that uses blockchain smart contracts for e-commerce to manage online
shopping (Tanja, 2018). Eligma aims to ensure that shoppers experience less
complicated processes and are more comfortable while shopping. Eligma deploys
artiﬁcial intelligence to help consumers save time while monitoring their online
shopping and ﬁnding the best deals. Besides. The company oﬀers distributed
ledger transaction programs where consumers are awarded for shopping via the
platform by receiving tokens of ELIs (Tanja, 2018). Such tokens can be utilised
to undertake additional purchases, which encourages the use of blockchain smart
contracts in e-commerce.

2.4 Advantages of Smart Contracts in Business

The deployment of business can be attributed to far-fetched beneﬁts of blockchain,
including greater transparency, increased speed of transaction and eﬃciency, as
well as enhanced security, reduction of business costs, and improved traceabil-
ity (Tapscott and Tapscott, 2016). Transactional histories are becoming in-
creasingly transparent due to the deployment of blockchain technologies. As a
distributed ledger, the actors of the network will share similar documentation
instead of individual copies. To alter one transaction, it needs to change all
subsequent documents and to collude with the whole network (Savelyev, 2017).
Hence, data on a blockchain has been more accurate, precise, transparent, and
consistent than on paper-based imprecise processes.

2.4.1 Security
Blockchain enhances security through various mechanisms as compared to
record-keeping systems. Transactions need to be agreed upon prior to being
recorded. Besides, information is usually stored across several computer net-
works rather than one server, making it challenging for hackers to compromise
transactional data (Singh et al., 2020).
In any business, safeguarding sensi-
tive data is essential and blockchain technology oﬀers an opportunity to trans-
form the manner in which critical information is handled, which helps to curb
fraud and unauthorized activities. Additionally, the miners can beneﬁt from
the anonymity that cannot be enjoyed in conventional contracts. For instance,
trusted intermediaries facilitating most common sale agreements like credit card

10

organisations need proof of identity to carry out future payments (Conoscenti
et al., 2016). Consequently, intermediaries store massive amounts of consumers’
data sensitive and personal to every consumer who utilises such services. This
escalates the risk of the consumer’s data being hacked and exploited (Udokwu
et al., 2018). Transactions deploying cryptocurrencies enable consumers to buy
commodities online without providing personal data. Also, the use of distributed
ledger transactions in e-commerce ensures that consumer data will not be stored
in a centralised server, reducing the chance of hacking or stealing data (Golosova
and Romanovs, 2018).

2.4.2 Traceability and Transparency
Moreover, blockchain improves traceability, particularly for businesses deal-
ing with multifaceted supply chains where it is challenging to trace items back to
their origins. The documentation of goods on the blockchain provides an audit
trail that depicts assets’ origin (Tapscott and Tapscott, 2016). Such trans-
actional data visibility assists in verifying the authenticity of assets and fur-
ther curbs fraud. Due to the decentralization of data by deploying distributed
ledgers, signiﬁcant transparency is achieved. According to Giancaspro (2017),
the absence of central power and intermediary for validation and collation of
transactions and the transparency evident in blockchain implies that commer-
cial arrangements undertaken via smart contracts in the public ledger are visible
to all miners (Udokwu et al., 2018). As a result, users are likely to trust one
another due to increased conﬁdence.
2.4.3 Speed and eﬃciency
Also, blockchain increases the speed and eﬃciency of transactions, unlike
conventional paper-based processes.
It streamlines and automates processes
prone to human errors or requires third-party mediations, ensuring transactions
to be completed rapidly and eﬃciently (Savelyev, 2017). Transactions enabled
by smart contracts are usually not validated by a trusted intermediary but
instead by consensus mechanisms. Therefore, instead of a credit provider, a
ﬁnancial institution, or an insurance organisation facilitating digital transfers
of properties, smart contracts will automatically do all these activities (Gian-
caspro, 2017). Miners in blockchain are considered as contract parties who only
need to determine the content of their agreements, and smart contracts will exe-
cute the terms automatically. The disintermediation process enhances eﬃciency
by enabling the blockchain to address critical facets of transactions ranging from
record-keeping, enforcement, auditing, and monitoring (Wang, 2016). As a re-
sult, settlements will occur quickly due to eliminating delays caused by inter-
mediaries in conventional contracts. Further advancement of distributed ledger
technology will result in instantaneous settlements for multifaceted transactions.
Additionally, automation of critical processes in the lifecycle of a contract can
minimise human interventions, which further improves eﬃciency (Giancaspro,
2017).

2.4.4 Cost-Eﬀectiveness
Furthermore, blockchain reduces business costs since many third-parties are
eliminated from being middlemen and reducing legal and transaction costs. The
elimination of a central authority and trusted intermediary coupled with how

11

transactions are transparently veriﬁed and subsequently added onto the chin
by the miners implies that most transactions and legal costs incurred due to
intermediation are eliminated (Giancaspro, 2017). These costs include admin-
istration, legal and service fees linked to preparing, executing, and monitoring
written contracts. For instance, when a contract is established through credit
card purchase, the consumers purchase items from merchants and pay through
credit cards, the merchants will apply surcharges. Accordingly, surcharges in-
volve the cost of the merchant for accepting payments through credit cards.
Moreover, the credit card organisations apply additional fees. All these costs
can be eliminated by deploying smart contracts (Giancaspro, 2017). The cost-
savings associated with deploying smart contracts surpasses the transactions to
minimise infrastructure costs (Walch, 2015). Essentially, avoiding an interme-
diary by deploying smart contracts enables consumers, businesses, and govern-
ments to minimize commercial and operational costs drastically. Consequently,
substantial overheads are reduced (Giancaspro, 2017).

2.4.5 Accurate Recording-keeping
A major requirement of smart contracts involves the terms and conditions be-
ing deﬁned explicitly and precisely. Such requirements are essential because any
omission can result in transaction errors. Thus, automation of contracts evades
the challenges of manual ﬁlling of forms (Golosova and Romanovs, 2018). Also,
since transactional information is stored in a distributed ledger, including several
computers or nodes, it is hard to alter anything. Therefore, an e-commerce that
deploys smart contracts ensures all information and documents are kept in their
original versions with several copies, making data loss improbable (Conoscenti
et al., 2016).

2.5 Challenges of Blockchain and Smart Contracts

2.5.1 Image challenge

There is a common misconception among many users that blockchain tech-
nology only involves Bitcoin applications and cryptocurrencies. Particularly,
crypto has a negative reputation associated with the hackers and fraudsters
that deploy the technology for criminal undertakings (Meijer, 2020). This is a
negative reputation for blockchain applications as a whole, and many businesses
and individuals who do not understand that crypto is just a single application
of blockchain might shy away from adopting it for smart contracts. Therefore,
before the widespread adoption of blockchain smart contracts is achieved, the
public needs to comprehend the diﬀerences between bitcoin and other cryp-
tocurrencies and blockchain (Conoscenti et al., 2016). Such understanding will
assist in eliminating negative reputation and can lead to widespread willingness
to deploy smart contracts. Meanwhile, several collaborative initiatives are being
established in blockchain domain intended to realise a wider change. Such in-
terdependence might assist in moving ahead. Nonetheless, some businesses fear
that blockchain’s disruptive nature, while others do not perceive blockchain con-
tracts as disruptive (Meijer, 2020). Some fear that they might lose their market
share overnight when blockchain contracts become the order of the day due to

12

being obsolete.

2.5.2 Regulations and vested interests
The current regulations represent substantial challenges for blockchain tech-
nologies since the prevailing regulations existing companies and individual de-
velopers over the disruptors (Conoscenti et al., 2016). The digitalisation era is
occurring in a heavily regulated environment due to the long-standing regula-
tions enacted by various regimes intended to safeguard consumers and property
rights (Meijer, 2020). Blockchain presents novel hurdles to regulators who intend
to safeguard the markets and consumers, and the inﬂexibility with which devel-
oped economies are approaching blockchain technology might serve to strangle
its growth and innovations. However, such perspectives are rapidly changing as
regimes and businesses are experiencing beneﬁts from the technology and are
establishing a friendly regulatory environment that fosters innovations while
safeguarding the consumers.

2.5.3 Security and Privacy
Blockchain technologies such as cryptocurrencies deliver pseudonymity, and
other potential applications like smart contracts and transactions call for iden-
tities to be linked indisputably (Meijer, 2020). As a result, they raise signiﬁcant
questions concerning the security and privacy of data accessible and stored on
a shared ledger. Many businesses are using privacy rules based on regulations
governing business conduct. Consumers entrust businesses with sensitive data,
and when such data is stored within a public ledger, it is unlikely to be secured
and remain private. Only limited scenarios in smart contracts provide good pro-
tocols to cope with security challenges (Conoscenti et al., 2016). Even though
blockchain technologies are more secure than conventional systems, sophisti-
cated hackers are still breaching businesses, applications, and systems deploying
blockchain technologies. For instance, the Ethereum blockchain was attacked
recently in what is labeled as Classic 51Failed smart contracts have been ex-
amined and categorised into prodigal, greedy, and suicide contracts (Nikoli´c et
al., 2018). Prodigal contracts entail those hacked, and such fraud has led to
cryptocurrencies becoming properties of fraudsters (Giancaspro, 2017). Suicide
contracts involve the ones that have been closed after the exit requirements have
been triggered by an individual undertaking an attack. This can be caused by
a wrongly executed exit clause leading to a wrong individual taking all the en-
crypted money involved in smart contracts (Abadi et al., 2016). According to
Atzei et al. (2017), insuﬃcient protection is to blame for smart contracts allow-
ing money to be transferred illegally. The greedy contracts can arise from bad
practices or miswriting and cause the contracting party not to have the legit-
imacy of receiving encrypted currency. When such issues occur, the contracts
are likely to end, leading to economic losses attributed to vulnerability failures
(Golosova and Romanovs, 2018). According to Wang et al. (2018), smart con-
tracts experience re-entrancy vulnerability whereby an intruder can deploy a
recursive call function to undertake several repetitive withdrawals, but the at-
tacker’s balance is deduced just once. This can cause unexpected behaviours,
including consuming all the gas. Also, transaction-ordering dependence (TOD)
is a signiﬁcant challenge in a smart contract whereby several dependent transac-

13

tions invoking a single contract are situated in the same block (Conoscenti et al.,
2016). Miners usually set arbitrary orders between various transactions, includ-
ing the contract’s ﬁnal state. Consequently, an intruder can eﬀectively launch
an attack when the transactions are not executed in the right order (Wang et al.,
2018). Additionally, the timestamp dependence is a major loophole where the
miner can alter the value while other miners accept the block. A security chal-
lenge that arises by using timestamps as the activation mechanism to undertake
speciﬁc activities includes easily manipulated contracts. Furthermore, smart
contracts lack reliable data feeds and privacy issues since all history informa-
tion is stored in a blockchain and can be seen by other users (Wang et al., 2018).
The solutions to security and privacy is not only through the development of
policies by the governments to safeguard privacy and security. Self-sovereign
identities within the blockchain can allow businesses to capture and regulate
their data (Meijer, 2020). While several protocols have been proposed like proof
of zero-knowledge and good identity initiatives are being developed like Sovrin,
businesses will still have to wait for a radically novel identity framework.
2.5.4 Lack of clear governance and regulatory framework
There is inadequate clarity regarding the regulatory environment behind
blockchain technologies, which aﬀects mass adoption in business. Regulations
seem to be struggling in keeping up with technological advances, particularly
the hyped blockchain. A major motive of blockchain contracts is to minimise
oversight, but this remains one of the major hurdles today (Meijer, 2020). Most
organisations are developing the technology as a means of transaction, but there
are no speciﬁc smart contracts regulations. Therefore, no business adheres to
speciﬁc regulations when deploying smart contracts. Since regulations do not
cover smart contracts, they have inhibited its widespread adoption and invest-
ments. Notwithstanding the bottlenecks and challenges, centralised systems,
especially within the banking and ﬁnancial industry, can act as shock absorbers
during a crisis (Golosova and Romanovs, 2018). Conversely, decentralised sys-
tems might be less dependable during a crisis, aﬀecting the users directly unless
adequate measures are put into place. It has been proposed that smart con-
tracts need to work with existing regulatory structures. From a legal perspec-
tive, smart contracts need to tackle various issues like jurisdictional, trial and
enforcement risks (Salmer´on-Manzano and Manzano-Agugliaro, 2019).

2.5.5 Maturity and Scalability Problems
Blockchain several implementation hurdles since it is a relatively young tech.
The technology is less than a decade old and needs time to mature. In various
consortiums, the players solve decentralized puzzles and come up with unique so-
lutions such as Ripple, Corda, Enterprise Ethereum, and Hyerledger (Golosova
and Romanovs, 2018). Due to maturity challenges blockchain technology faces
the scalability challenge of its network that limits the adoption, particularly
public blockchain. Legacy systems and networks are known for their capability
to process thousands of transactions every second. For example, Anupam (2019)
compares the largest centralised payment system, VISA, and Bitcoin’s biggest
crypto payments. Where Visa processes 65,000 transactions per second, the
maximum speed for Bitcoin is 7 transactions each second. For centralised archi-

14

tecture, the controlling authority will decide the ﬂow and does not always notify
its peers regarding a given transaction, which saves speed and time (Anupam,
2019). Conversely, for blockchain technology, the validation can take several
minutes since most nodes need to authorise a transaction. For Ethereum, it
can only handle bout 20 transactions every second. Scalability challenges is
not a major challenges for private blockchain networks because nodes within a
networks are speciﬁcally developed to process transactions within an environ-
ment involving trusted parties that makes a lot of sense business-wise (Meijer,
2020). There are outstanding solutions being developed intended to resolve the
scalability challenges like Lightning Network that comprise of additional second
layer to the major blockchain network with the intent of fostering rapid trans-
actions. Another solution involves Sharding which groups subnets of nodes to
smaller networks known as “shards.” The small network node are responsible
for transactions speciﬁc to that shard (Meijer, 2020). When deliver together
with proof-of-stake consensus mechanism, it has the ability of scaling up.

2.5.6 Limited interoperability and standardisation
Besides, blockchain faces a challenges of limited interoperability between
massive numbers of blockchain networks. More than 6,500 projects are deploy-
ing various, but mostly standalone blockchain platforms as well as solutions
with various privacy measures, protocols, consensus mechanism and coding
languages. With many diﬀerent networks, blockchain space faces a “state of
disarray” since it lacks globally deﬁned standards that enable networks to com-
municate with one another (Meijer, 2020). Due to lack of uniformity across
the blockchain protocols, consistency is lacking on fundamental processes such
as security and this makes its adoption impossible for some players (Golosova
and Romanovs, 2018). The development of industry-wide standards for various
protocols can assist many businesses to cooperate on developing applications,
sharing blockchain solutions and validating concepts, and this will make it eas-
ier to incorporate blockchain with other existing systems. Various projects are
underway with the intent of realising interoperability for various blockchain
networks like Ark project that deploys SmartBridges architecture to address in-
teroperability problem. The Ark project is considered to deliver global interop-
erability and enables cross-blockchain communications and transfers. Another
project entails Cosmos and it deploys Interblockchain Communication (IBC)
protocols to ensure that blockchain economies can operates outside the silos
and ﬁles can be transferred between networks (Meijer, 2020). There a problem
of integrating blockchain with legacy systems. In many cases, businesses that
decide to deploy blockchain technology are compelled to entirely restructure
their existing systems or design them in manner that can successfully integrate
the two technologies side-by-side (Golosova and Romanovs, 2018). However,
many businesses lack skilled developers since they cannot access the required
talent to undertake such processes. The dependency on external players to
undertake these process force many businesses to invest a signiﬁcant amount
of resources and time to achieve the transition from legacy to blockchain sys-
tems. Additionally, there are many incidences of data loss and breaches that
have been reported. Such incidences discourage many businesses from shifting

15

to blockchain (Golosova and Romanovs, 2018). Every business is reserved or
unwilling to alter its databases since data corruption or loss is considered a ma-
jor risk. Recently, novel solutions are emerging that enable legacy systems to
be linked to blockchain backend. For instance, Modex Blockchain Database is
designed to assist businesses or users without a knowledge in blockchain technol-
ogy to access its beneﬁts and eliminate the risks associated with loss of sensitive
data.

2.5.7 Brain-Drain and lack of expertise
With the ever-increasing demand for blockchain personnel, the blockchain
industry is suﬀering from lack of suﬃcient personnel who are skilled and well-
trained to develop and manage the multifaceted tasks. The technology demands
increasingly qualiﬁed and skilled personnel. Meijer (2020) argues that the de-
mand for blockchain-related staﬀ has skyrocketed by about 2000 percent from
2017 to 2020. Therefore, having adequate personnel with the right qualiﬁca-
tions is a top challenge in the industry. As noted early, blockchain technology is
still immature and evolving. Consequently, it needs time for the developer com-
munity to share and for learning institutions, they need to put in place course
related to blockchain (Golosova and Romanovs, 2018). While such measures
might ease market demands, the outcome will become possible only after learn-
ers complete their training and this will take time. Recent surveys and analyses
have demonstrated that a signiﬁcant number of experts of blockchain are re-
locating to developed economies while searching for better opportunities. For
instance, Indian developers are moving abroad and blame brain drain on the lack
of adequate regulatory framework in every nation deploying blockchain technol-
ogy (Anupam, 2019). Other blockchain developers are reportedly relocating to
Switzerland, Singapore and the United Arabs Emirates which deliver tax breaks
as well as e-residency for start-ups. The rapidly developing blockchain techno-
logical infrastructures in these nations are considered to be better suited for
blockchain applications.

2.5.8 Complexity and Organisational Challenges
Blockchain can be complex, cumbersome and slow attributed to its encryp-
tion and the distributed nature. Transactions might take sometimes to process
than the conventional payment systems like debit and cash cards (Golosova and
Romanovs, 2018). When the number of users increase over a network, trans-
actions can even take longer. It can take days to process a single transaction.
Consequently, the transactions are likely to cost more than usual and this can
limit users from adopting the systems. The challenge extends to blockchain
networks that are utilised for other purposes than storing value such as smart
contracts and interaction of blockchain and Internet of Things (IoT) (Meijer,
2020). This challenges is likely to be resolved through advanced engineering and
processing speeds. There are various organisational challenges the e-commerce
businesses are likely to incur while deploying blockchain contracts. One of the
major challenges involves the lack of awareness regarding smart contracts, espe-
cially for small and medium businesses (Golosova and Romanovs, 2018). Many
businesses do not have suﬃcient knowledge regarding how smart contracts work
due to domination of technicians in the domain and signiﬁcant technological

16

approach of blockchain. Such problem might hinder many e-commerce busi-
nesses from investing and exploring smart contract concepts (Meijer, 2020). A
business oriented approach is required to improve the user experiences, partic-
ularly for those with limited technical knowledge. Also, there is a productivity
paradox the eﬃciency and speed of blockchain networks of executing peer-to-
peer transactions come at a cost which is increasingly high for some blockchain
applications (Golosova and Romanovs, 2018). The ineﬃciency originates from
nodes undertaking the same processes as each node copies data while trying
to be the ﬁrst to oﬀer a solution. Hence, decisions of businesses regarding the
adoption and deployment of blockchain smart contracts should be carefully and
thoroughly analysed. Returns from individual processing might decline as the
networks widen. As a result, blockchain applications need to harness network ef-
fects to provide value to the users and the business at large. Additionally, there
is lack of cooperation. Smart contracts oﬀer the most values for e-commerce
when they work together on ﬁelds of shared opportunity and challenges. The
challenge with most business models is that they are increasingly work as stan-
dalone with enterprises developing their own blockchain to beat their rivals
(Meijer, 2020). Therefore, in various industries various chains are being created
by various enterprises with various standards. Such approach defeats the role of
distributed ledge and does not harness network eﬀects making the standalone
approach less eﬀective (Golosova and Romanovs, 2018). Nevertheless, positive
development are being witnessed with the rise of blockchain consortia intend to
address industry-wide challenges like critical mass and standards.

2.5.9 Environmental Cost
Some scholars have warned about the challenges of smart contracts, par-
ticularly their resource intensive nature during the veriﬁcation processes. For
instance, Khezr et al. (2019) studied the relationship between bitcoin and sus-
tainability while Tapscott and Tapscott (2017) investigated the association of
sustainability and Energy Internet. Energy consumption remains a major hin-
drance of deploying blockchain technologies. A study conducted by the Univer-
sity of Cambridge approximated that the technology consumes high energy than
the entire Switzerland (Anupam, 2019). The energy is usually feed into the en-
tire network throughout the lifecycle. Smart contracts follow the bitcoin design
and deploy Proof of Proof-of-work (PoW) as a consensus mechanism to validate
transactions. Such protocols need the users to resolve multifaceted mathemat-
ical puzzles and require massive computing power in verifying and processing
transactions and to undertake these processes securely. Meanwhile, the amount
of energy utilised by computers competing to resolve a mathematical puzzle is
increasingly high. Some approximate that bitcoin transaction consume energy
which is almost the annual electricity usage in Denmark (Meijer, 2020). To over-
come energy requirements, supporters of blockchain technologies are advancing
the development of more eﬃcient consensus algorithm that consumes minimal
energy. The Proof-of-Stake (PoS) have been proposed as the protocols that
combine the user’s stake in the network and the algorithm randomly allocates
the process of validation to a given node (Meijer, 2020). Since the users do
not need to resolve multifaceted puzzles, the mechanisms can remarkably min-

17

imise the amount of energy consumed. Mengelkamp et al. (2018) investigated
how laws and private standards can improve sustainability in of smart contracts
and depicted how blockchain can enhance sustainability through informing the
users regarding the origins of products, oﬀering mechanisms for enforcing rep-
resentation via smart contract functions of blockchain and ensuring legitimacy.
Casino et al. (2019) proposed the use of energy transaction platform centred on
peer-to-peer blockchain to foster energy eﬃciency between prosumers. Further-
more, de Vries (2019) suggests the creation of an Energy Internet utilizing novel
power grid structures of generating renewable energy. In another exploration,
Gatteschi et al. (Gatteschi et al., 2018) suggest the deployment of insurance
sectors to boost eﬃciency. Other approaches that can enhance the sustainabil-
ity of smart contracts include accelerating and automating the exchange of data
(Salmer´on-Manzano and Manzano-Agugliaro, 2019). Additionally, storage is a
major technical challenge. For instance, Anupam (2019) notes that Bitcoin Core
as one of the applications of blockchain requires about 200 GB storage space
for every node which is part of the blockchain network. Besides, it needs about
5 GB upload and 500 MB download each day. Therefore, companies strug-
gling with internet speed are disadvantaged in implementing blockchain smart
contracts infrastructures (Anupam, 2019).

3 METHODOLOGY

3.1 Research Design

There are two major research designs: quantitative and qualitative. While
some researchers perceive quantitative design to be superior to qualitative re-
search, it is vital to understand that the two do not answer the same questions.
Qualitative research focuses on detailed explanation while quantitative design
concentrate on numbers or statistics. This study utilised a qualitative research
design to answer the research questions. While qualitative studies are perceived
to be less rigorous as compared to quantitative studies, qualitative informa-
tion is usually in-depth and oﬀers breadth regarding the phenomenon under
exploration (Creswell, 2014). Also, the qualitative design is beneﬁcial when a
phenomenon is multifaceted and cannot be encapsulated by a simple yes or no or
any other straightforward answers. While qualitative data provides numerical
data with a clear explanation of the relationship between the variables, quali-
tative approaches can yield insightful and richer data underlying the patterns
manifesting in a phenomenon (Creswell, 2014). Therefore, Qualitative research
was found to be the perfect ﬁt for this study due to its novelty. The study
targeted e-commerce businesses currently deploying smart contracts in their
operations, including the leading business leaders in every industry. Purpo-
sive sampling was utilized in identifying and choosing information-rich subjects
who are well-versed about smart contracts. Purposive sampling is commonly
deployed in qualitative research to choose participants, especially those knowl-
edgeable about the interested phenomenon (Creswell, 2007). Besides knowledge

18

and experience, purposeful sampling considers the subjects’ availability and
their willingness to take part in the study and their capability to communicate
their opinions and views in a thoughtful, articulate, and expressive way. The
management of these businesses were contacted to assist in recruiting personnel
who took part in the study. The researcher utilised purposive sampling to recruit
15 respondents who took part in the study. Heterogonous purposive sampling
was used to ensure that the selected sample originates from diverse backgrounds
to oﬀer varied experiences and views about smart contracts (Creswell, 2007).
Selected subjects received informed consent detailing the purpose of the study.
Participation in the exploration was voluntary without any coercion. The pri-
vacy, anonymity and conﬁdentiality of the study participants were protected
throughout the research.

3.2 Data Collection and Analysis

There are several data collecting approaches in a qualitative study, including fo-
cus groups, observations, content analysis, interviews, and others. The observa-
tional approach is also known as a ﬁeld study and needs a prolonged assessment
of a given setting.
In content analysis, the researcher examines information
fetched from written documents (such as court proceedings) or audio/visual
materials (King et al., 2010). The study utilized interview data collection tools
to obtain the views, experiences, and opinions of participants concerning smart
contracts and their role in business. King et al. (2010) note that interviews
are beneﬁcial in gathering people’s perspectives and outstanding tool in un-
covering the experiences of people to comprehend a given phenomenon. Semi-
structured interviews were used whereby the respondents answered to predeﬁned
open-ended questions. Semi-structured interviews are based on developed inter-
view guides involving the schematic presentation of the topics or questions that
should be explored during the interviewing process (King et al., 2010). Inter-
view guides oﬀer a valuable tool to interview participants about speciﬁc aspects
systematically. Interviews were conducted via telephone calls that were recorded
and subsequently transcribed verbatim in readiness for data analysis. For data
analysis, there are two general approaches for analysing qualitative data: induc-
tive and deductive approaches (Burnard et al., 2008). In a deductive approach,
the researchers uses a structured or predetermined framework for data analysis
whereby the investigators impose their theories or structures on the data. Such
approach is useful when the researchers understand the likely responses from
the participants. On the other hand, inductive approach entails analysing data
with minimal use of predetermined theory or structure (Burnard et al., 2008).
Inductive analysis is the most common approach particularly thematic analysis
of content. Thematic analysis was applied to analyse the qualitative data ob-
tained, emphasizing the identiﬁcation, analysis, and interpretation of patterns
of meanings (Adu, 2019). Interview transcripts provided descriptive accounts
of the research but do not deliver explanations. Therefore, the investigator
need to make sense out of the data by examining and interpreting it. Thematic
analysis of the content was improved by the use of NVivo software (Burnard

19

et al., 2008). The ﬁrst phase of data analysis involved preparing, reviewing
and reading the data several times while creating notes about the major ideas
emerging from the data. This enabled the researcher to create initial codes
which were reviewed and revised and subsequently combined to create themes
(Adu, 2019). The themes were reviewed to eliminate redundancy and ensure all
data is comprehensively described and presented.

4 RESULTS

This section articulates the views obtained from the participants regarding
smart contract. While the study anticipated to recruit 15 respondents to of-
fer opinions regarding smart contracts, only 11 respondents were recruited since
other declined to participate in the study due to various reasons like time con-
straints and unavailability. Therefore, the views presented in this section include
views only 11 respondents. The respondents were drawn from e-commerce busi-
nesses currently deploying smart contracts in their operations, including the
leading business leaders in every industry with suﬃcient information regarding
smart contracts. The subsequent sections present the views of various partici-
pants about smart contracts.

4.1 The use of Smart Contract E-commerce

All the participants were asked whether their organizations utilize smart con-
tracts in their e-commerce undertakings and they agreed that blockchain tech-
nologies is an integral part of their business activities. Additionally, the respon-
dents were asked to oﬀered opinions regarding the areas in which they apply
smart contracts. The table underneath documents the views of the 11 respon-
dents.

Table 1: Areas of applications of Smart Contracts in E-commerce

1. Respondent 1 - Financial industry As a ﬁnancial company, smart con-
tract and blockchain play an integral role in our operations. We use the
technology in various transactions including transferring of funds and for
the customers to pay for the services or products we are oﬀering them.

2. Respondent 2 - Smart contract is mainly used for record-keeping due
to its capability to document. Also, we utilize smart contract to facilitate
ﬁnancial trades, legal processes, credit authorization and crowdfunding
agreements or Initial Coin Oﬀering (ICOs). Smart contracts and tokens
can be created to foster secure payments.

3. Respondent 3 - We use smart contracts for storing receipts, customer

data, record keeping and managing the general stock.

4. Respondent 4 Our real estate business utilizes smart contracts for doc-

umenting property ownership from buildings to lands.

20

5. Respondent 5 We use smart contracts to automate payments and rentals
of electric vehicle charging stations. Smart contracts enable other parties
to add any objects (products or services) to our network

6. Respondent 6 We deploy smart contracts in our decentralized threat
intelligence. When businesses and ambassadors publish their bounty, they
will specify the amount of reward which will be given to any individual
submitting the right assertion. When a security expert submits an asser-
tion and it is determined to be accurate, the reward or money promised
will be realized automatically to the individual.

7. Respondent 7 We use smart contracts in our insurance business for es-
tablishing and encoding the terms of policy that will be agreed upon by
parties involved. These terms are usually copied into smart contracts and
cannot be altered with the involved parties agreeing. Smart contract pol-
icy are digitally executed through pre-deﬁned terms. It allows insurance
payouts and settlements to be processed promptly and eﬃciently.

8. Respondent 8 We use smart contracts to manage and secure buying and
selling of goods on the internet, launch ICO’s and tracking the shipping
process as well as stocktaking. Each step in the supply chain can be
recorded since smart contracts provide such capability which minimizes
theft and missing products.

9. Respondent 9 We use smart contracts for ﬂight insurance. It is chal-
lenging for our clients to work with airlines to receive compensation for
delayed ﬂights, particularly those with travel insurance. When a passen-
ger’s ﬂight is later for more than two hours, their details are automatically
inputted into an application which will digitally notify various compensa-
tion options and money will be transferred directly to the client’s credit
card. Smart contracts deployed is centered on parametric insurance where
the client will not compensation for total loss but instead for losses that
occur outside the conventional guidelines of insurance.

10. Respondent 10 Our business mainly focus on managing real properties
and estate. We use smart contracts to enable secure and eﬃcient buying
and selling of real estate. The owners or brokers can list their properties
and buyers can search, view and negotiate on the prices and ultimately buy
the properties if their meet their requirements. All the parties involved
in a deal can participate in the smart contract and decisive are included
to foster fair and legal transactions. A buyer who is interested in buying
a property can reserve it by paying about 10 dollars to escrow ﬁrms that
holds the property and in case the sellers refuses to change ownership, the
buyers can always receive their money back. Paperwork and signatures
are undertaken digitally irrespective of the origin of the seller and the
buyer.

21

11. Respondent 11 When us smart contracts for invoice ﬁnancing for obtain-
ing money from unpaid invoices. The invoice purchasers usually must pay
upfront in order to takeover an invoice for their business and will get paid
the original amount after the debtors have paid the invoice. Therefore,
any individual can buy and sell the outstanding invoice through blockchain
smart contracts.

4.2 Beneﬁts of Smart Contracts to E-commerce

The participants were asked to present the opinions regarding the beneﬁts that
are incurred by deploying smart contracts in their respective businesses. Their
views are documented in the table underneath. Views of the Respondent
about the Beneﬁts of Smart Contracts in E-Commerce

1. Respondent 1 Blockchain technology by nature enables autonomy and
no outside party will know the owner of the credit cards or obtain their
sensitive information. Thus, smart contract foster secure transactions.
Once we have recorded a given transaction, it is impossible to edit, delete
or alter the transaction. Thus, smart contract are tamperproof and secure
in storing important transactions with the fear than someone will access
them and alter the number. I believe that while we do not use smart con-
tracts in all our ﬁnancial undertakings, the areas that have implemented
the technologies have realized outstanding security and cases of fraud or
corruption have signiﬁcantly been reduced since workers cannot collude
with clients or other parties to alter ﬁnancial records.

2. Respondents 2 The beneﬁts obtained by using smart contracts includes
secured encryptions especially for peer-to-peer transactions. In the past,
our organization worried about customer’s sensitive data being exposed
to external hackers and intruders who can sell information to third party.
However, after our organization implemented smart contracts, our systems
are more secured and cases of fraud have signiﬁcantly reduced. Also, our
clients are happy since the tiresome middlemen and many parties involved
in the transaction have been eliminated. Particularly, today transactions
occur at a high speed since when do not need to engage third parties to
secure money transferred between the consumers and the company. Also,
our esteem clients are assured that they will receive the goods they have
purchases since smart contract documentation and record keeping enable
them to monitor the shipping process using a unique shipping code. In case
of any problem with a given order, our customer representative can ask the
client to provide the code which can easily be tracked and the customer can
be updated according regarding his/her order. Therefore, smart contracts
makes use serve our clients better to their satisfaction. A satisﬁed client
will become loyal and repeatedly purchase from us increasing our long-
term ﬁnancial performance and proﬁtability.

3. Respondent 3 A major beneﬁt incurred to our business is cost reduction

22

and eﬃciency. We continually invest in technologies that can help us save
more by streamlines our business activities delivering eﬃcacy. Smart con-
tract automate e-commerce transactions while dealing with another party
without the need to engage a third party. As a result, we avoid the cost
of third parties. Additionally, the fact that transactions are automated,
the processing cost is minimized. Besides, the systems enable our work-
ers to avoid costly human mistakes and errors which can be costly to our
business.

4. Respondent 4 We had almost trusted in many clients since their records
could be altered by our workers or external intruders. However, with the
use of smart contract, we have improved the trust in our clients. Cases of
altered records or traceable funds are not reported frequently. The tech-
nology acts as a backup in case our systems fail or data is tampered with
since all transactions are duplicated to enable the client and other parties
to have a record of their transactions. Even when moving data to another
system or upgrading, we can easily access original documents or records
and the probability of suﬀering from data storage failures are reduced to
minimal levels. Also, there is signiﬁcant cost-savings that stems from au-
tomating approval of transactions and clearing of e-commerce computation
that were in the past labor-intensive. Smart contracts take up meaningful
work that was previously done by accountants and record keepers. There
is a reduction in work-hours and a reduction of errors and the time taken
to undertake calculations. Since 2019, our company has saved a whopping
USD 200,000 due to smart contracts and blockchain tools.

5. Respondent 5 Smart contracts provides an excellent way to our business
to records and store business records. We hold millions of client records
and despite investing in various security measures in the past, intruders
could bypass encryption and ﬁrewall making the customers’ records and
our business secrets vulnerable to hacking. Smart contracts deploy strong
encryption keys that are hard to crack and the entire database comprising
client records can be secured through private keys implying that only
owners and a few individuals can access the records. Moreover, smart
contracts have improved the speed and led to cost-eﬃciency and oﬀer a
better alternative to our legacy systems which we are gradually replacing
as blockchain matures. We have been able to eliminate the costly services
like using brokers and lawyers since our e-commerce platform sellers can
handle all the transactions by themselves with seeking the services or
lawyers or third parties who can be costly.

6. Respondent 6 As a mortgage company, our business has beneﬁted from
smart contract in various way, including more secure, cheap and fast trans-
actions. Today, people can get into their property faster than before since
the technology makes the whole process to have minimal hassle. We can
digitally agree with the clients to sale even before processing their pay-
ment. After the deal is sealed, smart contract easily update properties’

23

ownership details to show the new owners. The use of a unique key code
fair authorization for the original owner make the entire process very se-
cure with minimal conning or fraud cases.

7. Respondent 7 Our insurance business utilizes millions every year in
In the past, we have lost missive
processing and paying out claims.
funds to fraudulent and false claims. Smart contract have come to our
recover through supporting the initial policy and enhanced the process-
ing of claims. Our employees and eﬃciently check for errors in various
claims and payouts using the established terms between our company and
the claimant. Therefore, it minimizes falling into trap of false claims
and errors and drastically makes it cheaper to process claims. With the
likelihood of using smart vehicles in future, we anticipate to implement
pay-as-you-go strategy to enable immediate activation of claims after our
clients incur an accident by promptly processing accident reports, pol-
icy information, driving records and licenses to foster rapid payouts to
save our clients time and also ensure our company saves time and cost of
processing claims and payouts.

8. Respondent 8 Our business processes have greatly beneﬁted from the
use of smart contracts. Particularly, stocktaking and our supply chain
have been streamlined. We have signiﬁcantly substantially eliminated in
house-thefts since our managers are able to trace any missing products
back to the exact place they were located and the time they went missing.
Any culpable worker is easy to ﬁnd and is punished for such activities.
We can also be able to view real-time levels of stocks and the period
taken to move goods in the supply chain. We use such data to analyze the
eﬀectiveness our processes and adjust the stock levels including developing
now practices and processes that enhance delivery time. This improves the
way we serve our online clients since when order are delivered on time,
the clients are happy. We can initiate automatic reordering and easily
pay when the orders are received. Ordering and payment information
is integrated into our smart contracts to assist us establish the type of
products to order in diﬀerent period of the year.

9. Respondent 9 The use of smart contract in compensating clients for
delayed ﬂights is quite aa breakthrough and it resolves challenges asso-
ciated with manual and traditional bureaucratic processes that are time-
consuming and can delay the clients from receiving their money. It enables
our clients to book other ﬂights in a fast way since their information is
automated and can promptly be compensated. The fear of compensating
the wrong client does not arise since the data of our clients is saved du-
plicated in several databases that cannot be altered by any individual to
swindle the clients. Thus, the entire process is more eﬃcient, secure and
occurs at outstanding speed.

10. Respondent 10 The use of smart contract in buying and selling of prop-
erties such as real estate signiﬁcant minimizes reduces cases of fraud, de-

24

ception and conning. Money is held by an escrow which is also aware of
terms of contracts established between the buyer and seller. In case the
seller does not provide the property based on the descriptions provided in
the smart contract. Money will be returned to the buyer. Also, money is
not transferred to the seller until when the product has changed owner-
ship. Therefore, smart contracts facilitate secured transactions where both
parties are happy and not one swindle the other. Furthermore, since all
the paperwork is undertaken digital and is legally binding, smart contract
streamline and make the process of buying and selling property eﬃcient
and quick to complete.

11. Respondent 11 The major beneﬁt realized from using smart contract
in invoice ﬁnancing is the elimination of intermediaries who are paid and
can increase transaction costs. Smart contracts ensure transactions move
rapidly while mitigating risks associated with duplication of invoice ﬁ-
nancing, human errors and fraud. At our company, once the invoice sellers
upload invoices and terms, the buyers are able to select the money and
the entire transactions are carried out digitally guided by the terms out-
lined in the smart contracts. Terms cannot be altered once agreed up and
transactions are easy to transactions. Information of the buyers and seller
of invoice remain undisclosed to any third party which boosts security.

4.3 Challenges limiting deployment of Smart Contracts in

E-Commerce

The participants were asked to oﬀer their opinions of what they believe re the
challenges aﬀecting the deployment of smart contracts in e-commerce. Table
3: Views of the challenges and limitations of smart contracts

1. Respondent 1 The adoption of smart contracts can be very challeng-
ing especially the technical obstacles when migrating and upgrading from
legacy systems to blockchain. You need to train your workforce regarding
how smart contracts work. Workers are so used to traditional systems
and they might resist moving to smart contracts due to fear of learn-
ing and understanding new technologies. Besides, smart contracts and
blockchain technologies are costly. To eﬀectively deploy the technology,
you must invest in talented persons and in the technology itself and before
any management or executives invest in the technology, you must convince
them the technology will reap the company positive beneﬁts. It is hard to
explain to CEOs about beneﬁts smart contract when they cannot ﬁgure
out what is blockchain in the ﬁrst place.

2. Respondents 2 While smart contracts ensures transactions are stream-
lined, it can be a major undoing since all the participants need to agree on
plainly deﬁned standards. It has been hectic one our clients or our busi-
ness wants to change the rules or terms of engagement since the changes

25

can only occur after all parties involved agree to the changes. Some par-
ties might take long to respond especially when you are dealing with more
than one client within a single smart contract. Also, many of our workers
lack suﬃcient understanding of smart contracts. Our company has been
forced to invest money to train them on who smart contracts work. Find-
ing experts to train workers is a challenging processes and once your ﬁnd
one, they charge highly as compared to training on other technologies.
Therefore, an organization with insuﬃcient funds should not go for smart
contracts, but get prepared since it is an uphill task.

3. Respondent 3 A ﬁnd smart contract systems and apps to be incompati-
ble with other existing legacy systems. It is hard for blockchain systems to
communicating with our old systems. Their maturity level are questions
and most of the apps being developed are full of ﬂaws and need further
improvement. Another determining factors for our company to deploy
smart contract is performance in validating and processing transactions
as well as fraud detection. Smart contracts are a bit slow in handling many
transactions without compromising security of data. Therefore, you will
be forced to trade oﬀ speed or security. In business you need to decide
what is important over the other. Furthermore, there are many uncer-
tainties whether contracts enforced through smart contracts are legally
binding especially when selling services or goods to third world nations
which have not developed blockchain regulation. In case of aa dispute,
the only options we have is to utilize dispute resolution due to varied
enforceability of smart contracts in diﬀerent nations.

4. Respondent 4 A key question I keep asking myself is about liability and
recourse in smart contract. What happens if someone does something
wrong with executing the blockchain contract or suﬀers a loss? Where
will they seek a recourse? Smart contract are still developing and imma-
ture. They lack a tech-savvy court system to resolve disputes. While some
courts in the US and Europe recognize blockchain, particularly cryptocur-
rency and how smart contract enhance administration of regulation, they
lack technical knowledge about the execution of these contracts. However,
they need to become aware on how to utilize blockchain evidence when
resolving a dispute. I still do not understand how an individual can be
made liable. Also, the permanency of smart contract documentation can
be hard to alter in case there is a duress or if the contract breaches some
regulatory requirements.

5. Respondent 5 It is hard to retain all the beneﬁts of blockchain without
compromising or trading oﬀ others. For instance, blockchain contracts
foster transparency among the parties involved since each party will receive
a copy of the original document. But it becomes hard to ensure privacy
especially when the parties involved do not intend their information to be
disclosed.

26

6. Respondent 6 The development of smart contracts remains an opaque
process and many people have little knowledge since they need on pro-
graming languages like Java, Solidity, Kotlin or Go. Most developers
have not released their codes to the public to assist us when creating the
contracts. Without source codes, it is challenging for auditors to assess
documents and obtain audit trails for various transactions documented by
smart contracts. Also, blockchain contracts are perceived to be promis-
ing since they generate unpredictable random values and codes. However,
such randomness is exaggerated. I have had cases where miners controlled
the generation and release of blocks to beneﬁt themselves. Thus, while
smart contract enhance security, sophisticated hackers can still ﬁnd loops
to bypass the security mechanisms utilized.

7. Respondent 7 In smart contract, a legal problem can arise when the
products or services advertised do not turn out to be as speciﬁed in the ad.
For instance, when renting out apartments, some tenant might want their
money back since the property is not as speciﬁed in the advertisement. We
have faced a challenge when the landlord refuses to pay back the tenant.
Thus, since smart contracts are executed without physical meetings, cases
of misrepresentation and fraud can increase. Furthermore, is problematic
to ﬁnd a person to be held responsible for coding errors or when systems
malfunction because of unseen challenges.

8. Respondent 8 I believe that enforceability is a major challenges that
smart contracts are yet to overcome. As blockchain come into existence,
they promised decentralization and contracts which do not require per-
mission before being deployed in order to improve the speed of business
transactions between various entities located in diﬀerent geographical lo-
cations. The stipulated dispute resolution for contracts vary from one
nation to another and can be settled in courts. However, smart contracts
do not involve courts but consensus of nodes for the transactions to be
agreed upon. A problem emerge regarding how decentralized systems will
ensure a consensus about a dispute, especially those residing in diﬀerent
nations. As many of our clients begin to embrace smart contracts and
our company utilizes them, we will need to ﬁnd a way to resolve conﬂicts
involving international transactions. Some nations are rapidly develop-
ing legal provisions for blockchain and smart contract while others do not
understand these technologies. Furthermore, diﬀerent interpretations of
contract regulation in relation to smart contract continues to present a
major challenge.

9. Respondent 9 Presently, the maturity level and development of smart
contract is somewhat messy and lacks interoperability. Developers use
various languages like Python, Java, Solidity and Csharp. A lot has to be
done to achieve standardization of smart contracts. Sometimes you ﬁnd
we have installed or purchase a smart contract product or app which is not
compatible with other tools. I believe for smart contract to achieve wide

27

deployments globally, they need to sort out compatibility and standard-
ization challenges by making them to easily get along with other existing
systems and emerging technologies.

10. Respondent 10 While smart contracts promise superior security mech-
anisms, this is not the case in some situations. It seems like hackers can
still ﬁnd security loopholes and vulnerabilities that can be exploited. Even
though our organization has a robust security strategy, we still fear that
our networks can be attacked and result in millions of losses. Besides,
we have invested heavily to train our workforce regarding how smart con-
tract works but recent appraisal still reveal that some workers in our com-
pany are not comfortable with smart contract. Some even prefer the use
of paper-based contracts due to technical complexity of smart contract.
Therefore, will feel that our business is losing a lot of funds to blockchain
smart contract whereas the returns are low.

11. Respondent 11 A major undoing of smart contract is ﬁnding the right
talent of developers to code the contracts and execute the terms and policy.
Hiring people with the right knowledge can be hard since you have to pay
them highly. Also, I think the technology lacks regulatory framework for
dispute resolution, including international regulation that are standard-
ized across various jurisdictions. Moreover, there is still poor understand-
ing by CEOs and managers about the role played by smart contracts and
exactly how they work. Some are hesitant in investing in the technology
due to lack of knowledge. Poor understanding is also witnessed among
some employees who need thorough training before transitioning fully to
the technology.

4.4 The future of Smart Contracts and Solutions

Indeed, smart contracts have several both from literature examined and the
primary data collected. Therefore, it was prudent to seek ﬁrst-hand opinions
from the e-commerce users of this technology regarding what they expect is the
future of smart contract and what should be done to enhance their eﬀectiveness.
Table 4: The future and solutions to smart contract challenges

1. Respondent 1 I believe that developers of smart contract technology
should work to improve its interoperability to enhance wide-scale adop-
tion and deployment. Additionally, learning institutions should introduce
courses on blockchain and smart contract in order for the future work-
force to be well-verse about the technology. In the workplace, businesses
should invest in training their workforce about smart contract to minimize
resistance during its implementation.

2. Respondents 2 Flexibility is a major ball of contention. Smart contracts
are increasingly rigidity particularly in altering contract provisions and
terms. The technology should allow people to make mistakes and modify

28

any terms that are deﬁned easily without bringing back to traditional
hassle and bureaucratic procedures which are lengthy and time-consuming.
Furthermore, the cost of hiring training the workforce on smart contract
should go down so that many companies can realize return on investment.

3. Respondent 3 Experts in the ﬁeld of smart contract should focus on
enhancing the eﬃciency of the technology to be able to handle several
transactions simultaneously in order to same time. Also, security will
remain a major determinant in the adoption and retention of blockchain
I read a lot of stuﬀ online regarding what is being done to
contracts.
secure smart contract transactions. These are the most awaited improved
to assure the users that their information will not be compromised.

4. Respondent 4 I think that legal frameworks and regulations need to be
developed to oﬀer guidance in conﬂict resolution in smart contract. Since
the technology is still developing, I expect to see policymakers from dif-
ferent countries coming together to form a body for developing blockchain
regulations that can be used across various nations. Also, I expect the see
more ﬂexible smart contract were modiﬁcation or changes can be made
easily to the initial terms. Sometimes people make mistakes and smart
contracts should allow them to alter some stances where applicable with-
out any deception.

5. Respondent 5 My major concern is about privacy and security of data
in blockchain contracts. Since the technology fosters decentralization of
information, third parties are likely to gain access to sensitive data. There-
fore, the developers should seal these loopholes so that the technology can
keep its promise of securing transactions.

6. Respondent 6 Improvement of knowledge and understanding can sig-
niﬁcantly improve the use and adoption of smart contract. We need to
seem more universities and colleges oﬀering courses on smart contract
and blockchain. Also, smart contract tools should be made open source
so that individual developers and organizations can improve on the tools
and address any bugs. Open source codes can be accessed by auditors for
evaluation and tracking of various transactions. Furthermore, the existing
security loopholes should be sealed to guarantee safe transactions without
exposing customer data.

7. Respondent 7 A legal mechanism is needed to ensure that parties in-
volved in a smart contract can seek legal redress irrespective of the country
of origin. Sellers need to be assured that they will receive their payment
while the buyers can also get their money back in case the product or
property agreed upon does not match the indicated speciﬁcations. De-
velopers should also ensure that they continuously improve their codes
to minimize coding errors experienced in some smart contract and other
blockchain applications.

29

8. Respondent 8 More research and development should focus on enhanc-
ing security mechanisms of smart contract to secure sensitive informa-
tion belong to the clients. Also, I expect to see smart contract and
other blockchain technologies becoming more eﬃcient and cost-eﬀective.
The developers need to ﬁnd strategies that can bring down the cost of
blockchain tools to enable small and medium-sized business deploy them.

9. Respondent 9 Further development is needed in the ﬁeld of blockchain
to make the technology mature enough with minimal errors. Develop-
ments need to concentrate on security and privacy of information. Also,
developers should oﬀer blockchain tools that are compatible with existing
systems and can be used in various devices such as laptops, tablets and
smartphones.

10. Respondent 10 Companies developing blockchain technologies should
create trusted systems for e-commerce. The development of trust smart
contracts will enhance the economic and social eﬃcacies by fostering ﬁ-
nancial security as well as enhance the core competency of the systems. In
such systems, data cannot be tampered with. Besides, distributed account
ledgers should be oﬀered to resolve cross-business exchanges. Such sys-
tems should be standardized to facilitate communication and information
sharing between the systems.

11. Respondent 11 The global market should invest in talent in blockchain
industry for organizations to access competent and skilled workers to push
ahead the use of smart contracts. Additionally, regulatory frameworks and
guidelines need to be developed to oﬀer laws and guidelines regarding the
use of smart contracts. This will foster easier conﬂict or dispute resolution.
Moreover, company managers and CEO need to be aware of market dy-
namics regarding emerging technologies and their beneﬁts. Leaders should
not shy away from learning about smart contracts and its applications in
business.

5 DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION

Blockchain technologies have recently fueled massive interests in both indus-
try and research due to the ability to enable decentralization of transactions
that can be processed minus the need of a trusted intermediary. This paper
investigated the applicability of smart contract in e-commerce by obtained data
from various industry leaders with understanding about the technology. First
the study examined the use cases of deploying smart contracts in e-commerce
based on the recruited participants. Findings indicated that smart contracts are
deployed to streamline ﬁnancial transactions including transfer of funds, record-
keeping and facilitating ﬁnancial trade, credit authorization and crowdfunding
agreements or Initial Coin Oﬀering (ICOs). Other e-commerce business utilize
smart contracts for storing receipts, customer data, managing stock, document

30

property and exchange of ownership and automate payment of rent for electric
vehicles. The technology is also deployed for decentralized intelligence, gaming
and securing transactions as well as in insurance to encode policy terms for
rapid payouts to the client. E-commerce businesses can use smart contracts to
manage and secure the buying and selling of products via the internet, shipping
of the products and tracking every processes within the supply chain to mini-
mize theft and lost orders. The aviation sector has also found the technology
to be important in ensuring processing compensation claims of delayed ﬂights
and in real estate, it improves property management. Another emerging use
of smart contract include invoice ﬁnancing. This explains why large-scale in-
vestments are being made on smart contracts with venture-capitalists funding
start-ups to reinvent and transform the conventional business models (Katsi-
(2016) explain that the ever-increasing ﬁelds of
ampa, 2019). Ream et al.
relevance and applications this technology will see many e-commerce businesses
customizing the technology to ﬁt their needs. The increased use can be further
explained by the beneﬁts delivered by smart contracts. The respondents oﬀered
various opinion regarding the beneﬁt of this technology in e-commerce. The
technology enhances privacy, security and autonomy of transactions be limiting
exposure to third parties. Udokwu et al. (2018) explain that blockchain tech-
nology allow consumers to purchase products without exposing their personal
data. Golosova and Romanovs (2018) attribute the outstanding security to
distributed ledge where consumer data is not stored in a centralized server and
this minimizes the chances of being hacked or compromised. Also, once transac-
tions have been recorded it is impossible to edit, delete or alter the transaction.
The permanency of these transactions implies that workers cannot collude to
siphon funds and this limits corruption and fraudulent activities since smart
contracts oﬀer a perfect audit trail where money can be tracked to the origin.
Also, terms of the contract cannot be alter until there is a consensus among
the nodes involved. Secure transactions enhances the reputation of businesses
making clients satisﬁed and loyal since their interests are safeguarded. Happy
clients improve retention of customers who repeat purchases to foster sound ﬁ-
nancial performance and proﬁtability. Smart contracts were found to improve
eﬃcacy, cost-eﬀectiveness and speed of transactions by automating processes
while eliminating bureaucratic and lengthy procedures involving third parties
that are time-consuming. Cost. Eﬀectiveness is also achieved through reducing
the number of workers needed to process transactions and elimination of admin-
istration and third party (such as lawyers and brokers) costs. Similar ﬁndings
are documented by Wang (2016), arguing that the disintermediation process in
smart contracts enhance eﬃciency by addressing critical aspects of transactions
ranging from record-keeping, enforcement, auditing and monitoring. Moreover,
smart contracts minimise human errors and mistakes since the technology auto-
mate most transactions by encoding the terms and conditions that are executed
automatically. The technology fosters transparency and accountability where
transactions are shared among the parties who hold an original copy and buyers
can track their products after ordering. Moreover, the storage of transactions
in distributed ledger acts as a backup and resilience strategy to foster business

31

continuity and recovery in case of data failures. Similar ﬁndings are documented
by Giancaspro (2017) who deduce that the absence of central authority is smart
contracts and intermediary for validation and collation of transactions coupled
with the transparency means that commercial activities undertaken through
blockchain contracts in public ledger are visible to all miners. Furthermore,
the technology delivers real-time in supply chain to enable managers undertake
analytics to obtain knowledge applied of stock management including ordering
of stock. While smart contract promise to reinvent and transform e-commerce,
the technologies face a myriad of challenges and limitations. Golosova and Ro-
manovs (2018) note that the technology is less than a decade old and needs time
to mature. There are technical challenges of migrating from legacy systems to
blockchain contracts attributed to interoperability challenges coupled with lack
of standardisation. Also, some apps and tools are full of bugs and ﬂaws that can
expose data to hackers. Moreover, Smart contract can be slow and ineﬀective
as compared to conventional legacy systems and networks known for the ca-
pability to process thousands of transactions simultaneously like Visa payment
system that processes 65,000 transaction per second (Anupam, 2019). The im-
maturity challenge also implies that Blockchain technology lacks suﬃcient legal
frameworks and regulatory mechanism, especially for international deals.
It
remains uncertain whether smart contracts can be enforced by law legally bind-
ings. Also, it is not clear whether unsatisﬁed party can seek legal redress in a
court of law and who should be held liable since there are no tech-savvy courts
across the globe. Moreover, diﬀerent interpretations of contract regulations in
relation to smart contract continues to present a major challenge. According to
Meijer (2020), there is insuﬃcient clarity of the regulatory frameworks and laws
governing blockchain technologies and this aﬀects mass adoption in business.
Nonetheless, Golosova and Romanovs (2018) have a diﬀerent opinion indicat-
ing that digitalization and development of novel technologies are occurring in
a heavily environment due to the long-standing regulations enacted by vari-
ous regimes intended to safeguard the consumers as well as property rights.
Salmer´on-Manzano and Manzano-Agugliaro (2019) point out that smart con-
tracts need to tackle various issues like jurisdictional, trial and enforcement risks.
Additionally, workers, managers and some CEOs lack suﬃcient understanding
about technology and raise doubts whether smart contracts will beneﬁt busi-
nesses. Therefore, there is hesitation in investing in the blockchain contracts.
Besides, it is costly to hire and training workers on smart contract due to the
immaturity of the technology and scarcity of talent in the arena. Meijer (2020)
found that the demand for blockchain-related talent had skyrocketed by about
2000 percent from 2017 to 2020. Besides, smart contracts are still considered to
be opaque to many and this is escalated by absence of original codes to enable ro-
bust auditing. Furthermore, while permanency of blockchain records is a major
beneﬁt in evading corruption and fraud, it is hectic for parties to alter the terms
and provisions after they agree to modify something after discovering an error.
Privacy issue comes into play for decentralised ledger transactions where infor-
mation is likely to leak to other third parties. Also, there are security loopholes
that can be exploited by sophisticated hackers to generate their order blocks for

32

fraudulent activities. Conoscenti et al. (2016) explains that only limited scenar-
ios of blockchain contracts oﬀer adequate security mechanism to cope emerging
security threats. While blockchain technologies are more secure as compared to
the conventional systems, sophisticated hackers are still breaching businesses,
applications and systems deploying blockchain technologies (Anupam, 2019).
Evidently, while smart contract provides outstanding solutions to e-commerce,
policymakers, researchers, practitioners and other stakeholders, need to invest
eﬀort and time to foster growth to the technologies and resolve existing challenge
to enable global adoption of smart contract by small and big businesses.

5.1 Recommendations
Notwithstanding the rapid developments of blockchain contracts and their
beneﬁcial impacts, there are several challenges that need to be addressed. The
developers of smart contracts and blockchain need to collectively work in en-
hance interoperability and security loopholes to encourage widespread of the
adoption of these tools in e-commerce and other sectors. The detection of secu-
rity loopholes and sealing them will required extensive software engineering and
data analytics. Smart contracts tools and systems should be able to run in dif-
ferent environments and devices to ensure compatibility with existing systems.
Besides, more research should focus on enhancing eﬃciency of smart contract by
developing tools that reduce the cost of the technology, energy consumption and
storage. Researchers should follow open source model where codes are available
to the public for enhancement and use. Also, it is vital that higher learning
institutions begin oﬀering robust courses on blockchain to ensure the labour
market has suﬃcient workers with understanding on blockchain technologies.
Within the workplace, HR and managers should work together to oﬀer train-
ing to their workforce to foster smooth transition into smart contracts. The
legal environment must work fast to establish policies, standards and regulation
for smart contracts that can be deployed internationally, since the majority of
transactions involve geographically dispersed parties. Courts and policymakers
will need to establish the pathways utilized to introduce, validate and admit ev-
idences regarding smart contracts. Moreover, smart contract regulations need
be enforced to enable regulators access private information in order to track
underlying transactions. Also, courts and lawyers need to become tech-savvy in
relation to smart contracts. Personnel should receive training on various modal-
ities of smart contracts and how they can obtain pieces of evidence to resolve
various conﬂicts.

6 References

1. Abadi, M., Chu, A., Goodfellow, I., McMahan, H.B., Mironov, I., Talwar,
K. and Zhang, L., 2016, October. Deep learning with diﬀerential privacy.
In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and
Communications Security (pp. 308-318).

2. Adu, P. 2019. A step-by-step guide to qualitative data coding. Abingdon,

33

Oxon; New York, NY : Routledge.

3. Ali, O., Ally, M. and Dwivedi, Y., 2020. The state of play of blockchain
technology in the ﬁnancial services sector: A systematic literature review.
International Journal of Information Management, 54, p.102199.

4. Anupam, S. 2019. What Are The Major Limitations, Challenges In Blockchain?
Retrieved from INC42: https://inc42.com/features/what-are-the-major-
limitations-challenges-in-blockchain/

5. Atzei, N., Bartoletti, M. and Cimoli, T., 2017, April. A survey of attacks
on ethereum smart contracts (sok). In International conference on princi-
ples of security and trust (pp. 164-186). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.

6. BarNir, A., Gallaugher, J. M., and Auger, P. 2003. Business process
digitization, strategy, and the impact of ﬁrm age and size: the case of
the magazine publishing industry. Journal of Business Venturing, 18(6),
789-814.

7. Beneki, C., Koulis, A., Kyriazis, N.A. and Papadamou, S., 2019. Investi-
gating volatility transmission and hedging properties between Bitcoin and
Ethereum. Research in International Business and Finance, 48, pp.219-
227.

8. Burnard, P., Gill, P., Stewart, K., Treasure, E. and Chadwick, B., 2008.
Analysing and presenting qualitative data. British dental journal, 204(8),
pp.429-432.

9. Carson, B., Romanelli, G., Walsh, P. and Zhumaev, A., 2018. Blockchain
beyond the hype: What is the strategic business value. McKinsey and
Company, pp.1-13.

10. Carson, B., Romanelli, G., Walsh, P., and Zhumaev, A. 2018. Blockchain
beyond the hype: What is the strategic business value? Retrieved from
Mckinsey: https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/mckinsey-digital/our-
insights/blockchain-beyond-the-hype-what-is-the-strategic-business-value

11. Casino, F., Dasaklis, T.K. and Patsakis, C., 2019. A systematic literature
review of blockchain-based applications: current status, classiﬁcation and
open issues. Telematics and Informatics, 36, pp.55-81.

12. Chepurnoy, A. and Saxena, A., 2019. Multi-stage Contracts in the UTXO
Model. In Data Privacy Management, Cryptocurrencies and Blockchain
Technology (pp. 244-254). Springer, Cham.

13. Cole, R., Stevenson, M. and Aitken, J., 2019. Blockchain technology:
implications for operations and supply chain management. Supply Chain
Management: An International Journal, 24(4), pp.469-483.

34

14. Conoscenti, M., Vetro, A. and De Martin, J.C., 2016, November. Blockchain

for the Internet of Things: A systematic literature review. In 2016 IEEE/ACS
13th International Conference of Computer Systems and Applications
(AICCSA) (pp. 1-6). IEEE.

15. Creswell, J. W. 2007. Qualitative inquiry and research design. London:

Sage Publications.

16. Creswell, J. W. 2014. Research design: Qualitative, quantitative, and

mixed methods approaches. Thousand Oaks: SAGE.

17. Daniel, E., and Wilson, H. 2002. Adoption intentions and beneﬁts re-
alised: a study of e-commerce in UK SMEs. Journal of Small Business
and Enterprise Development.

18. De Vries, A., 2019. Renewable energy will not solve bitcoin’s sustainability

problem. Joule, 3(4), pp.893-898.

19. Edelman, R. 2017. 2017 Edelman trust barometer: Global report.

20. Fries, M., and Paal, B. P. 2019. Smart contracts. Mohr Siebeck.

21. Gatteschi, V., Lamberti, F., Demartini, C., Pranteda, C. and Santamar´ıa,
V., 2018. Blockchain and smart contracts for insurance: Is the technology
mature enough?. Future Internet, 10(2), p.20.

22. Giancaspro, M., 2017. Is a ‘smart contract’really a smart idea? Insights
from a legal perspective. Computer law and security review, 33(6), pp.825-
835.

23. Golosova, J. and Romanovs, A., 2018, November. The advantages and
disadvantages of the blockchain technology. In 2018 IEEE 6th workshop
on advances in information, electronic and electrical engineering (AIEEE)
(pp. 1-6). IEEE.

24. Iansiti, M., and Lakhani, K. R. 2017. The Truth About Blockchain.
Retrieved from Havard Business Review: https://hbr.org/2017/01/the-
truth-about-blockchain

25. Ismanto, L., Ar, H. S., Fajar, A. N., and Bachtiar, S. 2019. Blockchain
as E-Commerce Platform in Indonesia. In Journal of Physics: Conference
Series (Vol. 1179, No. 1, p. 012114). IOP Publishing.

26. Katsiampa, P., 2019. An empirical investigation of volatility dynamics
in the cryptocurrency market. Research in International Business and
Finance, 50, pp.322-335.

27. Khezr, S., Moniruzzaman, M., Yassine, A. and Benlamri, R., 2019. Blockchain
technology in healthcare: A comprehensive review and directions for fu-
ture research. Applied sciences, 9(9), p.1736.

35

28. King, N., Horrocks, C., and SAGE Publishing. 2010. Interviews in quali-

tative research. London [i pozosta le: SAGE.

29. Kouhizadeh, M., Saberi, S. and Sarkis, J., 2020. Blockchain technology
and the sustainable supply chain: Theoretically exploring adoption barri-
ers. International Journal of Production Economics, 231, p.107831.

30. Meijer, C. R. 2020. Remaining challenges of blockchain adoption and pos-

sible solutions. Retrieved from Finextra: https://www.ﬁnextra.com/blogposting/18496/remaining-
challenges-of-blockchain-adoption-and-possible-solutions

31. Mengelkamp, E., Notheisen, B., Beer, C., Dauer, D. and Weinhardt, C.,
2018. A blockchain-based smart grid: towards sustainable local energy
markets. Computer Science-Research and Development, 33(1-2), pp.207-
214.

32. Nikoli´c, I., Kolluri, A., Sergey, I., Saxena, P. and Hobor, A., 2018, De-
cember. Finding the greedy, prodigal, and suicidal contracts at scale. In
Proceedings of the 34th Annual Computer Security Applications Confer-
ence (pp. 653-663).

33. Notland, J. S., Notland, J. S., and Morrison, D. 2020. The Minimum Hy-
brid Contract (MHC) Combining Legal and Blockchain Smart Contracts.
In Proceedings of the Evaluation and Assessment in Software Engineering
(pp. 390-397).

34. Pan, X., Pan, X., Song, M., Ai, B. and Ming, Y., 2020. Blockchain
technology and enterprise operational capabilities: An empirical test. In-
ternational Journal of Information Management, 52, p.101946.

35. Ream, J., Chu, Y. and Schatsky, D., 2016. Upgrading blockchains: Smart

contract use cases in industry. Retrieved December, 12, p.2017.

36. Ryan, P.A., 2017. Smart contract relations in e-commerce: legal implica-
tions of exchanges conducted on the blockchain. Technology Innovation
Management Review.

37. Salmer´on-Manzano, E. and Manzano-Agugliaro, F., 2019. The role of
smart contracts in sustainability: worldwide research trends. Sustainabil-
ity, 11(11), p.3049.

38. Savelyev, A. 2017. Contract law 2.0:‘Smart’contracts as the beginning of
the end of classic contract law. Information and Communications Tech-
nology Law, 26(2), 116-134.

39. Singh, A., Parizi, R. M., Zhang, Q., Choo, K. K. R., and Dehghantanha,
A. 2020. Blockchain smart contracts formalization: Approaches and chal-
lenges to address vulnerabilities. Computers and Security, 88, 101654.

36

40. Suliman, A., Husain, Z., Abououf, M., Alblooshi, M. and Salah, K., 2018.
IET Networks, 8(1),

Monetization of IoT data using smart contracts.
pp.32-37.

41. Szabo, N. 1997. Formalizing and securing relationships on public net-

works. First Monday.

42. Tanja, M. 2018. How Can Blockchain Smart Contracts Be Used in e-

Commerce? Retrieved from Stockholm: https://stockholm.bc.events/en/news/how-
can-blockchain-smart-contracts-be-used-in-e-commerce-91278

43. Tapscott, D. and Tapscott, A., 2016. Blockchain revolution: how the
technology behind bitcoin is changing money, business, and the world.
Penguin.

44. Tapscott, D. and Tapscott, A., 2017. How blockchain will change organi-

zations. MIT Sloan Management Review, 58(2), p.10.

45. Tapscott, D., and Tapscott, A. 2016. Blockchain revolution: how the
technology behind bitcoin is changing money, business, and the world.
Penguin.

46. T¨onnissen, S. and Teuteberg, F., 2020. Analysing the impact of blockchain-
technology for operations and supply chain management: An explanatory
model drawn from multiple case studies. International Journal of Infor-
mation Management, 52, p.101953.

47. Udokwu, C., Kormiltsyn, A., Thangalimodzi, K. and Norta, A., 2018.
An exploration of blockchain enabled smart-contracts application in the
enterprise. Technical Report.

48. Walch, A., 2015. The bitcoin blockchain as ﬁnancial market infrastructure:
A consideration of operational risk. NYUJ Legis. and Pub. Pol’y, 18,
p.837.

49. Wang, B., 2016. Blockchain and the law. Internet Law Bulletin, 19(1),

pp.250-254.

50. Wang, S., Yuan, Y., Wang, X., Li, J., Qin, R. and Wang, F.Y., 2018,
June. An overview of smart contract: architecture, applications, and
future trends.
In 2018 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV) (pp.
108-113). IEEE.

51. Yaga, D., Mell, P., Roby, N. and Scarfone, K., 2019. Blockchain technol-

ogy overview. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.11078.

52. Zhang, Y., Bian, J., and Zhu, W. 2013. Trust fraud: A crucial challenge
for China’s e-commerce market. Electronic Commerce Research and Ap-
plications, 12(5), 299-308.

37

7 APPENDIX

7.1

Interview Guide

1. Does your business use smart contracts?

2. Explain the areas in your business where smart contracts are applied.

3. What are the beneﬁts and reasons for using smart contracts in e-commerce?

4. How has smart contract improve business processes and eﬃciency?

5. What are the major hindrance limiting the use of smart contract in e-

commerce?

6. Is the technology mature enough?

7. Comment on the legal framework on smart contracts and limitations?

8. What do you believe can be done to resolve the challenges you have dis-

cussed?

9. What is the future of smart contracts?

10. What development could you like to see in smart contract ﬁeld?

38

