A Secure Dynamic Edge Resource Federation
Architecture for Cross-Domain IoT Systems

Ronghua Xua, Yu Chena, Xiaohua Lia, Erik Blaschb

aDept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Binghamton University, Binghamton, USA
bThe U.S. Air Force Research Laboratory, Rome, USA
Emails: {rxu22, ychen, xli}@binghamton.edu, erik.blasch@us.af.mil

2
2
0
2

g
u
A
2

]
I

N
.
s
c
[

1
v
6
6
4
1
0
.
8
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—The fast integration of 5G communication,
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI), and Internet-of-Things (IoT)
technologies is envisioned to enable Next Generation Net-
works (NGNs) for diverse smart services and user-deﬁned
applications for Smart Cities. However, it is still challenging
to build a scalable and efﬁcient infrastructure that satisﬁes
the various performance, security, and management de-
mands by heterogeneous IoT applications across multiple
administrative domains. This paper presents a dynamic
edge resource federation architecture, which integrates the
concept of network slicing (NS) and blockchain to improve
scalability, dynamicity, and security for multi-domain IoT
applications. A NS-enabled dynamic edge resource federa-
tion framework adopts intelligent mechanisms to support
efﬁcient multi-domain service coordination that satisﬁes
diverse Quality of Service (QoS) and security requirements.
We propose a Hierarchical Integrated Federated Ledger
(HIFL), which aims to guarantee decentralized security and
privacy-preserving properties in multi-domain resource
orchestration and service re-adjustment. As a secure-by-
design solution, HIFL is promising to support efﬁcient,
trust and secured end-to-end IoT services. A preliminary
proof-of-concept prototype has been implemented for com-
paring intra- and inter-domain performance expectations.

Index Terms—Next-Generation Networks (NGNs), Smart
Cities, Internet of Things (IoT), Edge Network, Network
Slicing, Blockchain.

I. INTRODUCTION

The rapid evolving ﬁfth-generation (5G) commu-
nication networks combined with Internet of Things
(IoT) and edge-cloud computing technologies brings the
concept of Smart Cities into practice. A plethora of
novel smart applications improve the quality of our
lives through enhancing health, safety, and convenience,
including intelligent transportation [8], smart e-health
care [18], distributed data markets [26], smart agriculture
[25], intelligent edge surveillance [13], and more. Mean-
while, smart cities highly rely on an efﬁcient and secure
infrastructure, which has to meet various performance,
security, and management demands through heteroge-
neous IoT applications across multiple administrative
domains [30].

that

It becomes more evident

the existing homo-
geneous network infrastructure is not able to handle
scalability and extensibility due to the rapid growth of
IoT connections [11], [20]. In addition, it is difﬁcult
for a traditional centralized service framework to facil-
itate dynamic and heterogeneous IoT ecosystems that
need optimal resource utilization and diverse Quality-of-
Service (QoS) requirements [24]. Furthermore, unifying
sensitive information among geographically scattered
devices that belong to different domains also brings
increasingly concerns on security and privacy.

As one of the key enabling technologies in the context
of 5G, Network Slicing (NS) utilizes virtualization and
softwarization to divide the physical network into mul-
tiple isolated logical networks (i.e, slices) with different
network characteristics [24]. Through dynamic resource
allocation among dedicated slices for heterogeneous IoT
applications, NS is a promising method to improve scala-
bility and dynamicity in a large scale of IoT network that
satisﬁes various QoS demands [6], [10], [21]. Moreover,
the isolation property of NS ensures performance and
security guarantees [2]. Thus, NS facilitates mitigat-
ing impact of attacks like Distributed Denial-of-Service
(DDoS) and protecting sensitive information collected
by IoT devices.

Blockchain, a distributed ledger technology (DLT)
[12], has demonstrated great potential to revolutionize
various aspects of economy and society. Blockchain
utilizes a decentralized architecture to securely store and
verify data without relying on a centralized trust author-
ity [29]. The decentralization of blockchain is promis-
ing to improve performance and reduce a single point
of failure caused by a centralized service architecture.
Moreover, leveraging consensus protocols to verify and
record transactions on a immutable and transparent pub-
lic distributed ledger, blockchain guarantees availability,
correctness, and provenance for resource sharing (i.e,
computing, storage and networking.) among untrusted
participants in a multi-domain IoT system.

To improve scalability, dynamicity and security for
multi-domain IoT applications, this paper proposes a

 
 
 
 
 
 
secure-by-design and dynamic edge resource federation
architecture based on NS and blockchain technologies.
Integrating NS-enabled dynamic edge resource orches-
tration with federated ledger fabric [26], the Hierarchical
Integrated Federated Ledger (HIFL) solution aims at
an organic mutual reinforced networking service infras-
tructure. All physical edge resources are converted to
virtual resources that are managed by domain speciﬁc
slices. The multi-domain coordination federates these
isolated slices that are dynamically designed, deployed
and optimized according to service requirements and
operating conditions. The federated ledger allows for
a decentralized security fabric to enhance security and
privacy-preserving properties in intra-slice and inter-slice
resource orchestration and service inter-operations.

The remainder of this article is organized as follows.
Section II introduce the background knowledge and
related work of integrating NS and blockchain into
IoT systems. In Section III, the system architecture of
HIFL and main procedures are explained followed with
descriptions of the main components and procedures
in multi-domain orchestration. Section IV presents the
preliminary prototype implementation and evaluation
along with discussions on the open questions yet to be
addressed. Section V concludes this paper.

II. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK

A. Network Slicing for IoT

Network slicing concept

in 5G is introduced by
NGMN (Next Generation Mobile Network) in [4]. To
assure service customization, isolation and multi-tenancy
support, NS can divide a common physical network
infrastructure into multiple logic networks called slices
or subnets. Each NS slice is a uniﬁcation of virtual
resources, which run a set of virtual network functions
and software deﬁned network (SDN) settings for a
speciﬁc communication service and business model. NS
builds on top of key principles, like isolation, elasticity,
automation and customisation, which are promising to
improve scalability and dynamicity of heterogeneous IoT
systems [2].

To support

the intelligent allocation and dynamic
adjustment of virtual resources in NS networks, adap-
tive virtual network slices for diverse IoT services is
proposed to achieve vertical, horizontal and internetwork
scaling purposes [10]. Given real-time resource utiliza-
tion and performance requirements, adaptive resource
adjustment algorithms can produce the output of new
optimal values to re-allocate resources. NS may com-
bine resources from different administrative domains.
Thus, a multi-domain network slicing management and
orchestration architecture is designed to enable efﬁcient
and dynamic federated resources allocation across do-
mains [21]. Each domain uses sub-domain controllers

to orchestrate and manage resources and Network Slice
Subnet Instances (NSSI), while an global end-to-end
slice coordinator uniﬁes the management of federated
domains. By using a brokering layer that relies on a
graph-based resource database, a brokering architecture
for network slicing is proposed to federate IT and
edge resources owned by multiple third-party actors [6].
The proposed architecture [6] is implemented for the
federation of a stadium infrastructure resources, and an
author evaluates the time for resource federation, slice
provisioning and slice activation.

B. IoT-Blockchain Considerations

Blockchain initially was implemented as an enabling
technology of Bitcoin [12], which aims to provide a
cryptocurrency to record and verify commercial transac-
tions among trustless entities in a decentralized manner.
In a blockchain network, a large amount of miners or
validators execute a consensus protocol under a Peer-
to-Peer (P2P) network to ensure integrity, consistence
and total order of data on the distributed ledger. Thanks
to the decentralized network architecture and crypto-
graphic security mechanisms, all trust-less participants
in a blockchain system cooperatively maintain a security
and trust framework instead of relying on a centralized
third party trust authority. Emerging from the intelli-
gent property, a smart contract (SC) encapsulates self-
executing procedures recorded on the distributed ledger,
Thus, a SC introduces programmability into blockchain
to support various customized transaction logic rather
than simple cash transactions [30].

Combining blockchain and a smart contract enables
a secured and trust-free framework to facilitate data
sharing and the federation of resources from third party
actors. However, resources intensive consensus algo-
rithms, like Proof-of-Work (PoW) and its variants, are
not affordable for IoT devices that are strictly con-
strained by computation and storage capacity. Using a
Practical Byzantine Fault Tolerance (PBFT) [7] protocol
can achieve high throughput, lower latency and limited
computation overhead; however, it cannot scale up to
a large consensus network. Moreover, IoT devices are
managed by different administrative domains with di-
verse performance and security requirements. Therefore,
a monolithic blockchain network cannot perfectly ensure
decentralization, scalability and security for dynamic and
heterogeneous IoT systems across multiple domains.

C. Lightweight Distributed Ledgers for Edge Networks

The inherent security guarantees of blockchain pro-
vide the foundations of a serverless record-keeping
without the need for centralize trusted third-party au-
thorities [3]. Transparency, immutability and auditability
ensure resilience, correctness, and provenance for all

data sharing among untrusted participants. Many efforts
try to leverage blockchain to support security features
required in IoT systems. IoTChain [5] proposes a three-
tier blockchain-based IoT architecture, which allows re-
gional nodes to perform any lightweight consensus, like
Proof-of-Stake (PoS) and PBFT. IoTChain only provides
simulation results on communication cost of transac-
tions; however key metrics in the consensus layer, like
computation, storage and throughput, are not considered.
FogBus [22] proposes a lightweight framework for inte-
grating blockchain into fog-cloud infrastructure, which
aims to ensure data integrity as transferring conﬁdential
data over IoT-based systems. In FogBus, master nodes
deployed at the fog layer are allowed to perform PoW
mining, while IoT devices send transactions to master
nodes as trust intermediates to interact with blockchain.
However, using PoW as the backbone consensus pro-
tocol still results in high energy consumption and low
throughout.

HybridIoT [19] proposes a hybrid blockchain-IoT
architecture to improve scalability and interoperability
among sub-blockchains. In HybridIoT, a BFT inter-
connector framework works as a global consortium-
blockchain to link multiple PoW sub-blockchains. How-
ever, using PoW consensus in sub-blockchain networks
still brings computation and storage overhead on IoT
devices if they are deployed as full nodes. IoTA [9] aims
to enable a cryptocurrency designed for the IoT industry,
and it leverages a directed acyclic graph (DAG), called
tangle [17], to record transactions rather than chained
structure of the ledger. IoTA provides a secure data
communication protocol and zero fee micro-transaction
for IoT/machine-to-machine (M2M), and it demonstrates
high throughput and good scalability. However, existing
IoTA networks still rely on hard-coded coordinators,
which employ PoW to ﬁnalize path of recorded transac-
tions in DAG.

Unlike the above mentioned IoT-Blockchain solutions,
which either adopt computation intensive PoW as their
backbone consensus mechanism or rely on a interme-
diate fog layer to execute consensus protocol, HIFL
aims at a partially decentralized, lightweight hierarchi-
cal blockchain network fabric that is customized for a
dynamic network slice in a highly heterogeneous edge
computing environment. In addition, HIFL will form an
organic network fabric of the network slices, not merely
taking advantage of blockchain as a time-stamped series
of data records, but can also serve as network slice
brokers [15], [23], [31].

III. HIFL: RATIONALE AND DESIGN

solution takes advantage of NS and blockchain tech-
nologies to enable efﬁcient and scalable edge resources
federation and orchestration under heterogeneous multi-
domain IoT environments. The proposed HIFL archi-
tecture is depicted in Figure 1 with two distinct sub-
frameworks.

(1) Multi-domain Coordination: adopts a dynamic
edge resource federation paradigm with NS as an en-
abling technology. The virtualization layer abstracts all
physical edge resources to virtual resources according
to functionalities, like computing, storage and network
connectivity. Each domain speciﬁc slice manages virtual
resources within a domain and provides interfaces to up-
per level multi-domain coordination. A software-deﬁned
network (SDN) controller provides network connectivity
and service chaining among allocated Virtual Networ
Functions (VNF). VNF Management and Orchestration
(MANO) manages the VNFs along with required virtual
computing and storage resources. Dynamic resource or-
chestration depends on customer/user requirements and
system performance monitoring. By federating virtual
resources managed by different domain speciﬁc slices,
multi-domain orchestration relies on intelligent algo-
rithms to achieve fast resource deployment and efﬁcient
services re-adjustments with diverse QoS and security
requirements.

(2) Federated Ledger: provides a decentralized secu-
rity fabric to guarantee security and privacy-preserving
in data and resource sharing across different domains. In
a speciﬁc domain, a random elected committee executes
an efﬁcient BFT-based consensus protocol to verify and
record data on a private intra-domain ledger. Because
each domain is a permissioned network, only authorized
users are allowed to access data on an intra-domain
ledger. Moreover, running BFT consensus protocol by
a small scale validator committee can achieve low
latency and high throughput of transactions. Such an
intra-domain ledger blockchain network supports partial
decentralization at the network of edge with performance
and privacy-preserving guarantees. At the multi-domain
level, a public inter-domain ledger network federates
fragmented intra-domain ledger networks, and it uses
a scalable PoW consensus to secure cross-domain op-
erations. For multi-domain operations, the public inter-
domain ledger only records checkpoints data that indi-
rectly refer to raw data on private intra-domain ledgers.
Therefore, the NIFL federated ledger structure is promis-
ing to ensure scalability and security without sacriﬁcing
performance and privacy requirements of individual do-
mains [26].

A. System Architecture Design

B. Dynamic Resource Orchestration

Aiming at a self-adaptive, secure-by-design and partial
decentralized networking service architecture, the HIFL

The dynamic resource orchestration uses federated
NS Instances (NSIs) to support end-to-end connectiv-

Fig. 1.

Illustration of system architecture consisting of multi-domain service coordination and federated ledger fabric.

different administrative domains. Given current uniﬁed
resources of the system, service mapping process selects
appropriate NS templates (NSTs) to create a service
graph that is sent to domain NSI control for resource
conﬁguration. The domain NSI control allocates virtual
resources for new NS instantiation. After conﬁguration
and activation, an NSI becomes run-time that supports
functionalities of service and reports performance.

2) When system monitoring detects performance
degradation due to insufﬁcient resource or service con-
ﬁgurations, domain NSI’s control will send service re-
adjustment requests to service orchestration. The service
mapping process may modify service speciﬁc parame-
ters, and/or allocate more topology, links and computing
resources. Then it sends resource re-conﬁguration to do-
main NSI control, which is responsible for instantiating,
modifying or decommissioning NS to meet on-demand
requirements in service providing time.

C. Blockchain based Security Mechanism

The identiﬁed threads and probable points of attack for
network slicing can be categorized as: life-cycle security,
intra-slice security and inter-slice security [16]. Figure 3
summarizes the representative threats and explains how
blockchain can be used to enhance security proprieties
of dynamic edge resource federation framework.

Slice life-cycle Attack: An adversary can modify NS
templates in preparation phase or change conﬁgura-
tion when new slices are instantiating given on-demand
service requests. The access violation may happen in
slice run-time phases such that unauthorized entities can

Fig. 2. The dynamic resource orchestration mechanism.

ity for multi-domain applications. Given continuously
analyzing service and monitoring performance, NSIs
carry out resource allocation and service re-adjustment
to ensure desired requirements. An overview of multi-
domain service orchestration and domain NSI control is
shown in Figure 2. The dynamic resource orchestration
happens if 1) customers/users launch service requests;
or 2) running services with allocated resources cannot
fulﬁll desired performance.

1) After receiving customer requirements, Service
Orchestration (SO) ﬁrstly negotiates with verticals and
service providers on admission control and charging.
Then, SO decomposes and abstracts services toward

Fig. 3. Blockchain based security mechanism for dynamic edge resource federation.

conduct performance and DoS attacks by changes in
conﬁguration or even deactivation of slices. Moreover,
improper decommissioning handles may expose sensitive
data of resource providers within a domain.

For each domain assuming that the domain adminis-
trator is a trust oracle, a dedicated intra-domain ledger
network relies on permissioned management to provide
ﬂexible authentication primitives, like identity veriﬁca-
tion [28] and access control [27]. It is promising to
prevent against unauthorized access to data and resource
as well as performing malicious operations under a dy-
namic network condition. Moreover, slice template and
instance information can be recorded on an immutable
and auditable intra-domain ledger storage. Thus, a decen-
tralized data integrity scheme [14] supports authenticity
and integrity veriﬁcation for slices, to prevent fake or
modiﬁed slice instances when new resources join or
leave the system.

Intra-slice Attack: Slices within a domain also expose
vulnerabilities on interfaces between services and sub-
slices. Moreover, a slice manager collects resources and
network functions shared by different providers. Thus, it
needs audit participants’ behaviors to identify dishonest
activities. The intra-domain ledger provides a trust free
platform that all authorized participants can verify data
on the distributed ledger without relying on any third-
party agency. By properly designing authentication and
access control strategies, the intra-domain ledger can
guarantee privacy-preserving data and resource sharing
among untrusted providers.

Inter-slice Attack: Considering inter-slice scenarios, an
adversary can compromise service brokers to interrupt
multi-domain coordination, or use authorized slices to
gain access to other unauthorized slices. Moreover, it
may leak sensitive data during inter-slice operations. The
HIFL federated ledger leverages a cryptographic secure
inter-ledger transaction (tx) protocol to guarantee au-
ditability and provenance of multi-domain tasks without
exposing sensitive data on intra-domain ledgers. More-
over, incentives and punishment strategies by blockchain

TABLE I
CONFIGURATION OF EXPERIMENTAL DEVICES.

Device

Dell Optiplex-7010

Raspberry Pi 4 (B)

CPU

Intel Core TM i5-
cores),
(4
3470
3.2GHz

Broadcom ARM Cortex
A72 (ARMv8), 1.5GHz

Memory

8GB DDR3

4GB SDRAM

Storage

350G HHD

64GB (microSD card)

OS

Ubuntu 16.04

Raspbian GNU/Linux
(Jessie)

motivate more honest participants to join the system and
gain beneﬁts in data and resources sharing.

IV. PROOF-OF-CONCEPT PROTOTYPE EVALUATION

To study the feasibility of proposed HIFL solution, we
implemented a conceptual prototype of resource federa-
tion that simulates a video surveillance system including
two administrative domains. Table I shows conﬁguration
of devices for prototype setup. Each domain consists
of 10 Raspberry Pi-4 (RPi) devices that provide edge
resources and a Dell Optiplex-7010 desktop as a domain
manager. We use Tendermint core [1] to build a intra-
ledger network for each domain, and all RPis within a
domain also act as validators to execute an efﬁcient BFT
protocol and maintain its intra-domain ledger. A private
Ethereum network is used to simulate a inter-domain
ledger network, where 4 miners are deployed on separate
desktops and each has Intel(R) Core(TM) 2 Duo CPU
E8400 @ 3 GHz and 4 GB of RAM. All desktops and
RPis are connected through a local area network (LAN).

A. Numerical Results

Table II provides a set of comparative numeral results
by querying or recording data on intra-domain and inter-
domain networks separately. 100 test runs have been
conducted for each test scenario and we use the average
value to show performance. Because querying data from
an inter-domain ledger uses smart contract as enable
technology, such that
it needs more processing time
than intra-domain ledger does. In addition, the HIFL

TABLE II
COMPARATIVE EVALUATION OF COMMITTING TRANSACTIONS ON
FEDERATED LEDGER NETWORKS.

Intra-domain

Inter-domain

query data (ms)

record data (s)

tx throughput (tx/s)

CPU usage (%)

Memory usage (MB)

Gas/tx (Ether)

18

1.6

625

100

1,200

0.001

110

4.5

127

32

80

×

intra-domain ledger relies on an efﬁcient BFT consensus
protocol, which achieves lower latency and higher trans-
action throughput as recording data on distributed ledger.
Thus, HIFL is able to satisfy time sensitive and high
throughput requirements in speciﬁc domain networks.
Moreover, the inter-domain ledger is mainly to guarantee
scalability, auditability and global security for cross-
domain operations. Therefore, 4.5 s transaction latency
and 127 tx/s transaction rate is acceptable for majority
of inter-domain scenarios.

To evaluate resource consumption as validators and
miners run on host machines, we use “top” command
to monitor CPU and memory usages by consensus pro-
cesses on desktop and RPi. The Ethereum miner uses
a computation intensive PoW mining algorithm such
that needs full capacity of a CPU core and consumes
about 1.2GB memory. As a result, miners can only be
deployed on the powerful platforms, like edge or fog
servers. Due to lightweight BFT consensus algorithm
that achieves efﬁciency in CPU and memory usage, it’s
affordable for IoT devices to work as validators in intra-
ledger networks. Ethereum network requires gas fees
that are used to reward miners who commit transactions
on the inter-ledger. It introduces extra ﬁnancial cost on
inter-ledger transactions, which is $1.23/tx according to
Ether price of the public Ethereum market at Jan 22,
2021. However, intra-ledger transactions do not require
transaction fees, and each domain can design their own
rewarding strategies for participants.

B. Discussions

This paper focuses on the design rationale and princi-
ples of the HIFL solution. In terms of completeness, it
is an introduction of a work-in-progress. There are a lot
of open questions yet to be answered and limitations of
the current proof-of-concept prototype.

Basically, HIFL takes advantages of properties of NS
and blockchain to achieve multi-domain dynamic edge
resources orchestrations and service re-adjustments on a
physically distributed infrastructure. Actually HIFL still
relies on a partially decentralized network framework

owing to a logically centralized administrative manage-
ment for domain-speciﬁc NS and VNF.

In addition, HIFL is a promising basic abstract ar-
chitecture to address issues in distributed, dynamic and
heterogeneous cross-domain IoT systems. Because of
the high diversity in the smart cities application domain
and the design of NS itself is highly application de-
pendent, implementations based on certain speciﬁc real-
life applications are necessary to gain deeper insights
and demonstrate practical beneﬁts of using HIFL. On
top of a preliminary proof-of-concept prototype that is
built leveraging our earlier work on intelligent public
safety surveillance, we have obtained some numerical
results that evaluate general performance in terms of
network latency and processing overhead. Due to limited
efforts, however, we have not validated security and
privacy properties given possible attack scenarios. We
leave aforementioned issues to future work.

V. CONCLUSIONS

This paper proposes HIFL - a partially decentralized
and secure-by-design dynamic edge resource federation
architecture atop of multi-domain IoT systems. Exper-
imental results based on a proof-of-concept prototype
demonstrate the feasibility of applying the HIFL solution
in smart cities scenarios, like smart video surveillance
systems. While the HIFL experimental results are en-
couraging, what we have presented in this paper is
merely an initial conceptual design and some preliminary
study results. There are many open questions are yet to
be solved before the HIFL architecture becomes appli-
cable in real-world smart cities applications. Our current
ongoing efforts mainly focus on the design of an efﬁcient
dynamic edge resource orchestration mechanism and an
approach for the evaluation on the performance and
security features in a large scale IoVT network.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

This work is supported by the U.S. National Science
Foundation (NSF) via grant CNS-2141468 and the U.S.
Air Force Ofﬁce of Scientiﬁc Research (AFOSR) Dy-
namic Data and Information Processing Program (DDIP)
via grant FA9550-21-1-0229. The views and conclusions
contained herein are those of the authors and should
not be interpreted as necessarily representing the ofﬁcial
policies or endorsements, either expressed or implied, of
the U. S. Air Force.

REFERENCES

[1] “Tendermint core,” https://docs.tendermint.com/master/.
[2] I. Afolabi, T. Taleb, K. Samdanis, A. Ksentini, and H. Flinck,
“Network slicing and softwarization: A survey on principles,
enabling technologies, and solutions,” IEEE Communications
Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 2429–2453, 2018.

[22] S. Tuli, R. Mahmud, S. Tuli, and R. Buyya, “Fogbus: A
blockchain-based lightweight framework for edge and fog com-
puting,” Journal of Systems and Software, vol. 154, pp. 22–36,
2019.

[23] K. Valtanen, J. Backman, and S. Yrj¨ol¨a, “Creating value through
blockchain powered resource conﬁgurations: Analysis of 5g
network slice brokering case,” in 2018 IEEE Wireless Com-
munications and Networking Conference Workshops (WCNCW).
IEEE, 2018, pp. 185–190.

[24] S. Wijethilaka and M. Liyanage, “Survey on network slicing for
internet of things realization in 5g networks,” IEEE Communi-
cations Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 957–994, 2021.
[25] Y. Xing, S. Lei, C. Jianing, F. M. Amine, W. Jun, N. Edmond,
and H. Kai, “A survey on smart agriculture: Development modes,
technologies, and security and privacy challenges,” IEEE/CAA
Journal of Automatica Sinica, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 273–302, 2021.
[26] R. Xu and Y. Chen, “Fed-ddm: A federated ledgers based
framework for hierarchical decentralized data marketplaces,” in
2021 International Conference on Computer Communications
and Networks (ICCCN).

IEEE, 2021, pp. 1–8.

[27] R. Xu, Y. Chen, E. Blasch, and G. Chen, “Blendcac: A smart
contract enabled decentralized capability-based access control
mechanism for the iot,” Computers, vol. 7, no. 3, p. 39, 2018.

[28] R. Xu., Y. Chen, E. Blasch, and G. Chen, “Exploration of
blockchain-enabled decentralized capability-based access control
strategy for space situation awareness,” Optical Engineering,
vol. 58, no. 4, p. 041609, 2019.

[29] R. Xu, D. Nagothu, and Y. Chen, “Decentralized video input au-
thentication as an edge service for smart cities,” IEEE Consumer
Electronics Magazine, 2021.

[30] R. Xu, S. Y. Nikouei, D. Nagothu, A. Fitwi, and Y. Chen,
“Blendsps: A blockchain-enabled decentralized smart public
safety system,” Smart Cities, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 928–951, 2020.

[31] L. Zanzi, A. Albanese, V. Sciancalepore, and X. Costa-P´erez,
“Nsbchain: A secure blockchain framework for network slicing
brokerage,” in ICC 2020-2020 IEEE International Conference on
Communications (ICC).

IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–7.

[3] M. S. Ali, M. Vecchio, M. Pincheira, K. Dolui, F. Antonelli, and
M. H. Rehmani, “Applications of blockchains in the internet of
things: A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Communications Surveys
& Tutorials, vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 1676–1717, 2018.

[4] N. Alliance, “5g white paper,” Next generation mobile networks,

white paper, vol. 1, 2015.

[5] Z. Bao, W. Shi, D. He, and K.-K. R. Chood, “Iotchain: A three-
tier blockchain-based iot security architecture,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1806.02008, 2018.

[6] A. Boubendir, F. Guillemin, C. Le Toquin, M.-L. Alberi-Morel,
F. Faucheux, S. Kerboeuf, J.-L. Lafragette, and B. Orlandi, “Fed-
eration of cross-domain edge resources: a brokering architecture
for network slicing,” in 2018 4th IEEE Conference on Network
Softwarization and Workshops (NetSoft).
IEEE, 2018, pp. 415–
423.

[7] M. Castro, B. Liskov et al., “Practical byzantine fault tolerance,”

in OSDI, vol. 99, 1999, pp. 173–186.

[8] N. Chen and Y. Chen, “Anomalous vehicle recognition in smart
urban trafﬁc monitoring as an edge service,” Future Internet,
vol. 14, no. 2, p. 54, 2022.

[9] IOTA Foundation, “IOTA Data Marketplace,” https://data.iota.

org, accessed: Jan. 2, 2020.

[10] V. P. Kaﬂe, Y. Fukushima, P. Martinez-Julia, T. Miyazawa,
and H. Harai, “Adaptive virtual network slices for diverse iot
services,” IEEE Communications Standards Magazine, vol. 2,
no. 4, pp. 33–41, 2018.

[11] W. Kassab and K. A. Darabkh, “A–z survey of internet of
things: Architectures, protocols, applications, recent advances,
future directions and recommendations,” Journal of Network and
Computer Applications, vol. 163, p. 102663, 2020.

[12] S. Nakamoto, “Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system,”

Manubot, Tech. Rep., 2019.

[13] S. Y. Nikouei, Y. Chen, S. Song, B.-Y. Choi, and T. R. Faughnan,
“Toward intelligent surveillance as an edge network service
(isense) using lightweight detection and tracking algorithms,”
IEEE Transactions on Services Computing, vol. 14, no. 6, pp.
1624–1637, 2019.

[14] S. Y. Nikouei, R. Xu, D. Nagothu, Y. Chen, A. Aved, and
E. Blasch, “Real-time index authentication for event-oriented
surveillance video query using blockchain,” in 2018 IEEE In-
ternational Smart Cities Conference (ISC2).
IEEE, 2018, pp.
1–8.

[15] B. Nour, A. Ksentini, N. Herbaut, P. A. Frangoudis, and
H. Moungla, “A blockchain-based network slice broker for 5g
services,” IEEE Networking Letters, vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 99–102,
2019.

[16] R. F. Olimid and G. Nencioni, “5g network slicing: A security
overview,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 99 999–100 009, 2020.

[17] S. Popov, “The tangle,” cit. on, p. 131, 2016.
[18] A.-M. Rahmani, N. K. Thanigaivelan, T. N. Gia, J. Granados,
B. Negash, P. Liljeberg, and H. Tenhunen, “Smart e-health
gateway: Bringing intelligence to internet-of-things based ubiq-
uitous healthcare systems,” in 2015 12th annual IEEE consumer
communications and networking conference (CCNC).
IEEE,
2015, pp. 826–834.

[19] G. Sagirlar, B. Carminati, E. Ferrari, J. D. Sheehan, and E. Rag-
noli, “Hybrid-iot: Hybrid blockchain architecture for internet
of things-pow sub-blockchains,” in 2018 IEEE International
Conference on Internet of Things (iThings) and IEEE Green
Computing and Communications (GreenCom) and IEEE Cyber,
Physical and Social Computing (CPSCom) and IEEE Smart Data
(SmartData), 2018, pp. 1007–1016.

[20] N. Srinidhi, S. D. Kumar, and K. Venugopal, “Network optimiza-
tions in the internet of things: A review,” Engineering Science
and Technology, an International Journal, vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 1–
21, 2019.

[21] T. Taleb, I. Afolabi, K. Samdanis, and F. Z. Yousaf, “On multi-
domain network slicing orchestration architecture and federated
resource control,” IEEE Network, vol. 33, no. 5, pp. 242–252,
2019.

