Tamperproof IoT with Blockchain

Guangsheng Yu∗, Ren Ping Liu∗, J. Andrew Zhang∗, Y. Jay Guo∗
∗ Network Security Lab, Global Big Data Technologies Centre, University of Technology Sydney
Email: {guangsheng.yu, renping.liu, andrew.zhang, jay.guo}@uts.edu.au

2
2
0
2

g
u
A
0
1

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
9
0
1
5
0
.
8
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—We investigate the tamper-resistant property of
Blockchain and its effectiveness for IoT systems. In particular,
we implemented an IoT testbed, and built a Blockchain into
the testbed. A number of tamper-resistance experiments were
conducted and analyzed to corroborate the process of block
validation in Blockchain. Our analysis and experimental results
demonstrate the tamper-resistant capability of Blockchain in
in IoT systems. The demonstration video is
securing trust
provided at [1].

I. INTRODUCTION

The Internet of Things (IoT) is poised to transform our lives
and unleash enormous economic beneﬁt. However, inadequate
data security and trust are seriously limiting its adoption.
Blockchain, a distributed tamper-resistant database, has native
resistance to data tamper by which it is practically impossible
to modify the data retroactively once a transaction has been
recorded. We believe such tamper-resistance property can be
of signiﬁcant value in ensuring trust in IoT systems.

We aim at demonstrating the tamper-resistant capability of
Blockchain in securing trust in IoT systems. An IoT testbed
was constructed in our lab, and Ethereum based Blockchain
was built
in the testbed. A number of tamper-resistance
experiments have been carried out and analyzed to examine
the process of block validation in Blockchain on both full node
and light node. Our demonstrations reveal that Blockchain has
a dedicated tamper-resistant capability, which can be applied
to IoT to ensure trusted data collection and sharing. With
this features used within P2P network, precisely by design, a
Blockchain-based database can therefore constitute a trust-free
decentralized consensus system. Note that trust-free means
conventional 3rd party as an arbitral body is ﬁlled in by
common cryptographical theorems. This promotes Blockchain
to be a suitable role for data recording, storage and identity
management, especially for those sensitive data [2].

The connection between Blockchain and IoT has no longer
been futuristic [4-9]. With the research running, scientists
have handed out Blockchain-based IoT. There is no doubt
that Blockchain and IoT are the two hot tags in the ﬁeld of
science and technology. IoT, including sensors, vehicles and
other moving objects, basically contains any use of embedded
electronic components with the outside world communication
equipment, in particular, it makes use of the IP protocol, as
shown in Fig. 1.

II. CORE CONCEPT OF TAMPER-RESISTANT

A. Key components

We now explain the key components of tamper-resistant.

Fig. 1: Trusted digital Supply Chain

First of all, we point out the difference between the so-
called 51% attack and chain reorganization. Nodes will never
import a block that fails validation. A 51% attack consists of
a 51% of the miners forking off from a block in the past and
creating a new chain that eventually beats the current canonical
chain in total difﬁculty.

A reorganization is done only if a block being imported on
a side fork leads to a higher total difﬁculty on that particular
fork than the canonical fork. The blocks nonetheless still need
to be valid. Note that triggering re-organization function is
based on TotalDifﬁcult in Proof-of-Work [2].

Synchronization happens all the time across each node
starting from an identical genesis block in a chain. Each node
runs a validation function to validate each incoming block. No
block will be accepted unless passing the validation.

B. Validation procedures

Throughout the validation procedures, the follow conditions

are evaluated:

• if StateRoot ∈ local levelDB, throw errors;
• if ParentBlock /∈ local levelDB, throw errors;
• if StateRoot|ParentBlock /∈ local levelDB, throw errors;
• if Validate(Header) where {nonce, difﬁculty, mixDi-

gest. . . } ∈ Header not passed, throw errors;

• if Validate(UncleHeader) not passed, throw errors;
• if Validate(GasUsed) not passed || Validate(bloom) not

passed, throw errors;

• if TxHash (cid:54)= Hash(Txs) || ReceiptHash (cid:54)= Hash(Receipts),

throw errors;

• if StateRoot (cid:54)= StateRoot| T xs⇐=== CurrentStateRoot, throw

errors.

The last validation points out that since there is no trans-
action sent to those normal nodes, the state root after a state
change will never equal to the state root of the header of the
incoming block coming from an abnormal node.

A simple fraud of database does not account for any PoW
computation. However, not only difﬁculty, epochDataset and

 
 
 
 
 
 
mixhash, but also the HeaderHash is involved in calculating
the targeting nonce. It means arbitrary but sufﬁcient amount of
computation should be carried out on the tampered block. Even
if sufﬁcient amount of computation is satisﬁed, the record can
be recovered by the canonical chain with the fastest speed
effort, unless the hacker has control over 51% computational
power among the whole network.

III. TAMPER-RESISTANCE DEMONSTRATIONS

A. System setup

Hardware setup (shown in Fig.1):
• two workstations as mining nodes, shown in Fig.1(a);
• three Raspberry Pi 3 B+, shown in Fig.1(b), attached with
IoT sensors as end-point nodes, which are only allowed
to look up and upload data without mining.

difﬁculty transcends that of the tampered block is generated by
one of the normal mining nodes, this tampered block will be
seen as an uncle block, the canonical chain will be recovered
back by those normal blocks from other normal nodes.
2) Mining node hacked:

When a mining node hacked, and the total difﬁculty is
smaller than that of a normal block, the results are the same
as that of the non-mining node hacked case. Once this node
starts mining, the uncle block will be broadcast at the same
time for validation, contributing to errors throwing on other
normal nodes shown as in Fig.2.

(a)

(b)

Fig. 2: Overview of testbed

Software setup:
• Ubuntu 14.04 Trusty and Mac OS on mining nodes;
• Raspbian on Raspberry Pi;
• Golang Ethereum 1.5.9 for Blockchain [3];
• Golang on hacking, tampering and logging;
• Python on data receiving and encapsulation;
• Javascript on Blockchain processing via web3 API [3].

System Implementation:
The Raspberry Pi IoT devices equipped with temperature
sensors measure room temperatures in the lab every 30 min-
utes. An Ethereum based Blockchain is built in the testbed.
The IoT measurement data are encapsulated and uploaded to
a pre-built contract in the Blockchain.

B. Hacking scenarios and analysis

We demonstrate several distinct scenarios where blocks are
tampered with fake solution to PoW. Scenario analysis and
experimental results are presented.
1) Non-mining node hacked:

When a non-mining node is hacked, and the total difﬁculty
is smaller than that of a normal block, the canonical chain
always chooses the block with larger total difﬁculty in the
context of a valid block. Thus this tampered block will be
seen as an uncle block, the canonical chain will be recovered
back by those normal blocks from other normal nodes.

When the total difﬁculty is greater than that of a normal
block, other normal nodes will not accept the incoming blocks
since the tampered block fails to pass the PoW validation
during the synchronization. Once a future block whose total

Fig. 3: Bad Block with tampered uncle blocks

When the total difﬁculty is greater than that of a normal
block, it ends up being insufﬁcient computational power. As a
result, this tampered block will not be accepted by any other
adversaries, and this mining node will be removed as a bad
peer by other normal nodes, shown in Fig.3.

Fig. 4: Insufﬁcient computation leading to incorrect nonce

3) Tampered Block on light node:

We now investigate the scenario that a light node is hacked,
and the PoW veriﬁcation passes and the height of this light
node is greater than that of those mining nodes. In this
scenario, there will be no suitable peers available for this light
node and any transactions sent from local will be broadcast to
null, until the height is transcended by canonical chain, shown
in Fig.4.

(a) No suitable peer available when fetching data

(b) No suitable peer available when sending transactions

IV. A PRACTICAL DEMONSTRATION

We now demonstrate the effectiveness of the tamper-
resistant property of Blockchain in protecting the IoT data
records. In our Blockchain secured IoT testbed, one Raspberry
Pi device was hacked, its temperature record was changed
from the original measure of 34◦C to -4◦C.

As soon as the tampering happened, the blockchain noticed
this anomaly with a broken chain in the hacked node, which
signals a tampering action.

Next, when the blockchain is synchronized, the abnormal
block is automatically recovered back to the major one through
the canonical chain. As a result the tampered record of -
4◦C has been replaced by the original record of 34◦C. This
is the chain reorganization process of the Blockchain. A
log is generated to record which content had been changed
unexpectedly, and this log is automatically uploaded onto
Blockchain for future reference.

This demonstrated that the Blockchain can be applied to

IoT to secure data records.

[1] Demo Video: <https://drive.google.com/ﬁle/d/1vuo ZUxxWdDIJl6awOnLsbHW

REFERENCES

U4ECOh1i/view>

[2] S. Nakamoto, ”Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system” 2008.
[3] V. Buterin, ”Ethereum: A next-generation smart contract and decentral-

ized application platform” 5D-White-Paper, 2014.

[4] G. Yu, ”Blockchain Meets IoT: What Needs To Be Addressed” 2021
[5] X. Wang, G. Yu, et al.”Capacity of blockchain based Internet-of-Things:

Testbed and analysis.” Internet of Things 8 (2019): 100109.

[6] G. Yu, et al.”Enabling attribute revocation for ﬁne-grained access control
in blockchain-IoT systems.” IEEE Transactions on Engineering Manage-
ment 67.4 (2020): 1213-1230.

[7] G. Yu, et al.”A novel Dual-Blockchained structure for contract-theoretic
Information Processing & Manage-

LoRa-based information systems.”
ment 58.3 (2021): 102492.

[8] X. Wang, et al. ”A high-performance hybrid Blockchain system for
traceable IoT applications.” International Conference on Network and
System Security. Springer, Cham, 2019.

[9] X. Wang, et al. ”Blockchain-Enabled Fish Provenance and Quality
Tracking System.” IEEE Internet of Things Journal 9.11 (2021): 8130-
8142.

