2
2
0
2

g
u
A
6
1

]

C
D
.
s
c
[

1
v
3
9
9
7
0
.
8
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

Recent Advances of Blockchain and Its
Applications

Xiao Li, Weili Wu, Senior Member

Abstract—Blockchain is an emerging decentralized data collection, sharing and storage technology, which have provided abundant
transparent, secure, tamper-proof, secure and robust ledger services for various real-world use cases. Recent years have witnessed
notable developments of blockchain technology itself as well as blockchain-adopting applications. Most existing surveys limit the
scopes on several particular issues of blockchain or applications, which are hard to depict the general picture of current giant
blockchain ecosystem. In this paper, we investigate recent advances of both blockchain technology and its most active research topics
in real-world applications. We ﬁrst review the recent developments of consensus mechanisms and storage mechanisms in general
blockchain systems. Then extensive literature is conducted on blockchain enabled IoT, edge computing, federated learning and several
emerging applications including health care, COVID-19 pandemic, social network and supply chain, where detailed speciﬁc research
topics are discussed in each. Finally, we discuss the future directions, challenges and opportunities in both academia and industry.

Index Terms—Blockchain,Edge Computing, Federated Learning, Healthcare, IoT, Survey.

(cid:70)

1 INTRODUCTION

B LOCKCHAIN technology is a decentralized storage tech-

nology working on peer-to-peer network. Peers, which
are also called blockchain nodes, work as exactly same role
and perform the same function following particular smart
contracts speciﬁed in the system. In a blockchain system,
every nodes keeps the whole copy of blockchain storage
where transactions are packaged into blocks and every block
is linked to previous block through block hash. The actions
of nodes are supervised by smart contracts deﬁned on the
blockchain, where the consensus mechanisms and incentive
mechanisms are speciﬁed. The consensus mechanisms are
the core functions for maintaining system decentrality and
storing blocks by carefully giving the ledgering right to one
of the nodes who are called miners. Incentive mechanisms
assists consensus mechanisms to distribute the working
rewards and incentivize nodes to keep working honestly.
A typical architecture of blockchain systems is illustrated in
Figure 1.

Blockchain attracts

increasing attention from both
academia and industry because of its special capabilities and
advantages comparing to existing conventional decentral-
ized database storage approaches. Public blockchains, such
as Bitcoin, can make the data available on every node which
enables transparency to every participants. Since blockchain
can work under totally anonymous setting without hav-
ing to build trust among nodes, privacy of nodes can be
preserved. Blockchain is tamper-proof storage, because the
blocks are linked together with speciﬁc hash values that
would cause a violation if any modiﬁcation is made on
block data. Blockchain storage is also free of single-point
failure as long as the fraud users hold less than 51% mining
power of the whole blockchain system. The comparison

• X. Li and W. Wu are with the Department of Computer Science, The

University of Texas at Dallas, TX, USA, 75080.
E-mail: xiao.li@utdallas.edu and weiliwu@utdallas.edu

Fig. 1. A typical architecture of blockchain systems.

between conventional distributed database and blockchain
is discussed in Table 1.

Blockchain has been proven to be a remarkable suc-
cess in cryptocurrency applications such as Bitcoin [1],
Ethereum [2], and PeerCoin [3], the adoption of blockchain
in many other ﬁelds is keep expanding the existing
blockchain ecosystem. For instance, blockchain-enabled sys-
tems have been developed in areas of ﬁnancial ledger sys-
tem [4], Internet of Things (IoT) [5], [6], edge and cloud
computing [7], public administration [8], [9], healthcare [10]
and supply chain [11].

Current blockchain technology is still not perfect for
general adoption and have many deﬁciencies to be im-
proved. These deﬁciencies also bring troubles to blockchain-
enabled applications. Researchers have devoted tremendous
work on improving blockchain system with faster process-
ing speed, more light-weight consensus mechanisms, less
storage cost and lower communication bandwidth require-
ment. These advances of blockchain technology can beneﬁt

Application LayerConsensus/Incentive LayerNetwork LayerHardware/Physical LayerData LayerDapps, GUI,  Web BrowserPoW,PoS,DPoS,PBFT,etc.Peer-to-Peer NetworkSmartDevices,Computers,EdgeServersDataBlocks,MerkleTrees,Hash 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE 1
The Comparison between Traditional Distributed Database Storage and Blockchain

2

Traditional Distributed Database

Blockchain

System Management

Data Accessibility

Database is stored on different physical
places with multiple copies
However managed by a central server
Common participants have no access
to whole database

Function Execution

Central server perform data collection and calculation

Costs
Communication

Participants Privacy

Data Security

Computation and storage cost are on central server
Participants mainly communicate only to central server
Need provide information to central server
to build trust
Single-point failure on central server Data can be
tampered and destroyed if central server is breached

Blockchain maintained by all participants
Full copies are stored by every participant

Blockchain is public and
accessible to all participants
Each participant is able to generate and
record new data following smart contract
Computation and storage cost are on every participant
Each participant broadcast updates to everyone else
Fully functional under anonymous setting
with no trust been built
No single-point failure Data are not able
to be tampered once stored on blockchain

blockchain-enabled applications that are still at the very ini-
tial stage. However, there are nature gaps that the advances
are hard to propagate among applications. It is highly de-
manded to connect multiple parts of the whole blockchain
ecosystem together to facilitate future developments.

Existing related surveys mostly limit their scope on
speciﬁc research topics. Wang et al [12] and Signh et al. [13]
surveyed recent popular blockchain consensus mechanisms.
Zhou et al. [14] summarize existing solutions on solving the
scalability issue of blockchain. They classify the solutions
into three layers: Layer0 which is about data propagation,
Layer1 which is about on-chain methodologies and Layer2
which is about external off-chain solutions. Zhang et al. [15]
and Feng et al. [16] investigate the security and privacy
protocols of blockchain systems. Zhang et al. [15] try to
analyze how well blockchain systems supports the privacy
and security requirement of transactions and conclude that
only a small part of the blockchain platforms can achieve
the security goals in practice. Feng et al. [16] summarize
methodologies proposed by recent work to tackle the pri-
vacy issues in blockchain applications.

Gamage et al. [17] introduced several blockchain ap-
plications in their survey such as supply chain, however
most the mentioned applications are special use cases of
blockchain while some major applications are left behind,
for instance IoT and edge/cloud computing. Huo et al. [18]
investigated research topics of blockchain-enabled IoT. They
summarize that blockchain is mainly used in IoT for equip-
ment safety and management, data collection and sharing,
energy trading, collaborative production and traceability.
Wang et al. [19] and Mollah et al. [20] conduct detailed
survey about recent blockchain applications in Internet of
Vehicles (IoV) which is a special instance of IoT. Blockchain-
enabled IoV are usually studied with more speciﬁed use
cases than general IoT [21], such as recent emerging elec-
trical vehicle charging and smart parking. Zou et al. [22]
extensively review blockchain developments in cloud com-
puting and consider both Cloud as a Blockchain Service
where blockchain assists could service and Blockchain as
a Cloud Service where blockchain service is deployed on
cloud. Liao et al. [23] study the overlapped areas of edge
computing and IoT. There are also comprehensive surveys
on federated learning [24], [25], which is an emerging dis-
tributed machine learning schema to protect data providers’
privacy and reduce the data transmission consumption.

Sreerakhi et al. [26] review blockchain works in supply chain
to discover the possibility of blockchain to help solve chal-
lenges including asymmetric information sharing, quality
monitoring and market counterfeiting.

There is few survey that provides literature review
for multiple research ﬁelds. In this paper, we bridge the
advances of blockchain technology and it applications by
expanding the reviewing scope to several most active
blockchain research topics and emerging blockchain ap-
plications. An overview picture of blockchain ecosystem
including blockchain and its applications is constructed as
illustrated in Figure 2. We review the recent remarkable
improvements of general blockchain technology. We choose
IoT, edge computing, federated learning, healthcare, social
network, supply chain as the most representative blockchain
use cases in whole blockchain ecosystem. Extensive liter-
ature review is conducted on those selected use cases by
discussing recent active research topics in each. We enumer-
ate several remaining issues for academia and industry to
summarize the survey.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: In
Section 2 we ﬁrst summarize the recent important develop-
ments of general blockchain technology. Then in Section 3,
we review how blockchain can serve IoT systems and IoV
which is a special use case in IoT. Next in Section 4, top-
ics on blockchain-enabled edge computing and federated
learning are investigated. In Section 5, we study several
emerging hot topics that beneﬁt from blockchain, including
healthcare, COVID-19 pandemic, social network and supply
chain. Next in Section 6, we discuss our ﬁndings on current
open issues and challenges of blockchain, then present the
suggestions on future work. Finally, this paper is concluded
in Section 7.

2 GENERAL BLOCKCHAIN

Blockchain technology is explored from varied directions.
Maesa et al. study blockchain from graph view [27],
[28]. Chen and Liu attempt to discover communities in
blockchain networks [29]. Pontiveros et al. propose a cen-
trality measurement for Bitcoin transaction graph [30]. Li et
al. discover topological and geometrical feature of Ethereum
blockchain [31]. Banno and Shudo propose a simulation tool
for simulating blockchain systems [32]. Liu et al. design
a neural network that can automatically discover features

3

Fig. 2. The blockchain ecosystem constructed in this paper.

of blockchain from the blockchain whitepapers [33]. Self-
ish mining problem is studied in Ethereum and Bitcoin
Blockchain [34], [35], [36]. Chen et al. study potential phish-
ing scam problem in ﬁnancial blockchains [37]. Hou et al.
propose SquirRL model that utilizes reinforcement learning
method to analyze blockchain incentive mechanisms for
vulnerabilities such as selﬁsh mining [38].

Generally, majority works are focusing on solving the
scalability issue of blockchain, that is to improve the con-
sensus efﬁciency, increase transaction throughput, reduce
computation and communication cost as well as storage
overhead. In this section, we discuss recent advances in
consensus mechanisms and storage methods for general
blockchain systems.

2.1 Consensus Mechanism

Proof of Work (PoW) is the most popular consensus mech-
anism for blockchain systems. In PoW-based blockchain
systems, peers invest powerful machines to solve crypto-
graphic problems to win the right for ledgering. Though it
is proven to be secure and stable in some well-known ap-
plications, such as Bitcoin [1] and Ethereum [2], it consumes
extraordinary power for solving meaningless cryptographic
puzzles. PoW limits the throughput of processing trans-
actions and brings increasing computational and storage
overhead.

Proof of Stake (PoS) [3], [39] is a popular consensus
mechanism as a competitor of PoW. PoS gives the ledgering
right to the peers with the probability as the contribution
the peers made to the system, namely stake. PoS is less
decentralized than PoW, but signiﬁcantly improves the scal-
ability and consensus efﬁciency. Delegated Proof of Stake
(DPoS) [40] is proposed to give more probability for being
a miner than PoS to those who hold small amount of
stakes . In DPoS consensus mechanism, whenever there is

no candidate miners, every user will vote someone they
trust. The weight of the vote is proportional to the stake
of the voter. After voting, the peers received top k votes
become candidate miners. DPoS has been applied in many
applications [41], [42], [43], [44]. DPoS is also a scalable
and light weight consensus mechanism but not perfectly
decentralized. Various modiﬁcations have been proposed
for DPoS [45], [46], [47], [48], [49]. Xu et al. [50] propose
to improve the DPoS consensus by allowing nodes to vote
favor, against and abstention. Then a vague value of node is
calculated based on all three kind of received votes. Fuzzy
value is ﬁnally derived as ﬁnal score on which miners are
selected.

Practical Byzantine Fault Tolerance (PBFT) [51] is a clas-
sic byzantine fault tolerant protocol and introduced into
blockchain systems as consensus mechanism [52], [53]. PBFT
consensus mechanism commonly have ﬁve phases, namely
request, pre-prepare, prepare, commit and reply. The client sends
the message to be conﬁrmed to a selected “primary” at
request phase. The “primary” then broadcast this message to
all other peers (“replicas”) at pre-prepare phase. Then each
“replica” broadcasts received message to all other peers
including “primary” and other “replicas” at prepare phase.
Next at commit, all peers, including the “primary” and all
“replicas” send the message received at last phase to all
other peers. Finally all peers send back the message to the
“client” at reply phase. PBFT consensus is made through
message transmission and commitment, therefore requires
notable communication cost.

SCP [54], proposed by Luu et al. constructs two-layer
blockchain with committees, where one layer is for data
blocks which are proposed by normal committee and an-
other layer is for consensus blocks which are proposed by
the ﬁnal designated committee in SCP to include all data
blocks. The committees can make parallel PoW consensus,

Edge ComputingBlockchain TechnologyInternetofThingsSupply ChainSocialNetworkHealthcareIoVFederated LearningTraﬃcSharingCollabora�veCrowdSensingReputa�on ControlDataSharingTraceabilitySustainabilityTrust ControlDecentralized OSNAccess/Reputa�on ControlEHR SystemPa�ent MonitoringCOVID-19 PandemicMedica�on Tracinghence improve the efﬁciency and transaction throughput.
Li et al. [55] propose ISCP to promote the security level
and communication efﬁciency of SCP . ISCP eliminates
the need of ﬁnal committee in SCP with a decentralized
multi-partition consensus model. Amiri et al. [56] propose
a novel OXII distributed diagram allowing transaction to
be executed without conﬂict in permissioned blockchain.
ParBlockchain is then proposed based on OXII diagram to
achieve better transaction throughput.

In order to adapt to speciﬁc applications, various Proof
of X (PoX) are developed where “X” can be any metrics de-
ﬁned in those applications, such as Proof of Reputation [57],
Proof of Quality Factor [58], Proof of Event [59]. Bahri
et al. study crypto-currency-free blockchain system [60].
They propose viable permisionless non-ﬁnancial Blockchain
where Proof of Trust (PoT) is designed based on trust graph
among peers. In PoT, peers with higher trust level can solve
PoW cryptographic puzzle at lower difﬁculty level, thus
reducing overall energy expense of PoW.

2.2 Storage Method

Classic blockchain systems require every peer store full copy
of entire blockchain storage. This storage mechanism not
only wastes enormous resources, but make system get cen-
tralized gradually. The oversized blockchain increases the
bar of storage requirement for participants and also make
the system hard to process data-heavy applications. With the
blockchain growing in size, more and more disadvantaged
nodes who can not afford the storage cost are gradually
leaving the mining game. Finally, the system becomes more
and more centralized.

Blockchain sharding technology [61], [62] is explored
for reducing the storage overhead. Generally, blockchain
sharding is to divide peers into groups where consensus
are made within each group so that transactions can be
processed concurrently. Peers in each group (shard) main-
tain their local ledger, therefore in order to derive the full
chain, an concurrency control and a commitment mecha-
nism need to be designed [63]. Zamani et al. [64] propose
RapidChain to further reduce the communication cost while
maintaining the resistance to Byzantine faults when there
are less than 1/3 fault nodes in all participated nodes. Xu
and Huang develop an blockchain sharding mechanism that
can tolerate 1/2 fault nodes [65]. SkyChain is a dynamic
sharding method enabled by deep reinforcement learning
which can effectively deal with the dynamic environment in
the blockchain system, i.e., joining and leaving of nodes, and
malicious attacks [66]. Blockchain sharding technology is
also developed in many domain-speciﬁc applications, such
as IoT [67] and Federated Learning [68].

Xu and Huang [69] propose segment blockchain where
the whole blockchain is broken down into segments, and
peers are only requires to store several segments. The whole
blockchain storage can be recovered from multiple nodes’
storage. Qi et al. [70] propose a storage partition method
namely BFT-Store for permissioned blockchain reducing the
storage complexity per block from O(n) to O(1). Mean-
while, the data availability and data access efﬁciency are
ensured by proposed four-phase re-encoding protocol based
on PBFT and multiple replication mechanism with cache

structure. The experimental results in [70] show that at the
same number of nodes, BFT-Store enabled blockchain can
store more blocks, with remarkably lower storage overhead.

4

Fig. 3. General Architecture of Blockchain-enabled IoT and Edge Com-
puting systems.

3 INTERNET OF THINGS (IOT)
Internet of things allows smart devices to connect with
each other through the internet protocol for a ubiquitous
data exchange [71], [72]. The devices or objects working in
internet of things are mostly sensors, micro-computers that
can be easily compromised by malicious attacks. Blockchain
technology applied in internet of things is a promising
solution to improve the data integrity and security [73].
Figure 3 shows a typical structure of blockchain-enabled
IoT and edge computing systems which will be discussed
in next section.
However

realizing
there are some challenges
blockchain-enabled IoT systems. Due to the low computa-
tion capability, battery life and memory storage of devices
in IoT, the devices are not able to process heavy-weight
consensus mechanisms like PoW [74]. On the other side,
Blockchain systems are mostly not able to produce high
throughput which can not meet the demand of tremendous
data generating and storage tasks in IoT systems [75].

for

In this section, we ﬁrst review the recent blockchain
works in general IoT systems, then we investigate an active
special use case in IoT, namely Internet of Vehicle (IoV).

3.1 General IoT

Many light-weight consensus mechanism are designed to
make blockchain feasible in IoT, such as credit based con-

Edge Devices and IoT Devices: Generate raw data orreceivedataforcomputing,sometimesalsobepart of above P2P Network   Could Server: Registration Management/ Could StorageP2P Network : Edge Servers/Access Points maintainingtheblockchainsensus mechanism [76], PoBT [77], PoRX [78] and Proof-of-
Transactions [79]. Dorri et al. [80] propose a Lightweight
Scalable Blockchain (LSB) for industrial IoT, where nodes
are divided into clusters and managed by cluster heads.
A Distributed Throughput Management (DTM) algorithm
is proposed to dynamically adjust number of clusters and
consensus period for maintaining high transaction through-
put. Biswas et al. [81] separate the workers in IoT network
from the peers in blockchain network. The workers in IoT
networks are deﬁned as local peers who are connected to
designated anchor peer representing one organization in
blockchain network. Transaction commitment can be made
within organization without global consensus, hence the
transaction throughput is improved.

Incentive mechanisms are also studied for IoT. Ding et
al. [82] designs an incentive mechanism to motivate devices
to devote more power in mining. A two-stage Stackelberg
game is formulated to ﬁnd reasonable reward pricing strat-
egy to maximize blockchain utility.

Instead of proposing consensus mechanism, some work
speciﬁes more details and design comprehensive blockchain
systems for
IoT applications, such as AEChain [83],
BPAF [84], BET [85] and B-MET [86]. Li et al. [87] are the
ﬁrst to study the problem of extra cost caused by frequent
smart contract updates in blockchain-enabled IoT system. A
new smart contract architecture is proposed, namely ATOM,
that can construct the bytecode of smart contract from appli-
cation by directly assembling templates pre-built upon the
designed Application-oriented Instruction (AoI) set rather
than by compilation. Zhou et al. [88] aim to improve the
storage efﬁciency of blockchain-enabled wireless commu-
nication by proposing dynamic adjusted block-assignment
(DAB) contract which dynamically assigns blockchain por-
tions to different devices.

Reinforcement learning methods are developed to opti-
mize resource allocation in IoT networks to achieve better
scalability [89], [90] and resource allocation [91]. Liu et
al. [92] propose a deep reinforcement learning approach
that can help maximize on-chain transaction throughput of
the blockchain system by selecting the block producers and
consensus algorithms as well as adjusting the block size and
block interval. Yun et al. [93] propose deep Q network shard-
based blockchain (DQNSB) scheme that dynamically ﬁnds
the optimal throughput by selecting transaction sharding
methods, also the block size and block interval. Ding et
al. [94] introduces edge server into IoT networks, where
IoT devices are able to purchase computational power from
edge servers. They derive a Stackelberg equilibrium to opti-
mize the pricing and budget allocation.

3.2 Internet of Vehicle

Internet of vehicle (IoV) or Vehicular Network is a special
IoT application where the IoT nodes are the mobile devices
installed on vehicles. In IoV system, vehicles can share
information such as road condition, trafﬁc conjunction and
accident information with other vehicles, so that vehicles are
able to decide best routes or collaborating with each other
on some emergency issues.

Blockchain technology brings decentralized architecture
to IoV as it does to IoT. IoV usually has more strict re-
quirements on applied blockchain system [95]. Vehicles are

5

moving making them can only connect to roadsides or
other vehicles periodically. Vehicles are also have limited
battery and computation power making them reluctant to
participating in low-proﬁt or computation-expensive tasks.
Cho et al. [96] propose iCarChain for managing vehicle
related businesses in decentralized manner. iCarChain is
an initial attempt for beneﬁting consumers and vehicle
business industry with fewer technological restrictions and
more affordable expenses by decentralizing the business
system. Blockchain servers as distributed storage system
for IoV in [97] where roadside units are selected based on
both PoS and PoW as miners to pack data and messages
generated by vehicles. Wang et al. [98] propose Trafﬁc-
Chain which is a two-layer blockchain-enabled secure and
privacy-preserving decentralized trafﬁc information collec-
tion system. Wang et al. specially study Byzantine attack
and Sybil attack on TrafﬁcChain and propose novel LSTM
based methods to defend against them. Yin et al. [99] study
a special case in IoV that multivehicles collaboration can be
performed when a single vehicle is not able to accomplish
a task. They carefully design an incentive mechanism and
a task assignment algorithm to motivate vehicles to partic-
ipate the tasks as well as shorten the collaborative tasks’
ﬁnish time. Hui et al. [100] study similar collaborative crowd
sensing problem that aims to motivate vehicles collaborate
each other by formulating and solving a Coalition Game.

Despite some classic consensus mechanisms are adopted
in IoV, such as PoS [97], [101], PoET [102] and PBFT [103],
[104], researcher are developing more scenario-speciﬁc con-
sensus mechanisms in order to achieve better security, la-
tency and throughput in IoV. Kang et al. [101] design a
reputation-based voting scheme to improve the security of
blockchain-enabled IoV. This scheme evaluates candidates’
reputation using both past interactions and recommended
opinions from other vehicles. Proof of Quality Factor [58]
is proposed to bridge vehicles and edge computing servers,
which allows mobile edge nodes serve as mining nodes.
As the number of electric vehicles (EVs) increasing, Luo et
al. [105] study the energy trading in the internet of electric
vehicles. They propose to deploy blockchain server in local
energy aggregators (LEAG) to store all the trading transac-
tion records and specify smart contacts as agents for optimal
energy pricing and allocation. Abishu et al. [106] jointly
consider PBFT and Proof of Reputation (PoR) and propose
PBFT-based PoR (PPoR). Electric vehicles are grouped in
clusters according to the roadside units they connect to.
PPoR will select miners (validators) in the cluster based on
their reputation value that is calculated based on evidence
and opinion spaces collected from EVs in each cluster.

Reinforcement learning also plays important role in
many works of blockchain-enabled IoV [107]. Kim and
Ibrahim [108] design a reinforcement learning model to de-
cide the optimal number of peers participating in consensus
making to improve the latency and throughput without
compromising the Byzantine fault tolerance. They connect
peers in different groups through channels, and formulate
the problem of choosing channels as Multi-Arm Bandit
problem which is solved by the proposed reinforcement
learning algorithm. Liu et al. [109] ﬁrst propose a methodol-
ogy to quantify the performance of blockchain systems from
the aspects of scalability, decentralization, latency and secu-

rity, then apply deep reinforcement learning technique to
select block producers, adjust block size and block interval,
in order to maximize the transaction throughput without
sacriﬁcing other properties.

4 EDGE COMPUTING
Edge computing is a technology to allow devices at the edge
of network, such as smart devices, mobile micro computers,
bases stations and network access points, to generate, col-
lect, transmit and process data. Edge computing is an exten-
sion of IoT and overlaps with IoT in many applications. For
example, The sensors or smart objects in IoT might need to
connect to some edge servers to complete data sharing and
computing. Some devices in IoT such as electric vehicles can
also be considered as edge nodes in edge computing. In this
section, we ﬁrst investigate the blockchain development in
general edge computing then specially discuss an emerging
topic in edge computing, namely federated learning.

4.1 General Edge Computing

Like the deﬁciencies of blockchain system in many other ap-
plication ﬁelds, blockchain system brings extra computation
cost and communication cost to edge nodes. Off-loading as
a popular methodology to alleviate the stress of edge nodes
is to move computation task to external machines, such as
Edge Computing Service Provider (ESP) or Cloud Comput-
ing Service Provider (CSP) [110]. Those service providers
that are qualiﬁed to conduct the off-loaded tasks may earn
some proﬁt or reward for providing computation service. In
the process of computation ofﬂoading in edge computing, it
is critical to dynamically make optimal ofﬂoading decisions
to minimize the communication delay, energy consumption
spent on the devices and the throughput of data storage on
blockchain [111].

Jiang et al. [110] design an multi-leader multi-follower
Stackelberg game to address computing resource manage-
ment achieving maximized proﬁts of service providers and
the rewards of miners in the network. Hu et al. [112] detail a
blockchain enabled edge computing system, and propose a
deep reinforcement learning algorithm to jointly optimize
the computation ofﬂoading policy and block generation
strategy to maximize the scalability. Though abundant off-
loading optimization methods have been developed, it is
hard to evaluate how good the outcome as well as to
compare these methods. To address this issue, Qu et al. [111]
propose ChainFL, that is a lightweight simulation platform
for building a test edge computing environment which also
supports federated learning and blockchain technology.

Cooperative or collaborative ofﬂoading in edge com-
puting is an extended problem over off-loading. Feng et
al. [113] utilize deep reinforcement learning algorithm to
jointly optimize the cooperative ofﬂoading decision and
blockchain parameters in blockchain-enabled mobile edge
computing systems. Zuo et al. [114] also study coopera-
tive mobile edge computing, they formulate the ofﬂoading
optimization problem with a three-stage Stackelberg game.
Cheng et al. [115] use blockchain to form a authentica-
tion system for collaborative edge computing systems that
achieves anonymity while avoid malicious attacks from fake
IoT devices.

6

Xiao et al. [116] address selﬁsh attack problem in edge
computing that attackers use less computation resources
than promised to process ofﬂoading tasks or provide faked
computation results. They propose a trust mechanism to
assign reputations to edge nodes, then the CPU computa-
tion resources are allocated based on the reputation. Liu
et al. [117] address the problem of the existence of low-
quality data such as missing values, inconsistent values
and incorrect values due to the data heterogeneity in edge
computing. These low-quality data may not support or even
slow down the computation tasks. To tackle this issue, a
consortium blockchain is design in [117] where the data
quality will ﬁrst be evaluated and repaired before being off-
loaded.

More works incorporate blockchain system deeper with
edge computing network to allow blockchain provide more
reliable functions by proposing speciﬁc consensus mecha-
nisms and comprehensive blockchain-enabled edge com-
puting systems. Baranwal and Kumar [118] propose PoSP
consensus mechanism that replace the hash puzzle in
PoW with a service placement problem whose result can
meanwhile help the resource allocation in edge comput-
ing. Maskey et al. [119] use neural networks to decide
the miner’s reputation instead of a heuristic computation
in a blockchain-enabled vehicular edge computing envi-
ronment. Balistri et al. [120] embed blockchain into edge
computing network in order to promote the cyber-resiliency,
where edge nodes and service providers work as peers in a
blockchain system. Li et al. [121] design a typical multi-layer
blockchain enabled system, where the blockchain layer is
incorporated into edge-computing layer. Similar to [120],
the edge computing nodes in [121] are also the blockchain
peers(nodes) to conduct consensus mechanism and create
new blocks. Wang et al. [122] are the ﬁrst to extend the
collaborative task ofﬂoading to collaborative edge storage.
They propose a blockchain system called CSEdge where a
reputation based consensus mechanism called ER-BFT is
designed to select edge servers based on their reputation,
and a incentive mechanism is proposed to motivate edge
server to help complete data ofﬂoading .

4.2 Federated Learning

Federated Learning (FL), ﬁrst proposed by Google [123] is
an emerging distributed machine learning schema. Instead
of collect all the data ﬁrst from data providers, then training
a complicated machine learning model on a central comput-
ing device, federated learning allows each data provider to
train a local model ﬁrst and then upload the parameters to
the central computing device. In federated learning schema,
since data providers keep their data locally, the communi-
cation cost is saved and the privacy of data provider can be
preserved.

Before federated learning is proposed, blockchain had
been adopted to secure the data or model parameters in
machine learning. Goel et al. [124] propose DeepRing which
is a blockchain secured CNN model and shows signiﬁcant
resistance to tampering attack than ordinary models. Fu
et al. [125] use blockchain system to secure the collective
learning in IoV environment which is similar to federated
learning schema. The adoption of blockchain technology

7

Fig. 4. Comparison between Federated Learning architecture with and without blockchain.

in federate learning further promotes the security of ma-
chine learning to next level [25], [68], [126], [127]. Based
on literature review, we create a generalized blockchain-
enabled federated learning architecture, and compare it with
conventional federated learning in Figure 4.

Lu et al. [128] design a data sharing platform for IoT with
blockchain enabled federated learning, and propose proof of
training Quality (PoQ) as a light weight consensus mecha-
nism. Lu et al. [129] propose a blockchain-enabled federated
learning scheme to strengthen communication security and
data privacy protection for communication between digital
twins of IoT devices and edge network. The digital twins get
the trained parameters from IoT devices instead of tedious
device state information. Peng et al. [130] propose to use
blockchain to achieve veriﬁable and auditable federated
learning framework where committee based aggregation
model and a authenticated data structure are developed
over blockchain system.

Li et al. [131] propose a committee consensus to improve
the consensus efﬁciency for a blockchain-enabled federated
learning framework, called BFLC. In BFLC, the local up-
dated model gradients and model parameters are stored on
blockchain. A committee is form to evaluated the updates,
and only the qualiﬁed updated will be stored in blockchain.
Qu et al. [132] creatively combine the PoW with federated
learning and proposed Proof of Federated Learning (PoFL)
that instead of solving the meaningless puzzles in PoW,
solving the actual tasks in the federated learning will make
much less computation power waste. Nodes are gathered in
pools where the PoFL is making for aggregating the desired
model.

In federated learning, it is important to deﬁne suitable
rewards for the worker clients who spend local computation
and communication resources training local models. Other-
wise, workers may be reluctant to do the training and report
useless or even harmful parameters to global model aggre-
gators. In order to jointly satisfy the privacy, integrity, and
fair incentives of blockchain-enabled federated learning,
R ¨uckel et al. [133] propose a federated learning framework

that incentives each clients based on their individual contri-
bution to the global model, uses zero-knowledge proofs to
ensure data integrity and adopts local differential privacy
to perturb each clients’ model update with Laplacian noise
to ensure the data privacy. Gao et al. [134] propose FGFL
model that assesses workers based on both contribution and
reputation. They also states that it is crucial to design both
an effective incentive mechanism and a reliable incentive
management system to insure the fairness of incentives.

Since federated learning requires each device to upload
the trained models to the aggregator, the global model may
need to wait the slowest device to ﬁnally get updated.
Asynchronous federated learning is then studied to deal
with the delay of communication from multiple devices.
Lu et al. [135] attempt to solve the asynchronous prob-
lem in IoV by optimally selecting the participating nodes
through deep reinforcement learning. The models will ﬁrst
be aggregated within local range of vehicles asynchronously,
then globally aggregated by roadside units synchronously.
Feng et al. [136] propose BAFL, which is a blockchain-Based
Asynchronous Federated Learning Framework. In BAFL,
each device is communicating with one miner, for local
model uploading and global model updating. The global
model can be aggregated by each device once the device
decides to update it with local models. Then the consensus
of global model will be reached in blockchain layer, hence
avoid waiting all devices. Wang and Tsai et al. [137] propose
to compose a blockchain-enabled asynchronous federated
learning system with multiple blockchains, where Sub-
Blockchains are responsible for the model local training in
multiple devices, and those Sub-Blockchains will communi-
cate with a Main-Blockchain which is for the global model
aggregation.

The distributed nature of federated learning schema
make it easy to be integrated into IoT networks or edge com-
puting networks, where sensing nodes in IoT and mobile
devices can be the clients to train local models [138], [139].
Otoum et al. [140] propose a blockchain-enabled FL model
the decentralizes the learning process to ensure privacy

LocalDataLocalModelTrainLocal DataLocal ModelTrainLocal DataLocal ModelTrain…AggregateSmart Edge DevicesModel AggregatorGlobal ModelBlockchain P2P NetworkWithout BlockchainWithBlockchainModel AggregatorEdge/Cloud ServerEdge/Cloud ServerAggregateLocal model uploadGlobalmodel downloadGlobalmodel downloadLocal model uploadand security for critical IoT infrastructure systems. Feng
et al. [141] propose a two-layer blockchain system to en-
able federated learning in mobile edge computing network
where the ﬁrst layer blockchain is for local model updates
and the second layer blockchain help update global model.
Ayaz et al. [142] propose a blockchain-enabled federated
learning vehicular networks to improve the quality and
efﬁciency of message dissemination.

5 EMERGING APPLICATIONS

In this section, we investigate four emerging research ﬁelds
where blockchain is increasingly playing important roles to
bring decentrality, system robustness and security to related
applications.

5.1 Healthcare

The potential of blockchain technology in healthcare has
shown and been discussed as a revolution for over 5
years [10], [143], [144]. Traditional healthcare systems are
suffering from single point of failures and information leak-
age by cybersecurity attacks [145], as well as lacking trans-
parency, trustful traceability, immutability, audit, privacy,
and security [146]. Blockchain technology provides promis-
ing solutions to tackle above issues that can decentralize the
storage and permission management, keep data traceable,
veriﬁable and immutable [147], [148].

Person health information (PHI) nowadays is usu-
ally digitized into Electrical Health/Medical Record
(EHR/EMR) and stores in healthcare authorities’ databases,
such as hospitals, health insurance companies or medi-
cal laboratories. People may have their PHI in multiple
healthcare authorities. Though the information are private,
people are not able to manage the abuse of their own infor-
mation [149]. Blockchain enabled decentralized healthcare
information management systems are proposed to tackle
this issue [149], [150], [151]. Soni and Singh [152] provide
a general mapping from blockchain technology to medical
processes and discuss the ability of blockchain to enable
access control, secure devices, identity protection and cost
reduction. Zaabar et al. [153] propose HealthBlock which is
a six-layer blockchain-enabled health information manage-
ment system. Blockchain works in a layer in HealthBlock
to manage the access from multiple parties in other layers.
Bhattacharya et al. [154] propose Blockchain-Based Deep
Learning as-a-Service (BinDaaS) system that ﬁrst adopts
blockchain to securely store the collected information using
lattice based signature generation and verifying operations,
then applies deep learning technology to produce valuable
prediction service, such as patient future disease predic-
tion. Zhang et al. [155] uses pairing-based cryptography
to generate temper-proof EHR which is further packaged
into transactions in blocks. They also design secure pay-
ment protocols between patients and healthcare providers
through smart contracts in blockchain. Chelladurai and
Pandian focus on improving the data access speed among
multiple parties with proposed Modiﬁed Merkle Tree data
structure in blockchain [156]. Wu et al. [157] propose multi-
level smart contracts to achieve dynamic access control
that allows different access rights for different scenarios.

8

They propose a Privacy Attribute Classiﬁcation algorithm
to classify medical records into different privacy levels, then
the access right can be matched.

Another helpful blockchain use case in healthcare is
medication tracing. Counterfeit medications have bring un-
neglectable public health concern and sever impact on
treatment outcomes due to insufﬁcient, incorrect, erroneous
ingredients, falsiﬁed information or wrong labeling [158].
Blockchain as a powerful distributed data storage method
that can manage accessibility, ensure data transparency and
immutability is hence an proactive approach to track, detect,
and manage counterfeits in healthcare supply chain [159],
[160]. Musamih et al.
implement an blockchain-
enabled healthcare supply chain system with Ethereum.
They designed on-chain and and off-chain structure where
the actual healthcare data are store in off-chain low-cost
decentralized storage system, blockchain is response for
storing the logs and interact with off-chain resources. Abbas
et al. [161] design Couch-DB where a machine-learning
model is built upon the blockchain system to provide drug
recommendation to customers.

[159]

Some miscellaneous topics in healthcare are studied with
blockchain. Liu et al. [162] and Mendoza-Tello et al. [163]
propose to use blockchain to avoid healthcare insurance
fraud. Blockchain can also be used to secure the channel of
remote patient monitoring [164]. Pighini et al. [165] imple-
ment SynCare ecosystem with blockchain and cloud service
that allows patients to directly send data to healthcare
professionals without concern of data leakage so that the
patient can be securely remotely monitored. Many other
patient monitoring systems require participation of IoT
devices, such as smart sensors, meters or network access
points, which will be discussed later. Blockchain is also
introduced into clinical trails which are usually with a larger
ﬂow of information and more conﬁdential data from more
parties [166]. Wong et al. [166] and Albanese et al. [167] have
implement prototype of blockchain system for clinical trail
data management.

Blockchain bridges healthcare with various other re-
search ﬁelds. As mentioned above, IoT devices are widely
used in healthcare, such as monitoring the status of
patients, sensing important parameters for treatment or
surgery [168]. Ali et al. [169] propose an efﬁcient blockchain
system for IoT-incorporated healthcare applications where a
secure search algorithm is designed to encrypt and anony-
mously search the data stored in blockchain. Hossein et
al. [170] propose two-chain structured blockchain system,
namely BCHealth for IoT healthcare applications that al-
lows data owners to personalize the access policies over
their healthcare data. In BCHealth, one chain stores access
policies and the other chain stores data transactions.

In healthcare, artiﬁcial

intelligence models provides
valuable predictions and analysis for diagnosis. However
due to privacy, healthcare providers are reluctant to share
their data for a common AI task. Federated learning is hence
introduced into Healthcare with blockchain to protect the
data and AI models in healthcare. Aich et al. [171] propose
a general framework to incorporate federated learning with
multiple healthcare providers, where blockchain works as
the intermediate platform for transmitting data from health-
care providers to federated learning AI task.

5.2 Special Healthcare Case Study: COVID-19 Pan-
demic

COVID-19 pandemic has lasted for over 3 years. Researchers
have developed abundant approaches contributing to the
prevention of virus spread. In this section, we review the
literature of this special use case in healthcare, and discuss
how Blockchain can beneﬁt the recovery from pandemics.

As special use case of healthcare, there are blockchain-
enabled EHR management system specially designed for
COVID-19 pandemic [172], [173]. Tan et al. [174] propose
a traceable COVID-19 record sharing system powered by
blockchain where a security game (IND-CPA) is built in
the system to achieve attack resistance. Aslan et al.
[175]
evaluate the possibility of world-wide COVID-19 informa-
tion sharing among countries with DApps (Decentralized
Applications) on blockchain system, but the idea is initial
and of high level, no implementation is provided. Abid et al.
[176] propose NovidChain which is a blockchain system to
replace the central server that stores test/vaccine certiﬁcates
of users. NovidChain works as a bridge for certiﬁcate issuer,
holder and veriﬁer, and is evaluated to be secure, scalable
and low-cost extensively in the paper. However Novid-
Chain is set to be private and manged by governments
or healthcare institutions, which brings centralization and
privacy concerns to NovidChain.

Contact tracing as one of the most effective ways to de-
feat pandemic has been developed in many countries [177].
Contact tracing requires people to share their private con-
tact history, sometime even including sensitive information
such as GPS coordinates or medical history [178], [179].
Most initial attempts of blockchain-powered contact tracing
approaches are of high level, treat blockchain naively as
external storage or with no simulation provided to illustrate
the effectiveness, such as BeepTrace [180], Arifeen et al. [181]
and Choudhury et al. [182]. Hasan et al. [183] propose to
use blockchain to record participants’ GPS coordinates and
trigger proof of location to conduct contact tracing and risk
alert. In the proposed system, external oracles are adopted
to conduct contact tracing algorithm, and blockchain works
as a bridge from external oracles to involved parties, in-
cluding testing center and patients. Torkye et al. [184] also
use blockchain to securely bridge contact tracing-concerned
parties and propose to use speciﬁc code patterns to encode
peoples locations, so that only people who have been to
the same place can be identiﬁed as contact cases while
protecting privacy. However, this method is not able to
reﬂect accurate contact history. Peng et al. focus on contact
data veriﬁcation to ensure data integrity, and propose P 2B
to realize a blockchain system [185].

Most of above contact tracing approaches assume people
are willing to join the contact tracing system and share
their contact history. However in real world people may be
reluctant to use such system or act reluctantly after joining
the contact tracing system, which lowers the effectiveness
of contact tracing. Incentive mechanisms play important
roles in blockchain systems that motivate people or par-
ticipants to perform contact tracing function honestly and
actively. Naren et al. [186] analyzed importance of incentive
mechanisms, but no speciﬁc method is proposed to solve
the mechanism. Lv et al. [187] considers large-scale contact

9

tracing with the help of IoT and proposed ByChain where
an artiﬁcial potential ﬁeld-based incentive allocation mech-
anism is proposed to motivate IoT witnesses to maximize
monitoring coverage.

Alansari et al. [188] extend contact tracing with two other
subsystems to perform public places access control and safe-
places recommendation, respectively. All three subsystems
are incorporated with consortium blockchain to manage the
data access and storage.

Blockchain technology also helps COVID-19 vaccine con-
trol and management [178]. Considering fragile biologi-
cal substances, which should be take special care during
transmission and distribution, Robit et al. [189] discuss a
concept of blockchain-enabled automatic vaccine lots man-
agement to promote the transparency and immutability
of management data. Musamih et al. [190] implement a
prototype of blockchain system on Ethereum to help track
the vaccine during delivery from raw material supplier to
the beneﬁciary. The blockchain is responsible for storing
logs and events generated by smart contracts, and record
delivery events of the COVID-19 vaccine. The management
of vaccine is a special case of supply chain management, we
will investigate more blockchain works on supply chain in
Section 5.4.

5.3 Social Network

Social network has become an indispensable part of our
daily lives. Users of social media, such as Facebook, Twitter
and Weibo set up their proﬁles and make posts. The huge
amount of data generated by users are managed by the
social media providers which are sometimes not reliable.
For instance, Facebook has several data leakage incidents
recent years. Users have no control of their data even some
data are of high privacy concern. To solve the single-point
failure problem, ensure data security and preserve necessary
privacy in public social network, blockchain technology is
discovered to be one possible solution [191], [192] .

Jiang et al. [193] design a blockchain-based decentralized
social network, where blockchain serves as a replacement
centralized server to allow user registration, user posting,
adding friends or commenting with the help of smart con-
tracts. In the evaluation, the authors prove each post users
made will cost around 1.137 USD, which makes the system
not a budget solution. The data stored on blockchain is not
modiﬁable, therefore how users update their registration
information and posts is a remaining problem. Zhang et
al. [194] propose another blockchain-based social network,
namely BPP. They also propose a privacy preserving search-
ing algorithm in BPP. However, BPP is not fully decentral-
ized, blockchain works as external storage system to assist
social network providers. Most current designs or imple-
mentations of blockchain in social network system are still
at very ﬁst stage that blockchain only takes a minor part of
the system and have many deﬁciencies such as scalabity and
throughput problems. With the development of blockchain
system, handful fully decentralized social networks are able
to come to surface, such as Steemit 1 and FORESTING 2
which are both implemented with Steem Blockchain [195].

1. https://steemit.com
2. https://foresting.io/

The diagram of social network without a central server
requires all peers to maintain the whole network, which
gives much more rights to peers than centralized diagram.
With no proper user behavior control mechanism, malicious
users might make the blockchain-enabled social network
more vulnerable than traditional ones.

Gu et al. [196] study privacy concern during resource
sharing, such as moves, songs or pictures within social
network communities. Access control of the resource is
achieved by blockchain, and peers within the communities
are motivated by a smart contract to help disseminate the
resources. Rahman et al. [197] also study access control
problem in social network with blockchain. They design
four smart contracts, namely Access Control Contract for
controlling the access to the resources in the network, Repu-
tation Contract for calculating reputation score of users, In-
spector Contract for monitoring user behavior and Registrar
Contract for verifying user identities. Zhang el al. [198] ex-
tend the resource sharing within one community to the shar-
ing across multiple social networks. Their proposed frame-
work achieves consistent consensus on photo dissemination
control across independent and disparate social network
platforms. Yan et al. [199] propose Social-Chain to solve
the trust issue in Pervasive Social Networking (PSN) where
there is usually lacking a a centralized party to perform
information collection, social data aggregation, and trust
evaluation. Social-Chain is able to efﬁciently store the trust
evaluation of users into blockchain with the proposed Proof-
of-Trust. Guo et al. [200] study user reputation evaluation
task in social network where existing methods are facing
the issue caused by fake comments posted by adversaries.
They propose a consortium blockchain-based method that
users are the peers in the blockchain and a behavior game
model mechanism is developed to motivate peers to work
honestly.

Chen et al. [201] propose DEPLEST, a blockchain-based
distributed database system. They focus on solving the
storage cost if all users of social network stores whole
copies of database in blockchain-based social network. They
propose each user only need to store a part whole data,
and the size of storage on each device is ﬁxed. To save
the storage cost of synchronized blockchain, only sensitive
data will be encrypted and secured through blockchain,
non-sensitive data will be stored in traditional external
database. Proof-of-Communication is also proposed to save
the time for appending a new block. Nguyen et al. [202]
propose SoChainDB, which is a general database framework
to facilitate blockchain-based social networks for collect-
ing data generated in the network. SochainDB provides a
efﬁcient pipeline to crawl and formalize distributed data
storage in blockchain-based social network, and ﬁlls in the
gap between conventional social network engineers and
blockchain developers.

Ochoa et al. [203] propose FakeChain to detect fake news
in social network. They assume each node in social network
is also a node in blockchain, and when each node publish
some news, the news will be stored in blockchain. Then,
with the tractability of blockchain, the source of fake news
can be easily detected.

10

5.4 Supply Chain

Supply chain management is a vital component of indus-
try. Good traceability of products allows manufactures and
retailers to identify the source of parts and raw materials,
as well as avoid business fraud with transparent product
information. With the increasing complexity of global sup-
ply chain networks, traditional supply chain management
approaches are facing challenges to match the requirements
of efﬁciency, accessibility, transparency and security [204],
[205].

Blockchain can be a revolutionary technique in sup-
ply chain to provide effective product tracing, transparent
information sharing and reliable attack resistance. Many
companies have announced blockchain projects in their sup-
ply chain for better tractability, such as Walmart 3, Toyota
and Alibaba [206]. Queiroz et al. [207] systematically ana-
lyzed the barrier for the adoption of blockchain in supply
chain with a real-world empirical study in the Brazilian
OSCM (Operations and Supply Chain Management) con-
text. Through questionnaire, they found out that the per-
formance expectancy may also constitute an impediment to
adoption of blockchain. In Wu’s theoretical analysis [208]
blockchain technology is able to elevate the proﬁt of supply
chain, though the proﬁt may differ when different parties
lead the construction of the blockchain system.

One of the most fundamental property that supply
chains ought to have is traceability. Abundant blockchain-
enabled supply chains have been investigated and designed
for many speciﬁc use cases to improve traceability, including
fresh produces and foods [208], [209], [210], [210], animal
products [211], agriculture [212] and healthcare [190], [213].
Yakubu et al. [214] propose RiceChain to provide traceable
rice supply chain, achieving at most 25% lower tracing
latency than existing work. Caro et al. [215] propose Agri-
BlockIoT and implement with Ethereum and Hyperledger
Sawtooth, which is a fully-decentralized traceable supply
chain for agriculture and food with blockchain and IoT.
In AgriBlockIoT, IoT devices deployed in the supply chain
processes are working nodes of blockchain, and the whole
blockchain is maintained on cloud. To evaluate the trace-
ability level of blockchain-enabled supply chain, Dasaklis et
al. [216] deﬁne the granularity levels of traceability. They
design a smart contract to collect necessary information
for conduct traceability classiﬁcation based on the existing
traceability granularity standard4.

Kouhizadenh et al. [217] and Saberi et al. [218] analyze
that blockchain could help verify audit and certiﬁcate sus-
tainability in supply chain which is emphasized of great
importance recent years, yet hardly can be achieved in most
supply chain systems. The key idea of sustainability of
supply chain is to save energy, build environmental-friendly
products in sustainable manner. However, in addition to
the beneﬁts brought by blockchain for supporting sustain-
ability, blockchain itself may introduce extra overhead and
energy consumption for maintaining functionality of smart
contracts and miners. Some other problems such as scalabil-

3. https://one.walmart.com/content/globaltechindia/en in/
Tech-insights/blog/Blockchain-in-the-food-supply-chain.html
4. https://www.gs1.org/docs/tl/T L Keys Implementation

Guideline.pdf

11

Fig. 5. Blockchain-enabled (circular) supply chain.

ity, communication deﬁciency and unprecedented security
issues may also present [219].

The interactions between multiple partners in the supply
chain rely on the trust among them. Therefore trust manage-
ment plays the crucial rule to build and maintain a supply
chain. Beside the above blockchain-based tamper-proof and
audible supply chain is proposed, Malik et al. [220] con-
sider the trust evaluation problem for parties in the supply
chain. In the propose TrustChain, a reputation evaluation
algorithm is developed for calculating the ratings of product
sellers in the blockchain-based supply chain. AlRakhami
et al. [221] bring both blockchain and IoT into trust man-
agement in supply chain. In their work, IoT devices work
as data collector and relayor to transmit cryptographically
edited essential data to blockchain. However, incorporating
IoT devices may introducing potential security threats into
supply chain that unauthorized or uncontrolled IoT devices
from malicious parties may access and tamper the sensitive
data. Song et al. [222] propose a robust blockchain based
IoT enabled supply chain management framework, where a
registration module is designed for enforcing registration
policies on all participants and inspection module is de-
signed for monitoring, analyzing and judging misbehaviour
of participants.

Circular supply chain extends the one-way supply that
from manufacture to products with three extra process,
namely recycle, remanufacture and redistribute. Different
from the simple forward manner in common supply chains,
circular supply chains usually have more complicated prod-
uct information ﬂow among multiple parties that may back
and forth when redistributing and recycling. Figure 5 illus-
trates the information ﬂow and material ﬂow in regular sup-
ply chain and circular supply chain. Centobelli et al. [223]
design a Triple Retry blockchain framework with multiple
smart contracts for executing different processes.

Raj et al. [224] propose to use blockchain to solve the
payment delay issue in supply chain especially when the
participants locating in different place of the globe. With
smart contracts enforced on participants as well as the

authenticity and tamper-proof nature, blockchain is able
to achieve trustable information and payment conﬁrming
which alleviates the transaction delays in supply chain.

Despite abundant blockchain-based supply chains are
designed and implemented, the proﬁting outcome with the
adoption of blockchain technology is still question to be
answered. Researchers may result in opposite conclusions
when modeling and scenario settings differ. Zhou et al. [225]
and Sun et al. [226] conduct detailed analysis and proof on
the impact of blockchain in two-echelon supply chain where
only one supplier and one retailer exist. Zhou et al. [225]
point out that, blockchain enabled supply chain not nec-
essarily superior than non-blockchain ones, which is closely
related to the reliability of information and the transparency
cost of products. Based on full equilibrium results through
the Stackelberg game between the supplier and the retailer
designed in the paper, the authors conclude that the retailer
can tolerant higher blockchain adopting cost than supplier
in most cases especially when the product cost is high, while
supplier can tolerant a higher adopting cost only when
both the product cost and consumers’ willing to pay are
low. Zhou et al. [225] thinks both supplier and retailer will
beneﬁt from blockchain technology when the adopting cost
is low enough, while Sun et al. [226] concludes blockchain
technology can always improves the supply chain proﬁt no
matter the status of market demand.

6 DISCUSSION
In above extensive literature review, we have investigated
and discussed recent advances of blockchain and its ap-
plications as well as providing some suggestions for some
speciﬁc research topics. In this section, we make further
conclusions and more general foresight of future academic
or industry work on Blockchain.

Blockchain systems are constructed upon peer-to-peer
networks, where smart contracts and consensus mecha-
nisms are enforced on every participants to achieve trans-
parency. Some consensus mechanisms, especially Proof-of-
Work and its variants, will consume notable computation

SupplierManufactureDistributorLogisticsRetailerCustomerBlockchainP2PNetworkRecyclingCenterWaste:Supply ChainMaterial Flow:Supply ChainInformationFlow:Circular Supply ChainMaterial Flow:Circular Supply ChainInformationFlow12

Fig. 6. The On-Chain/Off-chain architecture of blockchain applications.

resources. Though many other consensus mechanisms are
proposed, such as Proof of Stake or PBFT which signiﬁ-
cantly reduce computation cost, they also bring extra com-
munication resource consumption. The communication or
communication consumption are not affordable to many
lightweight applications. On the other hand, applications
with resource-limited devices are often not able to consis-
tently perform stable communications or computation tasks.
For example, in a IoT network, the out-door smart meters or
smart sensors not only have limited computation resources,
and but may face challenges to collect data or loss network
connection due to bad weather, which will fail effective com-
munications. To mitigate this problem and make blockchain
effective in these use cases, future work may consider to
simultaneously optimize blockchain consensus mechanism
and communication schema.

Another obstacle to the adoption of blockchain technol-
ogy is the scalability issue. In other words, the transac-
tion throughput, the transaction processing latency and the
storage cost of blockchain can not all satisfy the demands
of many use cases. We have mentioned many remarkable
works above that improves the scalability. Efﬁcient consen-
sus mechanisms, such as PoS, DPoS and community-wise
consensus mechanisms are developed to package transac-
tions into blocks in much shorter time than PoW. In order to
mitigate the total storage consumption meanwhile to keep
the robustness and tamper-proof ability, literature proposes
blockchain sharding methods and storing actual data at
external databases while only keeping the data index on
blockchain. However, it is hard to achieve the perfect bal-
ance among three key properties: decentralization, security,
and scalability [14]. Most above-mentioned works are able
to optimize one or two of them under given particular
application scenarios, and only handful works are trying to
optimize all three properties at the same time [92], which are
still initial attempts under many constraints, such as only
limited number of consensus mechanisms are considered
and the block size is assumed to be only discrete num-
bers. New consensus mechanisms are highly demanded by
optimizing all three properties under much more general
settings and use cases.

The industry is no doubt a critical rule in the adoption
of blockchain technology from theory to practice. The main
concern of companies to adopt blockchain in IoT services,
healthcare systems or supply chain systems is if blockchain
will bring more proﬁt than the cost to build it. The cost
of blockchain technology are seldom analyzed in existing
literature. We have mentioned several works that theoreti-
cally analyze the potential beneﬁts and cost of blockchain in
supply chain [208], [225], [226]. Further extensive research
can be done in many other applications such as IoT, edge
computing and healthcare. In addition, blockchain simula-
tion tools are highly desired for helping evaluate the per-
formance of blockchains system, which provides intuitive
results for industry to understand the performance and cost
of blockchain systems.

Apparently, lower the cost of blockchain will promote
the adoption of blockchain in industry. The cost to build
a blockchain generally comes from the development of
blockchain client for each working node, the computation
resource to perform consensus mechanism, the storage re-
source to store the blocks and the cost of incentive mech-
anism to reward working nodes if necessary. The cost for
developing blockchain client is mostly decided by software
engineering market price. Therefore better consensus mech-
anisms and corresponding incentive mechanism take great
weights in lowering the cost for blockchain industry.

Blockchain is a third-party free, non-trust built, dis-
tributed data management approach. The adoption of
blockchain technology not only brings beneﬁts, but also
potential risks and security weakness due to anonymity.
Though most popular consensus mechanisms are proved
able to resist dishonest users when the ratio is under 51%
or 1/3, the resistance to cyber-security attacks such as regis-
tration attack, data leakage and encryption break-through is
still a question. Different from the most famous successful
blockchain system such as Bitcoin and Ethereum which
run on high-end computers, the blockchain applications in
IoT, edge computing, healthcare and supply chain usually
involves tremendous edge devices, such as mobile smart
phones, IoT smart devices or network access points, which
can be easily compromised. Future academy and industry

OnChainOffChain…Blockchain 1Blockchain N (Optional)Smart Contract, Consensus, Registration Management, Access controlSmall-volumeData/DataHash/DataIndex,Transactions,SystemlogsDevices, Data Collection/Exchange/Computing, Huge-volume data storage, Performing whole system logisticsmay work together to study those external cyber-security
attacks in blockchain systems.

In many existing blockchain-enabled applications, we
found that blockchain serves as an external distributed
storage approach to simply replace the traditional storage
instead of being specially designed to be integrated into
application logistics. In this architecture, blockchain assists
computation server by providing authentication control,
data indexing, system logging without deﬁning speciﬁc
consensus mechanisms and incentive mechanisms. In other
words, the participants or peers in the blockchain can not
actively compute and generate data, while only passively
take the data given by the computation server. Some works
take On-chain/Off-chain architecture for their applications
as illustrated in Figure 6, that uses blockchain for making
important consensus and storing important system logs or
transaction, while still keeps the logistics and massive data
on off-chain devices. Though this architecture is good for
alleviating consumption of blockchain system in term of
computation and storage resources, the blockchain does
not directly participate in system logistics. We believe the
blockchain-enabled applications can put more functions
on blockchain through smart contracts to decentralize the
computation power and take full advantages of blockchain
technology.

It

is also worth-mentioning that

the advantages of
blockchain are not necessarily the beneﬁts for applications
sometimes. For example, blockchain is tamper-proof, that
everything stored on blockchain can never be modiﬁed or
deleted in anyway, otherwise the chain rule will be broken
due to the uniqueness of block hash. For the application
of social network, it is common that people can leave the
social network and need to erase all the social records.
However blockchain-enabled social networks are hard to
achieve this as long as there is any data of users stored on
blockchain. Another example is that blockchain is decen-
tralized that ideally requires every participants to store the
full copy of blockchain. However, in real world, many use
cases mentioned above can not satisfy the ideal situation
that the storage cost will soon become unaffordable if the
blockchain stores all data. In addition, in some use cases,
such as healthcare, it is not always secure to allow everyone
holds full copy of data, since some sensitive information
of patients may not be supposed to be accessible to some
particular parties. We suggest future work may develop
variants of current popular blockchain systems to meet the
demands of particular use cases.

7 CONCLUSION

In this paper, we created an overview picture of blockchain
ecosystem by reviewing the recent advances of blockchain
technology as well as the most active blockchain applica-
tions overlapped with each other. With the steep expanding
of the whole blockchain ecosystem, it is of great meaning
to review the development in the most noticeable parts
in the ecosystem. We ﬁrst reviewed the recent studies on
general blockchain technology, then the blockchain-enabled
applications, including IoT, IoV, edge computing, federated
learning, healthcare, COVID-19, social network and supply
chain. With the extensive review, we suggested several

13

foreseeing problems for future developments of blockchain
ecosystem, including the dilemma to achieve balance among
scalability, security, dencentrality and cost, the external se-
curity risks outside blockchain from cyber-attack in indus-
try, the ignorance of blockchain smart contracts and the
unexpected disadvantages caused by blockchain inevitable
properties. This paper toward weaving the core part of
current blockchain ecosystem from both academic research
to frontier industry applications. Therefore we expect this
survey could be helpful for future researchers developing
more and better blockchain-enabled applications.

REFERENCES

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

S. Nakamoto, “Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system,”
Decentralized Business Review, p. 21260, 2008.
G. Wood et al., “Ethereum: A secure decentralised generalised
transaction ledger,” Ethereum project yellow paper, vol. 151, no.
2014, pp. 1–32, 2014.
S. King and S. Nadal, “Ppcoin: Peer-to-peer crypto-currency with
proof-of-stake,” 2012.
F. Sch¨ar, “Decentralized ﬁnance: On blockchain- and smart
contract-based ﬁnancial markets,” Review, 2021.
L. D. Xu, Y. Lu, and L. Li, “Embedding blockchain technology
J.,
into iot
vol. 8, no. 13, pp. 10 452–10 473, 2021.
[Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2021.3060508

for security: A survey,” IEEE Internet Things

[7]

[6] M. A. Uddin, A. Stranieri, I. Gondal, and V. Balasubramanian,
“A survey on the adoption of blockchain in iot: Challenges and
solutions,” 2021.
R. Yang, F. R. Yu, P. Si, Z. Yang, and Y. Zhang, “Integrated
blockchain and edge computing systems: A survey, some
research issues and challenges,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutorials,
[Online]. Available:
vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 1508–1532, 2019.
https://doi.org/10.1109/COMST.2019.2894727
R. Belchior, M. Correia, and A. Vasconcelos, “Justicechain:
Using blockchain to protect justice logs,” in On the Move to
Meaningful Internet Systems: OTM 2019 Conferences - Confederated
International Conferences: CoopIS, ODBASE, C&TC 2019, Rhodes,
Greece, October 21-25, 2019, Proceedings, ser. Lecture Notes
in Computer Science, H. Panetto, C. Debruyne, M. Hepp,
D. Lewis, C. A. Ardagna, and R. Meersman, Eds., vol.
11877.
[Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-33246-4 21

Springer, 2019, pp. 318–325.

[8]

[9] ——, “Towards secure, decentralized, and automatic audits
with blockchain,” in 28th European Conference on Information
Systems - Liberty, Equality, and Fraternity in a Digitizing World,
ECIS 2020, Marrakech, Morocco,
June 15-17, 2020, F. Rowe,
R. E. Amrani, M. Limayem, S. Newell, N. Pouloudi, E. van
Heck, and A. E. Quammah, Eds., 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://aisel.aisnet.org/ecis2020 rp/68

[10] H. M. Hussien, S. M. Yasin, N.

I. Udzir, A. A. Zaidan,
and B. B. Zaidan, “A systematic review for enabling of
develop a blockchain technology in healthcare application:
Taxonomy,
challenges,
substantially analysis, motivations,
recommendations and future direction,” J. Medical Syst.,
vol. 43, no. 10, pp. 320:1–320:35, 2019.
[Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10916-019-1445-8
S. Jabbar, H. Lloyd, M. Hammoudeh, B. Adebisi, and U. Raza,
“Blockchain-enabled supply chain: analysis, challenges, and
future directions,” Multim. Syst., vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 787–806, 2021.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/s00530-020-00687-0
S. Wan, M. Li, G. Liu, and C. Wang, “Recent advances in
consensus protocols for blockchain: a survey,” Wirel. Networks,
vol. 26, no. 8, pp. 5579–5593, 2020.
[Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11276-019-02195-0

[11]

[12]

[13] A. Singh, G. Kumar, R. Saha, M. Conti, M. Alazab, and
R. Thomas, “A survey and taxonomy of consensus protocols for
blockchains,” J. Syst. Archit., vol. 127, p. 102503, 2022. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sysarc.2022.102503

[14] Q. Zhou, H. Huang, Z. Zheng, and J. Bian, “Solutions to
scalability of blockchain: A survey,” IEEE Access, vol. 8,
pp. 16 440–16 455, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.
1109/ACCESS.2020.2967218

[15] R. Zhang, R. Xue, and L. Liu, “Security and privacy on
blockchain,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 52, no. 3, pp. 51:1–51:34,
2019. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3316481
[16] Q. Feng, D. He, S. Zeadally, M. K. Khan, and N. Kumar, “A
survey on privacy protection in blockchain system,” J. Netw.
Comput. Appl., vol. 126, pp. 45–58, 2019. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jnca.2018.10.020

[17] H. T. M. Gamage, H. D. Weerasinghe, and N. G. J. Dias, “A
survey on blockchain technology concepts, applications, and
issues,” SN Comput. Sci., vol. 1, no. 2, p. 114, 2020. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/s42979-020-00123-0

[18] R. Huo, S. Zeng, Z. Wang, J. Shang, W. Chen, T. Huang,
S. Wang, F. R. Yu, and Y. Liu, “A comprehensive survey
on blockchain in industrial
things: Motivations,
research progresses, and future challenges,” IEEE Commun. Surv.
Tutorials, vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 88–122, 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1109/COMST.2022.3141490

internet of

[19] C. Wang, X. Cheng, J. Li, Y. He, and K. Xiao, “A survey:
applications of blockchain in the internet of vehicles,” EURASIP
J. Wirel. Commun. Netw., vol. 2021, no. 1, p. 77, 2021. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1186/s13638-021-01958-8

[20] M. B. Mollah, J. Zhao, D. Niyato, Y. L. Guan, C. Yuen, S. Sun,
K. Lam, and L. H. Koh, “Blockchain for the internet of vehicles
transportation systems: A survey,” IEEE
towards intelligent
Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 4157–4185, 2021. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2020.3028368

[21] T. Alladi, V. Chamola, N. Sahu, V. Venkatesh, A. Goyal, and
M. Guizani, “A comprehensive survey on the applications of
blockchain for securing vehicular networks,” IEEE Commun.
Surv. Tutorials, vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 1212–1239, 2022. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/COMST.2022.3160925
J. Zou, D. He, S. Zeadally, N. Kumar, H. Wang, and K. R.
Choo, “Integrated blockchain and cloud computing systems:
A systematic survey, solutions, and challenges,” ACM Comput.
Surv., vol. 54, no. 8, pp. 160:1–160:36, 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3456628

[22]

[23] Z. Liao, X. Pang, J. Zhang, B. Xiong, and J. Wang, “Blockchain
on security and forensics management
in edge computing
for iot: A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Serv.
Manag., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 1159–1175, 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1109/TNSM.2021.3122147

[24] D. Li, D. Han, T. Weng, Z. Zheng, H. Li, H. Liu, A. Castiglione,
and K. Li, “Blockchain for federated learning toward secure
distributed machine learning systems: a systemic survey,” Soft
Comput., vol. 26, no. 9, pp. 4423–4440, 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00500-021-06496-5

[25] D. C. Nguyen, M. Ding, Q. Pham, P. N. Pathirana, L. B.
J. Li, D. Niyato, and H. V. Poor,
Le, A. Seneviratne,
“Federated learning meets blockchain in edge computing:
Opportunities and challenges,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 8,
no. 16, pp. 12 806–12 825, 2021.
[Online]. Available: https:
//doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2021.3072611

[26] V. Sreerakhi, N. Balagopal, and A. Mohan, “Transforming supply
chain network and logistics using blockchain - a survey,” Int.
J. Bus. Inf. Syst., vol. 39, no. 2, pp. 193–218, 2022. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1504/IJBIS.2022.121430

[27] D. D. F. Maesa, A. Marino, and L. Ricci, “Uncovering the
bitcoin blockchain: An analysis of
the full users graph,”
in 2016 IEEE International Conference on Data Science and
Advanced Analytics, DSAA 2016, Montreal, QC, Canada, October
17-19, 2016.
[Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1109/DSAA.2016.52

IEEE, 2016, pp. 537–546.

[28] ——, “The bow tie structure of the bitcoin users graph,” Appl.
Netw. Sci., vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 56:1–56:22, 2019. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1007/s41109-019-0163-y

[29] Y. Chen and J. Liu, “Distributed community detection
over blockchain networks based on structural entropy,” in
Proceedings of the 2019 ACM International Symposium on Blockchain
Infrastructure, BSCI 2019, Auckland, New
and Secure Critical
July 8, 2019, K. Gai, K. R. Choo, D. He, and
Zealand,
S. Wen, Eds. ACM, 2019, pp. 3–12.
[Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3327960.3332381

[30] B. B. F. Pontiveros, M. Steichen, and R. State, “Mint
centrality: A centrality measure for the bitcoin transaction
graph,” in IEEE International Conference on Blockchain and
(South), May 14-
Cryptocurrency,

ICBC 2019, Seoul, Korea

14

17, 2019.
https://doi.org/10.1109/BLOC.2019.8751401

IEEE, 2019, pp. 159–162.

[Online]. Available:

[31] Y. Li, U. Islambekov, C. G. Akcora, E. Smirnova, Y. R. Gel,
and M. Kantarcioglu, “Dissecting ethereum blockchain analytics:
What we learn from topology and geometry of ethereum graph,”
in SDM, 2020.

[32] R. Banno and K. Shudo, “Simulating a blockchain network
with simblock,” in IEEE International Conference on Blockchain
ICBC 2019, Seoul, Korea (South), May
and Cryptocurrency,
2019.
14-17,
[Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1109/BLOC.2019.8751431

2019, pp.

IEEE,

3–4.

[33] L. Liu, W. Tsai, M. Z. A. Bhuiyan, and D. Yang, “Automatic
blockchain whitepapers analysis via heterogeneous graph neural
network,” J. Parallel Distributed Comput., vol. 145, pp. 1–12, 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpdc.2020.05.014

[34] C. Feng and J. Niu, “Selﬁsh mining in ethereum,” in 39th IEEE
International Conference on Distributed Computing Systems, ICDCS
2019, Dallas, TX, USA, July 7-10, 2019.
IEEE, 2019, pp. 1306–1316.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/ICDCS.2019.00131
[35] F. Ritz and A. Zugenmaier, “The impact of uncle rewards on
selﬁsh mining in ethereum,” 2018 IEEE European Symposium on
Security and Privacy Workshops (EuroS&PW), pp. 50–57, 2018.

[36] H. Kang, X. Chang, R. Yang,

J. V. Misic, and V. B.
Misic, “Understanding selﬁsh mining in imperfect bitcoin and
ethereum networks with extended forks,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Serv.
Manag., vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 3079–3091, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1109/TNSM.2021.3073414

[37] W. Chen, X. Guo, Z. Chen, Z. Zheng, and Y. Lu, “Phishing scam
detection on ethereum: Towards ﬁnancial security for blockchain
ecosystem,” in IJCAI, 2020.

[38] C. Hou, M. Zhou, Y. Ji, P. Daian, F. Tram`er, G. Fanti, and A. Juels,
“Squirrl: Automating attack analysis on blockchain incentive
mechanisms with deep reinforcement learning,” in 28th Annual
Network and Distributed System Security Symposium, NDSS 2021,
virtually, February 21-25, 2021. The Internet Society, 2021.
[39] A. Kiayias, A. Russell, B. David, and R. Oliynykov, “Ouroboros:
A provably secure proof-of-stake blockchain protocol,” in
in Cryptology - CRYPTO 2017 - 37th Annual
Advances
International Cryptology Conference, Santa Barbara, CA, USA,
August 20-24, 2017, Proceedings, Part
I, ser. Lecture Notes
J. Katz and H. Shacham, Eds., vol.
in Computer Science,
10401.
[Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-63688-7 12

Springer, 2017, pp. 357–388.

[40] D. Larimer, “Delegated proof-of-stake (dpos),” Bitshare whitepa-

per, vol. 81, p. 85, 2014.

[41] F. Schuh and D. Larimer, “Bitshares 2.0: general overview,”
bitshares.

http://docs.

accessed
June-2017.[Online]. Available:
org/downloads/bitshares-general. pdf, 2017.

[42] Y. Huang, H. Wang, L. Wu, G. Tyson, X. Luo, R. Zhang,
X. Liu, G. Huang, and X. Jiang, “Understanding (mis)behavior
on the EOSIO blockchain,” Proc. ACM Meas. Anal. Comput.
Syst., vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 37:1–37:28, 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3392155

[43] B. Xu, D. Luthra, Z. Cole, and N. Blakely, “Eos: An architectural,
performance, and economic analysis,” Retrieved June, vol. 11, p.
2019, 2018.

[44] B. Guidi, A. Michienzi, and L. Ricci, “Steem blockchain:
the graph,” IEEE Access,
[Online]. Available: https:

Mining the inner
vol. 8, pp. 210 251–210 266, 2020.
//doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3038550

structure of

[46]

[45] Y. Sun, B. Yan, Y. Yao, and J. Yu, “Dt-dpos: A delegated proof
of stake consensus algorithm with dynamic trust,” Procedia Com-
puter Science, vol. 187, pp. 371–376, 2021.
J. Liu, M. Xie, S. Chen, C. Ma, and Q. Gong, “An
improved dpos consensus mechanism in blockchain based
the smart autonomous multi-robot system,”
on PLTS for
Inf. Sci., vol. 575, pp. 528–541, 2021.
[Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ins.2021.06.046

[47] F. Yang, W. Zhou, Q. Wu, R. Long, N. N. Xiong, and M. Zhou,
“Delegated proof of stake with downgrade: A secure and efﬁcient
blockchain consensus algorithm with downgrade mechanism,”
IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 118 541–118 555, 2019. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2935149

[48] X. Fan and Q. Chai, “Roll-dpos: A randomized delegated proof
of stake scheme for scalable blockchain-based internet of things
systems,” in Proceedings of the 15th EAI International Conference
on Mobile and Ubiquitous Systems: Computing, Networking and

Services, MobiQuitous 2018, 5-7 November 2018, New York City, NY,
USA, H. Schulzrinne and P. Li, Eds. ACM, 2018, pp. 482–484.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3286978.3287023

2018, Toronto, ON, Canada, October 15-19, 2018, D. Lie, M. Mannan,
M. Backes, and X. Wang, Eds. ACM, 2018, pp. 931–948. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3243734.3243853

15

[49] Y. Luo, Y. Chen, Q. Chen, and Q. Liang, “A new election al-
gorithm for dpos consensus mechanism in blockchain,” 2018 7th
International Conference on Digital Home (ICDH), pp. 116–120, 2018.
[50] G. Xu, Y. Liu, and P. W. Khan, “Improvement of the dpos
consensus mechanism in blockchain based on vague sets,”
IEEE Trans. Ind. Informatics, vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 4252–4259, 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/TII.2019.2955719

[51] M. Castro, B. Liskov et al., “Practical byzantine fault tolerance,”

in OsDI, vol. 99, no. 1999, 1999, pp. 173–186.

[52] Y. Li, L. Qiao, and Z. Lv, “An optimized byzantine fault
tolerance algorithm for consortium blockchain,” Peer-to-Peer
Netw. Appl., vol. 14, no. 5, pp. 2826–2839, 2021.
[Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/s12083-021-01103-8

[53] W. Li, C. Feng, L. Zhang, H. Xu, B. Cao, and M. A. Imran,
“A scalable multi-layer PBFT consensus for blockchain,” IEEE
Trans. Parallel Distributed Syst., vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 1146–1160, 2021.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/TPDS.2020.3042392
“SCP: A computationally-scalable byzantine consensus protocol
for blockchains,” IACR Cryptol. ePrint Arch., p. 1168, 2015,
withdrawn.
[Online]. Available: http://eprint.iacr.org/2015/
1168

[54]

[55] Z. Li, J. Huang, D. Gao, Y. Jiang, and L. Fan, “ISCP: an improved
blockchain consensus protocol,” Int. J. Netw. Secur., vol. 21, no. 3,
pp. 359–367, 2019. [Online]. Available: http://ijns.jalaxy.com.tw/
contents/ijns-v21-n3/ijns-2019-v21-n3-p359-367.pdf

[56] M. J. Amiri, D. Agrawal, and A. E. Abbadi, “Parblockchain:
Leveraging transaction parallelism in permissioned blockchain
systems,” in 39th IEEE International Conference on Distributed
July 7-
Computing Systems,
10, 2019.
[Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICDCS.2019.00134

ICDCS 2019, Dallas, TX, USA,

IEEE, 2019, pp. 1337–1347.

[57] F. Gai, B. Wang, W. Deng, and W. Peng, “Proof of reputation: A
reputation-based consensus protocol for peer-to-peer network,”
in Database Systems for Advanced Applications - 23rd International
Conference, DASFAA 2018, Gold Coast, QLD, Australia, May
21-24, 2018, Proceedings, Part II, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, J. Pei, Y. Manolopoulos, S. W. Sadiq, and J. Li, Eds.,
vol. 10828.
Springer, 2018, pp. 666–681. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-91458-9 41

[58] F. Ayaz, Z. Sheng, D. Tian, and Y. L. Guan, “A proof-
of-quality-factor (poqf)-based blockchain and edge computing
for vehicular message dissemination,” IEEE Internet Things
J., vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 2468–2482, 2021.
[Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2020.3026731

[59] H. Guo, W. Li, M. M. Nejad, and C. Shen, “Proof-of-event
recording system for autonomous vehicles: A blockchain-based
solution,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 182 776–182 786, 2020. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3029512
[60] L. Bahri and S. Girdzijauskas, “Trust mends blockchains: Living
up to expectations,” in 39th IEEE International Conference on
Distributed Computing Systems, ICDCS 2019, Dallas, TX, USA,
July 7-10, 2019.
IEEE, 2019, pp. 1358–1368. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICDCS.2019.00136

[61] H. Dang, T. T. A. Dinh, D. Loghin, E. Chang, Q. Lin, and
B. C. Ooi, “Towards scaling blockchain systems via sharding,”
in Proceedings of the 2019 International Conference on Management
of Data, SIGMOD Conference 2019, Amsterdam, The Netherlands,
June 30 - July 5, 2019, P. A. Boncz, S. Manegold, A. Ailamaki,
A. Deshpande, and T. Kraska, Eds. ACM, 2019, pp. 123–140.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3299869.3319889

[62] L. Luu, V. Narayanan, C. Zheng, K. Baweja, S. Gilbert, and
P. Saxena, “A secure sharding protocol for open blockchains,”
in Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer
and Communications Security, Vienna, Austria, October 24-28, 2016,
E. R. Weippl, S. Katzenbeisser, C. Kruegel, A. C. Myers, and
S. Halevi, Eds. ACM, 2016, pp. 17–30. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/2976749.2978389

[63] R. Han,

J. Yu, H. Lin, S. Chen, and P.

J. E. Ver´ıssimo,
“On the security and performance of blockchain sharding,”
IACR Cryptol. ePrint Arch., p. 1276, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://eprint.iacr.org/2021/1276

[64] M. Zamani, M. Movahedi, and M. Raykova, “Rapidchain: Scaling
blockchain via full sharding,” in Proceedings of the 2018 ACM
SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security, CCS

[65] Y. Xu and Y. Huang, “An n/2 byzantine node tolerate blockchain
sharding approach,” in SAC ’20: The 35th ACM/SIGAPP
Symposium on Applied Computing, online event,
[Brno, Czech
Republic], March 30 - April 3, 2020, C. Hung, T. Cern ´y, D. Shin,
and A. Bechini, Eds. ACM, 2020, pp. 349–352.
[Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3341105.3374069
J. Zhang, Z. Hong, X. Qiu, Y. Zhan, S. Guo, and W. Chen,
“Skychain: A deep reinforcement learning-empowered dynamic
blockchain sharding system,” in ICPP 2020: 49th International
Conference on Parallel Processing, Edmonton, AB, Canada, August
17-20, 2020,
John, and X. Shen,
Eds. ACM, 2020, pp. 3:1–3:11.
[Online]. Available: https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3404397.3404460

J. N. Amaral, L. K.

[66]

[67] E. Bandara, S. Shetty, A. Rahman, R. Mukkamala, and X. Liang,
“Moose: A scalable blockchain architecture for 5g enabled
iot with sharding and network slicing,” in IEEE Wireless
Communications and Networking Conference, WCNC 2022, Austin,
TX, USA, April 10-13, 2022.
IEEE, 2022, pp. 1194–1199. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/WCNC51071.2022.9771885

[68] E. Madill, B. Nguyen, C. K. Leung, and S. Rouhani, “Scalesﬂ: A
sharding solution for blockchain-based federated learning,” in
BSCI 2022: Proceedings of the 4th ACM International Symposium on
Blockchain and Secure Critical Infrastructure, Nagasaki, Japan, May
30, 2022, K. Gai and K. R. Choo, Eds. ACM, 2022, pp. 95–106.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3494106.3528680

[69] Y. Xu and Y. Huang, “Segment blockchain: A size reduced
storage mechanism for blockchain,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp.
17 434–17 441, 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.
1109/ACCESS.2020.2966464

[70] X. Qi, Z. Zhang, C. Jin, and A. Zhou, “A reliable storage
partition for permissioned blockchain,” IEEE Trans. Knowl.
Data Eng., vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 14–27, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1109/TKDE.2020.3012668

[71] H. Tran-Dang, N. Krommenacker, P. Charpentier, and D.-S. Kim,
“The internet of things for logistics: Perspectives, application
review, and challenges,” IETE Technical Review, vol. 39, no. 1, pp.
93–121, 2022.

[72] A. Alkhateeb, C. Catal, G. Kar, and A. Mishra, “Hybrid
blockchain platforms for the internet of things (iot): A systematic
literature review,” Sensors, vol. 22, no. 4, p. 1304, 2022.

[75]

[74]

1–4.

2019.

IEEE,

2019, pp.

[73] O. Novo, “Blockchain meets iot: An architecture for scalable
access management in iot,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 5, no. 2,
pp. 1184–1195, 2018. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.
1109/JIOT.2018.2812239
J. Marchang, G. Ibbotson, and P. Wheway, “Will blockchain
technology become a reality in sensor networks?” in 2019
Wireless Days, WD 2019, Manchester, United Kingdom, April
24-26,
[Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1109/WD.2019.8734268
S. Aggarwal, R. Chaudhary, G. S. Aujla, N. Kumar, K. R.
Choo, and A. Y. Zomaya, “Blockchain for smart communities:
Applications, challenges and opportunities,” J. Netw. Comput.
Appl., vol. 144, pp. 13–48, 2019.
[Online]. Available: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.jnca.2019.06.018
J. Huang, L. Kong, G. Chen, L. Cheng, K. Wu, and X. Liu,
“B-iot: Blockchain driven internet of things with credit-based
consensus mechanism,” in 39th IEEE International Conference on
Distributed Computing Systems, ICDCS 2019, Dallas, TX, USA,
July 7-10, 2019.
IEEE, 2019, pp. 1348–1357. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICDCS.2019.00135
S. Biswas, K. Sharif, F. Li, S. Maharjan, S. P. Mohanty,
and Y. Wang, “Pobt: A lightweight consensus algorithm
for scalable iot business blockchain,” IEEE Internet Things
J., vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 2343–2355, 2020.
[Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2019.2958077

[76]

[77]

[78] E. K. Wang, Z. Liang, C. Chen, S. Kumari, and M. K. Khan,
“Porx: A reputation incentive scheme for blockchain consensus
of iiot,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 102, pp. 140–151, 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.future.2019.08.005
[79] Z. Ai and W. Cui, “A proof-of-transactions blockchain
consensus protocol for large-scale iot,” IEEE Internet Things
J., vol. 9, no. 11, pp. 7931–7943, 2022.
[Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2021.3108627

[80] A. Dorri, S. S. Kanhere, R. Jurdak, and P. Gauravaram, “LSB: A
lightweight scalable blockchain for iot security and anonymity,”
J. Parallel Distributed Comput., vol. 134, pp. 180–197, 2019.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpdc.2019.08.005
S. Biswas, K. Sharif, F. Li, B. Nour, and Y. Wang, “A scalable
blockchain framework for secure transactions in iot,” IEEE
Internet Things J., vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 4650–4659, 2019. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2018.2874095

[81]

[82] X. Ding, J. Guo, D. Li, and W. Wu, “An incentive mechanism
for building a secure blockchain-based internet of things,” IEEE
Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 477–487, 2021. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/TNSE.2020.3040446
S. Khan, W. Lee, and S. O. Hwang, “Aechain: A lightweight
iot applications,” IEEE Consumer Electron.
blockchain for
Mag., vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 64–76, 2022.
[Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1109/MCE.2021.3060373

[83]

[84] C. Zhang, L. Zhu, and C. Xu, “BPAF: blockchain-enabled reliable
and privacy-preserving authentication for fog-based iot devices,”
IEEE Consumer Electron. Mag., vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 88–96, 2022.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/MCE.2021.3061808
J. Guo, X. Ding, and W. Wu, “A blockchain-enabled ecosystem
for distributed electricity trading in smart city,” IEEE Internet
Things J., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 2040–2050, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2020.3015980

[85]

[86] ——, “An architecture for distributed energies trading in
byzantine-based blockchains,” IEEE Trans. Green Commun.
Netw., vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 1216–1230, 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1109/TGCN.2022.3142438

[87] T. Li, Y. Fang, Z. Jian, X. Xie, Y. Lu, and G. Wang, “ATOM:
architectural support and optimization mechanism for smart
contract fast update and execution in blockchain-based iot,”
IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 11, pp. 7959–7971, 2022.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2021.3106942
J. Zhou, G. Feng, and Y. Wang, “Optimal deployment mechanism
of blockchain in resource-constrained iot systems,” IEEE Internet
Things J., vol. 9, no. 11, pp. 8168–8177, 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2021.3106355

[88]

[89] L. Yang, M. Li, P. Si, R. Yang, E. Sun, and Y. Zhang, “Energy-
efﬁcient resource allocation for blockchain-enabled industrial
learning,” IEEE
internet of
Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 2318–2329, 2021. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2020.3030646

things with deep reinforcement

learning for blockchain in industrial

[90] Y. Wu, Z. Wang, Y. Ma, and V. C. M. Leung, “Deep
reinforcement
iot: A
survey,” Comput. Networks, vol. 191, p. 108004, 2021. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.comnet.2021.108004
[91] M. Li, F. R. Yu, P. Si, W. Wu, and Y. Zhang, “Resource
optimization for delay-tolerant data in blockchain-enabled iot
with edge computing: A deep reinforcement learning approach,”
IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 7, no. 10, pp. 9399–9412, 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2020.3007869
[92] M. Liu, F. R. Yu, Y. Teng, V. C. M. Leung, and M. Song,
“Performance optimization for blockchain-enabled industrial
internet of things (iiot) systems: A deep reinforcement learning
approach,” IEEE Trans.
Informatics, vol. 15, no. 6, pp.
3559–3570, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/
TII.2019.2897805
J. Yun, Y. Goh, and J. Chung, “Dqn-based optimization
framework for secure sharded blockchain systems,” IEEE
Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 708–722, 2021. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2020.3006896

[93]

Ind.

[94] X. Ding, J. Guo, D. Li, and W. Wu, “Pricing and budget allocation
for iot blockchain with edge computing,” IEEE Transactions on
Cloud Computing, 2022.

[96]

[95] A. K. V, A. K. Tyagi, and S. Kumar, “Blockchain technology
for securing internet of vehicle: Issues and challenges,” 2022 In-
ternational Conference on Computer Communication and Informatics
(ICCCI), pp. 1–6, 2022.
S. Cho, N. Chen, and X. Hua, “Developing a vehicle networking
platform based on blockchain technology,” in Blockchain -
ICBC 2019 - Second International Conference, Held as Part of the
Services Conference Federation, SCF 2019, San Diego, CA, USA,
June 25-30, 2019, Proceedings, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, J. Joshi, S. Nepal, Q. Zhang, and L. Zhang, Eds.,
Springer, 2019, pp. 186–201. [Online]. Available:
vol. 11521.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-23404-1 13

16

[97] Z. Yang, K. Yang, L. Lei, K. Zheng, and V. C. M. Leung,
“Blockchain-based decentralized trust management in vehicular
networks,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 1495–1505,
2019.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2018.
2836144

[98] Q. Wang, T. Ji, Y. Guo, L. Yu, X. Chen, and P. Li, “Trafﬁcchain:
A blockchain-based secure and privacy-preserving trafﬁc map,”
IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 60 598–60 612, 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2980298

[99] B. Yin, Y. Wu, T. Hu, J. Dong, and Z. Jiang, “An efﬁcient
collaboration and incentive mechanism for internet of vehicles
(iov) with secured information exchange based on blockchains,”
IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 1582–1593, 2020. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2019.2949088

[100] Y. Hui, Y. Huang, Z. Su, T. H. Luan, N. Cheng, X. Xiao, and
G. Ding, “BCC: blockchain-based collaborative crowdsensing
in autonomous vehicular networks,” IEEE Internet Things
J., vol. 9, no. 6, pp. 4518–4532, 2022.
[Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2021.3105547
[101] J. Kang, Z. Xiong, D. Niyato, D. Ye, D.

I. Kim, and
J. Zhao, “Toward secure blockchain-enabled internet of vehicles:
Optimizing consensus management using reputation and
contract theory,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 68, no. 3, pp.
2906–2920, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/
TVT.2019.2894944

[102] L. Chen, L. Xu, N. Shah, Z. Gao, Y. Lu, and W. Shi, “On security
analysis of proof-of-elapsed-time (poet),” in Stabilization, Safety,
and Security of Distributed Systems - 19th International Symposium,
SSS 2017, Boston, MA, USA, November 5-8, 2017, Proceedings,
ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, P. G. Spirakis and
P. Tsigas, Eds., vol. 10616. Springer, 2017, pp. 282–297. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-69084-1 19
[103] M. Cebe, E. Erdin, K. Akkaya, H. Aksu, and A. S.
Uluagac, “Block4forensic: An integrated lightweight blockchain
framework for forensics applications of connected vehicles,”
IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 56, no. 10, pp. 50–57, 2018. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/MCOM.2018.1800137

[104] L. Zhang, M. Luo,

J. Li, M. H. Au, K. R. Choo,
T. Chen, and S. Tian, “Blockchain based secure data sharing
internet of vehicles: A position paper,” Veh.
system for
Commun., vol. 16, pp. 85–93, 2019.
[Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vehcom.2019.03.003

[105] L. Luo,

J. Feng, H. Yu, and G. Sun, “Blockchain-enabled
two-way auction mechanism for electricity trading in internet
of electric vehicles,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 11, pp.
8105–8118, 2022. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/
JIOT.2021.3082769

[106] H. N. Abishu, A. M. Seid, Y. H. Yacob, T. Ayall, G. Sun, and
G. Liu, “Consensus mechanism for blockchain-enabled vehicle-
to-vehicle energy trading in the internet of electric vehicles,”
IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 71, no. 1, pp. 946–960, 2022.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/TVT.2021.3129828

[107] S. Wang, S. Sun, X. Wang, Z. Ning, and J. J. P. C. Rodrigues,
“Secure crowdsensing in 5g internet of vehicles: When deep
learning meets blockchain,” IEEE Consumer
reinforcement
Electron. Mag., vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 72–81, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1109/MCE.2020.3048238

[108] S. Kim and A. S. Ibrahim, “Byzantine-fault-tolerant consensus via
reinforcement learning for permissioned blockchain-empowered
v2x network,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Vehicles, 2022.
[109] M. Liu, Y. Teng, F. R. Yu, V. C. M. Leung, and M. Song,
“Deep reinforcement learning based performance optimization
in blockchain-enabled internet of vehicle,” in 2019 IEEE
International Conference on Communications, ICC 2019, Shanghai,
China, May 20-24, 2019.
IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–6. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICC.2019.8761206

[110] S. Jiang, X. Li, and J. Wu, “Hierarchical edge-cloud computing
for mobile blockchain mining game,” in 39th IEEE International
Conference on Distributed Computing Systems, ICDCS 2019, Dallas,
TX, USA, July 7-10, 2019.
IEEE, 2019, pp. 1327–1336. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/ICDCS.2019.00133

[111] G. Qu, N. Cui, H. Wu, R. Li, and Y. Ding, “Chainﬂ: A
simulation platform for joint federated learning and blockchain
in edge/cloud computing environments,” IEEE Trans.
Ind.
Informatics, vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 3572–3581, 2022.
[Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/TII.2021.3117481

[112] Z. Hu, H. Gao, T. Wang, D. Han, and Y. Lu, “Joint optimization
for mobile edge computing-enabled blockchain systems: A deep
reinforcement learning approach,” Sensors, vol. 22, no. 9, p. 3217,
2022. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.3390/s22093217

[113] J. Feng, F. R. Yu, Q. Pei, X. Chu, J. Du, and L. Zhu, “Cooperative
computation ofﬂoading and resource allocation for blockchain-
enabled mobile-edge computing: A deep reinforcement learning
approach,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 7, no. 7, pp. 6214–6228,
2020.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2019.
2961707
[114] Y. Zuo, S.

Jin, S. Zhang, and Y. Zhang, “Blockchain
storage and computation ofﬂoading for cooperative mobile-edge
computing,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 11, pp. 9084–9098,
2021.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2021.
3056656

[115] G. Cheng, Y. Chen, S. Deng, H. Gao, and J. Yin, “A blockchain-
based mutual authentication scheme for collaborative edge
computing,” IEEE Trans. Comput. Soc. Syst., vol. 9, no. 1,
pp. 146–158, 2022. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/
TCSS.2021.3056540

[116] L. Xiao, Y. Ding, D. Jiang, J. Huang, D. Wang, J. Li, and
H. V. Poor, “A reinforcement learning and blockchain-based
trust mechanism for edge networks,” IEEE Trans. Commun.,
vol. 68, no. 9, pp. 5460–5470, 2020.
[Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1109/TCOMM.2020.2995371

[117] Y. Liu, X. Guan, Y. Peng, H. Chen, T. Ohtsuki, and Z. Han,
“Blockchain-based task ofﬂoading for edge computing on low-
quality data via distributed learning in the internet of energy,”
IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 657–676, 2022.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/JSAC.2021.3118417
[118] G. Baranwal and D. Kumar, “Posp: A novel proof of
in blockchain-based edge computing,” in
service placement
2022 IEEE International Conference on Pervasive Computing
and other Afﬁliated Events,
and Communications Workshops
PerCom 2022 Workshops, Pisa, Italy, March 21-25, 2022.
IEEE,
2022, pp. 18–21. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/
PerComWorkshops53856.2022.9767225

[119] S. R. Maskey, S. Badsha, S. Sengupta, and I. Khalil,
“Reputation-based miner node selection in blockchain-based
vehicular edge computing,” IEEE Consumer Electron. Mag.,
vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 14–22, 2021.
[Online]. Available: https:
//doi.org/10.1109/MCE.2020.3048312

[120] E. Balistri, F. Casellato, S. Collura, C. Giannelli, G. Riberto,
and C. Stefanelli, “Design guidelines and a prototype
implementation for cyber-resiliency in IT/OT scenarios based
on blockchain and edge computing,” IEEE Internet Things
J., vol. 9, no. 7, pp. 4816–4832, 2022.
[Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2021.3104624

[121] C. Li, S. Liang, J. Zhang, Q. Wang, and Y. Luo, “Blockchain-based
data trading in edge-cloud computing environment,” Inf. Process.
Manag., vol. 59, no. 1, p. 102786, 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ipm.2021.102786

[122] L. Yuan, Q. He, F. Chen, J. Zhang, L. Qi, X. Xu, Y. Xiang,
and Y. Yang, “Csedge: Enabling collaborative edge storage for
multi-access edge computing based on blockchain,” IEEE Trans.
Parallel Distributed Syst., vol. 33, no. 8, pp. 1873–1887, 2022.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/TPDS.2021.3131680
[123] J. Koneˇcn ´y, H. B. McMahan, F. X. Yu, P. Richt´arik, A. T. Suresh,
and D. Bacon, “Federated learning: Strategies for improving
communication efﬁciency,” CoRR, vol. abs/1610.05492, 2016.
[Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1610.05492

[124] A. Goel, A. Agarwal, M. Vatsa, R. Singh, and N. Ratha, “Deep-
ring: Protecting deep neural network with blockchain,” in 2019
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
Workshops (CVPRW), 2019, pp. 2821–2828.

[125] Y. Fu, F. R. Yu, C. Li, T. H. Luan, and Y. Zhang,
“Vehicular blockchain-based collective learning for connected
and autonomous vehicles,” IEEE Wirel. Commun., vol. 27, no. 2,
pp. 197–203, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/
MNET.001.1900310

[126] J. Sun, Y. Wu, S. Wang, Y. Fu, and X. Chang, “Permissioned
blockchain frame for secure federated learning,” IEEE Commun.
Lett., vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 13–17, 2022.
[Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1109/LCOMM.2021.3121297

[127] P. Ramanan and K. Nakayama, “BAFFLE : Blockchain based
free federated learning,” in IEEE International
on Blockchain, Blockchain 2020, Rhodes, Greece,

aggregator
Conference

17

November 2-6, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1109/Blockchain50366.2020.00017

IEEE, 2020, pp. 72–81. [Online]. Available:

[128] Y. Lu, X. Huang, Y. Dai, S. Maharjan, and Y. Zhang,
“Blockchain and federated learning for privacy-preserved
iot,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informatics,
data sharing in industrial
vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 4177–4186, 2020.
[Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1109/TII.2019.2942190

[129] Y. Lu, X. Huang, K. Zhang, S. Maharjan, and Y. Zhang,
“Communication-efﬁcient federated learning and permissioned
blockchain for digital twin edge networks,” IEEE Internet Things
J., vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 2276–2288, 2021.
[Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2020.3015772

[130] Z. Peng,

J. Xu, X. Chu, S. Gao, Y. Yao, R. Gu, and
Y. Tang, “Vfchain: Enabling veriﬁable and auditable federated
learning via blockchain systems,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci.
Eng., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 173–186, 2022.
[Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1109/TNSE.2021.3050781

[131] Y. Li, C. Chen, N. Liu, H. Huang, Z. Zheng, and Q. Yan, “A
blockchain-based decentralized federated learning framework
with committee consensus,” IEEE Netw., vol. 35, no. 1, pp.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/
234–241, 2021.
MNET.011.2000263

[133] T. R ¨uckel, J. Sedlmeir, and P. Hofmann, “Fairness,

[132] X. Qu, S. Wang, Q. Hu, and X. Cheng, “Proof of federated
learning: A novel energy-recycling consensus algorithm,” IEEE
Trans. Parallel Distributed Syst., vol. 32, no. 8, pp. 2074–2085, 2021.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/TPDS.2021.3056773
integrity,
and privacy in a scalable blockchain-based federated learning
system,” Comput. Networks, vol. 202, p. 108621, 2022. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.comnet.2021.108621
[134] L. Gao, L. Li, Y. Chen, C. Xu, and M. Xu, “FGFL: A
blockchain-based fair incentive governor for federated learning,”
J. Parallel Distributed Comput., vol. 163, pp. 283–299, 2022.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpdc.2022.01.019

[135] Y. Lu, X. Huang, K. Zhang, S. Maharjan, and Y. Zhang,
“Blockchain empowered asynchronous federated learning for
secure data sharing in internet of vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Veh.
Technol., vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 4298–4311, 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1109/TVT.2020.2973651

[136] L. Feng, Y. Zhao, S. Guo, X. Qiu, W. Li, and P. Yu, “BAFL: A
blockchain-based asynchronous federated learning framework,”
IEEE Trans. Computers, vol. 71, no. 5, pp. 1092–1103, 2022.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/TC.2021.3072033

[137] R. Wang and W. Tsai, “Asynchronous federated learning system
based on permissioned blockchains,” Sensors, vol. 22, no. 4,
p. 1672, 2022.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.3390/
s22041672

[138] B.

Jia, X. Zhang,

J. Liu, Y. Zhang, K. Huang,

and
Y. Liang, “Blockchain-enabled federated learning data protection
aggregation scheme with differential privacy and homomorphic
encryption in iiot,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informatics, vol. 18, no. 6, pp.
4049–4058, 2022. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/
TII.2021.3085960

[139] Y. Zhao, J. Zhao, L. Jiang, R. Tan, D. Niyato, Z. Li, L. Lyu, and
Y. Liu, “Privacy-preserving blockchain-based federated learning
for iot devices,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 8, no. 3, pp.
1817–1829, 2021.

[140] S. Otoum, I. A. Ridhawi, and H. T. Mouftah, “Securing critical iot
infrastructures with blockchain-supported federated learning,”
IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 2592–2601, 2022. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2021.3088056

[141] L. Feng, Z. Yang, S. Guo, X. Qiu, W. Li, and P. Yu, “Two-layered
blockchain architecture for federated learning over the mobile
edge network,” IEEE Netw., vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 45–51, 2022.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/MNET.011.2000339
[142] F. Ayaz, Z. Sheng, D. Tian, and Y. L. Guan, “A blockchain
based federated learning for message dissemination in vehicular
networks,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 71, no. 2, pp. 1927–1940,
2022.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/TVT.2021.
3132226

[143] M. Mettler, “Blockchain technology in healthcare: The revolution
starts here,” in 18th IEEE International Conference on e-Health
Networking, Applications and Services, Healthcom 2016, Munich,
Germany, September 14-16, 2016.
IEEE, 2016, pp. 1–3. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/HealthCom.2016.7749510

[144] T. McGhin, K. R. Choo, C. Z. Liu, and D. He, “Blockchain in
healthcare applications: Research challenges and opportunities,”

J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 135, pp. 62–75, 2019. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jnca.2019.02.027

T. Cern ´y, Eds. ACM, 2022, pp. 1900–1907. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3477314.3507118

18

[145] I. Yaqoob, K. Salah, R.

Jayaraman, and Y. Al-Hammadi,
“Blockchain for healthcare data management: opportunities,
challenges, and future recommendations,” Neural Computing and
Applications, pp. 1–16, 2021.

[146] X. Yue, H. Wang, D. Jin, M. Li, and W. Jiang, “Healthcare
data gateways: Found healthcare intelligence on blockchain
with novel privacy risk control,” J. Medical Syst., vol. 40,
[Online]. Available: https:
no. 10, pp. 218:1–218:8, 2016.
//doi.org/10.1007/s10916-016-0574-6

[147] C. C. Agbo, Q. H. Mahmoud, and J. M. Eklund, “Blockchain
technology in healthcare: a systematic review,” in Healthcare,
vol. 7, no. 2. MDPI, 2019, p. 56.

[148] A. Haleem, M.

Javaid, R. P. Singh, R. Suman,

and
S. Rab, “Blockchain technology applications in healthcare: An
overview,” International Journal of Intelligent Networks, vol. 2, pp.
130–139, 2021.

[149] S. Rahmadika and K.-H. Rhee, “Blockchain technology for pro-
viding an architecture model of decentralized personal health
information,” International Journal of Engineering Business Manage-
ment, vol. 10, p. 1847979018790589, 2018.

[150] V. Jaiman and V. Urovi, “A consent model for blockchain-based
health data sharing platforms,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp.
143 734–143 745, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.
1109/ACCESS.2020.3014565

[151] L. Liu, X. Li, M. H. Au, Z. Fan, and X. Meng, “Metadata
privacy preservation for blockchain-based healthcare systems,”
in Database Systems for Advanced Applications - 27th International
Conference, DASFAA 2022, Virtual Event, April 11-14, 2022,
Proceedings, Part I, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
J. Lee, M. Li, D. Agrawal, P. K. Reddy,
A. Bhattacharya,
M. K. Mohania, A. Mondal, V. Goyal, and R. U. Kiran, Eds.,
vol. 13245.
Springer, 2022, pp. 404–412. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-00123-9 33

[152] M. Soni and D. K. Singh, “Blockchain-based security & privacy
for biomedical and healthcare information exchange systems,”
Materials Today: Proceedings, 2021.

[153] B. Zaabar, O. Cheikhrouhou, F.

Jamil, M. Ammi, and
M. Abid, “Healthblock: A secure blockchain-based healthcare
data management system,” Comput. Networks, vol. 200, p.
108500, 2021.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
comnet.2021.108500

[154] P. Bhattacharya, S. Tanwar, U. Bodkhe, S. Tyagi, and
N. Kumar, “Bindaas: Blockchain-based deep-learning as-a-
service in healthcare 4.0 applications,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci.
Eng., vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 1242–1255, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1109/TNSE.2019.2961932

[155] G. Zhang, Z. Yang, and W. Liu, “Blockchain-based privacy
preserving e-health system for healthcare data in cloud,”
Comput. Networks, vol. 203, p. 108586, 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.comnet.2021.108586

[156] U. Chelladurai and S. Pandian, “A novel blockchain based
electronic health record automation system for healthcare,” J.
Ambient Intell. Humaniz. Comput., vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 693–703, 2022.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/s12652-021-03163-3
[157] G. Wu, S. Wang, Z. Ning, and B. Zhu, “Privacy-preserved
electronic medical record exchanging and sharing: A blockchain-
based smart healthcare system,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health
Informatics, vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 1917–1927, 2022.
[Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/JBHI.2021.3123643

[158] M. Uddin, K.

Salah, R.

and
S. Ellahham, “Blockchain for drug traceability: Architectures
27,
and open
no.
[Online]. Available:
p.
2,
https://doi.org/10.1177/14604582211011228

challenges,” Health
146045822110112,

Jayaraman,

Informatics

Pesic,

2021.

vol.

J.,

S.

[159] A. Musamih, K. Salah, R. Jayaraman, J. Arshad, M. Debe,
Y. Al-Hammadi, and S. Ellahham, “A blockchain-based
approach for drug traceability in healthcare supply chain,”
IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 9728–9743, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3049920

[160] E. K. Kambilo, H. B. Zghal, C. G. Guegan, V. Stankovski,
P. Kochovski, and D. Vodislav, “A blockchain-based framework
for drug traceability: Chaindrugtrac,” in SAC ’22: The 37th
ACM/SIGAPP Symposium on Applied Computing, Virtual Event,
April 25 - 29, 2022,
J. W. Park, and

J. Hong, M. Bures,

[161] ——, “A blockchain-based framework for drug traceability:
Chaindrugtrac,” in Proceedings
the 37th ACM/SIGAPP
Symposium on Applied Computing, ser. SAC ’22. New York, NY,
USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2022, p. 1900–1907.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3477314.3507118

of

[162] W. Liu, Q. Yu, Z. Li, Z. Li, Y. Su, and J. Zhou, “A blockchain-based
system for anti-fraud of healthcare insurance,” 2019 IEEE 5th
International Conference on Computer and Communications (ICCC),
pp. 1264–1268, 2019.

[163] J. C. Mendoza-Tello, T. Mendoza-Tello,

and H. Mora,
“Blockchain as a healthcare insurance fraud detection tool,”
in Research and Innovation Forum 2020 - Disruptive Technologies
in Times of Change, RIIFORUM 2020, Athens, Greece, 15-
17 April
and N. R.
Aljohani, Eds. Springer, 2020, pp. 545–552. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-62066-0 41

2020, A. Visvizi, M. D. Lytras,

[164] M. J. Hossain Faruk, H. Shahriar, M. Valero, S. Sneha, S. I.
Ahamed, and M. Rahman, “Towards blockchain-based secure
data management for remote patient monitoring,” in 2021 IEEE
International Conference on Digital Health (ICDH), 2021, pp. 299–
308.

[165] C. Pighini, A. Vezzoni, S. Mainini, A. G. Migliavacca,
A. Montanari, M. R. Guarneri, E. G. Caiani, and A. Cesareo,
“Syncare: An innovative remote patient monitoring system
secured by cryptography and blockchain,” in Privacy and Identity
Management. Between Data Protection and Security - 16th IFIP WG
9.2, 9.6/11.7, 11.6/SIG 9.2.2 International Summer School, Privacy and
Identity 2021, Virtual Event, August 16-20, 2021, Revised Selected
Papers, ser. IFIP Advances in Information and Communication
I. Schiering, and
Technology, M. Friedewald, S. Krenn,
S. Schiffner, Eds., vol. 644.
Springer, 2021, pp. 73–89. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-99100-5 7
[166] D. R. Wong, S. Bhattacharya, and A. J. Butte, “Prototype of
running clinical trials in an untrustworthy environment using
blockchain,” Nature Communications, vol. 10, 2019.

[167] G. Albanese, J. Calbimonte, M. Schumacher, and D. Calvaresi,
“Dynamic consent management for clinical trials via private
Intell. Humaniz. Comput.,
blockchain technology,” J. Ambient
vol. 11, no. 11, pp. 4909–4926, 2020.
[Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12652-020-01761-1

[168] S. Singh, S. Rathore, O. Alfarraj, A. Tolba, and B. Yoon, “A
framework for privacy-preservation of iot healthcare data using
federated learning and blockchain technology,” Future Gener.
Comput. Syst., vol. 129, pp. 380–388, 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.future.2021.11.028

[169] A. Ali, M. A. Almaiah, F. Hajjej, M. F. Pasha, O. H. Fang, R. Khan,
J. Teo, and M. Zakarya, “An industrial iot-based blockchain-
enabled secure searchable encryption approach for healthcare
systems using neural network,” Sensors, vol. 22, no. 2, p. 572,
2022. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.3390/s22020572

[170] K. M. Hossein, M. E. Esmaeili, T. Dargahi, A. Khonsari,
and M. Conti, “Bchealth: A novel blockchain-based privacy-
preserving architecture for iot healthcare applications,” Comput.
Commun., vol. 180, pp. 31–47, 2021.
[Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.comcom.2021.08.011

[171] S. Aich, N. K. Sinai, S. Kumar, M. Ali, Y. R. Choi,
M. Joo, and H. Kim, “Protecting personal healthcare record
using blockchain & federated learning technologies,” in 24th
International Conference on Advanced Communication Technology,
ICACT 2022, Pyeongchang, Korea, February 13-16, 2022.
IEEE,
2022, pp. 109–112.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.
23919/ICACT53585.2022.9728772

[172] M. Torky, A. Darwish, and A. E. Hassanien, “Blockchain use cases
for COVID-19: management, surveillance, tracking and security,”
in Digital Transformation and Emerging Technologies for Fighting
COVID-19 Pandemic: Innovative Approaches, A. E. Hassanien and
A. Darwish, Eds. Springer, 2021, vol. 322, pp. 261–274. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-63307-3 17

[173] S. Yao, P.

Jing, P. Li, and J. Chen, “A multi-dimension
traceable privacy-preserving prevention and control scheme
the COVID-19 epidemic based on blockchain,” Connect.
of
Sci., vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 1654–1677, 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1080/09540091.2022.2077912

[174] L. Tan, K. Yu, N. Shi, C. Yang, W. Wei, and H. Lu, “Towards
secure and privacy-preserving data sharing for COVID-19

medical records: A blockchain-empowered approach,” IEEE
Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 271–281, 2022. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/TNSE.2021.3101842

[175] B. Aslan and K. Atasen, “COVID-19 information sharing with
blockchain,” Inf. Technol. Control., vol. 50, no. 4, pp. 674–685, 2021.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.5755/j01.itc.50.4.29064

[176] A. Abid, S. Cheikhrouhou, S. Kallel, and M. Jmaiel, “Novidchain:
Blockchain-based privacy-preserving platform for COVID-19
test/vaccine certiﬁcates,” Softw. Pract. Exp., vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 841–
867, 2022. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1002/spe.2983
[177] S. Tahir, H. Tahir, A. Sajjad, M. Rajarajan, and F. Khan, “Privacy-
tracing using blockchain,” J.
preserving COVID-19 contact
Commun. Networks, vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 360–373, 2021. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.23919/JCN.2021.000031

[178] L. Ricci, D. D. F. Maesa, A. Favenza, and E. Ferro, “Blockchains
for COVID-19 contact tracing and vaccine support: A systematic
review,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 37 936–37 950, 2021. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3063152
[179] M. Kassab and G. Destefanis, “Blockchain and contact tracing
applications for COVID-19: the opportunity and the challenges,”
in 28th IEEE International Conference on Software Analysis,
Evolution and Reengineering, SANER 2021, Honolulu, HI, USA,
March 9-12, 2021.
IEEE, 2021, pp. 723–730. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1109/SANER50967.2021.00092

[180] H. Xu, L. Zhang, O. Onireti, Y. Fang, W. J. Buchanan, and
M. A. Imran, “Beeptrace: Blockchain-enabled privacy-preserving
contact tracing for COVID-19 pandemic and beyond,” IEEE
Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 3915–3929, 2021. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2020.3025953

[181] M. M. Arifeen, A. Al Mamun, M. S. Kaiser, and M. Mahmud,
“Blockchain-enable contact tracing for preserving user privacy
during covid-19 outbreak,” 2020.

[182] H. Choudhury, B. Goswami, and S. K. Gurung, “Covidchain:
An anonymity preserving blockchain based framework for
protection against covid-19,” Inf. Secur. J. A Glob. Perspect.,
vol. 30, no. 5, pp. 257–280, 2021.
[Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1080/19393555.2021.1921315

[183] H. R. Hasan, K. Salah, R. Jayaraman, I. Yaqoob, M. A. Omar,
and S. Ellahham, “COVID-19 contact tracing using blockchain,”
IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 62 956–62 971, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3074753

[184] M. Torky, E. Goda, V. Sn´asel, and A. E. Hassanien, “COVID-19
contact tracing and detection-based on blockchain technology,”
Informatics, vol. 8, no. 4, p. 72, 2021.
[Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.3390/informatics8040072

[185] Z. Peng, C. Xu, H. Wang,

J. Huang,

J. Xu, and X. Chu,
“P2b-trace: Privacy-preserving blockchain-based contact tracing
to combat pandemics,” in SIGMOD ’21: International Conference
on Management
20-
25, 2021, G. Li, Z. Li, S.
Idreos, and D. Srivastava,
Eds. ACM, 2021, pp. 2389–2393. [Online]. Available: https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3448016.3459237

of Data, Virtual Event, China,

June

[186] N. Naren, A. Tahiliani, V. Hassija, V. Chamola, S. S. Kanhere,
and M. Guizani, “Privacy-preserving and incentivized contact
tracing for COVID-19 using blockchain,” IEEE Internet Things
Mag., vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 72–79, 2021.
[Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1109/IOTM.0211.2100002

[187] W. Lv, S. Wu, C. Jiang, Y. Cui, X. Qiu, and Y. Zhang, “Towards
large-scale and privacy-preserving contact tracing in COVID-19
pandemic: A blockchain perspective,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci.
Eng., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 282–298, 2022.
[Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1109/TNSE.2020.3030925

[188] S. A. Alansari, M. M. Badr, M. M. E. A. Mahmoud,
W. Alasmary, F. Alsolami, and A. M. Ali, “Efﬁcient and
covid-19-
privacy-preserving infection control
like pandemics using blockchain,” IEEE Internet Things J.,
vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 2744–2760, 2022.
[Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2021.3092601

system for

[189] M. F. Rotbi, S. Motahhir, and A. E. Ghzizal, “Blockchain
technology for a safe and transparent covid-19 vaccination,” J.
ICT Stand., vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 125–144, 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.13052/jicts2245-800X.1022

[190] A. Musamih, R. Jayaraman, K. Salah, H. R. Hasan, I. Yaqoob,
and Y. Al-Hammadi, “Blockchain-based solution for distribution
and delivery of COVID-19 vaccines,” IEEE Access, vol. 9,
pp. 71 372–71 387, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.
1109/ACCESS.2021.3079197

19

[191] G. Lax, A. Russo, and L. S. Fasc`ı, “A blockchain-based approach
for matching desired and real privacy settings of social network
users,” Inf. Sci., vol. 557, pp. 220–235, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ins.2021.01.004

[192] B. Guidi, “When blockchain meets online social networks,”
[Online].

Pervasive Mob. Comput., vol. 62, p. 101131, 2020.
Available: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pmcj.2020.101131

[193] L.

Jiang and X. Zhang,

“BCOSN: A blockchain-based
decentralized online social network,” IEEE Trans. Comput. Soc.
Syst., vol. 6, no. 6, pp. 1454–1466, 2019. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1109/TCSS.2019.2941650

[194] S. Zhang, T. Yao, V. K. A. Sandor, T. Weng, W. Liang, and
J. Su, “A novel blockchain-based privacy-preserving framework
for online social networks,” Connect. Sci., vol. 33, no. 3, pp.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1080/
555–575, 2021.
09540091.2020.1854181

[195] A. Kiayias, B. Livshits, A. M. Mosteiro, and O. S. T. Litos, “A puff
of steem: Security analysis of decentralized content curation,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.01719, 2018.

[196] K. Gu, L. Wang, and W. Jia, “Autonomous resource request
transaction framework based on blockchain in social network,”
IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 43 666–43 678, 2019. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2908627

[197] M. U. Rahman, B. Guidi, and F. Baiardi, “Blockchain-based access
control management for decentralized online social networks,”
J. Parallel Distributed Comput., vol. 144, pp. 41–54, 2020. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpdc.2020.05.011

[198] M. Zhang, Z. Sun, H. Li, B. Niu, F. Li, Y. Xie, and
C. Zheng, “A blockchain-based privacy-preserving framework
for cross-social network photo sharing,” in IEEE INFOCOM
2022 - IEEE Conference on Computer Communications Workshops,
INFOCOM 2022 - Workshops, New York, NY, USA, May
2-5, 2022.
[Online]. Available: https:
//doi.org/10.1109/INFOCOMWKSHPS54753.2022.9798330
[199] Z. Yan, L. Peng, W. Feng, and L. T. Yang, “Social-
chain: Decentralized trust evaluation based on blockchain
in pervasive social networking,” ACM Trans. Internet Techn.,
vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 17:1–17:28, 2021.
[Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3419102

IEEE, 2022, pp. 1–6.

[200] W. Guo, J. Xue, Y. Wang, and Z. Zhou, “Blockchain-based
reputation evaluation using game theory in social networking,”
in BSCI 2022: Proceedings of the 4th ACM International Symposium
on Blockchain and Secure Critical Infrastructure, Nagasaki, Japan, May
30, 2022, K. Gai and K. R. Choo, Eds. ACM, 2022, pp. 107–114.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3494106.3528681

[201] Y. Chen, H. Xie, K. Lv, S. Wei, and C. Hu, “DEPLEST:
A blockchain-based privacy-preserving distributed database
toward user behaviors in social networks,” Inf. Sci., vol. 501,
pp. 100–117, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.ins.2019.05.092

[202] H. H. Nguyen, D. Bozhkov, Z. Ahmadi, N. Nguyen, and
T. Doan, “Sochaindb: A database for storing and retrieving
blockchain-powered social network data,” in SIGIR ’22: The 45th
International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development
in Information Retrieval, Madrid, Spain,
July 11 - 15, 2022,
E. Amig ´o, P. Castells, J. Gonzalo, B. Carterette, J. S. Culpepper,
and G. Kazai, Eds. ACM, 2022, pp. 3036–3045.
[Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3477495.3531735

[203] I. S. Och ˆoa, G. de Mello, L. A. Silva, A. J. P. Gomes, A. M. R.
Fernandes, and V. R. Q. Leithardt, “Fakechain: A blockchain
architecture to ensure trust
in social media networks,”
in Quality of
Information and Communications Technology -
12th International Conference, QUATIC 2019, Ciudad Real,
Spain, September 11-13, 2019, Proceedings, ser. Communications
in Computer and Information Science, M. Piattini, P. R.
da Cunha, I. G. R. de Guzm´an, and R. P´erez-Castillo, Eds.,
vol. 1010.
Springer, 2019, pp. 105–118. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-29238-6 8

[204] D. M. Lambert and M. G. Enz, “Issues in supply chain manage-
ment: Progress and potential,” Industrial Marketing Management,
vol. 62, pp. 1–16, 2017.

[205] D. Ivanov, A. Dolgui, and B. Sokolov, “The impact of digital
technology and industry 4.0 on the ripple effect and supply chain
risk analytics,” International Journal of Production Research, vol. 57,
no. 3, pp. 829–846, 2019.

[206] N. Kshetri and E. Loukoianova, “Blockchain adoption in supply

20

[225] Z. Zhou, X. Liu, F. Zhong, and J. Shi, “Improving the
reliability of
the information disclosure in supply chain
based on blockchain technology,” Electron. Commer. Res.
Appl., vol. 52, p. 101121, 2022.
[Online]. Available: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.elerap.2022.101121

[226] Z. Sun, Q. Xu, and B. Shi, “Price and product quality decisions
for a two-echelon supply chain in the blockchain era,” Asia Pac.
J. Oper. Res., vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 2 140 016:1–2 140 016:31, 2022.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1142/S0217595921400169

Xiao Li received his B.S. and M.S degree in
Software Engineering from Dalian University of
Technology, China in 2016 and 2019, respec-
tively. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree
with the Department of Computer Science, Uni-
versity of Texas at Dallas, Richardson, TX, USA.
His current research interests include data min-
ing and Blockchain.

Weili Wu (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from the Department
of Computer Science, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, MN, USA, in 1998 and 2002, re-
spectively. She is currently a Full Professor with
the Department of Computer Science, University
of Texas at Dallas, Richardson, TX, USA. Her
research mainly deals in the general research
area of data communication and data manage-
ment. Her research focuses on the design and
analysis of algorithms for optimization problems
that occur in wireless networking environments and various database
systems.

chain networks in asia,” IT Prof., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 11–15, 2019.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/MITP.2018.2881307
[207] M. M. Queiroz, S. F. Wamba, M. de Bourmont, and R. Telles,
“Blockchain adoption in operations and supply chain manage-
ment: empirical evidence from an emerging economy,” Interna-
tional Journal of Production Research, vol. 59, pp. 6087 – 6103, 2021.
[208] X. Wu, Z.-P. Fan, and B. Cao, “An analysis of strategies for
adopting blockchain technology in the fresh product supply
chain,” International Journal of Production Research, pp. 1–18, 2021.
J. Moschuris,
S. Stachtiaris, M. Pagoni, and N. P. Rachaniotis, “Blockchain-
based food supply chain traceability: a case study in the dairy
sector,” International Journal of Production Research, vol. 59, pp.
5758 – 5770, 2021.

[209] F. Casino, V. Kanakaris, T. K. Dasaklis, S.

[210] J. D. Sekuloska and A. Erceg, “Blockchain technology
toward creating a smart local food supply chain,” Comput.,
vol. 11, no. 6, p. 95, 2022.
[Online]. Available: https:
//doi.org/10.3390/computers11060095

[211] F. Marinello, M. Atzori, L. Lisi, D. Boscaro, and A. Pezzuolo,
“Development of a traceability system for the animal product
supply chain based on blockchain technology,” in Proceedings of
the European Conference on Precision Livestock Farming (ECPLF),
Nantes, France, 2017, pp. 258–268.

[212] S. S. Kamble, A. Gunasekaran, and R. Sharma, “Modeling the
blockchain enabled traceability in agriculture supply chain,”
International Journal of Information Management, vol. 52, p. 101967,
2020.

[213] I. A. Omar, M. Debe, R. Jayaraman, K. Salah, M. A. Omar,
and J. Arshad, “Blockchain-based supply chain traceability
for COVID-19 personal protective equipment,” Comput. Ind.
Eng., vol. 167, p. 107995, 2022.
[Online]. Available: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2022.107995

[214] B. M. Yakubu, R. Latif, A. Yakubu, M. I. Khan, and A. I. Magashi,
“Ricechain: secure and traceable rice supply chain framework
using blockchain technology,” PeerJ Comput. Sci., vol. 8, p. e801,
2022. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.7717/peerj-cs.801

[215] M. P. Caro, M. S. Ali, M. Vecchio, and R. Giaffreda, “Blockchain-
based traceability in agri-food supply chain management: A
practical implementation,” 2018 IoT Vertical and Topical Summit
on Agriculture - Tuscany (IOT Tuscany), pp. 1–4, 2018.

[216] T. K. Dasaklis, F. Casino, and C. Patsakis, “Deﬁning granularity
levels for supply chain traceability based on iot and blockchain,”
Proceedings of the International Conference on Omni-Layer Intelligent
Systems, 2019.

[217] M. Kouhizadeh, S. Saberi, and J. Sarkis, “Blockchain technology
and the sustainable supply chain: Theoretically exploring adop-
tion barriers,” International Journal of Production Economics, vol.
231, p. 107831, 2021.

[218] S. Saberi, M. Kouhizadeh, J. Sarkis, and L. Shen, “Blockchain
technology and its relationships to sustainable supply chain
management,” International Journal of Production Research, vol. 57,
pp. 2117 – 2135, 2019.

[219] R. L. Rana, C. Tricase, and L. D. Cesare, “Blockchain technology
for a sustainable agri-food supply chain,” British Food Journal,
2021.

[220] S. Malik, V. Dedeoglu, S. S. Kanhere, and R. Jurdak, “Trustchain:
Trust management in blockchain and iot supported supply
chains,” in IEEE International Conference on Blockchain, Blockchain
2019, Atlanta, GA, USA, July 14-17, 2019.
IEEE, 2019, pp. 184–
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/Blockchain.
193.
2019.00032

[221] M. S. Al-Rakhami and M. A. Al-Mashari, “A blockchain-based
trust model for the internet of things supply chain management,”
Sensors (Basel, Switzerland), vol. 21, 2021.

[222] Q. Song, Y. Chen, Y. Zhong, K. Lan, S. J. Fong, and R. Tang,
“A supply-chain system framework based on internet of things
using blockchain technology,” ACM Transactions on Internet Tech-
nology (TOIT), vol. 21, pp. 1 – 24, 2021.

[223] P. Centobelli, R. Cerchione, P. D. Vecchio, E. Oropallo, and
G. Secundo, “Blockchain technology for bridging trust, trace-
ability and transparency in circular supply chain,” Information
& Management, 2021.

[224] P. V. R. P. Raj, S. K. Jauhar, M. Ramkumar, and S. Pratap,
“Procurement, traceability and advance cash credit payment
transactions in supply chain using blockchain smart contracts,”
Comput. Ind. Eng., vol. 167, p. 108038, 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2022.108038

