NON-FUNGIBLE TOKENS IN BUSINESS AND MANAGEMENT – A REVIEW 

Najam A. Anjum*, and Mubashir Husain Rehmani** 

*Lancaster University, Leipzig, Germany, Email: n.anjum1@lancaster.ac.uk  
** Munster Technological University (MTU), Cork, Ireland, Email: mshrehmani@gmail.com  

ABSTRACT 

Non-Fungible  Tokens  (NFTs)  are  a  new  development  in  blockchain  technology.  News  around 

NFTs is surrounded by skepticism because unrealistically high prices are being paid online for 

these NFTs which are in the form of apparently simple digital arts and photographs. It is not clear 

if  this  is  a  trend,  a  hype,  a  bubble,  or  a  legitimate  novel  way  of  holding  and  trading  value.  A 

literature  review  of  peer-reviewed  scholarly  studies,  performed  in  the  context  of  business  and 

management, is presented here. Moreover, we also discuss open issues, and challenges, and present 

future research directions. Analysis of these studies reveal that schools of thoughts are divided on 

the validity of this form of digital tokens. On one hand, there is a lot of criticism but on the other 

hand, we can find novel business models and applications of NFTs especially the feature of smart 

contracts. It can, therefore, be concluded that NFTs, even if not in their current form, are here to 

stay and may promise new ways of protecting digital assets in an immutable and easily traceable 

form. 

Keywords 

NFTs, Non-Fungible Tokens, Digital Assets, Review, Business, Management 

P a g e  1 | 20 

 
 
 
 
I. 

INTRODUCTION 

Non-Fungible  Tokens  or  NFTs  are  fast  gaining  popularity.  Currently,  the  most  popular  use  of 

NFTs, within the domain of business and management, can be seen in the field of digital art but 

there have also been attempts at using this tokenization for securing real estate, music (Chalmers 

et al, 2022), and other forms of intellectual property (Fairfiled, 2021). Although, sales of digital 

art amounting to as big as $69 million can be seen (Dunne, 2022), the talk around the legitimacy 

of NFTs is facing some skepticism because of the astronomical rise in prices of these digital assets 

within the time span of a few months and some evidence of wash-trading (Chalmers et al, 2022). 

There can, however, be seen some work developing around the use and application of NFTs in 

other fields as well (Regner et al, 2019; Popescu, 2021; Dowling, 2021a; 2021b).  

Because  of  being  a  relatively  recent  phenomenon,  the  scholarly  work  around  NFTs  is  still 

immature and is at a stage where researchers are grappling with the issues of correct understanding 

and future scope of this technology especially in the field of business and management. In this 

context, Andrea et al (2022) discussed the impact of NFTs on consumers and marketing strategies. 

Authors first provided a detailed discussion on marketing literature on NFTs. Then authors focused 

on  how  materialism,  status  consumption  orientation,  and  innovativeness  are  related  with  the 

buying of NFTs in artworks, music compilations, and fashion products. Another interesting review 

article is on the pricing aspect of NFTs (Bao et al, 2022), however, authors only covered 13 articles 

published in economics and finance journals in their review.  

Complementary to these works, in this study therefore, the authors contribute to the growing set 

of  research  literature  that  attempts  at  helping  the  research  community  in  making  sense  of  this 

concept. Hence, we ask the following very basic questions: 

P a g e  2 | 20 

 
1.  Are NFTs here to stay or are they just a fad and a bubble soon to be burst. 

2.  What other applications of NFTs can there be if this tokenization method is considered 

legitimate?  

The study presented here reviews the scholarly work being done on NFTs and to answer these 

questions. This is such a new field of research that not many peer-reviewed studies can be found. 

The aim of this study, therefore, is to establish an understanding of this field and identify possible 

research directions that it may take in the times to come. In the following sections, NFTs, their 

characteristics, and market trends have been discussed. We then discuss in detail the use of NFTs 

in business and management, finance, and social sciences. Finally, we highlight issues, challenges, 

and future research direction along with providing conclusions obtained through the findings of 

this review.  

II.  WHAT ARE NON-FUNGIBLE TOKENS? 

NFTs are tradeable rights to digital assets. These rights are created through the establishment of a 

smart contract on the Ethereum blockchain (Dowling, 2021 a). Non-Fungible Tokens came into 

inception  through  the  ERC-721  standard  in  2017  (Entriken  et  al,  2018)  which  prescribes  an 

improved way of tokenization of individual assets which was not possible with fungible tokens 

because of their inability to represent uniqueness (Regner et al, 2019). Being non-fungible means 

a particular NFT has a unique value. This means these digital assets cannot be traded one-on-one 

like other fungible cryptocurrencies e.g., Bitcoin, Ether, etc (Popescu, 2021). Figure 1 shows types, 

characteristics, and usage of NFTs. 

P a g e  3 | 20 

 
 
 
Figure 1: Types, Characteristics, and Usage of NFTs 

Possible applications 

NFTs, in a way, provide a Proof-of-Asset, its indivisible and hence cannot be divided into smaller 

components,  its  accurately  verifiable  since  it  is  connected  to  a  blockchain,  and  its  record  is 

immutable for the same reason (Popescu, 2021). It also improves the tokenization of individual 

unique  assets  which  is  not  possible  in  fungible  tokens  (Regner  et  al,  2019).  NFTs  can  be 

programmed to pay royalties, they can provide the records of ownership for in-game items, they 

can be used to prevent digital content piracy over the Internet and can also be used as collateral to 

borrow Stablecoins like DAI (Popescu, 2021). 

P a g e  4 | 20 

 
 
 
 
Market Trends in sale of digital art 

As understood, NFTs could be useful in connecting the digital tokenization with the market of 

collectibles, which according to an estimate, have a global market size of USD 200 billion (Fenech, 

2018). The first notable NFT based application that gained prominence was an online game called 

‘Crypto  Kitties’  which  became so  popular that  at  one  point  it  took  more  than  70% of  network 

capacity of Ethereum blockchain and the NFTs representing ownership of these cat characters got 

sold for as high as USD 100,000 (Tepper, 2017).  

Some of the high-valued NFTs are listed in Table 1. As can be seen, ‘Everydays: The first 5000 

days’  was  sold  for  $69.3m.  This  purchase  took  place  in  March  2021  and  the  buyer,  Vignesh 

Sundaresan,  nicknamed  MetaKovan,  a  Singaporean  citizen  and  an  active  entrepreneur,  seems 

convinced that digital artwork NFTs could be a useful medium to hold and trade value especially 

in the times of Metaverse (Frank, 2021). 

Table 1: Some of the most expensive NFTs ever sold 

S. No 

NFT Artwork 

Selling price (million USD) 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

Everydays: The first 5000 days 

CryptoPunk #7523 

CryptoPunk #7804 

CryptoPunk #3100 

Crossroads 

Ocean Front 

CryptoPunk #5217 

8  World Wide Web Source Code 

9 

Save Thousands of Lives 

10 

Stay Free 

Data Source: Dunne (2022) 

69.3 

11.8 

7.56 

7.51 

6.66 

6 

5.59 

5.4 

5.23 

5.27 

P a g e  5 | 20 

 
 
III.  NFTs IN BUSINESS, MANAGEMENT, AND ACCOUNTING 

In this section, we discuss the use of NFTs in Business and Management. Table 2, 3, and 4 list the 

papers that deliberate the applications of NFTs in Business and Management. Scopus database was 

used to find these papers. Since this is a new and emerging field, very few studies from reputable 

sources could be found. 

One of the latest works, when searching for NFTs, comes out to be that of Whitaker (2022). Here, 

the author does narrate a case created out of interviews but upon detailed review this publication 

doesn’t appear to fall in the category of research focusing on NFTs. The work of Bouraga (2021), 

Ismail  et  al  (2021),  and  Casale-Brunet  et  al  (2021)  attempts  at  exploring  the  integration  and 

resulting effects of NFT in the existing socio-economic fabric. Another growing set of research 

literature on NFTs deals with its applications in different fields. This is apparent from the work of 

Ismail et al (2021) and Mofokeng and Matima (2018) who analyze the applicability of NFTs in 

the  fields  of  supply  chain  management  and  wildlife  conservation  respectively.  The  work  of 

Mofokeng  and  Matima  (2018)  also  discusses  the  use  of  NFTs  in  Metaverse.  The  echo  of  this 

application in the virtual worlds can also be heard in other fields of management science as will 

be discussed later. Regner et al (2019) demonstrate the use of NFTs in event ticketing. They design, 

prototype, and implement a decentralized NFT-based event-ticketing system. They found that this 

system could be a good replacement of a conventional event-ticketing system because it may help 

in preventing fraud, better control on secondary market transactions, and validation of ownership. 

Another important point that can be noticed in the literature is the positive connotation around the 

use  of  Smart  Contracts  that  binds  digital  assets  with  Ethereum  blockchain.  It  is  this  feature  of 

Ethereum  that  makes  it  useful  for  applications  in  supply  chain  management  as  highlighted  by 

Ismail  et  al  (2021).  Another  application  of  NFTs  that  is  also  apparent  in  the  other  fields  of 

P a g e  6 | 20 

 
management sciences is its use in Intellectual Property protection. A glimpse of this can be seen 

in the work of Whitaker (2022) and Chalmers et al (2022) and more is visible in the search results 

of ‘Economics, Econometrics, and Finance’ and ‘Social Sciences’. To cap the review of research 

in  business  and  management,  the  work  of  Chalmers  et  al  (2022)  must  be  discussed  which 

specifically  focusses  on  the  entrepreneurial  potential  of  NFTs.  The  authors  do  show  some 

excitement for this new and emerging technology, especially its application in protecting digital 

rights  for  artwork,  music,  and  properties,  but  are  also  cautious  of  its  widespread  use  as  they 

highlight the presence of wash trade and an artificial hype that, as always, may lead to the bursting 

of this bubble and thus making a big correction in the pricing and value of NFTs. History of frauds 

related to Initial Coin Offering (ICO) in the cryptocurrency space also make the trade around NFTs 

a little questionable. Any investment in this area should, therefore, be governed by calculated risks. 

A framework about NFT enabled entrepreneurship has been proposed by Chandra, Y. (2022). In 

the  proposed  framework,  technology  enablers  as  well  as  mechanisms  were  discussed  in  detail. 

From  the  marketing  perspective,  Chohan,  R.  (2021)  presented  a  case  study  and  identified 

enormous potential applications for marketers in NFT domain. 

IV.  NFTs IN ECONOMICS, ECONOMETRICS, AND FINANCE 

Search results of the use of NFTs in Economics, Econometrics, and Finance, are presented in Table 

3. It can be seen that, apart from the study of van Haaften-Schick and Whitaker (2022), all other 

studies are finance related.  

P a g e  7 | 20 

 
Table 2: Search results at Scopus for ‘Business and Management’ 

S. 
No. 

Authors 

Scope 

Methodology 

Relevant Findings and Conclusions 

1 

Chalmers et al 
(2022) 

Identification of potential opportunities in NFT for 
creative entrepreneurs  

Literature review 

NFTs should be approached with caution 

2  Whitaker (2022) 

Proposing a conceptual framework of ungenerous 
and generous contracts to avoid draconian practices  Case Study 

Nothing relevant to NFTs 

3 

Bouraga (2021) 

Proposing a correlation analysis between various 
NFTs’ 
characteristics and the popularity of the NFTs 

Heat map analysis of transfer record 
data collected for top 500 NFTs up 
on sale online  

A strong positive correlation between Total 
Transfers and Holders and between 
Total Transfers and Supply of NFTs 

4 

Ismail et al (2021) 

Demonstrating the usefulness of smart contracts for 
supply chain access control and for virtual assets in 
a supply chain 

Model building and testing through 
prototyping 

Smart contract driven tokenization show promise in 
intelligently controlling access rights of different 
roles in a supply chain 

5 

Casale-Brunet et 
al (2021) 

Systematic analysis of transactions in an NFT 
ecosystem based on Ethereum blockchain 

Analysis of cluster and line graphs 
created out of transaction data 
extracted from the blockchains 

Structure of interaction in an NFT networks is 
similar to the structure of interactions in a social 
network 

P a g e  8 | 20 

 
6 

7 

8 

Mofokeng and 
Matima (2018) 

Proposing the use of NFTs as tokens for unique and 
rare crypto-wildlife assets the trading of which can 
be used for wildlife conservation 

Background review 

Use of NFTs as virtual unique collectable crypto-
wildlife assets show promise especially as tradeable 
tokens in metaverse  

Chandra Y. 
(2022) 

Chohan et al 
(2021) 

Proposed NFT enabled entrepreneurship (NFTE) 

Proposed framework 

NFT enabled entrepreneurship can open new 
opportunities 

Discussed how NFTs can be used by marketers 

Case Study 

Identified that NFTs has enormous potential in 
marketing 

P a g e  9 | 20 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 3: Search results at Scopus for ‘Economics Econometrics and Finance’ 

S. 
No. 

Authors 

Scope 

Methodology 

Relevant Findings and Conclusions 

1 

Dowling (2021a) 

Finding evidence to see if NFT pricing is correlated 
with cryptocurrency pricing 

Analysis of descriptive statistic 
graphs made out of pricing data 
obtained from online sources 

NFT pricing is quite distinct in terms of volatility 
transmission when compared with cryptocurrency 
pricing and there is little spillover between NFT 
markets 

2 

Dowling (2021b) 

Exploring the presence of pricing behavior in NFC 
markets 

Analysis of descriptive statistics 
graphs made out of pricing data 
obtained from online sources 

The analysis reveals an inefficiency in pricing but a 
sharp rise in value of NFTs 

Aharon and 
Demir (2021) 

Analysis of the connectedness between returns of 
traditional financial assets and that of NFTs 

Static and dynamic analysis using 
TVP-VAR methodology 

Static analysis reveals that NFTs do not get affected 
by the shocks from other traditional assets classes 
and even from Ethereum. Dynamic analysis 
suggests that in stable market conditions, NFTs act 
as transmitters of  
systemic risk while in more unstable market 
condition, such as Covid, NFTs act as absorbers of 
risk spillovers. 

van Haaften-
Schick and 
Whitaker (2022) 

Discussion on the different forms of use of 'Smart 
Contracts' on Ethereum Blockchain for digital 
artists 

Study of contemporary data on the 
online NFT marketplace 'Super 
Rare' 

Smart Contracts have the potential to be a 
disruptive intervention in the world of art trade and 
IP rights 

Umar et al (2022)  Analysis of connectedness between NFTs and other 

traditional asset classes 

Use of squared  
wavelet coherence (SWC) technique 
on data obtained from major 
indexes 

Return coherence depends upon the time period of 
investment. In this case a threshold of two weeks 
was observed 

3 

4 

5 

P a g e  10 | 20 

 
 
 
Table 4: Search results at Scopus for ‘Social Sciences’ 

S. 
No. 

Authors 

Scope 

Methodology 

Relevant Findings and Conclusions 

1 

Truby et al (2022) 

Environmental damage caused by cryptocurrencies 
and blockchain based tokens due to high energy 
consumption 

Study of energy consumption trends 
of different blockchains across 
countries 

Proof of work method should be phased out to make 
the processes of blockchain more sustainable 

2 

Zaucha and Agur 
(2022) 

Attitudes and behaviors apparent in the people 
involved in trading of commodified NBA fan 
experience 

Thematic analysis of conversation 
obtained from an online chatting 
platform called Cord 

The main social force behind the hype of NFTs is a 
social pressure that pushes the people to invest and 
be a part of the game 

3 

Fernandez (2021)  Exploring the applications of NFT in libraries 

Opinion. Research Note. 

Apparently, there are differences in the nature and 
functionalities of libraries and NFT, the two do 
have a potential for interaction in the future 

4 

Okonkwo (2021) 

Possible applications of NFTs in IP and its 
commercialization 

Opinion, literature review 

 Discussed relationship and applications of NFTs in 
IP 

5 

Heim and Hopper 
(2022) 

Exploring the applications of blockchain in circular 
fashion in textile 

Thematic analysis of responses to 
semi structured interviews 

The IT systems around textile industry are not ready 
for blockchain adoption but this technology does 
show promise 

P a g e  11 | 20 

 
6 

Mackenzie and 
Berzina (2021) 

Social and criminal lives of NFTs. Are they 
preventing crime or causing it? 

Opinion 

NFTs are a hype and their status as tokens with a 
potential of preventing online fraud is wrong 

7 

Kshetri, N. (2022) 

Explored frauds, scams, and deceits in the NFT 
market 

Opinion 

Emphasized the need of clear regulatory framework 
to reduce scams and fraud in the NFT market 

P a g e  12 | 20 

 
In one of his studies, Dowling (2021 b) studied the secondary market NFT trades between March 

2019 and March 2021 that took place against virtual land in the largest blockchain based virtual 

world  called  Decentraland.  Authors  considered  LAND  prices  in  Decentraland  and  evaluated 

Automatic  variance  ration  (AVR),  Automatic  portmanteau  (AP),  Consistent  Test  (DLT),  and 

Corrected Empirical Hurst Exponent scores. This work is important because of its investigation 

into the application of NFTs in virtual worlds. Aharon and Demir (2021) and Umar et al (2022) 

do some similar work but they check the connectedness of NFTs with common asset classes and 

they  discover  mixed  results.  When  it  comes  to  application  of  NFTs,  the  work  of  van  Haaften-

Schick and Whitaker (2022) is the only one that contributes to this direction. In line with the study 

of Ismail et al (2021), van Haaften-Schick and Whitaker (2022) also highlight the usefulness of 

Smart Contracts and how they make NFTs applicable for digital rights for art, music, and other 

forms of digital properties. 

V. 

NFTs IN SOCIAL SCIENCES 

The work of Fernandez (2021) and Heim and Hopper (2022) qualify to be application oriented as 

the  former  explores  NFTs  for  library  applications  while  the  latter  looks  into  the  use  of  this 

technology in IT service, in circular fashion, and in textile industry. An unmistakable, and quite 

intriguing,  aspect  of  studies  in  social  sciences  is  their  criticism  for  NFTs.  The  connotations 

apparent in these papers are clearly negative. Studies by Zaucha and Agur (2022) and Mackenzie 

and Berzina (2021) are especially relevant here. They present a sharp critique on NFTs and they 

conclude that NFTs do not have any intrinsic value, it’s a hype, and the only reason people are 

highly interested in them is social pressure that pushes them to be a part of this trend. Even the 

work of Fernandez (2021) and Heim and Hopper (2022), which is more application oriented, seems 

to present its argument in a cautious tone with suspicion and doubt evident between the lines. One 

P a g e  13 | 20 

 
similar dimension of application of NFTs in intellectual property can also be seen here in the form 

of the work of Okonkwo (2021). 

VI. 

ISSUES, CHALLENGES AND FUTURE RESEACH DIRECTION  

In this section, we discuss issues, challenges, and future research directions related with NFTs in 

the context of business, and management, accounting, economics, finance, and social sciences. 

Coupling of Physical Assets and Their Digital Representation 

Buying and selling virtual piece of land is common these days for its use in Metaverse such as 

NextEarth, Earth2, Decentraland, and Sandbox. The NFT of this virtual piece of land mapped onto 

the earth can be traded and a complete record of ownership can be traced using NFTs, but currently 

this  virtual  piece  of  land  is  not  coupled  with  the  actual  physical  earth.  In  order  to  completely 

envisage  the  implementation  of  Metaverse  using  Augmented  Reality  (AR)  and  Virtual  Reality 

(VR),  one  can  think  of  Avatars  interacting  with  each  other,  attending  meetings,  visiting 

conferences, and owning their own piece of virtual land on Metaverse, which should somehow 

couple  with  the  actual  physical  earth.  The  question  is  how  to  couple  physical  asset  (digital 

representation of earth land) with the actual physical land? Who manages it? Note that it will be 

against the main theme of decentralization which blockchain and NFT will bring that a central 

entity manages this mapping of virtual piece of land with this physical earth. Moreover, what will 

be the legal implication of owing this digital land without being mapped onto real earth and how 

the market value will be determined? 

Representation of Same Digital Asset Over Various NFT Platforms 

Another issue is that the same piece of virtual land, for instance, Eiffel Tower, can be recorded as 

digital asset on different NFT platforms. For instance, an NFT for Eiffel Tower can be minted over 

P a g e  14 | 20 

 
NextEarth, Earth2, Decentraland, and Sandbox. One future research direction is how to transfer 

one NFT minted on a platform to another? How multiple NFTs of the same digital asset, Eiffel 

Tower in this case, can be considered in real world and what will be its implication in terms of true 

ownership of the digital land? 

NFTs for Small Physical Items 

NFTs carry value because of their uniqueness, non-interchangeability, and scarcity. But when it 

comes to small physical items and its representation as NFT, this may create technical challenges 

in terms of scalability (Park, A., et al, 2022). Even in the case of small digital assets – such as 

skins, weapons, clothes - a huge volume of digital assets can be minted on blockchain platform. 

Keeping track of ownership record for all such small physical and digital asset will create huge 

number of transactions on the blockchain, thus increasing the size of the blockchain, and reducing 

the  block  addition  time  and/or  transaction  speed.  The  question  will  be  how  much  gain  it  will 

provide if central entity is removed and NFT is minted for such small physical and digital assets?  

Scams and Frauds in the NFT market 

Recent studies (Kshetri, N., 2022) shows that there are several threats associated with minting, 

investing, and selling NFTs without the permission of the actual owner of the asset. One future 

research direction is to empirically investigate the impact of scams and frauds in the NFT market 

and devise some solutions to mitigate such scams and frauds. 

VII.  CONCLUSION 

Non-Fungible Tokens are a very new and rapidly emerging technology governed by the use of 

Smart Contracts that binds a digital asset with Ethereum blockchain. And since its bound with a 

blockchain, this contract enjoys the features of immutability and quick traceability which no other 

P a g e  15 | 20 

 
technology provides. A thorough analysis of scientific literature reveals that researchers are not 

too  confident  about  the  legitimacy  of  this  form  of  tokenization.  Although  they  do  find  its 

application in the digital rights space, especially intellectual properties like digital art, music, and 

assets  in  virtual  worlds  like  Metaverse  and  Decentraland,  they  are  still  skeptical  about  the 

continuation of NFTs as a useful tool for this purpose. Gold rush around NFTs, as apparent by 

astronomically  high  value  of  its  trades,  however,  tells  a  different  story.  This  hype,  though,  is 

considered, by most authors, as a bubble that is soon going to burst and this major correction will 

leave many in possession of highly priced NFTs with almost no inherent value. Having said that, 

the  technology  behind  NFTs  appears  so  have  an  approval  from  the  researchers  especially  the 

feature of smart contract that has many other applications then just registering a digital art or music 

on the blockchain. Following, therefore, could be concluded: 

1.  NFTs provide the luxury of immutability and traceability which has found its applications 

in the digital rights and digital assets ownership space. This is especially helpful for digital 

artists who previously had no way of generating a consistent income out of their work. 

2.  The mechanism of ‘Smart Contract’, is the key here because these contracts can be used to 

find many new applications of this technology. 

3.  These smart contracts protected digital rights make NFTs very useful for trading in virtual 

worlds like Metaverse and Decentraland. 

4.  NFTs, however, must be adopted with caution as it still has to test its long-term resilience 

and the current hype around its value is bound to go through a major correction.  

As a concluding remark, and answer to the questions that this study posed in the beginning, NFTs 

are here to stay although not necessarily in the form of highly priced digital art only. Applications 

of NFTs could be innumerable and in any field where an immutable and traceable identification 

P a g e  16 | 20 

 
and ownership of assets is needed. A few areas in which further research on NFTs in business and 

management may spread could be product traceability in supply chain management, intellectual 

property rights  protection,  and  online  trades  in  virtual  worlds.  This  last  application  could  have 

immense potential for NFTs to thrive and give ways of innumerable fields of research. Imagine a 

virtual  world  existing,  with  its  own  economy,  parallel  to  the  real  material  world.  Whatever 

ownership and trade related areas of study we see in this real world will also exist in one form or 

the  other  in  that  virtual  world  thus  opening  up  a  vast  avenue  of  totally  novel  ideas,  concepts, 

applications, and of course, research.  

REFERENCES 

Aharon,  D.Y.,  and  Demir,  E.,  2021,  NFTs  and  asset  class  spillovers:  Lessons  from  the  period 
Letters, 

COVID-19 

pandemic, 

Research 

Finance 

the 

around 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.frl.2021.102515 

Arksey,  H.  and  O'Malley,  L.,  2005,  Scoping  studies:  towards  a  methodological  framework, 

International Journal of Social Research Methodology, 8, 1, 19-32.  

Bao,  H.,  and  Roubaud,  D.,  2022  Non-Fungible  Token:  A  Systematic  Review  and  Research 
Agenda,  Journal  of  Risk  and  Financial  Management,  15(5),  215;  DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.3390/jrfm15050215 

Bouraga  S.,  2021,  On  the  Popularity  of  Non-Fungible  Tokens:  Preliminary  Results,  3rd 
Conference  on  Blockchain  Research  and  Applications  for  Innovative  Networks  and 
Services, BRAINS 2021, pp. 49 - 50 

Casale-Brunet S., Ribeca P., Doyle P., Mattavelli M., 2021, Networks of Ethereum Non-Fungible 
Tokens:  A  graph-based  analysis  of  the  ERC-721  ecosystem,  Proceedings  -  2021  IEEE 
International Conference on Blockchain, pp. 188 - 195 

Chalmers D., Fisch C., Matthews R., Quinn W., Recker J., 2022, Beyond the bubble: Will NFTs 
and  digital  proof  of  ownership  empower  creative  industry  entrepreneurs?  Journal  of 
Business Venturing Insights, 17, DOI: 10.1016/j.jbvi.2022.e00309 

Chandra,  Y.,  2022,  Non-fungible  token-enabled  entrepreneurship:  A  conceptional  framework, 

Journal of Business Venturing Insights, vol., 18, e00323 

P a g e  17 | 20 

 
Chohan,  R.,  Paschen,  J.,  2021,  How  marketers  can  use  nonfungible  tokens  (NFTs)  in  their 

campaigns, Business Horizons, in Press 

Dowling, M., 2021 a, Is non-fungible token pricing driven by cryptocurrencies? Finance Research 

Letters, 44, 1544-6123 

Dowling, M., 2021 b, Fertile LAND: Pricing non-fungible tokens, Finance Research Letters, 44, 

102096 

Dune,  E.,  2022,  11  most  expensive  NFTs  ever  sold,  InsideBitcoins,  available  at: 

https://insidebitcoins.com/buy-cryptocurrency/buy-nft/most-expensive-nfts 

Entriken, W., Shirley, D., Evans, J., and Sachs, N., 2018, ERC-721 Non-Fungible Token Standard, 

Retrieved from https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-721 

Fairfiled, J., 2021, Tokenized: The Law of Non-Fungible Tokens and Unique Digital Property, 
SSRN: 

Forthcoming, 

Available 

at 

Indiana 
Law 
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3821102 

Journal, 

Fenech,  G.,  2018,  Unlocking  a  $200  Billion  Dollar  Collectibles  Market  on  the  Blockchain, 
Retrieved  from  https://www.forbes.com/sites/geraldfenech/2018/11/08/unlocking-a-200-
billion-dollar-collectiblesmarket-on-the-blockchain/#4e2a60cf5554 

Fernandez P., 2021, Non-fungible tokens and libraries, Library Hi Tech News, 38 (4), pp. 7 - 9 

Frank, R., 2021, Metakoven on why he bought Beeple NFT for $69 million, CNBC, available at: 

https://www.cnbc.com/video/2021/03/30/crypto-investor-metakoven-beeple-nft-art.html 

Heim H., Hopper C., 2021, Dress code: the digital transformation of the circular fashion supply 
International  Journal  of  Fashion  Design,  Technology  and  Education, 

chain, 
DOI:10.1080/17543266.2021.2013956 

Ismail A., Wu Q., Toohey M., Lee Y.C., Dong Z., Zomaya A.Y., 2021, TRABAC: A Tokenized 
Role-Attribute Based Access Control using Smart Contract for Supply Chain Applications, 
Proceedings - 2021 IEEE International Conference on Blockchain, Blockchain 2021, pp. 
584 - 588 

Kshetri, N., (2022), Scams, Frauds, and Crimes in the Nonfungible Token Market, Computer, vol. 

55, no. 4, pp. 60-64, April 2022, doi: 10.1109/MC.2022.3144763 

Mackenzie  S.,  Bērziņa  D.,  2021,  NFTs:  Digital  things  and  their  criminal  lives,  Crime,  Media, 

Culture, DOI: 10.1177/17416590211039797 

P a g e  18 | 20 

 
Mofokeng N.E.M., Matima T.K., 2018, Future tourism trends: Utilizing non-fungible tokens to 
aid wildlife conservation, African Journal of Hospitality, Tourism and Leisure, 7 (4) 

Okonkwo I.E., 2021, NFT, copyright and intellectual property commercialization, International 

Journal of Law and Information Technology, 29 (4), pp. 296 - 304 

Park,  A,  Kietzmann,  J.,  Pitt,  L.,  Dabirian,  A.,  2021,  The  Evolution  of  Nonfungible  Tokens: 

Complexity and Novelty of NFT Use-Cases, IT Professional, vol. 24, pp. 9-14 

Popescu, A.D., 2021, Non-Fungible Tokens (NFT) – Innovation beyond the craze, Proceedings of 
the  5th  International  Conference  on  Innovation  in  Business,  Economics  &  Marketing 
research (IBEM-2021), ISSN 1737-9334 

Rousseau, D. M., J. Manning, and D. Denyer. 2008. “Evidence in Management and Organizational 
Science: Assembling the Field’s Full Weight of Scientific Knowledge through Syntheses.” 
In AIM Research Working Paper Series: Advanced Institute of Management Research 

Regner, F., Schweizer, A., and Urbach,  N.,  2019, NFTs  in  Practice  – Non-Fungible Tokens as 
Core Component of a Blockchain-based Event Ticketing Application, Proceedings of the 
Fortieth International Conference on Information Systems, Munich 2019 

Sestino, A., Guido, G., M.Peluso, A., 2022, Non-Fungible Token (NFTs) – Examining the Impact 
on Consumers and  Marketing Strategies, Palgrave Macmillan Cham, Switzerland, DOI: 
10.1007/978-3-031-07203-1 

Tepper, F., 2017, People have spent over $1M buying virtual cats on the Ethereum blockchain, 

Retrieved from https://t.co/Ea718is6M5 

Truby J., Brown R.D., Dahdal A., Ibrahim I., 2022, Blockchain, climate damage, and death: Policy 
interventions to reduce the carbon emissions, mortality, and net-zero implications of non-
fungible tokens and Bitcoin, Energy Research and Social Science, 88, art. no. 102499 

Umar Z., Gubareva M., Teplova T., Tran D.K., 2022, Covid-19 impact on NFTs and major asset 
classes  interrelations:  Insights  from  the  wavelet  coherence  analysis,  Finance  Research 
Letters, art. no. 102725 

van Haaften-Schick L., Whitaker A., 2022, From the Artist’s Contract to the blockchain ledger: 
new  forms  of  artists’  funding  using  equity  and  resale  royalties,  Journal  of  Cultural 
Economics, DOI: 10.1007/s10824-022-09445-8 

Whitaker  A.,  2022,  Generous  and  Ungenerous  Contracts:  Case  Study  of  the  Artist  William 
Powhida’s Grevsky and Store-to-Own Contracts, Journal of Arts Management Law and 
Society, Article in press 

P a g e  19 | 20 

 
Xia, Y. and Watson, M., 2019, Guidance on Conducting a Systematic Literature Review, Journal 

of Planning, Education, and Research, Vol. 39(1) 93–112 

Zaucha  T.,  Agur  C.,  2022,  Newly  minted:  Non-fungible  tokens  and  the  commodification  of 

fandom, New Media and Society, DOI: 10.1177/14614448221080481 

P a g e  20 | 20 

 
 
