IOTA Tangle 2.0: Toward a Scalable, Decentralized,
Smart, and Autonomous IoT Ecosystem

Nathan Sealey, Adnan Aijaz, and Ben Holden
Bristol Research and Innovation Laboratory, Toshiba Europe Ltd., Bristol, United Kingdom
ﬁrstname.lastname@toshiba-bril.com

2
2
0
2

p
e
S
1
1

]
I

N
.
s
c
[

1
v
9
5
9
4
0
.
9
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—IOTA Tangle is a distributed ledger technology
(DLT), primarily designed for Internet-of-Things (IoT) networks
and applications. IOTA Tangle utilizes a direct acyclic graph
(DAG) structure for the ledger, with its protocol offering features
attractive to the IoT domain, over most blockchain alternatives,
such as feeless transactions, higher achievable transactions per
second (TPS), and lower energy consumption. The original IOTA
implementation relied on a bootstrap centralized coordinator
solution for consensus which limited its degree of decentralization
and scalability. This concern, alongside other limitations to its
adoption, such as lack of smart contracts, are being addressed
with the release of IOTA 2.0. This update brings with it signiﬁcant
changes in order to remove the coordinator and achieve a scalable
decentralized solution. To this end, this paper provides a technical
overview of the key features of IOTA 2.0 while discussing their
relevance and beneﬁts for the wider IoT ecosystem. The paper
also provides performance insights and future research directions
for IOTA 2.0.

Index Terms—Blockchain, consensus, DLT, IoT, IOTA, ma-

chine economy, smart contracts, Tangle.

I. INTRODUCTION

Distributed ledger technology is promising to address the
issues originating from existing centralized Internet-of-Things
(IoT) architectures. The key features of DLT which are ben-
eﬁcial to IoT implementations include decentralization, im-
mutability, auditability, and cryptographic security. Decentral-
ization allows network-wide information exchange via peer-to-
peer (P2P) communication, removing the need for validation
or control by an authorized and trusted central third party.
This can reduce system costs as maintenance and running of
said centralized main sever is no longer required and has the
additional beneﬁt to users that they no longer must rely on
and trust any centralized third party. Immutability prevents
tampering of data and facilitates full history tracking of all
data exchanges. Auditability is important for IoT networks
with each device having the option to store a full copy of the
ledger, if required, and timestamped transaction records ensure
all transactions and data exchanges are veriﬁable. Each DLT
utilizes a unique cryptographic algorithm to secure its protocol
which equips IoT networks with resilience against adversarial
attacks. Some of the employed cryptographic algorithms, such
as those that harness one-time signature schemes, are quantum-
secure, whilst those that use RSA or elliptic curve encryption
are susceptible to attacks from quantum computers.

Blockchain is the most well-known form of DLT; how-
ever, associated fees and energy concerns of the mining
process as well as limited transaction throughput make many

blockchain solutions unsuitable for IoT applications. DLTs
utilizing directed acyclic graph (DAG) topology do away with
the singular block chains, thereby storing transactions directly
within the ledger as opposed to within blocks. The DAG struc-
ture allows asynchronous parallel attachment of transactions
therefore facilitating a larger throughput and addressing the
scalability concerns of blockchain. DAG-based DLTs also do
not use mining, with their protocol consequently facilitating
feeless transactions and much more lightweight devices due
to the reduced energy demand.

IOTA Tangle is a DAG-based DLT, speciﬁcally targeting
IoT networks and devices. The Tangle network comprises
nodes that use P2P communication to propagate messages
and transactions. The nodes are entry points for data and
transactions into the network and autonomously handle and
verify messages and maintain the state of the Tangle (ledger).
Each node has its own local view of the ledger and their
decentralized and autonomous nature are key to the operation
of the Tangle protocol. The DAG structure of the Tangle
ledger, as well as the blockcain topology, is shown in Figure
1. When issuing each new message (tip), network nodes must
ﬁrst approve two previous messages. Unconﬁrmed messages
are considered conﬁrmed once an accepted level of network
consensus has been reached. As the number of transactions
per second (TPS) increases, the conﬁrmation time decreases
due to the requirement of each node having to approve two
messages when issuing one. Consensus aspects are covered in
detailed later. Numerous works have compared IOTA Tangle
to alternative DLTs and it performs well, if not best in class,
for many key metrics [1].

However, upon ﬁrst going live in 2016, IOTA could not
fully realize their vision [2], and instead relied on a bootstrap
solution called the coordinator. The coordinator added a non-
ideal element of centralization into the protocol and since then,
the IOTA foundation has worked to change their protocol to
remove the coordinator in a development arc called coordicide
[3]. Not only is the coordinator an unwanted element of
centralization, it also limits scalability of the protocol. Lack
of smart contracts and digital asset support were also the key
concerns for industry adoption.

In 2021 IOTA’s ﬁrst fully decentralized network was re-
leased on their development network [4]. The protocol, named
IOTA 2.0,
is signiﬁcantly and notably different from the
legacy protocol and addresses many of its shortcomings, in
regard to IoT applications. Developed in a modular fashion on

 
 
 
 
 
 
Feature

Smart contracts
Digital asset support
Transaction size
Decentralization
Sybil protection
Spam prevention
Address types
Consensus mechanism

Scalability

Approvement ﬁnality

TABLE I: Key differences between legacy IOTA and IOTA 2.0

IOTA 2.0

Legacy IOTA

Supported
Yes
100 bytes
Fully decentralized
Mana reputation system
Lightweight Adaptive PoW
Reusable
FPC binary voting protocol

Very scalable (increased TPS with in-
creased network size)
Based on consensus mana approval
weight – no orphans

Not supported
No
1700 bytes
Coordinator as point of centralization
None
PoW
One-time use
Weighted MCMC tip selection with co-
ordinator
Limited (coordinator and milestones
limit scalability)
Based on MCMC weight magnitude –
orphans possible

II. OVERVIEW OF IOTA 2.0
The differentiating aspects of IOTA 2.0 can be split into
modules [5] in order to understand their impact on the overall
protocol as well as to IoT implementations. Security beneﬁts
of highlighted features are mentioned in this works but for
a full survey on IOTA’s security please see [6]. Table I
summarizes some of the key differences between the legacy
IOTA and IOTA 2.0, which are discussed in this section.
Figure 2 provides a holistic view of the overall structure and
protocol operation of IOTA 2.0. The network layer handles
the Tangle node functionality that works with bytes, and
therefore encompasses all the P2P (inter-node) exchanges. The
communication layer handles IOTA messages. This includes
the required tip selection approvals, rate control mechanisms,
as well as handling the Tangle ledger itself. The application
layer deals with executing message payloads. For example, for
a value transaction it executes the required consensus, fund
transfers, and reputation (mana) transfer.

It is emphasized that each of the shown modules is under
continuous review and development by the IOTA Foundation.
We summarize the functionality of each module while high-
lighting its beneﬁts to the overall protocol and IoT networks.

A. Adaptive Proof-of-Work

IOTA uses an explicit rate control mechanism to protect
against spam or denial-of-service (DoS) attacks. In the legacy
version this took the form of a proof-of-work (PoW) puzzle
of set uniform difﬁculty that every node must complete before
attaching a transaction. This ties some workload weight to
the attachment thus limiting the rate at which any one node
can attach transactions. However, IOTA 2.0 improves on this
by implementing an adaptive PoW [7]. Instead of having a
set difﬁculty, deﬁned by minimum weight magnitude (MWM)
instead adapts the difﬁculty
in legacy IOTA,
based on a nodes message rate during a set time interval.
The more messages a node tries to issue within said given
period, the harder the PoW puzzle becomes, and therefore,
the lower the rate at which said node can attach messages
until it becomes computationally impossible. This protects
against burst transaction, and spam and DoS attacks whilst
also making the PoW difﬁculty lower for honest nodes.

the protocol

(a)

(b)

Fig. 1: 1a shows the Tangle topology; 1b shows the blockchain topology.

IOTA’s development network (devnet), IOTA 2.0 is the future
of the protocol. Development work continues but a working
implementation, nicknamed Nectar, is live, with a network
migration to the main network (mainnet) planned. The Nectar
network can support up to 1000 TPS with conﬁrmation times
on average between 10 and 12 seconds. It is for this reason a
switch in focus from the legacy implementation to that of the
decentralized network is recommended for industry.

This paper reviews the key protocol changes in IOTA 2.0
with an emphasis on potential impact and beneﬁts to the IoT
ecosystem. Exploring the evolution of IOTA Tangle is impor-
tant from the viewpoint of new IoT-centric opportunities. By
providing a technical overview of IOTA 2.0, this work shows
the suitability and purposeful design of different components
for IoT networks and applications. It provides simulations-
based performance evaluation providing insights into the vari-
ables affecting the new consensus algorithm. It also discusses
key directions for further research and development for IOTA.

(a)

(b)

Fig. 2: 2a shows abstract protocol layer model for IOTA 2.0; 2b describes high-level ﬂow diagram of IOTA 2.0 protocol.

B. Fast Probabilistic Consensus

Consensus in the legacy Tangle was reliant on the coordi-
nator which brought an unwanted element of centralization to
the network. With IOTA 2.0, consensus is instead achieved
with a probabilistic leaderless binary voting protocol called
fast probabilistic consensus (FPC). Consensus is needed to
maintain the validity of the Tangle by addressing conﬂicts such
as double spends. In its simplest reduction, FPC allows a node
to update its opinion by querying a set size subset of other
nodes on the network and then choosing the majority opinion.
This is done multiple times (rounds) until an unchanging
opinion is decided or a maximum round threshold is reached.
For increased resistance to attackers, opinions are weighted
by a node’s mana (discussed later) and random thresholds are
used throughout the protocol to prevent meta-stable situations
[8]. The random thresholds are common amongst the nodes
and set via a decentralized random number generator (dRNG)
module.

There are various variables which affect FPC performance,

particularly in terms of metrics like agreement rate and
mean termination round of the protocol. We have conducted
performance evaluation of FPC using the simulation software
by the IOTA Foundation [9]. Fig. 3 shows the agreement rate
of FPC when changing the total number of nodes (N), the
quorum size (k) which is the number of neighbors each node
queries every round, and the proportion of adversarial nodes
in the network (q), respectively. Similarly, Fig. 4 shows the
corresponding mean termination rounds of the protocol. Fig.
3a and Fig. 4a demonstrate the scalability of the protocol with
no change in agreement rate and the average ﬁnalization round
also remaining effectively unchanged, even with increasingly
large changes to the number of nodes. As shown in Fig. 3b
and Fig. 4b, controllable variables such as the number of
nodes queried each round must be adapted to the speciﬁc
network implementation in order to maximize performance
at a manageable communication overhead. It can be seen in
Fig. 3b that if k is too low, most of the nodes won’t query
an adversarial node, providing a seemingly high agreement

(a)

(b)

(c)

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 3: FPC simulations for agreement rate.

Fig. 4: FPC simulations for mean termination round.

rate but masking the adversarial attack. When k is set to the
size of the network the highest healthy agreement rate can be
seen and the low termination round is observed in Fig. 4b;
this comes at the cost of a very high communication overhead
that some networks could not support. Fig. 3c and Fig. 4c
demonstrate the algorithm’s robustness to adversarial nodes up
to the unrealistic point where half of the network is maliciously
controlled.

C. Tip selection

With IOTA 2.0 implementing a dedicated FPC voting mech-
anism, the health of a message and thus its eligibility for tip
selection can be decided before any tip selection algorithm
This means as opposed to tip selection playing a vital role in

consensus, as in the legacy implementation, its purpose now is
only to allow the Tangle ledger to grow in a stable and secure
way. This depreciates the value derived from any recent studies
that focused on the tip selection algorithm as a component of
consensus.

IOTA 2.0 uses restricted uniform random tip selection
(RURTS) which with uniform probability selects a tip from
a list of tips deﬁned as eligible. The number of approvals a
message carries out is now also variable from the original two
up to a maximum of eight. The higher number of approvals is
used in times of congestion to prevent a spam attack from
widening the Tangle and therefore maintaining the healthy
growth of the ledger.

010002000300040005000600070008000900010000Number of Nodes (N)00.20.40.60.81Agreement RateAgreement rate with increasing N (k=11, q=0.1)0102030405060708090100Quorum Size (k)00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91Agreement RateAgreement Rate with increasing k (N=100, q=0.49)00.050.10.150.20.250.30.350.40.450.5Proportion of adverserial nodes (q)00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91Agreement RateAgreement Rate with increasing q (k=11, N=100)010002000300040005000600070008000900010000Number of Nodes (N)0102030405060708090100Mean Termination RoundMean Termination Round with increasing N (k=11, q=0.1)0102030405060708090100Quorum Size (k)0102030405060708090100Mean Termination RoundMean Termination Round with increasing k (N=100, q=0.49)00.050.10.150.20.250.30.350.40.450.5Proportion of adverserial nodes (q)0102030405060708090100Mean Termination RoundMean Termination Round with increasing q (k=11, N=100)D. Mana

Mana can be seen as a new reputation system for nodes
with the primary objective of securing the network against
Sybil and Eclipse attacks [10]. Each node holds an amount of
decaying mana with this quantity being stored and recorded as
an extension to the Tangle ledger. When a value transaction is
processed, a node ID to ‘pledge’ access mana to is speciﬁed
causing an increase to that node’s access mana and thus
reputation in the network. When a node takes part in FPC, it is
‘pledged’ consensus mana. The combination of access mana
and consensus mana constitutes a nodes total mana. Aside
from processing value transactions, nodes can gain mana by
holding tokens (larger token balance the larger mana gained)
or renting mana from a higher mana node. A node’s mana
decays over time.

Mana protects against Sybil attacks across the protocol with
key applications in four modules. Access mana is used in
congestion control to limit the data a node can attach to
the Tangle as such that the data any one node can add is
proportional to their share of the active access mana in the
network. The probability a node is queried in FPC, as well as
to be selected during dRNG, is also proportional to the amount
of consensus mana a node holds. The opinion of a node during
FPC is similarly weighted by its consensus mana. The use of
mana during consensus, and the difﬁculty in acquiring mana,
is key to defending Sybil attacks. New malicious identities are
therefore easily distinguished by nodes trusted by the network
by their amount of held mana. The most inﬂuential nodes
(high mana nodes) are also protected against Eclipse attacks
as during auto peering nodes peer with others with a similar
amount of mana.

E. Unspent Transaction Output Model Ledger

Due to other changes in the protocol, a need is established to
both easily and quickly detect double spends and transactions
that try to spend non-existing funds and determine a node’s
initial opinion for every received transaction. To facilitate this,
the ledger model is changed to that of an unspent transaction
output (UTXO) model which enables real-time transaction
payload validation.

Unlike the legacy implementation, the UTXO ledger’s bal-
ances are not directly associated with addresses and instead are
tied to the output of transactions. Inputs to new transactions
are then deﬁned via the output of old transactions. This means
funds are individually speciﬁable and the same addresses can
now be reused with multiple transactions without a loss in
security. Double spends are addressed via the reality based
ledger state which models the possible realities of the ledger
state thus identifying double spends and unmergeable branches
and instead taking the reality that offers the most healthy
Tangle end state. This information is all available without
having to walk the Tangle [5].

F. Message layout

The data carrying objects of the IOTA 2.0 protocol are called
messages as opposed to the previously employed transactions.

Messages are split into three parts: the header, the payload and
the signature. The header includes the IOTA version number,
message parents, issuing timestamp, issuing node ID, and a
proof-of-work (PoW) nonce. The payload stores the intended
content of the message and can be of many types whether
that be plain data, a value transaction, or a user-deﬁned custom
payload. Depending on the payload type, the message is parsed
in a different way with any application being able to deﬁne
a payload and thus how it interacts with the Tangle. The
message ends with a signature from the issuing node which
signs the entire message, including the payload, making the
entire message unalterable.

G. Smart contracts

Lack of support for smart contracts has been a barrier in
widespread industry adoption of IOTA Tangle. IOTA smart
chain protocol (ISCP) implements smart contract functionality
to the new decentralized network and does so in a way that is
different to current alternatives like Ethereum [11].

ISCP uses off-chain smart contracts, as to say that the
contracts are not executed and secured by the entirety of
the main network. Instead, smart contracts are run on sub-
chains connected to the main Tangle and maintained by a
subset of nodes called the committee. The committee handles
the consensus and execution of all contracts on its chain and
updates the main Tangle, and thus the rest of the network, as
to their state with signed transactions. This means transaction
costs are very low and can be more easily forecast. ISCP
operation does not contribute to the operational stress of the
whole main network and the security of any smart contract
is variable and can be increased by increasing its committee
size.

Although IOTA smart contracts are written in their own
language, the ISCP supports an Ethereum virtual machine.
This allows smart contracts written in solidity for the Ethereum
DLT to be run on an IOTA Tangle network. This facilitates
the reuse of exiting Ethereum contracts and allows them to
leverage the beneﬁts of the IOTA network such as feeless
transactions and a faster execution speed.

Smart contracts are conﬁgured and deployed by their owner
but are run and maintained by the committee. The owner can
set a variable reward to incentivize committee nodes to process
their contract. Fees are again ﬂexible and dependant on the
chain, contract and its owner.

H. Digital Assets

Digital assets have been a promising feature of many other
DLTs with the legacy IOTA not supporting them. However,
with the changes to the protocol bought about by IOTA 2.0,
IOTA will now support digital assets with the main short
falling of other DLTs’ implementations addressed. Due to the
feeless transactions of IOTA, they will support the creation of
digital assets that are secured by the main Tangle, without any
fees. This will allow the free digital twinning or tokenization
of any system or asset; physical or otherwise [12].

III. IOTA 2.0 FOR IOT

This section discusses the key beneﬁts of each module

change in relation to IoT networks and applications.

A. Consensus Enhancements for IoT

The implementation of a dedicated consensus module and
associated algorithm into the IOTA protocol is key for achiev-
ing full decentralization, and therefore of importance to IoT
network implementations. As a consensus protocol, FPC is
energy-efﬁcient and lightweight, doesn’t require staking, and
is highly scalable; making it attractive to IoT networks. The
communication overhead required for direct queries of FPC
can be of concern for some IoT implementations; however,
techniques to overcome this are discussed later.

With adaptive PoW, nodes are rewarded for honest be-
haviour with the computational intensity of the puzzle be-
ing solved remaining low. By making this process more
lightweight than the constant difﬁculty PoW previously used,
it is of beneﬁt to resource constrained IoT devices.

B. Tip Selection Enhancements for IoT

The beneﬁts of the changes to tip selection for IoT networks
are that tip selection becomes both substantially faster and
more lightweight. The previously employed weighted Markov
Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithm required walking the
Tangle and the updating of weights, both of which had an
associated computational cost. These elements are not required
by RURTS with the time complexity moving from the O(n2)
of MCMC to O(n) for RURTS. There is also an increased
reliability in the transactions in the network and a signiﬁcant
reduction in orphaned messages and the resulting need for re-
attachments.

This has obvious beneﬁts when applied to IoT networks. For
honest nodes, the rate setting PoW becomes less computation-
ally intensive which is good for lightweight IoT devices. This
change also facilitates a higher healthy message attachment
rate as healthy behaviour is less limited by the PoW as the
difﬁculty can be assumed to be low.

C. IoT Security Beneﬁts via Mana

Mana brings clear security beneﬁts to IoT networks looking
to utilize IOTA with the threat of an attacker gaining increased
control over the network by creating multiple identities being
nulliﬁed. Mana offers a higher level of protection to this kind
of attack than the previously employed tip selection algorithms
whilst also more astutely tackling congestion control and
increasing the robustness of the employed consensus protocol.

D. IoT-centric Implementation Enhancements

The change of the ledger state, as discussed previously,
helps facilitate some of the other module changes in the
protocol. Its implementation provides necessary information
previously not available without walking the Tangle. This
is a beneﬁt for IoT networks as it avoids the associated
computational and time cost of both walking the past cone

of a message as well as solidiﬁcation that would have been
required to do so.

The changes to the message layout, as discussed previ-
ously, allow for applications to build message payload types
speciﬁcally designed to their use case, which is attractive for
any network looking to employ IOTA. The change to atomic
messages also provides a massive reduction in the transaction
size used by legacy IOTA. Previous transactions were not
size variable and were ﬁxed at around 1.7 kb with atomic
transactions being as small as 100 bytes [13]. This makes them
much more suitable for lightweight IoT devices and reduces
communication overhead.

E. Smart Contracts for IoT

The ability to use feeless smart contracts as well as those
incentivized with micro-transactions is extremely attractive to
IoT networks of which many were not resource rich enough
to participate in Ethereum smart contracts.

The key differences between the popular alternative
Ethereum, and IOTA are summarized in Table II. Clear beneﬁts
to IoT networks are shown, such as reduced transaction fees
and reduced network load. However, security must be consid-
ered on a individual contract basis so the necessary degree of
decentralization and security can be picked via the committee
size. Contracts which hold a large value for example, should
have an appropriately large committee size and thus level of
security.

F. Asset Digitalization for IoT

Digital assets, like non-fungible tokens (NFTs), allow for
anything from art, IoT devices, or industrial machinery to be
digitally represented, providing proof of both authentication
and ownership. Attractive applications of digital assets to
an industrial and IoT setting become apparent when you
also consider IOTA’s support of both encrypted, immutable,
and veriﬁable data as well as feeless transactions. These in
combination could facilitate the digital twinning of a whole
system with physical assets being digitally tokenized and all
their associated data ﬂows being handled and mapped by the
Tangle. All of this whilst being secured by the Tangle. IOTA
believe this will lead to the creation of the machine economy
[12].

IV. DIRECTIONS OF FURTHER RESEARCH

The development network implementation of IOTA 2.0
is under constant review. All modules are being ﬁne-tuned
and edited based on the analysis of their operation on the
IOTA Foundations development network implementation. This
section aims to cover research directions and areas of develop-
ment that will have sizeable impact on IoT Tangle implemen-
tations and thus the wider IoT ecosystem. These changes aim
to improve scalability, reduce conﬁrmation times, and improve
data credibility amongst others. Three main development di-
rections are discussed within this section: consensus, oracles,
and sharding.

TABLE II: Key differences between Ethereum and IOTA smart contract protocols

Feature

Transaction fees

Network utilization

Security

Layer
Speed

Scalability

IOTA Smart Contracts

Ethereum Smart Contracts

Very low (feeless), supports microtrans-
actions, forecastable
Uses a subset committee of nodes of
variable size
Variable (dependent on committee size)

2 – off-Chain
Parallel transactions, parallel smart con-
tract chains, only committee nodes in-
volved, very fast execution
High (smart contracts executed in par-
allel by various committees and chains)

Higher transaction fees + gas, no micro-
transactions
Each contract executed by the whole
network
Set and scales with network size – al-
ways high
1 – on-chain
No parallel transactions, whole network
secures each contract, slower execution
time
Poor (each contract executed by whole
network)

A. Consensus - On Tangle FPC

IOTA continues to develop and research improvements to
its consensus protocol. The most recent development direction
focuses on on-Tangle fast probabilistic consensus (OTFPC)
[14]. This takes some elements of the previously described
FPC and combines them with a virtual voting protocol that
considers approval weight (AW), which is dependent on the
number of indirect and direct approvals of the message, in
order to provide ﬁnality based on the heaviest branch in double
spend scenarios. More formally, AW is ‘the percent of the
active consensus mana of nodes who directly or indirectly
reference it’ [15]. A double spend conﬂict is resolved when
one of the conﬂicting transactions reaches a threshold AW
and thus its branch is ﬁnalized. To minimize the amount
of orphaned transactions from the losing branch, only the
double spend message’s payload is rejected. This allows the
subsequent non-conﬂicting approving messages in the branch
to merge with the main Tangle avoiding being orphaned.

OTFPC is also run in rounds but a key difference is that
instead of asking nodes to vote on their opinion via direct
queries, a node simply referencing that message is considered
equivalent to a positive vote as nodes only reference mes-
sages they approve of. By tracking the references, and thus
approvals, and calculating an approval weight, conﬂicts can
be simply resolved by picking the message or branch with the
highest AW. This removes the need for P2P communication
between nodes during consensus, reducing the communication
overhead, a positive for IoT networks. As all the information
needed for consensus is available on the Tangle, conﬁrmation
times are also reduced.

B. From Source Data Issuing - Oracles

Oracles are a key progression with high relevance to the
IoT ecosystem. Oracles facilitate data being uploaded to the
Tangle directly from the source, for example IoT sensor
devices. This increases the level of trust
in the data and
removes opportunities for data manipulation which could bring
the data’s credibility into repute as there is no intermediary
between the data issuer and the attachment of its data to the
Tangle. Therefore, lightweight IoT data sources will be able
to feed data directly into smart contracts or, as data messages,

or streams, stored and secured by the Tangle ledger without
having to contribute to the PoW and other protocol processes.
Further developments include the use of oracle distributed
networks (ODNs) [14]. By combining several oracles, which
all provide data relevant to each other, as well as an ‘aggrega-
tor oracle’ which connects to the main Tangle ledger, ODNs
aim to not only provide direct data issuing but also create a
network that enhances the credibility of data by acknowledging
and disregarding erroneous data submissions as part of data
validation, regardless of data type. Developments as to an ag-
gregator oracle with a built in ‘truth ﬁnding algorithm’ aim to
consolidate data, checking for and eliminating inconsistencies,
before issuing only data deemed correct/truthful to the main
tangle.

Data provider sources and use cases also vary with them
not limited to IoT sensors. For example, an oracle could be
set to regularly pull data from a publicly accessible feed of
a website or even provide potential DLT interoperability by
using data from a secondary DLT platform.

C. Enhancing Scalability - Sharding

Sharding is a technique being researched and developed to
further increase the scalability of IOTA Tangle networks [14].
IOTA Tangle aims to be able to increase its throughput to a
level that can facilitate the relevant demands of the whole IoT
ecosystem and sharding is the leading development direction
to attain this goal.

In its basics, a shard is a subset of network nodes with
those nodes processing and sending their messages amongst
their subset and not having to process other shards messages.
This breaks up the total number of messages nodes must
process, reduces redundancy, and with each of these shard
networks operating in parallel, the overall network throughput
can be increased. A shard can be permissioned with approval
needed for nodes to join and control of the sybil protection
mechanism and congestion control amongst the shard given.
This is of particular interest
to IoT use cases that were
previously more suited to private implementations; by instead
using a permissioned shard running on the main public Tangle
network the privacy beneﬁts of a permissioned setup are given
with the added beneﬁts brought by connection to the public
network. The IOTA Foundation data sharding approach is in

development and plans to use a hierarchical sharding approach
to increase overall network throughput for data messages.
Shards update the main tangle as to messages they have
processed via stamp messages to their parent shard with
consensus being reached upon said stamp and being necessary
for conﬁrmation of the original message. Sharding can be
multiple levels deep with stamping occurring recursively to the
parent shard until the main Tangle network is stamped. This
ensures a proof of inclusion for any message in any shard and
allows the main tangle to contribute to the conﬁrmation of all
messages no matter the shard depth.

Other non-hierarchical sharding techniques are in develop-
ment with ﬂuid sharding being an active research direction
that aims to inﬁnitely increase the scalability of the network
and create a network that can optimally support any device
regardless of individual device requirements. Early research
suggests an approach that sees all nodes as individual shards
with interaction occurring with other shards within a radius of
perception.

V. CONCLUDING REMARKS

The key objective of removing the coordinator is vital to
the wide adoption of IOTA Tangle into the IoT ecosystem. Re-
moving the coordinator achieves a greater degree of scalability
for IOTA 2.0 as well as other beneﬁts of full decentralization
such as removing the single point of failure and a necessary
trust in a central authority. Other changes, such as mana,
offer improved Sybil protection and new features, like smart
contracts and digital assets, show improved functionality when
compared to current
industry adoption leaders. Consensus
is also improved upon and is now both more scalable and
faster than before. With the reduced need to walk the Tangle
and adaptive PoW, the protocol becomes more lightweight
for honest nodes increasing its accessibility within the IoT
domain. The communication overhead is also reduced with
the use of atomic messages.

With the ongoing developments discussed, the IOTA Tangle
looks to become increasingly more scalable, with a smaller
communication overhead and provide the means of direct
from source data attachment of integrity veriﬁed data. These
developments continue to position IOTA Tangle as a highly
attractive DLT for IoT industry.

REFERENCES

[1] M. Salimitari and M. Chatterjee, “A Survey on Consensus Protocols
in Blockchain for IoT Networks,” Sept. 2018. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1809.05613

[2] S. Popov, “The Tangle,” Tech. Rep., 2018.

[Online]. Available:

http://www.descryptions.com/Iota.pdf

[3] S. Popov et al., “The Coordicide,” 2020.

[Online]. Available:

https://ﬁles.iota.org/papers/202001204 Coordicide WP.pdf

[4] “IOTA 2.0 DevNet (Nectar) - The Era of IOTA’s Decentralization Starts

Here.” [Online]. Available: https://blog.iota.org/iotav2devnet/

[5] “IOTA 2.0 DEVNET - Nectar Release.” [Online]. Available: https:

//v2.iota.org/how-it-works/introduction

[6] M. Conti, G. Kumar, P. Nerurkar, R. Saha, and L. Vigneri, “A Survey on
Security Challenges and Solutions in the IOTA,” Journal of Network and
Computer Applications, vol. 203, p. 103383, 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1084804522000467

[7] L. Vigneri, W. Welz, A. Gal, and V. Dimitrov, “Achieving Fairness in
the Tangle through an Adaptive Rate Control Algorithm,” in 2019 IEEE
International Conference on Blockchain and Cryptocurrency (ICBC),
2019, pp. 146–148.

[8] S. Popov and W. J. Buchanan, “FPC-BI: Fast Probabilistic Consensus
within Byzantine Infrastructures,” Journal of Parallel and Distributed
Computing, vol. 147, p. 77–86,
[Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jpdc.2020.09.002

Jan 2021.

[9] “GitHub - iotaledger/fpc-sim: Fast Probabilistic Consensus Simulator.”

[Online]. Available: https://github.com/iotaledger/fpc-sim

[10] “Explaining Mana in IOTA.” [Online]. Available: https://blog.iota.org/

explaining-mana-in-iota-6f636690b916/

[11] E. Drasutis, “IOTA Smart Contracts,” IOTA Foundation White Paper,

2021. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/iotaledger/wasp

[12] “IOTA Native Digital Assets - DevNet Version.” [Online]. Available:

https://blog.iota.org/iota-native-digital-assets-devnet/

[13] “Towards Full Decentralization with IOTA 2.0.” [Online]. Available:

https://blog.iota.org/path-towards-full-decentralization-with-iota-2-0/

[14] “IOTA Research Symposium 2021.”

[Online]. Available: https:

[15] “Improvements

//blog.iota.org/iota-research-symposium-2021/
IOTA
to
Available:

sus Mechanism.”
improvements-to-the-iota-2-0-consensus-mechanism/

the
[Online].

2.0

Consen-
https://blog.iota.org/

