Efﬁcient quantum non-fungible tokens for
blockchain

Subhash Shankar Pandey, Tadasha Dash, Prasanta K. Panigrahi, and Ahmed Farouk

1

2
2
0
2

p
e
S
2

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
9
4
4
2
0
.
9
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Blockchain is a decentralized system that allows
transaction transmission and storage according to the roles of
the Consensus algorithm and Smart contracts. Non-fungible
tokens (NFTs) consolidate the best characteristics of blockchain
technology to deliver unique and bona ﬁde tokens, each with
distinctive attributes with non-fungible resources. Unfortunately,
current classical NFTs are suffering from high costs regarding
the consumed power of mining and lack of security. Therefore,
this paper presents a new protocol for preparing quantum non-
fungible tokens where a quantum state representing NFT is
mounted on a blockchain instead of physically giving it to
the owner. The proposed scheme is simulated and analyzed
against various attacks and proves its ability to secure against
them. Furthermore, the presented protocol provides reliable and
cheaper NFTs than the classical one.

Index Terms—Blockchain, Non-fungible token, Proof of stake,

IBM Q experience, Quantum state tomography.

I. INTRODUCTION

The modern digital era is characterized by heightened trust
and security concerns, especially regarding money. However,
due to its digital ledger technology, blockchain is currently
the most trusted technology for its ability to store continu-
ously evolving data records in a decentralized and distributed
network [1], [2]. Blockchain utilizes a cryptographic hash
function to encrypt communication between decentralized net-
work nodes, immune to unauthorized attacks. The information
stored in digital ledgers can be acquired and sold worldwide
through cryptocurrency exchanges; however, the exchange of
funds is recorded in a public ledger, and your coins are
stored in your digital wallet [3]. Blockchains are integrated
innovations that consolidate computer technologies with in-
frastructure, network, proof of stake, data, and applications.
Blockchain technology enables the creation of a transparent,
distributed, cost-efﬁcient, and adaptive environment where
each transaction can be audited and audit
trails can be
created. With blockchain technology, trustability, auditability,
immutability, identiﬁcation, persistency, credibility, and trans-
parency are all built-in, making it more effective [4].

Subhash Shankar Pandey is with the Indian Institute of Science Education

and Research Kolkata, Mohanpur 741246, West Bengal, India
E-mail: subhashshankarpandeyy@gmail.com

Tadasha Dash is with the Indian Institute of Science Education and Research

Kolkata, Mohanpur 741246, West Bengal, India
E-mail: tadashadash08@gmail.com

P. K. Panigrahi is with the Indian Institute of Science Education and

Research Kolkata, Mohanpur 741246, West Bengal, India
E-mail: pprasanta@iiserkol.ac.in

A. Farouk is with Department of Physics and Computer Science, Faculty

of Science, Wilfrid Laurier University, Waterloo, Canada.
E-mail: afarouk@wlu.ca

Beyond

blockchain

technology

cryptocurrency,

has
numerous applications in areas such as ﬁnancial services
[5] and social services, risk management [6], healthcare
facilities [7], the internet of things (IoT) [8] to public and
social services [9], Among the signiﬁcant blockchain-based
innovations that impact intellectual property are non-fungible
tokens (NFT). Non-fungible Tokens are a type of non-
interchangeable digital asset which cannot be substituted for
its equivalent one. Uniqueness, traceability, programmability,
indivisibleness, and atomicity enable NFT to become more
promising [10], [11]. This allows them to be traced throughout
an immutable digital ledger, resulting in a veriﬁable asset
history. A government or any centralized entity would not
manage these tokens but solely rely on peer-to-peer fashion
among its users. Precisely NFTs act as a liaison between the
digital and physical world through numerous applications in
collectables, gaming, virtual art [12], [13], identity, private
equity transactions, and real estate deals [14], ticketing events
[15], intellectual property assets [16] to name a few.The NFT
market has gone vertical; in just one year, the NFT market
has taken substantial rise from total daily sales of about USD
183,121 in 2020 to an average of USD 38 million in 2021 [17]

Classical cryptography is like some puzzle means security
is ensured by complexity. The key to the security of classical
computers is the limitation of the computational power of
a classical computer. The emergence of powerful supercom-
puters and quantum computers jeopardised the security of
classical encryption. We can solve these issues with the help of
quantum computers, where the law of quantum physics ensures
security.

Notwithstanding the importance of the topic, few studies
have been conducted on non-fungible tokens; however, to our
knowledge, we are the ﬁrst to incorporate it into quantum
computing. A novel protocol for preparing a quantum non-
fungible token has been developed. The NFT is mounted on a
blockchain made using doubly hypergraph states. The informa-
tion is added as the weight of the quantum state further, and the
entanglement of weighted doubly hypergraph states replaces
the classical cryptographic hash functions. The security of the
proposed protocol is guarded by the law of quantum physics,
making it safe from all types of classical and quantum attacks.
Also, an experimental demonstration of the protocol using a
cloud-based quantum computer IBM Q Casablanca established
in Casablanca, the largest city in Morocco, and compared the
experimental result with the expected result [18].
The contributions of this work are mentioned below:

• An efﬁcient protocol for preparing a quantum non-

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

fungible token is proposed on a blockchain using dou-
bly hypergraph states where entanglement took over the
classical cryptographic hash functions.

• A hybrid approach to making it more reliable and envi-

ronmentally benign involves Proof of Stake.

• The aforementioned protocol is tested and simulated us-
ing the IBM cloud-based quantum computer, and ﬁdelity
of 0.8 is achieved in the current accessibility.

• The designed protocol proves its performance, adequacy,

and efﬁciency against various possible attacks.

Our paper is organized in the following manner, sec.II dis-
cusses the fundamental constituents of our QNFT protocol.
sec.III represents the prototype design to develop quantum
NFT. Security and adequacy of the scheme are examined
in sec.IV. Experimental realization of our protocol is carried
out in sec.V. sec.VI concludes the paper with possible future
directions.

Fig. 1. Representation of entanglement between six qubits double hypergraph
state

II. FUNDAMENTALS OF QNFT PROTOCOL

We put forth quantum NFT protocol, in which token is
minted on the blockchain by employing doubly hypergraph
states. Proof of stake is utilized to develop an environmen-
tally friendly, productive protocol. We explain the primary
constituents of our protocol.

just in case they bolster numerous blockchains in the event
of a blockchain split. Hence, each fork can cause multiple
blockchains, and validators can work; additionally, the nodes
inside the network can never reach a consensus.
To begin with, the operational execution of a proof-of-stake
cryptocurrency was Peercoin [22]. There are sporadic propos-
als for Ethereum to alter from a POW to a POS mechanism.

A. Proof of Stake

A stake characterizes the esteem or money one tends to
wager on a particular outcome, and the strategy is named
staking. Proof of stake [19] (POS) may be a category of a
mechanism utilized for blockchain. It works by choosing the
validators in proportion to their stake within the associated
cryptocurrency. We tend to append a blockchain group action
to the blockchain itself, so it is frequently recognized. Valida-
tors perform this included factor to make it safely. We have
proposed a mechanism to prevent a malicious user from being
built up by imposing the compulsion that validators ought
to have the number of blockchain tokens. It needs potential
attackers to accumulate an outsized fraction of the tokens on
the blockchain to mount an attack.
A validator stake is outlined by the product of the number
of coins with the number of times a single user has con-
trolled them. In layman’s dialect, the individual will mine or
validate block transactions agreeing to the number of coins
they hold. This proposes that the more coins closely held
by a miner,
is an
alternate to Proof of Work (POW) [20], the original consensus
algorithm in blockchain technology, to make sure transactions
and incorporate new blocks to the chain. For case, Peercoin,
Nxt, Blackcoin, and ShadowCoin all work on proof of stake
mechanism.
One of the signiﬁcant advantages of Veriﬁcation of Stake(POS)
[21] is that they are energy efﬁcient. Since all the nodes
appear to be not competing against one another to associate a
replacement block to the blockchain, energy is spared inside
the proof of stake. Moreover, it is decentralized as rewards
are proportional to the amount of stake. There is an issue of
nothing at stake with this as there is no drawback to the nodes

the more mining control

they have. It

B. Quantum double hypergraph states

Quantum hypergraph states are profoundly entangled mul-
tipartite quantum states based on a mathematical hypergraph.
The quantum states reside on the vertices of the hypergraph,
and the edges appear as attachments to other qubits, form-
ing a non-separable many-body quantum state. The double
hypergraph is comparative to the hypergraph state [23], but
each vertex have a parallel vertex shown in Fig. 1. We
propose a methodology for creating a fundamentally quantum
blockchain, using such states’ entanglement as a replacement
for traditional ledger and hash functions. A fundamental clar-
iﬁcation of a hypergraph state is shown below. A comparable
quantum state may be made from a mathematical hypergraph
with k hyperedges (i.e., hyperedges connecting 2k qubits)
and n vertices. The hypergraph’s number of vertices breaks
even with n, the double number of qubits within the quantum
framework. All qubits are at ﬁrst in a pair of bell states. One
qubit of the bell state is class A and the second qubit is
represented as class B. A controlled-phase operation with a
phase angle of π/2 is then performed on each k-hyperedge of
class A and B, shown in Fig. 2. A double hypergraph with
four vertices 1,2,3,4 where each vertex contains two qubits
represented with classes A and B. Each qubit of class A and B
are entangled in a bell state with each other at their respective
vertices. The weighted double hypergraph states can be created
by adding a phase to each qubit by local operation.

III. PROTOTYPE DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT OF
QUANTUM NFT
We have proposed a protocol for Quantum non-fungible
tokens. Our protocol can potentially replace the classical NFT

3

Fig. 3. Circuit to get random phase in q3 where q0,q1 and q2 are qubits for
generation of random number.

Likewise, all the peers encode the classical information fol-
lowing the same function added by the ﬁrst peer. The chosen
function can be any bijective function only known to the
particular peer in this blockchain. Let us look at the example
if we consider our information input as 110 and function is θi
= 1
8 + 0
. This is how we can encode the name of owner and info of
art. The length of info must be ﬁxed,in our case we ﬁx three
digit binary number whose value will be around 50 to 100 to
ensure enough space for information.

4 then 110 can be written as π

2i−1 θ1 here θ1 = π

4 + π

B. Creation of Token

To create a token that is a random and unique phase, we use
a Hadamard gate to place a qubit in a superposition of zero
and one. After this, we measure that qubit. The measurement is
purely random zero and one [26] (here, the randomness of this
number depends on the laws of physics). Then, depending on
the measurement outcome, we apply the phase gate. The angle
of the phase gate is decided by a function θk = 1
2k+i θ1, where
i is the position of the binary number, and k is the number of
peers. In Fig 3 we have to generate a random phase for the
ﬁrst peer using only three qubits where θ1 = pi. The number
of Hadamard gates will decide the randomness of the phase.
Hence the Hadamard gates must be substantial enough (around
20 to 50) to ensure randomness. Again this function takes care
of uniqueness because the phase of the token depends on the
number of blocks it belongs to on the chain.

In equation 2 to 5, we show that if we use only three
Hadamard gates, then there are eight possible combinations,
and for each binary string, we have different phases.

=

π
4

|000(cid:105) = 0 + 0 + 0 = 0
π
4
π
16
3π
16

|001(cid:105) = 0 + 0 +
π
16
π
16

+ 0 + 0 =

+ 0 =

π
8

+

|100(cid:105) =

|110(cid:105) =

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

This is how we get a relative random phase. As the number
of Hadamard gate increases, the uniqueness of the phase will
increase exponentially. If we use about 20 to 50 qubits, it is
tough to guess the phase. This consensus will also ensure the
randomness as well as the uniqueness of the token.

Fig. 2. Circuit to create quantum double hypergraph state.

with the assistance of entanglement of a double-weighted
hypergraph state, where the sell-off and statement of the victor
can be chosen either classically or with quantum auction pro-
tocol. After announcing a victor, we create a token concurring
with the agreement; a token has a few random angles. Each
block of the blockchain contains two qubits (entangled in bell
state) ﬁrst qubit stores the information of the proprietor and
its information, and the second qubit stores the token’s data (a
token is a few random angles). We utilize the ”weights,” i.e.,
the phase carried by the hyperedges of the double-weighted
hypergraph state, to encode the classical information. In this
protocol, we created a unique, non-fungible quantum token
and mounted it on the blockchain [24]. We do not grant any
physical state or physical token to the owner; instead, we
mount the owner’s name or id and the asset’s information on
the blockchain. The owner is also part of that blockchain. Let
us look at each step gradually.

A. Creation of block of NFT

NFT does not contain any physical data but contains infor-
mation about the owner and art [25] (link of art or name of art
). In our protocol, we have taken a bell state such that the ﬁrst
qubit of the bell state contains information about the owner
and art, whereas the second qubit stores information of token
(token is some random phase). We consider the information
as a string of binary which will have a decimal equivalent
of p. Two qubits combine to make a peer state deﬁned as
|ψ(cid:105) = |00(cid:105)+|11(cid:105)√
and introduce the relative phase ( p-value ) of
the system as,

2

|ψ1A,1B(cid:105) = S(p1A) ⊗ S(p1B) =

|00(cid:105) + ei(θ1A+θ1B ) |11(cid:105)
√
2

.

(1)
Where θ1A and θ1B ∈ (0, π
2 ) is a function of P , f (P ), any
bijective function can be chosen and known to the particular
peer who is part of the block, and (cid:80)
i θiA + θiB and < π ∀i
Here, the number of the block added to the chain is represented
by i. Now the state |ψ1A,1B(cid:105) carries information of owner and
art in its ﬁrst phase (1A) and token in the second phase (1B),
this two set of qubits is the peer of the blockchain. There is
a mutual agreement upon consensus between the peers.

4

Fig. 4. Elucidating our quantum NFT ecosystem for certain scenario such as addition of one peer to the main blockchain.

Fig. 5. Circuit for quantum 3-NFT ( q0,q2 and q4 hold information
of the owner and q1,q3 and q5 are tokens) prepared in IBM quantum
experience(information encoded by applying suitable phase gate.

Fig. 6. Circuit for equivalent control- control phase gate .

C. Veriﬁcation of the blocks

This step of veriﬁcation is necessary to ensure that blocks
are added according to consensus. The entanglement of double
weighted hypergraph state allows us this step of veriﬁcation,
and every block should pass this veriﬁcation step before adding
it into our blockchain. According to our consensus, the peer
who creates a token and mounted the owner name with asset
sends the copy of the state to all peers and also informs them
about relative phase θmA and θmB.Now using QKD each peer
veriﬁes the state,

|ψmA,mB(cid:105) =

|00(cid:105) + ei(θmA+θmB ) |11(cid:105)
√
2

.

(6)

1

Where the relative phase should be θmA = (

nm−1 )θ1A
nm−1 )θ1B. He or she conveys a single copy
and θmB = (
of the state with each peer within the framework. When
the peers get the qubit, they measure it on a basis |±m(cid:105) =
|00(cid:105)+ei(θmA+θmB )|11(cid:105)
. In the event that the result of estimation
√
2

1

is one, at that point they add the state in their native copy
utilizing the m − 1controlled-P( π
2 )gate to each qubit of the
block as appeared in Fig.7. The protocol is aborted for the
other measurement results, and the peer is designated as
untrustworthy as a result. and can be penalized in line with
proof of stake.

As we know that in IBM we don’t have a control-control
2 ) gate but we can apply some equivalent gate that

phase( π
shown in Fig 6.

IV. SECURITY AND EFFECTIVENESS
In our protocol, entanglement ensures the security of the
blockchain in which QNFT is encoded. Entanglement deals
with blockchain security only after the addition of a block
in the chain by the peer. The authenticity of the blocks is
veriﬁed by the process discussed previously. If the block does
not succeed in the veriﬁcation process, the corresponding peer
who creates the block will lose the stake. The amount of stake
is much higher than rewording, so the ﬁnancial motivation will
stop peers from doing unethical work.

I want NFT for my product.furehfurehfuewhfuwehuwhuwheufhuewhuewhfuewhruewhrueeufurehfurehfuewhfuwehuwhuwheufhuewhuewhfuewhruewhrueeufurehfurehfuewhfuwehuwhuwheufhuewhuewhfuewhruewhrueeufurehfurehfuewhfuwehuwhuwheufhuewhuewhfuewhruewhrueeufurehfurehfuewhfuwehuwhuwheufhuewhuewhfuewhruewhrueeufurehfurehfuewhfuwehuwhuwheufhuewhuewhfuewhruewhrueeufurehfurehfuewhfuwehuwhuwheufhuewhuewhfuewhruewhrueeufurehfurehfuewhfuwehuwhuwheufhuewhuewhfuewhruewhrueeuHey, I have the largest stake; thus, I won.furehfurehfuewhfuwehuwhuwheufhuewhuewhfuewhruewhrueeufurehfurehfuewhfuwehuwhuwheufhuewhuewhfuewhruewhrueeufurehfurehfuewhfuwehuwhuwheufhuewhuewhfuewhruewhrueeufurehfurehfuewhfuwehuwhuwheufhuewhuewhfuewhruewhrueeufurehfurehfuewhfuwehuwhuwheufhuewhuewhfuewhruewhrueeufurehfurehfuewhfuwehuwhuwheufhuewhuewhfuewhruewhrueeufurehfurehfuewhfuwehuwhuwheufhuewhuewhfuewhruewhrueeufurehfurehfuewhfuwehuwhuwheufhuewhuewhfuewhruewhrueeufurehfurehfuewhfuwehuwhuwheufhuewhuewhfuewhruewhrueeufurehfurehfuewhfuwehuwhuwheufhuewhuewhfuewhruewhrueeufurehfurehfuewhfuwehuwhuwheufhuewhuewhfuewhruewhrueeufurehfurehfuewhfuwehuwhuwheufhuewhuewhfuewhruewhrueeufurehfurehfuewhfuwehuwhuwheufhuewhuewhfuewhruewhrueeufurehfurehfuewhfuwehuwhuwheufhuewhuewhfuewhruewhrueeufurehfurehfuewhfuwehuwhuwheufhuewhuewhfuewhruewhrueeufurehfurehfuewhfuwehuwhuwheufhuewhuewhfuewhruewhrueeufurehfurehfuewhfuwehuwhuwheufhuewhuewhfuewhruewhrueeu Finally, I am part of this NFT containing blockchain.Step 1 : Proof of StakeStep 2 : Token CreationStep 3 : Token VerificationIt's okIt’s okIt's okIt's okIt's okIt's okIt's okGuys, we have a new friend. Let’s verify and add his block to our ledger.HiiAlgorithm 1 Quantum NFT

5

1: All the NFT owners put their stake for POS process.
2: Probability of win in POS ∝ amount of stake.
3: The winner create a state |ψ(cid:105) = |00(cid:105)+ei(θmA+θmB )|11(cid:105)
4: The state is sent to each peer for veriﬁcation.
5: if
6:

the state pass veriﬁcation. then
The peer will add that state in their local blockchain
copy.

√

2

.

7: else
8:
9: end if

The peer will discard the state.

Fig. 7. Flowchart for creation of token and encoding it into blockchain.

Our convention depicts a blockchain as an entangled state,
information is stored in phases, and n peers share n copy
of the state at any given time. We do not have any public
database; only θp1 is shared with the assistance of QKD to all
peers. In case we assume Eve altered with data, at that point,
we can ﬁgure out the block that causes the collapse of the
state and the peer whose state was annihilated. Once again,
the particular state can be recouped as he/she knows the
particular state without violating the no-cloning hypothesis.

In the following, we have considered a few possible attacks:
intercept-and-resend, entangle-and-measure and man-in-the-
middle in addition to classical threat. We will see how our
protocol overcomes these attacks.

A. Intercept-and-resend attack

We presume Eve as an eavesdropper who intercepts particles
sent by Alice or any participant and resends a sequence of
forged particles in the hope of succeeding the eavesdropping.
In this case the forged particle can be identiﬁed in veriﬁcation
process when each peer measure the particle on a basis |±m(cid:105)
= |00(cid:105)+ei(θmA+θmB )|11(cid:105)
. In that event, the result of estimation
is one; at that point, they add the state in their native copy
utilizing the m − 1 controlled-P( π
2 ) gate to each qubit of

√

2

Fig. 8. Control swap test to test peer m and peer n is same or not.

the block as appeared in ﬁg. 4. The protocol is aborted for
the other measurement results, and the peer is labeled as
untrustworthy as a result. He can be penalized in line with
proof of stake.

B. Entangle-and-measure attack

In this kind of attack, Eve uses a unitary operation UE to
entangle an ancillary particle on the transmitted quantum state
and then measures the ancillary particle to steal information.In
this protocol, all information is stored in distributed phase, so
even if Eve tries to entangle, he will not succeed.

UE |ψmA,mB(cid:105) =

+

a |0(cid:105) |00(cid:105) + b |0(cid:105) ei(θmA+θmB ) |11(cid:105)
√
2
c |1(cid:105) |00(cid:105) + d |1(cid:105) ei(θmA+θmB ) |11(cid:105)
√
2

UE |ψmA,mB(cid:105) =

+

a |+(cid:105) |00(cid:105) + b |+(cid:105) ei(θmA+θmB ) |11(cid:105)
√
2
c |−(cid:105) |00(cid:105) + d |−(cid:105) ei(θmA+θmB ) |11(cid:105)
√
2

(7)

(8)

Where eθmA+θmB is combined phase of token and information
of owner. Hence getting phase individual
token is nearly
impossible for invader if block is integrated in proposed
blockchain. If Invader entangle with any block the controlled
swap operation [27] is used to verify whether two states are
the same or not. In this operation we use 3 qubits; q0 is the
test qubit , q1, and q2 are peerm and peern respectively. If
the test outcome is 0, then the test is successful; otherwise, it
fails. With this controlled swap, we can compare two copies
of the blockchain. This operation will not work for individual
peers. A circuit for control swap test is shown in ﬁg 8.

C. Man-in-the-middle attack

Eve, the attacker, can use this type of attack to secretly
relay and possibly manipulate communication between two
parties who believe they are directly communicating. As a
result, Eve can steal information from intercepted particles and
also disrupt communication via re-sending forged particles.
However, this type of attack cannot penetrate our protocol
because our veriﬁcation procedure protects it.

We need to incorporate quantum identity authentication into
our protocol, which can assist a party in determining whether
another party is legitimate or not. When two parties interact,
they must ﬁrst validate each other’s identities via quantum
identity authentication, after which the attacker will be unable
to impersonate a participant and connect with others.

Threat
Spooﬁng (Authenticity)

Tampering
(Integrity)
Repudiation
(Non-repudiability)
Information disclosure
(Conﬁdentiality)

Classical Security Issues
Authentication vulnerabilities might be exploited by
a hacker. A user’s private key might be stolen.
Manipulation with data store
outside the blockchain is possible.
Binding of hash data with
an attacker’s address possible.
To link a particular NFT buyer or seller, an
attacker can exploit the hash and transaction.

Quantum Solutions
Information is secure with entanglement and temper-
ing with entanglement is not possible
All the data shared between the peers using QKD
is very secure
No cloning theorem says
Quantum state can not be clone
To exploit information attacker have to measure
the state which will cause collapse of state

TABLE I
SECURITY LAPSES WITH CLASSICAL NFT AND THEIR QUANTUM SOLUTIONS

6

D. Classical Threat

The primary vulnerabilities associated with classical NFT
are Spooﬁng, Tampering, Repudiation, and Information
transparent
disclosure. Our protocol will attain a higher
system with quantum technology.

Spooﬁng is the capacity to imitate another entity on the
same framework (for case, an individual or a computer), which
correlates to genuineness. All data is stored in an entangled
state (double hypergraph state), and imitating entanglement is
unattainable.
Tampering is deﬁned as the malicious alteration of NFT data to
compromise its integrity. Tampering with information is only
possible before adding it to the blockchain, so all information
is shared using QKD to avoid any attack.
The term ”repudiation” refers to a situation in which the
originator of a statement is incapable of disputing it, which
is linked to the security highlight of non-reputability [28]. To
accomplice this, a hostile attacker might steal the hash data,
or the hash information could connect with the assailant’s
address. In our convention, data is put away in a quantum
state, and the no-cloning theorem says that cloning a quantum
state is impossible, so our NFT is secure from this sort of
attack.
When conﬁdential information is exposed to unapproved users,
usually known as information tampering, however,
in our
protocol, if an attacker wants to get information, he needs to
apply a measurement operator that will lead to the collapse of
the block and can effortlessly be taken note of by the owner.
Table I displays how our protocol conquers the security lapses
as to classical one.

V. DISCUSSION AND EVALUATION

We will discuss in a manner our protocol fulﬁlls all the

basic properties of NFT.

1) Token has unique identity: A token is some random
phase that builds using 200 to 300 qubits if we use only 20
qubits we have phase 1 in around 10 lakhs so it is extremely
unlikely to have two tokens have the same phase even in 20
qubits so if we use such a large number it is nearly impossible
that two tokens have the same phase, this is how we will ensure
the uniqueness of token.

2) Token must be non-fungible: As the token is unique and
the name of the owner and art is also attached to it due to
this token can not be interchangeable. Non-fungibility does

not mean one can not sell the art again rather it tells art is
not interchangeable with each other, this is ensured by the
uniqueness of token.

3) Proof of ownership: The token is minted on the
blockchain and can be tracked to give the owner proof of
ownership. In sec. III we addressed in detail how we have
added token in our blockchain, One block consists of two
qubits. The ﬁrst qubit stores the information of the owner and
its art, while the second qubit is reserved for tokens. According
to our protocol, the owner is part of the blockchain as he/she
is a peer of the blockchain. This gives the owner proof of
ownership.

4) Transparent operation.: Each peer has their own copy
of the blockchain. All the NFT operations including mounting,
purchasing, and selling are open to the public.

5) Availability, Tamper-resistance and Usability: As
NFT is a distributed system, one or two fabrication does
not affect
the whole system. The system will always be
available for the public to use. Entanglement ensures the
whole system’s security, so tempering it is not possible. Each
block is instantaneously added to all blockchain copies, so
each copy of the blockchain is up to date, which makes it
user-friendly. We have carried out our experiment on IBM
Quantum Experience. Even though our protocol is planned
for distributed ledger frameworks, we have executed our
circuit on the IBM Quantum computer as a proof of concept.
A set of circuits that work to complete our whole protocol.
We have illustrated our blockchain circuit, a signiﬁcant and
principal portion of our entire protocol. This blockchain
circuit is a 4-qubit system that incorporates a large set of
quantum gates alongside our group of circuits. It contains two
blocks of NFT. We run our circuit on ’IBM Q Casablanca,’ a
7-qubit Quantum computer exclusively accessible to premium
users. While testing, the most extreme number of shots, i.e.,
8192, have been considered. We obtained a density matrix
pretty much closer to the simulated matrix, which once more
we get by running our circuit through 100000 shots on the
QASM simulator. It gives us a density matrix that is nearly
equal to the theoretical density matrix. We have calculated
quantum state tomography to discover ﬁdelity between the
simulated density matrix and the experimental density matrix.
The ﬁdelity of 0.80 is achieved.

A. Experimental realization

For our experiment, we have assumed the ﬁrst block q0,
which holds the information about the owner and asset of the

7

Fig. 12. City plots of real (left) and imaginary (right) parts of a experimental
density matrix.

1st nft, denoted as π/16. The random token q1 is also π/16,
and the second block q2 taken as π/32, which is carries
particulars of the owner and asset of the 2nd nft, random
token q3 is also taken π/32. All these values are according to
the consensus. A city plot is the conventional representation
of quantum states, in which the real and imaginary (image)
components of the state matrix are represented like a city.
Fig.9 is the state city plot of the simulated density matrix,
and Fig 12 is the state city plot of the experimental density
matrix. The resemblance between the experimental and
simulated (theoretical) density matrices can easily be seen,
indicating that the effect of device noise is minimal.
Fig 10 and Fig 11 is the Hinton representation of simulated
and experimental density matrix respectively. The element’s
size shows the value of the matrix element in a state Hinton
plot, which is similar to a city plot.

We have also plotted a blockchain containing three QNFTs,
shown in Fig 5. For this plot, we assumed the phases as( π/2,
π/4), (π/4,π/16) and (π/32, 3π/16) for the ﬁrst, second,
and third block respectively. The ﬁrst phase of each block
is information about the owner and assets, and the second
phase of each block is the token. In order to add those blocks
to our blockchain, we have to apply the respective control
phase (θ = π/2) operation. For the second block, we have to
apply the control phase operation directly available on IBM.
However, in the third block, we have to apply the control-
control phase (θ = π/2) operation not directly available
on IBM. So we use the equivalent circuit shown in Fig 6.
Following the same manner, we can add multiple blocks to
this chain. Fig 4 portrays simple animation elaborating how a
new block is added to the existing NFT blockchain. In step 1,
all peers put their stakes, and the peer with the largest stake has
the largest probability of being selected. In step 2, the winner
from POS creates the quantum state representing the block
and sends every peer for veriﬁcation. And in the last step, the
new peer is added to the blockchain as a new member and
owns a complete blockchain set.

Fig. 9. City plots of real (left) and imaginary (right) parts of a simulated
density matrix.

Fig. 10. Hinton plots of real (left) and imaginary (right) parts of a simulated
density matrix.

Fig. 11. Hinton plots of real (left) and imaginary (right) parts of a
experimental density matrix.

8

[7] T. McGhin, K.-K. R. Choo, C. Z. Liu, and D. He, “Blockchain in
healthcare applications: Research challenges and opportunities,” Journal
of Network and Computer Applications, vol. 135, pp. 62–75, 2019.
[8] O. Novo, “Blockchain meets iot: An architecture for scalable access
management in iot,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 5, no. 2, pp.
1184–1195, 2018.

[9] R. Huo, S. Zeng, Z. Wang, J. Shang, W. Chen, T. Huang, S. Wang,
F. R. Yu, and Y. Liu, “A comprehensive survey on blockchain in
industrial internet of things: Motivations, research progresses, and future
challenges,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, 2022.

[10] Q. Wang, R. Li, Q. Wang, and S. Chen, “Non-fungible token (nft):
Overview, evaluation, opportunities and challenges,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2105.07447, 2021.

[11] U. W. Chohan, “Non-fungible tokens: Blockchains, scarcity, and value,”
Critical Blockchain Research Initiative (CBRI) Working Papers, 2021.
[12] L. J. Trautman, “Virtual art and non-fungible tokens,” Available at SSRN

3814087, 2021.

[13] L. Kugler, “Non-fungible tokens and the future of art,” Communications

of the ACM, vol. 64, no. 9, pp. 19–20, 2021.

[14] N. Mofokeng and T. Fatima, “Future tourism trends: Utilizing non-
fungible tokens to aid wildlife conservation,” African Journal of Hospi-
tality, Tourism and Leisure, vol. 7, no. 4, 2018.

[15] F. Regner, N. Urbach, and A. Schweizer, “Nfts in practice–non-fungible
tokens as core component of a blockchain-based event ticketing appli-
cation,” 2019.

[16] S. M. H. Bamakan, N. Nezhadsistani, O. Bodaghi, and Q. Qu, “Patents
and intellectual property assets as non-fungible tokens; key technologies
and challenges,” Scientiﬁc Reports, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 1–13, 2022.
[17] C. Pinto-Guti´errez, S. Gait´an, D. Jaramillo, and S. Velasquez, “The
nft hype: What draws attention to non-fungible tokens?” Mathematics,
vol. 10, no. 3, p. 335, 2022.

[18] “Ibm quantum experience,” URL: https://quantum-computing.ibm.com/.
[19] A. Kiayias, A. Russell, B. David, and R. Oliynykov, “Ouroboros: A
provably secure proof-of-stake blockchain protocol,” in Annual Interna-
tional Cryptology Conference. Springer, 2017, pp. 357–388.

[20] A. Gervais, G. O. Karame, K. W¨ust, V. Glykantzis, H. Ritzdorf,
and S. Capkun, “On the security and performance of proof of work
blockchains,” in Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC conference on
computer and communications security, 2016, pp. 3–16.
protocol

v2,” URL:
https://blackcoin. co/blackcoin-pos-protocol-v2-whitepaper. pdf, vol. 71,
2014.

[21] P. Vasin,

proof-of-stake

“Blackcoin’s

[22] T. Xue, Y. Yuan, Z. Ahmed, K. Moniz, G. Cao, and C. Wang, “Proof of
contribution: A modiﬁcation of proof of work to increase mining efﬁ-
ciency,” in 2018 IEEE 42nd annual computer software and applications
conference (COMPSAC), vol. 1.

IEEE, 2018, pp. 636–644.

[23] M. Rossi, M. Huber, D. Bruß, and C. Macchiavello, “Quantum hyper-
graph states,” New Journal of Physics, vol. 15, no. 11, p. 113022, 2013.
[24] S. Banerjee, A. Mukherjee, and P. K. Panigrahi, “Quantum blockchain
using weighted hypergraph states,” Physical Review Research, vol. 2,
no. 1, p. 013322, 2020.

[25] L. Ante, “The non-fungible token (nft) market and its relationship with

bitcoin and ethereum,” Available at SSRN 3861106, 2021.

[26] K. Tamura and Y. Shikano, “Quantum random number generation with
the superconducting quantum computer ibm 20q tokyo.” IACR Cryptol.
ePrint Arch., vol. 2020, p. 78, 2020.

[27] S. R. Moulick and P. K. Panigrahi, “Quantum cheques,” Quantum

Information Processing, vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 2475–2486, 2016.

[28] J. Zhou and D. Gollman, “A fair non-repudiation protocol,” in Proceed-
IEEE, 1996, pp.

ings 1996 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy.
55–61.

VI. CONCLUSION

To summarize, We have designed a protocol for preparing
a quantum non-fungible token. Rather than giving the owner
a physical quantum state representing NFT, we mounted it
on a blockchain created utilizing doubly hypergraph states.
The entanglement of the weighted double hypergraph state
supplanted the conventional cryptographic hash functions. Our
protocol incorporates proof of stake (POS) to develop an envi-
ronmentally friendly, productive protocol which is eventually
more effective than proof of work (POW). With POS, a peer is
chosen; the same peer is responsible for making fair tokens and
sends that token to each peer. After conﬁrmation, each peer
will include the new peer in their particular blockchain. With
the help of animation and several ﬁgures, we have elaborated
a simple process of forming QNFT in the blockchain. We
have too tossed light on the adequacy and secureness of a
few possible renowned attacks such as intercept- and-resend,
entangle-and-measure, man-in-the-middle attack, and classical
threat employing a quantum computer. We put up a quantum
blockchain with two blocks on the IBM seven-qubit processor
”IBM Q Casablanca” as a proof of concept, and the ﬁdelity of
0.80 is achieved. A higher number of shots and a low noise
device can increase ﬁdelity. With the rapid development of
quantum hardware, we are hopeful our protocol will achieve
higher ﬁdelity shortly.
The application of this protocol is exceptionally noteworthy.
This protocol can replace classical NFT, and with the property
of quantum physics, NFT proprietors will get a more secure
stage for recognizing their assets. Eventually, NFTs pave the
way to possibly digitizing the intellectual property rights and
tokenizing the resources.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

S.S.P would like to thank IISER Kolkata for provid-
ing hospitality during the course of project work and
QUEST(DST/ICPS/QuST/Theme-1/2019/2020-21/01) for ﬁ-
nancial support. T.D acknowledges ﬁnancial support by Dept.
of Science and Technology,
India –INSPIRE Fellowship
(IF180118). We would also like to acknowledge the IBMQ
Experience, through which all the experimentation has been
carried out.We are thankful
to Bikash K. Behera for his
discussion prior to the start of the project.

REFERENCES

[1] M. Nofer, P. Gomber, O. Hinz, and D. Schiereck, “Blockchain,” Business
& Information Systems Engineering, vol. 59, no. 3, pp. 183–187, 2017.
[2] W. Meng, J. Wang, X. Wang, J. Liu, Z. Yu, J. Li, Y. Zhao, and
S. S. Chow, “Position paper on blockchain technology: Smart contract
and applications,” in International Conference on Network and System
Security. Springer, 2018, pp. 474–483.

[3] Z. Zheng, S. Xie, H.-N. Dai, X. Chen, and H. Wang, “Blockchain
challenges and opportunities: A survey,” International Journal of Web
and Grid Services, vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 352–375, 2018.

[4] A. A. Monrat, O. Schel´en, and K. Andersson, “A survey of blockchain
from the perspectives of applications, challenges, and opportunities,”
IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 117 134–117 151, 2019.

[5] P. Treleaven, R. G. Brown, and D. Yang, “Blockchain technology in

ﬁnance,” Computer, vol. 50, no. 9, pp. 14–17, 2017.

[6] Y. Fu and J. Zhu, “Big production enterprise supply chain endogenous
risk management based on blockchain,” IEEE access, vol. 7, pp. 15 310–
15 319, 2019.

