Towards Security Enhancement of Blockchain-
based Supply Chain Management  

L. Al-Alawi, R. Al-Busaidi, A. K. Shaikh  

Department of Information systems, Sultan Qaboos University, Muscat, Oman, 
s92179@student.squ.edu.om, s91197@student.squ.edu.om, shaikh@squ.edu.om* 

Abstract – The cybersecurity of modern systems has dramatically increased attention 
from both industrial and academia perspectives. In the recent era, the popularity of the 
blockchain-based system has traditionally been emergent among various industrial’s 
sectors  especially  in  supply  chain  management  due  to  its  streamlined  nature.  This 
reveals  the  importance  of  the  quality  aspects  from  a  supply  chain  management 
perspective.  Many  industries  realized  the  importance  of  having  quality  systems  for 
supply chain management and logistics.  The emergence of blockchain technology has 
created several potential innovations in handling and tracking business activities over 
the supply chain processes as specific.  This paper shed the light on the blockchain 
and specifically on a smart contract technology which been used to handle the process 
of creation, verification and checking data over the supply chain management process. 
Then, touch upon the area of blockchain cybersecurity in the  supply chain context. 
More and more, since the smart contract handles the transfer of data over different 
locations, then the security protection should be strong enough to secure the data and 
the assets from any attacks. Finally, the paper examines the main security attacks that 
affect the data on the blockchain and propose a solution. 

Keywords:  Blockchain,  Ethereum,  Security,  Smart  Contract,  Supply  Chain 

Management. 

* Corresponding Author : A. K. Shaikh, shaikh@squ.edu.om 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
Introduction 
To manage the total flow of a distribution channel from supplier to the ultimate user is 
known  as  supply  chain  management.  Although  most  of  the  new  supply  chain 
management systems are complex and expensive, it considers one of the most important 
elements for many different disciplines of the economy. It works to handle the growing 
capacity and enhance the effectiveness of the product’s flow  [1]. A successful global 
supply chain  management  hinges  upon the cohesive and harmonized  management of 
four  main  flows,  specifically,  the  product’s  flow,  the  processes,  information  and  the 
cash. Moreover, it is used to stop any possible threats and ensure industry alignment. 
Today, technological innovations have made it easier and quicker to move products or 
full  cargo  from  one  place  to  another  across  the  globe.   Recently,  a  large  number  of 
companies manage and monitor their own IT systems for the supply chain processes. 
Yet, still difficult for those systems to collaboratively works to provide a clear vision of 
the scattered supply chain systems. Employing decentralized ledgers such as blockchain 
technology to build and sustain supply chain management will be a promising solution 
[2]. All the blockchain transactions are processed in a digital approach where the data 
will be stored, checked and proved online via the network without any approval from a 
central authority. All the data in the blockchain are stored in distributed nodes [3] and 
has some pros and cons in terms of security and transparency. This paper investigates 
how the blockchain technology helps to support the supply chain management processes 
[4], enhancing the process and data security and ensuring cost-effectiveness. The main 
contribution of this paper includes: 

 

Investigate the current challenges of blockchain-based supply chain and find 
out the ways to overcome them. 

  Confer  security  concerns  when  utilizing  blockchain  technology  in  supply 

chain processes.  

  Provide 

recommendations  on  common  attacks  against  blockchain 

technology and its consequences on supply chain processes. 

The rest of the paper is organized as below: 
Section 2 presents the earlier research related to blockchain technology and supply chain 
management. Section 3 examines the pros and cons of blockchain technology when this 
technology is used in supply chain processes. Section 4 discusses the security attacks in 
the blockchain network and their implications on supply chain management processes 
and  Section  5  concludes  the  research  and  presents  the  future  research  directions 
components, incorporating the applicable criteria that follow: 

 
Literature Review 

A.  Blockchain Technology 

Blockchain  is  a  peer-to-peer cryptographic-based  distributed  ledger  [5]  that  allows 
the  creation  of  secure  transactions  permanently  without  third-party  control  [6].  Each 
block has to be validated by at least 51% of the nodes in the network [7]. There are many 
mechanisms of unanimity but the main four are: Proof of Work “POW”, Proof of Stake 
“PoS”,  Practical  Byzantine  Fault  Tolerance  “PBFT”,  and  Delegated  Proof  of  Stake 
“DPoS”. The most commonly used is PoW in Bitcoin and Ethereum platforms. PoW 
technique uses a solution to a puzzle to prove the trustiness of the data [8]. The process 
of  solving  the  puzzle  and  processing  must  be  done  by  checking  all  monetary 
transactions, which is called “mining”[9]. Once the data is proofed, only then the block 
can be created and have a hash value that links it to the previous block; Hence, a block 
is added to the blockchain [7]. The block then will be broadcasted to the nodes within 
the network [7]. Even though the data is publicly available for everyone who can access 
the blockchain, however, the data is encrypted and can only be decrypted by the intended 
parties involved. The cryptography of blockchain-based on asymmetric keys. Meaning, 
that  the  key  used  to  encrypt  the  data  is  different  from  the  key  used  to  decrypt  it. 
However, the two keys are  mathematically linked and created the public and private 
keys. The public key is used to encrypt and validate the overall transactions, whereas 
the intended recipient within the network will use their private keys to decrypt the data 
[10]. Thus, the blocks created in the chain are secure from a confidentiality point of 
view, immutable and cannot be deleted or altered and its integrity is intact.  

Blockchain mainly focused on Bitcoin and decentralized exchange of payment and 
cryptocurrencies.  Then  it  evolved  into  Blockchain  2.0  in  2013  and  focuses  on 
decentralizing  the  whole  market  and  exchanging  the  data  and  assets  through  smart 
contracts. Most of  the smart  contracts  used today is running on Ethereum  – an open 
decentralized platform [11] [12]. A smart contract is a digital contract that enables the 
trigger of an action based on predefined conditions to execute business transactions in a 
secure way [7] [13]. Accordingly, each created smart contract will be copied to each 
node in the blockchain in order to prevent tempering the contracts [11].  

B.  Supply Chain Management 

Nowadays, people thinking in supply chain sector been changed due to the changes 
that  happened  in  the  global  industries.  Currently,  the  industries  can't  compete 
productively  while  all  supply  chain  parties  are  scattered  across  the  country  or  even 
outside.  The  trend  of  having  proper  supply  chain  systems  in  place  has  grown 
dramatically  over  the  few  past  decades.  The  historical  initiatives  of  supply  chain 
management can be traced to the beginnings of the apparel industry  where  the  rapid 

 
 
response approach and then to the effective customers response of the grocery sector 
[14].  

Various  supply  chain  definitions  have  been  presented  in  the past  few  years  as  the 
companies saw the concept gain popularity. According to Gao Z and his research team, 
Supply Chain management is a cooperation approach of business activities from the end 
consumers to the original goods or products providers [1]. Also, the APICS Dictionary 
defines it as “the full procedure from producing the raw resources up to the final usage 
of the final products [14].  

A typical supply chain management processes consist of ordering and receiving the 
raw  materials  or  products,  supporting  the  customers'  services  and  performance 
measurements.  The  management  of  multiple  functions  and  processes  across  the 
enterprise  is  required  to  offer  quick  and  quality  actions  to  the  supply  chain  events 
[1].  Logistic services normally play an integral role in delivering the intended values to 
consumers. The main intention of the logistic within the supply chain management is to 
get the products in the right and good conditions, at an appropriate time and with the 
lowest  possible  costs.  Performance  of  the  SCM  is  often  measured  based  on  value, 
dependability, rapidity, flexibility and price. Supply chain  management is a complex 
process by nature and one of its major objectives of it is to reduce the risk associated 
with the process. The source of the risks within the SCM has been categorized into two 
types, specifically, holistic and atomistic. The holistic source of risk needs an overall 
supply  chain  process  analysis  to  measure  the  risk  associated.  This  type  is  highly 
preferred to the components which are complex, rare and of high value. Whereas, the 
atomistic focus is on selecting a specific part of the supply chain process to measure the 
risk associated. It is highly preferred to the components which are with low complexity, 
available and low value [15]. Although a large number of companies, accept the idea of 
properly managing the supply chain, the growth of this new sector is still low. The main 
factors behind this are mainly the lack of guidelines for establishing proper agreements 
with the supply chain parties and the failure to build proper procedures for assessing the 
agreements. As well as, a lack of trust within and outside the company. Lack of cohesive 
information  systems  and  electronic  business  linking companies  [14]. Across  many 
activities that are possible to be tackled by the blockchain supply chain management 
also deserve special attention [16]. 

 Blockchain-based Supply Chain Management 

C. 
Utilizing blockchain in a conventional supply chain process can overcome lots of 
the current operational obstacles and can provide several benefits as well. To start with, 
the traditional supply chain lacks the visibility between different parties as each one of 
them has its centralized database to manage their operation. Therefore, it raises other 
issues such as trust and security, as there is no transparency of the operations along the 
supply chain. This will increase the lateness of material or information flow between 
the different. Moreover, the current system is poor to prove its compliance with laws 

 
and regulations as the data can easily tamper. This may lead to significant health, safety, 
and environmental damages if the final produced product is not up to the standard [3].  

The  adoption  of  blockchain  technology  will  resolve  the  visibility  issue  as  the 
transactions will be publicly available for the concerned stakeholders. In addition, the 
blockchain will ensure the trust between the parties as the system is self-contained and 
not under the control of any third party. The exchange of data is secure using the public-
key-infrastructure where the blocks of data are immutable. Thus, secure from attacker 
manipulation and ensure compliance with the laws and regulations. The research study 
[17] suggests the solution to use blockchain technology in the supply chain to improve 
security  and  integrity  of  chain  transparency.  Therefore,  implementing  blockchain 
technology  in  the  supply  chain  context  will  make  its  processes  faster,  solid,  intact, 
secure and more reliable [10] [18]. A business model approach is proposed by [19] for 
designing a blockchain-enabled supply chain.   The model discussed the potential use 
cases and critical issues such as value proposition in terms of data integrity, security, 
ownership and privacy. A considerable amount of literature reviews distributed nodes 
and discusses the importance of utilizing blockchain technology to facilitate and robust 
the  supply  chain  management  process  in  several  sectors,  such  as  food,  medical,  and 
education. In addition, few studies examine the security perspective of the blockchain 
as a technology. However, the research study discusses the details the security aspect of 
binding blockchain in the supply chain context. 

D.  Conventional supply chain v/s Blockchain-based supply chain management 
The implementation of the supply chain management process starts by identifying the 
key players of the process [20]. As the objectives of this process are to create the most 
value for the entire supply chain network [21]. SCM is an integral part of other business’ 
logistic processes from the end consumers to the suppliers that provide services, goods 
or information. The typical process of SCM consists of ordering or receiving the raw 
materials/products, supporting consumer services and performance measurement from 
the suppliers [1]. On the other hand, the cash flow process will be via customers to the 
suppliers for the delivery of the product. Moreover, the information flow will be through 
both  suppliers  and  customers  on  a  frequent  based.  Proper  information  flow  also 
essential as both parties will be aware of how good or bad the relationship among them. 
Quick and quality responses to the supply chain management events are surely required 
to coordinate several functions across any enterprise. It illustrates the role of the supply 
chain  in  the  business  process.  It  provides  the  essentials  for  various  functions  and  is 
responsible to manage the information flow [1]. A continuous effort from the company 
is essential, as the supply chain process integration is a dynamic process 

Fig. 1 Illustrate the role of Supply chain management  [1] 

Adapting blockchain in supply chain processes can be done through the help of smart 
contracts. All supply chain parties should be the first part of the blockchain network, 
such  as  the  supplier,  producer,  distributor,  warehouse,  and  retailer.  Each  party  will 
contribute to adding a new block to the blockchain whenever they perform their task. 
Each block is linked to the previous block coming from the last responsible party in the 
chain, and hence, creating the blockchain. Therefore, the data is cumulated and can be 
easily retrieved and traced.  

The process starts when a supplier will provide the raw material to the producer as per 
their request. A new block will be added to the blockchain that has information about 
the raw materials such as the certificate of origin, batch data, order number, shipment 
date, and a barcode. Once the producer receives the raw material, this will 
trigger the smart contract to check the shipment against the specifications, quantity, and 
quality mentioned in the order. If the raw materials received are as per the order, then 
the payment will be triggered by the smart contract to be processed to the supplier. Next, 
the producer will use the raw materials to produce products. Once the products are ready 
to be shipped, a new block will be added to the blockchain that has the previous product 
information provided by the supplier and added to it the production number. The newly 
added block will be linked to the previous block in the chain by the hash value. The 
products now are ready to be shipped to the warehouses. When the products are shipped, 
a new block will be added to the blockchain that has the shipment number in addition 
to the previous information. Once the warehouse receives the shipment, another smart 
contract  will  be  triggered  and  match  the  supplier,  order,  invoice,  and  shipment  and 
check the quality and quantity. If passed, then the inventory level will be updated in the 
warehouse,  and  the  smart  contract  will  trigger  to  process  the  of  payment  to  the 
manufacturer. The warehouse then will ship the required products to the retailer as per 
their  request  and  add  a  new  block  to  the  blockchain  that  has  product  received  data, 

 
 
shipment date, and packaging barcode in addition to the previous information. The new 
block will be linked to previous blocks by a hash value. When the shipment is received 
by the retailer, another smart contract will be triggered to check if the received shipment 
is as per the order. If yes, a smart contract will be triggered to process the payment and 
the  inventory  levels  will  be  updated.  Then  the  retailer  will  add  a  new  block  to  the 
blockchain  that  has  the  receive  date,  order  number,  and  customer  ID,  which  will  be 
linked to previous blocks by a hash value. The end customer then can easily scan the 
barcode in the product to trace it back to its origins 

Blockchain’s  Security in Supply Chain Context 
This section examines the pros and cons of blockchain technology  when blockchain 
used within supply chain processes. 

A.  Tamper-Proof Data 

In the context of the supply chain, and because different stakeholders are involved along 
the process, it is essential to have a timestamp for each and every block added to the 
blockchain. The timestamp ensures the data integrity and no further modifications are 
allowed. Traditionally, the time stamp technique is performed on the blocks by a trusted 
server using the user’s private key. However, if the server is compromised, this may 
result  in  signing  and  posting  previous  transactions.  Therefore,  the  issue  can  be 
overcome by decentralizing and distributing the timestamping [22] [23]. 

B.  Single Point of Failure 
One of the core features of blockchain technology is decentralization. The data is 
stored across all the nodes within the network. Each node will have a copy of the entire 
blockchain; which will prevent the one-point-failure issue. In addition, even if one or 
more of the nodes is down for several reasons such as maintenance, upgrade, or Denial 
of Service (DoS) attack, the data will still be available within the remaining nodes in 
the network. Thus, the blockchain ensures data availability. And as Ethereum is an open-
source platform, its code is less prone to malicious changes as the code is under the 
supervision of many different parties. But like any other code, it may have some bugs 
or vulnerabilities due to human errors. All in all, insuring the data availability will boost 
the efficiency of the supply chain processes such as ordering the material in the right 
time and quantity, shipping the products when it is ready, and optimizing the stock levels 
in the warehouses [22] 

C.  Privacy 
Data  privacy  is  essential  in  supply  chain  management  as  each  party  wants  to 
protect its own data from being exposed to other stakeholders in the chain and maintain 

 
 
its  competitive  advantage  [24].  Blockchain  ensures  the  privacy  of  the  data  by  using 
public-private  keys  (Asymmetric  encryption).  The  keys  are  used  to  create  a  digital 
identity for each stakeholder to control the real-time data access [24] The mechanisms 
of exchanging the keys within the blockchain can be done by using one of two suites 
for  Transport  Layer  Security  (TLS),  which  are  Rivest-Shamir-Adleman  (RSA)  or 
Elliptic  Curve  Diffie-Hellman  Exchange  (ECDHE).  However,  both  of  them  were 
discouraged by the National Security Agency (NSA) in 2015. Some studies claim that 
this is due to the quick transition to quantum and post-quantum computing. In addition, 
the  cryptographic  primitives  in  blockchain  are  classified  into  two  main  categories: 
Optional and primary. The Optional category is used to enhance the anonymity and the 
privacy of blockchain-based transactions. Whereas the primary category contains the 
cryptographic hashes and standard digital signatures which are important for ensuring 
the blockchain as a global ledger  with public  verifiability, achievable consensus and 
tamper-proof [25]. Data privacy is fostered by the hash function that is used to sign the 
transactions in the blockchain. The level of data security depends on the hash functions 
used, such as Scrypt, SHA-256, and SHA256D. However, the hash function should be 
selected  carefully  based  on  the  data  sensitivity;  as  stronger  the  hash  function  may 
consume  more  time  to  process  the  transaction  signing,  which  may  delay  the  overall 
supply chain processes [22]. 

D.  Identity Management 
Defining digital identities for supply chain stakeholder ensure data confidentiality, 
as  the  data  can  only  be  seen  by  authorized  people.  Thus,  there  are  several  ways  to 
manage digital identities. For instance, a research study [26] proposed the model via a 
Secure  Cryptography-based  Clustering  Mechanism  where  signature  generation  and 
signature  verification  processes  are  applied.  To  start  with,  a  single  entity  can  be 
responsible to manage and issue the digital identities for the stakeholder (centralized 
approach). However, if the supply chain stakeholders are located in different countries, 
each country will be responsible to generate a digital identity for their local companies. 
On  the  other  hand,  identity  can  be  controlled  by  the  users  themselves  (user-centric 
approach) [22]. 

E.  Smart Contract Management 
While  combining  blockchain  with  the  supply  chain,  smart  contract  is  a  key  to 
facilitating the overall supply chain process. It is a piece of code that is triggered based 
on a specific pre-defined condition. As per the proposed system in this paper, the trigger 
of  a  smart  contract  will  result  in  proceeding  to  the  next  process  and  will  trigger  the 
money payment process. All smart contracts are deployed and saved in the blockchain 
to  prevent  unauthorized  amendments.  However,  the  security  of  the  smart  contract 
depends on how robot the code is, as weak contracts are vulnerable and can be exploited 
by hackers. Therefore, they have to be written carefully. The triggers of smart contracts 

 
 
can be done  manually or by pushed by oracles from an existing technology  with the 
respective  stakeholder to the smart contracts. Examples of such technology can be a 
company website, RFID, and IoT [22].  

Possible Security Attacks in Blockchain-based Supply Chain 
Context 
This  section  discusses  the  most  common  security  attacks  in  Peer-to-Peer  networks 
(blockchain)  and  their  implications  on  supply  chain  management  processes.  These 
attacks  aim  to  disrupt  the  communication  between  the  involved  nodes  within  the 
network [27] and compromise data confidentiality, integrity, and availability. Therefore, 
when adopting blockchain technology in supply chain processes, these attacks should 
be considered, and build the network securely to avoid or minimize their effect.   

A.  Sybil attacks   
Sybil attack is considered one of the most famous and serious attacks in peer-to-
peer networks like blockchain. The attack is performed when a user can control a large 
number  of fake  IDs  within  the  network  [28]  which  will  lead  to  providing  forged 
information  to  other  legitimate  nodes  [27]. As  a  result,  can  compromise  data 
confidentiality and integrity. The attack depends heavily on the vulnerabilities on the 
blockchain network, such as how cheap is the identity management defined, the level 
of trust linking the blocks, and how secure are the private keys. Thus, this attack is hard 
to  prevent,  but  its  effect  can  be  minimized  if  proper  security  techniques  are 
implemented.  

B.  Eclipse attack   

In this type of attack, an entity uses multiple identities to conspire and to cut off traffic 
passing through legitimate nodes as the main goal of this attack is to hide and eclipse 
the  legitimate  nodes  from  the  network.  This  attack  aims  at  the  victim  of  public  IP 
addresses. One of the main issues of the peer – 2 – peer networks is security and that’s 
due to  their distributed nature. This P2P network is subject to more  complex attacks 
than the client-server networks. in this Eclipse attack, the attackers have control over a 
large part of the neighbors of good nodes in the network. Hence, they may manipulate 
the overlay network and control the majority of the nodes [27]. The attackers are able 
to control all the legitimate users' transactions and operations and hence, isolate them 
from the other connected nodes in the network. Moreover, they are also able to sort the 
user's  view of the peer-to-peer network and force him to  waste the  power in unused 
directions in the blockchain networks.  

 
As stated in the research study  [29], this kind of attack can cause Denial of Service. 
This attack is hard to be eliminated but its effect of it can be minimized by applying the 
proper protections in place as limiting the access to the blockchain nodes to the highly 
authorized people. Eclipse attacks compromise the data availability, confidentiality and 
integrity hence, the effect of this attack on the supply chain management is very high 
as people  will not be able to find the data  or check the originality of the data  or the 
resources then the financial loss will be high.  

 51% Attack 

C. 
51%  attack  or  Majority  attack  is  one  of  the  important cyber-attacks within  the 
blockchain.  Its  mechanism is  based  on  the  ability  of  a  hacker  to  get  control  of  the 
majority – or more than half of the nodes within the network in order to make a false 
agreement  in  the  voting  system.  The  hacker  cannot  modify  the  existing  data  in  the 
blockchain as he has no access to the participants' private keys. However, the attacker 
may create new fault blocks within the chain [30]. This attack is hardly performed in a 
public  blockchain  as  the  number  of  nodes  within  the  network  is  huge. Thus,  private 
networks  are  more  vulnerable  to  this  attack  [29]. As  a  result,  the PoW consumption 
power  and  electricity of  the nodes  which  are  under  the  control  of  the  hacker is 
considered a cost for the network participants. The longer the attack will last, the more 
costly it is [30]. This attack compromises data confidentiality, integrity, and availability. 
Thus,  it  may  incur  financial  losses  to  the  stakeholders  within  the  supply  chain.  In 
addition,  the  information  flow  will  not  be  accessible,  and  therefore,  it  is  hard  to 
complete business transactions such as procurement, shipment, and performing quality 
check processes.   

Based  on  the  analysis  of  blockchain  technology  and  security  concerns,  the  paper 
suggests  the  use  of  Blockchain  technology  in  supply  chain  management  for  a 
sustainable and secure process that  will help to optimize  the  overall effectiveness of 
supply management processes. The use of blockchain would provide a better solution 
to the challenges faced by traditional supply chain management systems. In addition, 
the supply chain process can utilize the capabilities of the smart contract of Ethereum 
platform  to  monitor  and  manage  the  supply  chain processes  by  the  cryptography 
processes for better security protection of supply chain processes and transactions. 

Conclusion  
This paper identified the challenges and  their consequences in  the  traditional supply 
chain process and discussed how the blockchain-based supply chain can optimize the 
operations of supply chain processes throughout the  value  chain, and described how 
smart contracts in the Ethereum platform can help in end-to-end supply chain processes. 
In addition, the paper explored the blockchain’s cybersecurity benefits and concerns 

 
when it is adopted in supply chain management. Finally. the paper examined the main 
security attacks on blockchain and its effects on supply chain processes and suggest the 
solution  for  sustainable  and  secure  supply  chain  processes.  For  future  research, 
additional  security  and  interoperability  issues  need  to  be  considered  as  currently, 
organizations are considering cloud-based blockchain technology in the supply chain 
management process. 

Reference 
1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

10. 

11. 

12. 

Gao, Z., et al., Coc: A unified distributed ledger based supply chain management system. 
Journal of Computer Science and Technology, 2018. 33(2): p. 237-248. 
Chang, Y., E. Iakovou, and W. Shi,  Blockchain in global supply chains and cross border 
trade: a critical synthesis of the state-of-the-art, challenges and opportunities. International 
Journal of Production Research, 2020. 58(7): p. 2082-2099. 
Aich,  S.,  et  al.  A  review  on  benefits  of  IoT  integrated  Blockchain  based  supply  chain 
management  implementations  across  different  sectors  with  case  study.  in  2019  21st 
international conference on advanced communication technology (ICACT). 2019. IEEE. 
Korpela,  K.,  J.  Hallikas,  and  T.  Dahlberg.  Digital  supply  chain  transformation  toward 
blockchain  integration.  in  proceedings  of  the  50th  Hawaii  international  conference  on 
system sciences. 2017. 
Taylor,  P.J.,  et  al.,  A  systematic  literature  review  of  blockchain  cyber  security.  Digital 
Communications and Networks, 2020. 6(2): p. 147-156. 
Wang,  Y.,  et  al.,  Making  sense  of  blockchain  technology:  How  will  it  transform  supply 
chains? International Journal of Production Economics, 2019. 211: p. 221-236. 
Lu,  Q.  and  X.  Xu,  Adaptable  blockchain-based  systems:  A  case  study  for  product 
traceability. IEEE Software, 2017. 34(6): p. 21-27. 
Li, X., et al., A survey on the security of blockchain systems. Future Generation Computer 
Systems, 2020. 107: p. 841-853. 
Holotescu,  C.  Understanding  blockchain  opportunities  and  challenges.  in  Conference 
proceedings of» eLearning and Software for Education «(eLSE). 2018. ” Carol I” National 
Defence University Publishing House. 
Apte, S. and N. Petrovsky, Will blockchain technology revolutionize excipient supply chain 
management? Journal of Excipients and Food Chemicals, 2016. 7(3): p. 910. 
Cheng,  J.-C.,  et  al.  Blockchain  and  smart  contract  for  digital  certificate.  in  2018  IEEE 
international conference on applied system invention (ICASI). 2018. IEEE. 
Shaikh,  A.K.,  S.M.  Alhashmi,  and  R.  Parthiban.  A  Semantic  Decentralized  Chord-Based 
Resource  Discovery  Model  for  Grid  Computing.  in  Parallel  and  Distributed  Systems 
(ICPADS 2011), IEEE 17th International Conference on. 2011. 

13. 

14. 

15. 

16. 

17. 

18. 

19. 

20. 

21. 

22. 

23. 

24. 

25. 

26. 

27. 

28. 

29. 

30. 

Brilliantova,  V.  and  T.W.  Thurner,  Blockchain  and  the  future  of  energy.  Technology  in 
Society, 2019. 57: p. 38-45. 
Lummus,  R.R.  and  R.J.  Vokurka,  Defining  supply  chain  management:  a  historical 
perspective and practical guidelines. Industrial management & data systems, 1999. 
Kshetri,  N.,  1  Blockchain’s  roles  in  meeting  key  supply  chain  management  objectives. 
International Journal of Information Management, 2018. 39: p. 80-89. 
Nakasumi,  M.  Information  sharing  for  supply  chain  management  based  on  block  chain 
technology. in 2017 IEEE 19th conference on business informatics (CBI). 2017. IEEE. 
Saberi,  S.,  et  al.,  Blockchain  technology  and its  relationships  to  sustainable  supply  chain 
management. International Journal of Production Research, 2019. 57(7): p. 2117-2135. 
Xu, L., et al. Binding the physical and cyber worlds: A blockchain approach for cargo supply 
chain  security  enhancement.  in  2018  IEEE  International  Symposium  on  Technologies  for 
Homeland Security (HST). 2018. IEEE. 
Wang, Y., C.H. Chen, and A. Zghari-Sales, Designing a blockchain enabled supply chain. 
International Journal of Production Research, 2020: p. 1-26. 
Chen, H., P.J. Daugherty, and T.D. Landry, Supply chain process integration: a theoretical 
framework. Journal of business logistics, 2009. 30(2): p. 27-46. 
Croxton, K.L., et al., The supply chain management processes. The International Journal of 
Logistics Management, 2001. 12(2): p. 13-36. 
Fraga-Lamas, P. and T.M. Fernández-Caramés, A review on blockchain technologies for an 
advanced and cyber-resilient automotive industry. IEEE Access, 2019. 7: p. 17578-17598. 
Shaikh, A., S. Alhashmi, and R. Parthiban,  A Semantic Impact in Decentralized Resource 
Discovery Mechanism for Grid Computing Environments, in Algorithms and Architectures 
for Parallel Processing. 2012, Springer Berlin Heidelberg. p. 206-216. 
Chen, S., et al. A blockchain-based supply chain quality management framework. in 2017 
IEEE 14th International Conference on e-Business Engineering (ICEBE). 2017. IEEE. 
Wang, L., et al., Cryptographic primitives in blockchains. Journal of Network and Computer 
Applications, 2019. 127: p. 43-58. 
MOHINDRA, A.R. and C. GANDHI, A secure cryptography based clustering mechanism 
for improving the data transmission in MANET. Walailak Journal of Science and Technology 
(WJST), 2021. 18(6): p. 8987 (18 pages)-8987 (18 pages). 
de  Asís  López-Fuentes,  F.,  I.  Eugui-De-Alba,  and  O.M.  Ortíz-Ruiz,  Evaluating  P2P 
networks against eclipse attacks. Procedia Technology, 2012. 3: p. 61-68. 
Shareh,  M.B.,  et  al.,  Preventing  Sybil  attacks  in  P2P  file  sharing  networks  based  on  the 
evolutionary game model. Information Sciences, 2019. 470: p. 94-108. 
Liang, G., et al., Distributed blockchain-based data protection framework for modern power 
systems against cyber attacks. IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, 2018. 10(3): p. 3162-3173. 
Guégan, D. and C. Hénot, A probative value for authentication use case blockchain. Digital 
Finance, 2019. 1(1-4): p. 91-115. 

Biography 

 Ms Al-Lawati is a final year MSc student in the Department of Information Systems, 
College  of  Economics  &  Political  Science  at  Sultan  Qaboos  University  Her  master 
research investigates Factors Affecting Undergraduate Students Academic Performance 
Resulting in Falling Under Probation, Her research interest include Blockchain, Supply 
chain, Peer to Peer network  
. 

Ms  Al  Busaid  Lawati  is  a  final  year  MSc  student  in  the  Department  of  Information 
Systems,  College  of  Economics  &  Political  Science  at  Sultan  Qaboos  University  Her 
master  research  investigates  Fostering  knowledge  management  for  institutional 
development. Her research interest include Blockchain, Supply chain and Smart contract, 
. 

Abdul Khalique Shaikh is an Assistant Professor associated with the Department of 
Information Systems at Sultan Qaboos University Muscat Oman. He has received his 
PhD degree from a highly reputable Australian University Monash in 2013 and Master 
degree from University of Detroit USA with distinction. He has a strong skill set and 
experience gained from working in both academia and industry that endow him with 
a broad background and a unique perspective on research & teaching.  His research 
interest includes Social Network Analytics, Big Data Analytics, Data Science, Data 

Governance, E-participation and Blockchain Technology. 

 
 
 
 
 
