Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 

Technological Forecasting & Social Change 

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/techfore 

Managing a blockchain-based platform ecosystem for industry-wide 
adoption: The case of TradeLens 

Marin Jovanovic a, *, Nikola Kosti´c b, Ina M. Sebastian c, Tomaz Sedej b,c 
a Department of Operations Management, Copenhagen Business School, Solbjerg Plads 3, 2000 Frederiksberg, Denmark 
b Department of Accounting, Copenhagen Business School, Solbjerg Plads 3, 2000 Frederiksberg, Denmark 
c Center for Information Systems Research (CISR), The MIT Sloan School of Management, 245 First Street, Cambridge, USA   

A R T I C L E  I N F O    

A B S T R A C T    

Keywords: 
Blockchain-based platforms 
Platform ecosystems 
Platform value 
Platform governance 
Interoperability governance 
Technology governance 

The proliferation of blockchain-based platform ecosystems in recent years has prompted scholars across various 
disciplines to explore the conditions leading to their successful deployment. However, developing a blockchain- 
based platform ecosystem creates various challenges for the platform sponsor that may influence industry-wide 
adoption  and,  ultimately,  the  platform's  success.  This  study  follows  the  development  of  TradeLens,  a  leading 
global  shipping  platform ecosystem underpinned by blockchain technology. We examine the factors affecting 
industry-wide  adoption  among  global  supply  chain  actors  by  unpacking  platform  value  drivers  and  platform 
governance  mechanisms  identified  at  TradeLens.  While  the  platform  value  hinges  on  the  digitalization  of 
workflows and the ecosystem leverage, the platform governance includes strategic (off-chain), technology (on- 
chain),  and  interoperability  (on-  and  off-chain)  governance  –  as  mechanisms  for  effectively  managing  a 
blockchain-based  platform  ecosystem.  This  paper  contributes  to  the  literature  on  blockchain-based  platform 
ecosystems and the platform literature.   

1. Introduction 

“I won't mince words here – we do need to get the other carriers on the 
platform.  Without  that  network,  we  don't  have  a  product.  That  is  the 
reality of the situation.” 
- Marvin Erdly, Head of TradeLens. 

In recent years, blockchain and distributed ledger technologies have 
evolved from their origins in digital currencies (e.g., Bitcoin, Ethereum) 
to  various  other  use  cases,  including  blockchain-based  platforms  for 
digital transformation with the prospect of disrupting established supply 
chains  (e.g.,  pharma,  food,  logistics),  governments  (e.g.,  El  Salvador) 
and  possibly  society  in  its  entirety  (e.g.,  disintermediation  of  trust) 
(Chen and Bellavitis, 2020; Halaburda et al., 2022; Lacity and Van Hoek, 
2021). One of the most exciting blockchain applications has appeared in 
global supply chains (cf. Agi and Jha, 2022; Kouhizadeh et al., 2021; 
Kumar et al., 2020; Pournader et al., 2020; Wamba and Queiroz, 2020). 
While the global container shipping supply chain accounts for approx-
imately 60 % of all seaborne trade, valued at 12 trillion USD (Statista, 
2021), the shipping industry is plagued by inefficiencies (Balci, 2021; 
Hastig  and  Sodhi,  2020;  Yang,  2019).  These  inefficiencies  stem 

predominantly from manual and time-consuming customs clearance and 
contracting  processes,  outdated  legacy  systems  with  data  trapped  in 
silos, and disparate perspectives on the transaction state that typically 
involve more than 40 actors (Jensen et al., 2019, 2018). 

To address these issues, incumbent shipping companies and startups 
have  begun  to  leverage  blockchain  technology  to  facilitate  the  emer-
gence of platform ecosystems that would create value across the global 
shipping supply chains (Chin et al., 2022; Kumar et al., 2020; Pereira 
et al., 2019). Specifically, blockchain-based platform ecosystems offer 
decentralized solutions for digitizing the records of container transiting 
history that can handle data security with great precision (Jensen et al., 
2019; Schmeiss et al., 2019). The unique feature of a blockchain-based 
platform  ecosystem  is  that  it  can  provide  services  to  global  supply 
chain  actors  through  seamless  connections  without  having  access  to 
their sensitive data (Cai et al., 2021; Chang et al., 2020). Hence, digi-
tizing  the  physical  workflows  with  a  blockchain-based  platform 
ecosystem  can  reduce  transaction  costs  by  making  transactions  more 
transparent  and  seamless  (Babich  and  Hilary,  2020;  Gaur  and  Gaiha, 
2020). Furthermore, a blockchain-based platform ecosystem generates a 
data layer (Alaimo and Kallinikos, 2021), that can be further utilized 
through  a  marketplace  of  complementary  applications  that  create 

* Corresponding author. 

E-mail addresses: mjo.om@cbs.dk (M. Jovanovic), nk.acc@cbs.dk (N. Kosti´c), isebasti@mit.edu (I.M. Sebastian), tse.acc@cbs.dk, tsedej@mit.edu (T. Sedej).  

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2022.121981 
Received 15 September 2021; Received in revised form 17 August 2022; Accepted 22 August 2022   

TechnologicalForecasting&SocialChange184(2022)1219810040-1625/©2022TheAuthors.PublishedbyElsevierInc.ThisisanopenaccessarticleundertheCCBYlicense(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).M. Jovanovic et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

additional value for all platform contributors, complementors, and users 
(e.g., smart-contract solutions for automating and self-executing trans-
actions) (Bonina et al., 2021; Dolgui et al., 2020; Schmidt and Wagner, 
2019).  However,  developing  a  blockchain-based  platform  ecosystem 
creates unique challenges for the platform sponsor which may influence 
the industry-wide adoption necessary for the platform's success (Helfat 
and Raubitschek, 2018; Uzunca et al., 2022). 

First,  while the  general  benefits  of blockchain-based  platforms for 
the global supply chain actors have been explored in the literature (cf. 
Garg et al., 2021; Pereira et al., 2019; Rejeb et al., 2021; Wamba and 
Queiroz, 2020), the value-creating opportunities of a blockchain-based 
platform  ecosystem  for  different  public  and  private  global  supply 
chain actors remain underexplored (Jensen et al., 2019). Moreover, the 
platform value is often unevenly distributed among global supply chain 
actors,  difficult  to  define,  and  hard  to  measure  (Bauer  et  al.,  2022; 
Goldsby  and  Hanisch,  2022).  For  instance,  blockchain  features  may 
bring  to  global  supply  chain  actors  improved  inter-organizational 
workflow management (Kosti´c and Sedej, 2022), increased operational 
efficiency (Toorajipour et al., 2022), and opportunities to leverage the 
open  ecosystem  (Cenamor  and  Frishammar,  2021;  Eisenmann  et  al., 
2009;  Schmeiss  et  al.,  2019).  Therefore,  it  is  essential  for  platform 
sponsors who are actively building an industry-wide blockchain-based 
platform ecosystem to comprehensively understand the platform value 
from the perspective of diverse global supply chain actors (Kouhizadeh 
et al., 2021). 

Second,  effective  platform  governance  mechanisms  are  critical  to 
ensure  industry-wide  adoption  and  platform  success  (Murthy  and 
Madhok,  2021;  Rietveld  and  Schilling,  2021;  Uzunca  et  al.,  2022).  A 
blockchain  platform  architecture,  by  design,  puts  in  place  on-chain 
technology  governance  features  (Lumineau  et  al.,  2021;  Wareham 
et  al.,  2014).  However,  the  underlying  blockchain  features  are  often 
insufficient to establish the level of trust that would convince prospec-
tive  global  supply chain actors to  join the platform  (De Filippi et  al., 
2020;  Zhao  et  al.,  2022).  Consequently,  a  platform  sponsor  needs  to 
design various off-chain governance mechanisms that would address the 
inter-organizational  concerns  of  prospective  actors  (Kosti´c  and  Sedej, 
2022; Schmeiss et al., 2019; Uzunca et al., 2022). Still, issues concerned 
with establishing platform interoperability and the associated process of 
digital standardization (Rossi et al., 2019), and, more broadly, platform 
regulation  (Cusumano  et  al.,  2021;  Jacobides  and  Lianos,  2021)  are 
underexplored  in  the  platform  literature.  These  concerns  are  all  con-
nected  to  lowering  the  barriers  to  platform  ecosystem  adoption  and 
harnessing the potential of blockchain technology (Kumar et al., 2020). 
Overall,  the  interplay  of  different  governance  mechanisms  at  nascent 
stages of blockchain-based platform ecosystem development is under-
explored (cf. Chen et al., 2022). 

This study seeks to understand how a platform sponsor manages a 
blockchain-based  platform  ecosystem  in  the  shipping  industry  to 
ensure industry-wide adoption. The study follows the development of 
TradeLens, a blockchain-based platform ecosystem jointly developed by 
Mærsk Line,1  a logistics conglomerate, and IBM, a multinational infor-
mation technology company. TradeLens is a leading blockchain-based 
platform ecosystem in the shipping industry that aims to establish an 
ecosystem that is connected end to end, embracing various global supply 
chain  actors,  such  as  shippers,  cargo  owners,  ports,  and  freight  for-
warders. To this end, TradeLens has established a shared and secured 
blockchain-based  platform  ecosystem  that  allows  global  supply  chain 
actors to significantly diminish the costs of information exchange and 
create an open marketplace of applications. Analysis of the rich quali-
tative data unpacked the platform value drivers, namely the digitaliza-
tion of workflows and the ecosystem leverage. Additionally, the study 

1  To ease the exposition, in the remainder of the paper Mærsk Line will be 
referred to simply as Mærsk. When referring to Mærsk Line's parent company 
we use the term Mærsk Group. 

delineated  three  platform  governance  mechanisms,  namely  strategic 
(off-chain),  technology  (on-chain),  and  interoperability  (on-  and  off- 
chain)  governance.  These  value  drivers  and  governance  mechanisms 
collectively  facilitated  the  effective  management  of  TradeLens.  The 
paper  contributes  to  the  literature  on  blockchain-based  platform  eco-
systems and, more broadly, the platform literature. 

The paper is structured as follows. First, we develop our theoretical 
orientation.  Second,  we  introduce  our  research  methods  before  pre-
senting the findings of our study. Third, we discuss the results and po-
sition our contribution within the broader platform literature. Finally, 
we highlight the managerial implications and limitations of our study. 

2. Theoretical background 

2.1. Blockchain-based platform ecosystems 

The  shipping  industry  has  traditionally  relied  on  the  physical 
movement of large amounts of paper documentation, which has been 
associated  with  delays,  human  error,  and  fraud  (Stopford,  2009).  In 
addition, the digital infrastructure (Fürstenau et al., 2019) in the ship-
ping industry is disseminated across different legacy systems developed 
by ports, freight forwarders, terminal operators, and customs offices that 
use different formats and standards (e.g., EDI, fax, e-mail) to exchange 
documents about the physical shipment (Toorajipour et al., 2022). More 
than 40 organizations can share data and documents in a single ship-
ment,  producing  large  amounts  of  documentation  in  diverse  formats 
(Jensen et al., 2018; UN, 2016). More importantly, the manual handover 
of paper documents is largely inefficient, expensive, and prone to error, 
which increases the price of the overall shipment and produces supply 
chain bottlenecks (Sund et al., 2020). Indeed, the processing of accom-
panying trade documentation can be even more expensive than moving 
an actual shipment (Chang et al., 2020). 

To  address  these  issues,  both  practitioners  and  scholars  propose 
developing a blockchain-based platform ecosystem to securely connect 
the public and private global supply chain actors (Jensen et al., 2019). 
Such  platform  ecosystems  are  particularly  important  for  low-trust  in-
dustries, such as shipping (Stopford, 2009). The underlying blockchain 
features, combined with the platform ecosystem features, are increasing 
the platform value (Cennamo, 2021) and the likelihood of industry-wide 
adoption (Goldsby and Hanisch, 2022). 

First, a blockchain-based platform ecosystem uses the platform ar-
chitecture with a distributed ledger system, which maintains the records 
(or transactions) in a chain of blocks (Schmeiss et al., 2019). A distrib-
uted architecture guarantees security, transparency, and control among 
transaction partners, allowing ecosystem participants to transfer digital 
assets or business-relevant information across firm boundaries through a 
shared,  tamper-proof  distributed  ledger  (Kumar  et  al.,  2020;  Pereira 
et al., 2019). Therefore, blockchain features address the trust issue in the 
industry  by  moving  some  of  the  complexity-related  issues  from  the 
organizational  to  the  technical  level  (Beck  et  al.,  2018;  Catalini  and 
Gans, 2020). In other words, instead of entrusting a platform sponsor 
with  potentially  sensitive  data,  blockchain  features  offer  a  technical 
solution  for  handling  the  distribution  and  integrity  of  shared  data 
(Jensen et al., 2019). Moreover, scholars suggest that blockchain plat-
form architecture can reduce costs associated with supply chain trans-
actions  by  decreasing  information  and  search  costs  as  well  as 
expenditure  on  post-contractual  control  (Kosti´c  and  Sedej,  2022). 
Therefore, an immutable ledger permits automated actions and perfor-
mance  tracking  among  contractual  partners  (Schmidt  and  Wagner, 
2019). Finally, Lumineau et al. (2021) suggest that data integrity and 
reliability,  enabled  by  the  blockchain,  can  better  detect  opportunism 
while reducing monitoring costs. 

Second,  apart  from  leveraging  the  blockchain  features,  platform 
sponsors are expanding the platform value by developing complemen-
tary  applications  and  engaging  with  external  developers,  thereby 
creating an open platform ecosystem (Cenamor and Frishammar, 2021; 

TechnologicalForecasting&SocialChange184(2022)1219812M. Jovanovic et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

Pereira  et  al.,  2019).  Indeed,  secure  and  transparent  data  exchange 
among  the  business-to-business  platform  ecosystem  actors  holds  the 
potential to generate an open marketplace of complementary applica-
tions  (Jovanovic  et  al.,  2021).  More  importantly,  in  industries  where 
interdependence  among  actors is  high (e.g.,  shipping  industry, phone 
network industry, computer operating systems), the presence of com-
plementors could significantly drive the platform value (e.g., movies on 
a streaming service, applications for a smartphone, shipping industry) 
(Ozalp et al., 2018). Therefore, the network externalities of a platform 
could represent a large portion of its overall platform value (Cennamo, 
2021; Jovanovic et al., 2021; Ozalp et al., 2018). However, when a large 
portion of a platform value is derived from its network externalities (i.e., 
the  size  of  the  end-user  network  and  the  size  of  the  complementor 
network) (Cennamo, 2021), new technology, such as blockchain, may 
not be able to displace an incumbent technology, even when the benefits 
brought forth by the new technology compared to the old technology are 
well understood (Lacity and Van Hoek, 2021). Both complementors and 
end users make platform adoption decisions based on which platform 
they believe will have the largest number of ecosystem actors. Conse-
quently, ensuring that platform adoption is industry-wide is of utmost 
importance for a platform sponsor (Eisenmann, 2008; Eisenmann et al., 
2009).  Therefore,  characterizing  the  platform  value  drivers  of  a  suc-
cessful blockchain-based platform ecosystem may provide clues to the 
factors critical for the platform's success (Yoffie et al., 2020; Zhu and 
Iansiti, 2019). 

2.2. Governing a blockchain-based platform ecosystem 

While  it  is  widely  understood  that  the  success  of  a  business-to- 
business  platform  ecosystem  depends  on  industry-wide  adoption 
(Jovanovic et al., 2021), less is known about how a platform sponsor 
employs  different  governance  mechanisms  to  attract  prospective  con-
tributors, complementors, and end users in a blockchain-based platform 
ecosystem  (Beck  et  al.,  2018;  Bonina  et  al.,  2021).  First,  a  platform 
sponsor  decides  on  a  set  of  blockchain  features  (e.g.,  private  permis-
sioned blockchain) that define the level of security, transparency, and 
control over the shared data (Lumineau et al., 2021). Second, the initial 
capital  investment  may  grant  the  platform  sponsor  a  wide  market 
presence,  the  ability  to  attract  ecosystem  actors,  and  the  potential  to 
dominate  the  market  even  if  the  technology  was  initially  considered 
inferior  (Kim  and  Mauborgne,  2019;  Ozalp  et  al.,  2018).  Third,  the 
literature argues that the neutral position of a platform sponsor has to be 
established ex ante in order to signal that the platform ecosystem goals 
are aligned with the industry-wide interests of ecosystem actors (Jensen 
et  al.,  2019).  Fourth,  managing  an  industry-wide  platform  ecosystem 
requires  addressing  cooperation  and  competition  among  the  actors 
(Cennamo and Santal´o, 2019; Hannah and Eisenhardt, 2018). Therefore, 
the literature argues that the initial specification of governance terms is 
critical for the success of the platform ecosystem (Goldsby and Hanisch, 
2022; Uzunca et al., 2022). In particular, defining the governance terms 
early on is acutely important when deploying a blockchain-based plat-
form ecosystem because certain collaboration and coordination rules are 
embedded in the initial specification and are enforced according to the 
business logic encoded in the blockchain software (Chen et al., 2021). 
Fifth,  a  platform  sponsor  needs  to  engage  with  the  prospective 
ecosystem  actors  to  assist  them  in  transitioning  to  a  new  way  of 
exchanging  and  validating  information  and  integrating  their  existing 
legacy  systems  into  the  blockchain-based  platform  ecosystem  (cf. 
Monika  and  Bhatia,  2020;  P´olvora  et  al.,  2020).  Overall,  how  the 
blockchain  features  and  platform  ecosystem  governance  interact 
(Lumineau et al., 2021; Zhao et al., 2022) and how the platform sponsor 
engages with and onboards the potential ecosystem actors are concepts 
that remain insufficiently researched  in the platform literature (Jova-
novic et al., 2021). 

Finally, a platform sponsor needs to decide on the interoperability 
governance  in  relation  to  complementary  and  competing  platforms 

(Marsal-Llacuna, 2018). For instance, ecosystem actors are reluctant to 
risk investment in a specific blockchain-based platform ecosystem if the 
selected platform does not look likely to “take off” (Jensen et al., 2019; 
Markus et al., 2006). While (digital) standardization is a proven solution 
to safeguard customers, the roadmap is lengthy (DCSA, 2020). There-
fore,  it  is  typical  for  platform  sponsors  to  actively  participate  in  the 
ongoing process of developing a digital standard (DCSA, 2022). How-
interoperability  governance  – 
for 
ever,  platform 
blockchain-based platform ecosystems – is less explored in the literature 
(cf. Wimmer et al., 2018). 

specifically, 

3. Research method 

3.1. Research design 

We  conducted  the  study  using  an  exploratory  in-depth  case  of 
TradeLens, a world‑leading example of a large-scale, blockchain-based 
platform ecosystem that provided a rich source of information for this 
study. We opted for a case study research design (Yin, 2017) because it 
could provide valuable insights of a particular phenomenon in depth and 
within its real-life setting. Moreover, this research design was particu-
larly useful since the primary objective of this paper was to identify the 
most  relevant  factors  for  the  effective  management  of  TradeLens  – 
namely,  platform  value  and  platform  governance  mechanisms  –  that 
would influence the decision of various global supply chain actors to join 
TradeLens. Given the dearth of studies offering empirical evidence on 
blockchain-based platform ecosystems, this study follows a qualitative 
theory-building approach (Eisenhardt and  Graebner, 2007). In partic-
ular, qualitative data are a source of well-grounded, rich descriptions 
and are able to explain processes in identifiable local contexts (Miles and 
Huberman, 1994). 

Moreover, we followed an abductive approach (Dubois and Gadde, 
2002).  Our  empirical  fieldwork,  case  analysis,  and  theoretical  frame-
work development occurred simultaneously. In such studies, the initial 
theoretical framework is continuously adjusted, as a result of both un-
expected empirical findings and theoretical insights attained during the 
process. An abductive approach can result in useful cross-fertilization in 
which new combinations are created through the amalgamation of well- 
established  theoretical  models  and  new  concepts  derived  from  the 
collection of empirical data (Dubois and Gadde, 2002). 

3.2. Data collection 

Between  February  2018  and  September  2021,  the  data  were 
collected from three sources: i) in-depth semi-structured interviews; ii) 
informal  conversations  with  individuals  involved  with  TradeLens;  iii) 
secondary data including TradeLens's documentation, industry reports, 
industry  conference  presentations,  news  articles,  press  releases,  and 
participation  in  industry  conferences  and  live  webinars.  A  semi- 
structured  interview  guide  was  developed  that  sought  to  unpack  the 
platform  value  drivers  and  governance  mechanisms  for  the  effective 
management  of  TradeLens  that  would  trigger  industry-wide  adoption 
(Fontana and Frey, 1998). When conducting in-depth semi-structured 
interviews, the authors had a list of theory-based questions and themes 
to cover. However, they did not follow a rigid order of questions and 
allowed interviewees to describe the phenomenon in their own terms 
and from their own viewpoints (Kvale, 1996). To obtain a preliminary 
understanding and overview of TradeLens, initial exploratory interviews 
with Mærsk and GTD Solution/TradeLens in 2018. Although TradeLens 
went live in December 2018, and despite all the potential upside, the 
adoption  of  the  platform  remained  sluggish.  Consequently,  in  2019, 
additional interviews were conducted with Mærsk and a sample of other 
industry  participants  to  understand  the  reasons  for  the  slow  uptake. 
During  these  interviews,  particular  attention  was  paid  to  the  factors 
holding back the industry-wide adoption of the blockchain-based plat-
form  ecosystem  and  to  exploring  how  the  two  founding  companies 

TechnologicalForecasting&SocialChange184(2022)1219813M. Jovanovic et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

intended to address them. Additionally, an interview with a prominent 
shipping  industry  analyst  was  conducted  to  obtain  an  external 
perspective on the issues in the container shipping sector in general, as 
well as specific concerns related to blockchain-based platforms in the 
industry. In 2020 and 2021, additional interviews were conducted with 
global  supply  chain  actors,  including  terminals,  ocean  carriers,  and 
customers. In total, the authors conducted 24 interviews with key in-
formants  that  were  recorded  and  transcribed  using  the  automated 
speech-to-text software service. In addition, detailed notes were taken 
during  and  immediately  after  each  interview.  Table  1  provides  an 
overview of the conducted interviews. 

The informants were identified using natural or convenience sam-
pling (Collis and Hussey, 2014) because the choice of participants was 
influenced by interviewees' roles and their involvement in TradeLens. 
The  data  were  collected  from  informants  in  several  large  companies, 
including the two largest ocean carriers in the world (Mærsk and MSC, 
respectively), a technology provider (IBM), container terminals (GCT, 
ICTSI terminals, and APM terminals) and large customers/exporters (e. 
g.,  AB  InBev  and  Van  den  Ban  Autobanden  B.V.).  This  approach  was 
deemed necessary because blockchain-based platform ecosystems such 
as TradeLens typically require complex interactions between multiple 
organizations. The majority of informants held senior positions in their 
respective companies (e.g., CEO, CIO, CTO, VP, head of department). 
They were chosen because the nature of their positions allowed them to 
provide a high-level view of the decision-making process at TradeLens. 
Another informant selection criterion filtered only TradeLens ecosystem 
partners who were already involved in the process of joining TradeLens. 
Repeated  interviews  allowed  us  to  crosscheck  information  collected 
from other respondents and secondary data. 

In  addition  to  formal  interviews,  several  informal  talks  were  held 
with  individuals  involved  with  TradeLens.  These  include  the  CEO  of 
GTD Solutions/TradeLens, Head of Digital Business Solutions at Port of 
Rotterdam (a TradeLens member), and the CIO of Hapag Lloyd AG (a 
TradeLens member). In addition to primary data, secondary data were 
collected to complement and verify interview data. Secondary data used 
in this study consists of TradeLens's published documentation, industry 
reports, industry conference presentations, news articles, and press re-
leases. Discrepancies between interview data and secondary data raised 

new  questions,  which  guided  subsequent  data  collection  and  analysis 
(Alvesson, 2011). Appendix A maps the industry conferences and live 
webinars,  and  Appendix  B  provides  an  overview  of  secondary  data 
sources. 

3.3. Data analysis 

Interview transcripts were coded using constant comparative anal-
ysis  (Corbin  and  Strauss,  1990;  Glaser  and  Strauss,  2017).  As  the 
research developed and new data were collected, the categories identi-
fied were continuously compared to the existing data (Alvesson, 2011). 
When data produced novel or contradictory information, the categories 
were adjusted to take these new developments into account. This pro-
cess was repeated until no new categories emerged and no new infor-
mation was inconsistent with existing categories (i.e., until theoretical 
saturation  was  reached)  (Corbin  and  Strauss,  1990).  This  constant 
comparative  analysis  involved  data  triangulation  by  cross-checking 
statements  across  informants  and  verifying  them  against  secondary 
data. Initial open coding produced eleven empirical themes describing 
platform value drivers and twelve empirical themes indicating different 
underpinnings  of  effective  platform  governance  mechanisms  that  in-
fluence the decision of global supply chain actors to join TradeLens. As 
we cycled between data collection, coding, and existing theory, initial 
empirical  themes  were  grouped  into  five  conceptual  categories  using 
axial  coding  (Corbin  and  Strauss,  1990;  Strauss  and  Corbin,  2015). 
These  were,  in  turn,  synthesized  into  two  aggregate  dimensions  – 
namely,  the  blockchain-based  platform  ecosystem  value  composed  of 
improving the digitalization of workflows and ecosystem leverage, and 
the  blockchain-based  platform  ecosystem  governance  composed  of 
strategic ecosystem governance, technology ecosystem governance, and 
interoperability governance. The data structure that resulted from this 
iterative analysis is presented in Fig. 1. The following section discusses 
each of the dimensions in greater detail. 

Table 1 
The overview of conducted interviews.  

# 

Date 

Type 

Position 

Company 

Location  

1 
2 
3 
4 
5 

6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 

17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 

23 
24 

14.2.2018 
7.3.2018 
2.5.2018 
24.5.2018 
14.6.2018 

3.7.2018 
6.7.2018 
7.3.2019 
14.3.2019 
4.7.2019 
10.10.2019 
21.10.2019 
30.3.2020 
31.3.2020 
20.5.2020 
26.5.2020 

26.5.2020 
10.6.2020 
7.7.2020 
3.9.2020 
9.9.2020 
27.5.2021 

Interview 
Interview 
Interview 
Interview 
Interview 

Controller and Analyst 
Controller 
Digital Product Manager 
Lead IT Architect 
Special Consultant & Chief Consultant 

Digital Product Manager 

Interview 
Interview  Head of Data and Business Development 
Interview 
Interview 
Interview 
Interview 
Interview 
Interview 
Interview  Head of Strategy and Operations 
Interview 
Interview 

Senior Consultant 
Digital Product Manager 
Global Head of Integration 
CEO, Partner 
Digital Product Manager 
Digital Product Manager 

CDIO (MSC); Chairman (DCSA) 
Project (Stream) Lead at Global International 
team 
Vice President, Blockchain Solutions 
President/CEO 
Various departments 
CTO 
CIO 
CIO 

Interview 
Interview 
Interview 
Interview 
Interview 
Interview 

1.7.2021 
14.9.2021 

Interview 
Interview 

Customs & Trade Compliance Manager 
Program Director 

Gefion Insurance 
Gefion Insurance 
Mærsk 
GTD/TradeLens 
Ministry of Industry, Business and Financial 
Affairs 
Mærsk 
Danish Maritime Authority (DMA) 
IBM 
Mærsk 
APM Terminals 
SeaIntelligence Consulting 
Mærsk 
Mærsk 
GTD/TradeLens 
MSC/DCSA 
Anheuser-Busch InBev 

Case site (Gefion)  
Case site (Gefion)  
Case site (Mærsk)  
Case site (GTD/TradeLens)  
Ministry of Industry, Business and Financial 
Affairs  
Case site (Mærsk)  
DMA  
Online/Zoom  
Case site (Mærsk)  
Case site (Mærsk)  
SeaIntelligence Consulting  
Case site (Mærsk)  
Online/Zoom  
Online/Zoom  
Online/Zoom  
Online/Zoom  

IBM 
Global Container Terminals Inc. 
Pacific International Lines 
Youredi 
YILPORT holding 
International Container Terminal Services, 
Inc. 
Van den Ban Autobanden B.V. 
DCSA 

Online/Zoom  
Online/Zoom  
E-mail  
Online/Zoom  
Online/Zoom  
Online/Zoom  

Online/Zoom  
Online/Zoom  

TechnologicalForecasting&SocialChange184(2022)1219814M. Jovanovic et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

Fig. 1. Data analysis structure.  

4. Findings 

4.1. TradeLens – a blockchain-based platform ecosystem 

In order to drive platform adoption, TradeLens leadership needed to 
demonstrate  the  platform's  value.  TradeLens  provided  an  efficient, 
standardized, and secure exchange of information and trade documen-
tation that could bring digitalization of workflows to the shipping industry 
and  unlock  substantial  financial  gains  by  addressing  massive  in-
efficiencies.  Additionally,  digitizing  and  automating  the  exchange  of 
trade  documentation  would  allow  companies  to  redirect  their  efforts 
from handling burdensome administration to more value-adding activ-
ities.  Moreover,  TradeLens  has  created  the  foundation  for  ecosystem 
leverage with a planned marketplace of innovative complementary ser-
vices that can benefit actors in addition to a high level of network ex-
ternalities and interdependency among the global supply chain actors in 
the shipping industry. 

4.1.1. Digitalization of workflows in global supply chains 

TradeLens creates  value from providing end-to-end visibility, which 
involves the entire shipping ecosystem. For many shipping firms, the key 
benefit was that TradeLens would enable them to easily gather infor-
mation on the status of the cargo at each stage of the journey. The ability 
to have visibility into the previous blind spots in their journey was the 
dominant  factor  that  led  to  their  decision  to  opt  for  TradeLens.  This 
sentiment was echoed by the project leader of the Global International 
team at Anheuser-Busch InBev who argued: 

“The problem [with] platforms such as INTTRA, GTN or CargoSmart, for 
example,  is  [that  they  are]  communication  platforms  between  us  as  a 

shipper and our freight provider or carrier. There's no other supply chain 
party posting data in these platforms. So, these platforms have a lot of 
data, but the data are only coming from the carriers or shippers. That's 
where most of the platforms are still failing today – they don't have the full 
ecosystem, all of the supply chain or cargo transport participants under 
one platform.” 

TradeLens promises significant improvements in operational efficiencies 
for global supply chain actors. This study finds that the back offices of 
organizations in the shipping industry spend significant amounts of time 
on  gathering,  exchanging,  and  reconciling  inter-organizational  infor-
mation due to the data that is trapped in organizational silos. Since data 
is shared in several different formats, standardized and digitized trade 
documentation could unlock data silos and remove these inefficiencies by 
automating  cross-organizational  information  exchange.  This,  in  turn, 
will result in significant reductions in back-office workload and associ-
ated  costs,  further  allowing  organizations  to  re-focus  on  more  value- 
adding  activities.  A  senior  Mærsk  executive  provided  an  interesting 
anecdote: 

“Today, a lot of the data is tied up in organizational silos and those silos 
don't talk to each other. I remember, I had a chat with someone in the 
network  who  said,  ‘We  are  all  connected,  only  not  to  each  other.’  I 
thought in the beginning it was funny, but actually it is the case. We think 
we  are  connected,  and  we  somehow  are,  but  often  what  happens  in 
shipping, today, is that people are connected by fax, email, EDI, all types 
of communication, that are really not up to speed with what is required 
today,  which  is  real  time  information.  The  value  proposition  in  the 
beginning [of the TradeLens project] was simply to take out the friction, 
remove  the  friction  from  the  communication  that  goes  on  between  the 

TechnologicalForecasting&SocialChange184(2022)1219815•Open application marketplace(cid:129)Smart contracts(cid:129)Hidden value(cid:129)Network externalities(cid:129)Crossing the chasmBlockchain-based Platform Ecosystem ValueEcosystem leverage (cid:129)Making the platform sponsor neutral(cid:129)Customer advisory board(cid:129)Managing the level of governance decentralization(cid:129)Facilitating platform regulation and developing bylaws (cid:129)Data immutability(cid:129)Data security(cid:129)Distributed control via trust anchors(cid:129)Data access and data sharing specificationsStrategic ecosystem governance(off-chain governance)Technology ecosystem governance(on-chain governance)Empirical themesConceptual categoriesAggregate dimensions(cid:129)Interoperability with legacy systems via APIs(cid:129)Onboarding and integration support(cid:129)Standardization (e.g., digital standards development)(cid:129)Interoperability with other platforms and third-party SaaSInteroperability governance(on-and off-chain governance)(cid:129)End-to-end visibility(cid:129)Unlocking data silos with a single point of contact(cid:129)Aggregation of data(cid:129)Advanced data analytics(cid:129)Actor-specific asset utilization(cid:129)Efficient compliance and inspection processesDigitalization of workflowsBlockchain-based Platform Ecosystem  GovernanceM. Jovanovic et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

different parties in the supply chain, because it is a chain, so no actor can 
act independently anyway.” 

TradeLens aims to establish itself as a single point of contact in the digi-
talized shipping industry. The benefits of maintaining a single interface 
with many different global supply chain actors in the shipping industry 
were  noted  by  several  respondents.  The president  and  CEO  of  Global 
Container Terminals Inc., for instance, observed: 

“[The benefit of TradeLens is that] we only need to connect to the plat-
form,  and  all  the  shippers  need  to  connect  to  the  platform  versus  us 
connecting to each of the 15 shippers directly, which costs a lot of money, 
takes a lot of time, and does not create a lot of value.” 

Through digitizing trade documentation, structuring data pipelines, 
enabling  real-time  information,  and  automating  multi-party  in-
teractions,  TradeLens laid  the  foundations  for unlocking  digital  value 
from data-driven innovations. The chief digital and information officer 
(CDIO) at Mediterranean Shipping Company (MSC) observed that the 
aggregation of data can improve existing services: 

“I think by digitizing or digitalizing, we can bring a little bit more value, 
maybe monetize different things that we're not doing today and overall 
being more efficient. We could even aggregate some data from the plat-
form and improve it.” 

Interviewees from Mærsk and GTD Solution further contend that accu-
rate, reliable, and near real-time information is available for TradeLens 
ecosystem members. They can improve their internal planning systems 
by employing near real-time advanced data analytics, which can result in 
reduced uncertainty about the availability of goods and a consequent 
strengthening  of  their  capacity  to  serve  their  clients.  In  addition  to 
improved customer service, advanced data analytics can enable ocean 
carriers  to  minimize  costs  related  to  moving  empty  containers.  As 
observed by the vice president of Blockchain Solutions at IBM: 

“One of  the biggest  problems  carriers  face  is  empty container  position. 
They move a lot of empty containers from one part of the world to the 
other because goods need to be shipped from one part of the world. To 
solve  that  optimization  problem,  the  industry  loses  tens  of  billions  of 
dollars. They spend billions of dollars in moving stuff unnecessarily. They 
want to minimize that. So, data that's flowing through TradeLens will be 
valuable for that too because it just tells you the total location of all the 
containers that are available globally.” 

“Data about the actual movement of the goods, instead of that coming in 
delayed. Because you know, from an ocean carrier, what they care about 
is when the vessel leaves the port and when it enters into the next port. So, 
all the information that they give out is based on their part of the journey. 
The  same  goes  for  the  terminal.  The  terminal  cares  about  when  the 
container enters the terminal and when it leaves again. For the trucker, it's 
about when they pick up the container and when they drop it off at the 
gate.  So,  you  know,  instead  of  some  human  stitching  up  that  whole 
patchwork of information, the idea is that the infrastructure will do that 
automatically.” 

Next, TradeLens has facilitated an increase in actor-specific asset utiliza-
tion.  However,  the  benefits  of  asset  utilization  may  differ  among 
ecosystem actors. For instance, governments may benefit from timely 
and accurate information in relation to customs inspection and audits, 
ports and terminals may improve on-site throughput, freight forwarders 
may maximize the utilization of their trucks and synchronize their op-
erations according to dynamic changes in the global supply chain, and 
ocean  carriers  may  optimize  their  vessel  utilization.  A  senior  IBM 
consultant  provided  an  example  of  how  TradeLens  digital  value  may 
come in different forms. He noted: 

“The primary benefit is to increase the utilization of the assets that they 
[platform  ecosystem  participants]  own.  So,  for  a  terminal,  it's  about 
speeding  the throughput of  vessels,  so that you can make more money 

from your investment in the terminal, the reason that we can speed that 
throughput  is  because  we  are  increasing  the  efficiency  of  the  data  ex-
change, and we're making it more reliable.” 

“Different members of this platform get very different benefits. That's also 
quite a challenge when it comes to communicating the value, that these 
sort of platforms bring value that is different for governments to the value 
for an importer, an exporter, and different to the value for a terminal.” 

Moreover,  partnerships  with  customs  authorities  are  major  source  of 
advantage  and  value  for  prospective  members  of  TradeLens  because 
faster  and  more  efficient  compliance  and  inspection  processes  are  an 
important  part  of  improving  operational  efficiencies  for  the  entire 
shipping industry. Several interviewees see these partnerships as both 
essential  and  mutually  beneficial.  By  joining  TradeLens,  customs  au-
thorities are able to obtain all their required documentation in an effi-
cient,  standardized,  and  reliable  manner.  Since  TradeLens 
is 
underpinned  by  blockchain,  authorities  can  benefit  from  the  tamper- 
proof  log  of  transactions  that  creates  a  reliable  audit  trail.  Addition-
ally, customs authorities can benefit from a single interface (i.e., with 
TradeLens) for all members that have already onboarded the platform 
ecosystem. A senior IBM consultant explained the benefits of TradeLens 
for the authorities: 

“One of the benefits is that they [the authorities] can improve their tar-
geting  selection  and  risk  assessment  processes.  So,  they  can't  possibly 
inspect  every single movement of goods across the world, they  have to 
decide what to inspect. You do that based on data. And there are currently 
two challenges with that data. They don't necessarily get data as early as 
they want, and they go through many steps. So, before it [the data] gets to 
the government, lots of unintentional errors are made and lots of infor-
mation is lost in that process.” 

“Governments are interested in any and all data that they can get in order 
to facilitate trade and sort out the bad guys and claim their revenue. So, 
we plan to be an enabler of data for regulators.” 

In  a  similar  way,  partnering  with  customs  authorities  has  enabled 
TradeLens to offer additional value for prospective ecosystem members 
from easier and faster compliance processes. Digitizing trade documen-
tation on TradeLens can lead to an easier compliance process because 
TradeLens ensures that documents are standardized and compliant with 
the current rules and regulations of particular jurisdictions. This may be 
especially  valuable  for  smaller  players  in  the  ecosystem  who  do  not 
possess sufficient resources to adjust their local documentation to the 
changing demands from regulators. An example was given by a project 
leader of the Global International team at Anheuser-Busch InBev: 

“The  stamp  [on  documents  for some  customs  authorities]  has to  be  in 
black ink. If it's in blue, they don't accept it. All of this takes a lot of effort 
for a shipper to remember, and we sometimes forget to put the ink in black 
and they seize the container. The container is stuck in the port, where we 
pay $150 storage a day. We need to send them a new bill of lading, but via 
post. So, you can already do the math how much this little mistake will 
cost  us.  If  we  have  a  functioning  and  trusted  platform  in  place,  the 
amendment of the bill of lading is immediate. It's within minutes, not days, 
so issues like this will not exist anymore. That's where we will save the 
money.” 

4.1.2. Ecosystem leverage 

Another way in which TradeLens seeks to encourage innovation is by 
developing an open application marketplace (e.g., application store) with 
open APIs that allow ecosystem members  to build fit-for-purpose ser-
vices  on  top  of  the  platform.  There  are  currently  three  applications 
available in the application marketplace, all developed by TradeLens. 
The  first  is  TradeLens  Core,  a  supply  chain  management  tool,  which 
captures  shipment  information  and  delivers  it  to  relevant  ecosystem 
participants via API or a user interface. The second application is the 

TechnologicalForecasting&SocialChange184(2022)1219816M. Jovanovic et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

electronic Bill of Lading (eBL), which is an electronic version of a legal 
and commercial document between a shipper and a carrier that specifies 
the type, quantity, and destination of the goods. The third application is 
a  Bill  of  Lading  Verifier,  which  is  tailored  specifically  for  banks  and 
other financial institutions, enabling more effective trade finance pro-
cesses. The leadership of TradeLens believes that these applications will 
become the main source of the company's revenue in the long run. While 
TradeLens developed all three of the initial applications, the aim of an 
open  application  marketplace  is  to  invite  complementors  to  develop 
their own innovative applications and continually contribute to the us-
ability and versatility of the platform ecosystem. The vice president of 
Blockchain Solutions at IBM described these considerations: 

shipping  industry  are  highly  interdependent,  network  externalities  of 
TradeLens are high and TradeLens can only reach its full potential if all 
relevant  parties  participate  in  the  same  platform  ecosystem.  Since 
dozens of large organizations, such as ocean carriers, ports, terminals, 
and governmental authorities, are involved in a single container ship-
ment, any missing nodes would require TradeLens customers to engage 
individually with the prospective ecosystem member in order to com-
plete  the  flow  of  information.  Additionally,  the  participation  of  all 
ecosystem actors involved in a shipment journey increases transparency 
and helps alleviate the invoicing concerns that characterize contempo-
rary global supply chains. The vice president of Blockchain Solutions at 
IBM described these problems: 

“Third parties will come in simply because, ‘Hey, you guys have gathered 
an ecosystem of network members and clients and you're just pumping 
data through the system, how can I add value to let's say a shipper, by 
giving them a better invoice dispute resolution solution or an application?’ 
The raw data can be used in various ways, and that is where third parties 
come in to deliver more value.” 

“We have called it an app store; marketplace is another word you can use. 
We are in conversation with others who are also having ideas for apps, 
and they can vary from logistics, but they can also go into the financial 
sector. We're not going to have all of the ideas and certainly there are 
some  things  that  we  can't  do,  like  financing,  for  example.  But  we  can 
facilitate those activities through TradeLens.” 

Interviewees also expressed the belief that incentivizing third parties 
to develop new, innovative solutions will contribute to an expansion of 
the  TradeLens  ecosystem  by  offering  unique  solutions  previously  un-
available to global supply chain actors, such as ports and terminals. As 
noted by the president and CEO of Global Container Terminals Inc.: 

“If the TradeLens Marketplace will become an economic clearing hub for 
rail  volume  consolidation  or  truck  volume  consolidation  and,  through 
that, they will reduce price to our customers, the shippers, we would want 
to be a part of that.” 

Further, the blockchain-based architecture of TradeLens allows for the 
development of smart contracts – programmable algorithms stored on the 
blockchain that are executed when predetermined conditions are met. A 
senior consultant from IBM described an example of how they see the 
value of TradeLens's smart contracts: 

“[…] The capability of smart contracts is to agree that certain processes 
are enforced between parties, or a certain set of rules are enforced before 
the transaction is accepted on the blockchain. So, for example, the ability 
to coordinate the approval processes of certain regulatory documents, like 
sanitary certificates, or these kind of things, where you've got a govern-
ment authority that issues it and signs it, and then somebody else has to 
approve it. And then in another country, another government authority 
looks at it and approves it. We're working on streamlining these processes 
by using the smart contract functionality.” 

Finally, some of the potential value of TradeLens is relatively “hid-
den” in the early stages, meaning that TradeLens will need to convince 
potential adopters that the platform ecosystem will deliver more value 
in the future. A Mærsk executive explained its ambition and resolve to 
leverage TradeLens and unlock the value they cannot envision yet. He 
explained: 

“We think that probably there will be a lot of things, which we cannot 
think of right now, which will pop up. So, we really want to add builders to 
come  with  creative  ideas.  Disruptive  power,  implicitly,  because  if  you 
make things transparent, the middlemen have to change their role. They 
have to find ways to upgrade the service and then the whole work starts to 
shift.” 

Attracting prospective global supply chain actors is key to creating 
value  in  a  blockchain-based  platform  ecosystem.  Since  actors  in  the 

“If you move X number of containers from one part of the world to the 
other, you've got to pay a bill. The bill is basically made up of multiple 
parts. You've got to pay the inland trucking lanes on either end, you've got 
to  pay  the  ocean  carrier,  you've  got  to  pay  the  port  for  storage  of  the 
container. So, the bill is pretty hard to understand. Moreover, you have no 
idea whether you're paying for the right services. With TradeLens, you 
could see that [the container] was at this port for this many days. It was 
on this bunker journey at this point in time, bunker oil surcharges were at 
this point in time. So, just tracking that helps you deliver a better invoice.” 

“Let's  say  port  terminal  operator  says,  I  don't  want  the  ports  to  know 
what's in the container, but the port says, well, I have to put it on the train 
in my operations, I have to do something with it, and I also want to know. 
We talk through those supply chain groups, and they very quickly realize 
there's so much benefits that they step over that.” 

TradeLens  demonstrated  its  ability  to  “cross  the  chasm”  more  quickly 
than its competitors. Since Mærsk, the biggest ocean carrier in the world 
at the time, was the initiator of TradeLens, it was able to leverage its 
dominant  market  position  to  onboard  downstream  and  upstream 
members of the value chain. In particular, TradeLens onboarded five of 
the top six global ocean carriers. Our data suggest that, while competing 
ocean  carriers  were  initially  reluctant  to  join  TradeLens,  there  was  a 
considerable appetite from other actors in the shipping industry to adopt 
the platform. Interviewees from Mærsk and IBM noted that this initial 
interest contributed to the perceived value of the TradeLens network in 
two  material  ways.  First,  as  the  platform  sponsor  and  a  heavyweight 
actor  in  the  shipping  industry,  Mærsk  was  able  to  leverage  its  own 
networks  to  onboard  new  members.  Second,  the  growing  ecosystem 
created  an  incentive  for  other  ocean  carriers  to  join  the  network,  as 
several of their customers and partners were already participants. They 
had the incentive to do so because the benefits they could realize would 
expand  as  the  number  of  ecosystem  actors  that  joined  TradeLens 
increased.  A  senior  consultant  from  IBM  explained  the  logic  behind 
creating  a  critical  mass  of  shipping  transactions  on  the  platform.  He 
explained: 

“The reason we launched this platform with Mærsk is that by launching a 
trade platform with a large carrier, we're able to overcome some of the 
challenges around the network effects for the platform. You need a critical 
mass of people and information on a platform in order for it to deliver 
value.  By  starting  and  seeding  the  platform  with  the  information  from 
Mærsk, we already have nearly 20% of global trade or containers that are 
traveling  around  the  world  available  through  that  platform.  So,  the 
thinking  was  to  bring  together  a  technology  company[IBM]  and  a  big 
ocean carrier [Mærsk]. That way, you can create the critical mass that 
you need to make this successful.” 

This reasoning was confirmed by a digital product manager at Mærsk 
when asked about plans for TradeLens. He observed: 

“The idea was to find the strong partners that could create critical mass, 
and  then  have  them  influence  their  networks  to  grow  the  [TradeLens] 
network.” 

TechnologicalForecasting&SocialChange184(2022)1219817M. Jovanovic et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

4.2. Managing off-chain and on-chain governance on a blockchain-based 
platform ecosystem 

the end of the day, every decision that we make is done where we think 
will be aligned with what is good for the fullest supply chain ecosystem.” 

Due  to  the  high competitiveness  and  low  trust  in  the  shipping  in-
dustry, governance decisions were critical in influencing the willingness 
of global supply chain actors to adopt TradeLens. Because the TradeLens 
platform  ecosystem  is  shared  across  multiple  actors  including  rivals, 
effective  governance  decisions  helped  align  goals  and  incentives, 
ensured intellectual property protection, and mitigated disputes. Based 
on the findings, TradeLens's governance is discussed on three distinct 
levels.  The  first  level  involves  decisions  on  ownership,  participation, 
distribution of benefits, and platform development. In other words, it 
encompasses  agreements  and  arrangements  between  global  supply 
chain actors pertaining to the overall goals and objectives of the plat-
form ecosystem. For the purposes of this paper, this level of governance 
is termed strategic ecosystem governance (or off-chain governance). The 
second level refers to the technology ecosystem governance (or on-chain 
governance).  It  involves  the  technical  execution  of  blockchain  plat-
form architecture and sets blockchain agreements between global sup-
ply  chain  actors.  This  level  defines  who  is  in  control  of  the  data  and 
ensures that shared data are protected. Finally, the third level involves 
interoperability  governance  (on-  and  off-chain  governance),  including 
managing the interoperability with legacy systems of ecosystem actors 
and  with  other  shipping  platforms  (blockchain  and  non-blockchain). 
The notion of interoperability governance is mainly related to the con-
cepts of efficiency and risk. 

4.2.1. Strategic ecosystem governance (off-chain governance) 

With  regard  to  strategic  ecosystem  governance,  TradeLens  had  to 
signal to prospective ecosystem members that the platform ecosystem 
was  open  and  neutral,  and  that  it  would  establish  and  continuously 
manage  an  advisory  board  to  represent  interests  of  all  ecosystem 
members.  The  first  step  for  Mærsk  was  creating  a  separate  business 
entity within Mærsk Group, called GTD Solution, that was to operate at 
arm's  length  from  the  rest  of  Mærsk  and  treat  Mærsk  as  any  other 
ecosystem  member.  GTD Solution  ensures  that the  terms  offered  to a 
particular ecosystem member, regardless of who it is, are equivalent to 
the  terms available to other ecosystem members, such as large ocean 
carriers.  The  aim  of  establishing  GTD  Solution  was  to  signal  that  a 
neutral  platform  sponsor  operated  TradeLens,  and  that  its  goal  was  to 
unlock  digital  value  across  the  entire  industry,  rather  than  accruing 
benefits  to  Mærsk  alone.  Respondents  from  Mærsk  anticipated  that 
neutrality would lead to an increase in the perceived trustworthiness of 
the platform, resulting in industry-wide adoption. The head of strategy 
and operations at GTD Solution/TradeLens believed that this approach 
would  alleviate  concerns  of  prospective  ecosystem  members  –  in 
particular, competing ocean carriers. He noted: 

“When you interact with GTD, you're interacting with it as if it were its 
own company, even though it's part of the Mærsk group. And so, all of a 
sudden  you  no  longer  have  the  risk  of  data  that  you're  giving  as  a 
competitor to Mærsk, to this platform, getting in the hands of Mærsk itself 
because there is a separation of system, separation of people, separation 
of legal constructs.” 

The second step was establishing the TradeLens customer advisory board, 
making sure that decisions on the development of the platform, such as 
data  standardization  and  the  product  roadmap,  are  transparent  and 
aligned with other members of the ecosystem. The idea behind creating 
an advisory board was described by a digital product manager at Mærsk: 

“We have created the customer advisory board whose job it is to represent 
those who are TradeLens customers, so that we make decisions through 
collaboration. So, for example, around data standardization, the product 
roadmap,  and  things  like  that  to  make  sure  that  what  we're  doing  is 
aligned with the mission statements that we have for the company. But at 

“The advisory board was a response to the many questions about: ‘Why 
should I join something that IBM has built for Mærsk?’ The idea with the 
advisory board was simply to listen to the industry, to set up a team of 
people who would be representative of different actors in the supply chain, 
and to open that up. I think that, on the one side, it was a good move to 
have a voice of more than just one customer. At the same time, I think it 
illustrates one of the problems in shipping in general that, on the surface, 
we all trust each other but, actually, we don't. That is what the advisory 
board was set down to do, to be the voice of the whole industry and to also 
have an influence on the development.” 

Although Mærsk and IBM made initial decisions on the functioning of 
the platform ecosystem, in order to drive adoption, the two companies 
needed to take a step back and involve other global supply chain actors. 
This approach signified a move toward a more decentralized governance 
model, which aims to ensure that decisions are transparent and aligned 
with the members of the entire industry, rather than residing with a few 
dominant players. Executives from Mærsk and IBM suggested that the 
final shape of the advisory board is not yet determined. As the platform 
ecosystem  grows,  TradeLens  needs  to  manage  the  level  of  governance 
decentralization. This may require tradeoffs between the inclusion of a 
larger number of ecosystem participants and flexibility in terms of de-
cision making and TradeLens development. This tradeoff was also noted 
by the CEO and partner at SeaIntelligence Consulting, a leading shipping 
industry expert: 

“If you invite a lot of carriers and give them veto right, you run into the 
INTTRA2 problem – when you reach a minimum threshold, some of the 
carriers will be happy, and it's impossible to move it further. The other 
extreme would be to position it as a Mærsk–IBM project, get flexibility, 
but immediately alienate all the other carriers.” 

While  there  seems  to  be  a  consensus  across  respondents  that  the 
inclusion of customs authorities will create considerable value for the 
ecosystem  as  a  whole,  some  interviewees  noted  that  getting  more  of 
them to join might present an administrative challenge for TradeLens. 
Several customs authorities around the globe still require original paper 
documentation,  including  stamps  and  signatures.  Fully  realizing  the 
benefits of TradeLens will, therefore, require some changes in platform 
regulations and developing bylaws. Moreover, adopting an industry-wide 
platform is largely a political decision because many governments are 
skeptical of sharing data through a global platform. A program director 
at DCSA explained: 

“So, bylaws could help interoperability, but it's not only for interopera-
bility. Let's imagine for a second a world in which interoperability never 
happens in terms of eBL solution providers; to us, it still makes sense [to 
create standard bylaws].” 

4.2.2. Technology ecosystem governance (on-chain) 

Concerning  technology  ecosystem  governance,  TradeLens  had  to 
address  the  issues  of  data  immutability,  data  security,  distribution  of 
control  via  trust  anchors,  and  data  access  and  sharing  models  on  the 
blockchain-based  platform  ecosystem. First,  the  inherent attributes  of 
blockchain  technology  ensure  the  data  immutability  feature  of  Trade-
Lens.  An  informant  from  IBM  elaborated  on  the  importance  of  data 
immutability in platform ecosystem governance, stating: 

“Because of the consensus algorithms, we can say that, once some data is 
in there, it's impossible for a single organization to change it. And that has 

2  INTTRA  is  an  EDI-based  portal  for  standardized  contained  bookings  that 
was founded as a joint venture of seven of the world's largest ocean carriers in 
late 2000. 

TechnologicalForecasting&SocialChange184(2022)1219818M. Jovanovic et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

some very useful consequences when you are looking at scenarios where 
you've got a lack of trust. So, either between the private sector and gov-
ernment,  or  between  different  private sector  participants  where  serious 
amounts of money are at stake. So, I think that the ability, through an 
appropriate  consensus  algorithm, to  say  that  no  party  can  unilaterally 
change the history is powerful.” 

A similar point was highlighted by the project leader at AB-InBev who 
provided an example: 

“It's a trustful source because we see the digital signature, and we see it's 
not a changeable field. But if you use normal kind of EDIs or IDocs or 
whatever, you can post the data to someone's system, and he can of course 
amend it, and it is happening. It is happening also in our work. It's time to 
change it. It's the 21st  century. We don't want to work with paper. We 
don't  want  to  create  hard  copies  of  documents  and  have  them  signed, 
stamped, no.” 

Similarly,  the  underlying  blockchain  platform  architecture  is  an 
important element contributing to TradeLens data security. However, the 
level of security and control over data depends on decisions made during 
the design of the blockchain platform architecture – notably the number 
and ownership of validating nodes. Respondents from Mærsk and IBM 
noted  that,  even  though  the  two  companies  initiated  TradeLens,  it 
quickly became apparent that companies could not run all, or even the 
majority, of the blockchain nodes because this would result in excessive 
power in the hands of a single company, which would run against their 
positioning  as  a  genuinely  neutral  industry-wide  platform  ecosystem. 
The  head  of  strategy  and  operations  at  GTD  Solution/TradeLens 
described these efforts: 

“We took a number of steps to address concerns like, ‘What if I give my 
data to this platform that is controlled by my key competitor? What can 
they do with those insights, and what might they do with it?’ Or, ‘How can 
I be sure that whatever I do here, another shipping line isn't going to get an 
advantage from mine being on there that I can't realize?’” 

A blockchain is a tool for distributing control over a shared ledger among 
multiple  participants  in  which  no  single  participant  can  unilaterally 
exercise full authority over the system. TradeLens offered participating 
ocean carriers the option to host and manage a blockchain node. Carriers 
who opt for this option are referred to as “trust anchors” and maintain an 
exact copy of the ledger. Trust anchors are known to the network by 
their cryptographic identities. They participate in the consensus mech-
anism, meaning that they validate transactions, host data, and assume a 
critical role in securing the network. As opposed to public permissionless 
blockchains,  in  which  the  ledger  is  replicated  on  every  node  in  the 
system (i.e., universal data diffusion), only trust anchors hold a copy of 
the  ledger  on  TradeLens's  private  permissioned  blockchain.  A  Digital 
product manager at Mærsk explained: 

“The  trust  anchors  are  handling  all  the  verification  on  behalf  of  the 
number of participants in the network. That, of course, speeds up every-
thing because you don't replicate the same truth on so many nodes…plus 
then…less transactions, faster speed. The idea is that instead of having 
everyone setting up a node, you save the cost of doing that. Both in terms 
of the transaction and also money, of course. Because you don't need that 
server running, you don't need expertise in running that server and setting 
it up, and making sure everything is in place, security, privacy, GDPR and 
so on.” 

Finally,  in  terms  of  data  access,  TradeLens  leveraged  a  permissioned 
blockchain  structure  to  develop  the  “data  sharing  specification”.  It  is 
based on a data model, referred to as a “consignment hierarchy”, which 
TradeLens adopted from the United Nations Centre for Trade Facilita-
tion  and  Electronic  Business  (UN/CEFACT).  It  differentiates  between 
three layers – shipment, consignment, and equipment. A shipment de-
fines  a  commercial  and  financial  relationship  between  a  buyer  and  a 
seller  and  typically  includes  the  buyer's  and  the  seller's  banks.  A 

consignment is the operational execution of that commercial relation-
ship and includes more organizations, such as ports and inland trans-
portation providers, but will tend not to involve banks. Equipment is the 
unit that contains goods that are part of the commercial relationship (e. 
g., a shipping container). There is a many-to-many relationship between 
these three layers. A shipment, for example, can be comprised of several 
different consignments, and a single consignment can have many ship-
ments  associated  with it.  TradeLens identifies  a  role  that a  particular 
ecosystem  actor  can  play  in  executing  a  shipment,  consignment,  or 
equipment. The identified role, in turn, determines what transactions a 
particular actor can access. 

More  importantly,  in  addition  to  the  data  sharing  specification, 
TradeLens also leverages IBM blockchain “channel architecture”, which 
specifies  how  data  is  shared  within  the  blockchain  environment.  A 
channel is  established  for  each  participating  ocean  carrier, and  infor-
mation is distributed only to those nodes participating in a channel (i.e., 
multi-channel diffusion). This means that none of the customer infor-
mation from ocean carriers will be distributed to other ocean carriers 
that  are  not a  part of  a  specific  transaction. Moreover,  only  the  hash 
value of commercially sensitive information is stored on the blockchain, 
so that only authorized participants are able to see if the information has 
changed (through a changed hash value), without actually seeing the 
underlying  data.  Documents  are  stored  on  a  single  node,  and  are 
accessed at runtime by other nodes on a particular channel as permis-
sions allow. This means that participants in the network stay in control 
of their own data, while TradeLens handles the operational integration 
of  these  independent  ecosystem  actors  using  standard  protocols. 
TradeLens's data retention policy defines how long the data is stored on 
the  platform.  The  hashes  on  the  blockchain  ledger  are  stored  indefi-
nitely,  but  the  hash  cannot  be  used  to  recreate  the  original  data.  An 
executive from TradeLens explained: 

“It's important to remember that the data resides with the data owner. The 
platform as such doesn't hold the data. The platform enables the different 
actors to exchange data when it is relevant so if you are a party relevant to 
a shipment, you have access, if you have been delegated that access by the 
data owner. If I'm a producer and I'm shipping sneakers from Bangladesh 
to the US, I know my suppliers, I know my forwarder, I know my ocean 
carrier, and I delegate access to all of them to be able to help me out on 
creating  the  trail  of  information  that  is  needed  for  me  to  get  it 
somewhere.” 

“We  have  a  data  sharing  model,  called  a  diagram  or  table,  where  we 
arranged who can see what. Basically the objective is that the sharing is 
minimized amongst the parties who handle a specific container that they 
see the data… so that the transparency is where the benefits mostly come 
from. If I have the container, and I send it to you, if we all know what's in 
it, and when it's coming, and when it should be coming, the rest of the 
world doesn't have to know. And if you are involved in 200 containers, 
you'll see of those 200 containers, that information. So, that limits the 
visibility to a very effective level.” 

4.2.3.

Interoperability governance (on- and off-chain governance) 

In  interoperability  governance,  TradeLens  had  to  address  interop-
erability with legacy systems, providing onboarding and software inte-
gration  support,  digital  standardization,  and  interoperability  between 
TradeLens  and  other  platforms.  First,  as  noted  by  respondents  from 
Mærsk and GTD Solution, there are two different options for connecting 
to  TradeLens.  Prospective  ecosystem  members  can  interact  with  the 
platform by linking it to their proprietary IT systems via open applica-
tion  programming  interfaces  (APIs).  Integrating  legacy  systems  with 
TradeLens via APIs is particularly attractive for major organizations who 
are processing large amounts of data. As the head of strategy and op-
erations at TradeLens observed: 

“[…] if you think of a shipping line or a terminal, the amount of data that 
they are using is considerable, and those data need to be in our platform at 

TechnologicalForecasting&SocialChange184(2022)1219819M. Jovanovic et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

scale. And that's not going to happen if you have to have 40 people in a 
room typing data into a system that can then go to TradeLens.” 

“Of course, many  of these different organizations also  have to change 
their tech set up to accommodate to working with the APIs from Trade-
Lens and to make sure that this goes into their operational systems because 
one thing is that they're feeding data into the system. They also need to 
somehow consume the APIs and be able to use that operationally so it is 
not just saying, ‘We all know how this is working, we can just open up the 
gates and everything will just start flowing.’” 

“So, API is the next level from an EDI connection. And the reason why 
that's important is that everybody knows that EDI connections are very 
hard to change. It takes a lot of work, and it is very expensive, whereas an 
API is way more flexible.” 

An  ecosystem  member,  Anheuser-Busch  InBev,  also  reiterated  the 
importance of interoperability with the legacy systems as noted by its 
project leader: 

“Imagine that you're shipping over 250,000 containers a year. We need to 
have a platform directly interfacing with our system. Because the opera-
tional teams cannot go and manually put all the data needed for ocean 
booking or shipping instructions. That would require an army of people, 
and we definitely don't want this. We must have something connected.” 

Ecosystem  members  can  also  take  the  option  of  employing  a  user 
interface instead of integrating their existing systems with the platform 
ecosystem. This is particularly relevant for smaller firms who either do 
not have a core legacy system or consider such integration too expen-
sive.  Therefore,  the  level  of  integration  and  the  amount  of  platform- 
specific investment are dependent on a specific actor, its size, and the 
amount of data exchanged, which requires the actor-specific approach 
to interoperability governance. 

Next,  TradeLens  offers  onboarding  and  integration  support  for  pro-
spective  members  to  assist  in  integrating  their  legacy  systems  with 
TradeLens. The onboarding team provides guidance and assistance with 
data and process mapping and integration testing to ensure the current 
legacy systems  of ecosystem  members  are able  to both feed data and 
consume data from TradeLens. One TradeLens executive explained: 

“Full integrations will happen and then the data starts flowing because as 
of today  it's actually only Mærsk's data that is  available to all parties 
whereas the work of onboarding the rest of the carriers takes a lot of time 
because there is some data mapping going on.” 

Open APIs and the support offered by GTD Solution and IBM reflect the 
ambition of the two companies to motivate actors to join the platform 
ecosystem by making connecting to TradeLens as easy as possible. Some 
respondents,  however,  noted  that  introducing  new  technology  is  a 
challenging endeavor that may not resolve persistent data quality issues. 
As observed by the CTO of Youredi, TradeLens's integration solutions 
provider: 

“When updating an existing integration from old batch-based to a modern 
API […] many players will give you the impression that using new tech-
nology will somehow magically fix problems with the old technology, and 
this  is  very  often  not  the  case.  Implementing  a  new  API  might  give  a 
company  the  opportunity  to  fix  issues  with  old  technology,  but  new 
technology is no guarantee that issues will be fixed. Fixing data quality 
errors usually requires improvements to several downstream systems in 
the process.” 

This can be particularly difficult for companies using a lot of customized 
software  accumulated  over  the  years.  A  digital  product  manager  at 
Mærsk argued that: 

“Over time you build a lot of technical debt, and just by introducing new 
modern  APIs,  that's  never  going  to  solve  the  legacy  problems,  or  the 
technical depth that you may have built up over 20 years.” 

Next, an important topic related to interoperability is standardization, 
which remains a problem in the shipping industry. The aim is to achieve 
higher levels of standardization, adopt some of the most basic vocabu-
lary conventions developed by UN/CEFACT, and leverage UN/CEFACT's 
Supply  Chain  Reference  Data  Model  (SCRDM).  Adopting  this  model 
helps to make the TradeLens platform interoperable with the systems of 
other ecosystem actors who have also adopted SCRDM. In addition to 
adopting the UN/CEFACT standard data model in 2018, TradeLens is 
also involved in co-creating industry digital standards by collaborating 
with  the  recently  established  Digital  Container  Shipping  Association 
(DCSA). DCSA is a not-for-profit, independent organization founded by 
nine of the ten largest global ocean carriers in 2018 with the mission to 
establish  standards  for  the  entire  shipping  industry,  which  will  allow 
systems to “speak to each other”. Therefore, it will play a crucial role in 
establishing industry-wide interoperability. As the CDIO at Mediterra-
nean Shipping Company (MSC) and the chairman of DCSA observed: 

“When they tell you a plane has landed, you understand that the plane has 
landed and it's going to the terminal. It's going to discharge the passengers. 
When you say a vessel has arrived, it means nothing. It could have arrived 
in berth, it could have arrived and be waiting outside, it could have arrived 
in the mouth of a river, and it still has 12 hours to get to the berth.” 

Finally,  interoperability  between  TradeLens  and  other  platforms  is  a 
critical  consideration  for  potential  participants  because  it  decreases 
switching  costs  and  risks.  In  2020, developers  from  Oracle, IBM,  and 
SAP disclosed that they had completed cross-platform testing and were 
able to connect consortia of firms clustered on different platforms. Since 
TradeLens  is  run  on  an  IBM  blockchain  and  GSBN  (a  competing 
blockchain-based platform) is run on an Oracle blockchain,3 this could 
well  mean  that  the  risk  for  partners  to  join  either  platform  will  be 
diminished considerably. The CDIO at MSC, for example, suggested: 

“The world needs more than one platform, that's for sure. There has to be 
interoperability because you will always have some of the parties using 
platform A and some of the parties using platform D or E or F, because 
that's going to develop.” 

TradeLens  has  established  data  arrangements  that  enable  firms  to 
exchange  data  with  a  platform  that  is  partially  overlapping  with 
TradeLens  and,  therefore,  competes  in  one  segment  but  is  also  a 
powerful data complementor in another segment. A senior IBM execu-
tive  explained  TradeLens's  position  in  relation  to  the  competing 
platforms: 

“If they're big enough, or interesting enough, we connect, for example, 
some are regional logistic platforms. What do we do? We make a data 
deal. We say, you give this information, you get that information from us, 
but we both win. And we have another level of digitization, some might be 
for our app store. So, for example, groups of platforms who are in the 
financial, around the bill of lading, there's a lot of scrutiny and checks and 
banks, guarantees and that type of stuff. Some have even a blockchain 
solution for that. So, we will plug that into TradeLens or work together. 
We think always that we set the entrance of the universe.” 

Additionally,  TradeLens  ensured  interoperability  with  third-party  Soft-
ware-as-a-Service (SaaS)  providers who offered onboarding  support to 
prospective  clients.  This  is  a  particularly  interesting  option  for  com-
panies who are hesitant to let onboarding teams from GTD Solution or 
IBM get too close to their proprietary data. As a result, the TradeLens 
leadership was considering the possibility of integrating TradeLens into 
SAP  because  this  could  create  an  additional  incentive  for  ecosystem 
members to adopt the platform. As a Digital product manager at Mærsk 
noted: 

3  Both IBM  blockchain  and  Oracle blockchain  are  powered by  Hyperledger 
Fabric,  an  enterprise-grade  permissioned  distributed  ledger  framework, 
providing modular architecture. 

TechnologicalForecasting&SocialChange184(2022)12198110M. Jovanovic et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

“[if we integrate with SAP] then you would have another gateway because 
all the companies using SAP would suddenly see: ‘Oh, this is a component 
within my suite of ERP that I'm already working with.’” 

5. Discussion and conclusion 

This study aims to unpack the most important factors in managing a 
blockchain-based  platform  ecosystem  in  the  shipping  industry.  Our 
study  extends,  in  several  ways,  the  literature  on  platform  ecosystems 
supported  by  blockchain  technology  in  the  context  of  global  supply 
chains and the platform literature more broadly. 

First,  the  study contributes  to the  emerging platform  literature by 
exploring  one  of  the  largest  active  blockchain-based  platform  ecosys-
tems  operating  globally  (Goldsby  and  Hanisch,  2022;  Jensen  et  al., 
2019). It also contributes to the literature on platform adoption and the 
antecedents of platform success (Zhu and Iansiti, 2019) by unpacking 
the  critical  elements  influencing  the  decision  of  global  supply  chain 
actors  to  embark  on  digital  transformation  by  joining  a  blockchain- 
based platform ecosystem (Hsuan et al., 2021; Schmeiss et al., 2019). 

Second,  while  blockchain-based  platform  ecosystems  serve  as  a 
promising vehicle for digital transformation in data-sensitive industries 
(Lacity and Van Hoek, 2021), the potential value of a blockchain-based 
platform ecosystem that will legitimize industry-wide adoption needs to 
be clearly conceptualized and communicated (Garg et al., 2021; Jova-
novic et al., 2021; Rejeb et al., 2021). The study shows that platform 
value  is  affected  by  both  blockchain-based  and  platform  ecosystem 
features.  In  particular,  the  digitalization  of  workflows  has  unlocked 
organizational  and  cross-organizational  data  silos  (e.g.,  data  islands) 
and  allowed  for  efficient  end-to-end  collaboration  across  the  entire 
global  supply  chain  (Phadnis  and  Fine,  2017;  Schmidt  and  Wagner, 
2019).  However,  the  value  generated  and  prioritized  may  differ 
depending on the actor's type and role in the ecosystem (e.g., authorities, 
ports,  ocean  carriers)  (Cennamo,  2021;  Parida  and  Jovanovic,  2021). 
Additionally, the data layer allowed for the creation of a marketplace 
that can be opened to specialized complementors to develop innovative 
solutions that expand the platform ecosystem value (Jovanovic et al., 
2021).  High  task-oriented  interdependence  among  the  global  supply 
chain  actors  creates  strong  network  effects  (Gawer  and  Cusumano, 
2014;  Helfat  and  Raubitschek,  2018;  Ozalp  et  al.,  2018),  making 
crossing the chasm to industry-wide adoption critical for the long-term 
success of a platform ecosystem (Clarysse et al., 2014; Moore, 2014). 

Third, the study unpacks a set of key governance mechanisms for a 
blockchain-based  platform  ecosystem  –  strategic,  technology,  and 
interoperability  governance.  More  specifically,  due  to  the  complex 
interplay  between  the  blockchain-related  governance  and  inter- 
organizational governance features, our study makes a distinction be-
tween  on-chain  and  off-chain  governance  (cf.  digital  and  non-digital 
governance  features,  Chen  et  al.,  2022).  Strategic  ecosystem  gover-
nance  safeguards  platform  ecosystem  members  from  potential  oppor-
tunistic  behavior  by  other  members  or  the  platform  sponsor.  Studies 
have shown that platform sponsors use signaling to establish the role of a 
trusted intermediary or a trusted platform sponsor (Deng et al., 2021). 
This  is  particularly  important  for  the  industry-wide  adoption  of  a 
blockchain-based  platform  ecosystem  that  connects  “frenemy”  actors 
(Adner et al., 2019). In this study, we show that establishing a neutral 
position of a platform sponsor positively affects industry-wide adoption, 
similar to standard-setting organizations and open-source communities 
(O'Mahony  and  Karp,  2022).  In  our  study,  establishing  an  advisory 
board assured potential adopters that decisions on operations and future 
development of the platform ecosystem will be governed by a broader 
ecosystem (Pombo-Ju´arez et al., 2017). The study also contributes to the 
literature on participation architecture (West and O'Mahony, 2008) by 
highlighting the challenge of setting the right level of advisory board 
decentralization (Lacity and Van Hoek, 2021). 

Fourth, this study finds that the platform sponsor must proactively 

work on the platform regulation (Cusumano et al., 2021; Jacobides and 
Lianos, 2021) and create bylaws for paperless trade because current laws 
and  regulations  do  not  adequately  address  the  legal  framework  for 
digital  and,  especially,  blockchain-based  trade  (Goldby,  2016).  This 
research  contributes  to  the  emerging  literature  on  interoperability 
governance (Wimmer et al., 2018) by underscoring both interoperability 
with  different  legacy  systems  and  competing  platforms  (Ziolkowski 
et al., 2020) as vehicles to increase the perceived usability of the plat-
form  but  also  to  decrease  the  risk  of  platform  lock-in  and  platform- 
specific  investments  (Ozalp  et  al.,  2018).  Similarly,  the  study  high-
lights  the  importance  of  digital  standards  to  strengthen  blockchain- 
based platform adoption (Zachariadis et al., 2019). 

Finally, the study provides a perspective on technology ecosystem 
governance (Lumineau et al., 2021; Wareham et al., 2014) in the context 
of a blockchain-based platform ecosystem. In particular, this research 
has  demonstrated  that  design  choices  of  the  blockchain  platform  ar-
chitecture  have  important  implications  for  governance  and  platform 
adoption (Lumineau et al., 2021). More specifically, the study provides 
evidence  on  emerging  models  to  balance  data  access  and  permission 
management  (Azaria  et  al.,  2016).  Our  research  also  provides  a  rare 
example of smart contract application in the context of the global supply 
chain  (Agrawal  et  al.,  2022;  Murray  et  al.,  2021;  Ziolkowski  et  al., 
2020). 

5.1. Managerial implications 

Despite limitations to generalizability based on a single case, insights 
from  this  study  provide  valuable  information  for  firms  in  other  in-
dustries, which are developing or exploring blockchain-based platform 
ecosystems.  Platform  sponsors  should  carefully  consider  proposed 
design  decisions  when  building  a  blockchain-based  platform  because 
these decisions will determine the platform characteristics (e.g., secu-
rity, transparency) and influence the adoption decisions of other actors 
in  the  industry.  Demonstrating  value  and  building  an  appropriate 
governance structure help align the interests of various actors and pro-
mote  the  diffusion  of  an  industry-wide  blockchain-based  platform 
ecosystem,  irrespective  of  the  particular  industry.  In  addition,  estab-
lishing a collaborative structure such as TradeLens's customer advisory 
board can ensure the collective participation of representative members 
of heterogeneous groups, further increasing the likelihood of industry- 
wide  platform  adoption.  Finally,  ensuring  the  interoperability  of  a 
blockchain-based  platform with legacy systems, as well as  with other 
(potentially  competing)  blockchain-based  platforms,  can  lead  to 
increased  efficiency  and  lower  risk,  which  can  incentivize  a  greater 
number of global supply chain actors to adopt a particular platform. 

5.2. Limitations 

This study is subject to several limitations. The case study method is 
potentially  vulnerable  to  researcher-induced  bias  during  both  data 
collection and analysis. Even though case-based research and qualitative 
data  facilitate  the  investigation  of  complex  phenomena,  they  also 
restrict the statistical generalizability of findings (Yin, 2017). This study 
does  not  suggest  that  platform  value  and  platform  governance  fully 
explain  all  aspects  of  effective  management  of  a  blockchain-based 
platform ecosystem and that achieving positive results in each of these 
areas will unequivocally result in industry-wide platform adoption. The 
latter  will  depend  on  several  contingencies  of  each  specific  imple-
mentation project, such as individual preferences of a particular global 
supply chain actor, the prior relationship with a platform sponsor, and 
specifics  of  platform  regulation.  Yet,  the  two  identified  dimensions 
outline the most important considerations of current TradeLens mem-
bers  and  potential  adopters,  influencing  their  decision  to  adopt  the 
platform. TradeLens will need to find a balance between addressing the 
requirements of various global supply chain actors and the complexity to 
meet all these specific requirements. Finally, some regulatory hurdles 

TechnologicalForecasting&SocialChange184(2022)12198111M. Jovanovic et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

are inhibiting TradeLens from reaching its full potential. To achieve the 
goal to simplify compliance processes, several customs authorities and 
governments  worldwide  would  need  to  start  accepting  data  from 
TradeLens. 

5.3. Future research 

Future studies should continue to explore the TradeLens case as it 
develops and evaluate the progress made in each of the two dimensions. 
Researchers could also explore the TradeLens case in depth in specific 
areas  (e.g.,  the  financial  impact  of  joining  TradeLens  for  a  particular 
company, the effect of standardization on the success of the platform, 

impact of digitized trade documentation and automatic execution of pre- 
defined  rules  on  management  control).  We  propose  that  researchers 
apply the two identified dimensions – platform value and governance – 
to  explore  how  firms  build  successful  blockchain-based  platform  eco-
systems in other industries. As the emerging landscape of blockchain- 
based  platform  ecosystems  continues  to  evolve,  we  expect  it  will 
fundamentally change how companies collaborate, compete, share data, 
and develop innovative products and services. 

Data availability 

No data was used for the research described in the article.  

Appendix A. The overview of conferences and webinars  

Date 

Type 

Title 

Nordic Blockchain conference 

Organizer 

ITU Copenhagen 

04.11.2017. 

18.04.2018. 

18.06.2019. 

11.11.2019. 

Conference 
participation 
Conference 
participation 
Conference 
participation 
Conference 
participation 

19.02.2020.  Webinar 
12.05.2020.  Webinar 

26.05.2020.  Webinar 
09.06.2020.  Webinar 

03.07.2020.  Webinar 

14.07.2020.  Webinar 
15.07.2020.  Webinar 
05.08.2020.  Webinar 

12.08.2020.  Webinar 

19.08.2020.  Webinar 

Blockchain conference and exhibition 

Blockchain Expo World Series 

TOC Europe 

TOC Events Worldwide 

SHIP TECH 2019: Conference on the future of shipping 

ShippingWatch 

Learning about DCSA's Track & Trace standards 
Digitalisation and data standardization: time for the maritime 
industry to act 
Adapting to ‘New’ New Normal: The Impact of COVID 19 
Accelerating Digitalization: The Role Of Start-up Tech In Post- 
covid-19 Supply Chains 
Where next for global shipping? 

Global Overview of the Container Shipping Market 
Global Smart Container Forum 
An electronic bill of lading, considered the holy grail of the 
maritime industry 
How 3PLs and FFWs move from linear logistics to a platform 
business model 
BiTA + TradeLens: Alignment & Opportunities Moving Forward 

Digital Container Shipping Association (DCSA) 
Maritime Optimization and Communication 

TOC Events Worldwide 
TOC Events Worldwide 

Executive MBA in Shipping and Logistics: Copenhagen 
Business School 
Intermodal Digital Insights 
Intermodal Digital Insights 
IBM Blockchain/TradeLens 

IBM Blockchain/TradeLens 

FreightWaves 

Location 

Copenhagen 

London 

Rotterdam 

Copenhagen 

Online 
Online 

Online 
Online 

Online 

Online 
Online 
Online 

Online 

Online  

Appendix B. The overview of the secondary data sources  

Outlet 

Webpage 

TradeLens webpage 
TradeLens blog 
TradeLens press releases 
TradeLens documentation 
GTD Solution webpage 
Digital Container Shipping Association (DCSA) 
JOC.com (Container shipping and trade news and analysis) 
Coindesk 
Ledger Insights 
Wired 
World Economic forum 
LinkedIn posts 
Twitter Posts 
IBM Blockchain 
PWC 
Coin Telegraph 
The Loadstar 
Container news 
SeaIntelligence Consulting 
Supplychain dive 
Global Trade review 
Globe newswire 
Logistics Middle East 
Seatrade Maritime News 
Port Technology 
Express Computer 

https://www.tradelens.com/ 
https://www.tradelens.com/blog 
https://www.tradelens.com/blog/all-press-releases 
https://docs.tradelens.com/ 
https://www.gtdsolution.com/ 
https://dcsa.org/ 
https://www.joc.com/ 
https://www.coindesk.com/ 
https://www.ledgerinsights.com/ 
https://www.wired.co.uk/ 
https://www.weforum.org/ 
https://www.linkedin.com/ 
https://twitter.com/ 
https://www.ibm.com/blockchain 
https://www.pwc.com/gx/en/industries/technology/blockchain/blockchain-in-business.html 
https://cointelegraph.com/ 
https://theloadstar.com/ 
https://container-news.com/ 
https://www.seaintelligence-consulting.com/ 
https://www.supplychaindive.com/ 
https://www.gtreview.com/ 
https://www.globenewswire.com/en 
https://www.logisticsmiddleeast.com/ 
https://www.seatrade-maritime.com/ 
https://www.porttechnology.org/ 
https://www.expresscomputer.in/ 

(continued on next page) 

TechnologicalForecasting&SocialChange184(2022)12198112M. Jovanovic et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

(continued ) 

Outlet 

Container Management 
The Maritime Executive 
BTC Manager 
PR Newswire 
Splash247.com 
Business Blockchain HQ 
Forbes 
Market Research Reports 
Harvard Business Review 
MIT Technology Review 
The National Law Review 
Coin Rivet 

Webpage 

https://container-mag.com/ 
https://www.maritime-executive.com/ 
https://btcmanager.com/ 
https://www.prnewswire.com/ 
https://splash247.com/ 
https://businessblockchainhq.com/ 
https://www.forbes.com/ 
https://www.marketresearchreports.com/maritime 
https://hbr.org/ 
https://www.technologyreview.com/ 
https://www.natlawreview.com/ 
https://coinrivet.com/  

References 

Adner, R., Chen, J., Zhu, F., 2019. Frenemies in platform markets: heterogeneous profit 
foci as drivers of compatibility decisions. Manage. Sci. https://doi.org/10.1287/ 
mnsc.2019.3327 mnsc.2019.3327.  

Agi, M.A.N., Jha, A.K., 2022. Blockchain technology for supply chain management: an 
integrated theoretical perspective of organizational adoption. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 
108458 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2022.108458. 

Agrawal, T.K., Angelis, J., Khilji, W.A., Kalaiarasan, R., Wiktorsson, M., 2022. 

Demonstration of a blockchain-based framework using smart contracts for supply 
chain collaboration. Int. J. Prod. Res. 1–20 https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
00207543.2022.2039413. 

Alaimo, C., Kallinikos, J., 2021. Organizations decentered: data objects, technology and 

knowledge. Organ. Sci. https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.2021.1552. 

Alvesson, M., 2011. Interpreting Interviews. SAGE Publications Ltd, 1 Oliver’s Yard, 55 

City Road, London EC1Y 1SP United Kingdom. https://doi.org/10.4135/ 
9781446268353.  

Azaria, A., Ekblaw, A., Vieira, T., Lippman, A., 2016. MedRec: using blockchain for 
medical data access and permission management. In: 2016 2nd International 
Conference on Open and Big Data (OBD). IEEE, pp. 25–30. https://doi.org/10.1109/ 
OBD.2016.11. 

Babich, V., Hilary, G., 2020. OM forum—distributed ledgers and operations: what 

operations management researchers should know about blockchain technology. 
Manuf. Serv. Oper. Manag. 22, 223–240. https://doi.org/10.1287/ 
msom.2018.0752. 

Balci, G., 2021. Digitalization in container shipping: do perception and satisfaction 
regarding digital products in a non-technology industry affect overall customer 
loyalty? Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change 172, 121016. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
techfore.2021.121016. 

Bauer, I., Parra-Moyano, J., Schmedders, K., Schwabe, G., 2022. Multi-party certification 
on blockchain and its impact in the market for lemons. J. Manag. Inf. Syst. 39, 
395–425. https://doi.org/10.1080/07421222.2022.2063555. 

Beck, R., Müller-Bloch, C., King, J.L., 2018. Governance in the Blockchain economy: a 

framework and research agenda. J. Assoc. Inf. Syst. 19, 1020–1034. 

Bonina, C., Koskinen, K., Eaton, B., Gawer, A., 2021. Digital platforms for development: 

foundations and research agenda. Inf. Syst. J. 31, 869–902. https://doi.org/ 
10.1111/isj.12326. 

Cai, Y., Choi, T., Zhang, J., 2021. Platform supported supply chain operations in the 
blockchain era: supply contracting and moral hazards*. Decis. Sci. 52, 866–892. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/deci.12475. 

Catalini, C., Gans, J.S., 2020. Some simple economics of the blockchain. Commun. ACM 

63, 80–90. https://doi.org/10.1145/3359552. 

Cenamor, J., Frishammar, J., 2021. Openness in platform ecosystems: innovation 

strategies for complementary products. Res. Policy 50, 104148. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.respol.2020.104148. 

Cennamo, C., 2021. Competing in digital markets: a platform-based perspective. Acad. 

Manag. Perspect. 35, 265–291. https://doi.org/10.5465/amp.2016.0048. 
Cennamo, C., Santal´o, J., 2019. Generativity tension and value creation in platform 
ecosystems. Organ. Sci. 30, 617–641. https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.2018.1270. 
Chang, Y., Iakovou, E., Shi, W., 2020. Blockchain in global supply chains and cross 

border trade: a critical synthesis of the state-of-the-art, challenges and opportunities. 
Int. J. Prod. Res. 58, 2082–2099. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
00207543.2019.1651946. 

Chen, Y., Bellavitis, C., 2020. Blockchain disruption and decentralized finance: the rise of 
decentralized business models. J. Bus. Ventur. Insights 13, e00151. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.jbvi.2019.e00151. 

Chen, Y., Pereira, I., Patel, P.C., 2021. Decentralized governance of digital platforms. 

J. Manage. 47, 1305–1337. https://doi.org/10.1177/0149206320916755. 
Chen, L., Tong, T.W., Tang, S., Han, N., 2022. Governance and design of digital 

platforms: a review and future research directions on a meta-organization. 
J. Manage. 48, 147–184. https://doi.org/10.1177/01492063211045023. 

Chin, T., Shi, Y., Singh, S.K., Agbanyo, G.K., Ferraris, A., 2022. Leveraging blockchain 

technology for green innovation in ecosystem-based business models: a dynamic 
capability of values appropriation. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change 183, 121908. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2022.121908. 

Clarysse, B., Wright, M., Bruneel, J., Mahajan, A., 2014. Creating value in ecosystems: 

crossing the chasm between knowledge and business ecosystems. Res. Policy 43, 
1164–1176. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2014.04.014. 

Collis, J., Hussey, R., 2014. Business research, 4th ed. Palgrave Macmillan, Basingstoke.  
Corbin, J.M., Strauss, A., 1990. Grounded theory research: procedures, canons, and 

evaluative criteria. Qual. Sociol. 13, 3–21. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00988593. 

Cusumano, M.A., Gawer, A., Yoffie, D.B., 2021. Can self-regulation save digital 

platforms? Ind. Corp. Chang. 30, 1259–1285. https://doi.org/10.1093/icc/dtab052. 

DCSA, 2020. Standard for the Bill of Lading: A Roadmap towards eDocumentation. 
DCSA, 2022. Streamlining International Trade by Digitalising End-to-End 

Documentation. 

De Filippi, P., Mannan, M., Reijers, W., 2020. Blockchain as a confidence machine: the 
problem of trust &amp; challenges of governance. Technol. Soc. 62, 101284 https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.techsoc.2020.101284. 

Deng, Z., Liesch, P.W., Wang, Z., 2021. Deceptive signaling on globalized digital 

platforms: institutional hypnosis and firm internationalization. J. Int. Bus. Stud. 52, 
1096–1120. https://doi.org/10.1057/s41267-021-00401-w. 

Dolgui, A., Ivanov, D., Potryasaev, S., Sokolov, B., Ivanova, M., Werner, F., 2020. 

Blockchain-oriented dynamic modelling of smart contract design and execution in 
the supply chain. Int. J. Prod. Res. 58, 2184–2199. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
00207543.2019.1627439. 

Dubois, A., Gadde, L.E., 2002. Systematic combining: an abductive approach to case 

research. J. Bus. Res. 55, 553–560. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0148-2963(00)00195- 
8. 

Eisenhardt, K.M., Graebner, M.E., 2007. Theory building from cases: opportunities and 

challenges. Acad. Manag. J. 50, 25–32. https://doi.org/10.5465/ 
AMJ.2007.24160888. 

Eisenmann, T.R., 2008. Managing proprietary and shared platforms. Calif. Manag. Rev. 

50, 31–53. https://doi.org/10.2307/41166455. 

Eisenmann, T.R., Parker, G., Van Alstyne, M., 2009. Opening platforms: how, when and 
why?. In: Platforms, Markets and Innovation. Edward Elgar Publishing. https://doi. 
org/10.4337/9781849803311.00013. 

Fontana, A., Frey, J.H., 1998. Interviewing: the art of science. In: Denzin, N.K., 
Lincoln, Y.S. (Eds.), Collecting and Interpreting Qualitative Materials. Sage 
Publications Ltd, Thousand Oaks, pp. 47–78. 

Fürstenau, D., Baiyere, A., Kliewer, N., 2019. A dynamic model of embeddedness in 
digital infrastructures. Inf. Syst. Res. 30, 1319–1342. https://doi.org/10.1287/ 
isre.2019.0864. 

Garg, P., Gupta, B., Chauhan, A.K., Sivarajah, U., Gupta, S., Modgil, S., 2021. Measuring 
the perceived benefits of implementing blockchain technology in the banking sector. 
Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change 163, 120407. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
techfore.2020.120407. 

Gaur, V., Gaiha, A., 2020. Building a Transparent Supply Chain. Harvard Buiness Rev. 
Gawer, A., Cusumano, M.A., 2014. Industry platforms and ecosystem innovation. J. Prod. 

Innov. Manag. 31, 417–433. https://doi.org/10.1111/jpim.12105. 

Glaser, B.G., Strauss, A., 2017. Discovery of Grounded Theory Strategies for Qualitative 

Research. Routledge. 

Goldby, M., 2016. The rising tide of paperless trade: analysing the legal implications. In: 
Soyer, B., Tettenborn, A. (Eds.), International Trade and Carriage of Goods. Informa 
Law from Routledge, pp. 145–162. https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315644929. 
Goldsby, C., Hanisch, M., 2022. The boon and bane of blockchain: getting the governance 

right. Calif. Manag. Rev. 64, 141–168. https://doi.org/10.1177/ 
00081256221080747. 

Halaburda, H., Sarvary, M., Haeringer, G., 2022. Beyond Bitcoin. Springer International 

Publishing, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-88931-9.  

Hannah, D.P., Eisenhardt, K.M., 2018. How firms navigate cooperation and competition 
in nascent ecosystems. Strateg. Manag. J. 39, 3163–3192. https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
smj.2750. 

Hastig, G.M., Sodhi, M.S., 2020. Blockchain for supply chain traceability: business 

requirements and critical success factors. Prod. Oper. Manag. 29, 935–954. https:// 
doi.org/10.1111/poms.13147. 

Helfat, C.E., Raubitschek, R.S., 2018. Dynamic and integrative capabilities for profiting 
from innovation in digital platform-based ecosystems. Res. Policy 47, 1391–1399. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2018.01.019. 

TechnologicalForecasting&SocialChange184(2022)12198113M. Jovanovic et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

Hsuan, J., Jovanovic, M., Clemente, D.H., 2021. Exploring digital servitization 

Rossi, M., Mueller-Bloch, C., Thatcher, J.B., Beck, R., 2019. Blockchain research in 

trajectories within product–service–software space. Int. J. Oper. Prod. Manag. 41, 
598–621. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJOPM-08-2020-0525. 

information systems: current trends and an inclusive future research agenda. 
J. Assoc. Inf. Syst. 1388–1403 https://doi.org/10.17705/1jais.00571. 

Jacobides, M.G., Lianos, I., 2021. Regulating platforms and ecosystems: an introduction. 

Schmeiss, J., Hoelzle, K., Tech, R.P.G., 2019. Designing governance mechanisms in 

Ind. Corp. Chang. 30, 1131–1142. https://doi.org/10.1093/icc/dtab060. 
Jensen, T., Vatrapu, R., Bjørn-Andersen, N., 2018. Avocados crossing borders: the 

problem of runaway objects and the solution of a shipping information pipeline for 
improving international trade. Inf. Syst. J. 28, 408–438. https://doi.org/10.1111/ 
isj.12146. 

Jensen, T., Hedman, J., Henningsson, S., 2019. How TradeLens delivers business value 
with blockchain technology. MIS Q. Exec. 18, 221–243. https://doi.org/10.17705/ 
2msqe.00018. 

Jovanovic, M., Sj¨odin, D., Parida, V., 2021. Co-evolution of platform architecture, 
platform services, and platform governance: expanding the platform value of 
industrial digital platforms. Technovation 102218. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
technovation.2020.102218. 

Kim, W.C., Mauborgne, R., 2019. Nondisruptive Creation: Rethinking Innovation and 

Growth. MIT SLOAN Manag. Rev. 

Kosti´c, N., Sedej, T., 2022. Blockchain technology, inter-organizational relationships, 

and management accounting: a synthesis and a research agenda. Account. Horizons 
36, 123–141. https://doi.org/10.2308/HORIZONS-19-147. 

Kouhizadeh, M., Saberi, S., Sarkis, J., 2021. Blockchain technology and the sustainable 
supply chain: theoretically exploring adoption barriers. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 231, 
107831 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2020.107831. 

platform ecosystems: addressing the paradox of openness through blockchain 
technology. Calif. Manag. Rev. 62, 121–143. https://doi.org/10.1177/ 
0008125619883618. 

Schmidt, C.G., Wagner, S.M., 2019. Blockchain and supply chain relations: a transaction 
cost theory perspective. J. Purch. Supply Manag. 25, 100552 https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.pursup.2019.100552. 

Statista, 2021. Container Shipping Worldwide. 
Stopford, M., 2009. Maritime Economics, 3rd ed. Routledge. 
Strauss, A., Corbin, J., 2015. Basics of Qualitative Research. Handbook of qualitative 

research, Sage, Thousand Oaks, CA.  

Sund, T., L¨o¨of, C., Nadjm-Tehrani, S., Asplund, M., 2020. Blockchain-based event 

processing in supply chains—a case study at IKEA. Robot. Comput. Integr. Manuf. 
65, 101971 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rcim.2020.101971. 

Toorajipour, R., Oghazi, P., Sohrabpour, V., Patel, P.C., Mostaghel, R., 2022. Block by 
block: a blockchain-based peer-to-peer business transaction for international trade. 
Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change 180, 121714. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
techfore.2022.121714. 

UN, 2016. Mobilizing Sustainable Transport for Development: Analysis and Policy 

Recommendations from the United Nations Secretary-General’s High-Level Advisory 
Group on Sustainable Transport. 

Kumar, A., Liu, R., Shan, Z., 2020. Is blockchain a silver bullet for supply chain 

management? Technical challenges and research opportunities. Decis. Sci. 51, 8–37. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/deci.12396. 

Uzunca, B., Sharapov, D., Tee, R., 2022. Governance rigidity, industry evolution, and 
value capture in platform ecosystems. Res. Policy 51, 104560. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.respol.2022.104560. 

Kvale, S., 1996. InterViews: An introduction to Qualitative Research Interviewing. Sage 

Publications Ltd, London.  

Lacity, M., Van Hoek, R., 2021. What We’ve Learned So Far about Blockchain for 

Business. MIT Sloan Manag. Rev. 

Lumineau, F., Wang, W., Schilke, O., 2021. Blockchain governance—a new way of 
organizing collaborations? Organ. Sci. 32, 500–521. https://doi.org/10.1287/ 
orsc.2020.1379. 

Markus, Steinfield, Wigand, 2006. Industry-wide information systems standardization as 
collective action: the case of the U.S. residential mortgage industry. MIS Q. 30, 439. 
https://doi.org/10.2307/25148768. 

Marsal-Llacuna, M.-L., 2018. Future living framework: is blockchain the next enabling 
network? Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change 128, 226–234. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
techfore.2017.12.005. 

Miles, M.B., Huberman, A.M., 1994, 2nd ed. Sage Publications, Inc. 
Monika, Bhatia, R., 2020. Interoperability solutions for blockchain. In: 2020 

International Conference on Smart Technologies in Computing, Electrical and 
Electronics (ICSTCEE). IEEE, pp. 381–385. https://doi.org/10.1109/ 
ICSTCEE49637.2020.9277054. 

Moore, G., 2014. Crossing the Chasm, 3rd ed. 
Murray, A., Kuban, S., Josefy, M., Anderson, J., 2021. Contracting in the smart era: the 

implications of blockchain and decentralized autonomous organizations for 
contracting and corporate governance. Acad. Manag. Perspect. 35, 622–641. https:// 
doi.org/10.5465/amp.2018.0066. 

Wamba, S.F., Queiroz, M.M., 2020. Blockchain in the operations and supply chain 
management: benefits, challenges and future research opportunities. Int. J. Inf. 
Manag. 52, 102064 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2019.102064. 

Wareham, J., Fox, P.B., Cano Giner, J.L., 2014. Technology ecosystem governance. 

Organ. Sci. 25, 1195–1215. https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.2014.0895. 
West, J., O’Mahony, S., 2008. The role of participation architecture in growing 

sponsored open source communities. Ind. Innov. 15, 145–168. https://doi.org/ 
10.1080/13662710801970142. 

Wimmer, M.A., Boneva, R., di Giacomo, D., 2018. Interoperability governance. In: 

Proceedings of the 19th Annual International Conference on Digital Government 
Research: Governance in the Data Age. ACM, New York, NY, USA, pp. 1–11. https:// 
doi.org/10.1145/3209281.3209306. 

Yang, C.-S., 2019. Maritime shipping digitalization: blockchain-based technology 

applications, future improvements, and intention to use. Transp. Res. Part E Logist. 
Transp. Rev. 131, 108–117. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tre.2019.09.020. 

Yin, R.K., 2017. Case Study Research: Design and Methods, 6th ed. SAGE Publications, 

Inc, Thousand Oaks, CA.  

Yoffie, D.D., Gawer, A., Cusumano, M.A., 2020. A Study of More Than 250 Platforms 

Reveals Why Most Fail. Harvard Buiness Rev. 

Zachariadis, M., Hileman, G., Scott, S.V., 2019. Governance and control in distributed 
ledgers: understanding the challenges facing blockchain technology in financial 
services. Inf. Organ. 29, 105–117. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
infoandorg.2019.03.001. 

Murthy, R.K., Madhok, A., 2021. Overcoming the early-stage conundrum of digital 

Zhao, X., Ai, P., Lai, F., Luo, X. (Robert), Benitez, J., 2022. Task management in 

platform ecosystem emergence: a problem-solving perspective. J. Manag. Stud. 58, 
1899–1932. https://doi.org/10.1111/joms.12748. 

O’Mahony, S., Karp, R., 2022. From proprietary to collective governance: how do 

platform participation strategies evolve? Strateg. Manag. J. 43, 530–562. https:// 
doi.org/10.1002/smj.3150. 

Ozalp, H., Cennamo, C., Gawer, A., 2018. Disruption in platform-based ecosystems. 

decentralized autonomous organization. J. Oper. Manag. https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
joom.1179. 

Zhu, F., Iansiti, M., 2019. Why Some Platforms Thrive and Others Don’t. Harv. Bus. Rev. 
Ziolkowski, R., Miscione, G., Schwabe, G., 2020. Decision problems in Blockchain 

governance: old wine in new bottles or walking in someone else’s shoes? J. Manag. 
Inf. Syst. 37, 316–348. https://doi.org/10.1080/07421222.2020.1759974. 

J. Manag. Stud. https://doi.org/10.1111/joms.12351. 

Parida, V., Jovanovic, M., 2021. Servitization in global markets: role alignment in global 
service networks for advanced service provision. R&D Manag. https://doi.org/ 
10.1111/radm.12505. 

Pereira, J., Tavalaei, M.M., Ozalp, H., 2019. Blockchain-based platforms: decentralized 
infrastructures and its boundary conditions. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change 146, 
94–102. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2019.04.030. 

Phadnis, S.S., Fine, C.H., 2017. End-to-end supply chain strategies: a parametric study of 
the apparel industry. Prod. Oper. Manag. 26, 2305–2322. https://doi.org/10.1111/ 
poms.12779. 

P´olvora, A., Nascimento, S., Lourenço, J.S., Scapolo, F., 2020. Blockchain for industrial 
transformations: a forward-looking approach with multi-stakeholder engagement for 
policy advice. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change 157, 120091. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.techfore.2020.120091. 

Pombo-Ju´arez, L., K¨onn¨ol¨a, T., Miles, I., Saritas, O., Schartinger, D., Amanatidou, E., 

Giesecke, S., 2017. Wiring up multiple layers of innovation ecosystems: 
contemplations from personal health systems foresight. Technol. Forecast. Soc. 
Change 115, 278–288. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2016.04.018. 

Pournader, M., Shi, Y., Seuring, S., Koh, S.C.L., 2020. Blockchain applications in supply 
chains, transport and logistics: a systematic review of the literature. Int. J. Prod. Res. 
58, 2063–2081. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2019.1650976. 

Rejeb, A., Keogh, J.G., Simske, S.J., Stafford, T., Treiblmaier, H., 2021. Potentials of 

blockchain technologies for supply chain collaboration: a conceptual framework. Int. 
J. Logist. Manag. 32, 973–994. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJLM-02-2020-0098. 

Rietveld, J., Schilling, M.A., 2021. Platform competition: a systematic and 

interdisciplinary review of the literature. J. Manage. 47, 1528–1563. https://doi. 
org/10.1177/0149206320969791. 

Dr. Marin Jovanovic is an assistant professor at the Department of Operations Manage-
ment at Copenhagen Business School and a visiting scholar at Luleå University of Tech-
nology. He received a Ph.D. degree in industrial economics and management from the KTH 
Royal Institute of Technology and a Ph.D. degree (cum laude) in industrial management 
from the Universidad Polit´ecnica de Madrid. His research has been published in academic 
journals, such as Organization Science, Journal of Product Innovation Management, R&D 
Management,  International  Journal  of  Operations  &  Production  Management,  Tech-
novation, International Journal of Production Economics, Journal of Business Research, 
and  Industrial  Marketing  Management.  His  research  interests  include  the  digital  trans-
formation of manufacturing and maritime industries, platform ecosystems in the business- 
to-business  context,  and  artificial  intelligence.  Marin  has  held  positions  at  the  ESADE 
Business School and the University of Cambridge. 

Dr. Nikola Kosti´c is a researcher at the Department of Accounting at Copenhagen Business 
School. His research has been published in a leading accounting journal Accounting Ho-
rizons. His research interests include accounting and management control issues in inter- 
organizational  settings,  digital  standardization  and  digital  transformation,  inter- 
organizational  implications  of  blockchain  technology  use,  and  digital  infrastructure 
governance. 

Dr. Ina M. Sebastian is a Research Scientist at the MIT Center for Information Systems 
Research (CISR). Her research areas are partnering and value creation in digital ecosys-
tems, and digital transformation of large enterprises. Prior to joining MIT CISR in 2014, Ina 
completed a Ph.D. with a focus on Information Systems Management at the Shidler College 
of Business, University of Hawaii. In her dissertation research, she studied how Electronic 
Health Record Systems enable and constrain relational coordination in multidisciplinary 
clinician teams. One of her ongoing research interests is the role of digital capabilities for 

TechnologicalForecasting&SocialChange184(2022)12198114M. Jovanovic et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

relational and adaptive coordination in health care systems, within and across organiza-
tional  boundaries.  Ina  also  holds  an  MBA  from  University  of  Hawaii  and  a  Diplom  in 
Business Administration from RWTH Aachen University. 

Dr. Tomaz Sedej is an external lecturer at the Department of Accounting at Copenhagen 
Business  School  and  a  visiting  research  scholar  at  MIT Center  for  Information  Systems 

Research. He holds a Ph.D. from Copenhagen Business School, MBA from Bradford Uni-
versity, School of Management and a B.Sc. from University of Ljubljana, Faculty of Eco-
nomics. Before joining academia, he worked in a private sector, where he held several 
different  positions  at  L'Or´eal,  Coca-Cola  HBC  and  Gorenje  Group  Nordic.  His  research 
interests  include  blockchain,  platform  ecosystems,  digital  partnering  and  digital 
transformation. 

TechnologicalForecasting&SocialChange184(2022)12198115