8
1
0
2

r
a

M
8

]

V
C
.
s
c
[

2
v
5
6
8
6
0
.
2
0
8
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Automated soft tissue lesion detection and segmentation in
digital mammography using a u-net deep learning network

Timothy de Moora, Alejandro Rodriguez-Ruiza, Albert Gubern M´eridaa, Ritse Manna, and
Jonas Teuwena,b

aRadboud University Medical Center, Department of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine,
Nijmegen, the Netherlands
bOptics Research Group, Imaging Physics Department, Delft University of Technology, the
Netherlands

ABSTRACT

Computer-aided detection or decision support systems aim to improve breast cancer screening programs by
helping radiologists to evaluate digital mammography (DM) exams. Commonly such methods proceed in two
steps: selection of candidate regions for malignancy, and later classiﬁcation as either malignant or not. In this
study, we present a candidate detection method based on deep learning to automatically detect and additionally
segment soft tissue lesions in DM. A database of DM exams (mostly bilateral and two views) was collected
from our institutional archive. In total, 7196 DM exams (28294 DM images) acquired with systems from three
diﬀerent vendors (General Electric, Siemens, Hologic) were collected, of which 2883 contained malignant lesions
veriﬁed with histopathology. Data was randomly split on an exam level into training (50%), validation (10%) and
testing (40%) of deep neural network with u-net architecture. The u-net classiﬁes the image but also provides
lesion segmentation. Free receiver operating characteristic (FROC) analysis was used to evaluate the model, on
an image and on an exam level. On an image level, a maximum sensitivity of 0.94 at 7.93 false positives (FP) per
image was achieved. Similarly, per exam a maximum sensitivity of 0.98 at 7.81 FP per image was achieved. In
conclusion, the method could be used as a candidate selection model with high accuracy and with the additional
information of lesion segmentation.

Keywords: digital mammography, automatic lesion detection, automatic lesion segmentation, deep learning

1. INTRODUCTION

Population-based breast cancer screening programs with mammography have proven to reduce mortality and the
morbidity associated with advanced stages of the disease. Nevertheless, their eﬀectiveness is subject of discussion
due to possible overdiagnosis, high false positive rate, or insuﬃcient detection rate for dense breasts. Still, one
of the main pitfalls is possible interpretation errors by the radiologists who have to evaluate a large amount of
mammograms with a very low prevalence of malignant cases.

Several studies have shown that a signiﬁcant number of the diagnosed cancers were already visible on previous
screening mammograms which were marked as negative.1, 2 Additionally, there is a signiﬁcant variability between
readers in terms of both sensitivity and speciﬁcity,3 and therefore combining assessments by two or more readers4
improves screening performance.

Computer-aided detection or decision support systems could improve the breast cancer screening programs by
helping radiologists. Unfortunately, several studies have shown that radiologists do not improve their screening
performance when using computer-aided detection systems, mainly because of a low speciﬁcity of these traditional
systems.5

Recent developments in machine learning algorithms have greatly improved the performance of computer
vision and models in medical imaging by using deep learning neural networks. It can therefore be expected that

Send correspondence to Jonas Teuwen: jonas.teuwen@radboudumc.nl.

 
 
 
 
 
 
a new generation of computer-aided detection or diagnosis systems for digital mammography (DM) could be
reliable used by radiologists to improve the eﬃciency of breast cancer screening programs.

Generally, computer-aided detection or decision support systems proceed in two steps.

In the ﬁrst step,
the whole mammogram is processed and regions of interest are selected, the so-called candidate detector. The
primary goal of this step is to greatly reduce the number of search locations while achieving a sensitivity near
100%. In the second step, the goal is to remove the false positives, while keeping the true positives. Up to now,
most reported candidate selectors are not based on deep learning technology. In this paper we propose a deep
learning network as candidate selector, which automatically detects and additionally segments malignant lesions
in DM images.

2.1 Patient population

2. MATERIALS AND METHODS

This study was conducted with anonymized data retrospectively collected from our institutional archive. It was
approved by the regional ethics board after summary review, with waiver of a full review and informed consent.

DM exams from women attending the national screening program at our collaborator institution, or our

institution for diagnostic purposes between 2000 and 2016 were included.

All cases with biopsy-proven malignant soft tissue lesions were collected, while normal exams were selected
if they had at least two years of negative follow-up. This yielded a total of 7196 DM exams, from which 2883
exams (42%) contained a total of 3023 biopsy-veriﬁed malignant lesions. Most exams were bilateral and included
two views (cranio-caudal -CC- and medio-lateral oblique -MLO-), resulting in a total of 28924 images. The exact
distribution is summarized in Table 1.

Table 1. Distribution of the DM exams included in this study.

number of studies
- normal images
- images with malignant lesion(s)

General Electric
2248
7771
1292

Siemens Hologic
1518
5842
255

3430
12288
1476

2.2 Image acquisition and preprocessing

The images were acquired by four DM machines from three diﬀerent vendors (Senographe 2000D and Senographe
DS, General Electric, USA; Mammomat Inspiration, Siemens, Germany; Selenia Dimensions, Hologic, USA;).
Distributions are shown in Table 1.

Images were preprocessed in three steps. First, an energy band normalization technique was applied.6 To
homogenize the pixel size across diﬀerent vendors, images were downscaled to 200µm after applying a Gaussian
ﬁlter. Finally, pixel values were scaled to the range [0, 1]. Examples of preprocessed images with outlined lesions
are shown in Figure 1.

2.3 Ground truth labeling and segmentation

All cases with malignant lesions were veriﬁed by histopathology and manually annotated and segmented under
the supervision of an expert breast radiologist, with access to other breast imaging exams, radiological and
histopathological reports. More than 99% of the lesions had a maximal bounding box diameter of 5.7cm and on
average had a height/width ratio of about 1. The negative cases were veriﬁed by at least two years of negative
follow-up imaging exams.

Figure 1. Examples of DM images acquired with machines from three vendors: General Electric (left), Siemens (middle)
and Hologic (right); after preprocessing. Biopsy-proven lesions are outlined.

2.4 Deep learning network and training

The goal was to detect and segment the malignant lesions. For that, a deep learning convolutional neural network
with modiﬁed u-net architecture7 was employed (detailed in Figure 2) and trained on data from all three vendors.

The u-net worked on a patch level (344 × 344 pixels = 6.88 × 6.88cm, considered to provide enough context to
discriminate soft tissue lesions). A u-net is a so-called fully convolutional network, so it is agnostic to the size of
the input, so we can evaluate the trained network on complete mammograms. Positive samples were extracted
around the center-of-mass of the annotated lesion and zero-padded if necessary. Negative patches were randomly
selected patches within the breast from the normal cases. During each epoch all positive samples were presented
and an equal number of randomly selected negatives. Data was split on a DM exam level to avoid bias: 50% of
the data was used for training of the u-net model, 10% for the validation, and 40% for independent test.

The model was trained using stochastic gradient descent with momentum (0.9) using a weighted logistic loss
function with weight 0.25 for the negative samples. The learning rate, initially 0.005 was reduced by a factor
of 2 if the validation loss did not improve for at least 5 epochs. Up-down and left-right ﬂips were used as data
augmentations.

2.5 Performance analysis: FROC

The performance of the model was evaluated with free receiver operating characteristic (FROC) analysis, on a
region and case basis.

Given a mammogram, the deep neural network produces a probability map where each pixel represents the

probability that this pixel belongs to a suspicious lesion.

Before we proceed with the FROC analysis where we compare predicted locations with the ground truth, we
need to convert this probability map to a list of candidate locations and the ground truth segmentation to such
a list as well.

To convert the probability map to a list of candidates, we ﬁrst binarize the map by thresholding at 0.5 which
is the value which gave good performance on the validation and training sets. On this map we compute all
connected components. Given these components, we generate candidates at threshold T by ﬁnding all points
which have probability values above T . To reduce the number of candidates, we cluster all candidates within a

Figure 2. The u-net architecture, where we have doubled the number of ﬁlters in the each block and applied batch
normalization. Each convolution 3 × 3 was followed by a rectiﬁed linear unit activation layer, while the ﬁnal convolution
1 × 1 was followed by a pixel-wise sigmoid activation layer.

radius of 1.5cm. The ground truth segmentation are converted into coordinates by computing the center of mass
for each lesion.

Given the candidates and the ground truth, we can compute two types of FROC curves: the image-based
and the exam-based FROC curve. In the FROC analysis, lesion is said to be correctly predicted if there is a
candidate within 1.5cm of the center-of-mass of the lesion.

In both FROCs we plot the average number of false positives per image (FP/image) against the true-positive
rate (TPR). A point on the FROC is computed as follows: for each threshold T we count the number of false
positives on the normals as we can guarantee there are no lesions there. In the image-based case we compute
the average TPR per image, where the TPR per image is the ratio of the number of lesions correctly predicted
in this image. The exam-based approach gives a TPR of 1 if at least one of the lesions is correctly predicted in
the study, and else 0.

3. RESULTS

The resulting FROC curves are given in Figure 3. For the image-based FROC we obtain a maximum sensitivity
of 0.94 with a false positive rate per image of 7.93 at a threshold of 0.5 (which is the lowest threshold where
the sensitivity did not further improve). In the exam-based FROC, the maximum sensitivity is 0.98 with a false
positive rate per image of 7.81. Several examples are shown in Figures 4-6.

In this abstract we presented a method which detects and segments soft tissue lesions in digital mammography,
and could be used as a candidate detection model for automated detection and diagnosis computer systems.
Therefore, it is important that such candidate model can detect all exams with cancer lesions. Our model

4. CONCLUSIONS

Figure 3. Image-based and exam-based FROC performance of the u-net. We reach a maximum sensitivity of 0.94 and
0.98 at a false positive rate per image of 7.93 and 7.81 for the image-based and exam-based respectively.

Figure 4. Example of a case with biopsy-proven invasive lobular carcinoma (ILC), where a few false positive candidates
are predicted. The predictions are delineated in blue, whereas the ground truth is delineated in red. We can see that
the annotation is split in two parts, while the prediction connects these regions. Given the intra-reader variability of the
segmentations, this is to be expected and is not an issue for our analysis.

achieved an acceptable performance of 0.98 sensitivity with a false positive rate per image of 7.81 in the exam-
based FROC.

Compared to the classical candidate detection techniques, we also provide a segmentation of the lesion. This

Figure 5. Example of a case with biopsy-proven invasive lobular carcinoma (ILC), which is properly segmented. The
predictions are delineated in blue, whereas the ground truth is delineated in red.

allows to study the temporal changes, such as growth or morphological modiﬁcations over time. Furthermore, if
we have information available of the shape of the projection of the lesion, this might improve the correlation of
candidates between the MLO and CC views more precisely.

One of the main limitations of our study is that we only studied soft tissue lesions. A model that can also
detect and segment calciﬁcations would be of great added value and the feasibility of using a u-net deep learning
architecture for this task should be explored. Also, including data from more manufacturers or some other
normalization techniques could allow to reduce the performance variability across vendors. Finally, introducing
benign lesions to provide the model with more information should also be explored, in order to reduce the number
of false positive assessments.

Another topic of future work is to study whether this two-dimensional detection and segmentation model can
be applied in digital breast tomosynthesis (slice by slice basis) or synthetic mammography images, both of which
are often combined with DM as a breast cancer screening protocol. Having a robust candidate detection for
all of these three types of images would be beneﬁcial to also have a robust computer system that can correlate
information across modalities.

Figure 6. Example of a case with non-Hodgkin b-cell lymphoma, where the lesions are properly detected in the MLO
view, but not in the CC view. The predictions are delineated in blue, whereas the ground truth is delineated in red. The
network did not have the information that both views belong together, while the annotator did.

REFERENCES

[1] “Breast Cancer Detected with Screening US: Reasons for Nondetection at Mammography,” Radiology 270,

369–377 (2014).

[2] “Breast Cancer: Missed Interval and Screening-detected Cancer at Full-Field Digital Mammography and

Screen-Film Mammography Results from a Retrospective Review,” Radiology 264, 378–386 (2012).

[3] R. Smith-Bindman, P. Chu, D. L. Miglioretti, et al., “Physician Predictors of Mammographic Accuracy,”

JNCI Journal of the National Cancer Institute 97, 358–367 (2005).

[4] N. Karssemeijer, J. D. Otten, A. A. J. Roelofs, et al., “Eﬀect of independent multiple reading of mammograms
on detection performance,” in Medical Imaging 2004, D. P. Chakraborty and M. P. Eckstein, Eds., 82–89
(2004).

[5] C. D. Lehman, R. D. Wellman, D. S. M. Buist, et al., “Diagnostic Accuracy of Digital Screening Mammog-

raphy With and Without Computer-Aided Detection,” JAMA Internal Medicine 175, 1828 (2015).

[6] R. H. H. M. Philipsen, P. Maduskar, L. Hogeweg, et al., “Localized Energy-Based Normalization of Medical
Images: Application to Chest Radiography,” IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging 34, 1965–1975 (2015).
[7] O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox, “U-Net: Convolutional Networks for Biomedical Image Segmenta-

tion,” (2015).

